The Sikh Religion: Its Gurus, Sacred Writings and Authors, Vol. II (Max Arthur Macauliffe, 1909)
================================================================================================
Volume II of the first complete English account of Sikhism, with translations from the Granth Sahib — Guru Angad to Guru Ram Das. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1909 Oxford edition.

THE SIKH RELIGION 

ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS 
AID AUT EHOKS 

BY 

Vee PEO VMACAULIEEE 

‘et wigt gay at, Hafi sfee uaa; 
Kat dat uss 3, ge Alat Ge ys, 

The egg of superstition hath burst; the 
mind is illumined: 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet 
and freed the captive. 

Guru ARJAN 

IN SIX VOLUMES 

VOb2 

OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1909 

HENRY FROW DE, WGA. 
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 

per at ns —— 
oe LEY Y ™ | 
\ 

1104943 

CONTENTS "OF-VOL. Tl 

LIFE OF GuRU ANGAD, THE SECOND GuRU . at 
SLOKS OF GuRU ANGAD . . 46 
LIFE OF GuRU AMAR DAS, THE THIRD GURU . . 58 

ANAND. . 2 117 

SADD . : ’ ms 
HyMNS OF GuRU AMAR Das. , . 154 
LIFE OF GuRU Ram Das, THE FourTH GURU . 253 
HYMNS OF GuRU RAm Das : . . 286 

LAWAN (EPITHALAMIUM) . : ; - 334 

GURU ANGAD AND A PUPIL 

SIKH 11 P.t 

Pies OF GURU ANGAD. THE 
SECOND Ui 

CHAPTER I 

In Matte di Sarai, a village about six miles from 
Muktsar in the Firozpur district of the Panjab, 
once lived a trader called Pheru. He subsequently 
removed to the village of Harike, where he found 
a better opening for commerce. His wife’s maiden 
name was Ramo, but after her marriage she was 
called Daya Kaur. She is described as a lady of 
gentle disposition, charitable, and religious. Four 
hours before day on the 11th of Baisakh in the 
Sambat year 1561 (A.D. 1504) a son was born to 
them. He received the name Lahina. In due time 
he wedded a lady called Khivi, a native of Matte di 
Sarai. His father grew weary of Harike, and with 
his own family and Lahina’s returned to Matte di 
Sarai and lived there. Lahina’s wife there gave 
birth to a daughter called Amro and to two sons 
who were named Dasu and Datu. 

When Matte di Sarai was sacked by the Mughals 
and Baloches, Pheru and Lahina’s families went to 
live in Khadur, now a famous Sikh town in the Tarn 
Taran sub-collectorate of the Amritsar district. 
While dwelling there Lahina organized a yearly 
pigrimage of devout Hindus to Jawalamukhi,! a 
place sacred to Durga in the lower Himalayas, where 
fire issues from the mountains. 

There lived in Khadur a Sikh called Jodha whose 

1 A place in the Himalayas where flame issues from the mountain. 
It is held sacred by Hindus, who make it an object of pilgrimage. 
It appears from one of Seneca’s letters that the ancient Romans 
worshipped similar places, such as springs of hot water, sources of 
rivers, &c. 

SIKH. II B 

2 THE SIKH RELIGION 

practice it was to rise every morning three hours 
before day and repeat the Japji and the Asa ki War. 
One pleasant night when gentle zephyrs cooled the 
heated air, Lahina heard a voice which awakened 
his emotions as it sang the following :— 

Ever remember that Lord by worshipping whom thou 
shalt find happiness. 

Why hast thou done such evil deeds as thou shalt suffer 
for ? 

Do absolutely nothing evil ; look well before thee. 

So throw the dice that thou mayest not lose with the 
Lerd. 

Nay, that thou mayest gain some profit.! 

As Lahina attentively listened, his mind obtained 
peace. After daybreak he asked Jodha who had 
composed that stimulating hymn. Jodha duly 
informed him that it was his Guru, Baba® Nanak, 
then dwelling in Kartarpur on the bank of the Ravi. 
Devotion was kindled in Lahina’s heart by all that 
he had heard from Jodha ; and he longed to behold 
the Guru, it is said, as the chakor? desires to see 
the moon. 

Lahina was conducting his family and his com- 
pany of pilgrims to Jawalamukhi, but he induced 
them to break their journey at Kartarpur, telling 
them that they could perform two religious acts on 
the one pilgrimage. They could visit Guru Nanak, 
whom many persons beheved to be beloved of God, 
and whose holy company was desirable and ought to 
be sought by all men. They might afterwards behold 
the flame goddess of Jawalamukhi. Lahina’s advice 
was adopted and he was enabled to offer his obeisance 
to the Guru. The Guru, on observing his kind heart 
and amiable disposition, inquired who he was and 

1 Asa ki War. 

2 Baba means father. The word was and is frequently applied to 
Guru Nanak. 

3 The Greek partridge. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 3 

whither he was going. Lahina told him his name 
and errand, on hearing which, the Guru spoke to 
him of the True Creator. His discourse made such 
an impression on Lahina that he threw away the 
bells with which he had provided himself to dance 
before the goddess at Jawalamukhi. Hecongratulated 
himself on his good fortune in meeting the Guru, 
and said he no longer felt an inclination to worship 
in a heathen temple. 

His companions, who had grown weary of waiting 
for him, at last pressed him to continue his journey 
to Jawalamukhi. They said that, though he was the 
leader of their party, yet he forsook them on the road 
and in a strange country. They further represented 
that it was written in the holy books of their faith, 
that he who threw any obstacle in the way of those 
who were doing penance, giving alms, fasting, going 
on pilgrimage, or getting married; who through 
laziness or fear of growing weary failed to worship 
Durga, the giver of wealth and holiness; or who 
having made a vow relinquished all efforts to accom- 
plish it, was a great sinner, and his wealth and sons 
should all perish. Lahina coolly replied that he was 
prepared to suffer every calamity that might occur 
to him, but he would not forsake his true Guru. He 
had obtained such peace of mind while listening to 
his discourses, that he said he had already derived 
all the advantage he could have hoped for from the 
worship of the goddess. He then decided to discon- 
tinue his pilgrimage and abide with the Guru. 

The Guru, on seeing his daily increasing devotion, 
said to him one day, ‘I must give thee some- 
thing ; but first go home and settle thine affairs, 
and when thou returnest I will initiate thee as 
a Sikh.’ Upon this Lahina returned to Khadur, 
and told his wife what had happened and the 
spiritual change which had been wrought in him 
by meeting Guru Nanak, whom he described as the 
bestower of happiness both in this world and the 

B2 

4 THE SIKH RELIGION 

next. He said he had determined to place himself 
for the future at the Guru’s feet. After a stay of some 
days at his home, during which he procured a new 
suit of clothes for himself and a bag of salt for the . 
Guru’s free kitchen, he set out, accompanied by his 
nephew, for Kartarpur. On arriving at the Guru’s 
house he was respectfully received by Sulakhani, the 
Guru’s wife, who told him that the Guru was in his 
fields, and would be home by evening. If, however, 
Lahina desired to see him at once, he might go to 
meet him. Accordingly Lahina, making over the 
bag of salt to Mata Sulakhani, went straightway 
for thes Gur 

The Guru had collected three bundles of grass 
for his cows and buffaloes, and he desired to have 
the bundles taken home; but, as the grass was wet 
and full of mud, his ordinary Sikhs slunk away from 
the task. He then asked his sons Sri Chand and 
Lakhmi Das to carry the bundles. They too evaded 
the duty, saving that there was a labourer coming 
who would take them. Lahina, who had just arrived, 
made his obeisance and said, ‘Consider me as 
a labourer, and give me this work to do.’ The 
Guru repeated his wish to have the bundles taken 
to his house. Lahina asked for assistance to lift 
the bundles on his head, and he would then carry 
them. The Guru said he might take as many as 
his strength permitted. Lahina, gathering strength 
from his enthusiasm, took up the three bundles, and 
walked with them in company with Guru Nanak to 
his house. On the way the dripping of the moist 
mud from the grass soiled his new clothes. 

When they arrived, the Guru’s wife, seeing Lahina’s 
state, asked the Guru if it were a proper thing for 
him to impose such menial labour on a guest and 
soil his new clothes. The Guru, she said, was depriv- 
ing the Sikhs of their faith through his great want 
of consideration. The Guru replied that God had 
put the bundles on the head of the man who was 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 5 

fit to carry them. His wife, not understanding the 
Guru’s hidden meaning, rejoined, ‘See, his clothes 
from his head to his feet are fouled with the mud 
which has been dripping from the grass.’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ This is not mud ; it is the saffron of God’s 
court, which marketh the elect. [ven one of these 
bundles was difficult to lft. He hath acquired 
divine strength, and lifted all three.’ On looking 
again the Guru’s wife observed that the mud on 
Lahina’s clothes had really changed to saffron. 
The three bundles are held by the Sikhs to symbolize 
spiritual affairs, temporal affairs, and the Guruship. 

It was Guru Nanak’s practice to rise three hours 
before day and go to bathe in the Ravi. After his 
bath, he used to recite the Japji, meditate on God, 
and sing His praises till day dawned. He was always 
attended by Lahina, who took charge of his clothes, 
and performed for him any other offices he required. 
Three other Sikhs—Bhai Bhagirath, Bhai Budha, 
and Bhai Sudhara—on seeing Lahina’s constancy 
and devotion to the Guru, thought that they too 
would perform meritorious service for him, so they 
proceeded in the early morning to the bank of the 
river to wait on him. It was the winter season, 
black clouds gathered, cold winds blew in gusts, and 
hail began to fall. The three men became quite 
‘benumbed, and were with difficulty able to make 
their way home shaking and shivering. It was only 
by warming themselves at the fire that they recovered 
the use of their limbs. Lahina endured the cold as 
if it had been the mildest weather. When the Guru 
at sunrise came out of the water, he congratulated 
Lahina on his endurance, and said he had attained 
salvation, which was the main object of human 
birth. 

Once Lahina thought to himself, ‘The Guru 
endureth great cold in performing his penance. It 
is not right that his servant should live in comfort.’ 
Accordingly before day next morning he too entered 

6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the water, and only came out at sunrise, by which time 
his body was nearly frozen. He fell down at the Guru’s 
feet, and the Guru’s touch had the effect of restoring 
the natural heat of his body. All the Sikhs were 
astonished on seeing the Guru’s kindness to the 
man who had voluntarily become his servant, and 
endured well nigh unendurable hardships for him. 

CHAPTER II 

The Guru now began to enter on a systematic 
trial of the devotion of his Sikhs. One winter’s 
night, as heavy rain was falling, a part of the wall of 
his house fell. The Guru said it must be repaired at 
once. His sons said it was now midnight and very 
cold, but they would send for masons and labourers 
in the morning, who would do the necessary repairs. 
The Guru replied that there was no need of masons 
and labourers. The Guru’s work must be performed 
by his Sikhs. Iéverybody was silent except Lahina, 
who at once stood up and began to repair the wall. 
The Guru’s sons and other Sikhs went off to sleep. 
When Lahina had to some extent restored the wall, 
the Guru said, ‘That is crooked, throw it down, 
and build it up again.’ Lahina did so, but the Guru 
again professed not to be satisfied. The foundation 
must be moved back, which meant that the wall 
must be thrown down again, and built up for the 
third time. Lahina obeyed his master’s order, but 
the master again expressed his dissatisfaction, and 
asked to have the wall again destroyed and again 
rebuilt. Upon this the Guru’s sons told Lahina that 
he was a fool to obey unreasonable orders. Lahina, 
putting himself into a respectful posture, replied that 
a servant should make his hands useful by doing 
his master’s work. The Guru then said to his family : 
‘You know not this man’s worth. He used every 
year to visit the shrine of Durga. Now, having met 
the Guru, he hath remained to serve the true God.’ 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 7 

The Guru and his disciple grew daily more pleased 
with each other. In proportion as the Guru instructed 
him, divine knowledge entered his heart. The Guru's 
sons grew jealous of the devoted servant and 
disciple, and took no pains to conceal their dis- 
like. Probably in order to still the enmity which 
daily increased, the Guru suggested that Lahina 
should return for a time to Khadur. The Guru said : 
‘Thy father, mother, and relations are much dis- 
tressed at thine absence from them. Wherefore 
return to Khadur, tarry there for some time, and 
cause God’s name to be repeated. I myself lived 
there once in the house of Satbharai. My bed is 
still there. Thou shalt behold me in Khadur as if 
thou wert near me.’ 

Lahina, who was the essence of obedience, at once 
proceeded to Khadur. On his arrival it became 
known that he had spent three years with Guru 
Nanak, and had made great progress in virtue and 
spirituality. Accordingly, everybody went to pay him 
homage. Among others Takht Mal, the head man of 
the city, went to touch his feet. Lahina said to 
him, ‘ This must not be, since thou art in every way 
of higher rank than myself ;’ but Takht Mal, knew 
of the power Lahina possessed to render him spiri- 
tually perfect, and would not abate a jot in his 
devotion to him. He pressed Lahina to give him 
religious instruction by which he might be saved. 
Lahina accordingly repeated to him the following 
hymn of Guru Nanak :— 

God will regenerate those in whose hearts there 1s love ; 

He will make them happy with gifts, and cause them to 
forget their sorrows. 

There is no doubt that He will assuredly save them. 

The Guru cometh to meet those for whom such destiny 
hath been recorded, 

And will give them for their instruction God’s ambrosial 
Name. | 

8 THE SIKH RELIGION 

They will walk as it pleaseth the true Guru, and never 
wander a-begging.} 

Why should he, for whom God’s court is at hand, bow to 
any one else ? 

The porter at God’s gate will ask him no questions 
whatever. 

Man shall be saved by the words of those on whom God 
looketh with favour. 

There is no one toadvise Him who sendeth and recalleth man. 

God knoweth how to do all things; He destroyeth, 
constructeth, and createth. 

Nanak, the Name is the reward of him to whom the 
Gracious One showeth favour2 

On hearing this the doors of Takht Mal’s under- 
standing opened, and divine knowledge shone on 
him. All the Sikhs, believing Lahina to be even as 
Guru Nanak, went to do him homage. Bread was 
daily made and distributed to visitors, and the 
devotion of the people daily increased. 

The Guru, knowing Lahina’s devotion, went to 
visit him in Khadur. Lahina and his wife fell at 
the Guru’s feet, and placed everything they had at his 
disposal. The Guru taught Lahina contempt for the 
world, discrimination, and divine knowledge. Having 
thus made him spiritually wise with excellent instruc. 
tion, the Guru returned to Kartarpur, leaving Lahina 
in Khadur. While reciting the prayers taught him 
by the Guru, the time passed speedily for Lahina. 
Hopes, desires, and worldly love all vanished, while 
his spiritual love and devotion were all centred on 
God. As gold is tried by the touchstone, so did 
Guru Nanak try Lahina, and find him pure and 
altogether fit for the exalted office of Guru. 

Henceforth Lahina never went into the town. 
He remained absorbed in spiritual thought and 
love of the Word. The only time he left his house 

' That is, they will not suffer transmigration. 2 Sul. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 9 

was when he went to the border of a tank outside 
Khadur, where he used to lie down in incessant and 
unwavering meditation on God. 

Guru Nanak, knowing Lahina’s devotion, was not 
very long in paying him another visit, and thus 
addressed him: ‘Thou hast performed excessive 
devotions. I cannot endure that thou shouldst 
suffer any longer. Between thee and me there is 
now no difference. None of my Sikhs hath such 
faith and confidence in me as thou, and therefore 
I love thee most of all. Thou art verily Angad 
a part of my body. I congratulate thee.’ Say- 
ing this the Guru embraced him, and took him to 
Kartarpur. 

While at Kartarpur Guru Nanak found time to 
attend to agriculture. He sowed several fields of 
corn which gave him an unfailing supply for his 
kitchen, from which he fed all comers, Musalmans 
as well as Hindus. Once, when there was an unusual 
crowd of visitors, continuous rain fell for three days, 
and it became impossible to light a fire or cook, so that 
there was nothing to eat for his guests. The Guru 
went out into the fields, taking with him his sons 
Sri Chand and Lakhmi Das. He explained to them 
his difficulty, and how improper it would be that 
his guests should want for anything as long as they 
sought shelter with him. His sons replied, ‘ How 
can we satisfy such a crowd in this heavy rain? 
Whence can we obtain sufficient bread?’ The 
Guru said, ‘Climb this kikar tree, shake it, and it 
shall rain fruit and sweets to satisfy our visitors.’ 
sri Chand replied, ‘ Nothing can fall from kikar but 
thorns or bitter fruit.’ The Guru then addressed his 
other son : ‘ Climb this tree and shake it... Lakhmi 
Das replied, ‘Hath such a thing ever been done 
before ? Have sweets and pastry ever fallen from 
trees?’ The Guru then told Angad to do what 
his sons had refused. Angad with great alacrity 
climbed the tree, shook it, when down fell heaps of 

10 THE SIKH RELIGION 

every conceivable form of Indian sweetmeats. When 
the Guru’s guests had partaken thereof and satisfied 
their hunger, they began to sing praises of the Guru 
and his faithful disciple. Angad promptly explained 
that such power was not in himself. It was divine 
knowledge not sweetmeats which dropped from the 
tree. It was all the miraculous effect of the Guru’s 
words. The Guru on hearing this said, ‘My words 
are profitable, but only they who obey them shall 
obtain the fruit thereof. It was then for the first 
time the Guru’s sons and many of his Sikhs realized 
the value of obedience. 

The Guru had by now well tested Lahina’s 
devotion, but at the same time deemed it proper to 
make further trial, principally with the object of 
humbling the pride of his sons, and convincing them 
and his disciples that Lahina alone was worthy to 
succeed him. On one occasion near midnight, when 
the sacred songs had ceased, and all except the 
Guru had retired, he called his sons, told them that 
his clothes were soiled, and asked them to take them 
at once and wash them. They replied that all the 
wells had stopped,’ that it was dark, and that, even 
if by any means they succeeded in washing the 
clothes, they could not dry them at that hour. 
When it was day they would procure a washerman 
who would perform the required service. The Guru 
said it would be well if they went themselves at once 
and washed them. They replied, that, if he could 
not wait till morning, he had better put on other 
clothes. Upon this the Guru addressed himself to 
Angad. Angad at once took up the clothes, where- 
upon day dawned, and he found the wells on the 
outskirts of the city in motion. He rapidly washed 
and dried his master’s clothes. On returning with 
them in an incredibly short space of time, everybody 

' Water in the Panjab is most generally raised by Persian wheels 
which are worked by bullocks or buffaloes. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD i 

was astonished, and the Guru again expressed him- 
self delighted with his service. 

One day, as the Guru was washing his hair, the 
cup he used slipped from his hand and fell into 
a deep sink. The Guru told his sons to bring it to 
him quickly. They replied that the sink was very 
deep and full of dirty water, but that they would 
get somebody to dive for it. Upon this the Guru 
told Angad torestore him hiscup. As soon as Angad 
put in his hand, it is said, the cup rose to the sur- 
face of the water, and he had no difficulty in taking 
it out and presenting it to his master. The Guru 
then said to his wife, ‘Sri Chand and Lakhmi Das 
are thy sons; Lahina, who obeys me, is my son.’ 
The Guru’s wife duly admonished her sons, giving 
them hope at the same time that, if they obeyed 
their father’s orders, one of them might be found 
fit to succeed him. The mother’s words were 
addressed to deaf ears for the sons in no wise 
showed filial affection or obedience. The last trial of 
Guru Angad was on the subject of eating the corpse 
mentioned in the Life of Guru Nanak. 

One day, as the Sikhs were assembled, the Guru 
seated Angad on his throne, put five pice and a 
coco-nut in front of him, and said to Bhai Budha, 
‘This is my successor ; put a tilak on his forehead 
in token of his appointment to the Guruship.’ Bhai 
Budha did so. The Guru then ordered his people 
to obey and serve Angad, who was in his image. 
Whoever did so should obtain the reward thereof. 
Guru Nanak’s sons were highly displeased at being 
superseded. He told them that Angad alone had 
proved himself most worthy of the Guruship. It 
was a position which depended on self-sacrifice, 
Angad had exhibited that virtue in the highest 
degree, and consequently had the best claim to 
the position to which he had been elevated. Guru 
Nanak directed Angad after his appointment to 
the Guruship to return to Khadur. He obeyed, 

12 THE SIKH RELIGION 

though he wished to remain in attendance on his 
master even to his latest breath. Bhai Gur Das 
thus describes the succession of Guru Angad :— 

Angad got the same tilak, the same umbrella over his head, 
and was seated on the same true throne as Guru Nanak. 

The seal in Guru Nanak’s hand entered Guru Angad’s, 
and proclaimed his sovereignty. 

He left Nartarpur, and went and lit the Guru’s lamp in 
Khadur. 

What was sown in the beginning hath germinated in this 
world ; to offer another opinion were false cleverness. 

Lahina obtained the gift from Nanak, and it must descend 
to the house of Amar Das. 

A short time after the appointment of Guru 
Angad, Guru Nanak departed this life in the manner 
already related. 

CHAPTER III 

A Jat girl called Nihali was one day making 
cakes of cow-dung for fuel in the vicinity of Khadur. 
She saw Guru Angad approaching and felt delighted 
at the opportunity afforded her of doing him homage. 
Guru Angad, who still keenly felt his separation 
from Guru Nanak, was singing his praises as he 
proceeded. Yearning for solitude, he said that the 
eyes which beheld Guru Nanak desired to see 
nothing more, and he then remained silent for some 
time. When he spoke again, he asked her to let 
him have a room where he might sit alone and 
meditate on God, without any distraction or inter- 
ruption. The room might be locked on him outside. 
He required nothing to eat or drink except a pot 
of milk daily. The girl granted his request. She 
gave him a pot of milk daily, and in doing so 
continued to gladden her eyes by beholding him. 
Guru Angad remained in profound meditation with 
the name of God as additional support. It is said 

Tar 1e6. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 13 

that six months passed in this manner, every moment 
of which seemed an age to his Sikhs. 

One day Bhai Lalo, Bhai Saido, Bhai Ajitta and 
other Sikhs asked Bhai Budha, to whom the 
Guru Nanak had been so kind, to tell them where 
they could find his successor. They had searched 
Khadur and other places, but could obtain no trace 
of him. Bhai Budha said he would give them an 
answer on the morrow. Overnight he read the 
Sodar and the Sohila, and then fixed his thoughts 
on the Guru. He then with his mind’s eye saw 
Guru Angad sitting concealed in the house of Nihali. 
Bhai Budha rose three hours before day and read the 
Japji, the Asa ki War, and other hymns of Guru 
Nanak. At daybreak the devout Sikhs came again 
and surrounded him, as they knew the Guru had 
communicated to him supernatural knowledge. He 
told them what he had seen in a vision. They then, 
taking him as leader, proceeded to Nihali’s house 
near Khadur. The owner of the house in reply to 
their inquiries gave them no information. Bhai 
Budha then said that, as there could be no darkness 
after the sun had arisen, so a Guru could not be 
hidden. Nihali went to Guru Angad, and told him 
of the visit of his four Sikhs. He at once ordered 
that they should be shown into hisapartment. The 
Guru embraced Bhai Budha and uttered the follow- 
ing sloks:— 

Die before the dear one thou lovest ; 

To live after him in the world is a curse to life. 

After a pause the Guru resumed :— 

Cut off the head which boweth not to the Lord. 
Nanak,! take and burn the wretched body ? which feeleth 
not the pain of separation.® 

1 Guru Nanak’s successors assumed the name Nanak as their xom 
de plume. 

2 Pinjar. Literally—a skeleton ; here used contemptuously for the 
body. ool Rae Wl War. 

I4 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The other Sikhs saw that Guru Angad had the 
same radiance on his countenance, the same manners, 
and the same appearance as Guru Nanak, and 
congratulated Bhai Budha on his success in dis- 
covering him. 

The Guru asked Bhai Budha how he had obtained 
his name Budha, and how it was that Guru Nanak 
had been always pleased with him. Bhai Budha 
then told him that he was the boy who had watched 
the little sticks burning first, and the large sticks 
afterwards, and had attended Guru Nanak’s prayer- 
meetings. Bhai Budha related another incident of 
his life. Once the Emperor’s troops marching 
through his village cut down all his father’s young 
crops to feed their horses. He begged his father to 
protect his fields. His father replied that he was 
powerless against the Emperor’s troops. Bhai 
Budha then concluded that, if his father could not 
withstand the I[mperor’s troops, how could he 
withstand Death, a still more powerful antagonist ? 
On this Bhai Budha went and put himself under 
Guru Nanak’s protection. Guru Nanak on hearing 
his history said, ‘ My brother, thou talkest like an old 
man (budha). Thou shalt henceforth be called Bhai 
Budha, and thy transmigration shall be at an end.’ 

Bhai Budha then told how next day he took a 
pot of clarified butter to Guru Nanak. The Guru 
asked if he had brought the offering with his mother’s 
consent or secretly. Bhai Budha replied he had 
brought 1t with his mother’s consent. ‘ Guru Nanak 
then’, continued Bhai Budha, ‘gave me divine 
instruction, upon which my mind became pure, and 
I obtained the spiritual knowledge which enabled 
me to find thee.’ Saying this he fell at Guru Angad’s 
feet. The Guru invited him to ask a favour. Bhai 
3udha replied, “Take thy seat as Guru and receive 
the Sikhs publicly. Instruct us in our faith, and 
save us all... Upon this Guru Angad repeated the 
following :— 

re OF GURU ANGAD 15 

He whom Guru Nanak’s instruction enlightened is im- 
mersed in the praises of the True One. 

What instruction can I give him who had divine Nanak 
for his guru ? + 

After this Guru Angad came forth from his 
seclusion. When this was announced, crowds went 
to see him and make him offerings. All that he 
received was sent to his kitchen for the support 
of pilgrims and wayfarers. There were continual 
preaching, singing, and repetition of the Name as 
in Guru Nanak’s time. 

It was Guru Angad’s daily practice to rise three 
hours before day, bathe in cold water, and engage 
in meditation and introspection. Meanwhile the 
musicians sang the Asa ki War. At its completion 
the Guru arose from his attitude of contemplation. 
Sick persons, particularly lepers, came from great 
distances to be healed by him; and on being healed 
returned to their respective homes singing the Guru's 
praises. After his healing ministrations the Guru 
preached and expounded Guru Nanak’s hymns. 
About nine o’clock in the forenoon visitors of all 
conditions sat in a line, and received sacred food in- 
discriminately. When the elders had finished and 
grace had been said, the children were fed and 
instruction imparted to them by the Guru himself. 
Very often he took the opportunity of pointing a 
moral from the children’s behaviour. He used to 
delight in watching their sports, and would tell his 
Sikhs that the children’s time for mourning had not 
yet come, that elders ought to be pure and simple in 
heart as they, and then should they be dear to their 
Creator. The Guru used sometimes to witness 
wrestling matches in the early afternoon. On such 
occasions he would often take the opportunity of in- 
structing the spectators how to overcome anger and 
other deadly sins. After this he used to hold court, 

1 Majh ki War. 

16 THE SIKH RELIGION 

when Balwand and Satta, two famous minstrels of 
the time, entertained the company with vocal and 
instrumental music. The Sodar was then repeated 
and food distributed as in the morning. After that 
followed further singing of sacred hymns, and then 
the Guru and his disciples retired to rest. 

Jogis of different sub-sects visited the Guru, and 
endeavoured to win him over to their own practices 
and beliefs. They represented that the great Rikhis, 
Munts, and Penitents of former ages had none of them 
obtained happiness or mental purity without Jog with 
its eight accessories of forbearance, observance, pos- 
ture, introspection, suspension of breath, contempla- 
tion, absorption, and trance.’ ‘ By the practice of Jog,’ 
they said, ‘life is prolonged and wealth and super- 
natural power obtained. Guru Nanak practised it, 
and was able to make disciples out of the four castes. 
Wherefore do thou also practise Jog. If thou now 
learn of us, thou shalt by the favour of Gorakh 
obtain twofold power.’ The Guru, divining their 
object, replied: ‘By the favour of Guru Nanak 
I am not conscious of any deficiency in myself for 
the work in which I am engaged. In this Kaljug it 
1s difficult to practise the Jog you mean, but by the 
Jog of real devotion it is easy to render the mind 
pure. Holy men say that Sahaj Jog consisteth in 
repeating the Name with fixed attention, and 
associating with the holy. By your Jog, wealth and 
supernatural power may be obtained, but, when 
man becometh attached to these things, he cannot 
obtain salvation. If man’s life be prolonged, he is 
ruined by avarice and pride. While pluming your- 
selves on your bodily austerities, you have not seen 
God who is in every heart. Guru Nanak hath shown 
us how to abide pure amid impurity, that is, how 
to find God while leading a secular life.’? The Guru 

"See the Hoga Si/ra of Patanjali, by Manilal Nabhubhai Dvivedi, 
Bombay. 

* So also Guru Amar Das ; see below, paragraph on salvation, pees 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 17 

then quoted for the Jogis Guru Nanak’s hymn 
describing in what religion consists. 

It is said that the superior of the Jogis on hearing 
it was pleased, and invited the Guru to ask him 
a favour. The Guru replied that Baba Nanak had 
given him everything, and he wanted nothing more. 
The superior again urged, ‘Ask for something, 
Let not my words be uttered in vain.’ Upon this 
the Guru asked for humility. The superior replied, 
‘I have it not, nor is it with the demigods in heaven.’ 
The Jogi then fixing his thoughts on God prayed for 
humility for himself, whereupon a voice came from 
heaven that humility had been granted with unspar- 
ing hand to Guru Nanak and his successor Guru 
Angad. Upon this the Jogis took their leave. 

After them came another Jogi of high spiritual 
rank called Harinath. He felt happy on seeing the 
Guru, and requested him to tell him man’s highest 
duty. The Guru replied with the twelfth slok of 
Asa ki War. On hearing it Harinath’s doubts were 
dispelled. The Guru’s fame increased ; there was 
ever a large crowd around him, and those for whom 
he interceded received the objects of their desires. 

One evening in the hot weather there arose a 
storm which brought clouds of dust and hindered 
the preparation of dinner. Jiva, the Guru’s cook, 
said he could only serve it if the Guru quelled the 
storm. The Guru chid him in the following lan- 
guage: “O Jiva, remain ever satisfied with the will 
of God and the true Guru. This is the main article 
of our faith ; and the Sikh who observeth it shall 
be beloved by the Guru. As a woman who is 
virtuous, well-behaved, and clever, is ever happy in 
her obedience to her spouse, so, O Jiva, do thou 
accept the Guru’s instruction and be ever happy 
in thine obedience to God. By so doing thou shalt 
obtain all the advantages of devotion, penance, 
fasting, and alms-deeds, and abide in bliss. 

A blacksmith called Gujjar went to the Guru 

SIKH. II G 

18 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and asked for divine instruction that he might 
obtain salvation. The Guru bade him recite the 
Japji with attention every morning, and work gra- 
tuitously for the poor. 

A barber named Dhinga remained with the Guru 
and performed ordinary menial offices for his Sikhs. 
One day he asked the Guru for spiritual consolation. 
The Guru replied, “The Guru is as it were a grave, and 
the Sikhs are as it were corpses. These are laid in 
the grave when life 1s extinct, and they cease to 
move. So when the Sikhs divest themselves of pride, 
they are fit to rest in the Guru’s bosom. His Sikhs 
should therefore be humble and serve others. The 
saint Sain * was of the same trade and caste as thou, 
yet he obtained salvation by serving his fellow-crea- 
tures. Thou shouldst therefore not despair of thy 
deliverance from transmigration during thy present 
birth.’ 

Paro of the Julka tribe asked the Guru the mean- 
ing of param hans—superior swan—as applied to 
holy men. The Guru replied: ‘In the first place, 
the holy accept good precepts from the Guru as 
the swan, according to the popular belief, feedeth 
on pearls in Lake Mansarowar ; secondly, the holy 
renounce evil and do good as the swan by the 
peculiar structure of its bill separateth water from 
milk.’ 

A soldier named Malu Shah, orderly of a Mughal 
officer, sought for spiritual advice which would be 
profitable to him here and hereafter. The Guru 
counselled him, if ever the necessity of battle arose, 
to fight for his master, and not consider whether 
lis side was in a numerical minority or not. 

Kidaru asked the Guru how he should escape from 
the fire of the deadly sins which was consuming the 
world. The Guru replied, ‘As when a forest is 
burning the deer flee and cool themselves in the 

* An account of this saint will subsequently be given. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 19 

nearest lake, so should man flee the deadly sins 
and take refuge in the cooling water of the Guru’s 
instruction.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

The Emperor Babar was succeeded by his son 
Humayun. He invaded Gujrat in the Dakhan, 
and then determined on making an_ expedition 
against Sher Shah, who had recently taken posses- 
sion of Bengal. Humayun was successful at first. 
He recovered Gaur, then the capital of Bengal, but 
was at last-defeated and obliged to seek safety in 
flight. Mounted on horseback he plunged into the 
Ganges; his horse sank, and he himself only escaped 
drowning by the prompt assistance rendered him 
by a water-carrier. On crossing the river, he made 
his way to Agra, and there effected a reconciliation 
with his brother Hindal, who had previously been 
his enemy. They with their brother Kamran col- 
lected a great force, and this time there were hopes 
of success for the imperial cause, but Humayun was 
again defeated near Kanauj, and was obliged to flee 
from Hindustan. He made his way to Lahore, and 
there inquired for some wonder-working priest 
who could restore him his throne and kingdom. 
He was informed of the greatness of the late Guru 
Nanak and of the succession of Guru Angad to 
his spiritual sovereignty, and advised to seek his 
assistance. Upon this Humayun, taking offerings 
with him, proceeded to Khadur. The Guru at the 
time was in a deep trance, minstrels were playing and 
singing the Guru’s hymns, and the Emperor was 
kept standing. He became violently angry, and 
put his hand on the hilt of his sword with the inten- 
tion of striking the Guru. The sword, however, 
would not come out of the scabbard, a circumstance 
which gave the fugitive Emperor time to repent of 
his haste. The Guru, nothing daunted, addressed 

C2 

20 THE SIKH RELIGION 

him: “When thou oughtest to have used thy sword 
against Sher Shah, thou didst not do so. Now when 
thou comest among priests, instead of saluting them 
respectfully, thou desirest to draw thy sword on 
them. In a cowardly manner hast thou fled from 
the battle, and now posing as a hero thou wishest 
to attack a body of men engaged in their devotions.’ 
Humayun repented and craved the Gurw’s spiritual 
assistance. The Guru replied : ‘ Hadst thou not put 
thy hand on the hilt of thy sword, thou shouldst at 
once have obtained thy kingdom. Thou shalt now pro- 
ceed for a time to thine own country Persia, and when 
thou returnest thou shalt recover thy possessions.’ 
The Emperor took his leave, crossed the Indus with 
great trouble and difficulty, and made his way to 
his native country. Having obtained a reinforce- 
ment of cavalry from the king of Persia, he returned 
to India, and after a pitched battle recovered his 
empire and captured Dihli. After his success he felt 
grateful to the Guru and desired to do him a favour. 
By this time Guru Angad was no more, and Guru 
Amar Das reigned in his place. Guru Amar Das sent 
a message to the Emperor to live honestly, not to 
desecrate holy places, and not again to come to molest 
the Guru. 

There was a Sikh called Mana who worked in 
Guru Angad’s kitchen. Through good feeding he 
waxed fat and proud, so that at last he would not 
obey any of the Sikhs or even perform his ordinary 
duties. He spent the principal part of his time 
quarrelling with his fellow Sikhs. He used to say, 
‘I am nobody’s servant. I am the Guru’s Sikh, 
and I will only do what he ordereth me.’ One day 
he showed a disposition to work. The Guru told 
him to serve the saints. He said, ‘I am not their 
servant, but I will do for thee what thou orderest 
me.’ The Guru, tired of seeing him suing for 
Service, told him to go to the forest, gather some 
firewood, and cremate himself. Mana accordingly 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD or 

went to the forest, collected wood, and made a pyre. 
On setting fire to it and seeing it blaze up he became 
afraid, and did not relish the idea of death. Mean- 
while a thief arrived and asked why this great fire ? 
Mana related his whole story. The thief on hearing 
of the Guru’s greatness began to repent, and con- 
cluded that he had at last an opportunity of wiping 
out the sins of his past life. He accordingly said to 
Mana, ‘ Take this casket of gems from me, and let 
me in exchange for it obey the Guru's order.’ Mana 
being a greedy man and loving life, a bargain was 
struck on these terms. The thief obtained faith, cre- 
mated himself, itissaid, and went tohisrepose at Guru 
Nanak’s feet. Mana went to the bazar to sell the 
gems, and was there arrested on suspicion of having 
stolen them. The result of his trial was that he - 
was hanged, and the stolen gems restored to their 
owner. ‘So true is it,’ as the Guru subsequently 
said, ‘that the perverse lose both worlds, and, if 
folly depart not from the heart, man obtaineth not 
salvation even by living near the Guru.’ 

Balwand and Satta continued to please the Guru's 
visitors with their songs and music; but on seeing 
his glory increase, their pride and greed increased 
in the same ratio. They boasted that it was on 
account of their music the Guru had become re- 
nowned. One day an elderly Sikh asked them to 
sing him a hymn. They made a rude reply, caying, 
‘Shall we sing hymns for peasants ?’ The Guru on 
hearing this was not pleased, and, when the minstrels 
came to sing at the evening seance, turned his back 
on them. They went round so as to catch his eye, 
but he again avoided their salutation. They asked 
what offence they had committed. He informed 
them and said that, as they would not sing to a Sikh 
of his, they must not sing to him. They fell at his 
feet and begged his pardon, which he good-naturedly 
granted. Their pride, however, was not totally 
humbled. They determined to sing for the future 

22 THE SIKH RELIGION 

only on condition that they received higher wages. 
After a sliort time they told the Guru that one of 
their daughters was to be married, and they asked 
for five hundred rupees to meet expenses. The Guru 
desired them to wait for two months, and he would 
settle their accounts at the yearly Baisakhi fair. 
Balwand said they could not wait so long; they 
wanted money at once, and pressed him to borrow 
it for them. The Guru replied that it was not 
a good thing to borrow, and he asked them to have 
patience and see what God would do. They then 
began to address him in an insolent tone: ‘ It is 
we who by singing thy praises have made thee 
famous. Did we not sing the Guru’s hymns, the 
Sikhs would never make thee offerings. Therefore 
refuse not our request. If thou choose not to give 
the money we require, we will go to our homes and 
sing our hymns there.’ 

The quarrel was not adjusted, and next morning 
they did not present themselves. The Guru sent for 
them, but they failed to answer his summons. He 
again sent a special messenger to tell them not to 
delay, but come to him at once. The more, how- 
ever, the Guru humbled himself, the prouder they 
became. They replied, ‘ The Guru knoweth not our 
worth. His court shall have no splendour without 
us. Itven Guru Nanak’s court would not have been 
known without the music of Mardana.’ The Guru 
could endure the ingratitude of the minstrels who 
owed everything to him, but he could not endure the 
disrespect shown to Guru Nanak’s court, so he 
cursed them and said, ‘ Their children shall wander 
forlorn, and none shall cherish them.’ The Guru 
then assigned the duty of singing the hymns to 
his Sikhs. Tor a good cause enthusiasts are some- 
times found. Bhai Ramu, Bhai Dipa, Bhai Ugarsain, 
and Bhai Nagauri came from Dalla with two- 
stringed violins and cymbals, and took the places 
of the faithless Balwand and Satta. It soon began 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 23 

to rain showers of melody and devotion, and the 
audiences were delighted. Balwand and Satta on 
reaching their homes continued to sing the Guru's 
hymns with the object of withdrawing the Sikhs 
from the Guru, but in this they completely failed. 
No one would go to them or listen to their minstrelsy. 
They found themselves without corn or money to 
buy it, and then they began to repent of their 
impudence and imprudence. They said to some 
Sikhs, whom they expected to perform the office of 
mediators between them and the Guru, that they 
would return to their duties, if they even received 
food and clothes as remuneration. The Sikhs men- 
tioned this to the Guru, but he sternly forbade 
them to make any representation again on behalf 
of men who showed disrespect to the house of Guru 
Nanak. He said he would have the beard and 
moustaches of any one who again spoke in their 
favour cut off and his face blackened, and he would 
then have him mounted on a donkey and led in 
disgrace through the city. 

Two months after this Balwand and Satta went 
to Lahore to visit one Bhai Ladha, whom they knew 
to possess great influence with the Guru. . They told 
him all the circumstances connected with their 
quarrel with the Guru, and begged him to intercede 
for them. Bhai Ladha said to himself, ‘ Here is 
a chance of doing good. The body and wealth 
abide not for ever. The only gain is for him who 
doeth a good action.’ He sent Balwand and Satta 
on before him, and having shaved his head, blackened 
his face, and mounted a donkey with his face turned 
to the tail, went round the city of Khadur, and 
finally arrived in the Guru’s presence. The Guru 
asked him what guise he had assumed. He said 
he was merely obeying the Guru’s order, and prayed 
him to be good enough to pardon and reinstate the 
rebeck-players. ‘The Sikhs err,’ said Bhat Ladha, 
“but the Guru can pardon and mend what is broken.’ 

24 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru granted Bhai Ladha’s request and, com- 
mending his self-devotion, took the opportunity of 
expatiating on the merits of philanthropy: ‘The 
best devotion is the remembrance of the True 
Name ; the best act is philanthropy: without both 
of these accursed is man’s human birth. He merely 
vegetateth and heedeth not what is best for him. 
He is a beast without a tail or horn, and vain is his 
advent into the world. At the last moment the 
myrmidons of Death shall firmly seize him, and he 
shall depart grieving with empty hands. Almsgifts, 
penance, and sacrifices are not equal to philanthropy. 
Of the various sins that man commits none is worse 
than selfishness.’ 

When the rebeck-players came, they fell at the 
Guru's feet, but they were too much abashed to lift 
their eyes to his. He put rebecks into their hands, 
and ordered them to sing with the same mouths 
and to the same instruments the praises of Guru 
Nanak whom they had reviled. They then com- 
posed and sang in Guru Nanak and Guru Angad’s 
praises five pauris in the Ramkali ki War, which, 
when completed by three pauris more, Guru Arjan 
subsequently included in the Granth Sahib.) The 
composition is known among the Sikhs as the Coro- 

1 In this narrative we have followed Bhai Dhiyan Singh Gyani, grand- 
uncle of Bhai Sardtil Singh Gyani. Bhai Santokh Singh states that 
the above composition was written in the tiine of Guru Arjan. This 
receives some support from Gur Das also. He makes ‘ Bhai Ladha 
parupkari, who interceded with Guru Angad for Balwand and Satta, 
live in the time of Guru Arjan. It does not, however, follow that 
Bhai Ladha did not live in the time of Guru Angad also. The 
statement that the circumstance occurred in the time of Guru Arjan is 
totally negatived by the internal evidence of the composition itself, if it 
be carefully examined. It was written by the minstrel Balwand to 
make his peace with Guru Angad. Satta afterwards, as we shall see, 
added three pauris to it in the time of Guru Arjan when the apotheosis 
of the Guru had become complete. ‘The pauris were added with the 
intention of making a complete panegyric on the Gurus up to the time 
of Guru Arjan, and obtaining for the ode the honour of insertion in 
the Granth Sahib. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 25 

nation Ode (Tikke di War). The pauris or stanzas 
which relate to Guru Nanak and Guru Angad are 
as follow :— 

[ 

How can the words of him who uttereth the Name of the 
Omnipotent Creator be weighed ? ! 

Grant us true merits that the gift of supreme salvation 
may be ours, and that our sisters and brothers may 
share 1." 

Nanak established his empire by laying a strong founda- 
tion of the fortress of truth.? 

He placed the crown over Lahina’s head, and Lahina re- 
peating God’s praises quaffed nectar. 

The true Guru put into Guru Angad’s heart the power- 
ful sword of the Almighty. 

The Guru and his disciple Lahina have made the straight 
road—hail to Nanak! 

The King during his lifetime gave the apostolic mark to 
Guru Angad. 

II 

Guru Nanak proclaimed the accession of Lahina as the 
reward of service. 

He had the same light, the same ways ; the king merely 
changed his own body.4 

The divine umbrella waved over him ; he obtained posses- 
sion of the throne in the place of Guru Nanak. 

Lahina did what Guru Nanak ordered him, and in doing so 
licked the insipid stone ® of Jogism. 

The kitchen of the Guru’s word was opened; in his 
earnings there was no deficiency. 

1 Also translated—He whose name is the Omnipotent Creator doeth 
everything ; how can His words be weighed? 

2 Also translated—Grant us virtues, truth, &c., as our sisters and 
brothers. 

3 Also translated—Nanak established the true empire and made firm 
the foundation of his fortress. 

4 That is, assumed another form. 

® So called because man must suffer worldly discomfort while 
striving to obtain union with God. 

26 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He liberally spent the Master’s gift, himself ate, and gave 
alms. 

The Lord is praised; His light flasheth from the upper 
to the lower regions. 

On beholding thee, O true King, the filth of different 
births hath been cut away. 

Since the Guru ordered us to speak the truth, why should 
we-recede from his order ? 

His sons would not obey his words ; they turned a deaf 
ear to their priest. 

With evil hearts they became rebels ; they took sackloads 
of sins on their heads. 

Lahina obeyed what the Guru had ordered him, and earned 
the reward of his acts.2 

Let us sce who hath lost and who hath gained. 

Il 

Lahina obeyed the orders of Guru Nanak whether necessary 
or unnecessary.3 

The Guru is impartial like the god Dharmraj, and inter- 
cedeth for those who appeal to him. 

The True One doeth at once what the true Guru telleth him. 

The sovereignty of Guru Angad was proclaimed and the 
true Creator ratified the act. 

A scion of Guru Nanak exchanged bodies with him and 
took possession of his throne. 

The people waited at the Guru’s door, and the rust of 
their sins was filed off. 

The darweshes at his gate became happy by uttering the 
Master’s true name and hymns. 

sath Balwand, Gurw Angad’s consort Khivi was a good 
person who afforded very effectual shade to his disciples. 

1 A reference to Gur Das, War I, 38, and XXVI, 33, will show that 
this line is correctly translated. 

* ‘This is on the supposition that £Aa//a? is read as the last word of 
the verse. ‘Those who read /hafa? translate—What Guru Nanak said 
he did, and what he attempted he successfully accomplished. 

° Ko sal jtwahe sali. Also translated—(a) which is better, thistle or 
rice? (The Guru’s sons are thistles, and Lahina rice.) (6) As man 
doeth good or evil so shall he be accepted. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 27 

She distributed the Guru’s wealth in his kitchen—rice 
boiled in milk and ghi tasting like ambrosia. 

The faces of the Guru’s Sikhs were bright ; those of the 
perverse grew pale. 

The disciples who toil are accepted in company with their 
master. 

Mother Khivi’s spouse is he who supporteth the earth. 

IV 

Guru Nanak, in bowing to Guru Angad, reversed the order 
of things,! and everybody said ‘ What is this he hath done ? ° 

King Nanak, the lord of the earth, uttered sublime 
sentiments. 

Taking a mountain as his churning staff and the snake 
as its rope he churned God’s word. 

He extracted the fourteen gems and illumined the world. 

He displayed such power when he tested so great a 
man as Angad. 

He put his umbrella over the head of Lahina who then 
was exalted to the skies. 

Guru Nanak’s light blended with Guru Angad’s, and 
Guru Nanak became absorbed in him. 

He tested his Sikhs and his sons, and the whole sect saw 
what he had done. 

It was when Lahina was purified that Guru Nanak 
consecrated him. 

V 

After Guru Nanak, Pheru’s son the true Guru, went and 
inhabited Khadur. 

Devotion, penance, and austerities abide with thee, 
O Lahina; great pride with other people. 

Greed spoileth men as slime doth water.’ 

Natural light streameth into the Guru’s court. 

They who can find no shelter elsewhere find it in thee, 
O Lahina. 

1 Porio Gang wahaiar. Literally—made the Ganges flow backwards. 
2 Balwand here censures himself. 

28 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou art completely filled with the Name, which is wealth 
and the nine treasures. 

He who slandereth thee shall be ruined. 

The people of this world only sce with their eycs, but 
thou scest afar with thy mind. 

Pheru’s son the true Guru went and inhabited Khadur 
after Guru Nanak. 

CHAPTER V 

There resided in Khadur the purse-proud Chaudhri! 
of the Khahiras, who placed himself in opposition to 
Guru Angad. He used to laugh at the Sikhs when 
he saw them doing service for the Guru. The 
Chaudhri had a son who was betrothed in childhood 
at vast expense. When he grew up he used to 
drink wine and frequent the society of women of 
ill fame, and he became an enemy of those who 
endeavoured to dissuade him from evil courses. 
Once he fell ill with fever, and epilepsy subsequently 
supervened. He became insensible and foamed at 
the mouth. His parents and relations tried every 
remedy and every form of incantation, burnt in- 
cense to exorcise the evil spirits who they thought 
possessed the patient, but all their efforts were in 
vain. At last friends suggested to the young man’s 
parents to place him under the Guru’s treatment. 
Persons suffering from various ailments came long 
distances to the Guru, and all returned to their 
homes restored to health, so why should not 
the Guru heal the Chaudhri’s son ? Moreover, the 
Chaudhri’s family lived near, and a trial at any rate 
might be made of the Guru’s healing power. The 
young man’s parents and friends yielded to the 
representations made them, and took him to the 
Guru. The Guru’s prescription was not elaborate. 
He ordered the patient to abstain from wine, serve 

1 The headman of a village. There were originally four (chaz) men 
in whom confidence was placed (dhar); hence the name. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 20 

holy men, repeat God’s name, and he should be 
effectually cured. When he recovered by this mode 
of treatment he was informed that if he disregarded 
the Guru’s injunctions his malady would return. 

There lived in Khadur a pretended religious man 
known as the Tapa, or Penitent, to whom recourse 
had been made at an early stage of the young man’s 
illness. He boasted that it was his own prayers 
which had effected the cure. When the Guru heard 
this, he said he did not desire to speak evilly of 
any one, and he repeated from the Asa ki War, 
‘Treat others as thou wouldst be treated thyself.’ 
A year passed, however, without any evil to the 
young man. When the month of Sawan came round 
with its gathering clouds, its flashing lightning, and 
its cooling rain, he said, ‘ When shall this pleasant 
time come again? Following the Guru’s instruc- 
tions I have passed a whole year in misery and 
suffering. Now bring wine and let me drink.’ 
Several persons tried to dissuade him, but in vain. 
He drank wine without measure, saying, * What 
knoweth Angad of the pleasure I feel?’ That 
moment his epilepsy returned, he fell to the ground 
from the top story of his house,and was immediately 
killed. Every one said that his death was the 
result of his opposition to the Guru and disregard 
of his warnings. The Guru, much distressed at the 
young man’s untimely fate, repeated Guru Nanak’s 
Alahanian or Lamentation. 

When the Guru subsequently visited Harike, the 
scene of his childhood, his Sikhs went to do him 
homage, and brought him a couch to rest on after 
the fatigue of his journey. The owner of the village, 
who had known the Guru when a boy, refused to 
accept him as a prophet, to show him honour, or to 
make him an offering, but sat down familiarly 
beside him at the head of the couch. As soon as he 
did so his head became giddy, and he fell from his 
seat. The Sikhs told him that that was the result 

30 THE SIKH RELIGION 

of his having put himself on an equality with the 
Guru. He replied, ‘I am of higher caste than the 
Guru, and owner of a village. How is he superior 
tome?’ Then the Sikhs repeated for his edification 
the eleventh slok of Asa ki War. On hearing it 
the man’s pride and malevolence departed, and he 
became a devout Sikh. 

King Ram Chandar, accepted by the Hindus as 
a god, had a younger half-brother named Bharat. 
It is said that from him the Khatris of the Bhalla 
tribe have descended. Tej Bhan of that line went 
and dwelt in the village of Basarka not far from 
Amritsar. His wife Bakht Kaur bore him four sons, 
the eldest of whom was Amar Das. He was born 
before day on the 14th of the light half of Baisakh 
in the Sambat year 1536 (A.D. 1479). He lived 
partly by agriculture and partly by trade. At the 
age of twenty-three years and ten months he was 
married to Mansa Devi. There were two sons, 
Mohri and Mohan, and two daughters, Dani and 
Bhani, born of the marriage. Amar Das was a zealous 
believer in the Vaishnav faith, and used to fast 
every eleventh day. He ever reflected that his 
human life was passing in vain, and he longed for 
the guidance of a religious teacher to make it pro- 
fitable. ‘Howcan the lotus bloom without the sight 
of the sun,’ he asked, ‘and how can man obtain 
salvation without a guru?’ He made a vow to 
bathe yearly in the Ganges, and zealously discharge 
all the duties of a pious Hindu. On returning for 
the twentieth time from that sacred river, wearied 
with travel and the noonday heat, he lay down to 
sleep outside the village of Mihra. 

As Amar Das continued his journey, he met a 
monk with whom he became so intimate and friendly 
that they cooked for each other. The monk on seeing 
Amar Das’s merits asked him what guru had taught 
him such piety and wisdom. Amar Das replied that 
he had no guru. On hearing this the monk said, 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 31 

‘Alas! I have committed a greatsin. I have eaten 
from the hands of a man who hath no guru. My 
ablutions in the Ganges are now of no avail. It 
was only when Narad and Shukdev' appointed gurus 
that they themselves became worthy of worship. 
I can now only be purified by returning to bathe 
again in the Ganges.’ Thus lamenting the monk 
departed. Amar Das then began seriously to con- 
sider how he could find a guru. Until he had found 
one, he had no heart to eat or perform his secular 
duties. He prayed, ‘O God, mercifully grant that 
I may meet such a guru as will possess the alchemic 
power of turning dross into gold.’ One morning 
before day, while engaged in such reflections on the 
upper parapet of his house, he heard the dulcet 
chanting of the Guru’s hymns. The voice came 
from his brother’s house where lived Bibi Amro, 
Guru Angad’s daughter, recently married to his 
(Amar Das’s) brother’s son. It was Bibi Amro’s 
practice to rise a watch before day, bathe, and 
recite the Japji and other hymns of Guru Nanak, 
and then make butter for the family. When over- 
heard by Amar Das, she was singing the third 
hymn in the Maru measure, already given in the 
Life of Guru Nanak. 

On hearing it, Amar Das became deeply absorbed 
in devotion. From the concluding lines in particular 
he derived the sublime consolation that he should 
be changed from dross into gold. He could not 
avoid asking the lady to sing the hymn again, 
and inquired where she had learnt it. She readily 
consented, and added that she had learned the 
composition from her father. Amar Das committed 
the hymn to memory, and prevailed on her to take 

1 A brief account of Narad has already been given. Shukdev was 
a rikhi the son of Vyas, the author of the Mahabharat and arranger of 
the Veds. As usual in his epoch, he desired to place himself under 
a guru. He succeeded in finding Raja Janak, the father-in-law of 
Ram Chandar, who made him his disciple. 

32 THE SIKH RELIGION 

him to see the Guru. The devotion of a former 
existence was kindled in his heart, and until he had 
the advantage of beholding Guru Angad, he deemed 
every moment an age. 

After some days, during which suitable arrange- 
ments were made for their travel, Bibi Amro accom- 
panied by Amar Das set out on a visit to her father 
in Khadur. When Amar Das arrived, the Guru, 
on account of his close affinity, desired to embrace 
him, but Amar Das courteously remonstrated. He 
said, ‘Thou art as God, I am ohly a worm,’ and 
then fell at the Guru’s feet. Amar Das, on doing 
homage to the Guru, felt as delighted as a poor 
man would who had obtained the wealth of the 
world. 

One day the Guru had a meat dinner prepared. 
Amar Das said, ‘ If the Guru is a searcher of hearts, 
he must know that I am a Vaishnav and do not 
touch flesh.’ The Guru, knowing this, ordered that 
dal* should be served him. Amar Das then reflected, 
‘The Guru knoweth that meat is forbidden me, so 
he hath ordered that dal be served me instead.’ 
Amar Das then rapidly arrived at the conclusion 
that any disciple, whose practice differed from that 
of the Guru, must inevitably fail. He therefore told 
the cook that if the Guru were kind enough to give 
him meat, he would partake of it. The Guru, on 
hearing this, knew that superstition was departing 
from Amar Das’s heart, and he handed him his own 
dish. When Amar Das had partaken of it, he for 
the first time felt peace of mind, and, as he became 
further absorbed in his attentions and devotion to 
the Guru, celestial light dawned on his heart. Thus 
did he break with the strictest tenet of Vaishnavism 
and become a follower of the Guru. 

One day the Guru, in order to further remove 

' Dal is the pulse of certain Indian leguminous plants such as chana, 

masur, moth, urad, ming, &c. It is not the name of any particular 
vegetable. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 33 

Amar Das’s prejudices, thus began to instruct him : 
‘ The meats it is proper to abstain from are these— 
Others’ wealth, others’ wives, slander, envy, covetous- 
ness, and pride. If any one abstaining from meat 
is proud on the subject and says, ‘‘I never touch 
meat,’ let him consider that the infant sucks nipples 
of flesh, that the married man takes home with 
him a vessel of flesh. Guru Angad then repeated 
and expounded Guru Nanak’s sloks on the subject. 
He also related to Amar Das the story of Duni Chand 
and his father, given in the Life of Guru Nanak. 

‘If you think of it,’ continued the Guru, ‘ there 
is life in everything, even in fruits and flowers, to say 
nothing of flesh; but whatever thou eatest, eat 
remembering God, and it shall be profitable to thee. 
Whatever cometh to thee without hurting a fellow- 
creature is nectar, and whatever thou receivest by 
giving pain is poison. To shatter another’s hopes, 
to calumniate others, and to misappropriate their 
property 1s worse than to eat meat.’ The last 
vestige of Amar Das’s superstition had by this time 
departed. He remained night and day in attendance 
on the Guru, and is said to have performed for him 
the menial offices of many servants. One day, as 
the Guru and Amar Das were walking together, 
Amar Das thoughtlessly put his left arm forward 
in advance of the Guru’s body. Amar Das was 
himself the first to notice and regret the occur- 
rence. He said, ‘This arm which hath caused 
disrespect to the Guru should be cut off. What 
sort of servant am I if I revere not my master ?’ 
The Guru replied, ‘It is of no consequence ; swing 
thine arm by all means. It is by austerities the 
senses should be controlled. Move thy feet and 
hands in the saints’ service and thy devotion shall 
be profitable. He who performeth such service 
shall be happy. Let man renounce pride, fear and 
love God, accept His will, and obey His commands. 
These are the marks of a true Sikh.’ 

SIKH. Il D 

34 THE SIKH RELIGION 

One day a man called Gobind came to make a 
complaint to Guru Angad. He had been involved 
in a lawsuit with his relations, and vowed that if 
ever he were victorious, he would found a city in 
honour of the Guru. Fortune having favoured him, 
he began to found the city on an open plot of land 
on the bank of the Bias, of which he had obtained 
a lease from the Emperor. Having received from 
astrologers an auspicious time for the inception of 
the work, he laid out the boundaries, employed 
masons, and began to build; but what was done 
by day was in some mysterious manner undone by 
night. It was supposed that this was the work 
of demons, but probably the enmity of Gobind’s 
relations has not been taken sufficiently into con- 
sideration. Gobind prayed the Guru to have the 
village completed and called after himself. The 
Guru then read him a homily on the futility of fame. 
‘Why trouble about miserable human affairs ? 
There ought to be naught dearer to man than the 
True Name.’ Gobind then prayed him to grant his 
desires, even if he had no ambition to have the city 
founded in his honour. 

Upon this Guru Angad sent Amar Das his walking- 
stick and commissioned him to remove whatever 
obstructed the construction of the city. Amar Das 
prayed to God for His assistance, and everything 
succeeded according to the Guru’s wishes. Gobind 
founded without further molestation a beautiful 
city, which Amar Das called Gobindwal in honour 
of him. The city isnow known as Goindwal. Gobind 
did not forget to build a palace in it for his benefactor 
Amar Das. When everything was completed, Gobind 
went again to Khadur to offer his thanks to the 
Guru for sending with him such a potent envoy as 
Amar Das, and also to beg the Guru to go and live 
in the newly-founded city. The Guru did not wish 
to leave his old town and residence, so he ordered 
Amar Das to go and live in Goindwal by night, and 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 35 

come to him by day. On account of the presence 
of Amar Das and the religious atmosphere which 
pervaded the place, Goindwal became a species of 
earthly paradise. Amar Das in process of time took 
with him all his relations from Basarka and _ per- 
manently settled in Goindwal. 

Amar Das was now old, but a halo of devotion 
shone round him. His daily duties were as follows : 
He rose at Goindwal a watch before day, and pro- 
ceeded to the river Bias to take water to Khadur 
for the Guru to bathe with. Meanwhile he repeated 
the Japji and generally finished it half-way between 
Goindwal and Khadur. After hearing the Asa ki 
War in Khadur he fetched water for the Guru's 
kitchen, scrubbed the cooking utensils, and brought 
firewood from the forest. Every evening he listened 
to the Sodar and the daily vespers and then sham- 
pooed the Guru. After putting him to rest he 
returned to Goindwal, walking backwards in his 
supreme reverence for his spiritual master. The 
half-way spot where he used every morning to 
finish the Japji is called the Damdama or breathing- 
place. A temple was erected on the spot, and is 
now an object of pious pilgrimage to Sikhs. 

CHAPTER VI 

Mention has already been made of the Tapa who 
lived at Khadur. He was worshipped as a guru by 
the Khahira Jats. He was constant in his external 
devotions, and knew how to practise spells and in- 
cantations, but he cherished a most unholy jealousy 
of the Guru, and did all in his power to hinder the 
Guru’s followers from making him the object of 
a reverence which, the Tapa contended, should 
never be shown to a family man. He maintained 
that it was he himself, who was both continent and 
a penitent, whom all men should worship. 

D2 

36 THE SIKH RELIGION 

It happened that one year there was a great 
drought in the land. The months of Har, Sawan, 
and even half of Bhadon—from the middle of June 
to the end of August—had passed, and the usual 
rains of the season had not appeared. Food stuffs 
became scarce and dear, and the people were greatly 
distressed. Cattle too suffered severely, and died 
in large numbers, for all the tanks were dry and 
no water came from heaven. The people went in 
a body to the Tapa and represented their condition. 
He said it was a small calamity in comparison with 
another which had befallen their town. ‘I am 
a monk,’ he said, ‘yet no one worshippeth me, but 
all worship the family man. Go now and tell the 
Guru to procure you rain.’ The cultivators replied : 
‘The Guru telleth no one to worship him. He 
careth naught for king or emperor, he thinketh not 
of eating or drinking. Every offering made him is 
sent into his kitchen, whence the poor, the indigent, 
the traveller, and the stranger are fed. We have no 
power to compel the Guru.’ 

The Tapa replied, ‘ If you expel him from the city 
I will send you rain in less than twenty-four hours. 
If, on the other hand, you allow him to remain, let 
him cause rain to fall.’ On hearing this the ignorant 
Jats lost their heads, went to the Guru, and requested 
him to send rain. The Guru said, ‘ Rest satisfied 
with God’s will. God hath no partner in His designs, 
and no one can influence Him.’ The Jats then 
delivered to the Guru the Tapa’s message. The 
Guru replied that if they thought they could thus 
gain their object, he would willingly leave their town. 
Bhai Budha was very angry with the Jats, but the 
Guru restrained him and said, ‘ Our religion teacheth 
pardon for offences.’ Saying this the Guru turned 
his back on the town, proceeded some distance, and 
sat under a tree. The cultivators who lived in that 
neighbourhood were warned not to receive him. 
In this way he had to leave seven villages in suc- 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 37 

cession, until at last he found refuge in a forest 
near Razad Khan’s hillock, south of Khadur, where 
he was visited by neighbours who bore no allegiance 
to the haughty and hypocritical Tapa. 

When Amar Das arrived in Khadur next morning, 
he found the Guru’s house empty. On inquiring 
of the villagers, he learned all the circumstances 
connected with his master’s exile. Amar Das told 
them they were fools, asked them if they had taken 
leave of their senses, and if a lamp could ever be 
substituted for the sun; that is, how could they 
have kept the Tapa and expelled the Guru? Upon 
this occasion Amar Das composed the two following 
sloks :— 

By meeting the true Guru worldly hunger departeth, but 
it departeth not by merely putting on a sectarial garb. 

Through the pain of hunger the Tapa wandereth from 
house to house; in the next world he shall obtain twofold 
punishment. 

His appetite is not satisfied, and he never eateth in comfort 
what he obtaineth. 

He ever beggeth with persistency and annoyeth the giver. 

Leading the life of a householder, by which somebody 
may gain, is better than putting on such a sectarial dress. 

They who are imbued with the Word acquire under- 
standing ; others are led astray by doubt. 

They act as they were destined ; it is of no use to address 
them. 

Nanak, they who please God are fortunate; they are 
honoured and acceptable. 

The fire of avarice is not extinguished by wearing a 
sectarial dress ; anxiety still continueth in the mind. 

As striking a serpent’s lair killeth not the serpent, so 
a man without the Guru performeth useless acts. 

Serve the generous true Guru, and let the Word abide 
in your hearts ; 

38 THE SIKH RELIGION 

So shall your bodies be refreshed, your minds become 
happy, and the fire of avarice be extinguished. 

You shall feel the height of bliss when you have banished 
pride from within you. 

The holy man, the real hermit, is he who continueth to 
fix his attention on the True One. 

He who is contented and satisfied with God’s name, shall 
feel not a particle of anxiety. 

Nanak, without the Name man will not be delivered ; 
he shall perish in his pride.! 

The people all flocked around the Tapa, and said, 
‘On account of thee have we fallen out with the 
Guru. When he was here, we always had enough 
even of dainties to eat from his kitchen. We have 
now expelled him, and yet no rain falleth.’ The 
Tapa replied, ‘Have patience; rain shall fall 
unmediately.’ He then made every form of incan- 
tation, but without success. Amar Das explained 
to the people that, excepting God, nobody had 
power to send rain, and they had been most unwise 
in accepting the statements of a hypocrite against 
a man who had never harmed any human being. If 
the Tapa could cause rain to fall, why should he 
beg from house to house ? On this the people were 
satisfied of the Tapa’s hypocrisy, and greatly 
repented of their treatment of the Guru. They 
then inflicted suitable punishment on the Tapa, so 
that other evil men might not be tempted to follow 
his example. After that they went in a body to 
solicit the Guru’s forgiveness for their acts. 

When Guru Angad heard of the Tapa’s punish- 
ment, he felt much grieved and thus addressed 
Amar Das: ‘ Thou hast not obtained the fruits of 
companionship with me, which are peace, forbear- 
ance, and forgiveness. Thou canst not endure 
things difficult to be endured. What thou didst, 
thou didst to please the rabble.’ On hearing this, 

1 Wadhans ki War. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 39 

Amar Das threw himself at the Guru’s feet and 
humbly besought his pardon. He promised that he 
would for the future rigidly abide by such instruc- 
tions as the Guru was pleased to communicate. 
The Guru replied: ‘ Thou shouldst have endurance 
like the earth, steadfastness in woe and weal like 
a mountain; thou shouldst bear pardon in thy 
heart, and do good to every one irrespective of his 
acts. Thou shouldst deem gold and dross as the 
same, and practise humility, for the humble shall 
ever be exalted. Behold how valuable even minute 
diamonds are. The pearl is small, but consider its 
price. Reflect on the tiny fruit of the bohr-tree,* 
and to what a prodigious size it groweth, filling 
a forest far and wide.’ 

The Guru on his return to Khadur passed by 
a village called Bhairo, where lived a friend of his 
called Khiwan. Hearing of the Guru’s coming, he 
went forth to meet him, and invited him to visit 
his house and bless it. The Guru accepted his 
hospitality, and made him supremely happy. Amar 
Das promised that the true Guru would grant 
Khiwan a son, and that that son should be a saint. 
On hearing this everybody was astonished that 
Amar Das during the Guru’s lifetime should have 
adopted the role of prophet and _ bestower of 
offspring. Amar Das on reflection felt that he had 
again transgressed the Guru’s injunctions, and 
expressed his contrition therefor. The Guru con- 
soled him: ‘ My light is in thee. For the future, 
whatever thou sayest, say with deliberation.’ 

There was great rejoicing in Khadur on the Guru's 
return. It was everywhere believed that the Tapa’s 
punishment was a supernatural event to attest the 
Guru’s divine mission. Henceforth no rival of Guru 
Angad set foot in Khadur. 

The Guru, on now observing Amar Das’s devotion, 

1 The bohr-tree is the F%cvs Zndica, generally known as the Indian 
fig-tree. 

40 THE SIKH RELIGION 

great merits, and innate nobility of character, said 
to his Sikhs: ‘Amar Das will save innumerable 
persons. Blest be the eyes which behold the saint 
of the True Guru, blest the hands which serve him, 
blest the feet which tread the way to the society 
of the holy, blest the ears which hear God’s 
praises, and blest the tongue which refraineth from 
calumny, slander, and falsehood. Ever speak the 
truth, and sing the hymns of the Guru.’ 

The Guru’s sons Dasu and Datu remained with 
him, but he was better pleased with Amar Das’s 
service. It was the Guru’s custom to distribute 
robes of honour half-yearly to his Sikhs. When 
Amar Das received his, he used to wear it as a 
turban or cushion on his head, and never remove 
it; and when he received another he used to tie it 
on the top of the last presented him. In this way 
he carried twelve turbans on his head by the time 
he was appointed Guru. On seeing him carry such 
a weight people said he was in his dotage, but in 
reality his faith and devotion daily increased. He 
felt no desire for wealth or supernatural power. 
His thoughts were ever absorbed in God, the Guru’s 
service, and the distribution of alms to the indigent. 

Once a rich Sikh presented a costly dress to the 
Guru. <A drop of blood fell on it from a sore on 
the Guru’s foot, and the Guru told Amar Das to 
take it to be washed. When the washerman examined 
it he said he feared the stain could not be removed. 
The cloth was of very fine material, and he asked 
not to be blamed if it were injured in the washing. 
Amar Das, on hearing this, sucked the blood from 
the dress, an extreme act of humility and devotion. 
The stain disappeared, and he took the dress 
thoroughly clean to his master, saying, ‘ As the stain 
hath vanished from this dress, so by thy favour 
hath impurity from my mind.’ 

Guru Angad’s sore foot occasionally gave him great 
pain. One night, as matter was issuing from it, he 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD AI 

complained to Amar Das that he could not sleep for 
the pain. Amar Das promptly applied his mouth to 
the sore and sucked it. The Guru obtained imme- 
diate relief and thus secured a good night’s rest. 
He then told Amar Das to ask a favour. Amar Das 
replied, ‘ Why suffer from this sore? The favour 
I ask is that thou heal it by thy supernatural power.’ 
The Guru replied by the twelfth slok of Asa ki 
War, and added :—‘ In pain God is remembered and 
the mind remaineth humbled. At night man 
awaketh in God’s service and is estranged from the 
world.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

One day Guru Angad said that his life was drawing 
to a close, and he must depart. In reply to his Sikhs, 
who desired that he should remain longer among 
them to bestow instruction and divine happiness, 
he said, ‘ The saints of the true Guru are of the 
nature of clouds. They assume a body for the 
benefit of the world, and confer benefits on men. 
The body, which is merely a store-house of corn, 
shall perish. As a rich man casteth aside his old 
clothes and putteth on new ones, so do the saints 
of the true Guru put away their crumbling bodies, 
and take new vesture for their souls. A man 
in his own house may remain naked or clothed, 
may wear old or new raiment—that is the con- 
dition of the saints—they are bound by no rules.’ 
The Guru’s disciples listened to this discourse 
with rapt attention and their anxieties were 
removed. 

While the Guru was considering that his sons 
were not, but that Amar Das was, fit to succeed 
him, an accident occurred which finally confirmed 
him in his determination. On the 14th of the month 
of Chet, when there was no moon, it rained all night. 

42 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Cold winds blew, lightning flashed, and every 
human being was glad to find shelter in his house 
and go to sleep. Three hours before day the Guru 
called out that he wanted water. He called again 
but no one answered him. The third time he shook 
one of his sons to awaken him, and told him to go 
and fetch water. When the son showed no inclina- 
tion to obey his father, Amar Das at once said, 
‘Great king, thy slave will fetch thee water.’ The 
Guru objected and said that Amar Das was now 
too old for such service. Amar Das replied that he 
had grown young on hearing the Guru’s order. He 
at once put a pitcher on his head and started for the 
river. Intoxicated with the wine of devotion he 
thought not of his body. On arriving at the Bias, 
he filled his vessel, began to repeat the Japji, and 
made the best of his way to his master. He paid 
no regard to the elements, but went straight towards 
the Guru's house, feeling his way in the thick dark- 
ness as he went along. 

On the outskirts of Khadur there was a colony 
of weavers. The holes in the ground, into which 
the weavers put their feet when sitting at their 
looms, were filled with water. Into one of these 
holes Amar Das fell, striking his foot against a peg 
of karir* wood. Notwithstanding his fall he still 
succeeded in saving the water on his head. On 
hearing the noise and uproar, some of the weavers 
awoke. They cried out, ‘Thief! thief!’ and called 
on their people to be on the alert. On going out of 
doors they heard some one repeating the Japjji, 
and one of the weavers’ wives said, ‘ Fear not, it 
is not a thief. It is that poor homeless Amru whose 
beard hath grown gray, and who hath taken leave 
of his senses. Having abandoned his sons and 
daughters, his house and home, his commerce and 
his dealings, he is now without occupation, and 
wandereth from door to door. Other people go to 

' Capparts aphylla, the wild caper tree. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 43 

sleep at night, but he will not rest even then. Single- 
handed he doeth the work of twenty men. He is 
ever bringing water from the river and firewood from 
the forest; and what a guru to serve ! ’ 

Amar Das could endure hearing disrespectful 
language of himself, but not of his Guru. He told 
the weaver’s wife that she had gone mad, and 
hence her slander of the Guru. Saying this, he 
took his vessel of water to the Guru. It 1s said 
that the weaver’s wife did in fact go mad as the 
result of Amar Das’s censure. They sent for physi- 
cians, who, however, knew no medicines to restore 
her. It soon became known that she had offended 
the Guru by her language, so on the failure of the 
physicians the weavers decided to take her to him 
with the object of imploring his pardon. 

The weavers informed the Guru of what had 
occurred, and implored him to pardon the mad 
woman’s error. The Guru said, ‘Amar Das hath 
done great service and his toil is acceptable. His 
words prove true ; wealth, supernatural power, and 
all earthly advantages wait on him. The peg 
against which he struck his foot shall grow green, 
and the weaver’s wife shall recover. He who 
serveth Amar Das shall obtain the fruit his heart 
desireth. Ye describe him as homeless and lowly, 
but he shall be the home of the homeless, the honour 
of the unhonoured, the strength of the strengthless, 
the support of the unsupported, the shelter of the 
unsheltered, the protector of the unprotected, the 
restorer of what is lost, the emancipator of the 
captive.’ 

After that the Guru sent for five copper coins 
and a coco-nut, bathed Amar Das, clothed him in 
a new dréss, and installed him in the Guru’s seat. 
He placed the five copper coins and the coco-nut 
before him while Bhai Budha affixed to his forehead 
the tilak of Guruship. Thus was Guru Amar Das 
regularly and solemnly appointed Guru Angad’s 

AA THE SIKH RELIGION 

successor. All the Sikhs, with loud acclamations, fell 
at his feet. Guru Angad sent for his two sons, 
Dasu and Datu, told them that the office of Guru 
was the reward of humility, devotion, and service ; 
and Guru Amar Das had obtained the high position 
as the reward of his ceaseless toil, manifold virtues 
and piety. He then ordered his sons to bow before 
the new Guru, which they were very reluctant to 
do, as they had always deemed him their servant. 
Guru Angad then summoned Punnu and Lalu, the 
head men of the town, and all his Sikhs, told 
them he was going to depart this life, and that he 
had appointed Guru Amar Das as his worthy suc- 
cessor on the throne of Guru Nanak. ‘ Whoever 
serveth him shall obtain happiness in this world 
and salvation in the next, and he who envieth him 
shall have sorrow as his portion.’ 

On the third day of the light half of the month 
of Chet in the Sambat year 1609 (A.D. 1552), Guru 
Angad gave a great feast to his Sikhs, and reminded 
them of the tenets and principles of the Sikh religion. 
On the following day he rose before dawn, bathed, 
and put on new raiment to prepare for his final 
departure. He then repeated the Japji, summoned 
all his family, consoled them, and enjoined them to 
accept God’s will. He ordered Guru Amar Das to 
live in Goindwal, and there save men by his teaching. 
Guru Angad then fixed his thoughts on Guru Nanak 
and, with ‘Wahguru’ on his lips, passed from this 
transitory world on the fourth day of the light half 
of Chet, 1609, having enjoyed the Guruship for 
twelve years six months and nine days. 

Guru Angad’s sons and Sikhs grew sad, but Bhai 
Budha bade them lament not, but repeat God’s 
name. They then began to sing the Guru’s hymns 
to the accompaniment of rebecks, drums, bells, and 
trumpets. They erected a splendid bier on which 
they placed the body of the deceased Guru and 
recited the Sohila of Guru Nanak and the lamenta- 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 48 

tions in the Maru and Wadhans measures. After 
this they placed the Guru’s remains on a pyre of 
sandal-wood and cremated him according to his 
express wish near the tree which sprang out of the 
karir peg against which Amar Das had struck his 
foot. 

Guru Amar Das enjoined his flock to console 
themselves and said to them, ‘Guru Angad is 
imperishable and immortal. It is a law of the body 
to be born and die, but the soul is different. It is 
ever the same essence. Holy men have deemed 
human life temporary, like the roosting of birds for 
a night on a tree, or like the brief occupation of 
a ferry-boat by passengers. Wherefore renounce all 
worldly love. A child may tremble and suppose his 
shadow to be a ghost, but the wise entertain no 
such alarm. And so the man who possesseth divine 
knowledge hath no apprehension of further trans- 
migration.’ 

On hearing the Guru’s words many Sikhs obtained 
divine knowledge, and crossing over the troublous 
ocean of the world, obtained beatitude in God. 

The principal points in Guru Angad’s character 
were to serve and love the Guru and worship God. 
It was by this means he succeeded in obtaining the 
spiritual leadership of the Sikhs in opposition to the 
wife, sons and relations of Guru Nanak. For the 
same reasons Guru Angad in spite of the opposition 
of his own relatives conferred the Guruship on Amar 
Das, who was proved to be the most worthy of the 
high dignity. 

SEORS OF GURY ANCA 

Maju KI WAR 

God rewards the upright and holy who toil in 
obscurity :— 

The gift, the perverse suppose, is preferable to the Giver ; 

What shall I say of their intelligence, understanding, and 
Glewerness ? 4 

He who toileth in obscurity 1s known in all directions ; 

He who acteth honestly is called honest, and he who 
committeth sin is known as a sinner. 

O Creator, Thou Thyself performest the whole play ; why 
mention any one else ? 

O Source of Light, as long as Thy light is in the body Thou 
speakest init. If any one have done aught without Thee, 
show Aim to me that I may recognize him. 

Nanak, God, who alone is skilful and wise, is made manifest 
by the Guru’s instruction. 

Spiritual exaltation :— 

To see without eyes, to hear without cars, 

To walk without feet, to work without hands, 

To speak without a tongue—that is to be dead while alive. 

Nanak, he who accepteth the will of God shall be united 
with Him. 

Addiction to pleasures is incompatible with true 
devotion :— 

We see, and hear, and know that God cannot be found in 
worldly pleasures ; 

How can man without feet, arms, and eyes? run to em- 
brace Him 7 

1 This is, of course, said ironically. 

9 

“ As long as a man is steeped in worldly pleasures he has no feet, 
arms, or eyes for God’s service. 

SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 47 

Make feet out of fear, hands out of love, and eyes out of 
understanding. 

Nanak saith, in this way, O wise women, shall you meet 
the Bridegroom. 

Who are perfect bankers :— 

They are perfect bankers who have found the Perfect One ; 

They are ever unconcerned and abide in the love of the 
One God. 

Few can obtain a sight of the Unfathomable Being. 

Nanak, if the perfect Guru, whose acts are perfect and 
whose words are perfect, 

Make any one perfect, he wil/ not decrease in weight. 

Man’s proper employment and the bliss attending 
morning devotion :— 

Let man during the eight watches subdue eight things— 
the five deadly sins and the three qualities—and his body the 
ninth. | 

The nine treasures are in the One God’s name for which 
they who are profoundly religious search. 

Nanak, the favourites of destiny have praised Him 
through their gurus and priests. 

In the morning during the fourth watch they who 
remember God feel delight ; 

They love the streams wherein they bathe, and the True 
Name is in their hearts and on their lips ; 

There nectar is distributed, and the fortunate obtain 
favour.” 

The body obtaineth the character of gold and assumeth 
a beautiful colour ; 

If the Assayer approve of it, He will not again put it in 
te fire. 

During the remaining seven watches of the day it is good 
to speak truth and sit with learned men ; 

There bad and good acts are considered, and the capital 
of falsehood decreaseth ; 

1 Athi. Literally—during the eight watches of the day. 
2 Also translated—favours are distributed according to man’s acts. 

48 THE SIKH RELIGION 

There the counterfeit are rejected and the genuine con- 
gratulated. 

Nanak, it is idle to tell the Master of one’s misery or 
happiness. 

The virtuous hunger for God :— 

The mouths of the virtuous who love the One God weary 
not of speaking, 

Nor their ears of hearing, nor their eyes of beholding Him. 

Hunger forsaketh not those who hunger for God; it 
departeth not by mere words} 

Nanak, the hungry man shall be satisfied when, by 
uttering God’s praises, he becometh absorbed in Him. 

Man ought not to undertake what is beyond his 
ability :-— 

If he who only knoweth the charm for a scorpion’s sting 
touch a serpent, 

He apphieth a brand to his body with his own hand ; 

It is the Master’s decree from the beginning that he be 
very severely buffeted. 

The perverse who contend with the pious shall perish ; 
this 1s God’s justice. 

God is the Lord of both ; He sifteth them carefully. 

Nanak, know that everything is according to God’s will. 

Know thyself and strive not to perform impos- 
sibilities :-— 

Nanak, deem him who can assay himself a true assayer, 

He who understandeth both disease and medicine is a 
knowing physician. 

Let man transact no id/e business on the road 2 but con- 
sider himself a guest ; 

1 The preceding three verses are also translated — 

The mouth is never satisfied with uttering wor/dly things, or the ears 
with hearing them, 

Or the eyes with beholding them; each of the senses delighteth to 
gratify itself. 

The hunger of the hungry departeth not by mere talk. 

* That is, let men have no entanglements in this world. 

SEOKS OF GURU ANGAD 4Q 

Let him know his own real character, confess it, and 
divest himself of his shortcomings ; 

Let him not walk in covetousness, but abide in truth ; 
he shall then become the best, and be acceptable. 

If an arrow be shot at the sky, how can it reach it ? 

The sky is inaccessible above us; know that the arrow 
will recoil on the archer. 

Man ought to meditate on his Creator :-— 

Until man knoweth God his human birth is unprofitable. 
A few pass over the world’s ocean by the Guru’s favour. 
God is the Cause of causes, omnipotent: saith Nanak, 

meditate upon Him. 
The creation is in the power of the Creator who holdeth 

the contrivance by which it ts sustained. 

Nothing can affect him whom God favours :— 

What effect can frost have on fire, the night on the sun ? 

What effect can darkness have on the moon? What 
effect hath caste on air or water ? 

What can affect the earth in which everything hath its 
birth ? | 

Nanak, man is accounted honourable if God preserve his 
honour. 

SORATH KI WAR 

Man reaps the fruit of his acts :-— 
The nose-string is in the hand of the Master; man is 

driven by his acts. 
It is true, Nanak—where God giveth there man eateth. 

SUHI KI WAR 

Man ought to think of his future :— 

Why do those who know they must depart make display ? 

They think not of their departure, but continue to arrange 
their worldly affairs. 

Man amasseth wealth for a night ; in the morning he must 
depart. 

SIKH, II E 

50 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Nanak, wealth shall not go with him, and then will he 
regret. 

There is no merit in divine service performed 
under pressure :— 

In the fine the prisoner payeth there is no merit, and no 
favour conferred on others ; 
Nanak, the act which is voluntarily performed is the best. 

God is won by love, not by force :— 

Obstinacy, however much one strive, winneth not God to 
mans side ; 

Nanak, he who truly loveth God and pondereth on the 
Word, winneth Him to his side. 

The contrast between those who fear and those 
who fear not God :— 

They who fear God, have no other fear, while they who 
fear Him not, shall have much! fear ; 
Nanak, they shall both be confronted at God’s court. 

Nature’s great law, Pares cum paribus facillime congre- 
gantur ;— . 

Things which walk associate with those which walk, things 
which fly with those which fly, 

The living associate with the living, the dead with the 
dead ; 

Praise Him, Nanak, who hath established this law. 

The happiness which pervades young religious 
hearts in the vernal season :— 

Nanak, they in whose house their spouse abideth, enjoy 
perpetual spring, 

While they whose spouse is in a distant land burn night 
and day. 

First meditate on God on the arrival of spring, 

Nanak, and praise Him who is the support of all. 

1 A/uch in the original. 

SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD ST 

In what a real meeting consists :— 

It is not by merely meeting that a meeting is effected, 
that is, if there is to be a real meeting. 

They who meet with their hearts are properly said to have 
met. 

When man has only one Friend, why should he 
forget Him ?— 

Different people have different friends; I, unhonoured, 
have only Thee, O God. 

Why do I not die of weeping when I bear Thee not in 
mind ? 

Think of God under all circumstances :— 

In weal repeat God’s name ; in woe also remember Him ; 
Nanak saith, in this way, O wise women, shall you meet 
the Bridegroom. 

RAMKALI KI WAR 

The supreme reward of spiritual obedience :— 

Devotion, penance, everything 7s obtained by obeying 
God; all other occupations are vain ; 

Nanak, obey him who hath himself obeyed God ;+ he is 
known by the favour of the Guru. 

The perverse cannot understand divine instruc- 
tion :— 

Nanak, if a blind man go to assay jewels, 

He will not know their value, but will return having made 
an exhibition of himself. 

If a jeweller go and open a purse of jewels, 

He thereby bringeth the jewels and a purchaser together. 

They who possess merits, Nanak, may deal in such jewels ; 

But they who know not their value go about like blind 
men in the world. 

1 Or—obey Him who is worthy to be obeyed. 
2 He brings a purchaser for the jewels, that is, he causes the 
purchaser to purchase God's name. 
E 2 

52 THE SIKH RELIGION 
The following was addressed to the Tapa :— 

He who followeth the road when shown by a blind man 
is blind himself ; 

Why should he, Nanak, who hath good eyes stray into the 
wilderness ? 

It isnot theywho have no eyes in their faces who are blind; 

They are blind, Nanak, who stray from the Lord. 

The sinner may find favour by repentance :— 

The Lord can make him whom He hath blinded see clearly ; 

God treateth man as He knoweth him, no matter what one 
may Say.! 

Where the real thing, God, is not seen, know that pride 
prevaileth : 

Nanak, how shall a purchaser purchase anything if he 
recognize it not ? 

It is the perverse who are really blind :— 

Why call him blind who is blind by the will of God ? 

Nanak, it is he who will not understand God’s will who 
should be called blind. 

God provides for all :— 

Nanak, be not anxious for thy maintenance, anxiety is 
for Him 

Who created animals in the water and also giveth them 
sustenance. 

There no shop is open and no one trafficketh ; 

There is no commerce and no traffic whatever. 

Animals are the food of animals, such food God giveth 
them ; 

He taketh care even of the animals He created in the ocean. 

Nanak, feel not anxious—anxiety is for God. 

SARANG KI WAR 

Only the Guru can cause divine knowledge to 
enter the heart :— 

? Literally—Even though one speak a hundred times. 

SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 53 

The Guru hath the key of the lock, the heart is the store- 
room, the body is its roof ; 

Nanak, without the Guru the doors of the heart cannot 
be opened, since nobody else hath the key. 

Men, though naturally equal, are appointed to 
different duties in life :— 

Thou Thyself, O God, didst create, saith Nanak, Thou 
Thyself didst put creatures in their different places ; 

Whom shall I call inferior since all have the same Master ? 

There is one Master of all; He appointeth men to their 
various duties, and watcheth over them— 

Some to small, some to great duties; none departeth 
empty. 

Men come naked, they depart naked, yet during their lives 
they make a display ; 

Nanak, it is not known what duty God will order for them 
in the next world. 

Souls proceed from God and bring their destinies :— 

Traders come from the Merchant; He sendeth their 
destinies with them ; 

Orders are recorded therein to take care of the real 
thing.t 

Of those who have made purchases and packed up their 
merchandise, 

Some have gone away with a profit 2 while others have 
lost their capital. 

No one wanteth small profits ; who shall be congratulated? 

Nanak, God looketh with favour on those who have kept 
their stock-in-trade intact. 

The nectar of the Name :— 

They who possess the greatness of Thy name, O God, are 
happy at heart. 
Nanak, there is only one nectar ;® there is none other ; 

1 Wast. Also translated—to take care of what they have received. 
2 Divine knowledge. 3 God’s name. 

54 TH SIKH RELIGION 

Nanak, that nectar is in the heart, but it is only obtained 
by the favour of the Guru ; 

They who were so destined from the beginning quaff it 
with delight. 

Magnify and praise the Creator only :— 

Why praise the creation ? Rather praise the Creator ; 

Nanak, there is no bestower but the One God. 

Praise the Creator who made the world ; 

Praise that Bestower who supporteth every one. 

Nanak, God, whose storehouses are full, is alone ever- 
lasting— 

Magnify and praise the Lord who hath no end or limits. 

The most exalted are subject to God’s order :— 

How shall I speak to Him who of Himself knoweth what 
is to be known ? 

That Lord is the greatest whose orders cannot be set 
aside— 

Orders by which kings, princes, and commanders must 
abide— 

What pleaseth Him, Nanak, is good. 

They who must abide by His order have no power of 
their own ; 

When He ordereth, men must take the road. 

Men must act according to God’s recorded order ; 

Nanak, men come when they are sent by God, and depart 
when they are called by Him. 

Divine knowledge is the key which unlocks God’s 
treasure house :— 

They to whom the praises of God have been vouchsafed 
are the real treasures ; 

They to whom the key is given obtain the treasure. 

The treasurers from whom good acts proceed are accept- 
able ; 

God looketh with favour, Nanak, on those who bear the 
standard of His name. 

SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 55 

The inferiority of the Veds to the Guru’s teach- 
ing — 

The readers of the Veds have brought tales and legends 
of the gods, and defined sins and virtues. 

For what men give they receive, and for what they receive 
they give,! and they are accordingly born again either in 
hell or heaven. 

The world wandereth in doubt as to what are high and 
low castes and species ; 

But the ambrosial word of the Guru speaketh of the Real 
Thing, and bringeth divine knowledge and meditation ; 

The pious utter it, the pious know it; they who possess 
divine knowledge meditate on it, and act according to it. 

God created the world by His fiat, and restraineth it there- 
by ; He beholdeth everything subject to it. 

Nanak, if man’s pride depart ere he die, he shall be deemed 
of account. 

Man’s future is determined by his acts :— 

As a man’s acts so is he: this is a necessary conse- 
quence ; 

He who hath the marks of piety cannot lose them ; he 
must retain such appearance. 

He who acteth according to the will of God receiveth his 
reward ; Nanak, he is worthy of homage? 

MALAR KI WAR 

The rainy season, during which the natives of 
India usually take rest, is accounted a time of 
pleasure :— 

Sawan ? hath come, my companions, think of the Bride- 
groom ; 

Nanak, the bad wife who loveth another shall pine away 
and die. 

1 Men reap the reward of their acts. 

2 Such as Hindus offer their idols. 

3 The Hindi month July-August, when the rains generally begin 
in India. 

56 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Sawan hath come, my companions, the clouds are about 
to. Laine: 

Nanak, the good wife who loveth her husband sleepeth in 
peace. 

The topsy-turvyism of Guru Angad’s epoch :— 

The beggar is styled a king, the blockhead a pandit, 

The blind a connoisseur—that is how people speak. 

The wicked man is styled a Chaudhri, and the liar is 
deemed perfect. 

Nanak, that is the way of this iron age ; how to distinguish 
men is known under the Guru’s instruction. 

Despise earthly glory :— 

Nanak, burn in the fire the praises of the world ; 
These accursed things have caused the Name to be for- 
gotten ; not one of them shall go with thee. 

No other composition of Guru Angad is found in 
the Granth Sahib. There are several verses in the 
sacred volume in his praise, composed by bards called 
Kalsahar, Kal, and Tal. 

Prior to Guru Angad’s time the compositions of the 
saints and reformers were for the most part written 
in Sanskrit letters. He, deeming that the com- 
positions of Guru Nanak were worthy of a special 
written character of their own, adopted and modified 
a Panjabi alphabet, called Gurumukhi, to give ex- 
pression to what fell from the Guru’s lips. This was 
furthermore a gain on the score of simplicity, for it 
contains but thirty-five letters, while the Sanskrit 
alphabet has fifty-two. 

The Gurumukhi character was well calculated to 
make its readers part with Hindu compositions 
written in Sanskrit. The Gurumukhi S is the San- 
skrit /, the Gurumukhi M is the Sanskrit Bh, the 
Gurumukhi W is the Sanskrit D, the Gurumukhi Dh, 
is the Sanskrit P, and the Gurumukhi B is nearly 
the Sanskrit Gh. When, therefore, one has become 

SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 57 

accustomed to the use of the Gurumukhi letters, 
a special and separate effort is required to read 
Sanskrit, however much one may have been pre- 
viously acquainted with it. The result has been 
that in most cases Gurumukhi scholars have parted 
company with Sanskrit and the multitudinous Brah- 
manical works in that recondite language. 

Guru Angad, elated with the adoption of a new 
character for the hymns of his predecessor, dedicated 
to God on the occasion the following hymn which we 
have found in an ancient manuscript ‘at Khadur :— 

SARANG 

O Thou who art perfect, light of the soul, the Supreme 
God, my beloved, my soul and body. 

Bewitcher, Thou hast bewitched my heart; I have 
obtained understanding by pondering on Thy Word. 

I am the handmaiden of my Lord. 

On clasping the feet of God, the life of the world, I have 
destroyed and parted with pride. 

I was perverse and low, but my evil understanding which 
hath caused me pain of mind and body hath left me. 

Since I began to love the joyous God, my mind hath 
been consoled by repeating His name. 

Having forgotten pride, I have abandoned the world, 
and true wisdom hath entered my heart. 

Since I have become reconciled with Him who is without 
enmity or stain, I have lost all regard for men’s opinion. 

O my Beloved, Support of my soul, there has been none 
like Thee in the past, and there shall be none like Thee in 
the 1uture. 

Nanak, she who is dyed with Thy name is a happy wile ; 
Thy name is my refuge. 

1 The MS. was then in possession of a Sikh lady named Sukh Dei. 

LAPE OF GURU AMAR DAS, THE 
TSR ID GLAU 

CHAPTER [ 

THE early history of Guru Amar Das has already 
been given. When he was appointed Guru he 
retired into a solitary room in the upper story of 
his house, and there meditated on God and Guru 
Angad’s instructions. His Sikhs went to see him, 
and he, on the representation of Bhai Ballu, a faith- 
ful Sikh who had attached himself to him, came 
forth from his solitude and presented himself to them 
as their Guru. 

Since the time of Guru Nanak the Gurus were 
obliged to turn their attention to secular affairs, and 
to provide for the maintenance of themselves and 
their followers. Guru Amar Das’s kitchen was 
abundantly supplied by the offerings of the faithful. 
All who came to visit him were fed to repletion. 
None departed disappointed. What he daily re- 
ceived was daily spent, and nothing was saved for 
the morrow. The Guru kept only one suit of clothes 
for himself. When he received a new suit he gave 
the old one to some deserving Sikh. On witnessing 
the profusion of Guru Amar Das the minstrel Satta 
composed the following, which is the sixth pauri of 
the Coronation Ode :— 

Guru Amar Das obtained the same mark, the same throne, 
and the same court. 

The grandson was as acceptable as the father and 
grandfather.? 

1 Guru Amar Das was as acceptable as Guru Angad and Guru 
Nanak. ‘The terms of relationship are figurative. 

_ GURU AMAR Das| 

SIKH If Pp. 58 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 59 

Guru Amar Das by the force of love threw into the churn 
the rope of the snake, 

And churned the ocean of the Word with the churning 
staff of Meru ; 

He brought forth fourteen gems and illumined the world. 

He madedivine knowledgehis steed and chastity his saddle; 

On his bow of truth he strung the arrow of God’s praise. 

In this age there was pitch darkness ; he arose like a sun. 

With him the field of truth germinated and the fruit of 
truth was produced. 

Ever in thy kitchen, O Amar Das, are clarified butter and 
flour to eat. 

Thou knowest the four quarters of the world ; the Word is 
dear to thy soul. 

Thou hast removed the transmigration of those on 
whom thou lookest with favour. 

The wise being Guru Nanak descended in the form of 
Amar Das. 

Firm as the mountain of Meru thou art swayed not by 
gusts of wind. 

Searcher of hearts, thou knowest the secrets of men. 

How can I praise thee, O true king, when thou art wise 
and omniscient ° 

Let Satta have whatever gifts please the true Guru. 

The sect was astonished on seeing Nanak’s umbrella over 
Amar Das’s head. 

Guru Amar Das obtained the same mark, the same throne, 
and the same court. 

The grandson was as acceptable as the father and grand- 
father. 

Hindu admirers and inquirers came from every 
part of India. It was necessary for all the Guru’s 
visitors to eat from his kitchen before they were 
allowed to behold him. The object of this ordinance 
was no doubt that his Hindu visitors should habituate 
themselves to liberal views on the subject of caste, 
and should relax their rigid customs of cooking and 
separation at meals. When his visitors had ob- 

60 THE SIKH RELIGION 

tained audience, they interrogated him on religious 
matters, and he resolved their doubts. In such 
benevolent and engrossing duties and in the peace 
and tranquillity he enjoyed, the Guru took no ac- 
count of the flight of time. 

It is related that, though the greatest delicacies 
were served from his kitchen, the Guru himself lived 
on coarse food, and observed the most ascetic habits. 
He used sometimes to consult the Veds, the Shastars, 
and the Purans, but they offered him no spiritual 
consolation. He thus expressed his conclusions :— 

The Simritis and the Shastars define good and evil, but 
they know nothing of the Real Thing ; 

They know nothing of the Real Thing ; without the Guru 
they know nothing of the Real Thing. 

The world is asleep in mammon and superstition ; in 
sleep 1t passeth the night. 

By the Guru’s favour they who put God into their hearts 
and utter His ambrosial word, are awake. 

saith Nanak, they who pass their nights awake, and who 
day and night fix their attention on God, shall obtain the 
Real Thing. 

At this stage of their history, when the Sikhs met 
they treated one another affectionately, and saluted 
one another with God’s name. All who came to 
receive the Guru’s instruction sat in a line and ate 
together. Even they who had not previously 
accepted the divine message, were allowed free 
access to the Guru, and partook of his hospitality. 

The inhabitants of Goindwal daily increased and 
the city extended itself owing to the number of those 
who sought the Guru’s spiritual advice and instruc- 
tion. There then arose a difficulty in procuring 
timber for the construction of houses, and a deputa- 
tion waited on the Guru to represent the matter. 
The Guru ordered his nephew Sawan Mal to proceed 
to Haripur in the Kangra district to cut down pine 

1 Anand. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS OL 

trees and cedars, and float them in rafts down the 
river Bias. 

Sawan Mal accordingly proceeded to Haripur and 
was received with great honour and rejoicing by 
the citizens. An umbrella was raised over his head, 
chauris were waved around him, and flowers showered 
on him in handfuls. Men washed his feet and drank 
the water therefrom. Those who came suffering from 
physical and mental ills he instructed in the True 
Name. All such were comforted and made whole, 
and joined in singing the Guru’s praises. The Raja 
requested to be allowed to perform a service for the 
miracle-worker. Sawan Mal merely requested a grant 
of the timber for which the Guru had sent him. 
The king at once sent his men to cut down pine 
trees and cedars, and dispatch them by rafts on 
the river Bias to Goindwal. The king’s order was 
promptly obeyed. When the timber reached the 
Guru, he distributed it among people of all castes, 
who then constructed comfortable dwellings for them- 
selves. Goindwal subsequently became an imposing 
city on the margin of the Bias. 

When the time arrived for Sawan Mal’s departure 
from Haripur he as a preliminary requested the 
Raja’s permission to leave his country. The Raja 
said he would accompany him to behold the Guru, 
and thus render his human life profitable. He 
provided elephants, horses, carriages, and palkis for 
his attendants, and set out in great state and splen- 
dour for Goindwal. Sawan Mal went in advance to 
the Guru to announce the Raja’s arrival. The Guru 
said, ‘Let His Highness come by all means when 
he hath eaten from my kitchen.’ The Guru’s 
condition was accepted. He received the Raja in 
private audience on the top story of his house, next 
in order the Raja’s prime minister, and lastly the 
Raja’s queens. They were all gratified with a sight 
of the Guru. One of the queens lately married would 
not remove her veil. The Guru quietly said to her, 

62 THE SURG RELIGION 

“Crazed lady, if thou art not pleased with the Guru’s 
face, why hast thou come hither ?’! On this she at 
once became insane, and casting aside her clothes 
ran naked into the forest. lfforts were made to stop 
her, but she succeeded in escaping and baffling pursuit. 

The Raja having remained for some days with the 
Guru took formal leave of departure. The Guru 
told him that Sawan Mal, whom he recommended to 
the Raja’s protection, would accompany him as his 
chaplain. The Raja was pleased to hear that Sawan 
Mal would return with him, and lavished on him 
his respectful attentions. Sawan Mal afterwards 
occasionally went from the hills to visit the Guru, 
and listen to his teaching, so that he might not 
inadvertently deviate from the tenets and principles 
of the faith. 

A simpleton, who only clothed himself with a 
blanket, attached himself to the Guru as factotum. 
He was in the habit of saying ‘Sach, sach!’ (true, 
true) to everything that was said to him, and was 
consequently nicknamed Sachansach. One day as 
he had gathered firewood in the forest and was about 
to return with his load, the insane queen appeared 
before him. She was quite naked, her hair was 
dishevelled, and she altogether presented a weird 
and alarming appearance. She caught Sachansach, 
pinched him, bit him, wrestled with him, and re- 
duced him to a sad plight. With great difficulty 
he escaped, and made his way home streaming with 
blood. The Sikhs on seeing his plight inquired what 
had occurred. His only reply was that he had had 
enough of the Guru’s service, and that he would 
leave it and return to his home. When pressed for 
his reason, he at last related his interview with a witch 
in the forest. The Guru said, ‘ Take my slipper, and 
if the witch come again, touch her with it, and she 
shall be cured of her malady.’ 

1 The Oriental custom of veiling the face is frequently reprobated 
in Sikh literature. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 63 

Sachansach obeyed the Guru’s order, and next 
day, on the queen’s aggressive approach, touched 
her with the Guru’s slipper, when she immediately 
recovered her sanity. She then for the first time 
discovered that she was naked, and sought to flce 
abashed from Sachansach’s gaze. He promptly tore 
up his blanket and gave her half of it. She wrapped 
it round her, and thus clothed went and fell at the 
Guru’s feet. He readily pardoned her offence. 
The shrine of Bhai Sachansach is near the town 
of Shekhupur. 

CHAPTER II 

After Guru Angad’s death, his son Datu sat on 
the Guru’s seat in Khadur, and issued the following 
proclamation: ‘Amru (Guru Amar Das) is old. He 
is my servant. I am prince of the Guru’s line. His 
throne is mine.’ The Sikhs, however, decided that 
only he whom the true Guru Angad had appointed, 
should be deemed the real Guru. They therefore left 
Datu at Khadur and went in a body to Goindwal, 
where Guru Amar Das resided. His Sikhs gathered 
round him, and there was ever a crowd of devoted 
followers at his door. Datu was kept duly informed 
by emissaries of the reverence in which Guru Amar 
Das was held by his followers. 

One day some Sikhs, who had not heard of Guru 
Amar Das’s change of residence, arrived in Khadur. 
As they were departing to behold him in Goindwal, 
a sympathizer of Datu said to him, ‘ Canst thou, 
whose servant Amar Das enjoyeth sovereignty, en- 
dure it and live ? Thou who oughtest to be master, 
canst now only look on, and be thy servant’s servant. 
An innumerable crowd of worshippers bearing offer- 
ings and presents go to visit thy rival. Go and see 
for thyself.’ Datu could no longer endure such taunts, 
and early next morning proceeded to Goindwal to 

64 THE SIKH RELIGION 

see with his own eyes the position of affairs. On 
beholding the Guru surrounded with such splendour 
he said, ‘ Only yesterday thou wert a water-carrier 
in our house, and to-day thou sittest as a Guru.’ 
Saying this he kicked the Guru off his throne. The 
Guru meekly replied, ‘O great king, pardon me. 
Thou must have hurt thy foot.’ Upon this the Guru 
arose and retired to the upper story of his house. 
His Sikhs, angry at the violence offered their master, 
also abandoned the place. The Guru, when alone, 
deliberated on his best course of action, and by 
evening decided he could only have peace by be- 
taking himself to a distance from his tyrant. He 
accordingly left Goindwal for Basarka, his native 
village. 

Early next morning a Jat cultivator of Basarka, 
going to his land some distance from the town, 
met the Guru on the way. He fell at his feet and 
said, ‘I have heard that thou hast obtained the 
Guru’s throne ; how is it thou hast come here alone ? 
May I be of service to thee?’ The Guru asked 
for a residence, and the Jat immediately prepared 
him one. The Guru on entering it requested his host 
to brick up the doorway and on it record the follow- 
ing: ‘Whoever openeth this door is no Sikh of 
mine, nor am I his Guru.’ The Guru on being thus 
immured consoled himself by reflecting on the couplet 
of Kabir :-— 

Kabir, heart-burning ariseth from claims, he who hath no 
claim is without anxiety. 

He who hath no claim deemeth Indar poor in comparison 
with himself. 

Datu was now free to sit on the Guru’s throne in 
Goindwal, and became very proud of his new position. 
The Sikhs, however, would not approach him, and all 
the pilgrims to Goindwal went away on hearing of 
his insult to the Guru. On seeing the contempt with 
which he was regarded, he loaded his newly-acquired 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 65 

wealth on a camel and returned to Khadur. On 
the way he encountered robbers, who seized the 
camel with its load. One of the robbers struck Datu 
on the foot with which he had kicked the Guru. It 
swelled up as big as a drum, and caused him great 
agony. 

The Sikhs were very much distressed at losing 
their Guru. Some searched the forests, others the 
banks of the Bias, but could procure no trace of 
him. It was then decided to consult Bhai Budha, 
the foremost of the Sikhs. He had formerly pointed 
out Guru Angad’s place of concealment, and they 
hoped he would have similar success in discovering 
Guru Amar Das. They accordingly prayed him to be 
again their guide. Their prayer placed Bhai Budha 
in a dilemma. If he pointed out where the Guru 
was, the Guru might be angry; and if, on the other 
hand, he did not do so, the distress of the Sikhs 
would be intolerable. Bhai Budha, after full con- 
sideration, decided to do what was proper, and 
endeavour to find the Guru. To this end he deter- 
mined that the Guru’s mare should be put in front 
of the search party, and that they should all follow 
her. Accordingly, bowing towards the Guru’s vacant 
throne, and uttering a prayer for the success of their 
quest, they let the mare loose and anxiously followed 
her at a short distance. 

She unerringly made her way to the Guru’s house 
in Basarka, and stood before his door. The Sikhs 
congratulated Bhai Budha on the success of the 
plan he had contrived. A difficulty now arose as 
to how they were to obtain access to the Guru. 
Before their eyes was distinctly written, ‘ Whoever 
openeth this door is no Sikh of mine, nor am [ his 
Guru.’ There was no prohibition, however, to find 
another entrance, so they resolved to make an 
Opening in the wall. They did so, and all entered 
by it. The Guru, on hearing the tumult, arose from 
his deep meditation. He asked his unexpected and 

SIKH, IW F 

66 THE SIKH RELIGION 

unceremonious visitors why they had opened his 
door in disregard of his orders. On their explanation 
the Guru accepted the position. Bhai Budha then 
frankly addressed him: ‘Guru Angad hath attached 
us, O Guru, to thy skirt; yet thou hast deserted us 
and concealed thyself. How are we to receive 
spiritual consolation ?’ The Guru smiled and re- 
mained silent. 

The opening, supported by brickwork, is still 
shown at Basarka, where a yearly fair, at the full 
moon in the month of Bhadon, is held in com- 
memoration of the event. The Guru could not 
disregard the love and devotion of his Sikhs, and 
mounting his mare returned with them to Goindwal. 
The resumption of his spiritual duties was celebrated 
with illuminations, rejoicings, and feastings. Mean- 
while Datu was detained at Khadur by the pain in 
his foot, and through very shame, if for no other 
reason, would not consent to visit the Guru. 

As the fame of the Guru’s piety and saintly char- 
acter increased, he became more and more the object 
of popular veneration. Bhai Paro, who lived in the 
village of Dalla in the Jalandhar Doab, that is, be- 
tween the rivers Satluj and Bias, received religious 
instruction and emancipation from him. Paro used 
to ride to visit the Guru every other day. Oncea 
Nawab’s son observed and followed him. He saw 
Paro take a plunge with his horse into the deep water 
of the Bias, and arrive safely on the opposite shore. 
The Nawab’s son congratulated him, and inquired in 
whose service he underwent such trial and danger. 
Paro informed him of his visits and devotion 
to the Guru. On hearing this and other particulars 
regarding the successors of Guru Nanak, the Nawab’s 
son became a Sikh and renounced his ancestral 
position. 

Bhai Lalo, a banker’s son of the village of 
Dalla, joined Bhai Paro in one of his visits to the 
Guru. Bhai Lalo had been religious from his earliest 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 67 

years. When he came of age his father died, leaving 
him considerable wealth. This he increased by his 
industry, while at the same time he relieved every 
case of distress brought before him, and became 
famous for his charities. Lal means a ruby. The 
Guru on hearing his name said, ‘Lalo Har rang 
vangia gaya,’ an expression which may be either 
translated—Lalo is imbued with God’s love, or— 
the ruby glows with every colour. Lalo on receiving 
instruction and initiation became a ruby or gem of 
the Guru. He used to visit him on the first day of 
every month. When returning home he always took 
with him one or two Sikhs. These he would bring 
back on the occasion of his next monthly visit, and 
then take one or two others to accompany him. By 
means of these relays of earnest Sikhs he preserved 
his orthodoxy and his connexion with the Guru. 

During one of Bhai Lalo’s visits the Guru com- 
plimented him on his great public benefactions. 
Then, patting him on the forehead, the Guru said 
that he had invested him with spiritual power and 
sanctity. On thus receiving the approbation of the 
Guru, Bhai Lalo returned home for the last time, 
and there continued to exercise the humility and 
generosity for which he had been previously so 
distinguished: 

A Khatri named Mahesha of Sultanpur also sought 
the Guru’s protection and permission to sit at his 
feet. The Guru initiated him into the Sikh religion 
and taught him its tenets. A short time afterwards 
Mahesha lost all his wealth, but not his faith in the 
Guru. On the Guru’s intercession God restored him 
all his property, and granted him the priceless boon 
of salvation. 

The Guru preached lessons of forgiveness and 
endurance, but his enemies only returned evil for 
the favours he had intended them. Their slander, 
however, was to him like a rain shower which, 
though it might cause a mud wall to crumble down, 

F 2 

68 THE SIKH RELIGION 

would only cleanse a mountain’s side. When 
Goindwal rose to importance some Muhammadan 
dignitaries settled there. Blinded by authority and 
wealth, they deemed every one inferior to themselves. 
They could not tolerate the fame of the Guru, and 
caused him every form of annoyance, but, so far 
from desiring to take revenge, he used to pray to 
heaven to soften their hearts and guide them aright. 
When Sikhs went to fetch water for the Guru’s 
kitchen, Muhammadan boys were instigated to break 
their earthen vessels with pellets and clods. When- 
ever the Sikhs remonstrated, the Muhammadans 
assaulted them. When the Sikhs, driven to ex- 
tremities, complained to the Guru, he told them, 
instead of fragile earthen vessels, to use goatskins 
which could not be so easily broken. This advice 
the Sikhs adopted, but the Muhammadans pierced 
the goatskins with arrows, and continued to harass 
the Sikh water-carriers as before. The Guru then 
counselled his people to use brass utensils. These 
the Muhammadans knocked off the bearers’ heads 
with bricks and stones, and drove the Sikhs almost 
to distraction. But, however much the Muham- 
madans annoyed the Sikhs and the Guru, he never 
uttered a harsh word, but, on the contrary, prayed 
that God would remove the hate and religious rancour 
of their hearts. His Sikhs asked how long they 
should bear the tyranny of the Muhammadans. The 
Guru replied, ‘ As long as you live. It is not proper 
for saints to take revenge. Nay, there is no greater 
penance than patience, no greater happiness than 
contentment, no greater evil than greed, no greater 
virtue than mercy, and no more potent weapon than 
forgiveness. Whatever man soweth he shall reap. 
If he sow trouble, trouble shall be his harvest. If 
a man sow poison, he cannot expect ambrosia.’ On 
hearing this homily the Sikhs regained their peace 
of mind. 

A company of armed Sanyasis arrived in Goind- 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 69 

wal. As the Muhammadan boys were discharging 
pellets at the Sikhs, one of the pellets knocked out 
the eye of the Sanyasis’ high priest. The Sanyasis 
became enraged, seized the offending boy, and beat 
him to death. Upon this an affray arose between 
them and the Muhammadans, in which arrows, 
swords, lances, daggers, and axes were employed. 
The Sanyasis invoked Dattatre,* and the Muham- 
madans Ali? to support them in the combat. 
Many brave men on both sides were slain, and 
among them several enemies of the Guru. The 
Sikhs regarded the destruction of the Muhammadans 
as a divine chastisement for the annoyance to which 
they had subjected them. 

Soon afterwards, as a detachment of soldiers 
guarding imperial treasure was on its way from 
Lahore to Dihli, a storm arose as the convoy 
approached Goindwal, and the heavens assumed 
a sable hue. Though the soldiers exercised great 
vigilance, yet one mule laden with money strayed 
to the Muhammadan quarters of the town. The 
soldiers searched everywhere, and the town-crier 
made proclamation, but no trace could be found of 
the mule. Some of the Muhammadans who had 
concealed the animal, hypocritically joined in the 
search, and expressed their regret at the occurrence. 
At last the mule betrayed its captors. Left alone 
in the house of a Musalman, the animal neighed 
plantively on missing the company of his fellows. 
When the police officer heard the sound, he pro- 
ceeded to the dwelling whence it had issued. The 
Muhammadans endeavoured to prevent his entry 
on the plea that he was violating their domestic 
privacy, but the police officer was not to be thwarted, 
and succeeded in rescuing the mule with his 
treasure. He then reported all the offences of the 
Muhammadans to the Emperor—their persistent 

1 The founder of the Sanydsi sect, who was afterwards deified. 
2 Son-in-law of Muhammad and leader of his four friends. 

70 THE SIKH RELIGION 

annoyance of the Guru and his Sikhs, their attack 
and slaughter of the Sanyasis, and finally their 
endeavour to rob the Emperor of his treasure. 
The Emperor ordered that they should be imprisoned, 
their houses razed to the ground, and all their 
property confiscated. ‘Such’, said the Guru, ‘shall 
ever be the condition of those who bear enmity to 
men who desire to live at peace.’ 

CHAPTER III 

On one occasion when the Guru visited an out- 
lying village and preached, the headman said _ his 
words ought to be recorded, and he sent for pen and 
ink for the purpose. The following was the Guru’s 
expostulation :— 

Why send for pen and ink ? Write my words in thy heart. 

If thou ever abide in the love of God, thine affection shall 
never be sundered from Him. 

Pens and ink-bottles shall perish—what they write shall 
go with them— 

Nanak, but the love of the True One which He bestoweth 
from the beginning shall not perish. 

The things which are seen shal! not depart with one; see 
if there be any contrivance by which they may go with you. 

The true Guru implanteth the True One in your hearts ; 
continue to love Him. 

Nanak, the Giver of the Word is true, and He is obtained 
by good acts. 

The Guru continued his instructions :—‘ The Guru 
will assist him who hath endurance; God is patient 
and patiently rewardeth. If any one ill-treat you, 
bear it. If you bear it three times, God Himself 
will fight for you the fourth time, and extirpate 
your enemies.’ 

He then quoted the twenty-first pauri of the 
Asa ki War. 

The Guru, having obtained respite from his 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS rp 

Muhammadan persecutors, continued to commu- 
nicate spiritual and ethical instruction to his Sikhs: 
‘Do good to all, but be not proud thereof. Deem 
another’s wife as a snake or a murderous elephant, 
and associate not with her. Avoid evil company ; 
be not conceited, glorify not yourselves, and for- 
swear slander and falsehood. Eat and work accord- 
ing to your ability. Practise not hypocrisy or 
ostentation. Meditate on the Guru’s instruction. 
Give a tithe of your substance to God. Associate 
with the virtuous and wait upon the stranger. In- 
voke Wahguru before meals, and He will bless your 
repasts.’ 

His Sikhs put a question to the Guru: “Who 
are the greatest saints and worshippers of God ?’ 
The Guru replied, ‘They who have repeated the 
Name and renounced pride are the best. The saint 
who so acteth, and leaveth this filthy and loathsome 
body, shall obtain in its stead a celestial body of 
light. True saints are passionless, and afford shelter 
to men. He who restraineth his desires hath ob- 
tained salvation while alive. The saints are ever 
independent. What they do is ever beautiful and 
of good report. The true Guru and the saints are 
sent into the world to benefit it, though in reality 
they live apart and are not of it.’ 

Kingurinath, at the head of a company of Jogis, 
visited Guru Amar Das. They proclaimed that they 
were Jogis and holy men, and in proof of their state- 
ment pointed to the garbs and earrings they wore. 
The Guru denied that that was the way to become 
holy. He would tell them, and thereupon he uttered 
the following :— 

RAMKALI ASHTAPADI 

Put the rings of modesty in thine ears, O Jogi, and make 
compassion thy patched coat. 

Apply the fear of transmigration to thy body as ashes, 
O Jogi, thus shalt thou conquer the three worlds. 

O Jogi, play such a kinguri 

72 THE SIKH RELIGION 

As shall produce the unbeaten strain and abiding love of 
God. 

Make patience thy wallet, truth thy platter, put the 
ambrosial Name thereon as food. 

Make meditation thy staff, O Jogi, and remembrance of 
God the horn thou blowest. 

Make the fixing of thy mind on God thy sitting posture,! 
O Jogi, so shall thine injuries depart. 

Go beg in the city of the body,? O Jogi, and thou shalt 
obtain the Name. 

It is not by means of this kinguri, O Jogi, that thou shalt 
meditate upon or obtain the True One; 

It is not by means of this kinguri, O Jogi, that thou shalt 
find peace, or that pride shall depart from thy heart. 

Make the fear and love of God the two gourds of thy 
kinguri, O Jogi, and thy body its frame. 

Be holy and the strings will play ; thus shall thine avarice 
depart. 

He who understandeth God’s order and applieth his heart 
to the one God is properly called a Jogi : 

His doubts are dispelled, he becometh pure, and thus 
obtaineth the way of union with God. 

All that is visible shall be destroyed ; wherefore fix thy 
mind on God. 

If thou bearlovetothetrueGuru, thoushalt understand this. 

Union with God consisteth not, O Jogi, in leaving one’s 
family and wandering abroad. 

By the Guru’s favour thou shalt obtain God’s name in the 
mansion of thy body. 

This body is an earthen puppet, O Jogi, and in it is a dire 
disease—the craving for mammon. 

This disease will not be cured, O Jogi, by thy many efforts 
or by wearing sectarial dresses. 

God’s name, O Jogi, in whatever heart He implanteth it, 
is the medicine. 

Wherever there is a holy man he obtaineth divine know- 
ledge, and findeth the way of union with Him. 

' FKighty-four postures of the Jogis are enumerated. 
* That is, practise contemplation. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 72 

The path of union with God is difficult, O Jogi; he on 
whom God looketh with favour obtaineth it. 

Whether he be at home or abroad, he seeth but the one 
God, and removeth doubt from his heart. 

O Jogi, play that kinguri which playeth without being 
struck.! 

Saith Nanak, in this way shalt thou obtain deliverance, 
O Jogi, and be absorbed in the True One. 

One day, as the Guru was taking a ride, he saw 
a wall broken by rain, which threatened to fall, and 
he accordingly rode quickly past it. On reaching 
home his Sikhs quoted to him one of his own hymns, 
in which he wrote :— 

Death shall not approach him who meditateth on God’s 
name. 

They also quoted to him a verse of Guru 
Nanak :— 

I feel no anxiety regarding death, and I have no desire to 
live. 

They then interrogated him: ‘Great king, death 
is subservient to thee. Thou hast enjoyed a long 
life. Thou hast no pride or selfishness. Why hast 
thou hastened past the dangerous wall?’ The Guru 
replied: ‘I only want to teach my Sikhs that since 
human life, for which even the demigods vainly 
long, is so difficult to obtain, it is our duty to preserve 
it. If a tree be preserved, it will many times bear 
leaves, blossoms, and fruit. So if the body be 
preserved, we can practise charity and perform 
religious works of every description ; but when the 
body perisheth, we can no longer perform our duty 
to God. Holy men derive endless advantages from 
their bodies. By them they serve the saints, repeat 
God’s name, obtain divine knowledge and become 
emancipated. The body by which we confer benefits 
on others, and by which happiness in this life and 

1 Attune thy heart to divine knowledge. 

74 THE SIKH RELIGION 

salvation in the next are obtained, ought to be 
cherished by all.! 

One day the Sikhs said to the Guru, ‘ Formerly, 
when we undertook any enterprise we used to con- 
sult the Brahman astrologers. Now that we have 
come under thy protection, whom shall we consult ? ’ 
The Guru replied, ‘The most favourable time for 
the Guru’s Sikhs is when they pray to God. If at 
the beginning of all undertakings they with a lowly 
mind invoke His assistance, all their efforts shall be 
successful.’ 

On one occasion, on seeing a large crowd of people 
who had come to him for the attainment of their 
desires, the Guru mourned over the ills of life, and 
decided to seek for a time the retirement of the 
forest. To escape notice he started on his journey 
at midnight. His movements, however, became 
known to his sons Mohri and Mohan and a few other 
devoted Sikhs, and they prepared to accompany 
him. When the party had been three days in the 
forest, a Muhammadan goatherd called Bahlol saw 
the Guru, and recognizing him as a holy man, fell 
at his feet and made him an offering of a bowl of 
milk. The Guru seeing his devotion, said, ‘I am 
happy. The goatherd, too, became happy in the 
consciousness of having ministered to the wants of 
a deserving man. The Guru invited him to ask a 
favour. The goatherd replied that there was nothing 
stable in the world, wherefore the only favour he 
asked was that he might be enabled to remember 
God's name. The Guru granted him this favour. 

! On this subject Guru Arjan subsequently wrote the following 
verses :— 

Dust flieth on the body of him who repeateth not God’s name 
and frequenteth not the society of the saints. 

Nanak, curses on the insipid body which knoweth not Him who 
created it. 

Nanak, cherish that body which remembereth God, in whose 
heart God’s lotus feet dwell, and whose tongue repeateth His name. 

Bihagre ki War. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS is 

CHAPTER [IV 

Once the Guru visited Kasur. It was a time 
of excessive heat, and he felt very weary. The 
governor of the city was a Khatri of the Puri tribe. 
The Guru sent a messenger to request his permis- 
sion to pitch his tent in his garden. The governor 
replied, ‘I know the Guru; he is a Khatri of the 
Bhalla tribe. Only yesterday he lived in Basarka 
and to-day he is Guru. He hath attached to him 
men of all castes, high and low. They sit in a line 
and eat with him and with one another. If he 
choose to be a Guru of outcastes, he can please him- 
self, but I will not allow him to approach my dwell- 
ing.’ The Guru on hearing this said, ‘ My disciples 
shall one day have sovereign power. A Sikh ruler 
shall reign here in Kasur, and the descendants of 
this Khatri who is now governor shall become his 
servants. The Guru, departing thence, found his 
way to the hut of a poor Pathan. On seeing the 
Guru the man arose and said that he was poor, 
otherwise he would give him suitable entertainment. 
The Guru replied in the words of Guru Nanak :— 

God can appoint a worm to sovereignty and reduce an 
army to ashes. 

The Guru continued, ‘ Do God’s service, and thou 
shalt become the lord of Kasur, but directly thou 
practise tyranny, thou shalt die.’ A short time 
afterwards the Khatri officials in Kasur caused such 
political disturbance that the Emperor ordered them 
to be disarmed and expelled, and Pathans appointed 
in their place. The latter and their descendants 
continued to govern that part of the Panjab until 
it was conquered by Ranjit Singh and the Sikhs. 

On one occasion, as the Guru lay asleep in the 
small hours of the night, he was awakened by a 
woman’s screams. He sent two of his Sikhs to 

76 TH SIKH RELIGION 

inquire the cause of her grief. They returned with 
the information that a young man had just died 
of tertian ague, and his mother was bewailing his 
loss. On hearing this the compassionate Guru 
prayed to the Deathless Being to console her. He 
told his Sikhs to repeat the first pauri of the Japji, 
and, while doing so, to put water into the mouth of 
the deceased. The Sikhs, instead of performing 
the ceremony themselves, brought the body to the 
Guru. He put water into the corpse’s mouth, and 
touched the head with his foot, when lo! the youth 
was re-animated. 

Once while a rich man was giving a religious feast 
a child was born in his house. The Brahmans in 
consequence declared the place impure, and refused 
food. The giver of the feast went to the third Guru 
to complain. The latter thereupon ordered his 
Sikhs to partake of the viands prepared, and they 
did so. The Brahmans subsequently went to the 
Guru to represent that his-disciples had eaten impure 
bread. The following was the Guru’s remonstrance:— 

The love of mammon is mental impurity, 

By which men are led astray in doubt and suffer trans- 
migration. 

The impurity of the perverse never departeth 

Until they become saturated with the Word and with 
God’s name. 

Whatever taketh the form of worldly love is all impurity : 

On this account man dieth and is born again and again. 

There is impurity in fire, in wind, and in water ; 

There is impurity in whatever is eaten ; 

There is impurity in religious ceremonies and in worship. 

Only the heart which is dyed with the Name is pure. 

By serving the True Guru impurity departeth : 

Then man dieth not, nor is he born, nor doth Death 
destroy him. 

Let any one carefully examine the Shastars and Simritis, 
and he shall find 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 27 

That without the Name there 1s no deliverance. 

In the four ages the Name is considered the best word, 
And by means of tt in this Kalage the pious are saved. 
The True One neither dieth nor suffereth transmigration. 
Nanak, the holy shall be absorbed in God.! 

A rich Muhammadan horse-dealer named Alayar, 
a native of Dihh, who had returned from Arabia 
through Kabul with five hundred horses, arrived at 
the Bias. He had intended to proceed to his native 
city, where he hoped to find a good market, but 
was unable to continue his journey as the river was 
flooded, and the boatmen did not think their boats 
sufficiently strong to withstand the current. The 
following morning he saw Bhai Paro, on his way to 
the Guru as usual, plunge his horse into the foaming 
river and reach the opposite shore in safety. The 
horse-dealer met him on his return, and compli- 
mented him on the feat he had performed. Bhai 
Paro said there was nothing wonderful in his crossing 
a swollen river. The true Guru, to whom he daily 
went to do homage, caused thousands of souls to 
swim across the still more dangerous ocean of the 
world. Alayar was anxious to behold so great 
a being, so he arranged with Paro on the next 
occasion to sit behind him on his horse, and thus 
cross the river and visit the Guru with him. 

Alayar was delighted on seeing the Guru, hearing 
his words, and witnessing the devotion of his Sikhs. 
Filled with enthusiasm and humility he mentally 
desired the Guru’s leavings. The Guru divined his 
wish and offered him the dish from which he had 
eaten. The Guru’s attention was then attracted 
to his name, and he said, ‘ It is difficult to become 
a friend (yar) of God (Allah), but I will make God 
thy Master, and thee His servant.’ Thus was Alayar 
made a priest and freed from all doubts, evil passions, 
and inclinations. He henceforth drew no distinction 
between Hindus and Muhammadans, and continued 

1 Gauri. 

78 THE SIKH RELIGION 

as he had begun, a model of humility and divine 
fervour. The Guru in due time sent him to a place 
called Devantal, where saints resided. His trade in 
horses was undertaken and continued by his son. 
Alayar’s family ultimately settled down in Dalla, 
where lived Bhai Paro and Bhai Lalo and other 
devoted servants of the Guru. Musalmans of every 
rank accepted and reverenced Alayar under the 
name of Ala Shah as a pious priest. A concourse of 
Sikhs, among whom were Bhai Dipa, Bhai Khana, 
Bhai Malu, and Bhai Kidara, gathered round these 
holy men in Dalla, and took up their abode with 
them. 

CHAPTER V 

There was a goldsmith in Goindwal married to 
an elderly woman. All medicines and incantations 
were employed to procure them offspring, but in 
vain. The everlasting cry of the childless couple 
was, ‘ How shall we be happy in this world? And 
who will take care of our wealth ?’ Their youth 
had passed, and the advent of old age naturally 
made them despair the more. They decided to dig 
a well where travellers might allay their thirst, and 
build a temple where the devout might pray. They 
hoped that in this way their wishes might be crowned, 
and their memory abide in the world. When the 
Guru heard of the pious work they had undertaken, 
he went and personally assisted in it. On being 
informed of his presence the goldsmith and his wife 
hastened with offerings to do him homage. He 
asked them what they desired. The goldsmith’s 
wife on this drew a veil over her face. The Guru 
said, ‘Be not abashed. Ask what thou desirest - 
without shame.’ She replied, ‘ Thou hast come to 
visit us; now give us an heir to our house.’ The 
Guru inquired if they expected him to keep children 
for his friends. The goldsmith, with humility and 

cat OF GURU AMAR DAS 79 

faith, replied that there were children in the words 
of the Guru. The Guru was pleased at this reply, 
and told them that, if they had faith, they should 
have two children. They were accordingly blessed 
with that number of offspring. People on seeing 
the children with the old lady said they must be her 
grandchildren. The twelfth generation of the gold- 
smith and his wife still reside in Goindwal, and are 
called Maipotre (mother’s grandsons) in memory of 
this event. 

Inquirers came from different countries in detached 
bodies to behold the Guru. On seeing their number 
and frequency, Bhai Paro and his friends represented 
that there should be one place of general meeting for 
the Sikhs, and special fairs should be established 
where Sikhs could assemble and become acquainted 
and fraternize with one another. Upon this the Guru 
proclaimed that gatherings of Sikhs should be held 
on the first days of the months Baisakh and Magh, 
and on the ancient festival of the Diwali.’ 

A shopkeeper called Girdhari, who lived in the 
south of India, was very fortunate as far as wealth, 
property, and relations were concerned, but he was 
distressed at having no children. He took a second 
wife, but still there was no offspring. On hearing 
what the Guru had done for the goldsmith, he went 
to Goindwal to do him homage. He remained there 
for some days and importuned the Guru, but could 
only obtain the following reply :— 

None can erase what was written on the forehead in the 
beginning : 

What was written happeneth ; he who hath spiritual 
insight understandeth this.” 

1 By this the Guru meant that his Sikhs should not follow the 
example of the Hindus who go on idolatrous pilgrimages in Baisakh, 
Magh, and at the Diwali, or feast of lights, in autumn, but that they 
should attend on him three times a year for religious instruction and 
God’s worship. 

2 Supplementary sloks of the Granth Sahib. 

So THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru when further pressed said to Girdhari, 
‘ Repeat the Name, do good works, and obey the 
will of God. A hankering for sons is the cause of 
worldly entanglements.’ On hearing this the shop- 
keeper’s eyes filled with tears, and heaving cold 
sighs he withdrew from the Guru’s presence. Bhai 
Paro meeting him asked why he was leaving without 
having obtained his object. Girdhari then narrated 
his conversation with the Guru. Paro said that if 
he had faith he should have five children. The 
shopkeeper went home, and in five years found him- 
self the father of five sons. 

Girdhari took his five sons and placed them all at the 
Guru’s feet. The Guru inquired how he had obtained 
such a large offspring. Girdhari rephed, ‘I have 
got them through the mediation of Bhai Paro, the 
servant of thy house.’ The Guru said, ‘ Well done, 
Bhai Paro, who art able to reverse the order of 
nature! Such power is not in me.’ Bhai Paro 
humbly represented: ‘Great king, on seeing this 
man going disappointed from thy house I merely 
gave him from thy store-room which is ever in- 
exhaustible. Why should we be niggardly ?’ The 
Guru replied, ‘True, but this is the Kalage when 
many persons come with desires and motives. Guru 
Nanak hath said :— 

‘“Whatever God doeth accept as good; have done with 
cleverness and orders.” ’ 

The Guru ironically continued: ‘If thou have 
compassion to spare, then ever satisfy the desires 
of those who go away disappointed from me. Thou 
art a saint of the highest order, and mine image. 
I grant thee the Guruship of the world! Spread 
saintship therein.’ Bhai Paro, touching the Guru’s 
feet, meekly replied, ‘ Pardon thy servant, and let me 
abide at thy feet. Even if I must suffer further 
transmigration, let me not be driven from thy 
presence. Guruship becometh thee; I am content 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 81 

to be a disciple. Grant me the gift of serving thee.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘If thou desire to serve me, 
repair to thy house ; God hath pardoned thee and 
granted thee deliverance.’ Bhai Paro went home, 
distributed his wealth among his heirs, and set apart 
a favourite mare and some money for the Guru, 
with strict injunctions for the proper disposition of 
his property. Having made sacred food, and pre- 
pared for his death, he lay down. Then uttering 
‘“Wahguru’, and parting with his body, he went 
to his repose at Guru Nanak’s feet. 

When Guru Amar Das heard of Bhai Paro’s death, 
he sent his own son Mohri to Dalla to console Bhai 
Paro’s family. Mohri passed a whole night in Dalla, 
recounting Bhai Paro’s praises, and next day returned 
to Goindwal. 

Bhai Lalo continued to perform every service in 
the Guru’s house. His mind, body, and wealth were 
all employed in conferring benefits on others. He 
fed and attended to the poor and needy, fanned the 
Guru, and distributed food to his Sikhs. He was so 
distressed at Paro’s death, and dissatisfied with the 
things of this world that he resolved to bestow all 
his property in alms, and consign his body to Death. 
He thought of the words of Kabir :— 

While the world feareth death, my mind is pleased there- 
with, 
Since it is only by death supreme bliss is obtained. 

When Bhai Lalo, after the usual prayers, assumed 
his final posture, his eyes filled with tears. His 
friends said to him. ‘ Thou hast no worldly love ; 
thou hast practised charity and the duties of thy 
religion; thou art free from all earthly desires ; 
then why art thou weeping ?’ He replied, ‘I have 
inherited countless wealth from my father. That 
shall be profitable if it be spent in the service of the 

1 Kabir’s sloks, 
SIKH, I G 

82 THE SEF RELIGION 

Guru and his Sikhs. I have also mine own earnings 
which I wish to dispose of for their benefit. Further- 
more, I have recently built a house at great expense, 
which I reserved for myself, but it is useless to me 
now. If that also be applied to the use of the Sikhs, 
I shall have nothing to regret.’ His relations and 
Sikh friends disposed of his property accordingly. 
He then, in the words of the Sikh chronicler, parted 
with his body as though it were the slough of 
a snake. 

One day a Sikh merchant went to the Guru,and said 
that he had given alms and feasts to Brahmans, 
and made pilgrimages according to prescribed rules, 
but obtained no spiritual profit or consolation there- 
from. He therefore requested the Guru, who was 
the pilot of the world’s terrible ocean, to save him. 
The Guru on that occasion composed the following :— 

Serve God ; perform no other service. 

By serving Him thou shalt obtain the fruit thy heart 
desireth ; by any other service thy life shall pass away in 
vain, 

God is my love, God is my rule of life, God is the subject 
of my conversation. 

By the Guru’s favour my heart is saturated with God’s 
love ; thus is my service rewarded. 

God is my Simritis, God is myShastars, God is my kinsman, 
God is my brother. 

Iam hungry for God; with His name my heart is satisfied. 
God is my relative, and at the last moment will be my helper. 

Except God all other capital is false, and goeth not with 
us when we depart. 

God is the wealth which shall depart with me ;_ whitherso- 
ever I go, thither will it go. 

He who is attached to falsehood is false, and false are the 
works he performeth. 

Saith Nanak, everything happeneth according to God’s 
will ; naught is gained by babbling.? 

1 Gijari. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 83 

The Guru continued: ‘ Repeat the one God’s 
name, be humble, abandon pride, and self-conceit. 
As fire burneth a dry crop, so do pride and self- 
conceit destroy the effect of alms and religious 
exercises. 

His Sikhs once asked the Guru, ‘ If, as the saints 
say, the world is lke a dream, then how do their 
bodies perform their functions ?’ The Guru replied, 
‘Their bodies perform all their functions, but their 
minds are not affected by the world. The saints 
abide in the form of ordinary mortals, as the sword 
touched by the philosopher’s stone retaineth its 
shape, but is at the same time changed into gold. 
By humility and contempt of the world the saints 
obtain deliverance at their death.’ The Guru then 
related the following parable: ‘Some one told 
a saint that his only son had been slain. The saint 
on hearing the news remained unmoved. On this 
people began to admire his fortitude, and say, 
“Thy son was a fine, obedient young man. Thou 
art to be congratulated that thou canst endure his 
death without a murmur.”’ The saint replied, “ The 
world is like a dream or a shadow; sons, wives, 
and wealth are all perishable. In a dream a poor 
man may become a king or a king a poor man, but 
when they awake they find their dreams have no 
reality. For whom shall man rejoice or mourn ?”’ 
Upon this some one came and told the father that 
his dead son had been re-animated. On hearing this, 
too, the saint manifested no joy.’ The Guru, 
pointing out the moral of his story, said, ‘ Saints 
are unaffected by joy or sorrow as the lotus is by 
water.’ 

Many persons continued to visit the Guru for 
religious instruction. Lalu, Durga, and Jawanda 
received from him the following advice, ‘ Ever do 
good to others. This is to be accomplished in three 
ways: By giving good advice, by setting a good 
example to Sikhs, and by ever desiring men’s welfare.’ 

G 2 

84 THE SIKH RELIGION 

A Sikh named Jagga asked the Guru’s permission 
to become a hermit. He said he had met a Jogi 
and asked him for instruction. The Jogi would only 
give it on his relinquishing a domestic and adopting 
an ascetic life. The Guru replied that deliverance 
could not be obtained either by the relinquishment 
of house and home or by the practice of Jog. As 
a lotus, while growing in the mud, turns its petals 
towards the sun, so should man while engaged in 
worldly affairs turn his thoughts to God by means 
of the instruction of the Guru. 

To Gopi, Mohan, Rama, and Amru, the Guru spoke 
as follows: ‘Practise forbearance and forgiveness, and 
harbour not enmity to any one in your hearts. 
Should any one address you a harsh or disrespectful 
word, be not angry, but speak civilly in return.’ 

To Gangu and Saharu the Guru delivered the fol- 
lowing instruction: ‘When you have prepared food, 
first feed the Sikhs, and then eat the remainder 
yourselves. He who eateth after his brother Sikhs 
shall become very holy. Ever remember Wahguru. 
Worship not cremation grounds, tanks,! or Hindu or 
Muhammadan shrines.’ 

When the Guru paid a visit to the Sikh families 
in Dalla, Prithi Mal and Tulsa of the Bhalla caste 
went to see him. They unceremoniously seated 
themselves beside him, and said with much famili- 
arity, “ Thou and we are of the same caste.’ The 
Guru replied in the words of Guru Nanak :— 

Caste hath no power in the next world; there is a new 
order of beings. 
It is the good whose accounts are honoured. 

‘This body’, continued the Guru, ‘is composed 
of five elements. It 1s subject to hunger, thirst, joy, 

1 Hindu women dig holes near tanks for the benefit of their 
ancestors, Others drawing forth mud from tanks worship unseen 
spirits under the name of Bibaris, who are supposed to control 
children’s diseases. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 8s 

sorrow, birth, and death. It perisheth, and no 
caste goeth with the soul to the next world. They 
who are honoured and exalted in God’s court are 
those whose minds are humble, who have renounced 
falsehood, fraud, slander, deceit, hypocrisy, and 
ingratitude, and who have repeated the Name and 
benefited others. If the high caste on which people 
plume themselves in this life be not recognized in 
the next, of what advantage is it? The Guru 
recognizeth no caste.’ 

Bhais Malhan, Ramu, Gobind, and Dipa asked 
the Guru to give them instruction whereby they 
might be saved. He replied, ‘ Abandon obstinacy 
and pride, serve the saints, prepare sacred food 
according to the rules of our religion, feed the 
hungry, clothe the naked, rise before day, repeat 
the Japji, bestow a little of your time and wealth 
on God’s service, associate with the saints, meditate 
on the Word, perform the duties of your religion, 
hurt no one’s feelings, sing the Guru’s hymns, be 
lowly and abandon pride, recognize only the Creator 
as the one God, and all your desires shall be fulfilled. 
If a man be weighed down with worldliness, he shall 
sink like an overladen boat in the world’s ocean ; 
but, if worldliness lie not heavily on him, his bark 
shall float, and he shall obtain deliverance.’ 

Bula, a learned pandit, laid before the Guru 
a scheme he had devised for a compilation of the 
Guru’s hymns, and mooted the question of remu- 
neration for his labour. The Guru replied: * Make 
a careful collection of the Guru’s hymns, and give 
it to the Sikhs in God’s name. If any one offer thee 
money, accept 1t for thy maintenance, but beg not, 
and great shall be thy gain.’ 

A Sultanpur bard named Bhikha embraced retire- 
ment from the world so as to search for the Creator. 
Wherever he heard of any saints he went to wait 
on them. For a long time he remained in a state 
of pupilage under a Brahman, without obtaining 

86 THE SIKH RELIGION 

any peace of mind. One day he felt very sad and 
prayed to God to guide him. Upon this he received 
an inspiration to go to Goindwal and see the Guru 
of whom everybody was speaking. Full of devotion 
he arrived and had the happiness of beholding the 
Object of his visit. He stood absorbed in thought 
for a short time, and then gave utterance to the 
following in the Guru’s praise :— 

By the Guru’s divine knowledge and meditation man’s 
soul is blended with God. He who with single mind fixeth 
his attention on God, shall know Him who ts the truest of the 
true. His mind shall not fly or wander who restraineth his 
lust and wrath. He who dwelleth in God’s land and obeyeth 
His order shall obtain wisdom. He who hath done good 
works in this age shall know God. If a Guru be found he 
willingly and cheerfully granteth a sight of Him. 

I have continued searching for a saint and seen many 
holy men—Sanyasis, ascetics, and sweet-voiced pandits— 
I have roamed for a year, but none of them hath satisfied 
me. I heard what they had to say, but I was not pleased 
with their conduct. What shall I say of the merits of those 
who renouncing God’s name attach themselves to mammon ° 
God hath caused me to meet the Guru; as Thou, O God, 
keepest me, so I abide.! 

Hearing Bhikha’s words the Guru put his hand 
on his forehead in token of accepting him as a dis- 
ciple, gave him the true Name, and made him 
happy. Having found the true Guru, Bhikha re- 
turned to his native town and abode there. Keeping 
the Guru’s image in his heart, he applied himself 
to meditation and contemplation. As the result of 
his devotion his name is recorded in the honoured 
roll of holy Sikhs, and his verses have been dis- 
tinguished by inclusion in their sacred book. 

1 Bards’ Sawatyas. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 84 

CHAPTER VI 

One morning, before day, while the Asa ki War 
was being chanted, the Guru fell into a trance. 
He thought he saw Guru Nanak appear and order 
him to make a place of pilgrimage where God alone 
should be worshipped, and thus confer a favour on 
the world. It was the object of the Gurus to pre- 
serve their Sikhs from contamination at Hardwar, 
Banaras, and other places of Hindu pilgrimage. 
Guru Amar Das resolved to obey the order he felt 
he had thus so solemnly received. He purchased 
some land, and on the day of the full moon in the 
month of Kartik laid with all due religious ceremony 
the foundation of the Bawali, or well with descending 
steps, which is now such an object of reverent 
pilgrimage to Hindus as well as Sikhs in the city of 
Goindwal. His Sikhs all joined in the work. Some 
dug up the earth, some put it into baskets, some 
removed it, some made offerings of corn for the sup- 
port of the workmen, some drew water for them, 
and some cooked their meals. There was great 
activity throughout the city during the construction 
of the Bawali. 

There lived in that portion of the city of Lahore 
called Chuni Mandi a Khatri of the Sodhi tribe 
named Thakar Das. He was married to a lady 
called Jaswanti, a word which means the praise- 
worthy. A son called Hari Das (Servant of God) was 
born to them. Hari Das afterwards married Anup 
Devi. After her marriage she was generally known 
as Daya Kaur. The associations and acts of both 
husband and wife were ever good and praiseworthy. 
Contrary to the polytheistic spirit of their time, 
they worshipped only one God, served saints, and 
made the repetition of God’s name the main object 
of their devotion. They worked diligently for their 

88 . THE SIKH RELIGION 

livelihood, and were contented with their lot. They 
rose early to perform their adoration and meditation, 
and their prayer ever was that a son might be born 
to them who should be the light of their family, 
and whose glory should shine like the sun. 

The result of their prayer and devotion was that 
after twelve years of married life, in the early morn- 
ing of Thursday, the second day of the dark half 
of the month Kartik, in the Sambat year 1591 
(A.D. 1534), a son was born to them, who appeared 
like a sun of the solar line from which they claimed 
their descent. He was called Ram Das, but was 
generally known as Jetha, a name which means 
first-born. He is described as of fair complexion, 
handsome figure, pleasing and smiling face, and not 
disposed to weep or cry in the manner of ordinary 
children. 

As he grew up he frequented the society of holy 
men, and gave them whatever he received from his 
parents. The latter desired that he should turn 
to some occupation for his livelihood, but that was 
not his own intention. There lived near his parents 
a poor man who made his living by selling boiled 
pulse. At his suggestion Jetha’s mother boiled 
some, put it into a basket, and gave it to him to sell, 
so that he might begin to do something profitable. 
An ordinary person would have taken the pulse to 
the bazars and streets for sale, but Jetha went off 
with his basket to the river Ravi and there sat 
down. He soon saw a company of holy men coming 
towards him from the opposite side, and waited 
until they had bathed and emerged from the river. 
They were very hungry, and on seeing him with his 
basket, asked him to supply their necessities. They 
represented that what was given in the name of the 
Lord would fructify a thousandfold, and that God 
would bless his earnings. Jetha gave them the 
whole contents of his basket and went home. The 
holy men were very pleased, and prayed that God 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 89 

would reward the boy for his compassionate and 
timely gift. 

He soon fell in with a company of Sikhs singing 
hymns to the accompaniment of cymbals and drums, 
and proceeding on their way with great rejoicing. 
When he asked whither they were going, one of 
them replied, ‘ Come with us, we are going to Goind- 
wal where Guru Amar Das, the third Guru, holds 
his court. Every blessing in this world and the 
next is obtained by his favour.’ On hearing this 
Jetha’s heart was filled with devotion, and he at 
once joined the Sikhs in their pilgrimage. Jetha, 
on arriving in Goindwal, prostrated himself before 
the Guru, who was much impressed with his devo- 
tion and handsome exterior. In reply to the Guru's 
inquiries Jetha told his name and station, and how, 
abandoning all worldly desires, he had sought his 
spiritual protection. The Guru replied, ‘If thou 
hast come abandoning all worldly desires, thou 
shalt obtain a true sovereignty. Perform work and 
service. It is thus God’s court 1s obtained.’ Jetha 
was delighted at his reception, and at once applied 
himself to the Guru’s service. He cooked in the 
kitchen, shampooed his master, drew water, brought 
firewood from the forest, and, when not so employed, 
assisted in the excavation of the Bawali. He never 
thought of his own ease and never felt weary. He 
was of such meek temper that, even if any one spoke 
harshly to him, he would never retaliate. He 
became known as what he really was, namely, kam 
Das, which being interpreted means God's slave. 

One of the Guru’s daughters, Bibi Sulakhani, known 
as Dani, had married Rama of the Bedi family to 
which Guru Nanak belonged. The other daughter, 
Bibi Bhani, was from her earliest years fond of 
prayer and seclusion. When her young girl com- 
panions would invite her on a pleasant day in 
summer to go with them to indulge in the pastime 
of the swing, she would inform her father, who in- 

go THE SIKH RELIGION 

variably gave her permission. At the same time 
he would remind her of the following composition 
of his own :— 

The world is dead through pride, the proud have no means 
of living. 

He who walketh as it pleaseth the Guru, shall obtain the 
dignity of eternal life. 

They who fix their attention on God’s feet shall live for 
ever 

Nanak, when He who looketh on all with favour, dwelleth 
in the heart, the pious man is easily absorbed in Him. 

She used to say to her playmates, ‘We are 
thoughtless beings like the skipping and_ playing 
lambs while the butcher Death standeth over us.’ 
She would then recite Guru Nanak’s lines :— 

This message is ever sent to every house, such invitations 
are ever issued. 

Kemember the Caller ; Nanak, the day is approaching. 

By this she meant that Death stood ready for his 
victims, and it was a mistake to think too much of 
earthly pleasures. Her mother, who used to ac- 
company her, would then say, ‘By Guru Nanak’s 
favour remain free from anxiety. What fear hast 
thou of Death? The Guru hath granted his Sikhs 
happiness in this life and salvation in the next, and 
hath commanded them to eat and enjoy themselves.’ 

A faithful Sikh once asked the Guru’s permission 
to offer Bibi Bhani money to purchase dresses and 
ornaments, so that she might decorate herself like 
Other girls, and not appear at a disadvantage in 
their company. On hearing of the offer she repeated 
Guru Nanak’s words :— 

False is gold, false is silver, false those who wear them ; 
and reminded the Sikh that the best use to which 
money could be applied, would be to fill the Guru’s 

kitchen with corn and supply the necessities of 
pilgrims. 

LIPE OF GURU AMAR DAS gl 

The Guru’s wife, Mansa Devi, one day seeing Bibi 
Bhani playing, remarked to her husband that, as 
Bhani had arrived at the age of puberty, they ought 
to search for a husband for her. The Guru ordered 
the necessary search to be made. When the Guru's 
agent was ready to depart, Bibi Bhani’s mother saw 
a boy outside her door hawking some articles. On 
attentively observing him, she said to the agent, 
‘Search for a youth like him to be Bibi Bhani's 
husband.’ Hearing this, the Guru ordered the 
agent to pause. On examining the youth’s linea- 
ments the Guru exclaimed, ‘ He is his own parallel, 
for God had made none other like unto him.’ 
On this the Guru called the youth and interro- 
gated him on matters in which fathers-in-law are 
interested. On being satisfied with the boy's 
replies and his desire to marry Bham, the Guru sent 
him with marriage presents to his father, Hari 
Das, in Lahore, and had the betrothal ceremony 
performed. 

After the completion of the nuptial negotiations 
Guru Amar Das wrote to Hari Das that the twenty- 
second of Phagan, Sambat 1610, would be a suitable 
time for the marriage. All the Sodhis congregated 
together, and there were great rejoicings. Women 
sang the Guru’s hymns, and bards exhibited their 
poetical skill. The bridegroom’s procession was 
formed, he was put on horseback, and he and his 
friends proceeded in state to Goindwal. Mohri, the 
Guru’s eldest son, went forth to receive him. As the 
bridegroom was about to enter the Guru’s house, the 
Guru said to him, ‘ My son Jetha, it is the custom 
of our family that before the bridegroom entereth 
the bride’s house he should make a request. Make 
one accordingly.’ Jetha accordingly repeated the 
first hymn of the Gujari measure contained in the 
Rahiras. 

Guru Amar Das, highly pleased at the request 
conveyed in the earnest language of the hymn, 

Q2 THE SIKH RELIGION 

granted Jetha a present of the Name, promised that 
at his court it should be unceasingly heard, and that 
it should flow like a current of waters. 

When the marriage was duly celebrated, the 
marriage procession returned to Lahore. Jetha’s 
parents wished the young couple to live with them 
according to the usual custom of the East, but 
Jetha considered the Guru as his god, and himself 
as his worshipper. He did not think of him at all 
in the light of a father-in-law, a relation who is 
ordinarily treated with scant respect by Indian 
bridegrooms. He deemed parting from him even 
worse than expulsion from heaven, and accordingly 
returned with his wife to Goindwal after a short 
sojourn in Lahore. In his heart he believed that the 
foundation of love sprang from the Guru’s lotus 
feet, and he used to pray :— 

May I abide from beginning to end in the joy of Thy 
lotus feet ! 

After his return to Goindwal he was the same 
Jetha and performed the same service for the Guru 
as before, without a particle of false pride in his 
heart. The more Jetha served the Guru, the more 
his love for him and for all mankind increased. His 
disposition became divine, as when iron is turned 
into gold by the contact of the philosopher’s stone. 
Specially did he labour at the Bawali which the Guru 
was constructing. He made no objection to carrying 
baskets of earth on his head, and paid no heed to 
the banter or reproaches of his companions. The 
Guru took special notice of his conduct, and showed 
him special favour. 

Bibi Bhani not only considered Amar Das her 
father, but also her Guru, the very image of Guru 
Nanak. In the same way she served Jetha not only 
as husband but as saint. In the month of Assu, 
Sambat 1614, a son, Prithi Chand, was born of the 
marriage. Three years after, in the month of Har, 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 93 

a second son, Mahadev, made his appearance. On 
Tuesday, the seventh day of the dark half of Bai- 
sakh, Sambat 1620, Jetha and Bhani were blessed 
with a third son called Arjan, at whose birth there 
were unusual rejoicings. 

CHAPTER VII 

There was a Bairagi named Mai Das, a most 
devout worshipper of the god Krishan. Strictly 
adhering to all Vaishnav ceremonials, he would only 
eat what he had cooked with his own hands. His 
chief desire was to behold the yellow-robed, peacock- 
crowned god in bodily form. In the hope of obtain- 
ing assistance for the purpose from the Guru, of 
whose fame he had heard, he went to Goindwal. On 
arriving there, however, he was informed he could 
not see the Guru until he had eaten food from his 
kitchen. He decided that as a strict Vaishnav he 
could never partake of such food, and he accordingly 
took his departure. On his way home he said to 
himself, ‘I have been lucky in deciding to see the 
Guru, but unlucky in departing without seeing him. 
I will by way of consolation go to Dwaraka to see 
Krishan.’ He accordingly made the long journey 
to Dwaraka, and took up his abode in an adjacent 
forest. On the night of his arrival he was holding 
the fast of the eleventh of the lunar month, during 
which he was allowed to eat fruit, but it was not 
obtainable for it was then the winter season. Cold 
winds were blowing, rain was falling in torrents, light- 
ning was flashing, and the night was appallingly dark. 
He called upon all his gods, “O Wasdev, O Krishan, 
O Girdhari, I have no shelter but in you.’ At last 
in his dire extremity he accidentally found a hollow 
tree in which he took shelter for the night. 

On the morrow at daybreak he searched the whole 

94 THE SIKH RELIGION 

forest, but could find nothing to eat. Closing his 
eyes and meditating on God he prayed for relief. 
A supreme Jogi, seeing his devotion, brought a plate 
full of dal and rice, and laying it before him de- 
parted. Mai Das on opening his eyes was astonished 
to see prepared food in such a place. He reflected, 
‘ This food having been cooked in water is impure. 
If I eat it, I shall become an outcaste, and if I do 
not, I shall die. Well, if die I must, let me die by 
all means, but I will not abandon my principles.’ 

The supreme Jogi knowing his unshaken faith 
placed before him unobserved a plate of sweets, 
which, as having been cooked in clarified butter, 
even a devout Hindu could receive from the hands 
of another without defilement. Mai Das then began 
to consider: ‘Into this solitude no man may bring 
sweets, nor have I seen anybody coming or going. 
Impure food was first brought me, and when I 
refused it, I received pure food. It was certainly 
God who came to me, but through my misfortune 
I did not see him.’ Mai Das searched in every 
direction, and again began to call on his god, ‘O 
Krishan, O Girdhari, O Murari, pardon my sins. 
OQ compassionate one, O Gobind, grant me a sight 
of thee.’ I*ull of devotion he wandered weeping and 
shouting through the forest. It is said that he then 
heard a voice: ‘ Thou hast not taken food from 
Amar Das’s kitchen, and hast not beheld him; there- 
fore shalt thou not obtain perfection. If thou desire 
to do so, then first behold Amar Das.’ 

On hearing this Mai Das returned to Goindwal. 
Invoking his favourite god, he partook of food from 
the Guru’s kitchen, and was then allowed the privi- 
lege of sitting in the Guru’s court and beholding 
him who had been so long the special object of his 
thoughts and aspirations. The Guru addressed him, 
‘Come, Mai Das, thou art a special saint of God.’ 
Mai Das with complimentary expressions suppli- 
cated to be made the Guru’s servant, so that he 

rt OF GURU AMAR DAS 95 

might ever behold him. The Guru replied, ‘ Abide 
with me for eight days, keep the company of my 
saints, and I will then point out to thee thy spiritual 
ulde.’ 

: Meanwhile the Sikhs continued with great energy 
and devotion to excavate the Bawali. After digging 
very deep they found large stones which hindered 
their progress. The Sikhs prayed the Guru to remove 
the obstacle. He counselled patience, and said that 
all should be well in due time. 

When water obstinately refused to enter the 
Bawali, the Guru inquired if there were any of his 
Sikhs sufficiently courageous to drive a peg into its 
base with the object of removing the obstruction. 
At the same time the Guru warned his hearers that 
the operation involved great peril. The man who 
performed it must be able to stem the current which 
would issue from the aperture formed by the peg; 
otherwise he would be drowned. All the Sikhs re- 
mained silent, and no one ventured to undertake 
such a perilous task. At last Manak Chand of 
Vairowal, a young man with a sprouting beard, who 
was married to a niece of the Guru, declared himself 
at the Guru’s service. 

This man’s history is connected with the miracu- 
lous power of the first Guru. When Guru Nanak 
visited Thatha, Hari Chand who was childless took 
him an offering of milk in the hope of obtaining the 
object of his desires. The Guru being pleased, said, 
‘A gem (manak) shall be strung on thy necklace.’ 
Within a year a son was born to him who was called 
Manak Chand, in remembrance of the word used by 
the Guru and the fulfilment of the prophecy. 

Manak Chand, invoking God’s name, extracted 
the peg, whereupon there immediately issued a rush- 
ing stream which overflowed the Bawali. Manak, 
though on his guard, was upturned, and though 
striking out vigorously sank to the bottom. Next 
morning his old widowed mother and his young wife 

96 THE SIKH RELIGION 

came and sat on the margin of the Bawali weeping 
piteously. The aged mother was crying out, ‘ Ah! 
Manak my son, who will protect me now? Thou 
oughtest to have taken me with thee.’ The Guru 
inquired who was weeping. The Sikhs brought the 
old lady to him, and she bowed at his feet. The 
Guru said, “ Manak is not drowned, he will save many 
aone yet. Have patience, and he will come to thee.’ 
The Guru went and stood by the Bawali. He called 
out, ‘Manak, behold thy mother is weeping for thee, 
come and meet her.’ Manak’s body at once rose to 
the surface. The Guru meditated on God, and 
touched the young man’s body with his foot, upon 
which he walked forth from the water in the full 
possession of life and vigour. The Guru then ad- 
dressed him: ‘Thou art my living—jiwar—son. Thy 
sons shall be called sons of Jiwar. Now become Mai 
Das’s spiritual guide, go home, and wealth and 
supernatural power shall come at thy bidding.’ Thus, 
by the favour of the Guru, Jiwar and his descendants 
have been reverenced by succeeding generations. 
By this time Mai Das’s stay of eight days was at 
an end. The Guru told him that Manak Chand 
should become his spiritual guide. The Guru having 
ordered him to go and preach to all people thus con- 
tinued: ‘Thou too shalt make converts and become 
a famous saint; save men by giving them God’s 
name, read the Guru’s hymns, and all blessings shall 
attend thee.’ Mai Das, having received spiritual 
and temporal favours from Manak Chand, returned 
to his village. He afterwards paid the Guru a yearly 
visit, obtained mental peace, found salvation for 
himself, and became empowered to grant it to others. 
The Bawali when finished yielded sweet drinking 
water, and the Sikhs greatly rejoiced at the comple- 
tion of their labours. It was provided with eighty- 
four steps. The Guru decreed that whoever should 
attentively and reverently repeat the Japji on every 
step, should escape from wandering in the wombs 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 97 

of the eighty-four lakhs of living creatures. Sadha- 
ran, a Sikh carpenter, devoutly made woodwork 
for seven steps of the Bawali and clamped it with 
iron. 

It was now the time for the Emperor Akbar to 
make his periodical visit to Lahore. Having crossed 
the Bias he made a détour to Goindwal, and accom- 
panied by a large escort of Mughal and Pathan 
soldiers made a state visit to the Guru, of whose 
sanctity he had heard such favourable accounts, and 
presented him with costly offerings of every descrip- 
tion. The Emperor, out of respect for the Guru, 
walked on the bare ground as he approached his 
residence. He learned, however, that he could not 
have an interview with the Guru until he had par- 
taken of his food. The Emperor inquired of what 
the food consisted, and was informed that it was 
coarse unseasoned rice. He asked for some and par- 
took of it as if it were ambrosia. Having seen the 
large number of people fed from the Guru’s kitchen 
he requested him to accept his service and his offer- 
ings. He added, ‘I will make thee a grant of what- 
ever land thou desirest, and I am ready to perform 
any other office that may be pleasing to thee.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘I have obtained lands and rent-free 
tenures from my Creator. He who cherisheth all 
existences giveth also unto me. My Sikhs devoutly 
give me wherewithal to supply my kitchen. What- 
ever cometh daily is spent daily, and for the morrow 
my trust is in God.’ The Emperor pressed on him 
the acceptance of several villages, but the Guru was 
firm in his refusal. The Emperor then said, ‘I see 
thou desirest nothing. From thy treasury and thy 
kitchen countless beings receive bounties, and I 
entertain similar hopes. The villages which thou 
refusest I will grant to thy daughter Bibi Bhani.’ 
The Emperor upon this signed a grant of the villages 
in her name. The Guru gave the Emperor a dress 
of honour, and dismissed him, highly pleased with 

SIKH. II H 

98 THE SIKH RELIGION 

his pilgrimage. The headmen of the villages granted 
by the Emperor went with offerings to the Guru, 
but he sent them and their offerings to Jetha, the 
husband of the proprietress. The management of 
the villages was entrusted to Bhai Budha, who went 
and lived in a forest in the midst of them. 

Every one was pleased on hearing of the healing 
virtues and fame of the Bawali, except a second Tapa 
who had settled in Goindwal. His heart was bitter 
as the colocynth, but his words as sweet as the 
mango. The Guru gave a great feast on the tenth 
day of the month following the completion of the 
Bawali. The Tapa, though invited, refused to attend. 
He said to the Guru’s messenger, ‘I want nothing 
from the Guru, nor will I give him anything. I will 
go to dine with the provincial governor instead. 
He too hath invited me, and irom’ him I hall 
receive presents of gold coins.’ The Tapa on going 
to the governor began to calumniate the Guru. 
‘Behold, O Diwan, Amar Das, though a Khatri, 
eateth the fruit of offerings as if he were a Brahman. 
He putteth men of the four castes all in a line, 
maketh them eat together, and thus destroyeth their 
religion. I have therefore refused to dine with him, 
and have come to thee as a candidate for thy favour.’ 

The Tapa was disappointed. He received only 
a bad dinner and one rupee from the governor. 
On returning home he heard that the Guru was not 
only giving an elaborate banquet to his guests, but 
bestowing five rupees, and in some cases sixteen 
on every religious man who attended. On hearing 
this the Tapa was filled with regret and said, if 
he had known it, he would have dined with him 
instead of with the governor. He could thus have 
kept in the good graces of the Guru, and received 
a good dinner and at least five rupees from him. 
He went to the Guru’s house, and said publicly that 
he had no quarrel with him, and did not desire any. 

1 Siraj Parkash, Ras I, Chapter ro. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 99 

The Guru’s door happened at the time to be closed 
as the feast was in progress. The Tapa called from 
outside, but received no answer. He then went 
home and brought his son, whom he caused to leap 
over the wall of the Guru’s courtyard and enter his 
dining-room. The Tapa’s son succeeded in getting 
from the Guru a share of the banquet and five rupees. 
Notwithstanding this the Tapa boasted that he did 
not desire a present or a share of the feast served 
out promiscuously from the Guru’s kitchen. He 
had only sent his son on the Guru’s repeated pressing 
invitations. The Tapa, however, got the worst of 
the transaction, for his son injured his leg in crossing 
the wall, and the Tapa’s own insolent speeches 
regarding the Guru were reported to the headmen 
of the city. After consultation among themselves 
they thought they would visit him, and see how he 
passed his time. They entered his apartment with- 
out having given previous intimation, and caught 
him in adultery with the landlord’s wife. They 
arrested him and took him to the landlord, to whose 
turn it now came to defend his honour. Such 
offences were then visited with exemplary severity. 
The Tapa was put to death with torture. On this 
incident Jetha composed the following :— 

He is not a Tapa whose heart is greedy and who ever 
wandereth begging for mammon. 

When he was first called, he would not accept the 
proffered money ; afterwards repenting he brought his son 
and seated him in the midst of the assembly. 

The village elders all began to laugh, saying that the wave 
of greed had overcome the Tapa. 

He will not approach the place where he seeth little wealth; 
where he seeth much there he forfeiteth his faith. 

My brother, he is not a penitent ; he isacrane ; the saints 
seated in council have decided this. 

While employed in praising the rest the Tapa slandereth 
the true Guru ; for this sin God hath cursed him. 

H 2 

100 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Behold the result the Tapa obtained for slandering the 
true Guru—all his labours have been in vain. 

When he sitteth outside among the village elders he is 
called a penitent ; when he sitteth at home he is committing 
sin ; God hath disclosed his secret sin to the elders. 

Dharmraj said to his myrmidons, ‘ Take and place the 
Tapa where the greatest murderers are. 

‘ Let no one look at this Tapa again ; he is accursed of the 
tie Gur. 

Nanak telleth what took place in God’s court. He under- 
standeth whom God hath regenerated.! 

The third Guru supplemented this hymn with his 
own injunctions: ‘He is a Tapa or penitent who 
practiseth penance, who renounceth slander, false- 
hood, envy, and jealousy, who is the same in woe 
as in weal. When a deceitful and_ ill-conducted 
man pretendeth to be a Tapa, his counterfeit gilding 
is soon discovered. Wherefore it is better to re- 
nounce evil deeds, falsehood, and deception.’ 

The Guru again added the following :— 

He whose heart is false acteth falsely ; 

He gocth about for money, yet he calleth himself a peni- 
Cent: 

Led astray by superstition he frequenteth all places of 
pilgrimage. 

How shall a penitent obtain the supreme reward ? 

By the favour of the Guru a few are sincere : 

Nanak, such penitents shall obtain salvation at home. 

The true penitent :-— 

He is a penitent who performeth the penance 

Of remembering the Word on meeting the true Guru. 
The service of the true Guru is the acceptable penance : 
Nanak, such a penitent shall obtain honour in God’s court. 

1 Gauri ki War I. 

LYFE OF GURU AMAR DAS IOl 

CHAPTER VIII 

A banker taking large offerings went to visit the 
Guru. The offerings included a necklace of pearls 
and precious stones. He wanted to put it on the 
Guru, but the Guru said he was too old for such 
ornaments. The banker might put it on him who 
was the Guru’s image, and who was dearer to him 
than life, and then the banker’s wishes would be 
gratified. The banker replied that the Guru might 
put it on whomsoever he pleased. The Sikhs began 
to conjecture whom the Guru could have meant. 
Some said Mohri, others Mohan—sons of the Guru— 
and others again thought of other faithful and 
obedient Sikhs. The Guru, disappointing them all, 
put the necklace with all its beauty and splendour 
on the neck of his favourite Jetha. 

On an occasional afternoon the Guru used to go 
with his retinue to the bank of the river Bias. On 
the way a filthy naked Muhammadan faqir, who 
was almost always under the influence of intoxicants, 
took up his position. He said in a voice loud enough 
for the Guru to hear as he passed by: ‘ He con- 
sumeth the wealth of the whole world. The older 
he groweth the more miserly he becometh. He only 
maketh gifts to those from whom he desireth some- 
thing in return. He taketh no notice of faqirs, and 
hath never remembered me who am a beggar like 
others. I take opium and bhang, and he never 
offereth me any, though he ought sometimes to 
think of the poor. I care for no one, be he king or 
emperor; I speak the truth to his face. When 
a man giveth me anything I pray for his welfare.’ 

The fagir often used such offensive language in 
reference to the Guru. The Guru, who was patience 
incarnate, used to remain silent and pass on. One 
day Jetha accompanied the Guru, and on hearing 
the graceless fagir spluttering and discharging, as 

I02 THE SIKH RELIGION 

it were, the sediment of his bhang, said to him, 
‘Why participate in sin by slandering the true 
Guru ?’ The faqir replied, ‘ Why should I not ? He 
hath never given me alms. Give me the necklace 
thou wearest.’ On this Jetha took off his gorgeous 
necklace, and put it on the faqir. Upon this he began 
to sing aloud the Guru’s praises: ‘ Thou art more 
generous than Raja Harishchandra, than Raja Karan, 
and than Raja Vikramadit.’* As the party returned 
from the river in the evening, and while the Guru 
was still distant, the faqir began to shower further 
praises and blessings on him. ‘ Thou savest the 
world ; may thy sons and grandsons flourish!’ The 
Guru on hearing this remarked that somebody must 
have been generous to the faqir, otherwise he could 
not so soon have altered his tone and language. On 
inquiry the Guru learned what had occurred. Jetha 
confessed, ‘O Guru, I have given the faqir my 
necklace. Thou hast given me God’s name as a 
necklace ; I keep it by me. This perishable neck- 
lace I have offered in thy name.’ On hearing this 
the Guru blessed Jetha: ‘ Thy line shall be endless 
and thine income and expenditure inexhaustible.’ 

The hostility of the Hindus now began to assert 
itself even more offensively than before. The Sikhs 
who visited the Guru at Goindwal used to speak 
as follows when they returned to their homes: ‘ The 
Guru hath proclaimed a new religion and abolished 
differences of castes and tribes. With him the four 
great castes eat from one vessel, and with great 
devotion perform uniform worship. He giveth to 
drink to his Sikhs the water in which he hath washed 
his feet, and teacheth them to reverently repeat 
Wahguru instead of the gayatri.’ 

When the Khatris and Brahmans, who were ex- 
tremely ignorant, irreligious, and proud of their 
castes, heard these reports, they could not endure 

1 Kings renowned in Eastern lore for their generosity. Raja Vikra- 
madit also gave his name to the Sambat era. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 103 

the Guru’s praises, and said, ‘ What an amount of 
deceit he hath been practising!’ They all met one 
day and arrived at the following conclusion : ‘ These 
are bad innovations the Guru hath introduced. No 
one will now reverence a Brahman, and the religion 
of the Khatris is quite abolished. The Guru hath 
reduced the four castes to one, and the result 1s that 
every one hath renounced and fallen away from 
his faith. All men eat together. The worship of gods 
and ancestors hath ceased, and all the popular cus- 
toms have been violated. Our only resource now 
is to appeal to the Emperor, so that he may abolish 
such new-fangled practices.’ 

The Hindus were joined in their opposition to the 
Guru by a Marwaha Khatri, whose interest it was, 
on the score of his commercial and banking trans- 
actions, to maintain the ancient superstitions. Ihe 
Guru had at that time few powerful allies. His old 
friend and disciple Gobind was dead, and Gobind’s 
son, having become depraved by bad company, 
joined in hostility to him. 

Even the very men from whom the Guru had 
purchased the land for the Bawali turned against 
him—no doubt instigated by the Brahmans—and 
complained that the Guru had not paid them its 
stipulated price. Moreover, he had not only ille- 
gally taken possession of it, but forcibly ejected 
them even from their homes. The Marwaha em- 
ployed a servant who blackened his face and put 
on dirty ragged clothes to take a complaint on the 
subject to the Emperor. As the Marwaha and his 
servant proceeded on their way, they endeavoured 
but without success to defame the Guru. Several 
people who had heard of the Guru’s virtues and 
extraordinary powers, would not allow them shelter 
in their villages. 

When they reached the royal court, the complaint 
against the Guru was read out to the Emperor. 
A Pathan friend of the Guru at court explained that 

104 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the complaint against him was false, and recalled 
circumstances to the Emperor’s recollection which 
induced him to believe so too. The Emperor then 
gave his decision. ‘I have never before heard that 
the Guru practised oppression on any one or coveted 
any one’s property. It was with great difficulty 
I induced him to accept villages to supply provisions 
for his kitchen, and I believe that the complainants 
and their representatives are lying. Send these men 
out of my sight.’ 

On the return of the Marwaha and his servant 
without having accomplished their object, Jetha com- 
posed the following :— 

The perverse man put on his perverse servant a blue-black 
patched coat filled with filth and vermin.} 

No one in the world would allow him to sit near him; he 
fell into ordure and still more dirt attached to him. 

The perverse man sent his servant to slander and backbite 
others, but the result was that the faces of both were 
blackened. | 

It was quickly heard through the whole world, my brethren, 
that the perverse man with his servant had been shoe- 
beaten ; with addled brains they arose and returned home. 

The perverse man for the future was not allowed to mix in 
society or even with his marriage relations ; then his wife and 
his niece went and brought him home 

He hath lost this world and the next ; hungry and thirsty 
he ever crieth out. 

Thanks to the Lord, the Creator, who Himself seated 77 the 
judgement seat caused real justice to be done. 

Him who slandereth the perfect true Guru, the True One 
punisheth and destroyeth. 

God who created the whole world hath uttered these words.3 

The Brahmans then made a special complaint of 
their own against the Guru. It was to the following 
effect. ‘Thy Majesty is the protector of our cus- 

According to the custom of petitioners in that age. 
* That is, hindered him from visiting his relations. 
* That is, has inspired me to utter these words. Gauri ki War J. 

@ 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 105 

toms and the redresser of our wrongs. Every man’s 
religion is dear to him. Guru Amar Das of Goindwal 
hath abandoned the religious and social customs of 
the Hindus, and abolished the distinction of the four 
castes. Such heterodoxy hath never before been 
heard of in the four ages. There is now no twilight 
prayer, no gayatri, no offering of water to ancestors, 
no pilgrimages, no obsequies, and no worship of idols 
or of the divine salagram. The Guru hath aban- 
doned all these, and established the repetition of 
Wahguru instead of Ram; and no one now acteth 
according to the Veds or the Simritis. The Guru 
reverenceth not Jogis, Jatis, or Brahmans. He 
worshippeth no gods or goddesses, and he ordereth 
his Sikhs to refrain from doing so for ever more. He 
seateth all his followers in a line, and causeth them 
to eat together from his kitchen, irrespective of 
caste—whether they are Jats, strolling minstrels, 
Muhammadans, Brahmans, Khatris, shopkeepers, 
sweepers, barbers, washermen, fishermen, or car- 
penters. We pray thee restrain him now, else it will 
be difficult hereafter. And may thy religion and 
empire increase and extend over the world!’ 

After hearing this complaint the Emperor decided 
that he would summon the Guru, and confront him 
with his accusers. He accordingly dispatched a high 
official to Goindwal to request the Guru’s attendance. 
The Emperor’s summons was not the brutal order 
of a modern court, ‘ Herein fail not,’ but, ‘ Kindly 
grant me a sight of thee.’ The official informed the 
Guru of the Brahmans’ and Khatris’ charges against 
him. The Guru replied, ‘I am too old to go any- 
where. My son Mohan is absorbed in divine medita- 
tion, and my other son Mohri says he has never seen 
a court-house. There is Jetha; he may wait on 
the Emperor.’ Upon this the Guru instructed Jetha 
to go and represent him. With an embrace he 
addressed him as follows: ‘ Thou art in mine image ; 
Guru Nanak will be with thee, and none shall pre- 

106 THE SIKH RELIGION 

vail against thee. The Khatris and Brahmans who 
have complained are ignorant and false. Answer 
truly all the questions put to thee. Be not abashed 
and fear nobody. If any difficult questions be put 
and thou art at a loss for an answer, then think of 
the Guru, and thou shalt be able to give a suitable 
reply. Vindicate before the court the true teaching 
of Guru Nanak. Falsehood cannot contend with 
truth. As Guru Nanak hath said :— 

Falsehood is at an end, Nanak, truth at last shall prevail. 

On receiving these instructions Jetha fell at the 
Guru’s feet, and said, ‘O my lord, I know nothing 
by myself. <A sight of thee is my only morning and 
evening prayer; my thoughts will be ever on the 
Guru, and what thou orderest that will I do.’ The 
Guru then patted him affectionately on the shoulder, 
and, giving him five trustworthy Sikhs as an escort, 
dispatched him on his journey. 

CHAPTER IX 

The Emperor received Jetha with great distinction, 
and inquired after the Guru’s health. The Brahmans 
and the Khatris, not deeming their representative 
capable of urging their complaints with sufficient 
force, decided, on further consideration, to appear 
personally before the Emperor. On their arrival 
they repeated verbally the charges they had made in 
writing against the Guru. It was reserved for them 
to give another complexion to their accusation. 
They said that the conduct of the Guru in diverting 
people from the old faith was likely to lead to politi- 
cal disturbance or insurrection. The Emperor then 
called for Jetha to reply to the charges. 

Jetha said, “O Emperor, in the Sat, the Treta, 
the Dwapar, and the Kal ages God was worshipped 
under the names of Wasdev, Hari, Gobind, and Ram 

1 Ramkali ki War I. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 107 

respectively. The Guru hath made out of the 
initials of these four names the word Wahguru, 
which is praise of God and the Guru. The Rikhis, 
who composed the Shastars, have written that when- 
ever the saints meet together and repeat God’s 
name and praises, there are the Ganges, the Jamna, 
the Saraswati, the Godavari, and all the rivers of 
Hindu pilgrimage. It is true that by bathing at 
these the body is cleansed, but it is by associating 
with saints and repeating God’s name that the mind 
becometh pure. Better than the worship of idols 
is it to recognize God’s light in everybody, and vex 
no one’s soul ; for what place of pilgrimage is equal 
to mercy ? To bear no one enmity is tantamount 
to fasting. To renounce hypocrisy and repeat the 
Name are the main elements of our religion. The 
true Guru giveth honour to all while he himself 
remaineth humble. The Brahmans claim to be 
equal to God. The Guru maketh no such boast, 
for he well knoweth that he is God’s slave. Selfish 
and ambitious men roam and wander in pursuit of 
wealth ; but the Guru hath no worldly desires, and, 
knowing that God is in all creatures and everywhere 
diffused, is firm in his faith, harboureth no doubts, 
and renounceth superstition.’ Jetha then repeated 
the following composition of his own :— 

God’s name is God’s treasure ; clasp it to thy heart under 
the Guru’s instruction. 

Be the slave of God’s slave; subdue pride and evil 
passions. 

They who have won the prize of human birth shall by the 
Guru’s favour never know defeat. 

Blest, blest and very fortunate are they, Nanak, who 
‘under the Guru’s instruction deem God the essence of all 
things. 

God, God, God is the treasury of excellences. 

Meditate on God, God under the Guru’s instruction, then 
shalt thou obtain honour in God’s court. 

108 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Repeat, God, God, God, and thy face shall become bright 
and distinguished. 
Nanak, he who hath obtained God’s name shall meet Him. 

Jetha then said, ‘ If, however, my accusers desire 
to test my knowledge I will expound to them the 
gayatri, although I place no faith in its efficacy.’ 
On this Jetha was called upon to fulfil his promise. 
On hearing Jetha’s exposition of the famous Hindu 
text, the Brahmans and Khatris who came to 
complain were astonished at his learning and inti- 
mate acquaintance with their religion. They were 
put to shame in the presence of the Emperor, while 
the Sikhs who accompanied Jetha were as pleased 
as the lotus when it beholds the sun. 

The Emperor then gave his decision: ‘I see no 
hostility to Hinduism in this man, nor do I find any 
fault with his compositions. To repeat or not to re- 
peat the gayatri is at his own discretion. It certainly 
doth not concern me to cause the gayatri to be re- 
peated or twilight devotions performed. Jetha’s 
words show how the mind may be purified and 
hypocrisy renounced. There is no difference be- 
tween God and His darwesh. No man can vie with 
either. You complainants are enemies of truth, and 
are only causing needless annoyance. Reply to 
Jetha if you can ; if not, ask his forgiveness.’ The 
Brahmans could give no reply and departed from 
court thoroughly crestfallen. 

Upon this the Emperor took Jetha aside, and 
told him to request Guru Amar Das, who before his 
conversion to Sikhism used to make a yearly pilgrim- 
age to the Ganges, to make one pilgrimage more 
in order to divert the wrath of the Hindus. The 
Ikmperor added that he would issue an order that 
no tax should be levied on the Guru’s party.! 

Gobind’s son took his discomfiture in the Mar- 
waha's land-suit so much to heart that he pined away 

1 Siraj Parkash, Ras I, Chapter 44. The jazzya or tax on 
‘infide!s” was subsequently abolished by Akbar in a.p. 1579. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 109g 

and soon died. His mother believed that her son’s 
fate was the result of his hostility to the Guru, so, in 
order to save the family from extinction, she brought 
her surviving son, then a child, to the Guru, and 
prayed him to protect him. The Guru compas- 
sionately said, ‘ This son shall remain attached to 
the Guru, and from him many sons shall be born’— 
a prophecy which was subsequently fulfilled. 

The Guru, in compliance with the Emperor’s 
suggestion, and also in order to have an opportunity 
of preaching his religion, set out for Hardwar. By 
the time he had crossed the river Bias and arrived 
in the Doab, he found himself accompanied by a 
great concourse of people. It had become publicly 
known that he and his retinue were exempted from 
the ordinary pilgrim-tax, so people flocked to him 
in numbers. They would have a sight of the Guru, 
they would perform their pilgrimage with singing 
and music, they would live on the Guru’s kitchen, 
they would be exempted from the pilgrim-tax, they 
would be protected from robbers, and they would 
have the advantage of bathing with all due cere- 
monial and observances at the renowned place of 
pilgrimage. For all these reasons several thousands 
followed in the Guru’s train. The Guru sometimes 
walked with a stick, but more generally rode, on 
account of his extreme age. Having crossed the 
Satluj he went to Pahoa, a place of pilgrimage not 
far from Thanesar or Kurkhetar, where in days 
long past, on the margin of the Saraswati, Rikhis 
and Munis performed painful penance and austerities. 
The Pandits and Brahmans of the place were well 
pleased to see the Guru, and they went and sat in his 
court. He then proceeded to Thanesar or the place 
par excellence of Shiv the destroyer. The Guru was 
asked whyhe had abandoned Sanskrit, the language of 
the gods, and composed hymns in the vulgar tongue. 
He replied, ‘ Well-water can only irrigate adjacent 
land, but rain-water the whole world. On this 

110 THE SIKH RELIGION 

account the Guru hath composed his hymns in the 
vulgar dialect, and enshrined them in the Gurumukhi 
characters, so that men and women of all castes and 
classes may read them.” A Brahman replied, ‘ Clouds 
rain on the earth, but is there not water enough in 
the earth already ?’ The Guru replied as follows :— 

You say, clouds rain upon the earth, but is there not 
water enough in the earth already ? 

I reply—There is, z¢ 1s true, water in the earth, but water 
only appeareth when the clouds rain.? 

The Pandit said that religious instruction ought 
not to be communicated to every one, it being for- 
bidden to instruct Sudars and women in the sacred 
lore. The Guru replied :— 

O, father, dispel such doubts. 

It is God who doeth whatever is done ; all who exist shall 
be absorbed in Him. 

What is the effect of the union of female and male without 
the interposition of God ? 

The different forms, O God, which appear are ever Thine, 
and at the last they shall all be resolved in Thee. 

{ have been led astray through so many births ; now that 
I have found Thee J am as 7f I had never strayed. 

He who is absorbed in the Guru’s word, shall thoroughly 
know Him who made this world. 

Thine is the Word, there is none but Thee ; where is room 
for doubt ? 

Nanak, he whose essence is united with the essence of God 
shall not be born again.? 

The Guru proceeded to the river Jamna, whose 
dark ripples delighted his eyes. There arose a slight 
unexpected difficulty. Every pilgrim endeavoured 
to escape taxation by saying he was a Sikh and 
follower of the Guru. The tax-gatherers waited on 

‘ In this allegory the water in the earth means recondite Sanskrit 
literature; the water from the clouds, the Guru’s instruction, which 

is continually poured down for the benefit of the world. 
a Galli: 

ibe Ol GURU AMAK DAS £11 

the Guru, and requested him to separate or name 
his own immediate followers, and they should pass 
free, but all others must pay. The Guru replied, 
‘Tf you want taxes, I will give you whatever money 
you require ; but if, in obedience to the Emperor’s 
order of exemption, you do not tax my Sikhs, they 
shall all be known by their uttering “Sat Nam! Sri 
Wahguru!’’ None may be expelled from the Guru’s 
company ; whoever cometh as a friend is ever 
respected.’ When the Guru was crossing the Jamna, 
thousands of people who were not Sikhs accompanied 
him, crying out ‘Sat Nam! Sri Wahguru!’ and 
passed over untaxed. 

After preaching at the Jamna the Guru proceeded 
in the direction of Hardwar. He rested under a tree 
on the way at a place called Kankhal, three miles to 
the south of the great Hindu source of cholera and 
devotion. As he approached Hardwar the crowd 
which gathered round him assumed still vaster pro- 
portions. When the tax-gatherers tried to impose 
a tax on any of them, they were met with the angry 
reply, ‘ Have I not said Wahguru ? Am I not the 
Guru’s Sikh ?’ Thus there was not even a farthing 
put into their boxes, and they went to their homes 
without the usual receipts. 

The Guru availed himself of the opportunity to 
read a brief homily to his followers: ‘As the tax- 
gatherers have not been able to prevail against you, 
so Death, another tax-gatherer, shall have no power 
against those who repeat “Sat Nam! Sri Wah- 
guru!’’ This is an example to hand of the way to 
escape from Death.’ 

CHAPTER 

The Guru having returned to Hardwar after so 
many years’ absence was received with great dis- 
tinction and demonstrations of friendship by Jogis, 
Bairagis, Sanyasis, Brahmacharis, Pandits, &c. They 

x12 THE SIKH RELIGION 

disclosed to him their spiritual doubts and difficul- 
ties, which he successfully solved. When the Guru 
was subsequently visited by the Chaudhri and the 
heads of the lay population of Hardwar, they asked 
him why he caused the four castes of Hindus to do 
him homage when he himself did homage to no one. 
He replied that the Brahmans were already very 
proud, and, if he paid them homage, their pride 
would only increase the more. And as regards the 
homage paid to him by the four castes, neither he 
nor his predecessors required it from any one. It 
was only when the earth, overladen with the burden 
of sin, raised its protest to heaven, that Guru Nanak 
appeared to point out the easy path of salvation, 
and not to obtain the praise or homage of human 
beings. 

When the Guru and his party had all returned to 
Goindwal, Jetha, in response to numerous inquiries 
and requests, gave the following metrical account 
of the recent pilgrimage :— 

it 

A sight of the true Guru was our bathing during the 
Abhiyit,} 

The filth of evil inclinations was cleansed, and the darkness 
of ignorance dispelled. 

The ignorance of those who saw the Guru was dispelled, 
and light beamed on their hearts. 

The pains of transmigration vanished in a moment, and 
men obtained God the imperishable Lord. 

God the Creator Himself made this auspicious time, when 
the true Guru went to the fair at Kurkhetar. 

A sight of the true Guru was our bathing during the 
Abhijit. 

? The lunar month, though generally considered twenty-eight days, 
is really only twenty-seven days, odd hours, minutes, and seconds. 
Abhijit was intercalated between the 21st and 22nd asterisms to 
adjust the difference. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 113 

iG) 

Sikhs travelled with the true Guru on his journey. 

Every day, every hour, and every moment service was 
held ; 

God’s service was held, and all people came to behold the 
Guru. 

God blended with Himself those who obtained a sight of 
him. 

The true Guru made the toil of pilgrimage in order to save 
all people ; 

And Sikhs travelled with the true Guru on his journey. 

EG 

It was an auspicious time when the true Guru first arrived 
in Kurkhetar. 

When it was known, the beings of the three worlds came 
to behold him. 

All the demigods, munis, and saints of the three worlds 
came to behold him. 

The sins of those who touched the perfect true Guru were 
all erased. 

Jogis, Digambars, Sanyasis, and men of the six schools 
entered into conversation with him. 

It was an auspicious time when the Guru arrived in 
Kurkhetar. 

IV 

The Guru then proceeded to the Jamna where he caused 
people to repeat God’s name. 

The tax-gatherers met the Guru with offerings and allowed 
his followers to cross over. 

All those in the Guru’s train who meditated on God, were 
exempted from toll— 

Death the tax-gatherer approacheth not those who walk 
in the true way according to the Guru’s instruction— 

Everybody took the Guru’s name, and by taking it all the 
pilgrims were excused toll. 

1 Also translated—Conversed with him and made him offerings. 

SIKH. II I 

114 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru then proceeded to the Jamna where he caused 
people to repeat God’s name. 

V 

After that he went to the Ganges and there was a mar- 
vellous scene. 

All were entranced on seeing the saintly Guru, and there 
too no one took half a dam! from him. 

No one paid half a dam or put any money into the toll-box ; 
the toll-collectors’ mouths were sealed. 

They said, ‘ Brethren, what shall we do? of whom shall 
we ask ? Every one is escaping under cover of the Guru.’ 

The toll-collectors by their skill and cleverness saw 7¢ was 
best to close their boxes and go away. 

After that the Guru went to the Ganges, and there was 
a marvellous scene. 

VI 

The leading men of the city went in a body, and took 
shelter in the true Guru. 

They asked the true Guru concerning God, and he proved 
His existence from the Simritis. 

The Simritis and Shastars all established God’s existence ; 
Shukdev, Prahlad?, and Sri Ram uttering God’s name medi- 
tated on Him. 

In the city of the body is the fort of the soul which the 
five deadly sins would rob, but the Guru hath destroyed 
their abode. 

The Purans everywhere contain praises of offerings, but it 
is from Guru Nanak’s words God’s service is obtained. 

The leading men of the city went in a body and took 
shelter im the trie Gur 

There was a merchant called Gango, a Khatri of 
the Basi tribe, who had become bankrupt by losses 

1 An ancient Indian coin or money-measure of very small value, 
twenty-five dams being equal to a paisa of Indian or a farthing of 
English money. 

2 An account of this saint will afterwards be given. 

3 Tukhari Chhant. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS IIs 

in trade. His former friends, connexions, and 
relations deserted him and laughed at him. Sad 
at heart, he went to Goindwal to see the Guru, of 
whose fame he had heard. Putting complete faith 
in him, he ate from his kitchen and then went to 
make his obeisance. He was only able to offer as 
much molasses as would weigh a penny. He told 
the Guru that, while very unfortunate in his worldly 
affairs, he was very happy at having seen him, and 
he solicited his protection. The Guru took the 
molasses in his hand, and inquired what distressed 
his heart. Gango told him and added, ‘ As a last 
resource I have come to thee.’ The Guru replied, 
‘Go to Dihli and open a bank there, serve and 
treat respectfully the saints who visit thee, and thou 
shalt obtain wealth from the Creator.’ Gango 
adopted the Guru’s suggestion. He opened a head 
office in Dihli, and afterwards a branch in Lahore, 
and did banking business in partnership with his 
son. Public confidence in him was restored, he 
grew wealthy, and was subsequently enabled to draw 
cheques for large amounts on his correspondents. 

On one occasion a poor man went to the Guru 
and complained that, though his daughter was 
marriageable, he had not wherewithal to defray 
her marriage expenses. The Guru put him no 
questions, but gave him a cheque on Gango for 
fifty rupees. Gango said to himself, ‘If I honour 
this, the Guru will trouble me again.’ He accord- 
ingly took no notice of the man or of the cheque. 
The man returned to the Guru, and told him the 
result of his mission. The Guru gave him the 
amount of the cheque out of his own pocket, and 
thus enabled him to procure his daughter’s marriage. 
As regards Gango’s conduct the Guru remarked, 
‘Worldly love and pride destroy love and con- 
fidence. Under their influence man turneth away 
from his Guru, and consequently suffereth great 
hardship.’ 

12 

116 THE SIKH RELIGION 

It happened that soon afterwards the tide 
of trade turned and Gango again became bankrupt. 
Thoroughly repentant, he re-addressed himself to 
the Guru, and performed menial service in his 
kitchen. Regard for the world and the customs 
of his family he totally disregarded. Whatever 
toil he performed he treated as penance for dis- 
honouring the Guru’s cheque, and while perform- 
ing his self-imposed duties, he was ever absorbed 
in devotion. After some time the Guru sent for 
him. He went, fell at his feet, and saying that 
all mortals were liable to err begged forgiveness. 
The Guru granted it, gave him a white dress, 
and communicating to him the true Name which 
was the spell of initiation said, ‘ Thou too shalt 
convert many to the faith, thine utterances shall 
prove true, and wealth and supernatural power 
shall come at thy bidding.’ Gango’s shrine is now 
at a village called Dau, near Kharar in the Ambala 
district. 

The choicest viands continued to be served up 
from the Guru’s kitchen. The traveller, the 
stranger, the beggar, as well as the follower of the 
Guru, could gratify his palate with the six physical 
tastes—sweet, salt, sour, bitter, pungent, and astrin- 
gent—of Indian cookery, while the Guru himself 
continued to live as before on coarse food served 
without condiments. His kitchen remained open 
till three hours after nightfall. Whatever remained 
after the guests had been fed, was compassionately 
thrown to the beasts and birds, and if, after they 
were satisfied, anything were left, it was given to 
the fish in the river, so that they too might be filled. 

One day a Sidh Jogi went to see the Guru and 
humbly addressed him: ‘Since thou, O Guru, hast 
been enthroned, I have desired to behold thee. 
I am fortunate to-day in having attained my object. 
I have performed every form of penance, but, 
finding it all unavailing, have now come to thee. 
I wish to obtain mental rest and an assurance that 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 117 

when I abandon this body I shall be born in thy 
family, andso be happy worshipping God and singing 
His praises.’ The Guru replied, ° Perfection and 
happiness are not obtained by calling one’s self 
a Sidh and obtaining many followers. It is by 
devotion to God that real happiness is obtained. And, 
as thou desirest to be born in my family, thou 
shalt be Mohri’s son and my grandson.’ The Jogi, 
in order to pursue his devotions without inter- 
ruption, retired to the margin of the Bias, and there 
parted with his body. 

It will be remembered that the Guru had two 
sons, Mohan and Mohri. Mohri's eldest son was 
Arth Mal, and his second son the Sidh Jogi. When 
the Guru heard of the Jogi’s rebirth, he sent Bhai 
Ballu to bring him the infant. Although it was 
not advisable to remove him so soon after birth, 
no one might disobey the Guru. On seeing his 
erandson, the Guru composed the Anand or Song 
of Joy on the spot, in thirty-eight pauris, and 
taking the infant in his lap gave him the name of 
Anand. Bhai Ballu then went on the housetop, 
and, calling the people with beat of drum to listen 
to him, recited the whole composition. It is now 
repeated on occasions of marriages and rejoicings, 
also before large feasts, and at the preparation of 
sacred food. 

THE ANAND 
i 

Joy, my mother, that I have found the True Guru !! 

I have easily found the True Guru, and the music of gratu- 
lation is in my heart. 

The excellent Rags and the race of the female singers of 
heaven have come to sing hymns. 

They who have fixed God in their hearts sing His praises. 

Saith Nanak, I feel joy that I have obtained the True Guru. 

1 The True Guru here means God. 

118 TRE SIKH RELIGION 

II 

O my soul, ever abide with God ; 

Abide with God, O my soul; He will make thee forget all 
SOrroW ; . 

He will accept thee, and arrange all thine affairs. 

The Lord is omnipotent in all things; why forget 
Him ? 

Saith Nanak, O my soul, ever abide with God. 

Ill 

O my true Lord, what is there not in Thy house ? 

In Thy house is everything ; he to whom Thou givest shall 
receive ; 

He will ever praise Thine attributes and plant Thy name 
in his heart. 

Many strains of rejoicing resound for him in whose heart 
Thy name abideth. 

saith Nanak, O true Lord, what is there not in Thy house ? 

IV 

The true Name is my support ; 

The true Name which satisfieth all my hunger, is my 
support. 

God’s name having entered my heart hath granted me 
peace and happiness, and fulfilled all my desires. 

I have ever sacrificed myself to the Guru who possesseth 
such excellences. 

Saith Nanak, hear, O saints, love God’s hymns : 

The true Name is my support. 

V 

The five forms of music resound in that happy house ! ; 

In that happy house into which God hath infused His 
might, the strains resound. 

Thou, O God, hast put the five evil passions under sub- 
jection, and vanquished Death the torturer. 

! That is, in the heart where God dwells. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 119 

They who were so predestined ! are attached to Thy name, 
O God. 

Saith Nanak, they obtain happiness, and in their hearts 
the unbeaten strain resoundeth. 

VI 

Without true love man? is unhonoured ; 

Man is unhonoured without love. What can the wretched 
creature do ? 

There is none omnipotent but Thee ; have mercy on me, 
O God. 

Man hath no other refuge than the Word, by attachment to 
which he is adorned. 

Saith Nanak, what can the wretched creature do without 
love ? 

Vil 

Every one talketh of happiness, but ¢vwe happiness can 
only be known from the Guru ; 

If the beloved Guru be merciful, happiness shall ever be 
known from him. 

The Guru being merciful cut away my sins, and put into 
mine eyes the salve of divine knowledge ; 

The True One hath adorned with the Word those whose 
hearts have parted with worldly love. 

Saith Nanak, that is the veal happiness which is known 
from the Guru. 

VIII 

O Father, he to whom Thou givest happiness obtaineth it ; 

He obtaineth it to whom Thou givest it; what else can 
poor mortal do ? 

Some led astray by error wander in every direction, 
others are adorned by attachment to Thy name ; 

1 Translated by Mahant Sumer Singh—-They to whom Thou didst 
show favour from the beginning. 

2 Literally—the body. 

3 Anjan, or surma, a preparation for darkening the eyelids, is made 
sometimes of lamp-black, sometimes of antimony. 

I20 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Through the Guru’s favour pure are the hearts of those to 
whom the will of God is agreeable. 

Saith Nanak, the man on whom Thou, O Beloved, con- 
ferreth happiness obtaineth it. 

IX 
Come, O beloved saints, let us speak of the Ineffable One ; 
Let us speak of the Ineffable One ; through whom shall 
we find words to do so.! 
Entrust body, soul, and wealth to the Guru, and obey his 
order, so shall you succeed. 
Obey the Guru’s order, and sing true songs ? of pratse— 

Saith Nanak, hear, O saints, 1 this way speak of the 
Ineffable. 

- 

O fickle man, no one hath obtained God by cleverness ; 

By cleverness no one hath obtained Him ; hearken, O my 
soul. 

This Maya who hath led man astray in such superstition 1s 
fascinating ; 

He who hath spread this illusion hath created Maya the 
fascinating. 

I have made myself a sacrifice to Him who hath rendered 
worldly love dear ¢o mortals. 

Saith Nanak, O fickle man, no one hath obtained God by 
cleverness. 

AI 

O dear man, do thou ever remember the True One. 

This family which thou seest shall not depart with thee ; 

It shall not depart with thee; why fix thy thoughts 
thereon ° 

Never do what thou shalt have to repent of at last. 

Hearken to the instruction of the true Guru; 2¢ zs that 
which shall go with thee. 

Saith Nanak, O dear man, ever remember the True One. 

' Also translatcd—Through whom shall we be able to find Him. 
2 The hymns of the Guru. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 20 

AIT 

O Inaccessible and Inapprehensible One, Thine end cannot 
be found. 

No one hath found Thine end ; 7¢7s only Thou Thyself who 
knowest Thyself. 

Men and lower animals are all Thy sport ; by what words 
can any one describe it ? 

It is Thou, who didst create the world, who speakest and 
beholdest all. 

Saith Nanak, Thou art ever inaccessible; Thine end 
cannot be found. 

ST 

Demigods, saints, and munis search for nectar,! but only 
from the Guru can it be obtained ; 

He to whom the Guru showeth favour findeth such nectar, 
and putteth the True One in his heart. 

Thou didst create all men and lower animals ; seeing Thee 
to be the One God, I have come to touch Thy feet.” 

They with whom the True Guru is well pleased, have no 
longer avarice, covetousness, or pride.® 

Saith Nanak, he with whom God is pleased, hath obtained 
nectar from the Guru. 

XIV 

The way of the saints is pecuhar ; 

The way of the saints is peculiar ; they travel by a difficult 
road : 

They renounce avarice, covetousness, pride, and worldly 
desires, and speak not much ; 

They go by the road which is sharper than a sword and 
finer than a hair. 

By the favour of the Guru the desires of those who renounce 
pride are centred in God— 

Saith Nanak, the way of the saints is peculiar in every age. 

1 God’s name. 

2 That is, to adore Thee. 

3 This line is also translated—Avarice, covetousness, and pride 
have left me, and the True Guru is endeared to me. 

122 THE SIKH RELIGION 

AV 

As thou causest us, O Lord, to walk, so we walk ; what 
more can we know of Thine attributes ? 

They whom Thou hast put on the right way walk as Thou 
causest them ; 

They whom Thou of Thy mercy appliest to Thy name 
ever meditate on Thee, O God ; 

They to whom Thou impartest Thine instruction through 
the Guru shall obtain happiness. 

Saith Nanak, O true Lord, Thou causest us to walk as Thou 
pleasest. 

XVI 

The Word is a delightful song of rejoicing ; 

The true Guru hath communicated to me the Word which 
is ever a delightful song of rejoicing ; 

It dwelleth in the hearts of those who were so destined 
from the beginning. 

Some go about talking much, but no one hath obtained 
the real Word by babbling. 

Saith Nanak, the true Guru hath communicated to me 
the Word which is a song of rejoicing. 

AVITI 

They who have meditated on God have become pure ; 

They who have meditated on God through the Guru’s 
instruction have become pure ; 

They are pure with their parents and families, and with all 
their associates. 

They who repeat God’s same are holy, they who hear it are 
holy, and they who treasure it in their hearts are holy ; 

Saith Nanak, they are holy who under the Guru’s instruc- 
tion have meditated on God. 

XVIII 

Divine knowledge is not obtained by superstitious cere- 
monies ; without divine knowledge doubt will not depart ; 

Doubt will not depart by any effort however much men 
continue to perform such ceremonies. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 123 

Through doubt the heart is filthy ; by what means shall it 
be cleansed ? 

By attaching thyself to the Word thy heart shall be 
cleansed ; continue to fix thy thoughts upon God. 

Saith Nanak, it is by the favour of the Guru divine know- 
ledge is obtained, and doubt dispelled. 

IPS 

Foul within and fair without ;? 

They who are fair without and foul within, have lost their 
human lives at play. 

They have contracted the great disease of avarice and 
forgotten death. 

The Name, which is the best thing in the Veds, they hear 
not ; they wander like demons. 

Saith Nanak, they who have renounced truth, and attached 
themselves to falsehood, have lost their human lives at play. 

XX 

Fair within and fair without ; 

They who are fair without and fair within, do good acts 
through the true Guru. 

Even the very name of falsehood reacheth them not, and 
truth is the object of their desires. 

The merchants who have earned the jewel of human birth 
are prosperous. 

Saith Nanak, the hearts of those who abide with the Guru 
are ever pure. 

XXI 

If any disciple turn towards the Guru ; 

If any disciple turn towards him, his heart shall be with 
the Guru ; 

He shall meditate on the Guru’s feet, and remember God 
in his heart ; 

He shall renounce pride, ever abide under the Guru’s 
guidance, and know none but him. 

1 This is an English idiom which we have ventured to use here. 
The literal translation is—The heart unclean, the external clean. 

124 THE SIKH RELIGION 

saith Nanak, hear, O saints, such a disciple shall turn 
towards the Guru. 

XAIT 

Whoever turneth away from the true Guru, shall not 
obtain salvation without him ; 

Nor shall he obtain salvation elsewhere—go inquire of 
persons of discrimination— 

He shall wander in many births, and not obtain deliver- 
ance without the true Guru ; 

But he shall at last obtain deliverance by attaching himself 
to the feet of the true Guru who will communicate to him 
the Word. 

saith Nanak, thoroughly reflect on this—there can be no 
deliverance without the true Guru. 

XXIII 

Come, ye disciples, beloved of the true Guru, sing a true 
song. 

Sing a song of the Guru, the song of songs ; 

It will enter the hearts of those on whom God looketh with 
favour. 

Abide in the love of God, repeat His name, and ye shall 
ever quaff nectar : 

Saith Nanak, ever sing this true song. 

XXIV 

Without the true Guru every song is false ;?} 

I-very song is false without the true Guru ; 

They who utter it are false, they who hear it are false, and 
false is its author. 

They may continually repeat God’s name with their 
tongues, but they heed not what they say. 

They whose hearts are seized by Maya pray mechanically ;? 

saith Nanak, without the true Guru all songs are false. 

1 No faith can be placed on any song other than that of the Guru. 
* Rawanr here means a continuous flow of prayer on the lips, but 
not felt by the heart. 

LIPS OF GURU AMAR DAS 125 

XXV 

The Guru’s word is a jewel enchased with diamonds ; 

The man whose heart is attached to the jewel of the Word 
shall be absorbed in God. 

When the heart is attached to the Word man loveth the 
True One. 

God is the diamond; the jewel is He; to whomsoever He 
giveth it He explaineth its worth. 

Saith Nanak, the Word is a jewel enchased with diamonds. 

XXVI 

God having by His divine power created the world 
subjected it to His order ; 

He subjected it to His order ; He Himself beholdeth ; He 
causeth some rare holy person to understand this ; 

Such a person giveth the Word a place in his heart, bursteth 
his bonds, and obtaineth deliverance. 

He whom God desiveth to make holy shall become so, and 
fix his attention on the one God. 

Saith Nanak, God is the Creator ; He Himself explaineth 
His orders. 

XXVIT 

The Simritis and the Shastars define good and evil, but 
they know nothing of the Real Thing ; 

They know nothing of the Real Thing ; without the Guru 
they can know nothing of the Real Thing. 

The world is asleep in mammon and superstition ; in sleep 
it passeth its time ;? 

By the Guru’s favour they who put God in their hearts 
and utter His ambrosial word are awake : 

Saith Nanak, they who pass their time awake, and who 
day and night fix their attention on God, shall obtain the 
Real Thing. 

1 Literally—night, a word which is often applied in the Granth 
Sahib to human life. 

126 THE SIKH RELIGION 

XW #11 

Why forget Him who cherished us in our mother’s wombs ? 
Why forget that great Benefactor who gave us sustenance 
in the midst of fire ? 
Nothing can affect him whom God causeth to love Him ; 
The holy man whom God causeth to love Him ever remem- 
bereth Him. 
Saith Nanak, why forget that great Benefactor ? 
XAIX 
As 1s the fire of the womb within, so is the fire of mammon 
without ; 
The fire of mammon and of the womb are the same; the 
Creator hath set a play going. 
When it pleaseth Him the child is born, and the family is 
well pleased ; 
The love the child bore God in the womb departeth, greed 
attacheth to it, and mammon ruleth over it. 
Maya is that influence by which God is forgotten, worldly 
love produced, and man becometh attached to secular things. 
saith Nanak, they who love God through the Guru’s 
favour, find Him even in the midst of mammon.! 
XXX 
God is priceless ; His price cannot be ascertained ; 
His price cannot be ascertained by any one though pcople 
usevevery clort.- 
If thou meet such a true Guru as will dispel thy pride, 
ernitrust thy head to him ; 
So shalt thou meet God who owneth thy soul, and He will 
come to dwell in thy heart. 
Saith Nanak, God is priceless; fortunate are they who 
have found Him, 
AXXI 
God is my capital, my mind is the merchant ; 
God is my capital, my mind is the merchant ; through the 
true Guru I know my capital. 

? Even by remaining a family man, and not adopting the life of an 
anchoret, * Literally—even though people continue to scream. 

LikE OF GURU AMAR DAS 127 

Ever repeat God’s name, my soul, and thou shalt gain 
profit daily. 

They who are pleasing to God have obtained this wealth— 

Saith Nanak, God is my capital, my mind is the merchant. 

AAXIT 

O my tongue, thou art attached to other savours; thy 
thirst departeth not. 

Thy thirst will not depart by any means until thou obtain 
God’s elixir. 

If thou obtain and drink God’s elixir, thirst will not again 
affect thee. 

This elixir of God is obtained by him who, on account of 
his previous good acts, hath met the true Guru : 

Saith Nanak, when God hath made His abode in the 
heart man forgetteth all other elixirs. 

AAXITI 

O body of mine, God infused light into thee, and then thou 
camest into the world ; 

When God put light into thee thou camest into the world. 

God is the mother, God is the father, who having created 
man showed him the world. 

To him who understandeth by the Guru’s favour, this 
world is a show, ov appeareth to be a show. 

Saith Nanak, when He who formed thy body out of the 
elements of nature put light into it, then camest thou into 
the world. 

XXXIV 

My soul was delighted when I heard of God’s coming ; 

O my friends, sing a song of welcome to Him ; my house 1s 
turned into a palace fo recetve Him. 

Ever sing a song of welcome to Him, my friends, and you 
shall feel nor sorrow nor suffering. 

Fortunate the days when I am attached to the Guru’s 
feet, and repeat the Name of my Beloved. 

Under the Guru’s instruction I knew the unbeaten strain, 
and enjoyed the divine relish of God’s name. 

128 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Saith Nanak, God Himself who is able to do and to cause 
everything to be done met me. 

AAXXV 

O body of mine, what hast thou done by coming into this 
world ? 

What hast thou done, O thou body, since thou camest 
into this world ? 

To the God who fashioned thee thou hast not given a place 
in thy heart. 

Through the Guru’s favour God dwelleth in the heart, if 
such was predestined. 

Saith Nanak, the man! who attacheth his heart to the 
true Guru, is acceptable. 

XXXVI 

O eyes of mine, God infused light into you, look at none 
but God ; 

Look at none but God ; look on Him intently. 

All this world which you behold is God’s image; God’s 
image appeareth in it. 

When by the Guru’s favour I received understanding, 
I saw that God was one, and that there was none besides. 

Saith Nanak, these eyes were blind, but on meeting the 
true Guru they obtained divine light. 

DOO O50! 

O ears of mine, you were sent to hear the truth ; 

You were sent and attached to this body to hear the truth ; 
hear the true Word, 

By hearing which the soul and body are revived, and the 
tongue absorbed in God’s relish. 

The True One is invisible and wonderful ; His state cannot 
be described. 

Saith Nanak, hear the ambrosial Name and you shall be 
pure ; you were sent to hear the truth. 

1 In this hymn sharir, body, means man gererally. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 129 

XXXVITI 

God having put the soul into the cave of the body, blew 
breath into it as a musical instrument ; 

He blew breath into it as a musical instrument ; nine doors 
of the body He disclosed, and the tenth He concealed ; 

To some through the Guru He gave faith and disclosed the 
tenth door : 

There are the various forms of God, there the nine treasures 
of His name, but His end is never found. 

Saith Nanak, the beloved God having put the soul into 
the cave of the body, blew breath into it as a musical instru- 
ment. 

XAXITX 

Sing this true song of rejoicing in the true temple ;? 

Sing this song of rejoicing in the true temple where the 
saints ever meditate on the True One. 

They who please Thee and to whom Thou givest under- 
standing through the Guru’s instruction, meditate on Thee, 
O True One. 

The True One is the Lord of all ; he on whom He bestoweth 
favours shall receive Him. 

Saith Nanak, sing this true song of rejoicing in the true 
temple. 

4 B 

Listen to my joy, my very fortunate friends, all my 
desires have been fulfilled : 

I have obtained God the Supreme Brahm, and all my 
sorrows have departed ; 

My sorrows, mine afflictions, and my sufferings have 
departed by listening to the true Word. 

The saints and holy men are happy on hearing it from the 
perfect Guru : 

Pure are they who hear it, stainless those who utter it, the 
true Guru will fill their hearts ! 

Nanak representeth, for those who attached themselves to 
the Guru’s feet the unblown trumpets play. 

1 In the congregation of saints. 

SIKH. K 

130 THE SIKH RELIGION 

All who heard the Anand were filled with love 
and devotion. The Guru ordered that from that 
day forward it should ever be recited on festive 
occasions. The Sikhs believe that when the Anand 
is read at the beginning of any undertaking, it is 
successful ; and if it be read in the morning, the day 
is passed in happiness. Guru Ram Das and Guru 
Arjan added each a pauri to the composition, thus 
increasing the number of pauris to forty altogether.’ 

A third son, who died at his birth, was born to 
Mohri. Mohri’s wife then went to the Guru and 
said, ‘ My son is dead, I pray thee have compassion 
on me.’ The Guru, uttering ‘Sat Nam! Sri Wahguru!’ 
touched the child with his foot, and said, ‘ Arjani, 
mayest thou have avja—long life.’ Upon this the 
child revived. 

CHAPTER XI 

One day the Guru called to his elder son, saying, 
‘Come here, crazy Mohan.’ From that moment 
Mohan, 1n fulfilment of his father’s words, renounced 
the world, shut himself up in a house, and fixed his 
attention on God. He used sometimes to eat 
ravenously with both hands, and sometimes he 
would speak to no one. His mother, on seeing his 
idiotic condition, addressed the Guru, ‘ My lord, 
by thy look of mercy even the dead revive. Be 
good enough to restore Mohan to reason. Had 
I known that he should have become like this, 
I would not have got him married. His wife, thy 
daughter-in-law, is now sitting in soiled garments 
mourning and heaving cold sighs.’ The Guru replied, 
‘People know not Mohan’s greatness. Tell his wife 
to decorate herself and fall at her husband’s feet, 
and she shall have a son.’ His wife accordingly 
arrayed herself and went to do homage to her hus- 
band as he sat alone in his chamber. Her hopes 

1 Suraj Parkash, Ras I, Chapter 59. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 131 

were fulfilled, and in due time she was delivered 
of ason. On hearing of the child’s birth the Guru 
said he should become an ascetic saint, who would 
be called Sant Ram. In a short time the boy’s 
mother died, and he was brought up under the 
Guru’s supervision. He became very clever, com- 
mitted to memory the Guru’s hymns, and used to 
recite them with great fervour. He compiled the 
hymns of Guru Amar Das in a volume which is said 
to be still extant. 

A Khatri after much longing obtained a son whom 
he called Prema. The child’s mother died in giving 
him birth. Then his father died. His paternal aunt 
and his sisters, who were nursing him, also died. So 
did all his paternal and maternal relations, and he 
was left alone in the world. His property was 
devoured by designing persons ; and, to crown his 
troubles, he became a prey to such virulent leprosy 
that his fingers and toes dropped off, his body melted 
away, blood trickled from it, and flies, by settling 
on it and stinging him, completed his misery. Some 
compassionate person tied a small earthen pot to 
his neck, that the charitable might put morsels into 
it for his maintenance. When he changed his place, 
he did so by crawling ; but nobody would allow him 
to approach. He heard of the cures effected by the 
Guru—how he healed the leper, restored sight to 
the blind, made the deaf hear, and the dumb speak— 
so his mind was filled with the desire of beholding 
such a wonder-worker. Trundling along the ground, 
he with great delay and difficulty reached Goindwal. 
On beholding the joy that pervaded the Guru’s city 
and the special happiness of his Sikhs, and on eating 
food from the Guru’s kitchen, he became so happy 
that he composed a song in allusion to his bodily 
ailment, and sang and repeated it with devotion :— 

I have now found my lost waist-cloth (body) ! 
I have now found my lost waist-cloth ! 

K 2 

132 THE SIKH RELIGION 

A crowd collected round, and as they listened to 
his stammering voice cried, ‘Encore! encore!’ 
Some put corn, others water into the vessel suspended 
from his neck. His pains decreased in proportion as 
he rolled in the dust of the temple. He implored the 
Sikhs to tell him how he could see the Guru. They 
replied that, whenever the Guru of his own accord 
sent for lepers, he might join them. He then began 
to reflect that his coming was in vain, and if he could 
find no refuge in the Guru’s sanctuary, whither should 
he go? He therefore thought that he had better 
remain where he was and die. He then began to 
weep and laugh alternately. He blamed the sins of 
his former existence for having been refused a sight 
of the Guru, which was free as air to all others. 

Some compassionate Sikhs represented the leper’s 
condition and devotion to the Guru. The Guru said, 
‘ He speaketh truly. He hath found his former body. 
Bathe him to-morrow in the water from my bath, 
then wrap him up from head to foot and bring him 
to me.’ The Sikhs acted accordingly. The Guru 
showed himself to him, and with his own hands 
removed the cloth in which they had swathed him, 
when lo! he stood forth in manly beauty and 
symmetry. He received from the Guru a new name, 
Murari, one of the epithets of Krishan. 

One day in public audience the Guru asked, ‘ Is 
there any lover of the Guru who will give his daughter 
In marriage to Murari?’ A man called Sinha 
stood up and offered to do so. He accordingly took 
Murari home, and on arriving there sent his wife, 
who was of stern temper, to her apartment, that 
she might not see what he was engaged in. Sinha 
set up a bridal pavilion, and causing the young 
couple to perform the usual circumambulations 
and ceremonies, duly solemnized their marriage. 

When Sinha’s wife heard of the marriage she ran 
weeping and wailing to the Guru. ‘A very im- 
proper thing hath occurred! I know nothing of this 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 133 

man’s antecedents, or of his caste, or parentage, 
and yet my husband hath given him my daughter!’ 
The Guru replied, ‘I am his father and mother, my 
caste is his caste. Thy daughter’s name is Matho 
and my son’s Murari. People will afterwards link 
their names together with reverence. Very fortunate 
are they who have entered Guru Nanak’s asylum.’ 
After this the angry mother was appeased, and con- 
ferred a dowry on her daughter. The Guru then 
addressed Murari: ‘Go home now and abide in 
happiness. Give men initiation by the true Name 
and save them. Thou too shalt make converts to 
the faith, and wealth and supernatural power shall 
wait on thee.’ 

There was a Brahman called Kheda who was such 
a devout worshipper of the goddess Durga that he 
was ever singing her praises. He used to go twice 
a year to see her arrayed in flame at Jawalamukhi. 
Once on passing through Goindwal he tarried there 
in his curiosity to behold the Guru. The Sikhs duly 
apprised the Guru of the stranger’s visit ; but he as 
usual said that he could only grant Kheda an inter- 
view when he had taken food from his kitchen. 
Kheda reflected that he was a Brahman, and as such 
could only eat food which he had cooked himself 
within a purified square. He could not forfeit his 
salvation by eating from a kitchen which supplied 
the four castes indiscriminately. He therefore re- 
turned to his party and resolved to continue his 
journey. It was agreed that they should all proceed 
on the morrow. At night the goddess of his worship, 
assuming a terrible shape, appeared to him in a vision. 
He called out, ‘O Durga, protect me! What offence 
have I committed ?’ She replied, ‘ Guru Nanak was 
born to save the world. Guru Amar Das in his image 
is now on his throne. Turning away from him thou 
art leaving Goindwal. On this account I have ap- 
peared unto thee. Now go, and see the Guru.’ 
Kheda went back, ate from the Guru’s kitchen, and 

134 THE SIKH RELIGION 

was then permitted to bow at his feet. In reply to 
the Guru’s inquiries he told him his whole history. 
The Guru was pleased with his visit and gave him 
every consolation. He gave him the spell of initia- 
tion as a Sikh, granted him salvation, and bestowed 
on him the power of conferring it on others. Kheda 
afterwards materially contributed to the spread of 
the Sikh gospel. 

A pandit called Beni, who expounded the Veds 
and the Shastars, and who had committed Sanskrit 
syntax, etymology, and prosody to memory, was 
travelling round India in great spiritual pride. 
Wherever he heard of any famous pandit, he went, 
discussed, vanquished him, and then took possession 
of all his library. Having defeated in argument the 
pandits of all the great cities of India, he turned his 
steps towards Goindwal. The pandits there naturally 
refused to enter into a discussion with a man who 
had gained so many victories, and referred him to 
the Guru. The Guru gave him a seat, and inquired 
why he favoured him with a visit. He replied, ‘ Thy 
Sikhs read not the twilight prayers or the gayatri. 
They perform not pilgrimages, penances, or the 
religious duties of the Hindus ; how shall they be 
saved ?° The Guru replied, ‘ Those things sufficed 
for the first three ages of the world, but in this 
fourth age they are useless. At present it is the 
Name alone that can confer salvation. Devotion is 
the means of salvation, and it is best performed 
under the Guru’s guidance. Without devotion all 
ritual is vain. Take a lamp in thy hand and walk 
not in darkness. Seed can only germinate at the 
proper season. Jenounce false pride, and perform 
such devotion as may absorb thy mind in God’s love. 
Now as thou art a pandit give an answer to my 
questions :— 

Is man a householder or an anchoret ? 
Is man without caste and ever immortal ? 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 135 

Is man fickle or without love for the world ? 

Whence hath pride attached to man ? 

O Pandit, reflect on man. 

Why read so much and bear further burden ? 

The Creator attached mammon and worldly love to man, 

And according to this law created the world. 

By the Guru’s favour understand this, O brother, 

And ever abide under God’s protection. 

He is a pandit who divesteth himself of the load of the 
three qualities, 

And daily uttereth the one Name. 

Such a pandit receiveth the instruction of the true Guru, 

And offereth his life unto him. 

The pandit who ever abideth apart and unmoved, 

Shall be acceptable in God’s court. 

To all he preacheth that there is only the one God. 

All that he beholdeth he recognizeth as the one God. 

Him whom he favoureth he blendeth with God, 

And rendereth ever happy in this world and the next. 

Saith Nanak, what can one do and how ? 

He to whom God is merciful shall be saved ; 

He shall each day sing God’s praises, 

And not be again deafened with the Shastars and the Veds.’* 

The Pandit, on hearing this, thought to himself, 
‘I have been carried away by the stream of intel- 
lectual pride. Now that I have the raft of the Guru's 
instruction, I will embark on it, cross the world’s 
dangerous ocean, and obtain salvation.’ The star of 
the pandit’s good fortune had arisen ; he sought the 
Guru’s protection and obtained the fruit thereof. 
With clasped hands he again addressed the Guru : 
‘Great king, I have become a pandit by reading, 
but until now I have not understood what real know- 
ledge meant. I have been so blinded by pilgrimages, 
penance, and reading the Shastars, and so absorbed 
in idol-worship and pride, that I have possessed no 

1 Literally—The Shastars and the Veds shall not again be shouted 
athim. Rag Malar. 

136 THE SIKH RELIGION 

real devotion. Now that I have entered thine 
asylum instruct me and save me.’ The pandit dis- 
encumbered himself of all his volumes, and humbly 
sat at the Guru’s feet for spiritual instruction. The 
doors of his understanding opened, and he became 
filled with devotion. Thus having, by the Guru’s 
favour, obtained salvation while alive, he thanked 
him and took his departure. 

CHAPTER XII 

There lived a devout Sikh named Prema in the 
village of Talwandi,' about seven kos from Goindwal. 
He was lame, but yet able to walk with the aid of a 
crutch. He used every day to take a pitcher of milk 
to the Guru, who drank some himself, and distributed 
the remainder among his guests. One day in the 
height of the rainy season, as the roads were full of 
mire, he set out with his usual offering. The village 
chaudhri frequently observed him going and coming. 
On this particular day the chaudhri remained at 
home, and, having nothing better to do, watched the 
Sikh, and furtively took away his crutch, saying to 
him, ‘Go not to-day; there is too much mire on 
the ground. If you persist in going, you will fall 
down and die.’ Another man said to him, ‘ Your 
Guru is such a wonder-worker, why does he not cure 
your leg? If he cannot do so, how shall he save 
you hereafter ?’ Prema prayed to be allowed to 
pay his usual visit to the Guru. In reply to the 
impertinent inquiries he said he had not become 
a Sikh to have his leg made whole, and he had never 
asked the Guru for a new one. His tormentors con- 
tinued to tease him for some time, and at last re- 
turned him his support, whereupon he hastened with 
all his might to the Guru. Prema told the whole 
story how he had been delayed by the mischievous 
pranks of the chaudhri. Upon this the Guru said 

1 This is not the T'alwandi where Guru Nanak was born. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 137 

that his leg must be mended. The Guru continued: 
‘On the bank of the river there dwelleth a Muham- 
madan faqir called Husaini Shah. Go and tell him 
that the Guru hath sent thee to be thoroughly cured.’ 

Husaini Shah lived alone and allowed no one to 
approach him, but by the Guru’s favour he made 
Prema an exception, and allowed him to sit down 
beside him. When Prema had finished his narrative, 
the faqir took up a stick to castigate him, as he had 
done other visitors for intruding on his privacy. 
Prema watching his movements ran away, forgetting 
in his haste to take his crutch with him. To his 
delight and surprise his leg became whole. Prema 
then returned to the fagqir, fell to the ground before 
him, and thanked him profusely for the cure he had 
wrought in such an unceremonious and extraordinary 
manner. Husaini modestly disclaimed all credit, and 
said, ‘ Thy leg was cured the moment the Guru told 
thee to come to me; but he hath given me the evil 
reputation of exercising supernatural power. Go 
now, fall at his feet, and offer him my homage 
also. There are many servants of God like me, but 
I am confident there is none like the Guru who is 
perfect and omnipotent.’ Thus did even pious 
Muhammadans bear testimony to the Guru’s spiritual 
greatness. 

The Guru was an ocean of mercy which contained 
many gems of virtue and divine knowledge; and 
whoever dived therein with faith obtained his great 
reward. One day Bhai Budha and other Sikhs, find- 
ing a favourable opportunity, requested the Guru to 
be good enough to recount to them the rules of his 
religion. He said, ‘While yet a watch of night 
remaineth, let my Sikhs arise, bathe, and sit apart 
for meditation. Let them ponder on the Guru’s 
hymns and repeat God’s name until the morning. 
Let them out of their honest earnings assist holy 
men and never take another’s wife or property. Let 
them never utter harsh words, falsehood, or slander. 

138 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Let them mourn when others mourn, and rejoice 
when they rejoice. Let them not eat until they 
are hungry, or sleep until they are sleepy, for he who 
eateth unnecessarily contracteth disease, and he who 
sleepeth unnecessarily shorteneth his life. Let them 
forget not the true Name for a moment. Let them 
accept God's will, and, deeming what God doeth to 
be for the best, impute no blame to Him. Let them 
maintain their mental serenity, subdue pride, lust, 
wrath, and avarice, and be contented with rightful 
gain. Let them not desire to have their good acts 
known, otherwise their full advantage would not 
be obtained, and vainglory would be added to their 
other sins. Let them never listen to slander of God 
or the Guru, but shun the company of slanderers. 
Let them avoid deceit, envy, and avarice, and rely 
on God’s worship for salvation. Let them ever make 
preparation for their future happiness, and never be 
entangled with worldly pleasures. Let Sikhs ever 
associate with the holy, love the Guru’s hymns, and 
be pleased when they read or listen to them. Let 
them act according to the Guru’s words ; then shall 
they know that they are saved.’ 

Whenever Arjan, Jetha’s youngest child, was 
brought to the Guru he used to embrace and fondle 
him. One day as the Guru was taking his meal, 
Arjan crawled to his chamber and put his hand into 
his plate. The Sikhs took the child away, but he 
returned and acted as before. He was again re- 
moved, and on his return for the third time the Guru 
gave him his leavings. The Guru then said, ‘ Come, 
heir to the plate, wilt thou have it?’ The Sikhs 
understood that the Guru, by these words, foretold 
Arjan’s succession to the exalted position of Guruship. 

One day Bhai Budha, on seeing the Guru eat, said 
to him, “Is it right for the Sikhs to eat dainty food 
while thou art satisfied with a coarse meal ? Issue 
an order that only such food as thou eatest shall be 
served from thy kitchen.’ The Guru replied, ‘ O Bhai 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 139 

Budha, thou supposest there is a difference between 
the Sikhs and me. I enjoy the flavour of what the 
Sikhs eat.’ Then all became certain that what entered 
the Sikhs’ mouths contributed to the Guru's sus- 
tenance. Upon that occasion Jetha composed the 
following :— 

As a mother is delighted when her child taketh food, 

As a fish is delighted when it batheth in the water, 

So the true Guru is delighted when his disciple findeth 
food. 

O beloved God, cause me to meet such servants of Thine 

As will remove sorrow from me by the interview. 

As a cow is delighted at the meeting of her calf, 

As a wife is delighted when her beloved returneth home, 

So is a holy man delighted when he singeth God’s praises. 

As the chatrik is delighted when it raineth in torrents, 

As a king is delighted to see his wealth increase, 

So is a godly man delighted when he repeateth the Name of 
the Formless. 

As man is delighted at acquiring worldly wealth, 

As the Guru’s disciple is delighted when he meeteth and 
embraceth his Guru, 

So is Nanak delighted on licking the feet of holy men." 

Two men named Phiria and Katara from the 
neighbourhood of Dihli having heard of the Guru's 
fame, visited him at Goindwal, and performed for him 
assiduous service. The Guru, being very pleased, one 
day said to them, ‘ You have obtained full knowledge 
of my religion, and you may now return to your own 
country to preach there the true Name and lead souls 
to salvation.’ They represented, ‘O true king, the 
inhabitants of our country are followers of Jogis who 
split their ears. The Jogis deceive them by incanta- 
tions and spells, and consequently the people know 
nothing of devotion, the Guru’s hymns, or divine 
knowledge. They worship cemeteries and cremation 
grounds, are averse from true religion, and none but 

2 Gauri. 

140 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the true Guru himself can save them. The Guru 
replied, ‘Go utter Wahguru, teach every one you 
meet the virtues of the True name, and put people 
on the Guru’s way.’ Phiria and Katara again repre- 
sented: “Such is the power of the Jogis, that simple 
men like us may not withstand them. Without the 
special power of the Guru how can the True name 
be proclaimed among such persons?’ The Guru 
replied, “ The Creator will be with you ; your words 
shall penetrate their hearts ; and their impious efforts 
shall not prevail against you. From the sleep of 
ignorance men shall awake to divine knowledge. 
Grant them the gift of the Name, cause them to 
utter Wahguru and walk in the path shown by the 
Gurit.’ 

Having received these commands and the Guru’s 
blessing, and meditated on the Immortal Being in 
their hearts, Phiria and Katara returned to their 
own country. On arriving there they proceeded to 
a Jogis' monastery. The Jogis, on seeing their faces 
beaming with the light shed on them by the Guru, fled 
like deer on seeing a tiger. Phiria and Katara then 
converted the monastery into a temple. People 
assembled in crowds, and asked whence these very 
mighty men had come, who had dared violate the sanc- 
tuary of Gorakhnath, and before whom the priests of 
the Jogis had fled. A crowd of people came to create 
a disturbance, but, on hearing Phiria and Katara 
sing the Guru’s hymns, their hard hearts so melted 
that they sought the Sikhs’ protection, and with all 
due ceremonies embraced the Sikh religion, and 
began to worship the one God. All their desires, 
spiritual and temporal, were then fulfilled. Several 
persons were gradually converted, Jogis’ monasteries 
were destroyed, and in their places imposing Sikh 
temples reared to the glory of God and true religion. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 141 

CHAPTER XIII 

Probably anticipating the trouble that his sons 
Mohan and Mohri would cause Jetha, the Guru said 
to him, ‘ Search for some place other than Goindwal 
for the residence of our Sikhs. Go thither, build 
‘a great city, and cause it to be inhabited. Thou 
possessest the lands assigned thee by the Emperor. 
First build a house therein for thyself, and then 
excavate a tank to the east of it as a place of Sikh 
pilgrimage.”? 

Jetha searched, and found an open uninhabited 
tract of country some twenty-five miles from Goind- 
wal, and there he established himself. He built 
a house for his residence and employed a crowd of 
labourers to excavate the earth for the construction 
of a tank. After some time, when a portion of the 
work was accomplished and several people had built 
huts for themselves on the new site, Jetha, suffering 
from the pain of separation from the Guru, returned 
to Goindwal to report the extent of the work he had 
performed. ‘I have built a village consisting of 
several houses, and excavated a considerable portion 
of a tank on the spot where thou didst order.’ 
Jetha remained for some time at Goindwal, became 
treasurer of the Guru’s income and superintended 
his expenditure. 

Guru Amar Das in due time again addressed Jetha: 
‘Go and attend to the house thou madest in the 
Guru’s Chakk. Cease to construct the rectangular 
tank thou didst lay out, and on which thou didst 
perform some work, and give it the name Santokhsar 
—a tank which will afford spiritual consolation to 
all who bathe therein. On the low land to the east of 
it excavate another tank and call it Amritsar—tank 
of nectar. It shall be consolidated with brickwork 
when there is an opportunity. Go and exert thine 
efforts to that end.’ 

1 Suraj Parkash, Ras II, Chapter 11. 

142 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Jetha went, and after the distribution of sweets 
as encouragement to the labourers, applied them to 
the work. It proceeded rapidly for several months 
until it was time for Guru Amar Das to appoint 
a successor, upon which he recalled Jetha. The 
latter, by the time of his departure, had excavated 
a somewhat deep pit near the ber tree now called 
Dukhbhanjani, or destroyer of sorrow, but he was 
obliged to leave the tank incomplete.! 

Guru Amar Das’s elder daughter Dani was married 
to a man called Rama, who became a zealous Sikh. 
Kama, besides performing the usual Sikh worship, 
used to work in the Guru’s kitchen and minister to 
the wants of pilgrims at the Bawali. One day the 
Sikhs addressed the Guru: ‘ Jetha and Rama are 
equally related to thee, and both perform service 
with great self-sacrifice. Rama is the elder, yet 
thou bearest greater love to Jetha. What is the 
cause thereof ?’ The Guru replied, ‘He who hath 
the greater faith, devotion, humility, and obedience, 
is the more deserving. The holy have God in their 
power, and they who perform the ordinary duties 
of their religion obtain the fruit thereof. I am going 
to make a trial of both Jetha and Rama in your 
presence. He who better comporteth himself shall 
be deemed the more worthy.’ 

The Guru went to the Bawali, and, sending for both 
Jetha and Rama, ordered each of them to make 
him a platform beside it, one that he might sit on in 
the morning, and the other in the evening. He who 
did the better work should receive the greater 
honour. Jetha and Rama began their labours. 
When the platforms were completed, the Guru went 
to inspect them. Rama, after the customary 
obeisance, showed the Guru his work, and thought 
he had done well. The Guru said, ‘ Thy platform 
is not straight, throw it down and build another.’ 
Kama represented that he had made the platform 

1 Suraj Parkash, Ras 11, Chapter 13. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 143 

straight and very beautiful with his own hands after 
ereat exertion. The Guru replied, “No doubt thou 
hast laboured hard, but the platform is not to my 
satisfaction.’ The Guru insisted on its demolition 
and the erection of another in its place. Kama 
consented and built the platform a second time. It 
still failed to please the Guru. Rama after long 
argument, threw it down again, but refused to build 
it up a third time. He said, ‘ The Guru hath grown 
old and his reason faileth him.’ The Guru remarked, 
‘This man hath not true devotion ; how shall he 
be worthy of the Guruship ? ’ 

The Guru, on going to Jetha’s platform, said, 
‘Jetha, I do not like this platform. Throw it down 
and build another.’ Jetha at once began to demolish 
his work and build it anew. When it was finished, 
the Guru said that he was not satisfied with that 
either, and asked him to do the work over again. 
Jetha consented and worked day and night till he 
had completed the platform for the third time. The 
Guru affected to find fault with it until it had been 
demolished and rebuilt seven times. Jetha clasped 
the Guru’s feet and humbly addressed him: ‘I am 
a fool; pray have regard for thy duty to me as thy 
son. I am erring and of mean understanding, while 
thou possessest all knowledge.’ 

On hearing this the Guru smiled, embraced him, 
and said, ‘Obeying my order, seven times hast thou 
built the platform, so seven generations of thine 
shall sit on the Guru’s throne.’ Then turning 
to the Sikhs the Guru said, ‘I have now tested 
the devotion of both my sons-in-law. You have 
seen the result; that is why Jetha is dearer 
to me. He is a perfect being who hath become 
incarnate, and the world following him shall be 
saved’. The Sikhs were astonished on witnessing 
Jetha’s marvellous devotion and obedience, and 
began to recognize him as the image of the Guru. 

Bibi Bhani after her marriage continued to attend 

144 THE SIKH RELIGION 

on her father. She used to fan him, draw water, 
and also work in the kitchen. One night, as the 
Guru was absorbed in deep meditation, she noticed 
that a part of one leg of his couch was broken off. 
Fearing that his meditation should be disturbed, 
she put her hand under the broken leg so as to 
keep the couch level. When the Guru arose and 
saw what she had done he asked why she had en- 
dured such torture. She said that seeing the leg 
broken, and fearing that there would be delay in 
getting another, she put her hand under it, so that 
her father might not suffer inconvenience. She 
thought that if her wretched body served the Guru, 
she would be very fortunate. The Guru was 
pleased and said, “ Whoever doeth good works shall 
reap the reward thereof.’ He invited her to ask 
a favour. Her request was that the Guruship 
should remain in her family. He blessed her say- 
ing, ‘ Thine offspring shall be worshipped by the 
world. From the offspring of thy womb shall be 
born a universal saviour ; but thou hast dammed the 
clear flowing stream of the Guruship, and conse- 
quently great trouble and annoyance shall result.’ 

Jetha possessing the spirit of obedience con- 
tinued to serve the Guru day and night, and never 
wearied. He used to shampoo him, draw water, 
cook, serve meals from the kitchen and then wash 
the dishes. The Guru blessed him: ‘The whole 
world shall do thee homage, and rich and poor shall 
reap the benefits of thy service.’ 

Once as Jetha’s relations were returning from 
a pilgrimage to the Ganges they halted at Goindwal. 
The Guru accorded them an affectionate reception ; 
but they, through excessive pride of being the male 
relations of his son-in-law, refused to fall at his feet, 
and simply asked him where Hari Das’s son, namely 
Jetha, was. The Guru gave them refreshments and 
sent for Jetha. On learning Jetha’s occupation 
they were filled with anger and said to him, ‘ Thou 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 148 

hast shamed thy family by performing menial 
service in thy father-in-law’s house. Couldst thou 
not obtain suitable maintenance with thy parents 
without having to draw water, scrub dirty vessels, 
and shampoo the Guru? Thou a Khatri’s son 
actest like this. Nobly hast thou enhanced the 
honour of thy family! When we go to the houses 
of our fathers-in-law, we get excellent couches to 
rest on, sweets and palaos to eat, and we laugh and 
play with their daughters. All the families of our 
fathers-in-law exert themselves to show us respect. 
Even a passer-by would be ashamed to see thy con- 
dition. Was it for this thou wert destined ? ’ 
Jetha, much displeased at this language, so offen- 
sive to the Guru in particular, replied: ‘In your 
estimation the Guru is my father-in-law, but in mine 
he is God in person. He hath procured for me 
happiness in both worlds. Through his favour 
I have obtained peace of mind, consolation, faith, 
and divine knowledge. I am in word and deed the 
Guru’s slave.’ On hearing this Jetha’s relations 
went to the Guru, and said to him, ‘ Thou callest 
thyself the Guru of the world, and claimest to know 
everything. To every one is dear the honour of 
his family, but thou hast totally disregarded it. 
In our family Jetha is the only one who hath for- 
saken his parents, lived with his father-in-law, and 
carried filth on his head for him. If thou desire 
that he should work for thee, give him some other 
occupation, so that he may not be a laughing-stock 
before men.’ The Guru looking at Jetha replied : 
‘TI have not made him carry filth on his head, but 
I have put filth on the heads of his slanderers, and 
I have caused the umbrella of true sovereignty to 
wave over him. If he had not been born in your 
family, you would all have been damned. It is he 
who hath saved the whole of your tribe. He is the 
incarnation of devotion, religion, and salvation. He 
is of noble mind, the very essence of humility, 

SIKH. II E 

146 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and hath ever acted as becometh the Guru’s 
disciple.’ 

The Guru being now old began to think of his 
death and the propriety of leaving the Guruship to 
the most deserving of his disciples. Jetha per- 
formed such unremitting service day and night that 
he allowed himself no repose of mind or body. One 
day as the Guru sat down after bathing, Bibi 
Bhani came and bowed to him. The Guru asked 
her what she would do if her husband were to die. 
She understood the Guru to mean that her husband 
was near his dissolution. She replied that she 
must accept her fate. She would either die with 
her husband, or do as her father ordered her. The 
Guru replied: ‘There is no necessity for thee to 
die, I will bestow a favour on thee, which will be 
far more advantageous; I will grant thy husband 
the Guruship, and extended life.’ 

Guru Amar Das, having in every way tested Jetha 
and found him perfect, ordered Bhai Ballu to send 
for a coco-nut and five paise. The Guru then 
caused Jetha to bathe and clothe himself in new 
raiment. He summoned his own two sons, Mohan 
and Mohri, and his principal Sikhs, including Bhai 
Budha, and, when they had all taken their seats, 
thus addressed them: ‘Guru Nanak in the begin- 
ning established this custom, that the Guruship 
should be bestowed on the most deserving. Where- 
fore, having found Ram Das—hitherto called Jetha— 
fully worthy, I now bestow on him the Guruship.’ 

The Guru descended from his throne and, taking 
Guru Ram Das’s arm, seated him on it. Bhai Budha, 
according to ancient custom, attached the tilak or 
patch of sovereignty to Guru Ram Das’s forehead. 
Then placing the coco-nut and the five paise before 
him the Guru said, ‘It is only a golden vessel that 
can hold a tigress’s milk’—that 1s, the responsibility 
of the Guruship can only be vested in a pure man. 
The Guru then declared Ram Das duly appointed 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 147 

as his successor. Upon this Guru Amar Das uttered 
the following :— 

Why keep property entrusted to another? A man is 
happy when he hath returned it} 

The Guru’s instruction resteth with the Guru ; it shineth 
from no other source. 

When a blind man findeth a gem, he taketh it from house 
to house to sell ; 

But people cannot assay it, and he cannot get an eighth 
of a paisa for it. 

When he cannot assay it himself, he ought to have it 
assayed by an assayer.? 

If he turn his attention to the Guru, he shall obtain the 
real thing,® and the nine treasures. 

Though all men possess wealth at home, they are dying of 
hunger, since without the true Guru they know not where 
to find it. 

When the refreshing Word dwelleth in the soul and body, 
there is no sorrow or pain of separation. 

He is a fool who poseth as a man of importance, and who 
is proud of what belongeth not to him. 

Nanak, without understanding no one hath obtained God, 
but is born and dieth again and again. 

All the Sikhs made offerings according to their 
means, and saluted Guru Ram Das on his appoint- 
ment. There were great rejoicings. An umbrella 
was raised, chauris waved over him, shells blown, 
and bugles, flutes, and clarions played. The date 
of Guru Ram Das’s appointment was the 13th day 
of the light half of Bhadon, Sambat 1631 (A.D. 1574). 
The following verses refer to the occasion :— 

The true Guru who desireth happiness for, and is merciful 
to souls, hath given the greatness of the Name to Guru Ram 
Das. 

1 This line refers to the throne, received from the second by the 
third Guru, which it was the duty of the latter to transmit to another. 

2 That is, the Guru. 

3 Divine knowledge. 

L2 

148 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru Ram Das hath now obtained greatness so as to 
save the Sodhis and the whole world. 

Mohan would not do homage to Guru Ram Das. 
He said, ‘ Our father hath superseded us and granted 
the Guruship to his son-in-law. We consider him 
our servant ; why should we bow to him?’ Saying 
this, Mohan went into his upper room and there 
mourned his fate. 

Guru Amar Das asked his son Mohri how he would 
regard Guru Ram Das. He replied, ‘ My lord, from 
the time thou gavest him the name Ram Das, I 
have deemed him the same as Guru Nanak, Guru 
Angad, and thyself.’ Guru Amar Das on hearing 
this was much pleased and thus congratulated his 

son: ‘Thou knowest no difference between the 
Gurus. I recognize in thee a dutiful and obedient 
son. Mohri replied, ‘Father mine, render me 

assistance when my account 1s called for in Dharm- 
raj’s court. The Guru said, ‘ While still alive 
I have settled thine account. Thou hast no need 
to go to Dharmraj.’ On hearing this Guru Ram 
Das said, ‘O true Guru, grant me the dignity of 
being thy disciple and give the Guruship to Mohri.’ 
The Guru rephed, ‘The ancient gift which was to 
be given I have given thee; and what was to be 
given him, I have given him. He is my poor son ; 
take thou care of him.’ 

Guru Amar Das in a devotional paroxysm then 
gave utterance to the following :— 

My mind is happy that I have obtained my beloved Lord ; 
my beloved friends and saints too are pleased. 

They who were united with the Creator from the beginning 
shall never be separated from Him, since it was He Himself 
who united them. 

I have found the Guru ; he hath dispelled all my sorrows, 
and the Word permeateth my heart. 

Let me praise God the Giver of all happiness and clasp 
Him to my heart. 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 149 

How can the jealousy of the perverse affect those who are 
regenerated by the true Word ? 

My Beloved shall preserve their honour since they have 
fallen for shelter at the Guru’s door. 

Nanak, it is the followers of the Guru who are happy ; 
their countenances shall be bright in God’s court! 

Bhai Gur Das composed the following on the 
accession of Guru Ram Das to the Guruship :— 

What he previously received must be restored, and 
descend to the line that owneth it. 

The Sodhi king Ram Das sat on the throne, and was called 
the true Guru. 

He dug a perfect tank, and awakened the light of divine 
knowledge in Amritsar. 

The play of the Lord is contrary to that of the world ; the 
ocean floweth backwards, and is contained in the Ganges.” 

Guru Ram Das received his reward for what he gave ; he 
who giveth nothing receiveth nothing. 

It will descend to Guru Ram Das’s son Arjan who shall be 
styled the world’s Guru. 

The Sodhis will not allow it to depart; no others can en- 
dure the unendurable thing. 

What belongeth to the house shall remain in the house.’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

When all the ceremonies of Guru Ram Das’s 
coronation were complete, Guru Amar Das ordered 
Bhai Budha and other Sikhs to do homage to the 
newly installed Guru. Then followed a great feast, 
at which every variety of dishes and dainties were 
served. Sending for the headmen of Goindwal, the 
members of his family and all his Sikhs, Guru 
Amar Das said: ‘God’s summons hath come, and 

1 Sarang ki War. 

2 Guru Amar Das is the ocean and Guru Rim Das the Ganges. 

Guru Amar Das has communicated his greatness and virtues to Guru 
Ram Das. sar leas. 

150 THE SIKH RELIGION 

I am about to depart. God’s will I accept with 
pleasure. The Creator by calling me hath conferred 
honour on me; and as true friends, relations, and 
well-wishers are pleased and never sorry at seeing 
an honour paid a friend, let there be no mourn- 
ing for me. When I have gone, sing God’s 
praises, read God’s word, hear God’s word, and obey 
God’s will.” Mohri then asked him how his obse- 
quies were to be celebrated. The Guru replied, 
' Perform no obsequies for me, place not a lamp in 
my hands during my last moments. Call me not 
a ghost as the Hindus do up to the thirteenth day 
after death. Remember to obey my instructions.’ 

Mohri put a final question to his father: ‘Thou 
hast ordered us to lead family lives. This cannot 
be done without the aid of wealth. What occupa- 
tion shall we pursue to maintain ourselves ?’ The 
Guru replied, ‘Live honestly, practise piety, and 
turn not away from God. Act according to my 
advice, and you shall be happy.’ 

The Guru repeated the Japji, drew a sheet over him 
and amid the surrounding Sikhs’ unbroken cries of 
Wahguru! Sat Guru! Sat Nam! blended the light 
of his soul with the light of God. After the Guru’s 
body had been washed and clothed in costly raiments, 
it was placed on a beautiful bier, and borne with the 
singing of the Sikh choristers, to the accompaniment 
of rebeck and tabla, and amid a rain of flowers, to the 
margin of the river Bias, where it was cremated with 
all solemnity. The ashes were afterwards thrown 
into the river. When the singing was over, the 
mourners recited the Sohila and distributed sacred 
food. They then returned home singing the Guru’s 
praises as they went. Guru Ram Das addressed 
words of consolation to the Sikhs and the family of 
the departed. 

Guru Ram Das’s glory daily extended like the 
rays of the rising sun, and the Sikh religion grew 
like a gigantic tree. It was Guru Nanak who had 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 151 

sowed the seed from which it sprang. In Guru 
Angad’s time its trunk towered on high, and its 
roots penetrated the earth, while during Guru Amar 
Das’s spiritual reign it put forth its widely spreading 
branches in every direction. 

As the Emperor Akbar administered his empire 
by the agency of governors of provinces, so Guru 
Amar Das similarly partitioned the Sikh spiritual 
empire into twenty-two districts. 

Guru Amar Das, after a spiritual reign of twenty- 
two years, departed this life at ten o’clock on the 
forenoon of the day of the full moon in the month 
of Bhadon,Sambat 1631 (A.D. 1574). There isa yearly 
fair held on that date at Goindwal to commemorate 
the act of the Guru’s blending with his Maker. 

Mohri had, as we have seen, a son called Anand. 
Anand’s son was Sundar Das, who afterwards at the 
request of Guru Arjan wrote the following account 
of the death of Guru Amar Das. The composition 
is called the ‘Sadd’ or the ‘Calling’, and is now 
sung by Sikhs on all occasions of mourning. 

THE SADD 
I 

God is the Benefactor of the Universe; He loveth the 
saints and filleth the three worlds. 

They in whose hearts the Guru’s instruction is contained 
know none besides God ; 

Under the Guru’s instruction they know none besides ; 
they meditate on the one Name. 

By the favour of Nanak and Guru Angad, Amar Das 
obtained the supreme position. 

When the message came for him to depart, he was absorbed 
in God’s name. 

In this world he obtained the eternal, immovable, and 
unequalled God by service. 

1 Manjis. Literally—couches on which the Gurus used to sit and 
communicate instruction to their audiences, 

152 THE SIKH RELIGION 

II 

The Guru gladly accepted the will of God to go to Him! 

The true Guru offered a prayer to God, * Protect mine 
honour ; this zs my supplication. 

‘Preserve the honour of Thy servant, O bright God, grant 
me Thy name, 

‘That it may assist me at my final departure, and van- 
quish death and death’s myrmidons.’ 

God heard the true Guru’s prayer and granted his request ; 

He mercifully blended the true Guru with Himself and 
said, ‘ Bravo! bravo! well done!’ 

Ill 

‘My disciples, sons, and brethren, hear me; I have 
received God’s order to go to Him.’ 

The Guru was pleased with the will of the Lord ; my God 
congratulated him. 

He to whom God’s order is pleasing is a saint of the true 
Guru: 

There are joy and unbeaten strains for him, and God 
Himself embraceth him. 

‘Carefully examine your hearts, my sons, my brethren, 
and my family. 

‘The order written in the beginning cannot be erased ; 
the Guru 1s going to God.’ 

IV 

The true Guru was pleased to sit up and call his family— 

‘Let no one weep when I am gone; that would never 
please me. 

‘When a friend obtaineth a robe of honour, friends who 
desire his honour are pleased. 

‘Consider and behold, my sons and brethren, God clotheth 
me with a robe of honour.’ 

The true Guru himself while alive appointed a successor to 
his authority ; 

1 Some attribute this line to Guru Amar Dis, and translate—What 
pleaseth God pleaseth me, the Guru is going to God, 

LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 153 

He caused all his disciples, relations, sons, and brethren to 
fall at Ram Das’s feet. 

V 

Finally, the true Guru spoke, “After my death, sing God’s! 
praises. 

‘Call God instead of a pandit and, for the Garar Puran, 
read God’s word ; ? 

* Read God’s word, hear God’s name; the Guru desireth 
God’s love tnstead of a lofty bier,® 

‘Barley rolls, bread on leaves, Hindu obsequies, lamps, 
and throwing his bones? into the Ganges.’ 

The true Guru spoke as it pleased God, and he was blended 
with the Omniscient Being. 

The true Guru gave Ram Das Sodhi the apostolic mark, 
the token of the true Word. 

Vi 

As the true Guru spoke, so his disciples obeyed his wishes. 

His son Mohri became obedient to him, and fell at Ram 
Das’s feet. 

Then all fell at the feet of the true Guru into whom Guru 
Amar Das had infused his spirit. 

Any person who through jealousy® did not bow before him 
was brought by the supernatural power of the true Guru, 
and made bow before him. 

It pleased God and the Guru to bestow greatness on Ram 
Das according to God’s will recorded in the beginning. 

Saith Sundar, hear me, O saint,® the whole world fell at 
Ram Das’s feet. 

1 The use of the word Vzréan here for God shows the Guru intended 
that the Sikh and not the Hindu ritual should be read at his decease. 

2 That is, the compositions of the Gurus. 

3 Beban, from the Sanskrit vzmdn, a celestial chariot. Among the 
Hindus, when an elderly person dies, he is raised on a lofty bier on 
which flowers, money, almonds, &c., are thrown, and in front of which 
musicians sing and play. 

4 Phil. The bones of the departed after the process of cremation. 

° The allusion here is to Guru Amar Das’s eldest son, Mohan, who 
at first refused to do homage to the new Guru. 

6 Guru Arjan is meant. 

evi S OF*GURU AMAK DAS 

Whether men wear religious garbs or revel in 
their worldly possessions, they still need the Guru’s 
guidance. 

SRILRAG 

Men put on many garbs and wander abroad, but in their 
hearts and minds practise deception. 

They shall not find God’s palace, and dying their abode 
shall be in filth. 

O man, be a hermit in thine own home. 

He who hath been enlightened by the Guru’s instruction 
practiseth truth, self-restraint, and good works. 

He conquereth his heart by the Guru’s instruction, and 
obtaineth salvation and deliverance in his own home. 

Meet the society of the saints, O man, and meditate on 
God’s name. 

Even though thou enjoy hundreds of thousands of women, 
and rule the nine regions of the world, 

Thou shalt not obtain happiness without the true Guru, 
but shalt be born again and again. 

Wealth and supernatural power follow those, even though 
they in no wise covet them, 

Who wear on their necks God’s necklaces! and attach 
themselves to the Guru’s feet. 

What pleaseth God and nothing else shall take place. 

The slave Nanak liveth by repeating Thy name, O God ; 
grant it to him of Thy grace. 

The condition of the pious as distinguished from 
the perverse :— 

Men act as they see others act: the perverse acquire not 
understanding. 

1 God's name. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS _ iss 

The service of the pious whose hearts are pure is acceptable 
to God. 

They sing God’s praises, ever read them, and by singing 
them become absorbed in Him. 

Nanak, the words of those who fix their attention on the 
Name are ever true. 

The saints trade in God’s name :— 

God is the wealth and capital of His saints; they trade in 
consultation with the Guru. 

They praise His name for ever and ever ; His name is their 
merchandise and their support. 

In theiy hearts the perfect Guru hath established God’s 
name as an inexhaustible storehouse. 

O my brethren, admonish your hearts. 

O man, why art thou indolent ? Ponder on the Name 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

To serve God is to love Him, if pious men reflect on it. 

God is not served by hypocrisy : the words of the double- 
dealer are despised. 

He in whose heart are discrimination and reflection 
uniteth not with him. 

He is called the servant of God who claspeth Him to his 
heart. 

The holy man who placeth before Him and entrusteth to 
Him his soul and body, and rooteth out pride from within 
him, 

Is blest and acceptable, and shall never suffer defeat. 

God is obtained by His own favour; without it He is not 
obtained. 

Eighty-four lakhs of species thirst for God, but only he 
whom He blendeth with Himself shall meet Him. 

Nanak, the pious man who is ever absorbed in God’s name 
shall find Him. 

The condition of the perverse is like that of an 
unhappy wife :— 

The acts of the perverse are like the external decorations 
of a wife separated from her husband : 

1 By evil passions or the god of death. 

156 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Her husband cometh not to her couch, and she is ever in 
disgrace. 

Far from reaching her husband’s chamber, she may not 
see even the door of his house. 

The necessity of a spiritual guide :— 

Though man mortified himself and performed penance 
with body reversed, yet pride would not forsake him. 

Were he even to investigate the relation between the 
supreme and the individual soul, he would never obtain the 
Name. 

The name of God abideth in the heart of him who, under the 
Guru’s instruction, while alive is dead. 

The means of obtaining deliverance :— 

Whom shall I worship ? What name shall I utter ? Go 
ask the true Guru. 

Let me obey the order of the true Guru and remove pride 
from within me. 

That is real worship and service by which the Name 
dwelleth in the heart. 

It is only from the Name happiness is obtained ; man is 
adorned by the true Word. 

O my soul, be wakeful night and day, and think upon God. 

Watch thy field or the kulang Death will descend upon it. 

His heart’s desires are fulfilled who is saturated with the 
Word. 

He who feareth, loveth, and serveth God day and night 
shall behold Him ever present. 

Doubts fly far away from him whose heart is ever dyed 
with the true Word. 

He obtaineth the pure Lord who is true and an ocean of 
excellences. 

They who are awake are saved, they who sleep are lost. 

They know not the true Word; their lives pass away like 
a dream. 

As from an empty house a guest goeth as he came, 

1 Literally—are robbed. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 157 

So the life of the perverse man passeth away in vain ; 
what face shall he show to God ? 

Thou art Thyself, O God, all in all; man in a state of 
pride cannot utter Thy praises. 

Recognize the Guru’s instruction, so shall the disease of 
pride vanish from thy heart. 

I touch the feet of those who serve their own true 
Guru. 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who are found to be true 
in God’s court. 

Instruction addressed to the sensual and the 
rise -—— 

Hear, hear, thou who art seized by lust, why goest thou 
swaggering along ° 

Thou knowest not thine own Beloved ; how shalt thou 
show thy face to Him ? 

I touch the feet of my friends who know their own Spouse. 

By associating with the guild of the saints, may I become 
like them ! 

O woman, the false have been ruined by their falsehood. 

God the Spouse is true and beautiful, and is found by the 
Guru’s instruction. 

The perverse know not their Spouse ; how shall they pass 
their nights ? 

They who are filled with pride burn with desire, and suffer 
pain from their worldly love. 

They who are dyed with the Word, and from whom all 
pride departeth are happy wives. 

They ever enjoy their Spouse and pass their days in the 
highest delight. 

Their Spouse hath abandoned those who are devoid of 
divine knowledge, and they shall not obtain the Dear One. 

The spiritually blind are in darkness ; without beholding 
the Bridegroom their hunger shall not depart. 

Come and meet me, my friends, and cause me to meet my 
Beloved. 

She who by perfect destiny hath met the true Guru, hath 
found her Beloved and is absorbed in the True One. 

158 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The women on whom God looketh with favour are happy 
WIves : 

They recognize their Spouse, and offer Him their bodies 
and their souls. 

By dispelling their pride, they find their Spouse in their 
own homes. 

Nanak, they who practise devotion day and night are happy 
wives worthy of praise. 

SRI RAG ASHTAPADI 

The holy are compared to non-migratory, the 
unholy to migratory birds :— 

Beautiful is the bird! on the tree ?, which pecketh at truth 
by the Guru’s favour. 

It drinketh the essence of God’s name, abideth in happi- 
ness, and flieth not hither and thither. 

It obtaineth a dwelling in its own nest, and is absorbed in 
God’s name. 

O man, do the Guru’s service. 

If thou walk in the way of the Guru, thou shalt be day 
and night absorbed in God’s name. 

Can the birds* on the tree be prized which fly in every 
direction ? 

The more they fly, the worse they suffer ; they ever burn 
and scream. 

Without the Guru they cannot behold God’s court or 
obtain the ambrosial fruit. 

For the pious who are naturally true, God is an evergreen 
LICe. 

They reject the three branches 4 and attach themselves to 
the Word which ts the trunk. 

Lhe name of God alone is ambrosial fruit; He Himself 
giveth it to be eaten. 

The perverse even while erect are withered ; they have 
no fruit or shadow. 

* The soul of the pious man. 2 The body. 
3 The souls of the perverse. 4 The three qualities. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 159 

Sit not near them; they have neither house nor village. 

They are ever cut down and burnt as dry wood; they have 
neither the Word nor God’s name. 

Men act according to God’s order and wander according to 
their previous acts. 

By His order they obtain a sight of Him, and whither He 
sendeth them thither they go. 

Of His own will God dwelleth in their hearts; and they 
become blended with the True One. 

The ignorant wretches who recognize not God’s order, 
wander about in error. 

Their acts are the result of obstinacy, and they are con- 
tinually disgraced. 

They have no peace within them, and they love not the 
True One. 

Beautiful are the faces of the pious who bear love and 
affection to the Guru. 

Theirs is the real worship ; they are dyed with the truth, 
and found true at the court of the True One. 

Fortunate is their advent into the world; they save all 
their families. 

The acts of all are under the eye of God ; none are beyond 
His supervision. 

As the true God beholdeth man, so he becometh. 

Nanak, the greatness of the Name is obtained by good acts. 

Even the holy without the Guru fall under the 
influence of mammon :— 

Sidhs wander abroad misled by Maya, and contemplate 
not God with love. 

Maya entereth the three worlds, and they are greatly 
entangled by her. 

Without the Guru deliverance cannot be obtained, nor 
shall doubt and worldly love depart. 

Whom do men call Maya ? What doth aede do ? 

She it is who hath enchained man in misery! and caused 
him to do works of pride. 

1 Dukh sukh. Pain and pleasure. In the Sikh sacred writings the 
words combined generally mean unhappiness. 

160 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Men even of the lowest caste obtain glory in God's 
Count -—— 

Nama, a calico printer, and Kabir, a weaver, obtained 
salvation from the perfect guru. 

Knowing God they embraced His word, and lost their 
consciousness of caste. 

Demigods and men sing their compositions ; none may 
erase them, my brethren. 

Prahlad, the son of a Daitya,! read not of religious cere- 
monies or austerities, yet he knew not worldly love ; 

On meeting a true guru he became holy, and uttered 
God’s name night and day. 

He read only of the one God; he required only the one 
Name, and knew none other. 

All long for rest and ultimate repose in God :— 

Everybody longeth for rest, but it cannot be obtained with- 
out the Guru. 

Pandits and astrologers grow weary of reading ; they who 
wear sectarial dresses wander in error. 

If God be merciful, rest is obtained by meeting the Guru. 

My brethren, rest is not obtained without the Guru. 

It is from the Word rest proceedeth and the true God is 
obtained. 

What is sung at rest is acceptable ; without rest recital is 
vain. 

It is in rest devotion springeth up ; in rest love of God and 
contempt of the world are produced. 

1 The Daityas were a race of demons and giants who warred 
against the gods. Prahlad’s father was, according to the Sikhs, 
Harnakhas the golden-eyed, who for a long time did penance and 
prayed to Shiv with the object of obtaining immortal life. He 
had a son called Prahlad who elected the rival deity Vishnu as 
the object of his adoration. Harnakhas, wearied with his son's dis- 
obedience, had him tied to a pillar with the object of striking off his 
head. He said to his son, ‘Where is now your God?’ Upon this, 
itis said, Vishnu, in one of his incarnations, half man and half lion, 
issued from the pillar, and with his nails tore Harnakhas to pieces. 
Multan is believed to have been the scene of this miracle. At any 
rate, a temple was built there in commemoration of the event. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 161 

It is from rest happiness and peace are obtained ; without 
fest jie 1s vain, 

It is in rest God is ever and ever praised ; in rest man 
applieth himself to contemplation. 

It is in rest God’s praises are uttered, and man attentively 
serveth Him. 

It is by the Word God dwelleth in the heart, and the 
tongue tasteth His nectar. 

In rest death is destroyed, and man entereth the sanctuary 
OF ihe [rie One. 

In rest God’s name dwelleth in the heart, and man prac- 
tiseth truth. 

They are very fortunate who have found God and entered 
into a state of rest. 

Rest is not found in mammon which produceth worldly 
love. 

The perverse perform ceremonial works, but they destroy 
themselves and others by their pride. 

Their birth and death cease not ; they come and go again 
and again. 

Rest is not found in Maya with the three qualities ; she 
leadeth men astray in error. 

What avail reading, studying, and talking if men wander 
from the First Cause ? 

In the fourth state there is rest ; it is obtained by the holy. 

The name of Him who is without qualities is a treasure ; in 
rest a knowledge of it is obtained. 

The virtuous praising God say, ‘ True is the fame of the 
Tre One.’ 

God will grant rest even to those who have gone astray, if 
they have found the Word. 

Without rest all are blind in the darkness of worldly love. 

In rest a knowledge of the true eternal Word is obtained. 

The perfect Guru, the Creator, hath pardoned and blended 
me with Himself. 

In rest the Unseen, the Fearless, the Luminous, the Form- 
less One is recognized. 

There 1s one Benefactor of all, the Luminous One who 
blendeth man with His light. 

SIKH. II M 

162 THE SIKH BEEIGION 

Under the instruction of the perfect Guru praise God who 
hath no end or limit. 

The Name is the wealth of those who possess divine know- 
ledge ; in rest they trade in it. 

Night and day they receive God’s name as their profit from 
a full and exhaustless storehouse. 

Nanak, there shall never be a deficiency since the Giver 
hath given it. 

SRI RAG KI WAR 

The Guru’s preference for the Sri Rag, the holy 
measure :— 

The Sri Rag is a measure among measures, if any one 
loving the True One sing in at} 

The understanding of him in whose heart the true God 
dwelleth 1s ever firm and unequalled. 

He who pondereth on the Guru’s instruction obtaineth the 
priceless jewel. 

His tongue is true, his heart 1s true, and true his body. 

O Nanak, ever true are the dealings of those who serve 
the true Guru. 

The love of mammon deprives men of their 
senses :— 

Until one love the Lord all other love? is unstable. 

Maya hath infatuated man, so that he cannot see or hear. 

Without beholding God love is not produced ; what shall 
a blind man do? 

Nanak, the True One who hath deprived man of sight can 
restore it. 

The true Guru can only be obtained by love :— 

The company of the Guru is not easily found cither far or 
edn: 

Nanak, thou shalt meet the true Guru 1f thy heart dwell 
with him. 

1 Also translated —If any one by means of it love the True One. 
2 Literally—separation ; absence which makes the heart grow 
fonder. . 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS ____163 

The following is said to have been written when 
the Guru’s brother-in-law suggested to him that in 
consequence of his large expenditure on guests, 
charity, &c., he ought to keep accounts :— 

May the pen with the ink-bottle be burnt, may the paper 
also be burnt ! 

May the writer who writeth love of the world be burnt ! 

Nanak, man acteth according to what was destined in the 
beginning ; nothing else can be done. 

To read about other things than God is false ; false it is to 
speak of worldly things or to love them. 

Nanak, nothing is permanent but the Name; man is 
ruined by perpetual plodding. 

The evil of worldly love :— 

The whole world is dead repeating ‘ Mine, mine’, yet 
worldly wealth departeth with no one. 

Man suffereth for worldly love ; Death is on the watch for 
every one. 

Nanak, the pious who remember God’s name shall be 
saved. 

The Guru deprecates obstinacy :— 

They who obey not God shall copiously weep ; 

Through the deceit of their hearts they shall find no sleep. 

If woman walk as it pleaseth her Spouse, 

She shall be honoured at home and invited to His 
chamber— 

Nanak, such wisdom is obtained by good acts— 

And she by the favour of the Guru shall be absorbed in 
the true One. 

The Guru preaches to those who are attached to 
worldly love :— 

O perverse man who possesseth not the Name, err not on 
beholding the safflower dye of this world. 
Paltry is its price, and it shall last but for a few days. 
The stupid, the blind, and the ignorant die in agony 
through attachment to mammon. 
M 2 

164 THE SIKH RELIGION 

They fall like worms into ordure, and continually perish 
therein. 

Nanak, they who are imbued with the Name are happy 
through the kind disposition of the Guru. 

The dye of devotion fadeth not; he who applicth it shall 
remain absorbed in God. 

The condition of the perverse :— 

The pandits induced by worldly gain read, and read, and 
recite tne: Weds. 

The fool who in his love of mammon forgetteth God’s 
name, shall be punished therefor. 

He never thinketh of Him who gave lim life and body, and 
suppheth him with his daily bread. 

The noose of death shall not be cut from his neck ; he shall 
come and go again and again. 

The perverse man is blind and seeth nothing ;_ he acteth 
as was predestined for him. 

The true Guru is found by complete good fortune ; the 
Name of the giver of happiness shall then abide in the 
disciples heart. 

Nanak, they who forget not the Name by which honour is 
obtained at the gate of the True One, 

Shall enjoy happiness, array themselves in happiness, and 
pass their lives in happiness. 

The condinion-ot thewiGiy: : 

By serving the true Guru happiness and the true Name 
of the Lord of excellences are obtained. 

By the Guru’s instruction man knoweth himself, and 
God's name is manifested to him. 

He who is true acteth truly, and obtaineth greatness near 
the-Great, One 

He praiseth and supplicateth God to whom belong body 
and soul. 

They who praise the true Word, dwell in supreme happiness. 

Though man may have practised devotion, penance, and 
self-restraint, yet without the Name in his heart accursed 1s 
lis life. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS __165 

The Name is obtained by the Guru’s instruction ;— the 
perverse perish through worldly love. 

Preserve me, O God, according to Thy will ; Nanak is Thy 
slave. 

The cupidity of the Brahman :— 

The Brahman when reading shouteth aloud through love 
of mammon. 

The foolish and ignorant man recognizeth not God who 1s 
within him. 

He preacheth to the world through worldly love, but he 
understandeth not divine knowledge. 

He spendeth his life in vain, and dieth and is born again 
and again. 

He who serveth the true Guru obtaineth the Name ; know 
and reflect upon this : 

His clamour and complaints shall come to an end, and 
peace and happiness ever abide in his heart. 

By reflecting on the Guru’s instruction, man effaceth him- 
self and his mind becometh pure. 

Nanak, they who are imbued with the Word and bear 
love and affection to God shall obtain deliverance. 

Spiritual pride cannot be removed without 
effort :-— 

Nanak, he is brave and a hero who chaseth the enemy of 
pride from within him. 

The pious man who praiseth the Name reformeth his 
ies: 

He is ever saved and saveth all his families. 

He who loveth the Name is honoured at the gate of the 
True One. 

The perverse die in pride ; they die an evil death. 

Everything befalleth according to God’s will; what can 
poor mortals do ° 

Man forgetteth the Master under the influence of pride and 
worldly love. 

Nanak, without the Name all is suffering ; happiness 1s 
forgotten. 

166 THE SIGH RELIGION 

The truly pious have no fear of death :— 

He in whose heart the true Guru hath established God’s 
naime is freed from superstition. 

He singeth God’s name and praises, light appeareth, and 
the way 1s shown unto him. 

He destroyeth his pride, fixeth his attention on the one 
God, and implanteth the Name in his heart. 

By the Guru’s instruction Death cannot look at him, for he 
Is absorbed in the true Name. 

The Creator Himself pervadeth everything : He applieth 
to His name those who please Him. 

If the slave Nanak repeat God’s name, he shall live ; with- 
out the Name he shall immediately die. 

The value of true devotion :— 

Through the kind disposition of the Guru adore God 
who is in thy heart. 

If man’s spirit have faith in the universal Spirit, it shall 
be happy at home : 

Through the kind disposition of the Guru it shall become 
steady and Wwover nob 

Without the Guru peace is not obtained, and the impurity 
of covetousness departeth not from the heart. 

If for one moment God’s name dwell in the heart, it is as 
bathing at the sixty-eight places of Hindu pilgrimage. 

Impurity attacheth not to the true ; it attacheth to those 
who love worldly things. 

It will never depart by ablution even though one bathe at 
the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage. 

Whatever the perverse proud man doeth, he shall only 
recelve pain in return. 

Nanak, when man is absorbed in the true Guru, his im- 
purity shall be washed away. 

The perverse prefer to tread the way of mammon :— 

If the perverse be admonished, will they ever heed the 
admonition ? 

If the perverse meet the good, these will not associate with 
them ; they are doomed to transmigration. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 167 

There are two ways—one the love of God, the other of 
mammon ;! the way man treadeth dependeth on God’s will. 

The believer chasteneth his heart and applieth to it the 
touchstone of the Word.? 

It is with his heart he quarrelleth, with his heart he strug- 
gleth, he is engaged with his heart. 

Whoever loveth the true Word shall receive what his heart 
desireth. 

He shall ever eat the ambrosia of the Name, and act 
according to the Guru’s instruction. 

They who quarrel with others, instead of quarrelling with 
their own hearts, waste their lives. 

The perverse are ruined by obstinacy and by the practice 
of falsehood and deception. 

He who by the Guru’s instruction subdueth his heart, 
shall fix his affection on God. 

Nanak, the believer practiseth truth ; the perverse suffer 
transmigration. 

Service to the Guru inculcated :— 

They who serve the true Guru shall be considered of 
account. 

Having effaced pride from their hearts they shall continue 
to love the True One. 

The lives of those who serve not the true Guru pass in 
vain. 

Nanak, God acteth as He pleaseth ; none may interfere 
with Him.* 

The fate of the spiritually blind :— 

The spiritually blind who are encompassed by sin, who 
commit sin, 
And who worship mammon, shall be punished in God's 
court. : 
Worship the divine spirit ; but without the true Guru He 
cannot be known. 
1 Literally—running about the world. 

2 To ascertain if his heart has become pure or not. 
3 Literally—talking is of no avail. 

168 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Devotion, penance, and austeritics please the true Guru, 
and are obtained by good acts. 

Nanak, service should be performed with attention ; he 
who pleaseth God shall be acceptable. 

Vain are the lives of the perverse :— 

They who worship not the true Guru or ponder on his 
words, 

Never obtain divine knowledge in their hearts, and are as 
dead in the world. 

They wander in the eighty-four lakhs of existences, and 
are ruined by transmigration. 

He whom God causeth to perform the true Guru’s service 
shall perform it. 

In the true Guru is the treasure of the Name which is 
obtamed by good acts. 

They who are imbued with the word of the true Guru, 
vier truly love God, 

Nanak, he whom God blendeth with Himself, shall never 
be separated from Him ; he shall naturally be absorbed in 
Him. 

The Guru's definition er 4scaint 

He is a saint who recognizeth God, 

Who by the Guru’s favour knoweth himself, 

Who restraineth his wandering mind and keepeth the one 
God in his heart, 

Who in life is dead, and who repeateth God’s name— 

Such a saint is the best, 

And, O Nanak, shall be absorbed in the True One. 

The sinner who pretendeth to be a saint :— 

He who hath deception in his heart and calleth himself a 
saint, 

Shall never by reason of his hypocrisy obtain the supreme 
God. 

He who practiseth calumny soileth his heart. 

He may wash away his bodily filth, but his heart’s impurity 
shall not depart. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 169 

He who quarrelleth with the guild of the saints, 

Who is smitten with worldly love, and who remembereth 
not the Name, 

Shall, even though he perform many religious ceremonies, 
be unhappy night and day. 

What is destined from the beginning cannot be effaced. 

Nanak, deliverance is not obtained without serving the 
true Guru. 

Hypocrisy is as vain as the external decorations 
of an evil woman :— 

The woman whose conduct is bad, and whose heart 1s 
counterfeit, may decorate herself, but she shall still be ugly. 

She acteth not as pleaseth her Spouse, nay, the foolish 
woman giveth Him orders. 

She who acteth as her Guru desireth shall escape all misery. 

The writing which the Creator wrote in the beginning 
cannot be efiaced. 

Let woman devote her soul and body to her Spouse and 
love His word. 

Without repeating His name no one hath obtained God ; 
reflect on this in thy heart. 

Nanak, that woman whom the Creator enjoyeth, shall 
become beautiful and well-conducted. 

The worldly grope in mental darkness, and are 
miserable without the Guru :— 

Worldly love is darkness whose limits cannot be seen. 

The perverse, the spiritually ignorant, and those who 
forget God’s name perish in great misery. 

After rising in the morning they perform many hollow 
ceremonies for the love of mammon ; 

Ist, it they serve their tinue Guru, they shall cross: tie 
terrible ocean. 

Nanak, the believers by clasping the true Name to their: 
hearts shall become absorbed in the True One. 

He who turns to idolatry falls to the level of an 
abandoned woman :— 

The perverse woman is filthy, ill-conducted, and evil ; 

170 THE SIKH RELIGION 

She leaveth her husband and her home through her love 
for another man : 

Her passion is never extinguished ; she burneth and crieth 
aloud. 

Nanak, without the Name she appeareth misshapen and 
unlovely, and her husband abandoneth her. 

The happiness of the holy :— 

She who is tinctured by the Word, and who beareth love 
and affection to the true Guru is a happy wife. 

She whose love and affection are true, shall ever enjoy her 
Spouse. 

Very lovely, beautiful, and honoured shall that woman be. 

Nanak, she is called the happy wife whom the Blender 
hath blended with Himself. 

Who shall obtain renown :— 

He who acteth according to the wishes of the Guru shall 
acquire great renown. 

The name of God, which is the greatest, shall dwell in his 
heart, and no one can remove it. 

He to whom God showeth His kindness obtaineth the 
Name through his good acts. 

Nanak, the creation is in the power of the Creator ; a few 
plous men understand this. 

Nanak, Mammon who is God’s servant waiteth upon those 

Who worship His name and fix their attention on Him 
night and day. 

The perfect One, the Regenerator, by His order hath 
made them perfect. 

They who by the Guru’s favour understand divine 
knowledge, have attained the gate of deliverance. 

The obstinate recognize not God’s order; Death the 
executioner shall punish them. 

The pious who worship God shall cross the terrible ocean 
of the world. 

He whom the Guru himself pardoneth, shall wipe out all 
his demerits with merits. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 171 

The Guru's fervid prayer :— 

May I meet my Beloved and hold Him to my heart ! 

May I ever and ever praise my God through the love and 
affection of the Guru! 

Nanak, she is a happy wife whom God looketh on with 
favour and uniteth with Himself. 

The effect of the effacement of spiritual pride :— 

If God look on man with favour, he shall obtain Him by 
service to the Guru. 

By pondering on God’s name man becometh a demigod. 

He who effaceth his pride meeteth God, and is saved by 
the Guru’s instruction. 

Nanak, they on whom God conferreth His favour become 
easily united with Him. 

God’s greatness and munificence :— 

Our lives and bodies are all His ; He supporteth all. 

Nanak, under the Guru’s instruction serve Him who Is ever 
and ever the Giver. 

I am a sacrifice to those who ponder on the Formless One. 

Their faces are ever bright; the whole world boweth 
before them. 

The spiritual exaltation conferred by the Guru :— 

I am completely altered since I met the true Guru; I have 
obtained the nine treasures to spend and eat. 

The eighteen perfections follow in my train, my mind 
abideth in its own house and home.! 

Unbeaten sounds ever play for me, and I direct my atten- 
tion to absorption in God. 

Nanak, devotion to God abideth in the hearts of those on 
whose foreheads such fate was written in the beginning. 

The advantages of obeying the word of God :— 
MAjJH ASHTAPADI 

He who dieth by the Guru’s word is really dead? 
Grief shall not annoy nor Death crush him 

1 My mind ceases to wander. 
2 That is, he shall not undergo transmigration. 

172 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Who heareth the true Word, obeyeth it, and treasureth 
it in his heart ; his ight shall be blended with God’s. 

Tam a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
derive glory from God’s name, 

Who serve the true Guru, who apply their hearts to the 
True One, and who under the Guru’s instruction have 
become absorbed in Him. 

The body is frail; it is a frail garment for the soul to 
wear. 

If woman attach herself to the world, she shall not attain 
(,od’s court. 

Night and day she shall burn and wander ; day and night 
without her Beloved shall she suffer great agony. 

Neither men’s bodies nor castes shall go to the next world. 

Where the account is taken, there shall man be delivered 
by the practice of truth. 

They who serve the true Guru and are absorbed in the 
Name, shall be blest here and hereafter. 

She who maketh fear and love her decorations, 

Shall by the Guru’s favour obtain God in her own home. 

She shall always enjoy God, and be day and night tinctured 
with the fixed dye of His love. 

The Beloved ever dwelleth with all, 

Though only a few can behold Him by the favour of the 
Guru. 

My Lord is the most high ; through His mercy He blendeth 
man with Himself. 

This world is asleep in worldly love. 

Men forget the Name and are ruined at last. 

He who put them to sleep will awaken them, and by the 
Guru’s instruction they shall obtain understanding. 

He who drinketh the nectar of God’s name shall have his 
doubts dispelled, 

And by the Guru’s favour attain the state of salvation. 

He who is dyed with service shall ever be free from attach- 
ment to the world, and, effacing himself, shall be blended 
with God. 

Thou didst create men, O God, and appoint them to their 
several duties ; 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 173 

And Thou givest their food to the eighty-four lakhs of 
animal species. 

Nanak, he who is dyed with love for the True One medi- 
tateth on the Name, and God causeth him to act according 
to His will. 

All good thoughts arise in the heart :— 

Diamonds and rubies are produced in the heart, 

But it is by the Guru’s instruction man assayeth them and 
hath them assayed. 

They who possess the truth utter the truth, and apply the 
touchstone of truth to their hearts. 

I am a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
implant the Word of the Guru in their hearts. 

Though in impurity, they obtain the Pure One; and 
their light is blended with God’s light. 

The perverse may perform hypocritical service, 
but for their salvation they must attend to the 
instruction of the Guru :— 

The perverse and fools practise cleverness, 

But for all theiy bathing and washing they shall not be 
acceptable. 

As they came into the world, so shall they depart 
grieving for their transgressions. 

The perverse are blind and see nothing. 

They have come into the world with death written for 
them, but they think not of it. 

Though the perverse perform religious ceremonies, they 
obtain not the Name, and without it they lose their human 
lives. 

The essence of the Word is to act honestly. 

Through the perfect Guru the gate of deliverance is 
obtained. 

Night and day the Guru reciteth God’s praises and Word ; 
himself dyed with the truth, he dyeth others therewith. 

The advantages of association with the holy :— 

By serving the true Guru man obtaineth great glory, 

174 THE SIKH RELIGION 

And God the Inconceivable dwelleth in the heart. 

God is a tree of goodly fruit; the thirst of him who 
drinketh its nectar departeth. 

I am a sacrifice, and my life is a sacrifice unto Him who 
causeth me to meet the society of the saints. 

God himself causeth us to meet the society of the saints, 
in which under the Guru’s instruction God’s praises are sung. 

Serve the true Guru whose word is pleasant, 

And who hath caused God’s name to dwell in the heart. 

God is pure: he who removeth the filth of pride shall 
obtain honour in the court of the True One. 

Without the Guru the Name cannot be obtained, 

Though Sidhs and strivers continually cry for it. 

Without serving the Guru happiness is not obtained, and 
it is by the greatest good fortune he is found. 

The mind is a mirror ; a few holy men behold themselves 
Pere ti. 

Rust attacheth not to it if the filth of pride be wiped away. 

The unbeaten strain resoundeth from the pure Word ;_ by 
the Guru’s instruction man is absorbed in the True One. 

Without the true Guru, God cannot in any way be seen. 

If the Guru be gracious he showeth Him unto man. 

God himself is everywhere diffused, and man by divine 
knowledge easily blendeth with Him. 

He who ts pious loveth the one God, 

And by the Guru’s instruction dispelleth his suspicion 
that there is another. 

He who tradeth and trafficketh in the Name in his heart 
obtaineth the true treasure. 

To praise God is the highest duty of the pious: 

In this way they attain the gate of deliverance. 

He who is dyed with Gad’s love singeth His praises night 
and day, and ts invited to His palace. 

The true Guru, the giver, is found when God causeth us to 
find him. 

Perfect is the fortune of him who causeth the Word to 
dwell in his heart. 

Nanak, the glory of God’s name is obtained by SH is the 
praises of the True One. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 175 

The world compared to a garden under God’s 
superintendence :— 

This world is a garden ; my Lord is its Gardener : 

He guardeth it ever, and there is no part of it exempt 
from His care. 

The odour which He infused into it prevaileth ; what ts 
planted is known by its odour. 

The perverse are ailing in this world. 

They forget the Giver of health who is inaccessible and 
illimitable. 

Stricken with disease they ever wander lamenting, but 
without the Guru they obtain not relief. 

The following is a satire on actors who repre- 
sent Krishan and his milkmaids :— 

God is bright, and bright are his saints. 

Through them my heart, speech, and desires are pure. 

The saints’ hearts are bright ; their faces are ever beauti- 
ful, and they ponder on the very bright Name. 

I ama sacrifice, my life 1s a sacrifice unto those who sing 
God’s praises, 

Who speak of Him day and night, and acclaim Him and 
His word. 

They the filth of whose pride departeth through fear of 
the Guru become bright, 

And sing of God with natural ease. 

They ever abide in bliss, they worship day and night, and 
hear and sing God’s praises. 

Fix thine unsteady mind on God’s service ; 

Obey the Guru’s instruction, and attune thy heart to it ; 

Make the dispelling of worldly love thy true and perfect 
tune, and set thy heart a-dancing to the Word. 

Death shall lie in wait for those who through worldly love 

Shout aloud and dash their bodies on the ground. 

Wordly love causeth the heart to dance; the deceit of 
man’s heart causeth him misery. 

1 The souls are the flowers of the garden, and they are known by 
their odour. | 

176 DHE SIR SRELIGION 

If God by the Guru’s instruction cause men to serve Him, 

Their bodies and minds shall naturally be dyed with His 
love. 

From the Word supernatural music is produced, and the 
service of the holy player gaineth acceptance. 

The perverse beat time and play many musical instruments, 

But no one lsteneth or payeth attention to them. 

Under the influence of Maya they make a stage and dance, 
but, on account of their worldly love, they find only suffering. 

He in whose heart there is love, hath already obtained 
Salvation ; 

He controlleth his senses and findeth the way of truth 
and self-restraint ; 

Under the Guruw’s instruction he ever pondereth on God— 
the service that pleaseth him. 

It is from the Guru’s instruction God’s service is obtained 
in the four ages : 

Irom no other source may it be obtained. 

Nanak, it is by service to the Guru and obeisance at his 
feet God’s name 1s obtained. 

The condition of the pious and the perverse com- 
pared :— 

The saints whom the Guru’s instruction and the Name 
adorn, 

Are illustrious 1n God’s true court. 

They day and night ever abide in bliss, and praising God’s 
excellences become absorbed in Him. 

I am a sacrifice, and my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
hear the Name and treasure it up in their hearts. 

God the true, the most high, removeth their pride and 
blendeth them with Himself. 

God is true, and true is His name. 

By the Guru's favour He blendeth a few with Himself. 

They who under the Guru’s instruction meet God, are not 
again separated from Him; they easily blend with the True 
One. 

Without Thee, O God, nothing can be done ; 

Thou beholdest and knowest the work of Thy hands. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 77 

Thou actest and causest to act, O Creator; and under 
the Guru’s instruction Thou blendest man with Thyself. 

The virtuous woman who maketh the fear 

And love of God her decorations, obtaineth Him. 

She who serveth the true Guru is ever a happy wife, and 
is absorbed in his true instruction. 

They who forget the Word have no house or home: 

They wander distraught like ravens in a ruined building ; 

They lose both this world and the next and pass their 
lives in extreme misery. 

Writing, writing paper, and ink have failed them— 

No one hath obtained happiness from worldly love— 

They write falsehood, they practise falsehood, and are 
ruined by their deliberate falsehood. 

The pious on the contrary reflect and write what is totally 
mre 

They are true men and gain the gate of deliverance. 

True are their paper, pens, and ink; writing the truth 
they become absorbed in the True One. 

My God dwelleth in men’s hearts and beholdeth their acts. 

He who through the Guru’s favour meeteth the Lord is of 
account. 

Nanak, they who obtain the Name from a perfect Guru 
obtain greatness. 

God dwells in man’s heart :— 

In the cavern of the heart there is an exhaustless store- 
house : 

In it dwelleth God, the unseen, the illimitable. 

He is concealed, but becometh manifest to him who 
effaceth himself under the Guru’s instruction. 

Iam a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice unto those in whose 
heart the ambrosial Name dwelleth. 

Of the ambrosial Name the taste is exceeding sweet; in- 
structed by the Guru they drink its nectar. 

He who effaceth his pride openeth the adamant doors of 
his understanding, 

And admitteth the priceless Name by the Guru’s favour. 

Without the Guru’s instruction no one obtaineth the N ame; 

SIKH, II N 

178 THE SIKH RELIGION 

but, if the Guru be gracious, he implanteth it in man’s 
heart. 

The Guru applieth to the eyes the true salve of divine 
knowledge, 

Which illuminateth the heart and dispelleth the darkness 
of ignorance. 

The soul is then happy, light is blended with light, and 
man obtaineth honour in God’s court. 

He who goeth beyond his body to search for God, 

Shall not find Him, but shall suffer the great misery of a 
forced labourer. 

The perverse man is blind and seeth not, but, when he 
returneth home after his search, he shall find the Real Thing 
by the Guru’s instruction. 

He from whom the filth of pride departeth seeth God in 
his soul and body, 

And by the favour of the Guru obtaineth the True One. 

He who sitteth down in a good place! and ever singeth 
God’s praises, shall become absorbed in the true Word. 

He who restraineth his wandering mind and closeth the 
nine gates, 

Shall obtain a dwelling in the tenth, God’s own home. 

There the unbeaten strain resoundeth day and night, and 
is heard under the Guru’s instruction. 

Without the Word there is mental darkness, 

Man obtaineth not the Real Thing, nor doth his transmigra- 
tion cease. 

The true Guru holdeth the keys; none save him can open 
the door ; the true Guru is found by good fortune. 

Thou art, O God, in every place at once concealed and 
manifest. 

Man knoweth this when he obtaineth the Guru’s favour. 

Nanak, ever praise the Name, and by the Guru’s instruc- 
tion it shall dwell in thy heart. 

Merits and demerits contribute to the attainment 
of a human body :— 

Within the body are two brothers, demerits and merits ; 

1 In the company of the saints. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 176 

Men were created out of both. 

He who under the Guru’s instruction effaceth them and 
entereth the asylum of the one God, shall be absorbed in 
Him: 

The pious and the perverse contrasted :— 

Their birth is the most exalted and their dwelling-place 
the best, 

Who serve the true Guru and remain hermits in their own 
homes. 

They abide in God’s love, they are ever dyed with His 
colour, and they satiate their souls with His nectar. 

I ama sacrifice, and my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
read of and know God, and who set Him up in their hearts. 

The pious who read and praise God’s name, shall obtain 
glory at the court of the True One. 

The Unseen and Inscrutable One is everywhere contained, 

Yet He cannot be found by any worldly contrivance. 

If God be gracious the true Guru is found, and he causeth 
man to meet the Kind One. 

He who readeth only secular compositions knoweth not 
God : 

He burneth for Maya of the three qualities ; 

But her bonds are broken by the Guru’s instruction ; 
the Guru’s instruction effecteth salvation. 

Man’s mind is volatile and cannot be restrained : 

Under the influence of worldly love it wandereth in every 
direction. 

It is a worm bred in poison, attached to poison, and by 
poison shall it perish. 

They who practise egotism and assert themselves,! 

Are not acceptable even though they perform many 
devotional works. 

There is none besides Thee, O God ; Thou pardonest those 
who are adorned with the Guru’s instruction. 

They who know not God, and night and day 

Wander in quest of mammon, are born and again perish. 

1 Who cause themselves to be known, who put themselves forward by 
boasting. 
N 2 

180 THE SIKH KELIGION 

The life of the perverse man passeth away in vain ; it is 
when he finally departeth he repenteth. 

As when a woman decorateth herself for her spouse who 
is abroad, 

Thus vain are the acts of the blindly perverse. 

They have no honour in this world, no admission to God’s 
court in the next, and they lose their lives in vain. 

The few who recognize the Word of the perfect Guru 

Know the name of God. 

They ever perform service, and day and night easily obtain 
Test: 

The one God pervadeth everything : 

A few pious men understand this. 

Nanak, they who are dyed with the Name are illustrious, 
and God of His mercy blendeth them with Himself. 

The following is directed against worldly-minded 
Brahmans :— 

The perverse read and are called pandits ; 

They suffer great pain from their worldly love ; 

They are intoxicated by their evil passions and know 
nothing ; they enter wombs again and again. 

I am a sacrifice, and my hfe is a sacrifice unto those who 
dispel their pride, and are blended with God. 

By serving the Guru, God dwelleth in their hearts, and 
they easily quaff divine nectar. 

Men read the Veds, but obtain not God’s nectar. 

Infatuated by mammon the pandits engage in disputa- 
tions. 

Devoid of knowledge they are ever in darkness ;_ the pious 
know God and sing His praises. 

They who are adorned by the Word speak of the Ineffable, 

And by the Guru’s instruction the truth is pleasing to 
their hearts. 

They repeat day and night the name of the Truest of the 
true, and dye their hearts with the truth. 

The True One is ever known through the Guru’s instruc- 
tion; by meeting the True One happiness is obtained. 

The filth of falsehood and slander attacheth not 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 181 

To those who by the Guru’s favour continually watch. 

The pure Name dwelleth within their hearts, and their light 
is blended with the light of God. 

They who read only secular compositions ? know not God, 
the Real Thing. 

They are led astray from the First Cause and recognize 
not the Guru’s word. 

They feel worldly love and understand nothing, but by 
the Guru’s instruction they shall obtain God. 

They who shout out the Veds for the sake of lucre 

Are perverse, and through worldly love know not God. 

It is secular compositions they read; they know not tlic 
one God, and suffer misery through their ignorance. 

God blendeth with Himself those whom He loveth, 

And by means of the Guru’s instruction removeth their 
doubts and troubles. 

Nanak, the Name possesseth true greatness ; by accepting 
it happiness is obtained. 

Polytheism is a cause of evil in the world :— 

Maya is the origin of the goddesses and gods 

Who composed the Simritis and the Shastars. 

She diffused lust and wrath in the world, wherefore man 
suffereth the pain of transmigration. 

Why hath he who serveth not the true Guru come into the 
world ? 

Accursed is his life ; he hath lost his human birth in vain. 

The perverse remember not the Name; without it they 
shall suffer great misery. 

MAJH KI WAR 

The effect of rendering praise and thanksgiving 
to God :— 

In the kal age God’s praise hath appeared as a light for 
the world ; 

Through it a few believers are saved. 

God bestoweth it on whom He looketh with favour : 

Nanak, such a man becometh holy and receiveth the jewel. 

1 Literally—who read of things possessing the three qualities. 

182 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The fear of God is the only fear that assists :— 

In fear man is born, in fear also he dieth, fear ever dwelleth 
in his heart. 

Nanak, profitable is his advent who dieth in the fear of 
the Lord. 

If he who liveth without the fear of God, and enjoyeth 
countless pleasures, 

Also die without that fear, O Nanak, his face shall be 
blackened. 

GAURI 

A Sikh asked Guru Amar Das what advantage he 
had obtained from association with Guru Angad. The 
following was the reply :— 

God is met by meeting the Guru ; 

God then blendeth man with Himself. 

My God knoweth all contrivances ; 

By His order He blendeth with Himself those who recog- 
nize His word. 

Through love of the true Guru doubt and fear vanish. 

He who feeleth fear shall be absorbed in the love of the 
Tine-One. 

On meeting the Guru, God will naturally dwell in the heart. 

My God is great ; His worth cannot be appraised. 

Let Him who hath no end or limit, be praised under the 
Guru’s instruction. 

May my God, the Pardoner, pardon me ! 

On meeting the Guru all wisdom and understanding are 
obtained. 

The heart becometh pure, and the True One dwelleth 
therein. 

When the True One dwelleth in the heart, everything 
which man doeth is true. 

Meditation on the Word is the best occupation. 

It is through the Guru true service is performed, 

And through his instruction a few know the Name. 

May the giver and benefactor? live for ever, 

Nanak, and may love attach to God’s name! 

1 The Guru. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 183 

The following was composed on the same subject :— 

Through the Guru a few obtain divine knowledge : 

He who knoweth God through the Guru shall be acceptable. 

Through the Guru there resulteth divine knowledge and 
meditation on the True One ; 

Through the Guru the gate of deliverance is attained. 

It is only by perfect good fortune the Guru cometh in 
one’s way. 

The true become easily absorbed in the True One. 

On meeting the Guru the fire of avarice is quenched. 

Through the Guru peace dwelleth in the heart. 

Through the Guru man becometh pure, spotless, and 
immaculate. 

Through the Guru the Word which uniteth man with God 
is obtained. 

Without the Guru every one wandereth in doubt. 

Without the Name great misery is suffered. 

He who is pious meditateth on the Name. 

On beholding the True One, true honour is obtained. 

Whom shall we call the giver ? The One God. 

If He be gracious, the Word by which we meet Him 1s 
obtained. 

May Nanak meet the beloved Guru, sing the True One’s 
praises, 

And becoming true be absorbed in the True One! 

God ought never to be forgotten :— 

Why forget Him to whom belong life and soul ? 

Why forget Him who is contained in everything, 

And by serving whom honour is obtained at His court and 
man becometh acceptable ° 

I am a sacrifice to the name of God ; 

When I forget Thee may I die that moment ! 

Thou forgettest those who forget Thee— 

It is they who love mammon who forget Thee— 

The perverse without divine knowledge re-enter wombs. 

Those with whom the one God is heartily pleased, He 
applieth to the service of the true Guru. 

184 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The one God dwelleth in the hearts of those with whom He 
is heartily pleased ; 

And under the Guru’s instruction they become absorbed 
in His name. 

They who have stored merits meditate on divine know- 
ledge ; 

They who have stored merits efface their pride. 

Nanak, Iam a sacrifice unto those who are dyed with the 
Name. 

The perverse sleep, the pious are awake in con- 
templation of God :— 

The perverse have gone to sleep through their love of 
worldly things ; 

The pious are awake contemplating divine knowledge and 
God's attributes. 

They who love the Name are awake. 

Nobody awakened by divine knowledge sleepeth. 

A few possess it by means of the perfect Guru. 

The impious and the indiscriminating never possess it. 

They may claim that they do, but they are burning with 
worldly love. 

The blind unbeliever is never acceptable. 

In this age salvation 1s obtained through God’s name, 

Which a few obtain by pondering on the Guru’s instruction. 

Such are saved themselves and save all their families. 

In this kal age there is no work of devotion equal to the 
repetition of the Name. 

The kal took birth in the house of a Sudar.} 

Nanak, without the Name salvation cannot be obtained. 

The advantages of service to the Guru which has 
been the custom from time immemorial :— 

The service of the Guru hath prevailed in the four ages : 

A few men practise it. 

God’s name is exhaustless wealth in which there is no 
deficiency. 

It ever conferreth happiness in this world and honour in 
God’s court. 

1 Whose duty it is to serve others and repeat God’s name. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 185 

O my soul, doubt not this: 

Through the worship of the Guru thou shalt quaff nectar. 

They who serve the true Guru are great men in the world : 

They are saved themselves and they save all their families. 

They clasp God’s name to their hearts. 

Dyed with the Name they cross over the terrible ocean. 

They who with lowly minds ever serve the true Guru, 

Expel their pride, and the lotuses of their hearts bloom. 

They dwell in their own homes where the unbeaten strain 
resoundeth. 

While hermits in their own homes they are dyed with the 
Name. 

The words of those who serve the true Guru are true. 

In every age the saints have repeated their words, 

And continually uttered God’s name. 

Nanak, they who are dyed with the Name obtain beatitude 
and eternal rest. 

Bliss is the portion of the virtuous :— 

God ordained that woman should remain in her father’s 
house for four days.! 

She is an honoured woman who singeth God’s praises under 
the Guru’s instruction. 

She who in her father’s house amasseth merits shall obtain 
a dwelling with her father-in-law. 

The pious whose hearts love God shall be easily absorbed 
in Him. 

The Beloved abideth in this world and the next; say 
how shall He be found ? 

It is God the pure and invisible who blendeth man with 
Himself. 

If God Himself grant wisdom, man shall meditate on His 
name. 

They who are very fortunate meet the true Guru; he 
putteth nectar into their mouths. 

Their pride and worldly love depart ; and they are easily 
absorbed in bliss. 

1 That is, that brief life should be man’s portion. 

186 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God Himself is all-pervading; it is He Himself who 
attacheth man to His name. 

The perverse through pride find Him not ; they are fools 
and devoid of divine knowledge. 

They serve not the true Guru, and shall repent again and 
again. 

They shall obtain a dwelling in the womb, and there suffer 
agony. 

It is the will of my Creator that the perverse shall suffer 
transmigration. 

My Lord God wrote man’s full destiny on his forehead at 
his birth. 

When man meeteth the brave Guru who hath conquered sin, 
he meditateth on God’s name. 

God is my father and mother, God is my kinsman and 
brother. 

O God, pardon and blend the worm Nanak with Thee. 

GAURI CHHANT 

The following was composed in reply to Dana, 
who inquired how man should cross over the tem- 
pestuous ocean of the world :— 

The world ts a tempestuous ocean ; how shall man traverse 
it ? 

Make God’s name the boat, and put the Word into it as 
the helmsman. 

When thou puttest the Word into it as the helmsman, God 
Himscelf will ferry thee over, and thus shalt thou traverse the 
ocean, difficult though it be. 

By the Guru’s instruction man obtaineth service, and is 
thus dead while alive. 

In a moment the name of God effaceth his sins, and his 
body becometh pure. 

By God’s name, Nanak, deliverance is obtained, and dross 
becometh gold. 

Women and men are immersed in lust, and know not to 
repeat God’s name. 

Mothers, fathers, children, and brothers are very dear, but 
they all drown even without water. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 187 

They drown even without water who know not the way of 
salvation, and who through pride wander about the world. 

All who come into the world shall depart; they who 
meditate on the Guru shall be saved. 

The pious who utter God’s name shall be saved themselves 
and shall save their families. 

Nanak, the pious man, within whose heart the Name 
dwelleth, shall meet the Beloved. 

There is nothing stable but God’s name: this world is a 
play. 

Fix true devotion firmly in thy heart and deal in the name 
of God. 

Deal in God’s name who is inaccessible and illimitable, 
and through the Guru’s instruction thou shalt acquire its 
wealth. 

Thy service, meditation, and devotion shall be true if thou 
erase pride from thy heart. 

We who are without understanding, foolish, stupid, and 
blind, have been put on the right way by the true Guru. 

Nanak, the pious are adorned by the Word, and night and 
day sing God’s praises. 

God acteth Himself and causeth to act; He adorneth 
men by His word. 

He Himself is the True Guru; He is the Word ; in every 
age His saints are dear to Him: 

In every age His saints are dear to Him; He Himself 
adorneth them ; He Himself appointeth them to His service. 

He Himself is far-seeing, He Himself causeth men to serve 
Him. 

He Himself is the Bestower of merits and the remover of 
demerits ; He causeth His name to dwell in men’s hearts. 

Nanak is ever a sacrifice unto that True One who Himself 
acteth and causeth to act. 

GAURI KI WAR I 

While praising the Gauri Rag the Guru extols the 
love of the True One and denounces falsehood and 
deception :— 

The Gauri Rag is auspicious, if in it one remember God. 

188 THE SURE RELIGION 

Walk as it pleaseth the true Guru; make that thy 
decoration. 

The Word of the Spouse is true ; repeat it ever and ever. 

She who devoteth her life to the True One, is deeply dyed 
as with boiling madder. 

She who loveth the True One shall be thoroughly tinctured 
with a deep dye. 

Falschood and deception are as things wrapped up in 
false gilding which remain not undetected. 

False 1s the boasting of those who love falsehood. 

Nanak, God is true and looketh with favour on man. 

The Guru sheds celestial light on the darkness of 
the perverse :— 

Pride, folly, mortal and venial sins have led the world 
NOY. 

The perverse who are in total darkness, shall see God if 
they meet the true Guru. 

Nanak, God hath blended with Himself him whom he 
caused to love His word. 

The difference between the worldly and the pious:— 

He who possesseth worldly love is very blind and deaf : 

He heareth not the Word, but maketh a great uproar and 
tumult. 

The pious are known by loving God’s word ; 

They hear and believe in God’s name and become absorbed 
in it. 

What pleaseth God He doeth and causeth others to do. 

Nanak, man the instrument playeth as God causeth him to 
play. 

except in God’s merey there is no hope for the 
proud unbeliever :— 

The proud unbeliever shall never know the Guru’s court : 
he shall be a little hither or a little thither. 

Though ever invited he never goeth to the Guru’s court : 
how should he be accepted in God’s court ? 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 189 

Few know the Guru’s court ; they who reach it ever stand 
with clasped hands. 
Nanak, if my God show mercy, He will restore man to Him. 

The condition of those who deny their Guru :— 

They who deny their Guru shall have no house or home : 

They shall lose both worlds, and find no place in God’s 
court. 

The opportunity of touching the true Guru’s feet cannot 
be again obtained. 

If man be not numbered among the Guru’s disciples he 
shall pass his life in deepest sorrow. 

The true Guru is a being without enmity who attacheth 
man to himself. 

Nanak, God will release at His court those to whom He 
hath disclosed Himself. 

ee 

The perverse are spiritually blind, foolish, and proud. 

In their hearts is wrath ; they lose their senses in play.} 

They commit the sins of falsehood and unrighteousness. 

What can they hear and what can they tell others ? 

They are blind and deaf; they lose their way and stray 
into the desert. 

The blind unbeliever suffereth transmigration. 

He obtaineth no place without meeting the true Guru. 

Nanak, man obtaineth what is written for him from the 
beginning. 

Even he who meets the Guru can confer salvation 
on others :— 

He who through the Guru’s instruction obtaineth divine 
knowledge, discrimination, and intelligence, 

Shall sing God’s praises and string a garland in his heart. 

He shall be the purest of the pure and possess the highest 
intelligence. 

He who meeteth such a person shall be saved by him. 

He whose heart containeth the perfume of God’s name, 

1 They stake their precious human lives and lose them. 

190 THE SASH RELIGION 

Shall utter great and exalted words to make happy those 
who hear them ; 

And he himself shall obtain honour at God’s court. 

Nanak, on meeting the true Guru, the Name is obtained 
as wealth and property. 

ASA 

The Guru's ts the best of all religious systems :— 

Very fortunate are they who obtain God’s system! 

True disregard of the world is obtained by the Guru’s 
instruction. 

Six Hindu religious systems pass current, 

But the Guru’s system is profound and unequalled. 

By the Guru’s system the way of salvation is obtained, 

And the True One Himself abideth in the heart. 

By the Guru’s system the world is saved, 

If men bestow love and affection on it. 

The few who bestow love and affection on it, 

Shall ever be happy. 

By the Guru’s system the gate of deliverance is attained. 

By serving the true Guru one’s family is saved. 

For him who is without the Guru there is nowhere 
salvation ; 

Deluded by sin he suffereth punishment. 

By the Guru’s word the body acquireth happiness and rest ; 

He who receiveth his instruction shall suffer no pain, 

Nor shall the god of death approach him. 

Nanak, the holy man shall be absorbed in the True One. 

The love of mammon leads to perdition :— 

The perverse when dying die evil deaths ; 

They destroy themselves by their love of mammon ; 

They are undone by continually speaking of their posses- 
sions : 

Lulled to sleep as they are by superstition, they know not 
themselves. 

He who dieth by the Word is really dead. 
1 The Sikh religion. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS IgI 

They, to whom the Guru hath shown that praise and blame 
are the same, obtain profit in this world by uttering God’s 
name. 

They who possess not the Name shall melt in wombs. 

Vain are the lives of those who are greedy for mammon. 

All those who are without the Name shall burn in pain. 

The perfect true Guru hath given me understanding. 

The man of wavering mind shall receive great punishment : 

Having lost his human birth he shall find no place of rest, 

But return to the filthy dwelling of the womb : 

It is there the perverse man shall take up his abode. 

I am ever a sacrifice to my own true Guru. 

His instruction hath blended the light of my soul with the 
light of God. 

I have obtained the pure Word while dwelling in mine own 
home. 

Nanak, having effaced pride, is ever a hermit. 

The condition of the perverse and the virtuous 
contrasted :— 

The perverse only practise falsehood ; 

They never reach the Master’s palace. 

Attached to the world they wander in doubt, 

And entangled in selfishness suffer transmigration. 

Lo the decorations of an evil wife !— 

She attacheth her heart to her sons and their wives, to 
wealth, mammon, falsehood, worldly love, hypocrisy, and 
vice. 

She who is pleasing to her Lord shall ever be a happy wife : 

She maketh the Guru’s instruction her decorations ; 

Her couch is pleasant and day and night she enjoyeth her 
Lord; 

Meeting her Beloved she is ever happy. 

She is a truly good wife who loveth the True One ; 

She ever claspeth her Beloved to her breast. 

She beholdeth him near, yea, ever present. 

My Lord is everywhere contained. 

Caste and beauty shall not go with thee to the next world : 

There shalt thou fare according to thine acts. 

192 THE SIKH RELIGION 

By the Word man becometh the most exalted of the 
exalted, 
O Nanak, and absorbed in the True One. 

It was represented to the Guru that salvation might 
be obtained by joining in the Ras Mandal, or circular 
dance of Krishan. The following was the Guru's 
reply :— 

Man may dance and play many musical instruments, 

But he is blind and deaf; what availeth speaking to him ? 

In his heart are the fire of avarice and the wind of super- 
stition ! 

Where the lamp burneth not and nothing can be seen, 

The pious man’s heart is lighted up by devotion. 

He knoweth himself and meeteth the Lord. 

For the pious the love of God is the dance, 

The destruction of pride the time, 

And the service of the pious the true way ; 

But the service and dancing of the hypocrite bring sorrow. 

ASA ASHTAPADI 

The following refers to the religious books of the 
Hindus and the helplessness of their avatars :— 

The ocean of the Shastars, the Veds, and the Simritis is 
Thine, O Lord ; the Ganges 1s contained in Thy feet. 

There are three branches,! Thou art the trunk : my mind 
telleth me Thou art wonderful in everything. 

The slave Nanak worshippeth Thy feet, and repeateth 
Thine ambrosial Word. 

The thirty-three karors? of divinities are Thy slaves ; 
Thou givest wealth and supernatural power ; Thou art the 
support of the soul. 

Thy form is not seen: what shall I say, however much I 
reflect ° 

Thine are the three qualities, Thine the four sources of 
production in every age. 

1 The three qualities. 
2 A karor is one hundred lakhs, or ten millions. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 193 

If Thou be gracious, man will speak of Thee the Ineffable 
and obtain the supreme dignity. 

Thou art the Creator; all creation is Thine; what can 
mortal man do ? 

The four Veds Thou gavest to Brahma that he might read 
and reflect on them, 

But the wretch understood not Thine order, and so 
he wandereth from hell to heaven.} 

The kings created by Thee in different ages are sung of as 
Thine avatars.” 

Even they did not find Thy limits; what shall I say, 
however much I reflect ? 

Thou art true, all Thou doest is true; if Thou grant me 
the truth, I will proclaim it. 

He whom Thou causest to understand Thy truth, shall 
be easily absorbed in the Name. 

Worship God in thine own home and go not to 
the wilderness to find Him :— 

In thine own home, O man, is everything; abroad is 
nothing. 

By the Guru’s favour everything is obtained, and the 
doors of the understanding opened. 

God is obtained from the true Guru, my brethren. 

The treasure of the Name is within the heart ; the perfect 
true Guru hath shown it me. 

He who dealeth in the name of God findeth it, and ob- 
taineth the gem of reflection. 

He openeth his heart, and beholdeth with his mind’s eye 
the storehouse of salvation— 

Within the body are many chambers ; the soul dwelleth 
therein— 

He shall obtain the fruit his heart desireth, and not again 
transmigrate. 

The assayers who have obtained wisdom from the Guru, 
have found the real gem after testing. 

1 Brahma suffers transmigration like other creatures. 
2 Obviously a reference to Ram and Krishan. 

SIKH. I O 

194 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The boon of the Name is inestimable; a few obtain it 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

What can be found by searching abroad ? the Real Thing 
is in one’s own home, my brethren. 

The whole world wandereth astray in error ; the perverse 
lose their honour. 

The false one who leaveth his own home and goeth 
elsewhere to worship, 

Shall be seized like a thief, and being without the Name 
shall suffer punishment. 

They who know God in their own homes are happy, my 
brethren ; 

They recognize God in their hearts bythe power of theGuru. 

God bestoweth gifts and conferreth understanding ; whom 
shall I address except Him ? 

Nanak, meditate on the Name, so shalt thou obtain glory 
in the court of the True One. 

The perverse shall not reach God’s court, while the 
virtuous shall be supremely happy :— 

Bad wives shall not reach their husband’s chamber or 
know his delights. 

Their words are harsh, they are not humble, they long for 
another love. 

How shall man’s heart be restrained ? 

By the Guru’s favour it shall be restrained and return 
home after instruction in divine knowledge. 

The Beloved Himself hath adorned good wives, and they 
bear Him love and affection. 

Walking as it pleaseth the true Guru, they are naturally 
decorated with the Name. 

They ever enjoy their Spouse, and then are their couches 
truly adorned. 

They become fascinated with their Spouse’s love, and on 
meeting Him are happy. 

Divine knowledge is the incomparable decoration 
of the virtuous woman :— 

Through the love and affection of herSpouse she is beautiful 
and the queen of them all. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 195 

The True, Unseen, and Endless One hath infused love 
into her heart ; 

She serveth her true Guru with true love and affection. 

The good wife hath decorated herself with a necklace of 
virtues. 

She anointeth her person with the sandal of love, and 
within her is the jewel of reflection. 

They who are dyed with devotion are the best; caste 
and lineage are obtained from the Word. 

Without the Name every one is of low caste and becometh 
a filthy worm. 

Every one goeth about saying ‘I, I’, but without the 
Word egoism shall not depart. 

Nanak, they who are dyed with the Name lose their pride, 
and are absorbed in the True One. 

One ought to persevere and be constant in devo- 
tion :— 

They who are dyed with the True One are pure, and ever 
true is their reputation. 

In this world they are famous in every house, and in the 
next they shall be distinguished through all ages. 

O dear playful heart, adopt a lasting colour. 

When thou art dyed with the excellent Word, its colour 
shall not fade or depart. 

We are low, filthy, very proud, and sin through love of 
mammon. 

Coming in contact with the Guru the elixir, I have become 
gold, and am blended with the pure light of the Eternal. 

Without the Guru none may be dyed with God’s love ; on 
meeting the Guru the true dye is applied. 

They who are dyed with the fear and love of the Guru, are 
blended with God whose praises are true. 

Without fear the love of God is not produced, nor doth 
the heart become pure. 

Without fear man’s works are false, and he findeth no 
place of rest. 

God by associating him with the saints will dye whoso He 
desireth to dye. 

GOrz 

1096 THE SIKH RELIGION 

From the perfect Guru is obtained the society of the 
saints, and man easily loveth the True One. 

Without such society all men are like beasts. 

They know not Him who made them ; without the Name 
they are all thieves. 

Some buy merits and sell demerits through the kind office 
of the Guru. 

By serving the Guru the Name is obtained and God 
dwelleth in the heart. 

The Giver of all is the one God, He assigneth every one 
his occupation. 

Nanak, God regenerateth! man by attaching him to the 
Name, and by means of the Word blendeth him with 
Himself. 

GUJARI 

Man ought to love God alone and not stray into 
idolatrous paths :— 

Curse on the life in which God’s love is not obtained, 

And on that occupation in which God is forgotten and 
man becometh attached to another.? 

So serve the true Guru, O my soul, that the love of God 
may be produced and all other love forgotten. 

If the heart remain attached to God, there shall be no 
fear of old age, and man shall attain the dignity of life 
eternal, 

Behold, from the love of God springeth peace according 
to the service performed. 

When I dismissed pride from within me, my heart became 
pure, and my light was blended with God’s. 

Without good fortune such a trueGuru cannot be obtained, 
howsoever all may desire it. 

When the screen of falsehood is removed, there shall ever 
be happiness. 

Nanak, what service shall the servant perform for such 
a true Guru? Let him lay down his life for the Guru. 

1 Sawdrian also means to adorn. 
* That is, to idols. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 107 

If man attend to the wishes of the Guru, the true Guru 
himself will show him kindness. 

God’s name must be uttered with attention and 
love :— 

Everybody uttereth God’s name, but God is not obtained 
by such utterance. 

If by the favour of the Guru God dwell in the heart, 
man shall obtain the advantage thereof. 

He whose heart feeleth the love of God, 

Shall never forget Him, but shall ever repeat His name 
with heart and soul. 

They in whose hearts there is deception and who pretend 
to be holy, 

Shall never lose a particle of their thirst, and shall be sorry 
at their final departure. 

Even though man sttive at various places of pilgrimages, 
the heart’s pride never thus departeth. 

The king of death shall punish him who forsaketh not his 
pride. 

If God be gracious, man shall meet Him; a few under 
the Guru’s instruction know this. 

Nanak, he who removeth pride from within him, shall 
meet God. 

Even he who meets the true Guru can communicate 
holiness to others :— 

When man meeteth the true Guru, he becometh a philo- 
sopher’s stone; and when he becometh a philosopher’s 
stone, he causeth men to worship him. 

He who worshippeth him shall obtain the fruit thereof, 
and giving instruction shall teach men the truth. 

Until man become a philosopher’s stone, he is not worthy 
to be worshipped; before satisfying his own mind he 
instructeth others. 

Though devoid of divine knowledge and blind, he calleth 
himself a guru: whom can he put in the right way ? 

Nanak, without the Kind One nothing can be obtained ; 
but he on whom God casteth a look of favour findeth Him, 

198 THE SIKH (RELIGION 

By the favour of the Guru God conferreth greatness and 
disseminateth His word. 

A Brahman told the third Guru that he had better 
live at Banaras, for divine knowledge and salvation 
were obtained only there. The following was the 
Guru’s reply :— 

Divine knowledge is neither gained nor lost at Banaras. 

Divine knowledge is obtained by meeting the Guru, then 
man knoweth God. 

Hear God’s praises, O man, and cause the Word to abide 
in thy heart. 

When the divine knowledge thus obtained remaineth 
permanent, then shall doubt depart. 

If thou give God’s feet a place in thy heart, thy sins shall 
be blotted out. 

If thou restrain thy mind! thou shalt dwell in the true 
place of pilgrimage. 

The minds of the perverse are stupid; they obtain no 
understanding : 

They know not God’s name, and, when they at last 
depart, regret theiy ignorance. 

In this heart are Banaras, all the places of pilgrimage, and 
the Simritis ; the true Guru hath explained this. 

The sixty-eight places of pilgrimage are with him whose 
heart is filled with God. 

Nanak, on meeting the true Guru God’s will is known, 
and the one God dwelleth in the heart. 

They who please Thee, O True One, are all true, and shall 
be absorbed in Thee, 

GUJARI ASHTAPADI 

The Guru again repudiates the idea that deliver- 
ance may be obtained by assisting in the dance of 
Krishan and the milkmaids :— 

I dance, but it is my heart I cause to dance : 

1 Panch bhu atmain. The three qualities are in each of the five 
elements. The five parts of sa/ogun make the an/ahkaran or mind 
here denoted ; the five parts of rajogun make the five organs of per- 
ception ; and the five parts of /amogun make the five organs of action. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 199 

By the favour of the Guru I have effaced myself. 

He who keepeth his mind firmly fixed on God, shall 
obtain deliverance and the object of his desires. 

Dance, O man, before thy Guru ; 

He who danceth as it pleaseth the Guru shall obtain 
happiness, and at the last moment the fear of Death shall 
forsake him. 

He whom God causeth to dance and whom He apphieth 
to His love is a saint. 

He himself singeth, he himself instructeth, and putteth 
ignorant man on the right way. 

He who banisheth worldly love shall dance day and night 
in God’s house and never sleep. 

Every one who danceth, leapeth, and singeth of other 
gods, is lulled to sleep in the house of mammon ; such are 
the perverse who have no devotion. 

Demigods and men who abandon the world dance in 
religious works; Munis and men dance in the contem- 
plation of divine knowledge. 

The Sidhs, Strivers, and holy men who have acquired 
wisdom to meditate on God, dance in God’s love. 

The regions, worlds, beings endowed with the three 
qualities, and they who love Thee, O God, dance. 

Men and the lower animals all dance, the four sources of 
life dance. 

They who please Thee dance, as do the pious who love the 
Word. 

They whom Thou causest to obey Thine order, are saints 
and real possessors of divine knowledge. » 

To love the True One is the real service ; men cannot be 
saints without serving Him. 

A few who ponder on the Word while alive are dead, and 
obtain the True One. 

Several dance for the sake of mammon; only a few 
meditate on the Real Thing. 

He to whom Thou art gracious shall obtain Thee by the 
favour of the Guru. 

If I forget the True One even for a moment, that 
moment passeth in vain. 

200 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Remember Him at every breath and He will pardon thee 
of His own grace. 

It is they who please Thee, O God, and who meditate on 
the Word, who really dance. 

Saith Nanak, they to whom Thou art merciful shall easily 
obtain bliss. 

GUJARI KI War I 
The condition of the perverse :— 

The hearts of the perverse are tortured by doubts ; they 
kill themselves with worldly affairs. 

They are lulled to sleep by love of the world and never 
awake : they remain attached to mammon. 

They remember not the Name; they think not of the 
Word ; such is the conduct of the perverse. 

They obtain not God’s name; they waste their lives in 
vain ; Nanak, Death shall punish and dishonour them. 

Before creation God was alone :— 

When God Himself made the world, there was none 
else. 

He took counsel and advice with Himself; what He did 
Came to pass. 

Then there was not heaven, or hell, or three worlds. 

Then was only the Formless One Himself; creation was 
not yet. 

God acteth as He pleaseth ; there is none but Him. 

God alone and not incarnations ought to be 
adored :— 

My Lord is eternal; He is seen by him who abideth by 
His word. 

He is ever imperishable, and suffereth not transmigration. 

I-ver and ever serve Him who is contained in everything. 

Why serve another who is born and dieth ? 

The lives of those who know not their Lord but fix their 
thoughts on others, are unprofitable. 

Nanak, it cannot be known how much punishment the 
Creator will inflict on them. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 201 
Man ought to bow to the will of God :— 

Ponder on the name of the True One; the True One 
pervadeth all things. 

Nanak, by understanding God’s order man becometh 
acceptable, and obtaineth his just reward. 

Man goeth about babbling, but he knoweth not God’s 
order at all; he is blind and lowest of the low. 

The homage offered to God must be suitable to 
His greatness :— 

That is real devotion and penance which pleaseth the 
True Guru. 

By pleasing the True Guru greatness is obtained. 

Nanak, by abandoning pride man devoteth himself to 
the Guru. 

Not all may receive the Guru’s instruction :— 

Nanak, only a few whom God Himself hath honoured, 
Receive the Guru’s instruction. 

Pride prevents entrance into bliss :— 

Nanak, the gate of salvation is very narrow; only the 
lowly can pass through. 

How can he whose mind is inflated with pride enter 
therein ? 

When one meeteth the true Guru, pride departeth and 
everything is illumined. 

The soul is emancipated for ever, and becometh easily 
absorbed in God. 

Happiness consists not in mammon_ but in 
devotion :— 

Curses on such lives as theirs who heed not the true Guru, 

And in whose hearts God’s name dwelleth not; what 
have they obtained by their advent into the world ? 

Mammon is counterfeit capital ; its gilding falleth off in 
a moment. 

! Literally—most unripe. 

202 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When it slippeth from man’s hands, his face is blackened, 
and he withereth away. 

Happiness dwelleth in the hearts of those who love the 
true Guru, 

Who ponder on God’s name with love and remain ab- 
sorbed in it. 

Nanak, the true Guru hath entrusted to them the wealth 
which is contained in the heart, 

And they obtain a high colour like the tint? applied 
to gold. 

Mammon isa snake, the holy are snake-charmers :— 

Mammon is a serpent which twineth herself round the 
World : 

She devoureth him at last who waiteth upon her. 

A few holy men are snake-charmers who trample on her 
with their feet. 

Nanak, they are saved who continue to fix their attention 
onethe TrucsOme- 

Man is called to bliss by obeying God’s order :— 

There is one Lord of all ; He remaineth ever present. 

Nanak, man obeyeth not God’s order; so, though God 
dwelleth in his heart, man goeth far from Him. 

Those on whom God looks with favour He causes 
to obey His order :— 

The wife who obeyeth His orders and loveth Him ob- 
taineth happiness. 

The evil wife burneth the whole night ; her spouse showeth 
her not affection. 

Nanak, the good wife, whose spouse is God, abideth in 
happiness. 

The soul while leaving the body bears its own 
responsibility :— 

What love subsisteth between the body and the soul since 
the latter forsaketh the former when fallen ? 

1 Wannt, colouring applied to gold, no matter how pure, to 
enhance its lustre. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 203 

Why, O man, pamperest thou with words of falsehood 
this body which departeth not with thee ° 

The body is dust and blind ; go ask the soul. 

The soul—‘ I am infatuated with mammon, so I suffer 
transmigration again and again ; 

‘I did not recognize my Lord’s order by which I should 
have been absorbed in the True One.’ 

The abiding wealth :— 

The Name alone is abiding wealth ; all other wealth is 
unstable. 

That wealth thieves cannot spy out, or pickpockets take 
away. 

That divine wealth is contained in the soul and shall 
depart with it. 

It is obtained from the perfect Guru, but the perverse 
shall not obtain it. 

Blest is the trader, O Nanak, who entering the world hath 
earned the wealth of the Name. 

The evil of pride and worldly love :— 

Curses on the lives of those who forsake divine happiness, 
and obtain misery by the sin of pride. 

The perverse devoid of divine knowledge are filled with 
worldly love ; they have no understanding. 

They shall not find happiness in this world or the next ; 
after their final departure they shall regret. 

A few by the Guru’s favour meditate on the Name, and 
from them pride departeth. 

Nanak, he for whom it is so predestined falleth at the 
Guru’s feet. 

The condition of the perverse :— 

The lotus of the heart of the perverse man is reversed ; 
he possesseth neither devotion nor God’s name. 

He acteth under the influence of mammon, and vain are 
his efforts. 

His heart softeneth not to any one, and the language he 
uttereth is harsh. 

204 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When he meeteth the religious he associateth not with 
them ; his heart relisheth falsehood. 

Nanak, the Creator hath so contrived that the perverse 
are wrecked by uttering falsehood, and the pious saved 
by repeating the Name. 

The mental peace of the holy :— 

Ievery one honoureth him who serveth his own true Guru. 

The greatest of all efforts is to obtain God’s name : 

A refreshing calm then dwelleth within, and the heart is 
ever happy repeating it. 

Nanak, they who magnify God’s name eat ambrosia, and 
are Clothed therewith. 

How God may be found :— 

O man, hearken to the Guru’s instruction, and thou shalt 
obtain God the treasury of excellences. 

God, the giver of comfort, will abide in thy heart, and thy 
pride and arrogance shall depart. 

Nanak, if thou fix thine attention night and day on the 
Ixind One, thou shalt obtain Him. 

The following was addressed toa proud Brahman :— 

He who knoweth God and fixeth his attention on Him 
night and day is a Brahman} 

The disease of pride shall leave him who consulteth the 
true Guru and practiseth truth and self-restraint. 

His light who singeth God’s praises and amasseth merits, 
shall be blended with the light of God. 

In this age there are few who know God, who erase their 
pride and become absorbed in Him. 

Nanak, happiness is ever obtained by meeting him who 
night and day pondercth on God. 

The fate of the hypocrite :— 

There is deception in the heart of the perverse and irre- 
ligious man ; his tongue uttereth falsehood. 

* A man is not a Brahman merely by paternity. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 205 

Though God graciously beholdeth and listeneth, yet 1s 
He not pleased by deception. 

He who, lost in worldly love, preacheth to men with the 
object of sinful gain, 

Shall ever suffer misery in attainment, shall be born and 
die, and come and go again and again. 

His superstition shall by no means be dispelled ; he shall 
rot in filth. 

My Lord causeth him on whom He bestoweth favour to 
hear the Guru’s instruction. 

He meditateth on God’s name, he singeth God’s name, 
and at last God’s name releaseth him. 

The happiness of the pious :— 

The pious meditate on God, a tranquillizing sound is 
produced within them, and they ponder on the true Name. 

The pious are night and day tinctured with God’s love, 
and the name of God is pleasing to their souls. 

The pious see God, the pious speak of God, the pious 
love God. 

Nanak, divine knowledge is obtained from the Guru’s 
teaching, and the thick gloom of ignorance is dispelled. 

The holy man, whose works are perfect from the beginning, 
meditateth on God’s name. 

The heedless shall ever suffer transmigration :— 

Why hath he come into the world who serveth not the 
true Guru, 

Who loveth not God’s word, and calmly meditateth not 
on His name ? 

He shall be born again and again, and be ever polluted 
with filth. 

Through false avarice he shall not enjoy either this world 
or the next. 

Nanak, the pious whom the Creator hath united with 
Himself shall be saved. 

The condition and power of the saints :— 
In this age the saints have earned the treasure of the 
Name, and obtained God’s highest dignity. 

206 THE SIKH RELIGION 

By service to the true Guru they have put the name of 
God into their hearts, and night and day ponder thereon. 

Through the Guru’s instruction they are hermits even in 
their own homes, and they destroy their pride and worldly 
love. 

They are saved themselves and they save the whole world ; 
happy the mothers who bore them. 

He on whose forehead God wrote such destiny in the 
beginning, hath obtained such a true Guru. 

Nanak is a sacrifice to his Guru who put him on the right 
road when he strayed in doubt. 

A satire on worldly-minded sectaries :— 

Man beholding mammon hath gone astray, as the moth 
beholding the lamp is consumed. 

Erring pandits look towards mammon to see what one 
may offer them. 

They read for hire and are ever tmmersed in sin; God 
hath deprived them of His name. 

Jogis, Jangams, Sanyasis have gone astray; they have 
allowed their arrogance and pride to greatly increase. 

They accept not alms of clothes and food offered 
them,’ but want more; through obstinacy they ruin their 
lives. 

In the midst of so many, only he who hath pondered on 
the Name under the Guru’s instruction hath obtained 
Peuiection. 

Nanak, to whom shall one complain since all act as God 
causeth them to act ? 

The evil of worldly love ; its antidote :— 

Pride and selfishness are deceitful and have ruined the 
perverse. 

They who apply their hearts to the love of the world feel 
its effects and remain entangled in it. 

When the light of the Guru’s words shineth, worldly love 
departeth from the heart. 

? Unsolicited alms which they may accept. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 207 

Then the body and soul become bright, and the Name 
abideth in the heart. 

Nanak, God’s name which is obtained by the Guru’s 
instruction is the antidote to worldly love. 

On transmigration :— 

Through how many ages hath this soul wandered! it 
abideth not permanently but cometh and goeth. 

When God pleaseth, He causeth it to wander; He pro- 
duceth this play of illusion. 

If God be gracious, the Guru shall be found, the soul 
shall be fixed, and become absorbed 2m tts Creator. 

Nanak, when man’s mind believeth through the mind 
of the Guru, he neither dieth nor is born again. 

The following sloks describe the pleasure obtained 
by praising God under the name of Wah Wah !— 

The True One causeth Himself to be applauded through 
the Guru’s instruction. 

Wah! Wah!! is His praise and eulogy; some pious 
men know this. 

Wah! Wah! are true words by which man meeteth the 
True One. 

Nanak, by uttering Wah! Wah! God is obtained ; 

His praise is obtained by good acts. 

The tongue is adorned by uttering the words Wah! Wah! 

By these perfect words God is found. 

Greatly blest are they from whose mouths Wah! Wah! 
proceedeth. 

They who utter Wah! Wah! shall be illustrious, and the 
people shall come and worship them. 

Wah! Wah! is obtained by good acts, Nanak; he who 
uttereth it shall obtain honour at the gate of the True One. 

By uttering Wah! Wah! the night passeth pleasantly ; 
By uttering Wah! Wah! there is ever happiness, my 
mother ; 

1 Wah!  Literally—bravo! The word is also a part of God’s 
name Wahguru. 

208 THE SIKH RELIGION 

By uttering Wah! Wah! man loveth God. 

By good acts man uttereth Wah! Wah! and causeth 
others to utter it. 

By uttering Wah! Wah! man obtaineth honour. 

Nanak, Wah! Wah ! is His praise whose ordinance is true. 

Wah! Wah! are true words which the pious have ob- 
tained by search : 

They utter the words Wah! Wah! and clasp them to 
their hearts. 

By uttering Wah! Wah! the pious have easily found 
God in their search. 

Greatly fortunate, Nanak, are they who remember God 
in their hearts. 

Address Wah! Wah! to Him who is true, deep, and 
profound ; 

Address Wah! Wah! to Him who is the giver of virtue, 
of intellect, and of patience ; 

Address Wah! Wah! to Him who is contained in every 
thine’; 

Address Wah! Wah! to Him who giveth sustenance 
to all. 

Nanak, by the words Wah! Wah! praise the one God 
Whom the true Guru hath pointed out. 

Whenever the holy repeat Wah! Wah! the wicked 
poison themselves. 

The words Wah! Wah! are not pleasing to them; they 
pass their lives in extreme misery. 

The pious repeat Wah! Wah! with fixed attention and 
quaff nectar. 

Nanak, they who repeat Wah! Wah! are holy, and have 
obtained knowledge of the three worlds. 

They to whom God Himself giveth understanding ever 
repeat Wah! Wah! 

By repeating Wah! Wah! the heart becometh pure and 
pride departeth therefrom. 

The Guru’s disciple who ever repeateth Wah! Wah! 
obtaineth his heart’s desires. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 209 

They who repeat Wah! Wah! are illustrious; O God, 
unite me with them. 

May I remember Wah! Wah! in my heart and also 
utter Wah! Wah! with my lips! 

Nanak, I bestow my body and soul on those who utter 
Wah! Wah! 

Wah! Wah! is that true Lord whose name is nectar. 

They who worship Him have obtained the reward thereof 
—I am a sacrifice unto them. 

Wah! Wah! is the Treasury of excellences; the man 
to whom He giveth enjoyeth His bounty. 

Wah! Wah! filleth sea and land, and is found through 
the Guru’s instruction. 

O all ye disciples of the Guru, ever repeat Wah! Wah!; 
Wah! Wah! is pleasing to the perfect Guru. 

Nanak, the myrmidons of Death approach not him who 
heartily repeateth Wah! Wah! 

Wah! Wah! are the words of the Formless One; there 
is none so great as He. 

Wah! Wah! to Him who is inaccessible and unfathom- 
able; Wah! Wah! to Him who is true. 

Wah! Wah! to Him who is independent ; whatever He 
doeth cometh to pass. 

Wah! Wah! to the nectareous Name which a few pious 
men obtain. 

Wah! Wah! is obtained from good acts by him to whom 
God showeth mercy. 

Nanak, Wah! Wah! is obtained by the holy man who 
night and day uttereth God’s name. 

They who trust in God are not disappointed :— 

Without serving the true Guru peace is not obtained, 
and worldly love departeth not. 

However much we desire it, the True Guru is only found 
by good acts. 

They in whose hearts there is the sin of avarice are 
ruined by worldly love ; 

SIKH. II P 

250 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Their transmigration ceaseth not; they suffer misery 
from their pride. 

Of those who fix their hearts on the true Guru none 1s 
disappointed. 

Death summoneth not them for punishment, neither do 
they suffer misery. 

Nanak, the pious who are filled with the true Word shall 
be saved. 

The heart requires a driver :— 

The mind is an elephant, the Guru the elephant-driver, 
divine knowledge the goad; whithersoever the Guru 
driveth, thither goeth the mind. 

Nanak, the elephant without a goad goeth astray again 
and again into the desert. 

In the following slok devotion is compared to 
rain from heaven, which the careful man prepares 
to receive. In the fervour of his heart he desires 
it not in drops but in a shower all at once :— 

The husbandman \ooking at the sky} raiseth the bound- 
aries of his fields to catch the rain. 

In the same way holy guests enter his house in whose 
heart there is devotion, and are there welcomed. 

Ye clouds, if ye rain at all, rain in abundance ; why rain 
when the season is past ?? 

Nanak, Iama sacrifice unto those who have received the 
Guru’s instruction in their hearts. 

Only the friendship of the upright and holy ought 
to be valued :— 

That is sweet which is pleasing ; he is a friend who is 
upright. 
Nanak, he whom God enlhighteneth is a holy man, 

1 Literally—beholding the lofty house, that is, the clouds in the sky. 
2 That is, ye holy men, impart your instruction now that we may 
profit by it. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 20k 

However much man obtains, he hankers for 
more -—— 

The world dicth in hopes, but its hopes are not fulfilled : } 
Nanak, he who devoteth his heart to the True One hath 
his hopes fulfilled. 

When divine knowledge is obtained there are no 
more hopes and desires :— 

Hopes and desires shall die; He who gave them will 
take them away. 
Nanak, there is nothing permanent but the name of God. 

BIHAGRE KI WAR 

The success of those who turn their hearts to 
God :— 

Nanak, the man of divine knowledge hath conquered the 
world which itself hath conquered everybody. 

Through the Name man’s business is successful; what 
occurreth taketh place by God’s will. 

‘The pious man’s mind is fixed, and nobody can move it. 

God granteth his saints’ prayers, and their deeds become 
brilliant. 

The perverse are led astray from the First Cause; in 
their hearts are avarice, covetousness, and pride. 

Their nights and days pass in wranglings; they reflect 
not on God’s word. 

God hath taken from them the good understanding they 
possessed ; all their words are sinful. 

However much is given them, they are not satisfied ; in 
their hearts are avarice and the great darkness of spiritual 
ignorance. 

Nanak, it is wise to break with the perverse to whom 
worldly love is dear. 

The fool in his folly :— 

The fool knoweth not himself; he annoyeth others by 
his language. 

1 Literally—hope neither dieth nor departeth. 
PaZ 

212 THE SIKH RELIGION 

His original disposition hath not left him; blind that 
he is, and separated from God, he shall suffer punishment. 

Fear of the true Guru hath not induced him to alter his 
disposition or chasten Azs heart so as to be united with God. 

His doubts cease not night or day; without the Word 
he is in misery. 

Lust, anger, and avarice are potent within his heart ; 
he ever passeth his life in worldly affairs, and never remem- 
bereth God. 

His feet, his hands, his eyes, and his ears fail him; his 
days are ended ; Avs death is near. 

The true Name, by which the nine treasures are obtained, 
hath never been dear to him. 

He who in life is dead, and who from death again returneth 
to life, obtaineth deliverance. 

What shall mortal obtain without God’s grace if it be not 
his from the beginning ? 

O fool, remember the Guru’s word by which thou shalt 
find the way of salvation. 

Nanak, thou shalt find the true Guru when thou effacest 
thyself. 

Man’s tongue should be properly employed :— 

May that tongue be burnt which hath not received the 
relish of God’s name ! 

Nanak, the tongue of him in whose heart God dwelleth, 
enjoyeth the taste of the Word. 

May his tongue be burnt who hath forgotten God’s name! 

Nanak, the tongues of the pious repeat God’s name and 
love it. 

Who is a real darwesh :— 

Few darweshes understand their duties, 

Curses on the life, curses on the garb of him who wan- 
dereth begging from house to house ! 

Nanak will wash his feet and be a sacrifice unto him 

Who abandoneth hopes and anxieties, and receiveth the 
Name as his alms from the Guru’s lips. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 213 

The body compared to a fruit-bearing tree on 
which the soul alights :— 

Nanak, there is one tree;! it beareth two fruits;? a 
bird * alighteth thereon. 

It is not seen coming or going; it hath no wings. 

Though enjoying pleasures of every sort, it only obtaineth 
deliverance through the Word. 

The deeds of him who is dyed with the juice of the fruit 
of God’s name, are, O Nanak, true and resplendent. 

Formal ceremonies and worldly love discour- 
aged :— 

The religious ceremonies of hypocrites are all entangle- 
ments ; bad and good are bound up with them. 

Man’s exertions for children and wife, made through 
selfishness and worldly love, are entanglements. 

Wherever I look, there I see the rope of worldly attach- 
ment. 

Nanak, without the true Name it is all groping in the 
dark. 

There lived at Goindwal a Musalman priest who 
conceived a great hatred of the third Guru for his 
spiritual success. The following was addressed to 
him :— 

O Shaikh, abandon the violence of thy heart, fear God, 
and dismiss thy madness. 

Through fear of the Guru how many have been saved ! 
through fear the Fearless One is obtained. 

Let the Word penetrate thy hard heart, so shall peace 
come to dwell therein. 

Whatever deed is done in peace is acceptable to the Lord. 

Nanak, no one hath obtained Him by lust and wrath ; 
go ask those who possess divine knowledge. 

The true Guru is a boat for man’s salvation :— 

The true Guru who is dyed with the Name is a boat 
for salvation in this age. 

1 The body. 2 Pain and pleasure. 3 The soul. 

214 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The pious man in whose heart the True One dwelleth 
Shall be saved. 

He remembereth the Name, he treasureth the Name, 
and obtaineth honour from the Name. 

Nanak hath found the true Guru and obtained the Name 
through his favour. 

The result of serving the Guru :— 

They who serve and wait upon the one true Guru and 
love God’s name, 

O Nanak, reform their own lives and save their families. 

The following was composed by the Guru on hear- 
ing Hindus chanting their vespers :— 

The vesper which recalleth God to my heart is acceptable: 

It produceth attachment to God and destroyeth worldly 
love. 

If man by the Guru’s favour make the contemplation 
of God his vespers, worldly love shall cease and his mind 
become stable. 

Nanak, in the vespers which the obstinate repeat their 
souls find no repose ; they shall be ruined by transmigration. 

The life of the hermit is of no avail :— 

{ wandered through the whole world calling out for my 
Beloved, yet my thirst departed not ; 

But on meeting the true Guru, O Nanak, my thirst 
departed, and I found my Beloved in my own home on 
my return. 

The Guru’s prescription for salvation :— 

The true Guru gave me this prescription— 

Kemember God’s name through the Guru. 

God is ever present. Having removed the film of doubt 
from thine eyes allow the light to enter. 

The name of God is nectar; apply it as eye-salve. 

Treasure up in thy heart the order of the Guru; make 
the love of the True One thine abstinence ; 

So shall God, O Nanak, preserve thee in happiness in 
this world, and thou shalt afterwards disport with Him. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 215 

The Guru’s order to abstain altogether from 
wine :— 

One man bringeth the full goblet, another cometh and 
filleth the cup. 

The intellect of him who drinketh departeth, and in- 
toxication entereth his brain. 

He distinguisheth not between mine and thine, and 1s 
buffeted by his master. 

If possible, drink not at all the false wine, 

By which man forgetteth God and receiveth punishment 
at His court. 

Nanak, he who by God’s look of favour meeteth the true 
Guru, obtaineth the true wine from him. 

Thus shall man ever abide in the joy of the Lord, and 
obtain a position in His court. 

He who practises humility fears not death :— 

Who knoweth how we shall die, or what death is ° 

If we forget not the Lord, death shall be easy. 

The world feareth death ; every one desireth to live. 

He who by the Guru’s favour while alive is dead, under- 
standeth God’s order. 

Nanak, he who dieth such a death shall live for ever. 

The surpassing wealth of the Name :— 

O my soul, the Name is wealth from which happiness 
ever and ever springeth. 

Loss never accrueth therefrom, but ever gain. 

It lesseneth not by eating or spending ; God bestoweth 
it ever and ever. 

He who possesseth it hath no anxiety whatever, and never 
sustaineth loss. 

Nanak, it is obtained through the Guru’s instruction by 
him on whom he looketh with favour. 

Man ought to be ever wakeful in God's service :— 

Men have died and continue to die through pride. 
Man while he hath breath in his body remembereth not 

216 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God; what shall he do when he hath gone to the next 
world ? 

He who hath divine knowledge is on the alert ; he who 
is without it acteth blindly. 

Nanak, according to man’s acts in this life shall be his 
reward in the next. 

Man is happy when he can rest his hopes of salvation on 
his Guru, 

In the beginning it was God’s will that He could not be 
remembered without a true Guru. 

When man meeteth the true Guru, God is contained in 
his heart, and he remaineth ever attached to Him. 

He remembereth God at every breath, and no breath 
Passeth in. vain. 

His fear of transmigration departeth and he obtaineth 
the dignity of eternal life. 

Nanak, this dignity is obtained by him to whom God 
showeth mercy. 

The Jogi who hearkens to the Guru :-— 

The Jogi who hath obtained the Name by the Guru’s 
instruction hath found the way. 

All excellences dwell in such a Jogi’s little City ;* tiie 
garb maketh not the Jogi. 

Nanak, there are few Jogis in whose hearts God’s light 
shineth. 

WADHANS ALAHANIAN 

Man should ever be prepared for death and for 
the account which he must render of his acts :-— 

This body is worn out ; old age hath overtaken it. 

They whom the Guru preserveth are saved; the others 
die and are born again ; 

The others die, are born again, and transmigrate; after 
their final departure they shall regret ; without the Name 
there is no happiness. 

1 His body, the microcosm. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 247 

Man shall obtain hereafter the fruits of his own acts in 
this life ; the perverse shall lose their honour. 

In the abode of Death are terrible darkness and great 
storms ; there is found no sister or brother. 

This body is worn out ; old age hath overtaken it. 

If the true Guru take me to himself my body shall become 
gold. 

WADHANS KI WAR 

A Jogi went one day to visit the third Guru, and 
coveting a rosary he had, succeeded in stealing it. 
When charged with the theft he denied his guilt. 
The attendants of the Guru searched and found the 
rosary on him, upon which the Guru said :— 

I thought he was a great swan,! so I held converse with 
qpbeee 

Had I known that he was only a wretched crane, I should 
never have touched him. 

The fate of the idolater :— 

Curses on the lives, curses on the habitations of those who 
worship strange gods ! 

They abandon ambrosia and turn to poison; they earn 
poison ; poison is their stock-in-trade, 

Poison their food, poison their dress, morsels of poison 
they eat. 

Here they are totally miserable, and when they die 
their abode shall be in hell. 

The mouths of the perverse who know not the Word are 
impure; they die of lust and wrath. 

They have abandoned the fear of the true Guru ; their 
business never succeedeth on account of their obstinacy. 

In the city of Death they shall be bound and beaten ; 
no one will hear their supplications. 

Nanak, they act according to their primal destiny, while 
the pious abide in the Name. 

1 A great swan in the religious language of the Sikhs means a 
great saint. 

218 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Death is in the power of the holy man :— 

Under the Guru’s instruction worship Him who hath 
created Death, and no sorrow shall come to thee. 

Nanak, Death worshippeth the pious man in whose heart 
the True One dwelleth. 

The saints are superior to monarchs :— 

My Beloved is pleased with the saints and hath attached 
them to Himself. 

He hath granted them an empire and made true crowns 
for their heads. 

They are ever happy and pure, and perform the work 
of the true Guru. 

They are not kings who, dying in the fight, have again 
to enter the womb.! 

Nanak, without the Name even kings are like noseless 
persons who roam about and receive no honour. 

The perverse have not only mental but physical 
deformity :— 

The perverse man who hath not obtained the Name, is 
a coward ugly and noseless. 

Day and night he is engaged in worldly affairs, and 
enjoyeth no happiness even in his dreams. 

Nanak, if man become pious, he shall be saved ;_ other- 
wise he shall be bound and suffer pain. 

The necessity of faith and love of God :— 

Even though man make efforts in hundreds of trans- 
migrations, happiness will never come to him 

Who hath no faith in the true Guru and loveth not his 
word. 

Nanak, love the True One, and thou shalt obtain peace 
through the Guru. 

God is the only male ; human beings are females 
who ought to love Him :— 
In this world there is one Male; all the rest are females. 

1 They who, struggling with the world, have not obtained salvation, 
are born again and cannot be called spiritual rulers. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 219 

He enjoyeth them all and yet remaineth separate from 
them: He is invisible and cannot be scen. 

The true Guru showeth Him, and man seeth Him through 
his word. 

She who serveth the Male and destroyeth pride by the 
Word, becometh a male herself. 

The Male hath no partner, no molester, and no enemy. 

Immovable for ever is His empire; it nor cometh nor 
goeth. 

Night and day worshippers worship and sing the true 
God’s praises. 

Nanak, on seeing the greatness of the true God, is happy. 

The perverse man is foolish and contemptible :— 

The perverse man enjoyeth not the relish of the Word, 
and loveth not God’s name. 

His tongue uttereth harsh language; and he is ever 
despised. 

O Nanak, he acteth according to destiny which none can 
erase. 

SORATH KI WAR 

The fate of those who think not of God :— 

According to what God Himself wrote in the beginning 
must man act. 

Worldly love hath cast its deception over him, and he 
hath forgotten the Lord of excellences. 

Deem not that the world is alive ; it is dead through the 
love of mammon. 

They who have not meditated on the Name through the 
Guru’s instruction, are not allowed to sit near God. 

They are miserable in the highest degree, and their 
children and wives shall not go with them. 

Their faces are blackened among men, and their hearts 
heave heavy sighs. 

No one trusteth the perverse ; trust in them is at an end. 

Nanak, the pious in whose heart the Name dwelleth are 

very happy. 

220 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God is in the heart, but the perverse know it 
not :— 

The heart is full of nectar, but the perverse enjoy not its 
savour. 

As the deer knoweth not its own musk, and wandereth, 
led astray by ignorance, 

So the perverse despise nectar, amass poison, and forget 
tlie Creator, 

A few pious men obtain insight and behold God within 
them. 

The extent of the Guru’s self-mortification :— 

Though my flesh ts so mortified that if my body were 
pressed in an oil-press, it would not give a drop of blood, 

Yet would [ still further sacrifice and quarter myself for 
my love for the True One. 

In this way I should not fail to meet Him either night or 
day, O Nanak. 

When the love of God is real, it is not transient :-— 

My Friend is merry ; by His merriment He attracteth 
ny soul. 

When clothes are dyed with madder and a base, 

Their colour, Nanak, will not depart, and no other 
colour may be given them. 

Man’s mind is difficult to restrain :— 

The mind of the perverse man is incorrigible and attacheth 
itself to mammon. 

He obtaineth no happiness even in his dreams; he 
passeth his hfe in extreme misery. 

The pandits grow weary of reading from door to door ; 
the Sidhs, of sitting in attitudes of contemplation. 

Man’s mind is not under restraint; men grow weary 
performing religious ceremonies, 

Changing their sectarial garbs, and bathing at the sixty- 
eight places of pilgrimage, 

While they exercise no control over their minds, but are 
led astray by pride and superstition. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 221 

By the favour of the Guru God’s love is obtained ; and 
by great good fortune God cometh and dwelleth in the 
heart. 

When there is fear of God the mind is restrained, and 
pride is destroyed by His word. 

The fate of those who turn away from their 
Guru :— 

They who turn their faces from the true Guru, shall find 
no house or home. 

They shall wander from door to door like divorced women 
of bad character and evil reputation. 

Nanak, they who are pardoned through the Guru’s 
instruction shall be blended with God. 

The food of life eternal :— 

Three things—truth, patience, and reflection are put into 
a dish; and, when kneaded with the water of God’s name, 
become perfect ambrosial food. 

By partaking of them man is satisfied, and attaineth the 
gate of salvation. 

This food is rare, O saints, but it can be obtained by the 
Guru’s instruction. 

Why should the spell! of God’s name be counteracted ? 
rather clasp it to your heart. 

The precious character of the Guru’s instruction :— 

There is one Creator, one Guru, and one Word to medi- 
tate on. 

True is the shop,’ true its dealings;? its garners are 
filled with jewels.4 

They are obtained by the Guru’s favour, if the Bestower 
bestow them. 

1 Mundawant is a spell employed at marriages by the females of 
the bride’s party to induce the bridegroom’s friends to believe that 
they cannot partake of the bridal feast until a counterspell is employed. 
The word mundawant literally means a thing sealed, as viands pre- 
paratory to eating, in order to preserve their purity. Here the word 
is used for God’s name, the fourth ingredient of the ambrosial food. 

ee ihe Guru. 3 In God’s name. 4 Virtues. 

222 HE Sig.ft RELIGION 

The following was addressed to the Muhammadan 
priest of Goindwal who followed devious ways :— 

OQ Shaikh, restrain thy mind which now wandereth 
towards the four cardinal points, the sport of the four 
winds. 

Abandon thy crooked ways, accept the instruction of 
the Guru ; 

Prostrate thyself before the true Guru; he knoweth 
everything that 1s to be known. 

Banish thy hopes and desires; become as a guest a the 
world. 

If thou walk as the true Guru desireth, thou shalt obtain 
honour in God’s court. 

Nanak, accursed the garb, accursed the food of those who 
remember not God. 

The inspired teacher is for the whole world :— 

Great men utter instruction for a special occasion, but 
the whole world becometh a partner in it. 

Nanak, how can he in whose heart there is no faith, 
expound divine knowledge ? 

The self-sacrifice of the disciple must be com- 
plete :— 

As the elephant offereth his head to the goad, as the 
anvil offereth itself to the hammer, 

So should the dzsciple put his soul and body before his 
Guru, and stand and wait on him. 

In this way the pious man, while humbling himself, 
assumeth the sovereignty of the whole universe.! 

Nanak, the pious understand this 1f God look on them 
with favour. 

Different ways of disposing of the dead :— 

Some are cremated, some buried, and others eaten by 
dogs ; 

Some are thrown into the river and others again into pits : 

Nanak, it is not known where they shall ultimately go. 

1 Spiritual sovereignty is of course meant. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 223 

The fate of slanderers :— 

The slanderers hate the saints, but love the wicked to 
fascination. 

They have no rest in this world or the next; they die 
and are born again and again. 

Their thirst is never slaked ; they are ruined by worldly 
love. 

Their faces are blackened in the court of the true One. 

Nanak, without the Name they neither abide in this 
world nor cross over to the next. 

When reading and study are advantageous :— 

Reading and study are worldly acts if the sin of avarice 
be in the heart. 

All who read through pride grow weary, and are ruined 
by worldly love. 

He is learned, he is a wise pandit who pondereth on the 
Guru’s word : 

He searcheth in his heart, findeth the Real Thing there, 
and reacheth the gate of deliverance : 

He tranquilly meditateth on God, and findeth Him who 
is the treasury of excellences. 

Nanak, blessed is that trader who by the Guru’s instruc- 
tion obtaineth the Name as his support. 

The Guru can remove the sins of previous births:— 

The impurity of many births hath attached to man’s 
mind, and it hath become quite black. 

An oilman’s towel will not become white by washing, 
even though it be washed hundreds of times. 

His nature altereth who by the Guru’s favour while alive 
is dead. 

Nanak, no impurity attacheth to him, and he shall not 
again enter a womb. 

The indifference of the world to spiritual matters: — 

O man, oppressed by a nightmare thy life hath passed 
away in sleep. 

224 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou hast not awakened on hearing the word of the true 
Guru, nor hath enthusiasm arisen in thy heart. 

May that body which hath no virtues and performeth not 
the Guru’s service be burnt ! 

I have seen the world burning with pride and worldly love. 

Nanak, they who meditate in their hearts on the true 
Word and seek the Guru’s protection shall be saved. 

I-xternal decorations lead astray :— 

Without the Word woman becometh not pure even though 
she don many ornaments ; 

She careth not for her husband, but loveth another. 

Nanak, such a woman is impure, ill-conducted, and evil 
among her sex. 

God is the Pardoner and Cherisher :— 

God appointeth men to do His service; He it is who 
rewardeth them. 

He is the Father and Mother of all, and taketh care of 
them. 

Nanak, they who ponder on the Name obtain a residence 
in God’s own palace and are honoured in every age. 

Suu1t ASHTAPADI 

A Sikh called Jacha inquired of the Guru the best 
means of obtaining God :— 

Praise not the world which shall perish ; 

Praise not men who shall die and become dust. 

ant! omy lerdal 

The pious ever praise Him who is true and independent. 

The perverse are burning with love for the world : 

They embrace not the present opportunity ; they shall 
be bound and beaten in the city of Death. 

The lives of the pious are profitable ; they cling to the 
true Word. 

God hath appeared unto them, and they abide in peace 
and happiness. 

The thirst and hunger of those who forget the Guru’s 
instruction and are attached to worldly love, 

FLYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 225 

Depart not ; night and day they wander in suffering : 

They cherish friendship for the evil and hatred for the 
holy. 

They shall perish with their families, and cause their 
whole tribe to perish. 

It is not good to slander any one; yet that is what the 
perverse and blockheads do. 

The faces of the slanderers become blackened, and they 
fall into horrible hell. 

O man, as thou worshippest, so shalt thou be, and so shall 
be the acts thou performest. 

It is thou thyself who didst sow ; it is thou thyself who 
shalt eat; nothing is obtained by prating. 

When great men speak it is with some object: 

They are filled to the brim with nectar, and have not 
a particle of avarice. 

The virtuous amass virtues and instruct others. 

They who meet them are fortunate ; night and day they 
repeat God’s name. 

“He who created the earth will give us sustenance. 

One alone is the Giver ; He Himself is the true Lord. 

That True One is with thee, O man; thou shalt behold 
Him by the Guru’s instruction. 

Ever remember God and He will pardon thee and blend 
thee with Himself. 

Man is impure; the True One is pure; how shall we meet 
Him ° 

When man dispelleth his pride under the Guru’s instruction, 
God will unite him with Himself, and that shall be a lasting 
union. 

Accursed is his life in this world who forgetteth the true 
Lord ! 

God will look with favour and not forget him who medi- 
tateth on the Guru’s instruction. 

When the true Guru blendeth me with God, a lasting 
union shall be effected, and I shall clasp the True One to 
my heart. 

Once I have found Him, through the love and affection of 
the Guru, we shall not be separated. 

SIKH, II QO 

226 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Let me praise my Beloved by meditation on the word 
of the Guru. 

When I meet my Beloved, I shall obtain happiness and 
become an illustrious woman. 

SUHI CHHANT 

Sins are erased by devotion ; God’s fellowship 
with the pious :— 

All his sins are erased, O God, who reverently singeth 
Thy praises day and night. 

All men are Thine ; Thou art theirs; Iam Thine; Thou 
art mine. 

SUHI KI WAR 
The repentant sinner :— 

The evil wife in a red dress goeth to enjoy a strange man. 

Infatuated with another she leaveth the husband of her 
home. ; 

She eateth bread because it is sweet ; its flavour greatly 
increaseth her disease. 

She leaveth God her lawful spouse, and afterwards 
suffereth the pain of separation from Him ; 

But under the Guru’s instruction she will return, renew 
her love for God, and decorate herself to attract Him. 

She will then enjoy God her true Spouse in peace, and 
clasp His name to her heart. 

She will be submissive and ever a good wife, and God will 
unite her with Himself. 

Nanak, she who hath obtained the true God as her Hus- 
band, shall ever be a happy wife. 

How repentance is effected :— 

O thou with the red robe,! thou shalt become a good wife 
if thou repeat the true Name with thy heart. 

By conciliating the true Guru thy beauty shall be greatly 
enhanced, and thou shalt have no other abode than his. 

1 Married women wear red. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 227 

Put on such decorations as shall never be tarnished, that 
thy husband may love thee night and day. 

Nanak, what are the signs of a good wife ? Her heart is 
pure, her face bright, and she is absorbed in her spouse. 

It is not the dress that ensures happiness :— 

O people, I have been in red, wearing a red robe, 

But, since it is not the robe that obtaineth the Bride- 
groom, I have ceased to robe myself. 

Nanak, they who have heard the Guru’s instruction, have 
found the Bridegroom. 

In this way the Bridegroom is found ; what pleaseth God 
taketh place. 

The dye of the worldly is temporary, of the saints 
permanent :— 

Thou with the red robe, the whole world steeped in folly 
and worldly love is red ; 

But the dye is false and totally vanisheth in a moment 
like the shadow of a tree. 

The colour of the pious is the reddest of the red as if 
dyed with madder. 

She in whose heart dwelleth God’s ambrosial name, 
turneth away from mammon and entereth the house of 
God. 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to my Guru by meeting whom 
I sing God’s praises. 

Man ought not to set his heart on fleeting plea- 
sures :— 

The red colour is useless; the Bridegroom is not obtained 
by it ; 

It taketh not long to fade. She who loveth mammon 
sitteth as a widow. 

The woman who coveteth a red robe is silly and fickle. 

Make the true Word thy red robe, and the fear and love 
of God thine ornaments. 

Nanak, they who act according to the wishes of the true 
Guru shall ever be happy wives. 

Q2 

228 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The idolater is compared to an unchaste woman :— 

The woman with the red robe who leaveth God and 
loveth another husband is a bad character. 

She hath neither modesty nor virtue ; she ever uttereth 
falsehood, and is ruined by her perversity. 

She for whom it is so written from the beginning, shall 
obtain God as her Spouse. 

She shall doff all her red robes and don the garment of 
humility. 

She shall obtain great honour in this world and the next ; 
the whole world shall worship her. 

No one is equal to her whom the Creator enjoyeth. 

Nanak, she who hath the everlasting Male as her Husband 
is holy, and shall ever be a happy wife. 

How a woman ought to love her husband :— 

It is not they who burn themselves with their husbands’ 
corpses who are Satis ; 

Nanak, rather are they Satis who die by the shock of 
separation from their husbands. 

They also are known as Satis who abide in modesty and 
contentment ; 

Who wait upon their Lord and rising in the morning ever 
remember Him. 

The concremation of widows is inadmissible :— 

Women are burnt in the fire with their husbands : 

If they appreciate their husbands they undergo sufficient 
pain by their death. 

Nanak, if they appreciate not their husbands, why 
should they be burnt ? 

Whether the husband be alive or dead such women will 
flee far away from him. 

1 Whether a widow loves her deceased husband or not, her cremation 
is useless. If she loves him, his death is a torture to her, while, if she 
loves him not, his life or death is of equal unconcern to her. ‘Therefore 
cremating her by force, or for the sake of custom or fashion, is utterly 
useless. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 229 

Men ought to acquire divine knowledge before 
adopting a religious dress :— 

O woman, only decorate thyself when thou hast conciliated 
thy Husband, 

Lest He come not to thy couch and thy decorations be 
in vain. 

When thy Husband’s heart is conciliated, decoration will 
become thee. 

It will be acceptable if thy Husband love thee. 

Make fear thy decoration, God’s love thy betel, and 
reverence thy food. 

Nanak, she who delivereth her body and soul to her 
Husband shall enjoy Him. 

God cannot be won by a religious garb :— 

A woman taketh collyrium, flowers, betel and attar of 
roses, and decorateth herself, 
But if her husband come not to her couch, it is all in vain. 

The Guru describes an ideal marriage :— 

They are not husband and wife who sit together : 
Rather are they husband and wife who have one soul 
and two bodies. 

BILAWAL! KI WAR 
God’s praises may be said or sung :— 

Enjoy yourselves when God’s name is in your mouths.* 

Measures, music, and hymns are pleasant if one meditate 
on God ; 

But if man serve God even without measures and music, 
he shall obtain honour at His court. 

Nanak, meditate upon God by the Guru’s instruction, so 
shall all the pride of thy heart depart. 

1 This word in Panjabi means enjoyment, in Sanskrit a musical 
measure. There is in the first line of the hymn a play on the word. 
The Bilawal is sung on festive, the Maru on mournful occasions. 

2 Or—the time to sing in the Bilawal measure is when God’s name 
is in your mouths. 

230 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru’s prayer for the human race :— 

O God, of Thy mercy save the world which is in flames. 
Save it in any way that it may be saved. 

The fate of the inidel.— 

The five thieves ? rob those who forget the Name 

And utter falsehood; they make a breach of pride in 
their hearts. 

The infidels who know not the savour of God’s name are 
ruined by their folly. 

They who have lost the ambrosial Name through doubt 
and conceived an affection for sin, 

Love the wicked and quarrel with the saints. 

Nanak, the infidels shall be bound by Death and suffer 
torments in hell ; 

They shall obtain the reward of their acts; where God 
placeth them there shall they remain. 

The fate of the holy :— 

They who serve the true Guru have become strong from 
being weak. 

God ever dwelleth within them and Death cannot look 
at them. 

Lakshmi is their servant in whose hearts is the sweet- 
ness of God’s name. 

The servant of the servants of God obtaineth the supreme 
boon. 

Nanak is ever a sacrifice to him in whose soul and body 
God dwelleth. 

RAMKALI 

The characteristics of the four ages :— 

In the Sat age every one spoke the truth ; 

In every house God’s service was performed, and men were 
holy. 

In the Sat age religion had four legs : ? 

1 The five senses. 
* Pure religion is compared to an unblemished cow. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 231 

Then a few understood divine knowledge by the Guru’s 
instruction. 

In the four ages the Name is magnified. 

They who cling to the Name obtain salvation ; without 
the Guru none may obtain the Name. 

In the Treta age one leg! of religion was removed ; 

Hypocrisy prevailed and men deemed God distant.’ 

He who obtained knowledge under the Guru’s instruction 
knew God, 

And acquired happiness by implanting the Name in his 
heart. 

In the Dwapar age worldly love and duality arose : 

Led astray in error men thought the Creator and creation 
distinct. 

In the Dwapar age religion was only left two legs.’ 

Wherever there was a holy man he fixed the Name firmly 
in his heart. 

In the Kal age only one leg remained to religion. 

She went on one leg and worldly love increased : 

Worldly love produced excessive darkness. 

If man meet the true Guru, the Name shall be his salvation. 

In every age there is only the one true Being : 

In everything is the True One, there is none besides. 

By praising the True One true happiness is obtained ; 

But only a few pious men utter such praises. 

Through all the ages the Name is the best thing ; ° 

Only a few holy men know this. 

He who pondereth on God’s name is a saint : 

Nanak, in every age the Name is magnified. 

RAMKALI KI WAR I 

The cultivation of the Name :— 
The true Guru is the field of happiness; he whom God 
causeth to love it, 

1 That is, truth. 

2 And not in their hearts as believed in the Sat age. 

3 The second leg that fell off is supposed to be sacrifice. 

4 Worship is supposed to be the third leg that dropped off; God's 
name, the fourth, remained. 

5 Superior to all religious ceremonies. 

232 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Soweth the Name; the Name springeth up, and he is 
absorbed in it. 

Pride which is the seed of doubt fleeth away from him. 

He no longer soweth the seed of doubt ; it no longer spring- 
eth up ; he liveth on what God giveth him. 

When water blendeth with water, it cannot again be 
separated. 

Nanak, that is the way of the holy ; O people, come and 
See : 

But what can wretched people sce who themselves know 
nothing ? 

He in whose heart God dwelleth and to whom He showeth 
Himself, beholdeth Him. 

Sorrow is the portion of the perverse :— 

The perverse man is a field of sorrow; he soweth sorrow 
and eateth sorrow. 

In sorrow is he born, in sorrow he dieth, and in pride he 
passeth his life. 

The mentally blind man acteth blindly, and thinketh not 
of his transmigration. 

He knoweth not the Giver, but clingeth to what is given : 

He acteth as was at first destined for him; O Nanak, 
he cannot act otherwise. 

The following is a reply to a hymn of Kabir :— 

Nanak, God will look with favour on him who hath 
turned himself into henna : 

God Himself will grind it, God Himself will rub it, and 
God Himself will apply it to Hts feet. 

This is a loving cup of the Lord. He prepareth it for 
him with whom He is pleased. 

The following is a reflection on anchorets :— 

Led astray by doubt, I have wandered the world over, 
and searched until I have grown weary. 

God gave me no peace; what can cope with Him ? 

Meditate on God under the Guru’s instruction, and clasp 
Him to thy heart. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 233 

Nanak, if God be merciful, man seated in his own home 
can find Him. 

The false and the true Abhyagat,' or mendicant, 
who claims to have reached the final goal of 
sanctity :— 

He in whose heart there is superstition ought not to be 
called an Abhyagat. 

Alms given to him, O Nanak, shall be as vain as himself. 

Few are they, O Nanak, to whose lot it hath fallen to 
give food to him 

Who hungereth for the supreme reward of the Fearless 
and Pure. 

They should not be described as Abhyagats who eat in 
other’s houses, 

And who to fill their bellies adopt many sectarial garbs. 

They are Abhyagats, O Nanak, who study their hearts, 

Who search and find the Lord, and dwell in their own 
homes. 

Man must do good acts and obey God’s laws :— 

Numberless persons are absorbed 1n God, the Mine of 
jewels ; but the false suffer transmigration : 

They act as they please and suffer great punishment. 

Everything is in the Mine of jewels, but it is only ob- 
tainable by good acts. 

Nanak, man obtaineth the nine treasures if he act accord- 
ing to God’s will. 

Better to taste God’s ambrosia than the poison 
of the perverse :— 

He who serveth not the Guru cheerfully shall lose his 
life by pride. 

The lotus of his heart shall never bloom whose tongue 
tasteth not God’s essence. 

The perverse die by eating poison; they perish by 
worldly love. 

1 This word in Sanskrit means a visitor. ‘The name was subse- 
quently given to pious mendicants. 

234 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He on whom the true God looketh with favour becometh 
the slave of His slaves : 

He serveth the true Guru night and day and never leaveth 
his side : 

As the lotus remaineth dry in the water, so he liveth a 
hermit in his own home. 

Nanak, the Lord of excellences acteth and causeth all to 
act as He pleaseth. 

Dutiful children ought to accept the counsel of 
sages :— 

Elders’ } advice maketh children good : 

They who are pleasing to God heed such counsel and act 
accordingly. 

Go and consult the Simritis, the Shastars, the writings of 
Vyas,” Shukdev, Narad, and those who uttered excellent 
words. 

They whom God attacheth to the truth remain attached 
to it and ever remember it. 

Nanak, their coming into the world is profitable who save 
all their families. 

The blind leading the blind :— 

When the guru is blind, the deeds of his disciples also 
are blind ; 

They act as it pleaseth themselves and continually utter 
the grossest falschood ; 

They practise lying and deception and ever slander 
others. 

The slanderers are ruined themselves and ruin all their 
families ; 

But they are, O Nanak, in the position in which God 
placed them ; what can the poor creatures do ? 

1 Literally—grandfathers ; in the East the fathers are often very 
young, and advice-giving then becomes the grandfather’s duty or 
privilege. Hfere the Guru means Guru Nanak’s instruction. 

* Vyas, the compiler of the Veds, see note 1, p. 31. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 235 

Nothing is gained by association with a fool :— 

The fool listeneth to the words of the fool. 

What are the marks of a fool ?. What his acts ? 

The fool is he who is stupid and dying of pride. 

In its practice he is ever miserable, and in misery he 
abideth. 

If his dearest friend fall into a well, what device shall he 
adopt to extricate him ? 

A pious man would think about it, but the fool would 
remain aloof. 

By repeating God’s name the pious man is saved, and 
they who were perishing shall be saved through him. 

Nanak, God acteth as He pleaseth, and man must endure 
what cometh from Him. 

MARU KI War I 

The condition of those who have not the fear of 
God in their hearts :— 

They who have not met the Guru and who have not a 
particle of fear, 

Suffer great pain in transmigration, and their anxiety 
never ceaseth. 

They are beaten like soiled garments or like a gong which 
striketh gharis and double gharis. 

Nanak, without the true Name they are never frec from 
entanglements. 

The Guru inculcates truth, the whole truth, and 
nothing but the truth :— 

I have searched the three worlds, my friends, and dis- 
covered that pride is bad for men. 

Grieve not, O my heart, speak the truth, Nanak, the 
whole truth. 

The Guru culls divine knowledge from God’s 
wee 
The tree spontaneously produceth flowers and fruits ; 

236 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the bumble-bee divesting himself of fear dwelleth among 
them. 

Nanak, there is but one tree (God), one flower (divine 
knowledge), and one bumble-bee (the Guru). 

The Guru teaches true piety to a Jogi :— 

If I become a Jogi, wander in the world, and beg from 
door to door, 

When my account is called for in God’s court, how many 
persons shall I have to satisfy ?! 

Let me make the Name my alms, patience my hut, com- 
panionship with the True One my cry; I shall not then be 
asked for an account. 

God is not obtained by sectarial garbs ; all who adopt 
them shall be seized by the god of death. 

Nanak, their words are false—do thou remember the true 
Name. 

I-ven the perverse may be saved by obeying 
God’s order :— 

A raven becometh not white, nor doth iron float. 

He who accepteth the boon of the Beloved, is blest and 
regenerateth others. 

The countenance of htm who recognizeth God’s orders shall 
become bright, and he shall cross over like iron on timber. 

To abandon avarice and abide in fear are,O Nanak, most 
meritorious acts. 

The heart is not chastened by wandering in 
forests :— 

The ignorant man who goeth into the desert to chasten 
his heart cannot succeed. 

Nanak, if the heart be chastened, it must be by reflection 
on the Guru’s instruction. 

Ikven though every one desire to chasten his heart, he 
cannot succeed ; 

' I shall have to compensate numerous persons for the alms I have 
received. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 2e7 

But man, O Nanak, shall chasten his heart, if he meet 
the true Guru. 

Were a man to forget God he would deserve 
expulsion from his fraternity :— 

Were I to become a pandit or an astrologer and recite the 
four Veds ; 

Were I to be worshipped for my wisdom and teaching in 
the nine regions of the world, 

May it not be that I should forget the true Name and 
that none should touch my cooking-square.* 

Cooking-squares are all false ; Nanak, God alone is true. 

It is when man ceases to think of merits and 
demerits and fixes his attention on God alone that 
he is saved :— 

Merits and demerits are the same ; since God created both. 
Nanak, happiness is obtained by obeying God’s order 
and pondering on the Guru’s instruction. 

The Guru refuses to use force to his slanderer :— 

They who have no divine knowledge or a particle of fear 
in their hearts, 

Have been destroyed by God; Nanak, why slay the 
slain ? 

The Guru rejects the Brahman’s horoscope and 
censures his pride and pretended learning :— 

To study one’s mental horoscope? is the real happiness. 

That Brahman is good who knoweth how to meditate on 
God ; 

Who reflecting on the Guru’s instruction extolleth God 
and readeth His pratses. 

His birth is profitable, and he saveth his family. 

In the next world there shall be no inquiry regarding 
caste; to act according to the Word is the real thing. 

1 The Guru means that if he forgot God’s name, he should deserve 

the penalty that nobody would eat or associate with him. 
2 To know the state of one’s own heart. 

238 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Vain is all other study, vain all other acting, since man 
thus becometh attached to sin. 

The perverse man hath no internal happiness ; his life is 
ruined. 

Nanak, they who are tinctured by the Name are saved 
by the Guru’s boundless love. 

BHAIRO 

A pandit asked the Guru to listen to a discourse 
of his. The Guru refused. Upon this the pandit 
said he himself was a Brahman while the Guru was 
only a Khatri, and it was the duty of Khatris to 
listen to Brahmans. The Guru replied as follows :— 

Let none be proud of his caste. 

He who knoweth God is a Brahman. 

O stupid fool, be not proud of thy caste ; 

From such pride many sins result. 

Everybody saith there are four castes, 

But they all proceeded from God’s seed. 

The world is all made out of one clay, 

But the Potter fashioned it into vessels of many sorts. 

The body is formed from the union of five elements ; 

Let any one consider 2f he hath less or more in his com- 
position. 

Saith Nanak, the soul is fettered by its acts. 

Without meeting the true Guru salvation is not obtained. 

BASANT 

The sectarial dresses, the scriptures, and the 
pilgrimages of the Hindus are of no avail :— 

ven if man take off his clothes, become naked 

And wear matted hair, how can he obtain union with 
God ? 

His mind is not pure, nor tarrieth it at the tenth gate. 

The foolish person wandereth and returneth again and 
again in transmigration. 

O foolish man, meditate on the one God, 

And thou shalt at once cross the world’s ocean. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 239 

They who expound the Simritis and the Shastars, 

And who as divines and learned men read the Purans, 

Practise in their hearts hypocrisy and deception. 

God cometh not near them ; 

How shall they obtain the Pure One, 

Who while practising great self-restraint 

And performing ceremonial works and special adoration, 

Have greed within them, and harbour the deadly sins in 
their hearts ° 

What can he make who is made himself, 

And whose movements are in God’s power ? 

If God look on him with favour, his doubts shall cease ; 

And if he understand God’s order, he shall obtain the 
True One. 

He in whose heart is the filth of sin 

May wander on pilgrimages through the countries of the 
world ; 

Yet, O Nanak, it is only when he associateth with the 
true Guru 

That the obstacles in the terrible ocean shall break for 
his passage. 

The holy enjoy perpetual spring :— 

When spring cometh, the forests bloom ; 

But men and lower animals only bloom by thinking on 
God : 

In this way the mind 1s refreshed. 

By repeating God’s name day and night under the Guru’s 
instruction pride is removed and washed away. 

When the true Guru reciteth his verses and hymns, 

The world bloometh again by his love. 

Fruits and flowers are produced when God Himself 
produceth them. 

When man findeth the true Guru, he attacheth himself to 
God, the root of all things. 

God is the spring ; the whole world is His garden ; 

Nanak, by perfect good fortune special service 7s per- 
formed. 

240 THE SIKH RELIGION 

SARANG KI WAR 

The Hindus fast on the eleventh day of the light 
and dark halves of the lunar month. Besides these 
certain other days of the lunations are occasionally 
dedicated to certain Hindu divinities. Thus the 
ninth is sacred to Devi, the tenth to Digpal, or the 
elephants who support the eight points of the com- 
pass, the eleventh to Vishnu, and the twelfth to 
Bawan, his dwarf incarnation. The Guru in the 
following gives substitutes for these fasts. The 
slok was addressed to Brahmans who censured 
the Guru for his neglect of fasting :— 

If man on the ninth day make a vow ¢éo speak the truth, 

His lust, wrath, and covetousness will depart. 

The tenth day ¢s auspicious if one restrain the organs of 
action and perception: the eleventh day 7s auspicious if 
one then know that God is one. 

If on the twelfth day man preserve himself from the five 
deadly sins, then, O Nanak, shall he be happy. 

If fasts be thus observed, O Pandit, why give more in- 
struction ? 

Brahmans and sectaries obtain no advantage 
from reading and pilgrimages :— 

Pandits and men vowed to silence grow weary of reading ; 
men who wear sectarial dresses grow weary of wandering 
from country to country. 

Through love of the world they never obtain God’s name, 
and very great misery attacheth to the 

They are stupid and blind, and make it their business to 
serve Mammon. 

With deception in their hearts the fools read books to 
fill their bellies. 

They who have expelled pride from their hearts, serve 
the true Guru and obtain happiness. 

Nanak, there is only one Name to read and meditate on ; 
a few reflecting men know this. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 241 

Man must accept the inevitable. As he came 
naked into the world, so must he depart :— 

Naked man cometh, naked he departeth—such is the 
will of God ; what can be done ? 

He who gave life will take it away. With whom shall 
man be angry on that account ? 

He who is pious obeyeth God’s will and tranquilly quaffeth 
divine nectar. 

Nanak, ever praise the Giver of happiness, and repeat 
His name with thy tongue. 

No hope from false gods :— 

When men have forgotten God’s name, what other name 
will they utter ° 

They are as worms in ordure ;_ their worldly affairs like 
thieves have robbed them. 

May Nanak not forget God’s name! False is all other 
desire. 

The fate of those who forget the Name :— 

They who forget the Name, even though they perform 
many other religious acts, 

Are bound and beaten in the city of Death, O Nanak, 
like robbers caught house-breaking. 

Man should be firm in his devotion :— 

As long as the mind is inconstant, man indulgeth in great 
pride and arrogance. 

He relisheth not the Word and loveth not the Name. 

His service is not acceptable; he fretteth and fretteth 
until he becometh an object of contempt. 

Nanak, call him a servant who would cut off his head, 
place it before his master, 

Obey the order of the true Guru, and take his instruction 
to heart. 

Only what pleases God can be deemed devotion, 
penance, and service :— 

If man renounce his pride, God will pardon him and 
blend him with Himself. 

SIKH. I R 

242 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Man once blended with God will never be separated ; 
light will be blended with light. 

Nanak, that man knoweth God whom he causeth to know 
Him through the Guru’s favour. 

God is ever young, and His name is ever holy :— 

The True One never groweth old, and His name is never 
defiled. 

He who walketh in the way of the Guru shall not be born 
again. 

Nanak, he who forgetteth the Name shall both come 
and go. 

He who obeys and loves the Almighty needs not 
fear death :— 

The order of the Unconcerned is over all ; no artifice can 
succeed and no argument prevail against Him. 

The holy man who effaceth himself, accepteth God’s will, 
secketh His protection, 

And renounceth his pride, shall not feel Death’s mace. 

Nanak, he is a worshipper who fixeth his love on the 
Tre One: 

The Creator and the creature contrasted :— 

All gifts, splendour, and beauty are Thine, O God ; 

Many artifices and pride are mine. 

They who harbour covetousness, worldly love, and pride 
shall never be free from transmigration, however many 
ceremonial acts they perform. 

Nanak, the Creator Himself causeth to act; what 
pleaseth Him 1s good. 

MALAR KI WAR 

The mental happiness obtained by heeding pious 
instruction :— 

On meeting the Guru the mind is happy as after rain the 
earth 1s decorated : 

Everything appeareth green, the lakes and pools are 
filled to the brim. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 243 

The colour of the True One attacheth to the heart as 
redness to madder. 

The lotus of the heart bloometh by obeying the True 
One ; man is rendered happy by the Gurw’s word. 

The perverse turn to worldly love ; carefully consider this. 

The god of death is seen standing over their heads as if 
they were ensnared deer. 

Avarice, covetousness, and slander are evil; lust and 
wrath terrible. 

God appeareth not to our eyes until we reflect on His 
word. 

They who please Thee, O God, acquire patience, and no 
longer have domestic entanglements. 

By serving the Guru man saveth his capital ;1 the Guru 
is a ladder and a boat of salvation. 

Nanak, they who love God obtain Him; Thou art true, 
O God, and true is he who obeyeth Thee. 

When the Guru instructs, the heart assumes a 
different colour. It is supposed that an Indian 
woman’s passions increase when there are clouds. 
Here she is considering what her relations with her 
spouse will be—whether he will withdraw or grant 
her his love. In the latter case she will be held 
to be imbued with a different colour. 

Lowering clouds come and give the earth different colours. 

I know not how long the love with which I have inspired 
my spouse will endure. 

The women shall be happy in whose hearts there are fear 
and love. 

Nanak, they who feel not fear and love are not happy. 

When lowering clouds come and the pure rain falleth, 

O Nanak, the women who have broken with their spouse 
are unhappy. 

When lowering clouds come and rain falleth continuously, 

O Nanak, the woman who acteth as her husband desireth, 
ever enjoyeth his embraces. 

1 His human birth; his soul does not descend to a lower animal. 
R2 

244 THE SIKH RELIGION 

It is God alone who sends rain :— 

Why stand ye up to look? unhappy people, this cloud 
can do nothing. 

It is He who sent the cloud ye should treasure in your 
hearts. 

He giveth Himself a residence in the hearts of those on 
whom He looketh with favour. 

Nanak, all on whom God looketh not with favour shall 
lament. 

As the chatrik is in need of rain, so is man in need 
of divine instruction :— 

O chatrik, every one longeth for Him on whom thou 
callest. 

When God is merciful it will rain, and the forests and 
glades become green. 

God is found by the Guru’s favour; few are they who 
know this. 

Resting or standing continually meditate on Him, and 
thou shalt be happy for ever and ever. 

Nanak, nectar ever raineth; God bestoweth it on the 
plous. 

God sends a divine teacher when required :— 

When the world is in distress, it heartily prayeth. 

The True One attentively listeneth and with His kind 
disposition? granteth consolation ! 

He giveth orders to the cloud-god and the rain falleth in 
toltents:- 

Then corn and wealth are produced in great abundance 
and of untold value. 

Nanak, praise His name who giveth to all creatures their 
sustenance, 

By eating whereof happiness is produced, and misery 
felt no more. 

1 Also translated—Of his own accord. 
2 The Guru gives copious instruction. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 245 

God knows man’s necessities better than he knows 
them himself :— 

O chatrik, cry not and allow not thy heart to long for 
water ; obey the order of the Lord. 

Nanak, by obeying His order thy thirst shall depart, and 
thou shalt have fourfold love for Him. 

There is no lack of divine instruction, but men 
recelve 1t not :— 

O chatrik, thy dwelling is in the water ; thou wanderest 
in the water ; 

Thou knowest not the water’s value and so thou fallest 
a-screaming. 

It raineth everywhere on sea and land ; there is no place 
without rain. 

So much rain falleth that they who are dying of thirst 
and receive tt not are unfortunate. 

Nanak, the pious in whose hearts God dwelleth find the 
water. 

It is they who are favoured by God who receive 
divine instruction :— 

This water raineth on every one; God by His kind 
disposition causeth it to fall. 

The trees which by the Guru’s instruction are absorbed 
in God become green. 

Nanak, the animals on which God looketh with favour 
become happy and their misery departeth. 

The bliss of those who receive divine instruction: — 

On a wet night there is lightning and it raineth in torrents : 

If it be the will of God, where it raineth much corn and 
wealth shall be produced, 

By using which the heart will be satisfied and men will 
perform their duties. 

This wealth is the sport of the Creator; it sometimes 
cometh and sometimes goeth ; 

1 Human beings thrive under divine instruction. 

246 THE SIKH RELIGION 

But the Name is the wealth of those who possess divine 
knowledge ;_ they are ever absorbed in it. 

Nanak, they on whom God looketh with favour, shall 
obtain this wealth. 

As the chatrik will not drink ordinary water, so 
men will not receive instruction :— 

This world is a chatrik ; let none make a mistake herein. 

This chatrik is an animal without understanding, other- 
«wise 1t would know 

That God’s name is nectar, by drinking which thirst 
departeth. 

Nanak, the pious who drink it shall not again be thirsty. 

When God is merciful men receive saving in- 
struction :— 

The Malar is refreshing ; by meditation on God in it 
comfort 1s obtained. 

If God show His mercy it raineth over the whole world. 

By rain animals obtain the means of subsistence, and the 
earth 1s decorated. 

Nanak, this world is all water; from water everything 
hath sprung. 

The few who know God by the Guru’s favour are ever 
emancipated. 

God, without being asked, gives man what 1s good 
for him :— 

O chatrik, thou knowest not the palace of the Lord ; 
When thou seest it: pray ticre, 

Thou pratest much to please thyself ; thy words are not 
acceptable. 

The Lord is very beneficent ; what thou desirest thou 
shalt obtain from Him. 

Then the world’s thirst to say nothing of thine, poor 
chatrik, shall depart.! 

1 As the chatrik wants special rain-drops, so the world seeks its 
own advantages. If the world accepted God's name, all unworthy 
desires should depart. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 247 

The chatrik, on obtaining the special drops it 
desires, 1s compared to the man disposed to receive 
instruction :— 

The chatrik on a rainy night naturally loving the True 
One crieth— 

‘ This water is my life; without water I cannot live.’ 

So by the Guru’s instruction the water of life is found 
when man dispelleth his pride. 

Nanak, the true Guru hath caused me to meet Him 
without whom I cannot live for a moment. 

God is not to be importuned for secular favours :— 

O chatrik, the chaste woman obtaineth access to hey 
spouse’s chamber ; the unchaste one is banished. 

Within thee, God dwelleth and is ever present with the 
holy. 

Thou shalt not have to shout and scream when God 
looketh on thee with favour. 

Nanak, they who love the Name and act according to the 
Guru’s instruction, shall be easily blended with God. 

In the following the chatrik represents the pious 
man praying for the gift of life :— 

The chatrik prayeth, ‘O God, mercifully grant me the 
gift of life ! 

‘Without water my thirst will not be quenched; I shall 
expire. 

* Thou O God, art the Giver of happiness, illimitable ; Thou 
art the Giver and treasury of favours.’ 

Nanak, God pardoneth the pious and at the last hour 
becometh their Friend. 

The worldly man, like the chatrik, accepts not 
what God grants him, but seeks his own advan- 
tages :— 

O chatrik, thou knowest not what thirst there is within 
thee, and by what draught it shall be quenched. 

Through worldly love thou wanderest, and the immortal 
water thou obtainest not. 

{ SIKH. 

248 THE SYR RELIGION 

If God cast His glance of favour, the true Guru will be 
easily found. 

Nanak, the immortal water will be obtained from him, 
and man will be easily absorbed in God. 

When man rises early for prayer his supplication 
is granted :— 

The chatrik calleth at the ambrosial hour of morning,! 
and his prayer is heard in God’s court. 

God mercifully issueth an order to the cloud to kindly 
Pali 

The joy felt by the holy in the rainy season :— 

Woman shall be happy in Sawan by reflecting on the 
Guru’s instruction. 

Nanak, by her unequalled love for the Guru she shall ever 
be a happy wife ; 

But she who is devoid of virtue, and who is attached to 
a second love shall burn in Sawan. 

Nanak, she careth not for her spouse, and therefore 
despiseth all decoration. 

SUPPLEMENTARY SLOKS 

In the opinion of the Guru forgetfulness of God’s 
name is the greatest sin. 

Saith Nanak, by forgetting the one Name sin is com- 
mitted equal zn the estimation of the Hindus to the killing of 
Brahmans, kine, and virgins, eating the food of the sinful, 

And the million transgressions which render men accursed 
and ever and ever victims of pride. 

Let all other wisdom depart, as long as the knowledge of 
the one God remaineth. 

The devotion of the saints is compared to that of 
the fond wife who cooks elaborate dishes for her 
spouse :— 

As a devoted wife in her husband’s house, intensely 
desiring to perform service for him, 

1 When a watch or about three hours of night still remain. 
2 So if a man rise early for prayer, God will hearken unto him. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 249 

Prepareth him viands of many savours, making some 
tart and others sweet ; 

Even with the same devotion the saints praise and apply 
their hearts to God’s name : 

They offer the Guru their souls, bodies, and wealth ; they 
would even sell their heads and place them before him. 

Many saints pray for the fear and service of God; God 
fulfilleth their desires, and blendeth them with Himself. 

The spiritual exaltation of the holy :— 

In the heart of the pious man is composure; his soul 
ascendeth to the tenth heaven, 

Where there is nor sleep nor hunger, and where God’s 
ambrosial name whitch conferreth bliss abideth. 

Nanak, sorrow is not felt where the light of God shincth. 

The fate of the perverse :— 

The perverse man is of unstable mind; in his heart he 
hath many artifices. 

What he hath done and what he doeth is all in vain; 
he is in no way acceptable. 

The fruit of his religious acts and alms shall all go to the 
king of death. 

Without the true Guru the king of death will not release 
him ; he shall be ruined by his worldly love. 

His youth glideth imperceptibly away, and on attaining 
old age he dieth without repentance. 

Children and wives are objects of affection, but at the 
last moment none of them will assist or accompany him. 

The condition of those who practise worldly love :— 

Worldly love is an ocean of sorrow, difficult to cross, nay, 
uncrossable. 

The perverse pass their lives in avarice and pine away 
talking of their possessions. 

They can neither retreat nor advance; they remain 
entangled in mid ocean. 

God may pardon man’s transgressions. The fol- 

250 THE SIKH RELIGION 

lowing is repeated by many Sikhs on rising in the 
morning :— 

We commit many sins of which there is no end. 

O God, be mercifully pleased to pardon them. 

We are great sinners and transgressors. 

O God, Thou pardonest and blendest unto Thee ;_ other- 
wise it will not come to our turn to be pardoned. 

The Guru graciously cut off our sins and transgressions 
by blending us with God. 

Hail to those, O Nanak, who have meditated on God’s 
nance. 

Kely not on the covetous :— 

As far as possible rely not on a covetous man ; 
At the last moment he will lead thee where nobody can 
lend thee a hand. 

The condition of the perverse :— 

The perverse are hke children and dotards whose hearts 
take no thought of God. 

The perverse and the pious contrasted :— 

How shall he who doeth evil be acceptable ? 

He shall burn in his own anger. 

The perverse man 1s a fool and worrieth himself with quar- 
relling. 

He who is pious knoweth everything. ee 

Nanak, the plous man struggleth with his own heart. 

¥ 

His singers represented to the Guru that the 
Dhanasari was a very popular measure, and that 
whenever they played or sang it they usually re- 
ceived large rewards from others. On this the Guru 
composed the following :— 

The Dhanasari measure is worthy of praise, brethren, if 
it perform the work of the True Guru.} 

Brethren, heartily entrust to Him thy body and soul along 
with thy life; turn away from the world and obey His order. 

1 If it be employed to sing God’s praises. 

HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 251 

Where He seateth you there sit, brethren ; and whither 
He sendeth you thither go. 

There is no wealth, brethren, so great as the true Name. 

May I ever sing the praises of the True One, brethren, and 
ever abide with the True One! 

Make God’s attributes and praises your raiment, brethren, 
and enjoy the relish of the honour He granteth you. 

Why merely praise Him, brethren ? You ought to offer 
sacrifices yourselves for a sight of Him. 

A man proud of his long beard went to visit 
Guru Angad, but would not bow to him. Guru 
Amar Das thus addressed the offender :— 

That is a real beard which toucheth the Guru’s feet. 

They who day and night serve their Guru ever abide in 
happiness ; 

Nanak, they are seen with beaming faces at the court of 
the True One. 

The advantage of possessing everything true :— 

When men speak the truth and act the truth, true are 
their mouths and true their beards. 

The true Word dwelleth in their hearts, and they shall be 
blended with the True Guru. 

From the capital springeth true wealth, and the highest 
rank is obtained. 

They who hear the truth, obey the truth, and practise 
truth, 

Shall obtain a seat in the True court, and be absorbed in 
the True One. 

Nanak, without the true Guru the True One shall not be 
obtained ; the perverse shall go astray. 

The advantage of meeting the Guru :— 

The chatrik crieth, ‘Prio, prio’ (Beloved! Beloved !) 
through love of the cloud. 

If it meet the Guru, it shall receive cool water to remove 
all its pain. 

Its thirst shall depart, composure ensue; and it shall 
cease its cries and screams. 

252 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Nanak, the pious who hold the Name to their hearts, 
obtain peace. 

The joy of him who is devoted to God :— 

Nanak, he who is absorbed in the service of the true 
Guru, enjoyeth perpetual spring. 

God is pleased with him, his mind and body bloom, and 
the whole world is clad in verdure for him. 

The orison of the holy :— 

At early dawn whose name should we take ? 
We should take the name of God who is omnipotent to 
destroy and to create. 

The inanimate world also praises the Creator :— 

O Persian wheel, thou also speakest well, saying * Tu, 
Tuy (Trou, Thom. + 

But the Lord is ever present ; why call to Him with a 
loud voice ? 

Man ought to be a sacrifice to Him who created the world 
and made creatures of different species. 

The forests and glades of the world meditate on Thee, 
O God, and thus ever pass their nights and days. 

Salvation is not obtained by wearing a sectarial 
dress :— 

Union with God is not obtained by an ochre-coloured 
robe, nor by a dirty garment : 

Nanak, it is obtained sitting in one’s own home under 
the Guru’s instruction. 

A perusal of the Veds will render man no assist- 
ance :— 

Wert thou to wander in all directions and read the Veds 
through the four ages, zt would be allin vain. 

Nanak, if thou meet the true Guru, God will dwell in thy 
heart, and thou shalt attain the gate of deliverance. 

1 The Guru deduces the original of these words from the sound of 
the Persian wheel in motion. 

Hige sue AS SekpsA) 

GURU RAM DAS RECEIVING HIS DISCIPLES 

SIKH II P. 253 

Elke OF GURU KRAME DAS, tHe 
FOURTH GURU 

CHAPTER [| 

Guru Ram Das’s parentage and birth, his early 
life, his meeting with Guru Amar Das, his marriage 
with Guru Amar Das’s daughter Bibi Bhani, and 
many other incidents in his life, have already been 
related in the Life of Guru Amar Das. 

The manner in which the Emperor Akbar bestowed 
several villages on Bibi Bhani, Guru Amar Das’s 
daughter, after they had been refused by her father, 
has also been narrated. She assigned them during 
her father’s lifetime to her husband. 

How the construction of the tank in Amritsar was 
entrusted to Jetha, and how he was appointed Guru 
Amar Das’s successor under the name of Guru Ram 
Das, have also been related. It needs hardly be said 
that Guru Ram Das adopted the principles and tenets 
of Guru Amar Das. 

The minstrel Satta dedicated to Guru Ram Das on 
his installation the seventh pauri of the composi- 
tion, which is known in the Granth Sahib as the 
joint production of Balwand and Satta, previously 
called the Coronation Ode. 

Hail! hail Guru Ram Das! God who created thee hath 
decorated thee. 

Complete are the miracles which the Creator Himself 
performed. 

The Sikhs and their congregation bowed to thee since 
God was with thee. 

Thou art immovable, unfathomable, unequalled ; thou 
hast no end or bounds. 

Thou didst save those who worshipped thee with love ; 

254 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou didst expel with ignominy! their former avarice, 
greed, lust, wrath, and worldly love with their train. 

Hail to thy place! true are those who abide in thy pre- 
Bece. 

Thou art Nanak, thou art Lahina, thou art Amar Das ; 
so I deem thee. 

When I saw the Guru my spirits were sustained. 

One day the Sikhs represented to the Guru: ‘The 
Purans describe the advantages of pilgrimages, and 
thou sayest that the repetition of the Name is the 
most efficacious form of worship. Be pleased to 
satisfy our minds on this subject. The Guru 
replied: “They who go on pilgrimages commit every 
species of enormity. Whatever good acts they per- 
form are merely for ostentation. They give alms 
to those who flatter them to their faces or speak 
well of them to others. How shall persons like that 
be saved ?’ The Guru then quoted the following 
hymn of Guru Nanak :— 

Shall I go to bathe at a place of pilgrimage ? God’s 
name is my place of pilgrimage. 

My places of pilgrimage are the Word, contemplation, and 
the divine knowledge within me. 

The divine knowledge given by the Guru is the true place 
of pilgrimage where the ten auspicious times for bathing 
and the Dasahra? are always present. 

I ever beg for God’s true name; grant it me, O God, 
Sustainer of the earth. 

1 Literally—having beaten them. 

* The Dasahra festival is held on the tenth day of the light half of 
the month of Jeth, May-June, in commemoration of the birth 
of the Ganges. The word is derived from dash, ten, and hara, 
to take away ; that is, the removal of ten great sins. The ten parads 
Or auspicious times for bathing are the eighth and the fourteenth 
of the lunar month, the day when no moon appears, the day when 
the moon is full, the first day of the solar month, the day of the new 
moon when it falls on a Sunday and the moon is in the mansion of 
Shrawan or Aquila, the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, eclipses of 
the sun and moon. Sardar Kahn Singh’s Gurumat Prabhakar. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 255 

The world is ill, the Name is its medicine ; without the 
True One the filth of sin attacheth to it. 

The Guru’s word is pure and ever diffuseth light ; ever 
bathe in such a true place of pilgrimage. 

Filth attacheth not to the true ; what filth have they to 
wash off ? 

Twine for thyself a garland of virtues, and then what 
shalt thou have to grieve for ? 

He who chasteneth himself by meditation shall be 
saved ; he shall save others and never again return to a 
womb. 

The supreme mediator is himself the philosopher’s stone ; 
the true are pleasing to the True One. 

They feel happiness and true joy night and day; their 
sorrow and their sins depart. 

The true Guru hath shown God to him who hath obtained 
the true Name; no impurity attacheth to him in whose 
hear isthe Tric-One, 

Association with the congregation of the saints is the 
perfect ablution. 

Sweet is the voice of the singer who singeth of God. 

Praising the True One and obeying the true Guru are in 
my opinion equal to alms-deeds, and works of mercy. 

He who loveth the society of the Beloved shall easily 
bathe in the society of those who are the truest of the true } 
as his Tribeni. 

Worship the one true God who ever giveth and whose 
gifts ever increase. 

Salvation is obtained by associating with saints; God 
associateth with the company of the saints him on whom 
He looketh with favour.” 

Every one giveth accounts of God ; how great shall I say 
Heis? 

I by myseif am a blockhead, low, and ignorant, but I 
understand Him from the Guru’s description. 

1 Sai Safle may also be translated—assuredly. 

2 Also translated—The society of the Friend is obtained from 
association with the saints; him on whom God casteth a favouring 
glance, He blendeth with Himself. 

2560 THE SIKH RELIGION 

True is the teaching of the Guru whose words are nectar : 
my heart is satisfied therewith. 

Man marcheth off to a place of pilgrimage and returneth 
laden with sin, while, if he had remained under the Guru’s 
instruction, he would have found the True One. 

There should be no end to speaking of God; He is the 
storekeeper of devotion and everywhere diffused. 

Nanak maketh a true representation—it is he who 
cleanseth his heart who is pure.} 

To this the Guru added the following hymn of his 
own :— 

The pandits read the Shastars and the Simritis, 

The Jogis cry ‘ Gorakh, Gorakh ’, 

But IT who am ignorant repeat God’s name. 

[ know not, O Lord, what my condition shall be. 

Worship God, O my soul, so shalt thou sail over the 
terrible ocean. 

The Sanyasis apply ashes to decorate their bodies, 

The Brahmacharis altogether avoid women ; 

But my hopes O God, ignorant though I am, are in Thee. 

The Khatri performeth deeds and obtaineth the rank of 
a hero: 

The Sudars and the Vaisyas work for others. 

God’s name hath saved me who am ignorant. 

The whole creation is Thine, Thou pervadest every place. 

Nanak, God giveth greatness to the holy. 

I being blind have set up God as my prop2 

The Guru continued: ‘Even if one go on a 
pilgrimage, the Name ought to be praised. Indeed, 
it 1s by praising the Name all advantages, whether 
temporal or spiritual, are obtained ; and it was for 
the magnification of the Name places of pilgrimages 
were established on spots frequented by great 
Rikhis and Munis who had spent their days in that 
form of devotion. On the other hand, making 
pilgrimages involveth great sufferings and ruffleth 

1 Dhandsari Chhant. © Gaunt 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 284 

the temper, whereas the pilgrimage of the Name 
requireth no exertion and causeth no exasperation. 
What is even the Tribeni—a place so holy in the 
estimation of the Hindus ? The Tribeni of the Sikhs 
is to repeat God’s name, sing His praises, and know 
Him present in every heart. Without intelligence 
and discrimination men go astray at pilgrimages. 
What pilgrimages did Kabir and Rav Das make? 
Yet they obtained salvation and are reverenced by 
the world. They each abode in a hut at the pil- 
grimage of the Name. The restraint of their desires 
they made the four walls of their lowly dwellings. 
Love and devotion were their roofs, and divine 
knowledge and meditation the beams on which 
they rested. They kept the love of God in their 
hearts to preserve them from the rain of -bad com- 
pany, the cold of superstition, and the heat of 
avarice. By dwelling in such huts men need not 
wander on pilgrimages, and may easily obtain 
deliverance from transmigration.’ 

Sri Chand, the elder son of Baba Nanak, wore 
long hair, wandered a naked hermit, and established 
the sect of the Udasis. He would not go to meet 
either Guru Angad or Guru Amar Das, but, now 
that a long time had elapsed since his father’s death, 
and he had partially forgotten his imaginary griev- 
ances, he thought he would visit Guru Ram Das. 
When he arrived in the suburbs of Goindwal, the 
Guru went and took him, as the son of Guru Nanak, 
an offering of sweets and five hundred rupees in 
money. Sri Chand on beholding Guru Ram Das, 
thought him the very image of Guru Nanak. In 
the course of conversation Sri Chand remarked to 
him that he had grown a long beard. The Guru 
replied, “ Yes, I have grown a long beard that I may 
wipe thy feet therewith’; whereupon the Guru 
proceeded to suit the action to the word. Sri Chand 
felt abashed, drew back his feet from the Guru, and 
said, “O great king, thou art senior, thou art in my 

SIKH. II S 

258 THE SIKH RELIGION 

father’s place. It is magic like this which hath 
made thee a Guru. I possess no such power, and 
therefore was I superseded. I cannot express thy 
greatness. The Sikhs who come to behold thee shall 
be saved.’ 

One day the Guru, while meditating on Guru 
Amar Das, remembered that he had received from 
him a parting injunction to preach the true Name 
everywhere, and make a supreme place of pilgrimage 
at Amritsar. He asked his brothers-in-law, Mohan 
and Mohri, to accompany him thither for the pur- 
pose, but they refused. He went himself and spent 
several months there excavating the tank ordered 
by Guru Amar Das. In process of time a deputa- 
tion of Sikhs came to him from Lahore inviting him 
to extend his journey to their ancient city. They 
said, ‘Since thy parents died, thou hast not visited 
thy birth-place. Return home, meet thy relations, 
preach to the Sikhs, and bless thy city. Wherever 
thou treadest, thou savest numberless sinners.’ 

The Guru accordingly proceeded to Lahore. As 
he approached that city, his relations and Sikhs 
came forth to meet him. He remained there for 
some time, turned his parents’ house into a temple, 
and built a well near it for the devotional ablutions 
of his followers. During his sojourn in his natal 
city he made many converts. It is said that his 
person and his words possessed such attractive 
power, that all who came under his influence felt 
constrained to embrace his religion. In due time 
he returned to Goindwal. 

CHAPTER II 

A company of Jogis with their superior went to 
make trial of the Guru. They said: ‘ Great king, 
thy Sikhs practise not Jog with its eight limbs or 
accessories, and without doing so the mind is never 
at peace. Until the mind is at peace, God 1s not 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 259 

obtained ; until God is obtained salvation is im- 
possible ; and until salvation is obtained the soul 
shall wander through the eighty-four lakhs of exist- 
ences. QO Guru, how can thy Sikhs obtain salva- 
tion? What advantage do they gain by serving 
thee 2 

The Guru replied: ‘As the teats on a goat’s neck 
yield no milk, so Jog without piety yieldeth no 
advantage. My Sikhs are family men, and may 
obtain salvation in that condition of life. It would 
be impossible for them to practise Jog. The best 
means of practising Jog is the repetition of the 
Name. The Name is implanted in the hearts of 
my Sikhs, and they repeat it day and night. All 
persons in whose hearts there are love and devotion, 
shall undoubtedly obtain deliverance from trans- 
migration. Wealth or supernatural power may 
strive to lead them astray, but will not succeed. 
Profit or loss, joy or sorrow, praise or blame never 
cause them to waver. At every breath they repeat 
the Name of Sri Wahguru, the immortal God. They 
never incline to mammon or worldly advantages, 
since they know that all such things are perishable 
and delusive like a mirage. He who hath not divine 
knowledge, is like a man in a lonely forest in the 
heat of the year, who searcheth for water but findeth 
only a sandy waste. The sun above him burneth 
his head, the sand beneath him his feet, and he 
findeth no respite from his sufferings. He who on 
the contrary hath divine knowledge, knoweth that 
it is not water, but a sea of sand that is before him, 
that everything is false and that God alone is true. 
Without love and devotion to God all other means 
of obtaining salvation are unprofitable. O Jogis, it 
is very difficult even for yourselves to practise Jog 
in this age, and you can never obtain perfection by 
it. Even if you obtain supernatural power, it is 
very difficult to fix your attention on God, for the 
mind wandereth in every direction, and is not at 

S 2 

260 THE SIKH RELIGION 

rest even for a moment. But, supposing it were 
possible to practise Jog, thoughts of wealth and 
supernatural power would ultimately lead men 
astray. Their desire is to obtain money, beautiful 
women, fame, greatness, and honour. In such 
aspirations man forgetteth God. They who know 
Him are never led astray. However potent their 
temptations may be, they conquer them, and there- 
fore enjoy the sweets of divine knowledge and medi- 
tation. A man may wear a Jogi’s garb, but without 
devotion in his heart God never entereth it. It 
must be one of our main objects to extricate our- 
selves from the mire of the world.’ The Guru com- 
pleted his instructions to the Jogis by repeating to 
them the following hymn :— 

O Jogi, when thou touchest the strings only with thy 
hands, thy lute is played in vain. 

Under the Guru’s instruction utter God’s praises, O Jogi, 
and dye thy soul with the dye of God’s love. 

O Jogi, teach thine intellect divine instruction. 

The one God existeth in every age, I bow before Him. 

Thou singest in many measures and arguest in many ways, 
but thy heart is only playing a game. 

Thou desirest to work thy well and water the ground after 
the oxen have gone to pasture. 

Perform the duty of sowing God’s name in the soil of thy 
body ; God will then germinate and there shall be a verdant 
field. 

Yoke a constant mind for a bullock and by means of it 
irrigate thy love of God with the Guru’s instruction. 

Jogis, Jangams and all creation, O Lord, are Thine ;_ they 
walk by the wisdom Thou givest. 

O Lord of slave Nanak, searcher of hearts, turn my soul 
unto Thee.! 

On account of the general impression produced 
by the Guru’s teaching, people of every class and 
religion flocked to see and hear him, and there was 

1 Asa. 

Piet OF GURU KAM DAS 261 

a great accession of converts. Several persons, as 
usual in such cases, became envious of his fame and 
success, and foremost among them was a third Tapa 
or penitent He said: ‘This is really the terrible 
Kal age. I a penitent bear cold and heat, yet 
people heed me not, while they reverence this 
married man asa guru.’ Thus the Tapa spluttered, 
and foamed, and impotently raged. One day he 
repaired to the Guru’s court and thus addressed 
him: ‘O Guru, thy Sikhs are very proud; they 
accept not the Veds or Shastars; they make no 
pilgrimages ; nor do they fast, perform the usual 
religious duties of Hindus, or practise austerities of 
any sort. They only reverence thee and recognize 
thy compositions. Their adoration is confined to 
the utterance of Wahguru. These misguided people 
are losing the advantages of their human birth. 
Pray tell me, sir, however can they go to heaven ?’ 

The Guru replied: “O Tapa, my Sikhs desire not 
heaven. Heaven they deem not fit reward for their 
merits. They never engage in worship which 1s 
merely intended for the admiration of the public. 
Their minds are absorbed in God’s love. That is 
their heaven and their salvation. Thou knowest not 
the glory of the saints. Thou hast forsaken the real 
thing, attached thyself to false ceremonies, and for- 
feited thy salvation. Thy mind is filled with pride. 
Through pride and boasting men completely lose 
their way in this world. Without faith no devotion, 
penance, or worship availeth. They who possess no 
faith are drowned in lust, wrath, worldly love, 
covetousness, pride, and whatever else there is of 
evil. It is not so with my Sikhs. Their confidence 
and trust are reposed in the one immortal God. 
At every breath they repeat His name, and thus 
easily merit salvation. They need not penances or 
pilgrimages. They are in themselves pure and holy 

1 Accounts of the Tapa who opposed Guru Angad and of the Tapa 
who opposed Guru Amar Das have already been given. 

262 THE SIKH RELIGION 

places.’ The Guru composed the following on the 
occasion :— 

The Ganges, the Jamna, the Godavari, and the Saraswati 
make efforts to obtain the dust of the saints’ feet. 

They say * The filth of sin which falleth into us from 
those who are full of it, is washed away by the dust of the 
Saints feet.” 

Bathe in the Name as in the sixty-eight places of pil- 
grimage. 

When the dust of the saints’ feet riseth and falleth into 
the eyes, it removeth all the filth of evil inclinations. 

Bhagirath ! by penance brought down the Ganges, and 
Shiv established Kedarnath 2? and Banaras ; 

Krishan herded cows in Bindraban ; but it was by pro- 
ducing saints of God that all these places became famous. 

All the places of pilgrimage which the gods established 
long for the dust of the saints’ feet, and say— 

‘When we meet a saint of God and a holy man of the 
Guru, we will apply the dust of his feet to our foreheads.’ 

O my Lord, all Thy creation longeth for the dust of the 
saints’ feet. 

Nanak, God granteth the dust of the saints’ feet to him 
on whose forehead it hath been written, and saveth him.’ 

It is said the Tapa was convinced on hearing this 
hymn, and embraced the Sikh religion. 

The Guru occupied most of his time in composing 
hymns breathing great devotional fervour and in 
receiving and addressing his Sikhs. Piles of wealth 
were offered him, but his thoughts turned not in 
that direction. 

Among the Sikhs at Goindwal was a simple man 
called Handal, a native of Jandiala in the present 

1 Sagara was king of Ajudhia. Bhagirath, a descendant of his, 
performed austerities which induced Shiv to allow the Ganges to 
descend to the earth for the purpose of bathing the ashes of Sagara’s 
sons who had been consumed by the wrath of the sage Kapila. 

2 Kedarnath, a place of pilgrimage in the Himalayas sacred to 

the god Shiv, who is there represented as a shapeless mass of rock. 
oerialar. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 263 

district of Amritsar, who was ever on the alert to 
perform submissive service for the Guru. Handal 
continually repeated God’s name, conversed with 
no one, and remained absorbed in devotion. He 
was unaffected by joy or sorrow, and every one 
loved him on account of his child-like nature ; but 
he himself bore neither love nor hate to any one, 
and was known as a saint. One day the Guru 
went to visit his kitchen. There he saw willing 
Sikhs at work. Handal, who was kneading flour at 
the time, was delighted to see him, and prepared 
to prostrate himself before him. As the wet flour 
was adhering to his hands, he put them behind his 
back, so that they might not be seen, and then 
threw himself at the Guru’s feet. The Guru was 
eratified on seeing his true and humble devotion— 
“O Handal, thy love is pleasing to my soul; thou 
hast prostrated thyself in a new manner. Thy 
service is complete. What thou desirest, that will 
I give thee. The Guru blessed him, gave him a 
robe of honour, granted him deliverance, and thus 
addressed him: ‘ Return to thy native town, repeat 
the Name, initiate Sikhs, and keep them on the 
Guru’s way. Have confidence in none but the 
Creator and the true Guru.’ Handal went home, 
and lived in Jandiala, where a shrine has been 
erected in his honour. His followers do not per- 
form the Hindu obsequies, nor take the bones of 
the dead to the Ganges. The vessels and clothes 
offered by the Hindus to the dead, to wear on their 
journey, are by the Handalis applied to their own 
wants instead of being distributed to the inferior 
priests who minister at Hindu funeral rites. Strange 
to say, it was the descendants of this pious man who 
introduced falsehood into the lives of the Gurus, 
and destroyed the first authentic accounts of their 
lives. 

264 THE SIKH RELIGION 

CHAPTER III 

About that time Gur Das, author of ‘Wars’ 
and ‘Kabits’, went to visit the Guru. He pro- 
strated himself before him and said, ‘ My lord, thou 
art the honour of the unhonoured, the life of the 
holy, the protector of the poor. I have come to 
seek thy protection. Make me a disciple of thine.’ 
The Guru was ever pleased to accede to such a 
request, and, having heard of Gur Das’s good 
report as a Sikh, directed him to go to Agra and 
preach the Sikh religion there. Bhai Gur Das be- 
came a famous and successful preacher. He sent 
several of the Agra Sikhs to the Guru, who taught 
them the advantages of human birth and the neces- 
sity of working out ultimate salvation therein. The 
Guru at that time composed the following for the 
instruction of his Sikhs in the practice of their 
religion :— 

Let him who calleth himself a Sikh of the true Guru, rise 
early and meditate on God ; 

Let him exert himself in the early morning, bathe in the 
tank of nectar, 

Repeat God’s name under the Guru’s instruction, and all 
his sins and trangressions shall be erased. 

Let him at sunrise sing the Guru’s hymns, and whether 
sitting or standing meditate on God’s name. 

The disciple who at every breath meditateth on God, will 
please the Guru’s heart. 

The Guru communicateth instruction to that disciple of 
his to whom my Lord is merciful. 

The slave Nanak prayeth for the dust of the feet of that 
Guru’s disciple who himself repeateth God’s name and 
causeth others to do so.2 

The Guru again reminded his disciples of the order 
of Guru Amar Das to make a nectareous tank—the 

1 Saray Parkash, Ras 11, Chapter 14. 
"aun kr war I. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 265 

sacred Sikh tank in Amritsar—as a second place of 
Sikh pilgrimage, and exhorted them to assist in 
completing the work he had begun. The Guru and 
his party proceeded to a thick forest filled with 
luxuriant Indian trees. He rested beneath the shade 
of the shisham tree near which he had previously 
laid out the tank and done some excavation. 

The Kardar, or magistrate and revenue collector, 
of Patti, a town in the Lahore district, had five 
daughters, but was not favoured with a son. All 
the daughters are described as beautiful, virtuous, 
and obedient. Four of them were married, and 
happened at the time to be visiting their parents, 
but the youngest had not yet been even betrothed. 
One day the whole five went to bathe and enjoy 
the fresh air in their father’s country garden. As 
they were returning home, they met a company of 
saints engaged in divine worship. One of the saints 
burst forth into God’s praises. The four married 
ladies went home, while the unmarried one remained 
to hear the holy man as he sang the eighth slok of 
the Asa ki War. 

The saint thus concluded his discourse: ‘God is 
the Cherisher and Lord of all. He is the Cause of 
causes. He setteth everything in motion, and hold- 
eth everything in His own power. It is the one 
God who destroyeth and preserveth, who produceth 
and cherisheth.” When the young lady heard this 
and similar instruction, divine love sprang up within 
her. She then and there divested herself of her 
jewels and superfluous costly raiment, and distributed 
them among the saints. Having thus gratified her 
spiritual promptings she went home, and there con- 
tinued to be absorbed in God’s love. She lost no 
time in communicating to her sisters the instruction 
and spiritual satisfaction she had received. 

When her mother heard that her youngest daughter 
had suddenly undertaken the réle of preacher, she 
became very angry, and informed her husband. The 

266 THE SEKH RELIGION 

father, in order to make trial of his daughters, sum- 
moned them all to his presence, and asked who gave 
them to eat and drink, and who cherished and pro- 
tected them. The four married daughters bowing 
to their father said, that it was their parents who 
had provided them with food and cherished and 
protected them. The jewels and ornaments and 
everything they possessed had been the gifts of their 
parents. The father, seeing that his youngest 
daughter was silent, inquired the cause. She then 
found utterance: ‘The one God alone is the Cherisher 
of creation. Parents are only a pretext.’ Her father 
was very angry on hearing this reply, and again 
addressed her: “Who hath given thee clothes and 
jewels?’ She replied: ‘Father dear, all are God’s 
gifts. It is the Creator who bestoweth everything. 
He giveth to thee and to me, and protecteth us all.’ 
The father replied, “I shall see if God will protect 
thee: 

After some time a leprous cripple came to the 
town. His flesh, where not melting away, was eaten 
by worms, and his whole body emitted a foul odour. 
To such a man did the angry father marry his pious 
daughter without her consent and without a dowry. 
He stripped her even of the jewels and dresses she 
had retained after her offerings to the saints. It 
was impossible for her to be pleased with her hus- 
band, yet she bore her evil fate with fortitude, and 
said: ‘O God, although I can have no happiness in 
this world with my husband, yet Thou art my true 
Lord and Creator. Thou cherisheth the eighty-four 
lakhs of existences, and wilt also cherish me.’ Saying 
this she set herself to wait on her leprous spouse, as 
if he were her god. She begged from door to door, 
thus maintained him and herself, and wore out her 
days of sorrow. 

One day her husband addressed her: ‘My be- 
loved, my beautiful, other people shun me in disgust, 
and will not even touch me, but thou waitest on 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 267 

me with extreme self-devotion. I have now one 
more request to make thee. By granting it God 
will vouchsafe thee thy reward.’ She replied, * My 
body and soul are thine, and as thou orderest so 
shall I do.’ Then her husband said: ‘I was born 
a cripple, and I afterwards contracted leprosy. I am 
weak, poor, and miserable. Far from being able to 
serve others, I cannot maintain myself. Attached 
to me thou hast undergone great hardship and 
misery. I have now suffered for my evil acts in 
former states of existence, but I have done nothing 
good even in this life. Now do me this last favour 
by taking me to a place of pilgrimage, that I may 
endeavour to earn salvation hereafter.’ 

She procured a basket, put her husband into it, 
and tenderly bore him on her head to Hardwar, 
Tribeni, and other places of Hindu pilgrimage in the 
hope of curing him of his malady. Wandering and 
wandering, she by the divine guidance of piety and 
virtue arrived footsore and weary at the very spot 
which the third Guru had indicated and the fourth 
Guru had marked out as the site of his tank of 
nectar, and there laid down her burden. She and 
her husband were soon seized with an imperious 
desire for food, and bethought them how it was to 
be obtained. After much discussion, during which 
the wife expressed her reluctance to leave her hus- 
band, it was decided that he should remain under 
a ber tree in the cool and grateful proximity of the 
water, while she departed to the nearest village to 
beg their daily meal. The leper, left alone, saw two 
crows fighting. One had a piece of bread in its 
mouth, which the other tried to snatch. While they 
were struggling, the bread fell into the pool. Both 
birds swooped down upon it. On emerging from 
the tank’s tiny wavelets they became swans of 
singular whiteness, and flew to Mansarowar, a lake 
in Tibbat (Thibet) supposed by the Indians to be the 
natal place of those beautiful birds. The leper saw 

268 THE SIKH RELIGION 

that the water possessed marvellous healing and 
cleansing properties, and at once determined to test 
its efficacy on himself. He left his basket and 
crawled into the water. The leprosy at once dis- 
appeared from the whole of his body except one 
finger by which he had held on to a branch of the 
ber tree on the margin. Not only had the leprosy 
disappeared, but he who had hitherto been a cripple 
was restored to health and the splendour of manly 
beauty, and he calmly awaited the return of his 
darling and faithful spouse from her mendicant 
excursion. 

On arriving, her consternation knew no bounds. 
In the perfect proportions of the man who stood 
before her, she could not discover her husband, the 
recent crippled and maimed leper, and she shrank 
from his embrace with all the indignation of out- 
raged virtue. In vain did he essay to explain to 
her the cause of his metamorphosis. She inter- 
rupted his narrative with tears and imprecations. 
Her belief was, that the stranger before her had 
killed her husband, and now presented himself as 
an unholy lover in her helplessness and bereave- 
ment. The quarrel waxed hot between husband 
and wife. She refused to accept his statements, and 
he felt mortified at the incredulity of his hitherto 
peerless spouse. emonstrance and argument had 
no effect on her, and feminine obstinacy temporarily 
triumphed. With ceaseless objurgations and moni- 
tions of divine vengeance she hastened from the 
presence of the man she believed guilty of such 
great enormity, to mourn her darling leper in some 
remote and forlorn solitude. 

Some villagers who had accidentally seen the 
occurrence, bore witness to the fact that it was really 
the same man she had brought in her basket. The 
lady still remained sceptical. On this they told her 
that Guru Ram Das, a famous saint of God, was 
sitting under a tree not far distant, and if she went 

Piri OF GURU KARP DAS 269 

to him he would resolve her doubts. Accordingly 
she and her husband appeared before him. The 
wife after compliments said: “I am a virtuous 
woman. I left my leprous husband here and he 
hath disappeared. This man whom I know not, 
claimeth to be he, but I believe he is some deceitful 
person who hath a design on my virtue. I deem 
not that this pool possesseth such extraordinary 
efficacy as he allegeth.’ The Guru smiled and said: 
‘Thou sayest this pool hath no such efficacy. It is 
in fact supreme among all places of pilgrimages. If 
thou even yet believe not, see this man is affected 
with leprosy in one finger. Let him dip it into the 
water, and thou shalt see the result. And whoever 
batheth in this tank shall obtain balm for his wounded 
spirit!’ The late leprous cripple put his finger into 
the water and it was immediately healed. Thus 
was his wife doubly convinced that it was in reality 
her husband who had accosted her, and that the 
pool possessed miraculous virtues. The ber tree still 
on the spot is that under which she left her crippled 
husband. The place is called the Dukhbhanjan1, or 
destroyer of sorrow. 

After the conjugal reconciliation through the kind 
offices of the Guru, the faithful couple embraced his 
religion, and the quondam leper and cripple assisted 
him in enlarging the tank, building to it flights of 
descending steps, and rearing on its margin imposing 
edifices for divine praise and prayer, worthy of the 
miraculous discovery of the water and its still more 
miraculous virtue. 

His Sikhs were rejoiced on seeing the Guru’s 
participation in this miracle, and the magistrate of 
Patti was astonished on hearing of it. He recognized 
the Guru as a real saint of God, made him offerings, 
and prostrated himself before him. The magistrate 
was delighted on again beholding his daughter and 
seeing her husband restored to ordinary human 
shape and vigour. Having no son he adopted his 

270 THE SIKH RELIGION 

completely healed son-in-law. The Guru on that 
occasion composed the following :— 

God is very dear to the hearts of those who have met the 
society of the saints and whose souls are fascinated by the 
Word. 

Repeat God’s name, meditate on God; it is He who 
conferreth gifts on all. 

O my brethren, God fascinateth my soul. 

I sing God’s praises ; His servant is honoured by meeting 
the Guru and the society of saints. 

The service of God under the Guru’s instruction is an 
ocean of happiness; through it wealth, prosperity, and 
supernatural power fall at man’s feet. 

They whose support is God’s name utter it and are adorned 
thereby. 

They who feel angry on hearing the Name are devoid of 
good fortune and possess a bad and worthless understanding. 

Thou mayest throw ambrosia to crows and ravens, but 
they will only satiate themselves with filth and ordure. 

The true Guru, the true speaker is a lake of nectar} by 
bathing wherein crows become swans. 

Nanak, blessed, and great, and very fortunate are they 
whose hearts’ filth is washed away by God’s name under 
the Guru’s instruction? 

The magistrate, on hearing this, became ashamed 
of his previous perversity. He made over all his 
property to his son-in-law, went to serve the Guru, 
and put himself under his instruction and spiritual 
protection.® 

The Guru, telling his Sikhs that Santokhsar, the 
first tank he had undertaken, should be finished by 
his successor, set about completing his Amritsar, or 

1 Amritsar. 2 Gajari. 

% In the Stray Parkash, Ras Il, Chapter 37 et seq., all this is 
represented to have occurred in the time of Guru Arjan. It is not 
likely that Guru Rim Das would have neglected to carry out the 
work which he himself had begun under the order of his beloved 
father-in-law, the third Guru. Even the author of the S#raj Parkash 
himself throws a doubt on his own narrative. Ras II, 39. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 271 

tank of nectar, as a place of pilgrimage for his 
followers. He induced all his Sikhs to join in the 
work, under Bhai Budha’s superintendence, and en- 
gaged labourers to assist them. He said that the 
tank of nectar should be God’s home, and whoever 
bathed 1n it should obtain all spiritual and temporal 
advantages. During the progress of the work the 
hut in which the Guru first sheltered himself was 
enlarged for his residence. It is now known as the 
Guru’s Mahal, or palace. 

CHAPTER IV 

Although the Guru's Sikhs, followers, and admirers 
of every class came to assist in the excavation of 
the tank, yet money was necessary to pay further 
labourers and maintain the Guru’s kitchen. Ac- 
cordingly Bhai Budha and the foremost Sikhs one 
day waited on the Guru and represented that further 
funds were necessary for the completion of the work. 

The Guru, after reflection, decided to send his 
agents to different countries to spread the Sikh 
religion and also collect the offerings of the faithful. 
Such agents were called masands. In the time of 
the Aighan kings, nobles were styled Masnad-i-ali. 
Hence the word masnad was employed as an ordinary 
appellation of courtiers. From its frequent use it 
was changed in the mouths of Sikhs into masand. 
The Guru was called Sacha Padshah, or the true 
king, so his agents were styled masands.*_ For some 
time after their appointment they sent large sums 
to the Guru, but they afterwards became a generally 
dishonest body of men, not contributing to the 
Guru’s treasury, and grasping power as opportunity 
offered. 

An aged couple went to the Guru and prayed 
him to grant them the favour of a son. He replied 
that a son was not recorded in their destiny. They 

1 Dabistan-1-Mazahib. 

272 THE SIKH RELIGION 

said they knew that, but they had come to him to 
reverse the decree of fate. The Guru then informed 
them that four sons were to be born to himself, but 
he would give them one of them and content him- 
self with three. After this Bhagtu! was born to 
the aged couple. 

Some Jogis who had previously visited the Guru 
thought they would return to him to ascertain 
whether the extension of his fame had filled his 
heart with pride. They were delighted at finding 
him possess the same humility, the same suavity, 
and the same toleration of indignities as before. They 
then begged him to give them instruction. Full of 
self-abasement the Guru uttered the following :— 

The heart coveteth gold and women, and sweet to it is 
worldly love. 

Man turneth his mind to palaces, mansions, horses, and 
other pleasures. 

O my Lord God, how shall I be saved who think not on 
Thee ? 

O my God, such base acts have been mine. 

Thou, O God, who possessest excellences and art com- 
passionate, mercifully pardon all my sins. 

No beauty is mine, no high birth, and no manners. 

What dare I without merits say in Thy presence since 
I have not uttered Thy name ? 

We sinners shall be saved with the Guru. This is the 
true Guru’s favour. 

God gave all men souls, bodies, mouths, noses, and water 
to use ; 

He gave them corn to eat, clothes to wear, and pleasures 
to enjoy. 

He who gave them is not remembered by man ; the brute 
thinketh that he hath made them all himself ; 

Whereas it is Thou, O Searcher of hearts, who hast made 
all things and pervadest them. 

* This man Bhagtu is ancestor of the Kaithal family and also of 
the Rais of Arnauli in the Ambala district. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 273 

What can we poor creatures do? This is all Thy play, 
Lora: 

Humble Nanak purchased in the market is a slave of the 
slaves of God.! 

On the text that no one can be relied on except 
God the Guru uttered the following :— 

Some rely ? on their friends, their sons, and their brothers ; 

Some rely on their marriage relations, and their sons-in- 
aw ; 

Some for a special object rely on their king and their 
headman, 

But I rely on God who is everywhere contained. 

My reliance is on God ; God is my prop. 

I have no party or faction except God ; I sing His mani- 
fold and unnumbered praises. 

What man relieth on is perishable ; 

He who relieth on what is false shall repent of it. 

The man who doeth base things shall not be lasting. 

My reliance is on God than whom none is more powerful. 

All other reliance is an illusion of Maya. 

The pagans burn for mammon. 

They suffer transmigration and lose their game. 

I rely on God who adjusteth everything in this world 
and the next. 

Lust, wrath, avarice, worldly love, and pride have in- 
creased ; 

And, on account of the quarrels resulting from these deadly 
sins, there are many factions in this age. 

God causeth him to whom He is merciful to meet the 
society of the saints. 

My partisan is God who hath destroyed all other partisans. 

They who feel false worldly love, sit down and form 
factions. 

They guess the faults of others and increase their own 
conceit. 

As they sow so shall they eat. 

> Gauni 
-® Dhara is literally a party or faction. 

SIKH. It 

274 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Nanak’s reliance is on the faith of God which conquereth 
the whole world.! 

The Guru then turning to his Sikhs counselled 
them to consult God in all undertakings, and He 
would render them assistance. 

Whatever work you desire to do tell it to God, 

And He will accomplish it; the true Guru beareth true 
witness to this. 

By the company and munificence of the saints you shall 
taste nectar. 

Destroyer of fear, Kind One, preserve the honour of Thy 
slave. 

Nanak, sing God’s praises, and thou shalt find Him 
though unseen ¢éo the world 

Put aside lust, wrath, falsehood, and slander ; renounce 
mammon, and cease to be proud. 

Renounce lust for woman, renounce worldly love, then 
shalt thou obtain the Bright One in this dark world. 

Renounce ideas of honour or dishonour and love of sons 
and wives; renounce greed and desire, and fix thine at- 
tention on God. 

Nanak, he in whose heart the True One dwelleth, shall 
by means of the true Word be absorbed in God’s name.® 

One TJiratha went to the Guru to be instructed 
how he could free himself from his sins and obtain 
mental peace. The Guru replied: “Ever speak the 
truth, than which there is nothing more meritorious. 
The true Guru will ever assist him who speaketh 
the truth. God is truth, and he who speaketh truth 
shall be absorbed in Him.’ 

Three Sikhs, Bishan Das, Manak Chand, and Puru 
went to visit the Guru, and begged him to give 
them instruction for their own salvation and that 
of their families. The Guru bade them serve Sikhs 
and induce their relations to do likewise. Bishan 

1 Asa. 2 Sri Rag ki War. 3 Majh ki War. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 275 

Das, Manak Chand, and Puru were further directed 
to consider their families as God’s gift, and repeat 
with them the Creator’s name. 

The Guru instructed Maiya, Japa, Kanaiya, and 
Tulsa to love the Guru’s hymns beyond their own 
affairs. ‘Whenever you read the Guru’s hymns, 
keep your attention on their meaning, and never 
allow your minds to wander. As a sick horse is 
curbed to receive medicine, so must the mind be 
restrained for the purpose of receiving the Guru’s 
hymns and their advantages. Withdraw your minds 
from evil, and reflect on what the Guru said and 
what is due to yourselves.’ 

seven Sikhs, named Dharam Das, Dugar Das, Dipa, 
Jetha, Sansari, Bula, and Tirath, asked the Guru to 
tell them how they could be saved. He replied as 
follows: ‘In the first place, abandon mental pride, 
adopt humility, slander not, eschew vice, serve out 
of your own resources the Sikhs who visit you. 
Cheerfully give them food and clothing. Grant 
their requests and refuse them not. When a Sikh 
hath an important work in hand, join him and pray 
for him ; and if you see that it cannot be accomplished 
without money, collect subscriptions for him from 
every quarter, and at the same time contribute 
yourselves. Bring a Sikh work to completion, and 
you shall obtain the essence of happiness. When- 
ever there is a congregation of the holy, cause the 
word of God to be adequately preached and sung. 
Go devoutly thither in the evening and the morning, 
and imbue your minds with love. To the best of 
your ability rear to God a beautiful temple, and 
appoint thereto a priest who is competent to ex- 
pound His word. Let the wayfarer ever be fed, 
whether by one Sikh or by many together. Re- 
member the Name, and you shall obtain indescribable 
spiritual advantage therefrom. Serve the holy, than 
which there is no greater work of charity. By 
attending to these instructions you shall obtain 

T 2 

276 THE SIRT RELIGION 

happiness in this world and dwell near your Guru 
in the next.’ 

While the tank was being excavated, dwellings 
arose in the vicinity for the accommodation of the 
Guru’s Sikhs, visitors, and workmen ; and in time 
a beautiful city was constructed, which was at first 
called Ramdaspur,' or the city of Ram Das, and 
finally Amritsar, as it is now known. 

Sahari Mal, the Guru’s first cousin, came from 
Lahore specially to invite him to grace his son’s 
marriage with his presence. The Guru represented 
all the difficulties there would be were he to leave 
Amritsar. Sikhs were daily coming to see him and 
receive instruction, and it would be improper for him 
to neglect his duty as Guru. In the second place, 
wherever he went he was accompanied by a large 
crowd of followers ; and it would not be right to 
impose the burden of feasting them all on the parents 
of the bride. In lieu of himself the Guru consented 
to send one of his sons. He addressed Prithi 
Chand, generally known as Prithia, but he made 
excuses. He said that he had never before been 
separated from his father, and he did not wish to 
leave him now. He represented how important it 
was that he should remain at home to take charge 
of the offerings, and to ensure that they were not 
misappropriated. It was also necessary for him to 
attend the Guru’s kitchen, and take care that 
strangers received due attention. The Guru replied 
that his own business was never interrupted, and 
some other Sikh would willingly undertake Prithia’s 
duties. Prithia finally urged that he dreaded the 
turmoil of weddings, and should feel unhappy if he 
went. Prithia had two motives of his own for 
refusing. He was in charge of the offerings, and 
was able to furtively set aside much wealth for him- 

1 This name, well known in former times, of the present city of 
Amritsar furnishes an additional proof that Guru Ram Das continued 
the work he had begun under his predecessor. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 274 

self. If he went to Lahore this illicit gain would 
falltosome oneelse. The time, too, was approaching 
for the selection of a Guru in succession to his father, 
and he apprehended supersession during his absence. 

The Guru then addressed his second son, Mahadev, 
who was a religious enthusiast and heeded not sub- 
lunary affairs. He replied that he had no relations 
or connexions in the world, and, that being the case, 
why should he entangle himself in any such enter- 
prise ? The Guru then addressed himself to his 
youngest son, Arjan, who when not in attendance on 
his father was constantly engaged in devotion, who 
was possessed of all saintly qualities, and regarded no 
wealth or worldly advantages. The Guru asked him 
to go with his relation to Lahore, and after the 
wedding remain at the temple there to give religious 
instruction to the Sikhs. Arjan replied that he only 
desired his father’s pleasure. It was but a wedding 
and an occasion of rejoicing; but even were it 
a mission which involved danger of life, he would 
go all the same and gladly obey his father’s orders. 
The Guru was well pleased, and again directed him 
to tarry some time in Lahore, and not return until 
he had received a written invitation. While there, 
whatever offerings Arjan should receive were to be 
consigned to his kitchen to feed the poor and the 
stranger, so that none should be sent away hungry. 

Before his departure his mother went to call him 
in the early morning, and asked him to repeat God's 
name. This was preparatory to giving him the 
maternal advice and uttering for him the prayer 
which he subsequently versified in the following 
hymn :— 

Ever repeat the name of that God who hath no end or 
limit ; 

By remembering Him all sin is removed and ancestors 
are saved. 

O my son, this is thy mother’s blessing. 

278 THE SIKH RELIGION 

May God never forget thee for a moment, and do thou 
ever repeat the name of the Lord of the world ! 

May the true Guru be merciful to thee and mayest thou 
love the saints ! 

May God’s preservation of thine honour be thy raiment, 
and singing His praises thy daily food ! 

Ever quaff the nectar of God’s name ; mayest thou live 
long and may the remembrance of God afford thee endless 
delight ! 

May joy and pleasure be thine; may thy desires be fulfilled 
and mayest thou never feel anxiety ! 

Let thy heart become the bumble-bee, and God’s feet the 
lotus for thee. 

Nanak, attach thyself to them with the delight the 
chatrik findeth in raindrops.2 

CHAPTER V 

One day, in conversation with his Sikhs in Lahore, 
Arjan expressed the regret he felt at his long separa- 
tion from his father. They accordingly suggested 
that he should write to him for his recall. Arjan was 
pleased with the suggestion and said, ‘ Although the 
Guru appeareth to have forgotten us, we have never 
forgotten him.’ Upon this he addressed the fol- 
lowing to his father :— 

My soul longeth for a sight of the Guru ; 

It crieth hke the chatrik for raindrops. 

My thirst is not quenched, and I have no rest without a 
sight of the dear saint. 

I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to a sight of the Guru, 
the dear saint.: 

He sent this quatrain by a Sikh to the Guru. 
When the Sikh reached Amritsar the Guru was 

1 May thy heart, like the bumble-bee, be attached to the lotus of 
God's feet ! 
= Cat. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 279 

taking his afternoon repose. Prithia recognized the 
messenger as the servant who had accompanied 
Arjan to Lahore. He called him, and asked if he 
had brought a letter. He replied that he had, and 
unsuspectingly delivered it. Prithia on reading it 
became filled with jealousy. He knew he could not 
have written the verses himself, and he feared that, if 
the Guru saw them, he might appoint Arjan as his 
successor. He therefore concealed the letter and 
sent a verbal reply in his father’s name, telling 
Arjan to remain in Lahore and not return until he 
was sent for. Arjan on receiving this message knew 
it had been sent by Prithia and not by his father 
the Guru, and on questioning the messenger, dis- 
covered what had occurred. He then wrote a 
second quatrain and dispatched it with strict orders 
to deliver it only to the Guru. It was as follows :— 

Thy face is beautiful, the sound of thy words giveth 
composure. 

It is long since I have seen my lord. 

Blest is the land where thou dwellest, O my saint, friend, 
and lord. 

I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to the holy Guru, my 
friend and lord. 

Prithia was lying in wait for the messenger and 
forcibly took possession of Arjan’s second letter. On 
reading it he became more incensed than before. 
In his father’s name he sent a second message, 
‘Remain at Lahore for some time yet and come not 
without orders. I will myself shortly go to fetch 
thee.’ Prithia instructed the servant to take the 
message quickly, or the Guru would be angry with 
him. What Prithia really feared was that if the 
servant delayed in Amritsar, the Guru might come 
to know the deceit that was being practised. The 
servant on reaching Lahore told Arjan how Prithia 
had taken possession of the letter. On this Arjan 

280 THE SIKH RELIGION 

wrote and despatched a third quatrain to his 
father :-— 

When I was separated from thee for a ghari, it seemed 
an age. 

When shall I now meet thee, O my beloved lord ? 

I cannot pass the night, and sleep cometh not without 
beholding the Guru’s court. 

I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to that court of the true 
Guru. 

On this letter Arjan took the precaution of writing 
No. 3, so that his father might know that two other 
letters had previously been dispatched. Arjan on 
this occasion gave urgent instruction to the mes- 
senger that the letter should only be handed to the 
Guru himself. 

Prithia, as before, was waiting to intercept the 
third letter. The messenger was also on his guard, 
and, on seeing Prithia, hid himself. Prithia could 
not be for ever on the watch. When he went to 
his private house for reflection, the messenger took 
the opportunity to approach the Guru and give him 
his son Arjan’s letter. The Guru on seeing it noticed 
that it bore the number 3, but only this one letter 
had reached him. The messenger told him what 
had previously occurred, whereat the Guru was 
much incensed. Prithia, who did not wish to remain 
long absent, arrived by the time the messenger had 
finished his narrative. The Guru asked Prithia 
what had become of the first two letters. He 
replied that he did not remember where they had 
been put. He would search and bring them. The 
Guru thrice asked him if he did not know where 
the letters were, and thrice he swore by the Guru’s 
holy feet that he had no knowledge of them. Upon 
this the Guru, reading his secret thoughts, told him 
that the letters were concealed in his coat pocket 
at home. The Guru sent a servant to Prithia’s house 
with a request to his wife to send Prithia’s coat which 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 281 

was hanging on a peg on the wall. The servant 
brought the coat, and in its pocket were found the 
two missing letters ! 

Bhai Budha then by order of the Guru proclaimed 
Prithia’s villainy to the whole assembly. Prithia 
was thoroughly ashamed, and found no retreat in 
subterfuge and no pardon in apology. The Guru 
said: ‘ Prithia’s deception hath been laid bare before 
the Sikhs. A trial hath been made as to whether 
he 1s noble or base, obedient or disobedient to the 
Guru.’ The Guru then at once dispatched Bhai 
Budha to Lahore with a carriage to bring Arjan 
home with all possible speed. After Arjan’s arrival 
and obeisance to his father, the Guru remarked to 
him that he had previously sent three quatrains, 
and suggested him to write a fourth that the hymn 
might be complete. On this he extemporized the 
following :— 

It is my good fortune to have met the holy Guru, 

And I have found the Immortal God in my own home. 

May I serve thee and never again be separated from thee 
for an instant! Nanak is thy slave. 

I am a sacrifice, and my soul is a sacrifice unto thee : 
Nanak is thy slave.! 

On hearing this the Guru was highly pleased and 
embraced his son. He then addressed him the 
following brief but pregnant words: ‘Guru Amar 
Das declared that the Guruship was the reward of 
merit. As only he who is lowly and humble-minded 
may lay claim to it, I grant it to thee.’ Saying 
this the Guru sent for five paise and a coco-nut, 
placed them before Arjan, and descending from his 
throne seated him on it in presence of the whole 
assembly. Bhai Budha affixed the tilak or mark of 
spiritual sovereignty to Arjan’s forehead, and he 
was publicly proclaimed Guru amid universal mani- 
festations of delight. Guru Ram Das said, ‘ Guru 

1 Majh. 

282 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Arjan hath become the world’s Guru, and, as one 
lamp is lighted from another, so the Guru’s spirit 
hath passed into him, and will dispel the darkness 
of the world.’ 

When Guru Arjan went to embrace his mother, 
he said: ‘All my anxieties have been removed. 
Having earned the true name of God, I have come 
home.’ He then composed the following :— 

The wealth of God’s name hath become my devotion, the 
wealth of God’s name my penance, the wealth of God’s 
name my food. 

May I not forget for a moment Him whom I have obtained 
in the company of the saints ! 

O mother, thy son hath come home to thee with profit. 

I possess God’s wealth walking, God’s wealth sitting, God’s 
wealth waking and sleeping. 

God’s wealth is mine ablutions, God’s wealth my divine 
knowledge ; I fix mine attention on God. 

God’s wealth is my raft, God’s wealth my boat ; it is 
God’s wealth which shall take me across. 

God’s wealth hath caused me to forget my worldly anxiety; 
God’s wealth hath removed my doubts of salvation. 

From God’s wealth I have obtained the nine treasures ; 
I have come into the possession of God as wealth. 

I may eat and spend this wealth without exhausting it ; 
it will abide with me in this world and the next. 

God loaded a treasure, and gave it to Guru Nanak; my 
mind is imbued with God’s love. 

Prithia, whose anger knew no bounds, addressed 
offensive language to his father, and then informed 
Bhai Budha that his father had acted improperly. 
The Guruship was his own right, yet it had been 
given to his youngest brother. He vowed that he 
would remove Guru Arjan, seat himself on the Guru’s 
throne, and the Emperor himself would admit the 
Justice of his claim. The Guru addressed Prithia 
the following by way of remonstrance :— 

) Gajari. 

PEO GURU GRA AS 283 

Why, O my son, quarrel with thy father ? 

It is a sin to quarrel with him who begot thee and reared 
thee. 

The wealth of which thou art proud belongeth to no one. 

In a moment shalt thou abandon the pleasures of sin, and 
then shalt thou repent. 

Repeat His name who is thy dear Lord, thy Master, and 
thy God. 

The slave Nanak giveth thee instruction ; if thou hearken 
unto it, thy regrets shall depart. 

Notwithstanding this remonstrance Prithia con- 
tinued to use offensive language to the author of 
his existence. ‘Fine mercy thou hast shown me! 
Thou hast conferred the Guruship on thy youngest 
son and told me falsehoods. Thou hast told me to 
repeat God’s name. Practise what thou preachest, 
and let Arjan, who hath been honoured by thee, 
also heed thine instructions.’ Guru Ram Das then 
uttered the following :— 

They render God hearty worship on whose forehead such 
destiny was recorded in the beginning. 

How can one be jealous of those whom my God the 
Creator assisteth ? 

Meditate on God, O my soul, meditate on God ; He is the 
Remover of the troubles of every birth. 

God in the beginning bestowed on his saints the am- 
brosial storehouse of saintship. 

The fool who trieth to rival them, shall have his face 
blackened both in this world and the next. 

They are saints, they are worshippers to whom God’s 
name is dear. 

God is obtained by their service ; ashes shall be thrown 
on the slanderer’s head. 

He in whose house this occurreth knoweth what 1s proper ; 
ask Guru Nanak the world’s Guru, and reflect on it. 

In the case of the four Gurus none hath ever obtained the 

1 Sarang. 

284 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guruship by revilings ; it is by God’s service the Guruship 
is obtained. 

When Prithia still continued to insult his father, 
the latter ordered him out of his sight, and said, 
‘Thou art a Mina*; my Sikhs will not obey thee, 
and will never associate with thee.’ Bibi Bhani 
then painfully called to mind the words of Guru 
Amar Das, namely, “Thou hast dammed the clear 
flowing stream of the Guruship and consequently 
great trouble and annoyance shall result.’ 

While this unpleasant scene was being enacted, 
night came on, and Guru Arjan, his mother, Bhai 
Budha, and all the Sikhs went to pay their respects 
to Guru Ram Das. Guru Ram Das announced that 
he could not always abide with them, that his end 
was approaching, and that he would go to die in 
Goindwal. At his departure so many Sikhs gathered 
round him that it was difficult for them to obtain 
a sight of him. He addressed them some parting 
words of instruction of priceless value, and taking 
Arjan with him set out for Goindwal. 

On arriving at Goindwal, Guru Ram Das bathed 
in the Bawali, and had interviews with his two 
brothers-in-law, Mohan and Mohri. The next day 
he prepared a great feast, at which every one ate 
his fill. The following morning before day the Guru 
again bathed, and, having repeated the preamble of 
the Japji and the Asa ki War, began to meditate 
on Guru Amar Das. When day dawned and his 
devotions were at an end, he entrusted his Sikhs to 
Guru Arjan, directed him to complete the tanks at 
Amritsar, and repeated for him the main tenets 
of Sikhism by which he charged him ever to 
abide. 

Bibi Bhani, knowing that these injunctions were 
the signals of her husband’s death, begged him to 

» Soh. 

2 This word originally meant a tribe of Hindu robbers of Rajpititana. 
In the Panjab the name is now applied to a villain with a smiling face. 

LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 285 

take her with him on his final journey. He bade 
her abide in the world for some days, and then she 
should meet him. Guru Ram Das’s soul was borne 
to the celestial regions on the third day of the light 
half of the month of Bhadon, Sambat 1638 (A.D. 
1581). The bard Mathura composed the following 
on his death :— 

Guru Ram Das who was pleasing to God, went to God’s 
city ; 

God gave him a throne and seated him on it. 

The demigods on receiving thee, O Ram Das, were pleased, 
and sang victory to thee. 

During thy life the sins of the demons! trembled within 
them and they fled.’ 

The sins of those who received Guru Ram Das’s instruction 
were cut away. 

He gave the umbrella and sovereignty of the earth to 
Guru Arjan? 

1 That is, sinful persons. 

2 That is, the evil trembled for their enormities and concealed 
themselves. 

3 Sawaiyas. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 
SRI RAG 

Praises of the Guru :— 

When the Name is obtained the mind is satisfied ; without 
the Name accursed 1s life. 

Let some holy friend who meeteth me point out to me 
God the Lord of excellence. 

I would be quartered for him who showed me the Name. 

O my Beloved, I live by meditating on the Name. 

Without the Name I could not live; O my true Guru, 
implant it in me. 

The Name is a priceless jewel ; the perfect true Guru 
possesseth it. 

By applying myself to the service of the true Guru, he 
bringeth forth and displayeth the jewel of the Name. 

Blest are the very fortunate who come to the Guru and 
meet him. 

They who have not met the true Guru are unfortunate 
and subject to death. 

They shall again wander in birth, and be placed in terrible 
filth. 

Approach not those in whose hearts is the pariah wrath. 

The true Guru is a tank of nectar; very fortunate are 
they who come to bathe therein. 

Their impurities of every birth depart, and the pure Name 
is implanted in them. 

The slave Nanak, by fixing his attention on the true 
Guru, hath obtained the highest dignity. 

The excellence of the Name is obtained through 
the Guru :— 

Let me sing God’s praises, let me proclaim God’s praises, 
Ict me utter God’s praises, O mother. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 287 

The holy man who repeateth His praises is my friend ; 
with him I will sing God’s praises. 

When I pierced the diamond of my heart with the diamond 
of divine knowledge, the deep colour of the Name appeared. 

O my God, let me sing Thy praises that my soul may be 
gratified. 

My heart thirsteth for God’s name; may the Guru be 
pleased to grant it me! 

Dye your hearts with the love of God, O ye very fortunate, 
and the Guru will be pleased to confer on you favours. 

yl am a sacrifice to that true Guru who lovingly fixeth the 
Name in my heart. 

Without the true Guru, God’s name is not found even 
though one perform hundreds of thousands and millions 
of ceremonies. 

Without good fortune God is not found, even though He 
dwell in our homes and be for ever near, 

Because a screen widely separateth Him from those in 
whose hearts there is the pain of ignorance and superstition. 

Without meeting the true Guru man becometh not gold ; 
the perverse sink like iron while the boat is hard by. 

God’s name is the boat the true Guru frovideth ; how 
shall we go on board ? 

He who walketh according to the will of the true Guru 
shall sit in the boat. 

Hail, hail to the greatly fortunate persons, O Nanak, 
whom the true Guru blendeth with God ! 

Man even though silly may be blended with God 
by piety. This hymn was composed by Guru Ram 
Das when after his marriage he was invited to make 
soime request -— 

Sri RAG CHHANT 

The girl is silly, how shall she behold God in this world ? 

When God is merciful the holy learn the affairs of the 
next world : 

The holy learn the affairs of the next world and ever 
meditate on God. 

288 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Woman shall then roam happy among her companions, 
and triumphantly swing her arm in God’s court. 

What balance of Dharmraj’s account shall remain after 
repeating God’s name ? 

The girl even though silly shall behold God in this 
world through the Guru’s instruction. 

The marriage is ended, my father; I have found God 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

The Guru hath dispelled the darkness of ignorance, and 
lit the lamp of divine knowledge : 

The Guru hath lit the lamp of divine knowledge, 
darkness is dispelled, and I have discovered the precious 
jewel of God’s name. 

The malady of pride hath departed, sorrow hath fled, 
and I have cured my pride under the Guru’s instruc- 
tion. 

I have obtained as my spouse the Deathless One, the 
Imperishable, who shall never die or be born. 

The marriage is ended, O my father; I have obtained 
God under the Guru’s instruction. 

God is very true, my father; when God’s saints meet, 
the marriage procession is beautiful. 

She who repeateth God’s name shall be happy in this 
world and be really beautiful in the next : 

In the next she shall be very beautiful who in this world 
hath remembered the Name. 

Profitable are the whole lives of those who under the 
Guru’s instruction have conquered their minds by throwing 
the dice of God’s name. 

By meeting God’s saints my work hath prospered ; for 
my spouse I have obtained the Joyful Being. 

God is very true, my father; when God’s saints meet, 
the marriage procession is beautiful. 

My father, give me God as a gift and dowry. 

Give me God as my raiment ; give me God as my glory 
that my work may succeed. 

By devotion to God the marriage is easy ; the Giver gave 
me the gift of the true Guru’s name. 

Thy glory, O God, shall fill the earth’s continents and the 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 289 

universe ; this dowry of the Name cannot be confounded 
with others. 

Any other dowry the perverse may display is false pride 
and worthless gilding. 

My father, give me God as a gift and dowry. 

My father, woman on meeting her beloved God extendeth 
the vine.} 

God, who is in every age, ever setteth a-going the Guru’s 
race ; 

In every age increaseth the true Guru’s race who under 
his instruction meditate on the Name. 

God shall never be destroyed; what He giveth ever 
increaseth. 

Nanak, the saints and God are one; by repeating God’s 
name woman is adorned. 

My father, woman on meeting her beloved God extendeth 
the vine. 

SRI RAG KI WAR 

True men eat the bread of labour; the false and 
the deceitful live by begging :— 

Thou didst create all things, O Lord; Thou givest 
sustenance to Thy creatures. 

Some live by deceit and fraud, and drop from their mouths 
falsehood and deception. 

Thou hast subjected creatures thereto; Thou doest what 
pleaseth Thyself. 

To others Thou hast explained the truth and given un- 
failing stores thereof. 

The food of those who remember God is profitable, they 
who remember Him not, stretch out their hands fo beg. 

There is none to beg from except God, the uni- 
versal Benefactor :— 

Every one belongeth to Thee; Thou art every one’s ; 
Thou art the capital stock of all. 

All beg of Thee and ever supplicate Thee. 

1 That is, produces a holy offspring. 
2 Vide Vol. i. p. 60, n. 1. 
SIKH. I! U 

290 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He to whom Thou givest hath obtained everything ; Thou 
art distant from some and to others Thou art near. 

Except Thee there is none to beg from; let some one 
investigate this in his mind. 

All praise Thee ; Thy door is open to the holy. 

The Guru in a vision presented himself at God’s 
door :— 

J a minstrel of the Lord God went to His door. 

God from within heard my cries, and called the minstrel 
into His presence. 

Having called the minstrel, He asked him for what object 
he had come. 

‘Thou ever bestowest gifts, merciful Lord, grant me to 
meditate on Thy name.’ 

Nanak, God the Giver caused me to repeat His name and 
clothed me with a robe of honour. 

MAJH 

The advantage of the society of the saints :— 

I meditate on God’s excellences and name, 

And in company with the saints I cause His name to 
dwell in my heart. 

The Lord God is inaccessible and inapprehensible ; but 
His deligkts are obtained on meeting the true Guru. 

Blessings on those men of God who know Him. 

I shall go and ask them to tell me of God. 

On meeting the men of God, I will shampoo their feet, 
rub and wash them, and drink the divine essence. 

The true Guru the giver made fast in me God’s name. 

Very fortunate am I who have obtained a sight of the 
Guru. 

In uttering the true ambrosial Name which is received 
from the perfect Guru, I drink nectareous essence. 

O God, cause me to meet the society of the saints, the 
true beings. 

On meeting them I shall meditate on God’s name. 

Nanak, may I under the Guru’s instruction hear of God, 
speak of Him, and regale myself with His name ! 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 205 

The Guru shows the one God who pervades all 
things but is distinct from them :— 

Come, my sisters, meet me, my dear ones : 

I am a sacrifice to her who shall show me my Beloved. 

On meeting the society of the saints I have found God 
the Friend, and am a sacrifice to the true Guru. 

Whithersoever I look, there is the Lord. 

Thou pervadest every heart, Thou Searcher of hearts. 

The perfect Guru hath shown me God who is with me; 
I am ever a sacrifice to the true Guru. 

There is but one breath, one matter, and one light in all 
things. 

One light pervadeth all things but is distinct in each ; 
there is no light equal thereto. 

By the favour of the Guru the one God hath been seen ; 
in everything I am a sacrifice to the true Guru. 

Nanak speaketh words of nectar 

Which are dear and pleasing to the hearts of his disciples. 

The perfect true Guru giveth instruction; he is benefi- 
cent to others. 

MAJH KI WAR 
Some of the attributes of the Guru :— 

He in whose heart there is truth hath the true Name, 
and uttereth the truth with his mouth ; 

He walketh in God’s way himself, and causeth others to 
do so. 

If there be a river on our way, it will wash away filth ; 
by bathing in a pond! more filth attacheth to one. 

The true Guru who meditateth on God night and day is 
the perfect river. 

He is saved himself with his family,-and by giving God’s 
name he saveth the whole world. 

The slave Nanak is a sacrifice to him who repeateth God’s 
name and causeth others to do so. 

1 By having recourse to a hypocritical guru. 

UZ 

292 THE SIKH RELIGION 

GAURI 

Ram Das is happy beyond expression in the 
society of Guru Amar Das :— 

The beggar is happy when a householder giveth him alms ; 

The hungry man is happy when he taketh food ; 

The disciple is happy and contented when he meeteth his 
Guru. 

Grant me, O Lord, a sight of Thee in whom is my hope. 

Mercifully fulfil my desires. 

The chakwi is happy when she seeth the sun : 

She then meeteth her beloved and all her sorrow de- 
parteth. 

The disciple is happy when he beholdeth his Guru ; 

The calf is happy when it sucketh milk ; 

Its heart 1s glad when it seeth its dam ; 

The disciple is happy when he beholdeth his Guru. 

All other affections are worldly and false, 

And shall perish like false and temporary gilding. 

The slave Nanak is happy and contented with the true 
Guru. 

Happy is the family in which a religious son has 
been born :— 

As the mother nourisheth her foetus in the hope of its 
being a son— 

‘ When he is big he will earn and allow me money which 
will give me enjoyment— ’ 

So the man of God loveth God, and God will render him 
assistance. 

O my God, I am foolish, preserve me, O my Lord. 

Thy servant’s praise is Thy glory. 

They to whose hearts God’s praises are pleasing, rejoice 
in their palaces and homes. 

When they sing God’s praises, they taste all sweets. 

The man of God is the saviour of his family ; he shall 
deliver twenty-one generations,! yea, the whole world. 

1 This includes seven generations of the father’s family, seven of 
the mother’s, and seven of the father-in-law’s. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 293 

Whatever hath been done hath been done by God and is 
His glory. 7 

O God, all creatures are Thine ; Thou pervadest them all, 
and causest them to worship Thee. 

O God, Thou causest them to acquire the treasure of 
devotion and Thou Thyself apportionest it. 

I am Thy slave purchased ina shop; what skill hath this 
creature ? 

Wert Thou, O God, to seat me on a throne, I should still 
be Thy slave; cause me even as a lowly grass-cutter to 
utter Thy name. 

Nanak is God’s slave, and magnifieth Him. 

The earnings of the holy :— 

The husbandman laboureth and hopeth in his heart, 

While yoking his plough and making his efforts, that his 
sons and daughters shall eat the fruits of his labour ; 

So the man of God uttereth God’s name that God may 
at last deliver him. 

O my God, accomplish my salvation, foolish though 
Tam! 

Apply me, O God, to the work of serving the true Guru. 

As the merchant who taketh horses for traffic, 

Earneth money and entertaineth hopes that his wealth 
shall increase ; 

So the man of God uttereth the name of God, and 1s 
happy in uttering it. 

The shopkeeper collecteth wares and sitting in his shop 
dealeth in them : 

His wealth is false, its display is false, he is wrapped up 
in falsehood. 

The man of God collecteth divine wealth and taketh God 
with him as his viaticum. 

Love of wealth and family is a snare when man turneth 
away from God. 

He who is the slave of God’s slaves shall be saved under 
the Guru’s instruction. 

Nanak, they who ponder on the Name under the Guru's 
instruction shall be enlightened. 

204 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The fervour of the Guru’s devotion :— 

The desire for God is ever in my mind and heart ; O God, 
how shall I behold Thee ? 

He who loveth God knoweth the pleasure thereof ; God is 
very dear to my mind and heart. 

I am a sacrifice to my Guru who hath caused me to meet 
my Creator from whom I had been separated. 

O God, Ia sinner have taken refuge at Thy gate. 

My understanding hath no merit; mercifully cause me 
to meet Thee some time. 

O God, my demerits are very great, and could never be 
numbered. 

It is Thou who possessest merits; it is Thou who art 
compassionate ; it is Thou who pardonest when Thou 
pleasest. 

I am a sinner, but Thou hast saved me by association 
with the Guru, who, by teaching me God’s name, hath 
delivered me. 

O my true Guru, how can I recount thy merits ? When 
thou speakest, I become astonished. 

Can any one else preserve a sinner like me as the true 
Guru hath preserved and saved me ? 

Thou, O Guru, art my father, thou art my mother, thou 
art my relation and companion. 

O God, my True Guru, Thou knowest of Thyself my 
condition. 

I was wandering astray ; no one cared for me when the 
great God placed me a worm near the true Guru. 

Hail! hail to the slave Nanak’s Guru, by meeting whom 
all my sorrow and trouble are at an end. 

The Guru ever cherishes his disciples :— 

As a woman having given birth to a son nourisheth him 
and keepeth her eye on him— 

In and out of doors she feedeth him and continually 
fondleth him— 

So the true Guru watcheth over his disciple who beareth 
love and affection to God. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 295 

O my God, we are silly children of Thine. 

Hail! hail to the Guru, the true Guru, the teacher who 
hath rendered us wise by divine instruction ! 

As the white-robed bird ! circling and flying in the heavens 

Keepeth her thoughts on her young left behind, and ever 
remembereth them in her heart, 

So the true Guru claspeth to his heart that disciple who 
loveth God. 

God preserveth the tongue made of flesh and blood 
within the scissors of the thirty or thirty-two teeth. 

Let any one consider if the tongue or the teeth have any 
power of themselves ; know that everything is in the power 
of God. 

When men calumniate the saints, God preserveth His 
servants’ honour. 

My brethren, let no one suppose that any one hath any 
power ; every one acteth as God causeth him to act. 

Old age, death, fever, headache, snakebite are all in the 
power of God. None of these may occur without God’s 
will, 

Nanak, ever so meditate on God’s name in thy heart, 
that at the last moment it may deliver thee. 

The advantage of meeting the true Guru :— 

He is called the true Guru whose presence maketh the 
heart glad ; | 

Then mental doubt vanisheth, and the supreme dignity 
is obtained. 

How shall I meet my beloved true Guru ? 

I every moment make obeisance that I may meet him. 

God mercifully caused me to meet my perfect true 
Guru. 

On applying the ashes of the true Guru his slave’s desires 
are fulfilled. 

Meet such a guru as shall implant God’s service in the 
heart and teach it to thee. 

Thus shall there never be any deficiency ; God’s profit 
shall ever be obtained. 

1 The kulang. 

296 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He in whose heart there is divine pleasure hath no love 
for mammon. 

Nanak, if such a guru be found, man shall be saved, sing- 
ing God’s praises. 

The debt men owe to the Guru :— 

This mind of many whims resteth not for a moment ; it 
roameth and wandereth in every direction. 

They who are very fortunate, have found the perfect Guru 
who giveth God’s spell by which their minds become fixed. 

O God, we are slaves of the true Guru : 

The brand hath been branded on our foreheads ; we owe 
a great debt to the Guru : 

He conferred on us many kindnesses and favours, and 
rescued us from the dangerous ocean of fear. 

They who have not the love of God in their hearts plot 
deceitful schemes. 

As paper is spoiled by water, so the perverse are ruined 
by pride. 

We know nothing of the past or future ; as God placeth 
us so shall we stand. 

O Guru, be merciful to us sinners ; saith the slave Nanak, 
we are thy dogs. 

The Guru’s happiness on meeting God :— 

O my Gobind,’ Thow art in my heart, Thou art in my 
heart : because Thou art in my heart, I am dyed with Thy 
lowe: 

O my Gobind, the sportive Hari is with me, yet cannot 
be seen ; but the perfect Guru hath shown me the Unseen. 

O my Gobind, all poverty and misery depart from him 
to whom the name of God hath been made manifest. 

The highly fortunate have obtained God, the highest 
dignity, O Gobind, and are absorbed in His name. 

O my Gobind, my beloved, hath any one seen the Lord 
God with his eyes ? 

* Gobind and Hari are both names of God. They are retained in 
the translation of this hymn to avoid confusion. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 297 

My mind and body are very sad, O my Gobind, without 
God I a woman waste away. 

On meeting the saints, O my Gobind, I have found my 
God, Friend, and Companion. 

God, the life of the world, hath come to me, O my Gobind ; 
I pass the night in happiness. 

Ye saints, cause me to meet my God, the Friend ; my 
soul and body hunger for Him. 

I cannot live without seeing my Beloved; separation 
from Him weigheth upon my heart. 

God is my Friend and Beloved ; the Guru introduced me 
to Him and my heart revived. 

The desires of my soul and body have been fulfilled, 
O my Gobind ; on meeting God my heart expanded. 

I am a sacrifice, O my Gobind, my Beloved; I am a 
hundred times a sacrifice unto Thee. 

In my soul and body is the love of the Beloved, O my 
Gobind, O God preserve my capital. 

O my Gobind, let me meet the true Guru, the mediator 
who will show me the way, and cause me to meet God ! 

Through Thy mercy, O my Gobind, I have obtained God’s 
name; the slave Nanak hath entered Thine asylum. 

The Guru’s longing for God :— 

J suffer from separation from God’s name and from God. 

May I meet my Lord, my Friend, and obtain happiness ! 

On beholding the Lord God I survive, O my mother, 

His name is my companion and brother. 

Ye dear saints, sing the praises of my Lord God. 

Ye greatly fortunate ones, repeat the Name under the 
Guru’s instruction. 

God and God’s name are my life and soul. 

By repeating the Name man hath not again to cross the 
terrible water. 

How shall I behold the Lord God, my soul and body’s 
desire ? | 

Present me to God, ye dear saints, my heart loveth Him. 

By the Guru’s word the beloved King is obtained. 

1 That is, make my human life profitable. 

2908 THE *SIKM RELIGION 

Ye greatly fortunate ones, utter His name. 

In my soul and body I have a great longing for God. 

Ye saints, cause me to meet Gobind who is my Lord God. 

By the true Guru’s instruction the Name is ever manifest 
(O-ie ; 

So the desires of the slave Nanak’s heart have been 
fulfilled. 

Man ought to keep watch over his refractory 
mind :— 

GAURI KARHALE 

O refractory ' soul? who comest from afar, how shalt thou 
meet God < 

When [ found the Guru by perfect good fortune, the 
Beloved came and embraced me. 

O refractory soul, meditate upon the True Guru ; 

O refractory and wretched soul, meditate on God’s name, 

And when thy account is called for, God Himself will 
release thee. 

O refractory soul, once very pure, the filth of pride hath 
now attached to thee. 

The Beloved Spouse was present in thy house; when 
thou didst separate from Him, thou wert punished. 

O refractory soul, my dear, search for God within thee. 

He is not found by contrivance; the Guru showeth Him 
in thy heart. 

OQ refractory soul, my dear, day and night fix thine 
attention on God. 

When thou findest God through the Guru thou shalt go 
home and obtain the painted palace. 

O refractory soul, my friend, abandon hypocrisy and 
eneed. ; 

The hypocritical and the greedy shall be smitten ; Death 
will punish them with his mace. 

1 Karhale, a camel. In a secondary sense it means a camel 
which does not obey its bridle, thence stubborn. The gyanis also 
translate the word—make effort. 

* In the original man, a word which is used sometimes for mind and 

sometimes for man, but here appears to mean the soul which has 
migrated from a distant body. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 299 

O refractory soul, who art dear to me as my life, rid 
thyself of the filth of hypocrisy and superstition. 

The perfect Guru is a tank of divine nectar; when the 
company of saints is obtained filth departeth. 

O refractory soul, my dear, listen only to the instruction 
of one guide the Guru— 

Worldly love may be widely diffused, yet at last nothing 
shall go with one— 

O refractory soul, my friend, take God’s name for thy 
travelling expenses, and thou shalt obtain honour. 

Thou shalt have a dress of honour in God’s court, and 
God Himself will embrace thee— 

O refractory soul, he who obeyeth the Guru shall under 
the Guru’s instruction accomplish his work. 

Make obeisance before the Guru, O slave Nanak, and he 
will blend thee with God. 

O refractory soul, gifted with the power of reflection, 
meditate and carefully look. 

They who dwell in forests are tired of wandering in them ; 
while they may under the Guru’s instruction behold the 
Beloved in their own hearts. 

O refractory soul, remember God ; 

O refractory and wretched soul, the perverse are caught 
in a great net, 

While the pious are delivered byremembering God’s name. 

O refractory soul, my beloved, search for the True Guru 
in the society of the saints. 

Attached to the society of the saints meditate on God and 
He will go with thee. 

O refractory soul, greatly fortunate are they on whom 
the one God looketh with favour. 

If God deliver thee, thou shalt be delivered ; worship the 
true Guru’s feet. 

O refractory soul, my beloved, think of is Light within 
thy body. 

When the merciful God conferreth a gift on ae the Guru 
will show thee the Name which is the nine treasures. 

O refractory soul, thou fickle-minded, lay aside thy 
perverse cleverness. 

300 THE SDRH RELIGION 

Remember God’s name, and at the last moment He will 
grant thee deliverance. 

O refractory soul, very fortunate shalt thou be if thou 
treasure the gem of divine knowledge. 

The divine knowledge of the Guru is a sword held in the 
hand to destroy the god of death. 

Within thee is the treasure, O refractory soul, yet thou 
wanderest abroad in doubt searching for it. 

When thou meetest the perfect Guru, thou shalt find God 
the Friend who is with thee. 

O refractory soul, ever remember the love of God and 
thou shalt be imbued with it. 

By serving the Guru and remembering his instruction the 
dye of God shall never fade. 

We are birds, O refractory soul, and God the immortal 
Being 1s a tree. 

Nanak, very fortunate are the pious who remembering 
the Name find the Tree. 

GAURI KI WAR I 

A message of love :— 

Hear, my Friend, this message of love ; mine eyes are 
fixed on Thee. 

When the Guru is pleased he blendeth me with the Friend, 
and then the slave Nanak sleepeth in peace. 

Men should not be jealous of the Guru, who is 
specially favoured of God :— 

Kknow that he is great whom the Lord maketh great. 

God pardoneth him who is pleasing to Him. 

If any one try to rival Him he is an insensate fool. 

He whom the true Guru causeth to meet Him, singeth 
His praises and dilateth on them. 

Nanak, true is the True One; he who knoweth Him is 
absorbed in the truth. 

The Guru is the soil in which religion is planted :— 

The true Guru is the field of religion ; as man planteth in 
it, so he gathereth fruit. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 301 

The Guru’s Sikhs plant ambrosia and obtain God as their 
ambrosial fruit. 

Their faces are bright in this world and the next, and 
they shall obtain a true robe of honour in God’s court. 

Some whose hearts are base ever act basely; as they 
plant, so the fruit they eat. 

When the true Guru the banker looketh at them and 
assayeth them, their gilding is all laid bare. 

As they meditate, so they obtain, and so God maketh 
them known.! 

Nanak, the Lord God Himself pervadeth both the good 
and the bad ;? he ever beholdeth the acts of all. 

Man’s regeneration must depend on himself :— 

Man hath one mind ; the one God pervadeth it ; as the 
mind turneth,? such is its acceptance. 

Man may say what he pleaseth; it is what he hath at 
home he eateth.* 

Without the true Guru there is no understanding, and 
pride departeth not from the heart. 

The spiritually proud are miserable and hungry ; they put 
out their hands and beg from door to door. 

Falsehood and robbery remain not concealed ; gilding 
and adulteration are laid bare. 

The true Guru meeteth, and God cometh to, him who was 
so fated in the beginning. 

As iron touched by the philosopher’s stone assumeth a 
bright colour, so doth man when he meeteth the company 
of the saints. 

O slave Nanak’s Lord, Thou guidest men as Thou pleasest. 

Reference to the fate of those who calumniated 
Guru Amar Das :— 

Him who slandereth the perfect true Guru the Creator 
will punish. 

1 They reap the fruit of their evil intentions and obtain an evil 
On 

~ Literally—both ends, men of both moral extremes. 

3 As man’s mind is disposed towards God. 

4 Better to depend on God ‘who is with one than go abroad in 
search of Him. , 

502 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The slanderer shall not have such an opportunity again ; 
as he soweth so shall he eat. 

He shall be taken away to terrible hell with blackened 
face and a halter on his neck like a thief ; 

But, if he return to the Guru’s protection and meditate 
on God’s name, he shall be saved. 

He who obeyeth not the Guru’s order is perverse and 
robbed by mental ignorance and poisonous mammon : 

In his heart is falsehood and he deemeth every one false ; 
God hath fastened unworthy disputes on his neck. 

He talketh a great deal, but what he saith pleaseth no- 
body ; 

He wandereth from house to house like an abandoned 
woman ; whosoever meeteth him beareth the mark thereof. 

The holy man keepeth aloof from him; he leaveth him 
to go and sit with the Guru. 

He who denieth the Guru is base ; O elect, he hath lost 
all his capital and profit. 

At first, O Nanak, men recited the Shastars and the Veds, 
but the words of the perfect Guru have superseded them. 

The magnification of the perfect Guru is pleasing to his 
disciples ; the perverse shall never more have this oppor- 
tunity. 

The world, which is God’s field, yields ambrosial 
produce to the Guru’s disciples :— 

The whole world is God’s field ; God Himself causeth the 
tillage to be performed. 

The holy man hath made God’s grace germinate; the 
perverse have lost their capital. 

Every one cultivateth for his own advantage ; if it please 
(,od, He causeth the field to germinate. 

The Guru’s disciples sow ambrosia, and obtain God’s 
name as the ambrosial fruit. 

Death the mouse ever gnaweth the produce ;! but God the 
Creator killeth and expelleth it. 

With God’s love the tillage succeedeth, and the harvest- 
heap is produced by His favour. 

1 That is, human life. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 303 

God hath removed all the trouble and anxiety of those 
who have meditated on Him. 

The slave Nanak hath worshipped the Name ; he is saved 
himself, and saveth the whole world. 

The Guru encourages his Sikhs to hear his in- 
struction :— 

True Sikhs sit with the true Guru; and the false toil 
and find no place even by search. 

Are their faces bright to whom the words of the true 
Guru are not agreeable ? Nay, they wander contemned of 
God. 

God causeth their acts to prosper who have the wealth 
of His name within them. 

They cease to be subject to others; God sitteth near to 
assist them. 

When God is on our side, every one is on our side; and 
every one who seeth us praiseth us. 

Kings and emperors, all the work of God, come and 
salute God’s servant. 

Great is the greatness of the perfect Guru; he who 
greatly serveth God obtaineth unequalled happiness. 

God hath given the perfect Guru a permanent gift, and 
what He hath given ever increaseth. 

No slanderer can endure his greatness; God Himself 
destroyeth the slanderer. 

The slave Nanak uttereth the praises of the Creator who 
ever preserveth His saints. 

Guru Ram Das addressed the following to the pre- 
tended Tapa, or penitent, who perpetually slandered 
Guru Amar Das :— 

Thou didst not at first show respect to Guru Amar Das ; 
thy excuses now are of no avail. 

How can the wretched perverse man who wandereth half 
way obtain happiness by mere words ? 

He who loveth not the true Guru cometh with a lie and 
departeth with a lie. 

304 THE SIKH RELIGION 

A pretended guru leads man astray :— 

When the master is naked and hungry, whence shall his 
servant eat to repletion ? 

If the master have anything in his house, the servant 
can get it; how can he get what there is not ? 

If a Sikh serve a false guru and Death afterwards call on 
him for an account, such service shall be hurtful. 

Nanak, perform service for the great God, a sight of whom 
is profitable, and no account shall afterwards be taken from 
thee, 

The following was addressed to Guru Amar Das’s 
enemies :— 

Nanak, the saints consider and the four Veds tell 

That what the saints utter with their mouths cometh to 
pass. 

In the extension of the world this appeareth manifest : 
all people hear of it. 

The fools obtain not happiness ; they are at enmity with 
the saints. 

The saints desire virtues for them, but they burn with 
pride. 

What can the wretches do, since their fate was evil from 
the beginning ? 

They whom the supreme Being smiteth have none to 
succour them. 

It is real justice that they who bear enmity to those who 
are without it should perish. 

They whom the saints curse shall wander again and again : 

When a tree is cut up by the roots, its branches wither. 

A magnification of the Guru :— 

The whole world come and fall at the feet of those to 
whom God giveth greatness. 

We may fear if we do anything by ourselves ; but it is 
the Creator who putteth forth His might in all things. 

Lo! my brethren, this is the arena of the true Beloved 
who by His power hath made every one subject to Him. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 305 

The Lord God preserveth His saints and blackeneth the 
faces of slanderers and enemies. 

The greatness of the true Guru ever increaseth; the 
saints themselves ever sing God’s praises. 

Night and day repeat the Name, ye disciples of the Guru, 
and through the true Guru implant the Creator in your 
hearts. 

O Guru’s Sikhs, know that the true Guru’s hymn is 
most true; the Creator Himself hath caused him to 
HEUCE It. 

The beloved God maketh bright the faces of the Guru’s 
Sikhs, and the whole world wisheth victory to him. 

Nanak is God’s slave ; God preserveth the honour of His 
servants. 

The fate of those who deny the Guru :— 

They who leave the Guru, who is present with them, shall 
find no entrance into God’s court. 

Let any one go and meet those slanderers, and he will 
see their faces pale and spat upon. 

They who are accursed of the Guru are accursed of the 
whole world, and shall ever be vagrants. 

They who deny their Guru shall wander about groaning. 

Their hunger shall never depart ; they shall ever shriek 
from its pangs. 

No one heareth what they say; they are ever dying of 
fear. 

They cannot bear the true Guru’s greatness ; they cannot 
find room in this world or the next. 

Whoever goeth to meet those cursed by the true Guru 
shall lose the remnant of his honour. 

They who were cursed by the Guru became leprous ; 
whoever meeteth them shall catch the leprosy. 

O God, allow me not to see those who turn their hearts 
to mammon. 

There is no escape from what the Creator Himself wrote in 
the beginning. 

Slave Nanak, worship the Name; nothing can equal it. 

Great is its greatness, and it ever increaseth. 

SIKH. II x 

306 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru Ram Das continues to magnify Guru Amar 
Das :— 

Great is Amar Das’s greatness who was appointed in the 
presence of Guru Angad. 

The world boweth to him ; all fall at his feet ; his praise 
filleth the worlds. 

The continents and the universe bow to him; he on 
whose forehead the perfect Guru put his hand became 
perect: 

The Guru’s greatness ever increaseth ; none can equal it. 

Slave Nanak, the Creator Himself appointed Gurw Amar 
Das, and will preserve his honour. 

Evil shall be the fate of the Guru’s slanderer :— 

He who slandereth the perfect true Guru shall find /zs 
position difficult in the world. 

Death shall seize and throw him into terrible hell which 
is a pit of sorrow. 

No one will hear his cries and lamentations; he shall 
weep In pain. 

He hath cast away all fis chances in this world and the 
next ; his capital and profit, all hath he lost. 

He shall become as an oilman’s ox which his master 
yoketh when he riseth in the morning. 

God ever seeth and heareth everything ; nothing is con- 
cealed from Him. 

As man sowed in a former life, so shall he reap in this. 

He to whom God showeth mercy shall wash the feet of 
the true Guru ; 

He shall be saved through the true Guru like iron attached 
to timber. 

Slave Nanak, meditate on and repeat God’s name and 
thou shalt be happy. 

Animate and inanimate nature congratulate the 
Guru and his family :— 

That land where my true Guru sitteth groweth green. 
The creatures who saw my true Guru have become happy. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 307 

Hail, hail to his father! hail, hail to his family! hail, 
hail to the good mother who gave him birth ! 

Hail, hail to the Guru who worshippeth the Name! he 
is saved himself and he saveth those who saw him. 

O God, mercifully cause me to meet the true Guru; the 
slave Nanak will wash his feet. 

The man who is separated from God is compared 
to one who suffers from a malignant ulcer :— 

They who have a malignant! ulcer within them know 
what torture is. 

They know what separation from God is; I am ever 
a sacrifice unto them. 

O God, unite me with the friend, and I will place my 
head as a sacrifice beneath his feet. 

I am a slave to the slaves of those disciples of the Guru 
who perform his work. 

Moist with God’s dye are the robes? of those who are 
imbued with God’s deep dye. 

Nanak, mercifully cause me to meet the Guru, and I will 
sell my head to him as the price of God’s name. 

The holy and unselfish man deserves congratula- 
tions :— 

O beloved, the holy man who meeteth the society of the 
saints in which God is praised, 

And who preacheth instruction for the good of others, is 
worthy of gratulation among mortals. 

The Guru excommunicates the hypocritical apos- 
tates :— 

The apostates go and bow to the Guru, but their hearts 
are base and filled with falsehood. 

When the Guru saith to them ‘Rise and work, my 
brethren,’ they go and squeeze themselves in somewhere 
like cranes. 

The true Guru abideth among his disciples ; he picketh 
out and expelleth the monkeys. 

1 Also translated—chronic. 
* Metaphorically for understandings. 
xX 2 

308 THE SIKH RELIGION 

They sitting here and there conceal their faces, and being 
counterfeit may not associate with the holy. 

There is no food for them there; they go and eat filth 
like sheep. 

If you desire to feed the apostate, he will spew and vomit 
poison on you. 

O God, give me not the company of the apostate ; he is 
accursed of the Creator. 

He who made this play beholdeth it; the slave Nanak 
remembereth His name. 

God protects the true Guru :— 

The true Guru who claspeth God to his heart 1s inscrutable. 

None can touch the true Guru on whose side God is. 

Devotion to God 1s the true Guru’s sword and armour by 
which the torturer death 1s destroyed. 

God Himself is the protector of the true Guru, and will 
save all who follow him. 

Him who meaneth evil to the true Guru the Creator 
Himself will destroy. 

This 1s the word of the true God’s court ; the slave Nanak 
uttereth this prophecy. 

Whether asleep or awake man should remember 
God :— 

What 1s sleeping? what waking? the holy are the 
acceptable. 

They who never forget God are perfect and distinguished. 

They obtain the true Guru from the Merciful One, and fix 
their thoughts on him night and day. 

May I continue to meet such persons and obtain honour 
at God’s gate ! 

Nanak, bright are the faces of those who ever as they 
awake remember God, 

And who repeat His praises whether sleeping or waking. 

The Guru has found God and His mediator :— 

Searching for God in my soul and body I have found the 
God whom I desired ; 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 309 

And I have found the Guru the mediator who hath 
blended me with Him. 

There is no alliance between God and mammon :— 

They who love mammon have no faith in the holy man. 

They come and go and wander in transmigration, and 
have no happiness even in their dreams. 

They act falsely ; they speak falsely ; attached to false- 
hood they become false. 

Worldly love is all trouble ; through trouble man perish- 
eth ; through trouble he weepeth. 

There is no union between worldliness and love of God, 
however all may desire it. 

They whose treasure-houses contain meritorious acts are 
happy under the Guru’s instruction. 

ASA 

The Guru’s instruction is communicated from one 
Man to another :-— 

The pious propagate God’s vine ; 

It beareth God’s fruit which epicures enjoy. 

Utter the name of God which containeth endless delights ; 

Utter God’s name and praises under the Guru’s instruc- 
tion, so shalt thou destroy the serpents which are Death’s 
myrmidons. 

God implanted His worship in the Guru ; 

If the Guru be pleased, he conferreth it on his disciple, 
my brethren. 

Religious ceremonies produce pride ; on account of them 
the way is not known ; 

They are idle as the dust the elephant throweth on his 
head after bathing. 

He whose fortune is very great and very exalted, 

Shall, O Nanak, by uttering the true Name become true 
and pure. 

The fourth Guru was fond of hearing the hymns 
of his predecessors sung. On one occasion when he 

310 THE SIKH RELIGION 

ordered a seance, the musicians were not ready. 
Then the following hymn was composed :— 

How long will they take to search for anklets and cym- 
bals ?) when will some one play the rebeck ? 

While a messenger is going and they are coming a short 
time must elapse; in the meantime let me repeat God’s 
name, 

Such devotion hath been produced in my heart 

That without God I cannot live for an instant ; asa fish 
dieth out of water. 

How long will it take to find five or seven singers ? 
When will some one raise the voice of song ? 

In tuning the instruments and selecting the music some 
little time must elapse ; meanwhile let my soul sing God’s 
praises. 

When will some one dance and stretch forth his feet ? 
when will some one wave his hands ? 

In stretching out one’s hands and feet some little delay 
must take place ; meanwhile let my heart remember God. 

When will some one satisfy the people? Yet by satis- 
fying people no honour is obtained in heaven. 

Nanak, ever meditate on God in thy heart, then shall 
every one congratulate thee. 

The Guru ardently desires to behold God :— 

O my mother, show me my beloved God : 

I cannot remain for a moment without Him ; on beholding 
Him 1 am as pleased as a camel with creepers. 

My soul through divine love hath renounced the world 
with the object of beholding God the Friend. 

As the bumble-bee cannot abide without the lotus, so 
can I not abide without God. 

Preserve me in Thy sanctuary, O beloved Lord of the 
world ; fulfil my desires, O Lord God. 

Nanak’s soul is glad when God showeth Himself even for 
a moment. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS ay a 

ASA CHHANT 

The supreme importance of the Guru’s instruc- 
tion :— 

Through love of the Guru’s instruction I have obtained 
real life during life. 

The Guru gave me God’s name, and implanted it in my 
Heart: 

He implanted it in my heart, and all doubt and trouble 
have departed. 

Under the Guru’s instruction I have meditated on the 
Unseen and Inapprehensible ; I have obtained the pure and 
supreme dignity. 

On singing the true Guru’s hymns the voice of the un- 
beaten strain ever resoundeth. 

Nanak, God the Giver bestowed on me a gift—my light 
hath blended with His. 

The perverse die in their perversity, saying their property 
was their own. 

They attach their hearts to skin-covered filth? which 
cometh for a moment and in a moment departeth : 

They attach their hearts to skin-covered filth which 1s 
fleeting as the dye of the safflower. 

They go now to the east, and now to the west, as a potter’s 
wheel revolveth. 

In sorrow they eat, in sorrow they amass and enjoy ; 
they extend their increase of sorrow. 

Nanak, if man enter the Guru’s asylum, he shall easily 
cross the dangerous ocean. 

My God is good, inaccessible, and unfathomable. 

I asked my merchant, the true Guru, for God as my 
stock-in-trade : 

I asked for God as my stock-in-trade and bought His 
name ; since then I sing God’s praises and they are pleasing 
LOnime. 

I have banished sleep and hunger and become absorbed 
in divine tranquillity. 

1 The body is meant. 

312 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Dealers of one description! come and take away God’s 
name as their profit : 

Nanak, it is they who offer their souls and bodies to the 
Guru who acquire it. 

The great ocean of God is full of jewels upon jewels ; 

They obtain them to whom the Guru’s words are pleasing : 

They to whom the Guru’s words are pleasing obtain the 
priceless unrivalled jewels. 

They who have obtained Thy unrivalled name, O God, 
have their storehouses filled with Thy service. 

I have churned the ocean of the body; I have seen a rare 
thing come toxiew, 

The Guru is God and God is the Guru; Nanak, there is 
no difference between them, my brethren. 

The following hymn is in effect a glorification of 
the Sikh religion which sprang up in the Kal or 
fourth and last age of the world. The Kal age is 
therefore here made out to be the best of all the 
four ages :— 

In the Sat age all men were contented ; religion had four 
legs, and men meditated on God. 

They sang of God with heart and soul, acquired the 
greatest happiness, and every heart possessed a knowledge 
of God’s excellences. 

A knowledge of God’s excellences was men’s wealth ; 
He was their salvation, and the pious became illustrious. 

At home or abroad there was but the one God and no 
other. 

Men fixed their attention on Him; His name was their 
helper; in His court they acquired honour. 

Then came the Treta age—though worldliness began to 
press on men’s hearts, yet they practised continence and 
austerities. 

One leg of religion dropped off; three legs remained ; in 
men’s minds and hearts wrath was inflamed. 

A great poisonous fermentation in men’s hearts and souls 
was wrath; kings made war and suffered in the conflict. 

1 Who deal in the Name, holy men. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 313 

Men’s hearts were attacked by the diseases of egotism and 
pride ; their conceit and arrogance increased. 

If my God be merciful, the poison shall depart by the 
Guru’s instruction and God’s name. 

The Dwapar age came—men wandered in doubt ; God 
created the milkmaids and Krishan. 

Penitents practised not penances, men initiated sacrifices 
and offerings, and performed many religious ceremonies : 

They performed religious ceremonies ; the second leg of 
religion dropped off, and two legs remained. 

Many heroes engaged in great wars; through pride they 
ruined themselves and others. 

He who is compassionate to the poor caused man to meet 
the sainted Guru, and on meeting him impurity departed. 

When God made the Kal age, religion had lost three legs 
and only the fourth remained. 

They who acted according to the Guru’s instruction 
obtained God’s name as their medicine, and in singing His 
praises obtained divine rest. 

The season for the praises of God arrived ; His name was 
magnified, and the field of God’s name germinated. 

If in the Kal age any other seed than the Name be sown, 
men lose all their profit and capital. 

Nanak, when the true Guru hath been found, he showeth 
the Name in man’s heart. 

God’s attributes :— 

My great God is inaccessible, inapprehensible, eternal, 
pure, formless. 

His condition cannot be described ; immeasurable is His 
glory ; my God is invisible and illimitable : 

God is invisible, illimitable and boundless; only He 
knoweth Himself. 

What can this poor creature utter, O God, which would 
be a description of Thee ? 

He on whom Thou castest Thy glance of favour, medi- 
tateth on Thee under the Guru’s instruction. 

Thou, great God, art inaccessible, inapprehensible, eternal, 
pure, formless. 

314 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou art the primal Male, the boundless Creator ; Thy 
limit cannot be ascertained. 

Thou art uninterruptedly within every heart, and in 
everything art Thou contained. 

Within the heart is the Supreme Brahm, the Supreme 
God, whose end cannot be found. 

He hath no form or outline ; He is unseen and inappre- 
hensible ; but under the Guru’s instruction the Invisible 
becometh visible. 

He who beholdeth God shall ever be happy day and night, 
and shall be easily absorbed in His name. 

Thou art the primal Male, the boundless Creator ; Thy 
limit cannot be ascertained. 

Thou art the true Supreme Being, ever indestructible ; 
O God, Thou art the treasury of excellences. 

O God, Thou alone art the Lord, there is none besides ; 
Thou art the omniscient Being. 

Thou art omniscient and most exalted ; there is none so 
great as Thou. 

Thine is the Word; Thou pervadest everything ; what 
Thou doest cometh to pass. 

The one God is contained in everything ; the pious behold 
Thee, O God, on repeating Thy name. 

Thou art the true Supreme God, ever indestructible ; O 
God, Thou art the treasury of excellences. 

Thou art the Creator of all; Thy glory is everywhere ; 
Thou settest everything in motion as Thou pleasest : 

Thou settest everything in motion as Thou pleasest ; 
everything is subject to Thy word : 

Iverything is subject to Thy word; when it pleaseth 
Thee, man obtaineth greatness therefrom. 

If man obtain wisdom from the Guru’s instruction and 
efface himself, he shall be absorbed in the Word. 

Thy word cannot be grasped; it can be obtained from 
the Guru’s instruction : Nanak, he who obtaineth it, shall be 
absorbed in the Name. 

Thou art the Creator of all, Thy glory is every- 
where; Thou settest everything in motion as Thou 
pleasest. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 315 

The Guru’s soul is thoroughly saturated with 
God’s love :— 

Mine eyes are wet with God’s nectar; my soul is dyed 
with His love. 

God applied His touchstone to the heart, and found it 
brightest gold. 

Through the Guru my soul and body are dyed with a deep 
colour. 

The slave Nanak hath perfumed himself with the musk 
of God’s love, and his whole life is supremely blest. 

The word of God’s love which is a pointed arrow hath 
smitten his heart. 

He who feeleth the pain of love knoweth its torment. 

He who in life is dead is said to have obtained deliver- 
ance while alive. 

Nanak prayeth, O God, may the true Guru cause me to 
meet Thee that I may cross over the dangerous world ! 

I ignorant and stupid have sought Thine asylum; may 
I obtain the love of God! 

I have obtained God from the perfect Guru; I pray for 
the service of God alone. 

My soul and body are pleased with Thy word; I repeat 
it with endless pleasure. 

On meeting the saints, Nanak hath obtained God in their 
association. 

O Thou compassionate to the poor, hear my supplication ; 
O God, Lord, King. 

I pray for the protection of God’s name and God putteth 
it into my mouth. 

O God, it is Thy function to love Thy saints and preserve 
their honour. 

The slave Nanak hath sought Thy protection ; Thy name 
hath saved him. 

The Guru has found God, who is a diamond in 
the golden fortress of the body :— 

On searching and searching for God, the Friend, I have 
found Him under the Guru’s instruction. 

It is known that God is in the golden fortress of the body. 

316 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God is a diamond and a jewel with which my soul and 
body are pierced. 

Having been very fortunate at my birth I have obtained 
God; Nanak is kneaded with His essence. 

I a young woman continually arise and inquire the road 
to my Spouse. 

The true Guru reminding me of God’s name putteth me 
on His road. 

The Name, the antidote to the poison of pride, is the 
support of my soul and body. 

The slave Nanak prayeth, O God, grant me to meet the 
true Guru who hath already met Thee. 

Through the Guru, O Beloved, come to me who have 
been so long separated from Thee. 

My soul and body are very sad ; mine eyes are moist with 
God’s love. 

O Guru, show me God the Beloved ; on meeting Him my 
soul shall be happy. 

Nanak, God hath appointed me, a fool, to perform His duty. 

The Guru’s body is moistened with God’s nectar, and he 
sprinkleth it on his disciples. 

They whose hearts are pleased with the Guru’s words 
drink their fill of nectar. 

The Guru being pleased, I have obtained God and I shall 
no longer be buffeted. 

Nanak, the man of God and God have become one, 

God ever preserves His saints :— 

God produced saints in every age, and continueth to 
preserve their honour. 

God destroyed the wicked Harnakhas and saved Prahlad. 

God turned His back on the proud and the slanderers, but 
showed His face to Namdev. 

Nanak hath so served his God that He will deliver him at 
last. 

It is said that the following hymn was composed 
by Guru Ram Das before he had become Guru. 

1 Either by transmigration or the god of death. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 317 

Guru Amar Das was highly pleased with this and 
other compositions of his saintly son-in-law :— 

Come home, O my beloved soul, which hath wandered 
afar. 

O Guru, cause me to meet God, my Beloved, that He 
may dwell in my heart. 

Thou shalt be happy, O my dear, if God show thee mercy. 

Nanak, when the Guru is pleased, my dear, he will blend 
man with God. 

I did not heartily taste God’s love, my dear ;! 

So the thirst of my heart hath never been slaked ; my 
dear, it formeth ever new desires. 

Youth is ever passing away, my dear, the god of death 
stealeth away the breath. 

Nanak, she is a fortunate wife, my dear, who claspeth 
God to her heart. 

Mine eyes are refreshed by the Beloved, my dear, as the 
chatrik with his raindrops. 

On drinking the raindrops of God, my dear, my heart is 
comforted. 

Separation from God kept me awake, my dear, and | 
could by no means sleep. 

But now Nanak by loving the Guru hath obtained God, 
the Friend, my dear, and 1s at rest. 

In the month of Chet, my dear, beginneth the pleasant 
season of spring ; 

But without my Beloved, my dear, the dust was flying 
about my court? 

There was hope in my heart and I was waiting, my dear ; 
both mine eyes were fixed on Him. 

But now Nanak on seeing the Guru is happy, my dear, 
as a mother on seeing her child. 

My dear, the true Guru hath repeated to me tales and 
legends of God. 

I am a sacrifice to the Guru, my dear, who hath caused 
me to meet God. 

I did not love Him, so I did not taste His love. 
Instead of spring it was autumn for me. 

1 
2 

318 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God hath fulfilled all my desires, my dear ; I have obtained 
the fruit my heart desired. 

When God is pleased, my dear, the slave Nanak is ab- 
sorbed in the Name. 

Without the love of my beloved God, I rejoice not. 

How shall I find the Guru through whom I may behold 
my Beloved ? | 

If the bounteous God cause me to meet the great Guru, 
[ shall meet Him. 

Nanak, he on whose forehead it was so written in the 
beginning shall find the Guru, my dear. 

GUJARI 

On Guru Amar. Das. —— 

The saints of God are the best ;_ their speech is the best ; 
what they utter is for others’ advantage. 

God mercifully saveth those who hear their words with 
faith and devotion. 

O God, grant me to meet the dear saints of God. 

The true Guru, the perfect Guru, dear to me as my Hie, 
will save us sinners. 

Very fortunate, very fortunate are the pious whose sup- 
port is God’s name. 

Under the Guru’s instruction they obtain God’s nectar, 
God’s essence, and a storehouse of devotion. 

They who have not obtained a sight of the true Guru, 
the true man, are unfortunate, and shall be punished by 
Death. 

They shall be born again as dogs, swine, and donkeys, and 
God will punish them as wilful murderers. 

O compassionate to the poor, have mercy on Thy servant 
and save him. 

The slave Nanak hath sought Thine asylum ; if it please 
Thee, O God, Thou wilt save him. 

The Guru prays never to forget God’s name :— 

Mercifully so dispose my heart, O God, that I may night 
and day continually meditate on Thy name. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 3109 

God is all comfort, all excellence, all wealth ; by utter- 
ing His name all misery and hunger depart. 

O my soul, God’s name is my companion and my brother. 

Under the Guru’s instruction let me sing the praises of 
God’s name; it will be at the last hour my helper, and 
deliver me in God’s court. 

O God, the Searcher of hearts, Thou Thyself art the 
Giver ; Thou didst mercifully infuse the longing for Thee 
into my soul. 

The longing of my heart and soul is for God; He hath 
fulfilled my longing since I have entered the asylum of the 
true Guru. 

Through meritorious acts I have obtained human birth, 
but without the Name it would be accursed and useless. 

He who is without the Name shall eat sorrow as his 
relish ; his countenance shall grow pale, and men shall spit 
on his face. 

God will give glory in His court to those who have entered 
His asylum. 

Nanak, God welcometh and applaudeth His servant, 
embraceth him and blendeth him with Himself. 

The advantage of the Name and of the Guru's 
instruction :— 

He who through the true Guru hath found the Lord God 
hath made Him dear to me by his instruction. 

My soul and body have become refreshed and happy ' 
since through good fortune I have meditated on God’s 
name. 

My brother, may some one come to meet me who will 
implant God’s name in my heart! 

He is my Beloved, my life, my soul, and my body; all 
would I give him who would tell me of my Lord God. 

I have obtained patience, faith, and God from the Guru’s 
instruction; may he ever apply my mind to God and His 
name ! 

Nectar droppeth into the mouth of him who uttereth the 
true Guru’s nectareous words and hymns. 

1 Literally—become cooled and green. 

320 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Pure 1s the Name; no soil attacheth to it; under the 
Guru’s instruction repeat it with devotion. 

The man who hath not found the wealth of the Name is 
unfortunate and dieth again and again. 

Meditate on God, the root of joy, the life of the world, 
who giveth to all men, and thou shalt be happy. 

Thou art the Giver; all creatures are Thine, saith the 
slave Nanak ; thou pardonest the pious and blendest them 
with Thyself. 

Guru Ram Das expresses his humility and_ his 
faith in family life :— 

Mother, father, son are all made by God; God estab- 
lished all their relationships. 

All my strength is as nothing before God, O my friend. 

The body, soul, and person are all in God’s power. 

(cod Himself inspired His saints with faith. 

Ikven in their families they abide as hermits. 

When hearty love is established with God, 

Then what man doeth is pleasing to Him. 

Whatever work God hath appointed us to do, 

That we do with His permission. 

Nanak, they whose devotion is pleasing to my Lord, 

Fix their attention on God’s name. 

DEVGANDHARI 

The first two lines of the following embody an 
inquiry made by Sangatia, a Sikh. The remainder 
of the hymn is the Guru’s reply :— 

Tell me in what street I shall find my Beautiful One : 

O saints of God, show me the way, and I will follow you. 

The word of the Beloved comforteth the heart ; good is 
this custom which hath been established. 

She who whether bent with age! or of small stature is 
pleasing to the Lord, is beautiful and becometh united with 
Him. 

' Latar? may also mean a hunchback. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 321 

There is but one Beloved ; all are His handmaidens ; she 
who pleaseth Him is good. 

What shall the poor wretch Nanak do? Let him walk 
in the way which pleaseth the Lord. 

The Guru has completely devoted himself to 
God :— 

I have now come weary to God: 

Since I have come to Thy protection, save me, O God, 
or destroy me. 

I despise 1 men’s artifices and praises. 

Whether one speak well or ill of me, I have humbled my 
body. 

God mercifully preserveth him who cometh to His pro- 
tection. 

The slave Nanak prayeth, O God, preserve mine honour 
who have sought Thy shelter ! 

BIHAGRA CHHANT 

The Guru encourages men to lead a religious 
life :— 

They who think not on God’s name, O my life, are per- 
verse, foolish, and silly. 

They who think on worldly love, O my life, shall regret 
it at their final departure. 

The perverse, O my life, who are led away by sin shall 
not enter God’s court. 

Nanak, O my life, they who meet the Guru, who repeat 
God’s name, and who are absorbed in it shall be saved. 

All ye people, go and meet the Guru, O my life, who 
will fix God’s name in your hearts. 

Make no delay in repeating God’s name, O my life; nobody 
knoweth whether he shall draw another breath or not. 

That time, that juncture, that ghari, that moment 
are profitable, O my life, when my God cometh into the 
mind. 

Nanak, by remembering the Name, O my life, Death’s 
myrmidons approach not. 

1 Literally—I have burnt in the fire. 

SIKH, I y 

322 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God always beholdeth and heareth everything, O my 
life ; it is he who committeth sin who feareth. 

All fear departeth from him, O my life, whose heart is 
pure within him. 

He who hath faith in God’s name is fearless, O my life, 
though all the hostile and the shameless slander him. 

They who have worshipped the perfect Guru Nanak, O 
my life, make all men bow at their feet. 

Ever worship such a God, O my life, as is the great Lord 
of all. 

They who have worshipped the one God with single mind, 
O my life, care for no one. 

By serving the Guru God’s palace is attained, O my life ; 
all slanderers talk foolishness and give causeless annoyance. 

O my life, the Lord God hath written good fortune on that 
man’s forehead in the beginning who meditateth on Him." 

BIHAGRE KI WAR 

It is God who performs all the agricultural and 
culinary operations by which man subsists. The 
following hymn is sung after Sikh entertainments :— 

God Himself is the soil, Himself the tiller; it is He who 
causeth the corn to spring up and be ground ; 

It is He who cooketh it ; it is He who putteth the food 
into dishes and serveth it; it is He who sitteth down to 
eat it. 

He is the finger-water ; He giveth the toothpick; He 
holdeth the water to wash the mouth. 

It is He who ever seateth the saints at His banquet ; it 
is He who dischargeth them. 

God causeth him to whom He is merciful to obey His 
order. 

WADHANS GHORIAN 

The following, in which the body is compared to 
a steed to be kept under subjection, is sung at 
marriages :— 

The body is a steed which God created. 

1 That is, the privilege of meditating on God is obtained by destiny. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 323 

Hail to human birth obtained by meritorious acts ! 

Human birth is obtained by greatly meritorious acts ; 
the body is fine gold 

Which by the Guruw’s instruction is dyed a rich colour, 
O God, a new colour. 

This body by which God’s name is repeated is beautiful 
as adorned by His name. 

It is obtained by great good fortune; the Name is its 
companion : O slave Nanak, it is God who created it. 

Having well reflected put a saddle thereon.! 

Mount it, Sir, and thou shalt cross the dangerous ocean. 

The dangerous ocean in which there are many waves 
shall be crossed through the Guru’s instruction. 

Very fortunate people, making God the boat, embark 
thereon and cross over; the pilot Guru ferrieth men over 
by the Word. 

Him who night and day singeth God’s love and God’s 
praises, God the Lover imbueth with His love. 

The slave Nanak hath obtained the rank of nirvan, God’s 
highest and best rank. 

The Guru hath put divine knowledge as a bit into the 
mouth, 

And applied God’s love as a whip to the body : 

The pious man who hath conquered his own mind, applieth 
God’s love as a whip to his body. 

He obtaineth the Word, fashioneth his unfashioned mind, 
and drinketh God’s nectar. 

He who heareth the Word which the Guru uttereth, 
dyeth his steed with God’s colour,? 

Traverseth the great and difficult way, O Nanak, and 
crosseth over. 

God created the body a fleet mare. 

The body by which God’s name is repeated is blest, is 
blest. 

The body by which God’s name is repeated, the result of 
prenatal acts, is to be congratulated and praised. 

Man having under the Guru’s instruction mounted his 

1 Keep it under subjection. 
2 Applies God’s love to his heart. 
Y 2 

324 THE SIKH RELIGION 

body as a mare, crosseth the difficult way and meeteth the 
Primal Joy. 
The perfect God hath arranged the marriage feast; a 
company of saints hath come as the marriage procession. 
O slave Nanak, I have obtained God as my Spouse ; the 
holy men meeting rejoice and utter gratulations. 

SORATH KI WAR 

The relation of God to His servants :— 

God loveth His slaves ; God is a friend of His slaves. 

God is in the power of His slaves as a musical instrument 
in the power of the musician. 

God’s slaves meditate on God and bear affection to the 
Beloved. 

Mercifully hear me, O God; may rain fall throughout 
the whole world ! 

The praise of God’s slaves contributeth to God’s great- 
ness. 

God is pleased with His own greatness when His slaves 
are congratulated. 

It is they who meditate on God’s name ; God and God’s 
saints are the same. 

The slave Nanak is God’s servant ; O God, preserve his 
honour. 

He who has no faith in the Guru 1s stupid and 
deceitful :— 

He in whose heart is spiritual ignorance and who hath 
no faith in the Guru hath but a poor understanding. 

He in whose heart there is deceit deemeth every one 
deceitful ; through this deception he is ruined. 

What is pleasing to the Guru entereth not his mind ; he 
wandereth about for his own object. 

If God be merciful, Nanak shall be absorbed in His words. 

The fate of him who is accursed of the Guru :— 

He who is accursed of the true Guru shall leave his home 
and wander for ever: 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 325 

He shall be followed by hootings and his face shall be 
blackened in the next world : 

Incoherent words shall ever issue from his lips, and he 
shall die spluttering them forth. 

What if anybody do anything ? he shall only obtain the 
result of his prenatal acts. 

Wherever he goeth he shall be proved a liar ; falsehood 
pleaseth no one. 

Brethren and saints, behold God’s graciousness ; as man 
doeth so shall he receive. 

This will be God’s decision in His true court ; the slave 
Nanak foretelleth this. 

DHANASARI 

How man’s impurities are removed :— 

The rust of the sins of many births attaches to man ; 
but when he joins the guild of holy men it is filed away : 
So when gold is heated in the fire, its impurity is removed, 

Obedience to the Guru inculcated :— 

We are totally blind, saturated with the greatest sins ; 
how shall we walk in the Guru’s way ? 

May the true Guru, the bestower of happiness, mercifully 
take us under his protection ! 

Sikhs of the Guru and friends, walk in God’s way. 

Faithfully obey! what the Guru preacheth; Divine 
teaching is unique. 

Hear, servants of God and brethren, serve the Guru very 
promptly. 

Tie up service to the Guru as thy travelling expenses to 
God ; think not of to-day or to-morrow. 

Saints of God, repeat His name; saints of God, let us 
walk with God. 

He who repeateth God’s name becometh as God, and 
meeteth God who sporteth. 

To repeat God’s name is the longing of my heart: O 
God, Dweller in the forest, have mercy. 

1 Also translated—Accept as good. 

326 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thy slave Nanak prayeth—O God, cause me to meet the 
company of holy men and be the dust of their feet. 

Let God be ever in man’s thoughts :— 

Read of God, write of God, repeat God’s name, sing God’s 
name, and He will cause thee to cross the terrible ocean. 
Meditate on God in thy heart with thought and word, 
and so repeat His name that thou mayest be happy. 
Mentally repeat the name of God, the Lord of the world ; 
And, O my friends, meet the company of the saints. 
Sing of God, the Dweller in the forest, and you shall be 
happy day and night. 
When God cast a look of favour on me, then I made 
mental effort ; by repeating God’s name I have been saved. 
O my Lord, preserve Thy servant Nanak’s honour ; he 
hath entered Thine asylum. 

JAITSARI 

God is a diamond which the Guru has made his 
own for the benefit of others :— 

A diamond or a ruby, however priceless or heavy, is, 
without a purchaser, as a blade of grass. 

When the holy Guru the purchaser saw the jewel, he 
bought it for hundreds of thousands. 

God was concealed as a diamond in my heart. 

When God, compassionate to the poor, caused me to 
meet the saintly Guru, I assayed the Diamond. 

In the house of the perverse is the darkness of igno- 
rance ; in their houses the Diamond is not seen. 

The pagans die wandering in the wilderness ; they have 
tasted of the poison of the serpent mammon. 

O God, cause me to meet Thy saint, the good man; 
O God, keep me under the saint’s protection ! 

O Lord God, accept me; I have hastened to Thy side. 

What praise of Thine can my tongue recount ? Thou art 
great and inaccessible, the greatest Being. 

The slave Nanak prayeth—O God, show mercy to me; 
O God, preserve me who am sinking like a stone. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 327 

Men are as silly children without the Guru :— 

I am a child, foolish, stupid, and silly, and know nothing 
of Thy state or condition. 

O God, be merciful, grant me the best understanding, 
and make me who am stupid wise. 

My mind is lazy and drowsy. 

O God, bring the holy Guru to meet me; let me meet 
him, and the doors of my understanding shall open. 

Love the Guru every moment, O my heart, that God’s 
name may become my love and life. 

Without the Name I should die, O my Lord, as a drunkard 
craveth for intoxicants.t 

The hearts of those who have good fortune from the 
beginning love God. 

I worship at all times the feet of those who have made 
God dear to me. 

O God, my Lord, have mercy on me, cause me, who hath 
long been separated from Thee, to meet Thy saint. 

Hail! hail to the true Guru who hath implanted God’s 
name in me! The slave Nanak is a sacrifice unto him. 

The repetition of God’s name and praises secures 
salvation :— 

O God, the mothers of those who keep not God’s name 
in their hearts ought to have been barren. 

They who wander without the Name pine away and dic 
in agony. 

O man, repeat the name of God who is within thee. 

God the merciful hath shown me mercy ; when the Guru 
gave me divine instruction my mind understood it. 

The praise of God in the Kal age holdeth the highest 
place ; God is obtained through the true Guru. 

I am a sacrifice to my true Guru who hath disclosed to 
me God’s hidden name. 

A sight of the holy man is obtained by great good fortune ; 
he removeth all sin. 

I have found the true Guru who is a very clever mer- 

1 That is, in a paroxysm of desire, 

328 THE SIKH RELIGION 

chant ; he hath made me a partner in God’s many attri- 
butes. 

They to whom the Life of the world hath shown mercy, 
have clasped Him to their hearts. 

Dharmraj in his court hath torn up my papers!; the 
slave Nanak hath settled his account. 

BAIRARI 

The position and occupation of the child in the 
womb :— 

When the child reversed was praying in the pit of fire, 
God preserved him in the womb. 

TiPANnG 

God is supreme and has no partner :— 

All come by the Master’s order; His order extendeth 
over all. 

True is the Lord, and true is all His play. 

Praise the True One; God the Master is over all. 

He hath no partner ; of whom shall I take account ? 

God hath built His temple out of air, water, earth, and 
ether. 

He Himself abideth in the centre; say what can be 
accounted false ? 

Instruction for the faithless :— 

The proud man of evil mind ever doeth fruitless work. 

When he practiseth deceit and falsehood, he thinketh he 
hath conquered the world. 

Such is his way in this life; he never remembereth 
God’s name. 

In a moment everything that is false shall perish ; O my 
mind, meditate on God. 

The time cometh not to thy memory when the torturer 
Death shall seize thee. 

Nanak, God will redeem him in whose heart He metci- 
fully dwelleth. 

' As was done by Indian bankers after accounts were adjusted. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 329 

Guru Ram Das’s devotion to Guru Amar Das and 
his disciples :— 

My friend the Guru hath told me tales and parables 
of God. 

I. am a sacrifice to my Guru ; to the Guru I am a sacrifice. 

Come to me, Sikhs of the Guru; come to me, beloved of 
my Guru. 

God’s praises are pleasing to Him; I have obtained them 
from the Guru. 

To those who obey the will of the Guru I am ever a 
sacrifice ; 

I am a sacrifice to those who have beheld the beloved 
true Guru ; 

I am ever a sacrifice to those who have served the Guru. 

O God, Thy name is Hari, because Thou effacest suffering.! 

Thou art obtained by service to the Guru; through his 
instruction is salvation. 

They who meditate on God’s name are accepted : 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to them, and ever and ever offer 
myself for them. 

That, O God, is Thy praise which is pleasing unto Thee. 

The holy men who serve the Beloved obtain Him as their 
reward. 

God is with the souls of those who hold Him dear. 

They repeat and remember the name of the beloved God, 
and live for ever. 

I am a sacrifice to the holy ones who have served the 
Beloved. 

They are saved themselves with their families, and have 
freed the whole world. 

The Guru who hath served the Beloved God is blest, is 
blest. 

The Guru who hath shown God’s way hath performed 
merit, the greatest merit. 

The Guru’s disciples who serve him are meritorious beings : 

The slave Nanak is a sacrifice unto them, and ever and 
ever offereth himself for them. 

1 Hri, to take away, is the root of Harz. 

330 THE SIKH RELIGION 

They are holy friends and companions ; they are pleasing 
to God Himself. 

God in His court clotheth them with robes of honour 
and embraceth them. 

Grant me, O Lord, a sight of the holy men who meditate 
on Thy name: 

I will bathe their feet, stir and drink the dirt thereof. 

They who, while eating betel leaf and betel nut and 
dyeing their lips therewith, 

Never think of God, shall be seized and taken away by 
Death ; 

But Death shall never approach those who remember 
God’s name, 

And clasp it to their hearts—the Guru’s Sikhs are dear 
to the Guru. 

God’s name is a treasure : some rare pious person knoweth 
this. 

Nanak, they who meet the true Guru shall enjoy the 
highest pleasure. 

The true Guru is the giver ; being pleased he bestoweth 
favours. 

I am ever a sacrifice to the Guru who gave me the Name. 

The Guru who giveth God’s love is congratulated and 
praised. 

As I behold the Guru I am glad; the Guru is true, the 
Guru is the giver. 

The Guru’s tongue uttereth nectar, and is adorned with 
God’s name. 

All the hunger of the Sikhs who hear and obey the Guru 
departeth. 

Men speak of God’s way ; say how shall we walk therein ? 

Har Har is Thy name, O God; take Har! with thee, 
O man, as thy travelling expenses. 

The pious who have adored God are wealthy and very 
Wise. 

I am ever a sacrifice to the true Guru; I am absorbed 
in the Guru’s word. 

Thou art Master, Thou art Lord, Thou art my sovereign. 

1 That is, God’s name. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 331 

If it please Thee, we perform Thy service ; Thou art an 
ocean of merits. 

Thou art, O God, of one phase, and Thou art of many 
phases. 

Saith Nanak, whatever pleaseth Thee is good. 

SUHI 
Instructions for the deceitful :— 

If man while publicly invoking God ever practise deceit, 
his heart shall never become pure. 

He may day and night perform many ceremonies, but 
he shall not have happiness even in his dreams. 

Without the Guru possessed of divine knowledge there 
can be no devotion. 

Unbleached clothes can never be dyed, however much all 
may desire it. 

The malady of the perverse departeth not, even though 
they perform lip-worship, penance, austerities, and fasting. 

Their internal malady is great pride ; they are ruined by 
worldly love. 

He who while in a religious garb practiseth cunning, who 
alloweth his mind to wander in every direction, 

Who is filled with pride and regardeth not the Word, 
shall wander in transmigration again and again. 

Nanak, he on whom God looketh with favour under- 
standeth, meditateth on the Name, 

By the Guru’s favour knoweth the one God, and shall 
be absorbed in Him. 

Men of the lowest castes obtain salvation by 
devotion :— 

He who even of low caste repeateth God’s name shall 
obtain the highest dignity. 

Ask Bidur! the son of a handmaiden, in whose house 
Krishan stayed. 

1 Krishan, once stayed at the house of Bidur (Vidur), a man of low 
caste, and was hospitably entertained by him. Krishan at his depar- 
ture was pleased to bless his host. 

S32 THE SKE RELIGION 

Hear the ineffable word of God, my brethren, by which 
all anxiety, pain, and hunger are removed. 

Men praise Rav Das the tanner who every moment sang 
the one God’s praises. 

Though of fallen caste he became the best: the four 
castes came and fell at his feet. 

The Khatris and Brahmans called Namdev who loved 
God a calico-printer ; 

But God turned His back on them and showed His face 
to Namdev. 

The sixty-eight places of pilgrimage yield the palm of 
victory } to the worshippers and saints of God. 

May the slave Nanak through God’s mercy night and 
day touch their feet ! 

The worship of God, the only permanent good, is 
inculcated :— 

Where God is remembered, there He becometh a friend 
and helper. 

God dwelleth in the heart by the favour of the Guru ; 
He is not otherwise obtained. 

Amass God’s wealth, my brethren, 

So that God may assist you in this world and the next. 

God’s wealth is earned in the company of the holy ; 
God’s wealth is not obtained elsewhere or by other effort. 

The holy who deal in God’s jewels purchase the jewel of 
God’s wealth : dealers in glass acquire not God’s wealth by 
idle words.? 

God’s wealth is as jewels, ornaments, and gems : 

God’s saints fix their attention on it at the suitable am- 
brosial hour. 

When God’s wealth is sown at the suitable ambrosial 
hour, God’s saints eat it, spend it, and it never faileth. 

Both in this world and the next the saints who deal in 
God’s wealth are congratulated. 

There is no fear for God’s wealth; it ever remaineth 

? Literally—put patches on their foreheads. 

* The holy meditate on God; the perverse continue their vain 
babbling. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS Bes 

immovable and permanent ; it cannot be destroyed by fire 
or by water; it is not the prey of thieves or of Death’s 
myrmidons. 

Pickpockets cannot approach God’s wealth, nor can the 
tax-gatherer Death impose a tax on it. 

The apostates through sin have amassed sinful wealth, 
but not a particle of it shall go with them. 

In this world the apostate is miserable when wealth 
slippeth from his hands : the apostate shall not find entrance 
into God’s court hereafter. 

The dealer in this wealth of God, O saints, is God Him- 
self; he to whom He giveth it, loadeth it and taketh it 
away. 

This wealth of God shall never suffer deficiency; the 
Guru hath given this knowledge to the slave Nanak. 

SuUHI ASHTAPADI 

The Guru’s passionate desire to obey and serve 
God :— 

I will sell myself to him who bringeth my dearly Beloved 
to me. 

I desire to behold God. 

By God’s mercy the true Guru will cause me to meet 
Him and meditate on His name. 

If Thou give me happiness, O God, I will worship Thee ; 
even in misery I will meditate on Thee. 

If Thou give me hunger even then I shall be satiated 
with it ; and in its torture I shall feel happy. 

I would cut up my body and soul and dedicate them all 
to Thee, or I would burn myself in fire ; 

I would fan Thee and draw Thee water; what Thou 
givest me I should eat. 

Poor Nanak hath fallen at Thy door, O God; Thine 
acceptance of him will be to Thy glory. 

I would take out mine eyes and put them beneath Thy 
feet : having wandered over the whole earth I have gained 
this wisdom. 

If Thou seat me near Thee, I will still reverence Thee ; 

334 THE SIKH RELIGION 

even if Thou strike me and thrust me away, I will still 
meditate on Thee. 

If men praise me, then the praise is Thine ; if they slander 
me, even then I will not leave Thee. 

If Thou art on my side, men may say what they please ; 
if Thou forget me, I die. 

I am a sacrifice to the perfect Guru: falling at their feet 
I propitiate the saints. 

Poor Nanak is mad for a sight of Thee. 

SUHI CHHANT 

The following, which Guru Ram Das composed on 

the occasion of his marriage, is now an epithalamium 
of the Sikhs. 

I 

God by this first round?! hath ordained secular life. 

Accept the Word zustead of Brahma and religion instead 
of the Veds, 

And God will free you from your sins. 

Hold fast to religion, meditate on God’s name, and let 
it be fixed in your memory. 

Worship the true Guru, the perfect Guru, and all your 
sins shall depart. 

Very fortunate is man when God is near to his heart ; 
then he feeleth composure and happiness. 

The slave Nanak hath given out the first round and made 
a beginning of the marriage. 

I] 

In the second round God hath caused me to meet the 
true Guru. 

1 Lawan is that part of the marriage ceremony which consists in 
tying together the upper garments of the bride and bridegroom, and 
causing them to go four times round the Granth Sahib, while this 
hymn is repeated by the Sikh priest. 

2 The first two lines of each stanza end in the original with the 
word Balram Jiu, which may mean, O Dear One, or, I am a sacrifice 
unto Thee. The Sikh reader may supply the word for himself. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 335 

The fear in my heart hath departed, and the filth of my 
mind hath been washed away. 

I have obtained a pure state by singing God’s praises 
and beholding Him before me. 

The Lord God the soul of the world is everywhere diffused 
and filleth every place. 

Within and without us is the one God; on meeting 
the saints, hymns of rejoicing are sung. 

The slave Nanak hath finished the second round and 
heard the strain of ecstasy. 

Il 

God hath appointed the third round, and pleasure and 
contempt of the world are produced in the mind. 

The saints have caused me to meet God, and I have found 
Him by great good fortune. 

I have found the pure God by singing His praises and 
uttering His hymns. 

I have by great good fortune found the company of the 
saints wherein tales of the Ineffable are told. 

The absorbing thought of God hath arisen in my heart, 
and I have repeated His name by the destiny recorded on 
my forehead. 

The slave Nanak hath given out the third round, and 
God’s love hath been produced in his heart. 

IV 

At the fourth round divine knowledge is produced in the 
heart, and I have obtained God. 

Under the Guru’s instructions I have obtained a good 
disposition, and God is dear to my soul and body : 

God is dear and pleasing to me; I meditate on Him 
night and day. 

By singing the praises of God’s name I have obtained 
the fruit my heart desired. 

God hath finished the work, and woman’s heart delighteth 
in His name. 

The slave Nanak hath given out the fourth round, and 
obtained God the Imperishable. 

336 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru composed the following also on his 
marriage :— 

The Lord God hath accomplished the work ; 

He came to wed a holy bride : 

He came to wed a holy bride who ¢hus found God; that 
bride is dear to her Spouse. 

On meeting the saints songs of rejoicing are sung; God 
Himself hath decorated the bride. 

Demigods, men, and heavenly minstrels have come in 
a body, and formed a marriage procession never seen before. 

Nanak, I have found the true God who never dieth or 
is born. 

BILAWAL ASHTAPADI 

Association with the holy and acceptance of their 
teachings are superior to the life of a Jogi :— 

By intercourse with the true Guru the rings I wear are 
in my heart, and the instruction of the Guru I have applied 
as ashes to my body. 

I renounced family life and wandered in the forest, but 
my heart was not at rest even for a moment. 

After wandering I returned home, and fell at the feet of 
God’s saints. 

Even the Sanyasi who abandoneth his children con- 
ceiveth many desires in his heart : 

He conceiveth desire upon desire, and knoweth not that 
under the Guru’s instruction man is freed from desires and 
is happy. 

When the wish for separation ariseth, man becometh 
a Digambar, yet his mind wandereth in every direction. 

He roameth about, but his thirst is not quenched ; it is 
only when he meeteth the saints that he attaineth the abode 
of mercy. 

The Sidhs study many postures and earnestly desire 
wealth and the tricks of supernatural power. 

They are not satisfied or contented, nor doth peace enter 
their minds: it is by meeting the saints man is satisfied, 
and by God’s name he obtaineth perfection. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 437 

As God made all men on an equality, so they 
obtain salvation :— 

God made the sources of production, human beings, and 
animals of all colours and forms : 

He who taketh the saints’ protection shall be saved. 
Kkhatris, Brahmans, Sudars, Vaisyas, the whole race of 
Chandals, 

Namdev, Jaidev, Kabir, Trilochan, the low caste Rav 
Das, the currier, 

And those who met the company of holy men, such as 
the blessed Dhanna Jat and Sain, obtained God. 

God, to whom His saints are dear, protecteth their honour 
and accepteth them. 

Nanak, he who entereth the asylum of God, the life of 
the world, is mercifully preserved by Him. 

GAUND 

Place all thy hopes in God :— 

O man, if thou rest thy hopes on God thou shalt obtain 
the fruits, however various, that thy heart desireth. 

God knoweth everything that passeth in the mind; He 
alloweth not man to lose a particle of his labour. 

O my soul, put thy hope in that Lord God who is con- 
tained in everything : 

O my soul, put thy hope in God, the Lord of the world. 

The hopes which are put in any other than God are 
fruitless and all in vain. 

The Guru is completely penetrated by God’s 
love :— 

My soul, like a thirsty man without water, greatly yearneth 
for a sight of God. 

The arrow of God’s love hath pierced my heart. 

God knoweth my suffering, the pain within my heart. 

He who telleth me anything of my beloved God, is my 
brother, is my friend. 

Join, join, my companions, sing the praises of my Lord, 
and adopt the counsel of the patient true Guru. 

SIKH. II Z 

338 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Fulfil, O Lord, every desire of the slave Nanak; on 
beholding Thee my mind is at rest. 

RAMKALI 

They who unselfishly meet the saint shall obtain 
their reward :— 

If I have very great good fortune I shall have no delay 
in meeting the saint. 

God’s saints are my excellent tank of nectar: by great 
good fortune shall man bathe therein. 

O God, apply me to the service of the saint : 

I will draw water, fan him, grind his corn, shampoo his 
feet, and put the dust thereof on my face. 

The saint of God, who causeth man to meet the true 
Guru, 1s very great and exalted. 

There is none so great as the true Guru; on meeting 
him meditate upon God. 

They who entered the true Guru’s protection obtained 
God, and He preserved their honour. 

Some people come for their own objects, and sit in front 
of the Guru like cranes in the act of meditation. 

When the crane gocth into the society of the base crow, 
he putteth his beak into a poisonous carcass. 

Saith Nanak, O God, cause me to meet holy company, 
that meeting it I may be made a saint of Thine. 

Nat ASHTAPADI 

The advantage of holy company :— 

O God, bathe me in the nectareous tank. 

The true Guru’s knowledge is the best thing wherein to 
bathe ; by obtaining it the filth of sin departeth. 

The advantages of holy company are very great—the 
courtesan was saved by teaching her parrot to repeat God’s 
Mame > * 

The touching of Krishan’s feet took the hunchback ? to 
heaven. 

1 The courtesan (Ganika) by the advice of a holy man taught her 

parrot to repeat God's name. 
2 A hunchbacked handmaiden had ground sandal for Krishan’s 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 339 

Ajamal bore love to his son, and called out, ‘N arayan!’! 

His faith pleased my God’s heart and He smote and 
expelled the myrmidons of Death. 

Man preacheth and dictateth to others, but practiseth 
not what he preacheth ; 

But, on meeting the company of the saints, obtaineth 
staunchness of faith, and God’s name saveth him. 

As long as the mind and body are healthy, man remem- 
bereth not God. 

When the house is on fire, is that the time for the water- 
man to dig a well from which to draw water ? 

O man, associate not with the apostate who hath for- 
gotten God’s name. 

The word of the apostate stingeth like a scorpion ; leave 
the apostate far away. 

When love is bestowed, it increaseth greatly ; attach- 
ment to the holy regenerateth. 

They who accept the Guru’s words as absolutely true, 
are very dear to my Lord. 

According to our dealings in previous births, God’s name 
becometh dear. 

By the favour of the Guru the ambrosial juice of the 
Name is obtained ; man singeth and pondereth on it. 

O God, my Jewel, my Darling, all forms and colours are 
Thine. 

Everything shall be according to the colour Thou givest ; 
saith Nanak, what is wretched man ? 

God’s word and the Guru are interchangeable 
Certs t= 

The Word is the Guru and the Guru is the Word; in 
the Word is the essence of ambrosia. 

The worshipper who obeyeth what the Guru’s word 
teacheth shall be saved by the Guru in person. 

uncle, but on accidentally meeting Krishan applied it to his feet. 
He raised her from her stooping posture, upon which it is said her 
hump disappeared, and her body became perfect. 

1 Narayan, one of God’s names, is frequently given to children. 
Ajamal, a worldly man, called on the point of death to his son so named, 
and obtained salvation because he had once mentioned God’s name. 

Za 

340 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Ablutions and decorations are of no avail without 
listening to the Guru :— 

Man continually washeth his body, and rubbeth it and 
adorneth it ; 

But the beautiful decorations of him whose heart accepteth 
not the words of my true Guru are all in vain. 

MARU kI WaR I 

The Guru is potent to save under all circum- 
stances: — 

I will embark on the boat and proceed, however agitated 
be the sea. 

The true boat cannot be stopped if the Guru give en- 
couragement. 

I will disembark at that landing-place where the Guru 
is seen on the alert. 

Nanak, if I obtain God’s look of favour I shall be honoured 
in His court. 

BASANT 

The presence of God in every heart :— 

As the light of the sun’s rays is diffused, 
So is God the warp and woof contained in every heart. 

Man’s life is ever decreasing, and he ought to 
remember God the Saviour :— 

Night and day are both calling— 

Remember God in your hearts: He is the Saviour at last 
and for ever. 

O my soul, ever remember God. 

When man completely removeth the disease of sloth, he 
obtaineth God and under the Guru’s instruction singeth 
His praises. 

The obstinate die again and again of pride. 

They who are destroyed by the demon Death shall go to 
his city. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 341 

BASANT ASHTAPADI 

The Guru preaches the necessity of controlling 
the mind :— 

A child? dwelleth in the city of the body; it will not 
rest even for a moment. 

We weary of our various efforts and struggles to restrain 
at, but yet it wandereth incessantly. 

My Lord, bring the child to a fixed home. 

By meeting the true Guru the Perfect One is obtained ; 
by repeating His name He is manifested. 

All men’s bodies in which God’s name dwelleth not, are 
earth in graves. 

When the Guru causeth man to taste the water of God’s 
name, he enjoyeth it and again reviveth. 

I have thoroughly examined and searched my body ; the 
holy man showed me a sight— 

All the apostates were dying of searching abroad, while 
I under the Guru’s instruction found God at home. 

God hath been compassionate to the poorest of the poor 
as when Krishan went to Bidur’s house. 

Sudama? went to Krishan with love, upon which Krishan 
removed his poverty, and rendered him happy. 

Great is the honour of God’s name; my Lord Himself 
hath bestowed it on me. 

If all the apostates were to practise slandering it, that 
would in no wise lessen it. 

God’s name is His servant’s praise by which he obtaineth 
honour in every direction. 

The slanderer and the infidel cannot endure it; they 
have set fire to their houses. 

God’s servant meeting another obtaineth honour, as 
virtue springeth from virtue. 

The men who are the slaves of slaves of my God are 
dear and beloved by me. 

1 That is, the mind. 
2 Sudama had been a class fellow of Krishan, and in great poverty 
approached him when his fame had spread far and wide. 

342 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Creator is as the ocean; He is without limit; it is 
He who blendeth man with Himself. 

Nanak, the holy man is naturally blended with God as 
water with water. 

SARANG KI WAR 

The following was addressed to a hypocritical 
faqir :— 

Thou smearest thy body with ashes, but in thy heart is 
ignorance. 

Thou hast a patched coat, a wallet, and many sectarial 
garbs, but thou art evil-minded and proud. 

Thou hast never uttered the Word of God; thy heart 
is filled with the love of fleeting things. 

In thy heart are avarice and superstition ; thou wanderest 
a pagan. 

Saith Nanak, thou hast not remembered the Name and 
hast lost thy game. 

Hypocrisy cannot for ever be concealed :— 

They who are clean outside, but in whose hearts is the 
filth of deception, 

Practise falsehood and deception, and their falsehood 
becometh apparent. 

What is within cometh forth and cannot be ie) 

He to whom falsehood and avarice attach, shall again 
enter the womb. 

Nanak, what man soweth he eateth: he obtaineth what 
the Creator destined for him. 

whe tate-o1 the slanderer. — 

They in whose hearts is the enemy slander cut their own 
noses and cause others to cut theirs. 

They become very ugly and pained, and their faces 
ever appear black. 

When they rise in the morning, they take and steal 
others’ property with God’s name in their mouths. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 343 

O God, associate me not with such; preserve me from 
them, O God. 

Nanak, such perverse persons act according to their 
destiny and are unhappy. 

Man may be holy in his own home :— 

Even in one’s own house and one’s own family man may 
be absorbed in God. 

Nanak, they who are imbued with the Name are the true 
hermits. 

Men cannot be compelled to holiness :— 

Service is not performed by calculation ; what is so done 
is not acceptable. 

He who hath not a relish for the Word, shall never love 
the True One. 

The obstinate person to whom the Guru is not dear, 
shall come and go in transmigration. 

When he maketh one step forward he retreateth ten. 

Man ought not to rail at Providence :— 

Saith Nanak, why, O man, be angry with Him who 
taketh thought for us, 

Without whom we cannot live for a moment, and by 
forgetting whom we cannot succeed in any degree ? 

In the rainy reason men obtain respite from out- 
door occupation, so that is the time for either love 
or devotion :— 

When rainy Sawan cometh, meditate on God’s name 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

All trouble, hunger and pain shall be at an end when 
the rain falleth in torrents. 

The whole earth becometh green, corn groweth, and there 
appear harvest heaps. 

God Himself mercifully calleth man when he expecteth 
it not and assigneth him a place. 

344 THE SIKH RELIGION 

KANRA ASHTAPADI 

The advantages of listening to the Guru’s instruc- 
tion :— 

O man, act according to the instruction of the Guru. 

As the iron goad subdueth the furious elephant, so let 
the goad of the Guru’s instruction restrain thy heart. 

The wandering mind wandereth in every direction; if 
the Guru restrain it, it will fix its attention on God. 

If the true Guru put the Word into the mind, the nectar 
of the Name shall trickle into the mouth. 

Man is filled with the poison of the serpents!; the Guru’s 
instruction is the jay which swalloweth them. 

The serpent mammon will not then approach such a 
person ; he will reject the poison and fix his attention on 
Cred, 

The dog covetousness is very powerful in the citadel of 
the body, but the Guru will in a moment smite and expel it. 

He will plant truth, patience, and faith instead ;_ then 
shall man sing God’s praises. 

Mortal would sink into the mire of worldly love, did the 
Guru not save him from sinking. 

When man repeating ‘Save! save!’ cometh into the 
Guru’s sanctuary 2, the Guru reacheth his hand and extri- 
cateth him. 

The world is all like the play of a dream ; God causeth 
the whole game to be played. 

Under the Guru’s instruction take the Name as your 
profit, and you shall be honoured in God’s court. 

Pride acteth and causeth to act: pride bringeth and 
putteth the charcoal of sin on man’s head. 

The torturer Death shall come, and cause man to eat 
what he hath sown. 

1 The deadly sins. 

* It cannot be said that the Hindus had an actual sanctuary corre- 
sponding to the dovAoy of the Greeks, but whoever approached a 
great man saying, trahi, trahi—protect me—might not be refused 
protection. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 345 

O saints, lay up God’s name; take it as your travelling 
expenses and you shall obtain honour : 

Fat it, spend it, and bestow it freely, and God will so 
give you that there shall be no deficiency. 

The wealth of God’s name is in the heart ; they who 
enter the Guru’s protection shall obtain it. 

O slave Nanak, the Lord of mercy hath shown mercy, 
removed my misery and poverty, and blended me with 
Himself. 

The Guru does for man what the philosopher’s 
stone does for iron :— 

O man, bethink thee of the Guru’s protection. 

As iron becometh gold by touching the philosopher’s 
stone, so do the virtues of the Guru, who is the philosopher’s 
stone, enter is disciples. 

The great being, the true Guru, is a philosopher’s stone ; 
he who is touched by it shall obtain his reward. 

As by the guru’s instruction Prahlad was saved, so the 
Guru protecteth the honour of the servant. 

The true Guru’s word is good; by means of it man 
obtaineth nectar. 

KANRE KI WAR 

God’s praises :— 

Thou O God, art the Sidh and the Striver ; Thou art the 
Jogi of Jogis. 

Thou art the Taster of tasters; Thou art the Enjoyer 
of enjoyers. 

Thou pervadest all things ; what Thou doest taketh place. 

Hail to the true congregation! hail to the true Guru 
by meeting whom man repeateth God’s name ! 

All ye people, proclaim Har, Har, Hare, Har, Har, Hare; 
by thus uttering God’s name all sins depart. 

The Guru’s instruction dispels poverty and sor- 
TOW :— 

Poverty and sorrow shall depart from those who walk 
as pleaseth the true Guru. 

348 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God is pleased with the saints who are pleased with Him. 

The Lord of light will blend their light with His, and both 
lights shall unite. 

When God is merciful, He will fix man’s attention on Him. 

The slave Nanak hath sought the asylum of God’s gate, 
and God will protect His honour. 

KALIAN ASHTAPADI 

An injunction to speedily seek the society of the 
saints :— 

O God, make me the slave of Thy slaves ; 

As long as there is breath in my body, nourish me with 
the dust of the saints’ feet. 

Shiv, Narad, Sheshnag?, and the Munis long for the dust 
of the saints’ feet. 

Every house where the saints put their feet becometh 
holy. 

Renounce shame of the saints’ Service ; renounce all pride ; 
when you meet a saint abide with him. 

He will cause you to disregard Dharmraj, and extricate 
you though drowning in a sea of poison. 

They who are parched by superstition are thoroughly 
parched, but they shall bloom again by association with the 
saints : 

Wherefore make not a moment’s waiting or delay: go 
and take the protection of the saints’ feet. 

The singing of God’s name is a precious thing which God 
deposited with His saints. 

It is offered him who obeyeth the Guru’s word as the 
truest of the true. 

Hear, hear, ye brother saints ; the Guru raiseth his arm 
and calleth unto men. 

Let him who desireth supreme mental happiness, enter 
the true Guru’s protection. 

1 The serpent which, in the Hindu dispensation, supports the earth. 
It is said to possess a thousand heads which formed the couch of 
Vishnu whilst sleeping between the different creations and destructions 
of the world. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 349 

Let him who is greatly fortunate and very virtuous, fix 
the Name in his heart under the Guru’s instruction. 

All worldly love is troublesome, but, by drinking the 
elixir of God’s name, man shall cross the world in comfort. 

They who possess excessive worldly wealth pine away in 
the midst of it. 

The way of ignorance is very gloomy and difficult, specially 
when man is weighted with the load of pride. 

Nanak, by ever repeating God’s name salvation is obtained. 

By meeting the true Guru the Name is fixed in the heart, 
and by it man is blended with God. 

God is not found even by search without the true 
Guru :— 

SUPPLEMENTARY SLOKS 

fT love my Dear One; how shall I meet my beloved 
Friend ? 

I search for that Friend who is adorned with truth. 

The true Guru is my friend ; if I meet him I will sacrifice 
my life unto him. 

The dear one will show me God the Friend, the Creator. 

Nanak, I was searching for my Beloved, but the true 
Guru hath shown Him unto me. 

The holy man is the true lover who finds the 
truly Beloved :— 

The holy man is the true lover by whom the truly Beloved 
is found. 

Nanak, man is then happy night and day and naturally 
absorbed in God. 

The love and affection vouchsafed by God through 
the Guru are not forfeited :— 

True love and affection are obtained from the perfect 

Guru ; 
They shall never be forfeited; Nanak singeth God’s 

praises. 

348 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God is pleased with the saints who are pleased with Him. 

The Lord of light will blend their light with His, and both 
lights shall unite. 

When God 1s merciful, He will fix man’s attention on Him. 

The slave Nanak hath sought the asylum of God’s gate, 
and God will protect His honour. 

IKALIAN ASHTAPADI 

An injunction to speedily seek the society of the 
saints :— 

O God, make me the slave of Thy slaves ; 

As long as there is breath in my body, nourish me with 
the dust of the saints’ feet. 

Shiv, Narad, Sheshnag?, and the Munis long for the dust 
of the saints’ feet. 

Ikvery house where the saints put their feet becometh 
holy. 

Renounce shame of the saints’ Service ; renounce all pride ; 
when you meet a saint abide with him. 

He will cause you to disregard Dharmraj, and extricate 
you though drowning in a sea of poison. 

They who are parched by superstition are thoroughly 
parched, but they shall bloom again by association with the 
saints : 

Wherefore make not a moment’s waiting or delay: go 
and take the protection of the saints’ feet. 

The singing of God’s name is a precious thing which God 
deposited with His saints. 

It is offered him who obeyeth the Guru’s word as the 
truest of the true. 

Hear, hear, ye brother saints ; the Guru raiseth his arm 
and calleth unto men. 

Let him who desireth supreme mental happiness, enter 
the true Guru’s protection. 

1 The serpent which, in the Hindu dispensation, supports the earth. 
It is said to possess a thousand heads which formed the couch of 
Vishnu whilst sleeping between the different creations and destructions 
of the world. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 349 

Let him who is greatly fortunate and very virtuous, fix 
the Name in his heart under the Guru’s instruction. 

All worldly love is troublesome, but, by drinking the 
elixir of God’s name, man shall cross the world in comfort. 

They who possess excessive worldly wealth pine away in 
the midst of it. 

The way of ignorance is very gloomy and difficult, specially 
when man is weighted with the load of pride. 

Nanak, by ever repeating God’s name salvation is obtained. 

By meeting the true Guru the Name is fixed in the heart, 
and by it man is blended with God. 

God is not found even by search without the true 
Guru :— 

SUPPLEMENTARY SLOKS 

I love my Dear One; how shall I meet my beloved 
Priend ? 

I search for that Friend who is adorned with truth. 

The true Guru is my friend ; if I meet him I will sacrifice 
my life unto him. 

The dear one will show me God the Friend, the Creator. 

Nanak, I was searching for my Beloved, but the true 
Guru hath shown Him unto me. 

The holy man is the true lover who finds the 
truly Beloved :— 

The holy man is the true lover by whom the truly Beloved 
is found. 

Nanak, man is then happy night and day and naturally 
absorbed in God. 

The love and affection vouchsafed by God through 
the Guru are not forfeited :— 

True love and affection are obtained from the perfect 

Guru ; 
They shall never be forfeited; Nanak singeth God’s 

praises. 

350 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The holy man may be cheerful or serious :— 

The holy man may laugh, the holy man may weep ; 
Whatever he doeth is in God’s service. 

Only those who possess discrimination and reflec- 
tion serve the Guru :— 

The service of the Guru and of Pirs! is very difficult, yet 
in it is the essence of happiness. 

God inspireth him on whom He casteth His glance with 
love and affection. 

The world will cross the terrible ocean if it attach itself 
to the true Guru’s service. 

He in whose heart there is discrimination and reflection, 
shall obtain the fruit his heart desireth. 

Nanak, when man meeteth the true Guru, he findeth God 
the remover of all sorrow. 

It is only the holy man who can regenerate and 
save by giving God’s name :— 

Even though the perverse man perform service, he at- 
tacheth his heart to mammon. 

Sons, wives, and families increase his worldly love : 

None of them will save him when his account is at last 
called for in God’s court. 

Without God’s name all is misery ; worldly love causeth 
misery. 

Nanak, when the holy man appeareth all worldly love 
departeth. 

The condition of the perverse :— 

The perverse feel love of the world, not love of the Name : 

They act falsehood, they amass falsehood, and they eat 
falsehood. 

They die amassing the wealth of poisonous mammon and 
at last all become dust. 

1 This verse was obviously intended for Sikhs and Muhammadans. 
By Pirs here are meant living saints, and not their cemeteries, as the 
word frequently means in India. 

HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 351 

They perform religious ceremonies, purifications, and 
self-restraint, but within them is the sin of greed. 

Nanak, what the perverse do is not acceptable ; they are 
despised in God’s court. 

It is good to sing God’s praises, but they may 
also be uttered by ordinary speech :— 

That is the best of all musical measures by which God 
abideth in the heart. 

Musical measures to which the Word is sung are all true ; 
their worth cannot be described ; 

But God is independent of musical measures and airs; His 
order cannot be understood merely from them. 

Nanak, he who understandeth God’s order becometh free 
from desires, and obtaineth understanding from the true 
Guru. 

Everything cometh from Him according to His will. 

END OF VOL. II 

OXFORD 
PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 

Roba E 
Arthur (tr ) 
: . e 

“Len 

KET 

saturday oe 
4pm to 10 pm 

4 

FORLANI SN NL IL NNN SRR RY PIERO ARG ARE, 8 Tm 

5 Pa ns a “at J} ‘ mite nan “ : 

- 
7 

nee le So” B.'s math opie 

te Fo det > 

mae 
ee ee 

4 * 
eertaew™™ 

~e 

TO SOT NT NAT DNR ON 

~ 

Se he 

> 
¢ 
< 

Soap re 

*% 
At 
“ 

Be ay 
we yo 

<n 

er 
‘ 

: en 
_ = - . 
oy 
Waite tere 
,. 7 . —~ 7 

; 
ee Care 

, “- _— 
on Ae Ae d= te ee wt 7