The Sikh Religion: Its Gurus, Sacred Writings and Authors, Vol. V (Max Arthur Macauliffe, 1909)
===============================================================================================
Volume V of the first complete English account of Sikhism, with translations from the Granth Sahib — Guru Gobind Singh. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1909 Oxford edition.

THE SIKH RELIGION

ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS
AND AUTHORS

BY

MAX ARTHUR MACAULIFFE

ee wigt gay ar, waft sfee uso;
wet Gat ua 3, ge Alat de us,

I ~~ =
The egg of superstition hath burst; the
mind is illumined:

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet
and freed the captive.

Guru ARJAN

IN SIX VOLUMES

VOL, V

OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

[909

Bu

SRG
aay

= =i
N og

HENRY FROWDE, M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE

LIBRARY
AUG 135 1966

CONTENTS OF VOL. V

PAGE

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH, THE TENTH GURU . if
GURU GOBIND SINGH AGAINST IDOLATRY . : . &
A PRINCESS’S DISCUSSION WITH A BRAHMAN . .
EXTRACTS FROM BHAI NAND LAL’sS WRITINGS . . ea
ZAFARNAMA (THE GURU’S EPISTLE TO AURANGZEB) . 201
INTERVIEW WITH BANDA . : ; - 2
BANDA’S CAREER IN THE PANJAB AND DEATH . 246
COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH . . 260

EXTRACTS FROM AKAL USTAT . . @0r

EXTRACTS FROM VICHITAR NATAK . 286

INTRODUCTION TO THE HINDU INCARNATIONS 306

THIRTY-THREE SAWAIYAS (QUATRAINS) , . Boe
HAZARE SHABD . ; : . : . 324
CHAUPAI : ; ; 7 328
ARDAS (SUPPLICATION) ; : : : . B3e

RAGS, OR MUSICAL MEASURES OF THE GURUS’ HYMNS 333.

WieAe yaHO A agare Mey Pagewal]

GURU GOBIND SINGH

SIKH VeeP. I

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH,
meotiae JENIA AND LAST GURU!

CHAPTER [|

AN account of the early years of Guru Gobind
Rai has already been given in the life of Guru Teg
Bahadur. Guru Gobind Rai, after his father’s
death, continued with even more diligence than
before to prepare himself for his great mission.
He procured a supply of sharp-pointed arrows from
Lahore, and practised archery with great industry.
The Guru’s principal companions and bodyguard at

1 The main authorities for the life of Guru Gobind Singh are the
Vichitar Natak, or Wonderful Drama, composed by the Guru himself ;
the Gur Bilas, by Bhai Sukha Singh; and the Suraj Parkash, by
Bhai Santokh Singh.

The Vichitar Nafak is a metrical composition divided into fourteen |

chapters, and written in archaic Hindi with a large admixture of
Sanskrit in the Gurumukhi character. The date is probably about
A.D. 1692.

Bhai Sukha Singh, the author of the Gur Silas, was born in
A.D. 1766 in Anandpur, where Guru Gobind Singh long had his
residence. He became a pupil of Bhais Bhagwan Singh and Thakur
Singh, and was subsequently a gyani or +: a of the Granth
Sahib at Kesgarh, where the tenth Guru first administered his baptism.
Bhai Sukha Singh completed the Gur Brlas in a.p. 1797, and died in
A. D. 1838. His work is also in old Hindi in the Gurumukhi character.

- The author has also consulted with advantage Bhai Gyan Singh’s a pA 3

Panth Parkash.
There is a book called the Sau Sakhi' which profes’ . to be a

conversation between Sahib Singh and Gurbakhsh ugh on the
Sayings and doings of the tenth Guru. It is held in “igh éstimation —

by the Kiikas—followers of the late Bhai Rim Sir jh of Bhaini, in

the Ludhiana district of the Panjab—and is relied ou by them as the -

main authority for their heresy. Santokh Singh sometimes gives
Bhai Gurbakhsh Singh’s communications to Sahib Singh as the basis

of his history of the Gurus from the time of Guru Angad but he

——t——
makes tlo—mention—o au Sakhi. ere appears nothing to

establish its authenticity.

SIKH. V B

2 THE SIKH RELIGION

this time were his aunt Viro’s five sons—Sango
Shah, Jit Mal, Gopal Chand, Ganga Ram, Mahri
Chand; his uncle Suraj Mal’s two grandsons, Gulab
Rai and Sham Das; Kripal, his maternal uncle;
Bhai Daya Ram, the friend of his youth; and Bhai
Nand Chand, an upright and favourite masand.
The descendants of the Gurus, the masands, and
the sons and grandsons of those who had served
Guru Gobind Rai’s father and grandfather gathered
round his standard. He also entertained a number
of singers, who sang the Gurus’ hymns, and a number
of bards who composed and sang in succession qua-
trains in praise of the Gurus. So great was the
enthusiasm that the women of the city used to
climb the top stories of their houses and chant the
Guru’s praises in extempore verses.

A man called Bhikhia residing in Lahore went to
visit the Guru. Bhikhia, seeing him handsome and
well-proportioned, thought he would be a suitable
match for his daughter Jito. The Guru’s mother was
pleased at Bhikhia’s proposal, and asked her brother
Kripal to advise the Guru to accept it. The Guru
did so, and there were great rejoicings at Anandpur
on the occasion of the betrothal. Great too were
the rejoicings in Bhikhia’s domestic circle when he
returned home with the good news. The twenty-
third of Har, Sambat 1734 (A.D. 1677), was fixed
for the marriage, and Bhikhia returned to Anandpur
to inform the Guru of the glad day, and invite
him to proceed with his marriage procession to
Lahore. The Guru, contrary to the custom on such
occasions, refused to go to Lahore, and said he
would make a Lahore near Anandpur for the occa-
sion. He sent written orders in every direction for
assistance, and his wishes were amply gratified.
The Sikhs thronged from the Panjab capital on the
occasion, and with them came Bhikhia and his
family. Shopkeepers and merchants opened shops
and warehouses, and abode in Anandpur until the

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 3

completion of the nuptial ceremonies. After the
marriage Bhikhia remained sometime with the Guru
and performed all possible service for him.

The Guru, according to the custom of his prede-
cessors, used to rise in the end of the night and
perform his devotions. He particularly delighted
to listen to the Asa ki War. After daybreak he gave
his Sikhs divine instruction and then practised
martial exercises. In the afternoon he received his
Sikhs, went shooting, or raced horses; and ended the
evening by performing the ‘divine service of the
Rahiras.

Once in the hot season when bathing with his
cousins and other youths of the same age in the
Satluj, the Guru divided the party into two opposing
factions to play a game of splash-water. The Guru
being endowed with superior strength reduced his
cousin Gulab Rai to such straits that he with diff-
culty emerged from the water. In his confusion he
began to put on the Guru’s turban, believing it was
his own. Bhai Sango ran to restrain him, for it
would be a sacrilege for any one to put on the Guru’s
turban. Gulab Rai accordingly laid it down in
consternation. The Guru saw the occurrence and
begged Gulab Rai to bind the turban on his head,
and it would some day obtain him honour. When
in after days the Guru had to leave Anandpur for
the Dakhan, Gulab Rai_obtained possession of the
city and established himself as Sikh priest there,
thus fulfilling the Guru’s prophecy.

The Guru delighted to wear uniform and arms,
and practise, and induce others to practise, archery
and musket-shooting. His handsome exterior was
much admired both by men and women.

One day as he was seated in darbar some new
converts to the Sikh faith came to do him homage.
Among them was a Sikh, who had a daughter called
Sundari, of marriageable age. He proposed to the
Guru to wed her and make her the slave of his feet.

B2

Nh)

Ny

new"

4 THE SIKH RELIGION

The Guru did not desire the alliance, but it was
pressed on him by his mother, and not long after-
wards the.Guru’s nuptials were solemnized.*

We have already seen that Raja Ram of Asam
implored Guru Teg Bahadur’s intercession for a son,
and a prince called Ratan Rai was duly born to him.
Raja Ram died when his son was only seven years
old. When Ratan Rai attained the age of twelve,
he felt an inclination to see the son of the Guru by
whose mediation he had been born. He accordingly,
with his mother and several of his ministers, pro-
ceeded to Anandpur. He took with him as an
offering five horses with golden trappings, a very
small but sagacious elephant, a weapon out of which
five sorts of arms could be made—first a pistol,
then by pressing a spring a sword, then a lance, then
a dagger, and finally a club—a throne from which,
by pressing a spring, puppets emerged and played
chaupar, a drinking cup of great value, and several
costly and beautiful jewels and raiment.

The Raja was received in great state. He offered
his presents, prayed the Guru to grant him the Sikh
faith and sincerity, so that his love might be ever
centred in the Guru’s feet. The Guru granted all
his desires. The Raja exhibited the excellence and
advantages of all his presents. He showed how five
weapons could be made out of one, he unloosened
the puppets from the throne and set them playing
chaupar. He caused the elephant to wipe the Guru’s
shoes and place them in order for him. The Guru
at the Raja’s suggestion discharged an arrow. The
elephant went and fetched it. The animal held
a jug of water from which the Guru’s feet were
washed, and then wiped them with a towel. At the

1 A learned Sikh informs us that Sundari, a word which means the
beautiful, frequently applied to the heroines of Indian history, was an
epithet of Jito and not a second wife of the Guru. ‘The same learned
Sikh thinks that Jito, who was generally known as Sundari, did not
= 3 Anandpur, but lived in Dihli after the demise of Guru Gobind

Ingn.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 5

word of command he took a chauri and waved it
over the Guru. At night he took two lighted torches
in his trunk, and showed the Guru and the Raja
their homeward ways. In due time the Raja bade
farewell to the Guru, and on his departure requested
him never to let the elephant out of his possession.
Several men went to the Guru for enlistment, and
his army rapidly increased. He now set about the
construction of a big drum, without which he deemed
his equipment would be incomplete. The work was
entrusted to Nand Chand. When the masands found
that it was nearly ready they said that when Bhim
Chand, the king of the country, heard it, he would
be wroth, and not suffer the Guru and his Sikhs to
abide in the locality.’ Afraid, however, to make a
representation to the Guru himself, they went to his
mother Gujari and expressed their sentiments: ‘The
Guru’s expenditure on works of charity and philan-
thropy is already great, and now he is increasing his
army and building a large drum. When the hill chiefs
hear it beaten, they will regard it as a symbol of
conquest and engage in battle with the Sikhs. He is
daily adding to the number of hissoldiers. Be pleased,
O lady, to restrain him.’ This speech convinced the
Guru’s mother. She sent for her brother Kripal, and
begged him to dissuade her son from completing the
drum. Kripal said he could not take it on himself
to make any such representation to the Guru. She
must do so herself. She accordingly spoke to her
son next morning in the terms used by the masands
to her. She added, ‘ Our business is with religion,
for which humility is required. Even if thou com-
plete the drum, beat it not in public.’ The Guru
replied, ‘ Mother dear, how long shall I remain in
concealment ? I am not going to take forcible
possession of the hill rajas’ territories. If they are
jealous for nothing, and allow their hearts to rankle,

1 In former times a raja might not beat a drum within another
raja’s territory, for beating a drum was a symbol of sovereignty.

6 THE SIKH RELIGION

[ cannot help it. This is the Guru’s castle where men
shall obtain their deserts.’

On this the Guru rose and went to inquire if the
drum were ready. If not, its completion must be
expedited. The masands then made a direct repre-
sentation: ‘Great King, first consider the resources
of the enemy. They are kings and possess armies,
wealth, and munitions of war. It is therefore not
advisable to contend with them. What a number
of troubles befell thy grandfather in his military
career! Wherefore thou hast need of peace. Our
Guru’s business is with the Sikhism of his country ;
war is the réle of kings.’

The Guru replied, ‘ How shall I conceal myself
from those hillmen ? I have received the immortal
God’s order to disclose myself, and you tell me to
remain in concealment. I must obey God’s order,
not yours. I have prepared the drum because my
army would have no prestige without it. Even if
Bhim Chand, Raja of Kahlur, and the other hill
rajas grow angry, are we who sit here women ? We
too shall meet sword with sword. If they keep the
peace, so shall we. We shall soon see what the
hillmen intend. .When we go hunting, we shall
take the drum with us, and beat it aloud on
arriving at the base of the mountain.’

The Guru celebrated with prayers and the distri-
bution of sacred food the completion of the big
drum, which he called Ranjit, or victorious on the
battle-field. When it was beaten, the men and
women of the city went forth to behold it, and
there was great rejoicing. The Guru and his men,
in full panoply, went hunting the same day. When
the party arrived near Bilaspur, the capital of
Kahlur, the Guru’s drummer beat the drum with
much energy and ostentation. It sounded like
thunder to the hillmen, who at once apprehended
that some potentate had come to take possession of
their country. Raja Bhim Chand consulted his

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 7

prime minister who said, ‘It is Guru Gobind Kai,
the tenth Guru in succession to Guru Nanak, who
hath arrived. His father purchased some land’ at
the base of the Tung mountain, and built a village
thereon. Thousands of worshippers come to him
from great distances. It is only recently that the
Raja of Asam came to visit him and presented him
large offerings. He hath constructed a drum and
come shooting here. My advice is to keep on good
terms with him. In the first place, he is worthy of
worship, secondly, he maintaineth a large army and
is greatly feared. Thirdly, he is very brave, and
such men are sometimes useful as allies.’

On hearing this Raja Bhim Chand determined to
go to meet the Guru, and dispatched his prime
minister to arrange for the interview. The minister
informed the Guru that his master, who was the
head of all the hill chiefs, desired to meet him, and
it would be well for the Guru to be on good terms
with him. Bhai Kripal, the Guru’s uncle, at a nod
from the Guru replied, ‘ This is the Guru’s castle.
As any one treateth him, so shall he be treated. If
any one come here with good intentions, he shall be
well received ; but if he come as an enemy, he shall
be treated accordingly. For men to be on good
terms with one another is very expedient and com-
mendable. Wherefore goand bring your Raja. We
shall receive him with great respect.’ The minister
taking with him a robe of honour—the Guru's gift—
returned to his master, and recommended him to
proceed immediately to the interview. The Raja
accordingly went with his courtiers and escort to
Anandpur.

Raja Bhim Chand was received in darbar with
great honour by the Guru, who invited him to tell
him the whole circumstances of the hill chiefs.
Bhim Chand gave him the desired information, and
then prayed the Guru to let him see the presents

1 This is mentioned in the Life of Guru Teg Bahadur.

8 THE SIKH RELIGION

from the king of Asam. The Guru at that interview
showed him all the presents, except the elephant.
Next morning the Guru had a costly tent erected
which had been sent him from Kabul by an enthusi-
astic Sikh named Duni Chand, and prepared to
receive Bhim Chand in it at the second interview.
With the Guru were his relations, courtiers, and
principal wrestlers and warriors. When Bhim
Chand saw the Kabuli tent he was astonished at
its magnificence. In reply to his inquiry he was
told that it had cost two and a half lakhs of rupees,
and that it was the offering of a pious Sikh. During
this conversation the elephant, beautifully decorated,
was led forward. Bhim Chand expressed his un-
bounded admiration of all that he had seen and
heard. On his homeward journey his mind burned
with envy of the Guru’s state and wealth, and he
considered how he could take possession of all his
valuables. On reflection, however, he came to the
conclusion that he would be satisfied with the
elephant, and he determined to have the animal
whether by force or stratagem.

On his arrival in his capital he unfolded his design
to his courtiers, and asked them to suggest how
possession of the elephant could be obtained. After
some discussion it was agreed that a message should
be sent to the Guru to the effect that an embassy
was coming from Srinagar in the present British
Garhwal district, with the object of betrothing the
daughter of its Raja, Fatah Shah, to Bhim Chand’s
son ; and Bhim Chand desired to borrow the elephant
so as to make a display of wealth to his guests. It
was accordingly decided that the Guru should be
requested to lend the elephant for the purpose.
When the Guru received this message he knew that
it was simply a trick to obtain permanent possession
of the animal. He thought to himself, ‘ If I refuse
the elephant, it means war, and if I send him it
also means war, as I must resort to force for his

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 9

recovery.’ He accordingly replied to Bhim Chand’s
message, ‘The raja who presented me with the
elephant requested me not to let the animal go out
of my possession ; and it is a principle of the Guru’s
house to comply with such requests. I have another
elephant, and should Raja Bhim Chand require him
he may take him.’ The messenger seeing that there
was no chance of obtaining the desired elephant
hastened to return to Bilaspur.

The Guru’s message was delivered with the addi-
tion that he did not seem afraid of any of the hill
chiefs. Raja Bhim Chand, much incensed, con-
sulted his prime minister, who advised him not to
provoke a quarrel with the Guru. Bhim Chand
angrily retorted, and charged his minister with age
and cowardice. The Guru had shown contempt for
him, and was he to calmly endure it ? Upon this
the minister advised his master to become a Sikh,
receive initiation from the Guru, and all would be
well. Bhim Chand replied, ‘I am an _ idolater.
I daily perform the tarpan,' and repeat the sandhia ’
and the gayatri. How can I forsake my religion,
and become a Sikh of the Guru ? In the first place,
I cannot as a Hindu be on good terms with a man
who hath discarded our holy faith. Secondly, none
of the hill rajas hath become a Sikh, and they
would all laugh at me were I to change my religion.
They would say that I did it with the mercenary
object of obtaining the elephant. In the third
‘place, no men of high caste have joined the Guru.
His followers are carriers, barbers, fishermen, washer-
men, sweepers, and similar nondescript persons. I am
a great king of distinguished Rajput ancestors. How
can I become the Guru’s follower and stand before
him with clasped hands in supplication ? If he give

1 A daily ceremony of the Hindus, in which water is presented to
the manes of deceased ancestors.

2 Prayers read by pious Hindus at morning and evening twilight.
Sometimes similar prayers are offered at noon.

10 THE SIKH RELIGION

me not the elephant by peaceable means, I will take
the animal by force. The Guru is already on bad
terms with the Emperor, and, if he fall out with me
also, he cannot abide here. He is still a mere boy ;
arms are new to his hands. When I show him what
I can do, he will know who I am and renounce his
pride.’

Saying this Bhim Chand ordered his chief police
officer to go to the Guru, and try to obtain the
elephant by soft and persuasive words. If these
failed, the Guru was to be threatened with the
strength of Bhim Chand’s army. The police officer
went on his mission and addressed the Guru as
directed. The Guru calmly replied, ‘ Thou givest
one advice to me to lend the elephant, and another
to Bhim Chand not to restore him.’ Upon this the
police officer knew that the Guru could divine the
secrets of others and begged his forgiveness. The
Guru then said, ‘ Tell the raja that if he have faith
in the Guru and if his intentions be honest, the Guru
can grant him what he desireth ; but if he practise
fraud and deceit, the Guru can protect his own
interests. The Guru knoweth the secrets of men’s
hearts, and thou canst not deceive him. When
thou talkest of the strength of the raja’s army,
know that there is nothing wanting on the Guru’s
side either. The Guru is already prepared for battle.
The Sikhs are not women, and they have had long
practice in martial exercises.’ The police officer
departed and delivered this message to Bhim Chand,
who decided that he would wait till the time had
actually arrived for his son’s marriage, and then he
would repeat his request for the elephant, and add
to it an application for the magnificent Kabuli tent
also.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH II

CHAPTER IT

The Guru continued to hunt and practise arms.
Companies of Sikhs used continually to visit him
and make him offerings. Those who came for
military service were received without reservation,
and taught the profession of arms. In this way
the Guru soon collected a considerable army. The
masands continued their opposition and again went
to complain to the Guru’s mother. They repre-
sented to her, ‘ The Guru is very young, and hath
no worldly experience. He hath stirred up strife
between himself and the hill Raja. He hath no
ally, for the Emperor beareth him no love. He
hath taken the unprecedented course of refusing on
- two occasions Bhim Chand’s request for the loan of
the elephant. These hill chiefs are not afraid to fight
and die. Wherefore, advise thy son that it is not
politic to contend with them. If war begin, how
shall Sikhs come with their offerings ? And where
shall we procure supplies for our public kitchen ? ’

When the Guru’s mother remonstrated with him
as thus advised, he replied, ‘ Mother dear, I have been
sent by the immortal God. He who worshippeth
Him shall be happy ; but he who acteth dishonestly
and worshippeth stones shall receive well-merited
retribution. This is my commission from God. If
to-day I give Raja Bhim Chand the elephant, I shall
have to pay him tribute to-morrow. He essayeth
to terrify me, but I only fear the immortal God and
know none beside.’

Nand Chand then joined in the conference : ‘ Lady,
hath a lion ever feared jackals ? Hath any one ever
seen the light of the firefly in bright sunshine ?
What availeth a drop of water in comparison with
the ocean? The Guru is a tiger brave and splendid
as the sun. Shall he fear Bhim Chand ? When the
foolish hillmen who are like mosquitoes contend

12 THE SIKH’ RELIGION

with the Guru, they shall become acquainted with
our strength and suffer the mortification of a late
repentance.’ Bhai Kripal then interposed: ‘ Sister
dear, Nand Chand understandeth the Guru’s plea-
sure. The Guru ended the discussion by saying,
‘Mother dear, heed not the evil advice of the masands.
They have become cowards from surreptitiously
eating the offerings of the Sikhs.’

The Guru, knowing Nand Chand to be brave and
skilful in war, made him his finance minister. More-
over, Nand Chand’s father had done service for Guru
Teg Bahadur, and the family was known to be loyal
to theGurus. Pay was due to the troops, and tact
and skilful management of them were necessary.
Kripal accordingly highly approved of the Guru’s
resolve, and accepted Nand Chand as the Guru’s
finance minister. Nand Chand was invested with
a robe of honour, and appointed to his high position
with all due formalities.

The Guru and his troops continued to practise
archery and devote themselves to the chase. When
the other hill rajas heard of this and of the Guru’s
difference with Bhim Chand, they began to fan the
flame of enmity, thinking that they would be more
secure themselves if the Guru and Bhim Chand
exhausted their strength on contests with each
other. Kripal, the Raja of Kangra, sent Raja Bhim
Chand a message, ‘Fear not, Iam with you. The
Guru is raising an army. Thou oughtest conse-
quently to be on thy guard against him. There
cannot be two kings in one state. Wherefore it is
proper for thee to expel him with all expedition.’
Bhim Chand replied that peace was the best thing
if it could be maintained; otherwise he would
welcome his friend’s assistance and expel the Guru.

Raja Kripal then with exquisite treachery sent
the following message to the Guru: ‘Great king,
fortunate are we that thou hast come to dwell in
this land. I have heard that thou hast some dis-

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 73

agreement with Bhim Chand. That fool knoweth
not thy greatness. Assert thyself and bring him to
reason by the sword. I will be thine ally. | Directly
thine order reacheth me, I shall be found fully
prepared.’ To this the Guru merely replied, ‘ This
is Guru Nanak’s house, where men shall be treated
as they deserve.’ Raja Kripal’s envoy took note of
the Guru's intelligence, determination, and material
strength, and on returning to his master informed
him that the Guru would certainly not yield to Bhim
Chand without a struggle.

The time for the marriage of Fatah Shah’s daughter
to Bhim Chand’s son was now approaching, so
Bhim Chand decided to ask the Guru again to lend
him the elephant and other articles of display for
the occasion. He accordingly sent his brother-in-law,
Kesari Chand, Raja of Jaswal, and a Brahman, with
orders to bring what he desired by all possible means.
They requested the Guru to lend Bhim Chand the
throne, the elephant, the Kabuli tent, and the five-
fold weapon. The family priest promised that
the loan should be returned with a present of
4,000 rupees. On this the Guru said, ‘ Am I a shop-
keeper that I should take hire for what I lend ?’
Kesari Chand remonstrated, ‘O Guru, thou livest
by offerings. Thou art not a landowner, thou hast
no kingdom, no fief from which thou mayest derive
income, and offerings of this description have doubt-
less often been made thee.’ The Guru on hearing
this declined further parley and abruptly dismissed
the envoys.

The masands again complained to the Guru’s
mother: ‘The Guru’s action is impolitic. Bhim
Chand’s army will come and plunder Anandpur.
The Guru is still a boy and hath never seen real
warfare, though he ever babbleth of it. At one time
he saith, “‘ We will destroy the oppressive Turks.”’
Again he saith, “I will give the whole country
from Lahore to Peshawar as a kingdom to my

14 THE SIKH RELIGION

Sikhs.”” Advise thy son to cease uttering such
irritating language.’ His mother duly remon-
strated with him: ‘ My son, why art thou stirring
up strife ? Send thy minister Nand Chand and thy
uncle Kripal to make peace, otherwise an army of
hillmen will attack us immediately. Whither shall
we go if we are obliged to depart hence? Thy
father purchased this land, and came here to live in
retirement and peace.’

The Guru replied: ‘ The hillmen have now come
to beg with the humility of goats, but when they
have received what they have asked for, they will
assume the bravery of tigers. On this account why
should we not take measures for our own safety ?
Mother dear, if we now betray fear of them, they
will soon be ready to devour us. They will only
respect us when we show them the sword. If thou
show a stick to a barking dog, he will fear to con-
tinue his barking. We cannot remain subject to
such people. If they play the part of aggressors,
I will show them what the Guru can do. The immor-
tal God hath sent me into the world to uproot evil
and protect from tyranny the weak and oppressed.’
On hearing this the Guru’s mother retired in sorrow
to her apartment, and the Guru proceeded to don
his arms and coat of mail.

When Raja Bhim Chand’s envoys returned to
their master, they repeated the Guru’s message with
marginal additions of their own. Bhim Chand
became very angry and addressed the Guru the
following letter: ‘ If thou desire to dwell in Anand-
pur, send the elephant quickly. If thou agree not to
this, I will take an army, plunder and assail thy
disciples of both sexes, expel them from the country,
and imprison thee. To save thyself, however, from
all these painful consequences, thou mayest imme-
diately depart from my state.’ The Guru on perusing
this letter smiled and said to his friends, ‘ I accept
the alternative of war which he offereth me.’ He

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 15

sent Bhim Chand a reply to this effect, and ordered
Nand Chand to make immediate preparation for
defence.

When Bhim Chand received the Guru’s letter he
called his brother hill chiefs to a council of
war, and informed them of his negotiations with
the Guru. He was himself, he said, for open hostili-
ties. Raja Kripal, however, counselled deliberation.
He urged, ‘Thou hast now made all preparations
for thy son’s marriage, and it is not time for war.
Should any relation of thine be killed, thy rejoicings
will be changed unto mourning. It is not well to
die at a time of festivity, or sing songs of joy at
a funeral.’ The other hill chiefs who were summoned
to the council and also Bhim Chand’s prime minister
were precisely of the same opinion. The contem-
plated war was consequently adjourned. Raja
Kripal then suggested that, when the bridegroom's
party went to Srinagar, they should induce Raja
Fatah Shah to ally himself with them and take up
arms against the Guru. ys

Meantime the Guru himself was making all pre-
‘parations to meet his opponents. He caused it to be
publicly known that he would be grateful to all who
brought him arms and horses, and his appeal met
with a ready response.

Raja Medani Parkash of Nahan at this time sent
an envoy to the Guru with an invitation to pay him
a visit. He was sure the Guru would be pleased
to see the Dun, or valley par excellence,’ which
enjoyed a cool climate and afforded abundant sport.
Ram Rai, the Guru’s relation, dwelt there, and found
it a pleasant and agreeable residence. The Raja of
Nahan had heard that Raja Bhim Chand was at
enmity with the Guru, but Raja Bhim Chand knew
not the Guru’s greatness and would afterwards
repent. The Raja of Nahan also desired the Guru’s
assistance, which would be useful to him 1n time of

1 The Din lies between the Himalayas and the Siwalik range.

16 THE SIKH RELIGION

need, and accordingly warmly invited him to make
a lengthened sojourn in his country. The Guru
requested the envoy to wait a few days for an answer.

The masands were very pleased to hear of the
Raja of Nahan’s invitation and thought, if the Guru
accepted it, there would be an end of the quarrel
between him and Bhim Chand. They induced the
Guru’s mother to persuade him to visit the Raja.
She told the Guru that after some time spent in
Nahan he might return to Anandpur, after which
she hoped there would be peace. The Guru accepted
her advice and promised to start for Nahan on the
morrow. By way of precaution he decided to take
the whole of his trained army with him, and ordered
Nand Chand to make all necessary arrangements for
the march.

On the morrow the Guru caused his drum to be
beaten as a signal for departure. He set out accom-
panied by his minister Nand Chand, his relations,
and five hundred Udasi Sikhs. For the defence of
Anandpur he left Suraj Mal’s-two grandsons, Gulab
Rai and Sham Das, with a suitable guard. The
Guru’s first march was to Kiratpur, where he visited
the shrine of his grandfather, Guru Har Gobind.
After a few days’ further journey he encamped at
the foot of the Nahan mountain.

The Raja duly went to greet and welcome his
distinguished guest. He took him to his palace,
begged him to enjoy himself with the chase, and
meanwhile design and superintend the building of
a fort for the protection of the state. On one of the
Raja’s and the Guru’s hunting excursions the subject
was again mooted. The Raja explained that Raja
Fatah Shah of Srinagar, the capital of Garhwal, had
often quarrelled with him over the ground on which
they were then standing. He would therefore be
very pleased when a fortress was constructed on the
spot for protection against all enemies.

The Guru erected a tent and in company with

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 17

the Raja held a darbar. It was unanimously agreed
that a fort was necessary for the protection of the
country. The Raja accordingly requested the Guru
to allow his army to assist in its construction, and
he would send his own workmen and labourers for
its speedy completion.

The Guru caused sacred food to be prepared,
and praying to the Creator distributed it. He then
laid the foundation stone of the fort. Such was the
zeal and energy of the workmen that it was completed
in twelve days. The Guru gave it the name of
Paunta. He abode there, and continued to increase
his army and enlist all Muhammadans as well as
Hindus who presented themselves for service. All
recruits as well as disciplined soldiers’ rendered
willing aid in the construction of the building.

CHAPTER III

Ram Rai of Dehra Dun heard of the Guru’s visit
and of the construction of Paunta which was only
about thirty miles distant from his residence. He
apprehended that the Guru had come to punish him
for his previous misdeeds, and he communicated his
suspicions to his masands. Gurdas, who had accom-
panied Ram Rai to Dihli when sent there by Guru
Har Rai, and who had remained with him ever since,
urged that Guru Gobind Rai was not so vindictive
and base as to take revenge. If, however, he mani-
fested any signs of aggression, Gurdas’s brother Tara,
who was a warrior and skilful archer, would be able
to oppose him and protect the city of Dehra Dun.
Ram Rai replied that no one could contend with the
Guru in archery. Even Bhim Chand hid himself in
his castle through fear of the Guru’s arrows. Should
the Guru decide to take action against them, whither
should they go for refuge? Gurdas rejoined, that
if Ram Rai fled before there was even a semblance

SIKH. V Cc

18 THE SIKH RELIGION

of an attack, there would be several tales circulated
to his discredit. The Guru subsequently hearing of
his anxiety and wishing to remove it, sent Nand
Chand and Daya Ram to reassure him. Ram Kai
on receiving the Guru’s message was delighted,
invested the envoys with dresses of honour, and
decided to remain on friendly terms with the martial
son of Guru Teg Bahadur.

Budhu Shah, a Saiyid, who lived in Sadhaura,
went with his disciples to pay a visit to the Guru
and make him offerings. Budhu Shah represented
himself as a great sinner, said that he should cer-
tainly have to render an account of his transgression
hereafter, and why should he not be pardoned now
by the Guru’s mediation ? The Guru replied, ‘ Thou
shalt not have to render an account hereafter. Guru
Nanak hath procured thy pardon.’ Budhu Shah
remained for some time with the Guru, who con-
ceived a great affection for him and vouchsafed him
religious instruction suitable to his circumstances.

Raja Fatah Shah of Srinagar in consultation with
his ministers arrived at the conclusion that it would
be. politic to be on good terms with the Guru, and
accordingly decided to visit him since he had ap-
proached so near his territory. When the Guru was
apprised of his intention, he prepared a magnificent
entertainment for his reception. Rich carpets were
spread and minstrels engaged to contribute to the
Raja’s amusement and enhance his enjoyment of
the feast. During the Raja’s visit the Guru sent his
uncle Kripal to him to suggest that it would be well
if he and the Raja of Nahan also were on good terms.
The Raja at once replied that he would act in all
such matters as the Guru desired. The Guru then
sent for the Raja of Nahan. He came and promised
to forget his former enmity to the Raja of Srinagar.
The Guru brought the two Rajas together in open
court, caused them to embrace and promise eternal
friendship.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 1g

Before the assembly was dissolved a _ hillman
arrived with tidings of a fierce tiger which was
destroying cattle in the neighbourhood. The mes-
senger pressed the Guru to free the country from the
pest. The Guru on the morrow took the two Rajas,
together with Nand Chand and others, to where the
tiger was reported to have his lair. The Guru asked
the hillman who had brought the intelligence to lead
the way. He guided the Guru and his party into
a very dense forest. The tiger, which had been
resting, awoke on hearing the tramp of the hunts-
men’s feet, and sat on his haunches looking at his
pursuers with tranquil curiosity. .

The Guru forbade a bullet or arrow to be dis-
charged, and called on any one who deemed himself
brave to engage the tiger with sword and shield.
No one came forward in response to the challenge.
Raja Fatah Shah addressed the Guru: ‘ Great king,
this tiger is very strong and hath been for a long
time in this forest. He hath destroyed several men
and cattle. If any one had been able to cope with
him, would he still be alive ? But as he is strong
and thou too art mighty, why not engage him thy-
self ? Who but thee hath prowess to contend with
sword and shield ?’ Hearing this the Guru alighted
from his horse and drew himself together for the
attack. The Raja of Nahan interposed: ‘O true
Guru, why confront such a tiger? We will shoot
him with our matchlocks.’ The Guru replied, ‘See
how I will deal with this tiger. I shall have no
difficulty in killing him.’ Saying this he took sword
and shield, advanced, and challenged the tiger. The
tiger rose with a roar and sprang at the Guru. The
Guru received him on his shield and striking him
on the flank with his sword cut him in twain. The
Rajas and the hunting-party were naturally aston-
ished and delighted at the Guru’s strength and
bravery and the result of the encounter.

The Guru took the opportunity to instruct his

Cz

20 THE SIKH RELIGION

friends: ‘ The tiger hath died like a hero and ob-
tained deliverance. It is cowards who suffer trans-
migration. The brave enjoy celestial happiness. If
a man die in battle, it should be with his face to the
foe. Next morning the two Rajas, leaving the
Guru in Paunta, departed to their several capitals.

On Budhu Shah’s return to his home in Sadh-
aura five hundred Pathans in uniform presented
themselves before him one morning. They stated
that they had been soldiers of the Emperor Aurang-
zeb, but for some trivial offence had been disbanded.
No one would now receive them through fear of the
Emperor. It occurred to Budhu Shah that the Guru,
who had no fear of anybody, would be likely to
accept their services in his army. He accordingly
took them to the Guru who was delighted to enlist
them. The Guru fixed a salary of five rupees per
day for each officer and one rupee a day for each
trooper. The officers’ names were Haiyat Khan,
Kale Khan, Nijabat Khan, and Bhikan Khan, men
of whom we shall hear much hereafter.

An envoy about this time arrived from Ram Rai.
When he was allowed to approach the Guru on the
morning after his arrival, he saw the Guru’s troops—
some fencing, some practising archery, and others
performing miscellaneous military exercises. The
envoy told the Guru that Ram Kai desired to meet
him, but could not go to Paunta, and did not desire
the Guru to come to Dehra Dun. They could meet
at some intermediate spot. Ram Kai had then
a large following, and did not desire that his disciples
should think he went as an inferior to the Guru, but
at the same time he never hoped that the Guru would
proceed to visit him. Hence his unusual request.
The Guru consented to meet him on the margin of
the Jamna on Sunday, the second day of the follow-
ing month. The interview accordingly took place.
When Ram Rai’s companions saw him touch the
Guru’s feet, they said, ‘ See, Ram Rai does obeisance

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 21

to his rival,’ and they made many remarks deroga-
tory to the rank arrogated to himself by their
spiritual guide.

The Guru and Ram Rai conversed on various
matters, particularly on the Guru’s relations with
Raja Bhim Chand. At the end of the colloquy Ram
Rai said, ‘I am fortunate to have obtained a sight
of thee; I have now but a brief time to live. My
masands are very proud. When I am gone, protect
my family and property. Thou art the sun of our
race, and hast for many reasons assumed birth.
The holy Guru Nanak made the name of the one
God the sole raft to ferry mortals over the world’s
ocean, and by means of it men have obtained deliver-
ance. But when in time the wind of evil passions
blew, the raft striking on the rock of pride was
foundered, and many souls were lost. My father
Guru Har Rai used to say that some one would be
born from our family who would restore and refit
the vessel for the safe conveyance of souls. Accord-
ingly thou hast come into the world for this special
purpose.’

When the Guru after hearing this looked round,
he saw all Ram Rai’s men standing with their backs
towards him and their master. The Guru then
observed, ‘Ram Rai’s Sikhs who turn their backs
on us are fools. They are not pleased with the sight
even of their own guru, so he will not render them
assistance hereafter.’

The Guru by his occult power knew Gurdas’s
boast that his brother Tara would be a match for
him and protect Ram Rai’s city against any aggres-
sion he might meditate. The Guru accordingly said
to Gurdas, ‘ Tell thy brother to discharge an arrow
in my presence. Thou saidst that thy brother could
shoot like the Guru, and that no Guru could be so
powerful as he.’ Gurdas on thus being taken to
task, begged the Guru’s pardon, and was duly for-
given. The Guru then returned to Paunta where he

22 THE SIKH RELIGION

abode for a time composing poetry in its pleasant
environment and salubrious climate.

The author of the Suraj Parkash gives the method
of the Guru’s composition. He used to rise early,
bathe, walk along the bank of the river Jamna
sufficiently far to obtain complete privacy and ensure
himself against interruption. He would then sit
down, and compose poetry for three hours. He first
translated from Sanskrit the history of Krishan
avatar.| The translation is generally in quatrains
adorned with similes and metaphors. The Guru
delighted to describe the sports of Krishan, the
circular dances performed by him and the milk-
maids, and his special devotion to Radhika his
queen. It was further to the south, on the margin
of the same river, that Krishan disported himself and
performed those great feats which have secured him
deification among the Hindus. The Guru in his
‘ Ras Mandal’ or description of the circular dance
of Krishan made an acrostic out of the thirty-five
letters of the Gurumukhi alphabet. The letters do
not begin but end the verses. At intervals in his
literary labour he used to watch the river rolling
over its shingly bed, and admire its sparkling foam
and blue wavelets.

Some time after the Guru’s visit Ram Rai fell
into a trance, and in that state was cremated by
the masands in defiance of the prayers and en-
treaties of his wife Panjab Kaur. The masands
then proceeded to take possession of his property and
of the offerings intended for him ; and each began
to proclaim himself guru. Panjab Kaur, through
the agency of Gurdas, who had remained faithful to
her, sent a letter to Guru Gobind Rai to inform him
of the circumstances, and to pray for his advice and
assistance. She then invited all the masands to

1 Suraj Parkash, Rut Il, Chapter 4. Some learned Sikhs are of

opinion that the translation was really made by one of the Guru’s
bards named Sydm, whose name frequently occurs in it.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 23

a feast on a certain day which she had fixed on for
the appointment of a successor to her husband, and
promised to the deserving dresses of honour on the
occasion.

When the masands arrived they each presented
a claim to spiritual authority. One man would say,
‘T want to be appointed guru of a certain country.’
Another would say, ‘I want to be appointed guru
of another country.’ When all the masands had
arrived, Panjab Kaur sent to inform the Guru. The
Guru at once ordered his troops to prepare for an
expedition. On the morrow he proceeded with
them to Dehra, leaving sufficient men to guard
Paunta. When the masands saw the Guru, their
faces grew pale and they asked one another why he
had come. The Guru and Ram Rai, they said, were
in opposition to each other, but perhaps the Guru
had come to condole with the widow on her husband’s
death. In any case the masands made certain that
the Guru would only stay for a day or two, as Panjab
Kaur would be unable to provide supplies for him
and his army for any length of time.

Next day Panjab Kaur requested the Guru to
punish the masands. Some of them suspected what
was in store for them, but fate was too powerful to ~
allow of their absconding. The Guru recalled to
memory all their crimes and misdemeanours. They
used to go to the houses of Sikhs to take intoxicants,
and frequent the society of courtesans. They used
to boast that the Guru was of their own making,
and, if they did not serve him, no one would even
look at him. They practised oppression in every
form; they embezzled offerings made to the Guru
and committed many other enormities. The Guru
accordingly meted out condign punishment to the
guilty among them, and rewarded those who had
remained faithful to Panjab Kaur. He then returned
to Paunta.

24 THE SIKH RELIGION

CHAPTER IV

The Guru set about extending Paunta and beauti-
fying it with gardens and pleasure grounds. One
day as he was sitting in his garden, he received an
invitation’ from Raja Fatah Shah of Srinagar to
his daughter’s marriage with the son of Raja Bhim
Chand of Bilaspur. The Guru declined the invita-
tion on the ground that Bhim Chand was at enmity
with him and a disturbance might result were the two
to meet. The Guru, however, promised to send his
finance minister with some troops to represent him.
He accordingly gave orders to Diwan Nand Chand
to hold himself in readiness and at the same time to
provide a necklace of the value of one lakh and
a quarter of rupees as a marriage present for Raja
Fatah Shah’s daughter.

Nand Chand on his departure said to the Guru,
“I go in obedience to thine order, but if Raja Bhim
Chand force a quarrel on me, it may be difficult for
me to return.’ The Guru replied, ‘ As the immortal
God will take thee thither, so will He restore thee
to me. Have no anxiety on that account.’ Nand
Chand set out according to order with five hundred
horse for Srinagar. The Raja sent officers some
distance to recelve him, and offered him suitable
quarters within the city. Nand Chand urged diplo-
matic reasons for not accepting the accommodation
provided, but his real object was to encamp outside
the city, so that he and his troops might be free to
escape if treacherously attacked. Accordingly a spot
on the road to Paunta was at his request assigned
him for his camp.

Raja Bhim Chand, Raja Kesari Chand, Raja Gopal,
Raja Hari Chand, and the Rajas of Kangra, Mandi,
and Suket, proceeded in great state to Srinagar. On

1 In former times an invitation to a marriage was made by sending
a piece of red string and some sweets.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 25

their way they halted on the margin of the Jamna not
far from Paunta. There Raja Bhim Chand heard
that the Guru with his forces was encamped at the
ferry of Rajghat four miles distant, and had made
preparations to obstruct his progress. Bhim Chand
accordingly considered what was to be done under
the circumstances. He knew the Guru to be very
brave, and he also knew the enmity he bore him. If
Raja Bhim Chand went straight on, he would have
to contend with the Guru’s troops ; and if he went
by a circuitous route to another ferry, he could not
arrive in time for the wedding.

In this difficulty Raja Bhim Chand consulted his
brother rajas, and recalled to their memory all the
circumstances connected with his negotiations with
the Guru. He had deferred making war on account
of his son’s approaching marriage, but the very
circumstance that he had apprehended now occurred,
for the Guru was on the way to obstruct his progress
and hinder his crossing the Jamna at Rajghat.
Various counsels were given, which were all rejected.
At last Bhim Chand decided to send his prime
minister to the Guru to represent that his son’s
marriage was about to be celebrated, and it was no
time for a clash of arms which would turn joy
into sorrow. The prime minister received instruc-
tions to present all this in the form of a respectful
request to the Guru. If it failed, he was then to
inform him of the names of the rajas who were with
the marriage procession. It was thus hoped that,
even if the Guru rejected the respectful request, he
would hesitate to attack so many powerful chiefs.

When the hill rajas’ envoy reached the Guru he
said, ‘O true Guru, Raja Bhim Chand with the hill
rajas hath come with his son’s marriage procession,
and they; request thy permission to pass. They
ordered me to entreat thee with clasped hands to
consider this as the marriage of thine own son.’
The Guru replied, ‘O envoy, there is no reliance to

26 THE SIKH RELIGION

be placed on these false hill rajas. While uttering
sweet words, they harbour enmity in their hearts.
Therefore tell them from me that they may come
this way if they are brave ; but, if they are cowards,
they may take another route, in which case I will
not molest them. Raja Bhim Chand threatened to
come and attack me at Anandpur. I will myself
proceed thither when I have vanquished him.’

When the Guru’s determination was communi-
cated to Raja Bhim Chand and the other hill chiefs,
there ensued a long discussion as to the best course
of action. It was at last decided that the bride-
groom should be sent with a few high officials to
request the Guru to allow him safe conduct for the
purpose of his marriage, and that the rest of the
marriage procession should go to Srinagar by a cir-
cuitous route. Bhim Chand vowed that after the
celebration of the marriage he would take revenge
on the Guru for his conduct, and bring Raja Fatah
Shah to dislodge him from his position. -

When Raja Bhim Chand’s son with his escort
_reached the Guru, he said, ‘O true Guru, thy name
is cherisher of those who seek thy protection, and
I dosonow. Had my father thought that thou wert
likely to molest me, he would never have sent me
hither. As I am his son, so I am now thine. I am
altogether at thy mercy.’ The Guru compassionated
the youth, and at once allowed him to proceed to
Srinagar for the due performance of his marriage
rites.

When the bridegroom and his small party in-
formed Raja Fatah Shah of what had occurred, he
felt sore grieved at the impediment placed by the
Guru in the way of his daughter’s marriage. Before
the hill chiefs had yet arrived, Diwan Nand Chand
desired to offer the Guru’s wedding present, and
then take his early departure. Raja Fatah Shah
replied, ‘You may offer me the Guru’s present when
all the rajas are assembled.’

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 27

When Raja Bhim Chand and the other hill chiefs
arrived, Nand Chand was anxious to present the
Guru’s wedding gift and leave Srinagar as early as
possible. The herald in attendance proclaimed :
‘Guru Gobind Rai, who is seated on Guru Nanak’s
throne, hath presented jewellery to the value of
a lakh and a quarter of rupees as dowry to Fatah
Shah’s daughter.” Raja Bhim Chand on hearing
this became enraged and said, ‘ Witness all ye
people. My kurm? is friendly to the Guru, and
taketh a marriage present from him, though he is
an enemy of mine. I must therefore refuse to accept
Fatah Shah’s daughter for my son.’ The Raja of
Kangra said to the speaker, ‘ It is not well to act in
haste. Send thy minister to Raja Fatah Shah, and
ask him if he will take the initiative in a war with
the Guru. Ifso, he is one of us, and we will conclude
the alliance with him. If, however, he refuse to
attack the Guru, then we will not accept his daughter.’

On this Raja Kesari Chand and Raja Bhim Chand’s
minister went to Raja Fatah Shah, told him all the
circumstances, and said that if he did not go to war
with the Guru, he should be considered an enemy
not only of Raja Bhim Chand, but of all the hill
chiefs. Raja Fatah Shah was much perplexed on
receiving this message, and saw that trouble awaited
him on every side. He replied, ‘ It is a great sin to
fight with a man who obviously manifesteth his
friendship. The Guru is my greatest friend. How
shall I engage in a conflict with him without reason ?
Raja Bhim Chand is at enmity with the Guru with-
out any just cause. If one man make a request and
another cannot comply, what ground of enmity is
that ? Come with me, and I will make peace between
the Guru and Raja Bhim Chand.’

When Raja Bhim Chand was informed of this he
caused the drum of departure to be beaten. When

1 Son’s father-in-law. There is no one word in English for this
relationship.

28 THE SIKH RELIGION

his horses were saddled and all preparation made he
sent his minister with an ultimatum to Fatah Shah,
‘Raja Bhim Chand now breaks off his son’s marriage
with thy daughter. On this account thou shalt
suffer much obloquy. The Guru is here to-day and
gone to-morrow. Thou hast no kinship to break
with him, so why break with thine affianced rela-
tions ?’ Fatah Shah was weakly overcome by this
representation, and promised to act as Raja Bhim
Chand desired. Raja Bhim Chand, who was already
on horseback, alighted on hearing Fatah Shah’s
change of determination and went to him. Fatah
Shah then renewed his promise to act according to
Bhim Chand’s wishes and join him in making war
on the Guru.

Meanwhile Nand Chand managed to secure his
property, including the Guru’s unaccepted wedding
present, and prepared for his homeward journey.
On hearing this Raja Bhim Chand sent five hundred
horse to intercept him and seize whatever he had
in his possession. Raja Bhim Chand promised the
leader of the detachment to send more troops to his
assistance as soon as possible. When Nand Chand’s
troops found their way obstructed, they began to
reflect that they were few, while the hillmen were
many, and they meditated flight or coalition with the
enemy. On this a brave Sikh spoke out, “ What are
you soldiers meditating ? On your departure for
Srinagar the true Guru promised that as the immortal
God would conduct you to your destination, so would
He restore you to your homes in safety. Put faith
in the Guru’s words.’ This short speech inspired
the Sikhs with courage, and shouting ‘ Sat Sri Akal !
Sat Sri Akal! ’—True is the immortal God, true is
the immortal God—prepared for the conflict.

Nand Chand also addressed cheering words to his
men. He assured them that the army in front of
them was weak, and his men might fearlessly advance.
They obeyed, and when within gunshot discharged

LIFE. OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 29

a volley at the hillmen which threw their ranks into
disorder. Nand Chand then shouted to the hill
troops, ‘ Why waste your lives in vain? The army
which was to reinforce you hath not arrived. Fly!’
On hearing this the hillmen dispersed in every direc-
tion. Their reinforcing army, which was approach-
ing, heard the sound of the Sikhs’ muskets and
feared to advance. Moreover, Raja Bhim Chand’s
troops would never fight unless commanded by him-
self. The result was that Nand Chand and his
troops safely returned to Paunta, and offered their
obeisance and congratulations to the Guru. Nand
Chand gave him an account of what had occurred
since his departure for Srinagar, and advised him
to hold himself in readiness, for the hill rajas with
Fatah Shah would certainly repeat their aggression.
Upon this the Guru ordered ammunition to be
served out to his army. It now became a ques-
tion whether the Guru would wait for the enemy
near Paunta, or advance to intercept their progress.
The Guru’s uncle said that the enemy would come
by Bhangani between the Jamna and the Giri, and
it would be best to select Bhangani, which was six
miles distant, for the field of battle. The Guru
approved of this plan of operations.

During Nand Chand’s stay in Srinagar a merchant
arrived there with one hundred horses which he had
purchased in Kashmir for the Guru. Nand Chand
had a difficulty in saving them from Bhim Chand’s
rapacity, and succeeded in taking them to Paunta.
He now informed the Guru that the horses were
present and at his disposal. The gift was a very
opportune one, and the Guru expressed his highest
satisfaction with the merchant. He distributed the
horses among selected Sikhs. There was nothing
now heard but warlike preparations and conversa-
tions. The Sikhs, who in the words of the Sikh
chronicler, watched for the enemy as a tiger for his
1 Not far from the city of Rajpura on the Mansiri (Mussoorie) road.

30 THE SIKH RELIGION:

prey, enjoyed in anticipation the approaching battle,
and vaunted that they would expel all the hill rajas
and take possession of their territories.

Raja Bhim Chand reproached his troops for failing

to arrest the departure of Nand Chand’s detachment,
and asked them if they had occupied their time in
feasting on honey or doing their duty. He said,
however, that he would forget the past if they
promised amendment in the future. He then sent
word to Fatah Shah to go and do battle with the
Guru according to his promise. Fatah Shah, in
order to please him, served out ammunition and beat
the drum of war. His soldiers buckled on their
swords, and slung their guns over their shoulders.
Fatah Shah propitiated the goddess of his state, and
putting himself at the head of his troops advanced
to the combat.
- “As already stated, the Guru’s army except the five
hundred Pathans recently taken into his service on
the recommendation of Budhu Shah, exulted in the
prospect of battle. The Pathans took council with
one another, and Bhikan Khan, one of their officers,
said, ‘ The Guru’s main dependence is on us. The
rest of his army is a miscellaneous rabble who have
never seen war, and will run away when they hear
the first shot fired. Then the brunt of the battle
will fall on us, and we shall be responsible for
defeat. Why waste our lives in vain? Let us go
to the Guru and ask permission to return to our
homes.’

Kale Khan, another of the Pathan officers, stoutly
resisted the proposal: ‘ You are untrue to your salt.
Are you not ashamed to think of running away when
your employer is involved in serious warfare ? No-
body will trust you in the future; and when you
die, you shall be condemned to the abode of sorrow
of which our holy prophet tells. You are a disgrace
to the Pathan race.’ Bhikan Khan rejoined, ‘ O Kale
Khan, remain thou loyal to the Guru. If any of us

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 31

have business at home, why should he not go there ?
Why should he die an untimely death ? Stay thou
with the Guru and earn such advancement as he
may confer on thee.’ On hearing this Kale Khan
detached himself from the Pathans, and adhered to
his allegiance to the Guru.

. Niyabat Khan and Haiyat Khan sided with the
majority under Bhikan Khan, and proceeded to the
Guru to ask on behalf of themselves and their
followers leave to depart to their homes. One man
had a child born to him, another was to be betrothed,
a third was to be married, the mother of a fourth
was dead, &c., &c., and all would suffer irrevocable
disgrace were they not to return to their homes at
once. They accordingly requested the Guru to
settle their accounts and pay the balance of their
salaries due to them. The Guru replied, ‘This is
not a time to ask for leave. The enemy is upon us,
and yet you desire to forsake me. If any one of
you wish to marry, let him first marry battle, and
then proceed to his home and celebrate marriage
with his betrothed. In that case I will largely
reward you.’

The Pathans again represented: “ It is incumbent
on us to go to our homes in case of births, deaths,
and marriages. Otherwise we could never show our
faces again to our relations. We must therefore
depart.’ To this the Guru replied, ‘ Be loyal to your
sovereign ; leave death and life in the hands of God.
Desert not your posts, abandon not your duty, and
you shall be happy in this world and the next. If
you die in battle, you shall obtain glory to which
not even monarchs can aspire. Shame not your sires
and your race. He who forsaketh his master in battle
shall be dishonoured here and condemned hereafter.
The vultures, knowing him to be disloyal, will not
touch but spurn his flesh. He shall not go to heaven
hereafter, nor obtain glory here ; abundant disgrace
shall light upon his head. Be assured of this that

32 THE SIKH RELIGION

human birth shall be profitable to him who loseth
his life with his face to the foe. For all the drops
of blood that fall from his body, so many years shall
he enjoy the company of his God.’?

The Guru offered double pay, which the Pathans
refused ; then triple, then quadruple. All the Guru’s
overtures were rejected. The Pathans replied,
‘ Money is a thing to be distributed among relations ;
but if relations fall out, of what use is money ?’
Kripal then addressed them, ‘O fools, you are
afraid to fight, and are only inventing excuses.
Having eaten the Guru’s salt you are untrue to it,
and are reflecting dishonour on the Pathan race.
A curse on your pay and on yourselves!’ Kripal
then quoted the texts from Bhai Gur Das’s Wars
against ingratitude.

Finding all remonstrance useless, Kripal recom-
mended the Guru to dismiss the wretches from his
service. The Guru again addressed the mutinous
men: “You appear like tigers, but you have only
the spirit of jackals.’ The Pathans cast down their
eyes and said in reply, ‘ O great king, say what thou
pleasest. We will serve thee no longer. We are not
thy prisoners. Why tauntest thou us?’ The Guru
replied, ‘ Leave my presence ; the immortal God will
assist me.’ When the Pathans, having received their
salary from the Guru, went to their tents to make
preparations for their departure, Kale Khan again
advised them to serve the Guru for one year more.
At the end of that time they should be wealthy men.
Bhikan Khan replied, ‘ The Guru is evidently afraid
of the enemy. If we want money, let us go and
fight on the side of the hillmen and obtain their
permission to plunder the Guru. The hillmen have
not the same information regarding his treasure as
we have. Accordingly, we shall be at the rear during
the battle and at the front during the plunder. We

1 Sukha Singh’s Gur Bilas, Chapter vi, and S#raj Parkash, Rut II,
Chapter 20.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 33

will then go straight to our homes taking with us
all we can seize.’

This advice of Bhikan Khan was applauded by
the Pathans. They accordingly sent five of their
men to negotiate with Raja Fatah Shah, and tell
him they would all serve him without pay if they
were allowed to plunder the Guru. Moreover, their
leaving the Guru would ruin him as they were the
only fighting men he had. In fact, on their departure
there would be none to fight on his side, and Fatah
Shah would gain a bloodless victory. Fatah Shah
was highly pleased, and at once gave the Pathans
written permission to appropriate the Guru’s pro-
perty. When the document was shown to the body
of the Pathans, they set about saddling their horses
to join Fatah Shah’s standard. Kale Khan again
remonstrated and threatened the mutineers, but in
vain. Some further overtures of the Guru were also
rejected. The upshot was that the Guru’s soldiers,
who were only waiting for his order, expelled the
mutinous Pathans from his camp. Kale Khan
remained with the troop of one hundred men of
whom he had been originally in command.

The Guru lost no time in informing Budhu Shah
of the misconduct of the mutinous Pathan soldiers
whom he had introduced and recommended to him.
Budhu Shah felt their behaviour a personal dis-
grace to himself. He sought to remove it, and also
gain spiritual advantage by assisting the Guru. He
accordingly placed himself, his brother, his four
sons, and seven hundred disciples at the Guru’s
disposal.

CHAPTER V

When the Pathans joined Raja Fatah Shah, he
asked them what the Guru, whose pay they had been
receiving and whose salt they had been eating, must
think of them after their desertion. Bhikan Khan

SIKH. V D

34 THE SIKH RELIGION

replied, ‘ Great king, the Guru is greatly afraid of
thee. He only declared war on thee through reliance
on us. He offered us shields full of rupees, but we
refused and came to thee. He hath only eight men
who know how to fight. These are his five cousins,
his uncle Kripal, Diwan Nand Chand, and Bhai
Daya Ram. The others who are with him are the
dregs of the populace, and know not even how to
handle a sword. We Pathans shall be too many for
them, so it will not be necessary for thy troops to
engage at all. The Guru hath treasure exceeding that
of an emperor.’ On this Fatah Shah remarked that
Providence was kind to him in having already granted
him victory. He repeated his promise to the Pathans
that they might go and plunder the Guru, and, if he
himself possibly could, he would generously reward
them out of his own resources also.

The Guru’s scouts, who had been sent to Bhangani,
reported that the enemy were marching to the
attack. He must therefore proceed at once to inter-
cept them, otherwise they would enter Paunta on
the morrow. The Guru sent orders to a body of
Udasis to put on their turbans, take their arms,
and prepare for defence. The Udasis too did not wish
to lose their lives. They said that there were other
countries where they might beg for their living, and
that the Guru’s kitchen from which they used to
eat, was not the only one in the world which remained
to them. It was not for the purpose of fighting
they had left their homes and become pilgrims.
They accordingly resolved to abscond during the
night one by one, so that their departure might be
unobserved.

Next morning the Guru was informed that the
Udasis had all fled except their mahant Kripal, who
remained in a state of abstraction. The Guru
smiled and said, ‘ The root at any rate is left, and
since there is the root the tree shall bear blossom
and fruit. If the mahant had gone, the Udasis

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 35

would have been totally extirpated, and excommu-
nicated from Sikhism.’ The Guru then ordered the
mahant to be sent for, and thus addressed him:
‘O mahant, whither have thy Udasis fled ? Hearken
tome. Thy disciples eat our sacred food, but when
they see a green field elsewhere, they go to graze
on it like cattle. They have all absconded in the
present hour of need.’ The mahant calmly replied,
‘All disciples of the Gurus are made by thee, and
thou thyself canst pardon them.’

While the Guru was conversing with the mahant
two Sikhs arrived to report that the army of the
hillmen had arrived near Bhangani. The Guru gave
orders to his five cousins to take troops and stop the
entrance of the enemy into the town. Then making
all arrangements for the defence of Paunta during
his absence, he sent for his arms and armour and
offered the following prayer to the Almighty :—

Eternal God, Thou art our shield,

The dagger, knife, the sword we wield.
To us protector there is given

The timeless, deathless, Lord of heaven ;
To us All-steel’s unvanquished might ;
To us All-time’s resistless flight ;

But chiefly Thou, Protector brave,
All-steel, wilt Thine own servants save.!

Then while repeating his orders he buckled on his
sword, slung his quiver over his shoulder, took his
bow in his hand, mounted his steed, and shouting
‘Sat Sri Akal’ in his loudest voice proceeded to
confront his enemies. It is recorded that the hoofs
of the Guru’s horse in their quick movement raised
clouds of dust which obscured the sun, and that the
cheers of his men resembled thunder in the stormy
and rainy month of Sawan.

When the Guru arrived at Bhangani, Bhai Daya

1 This is freely translated from a version of the first lines of the
Akal Ustat found in Malcolm’s Sketch of the Stkhs.

D2

36 THE SIKH RELIGION

Ram pointed out the positions of the armies arrayed
against him. ‘ Behold ; there is Fatah Shah’s army,
and to the right of it are the faithless Pathans who
have deserted us. Behind them all stands Fatah
Shah himself. In the van is seen Hari Chand, the
Raja of Handur, a brave and accomplished archer.’

Meanwhile a contingent was seen to approach,
discharging firearms and committing great havoc
among the hillmen. Diwan Nand Chand was puzzled
and applied to the Guru for information. A soldier
arrived in breathless haste, and said that Budhu
Shah had arrived to wipe out the Guru’s taunts for
having introduced the Pathans to him. The Guru
was of course overjoyed to receive Budhu Shah with
his reinforcement, and at once gave the order to
charge. Sango Shah, one of the Guru’s cousins,
who discharged bullets like hail and committed
fearful destruction among the enemy, is specially
mentioned on this occasion for his conspicuous
gallantry.

Raja Fatah Shah soon learnt that the Pathans
had misled him as to the character and strength of
the Guru’s army. Raja Hari Chand then suggested
that the Pathans under Bhikan Khan, being in the
Guru's secret and aware of his plan of operations,
should be sent to the front. This was accordingly
done. They charged the Guru’s army and used their
muskets with great effect. The Guru sent Nand Chand
and Daya Ram with their troops to check their
onset. Nand Chand and Daya Ram advanced with
the rapidity of arrows shot from the Guru’s bow-
string. They and their men discharged missiles like
winged serpents against the enemy. The Pathans
too, fought well, the battle was hotly contested, and
many brave men were untimely slain on both sides.

The struggle was continued by both armies with the
eagerness of wrestlers striving for victory. Sango
Shah continued his brave career and killed many of
the enemy. He was well supported by his brother

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 37

Mahii Chand, who showered bullets with deadly
precision on the Pathans, but was at last surrounded
as his missiles were exhausted. Sango seeing his
brother’s perilous position put his horse at full speed
to rescue him, and so deftly applied his arrows, that
the Pathans soon surrendered their expected prey
and fled.

Budhu Shah, his relations, and his disciples, fought
with great bravery and devotion, and succeeded
in slaying numbers of the enemy. The ground
resembled a red carpet. His men shouted like
thunder, and drove the enemy before them as a
hurricane drives chaff. Raja Gopal of Guler now
arrived with his troops to reinforce Fatah Shah.
He called out to the fugitives, “Why run away ?
I have come to your assistance.’ On this the hillmen
took courage and renewed the combat. They
directed their attack principally against Budhu
Shah’s troops. Seeing this, Budhu Shah’s sons
fought with the greatest bravery, felled the enemy
as a woodcutter fells forest trees, and warded off
all return strokes, so that they piled up corpses on
corpses. Raja Gopal, seeing the destruction of his
allies, addressed his men, ‘ My brethren, now is the
time for action. Maintain the honour of the hill
rajas. The result of this brief exhortation was that
the enemy surrounded Budhu Shah’s son. In this
critical position he fought with great desperation.
His bravery attracted the attention of the Guru
himself who sent his uncle Kripal with troops to
rescue him. Kripal’s men showered arrows and
bullets on the enemy, and succeeded in extricating
the youth. He and Kripal then joined in a terrific
charge on the hillmen. Raja Gopal seeing this dis-
charged an arrow at Budhu Shah’s son which struck
him on the chest, and brought him to the ground.
This led to a close engagement of the combatants
on both sides for the possession of the body. Every
form of weapon was plied and the carnage became

38 THE SIKH RELIGION

terrific. Such was the gallantry of Kripal and the
spirit he infused into his followers, that the enemy
fled, leaving the corpse of Budhu Shah’s son to be
borne away from the field by his father’s disciples
for honourable interment.

Raja Gopal, on seeing the confusion produced in
his ranks by the brave Kripal, directed his horse at
full speed against him. As Gopal advanced he dis-
charged an arrow at him, which lodged in his horse’s
saddle. On this Kripal shouted, ‘O Gopal, thou
hast had the first shot. It is for me to shoot now.’
On hearing this Gopal turned his horse round.
Kripal at once discharged an arrow, which penetrated
his horse’s temple, and the animal fell heavily on
the ground. Gopal, unhorsed, ran away with the
rapidity of a thief who finds day dawning on him in
the exercise of his calling, and took refuge at the rear
of his troops. He there provided himself with another
steed which he mounted for the battle.

The Rajas of Chandel and Handur now appeared
on the scene, and desired to come to close quarters
with the Guru himself. They and their troops were,
however, kept at bay by the bravery of the Guru’s
five cousins, supported by the faithful Sikhs.

Raja Fatah Shah now called out to Bhikan Khan
and his Pathans, and asked them why they were
concealing themselves and saving their skins like
dastards. Bhikan Khan had represented that the
Guru’s army was worthless, so Fatah Shah now
called on him to put that worthless army to flight.
He and his men might then return to their homes
with such plunder as they could obtain from their
victory. Bhikan Khan, thus roused from his
lethargy, joined in the fight. Haiyat Khan too
advanced and killed several of the Guru’s troopers.
Kripal, the mahant of the Udasis, now advanced on
horseback, and asked the Guru’s permission to engage
Haiyat Khan. The Guru replied, ‘O holy saint,
thou canst kill him with thy words. Pray that I may

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 39

be victorious.’ Kripal, the Guru’s uncle, over-
hearing this conversation, and seeing that the
mahant was filled with martial enthusiasm, prayed
the Guru to let him engage Haiyat Khan. The Guru
inquired with what weapon the mahant was going
‘to contend with his adversary. The mahant replied,
‘With this club.’ The Guru smiled and said, ‘ Go
and engage thine enemy.’ It was a spectacle.to see
the mahant with his matted hair twisted round his
head, his body only clothed with a thin plaster of
ashes, and his belly projecting far in front of his
saddle, proceeding to engage a practised warrior
armed with the latest weapons of destruction.

When the mahant approached and challenged
Haiyat Khan, the latter saw that he had no warlike
weapon and consequently retreated from him, scorn-
ing to attack a defenceless man. The onlookers
were amused and said, ‘How can that faqir contend
with a Pathan?’ The mahant, however, continued
to challenge Haiyat Khan. As when a snake is
escaping into its hole it will come forth if its tail be
trodden on and attack the aggressor, so Haiyat
Khan, who had been retiring before the mahant, now
advanced against him goaded by his taunts. He
aimed a blow of his sword at the mahant, which the
latter received on his club, when lo! Haiyat Khan’s
sword fell to pieces. The mahant then addressed
him, ‘Now hold thy ground and defend thyself
from me.’ The mahant rose on his stirrups, and
wielding his club with both hands struck Hatyat
Khan with such force on the head that his skull
broke, and his brains issued forth and stained the
battle-field.*

1 The Guru himself gives the following description of this single
combat and of the fighting which immediately followed :—

Mahant Kripal, raging, lifted his mace and smote the fierce Haiyat
Khan on the head, upon which his brains issued bubbling forth as
butter from the earthen vessel which Krishan broke. Nand Chand raged

in dreadful ire, launching his spear, then wielding his scimitar, When
the keen weapon broke, he drew forth his dagger for the honour of the

40 THE SIKH RELIGION

The mahant continued to display his skill and
bravery to the Pathans, but was at last surrounded
by them and placed in a very hazardous position.
When Jit Mal, one of the Guru’s cousins, saw this,
he rained such a shower of arrows on the Pathans,
that they retreated and left the mahant unmolested.
He then made his way to the Guru, and received his
approbation.

Ram Singh, a mechanic from Banaras, had made
a cannon for the Guru from which balls were dis-
charged with great effect during this battle. People
on seeing the impression made on the enemy con-
cluded that the Guru was destined to be victorious.

Bhikan Khan and Niabat Khan taunted their
men with being unable to cope with a rabble of
villagers who did not even know how to handle
a martial weapon. The result was that the Pathans
made another desperate effort to brighten their
gloomy prospects, and for a time caused the Guru’s
army to waver. One Sahib Chand, a captain of
a troop, asked the Guru’s permission to oppose the
onset of the enemy. The Guru ordered him to act
on his own responsibility. Sahib Chand and his men
so deftly and rapidly plied their arrows that the
Pathans found it necessary to take shelter behind
trees. Bhikan Khan, seeing this, addressed his men :
“How now, jackals, you are attaching a stigma to
the Pathan race. The hillmen are laughing at you,
and saying that a faqir, having killed Haiyat Khan,
hath put all the Pathans to flight.’ Saying this,
Sodhi race. Then my maternal uncle, Kripal, advanced in his rage.
The brave man’s body received many arrows, yet he emptied the saddle
of many a Turkish chief. Sahib Chand, as a true Kshatri, strove in the
battle’s fury and slew bloodthirsty leroes, shining lights of Khurasan.
Many excellent warriors were slain, and those who survived fled with their
lives. Sango Shah, lord of battle, gloriously acquitted himself, and
trampled underfoot bloodthirsty Pathans. Raja Gopal shouted as he
stood in the battle-field, like a tiger in the midst of deer. ‘The brave
Hari Chand planted his feet firmly on the field and in his fury dis-

charged sharp arrows which went through and through his adversaries.
—Vichitar Natak.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 41

Bhikan Khan set an example of bravery to his
soldiers, and discharged showers of arrows at the
Guru’s troops.

Sahib Chand, on the Guru’s side, continued to
fight with great determination, and caused great
havoc among the enemy. Seeing this, Hari Chand,
the Raja of Handur, became enraged and strove
with equal valour against him. His archery was so
unerring that the Guru’s army again wavered.
Sahib Chand then occupied himself in warding off
Hari Chand’s arrows and inspiriting his men. They
were not, however, to be encouraged, but were on
the point of retreat when the Guru heard a great
tumult near him. He at once ordered Nand Chand
and Daya Ram to stay the attack of the enemy.
These brave heroes discharged such showers of
arrows as effectually checked the onward progress
of the Pathans. Nand Chand, taking his sword in his
hand and putting his horse to full speed, rode into
the thick of his enemies, and chopped off their heads
like pumpkins severed from their stalks. In his
left hand he held a lance with which as occasion
served he impaled his antagonists. The Pathans,
however, retreated not, but with their religious
battle-cry, ‘Ya Ali! Ya Ali!’ firmly held their
ground and fell upon Nand Chand. He by his
bravery and skill in arms sent every one who
approached him to the next world by the way of the
sword. A Pathan ran his horse forward and received
Nand Chand’s sword on his musket. The sword
fell to pieces and then Nand Chand drew forth his
two-edged dagger. Daya Ram went to his assist-
ance at that critical moment, and a hand to hand
engagement with the Moslems ensued, in which they
were worsted and put to flight. Raja Hari Chand
still held his ground and was challenged by Daya
Ram. Hari Chand avoided not the conflict, but
continued to discharge arrows and bullets and
inflict great damage on the Guru’s army. His horse

42 THE SIKH RELIGION

was very swift and tractable, and he could turn him
rapidly round so as to save himself from a hostile
attack, while at the same time he could discharge
fatal missiles at his opponents. Saiyid Budhu Shah
was found to have lost during the last charge a second
son in the battle.

There came a confectioner named Lal Chand to
the spot on which the Guru stood directing the
battle. He said, ‘I feel greatly tempted to join in
the fray, but I have never learned how to handle
warlike weapons.’ The Guru replied, ‘ If thou desire
to fight, take and mount a horse.’ The confectioner
did so. Then the Guru gave him a sword and shield.
He inquired how they were to be held. The Guru
told him to take the sword in his right hand and the
shield in his left. The Guru’s soldiers laughed at
the confectioner’s ignorance and said, ‘ Well done!
our Guru and great King wants to kill hawks with
sparrows.’

The confectioner ran his horse into the Pathan
army. Bhikan Khan on seeing him said to his
friend Mir Khan, ‘ See, here comes an Arora.! He
hath been all day weighing flour and salt, and now
the Guru hath given him a sword and shield. Take
his arms and his horse, and then slay him.’ Upon
this Mir Khan pounced on him like a hawk on a
sparrow. When Mir Khan drew his sword the
confectioner warded it off with his shield. Then
meditating on the Guru he aimed a return blow at
Mir Khan which separated his head from his body.
The hillmen taunted the Pathans with not being able
to contend with petty hucksters, and asked them if
they were not ashamed of their cowardice. Pro-
voked by these taunts, Nijabat Khan and Bhikan
Khan urged their men to make a general charge and
not die like jackals. Raja Hari Chand joined them
in their onslaught. The Guru’s brave Sikhs, how-
ever, firmly held their ground. In the action that

1 A tribe of Khatris.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 43

ensued Jit Mal and Hari Chand engaged in single
combat. Jit Mal discharged an arrowat Hari Chand,
but the latter by an adroit movement of his horse
escaped it. Jit Mal became angry at having missed his
mark, and discharged another arrow at his opponent.
HariChand followed hisexample. Thearrows lodged
in their horses’ foreheads and both horses fell. The
combatants thus unhorsed continued to fight until
they were both wounded. After a short breathing
time, both again put forward their strength, when
their swords simultaneously took effect. Hari Chand
fell fainting to the earth, and Jit Mal dropped down
dead with his face to the foe. His comrades blest
the father who had begotten him and the mother
who had borne him.

When the hillmen found that their bravest warrior
had fallen into a swoon, they assembled to consider
what should bedone. On seeing the enemy huddled
together, the Guru ordered Ram Singh to direct his
cannon towards them. Ram Singh obeyed, with the
result that several of the enemy were killed. On
this the Rajas of Dadhwal and Jaswal became
enraged and actively joined in the battle. Fatah
Shah, however, saw that the day was lost and took
to flight. The Raja of Chandel was astonished at
the conduct of Fatah Shah, and continued to do
valiant battle on behalf of the hill chiefs.

At the time when Jit Mal and Hari Chand were
engaged in single combat, Sango Shah, the Guru’s
cousin, and Niabat Khan, the Pathan leader, were
similarly employed, and both fell by mutual slaugh-
ter. The Guru, on seeing the courage and fate of
the hero who had performed for him such gallant
deeds, changed his name from Sango to Shah San-
gram—Lord of battle. The Guru, enraged at his
loss, mounted his charger and rode into the thick
of the combat. He so plied his arrows that sounds
of woe arose on all sides from the Pathan ranks.
The Guru, on seeing the renegade Bhikan Khan,

44 THE SIKH RELIGION

discharged an arrow at him. It missed him but
killed his horse, upon which he took to flight. Nand
Chand and Daya Ram now saw an opportunity in
the demoralized state of the Pathans to make a final
desperate charge and complete their discomfiture.
The result was great slaughter of the treacherous
Muhammadans. When the hillmen saw the total
defeat of the Pathans, they too began to run away
from the field of battle.

Raja Hari Chand, who swooned on_ being
wounded by Jit Mal, had by this time recovered,
and appeared on the scene with the heroic resolution
to secure victory for his side. He addressed his
troops: ‘Hillmen, once so brave, why die like
cowards ? I have come to your assistance. Take
courage. Saying this the Raja stayed the fleeing
hosts. Meanwhile showers of arrows continued to
speed from the Guru’s army. Raja Hari Chand
shot many brave men with his own arrows. The
Guru on seeing this confronted him, and after-
wards thus described the combat that ensued :—

Hari Chand, in his rage, drew forth his arrows. He
struck my steed with one and then discharged another at
me, but God preserved me and it only grazed my ear in
its flight. His third arrow penetrated the buckle of my
waist-belt and reached my body, but wounded me not.
It is only God who protected me, knowing me His servant.
When I felt the touch of the arrow, my anger was kindled.
I took up my bow and began to discharge arrows in
abundance. Upon this my adversaries began to flee.
I took aim and killed the young chief, Hari Chand. When
he perished my heroes trampled their enemies under foot.
The chief of Korori was seized by death. Upon this the
hillmen fled in consternation and I, through the favour
of the eternal God, gained the victory. Having thus held
the battle-field, we raised aloud the song of triumph.
I showered wealth on my warriors and they all rejoiced.

Raja Fatah Shah saw there was only safety in

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 45

flight, and hastened to retire to his capital. Praises
of the Guru’s valour and skill in warfare were sung
throughout the country.

CHAPTER VI

After the battle the Guru went to where lay the
bodies of Sango Shah, Jit Mal, and his other brave
fallen Sikhs. He ordered the slain on both sides to
be disposed of. The bodies of the Sikhs were cre-
mated, of the Hindus thrown into the adjacent river,
and of the Musalmans buried with all solemnity.
Bards assembled and chanted their praises. Saiyid
Budhu Shah presented himself and his two surviving
sons to the Guru. The Guru said, ‘I hail thee as
a true priest of God. Thy human life is profitable
unto thee. Deem not that thy sons are dead. Nay,
they shall live for ever. Only those die who despise
God’s name and turn cowards on the field of battle.’
Budhu Shah replied, ‘ True king, I mourn not for
my sons who are slain, because, in the first place,
they have gone to enjoy seats in paradise, and,
secondly, because they have lost their lives in defence
of thee. Such a boon is not obtained even by the
greatest austerities.’

The Guru considered how he should requite Budhu
Shah for his supreme devotion to his cause. He
decided that, as worldly possessions were fleeting,
the gift of God’s name was the highest reward of
all, and so that inestimable boon he duly conferred
on him. But he made him other gifts also. The
Guru at the time was combing his long hair, and
a servant stood by holding his turban. When the
Guru had performed his toilet, he laid his comb with
loose hair in it upon the turban and presented them
to Budhu Shah to preserve in remembrance of him.
He also gave him a small knife which Sikhs usually
carry, and finally a sum of five thousand rupees to
distribute among his disciples. The Guru’s turban,

46 THE SIKH RELIGION

his comb, hair, and knife are preserved as relics
in the Sikh state of Nabha. They were acquired
from Budhu Shah’s descendants by Raja Bharpur
Singh.

The Guru remembered his cousins Sango Shah and
Jit Mal, and proclaimed them brave and puissant
warriors who had taken their seats in heaven. He
bade their brothers not mourn for them. The
brothers replied, ‘For whom should we mourn? Sango
Shah and Jit Mal have fought and obtained the
dignity of salvation. War means either to kill or
be killed, and there is no need to mourn the con-
sequences.’ The Guru rewarded all those who had
risked their lives for him and contributed to his
signal and decisive victory.

When the Guru’s fame extended after his recent
success and prowess in arms, he was visited by many
accomplished persons. Poets, singers, and musicians
flocked to his court, and all who visited him he
endeavoured to suitably reward. Now that the war
was over, the Sikh soldiers formed various projects
to occupy their time for the future. They would
go and seize Raja Fatah Shah, and make him bow
at the Guru’s feet. And they would conquer and
obtain the freedom of the country between Paunta
and Anandpur, so as to remove the obstacles inter-
posed in marching hither and thither. This last
enterprise, as being the one that affected them most
closely, they specially urged on the Guru’s con-
sideration.

The Guru remonstrated and restrained them. He
bade them bide their opportunity. Their empire
should yet extend far and wide. He knew, however,
that his troops would not sit down idle, flushed as
they were with their recent victory. Accordingly
he gave them an order to return to Anandpur, an
order with which they were delighted. They all set
forth accordingly, taking their wounded and their
baggage.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH = 47

The Guru marched by way of Sadhaura and Lahar-
pur. He encamped at the latter place, and was there
met by the envoy of the Raja of Nahan, who desired
to come to meet him. The Guru sent his army to
Anandpur, and remained himself with only a few
followers to meet the Raja. The Guru was fain to
divert himself with the chase after his recent warfare,
and ample opportunities were afforded him in that
part of the country. During his stay in Laharpur,
Budhu Shah often visited him, and held religious con-
versations with him. Though the Raja of Nahan
very much desired to entertain the Guru, yet he
apprehended the wrath of the other hill chiefs if
he were known to be still on amicable terms with
the high priest of the Sikhs, who had inflicted on
them such a signal defeat. The Raja used to send
a messenger daily to say that he was coming; but
somehow he was accidentally prevented. He would,
however, come on the morrow. The Raja carried on
this method of procrastination from day to day.
At last he asked the advice of his ministers, whether
it was proper for him to meet the Guru or not.
They advised him that it was not, seeing that the
Guru was at enmity with all the hill chiefs. Were
he now to meet the Guru, the chiefs would resent it
and probably make war on him. On this the Raja
sent a messenger to say he was very busy and could
not go himself to meet the Guru, but he would send
his chief minister to do him the honours of the
state. The Guru did not conceal his knowledge of
the Raja’s motives, and sent him a message that he
would now continue his journey to Anandpur, and
the Raja need not give himself any further concern
on the subject of an interview.

The Guru stayed altogether thirteen days at Lahar-
pur. The principal inhabitants were Kanghars,
thieves by instinct and profession, who stole two of
his camels. When the Ranghars refused to give up
the booty, the Guru sent for a faqir who lived near,

48 THE SIKH RELIGION

and told him to go, under pretence of begging, to
the house of a certain Ranghar, and see whether the
camels were there. The faqir went, saw the camels,
and duly reported his discovery. The Guru sent for
the Ranghar in possession, and told him to act as an
honest man, and give up the camels, otherwise he
would oust him from house and home. On this the
Ranghar parted with the stolen property. The Guru
called the Ranghars’ village counterfeit, and the
faqir’s village genuine, and said the faqir’s village
should ever gain and the Ranghars’ ever lose. The
prophecy of the Guru has been fulfilled. A temple
called Toka was subsequently constructed in Lahar-
pur in honour of the Guru’s visit.

As the Guru proceeded to Anandpur he was met by
the Rani of Raipur,! who waited for him on his route.
After making her obeisance she asked him to take rest
at her capital. The Guru gladly accepted her invita-
tion. She showed him the greatest hospitality and
sent her son to him with an offering of a bag of rupees.
At a subsequent interview she entreated the Guru to
pray that her son’s line might permanently endure.
The Guru said that her son ought to allow his hair
to grow and perfect himself in the practice of arms.
The Rani replied that the Turks were in power, and
she was afraid to allow her son to dress differently
from them. The Guru exhorted her not to be afraid.
The rule of the Turks should only last for a brief
period. ‘When my sect groweth more numerous and
obtaineth possession of the empire of the Turks, it
shall then adopt long hair as a distinction. And
when the line of the Turks is extirpated, thine shall

* Raipur is in the sub-collectorate of Nardingarh in the present
district of Ambala in the Panjab. To Raipur are attached about
twenty-three villages, yielding a yearly income of Rs. 18,000. The
present proprietor is Rao Baldev Singh, a Hindu Rajpit. His grand-
father was a Sikh, In the fort of Raipur is a Gurdwara on the spot
where Gobind Rai dined as the R&ni’s guest. There is also a

Gurdwara outside the fort on the spot where his tent was pitched.
The Granth Sahib is kept in both Gurdwaras.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 49

remain in undiminished dignity. It shall then unite
with the Khalsa and obtain all happiness.’

Upon this the Guru took his sword and shield and
presented them to the Ramni’s son. He said, ‘ Take
them and treat them with respect, so that when the
time of trouble ariseth, thy wishes may be fulfilled,
and thy life and property preserved.’ The Rani was
delighted with the Guru’s presents and words, and
thus addressed him: ‘Great king, great are thy
gifts. Who can deprive us of them? It is thy un-
swerving duty to hold thyself bound by the bonds of
love for the human race, and thou art, moreover,
merciful and compassionate.’ The Rani, seeing that
the Guru had made the gift with his own sacred hands,
was filled with delight, and taking the sword and
shield put them respectfully on her head and then
touched her son’s head with them. She bound a
coverleton a couch and placed the weapons reverently
on it. After this the Guru continued his journey to
Anandpur.

On the way the Guru halted at Kiratpur, where
Gulab Rai and Sham Das, the grandsons of Guru
Har Gobind, came to visit him. He there visited
the shrines of his ancestors. When it became known
that the Guru was returning to Anandpur, the
inhabitants of that city came forth to receive him,
and there were unusual rejoicings on his safe and
glorious return.

Not long afterwards complaints began to be made
against the Guru’s troops to Raja Bhim Chand.
Whenever the Guru’s men did not accompany him
to the chase, they used to go hunting in detached
groups by themselves. The Guru at that time set
about the construction of a fort, and made a strong
and lofty battlement around it.

Raja Bhim Chand was greatly irritated by the
numerous complaints he continually received against
the Sikhs. He took counsel with his minister, ‘ What
shall we do? We are not strong enough to contend

SIKH, V E

50 THE SIKH RELIGION

with the Guru, but how long are we to endure this
annoyance ?’ The minister replied, ‘O Raja, I see
no solution of the difficulty except reconciliation
with the Guru.’ All the other principal state officers
who were consulted gave similar replies. Bhim
Chand then decided that he would send an envoy
to ascertain if the Guru had any intention of making
an abiding peace with him.

' The envoy, who was selected from the most
polished officials of the state, duly delivered his
master’s message praying for peace and forgetfulness
of the past. The Guru replied, ‘I have not fallen
out with Raja Bhim Chand, but he hath fallen out
with me. See what deceit he exercised in his efforts
to obtain my elephant. When his marriage proces-
sion went to Srinagar, he endeavoured to kill my
minister and his troops. It was only by God’s
special favour they escaped. Even then thy Raja
left nothing undone against us, for he incited Fatah
Shah who had been my friend to make war on us.
Here again God protected us and we obtained the
victory. O envoy, our army hath taken possession
of no fort or village of yours. My troopers are
grievously in want of grass for their horses, and
goats’ flesh for themselves. These can only be
obtained from your villages. If we do not obtain
them on payment we must starve, but we do not
desire to accept anything else from you.’

The envoy smiled and said, ‘ Consider Raja Bhim
Chand’s country as thine own. He is very anxious
to meet thee, and if thou permit me I will conduct
him here.’ The Guru replied, ‘In Guru Nanak’s
house men meet their deserts. If any one with lowly
mind enter therein, he shall be happy ; but if any
one, lifting his head-too high, enter it, his life shall
pay the forfeit. Then plainly tell thy Raja that if
he entertain friendly intent, he may come to me,
and he shall be received with due consideration.’
The Raja was very pleased on receiving this message,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH | 51

and at once made elaborate preparations for his
visit to the Guru.

When Bhim Chand was introduced into the Guru’s
presence he said, ‘ O true Guru, thy name is cherisher
of those who seek thy protection. I pray thee to
pardon and forget any foolish words I might have
uttered or any foolish acts I might have done.’ The
Guru replied, ‘ O Raja, I have not been thine aggres-
sor. The aggression hath been all on thy side. If
thou act fairly towards the Guru, he will act fairly
towards thee.’ Bhim Chand promised to act for the
future according to the Guru’s wishes. Upon this
the Guru gave him a magnificent robe of honour,
and dismissed him highly delighted with the inter-
view.

The Guru’s wife Sundari now presented him with
a son named Ajit Singh on the fourth day of the
bright half of Magh, Sambat 1743 (A. D. 1687),

CHAPTER VII

During the absence of the Emperor Aurangzeb in
the south of India, whither he had gone to make
war on [Tana Shah, King of Golkanda,' there arose
great administrative irregularities. At that time
Mian Khan was viceroy of Jammu. He sent his
commander-in-chief, Alif Khan, to levy tribute on
Kripal, Raja of Kangra, Kesari Chand, Raja of
Jaswal, Prithi Chand, Raja of Dadhwal, Sukh Dev,
Raja of Jasrot, and others. Alif Khan first addressed
himself to Raja Kripal, ‘ Either pay me suitable
tribute or contend with me in arms.’ Kripal made
him certain presents, and then told him that Raja
Bhim Chand of Bilaspur was the greatest of all the
allied hill chiefs. Were he first to pay tribute, all the
rest would follow his example, and then there would

' Golkanda was then the capital of the state of Haidarabad in the
Dakhan.

E 2

52 THE SIKH RELIGION

be no necessity for warfare. If, however, Bhim
Chand were to refuse and elect the alternative of
war, Kripal would still support Alif Khan. Raja
Dayal, the chief of Bijharwal, probably persuaded by
Raja Kripal, also promised to meet Alif Khan's
demands.

Alif Khan adopted Raja Kripal’s suggestion and
proceeded towards Bilaspur, Raja Bhim Chand’s
capital. Halting at Nadaun he sent an envoy to
Bhim Chand with the same demand as he had
previously made Kripal. Bhim Chand replied that
he would rather defend himself than pay tribute.
Having dispatched this message he called his prin-
cipal officials to a council of war. His prime minister
thus advised him—‘ If thou desire victory, it shall be
assured on condition that thou obtain the Guru's
assistance.’ This advice pleased Bhim Chand, and
he accordingly sent the prime minister to the Guru
to request his active support.
| ‘The Guru pondered on the proposal and accepted
it for the following reasons :—The friendship between
himself and Raja Bhim Chand was duly ratified,
and it would be a shame to him if, by his refusal to
render assistance, his friend were defeated. Secondly,
Bhim Chand’s prime minister had put himself under
the Guru’s protection as a suppliant, and the Guru
felt that he could not refuse his prayer. He
accordingly sent Raja Bhim Chand the following
message, ‘I shall be with thee early on the morrow.
Pay no tribute to the Turks. If thou pay it to-day,
there will be another demand on thee to-morrow.
But if thou fight and cause the Turks to retreat,
then shall no one molest thee.’

Raja Bhim Chand on receiving this promise made
certain of his victory. Raja Kesari Chand, Raja
Prithi Chand, and Raja Sukh Dev took their forces
to join his, and all proceeded to Nadaun to give
battle to Alif Khan, Raja Kripal, and Raja Dayal’s
troops. These were encamped on an eminence, and

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 53

had therefore superiority of position. Bhim Chand
ineffectually essayed to take them by surprise, but
the arrows and bullets which his troops discharged
only struck rocks and trees, and inflicted no loss on
the enemy. Bhim Chand, much disheartened, in-
voked with all fervour, Hanuman, the monkey-god
who had assisted Ram Chandar in his expedition
against Ceylon, and called on his allies to join him
in another charge. This was met by Raja Kripal
and Raja Dayal’s forces, who slew all the men that
succeeded in scaling the eminence. Bhim Chand
had now almost lost all hope when the minister
reminded him that the Guru’s troops had not yet
entered the field. The Guru receiving Bhim Chand’s
summons, mounted his steed, and at once proceeded
to his assistance.

Bhim Chand, after greeting the Guru, requested
him, who was senior as well by virtue of his spiritual
rank as by the bravery of his troops, to storm the
enemies’ position. The Guru and his troops dis-
charged fatal arrows, rushed the stockades, and
created dismay in the ranks of the enemy. Alif
Khan, Raja Kripal, and Raja Dayal now thought
it time to leave their fastnesses and come forth to
confront Bhim Chand and the Guru. Their main
attack was directed against Bhim Chand whom they
caused to retreat. Prithi Chand endeavoured to
restrain Bhim Chand’s retreating forces, and single-
handed, with drawn sword, set himself to oppose
Alif Khan and Dayal’s onset. So completely did he
succeed that Alif Khan and his allies’ troops turned
to flee. Raja Dayal was enraged at seeing his troops
retreating, and began to ply his arrows with such
fatal effect on his opponents that Bhim Chand’s
troops again wavered. Upon this Bhim “Chand
again addressed himself to the Guru, ‘O Guru,
seest thou not that. this brave man is destroying
our army ? If I am defeated, thou shalt have the
odium thereof.’ The Guru at once turned his steed

54 THE SIKH RELIGION

round and challenged Raja Dayal, ‘ If thou mean to
strike, then deal the first blow. Say not hereafter
that the Guru hath struck thee unawares.’ This
enraged Dayal, who at once made a desperate effort
to kill the Guru. The Guru, seeing this, took steady
aim with his musket and lodged a bullet in Dayal’s
breast. Dayal fell hke a tree blown down by the
wind.

When Raja Kripal saw his brave ally fallen, he
knew that his cause was lost. He, however, put him-
self in the van and made a desperate effort to retrieve
the disaster. The Guru, now in full martial temper,
incessantly discharged arrows which took deadly
effect on the enemy. The survivors again fled to
their fastnesses. Upon this Alif Khan and Kripal
held a council of war. They both accepted the fact
that they had been defeated owing to the assistance
given Bhim Chand by the Guru, and they resolved to
escape at night. In this they succeeded. When the
allied army next morning found the ground un-
occupied, they were profuse in their praises and
acknowledgements to the Guru. The Guru in order
to take rest and enjoy retirement and contemplation
remained for eight days after the battle on the
pleasant and picturesque banks of the river
Bias.

Raja Kripal proposed a reconciliation with Raja
Bhim Chand, which, after some negotiations, was
duly effected. The Guru on hearing this was greatly
pleased. He decided on a speedy return to Anand-
pur, and caused his drum to be beaten as the signal
for his departure. His party arrived at Alsun on
their way. The inhabitants, having heard of Raja
Bhim Chand’s secret ill-will to the Guru, refused to
sell his troops supplies. On this the Guru, owing to
the necessity of travel, was compelled to order that
supplies be forcibly taken after payment at current
rates. When the Guru approached Anandpur he
caused his drum to be beaten. The inhabitants on

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 55

hearing the once familiar sound joyously came forth
to receive him.

The Guru’s wife, Jito, presented him with a son
on the seventh day of the month of Chet, Sambat
1747. The boy was called Zorawar Singh, or the
powerful lion, to commemorate the battle of Nadaun.

When it became known that the Sikhs had taken
supplies forcibly at Alsun, some of the hill chiefs feared
that the Guru would some day seize their territories
also. Others were of a contrary opinion, and remained
steadfast in their friendship for him. Some of the
inhabitants of Anandpur who wavered in their
loyalty, left the city lest they might suffer in any
attack made on it by the Guru’s enemies. In this
movement, however, they were far from successful.
Branded with infamy they could obtain no place of
rest elsewhere, and were glad to return and sue for
the Guru’s pardon.

One Dilawar Khan, who had attained power in
the Panjab during the insurrections which arose
while Aurangzeb was employed in the Dakhan,
became jealous of the Guru’s fame and success, and
sent his son with a force of one thousand men to
exact tribute from him. If he refused, then Anandpur
was to be sacked. When this was accomplished,
Dilawar’s son was to take tribute in a similar manner
from all the hill rajas. The son hastened to obey the
paternal command. When he reached the bank of
the Satluj one of the Guru’s scouts hastened to give
information of the approach of a hostile force. The
Guru was roused from his sleep at night to receive
this intelligence and make hasty preparations for
defence.

The Guru immediately ordered the drum to be
beaten as the signal for his troops to take arms.
His men fell into line almost immediately and
marched to the Satluj. On their arrival they startled

1 We here follow the S#raj Parkash and the Gur Bilas. Others
say it was Jujhar Singh who was born in the Sambat year 1747.

56 THE SIKH RELIGION

the enemy by peals of artillery, and thus gave an
exaggerated idea of their numbers. Dilawar Khan’s
son, seeing that his men were suffering from the cold
and unable to hold their weapons, yielded to the
representations of his officers to beat a retreat. On
their return march they plundered the town of
Barwa. After that they marched to Bhalan, where
they halted for two days and lived on the plunder
of the village. They thence returned to Dilawar
Khan. The son through shame durst not reply to
his father when he censured him for his cowardice
and the failure of his expedition.

Dilawar Khan had a slave called Husain, who
boasted that if his master gave him an army he
would plunder the Guru’s city, Anandpur, exact
tribute from Raja Bhim Chand, and return home
either with tribute or the heads of the recusant hill
chiefs. To effect these various objects, Dilawar
Khan gave him command of two thousand men,
with whom he promptly marched to Anandpur.

The Guru kept his troops in readiness to oppose
the Muhammadans. Meanwhile the latter were
plundering the towns and villages through which
they marched. They also attacked and were victori-
ous over the Raja of Dadhwal. Seeing this and also
the strength of Husain’s army, the faithless Raja
Bhim Chand broke his treaty with the Guru, and
threw in his lot with his enemies. Bhim Chand,
following the example of Raja Kripal of Kangra,
paid tribute to Husain, and in company with other
traitorous chiefs proceeded with him to sack and
destroy Anandpur. On hearing this the Guru’s
mother, Diwan Nand Chand, the Guru’s three sur-
viving cousins, and the masands, all waited on the
Guru. His mother said, ‘The brave Husain with
a large army will soon be upon us, and thou hast
not yet prepared for battle. My son, depute some
masand to go and make peace with him.’ The Guru
replied, ‘ Mother dear, be not in haste. I am only

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 57

doing the work which the immortal God assigned
me. The same immortal God will not allow him
whom thou counsellest me to fear to approach me.
He shall perish before he reacheth Anandpur.’

When Husain was on’ his way to Anandpur, Raja
Gopal of Guler sent an envoy to say that he desired to
meet him. Husain replied that he would be glad to
see Gopal if he gave him a subsidy as Raja Bhim
Chand and Kripal had done. Raja Gopal went with
Raja Ram Singh to meet him. Gopal took some
money with him, and went and sat in council with
Bhim Chand and the other hill chiefs who were
in Husain’s camp. Husain was not pleased with
Gopal’s contribution, and told him to go home and
bring as much again. Gopal set out for the purpose.
On his homeward way he changed his mind, and
decided that it would be more profitable to fight
with Husain than give him more money. He accord-
ingly sent a messenger to inform him of his deter-
mination. When Husain received this message, he
changed his objective from Anandpur to Guler to
do battle with Gopal. He vowed that he would first
destroy Gopal’s city and then march on Anandpur.

In pursuance of his vow Husain proceeded to Guler
and invested it. The citizens were soon reduced to
great straits, and the army asked permission to force
their way out and contend with the Muhammadans
in the open field. Raja Gopal replied, ‘Have patience;
I will at once send an envoy to make peace with
Husain.’ Husain’s terms were the payment of ten
thousand rupees, otherwise he would put Gopal and
his troops to death and destroy their fortress. Gopal,
unable to accept the terms, sent an envoy to the
Guru to pray him to negotiate the desired peace with
Husain. The Guru accordingly sent his agent San-
gatia with an escort of seven troopers and orders to
conclude such a peace between the combatants as
would be advantageous to Gopal.

Sangatia first took counsel with Bhim Chand and

58 THE SIKH RELIGION

Kripal. Bhim Chand said, ‘O Sikh, we have been
waiting for thee. We advise thee to send for Raja
Gopal at once, and effect a reconciliation between
him and Husain.’ In pursuance of this object,
Sangatia, who knew that Bhim Chand and Kripal
were on Husain’s side, took an oath from them
that if he could succeed in bringing Gopal to them
for the purpose of arranging peace, they would
not molest him. Sangatia then went to Gopal and
stated all the circumstances. He promised Gopal
that the Guru would conduct him to Bhim Chand
and Kripal who were with Husain, and again take
him back in safety to his fort. Sangatia added that
if Husain did not agree to peace, but accepted the
fate of battle, Gopal should by the Guru’s favour be
victorious.

When Gopal reached the allied chiefs, Bhim Chand
told him that if he paid the tribute demanded all
would be well. Gopal still refused to pay the money,
and said Husain might do as he pleased. Upon this,
Kripal plotted with Bhim Chand to arrest him
and make him over to Husain. Gopal, who heard
their intention, contrived to elude them, and having
retired to the protection of his army sent a message
of defiance to his enemies.

On one side were ranged Husain, Raja Bhim
Chand of Bilaspur, and Raja Kripal of Kangra. On
the other were Raja Gopal of Guler and Raja Ram
Singh, a powerful chief who was in alliance with him.
The fight began with indescribable vehemence. The
Guru’s envoy Sangatia and his seven Sikhs were
slain. Husain having fought with great bravery
perished on the battle-field. Raja Kripal of Kangra
was slain. Himmat and Kimmat, two of Husain’s
officers, were also slain. On seeing this, Bhim
Chand fled with his army. Gopal then went with
large offerings to the Guru and thanked him for his
support and his prayers for the victory.

Some masands escaped to the neighbouring hills

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 59

and proclaimed themselves gurus. In this they had
a twofold object. The Emperor Aurangzeb sent
his son Muazzim, afterwards known as Bahadur
Shah, into the Panjab to collect tribute, and the
masands feared that they should have to part with
their wealth both to the Emperor and the Guru. It
does not appear that the Emperor’s son remained
long in the Panjab or committed any depredations
there. He was succeeded by General Mirza Beg,
who, peremptorily demanded tribute from the hill
chiefs. They represented that the masands who had
settled in their territories, were in possession of great
wealth of which they had plundered the Guru and
his Sikhs, and which they might be called upon to dis-
gorge. Mirza Beg proceeded against them, stripped
them of all they possessed, and subjected them to ex-
quisite tortures. Any that escaped from him were
afterwards punished by four other equally relent-
less officers who succeeded him.

A third son, Jujhar Singh, was now born to the
Guru on Sunday, the first day of the second half of the
month of Magh, Sambat 1753, A.D. 1697. This was
his wife Jito’s second son.

Among those who went to the Guru to congratu-
late him on the birth of his son were many bards,
Sanyasis, Udasis, and Bairagis, who had often lis-
tened to the Guru’s conversation. At that time too
came a bard called Kuwar, son of a famous poet
called Kesho Das of Bundhelkhand. Aurangzeb had
tried to convert. Kuwar forcibly to Islam, upon
which he fled for protection to the Guru. He pre-
sented a very humble metrical petition, which the
Guru was pleased to accept. The Guru took him
into his service on a liberal salary, and in a similar
way welcomed all bards who came to him for
employment.

The practice of arms was never lost sight of at the
Guru’s court. Even his eldest son, Ajit Singh, though
now only ten years of age, was duly instructed in the

60 THE SIKH RELIGION

use of offensive and defensive weapons. The Guru
used to take Zorawar Singh in his lap while he
watched Ajit Singh fencing. Jujhar Singh too used
to be brought by his nurse to witness the performance
and imbibe from infancy a love for martial exer-
cises. The Guru used often to inform his children
of what the country had suffered from the Turks,
so it behoved them to learn how to protect them-
selves and their Sikhs.

Jito in due time gave birth to a third son, Fatah
Singh, who was born on Wednesday, the eleventh
day of Phagan, Sambat 1755, A.D. 1699. This was
the Guru’s fourth son in all.

CHAPTER VIII

One day the Sikhs asked a pandit who used to
read epic poems to the Guru, ‘ Are the deeds attri-
buted to Bhim, Arjan, and others, real or exaggerated?’
The pandit, thus addressed, actuated by greed, de-
cided to mislead his questioners, and replied, ‘ Bhim,
Arjan, and the rest were really as powerful as they
are described to have been. This was the result of
their sacrifices and burnt offerings in honour of
Durga which made her visible to them.’ The Sikhs
then prayed the pandit to show them how they
could behold the goddess, and vanquish their
enemies. The pandit, on hearing this, inwardly
rejoiced that the Sikhs had at last fallen into his
power, and, what he deemed more important, that
he had found an opportunity of making a compe-
tence for himself. He replied, ‘ Although no god
or goddess becometh visible in this Kal age, yet such
a manifestation may be possible by a due expendi-
ture of money and by the performance of certain.
acts of devotion. Were the goddess Durga to appear,
she would fulfil all your desires. But a great feast
must first be celebrated, and a trial made as to who

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 61

are the most holy Brahmans, so that they may
perform sacrifice and burnt offerings with the object
of ensuring the appearance of the goddess.’ The
Sikhs informed the Guru of this conversation. He
said to the pandit, ‘ Your statement that the goddess
becometh not manifest in the Kal age is not supported
by proof. If she appeared in the past ages, why
should she not also in this ? And if she appear not
in this age, then it is unlikely that she appeared in
any former age. At the same time, I require not
her blessings or curses. I am son of the Immortal,
who is the King of gods and men, who controlleth
millions of worlds, who is omnipotent, who cherisheth
me; and I have no need to adore gods or goddesses.’ *

The pandit again represented that if the Sikhs
made Durga manifest, they should be successful in
all their battles as Durga herself had been in all her
contests 2 with the demons who had made war on
the benign deities. The Guru being thus impor-
tuned, determined to demonstrate the hypocrisy of
the Brahmans. He invited them all to a great feast.
Every form of viands, including meat, was provided
for the guests. When they were assembled, he made
it known that he would give five gold muhars to
each Brahman who ate meat, while to each of those
who ate food cooked with clarified butter he would
give five rupees. To eat meat is really forbidden to
all Brahmans; yet several of them did so, induced
by the promised reward. According to one account
fourteen, and according to another twenty-one
Brahmans refused the meat offered them. The
Guru went to the Brahmans who had eaten it,
and rebuked them, saying, ‘ You are setting a bad
example to your people. You are not Brahmans
but ghouls. It is to deceive men you wear the tilaks
on your foreheads and pretend you are high priests

1 Bhai Gyan Singh’s Panth Parkash, Chapter 25.
2 These are related in the Markandeya Puran of the Hindus. The
work has recently been translated by Mr. I. E. Pargiter.

62 THE SIKH RELIGION

of religion, but in reality you are merely Chandals,
the lowest class of pariahs.’ The Guru, however,
gave them the prornised reward.

On that occasion the Guru quoted the following
words of Kabir :—

Kabir, where there is divine knowledge there is virtue :
and where there is falsehood there is sin ;

Where there is covetousness there is death ; where there
is forgiveness there is God Himself.

The Guru also quoted the following slok of Guru
Amar Das :—

As far as possible rely not on the covetous :
At the last moment they will plant thee where nobody
will lend thee a hand. |

The Brahmans who abstained from meat pressed
the pandit’s suggestion on the Guru, ‘If thou by
worship and austerities can behold Durga, who is the
living burning light of this age, she will grant thee
any boon thou mayest desire.’ The Guru inquired,
Can you render Durga manifest ? What you propose
is not according to my religion.’ The Brahmans
replied that there was a Brahman called Kesho at
Banaras who had power to render the goddess
manifest, but he would demand large remuneration.
The Guru again asked how a man filled with greed,
such as they represented Kesho to be, could possess
such spiritual power as to cause Durga to appear.
The Brahmans, unable to answer this question, took
their departure. ;

The Guru utilized the assemblage at the Hindu
festival of the Holi to organize on the following day
a mimic warfare, which he called mahalla,1 for the
exercise of his troops. The object of the Guru has
in recent times been obtained by the camps of exercise
yearly established by the Indian Government.?

1 A place for hal/a or contest.
* Sardar Kahn Singh’s Gurumat Prabhakar, D. a4.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 63

Kesho, who was exceedingly avaricious, heard that
the Guru was very open-handed, and accordingly
went to him. He said he was on his way to behold
the goddess of Jawalamukhi, but had halted to see
the Guru whose greatness was universally recog-
nized. He told the Guru that he had power to render
the goddess manifest, but the ceremonies and burnt
offerings which would have to be performed as
a preliminary would be very expensive. Kesho was
supported by the other Brahmans, who again pressed
the Guru to have the necessary ceremonies and
burnt offerings performed. The Guru in order to
demonstrate Kesho’s insincerity outwardly accepted
his offer. The Brahman on ascertaining the Guru's
wealth was highly pleased and promised all assistance.
He made out a list of materials for a hom or burnt
offering, which would cost a large sum of money.
The Guru provided what was required, and asked
where the hom was to be performed. The Brah-
man replied that it must be performed in a lonely
spot. The Guru pointed to the beautiful hill of
Naina Devi as a place where all ceremonies could
be performed privately and without interruption.
The Brahman was much pleased, praised the Guru’s
judgement and liberality, and said that the god-
dess would certainly appear at the place indicated.
The Guru then ordered the ground to be cleared,
after which the Brahman proceeded to perform the
ceremonies necessary for the goddess’s manifesta-
tion.

One day the Guru went out shooting and killed
several forest birds. On his return Kesho told him
the goddess would never appear to any one who took
life. The Guru replied that animals were continually
sacrificed to the Brahman’s goddess at Jawala-
mukhi. He then ordered his servant to let go the
birds. When the strings with which they had been
fastened to the Guru’s saddle were undone, it is
said, the birds flew away. Kesho was astonished and

64 THE SIKH RELIGION

expressed himself happy at having been brought in
contact with such a holy man as the Guru.

The Guru had many strange presents made him.
One day a gardener presented himself. He had
come all the way from Patna with a young mango-
tree as an offering. The gardener narrated how he
had planted a garden, and vowed in the hope of
success to give the first tree it produced to the Guru.
He now brought the tree, and asked the Guru where
he would have it planted. The Guru said he would
shoot an arrow, and where it fell the tree might be
planted. The Guru’s arrow fell far distant, and
there the young tree was duly planted.

Aiter nine months’ worship and invocation of the
goddess the pandit told the Guru that she would soon
appear. There would be many indications of such
a result. A disastrous earthquake would occur,
there would be unusual lightnings, and several other
formidable portents would appear in the heavens.
The Guru pressed the Brahman to fix a date for the
goddess’s appearance. The Brahman fixed the first
day of the Nauratar—a festival in honour of Durga
held in the month of Assu and Chet—for the pheno-
menon. The first day of Chet passed, and she did
not appear. The Brahman then said she would
appear on the fifth of the Nauratar. The fifth day
passed, and she did not appear. The Brahman then
said that some holy person must be offered as
a sacrifice to her, and she would afterwards un-
doubtedly disclose herself. The Guru replied, ‘ Who
so worthy to be offered as a sacrifice as thou ? Thou
sayest there are none so holy as Brahmans.’ The
pandit on hearing this began to suspect that the
Guru meant to sacrifice him to the goddess, and,
if this occurred, what a sad recompense it would be
for all his labours! He then said, ‘If thou give
me permission, I will go and fetch a human sacri-
fice. The Guru replied, ‘ No; the sacrifice is here.’
On this the pandit’s courage oozed forth from the

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 65

partitions of his brain. He immediately left the
Guru’s presence on the pretext of performing an
office of nature, and never paused in his flight until
he had arrived at a safe retreat.

After Kesho had thus absconded, the Guru ordered
that the materials which had been collected for the
ceremony should be thrown into the hom-pit. Upon
this a great flame shot up towards the heavens. When
this was seen from afar, all the spectators felt certain
that the Guru himself had caused Durga to appear.
The Guru drew his sword and set out for Anandpur.
When the people asked if the goddess had appeared
to him, he raised his sword aloft, inasmuch as to
say that by God’s assistance his sword would per-
form the deeds which the Brahmans attributed to
Durga. The people then erroneously believed that
the goddess had given him the sword.?

The Baisakhi festival was now approaching. The
Guru gave a great feast to which he invited all
who were assembled in Anandpur, but omitted the
Brahman Kesho. He, however, sent for him when
all the guests had partaken of the feast. Kesho
angrily refused the invitation, and said he would
not eat the leavings of a low-caste rabble. Diwan
Nand Chand, on behalf of the Guru, recalled
to Kesho’s memory the fact that he had like a
coward deserted him. ‘Fine service thou didst
perform for him, and thine anger and disappoint-
ment are the result!’ Kesho on further reflection went
to the Guru, but at the same time refused to eat the
remains of the feast. The Guru composed the fol-
lowing on this occasion :—

Whatever God wrote in thy destiny thou hast obtained ;
O Brahman, banish thy regret :

It is not my fault that it escaped my memory; think not
of anger.

I shall send thee clothes and bedding to-day; be thoroughly
assured of this.

1 Gyan Singh’s Panth Parkash, Chapter 25.

SIKH. V r

66 THE SIKH RELIGION

Kesho replicd—All Khatris are made by the Brahmans.
The Guru—Look on my Sikhs here with a glance of
favour.!

Here the Guru began to laud his Sikhs and acknow-
ledge the powerful assistance he had received from
them :—

My victories in battle have been through their favour ;
through their favour I have already made gifts ;

Through their favour all my troubles have been removed ;
through their favour again my house is replenished ;

Through their favour I have acquired knowledge; through
their kindness all my enemies have been killed ;

Through their favour I am exalted; otherwise there are
millions of ordinary men like myself.?

To serve them pleaseth my heart; no other service is
dear to my soul. ;

To bestow gifts on them is well; to make gifts to others
is not profitable for my Sikhs.

To bestow upon them will bear fruit in the next world
and will bring honour even in this: to bestow on others is
altogether useless.

_ All the wealth of my house with my soul and body is for
them.

The Brahman became angry and his heart began to fry
and burn like dry grass.

He wept at the custom which had been established for
the future.

Some writers are of opinion that the Guru, during
the time the chroniclers state he was occupied in wor-
shipping Durga, was in reality translating Sanskrit
works in the seclusion and tranquillity of the moun-
tain glades. These events occurred in Sambat 1755,

1 This was said ironically. The Guru did not require Kesho’s
assistance for his Sikhs.

2 That is, if the Sikhs had not assisted me I should be now in the
same plight as millions of others.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 67

A. D. 1698,' and it was on the fourteenth day of June
of that year the Guru according to his own state-
ment completed his translation of the Ram Avatar
from Sanskrit into Hindi. He adds that it was
completed at the base of the lofty Naina Devi on
the margin of the Satluj waters.

CHAPTER IX

We have now arrived at a very critical stage of
our biography of the Guru, and it is necessary to
set forth with clearness and certainty what the
Guru really thought of idolatry or the worship of
inanimate objects.

On this subject the best evidence obtainable is the
Guru’s own acknowledged compositions. In the
Akal Ustat he writes as follows :—

Some worshipping stones put them on their heads, some
suspend lingams from their necks;

Some see God in the south, some bow their heads to the
west ;2

Some fools worship idols, others busy themselves with
worshipping the dead.

The whole world entangled in false ceremonies hath not
found God’s secret.

Again in the same composition the Guru addressing
an idolater wrote as follows :—

O great beast, thou recognizest not Him whose glory
filleth the three worlds.

Instead of the Supreme God thou worshippest things the
touch of which shall cause thee to lose heaven.

By way of doing good acts thou committest sin at which
even the greatest sins are abashed—

1 Siraj Parkash, Rut UI, Chapter 29.

2 Dakhan desh Hart ka wasa, pachh'tm Allah mukama, Kabir. The
God of the Hindus dwells in the south (in Dwaraka), of the Muham-
madans jn the west (Makka).

F 2

68 THE SIKH RELIGION

Fall at the feet of the Supreme Being, O fool; He is not
in a Stone.

In the Vichitar Natak are found the following
among other similar verses :—

I am not a worshipper of stones,
Nor am I satisfied with any religious garb.

In the thirty-three Sawalyas the Guru expresses
himself as follows :— -

Some fasten an idol firmly to their breasts, some say that
Shiv is God ;

Some say that God is in the temple of the Hindus ; others
believe that He is in the mosque of the Musalmans ;

Some say that Ram is God ; some say Krishan ; some in
their hearts accept the incarnations as God ;

But I have forgotten all vain religion and know in my
heart that the Creator is the only God.

Why worship a stone? God is not in a stone.

Worship Him as God by the worship of whom all thy sins
shall be erased,

And by taking whose name thou shalt be freed from all
thy mental and bodily entanglements.

Make the meditation of God ever thy rule of action ; no
advantage can be obtained by the practice of false religion.

Again the Guru writes as follows in his celebrated
letter to the Emperor Aurangzeb :—

I am the destroyer of the turbulent hillmen,
Since they are idolaters and I am a breaker of idols.

In further evidence of the Guru’s sentiments on
the subject of idolatry, we have a composition,
either written or sanctioned by himself, which is
found in his collected works, on which to base our
conclusion.

There was a king called Sumat Sain married to a lady
called Samarmati. They had four sons and an only

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 69

daughter called Rankhambh Kala. The children were put
under the tuition of a Brahman. One day the princess
went earlier than usual to the Brahman’s house and found
him worshipping and prostrating himself before a salagram
andalingam.! She smiled on seeing her tutor thus engaged,
and asked him the reason of his extraordinary conduct.

The Brahman

This salagram, O lady, is a god whom great kings adore.
What dost thou who art ignorant know about it? Thou
deemest this salagram which is god to be a stone.

The Princess

O great fool, thou recognizest not Him whose glory filleth
the three worlds. Thou worshippest this stone at whose
touch man’s future bliss is forfeited. Thou committest sin
to attain thine own object—such sin as other sins would be
aghast at. O beast, fall at the feet of the great God; He
is not a stone. He liveth in the water, in the dry land, in
all things, and in all monarchs. He is in the sun, in the
moon, in the sky. Wherever thou lookest, thou mayest
fix thy gaze on Him. He is in fire, in wind, and be-
neath the earth. In what place is He not? He is con-
tained in everything. Were all the continents to become
paper and the seven seas ink; were all the vegetables to be
cut down and employed as pens; were Saraswati, the goddess
of eloquence, to dictate and all beings to write for sixty
ages, they could not in any way describe God. Yet, O fool,
thou supposest Him to be astone. O man, thou findest not
God’s secret. Thou deceivest the world in every way, and
fillest thy coffers with wealth as the reward of thy decep-
tion. Thou art thyself called by the world a clever and
wise pandit, but thou worshippest a stone and therefore
thou appearest to me to have abdicated thy reason. While

1 The lingam sacred to Shiv is the symbol of procreation. It was
worshipped in ancient times in Rome as it is now in India. The
author saw a lingam in the temple of Venus in Pompeii, and was
informed by his Italian guide that it was a stone on which barren
women used to sit in the hope of offspring.

70 THE SIKH RELIGION

uttering ‘Shiv, Shiv’ with thy mouth, thy heart is filled
with greed. Thou practisest excessive hypocrisy before the
world, and art not ashamed to beg from door to door.
Thou remainest for nearly two hours holding thy nose as
if thou wert practising Jog. Thou standest on one leg
invoking Shiv. If any one pass by and give thee one paisa,
thou pickest it up with thy teeth, and forgettest thy gods.
Thou givest instruction to others, but meditatest not on God
thyself. Thou ever preachest to people to despise money.
Yet for that very money thou beggest at the doors of high
and low, and art not ashamed to debase thyself before even
the meanest of thy fellow creatures. Thou sayest that
thou art holy, but thou art very unholy. Thou callest
thyself contented, but thou art very discontented, and only
leavest one door to go and beg at another. Thou makest
a clay idol of Shiv, and having worshipped it throwest it
into the river. When thou returnest home thou settest up
another in its place. Thou fallest at its feet, and rubbest
thy forehead on the ground for an hour. Think what it
hath to give thee. Thou worshippest the symbol of pro-
creation, and fallest before it believing it to be Shiv. Thou
callest a stone God, but it will not avail thee. Since the
stone belongeth to the lowest order of creation, say what
shall it give thee even if propitiated and pleased with thee ?
Even if it at any time make thee like itself, thou shalt be
no better than a stone. Great simpleton, be assured that,
when thy life hath departed, it will be too late for thee to
know anything of God. Thou hast passed thy childhood
without prayer, but even in thy manhood thou hast not
repeated God’s name. Thou hast induced others to give
charity, but never lifted thy hand to assist another. . Thou
hast bent thy head to stones, but never to God. O fool,
entangled in thy domestic affairs, thy life thou hast passed
in procrastination. Having read one or two Purans, O
Brahman, thou art swollen with conceit. Thou hast not
read the Puran through which all the sins of this life may
be erased. It is for the sake of show thou practisest
penance. Day and night thy mind is absorbed in lucre.
Fools accept thy statements, but not I. Why practisest

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 71

thou so much hypocrisy ? For what object adorest thou
a stone? Thou hast forfeited thy happiness here and
hereafter. Thou givest false instruction and gladly accept-
est all payment which thou claimest. It is enough that
thou hast given evil instruction to my brothers ; instruct
not me.

The Brahman

Hear me, O princess, thou hast not considered Shiv’s
greatness. Ever worship the gods Brahma, Vishnu, and
Shiv. Thou knowest not their greatness, and that is why
thou talkest in that way. Know that they are the oldest
of all the gods, and do thou recognize them as the lords of
the world. I am, O princess, a fasting Brahman, and love
all both high and low. I communicate instruction to all and
induce even great misers to practise charity.

The Princess

Thou communicatest spells in order to make disciples.
Thou then takest money as offerings from them in whatever
way thou canst, but thou teachest them not the truth, and
marrest their happiness in this world and the next. Hear,
O Brahman, thou plunderest in whatever way thou canst
those to whom thou givest thine initiatory spell. The
fools receive no divine knowledge from thee, but are fleeced
for their pains. Thou tellest them that thy spell shall be
advantageous to them, and that Shiv will grant them a
boon. When the spells turn out unsuccessful, thou pre-
tendest that they have omitted some necessary ceremony,
and that is why they have not been successful. Thou next
tellest them to give alms to Brahmans and perform the
spell by which they might behold the god. Thou takest
a fine from them when they ought to take it from thee for
misleading them, and in return for their money thou givest
them the same spell over again. Thou leadest them astray
all along the line, and at last thou tellest them that they
have omitted certain words, or that something interrupted
the ceremonies to account for the non-appearance of the
god and his failure to grant the desired blessing. On

72 THE SIKH RELIGION

this thou counsellest them to again give thee alms. O
Brahman, that is the sort of spell thou teachest those whose
houses thou designest to plunder. And when thy victims
become poor, thou goest to spy out others. Were thine
incantations and spells efficacious, thou wouldst sit as a
monarch at home and not go about begging.

The Brahman filled with anger and heaping curses on
the princess, said, ‘How canst thou know mine affairs ?
Thou talkest as if thou hadst taken bhang.’

The Princess

Hear, O Brahman, it is thou who knowest not what thou
sayest. Thou addressest me in an insolent manner. My
senses are not stolen away by bhang. Whither have thine
own senses gone without it? Thou callest thyself wise in that
thou never takest bhang even by mistake, but when thou
goest a-begging, thou insultest, as if under the influence of
bhang, him whose house thou visitest. Why beg from
door to door for the money thou pretendest to despise ?
Thou goest to rajas and takest morsels from them. Thou
sayest thou hast abandoned all worldly things and preachest
to everybody to do the same. Why stretchest thou forth
thy hand to grasp what thou pretendest to renounce? To
one man thou preachest to renounce wealth, to another thou
sayest that he is under the influence of malignant stars, and
therefore he ought to pay thee for deliverance therefrom.
It is in the hope of cheating people thou wanderest from
door to door. Thou recitest the Veds, the Shastars, and
the Simritis, so that a double paisa may fall to thee from
some one. Thou praisest him who givest thee anything
and revilest him who refuseth. In this way thou hopest to
obtain alms from all people. But thou reflectest not that
praise and blame are every one’s lot while alive, but affect
not the dead. Thou canst not confer salvation on those
who give thee alms, nor canst thou kill the son or father
of him who giveth thee none. I only accept him as a
Brahman who deemeth the givers and the refusers, praise
and blame as the same. O Brahman, the man from whom

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 73

thou extortest money, or whom thou pleasest with thy
varied flatteries, shall at last go to hell in thy company.

Brahmans, though they say they have abandoned the
world, are lovers of wealth, and in quest of it go to die
either in Banaras or Kumaun. Some through greed for
money twist their matted hair round their heads. Others
put on a wooden necklace and go forth shamelessly to the
forest. Others again, taking tweezers, pluck out all the
hair of their heads. The Brahmans practise hypocrisy in
order to plunder the world, and they thus lose their happi-
ness both here and hereafter. They make a clay lingam
and worship it, but it hath no power for good or evil. Why
do men who know that the lingam hath no light in it, light
a lamp before it? And why do very foolish and obstinate
persons thinking it God fall down before it? Thoughtless
one, think of God and quickly cast away thy mind’s
indecision. They who have studied for a long time in
Banaras go at last to die in Bhutan. Having acquired
a little learning thou leavest thy home and wanderest
from country to country. Thy father and mother thou
hast left somewhere ; thy wife, thy son, and thy son’s wife
cannot find thee. No one hath passed beyond the goal of
covetousness ; it hath beguiled all people.

Thou shavest the heads of some, on others thou imposest
fines, and on others again thou puttest wooden necklaces.
To one thou teachest spoken, to another written, and to
a third other forms of incantations, yet thou conferrest no
abiding spiritual knowledge. Some thou showest how to
argue on learned subjects, but to all thou settest an example
of covetousness in thine efforts to obtain wealth to the best
of thine ability. Thou showest no mercy and never pro-
pitiatest God, O fool, but worshippest clay. It is on this
account thou art doomed to wander begging. Think,
thoughtless one, on Him who made men conscious; why
deemest thou Him unconscious ? Why call a stone God ?
Why sellest thou thy precious soul under its value? Thou
knowest nothing, great simpleton, and yet thou callest
thyself a superior pandit. Diest thou not of shame, O great
boaster ? In thy pride thou forfeitest thine honour. Thou

74 THE SIKH RELIGION

callest thyself a prophet and pretendest to know the future,
but yet thou knowest not even the past. Thou thinkest
thyself very handsome and able, and claimest to be con-
tinent and physically strong. Thou sayest that Shiv is
certainly in the stone, but, O great fool, thou knowest
nothing. O clever man, consider in what part of the stone
Parbati’s lord is. Say what spiritual perfection thou attain-
est by bowing thy head to clay? He whom the world
cannot please will not be pleased by thy offerings of rice.
Thou burnest incense, blowest shells, and rainest a shower
of flowers. Thou growest weary in thine endeavours, but
findest not God in a stone. To those who accept not thine
incantations and spells thou recitest songs and verses. In
broad daylight thou stealest wealth from men’s houses.
Thieves, pickpockets, and robbers seeing thy cleverness are
ashamed of their ignorance. Thou payest no heed to the
magistrate or the judge. Thou livest by cheating thy
disciples.

Rich people are like flowers, clever men like thee are the
bumble-bees which, unmindful of their homes, continue to
buzz over them. Every one is at last in Death’s power,
and yet men have departed without resigning the craving
for wealth. There are no bounds to this desire. It is the
only thing in this world that surviveth.

You shave the heads of some, you send others to places
of pilgrimages, and at the same time ask for all they possess.
Those thou seest wealthy thou entanglest in the narrow
door! and leviest a tax at so much per head on them.
Thou then lettest them pass. It is thirst for money not
love of God that actuateth Brahmans.

1 In Gaya, Kamaksha, and other places of Hindu pilgrimage there
is an aperture in a wall through which pilgrims are bidden to pass
with the object of securing deliverance. When the pilgrim is a rich
man, he is by some secret mechanism caught in the aperture and
told that he cannot pass on account of his many sins and enormities.
He is then obliged to vow to perform certain penances and make
certain presents to the Brahmans. He is only allowed to pass through
the aperture when the promised money has been paid down.— 7hag
Lila, p. 34.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 75

The Brahman

Hear, O my daughter, thou understandest not. Thou
thinkest that he whom we call Shiv is a stone. All people
bow their heads to Brahmans, and apply to their foreheads
the water in which they have washed their feet. The whole
world worshippeth them, while thou, O foolish girl, slan-
derest them. This salagram is the primal and ancient
Brahm and is prized even by monarchs.

The Princess

Hear, O foolish Brahman, thou knowest nothing. Thou
recognizest a stone as the Primal Light of the world.
Thou thinkest it holdeth the Supreme Being. Thou hast
taken leave of thy senses. Deceive me not, but take what
thou desirest to take. Tell me not that a stone is God.
While telling fools so, thou plunderest them to thy heart’s
content. Thou sendest men to rivers of pilgrimage to
drown them in superstition. Thou makest unnumbered
efforts to strip them of their wealth and not allow them to
take a paisa home. Thou pretendest to find a number
of inauspicious circumstances connected with a rich man,
so that he may give thee feasts to bribe thee to intercede
for him. When thou knowest that a man hath spent all his
wealth, thou never lookest at him. Brahmans hover over
money like ravens, and quarrel like kites over a fish or
dogs over a bone. In public thou expoundest the Veds,
but in thy heart is worship of money. Thou findest not
God, thy money soon departeth, and vain is all thy service.
Thou paradest thy learning, but knowest not how to unite
men with God. Thou callest thyself wise and me a fool.
What if thou, O idiot, eat not bhang, even still thou art
not in thy senses. Everybody can see this for himself.
Brave men taking bhang fight and draw elephant’s teeth,
and grasping the scimitar and lance fearlessly smite their
enemies. Say, O tyrant; what couldst thou do even wert
thou to take bhang ? Thou wouldst even then, if engaged
in combat, fall on thy face like a corpse through fright.

76 THE SIKH RELIGION

Hear, O Brahman, give instruction to fools, save me from
thy lies, and preach thy falsehood to others. Why passest
thou leather for metallic coin? Thou shalt go to terrible
hell, and be born again as a pariah. Hung up by the heels
thou shalt be tortured in the house of Death. When thou
and all thy relations are suffering, what answer wilt thou
make? Say what books wilt thou then read, and wilt
thou then worship the lingam? Wilt thou find Shiv and
Krishan there where God will send thee bound? Where
thou hast no son, mother, father, or brother, will Ram
come to thine assistance ? Ever bow thy head to the great
God whom the fourteen worlds fear, whom all recognize as
the Creator and Destroyer, who hath no form or outline,
whose dwelling, appearance, and name are unknown. By
what name shall I speak of Him since He cannot be spoken
of? He hath no father, mother, or brother, no son or
grandson. Unlike Ram Chandar or Krishan He hath no
male or female nurse. He needeth no army to give Him
dignity. What He saith is true, and what He desireth He
doeth. Some He regenerateth, and others He consigneth
to perdition. He buildeth, fashioneth, createth, and again
destroyeth. It is the great God I recognize as my Guru.
I am His disciple and He is my priest. I am a girl made
by Him. O Brahman, I worship the great God. A stone
isnottomy mind. Icallastoneastone. On this account
people are displeased with me. I call what is false false—
a matter which is disagreeable to all. I tell the truth, and
pay no regard to any one. As for thee, O Brahman, art
thou not ashamed of thy conduct ? Fix thy thoughts even
for a brief period on God.

The Brahman

God will consider him a sinner who saith that this stone
is other than God, and will cast into hell any one who
useth profane language regarding it. It is the primal and
ancient God.

The Princess

I only worship the one great God. I regard not Shiv.

Nor do I worship either Brahma or Vishnu. I fear not

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH a7

your gods. Know that whoever invoketh them is already
dead, but death will not approach him who meditateth on
the Deathless One. He who meditateth on the Deathless
One and even once invoketh His name, shall obtain wealth
and perfection in every act. He who meditateth on the
immortal God shall never suffer, but enjoy great happiness
in the world. When death tortureth thee, O Brahman,
what book wilt thouthen read? Willit be the Bhagavat }
or the Gita? Wilt thou hold on to Ram or clutch at
Krishan for protection? The gods whom thou deemest
supreme have all been destroyed by Death’s mace. None—
not even Brahma, Vishnu, or Indar—may escape it. The
gods were born as the demons were, and both are subject
to transmigration. The Hindus and the Turks are the
same, and death is potent over them all. Sometimes the
demons killed the gods, and sometimes the gods the demons.
The Being who destroyed both gods and demons is He who
cherisheth me, and whom I have taken as my Guru. I bow
to Him whose sovereignty is recognized in the fourteen
worlds, who destroyed Indar, Vishnu, the sun, the moon,?
Kuver, Varun, and Sheshnag.

The Brahman
Shiv removeth all the sins of him who worshippeth this
stone. He who forsaketh this god and worshippeth another
shall fall into hell. He who giveth money to a Brahman
shall obtain tenfold in the next world. He who giveth to
other than a Brahman shall derive no advantage therefrom.

The Poet
Upon this the princess took the lingam in her hand,
struck the Brahman with it, and smashed all his teeth.
She then took away all the Brahman’s property.

The Princess
Say now, O Brahman, whither hath gone thy Shiv? He
whom thou hast ever served hath broken thy teeth. The
1 One of the eighteen Purans.

2 The Sikhs believe in the different creations and destructions of the
world.

78 THE SIKH RELIGION

idol which thou hast spent thy life in invoking, hath at last
entered thy mouth.

The Poet

All the property the Princess took from the Brahman she
distributed among other Brahmans and then said to her
antagonist, “ Never mind, thou shalt receive tenfold in the
next world.’ ?

The Princess

Thou sayest to others, ‘Bestow your wealth or spend
it ’—thou who art so miserly that thou puttest not turmeric
into the dal thou eatest. Thou art very deceitful and goest
about for the purpose of deceit. Thou publicly plunderest
people in the market-place. Thou spendest not a kauri
and art ever begging. Calling girls thy daughters thou
deflourest them. Thy mother was greed, thy father
avarice, and thou art the incarnation of meanness. While
practising greed thou boastest of thy prodigality, so that
people may think thee a monarch. Thou art utterly worth-
less. If any one knew the incantations thou pretendest to
know he would not have to beg from door to door. By
Yepeating even once such an incantation as thou boastest of,
thou mightest fill thy house with wealth. Ram and Krishan
of whom thou speakest, and those whom thou worshippest
as Shiv and Brahma, were all destroyed by Death. In due
time God will again give them birth, How many Ram
Chandars and Krishans! How many Brahmas, Shivs, and
Vishnus ! The sun and moon—what are these poor wretches ?
Simply water-carriers at God’sdoor. They were created in
due time and Death shall destroy them all. The Vishnu who
was cursed by Jalandhar’s wife 2 and became a stone, thou
callest a great god. Art thou not ashamed of thyself ?

1 The princess is here casting up the Brahman’s words to him.

* The legend is as follows:—Jalandhar was destroying the gods
and none could withstand him as he had a virtuous wife. It was
proposed to Vishnu to tempt her, and he accordingly simulated
Jalandhar and approached her. Recognizing Vishnu by a particular
mark on his side, the result of a kick given him by Bhrigu, a Rikhi,
she cursed him, and he became the salagram stone. Vishnu in turn.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 79

The Brahman
I will go to the Raja thy father and have thee imprisoned.

The Princess

I will tell him a different story, and have both thy hands
cut off. Then shall I be really the king’s daughter.

The Brahman

I will promise to do what thou tellest me provided thou
dismiss thy wrath.

The Princess
Worship not stones, fall at the feet of the great God.

The Poet

Then the Brahman fell at the feet of the great God, and
threw his idols into the river.

Bhai Nand Lal,! who was a famous Sikh of Guru
Gobind Rai, and wrote several works in the Persian
language on the Sikh religion, thus delivered him-
self in his Jot Bikas: ‘Thousands of Brahmas
praise Guru Nanak, for his glory exceedeth that of
them all. Thousands of Shivs and Indars place
themselves at his feet, for his throne is more exalted
than theirs. Thousands of Vishnus, many Rams
and Krishans, thousands of Durgas and Gorakhs
sacrifice themselves at his feet.’ Bhai Nand Lal
further on writes that as Guru Nanak, so were all the
Gurus his successors, including Guru Gobind Rai.
It is therefore inferred that, so far from Guru Gobind
Rai worshipping or doing homage to the goddess
Durga, she was an insignificant entity who did
homage to him.
cursed her, and she became the tulsi plant, and grew where the

salagram fell.
1 An account of Bhai Nand Lal will subsequently be given.

80 THE SIKH RELIGION

CHAPTER X

What is called the Granth of the tenth Guru is
only partially his composition. The greater portion
of it was written by bards in hisemploy. The two
works entitled Chandi Charitar and the Bhagauti ki
War found in it are abridged translations by dif-
ferent hands! of the Durga Sapt Shati, or seven
hundred sloks on the subject of Durga, an episode in
the “Markandeya Puran’ on the contests of the
goddess Durga with the demons who had made war
on the gods.

CHANDI CHARITAR [| ?

The poet in the Guru’s employ, who translated
this, states that he did it for amusement, but adds:
‘ The man who heareth or readeth this for any object
shall assuredly obtain it.’ This line is an abstract
of the eleventh and twelfth sloks of the ninety-second
canto of the original. The translator then darkly
refers to a special object of his own. ‘I have trans-
lated the book called the Durga Sapt Shati, the equal
of which there is none. O Chandi, grant the object
with which the poet has translated.’ The translator’s
object, however, is not stated. Whether he imbibed
some of the principles of Sikhism or not from the
Guru cannot be ascertained, but it is clear that he
was largely tinctured with Hinduism.

CHANDI CHARITAR II
At the end of this translation is found the couplet :—

The saints who continually meditate on thee, O Chandi,
Shall at last obtain salvation and find God as their reward.

1 Any one even moderately acquainted with Hindi can tell from
the internal evidence of style that these translations have been done
by different persons.

2 European readers not familiar with Indian words, and not in-
terested in the Hindi translations of the Durga Sapt Shati (Devi
Mahatamya) or their object, may omit the remainder of this chapter.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 81

This is not in the original Sanskrit, but the general
sense may be inferred by a believer in Chandi from
her own self-glorification in the ninety-second canto.

The first Chandi Charitar begins as follows: Ek
oamkar, Sri Wahguru 71 ki fatah. Ath Chandi Charitar
ukt bilas—Now the tale (bilas) of the deeds of Chandi
will be told (ukt). The second Chandi Charitar
begins in the same way but without the words ukt
bilas. The Bhagauti ki War begins as follows:
Ek oamkar Sn Wahguru 71 ki fatah ! Sr Bhagauts 71
sahai! War Sn Bhagauts 71 kt Patshaht das—There
is one God. Victory to the holy Wahguru! We
implore the favour of the holy Bhagauti (Sword)! The
paean of the holy Bhagauti of the tenth Guru.
It thus appears that the Bhagauti ki War was written
by the tenth Guru himself.

The Hindus maintain that in the tenth Guru’s
writings the word Bhagauti means Durga. In the
two Chandi Charitars the word Bhagauti does not
occur at all, and even in the Bhagauti ki War it is
only found three times—once in the title of the
composition, a second time in the first line, and
a third time elsewhere. In the latter instance, Laz
Bhagautt Durg shah, it is clear that the word
Bhagauti means a sword—‘ The goddess Durga took
up the sword.’ This is also attested by Gur Das.
In the sixth pauri of his twenty-fifth War he refers
to the manner in which the signification of words is
often altered, and writes—Nam bhagauti loh gharaya
—Man hath fashioned what is called the sword
(bhagautt) from iron. .

In further proof that Bhagauti does not mean
Durga in the Sikh scriptures the following line
in the Ad Granth is cited—Bhagautt mudra man
mohya maya, the translation of which is—Men
wear God’s marks while their minds are fascinated
with mammon.

The following are the first two pauris of the “ War
Sri Bhagauti j1 ki.’

SIKH. VY G

82 THE SIKH RELIGION

Having first remembered the Sword, meditate on Guru
Nanak,

Then on Guru Angad, Amar Das, and Ram Das; may
they assist me !

Remember Arjan, Har Gobind, and the holy Hari Rai ;

Meditate on the holy Hari Krishan, a sight of whom dis-
pelled all sorrows.

Remember Teg Bahadur and the nine treasures shall come
hastening to your homes.

Ye holy Gurus, everywhere assist us !

God having first fashioned the Sword created the whole
world.

He created Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv, and made them
the sport of His omnipotence ;

He made the seas and mountains of the earth, and sup-
ported the firmament without pillars ;

He made the demons and the demigods, and excited
dissension among them.

Having created Durga, O God, Thou didst destroy the
demons.!

From Thee alone Ram received his power, and slew
Rawan with his arrows.

From Thee alone Krishan received his power, seized =
by the hair, and dashed him on the ground.

Very os munis and gods mortified their bodies for many
ages,

But none of them found Thy limit.

The last line of the Bhagauti ki War is :—

He who sang this was not born again, that is, he obtained
deliverance.

This line gives the meaning of the twenty-second
slok of the ninety-second canto of the ‘ Markandeya
Puran ’.

The train of thought by which the Guru made

1 This line shows that the Guru believed Durga to be a creation

of God and not an independent divinity co-equal or co-powerful
with Him and worthy of human worship.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 83

God and the sword one was as follows: In the
‘Shastar Nam Mala’ is read :—

I first mention the word shatru (an enemy) and then the
word daman (subduer).

Know that the words compounded mean the Lord of the
world : be assured of this.

The meaning is—God subdues enemies, so does
the sword ; therefore the sword is God, and God is
the sword.

At that time it was the custom to recite on the
eve of battle the praises and warlike deeds of the
brave, so that the hearts even of cowards might be
inspired with eagerness for the fray. On that
account the tenth Guru maintained fifty-two bards
to translate the Mahabharat, the Ramayan, and
the gallant achievements of Ram, Krishan, Chandi,
and others. It does not follow from this that the
Guru worshipped those whose acts were thus cele-
brated; this was only done for the purpose of
inciting to bravery, dispelling cowardice, and filling
the hearts of his troops with valour to defend their
faith. This the Guru himself declares in his transla-
tion of the tenth canto of the Bhagawat, in which
are recounted the chivalrous exploits of Krishan.
He says, ‘I have rendered in the vulgar dialect the
tenth chapter of the Bhagawat with no other object
than to inspire ardour for religious warfare.’

Secondly, the Guru himself specially translated
the praises of Chandi so that they might be chanted
for warlike purposes, and that even cowards on
hearing her story might obtain courage and the
hearts of the brave beat with fourfold enthusiasm.
Such being the achievements of a woman, what
ought not a brave man to accomplish ? The Guru
maintained that if a man became a coward and
turned away from the battle-field, he would not only
become ashamed of himself, but also forfeit his
advantages here and hereafter.

G2

84 THE SIKH RELIGION

In the third place, the Guru desired that his Sikhs,
on becoming acquainted with the Hindu sacred
writings, might be able to form their own estimate
of them and their inferiority to the compositions of
the Gurus. Among the fifty-two bards employed by
the Guru there must have been several who had
suffered for their religion under the persecutions of
Aurangzeb; and for their opinions the Guru cannot
be held responsible.*

CHAPTER XI

The Guru directed all the masands to appear with
their Sikh constituents before him at Anandpur at
the Baisakhi festival, held about the middle of
the month of April. They collected large sums of
money as a preparation for their journey. Half they
kept for their own use, and half they placed before
the Guru. The Guru then addressed them, ‘O
brother masands, you have been the servants of the
Guru’s house since the time of Guru Ram Das.
You used formerly to collect large sums of money.
Why have you brought so little this year for the
support of the faith ?’ The masands replied, “ O true
Guru, the rich Sikhs are all dead, and we must take
what we can obtain from the survivors.’ The Guru
rejoined, ‘Say not that my Sikhs are poor. I am
going to make them all kings. If you desire your
welfare, disgorge the offerings you have received
from them.’ The masands became angry, and began
to say among themselves, ‘ The Guru is of our own
making. Did we not contribute the money necessary
for his maintenance, no one would call him a Guru.’

The masands left the Guru’s court and went to
complain to.Bhai Chetu, the eldest member of their
body who had survived since the days of Guru Ram
Das. They represented to him that no Guru had
previously found fault with them, but now Guru

1 Bhai Dit Singh’s Durga Prabodh,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 85

Gobind Rai had threatened them with serious conse-
quences. Chetu promised to speak to the Guru on
their behalf, but at the same time reminded them
that he was at the youthful age when men utter
praise and blame without due discrimination.

Chetu kept his promise and spoke to the Guru on
behalf of the masands, ‘ True king, the masands are
all thy servants. I beg thee to treat them with
respect, so that the Sikhs may follow thy example.
The next time they come they will bring a larger
amount of money for the supply of thy public
kitchen.’ The Guru replied, ‘Ask their brother
Sikhs here what language the masands have been
using regarding me. They have stolen the Guru’s
money and deposited it in their own homes. They
are very proud. They admit not the Guru’s power.
They have called my Sikhs poor, whereas I am daily
advancing them and bestowing on them the sove-
reignty of the country. And, finally, the masands
are telling me falsehoods.’ Chetu begged the Guru
to pardon them. The Guru then said that Chetu
had countenanced them in embezzling the offerings,
and that he too deserved punishment like his fellows.
At this Chetu began to storm and pretend innocence.
The Guru was now thoroughly satisfied that the
masands had arrived at a pass where they did-not
believe in any Guru, and that their insolence must
bechecked. He therefore decided that, as the human
Guruship must end with himself, so must his Sikhs
be freed from the tyranny of the masands.

Chetu went to the Guru’s mother, and threatened
that if the Guru disowned the masands, the Sikhs
would go in a body to Dhir Mal, and the Guru
would be left without any means of support.
When the Guru heard this, he said, ‘ Be not anxious,
OQ mother, my public kitchen belongeth to the im-
mortal God, and He will supply it with provisions.’

It happened that at that time a man arrived at
Anandpur from Chetu’s district. He had given

86 THE SIKH RELIGION

Chetu a set of bracelets made of rhinoceros hide
as a present for the Guru’s mother. When Chetu
was questioned, he said he had duly given her the
bracelets, but it was satisfactorily proved that he
had not, and that he had been prevailed on by his
wife to bestow them on her. Chetu was duly pun-
ished for his dishonesty.

The Guru continued to receive many complaints
against the masands. One of them in particular
billeted himself on a poor Sikh, and claimed sweets
instead of the crushed pulse and unleavened bread
which formed the staple food of his host. The
masand took the bread, threw it into his host’s face,
and dashed the crushed pulse on the ground. He
then began to abuse the Sikh, and would not cease
until the poor man had sold his wife’s petticoat to
provide him with sweets. When the Guru was
informed of this he set about punishing the masand.
He ordered that henceforth the Sikhs should them-
selves present their offerings, and that the employ-
ment of the masands for the purpose should cease.

One day a company of mimes went to perform
before the Guru. He ordered them to imitate the
masands. One of them accordingly dressed as
a masand, two as a masand’s servants, and a fourth
as a.masand’s courtesan riding behind him on horse-
back as he went to collect offerings for the Guru.
The mimes portrayed to life the villanies and oppres-
sion practised by the masands. The Guru upon this
finally resolved to free his Sikhs from their tyranny.
He ordered that all the masands should be arraigned
for their misdemeanours. He listened in every case
to their defences and explanations, punished those
whom he found guilty, and pardoned those who
succeeded in establishing their innocence. Among
the latter was a masand called Pheru, of whom
mention has been made in the life of Guru Har Rai.
Pheru lived in the country then called Nakka,
between the rivers Raviand Bias. The Guru ordered

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 87

that he should be brought before him. The Guru
remembered an expression used by Guru Har Rai
to Pheru, ‘ My purse is at thy disposal. Spend what
thou pleasest from it.’ Guru Gobind Rai added,
‘The purse is thine, and its disposal is also thine.’
Pheru replied, ‘ Great king, thine 1s the purse and
thine also its disposal: whether I am bad or good
I am thine.’ The Guru knowing him to be without
guile acquitted him, and with his own hands invested
him with a robe of honour. Some other masands
too were acquitted as the result of Pheru’s pleadings
on their behalf.

Once a company of Udasis brought the Guru
a copy of the Granth Sahib, written with great
elegance, for his attestation and signature. At that
time no Granth was accepted as correct unless
countersigned by the Guru. But petitioners had
first to approach his minister, Diwan Nand Chand,
and submit the work to him for approval. The
latter observing the beautiful penmanship of the
volume formed the dishonest intention of appro-
priating it. He told the Udasis to come in a month’s
time, and he would meanwhile find some means
of obtaining the Guru’s signature. When they
returned after the expiration of that period, he told
them he had not yet had an opportunity of speaking
to the Guru on the subject, and suggested their
waiting for another ten days. By similar subter-
fuges he kept the Udasis going backwards and for-
wards in suspense for six months. At the end of
that time he asked them to take the price of
the Granth Sahib from him, and prepare another
for the Guru’s approval. The Udasis refused,
whereupon he had them forcibly expelled from
Anandpur.

One day, when the Guru went hunting, the Udasis
found an opportunity of complaining to him of
Nand Chand’s conduct. The Guru at once ordered
that. their Granth should be restored to them. Nand

88 THE SIKH RELIGION

Chand sent a message to the Guru that he was ready
to return the book, but at the same time told the
Udasis to leave the place at once if they valued
their safety. If they made any further complaint
to the Guru, they should be imprisoned and put to
death. The Udasis were, however, not so easily
deterred. They bided their. time to approach
the Guru on another occasion. They com-
plained that Nand Chand had disobeyed his
order, forcibly expelled them from the city, and
threatened them with death in the event of their
return and making a further complaint against him.
The Guru sent a severe message to Nand Chand,
‘Evil days have come for thee. As I treated the
masands so shall I treat thee. If thou desire thine
own welfare, restore their Granth Sahib to the
Udasis.”. When the Guru’s message was communi-
cated to Nand Chand, he said, ‘Go away; I will
not return the Granth Sahib. See, my friends, how
the Guru seeketh to frighten me. Were I to shake
the dust off the skirt of my coat, I could make many
Gurus like him.’ The Sikhs replied, ‘ Very well ;
let the Guru come to thee, and thou shalt see. He
will draw no -distinction between thee and thy
brother masands.’ |
Nand Chand, shrinking from the consequences of
his temerity, fled with the Granth Sahib to Kartar-
pur. When the Guru heard that he had fled through
fear of death, he replied, ‘ Death will reach him
there too.’ When Nand Chand reached Kartarpur,
he sent a message to Dhir Mal, ‘ Hundreds of thou-
sands of Sikhs adhere to thy cause; they will all
worship thee, and make thee the Guru of the. world.
It is in my power to-day to raise thee to that emi-
nence. Nand Chand was, however, seriously dis-
trusted at Kartarpur. It wassuspected that he had
come from the Guru to practise some treachery—
either to kill Dhir Mal or take possession of the town.
Dhir Mal consulted his masands as to what was best

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 89

to be done. They advised that Nand Chand should
be put to death according to the following strata-
gem. As he came to pay a visit, a musketeer
should be hidden within the house to fire at him.
This was agreed on. When Nand Chand entered
Dhir Mal’s anteroom, he received a bullet in the
thigh. As he staggered, the doors were closed to
prevent his ‘escape, and he then received several
fatal bullets from the roof which had been opened
for the purpose.

One day the Guru saw two horsemen pass his
place and then make a diversion towards the Satluj.
They were Gurdas and his brother Tara, great-grand-
sons of Bhai Bahilo and masands of Ram Rai, who
had come to seek the Guru’s protection, but whose
courage failed them at the last moment. The Guru
caused them to be brought before him. In reply
to his messenger’s questions they had said that they
were Bairars. When they appeared before the Guru,
he detected their disguise and asked why they had
falsely represented themselves as Bairars. They told
their history. The Guru on his visit on a former
occasion to Dehra, believing them to be trustworthy,
allowed them to remain there with Panjab Kaur,
Ram Rai’s widow, for her protection. The other
masands had poisoned Panjab Kaur’s mind against
them, and they now fled to the Guru for protection.
On arriving at Anandpur they had heard of the
Guru's treatment of other masands, and through
fear turned aside to avoid him. The Guru compli-
mented them as the descendants of Bhai Bahilo on
their finally confessing the truth to him, and men-
tioned the respect in which Bhai Bahilo had been
held by the preceding Gurus. After their repentance
the Guru entertained them for some years, and then
allowed them to depart to their homes.

The Guru always held the belief that it would be
proper and advantageous to his Sikhs to wear long
hair and otherwise not alter man’s God-given body,

go THE SIKH RELIGION

and he often broached the subject to them. On one
occasion they replied that, if they wore long hair,
they would be subjected to the banter and annoyance
of both Hindus and Muhammadans. The Guru then
suggested that they should wear arms, and be at
all times ready to defend themselves. This advice
was adopted.

In ancient times the Guru said it was the universal
custom to wear one’s natural hair, and he instanced
the cases of Ram Chandar, Krishan, Christ, and Mu-
hammad. ‘Why should hair grow if God had meant
it to be cut off? A child’s hair groweth in the
womb.’* The Guru therefore hoped that his followers
would never be guilty of the sin of shaving or cutting
off their hair, and those who obeyed his injunctions
he promised to consider true members of his faith.

It is recorded that at this time the Sikhs lived in
great social love and harmony. They regarded
themselves as brothers. They used to feed one
another, shampoo one another when tired, bathe
one another, wash one another’s clothes, and one
Sikh always met another with a smile on his face
and love in his heart.

A company of Sikhs came to visit the Guru and
made the following representation : ‘ We have found
it very difficult to approach thee on account of the
violence of the Muhammadans. Some of our com-
pany have been killed by them on the way. Others
have been wounded, and have returned to their

1 Several texts from Hindu writings are cited on the importance
and sanctity of hair. Thus in the Institutes of Manu—Even
should a man be in wrath, let him never seize another by the hair.
When a Brahman commits an offence for which the members of other
castes are liable to death, let his hair be shaved off as sufficient punish-
ment.’ In the Aahabharat it is stated that when Arjan was, according
to the laws of warfare, on the point of killing Aswatthama for murdering
the children of the Pandavs, he appeased his wrath by merely cutting
off Aswatthima’s hair. And when Krishan defeated Rukmin, who
had resented the abduction of his sister Rukmini, he merely cut off his
hair—a punishment deemed worse than death itself.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH QI

homes. To whom can we look for assistance but to
thee ?’ The Guru on hearing this remained silent, and
reflected that the tyranny of the Turks had certainly
become intolerable, and that all religion was being
banished from the land.

The Guru invited all his Sikhs to attend the great
Baisakhi fair at Anandpur without shaving or cutting
their hair. On finding them assembled, he ordered
that carpets should be spread on a raised mound
which he indicated, and that an adjacent spot should
be screened off with qanats or tent walls. When
this was done, the Guru ordered a confidential Sikh
to go at midnight, tie five goats in the enclosure,
and let no one know what he had done. The goats
were duly tied, and separate orders were given to
the Guru’s orderlies not to go within the tent walls.

Next morning the Guru rose a watch before day,
performed his devotions, and put on his arms and
uniform. He then proclaimed that there should be
a great open-air gathering. When all were seated
he drew his sword, and asked if there was any one
of his beloved Sikhs ready to lay down his life for
him. No reply was given. All grew pale on hearing
such a proposal. The Guru asked a second time,
but with the same result. A third time he spoke
in a louder voice, ‘ If there be any true Sikh of mine,
let him give me his head as an offering and proof of
his faith.’ Daya Ram, a Sikh of Lahore, rose and
said, ‘ O true king, my head is at thy service.’ The
Guru took his arm, led him within the enclosure,
and gave him a seat. He then cut off a goat’s
head with one stroke of the sword, went forth and
showed the dripping weapon to the multitude. The
Guru again asked, ‘Is there any other true Sikh
who will bestow his head on me?’ The crowd felt
now quite convinced that the Guru was in earnest,
and that he had killed Daya Ram, so no one replied.
At the third time of asking Dharm Das of Dihli
answered, ‘O great king, take myhead.’ The Guru,

92 THE SIKH RELIGION

assuming an angry mien, took Dharm Das within
the enclosure, seated him near Daya Ram, and
killed another goat. The Guru then looking very
fierce came forth and said, ‘ Is there any other Sikh
who will offer me his head ? I am in great need of
Sikhs’ heads.’

On this some remarked that the Guru had lost his
reason, others went to the Guru’s mother to com-
plain, and said that he had undergone a complete
change, and was no longer responsible for his actions.
They instanced his sacrificing two Sikhs with ap-
parently no object. His mother was advised to
depose him and confer the Guruship on his eldest
son. She sent a messenger for him, but he was too
intent on his own purpose at the time to receive
messengers of any description. He called out for
a third Sikh ready to offer him his life, whereupon
Muhakam Chand of Dwaraka offered himself as
a sacrifice. Upon this the Guru handed him into
the enclosure and killed a third goat. He then
came forth showing his dripping sword as before.
When the Guru called out for a fourth Sikh for
sacrifice, the Sikhs began to think that he was going
to kill them all. Some ran away and many hung
down their heads. Sahib Chand, a resident of Bidar,
clasped his hands in an attitude of supplication, and
said he placed his head at the Guru’s disposal. The
Guru took him behind the tent walls and killed
a fourth goat. When he came forth as before,
he asked for a fifth Sikh who was prepared to lay
down his life for him. On this there was a general
flight of the remaining Sikhs, and only those who
were very staunch in their faith ventured to stay.
Himmat of Jaggannath answered the Guru’s last
call, and said he might take his life also. The Guru
then took him inside the enclosure and killed the
remaining goat.

The Guru was now ready to sacrifice his own life
for the five Sikhs who showed such devotion to him.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 93

He clad them in splendid raiment, so that they
shone like the sun, and thus addressed them: ‘ My
brethren, you are in my form and I am in yours.
He who thinketh there is any difference between us
erreth exceedingly.’ Then seating the five Sikhs
near him, he proclaimed to the whole assembly,
‘In the time of Guru Nanak, there was found one
devout Sikh, namely, Guru Angad. In my time
there are found five Sikhs totally devoted to the
Guru. These shall lay anew the foundation of
Sikhism, and the true religion shall become current
and famous through the world.’ The people became
astonished at the Gurwt’s expedient, and fell at the
feet of the five devoted Sikhs, saying, ‘ Hail to the
Sikh religion! You, brethren, have established it
on a permanent basis. Had we offered our heads
like you, we too should be blest.’

The Guru again addressed his Sikhs: ‘ Since the
time of Baba Nanak charanpahul hath been cus-
tomary. Men drank the water in which the Gurus
had washed their feet, a custom which led to great
humility ; but the Khalsa can now only be main-
tained as a nation by bravery and skill in arms.
Therefore I now institute the custom of baptism by
water stirred with a dagger, and change my followers
from Sikhs to Singhs or lions. They who accept the
nectar of the pahul shall be changed before your
very eyes from jackals into lions, and shall obtain
empire in this world and bliss hereafter.’

According to the Persian historian Ghulam Muhai
ul Din, the newswriter of the period sent the Emperor
a copy of the Guru’s address to his Sikhs on that
occasion. It is dated the first of Baisakh, Sambat
1756 (A.D. 1699), and is as follows: ‘ Let all embrace
one creed and obliterate differences of religion. Let
the four Hindu castes who have different rules for
their guidance abandon them all, adopt the one
form of adoration, and become brothers. Let no
one deem himself superior to another. Let none

94 THE SIKH RELIGION

pay heed to the Ganges, and other places of pil-
grimage which are spoken of with reverence in the
Shastars, or adore incarnations such as Ram, Krishan,
Brahma, and Durga, but believe in Guru Nanak and
the other Sikh Gurus. Let men of the four castes
receive my baptism, eat out of one dish, and feel
no disgust or contempt for one another.’

The newswriter, when forwarding this proclamation
to his master, submitted his own report: ‘ When the
Guru had thus addressed the crowd, several Brah-
mans and Khatris stood up, and said that they
accepted the religion of Guru Nanak and of the other
Gurus. Others, on the contrary, said that they
would never accept any religion which was opposed
to the teaching of the Veds and the Shastars, and
that they would not renounce at the bidding of a boy
the ancient faith which had descended to them from
their ancestors. Thus, though several refused to
accept the Guru’s religion, about twenty thousand
men stood up and promised to obey him, as they had
the fullest faith in his divine mission.’

The Guru caused his five faithful Sikhs to stand
up. He put pure water into an iron vessel and
stirred it with a khanda or two-edged sword. He
then repeated over it the sacred verses which he had
appointed for the ceremony, namely, the Japji, the
Japji,t Guru Amar Das’s Anand, and certain Sawai-
yas or quatrains of his own composition.

The Guru in order to show his Sikhs the potency
of the baptismal nectar which he had prepared put
some of it aside for birds to drink. Upon this two
sparrows came and filled their beaks with it. Then
flying away they began to fight, the chronicler
states, like two rajas struggling for supremacy, and
died by mutual slaughter. -The inference was that
all animals which drank the Guru’s baptismal water
should become powerful and warlike.

_ 1 The Japji is Guru Nanak’s, the Japji the tenth Guru’s own
composition. ~

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 95

Bhai Ram Kaur, a descendant of Bhai Budha,
went and told the Guru’s wife, Mata Jito, that he was
inaugurating a new form of baptism. He also gave
her an account of the incident of the sparrows.
Mata Jito, taking some Indian sweetmeats called
patasha, went out of curiosity to the Guru. He
said she had come at an opportune moment, and
asked her to throw the sweets into the holy water.
He had begun, he said, to beget the Khalsa’ as his
sons, and without a woman no son could be produced.
Now that the sweets were poured into the nectar
the Sikhs would be at peace with one another,
otherwise they would beat continual variance.

The five Sikhs, fully dressed and accoutred, stood
up before the Guru. He told them to repeat

gave them five palmfuls of the amrit " to drink. He
sprinkled it five times on their hair, and their eyes,
and caused them all to repeat ‘Wahguru ji ka
Khalsa, Wahguru ji ki Fatah.’ On this he gave
them all the appellation of Singhs or lions. He then
explained to them what they might and what they
might not do. They must always wear the following
articles whose names begin with a K, namely, kes,
long hair; kangha, a comb; knpan, a sword;
kachh, short drawers ; kava, a steel bracelet. They
were enjoined to practise arms, and not show their
backs to the foe in battle. ‘They were ever to help
the poor and protect those who sought their protec-
tion. They must not look with lust on another’s
wife or commit fornication, but adhere to their
wedded spouses. They were to consider their
previous castes erased, and deem themselves all
brothers of one family. Sikhs were freely to inter-
marry among one another, but must have no social

1 This word comes from the Arabic 4Aa/is pure, and was applied
by Guru Gobind Singh to the Sikhs who accepted the baptism of the
sword, which will presently be described.

2 Nectar. The consecrated water used in the baptism of Sikhs is
so called.

96 THE SIKH RELIGION

or matrimonial relations with smokers, with persons
who killed their daughters, with the descendants or
followers of Prithi Chand, Dhir Mal, Ram Rai, or
masands, who had fallen away from the tenets and
principles of Guru Nanak. They must not worship
idols, cemeteries, or cremation-grounds. They must
only believe in the immortal God. They must rise
at dawn, bathe, read the prescribed hymns of the
Gurus, meditate on the Creator, abstain from the
flesh of an animal whose throat had been jagged
with a knife in the Muhammadan fashion, and be
loyal to their masters.’
When the Guru had thus administered baptism to
| his five tried Sikhs, he stood up before them with
clasped hands, and begged them to administer bap-
tism to himself in precisely the same way as he had
administered it to them. They were astonished at
such a proposal, and represented their own un-
worthiness and the greatness of the Guru, whom
they deemed God’s vicar upon earth. They asked
why he made such a request, and why he stood
in a suppliant posture before them. He replied,
‘TIT am the son of the immortal God. It is by His
order I have been born and have established this
form of baptism. They who accept it shall hence-
forth be known as the Khalsa. The Khalsa is the
Guru and the Guru is the Khalsa. There is no
difference between you and me. As Guru Nanak
seated Guru Angad on the throne, so have I made
you also a Guru. Wherefore administer the bap-
tismal nectar to me without any hesitation.’ Accord-
ingly the five Sikhs baptized the Guru with the
Same ceremonies and injunctions he—himself had
employed. H us in his Gect) with the
dignity of Gurudom. The Guru called the five Sikhs
| Who-had baptized him his Panch Piyare, or five
1 In the present day an injunction is added at the time of baptism

hy to be loyal to the British Government, which the neophytes solemnly
promise,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH _ 97

beloved, and himself Gobind Singh, instead of Gobind
Rai, the name by which he had been previously
known.

Upon this many others prepared to receive bap-
tism. The first five to do so after the beloved of the
Guru were Ram Singh, Deva Singh, Tahil Singh,
Ishar Singh, and Fatah Singh. These were named
the Panch Mukte, or the five who had obtained
deliverance. After them many thousands were
baptized. A supplementary ordinance was now
issued that if any one cut his hair, smoked tobacco,
associated with a Muhammadan woman, or ate the
flesh of an animal whose throat had been jagged
with a knife, he must be re-baptized, pay a fine, and
promise not to offend any more: otherwise he must
be held to be~excommunicated from the Khalsa.
The place where the Guru administered his first
baptism is now known as Kesgarh.

The Sikh chronicler, Bhai Santokh Singh, has
composed the following on this memorable event :—

God’s Khalsa which arose is very holy. When its followers
meet, they say ‘ Wahguru ji ki fatah !’

The Khalsa hath abolished regard for pirs, spiritual
rulers, and miracle-workers of other sects, whether Hindu
or Musalman.

The world on seeing a third religion was astonished ;
enemies apprehended that it would deprive them of sove-
reignty.

The Guru inaugurated a new custom for the establish-
ment of the faith, the effacement of sin, and the repetition
of God’s name.

CHAPTER XII

We now come to further objections made by the
Hindus to the Khalsa. They said, ‘ It is impossible
to observe the rules of the Khalsa. How can the
four castes dine together ? Were we to accept the
Guru’s words, there would be no trace of caste left

SIKH. Vv H

98 THE SIKH RELIGION

in the world. The Guru hath confounded the four
castes. He hath stirred water with a dagger and
called it nectar. No matter who cometh to him,
he associateth with him without distinction of caste
and without regard for the duty prescribed for his
stage of life. He hath renounced the Veds and the
popular beliefs, and only believeth in Asidhuj,’ of
whom we have never before heard, and who is not
known even to pandits. The learned men among
the Hindus preach of Ram, Krishan, and the other
incarnations recorded in the Purans, and adhere to
the ancient religions. Brethren, this Khalsa is
a new-fangled institution for which we have no
scriptural authority. It is the Guru who hath
introduced this absurdity, and informed the world
that there is only one caste. He hath broken the
sacrificial thread of Brahmans and Khatris, and by
causing them to eat together hath brought discredit
on ancient customs sanctioned and hallowed by
religion. He hath ordered us not to give our daugh-
ters in marriage to any one who cutteth his hair.
So smitten is he with affection for his Khalsa, that
he hath rejected not only the Hindu but the Muham-
madan religion. He hath prohibited tobacco, pil-
grimages, and periodical oblations to the manes of
ancestors.’ ?

The Guru wrote to his Sikhs wherever they resided
to come and accept baptism, and become members
of the Khalsa. He warned those who failed to do
so that they should afterwards regret it. When they
met with affliction, they would be glad to seek the
protection of the Khalsa, but this could only be
obtained by their acceptance of baptism and by
their repentance and submission. The holy Khalsa
would then remove their entanglements and accept
them as brothers in the faith.

1 A name of God. He who hath the sword on his banner—an
epithet invented by the tenth Guru.
2 Gur Bilas, Chapter 12.

~

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 99

On this great occasion the hill chiefs, including
Raja Ajmer Chand, the successor of the late Bhim
Chand, went to visit the Guru. Ajmer Chand said,
‘It is thou who hast instituted the Khalsa religion.
By thy power and greatness all the Turks shall be
destroyed.’ The Guru replied, ‘If thou be baptized
and become a Sikh, thy glory shall increase tenfold.’
Ajmer Chand inquired what the marks of the Guru’s
Sikhs were, that is, how they could be recognized.
The Guru replied, “ My Sikhs shall be in their natural
form, that is, without the loss of their hair or foreskin,
in opposition to ordinances of the Hindus and the
Muhammadans.’ In reply to Ajmer Chand’s further
inquiries, the Guru informed him of the acts allowed
and disallowed his Sikhs. Ajmer Chand replied,
‘Great king, we must worship our idols and shave
on the occasions of deaths in our houses. This is
ordained by our religion.’ The Guru replied, ‘ If
hair were not pleasing to God, why should he have
caused it to grow ? In giving the baptismal nectar
I change you from jackals to tigers. My Singhs shall
destroy all oppressive Pathans and Mughals, and
rule in the world.’ Ajmer Chand said, ‘ That is
impossible. Each Turk can eat a whole goat. How
can we who only eat rice, cope with such strong
men?’ The Guru replied, ‘My Singhs too are
permitted to eat flesh, and one of them shall be able
to hold his ground against one hundred thousand
Turks. I will kill hawks with sparrows. O Raja,
have no anxiety. I shall make men of all four castes
my Singhs (lions) and destroy the Mughals. If
thou too embrace my faith and become a Singh,
thy realm shall abide.’

The Guru's teaching had the magical effect of
changing a pariah or outcast through an intermin-
able line of heredity intoa brave and staunch soldier,
as the history of the Sikh Mazhabi regiments con-
clusively proves. This metamorphosis has been
accomplished in defiance of the hide-bound preju-

H 2

I0Oo THE SIKH RELIGION

dices and conservatism of the old Hindu religious
systems. Prior to the time of the Sikh Gurus no
general ever conceived the idea of raising an army
from men who were believed to be unclean and pol-
luted from their birth; but the watchword and
war-cry of the Sikhs ‘Wahguru ji ka Khalsa, Wah-
guru ji ki fatah’, and the stimulating precepts of
the tenth Guru, altered what had hitherto been
deemed the dregs of humanity into warriors whose
prowess and loyalty never failed their leaders.

The Guru continued to address the assembled
rajas: ‘How has your religious, political, and
social status deteriorated! You have abandoned
the worship of the true God and addressed your
devotions to gods, goddesses, rivers, trees, &c.
Through ignorance you know not how to govern
your territories; through indolence and vice you
disregard the interests of your subjects. You
place over them officials who not only hate you,
but are besides your mortal enemies. In your
quarrels regarding caste and lineage you have not
adhered to the ancient divisions of Hinduism into
four sections, but you have made hundreds of sub-
sections and subordinate minor castes. You despise
and loathe one another through your narrow preju-
dices, and you act contrary to the wishes of the
great Almighty Father. Your morals have become
so perverted that through fear and with a desire ©
to please your Musalman rulers, you give them
your daughters to gratify their lust. Self-respect
hath found no place in your thoughts, and you have
forgotten the history of your sires. I am intensely
concerned for your fallen state. Are you not ashamed
to call yourselves Rajputs when the Musalmans seize
your wives and daughters before your very eyes.
Your temples have been demolished and mosques
built on their sites ; and many of your faith have
been forcibly converted to Islam. If you still possess
a trace of bravery and of the ancient spirit of your

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH IOI

race, then listen to my advice, embrace the Khalsa
religion, and gird up your loins to elevate the fallen
condition of your country.’ Upon this the rajas
took their departure without accepting the Guru’s
proposal to substitute his Khalsa for existing Indian
religious systems.

A Sikh called Ude Singh appeared before the Guru
without any offering. He said he had one, but was
unable to lift it. He had killed a tiger, but was not
strong enough to bring its body to the Guru. The
Guru sent for the tiger, skinned it, and clothed
a potter’s donkey with the skin. The donkey thus
arrayed being let loose frightened all animals and
rejoiced in his unmolested freedom. Several com-
plaints and requests to kill him were made to the
Guru. One day the Guru and some Sikhs went to
shoot him. On hearing the noise made by the Guru’s
party the donkey fled for protection to his old
master. The potter, seeing the animal’s behaviour
and movements those of a donkey and not of a tiger,
and moreover hearing him bray, approached him,
took off the tiger’s skin, gave him a sound drubbing,
and employed him as before to carry burdens. The
Sikhs on hearing this asked the Guru what he meant
by such.a stratagem. The Guru replied, ‘As long
as you were bound by caste and lineage you were
like donkeys and subject to low persons. I have
now freed you from these entanglements and given
you all worldly blessings. I have clothed you in
the garb of tigers, and made you superior to all men.
Enjoy happiness in this world, and the Guru will
take care of you in the next, and grant you the
glorious dignity of salvation. When the donkey
wore a tiger’s skin he was formidable, but when he
fell into the potter’s power he was beaten and a load
put on his back. In the same way, as long as you
preserve your tiger’s exterior, your enemies shall
fear you, and you shall be victorious, but if you part
with it, and return to caste observances, you shall

102 THE SIKH RELIGION

revert to your asinine condition and become subject
to strangers. Moreover, I have made you really
tigers, and not merely given you their garb, and it
is for you not to resume your caste habiliments. As
I have raised you from a lowly to a lofty position by
imparting to you spiritual knowledge, so if you
revert to evil ways and Hindu superstitions from
which I have delivered you, your last condition shall
be worse than your first, for then there will be no
hope of your amendment.’

Some Sikhs went to the Guru and told him that
the Ranghars and Guyjars of the village of Nuh had
been plundering their property, but that those who
were armed had successfully defended themselves.
The Guru took this as a text to preach to his people
the advantage of wearing arms. They who practised
their use should develop their martial instincts,
enhance their prestige, and defend their property,
while those who remained in the slough of ancient
apathy should lose all they possessed. But in
addition to arms men should also come to him to
be baptized, and should for the purpose appear
before him with their hair uncut, with drawers,
daggers, and complete armour, and retain all these
objects of defence as long as they had life.

A man named Nand Lal now visited the Guru.
He was son of a Vaishnav Khatri and disciple of
a Bairagi. At the age of twelve years the Bairagi
desired to put on his neck a wooden necklace, one of
the outward symbols of his sect. Nand Lal refused,
and asked to be invested with the necklace of God’s
name, which he might repeat to obtain future
happiness. The Bairagi dismissed him, and subse-
quently explained his action to Nand Lal’s father.
He had not the particular necklace which Nand Lal
had asked for, and so he set him free to select another
spiritual guide.

Nand Lal was an accomplished Persian scholar.
There is a tradition preserved among his descendants,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 103

that when the King of Persia sent a dispatch to
Aurangzeb, his chief courtiers were invited to draft
a reply. Nand Lal’s draft was deemed the most
suitable, and it was accordingly selected for dispatch
to Tuhran. Aurangzeb sent for Nand Lal, and after
an interview remarked to his courtiers that it was
a pity such a learned man should remain a Hindu.
Nand Lal on being apprised of the emperor’s desire
to convert him to Islam, and ever thinking of the
spiritual guide suitable for him, decided to flee from
court and take refuge with the Guru. He communi-
cated his intention to a friend of his, a high Muham-
madan official. They resolved to go together to
Anandpur and place themselves under the Guru's
spiritual guidance. Nand Lal presented the Guru
a Persian work called Bandagi Nama in praise of
God, a title which the Guru changed to Zindagi
Nama, or ‘ Bestower of eternal life.’ The following
are extracts from the work :—

Both worlds, here and hereafter, are filled with God’s
hght ;

The sun and moon are merely servants who hold His
torches.!

If, my friend, thou associate with the holy,
Thou shalt obtain abiding wealth.

Evil is that society from which evil resulteth,

And which will at last bring sorrow in its train.

As far as may be, remain servants and claim not to be
Master : *

A servant ought not to search for aught but service.

Hence, my dear friend, thou oughtest to distinguish
between thyself and God. Even if thou art united with

1 This was addressed to those who held the sun and moon to be
gods and objects of worship.

2 Some Vedantists with their pantheistic ideas claim to be God
Himself.

104 THE SIKH RELIGION

Him, utter not one word which doth not express thy sub-
jection to Him. When Mansur said, I am God, they put
his head on the gibbet.

This heart of thine, O man, is God’s temple :
What shall I say? This is God’s ordinance.

Since thou knowest that God abideth in every heart,

It is thy duty to treat every one with respect.

Though thy Lord sitteth and converseth with thee,

Yet through thy stupidity thou runnest in every
direction to find Him.

The Omnipotent is manifested by His omnipotence.

Sweetness trickleth from the words of the holy ;
The water of life drippeth from every hair of their bodies.

The saints are the same without and within ;
Both worlds are subject to their orders.

They who search for God are ever civil.

Courtesy pointeth out the way that leadeth to God.
The discourteous are beyond God’s kindness.?

In the following extract from Nand Lal’s Diwan
Goya, a clear distinction is drawn between God and
man :—

Although the wave and the ocean both consist of water,
yet there is a great difference between them. I am one
wave of Thee who art an endless sea. Thou art as distinct
from me as heaven is from earth,

1 That is, thou goest on idolatrous pilgrimages

2 After the death of Aurangzeb Bhai Nand Lal found a patron in
his son the Emperor Bahadur Shah, under whom he found leisure to
write his works on the Sikh religion.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 105

CHAPTER XIII

About this time the Guru, thinking that his
kitchen was not well served, paid a visit to it in
disguise, and asked for something to eat. He
received various refusals from the cooks. One of
them said that prayer must first be offered. Another,
‘We must first give the Guru his dinner.’ When
the Guru had received several similar excuses and
nothing to eat, though he urged that he was hungry,
he went to Nand Lal to beg his dinner. Nand Lal at
once brought forth flour, vegetables, salt, and clari-
fied butter, and handed them to the supposed
mendicant, who took them and departed. Next
day the Guru in open court told how he had
paid a visit in disguise to his kitchen, and how he
had been treated. The cooks were very much
ashamed and craved forgiveness. He then gave
orders that every wandering Sikh who came to his
door should at once receive food, whether raw or
cooked, without excuse or delay. The Guru con-
tinued: ‘There is nothing equal to the bestowal
of food. Blest is the man who giveth to the
really hungry. Let no one fix a time for the
exercise of this virtue. It is not necessary to consider
whether it is night or day, evening or morning,
whether the moon is dark or full, or if there is
a particular anniversary. Nor is it necessary to
consider what the social position of the applicant
may be. Avoid all delay in sucha matter. Charity
is of all gifts the greatest, for it saveth life.’

The Guru had an opportunity of making further
trial of the masands. Some Sikhs of Patna, Manger,
and other parts of Bengal came to see him. These
were accompanied by Chaia and Maia, sons of
Bulaki, the masand of Dhaka. One of the Sikhs
presented a piece of Dhaka muslin to the Guru as
an offering. His courtiers began to admire it, and
said they had never before seen such a beautiful

106 THE SIKH RELIGION

fabric. On inquiry it was discovered that the same
Sikh had previously made a similar present through
the masands to the Guru’s mother, but it had never
reached her. Chaia and Maia were scourged as
a punishment.

The Guru heard that the Ranghars and Gujars of
a town called Bajrur, beyond the Satluj, had plun-
dered some Sikhs. The Guru took occasion during
one of his hunting excursions to proceed thither
with a small force. The town was invested and
exemplary punishment meted out to its inhabitants,
so that no one might afterwards be tempted to annoy
the Guru’s followers.

A story is told which illustrates the Sikh view
of sacred music. A Sikh complained that the
musicians on one occasion began to chant before
he had quite finished reciting the Sukhmani. The
Guru said that reciting the Gurus’ hymns bore the
same comparison to chanting them to musical accom-
paniments as coarse pulse to sweet sacred food. The
gyanis supply another comparison, and say that
recitation is to chanting with music as well water,
which only benefits the owner of a few fields, to
rain water which sheds blessings on all.

There is an anecdote told of a Sikh who in the
Guru’s presence mispronounced a word in the
Granth Sahib, and so gave a wrong meaning to the
line in which it occurred. The Guru took the mis-
take as a text to preach the advantages of correct
reading of the Sikh sacred hymns. ‘O Sikhs, listen
to what I have to tell you on this subject. Read
the Gurus’ hymns correctly. There is the greatest
advantage in such reading, for it will ensure bliss
here and hereafter. Ifa hymn be written incorrectly,
correct it and then read it, as one may mend and usea
household article which hath been broken. The man
who thus correcteth not the Gurus’ hymns hath no
love for them.’

It will be remembered that Guru Teg Bahadur,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH _ 107

when in prison in Dihli, prophesied the advent of
the English. One day the conversation between
Guru Gobind Singh and his disciples turned on this
subject. His disciples asked him what the condition
of the Sikhs would be when the English arrived.
The Guru replied, ‘The English shall come with
a great army. The Sikhs too shall be very powerful,
and their army shall engage that of the English.
Sometimes victory shall incline to my Sikhs, some-
times to the English. As long as the religion of the
Sikhs remaineth distinct, so long shall the glory of
those who profess it increase. But when the Sikhs
become entangled in the love of mammon, think of
nothing but their own children, their wives, and
their homes ; when those who administer justice
oppress the poor and take bribes; when those who
sit on carpets sell their daughters and sisters ; when
Sikhs abandon the Gurus’ hymns and in lieu of them
follow the Shastars and adopt the religion of the
Brahmans; when Sikh rajas forsake their Gurus
and fall under the influence of the priests of other
religions ; when they scruple not to consort with
courtesans, and allow their states to be governed by
evil influences, then shall the English rule and their
glory increase.’ *

The Sikhs asked the Guru what should become of
the great empire of the Turks. The Guru replied,
‘ Aurangzeb relying on Makkan oracles is destroying
the Hindu religion, and in his insane career will stop
at nothing short of a miracle. He is even preparing
tocontend with me. He respecteth not the religion of
the Gurus, but we shall gain the victory, and the
glory of the Turks shall fade away. Such of them
as survive shall become common labourers and suffer
indignities from their masters. At the end of the
Sambat year 1800 (A.D. 1743) the Sikhs shall take
possession of many countries. Three years after
that Sikhs shall spring out of every bush, and there

1 Siraj Parkash, Rut III, Chapter 37.

108 THE SIKH RELIGION

shall subsequently be terrible warfare between the
Sikhs and the Muhammadans.

‘A powerful monarch shall come from Kandhar ?
and destroy countless Sikhs. Their heads shall be
piled in heaps. He shall continue his progress of
destruction to Mathura in Hindustan, and alarm
many lands. None shall be able to withstand him.
As prophesied by Guru Arjan, he shall raze the
temple of Amritsar to the ground, but the Sikhs
shall plunder his camp on his retreat from India.

‘In the Sambat year 1900 (A. D. 1843), the Turks
who survive shall lose their empire. A Christian
army shall come from Calcutta. The Sikhs who are
at variance with one another will join them. There
shall be great destruction of life, and men and
women shall be expelled from their homes. The
Sikhs who abandon their arms and join the Brah-
mans against the English, shall have great sufferings.
The real Sikhs shall hold their ground and survive.’

A Sikh called Kahn Singh was once plastering
a wall and let a drop of mud fall on the Guru. The
Guru ordered that he should receive one slight stroke
as punishment. The Sikhs exceeded their orders, and
several of them beat the man severely. The Guru
on discovering this wished to make reparation, and
the reparation was to provide the sufferer with
a wife. The Guru asked his Sikhs if any of them
would give his daughter in marriage to the plasterer.
All remained silent. The Guru said, ‘ You found it
easy to obey my order to strike this man. Why not
obey my present order ? I find you are Sikhs only
for your own advantage.’

It happened that at that time a Sikh called Ajab
Singh from Kandhar was present with his virgin
daughter in darbar. He said, ‘O true king, my
daughter is at thy disposal.’- The Guru compli-
mented him and said, ‘O Sikh, thou hast to-day

1 This refers to an invasion of Ahmad Shah in a.p. 1762 when
he blew up the Har Mandar, or Golden Temple, at Amritsar.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 109

proved that thou art a true member of the Khalsa.’

The plasterer represented that he would not marry
on account of the endless troubles attending wedded
life. The girl on hearing this said to him, ‘ By the
Guru’s order I am already thine. If thou accept me
not, I will not wed another, but remain here to do
service at the Gurw’s feet.’ The Guru then inter-
posed and urged the plasterer to wed the girl. He
accordingly did so by Sikh marriage rites known as
Anand. The Guru promised that he should have
five distinguished sons as the result of his marriage,
a prophecy which was duly fulfilled.

The Guru now became frequently silent, a matter
which caused his mother great anxiety. Seeing him
one day alone, she approached him, and after the
usual blessing said, ‘Blest am I that such a son
hath been born from my womb; but I am now
anxious regarding thee. People say that thou art
completely altered. Explain why thy spirits are

' depressed, and thou art no longer cheerful as before.’
The Guru replied, ‘ Mother dear, I will tell thee my
secret. I have been considering how I may confer
empire on the Khalsa.’

The Guru prescribed convivial rules as a pre-
liminary to his great enterprise. Wherever he had
a kitchen, it should be considered God’s own, and
the Sikhs should eat therefrom. Should any of them
object on the ground of caste prejudice, he should
be deemed beyond the pale of Sikhism. Before the
distribution of sacred food a prayer should first be
uttered. After meals the first stanza of the fifth
Ashtapadi of the Sukhmani should be recited as a
thanksgiving. When a man had satisfied himself
at the Guru’s kitchen, he should take no food away
with him. When a Sikh invited another to dine
with him, he should accept his hospitality and not
find fault with his viands. Whenever a Sikh was
hungry, he should be fed and treated with respect.

After this the Guru prescribed some general rules

110 THE SIKH RELIGION

for the guidance of his Sikhs. At the beginning of
every work or enterprise they should recite suitable
prayers. They should always assist one another,
they should practise riding and the exercise of arms.
If the Sikhs remembered the Guru’s instruction, he
promised to make all the inhabitants of India sub-
ject to them. He who cast a covetous eye on his
neighbour’s property should go to hell. He who
assisted a Sikh to complete any worthy or noble
undertaking or study, should obtain spiritual reward.

Being questioned on the subject of marriage
relations, the Guru uttered the following : ‘ When
I received understanding, my father Guru Teg
Bahadur gave me this instruction, ‘“ O son, as long
as there is life in thy body, make this thy sacred
duty ever to love thine own wife more and more.
Approach not another woman’s couch either by
mistake or even in a dream. Know that the love
of another’s wife is as a sharp dagger. Believe me,
death entereth the body by making love to another’s
wife. They who think it great cleverness to enjoy
another’s wife, shall in the end die the death of
dogs.’’’

Once when there was scarcity in the land the
Guru’s mother, without consulting him, ordered that
food should be cooked only once a day, and even
then be sparingly distributed. Upon this the Sikhs
complained to the Guru. He said, ‘Some evil
persons have induced my mother to issue orders
contrary to my wishes, but, O Khalsa, the Guru’s
kitchen shall be ever open. The Turks shall flay
those who have given evil advice to my mother.’
The Guru’s mother on hearing this became much
distressed, and with tears in her eyes implored her
son’s pardon. The Guru pardoned._her, but added,
‘If thou close the Guru’s kitchen, my curse shall
avail, but if thou keep it ever open, my curse shall
be retracted.’ From that day forth, twofold, nay
fourfold supplies poured into the Guru’s kitchen.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH §sIil

CHAPTER XIV

A handsome young goldsmith one day presented
himself before the Guru and began to fan him. He
said that his father had taken the charanpahul in
vogue at the time of the preceding Gurus, and he
himself had received baptism according to the new
rite. The youth’s mother accompanied him, and
the Guru invited them both to stay with him. The
Guru, to make trial of the goldsmith’s skill, gave
him ten gold muhars to convert into ornaments.
When the work was subsequently submitted for the
Guru’s inspection he was pleased, and ordered his
treasurer to keep the young artisan supplied with
gold, and store all the ornaments he made from it
in his treasury. The Guru asked the goldsmith if
he had any faults. He replied, ‘O great king, I am
the slave of thy feet, I only seek the society of the
saints.’ Upon this the Guru replied, ‘ He who hath
ereat talents must ever possess some fault. What
is thine ? The man possessing talent who hath no
fault must be in God’s own image.’ The young man,
however, would not admit any imperfection.

After this he was allowed to take as much
gold as he pleased to work upon. It was never
weighed to him, and he was never asked how
much he had taken. One day the Guru told his
treasurer to weigh for the future, without the gold-
smith’s knowledge, all the gold dispensed to him.
Upon this the treasurer weighed him out twenty
tolas of gold. When the goldsmith presented the
ornaments made therefrom, they were found to
weigh only seventeen tolas. Upon this the Guru
_ ordered all the ornaments the youth had made since

his arrival to be produced and weighed. The treasurer
found them to be far short of the amount of gold
taken from the treasury. On this the Guru remon-
strated with the young goldsmith. ‘Thou impliedst

112 THE "SIR RELIGION

that thou hadst no fault. What greater fault can there
be than to misappropriate what is entrusted thee ?
Didst thou not receive thy wages from the Guru’s
house, and was that not sufficient remuneration for
thee ? Thou art as evil as the masands whom I have
been punishing. I am pleased with those who,
though they may wear coarse garbs, eat what they
lawfully earn.’ It is said that on this censure the
youth reformed his ways.

The Guru being: asked by a devout Sikh what he
should do to cross over the world’s ocean, that is,
to be saved and obtain deliverance from rebirth,
gave the following recipe. ‘My brother, repeat the
name Wahguru. Eat what thou hast diligently
earned. As Baba Nanak hath said, ‘‘ He who
bestoweth a little out of his earnings recognizeth the
right way.’ Bear no one enmity. Know that God
is with thee at all times and remember death. Recog-
nize the world as unreal, and God alone as real.’

A Sikh went to the Guru and told him that he
had abandoned the world, as it contained only
trouble and anxiety. He added that he had come
in quest of rest, and requested the Guru to point
out the way to him. The Guru congratulated him
on having diverted his attention from the wickedness
of men, and inquired if he could read. The Sikh
replied in the negative. The Guru then said, ‘ It is
necessary that thou shouldst read little or much so
as to acquire understanding and improve thy mind.
Thou shalt thus learn the difference between good
and evil, and what thou oughtest and what thou
oughtest not to do. There are besides many other
advantages in reading. Thou mayest thereby obtain
everything beginning with the knowledge of God.
The heart of him who is uninstructed remaineth in
blind ignorance. He who readeth Gurumukhi is the
best and obtaineth good understanding. There is
great merit in reading the Japji and the other hymns
of morning and evening divine service, for they

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 113

erase the sins of many births. He who orally or
mentally fixeth his attention on the Name, who
_ worketh with his hands, who gladdeneth the hearts
of holy Sikhs, who ever performeth noble deeds,
and preserveth his mind humble, is very dear to me,
and it behoves me to minister unto him.’

The Sikh expressed his earnest desire to learn, if he
could only find a tutor. The Guru appointed his
own Granthi, or reader, to instruct him. When the
Sikh read as far as the line in the Anand, ‘Joy,
my mother, that I have found the true Guru!’ he
brought his tuition to an end, and never afterwards
pursued his studies. The Guru, after some months,
asked his Granthi how the pupil was progressing.
The Granthi replied that he had not seen him since
he had read that particular line of the Anand. Upon
this the Guru sent for him, and asked him why he
had ceased to attend his tutor. He replied that he
had read enough, and had attained happiness on
meeting the Guru. The Guru smiled and said,
Even with this little learning thou hast obtained
a knowledge of God, and shalt eventually find
deliverance.’

The Guru once asked his Sikhs to tell him who
was emperor of India in Kabir’s time. One Sikh
said Humayun; a second, Alexander the Great ;
a third, Madanpal. In short none of them could
tell the emperor’s name. The Guru made this a text
from which to preach the advantages of knowledge,
as well as holiness, and the good repute obtained
from them in both worlds—‘ Every one, even down
to ignorant women, knoweth the name of Kabir,
though he was only a weaver. That is because he
repeated God’s name and practised true devotion.
Sikandar Lodi was then emperor; but none of you
even knoweth his name, and there is no trace of
him left in the world, while Kabir’s fame is blazoned
in every country and his memory is universally
honoured. Wherefore, members of the Khalsa,

SIKH. V I

114 THE SIKH RELIGION

remember the true Name, serve the saints, be
humble, lay your love and devotion at the feet of
the immortal God, and you too shall be honoured
here and hereafter.’

As the Guru’s power daily increased, the hill
chiefs thought it expedient to send a resident to his
court who would inform them of his movements and
proceedings. A man called Paramanand was accord-
ingly selected for that delicate mission. When he
came to the Guru he told him that his object was
to be in a position to behold him continually, and
thus gain spiritual advantages. He added that he
desired to send the rajas occasionally accounts of
the Guru’s good health and welfare, and to preserve
the amicable relations which already subsisted.

Some Sikhs asked the Guru how karah parsad
or sacred food should be prepared. He replied:
‘Wash and clean the cooking-place, then procure
equal portions of refined sugar, fine flour, and
clarified butter. Boil the sugar in water and render
it liquid. Put the clarified butter and flour into
another vessel, and boil them until they assume
a reddish colour. Then mix the liquefied sugar with
the clarified butter and flour, and boil all together.
When this is done a Granthi must repeat certain
prescribed prayers. The mixture then becomes
sacred food (kavah parsad) and is fit for use.’?
The cook must be a Sikh who has bathed in the
morning and who can repeat at least the Japji from
memory.

A Sikh married couple came to the Guru in order
to complain against their son. They said they were
satisfied with the wealth God had given them ;
their only trouble arose from their son’s contumacy.
He was ever in attendance on religious men, and
paid no regard to what he ate or what he wore. If

1 The Hindus in the preparation of their sacred food use the same
ingredients, but add coco-nut as a donne bouche for the goddess
Durga, and anise seed as a relish for the monkey-god Hanuman.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 115

the subject of marriage, so natural to a young man,
were mentioned to him, he was ready to die as if
poisoned. When pressed on the subject, he said
that the Guru had forbidden his marriage. When
they represented to him that the Guru himself was
a married man, the youth would only say, ‘ He can
do what he pleaseth himself. He hath forbidden
me. The Guru sent for the youth and asked when
he had forbidden him. He replied, ‘O Guru, in the
Anand which thou wrotest as Guru Amar Das for
the instruction of the Sikhs, there is the following
passage :—

-O dear man, do thou ever remember the True One.
This family which thou seest shall not depart with thee ;
It shall not depart with thee; why fix thy thoughts
On it? |
Never do what thou shalt have to repent of at last.
Listen thou to the instruction of the true Guru, 7¢ zs that
which shall go with thee.
Saith Nanak, O dear man, ever remember the True One.

‘ This instruction,’ said the youth, ‘is imprinted
on my mind.’ The Guru was so pleased on hearing
this that he embraced him, and said to his parents,
‘ Men are continually warned, but none taketh heed.
Blest is he who hath forsaken mammon. It is his
good fortune that he hath awakened to contempt
of the world. This son of yours shall save both your
families, and you shall have another son besides to
gladden your hearts.’ The Guru detained the youth,
and dismissed his parents. He was pleased that the
spontaneous love of God had sprung up in the young
man’s heart, and he instructed him in the duties
both ofa husband andahermit. After a comparison
of both, he embraced domestic life.

Once in the sultry weather, as the Guru was
perspiring, his servants took his bed from the ground
floor to the top of his house. From there he heard
an altercation between two Sikhs regarding a debt

12

116 THE Sige RELIGION

of seven rupees. Mala Singh had lent this sum to
Lahaura Singh, but the latter would not return it.
When, at the suggestion of Mala Singh’s wife,
Lahaura Singh was further dunned, he composed this
couplet :—

O Sikh, eat the wealth of a Sikh without anxiety ;
Thou hast come to annoy me at which I am very angry ;

and added:—

A Sikh shall receive whatever is written in his destiny.

Mala Singh replied, “ Thou embezzlest my money,
and then lecturest me; thou forgettest what hath
been said :—

They whose acts are deceitful shall be punished in God’s
court :

Death shall smite them; they shall greatly weep and
regret when they enter hell.’

Lahaura Singh capped this with another :—

No one shall ask for an account as long as God pardoneth.}

The Guru overhearing this interchange of verses
cried out, ‘ They who live and spend money by de-
ceiving others shall be bound in God’s court. Ponder
on all your acts so as to preserve your honesty.’ The
Guru then quoted for the disputants the lines of
Baba Nanak against dishonesty.

After hearing the Guru; Lahaura Singh began to
speak civilly to Mala Singh, and promised to give
him his money on the morrow. Lahaura Singh kept
his promise, and then went to the Guru to solicit
his pardon. The Guru upon this repeated for the
first time his ‘Muktnama’, or means of salvation.
The following are its principal injunctions : ‘ O Sikhs,
borrow not, but, if you are compelled to borrow,
faithfully restore the debt. Speak not falsely and
associate not with the untruthful. Associating with

1 Guru Arjan, Maru ki War II.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH = 117

holy men, practise truth, love truth, and clasp it to
your hearts. Live by honest labour and deceive no
one. Let not a Sikh be covetous. Repeat the Japji
and the Japji before eating. Look not on a naked
woman. Let not your thoughts turn towards that
sex. Cohabit not with another’s wife. Deem
another’s property as filth. Keep your bodies clean.
Have dealings with every one, but consider your-
selves distinct. Your faith and daily duties are
different from theirs. Bathe every morning before
repast. If your bodies endure not cold water, then
heat it. Ever abstain from tobacco. Remember the
one immortal God. Repeat the Rahiras in the
evening and the Sohila at bedtime. Receive the
baptism and teaching of the Guru, and act according
to the Granth Sahib. Cling to the boat in which
thou hast embarked. Wander not in search of
another religion. Repeat the Gurus’ hymns day and
night. Marry only into the house of a Sikh. Pre-
serve thy wife and thy children from evil company.
Covet not money offered for religious purposes.
Habitually attend a Sikh temple and eat a little
sacred food therefrom. He who distributeth sacred
food should do so in equal quantities, whether the
recipients be high or low, old or young. Eat not
food offered to gods or goddesses. Despise not
any Sikh, and never address him without the ap-
pellation Singh. Eat regardless of caste with all
Sikhs who have been baptized, and deem them your
brethren. Abandon at once the company of Brah-
mans and Mullas who cheat men out of their
wealth, of ritualists who lead Sikhs astray, and of
those who give women in marriage with concealed
physical defects, and thus deceive the hopes of
offspring.

‘Let not a Sikh have intercourse with a strange
woman unless married to her according to the Sikh
rites. Let him contribute a tenth part of his
earnings for religious purposes. Let him bow down

118 THE SIKH RELIGION

at the conclusion of prayer. When a Sikh dieth,
let sacred food be prepared. After his cremation
let the Sohila be read and prayer offered for his
- soul and for the consolation of his relations. Then
sacred food may be distributed. Let not the
family of the deceased indulge in much mourning,
or bevies of women join in lamentation. On such
occasions let the Gurus’ hymns be read and sung,
and let all listen to them.

‘Worship not an idol, and drink not the water in
which it hath been bathed. The rules of caste and
of the stages of Hindu life are erroneous. Let
my Sikhs take care not to practise them. O Sikhs,
listen to me and adopt not the ceremonies of the
Hindus for the supposed advantages of the manes
of ancestors.

“My face is turned towards him who calleth out
to a Sikh “ Wahguru ji ki Fatah !’’ my right shoulder
towards him who returneth the salutation with love,
my left shoulder towards him who returneth it as
a matter of custom, and my back towards him who
returneth it not at all. To him who abideth by
these rules I will grant a position to which no one
hath yet been able to attain, and which was beyond
the conception of Shankar Acharya,” Dattatre,
Ramanuj,* Gorakh, and Muhammad.

‘As, when rain falleth on the earth, the fields
yield excellent and pleasant fruit, so he who listeneth
to the Guru and attendeth to all these injunctions
shall assuredly receive the reward thereof. Whoever
accepteth the Guru’s words, and these rules which
he hath given, shall have his sins pardoned ; he shall
be saved from transmigration through the eighty-
four lakhs of animals, and after death shall enter

1 Mani Singh’s Gyan Ratanawall.

2 The great expounder of the Vedant or pantheistic philosophy
and opponent of the Buddhists. He lived in the eighth century.

3 An account of this saint will be given in the final volume of this
work.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH Ig

the Guru’s abode. If any very worldly man devoted
to pleasure tell you to the contrary, listen not to him,
but ever follow the Guru’s instruction.’

CHAPTER XV

A Sikh went to the Guru, to complain that his wife
having been enchanted by a Muhammadan desired
to embrace Islam. He prayed the Guru to perform
incantations whereby his wife might adhere to her
faith and conjugal duties. The Guru replied,
‘Charms, incantations, and spells are useless. The
Gurus’ hymns alone are of any avail. No jin,’ fairy,
or demon shall approach her who daily reciteth or
heareth the Japji. It is the duty of all Sikhs to give
their wives religious instruction. Thy wife on
receiving it shall return to her religion and allegiance
to thee.’

One day the musicians were singing the story of
Gopi Chand in presence of the Guru. The story
being affecting, the audience were moved to tears.
One man said that the musicians ought to be fined
because they had in the Guru’s presence sung the
epic of Gopi Chand instead of the hymns of the
Gurus, and it was written in the Anand that all
compositions except the Gurus’ were inadmissible.
The Guru replied, ‘Only those compositions are
forbidden which lead men astray from God. When
simple men sing verses which lead to a reconciliation
with Him, it is not thy duty to spurn them. It
cannot harm thee tolisten to a story which containeth
a moral.’

The Guru thought it prudent to be ever prepared
for war, and he continued to enlist all who offered
themselves for service. He provided them with
horses and arms, and often represented to them that
the power of the Turks had now grown beyond all
endurance.

1 The genius of Arabian tales.

120 THE SIKH RELIGION

One day as the Guru was on a hunting excursion
in the Dun, Balia Chand and Alim Chand, two hill
chiefs, seeing him with only a small retinue, resolved
to surprise and capture him. A fight ensued, but
the Sikhs were too few in number to cope with their
assailants and were obliged to retreat. A Sikh
trooper came upon the Guru, who had lost his way
in the mélée, and thus addressed him: ‘As a forest
hath no beauty without a tiger, so a Sikh army
hath no ornament without its Guru. If thou assist
us not in our present difficulty, it will be a matter
of eternal reproach to thee.’ The Guru then dis-
charged five arrows at the enemy which took fatal
effect. Upon this the Sikhs, though few in number,
were encouraged to return to the combat. Blood
was spilled on both sides like red powder at the
Hindu festival of the Holi. Balia Chand, on seeing
the destruction of his men, rushed forward, but
found himself opposed by Ude Singh, one of the
bravest soldiers of the Guru’s army. Alim Chand
also advanced to support the hill army, but was con-
fronted by Alim Singh. Both sides fought despe-
rately, and men fell like trees cut down by the
woodman’s axe. Alim Chand aimed a blow of his
sword at Alim Singh, who received it on his shield,
and then with his return blow struck off Alim
Chand’s right arm. Alim Chand, however, contrived
to escape, leaving Balia in sole command of the hill —
troops. Balia Chand did not long enjoy that honour,
as he was soon shot dead by Ude Singh. The hill
troops, finding that one of their chiefs had fled with
the loss of his arm, and that the other was dead,
took to flight, leaving the honours of victory to the
Guru and his Sikhs.- After the battle the Guru,
undismayed, continued his hunting excursion.

After this defeat, the hill chiefs thought it highly
dangerous to allow the Sikhs to increase in power
and number. They remarked that the Sikhs were
to-day in thousands, but in a short time they

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH i121

would be in millions, therefore immediate measures
ought to be taken for their repression. An Indian
fig-tree when small can be easily destroyed, but,
if allowed to grow, it becomes a forest and cannot
be eradicated. The hill chiefs therefore thought
it desirable to complain to the Dihli government
against the Sikhs. The Emperor Aurangzeb was
still engaged in warfare in the south of India.
In his absence the Subadar or viceroy of Dihli
heard their representations. The hill chiefs, having
traced the Guru’s history from the time he had
left Patna and settled with a humble following
in Anandpur, thus continued: ‘ Knowing that he
was a successor of the holy Guru Nanak, we made no
objection to his residence among us. When he
obtained power and we essayed to restrain him, he
went to Nahan and there formed an alliance with
its raja. He then came into collision with Raja
Fatah Shah of Srinagar, which ultimately led to the
battle of Bhangani, where there was great destruc-
tion of human life. After his return to Anandpur,
the Guru established a new sect distinct from the
Hindus and Muhammadans, to which he hath given
the name of Khalsa. He hath united the four castes
into one, and made many followers. He invited us
to join him, and promised, if we consented, that
we should obtain empire in this world and salvation
in the next. -He suggested to us that if we rose in
rebellion against the Emperor, he would assist us
with all his forces, because the Emperor had killed
his father, and he desired to avenge his death. As
we did not think it proper to oppose the Emperor,
the Guru is displeased with us, and now giveth us
every form of annoyance. We cannot restrain him,
and have accordingly come to crave the protection
of this just government against him. If the govern-
ment consider us its subjects, we pray for its assist-
ance to expel the Guru from Anandpur. Should
you delay to punish and restrain him, his next

122 THE SIKH RELIGION

expedition will be against the capital of your empire.”!
This representation was duly submitted by the
Subadar to the Emperor.

A Qazi called Salar Din came to visit the Guru,
reminded him of the Sikh and Muhammadan belief
in destiny, and upbraided him with having reversed
the judgement of heaven. ‘They on whose fore-
heads unfavourable destiny was written,’ he said,
“have been blessed and have received from thee all
bounties and good gifts in return for their services
and their fidelity.. The Guru replied, ‘Destiny is
as the reversed letters on a seal. I bless those who
bow to the Guru. The letters of their destiny then
present their ordinary appearance.’ This shows that
the Sikhs need not implicitly believe in the con-
trolling power of destiny.

In October, when the cold season was approaching,
his troops represented to the Guru that they re-
quired warm clothing. He requested them to be
patient. A Sikh, he said, was bringing him a bag
of money to relieve all their necessities. A rich
merchant, who had been originally a follower of
Sakhi Sarwar, soon arrived with an offering of two
thousand rupees, and related his story: ‘While I was
a follower of Sakhi Sarwar, I invested a large sum
of money in merchandise, but failed to dispose of
it to advantage, notwithstanding a large offering of
sweets to my patron saint. That and other mercan-
tile ventures of mine having failed, I set about finding
a religious guide who possessed influence with the
supreme powers. I then heard that the tenth Guru
occupied the seat of the holy Guru Nanak, and
I vowed that in the event of commercial success
I would give him a tithe of my profits. I have
accordingly brought this bag of rupees, and I promise
that I will no longer be a follower of any Muhamma-
dan, but a Sikh of the Guru.’ The Guru duly bap-
tized him and accepted his offering. The Guru was

1 Gur Bilas, Chapter 14.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 123

thus enabled to provide warm clothing for his troops,
and their devotion to him and their belief in his
prophetic and divine power increased in consequence.

One day when the Guru felt thirsty, he asked a Sikh
to fetch him water. Before the Sikh had time to do
so, a young boy, who had come to see the Guru,
volunteered to perform the service. The Guru
noticing that the boy’s hands were soft and clean,
asked him if he had any occupation. He replied in
the negative. That was the first time he had ever
offered to fetch water for any one. When he brought
it the Guru refused to drink, saying it was impure.
The boy remonstrated and insisted on its purity..
The Guru replied, ‘ Hear me, O Sikhs, it is an impor-
tant article of the Guru’s faith that performing ©
service for saints contributeth to man’s salvation.
The hands are purified by serving them. The feet
are purified by going to behold the Guru. Without
serving holy men! man’s body is as unclean as the
limbs of a corpse from which all shrink and which
all fear to touch.’

The Guru quoted the following from Gur Das’s
Wars :—

Curses on the head which boweth not to the Guru and
which toucheth not the Guru’s feet ;

Curses on the eyes which instead of beholding the Guru
look at another’s wife ;

Curses on the ears which hear not and pay no attention to
the Guru’s instruction ;

Curses on the tongue which repeateth other spell than the
word of the Guru ;

Curses on the hands and feet which serve not the Guru :
all other work is fruitless.

His disciples are dear to the Priest ; happiness is obtained
by seeking the shelter of the Guru?
After this the boy placed himself under the Guru's
instruction and learned to know God.

1 The youth had not previously served any one.
2 War XXVII, ro.

124 THE SIKH RELIGION

In due time the orders of the supreme government
were received on the representation of the hill rajas’
envoy to the viceroy of Dihli. An army would be
sent to assist them against the Guru, if they paid its
expenses, but not otherwise. They accordingly sent
the necessary funds, and further represented that
they had no hope except in the Emperor’s assistance.
The viceroy sent for Generals Din Beg and Painda
Khan,’ both commanding divisions of five thousand
men, and ordered them to take their troops to resist
the Guru’s encroachments on the rights of the hill
chiefs. When the imperial troops arrived at Ropar,
they were joined by the hill chiefs at the head of
their contingents. They decided to expel the Guru
if he offered resistance, but, if he undertook to be
a loyal subject for the future, they were prepared
to allow him to abide in Anandpur.

A Sikh, hearing of the force proceeding against
the Guru, hastened from Kiratpur to Anandpur to
give him information. The Guru’s men were soon
under arms. He appointed the five whom he had
first baptized, as generals of his army. The Sikh
chronicler states that, when the engagement began,
the Turks were roasted by the continuous and
deadly fire of the Sikhs. The Guru went into the
midst of his troops and gave them every form of
encouragement. They never retreated, but staunchly
confronted the enemy. .

General Painda Khan, seeing the determined
resistance of the Sikhs, shouted to his men that they
were engaged in religious warfare, and called on
them to fight to the death against the infidels. Upon
this his troops discharged clouds of arrows, which
obscured the sky. Painda Khan himself formed
the design of engaging in single combat with the
Guru, and thus deciding the battle. The Guru, on
hearing his challenge, advanced on horseback and
said, ‘O Pathan, I am Guru Gobind Singh, the

! This is not the Painda Khan who was killed by the sixth Guru.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 125

enemy of thy life.’ On hearing this Painda Khan’s
eyes became bloodshot, and he vowed to fight to
the death against the priest of the Sikhs. He invited
the Guru to strike the first blow, so that he might
not afterwards have cause for regret. The Guru
refused the role of aggressor and said he had vowed
never to strike except in self-defence.

Painda Khan whirled his horse round and round
to find an opportunity of attacking the Guru and
breaking his guard. At last both warriors and their
horses stood still, and both sides began to speculate
on their chances of victory. Painda Khan dis-
charged an arrow which whizzed past the Guru's
ear. The Guru ironically complimented him on his
archery, and invited him to shoot again so that he
might have no cause for remorse. Painda Khan
discharged another arrow which also missed its
mark. Upon this he was on the point of retreating
through shame and vexation, when the Guru ad-
dressed him: ‘O jackal, wait a little. Whither
goest thou ? It is now my turn.’

The whole of Painda Khan’s body except his ears
was encased in armour. The Guru knowing this
discharged an arrow at his ear with such unerring
aim that he fell off his horse prone on the ground,
and rose no more. This, however, did not end the
battle. Din Beg now assumed sole command,
and urged on his troops. Maddened by Painda
Khan’s death they fought with great desperation,
but were unable to make any impression on the solid
ranks of the Sikhs. On the contrary the Sikh forces
caused great destruction among them. Ajmer Chand,
seeing this, prepared for flight. The other hill chiefs
followed his example. By this time Din Beg was
severely wounded, and began to ask himself why
he should try to keep the field any longer, since all
those whom he had come to assist had ingloriously
fled. He accordingly beat a retreat, and was pursued
by the Sikhs as far as Ropar.

126 THE SIKH RELIGION

The Guru sent an officer to recall his troops as he
did not think it became Sikhs to take the trouble
to pursue cowardly and fugitive enemies. The Sikhs
returned with horses, arms, and a vast quantity of
other booty taken from the Muhammadans. The
Sikh chronicler states that the enemies’ heads
remained on the field like so many pumpkins, and
that kites, ravens, and jackals hovered round them
impatient for a feast.

The Guru continued to keep his troops in readiness
for defence whenever attacked. He sent for ar-
mourers to make muskets, swords, and arrows, and
filled his magazine with gunpowder and lead. He
issued a proclamation that all Sikhs who came to
see him should bring offensive and defensive weapons
as offerings. Numbers, hearing of his bravery and
piety, flocked to his standard. He baptized all
comers and thus infused into them the spirit of the
Khalsa.

The hill chiefs again took alarm and said to them-
selves that the Guru who had defeated Painda Khan
and Din Beg, though commanding an army of ten
thousand men, would be soon emboldened to oust
them altogether from their territories. They must
therefore either kill him or expel him from Anandpur,
and with this object they again thought it necessary
to seek the assistance of the Dihli government. Raja
Ajmer Chand was deputed as envoy, and it was
resolved to provide him with costly presents for the
Emperor.

Raja Bhup Chand, now Raja of Handur, braver
than his fellows, opposed the dispatch of an envoy.
He said that nothing could be gained by again
seeking the assistance of the Emperor. They ought
to be able to defend themselves. If all the hill
chiefs concerned were to contribute reasonable
contingents, they could muster a large army which
would be more than sufficient to annihilate the Guru
and his Sikhs. He, however, proposed as the most

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH | 127

simple and feasible measure, to invest the Guru’s
capital, Anandpur, and starve its occupants into
submission. Should any hill chief not join in this
enterprise, the others were to hold no intercourse
with him, but treat him asanenemy. The Ranghars
and Gujars, who were their subjects and were at
ancient enmity with the Sikhs, would now be valuable
allies against the Guru. The Raja of Handur con-
cluded his address, ‘O Ajmer Chand, a reed is
a frail support, but a handful of reeds bound together
is not easily broken. If we all join together, the
Sikhs will be powerless to offer us resistance.’

Raja Ajmer Chand was gained over by the proposal,
and both he and Raja Bhup Chand sent envoys to
all the hill chiefs. Upon this the Rajas of Jammu,
Nurpur, Mandi, Bhutan, Kullu, Kionthal, Guler,
Chamba, Srinagar, Dadhwal, and others came with
their contingents. When they met in council,
Raja Ajmer Chand thus addressed them: * Hear
me, O rajas, the Sikhs are not merely my enemies.
They are the common enemies of all. No one is
able to withstand them. They cannot even be
bribed by money into submission. We know not
what their Guru’s designs may be. He baptizeth
Sikhs, and they beget Sikhs as wicked as themselves.
_ We know not what the Guru whispereth into their
ears, that night and day they think of nothing but
harrying and slaying. Give me your counsel as to
what you deem best to be done.’

The rajas were unanimous in promising that they
would agree to any proposal made by Raja Ajmer
Chand. If the Guru, they said, were put to death
they might all reign in peace. Accordingly ammuni-
tion was served out to the allied army over night,
and before daybreak all were on their march to
Anandpur. On arriving near the city the rajas drew
up the following letter and dispatched it to the
Guru : ‘ The land of Anandpur is ours. We allowed
thy father to dwell on it, and he ever paid us rent,

128 THE SIKH RELIGION

but thou payest us not a single kauri. Nay, thou
hast originated a new religion, and laid our country
waste. We have endured this up to the present,
but can now endure it no longer. Wherefore we have
come to blockade thy town and destroy thee and thy
Sikhs. This is the time for thee to pay arrears of rent
for the occupation of our land. We call on thee to
do so, and undertake to pay it regularly every year
for the future. If thou art not disposed to accept
these terms, then prepare for thy departure from
Anandpur or take the consequences.’

To this the Guru sent reply, ‘O Ajmer Chand, thou
and thine allied rajas desire to take money from me ;
but my father purchased and paid for the land and
now the only further payment you deserve is with
the sword. If you can deprive me of Anandpur,
you shall have it with bullets added thereto. Seek
my protection, and you shall be happy in both
worlds. Seek the protection of the Khalsa too, and
abandon pride. Part not with your senses and
come to terms with us. This is the Guru’s house,
in which men shall be treated as they deserve. It
is like a mirror. As men make themselves so they
appear in it. If you proceed to hostilities with the
Sikhs, they will not allow you to drink even a drop
of water. Now 1s the time for a settlement. I shall
act as a mediator between the Khalsa and you.
You may then rule your states without apprehen-
sion.’

CHAPTER XVI

It was now abundantly clear to the rajas that the
Guru would neither make peace nor surrender. Next
morning they beat the drums of war, and, as they
had anticipated, large numbers of Ranghars and
Gujars under one Jagatullah flocked to their stan-
dard. The allied armies then proceeded with banners
flying to Anandpur. In the van rode Kesari Chand,

LIFE Ol GURU GOBIND SINGH 129

the haughty chief of Jaswan, bearing himself, it was
said, like a mighty elephant. The Guru prepared
for defence and briefly addressed his men: ‘O
Khalsa, I am ever your companion and succourer.
If you die fighting, you shall enjoy all the happiness
reserved for martyrs, and if you survive and gain
the victory, empire shall be yours.’ The Sikhs wefe
further encouraged by the arrival of five hundred
men of the Manjha under Duni Chand, grandson of
Bhai Salo, a distinguished Sikh who lived in the time
of the fourth and fifth Gurus. Reinforcements from
other quarters also arrived at this conjuncture.

The names of the weapons served out by the Guru
to the Sikhs are given with minute detail : bows and
arrows, teghe (cutlasses), katars (small daggers),
jamdhars (two-edged dirks), savohts (flexible swords),
sangs (pikes), lances, bichhuas (daggers, literally
scorpions), jambuas (daggers), scimitars, selas (spears),
pistols, and muskets. |

Within Anandpur were two forts, one called Fata-
garh, the other Lohgarh. The Guru ordered his men
not to advance beyond the city, but remain as much
as possible on the defensive. Sher Singh and Nahar
Singh, each commanding five hundred men, were
told off to guard Lohgarh. The defence of Fatagarh
was entrusted to Ude Singh, who received from Duni
Chand command of the reinforcements of the Manjha.
Meanwhile the allied armies advanced and fell on
Anandpur like a flight of locusts.

Ajit Singh, the Guru’s eldest son, now grown up
to manhood, went to his father to offer him military
service. He was, however, too shy to speak in his
father’s presence, and requested Ude Singh to speak
for him. The Guru replied that it was the duty of
all true Sikhs to fight for their religion, their country,
and a good cause, and he was glad to see his son
adopting, their hereditary profession. The Guru
conferred on him the command of a company of
one hundred, and advised him, as he was still in-

SIKH. V K

130 THE SIKH RELIGION

experienced in warfare, to remain behind cover and
await events.

Raja Ajmer Chand, reminding his fellow chiefs that
this was really the most important engagement with
the Guru, advanced with his troops. The hill chiefs
opened fire with large guns on the Guru’s fortresses.
Raja Kesari Chand of Jaswan with his troops attacked
Ude Singh’s outposts. Arrows and bullets discharged
from both sides fell like rain in the Indian months of
Sawan and Bhadon.! The Ranghars and Gujars,
who appear to have fought with much determination,
were now reduced to half their numbers, and showed
a disposition to retreat. Raja Ajmer Chand went
to Jagatullah, their leader, and remonstrated with
him. He called on him to avenge the sack and
destruction by the Sikhs of the Ranghars’ towns
of Nuh and Bajrur. Jagatullah succeeded in rally-
ing his men, and they again began to fight with great
valour. Ude Singh on seeing this brought forth the
Guru’s son and with a strong force led an attack on
the enemy. Ajit Singh displayed great heroism and
address, and the Sikhs following his example chopped
off the heads of the enemy, as if they were water-
melons. The Guru surveyed the battle from an
eminence and continued to direct his arrows with
fatal precision against the allied hosts.

Several brave Sikhs made a determined stand
against the enemy and forced them to retreat. On
seeing this the allied chiefs held a brief council of
war, wherein it was decided to dispatch Kesar
Chand to attack the right flank and Jagatullah
the left flank of the Guru’s position, while Ajmer
Chand himself and his troops made a front attack
on Anandpur. Jagatullah was soon shot in the
chest by a bullet discharged from Sahib Singh's
musket, and fell lifeless to the earth. Man Singh,
one of the bravest of the Guru’s Sikhs, arrived

‘ 1 These are the principal months of the Indian rainy season—from
the early part of July to the early part of September,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 131

bearing the Guru’s standard, and planted it on the
spot as an indication to the enemy that the Sikhs
would not retreat a single pace, or allow them to
remove Jagatullah’s body.

Raja Ghumand Chand, now chief of Kangra, came
and sought to uproot the Guru’s standard and hinder
the Sikhs from taking possession of the body of the
fallen chief of the Ranghars. Upon this the allied
armies rallied, and then ensued terrific slaughter.
Ghumand Chand and his troops plied their arrows
incessantly, but failed to cause the Sikhs to retreat.
The latter defended themselves until nightfall and
retained possession of Jagatullah’s body. The
opposing armies then retired to their respective
quarters for rest. The Guru complimented his son
and Sahib Singh, the slayer of Jagatullah, on their
successful valour. It is stated that the leaves of the
sal* tree were employed overnight to heal the injuries
of the wounded.

The hill chiefs were in great dismay at the result
of the battle, and held a council of war during the
night. Raja Ajmer Chand apprehended from the
resistance offered by the Sikhs to the removal of
Jagatullah’s body, that it would be useless to
prolong the contest. If they had the same ill-for-
tune on the morrow, there would be little left of
the hill armies. The Raja of Kangra professed him-
self ready to acquiesce in Raja Ajmer Chand’s
decision. The Raja of Mandi too was for peace,
and advised suing for the Guru’s pardon, seeing that
he occupied Guru Nanak’s spiritual throne, and there
would be no indignity in appealing to him as sup-
pliants. The Raja of Handur, however, did not
consider that any reason for effecting a reconcilia-
tion. Raja Kesari Chand of Jaswan affected to
despise the Guru’s power, and promised to fight
with more determination on the morrow and expel
him from Anandpur.

+ The Shorea robusta. Natural order, Dipterocarpaceae.
K 2

132 THE SIKH RELIGION

Next morning, when the hill armies proceeded to
re-invest Anandpur, the Sikhs offered valiant resist-
ance. The allied troops contented themselves with
concentrating their attack on one particular part of
the city. The fighting continued with varying for-
tune until the afternoon, when Ajit Singh prepared
to renew the contest, and requested his father to
observe how he comported himself in it. The Guru
counselled caution, and forbade him to expose him-
self unnecessarily. At the same time he sent thou-
sands of Sikhs to support him in what he declared
was a war for the defence of their religion. The
allied armies rushed against them with the violence
of a torrent issuing from the Himalayas in the
height of the rainy season.

Whithersoever Ajit Singh discharged his arrows,
they were messengers of death. When his horse
was killed under him he fought on foot, and inflicted
great destruction on his opponents. He communi-
cated his martial enthusiasm to his Sikh warriors,
with the result that the hill armies began to retreat.
Raja Kesari Chand, seeing this, addressed them
severe reproaches, whereat they rallied and again
began to ply their weapons. At the same time the
enemy now clearly saw that they could not over-
power the brave Sikhs, but must trust to time and
the starving of the garrison for the success of their
enterprise.

The siege lasted for about two months, with the
usual incidents appertaining to that mode of war-
fare. The Sikhs at one time determined to remove
the entrenchments of the enemy, and put them all
to the sword without firing a shot. They accord-
ingly made a night sortie in which several of the
hill leaders were slain.

As the. hill chiefs unsuccessfully prolonged the
blockade, Raja Kesari Chand prepared to intoxicate
an elephant and direct him against the city. Kesari
Chand compared the defences of the city to paper

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 133

and sand, which would fall to the ground at the
touch of the elephant’s trunk. The Raja of Mandi
again raised his voice in favour of peace and sub-
mission to superior force. Kesari Chand, however,
swore that if he did not take the fort by evening,
he was no true son of his parents. All the future
punishments attaching to great crimes against the
Hindu religion should be his, if he failed in his
enterprise. He represented that in point of numbers
the Sikhs were not even as salt in the porridge of
the hillmen.

When the Guru heard of Kesari Chand’s boasts
he said’ that Duni Chand, who had brought the
reinforcement of Manjha troops, was his elephant,
in comparison with whom Kesari Chand’s elephant
was as an ant. Duni Chand, however, had no such
confidence in his own strength and prowess, and
counselled peace with the hill chiefs. He com-
plained that the Guru was violent and quarrelsome,
not mild and patient like his father. He therefore
advised the Sikhs to fly from such a leader. None
of the Guru’s immediate followers would listen to
such advice, but Duni Chand succeeded in _per-
suading the troops he had brought with him to
promise to desert to Dhir Mal in Kartarpur and
adopt him as their guru. The plan of escape pro-
posed was to descend by scaling-ladders. When
Duni Chand was in the act of descending, his scaling-
ladder gave way, and he fell heavily to the ground
and broke his leg. This interfered with his design
of going to Kartarpur to place himself and his
troops under Dhir Mal’s orders, and he consequently
thought it advisable to return to his own home in
Amritsar.

The next morning the Guru after his devotions
observed that no soldier of Duni Chand’s contingent
was present. In reply to his inquiries, his Sikhs
told him of the flight of Duni Chand and his followers
during the night. The Guru calmly remarked, ° He

'

134 THE SIKH RELIGION

who hath run away through fear of death shall find
death awaiting him at home.’ The conduct of
Duni Chand, notwithstanding his efforts to con-
ceal it, became known in Amritsar. All the Sikhs
of that city were thus enabled to avoid intercourse
with him, and he became an object of social as well
as religious detestation. One night as he rose from
his bed he was bitten by a cobra, and died almost
immediately. His grandsons with his leading soldiers
afterwards went to the Guru to pray him to efface
the stigma attached to the family—a prayer which
the Guru graciously granted.

As proposed by Raja Kesari Chand, an elephant
was intoxicated and prepared for the attack on
Anandpur. All his body except the tip of his trunk
was encased in steel. A strong spear projected from
his forehead for the purpose of assault. Thus
arrayed and prepared for offence and defence, he
was directed towards the gate of the fort. After
him came the hill rajas with their armies. They
were overjoyed as they joined in the unwonted pro-
cession, and made certain that on that very evening
the fort would fall into their possession. The Guru
asked Vichitar Singh, one of his bravest and most
powerful soldiers, to become his elephant, and he
cheerfully consented. The Guru gave him a trusty
lance and said that as Vichitar Singh was prepared
to resist the mad elephant, so some Sikh should
now go to cut off Kesari Chand’s head. Ude Singh
offered his services for the purpose, and received the
Guru’s blessing and a sword. On this he dashed
into Kesari Chand’s ranks like a tiger into a herd
of deer.

Kesari1 Chand’s elephant was specially directed
against the fort of Lohgarh. On his way he killed
some Sikhs, and so alarmed the sentries at the gate,
that they deserted their posts and fled within the
city for protection. Vichitar Singh found means of
opening the gates and went forth to meet the furious

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 135

animal. He raised his lance and drove it through
the elephant’s head armour. On this the animal
turned round on the hill soldiers, and killed several
of them with the offensive weapons attached to his
trunk. Some he trod under foot and others he
impaled on his tusks, so that he became a powerful
ally of the Sikhs. The hillmen made great efforts
to stop his career, but in vain.

Meanwhile Ude Singh continued to advance
against Kesari Chand, challenged him, called him
a great jackal, and asked why he was fleeing from
his fate. Ude Singh vowed that he would take
vengeance on him for all the Sikhs slain. Kesari
Chand, infuriated at his taunts, discharged an arrow
which lodged in Ude Singh’s saddle-cloth. Ude
Singh on this dashed forward sword in hand, and
with one blow cut off Kesari Chand’s head. Then
poising the head on his spear, he rode into the fort
to exhibit it as a tangible proof of his victory.
Upon this the Sikhs rallied, and cut off all the foot
soldiers of the hill army within reach. Muhakam
Singh, one of the Guru’s five beloved, shore off the
mad elephant’s trunk with one blow of his sword.
The animal then hastened to the Satluj to bring his
pains and his unsuccessful career to an end by self-
destruction.

What remained alive of the hill army now took
to flight pursued by the bravest of the Sikh warriors
who slew them in numbers. In this retreat the
Raja of Handur was severely wounded by the brave
Sahib Singh, who thus added another to his long
catalogue of triumphs.

On the morrow the hill army rallied owing to the

1 In former times in India men were trained to contend and grapple
even without weapons with elephants. In the Afahabharat such
a contest is described. The warrior Bhima is represented as
crouching under the body of Bhagadatta’s elephant and causing the
animal to whirl round and round by the deft application of his power-
ful arms.

136 THE SIKH RELIGION

encouragement given it by Ghumand Chand, the
Raja of Kangra. He disdained to retreat, and called
on Ajmer Chand to witness his prowess. He said
that death and life were the ordinary concomitants
of warfare, and bravely maintained that neither
should be taken into consideration. Ajmer Chand
said, ‘ Thou art the pilot to take us across the sea
of mourning. We depend on thee to kill the Guru
and ‘thus put an end to these protracted and un-
satisfactory operations.’ The Raja of Mandi for
the third time counselled peace. Meantime the
homes of the hill rajas resounded with female lamen-
tation for their husbands slain. Kesari Chand’s
ranis plucked out their hair for the loss of their
brave spouse, and heaped reproaches on Ajmer
Chand as responsible for all this sanguinary and
unavailing warfare.

On the following day Ghumand Chand directed
the efforts of his troops against the city, but the
Sikhs behind their embrasures and defences were
fully prepared to withstand them. The horse Ghu-
mand Chand rode was killed by a bullet from the
musket of Alim Singh. There was a sharp mélée
round Ghumand Chand when he fell, but his party
succeeded in keeping the Sikhs at bay and rescuing
their chief. The battle lasted with varying success
until evening, when Ghumand Chand, as he was
proceeding to his tent to take rest after the day’s
exertions, was mortally wounded by a chance bullet.
All the hill chiefs now became disheartened and
demoralized. Raja Ajmer Chand was the last to
remain, but he too left Anandpur, and marched
home in the dead of night.

_ ‘Ajmer Chand, notwithstanding the disastrous

défeat of the allied armies, determined to allow no

reposetothe Guru. As early as possible he dispatched

an envoy to Wazir Khan,’ the Emperor’s viceroy in

Sarhind, to complain that the Guru would not suffer
This is, of course, not the old friend of the Guru.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 137

His Majesty’s unoffending subjects to abide in peace.
He prayed the viceroy to assist the hill chiefs in
destroying the Guru’s power and expelling him from
Anandpur. Another envoy was dispatched to the
viceroy of Dihli to make a similar complaint. The
two viceroys then made a joint representation to
the Emperor against the Guru. It happened that
at that time some wandering mimes visited the
Emperor’s camp. He ordered them to imitate the
Sikhs, and they accordingly did so. Though their
performance was obviously a travesty, the Emperor
could very clearly gather from it the love the Sikhs
bore one another in popular estimation ; and he con-
cluded that they had become a formidable power,
which it would be expedient to crush. The
viceroy of Dihli had enough to do to protect the
capital during the Emperor’s absence in the distant
Dakhan, so orders were issued to the viceroy of
Sarhind to proceed at once with his army to expel
the Guru from Anandpur.

CHAPTER XVII

After the Guru’s victory over the hill chiefs his
disciples rapidly increased, and thousands of recruits
were added to his army. To enhance his style and
dignity he ordered that his body-guard should for
the future be provided with arrows tipped with gold
to the value of sixteen rupees each.

Bhai Ram Kaur, came to visit the Guru. The
Guru’s mother, it is said, had been expecting some
holy man and was anxiously awaiting him. The
Guru expressed the pleasure he felt to receive the
representative of a family which ever since the days
of Baba Nanak had been true and faithful to the
Guru and the Sikh cause. The Guru baptized him
and named him Gurbakhsh Singh. This man is
principally remarkable for having, it is said, dictated

138 THE SIKH RELIGION

to a scribe called Sahib Singh the work entitled Sau
Sakhi, some account of which has already been given.

One Joga Singh came from Peshawar to visit the
Guru, and remained with him until the time for his
marriage to a beautiful girl, when he departed to
his own country. The Guru unwilling to lose his
companionship, and wishing at the same time to
make trial of his devotion, sent a letter to be delivered
him in the midst of the marriage ceremony. It
contained an order that whether Joga Singh was
standing or sitting, sleeping or waking, he should
on receiving it at once return to the Guru. The
messenger presented the letter when only two of the
marriage circumambulations had been completed.
Joga Singh at once stopped the marriage ceremony,
and forthwith proceeded to the Guru. On the way
he plumed himself on his obedience, and thus com-
mitted the sin of pride. In further forgetfulness
of the Guru’s teaching, he on arriving at Hoshiarpur
thought he would visit a courtesan to drown in her
company his regret for the interruption of his
marriage. Whenever he presented himself to the
woman, a servant was found at her door to warn him
away. Having waited until the early morning, he
at last bethought him that he was violating the
commands of the Guru, and he consequently deter-
mined to proceed on his journey. The Guru smiled
on seeing him. When Joga Singh told the Sikhs
the incidents of his journey, they knew that he had
been saved from sin by the miraculous interposition
of the Guru.

The Guru about this time heard that a large
imperial army was on its way to attack Anandpur
and assist the hill chiefs, so he deemed it expedient
to advance to meet them on open ground. He
accordingly went to Nirmoh, a village over a mile
distant from Kiratpur.

Raja Ajmer Chand and the Raja of Kangra said
that now was their time to seize the Guru. He

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH ~— 139

had no fort to protect him and no further means of
withstanding them, and it was not necessary to
await the arrival of the imperial army. Both sides
were prepared for battle. The Guru and his troops
took up a post on an eminence, and the hill chiefs
also took up what seemed to them advantageous
positions. A fierce combat ensued in which the
Sikhs were ultimately victorious.

One afternoon as the Guru sat in court the hill
chiefs engaged a Muhammadan gunner to kill him
for adequate remuneration. Ajmer Chand under-
took in the event of the assassin’s success, to give
him Rs. 5000 and the proprietary rights of a village.
The other rajas too promised proportionate rewards.
The Muhammadan assured them that all prepara-
tions for his design would be ready by the morrow.

Next day, as the Guru sat in the same place, he
was warned by a Sikh of the plot against his life,
and advised to take precautions. The Guru replied,
‘How long am I to remain in concealment ? What-
soever the Creator hath decided shall take place.’
During this conversation a cannon ball from the
enemy's camp took away the servant who was
fanning him. The Guru took up his bow and arrow
and shot the gunner while in the act of reloading.
With a second arrow the Guru killed the Muham-
madan gunner’s brother who also was serving the
gun. On seeing these two skilled artillerymen slain,
the hillmen took to flight. The Muhammadans were
buried on the spot called Siyah Tibbi or black hill,
and a votive temple was erected by the Sikhs to
commemorate the Guru’s escape.

The army of Wazir Khan, the viceroy of Sarhind,
in due time proceeded against the Guru. The Guru
now found himself in a very dangerous position
between the hill chiefs on the one hand, and the
imperial army on the other. He resolved, however,
to defend himself where he was, and his Sikhs
resolved to stand faithfully and valiantly by him.

140 THE SIKH RELIGION

They discharged arrows with fatal effect on the
imperial troops as they advanced, so that corpse
rolled over corpse. Wazir Khan gave an order to
his troops to make a sudden rush and seize the
Guru. The Guru was ably and successfully pro-
tected by his faithful son Ajit Singh and his other
brave warriors. They stayed the advance of the
imperial troops, and cut them down in rows, as_if
they had lain down to sleep in their beds. The
carnage continued until night rendered it no longer:
possible for the adversaries to see one another.
After a council of war held during the night the
crafty hill chiefs represented to Wazir Khan that
the cause of enmity between the Guru and them-
selves was that he had tried to forcibly convert
them to his religion. They also stated that the
Guru had offered to join them in making war on
the Emperor, whom he proposed to kill, and whose
empire he promised to transfer to them. Continuing
their falsehoods, they further informed Wazir Khan
that they had spurned all the Guru’s offers on account
of their loyalty to the Emperor. | ll |
- Next day the imperial army and the contingents
of the hill chiefs made such a furious assault on the
Guru’s forces that he felt obliged to give way. For.
him to return to Anandpur would have been in-
judicious under the circumstances, and would only
lead to its destruction, so he decided on retiring to
Basali whose raja had frequently invited him to his
capital. Then marched in the van Ude Singh, Alim
Singh, Daya Singh, and Muhakam Singh in command
of two thousand men. They were accompanied by
the Guru’s son Ajit Singh. Sahib Singh marched
next with one thousand of the bravest of the Sikhs.
The Guru himself took command of the rear guard.
The Guru’s departure was the signal for an attack
by the imperial army and a general mélée ensued
in which dust obscured the sky. Cries of ‘ Kill
him!’> ‘Seize him!’ ‘Allow not the Guru to

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 141

escape!’ resounded. Wazir Khan bit his thumb,
and said he had never before witnessed such des-
perate fighting. Though the Sikhs were escaping,
they were destroying his army. He urged the hil
chiefs to support him, but they were unable to render
’ effectual help. Until the Guru’s army reached the
Satluj there was stubborn fighting, in which the
brave Sahib Singh was slain. The Guru then told
his men to make a firm stand, while his son Ajit
Singh crossed over: with the baggage. The Guru
with his troops then crossed over taking with them
Sahib Singh’s body. The hill chiefs were overjoyed
at being, as they thought,-delivered from the Guru.
They made presents of elephants to Wazir Khan
and departed to their homes.

The Guru having succeeded in crossing the river
proceeded to Basali, and took up his residence with
its hospitable raja. Wazir Khan did not avail him-
self of his opportunity to pursue the Guru, but
returned to his viceroyalty of Sarhind. After resting
himself and his troops in Basali, the Guru amused
himself with the chase as of yore. He occasionally
crossed over to the left bank of the Satluj and made
desultory attacks on Ajmer Chand’s army.

One day during the chase the Guru was met by
an envoy of the Raja of Bhabaur. The raja
followed close behind, and pressed the Guru to pay
a visit to his capital. The Guru, to the regret of
the Raja of Basali, accepted the invitation. The
Raja of Bhabaur had such, faith in him, and was
so favourably impressed with the general repute of
the excellence of his religion, that he washed his
feet, and performed for him all the duties of hospi-
tality. The raja pressed him to remain with him
for some time, a request with which the Guru com-
plied. — _ |

A company of Sikhs who had sought to make.
offerings to the Guru represented to him that the
Ranghars and Gujars of. Kalmot had violently seized

142 THE SIKH RELIGION

what they had intended for him. They cried for
justice in the name of the Guru, but the Ranghars
and Gujars heeded not their adjurations. The Guru
found it necessary to punish these turbulent tribes
who had never allowed him peace. His troops dis-
armed them and captured and destroyed their fort.

The Sikhs having now enjoyed sufficient rest began
to feel time drag slowly. Their trusted leaders
Daya Singh and Ude Singh represented to the Guru
that it was a disgrace to have evacuated Anandpur.
The Guru was not long in determining to return
and ordered the drum to be beaten for the march.
The hill chiefs appear to have been unprepared for
his return and offered no resistance. The inhabi-
tants of the city were delighted on seeing the Guru
again among them. Buildings were repaired and
decorated, and offerings of every description were
made to the great spiritual and temporal leader.
It was one magnificent scene of rejoicing.

Raja Ajmer Chand, the Guru’s most persistent
enemy, finding him again firmly established in
Anandpur, thought it expedient to sue for peace.
Daya Singh recommended the Guru to return a
favourable answer to Ajmer Chand’s prayer. The
Guru accordingly wrote to say he was willing to
come to terms with Ajmer Chand, but would punish
him if he were again guilty of treachery. Ajmer
Chand was glad to have a promise of peace for a
time even with the threat held out to him; and~
he sent his family priest with presents and con-
gratulations to the Guru. The other hill chiefs on
hearing of Ajmer Chand’s reconciliation with the
Guru followed his example, and sent him tangible
indications of their good-will and friendly intentions.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 143

CHAPTER XVIII

In a conversation regarding the fabulous bird
called anal in Hindi and huma in Persian poetry,
some one remarked that arrows winged with the
bird’s feathers would reach a prodigious distance.
The Guru remarked that, as it was the peculiarity
of the bird’s feathers to carry arrows to its home
in the sky, so the repetition of one of the Gurus’
hymns would take the soul to heaven. ‘ He’, con-
tinued the Guru, ‘who speaketh truth, who serveth
the congregation of saints, and who hath confidence
in the Gurus’ hymns is my Sikh, and shall for ever
abide in bliss.’

Several Sikhs from the north of the Panjab came
to visit the Guru and present their offerings. A
Sikh residing in Rohtas in the present district of
Jihlam? thought that the most suitable offering he
could make the Guru was his daughter Sahib Devi.
He accordingly took her to him in a palki. The
Guru, in response to this offer, said he had relin-
quished family life. The girl’s father on hearing
this became much disappointed and _ distressed.
He pointed out that he had long since dedicated
her to the Guru, that in consequence every one
called her mother, and now no one would wed her
after her rejection. On the other hand, if she
remained single, great sin would in the estimation
of pious persons attach to her parents. He accord-
ingly pressed the Guru to reconsider his decision.

The Guru then told him to ask her if she would
consent to serve him. She replied in the affirmative.
The Guru upon this baptized her, gave her the
name Sahib Kaur, and consigned her to his mother’s
apartments. There she made a vow that she would

1 Bhai Sukha Singh makes this event occur when the Guru was on

his way to the South of India. In that case the father of the girl
might have come from Rohtas in Bihar.

144 THE SIKH RELIGION

not touch food until she had seen the Guru. The
Guru could not allow her to die of hunger, and
accordingly visited her. One day as she was sham-
pooing him, he asked her if she had any request to
make. She replied, that as her two co-wives had
sons, so she also desired a son to call her own. The
Guru replied, ‘I will give thee a son who will abide
for ever. I will put the whole Khalsa into thy
lap. The lady on hearing this was much pleased,
and prostrated herself before her master. It is still
not an uncommon thing for a Sikh to say, when
asked regarding his parentage, that his father is
Guru Gobind Singh, and his mother Sahib Kaur.
Such a Sikh would also say that he was born in
Patna, and resided in Anandpur. Indeed, Sikhs are
enjoined to give these answers at the time of bap-
tism.

One Jagga Singh performed most assiduous ser-
vice for the Guru, and was consequently much
envied by his fellow servants. Some said that
several men had done similar service and gone away
ungrateful, and Jagga Singh was not superior to
any of his predecessors. Others again said that he
being a new servant was no doubt diligent, but his
zeal would soon evaporate. The Guru overhearing
these remarks sent for a vessel of water, a stone,
and some sweets. He put the stone and sweets
into the water. After a short time he. ordered
them to be taken out. The stone of course came out
whole, but the sweets had all dissolved. The Guru
read his servants a moral lesson from what they
had seen. He said that those who served him well
and heartily, blended with him as the sweets had done
with the water; while those who served him for
show and appearance, had hearts like the stone
which never dissolved. He then ordered that no
one should for the future molest or speak evil of
his faithful servant Jagga Singh.

Raja Ajmer Chand,.though outwardly professing

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 145

peace, determined to again expel the Guru from
Anandpur. He accordingly sent a Brahman as an
ambassador, but really as a spy on the Guru’s pro-
ceedings. The Brahman on being introduced to the
Guru used very mild and plausible language. The
Guru, however, soon discovered that he was a very
dangerous person, in no way to be trusted, soft to
the touch like a snake, but filled with concealed
poison. The man duly set himself to the task of
ferreting out the Guru’s secrets. The Guru well
understood his designs, but at the same time main-
tained a semblance of friendship towards him. The
Brahman wrote to his master to describe the excel-
lent and confidential relations that subsisted between
him and the Guru, and at the same time suggested
that some dexterous persons should be sent to steal the
Guru’s horses. The Brahman also kept his eye on the
Guru’s treasury with the object of ascertaining how
much it contained, and how its contents could be
abstracted. In due time Raja Ajmer Chand dis-
patched some of the most expert thieves he could
find in his state, and they succeeded in depriving
the Guru of two of his favourite chargers.

The Brahman suggested to the Guru to go to the
approaching fair of Rawalsar near Mandi. The
other chiefs would attend, and it would be a good
opportunity of cementing friendly relations with
them. At the same time, he told the Guru’s Sikhs
as an inducement that if they went there they should
see stones swim. The Guru’s mother, his wives,
and his sons all pressed him to visit the fair. He
yielded to the wish of the majority, and ordered
all preparations to be made for his departure.

The Brahman informed all the hill chiefs of the
Guru’s intention to appear at the fair, and suggested
that they should be present also. The Guru prepared
a magnificent reception for them, and they were all
charmed with his engaging manners. The rajas
entreated him to forget and forgive their former

SIKH, V L

146 THE SIKH RELIGION

offences. They were assured in reply that the Guru
would treat them as they deserved at his hands.

- The Guru received the wives of the rajas in
a separate tent. He gave them instruction suitable
to their status and position, and they were entranced
with the interview. The Guru noticing their admira-
tion told the eldest among them that it was time
for their departure. The ranis were, it is said, loth
to move, but the eldest lady convinced them of the
propriety of terminating their visit. One of them,
Padmani, daughter of the Raja of Chamba, with
her father’s permission, sent the Guru a letter in
the form of a riddle—‘ What is that which is com-
plete ? What is its three-fourths ? What is duality ?
What is departure ? What are the two houses for
human beings? They ate some and took the rest
to sleep with them. O Guru, riddle me this.’ The
Guru replied :—

A god’s body is complete ; a man’s is only three-quarters
thereof, /

People run after wealth; men and women are but dust.

People wander in both worlds after eating and spending
their wealth in this.

When the world is destroyed every one goeth to sleep ;
this is the answer to thy riddle, O child.

The princess was much pleased on receiving this
answer, and with her father’s permission went again
to visit the Guru. When she made her obeisance
before him he patted her on the shoulder with his
bow. She said, ‘I am thy worshipper ; why hast
thou not patted me with thy hand?’ The Guru
replied he never touched any woman except his own
wives with his hand.

As the Guru was returning home from the fair,
he was met by the Raja of Mandi who besought
him to pay a visit to his capital The Guru readily
accepted the invitation. During his stay the Guru

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 147

promised the raja that Mandi should for ever remain
in his line.

While the Guru was occupied with the hill chiefs,
the Brahmans were counteracting his religious
efforts. Sikhs who before their conversion had
been Brahmans and Khatris now came in fewer
numbers to visit him. They did not wish that their
sacrificial threads should be thrown away among
the bushes, or that they should have to part with
their loin-clothes'. It was in vain the Guru told
them that Sikhs should spring from every bush on
which their sacrificial threads had been thrown.
He said that they who had no faith in him might
or might not come as they chose. The paltry
fellows who wore threads the Guru thought of
no use to him. His Sikhs should become very
powerful, if they freed themselves from Brahmanical
prejudices and influences, and adopted the Sikh
ritual when there were births, marriages, or deaths
in their families.

The Guru upon this prepared a general feast both
for Sikhs and Brahmans, but the latter refused to
attend, and reproached him with having taken away
the distinguishing marks of the Hindus. When the
Sikhs were feasting he said that as the Brahmans
had forsaken him, so he would forsake them, and
break off all relations with them. To some of his
own people who manifested symptoms of dissatis-
faction, he said that if they remained on good terms
with the Khalsa, they should always be happy ;
otherwise sorrow should be their portion. He had.
given everything to the Khalsa—spiritual and tem-
poral power, enterprise, glory, self-devotion, skill in
arms, and by these should they acquire empire.
His speech was heard by his first wife, and when
he went to his private apartments she inquired
what he had left his family. He replied that he

1 For the dhoft’or insecurely fastened loin-cloth worn by the Hindus
the Guru substituted the short drawers called kachh.

L2

148 THE SIKH RELIGION

had given to her children the stable empire of
heaven.

His Sikhs were one day discussing idolatry. The
Guru when asked to give his opinion said, ‘ All
worship is valueless without love. The worship of
images is unreal: the worship of God alone is real.
Nothing can be obtained by image-worship They
who place images before them and worship them
are fools. Let my Sikhs ever meditate on the Im-
mortal God and worship none besides. Let them
ever practise arms, that they may be enabled to
defend themselves against their enemies.’

On another occasion the Guru gave the following
reply to questions put him by his Sikhs :—

He who ever thinketh of the future is accepted as the
Guru’s disciple.

Famine is bad, and bad is cold; bad is the love of a
courtesan ;

Bad are debt and falsehood ; utter the truth, my friends,

‘The Guru further advised his Sikhs not to employ
an enemy as a doctor, not to listen to astrologers,
to avoid greed, and to consider wealth unreal as
a dream. Winding up his discourse he said, ‘ Let
my Sikhs eschew evil, adopt what is good, and have
confidence in me.’

Bishambhar of Ujjain had once fallen under the
influence of the Guru’s teach ng and made him an
offering of one hundred rupees. He now sent his
son, a Vaishnav called Har Gopal, with an offering
of five times that amount. The son on seeing the
Guru eat meat became disgusted. The Guru said
in his presence, that all relishes were pleasing to the
mind. A Sikh replied that a relish was only pleasing
to the tongue. Others also gave their opinions, and
when it came to Har Gopal’s turn, he said that the
real relish was faith in Sikhism. The Guru knowing
that he was not uttering his real sentiments, said,
‘Thou enjoyest no such relish, for thou hast no

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 149

faith in the Sikh religion.’ When the Guru addressed
him further reproaches, he fell at his feet and im-
plored his pardon. He then laid his father's present
of five hundred rupees before the Guru. The Guru
jn return gave him a steel bracelet’ to wear, and
promised that the love of God should abide in his
family.

Har Gopal, not at all satisfied or convinced by
the Guru’s teaching or example, took his departure.
On his way home he stopped at Chamkaur where
he met an earnest Sikh named Dhyan Singh. He
confided to him how he had wasted five hundred
rupees in making a present to a Guru who ate meat.
Dhyan Singh said he would restore him the money,
if he in return gave him the steel bracelet and the
love of God bestowed on him by the Guru. Har
Gopal was delighted on receiving such an offer, and
took the money in exchange for what he believed
to be the worthless gifts of the Guru. He traded
with the money and made a large profit. When he
reached home he told his father Bishambhar all the
events of the journey. Bishambhar was much dis-
tressed at his want of faith in the Guru, and remon-
strated with him. Har Gopal continued his pecuniary
speculations, and in the end lost all his moncy.
He was then satisfied that this was the result of
his want of faith in the Guru, and he prayed his
father to take him again to the spiritual and temporal
head of the Sikhs. The father was pleased to do so,
and set out with his wife and all his family. On
the way the party called on Dhyan Singh at Cham-
kaur and induced him to accompany them on their
journey.

‘Bishambhar on reaching the Guru begged forgive-
ness for his unworthy son. The Guru baptized

1 In the time of the Guru men who could afford the expense, wore
gold and silver ornaments. The Guru desired to wean his followers
from the practice, and counselled them to depend on steel both for
ornaments and defensive weapons.

150 THE SIKH RELIGION

them all, and thus addressed Har Gopal— Thou
oughtest to have had confidence in my words. He
who believeth that the ten Gurus are all the same
is a Sikh of mine. JT.ook on the hymns of the
Granth as the embodiment of the true Guru. Put
faith in the Guru, and becoming a Sikh perform
thy worldly duties. With humble words induct
others into the faith, and give thy daughter to
a Sikh. Let him who is a Sikh according to
the old rites, marry his daughter to him who is
a Sikh according to the new rites. Ifa Sikh cannot
find a husband according to the new rites for his
daughter, then let him give her to him who is a
Sikh according to the old rites, but willing to receive
Sikh baptism. Let a Sikh receive instruction from
another Sikh, and not consider whether he is of
high.or low degree. Look on him as a good Sikh
who thinketh not of caste or lineage. Let a Sikh
be honest in his dealings, and pray for him who
affordeth him maintenance. Whoever of the rank
of Sikh committeth treachery shall find no place of
rest. ,
- “Love the Name; repeat it in thine innermost
heart ; teach the Name. In the Name is happiness ;
the Name is a generous companion. He who liveth
for his religion, who eateth only to support his
body, who walketh in the Guru’s way, and who is
not enamoured of the world, is my friend. As when
a traveller goeth to a foreign land and is ever hoping
for the end of his journey, so should man hope for
his soul’s final repose by doing good works and
remaining estranged from the world. Listen to me,
my friend, and be ever ready to leave this life. Thou
and I shall depart. This is not a new ordinance.’
After this the father and son proceeded rejoicing
to their home. In the course of a short time their
wealth increased, and Har Gopal recovered all that
he had lost. Dhyan Singh told the Guru that, as
he was ploughing in his field on the day after he

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 151

had received the bracelet and God’s love from Har
Gopal, his plough exposed a buried treasure of great
value. The Guru congratulated him and called him
a devout Sikh who would always possess God’s love
and favour.

One day Mata Jito, the Guru’s wife, appeared
_ before him and said, ‘ Thou bestowest on thy Sikhs
deliverance, union with God, and worldly blessings.
Let me also be a partaker of thy gifts.’ The Guru
told her to continually repeat Wahguru with fixed
attention, and she should obtain what her heart
desired. After some time she acquired by her
devotion a knowledge of the future, and went to
the Guru in great tribulation. She said, “ Mercifully
save thy children, for I foresee thou art going: to
make them martyrs to thy cause.’ The Guru
replied, ‘Is it to reverse God’s decree thou didst
receive instruction from me? [I intended that thou
shouldst abandon worldly love, but it hath increased
all the more. I have already granted thy sons high
rank in God’s court. Wherefore anticipate not their
fate.’ Jito, understanding that the Guru did not
intend to save the lives of his children, said she was
going to abandon her body for she could not bear
to behold their death. The Guru replied, ‘It is
well; thou mayest go; thy children shall follow
thee. Death is the law of all bodies. Some. may
perish four days before and some four days after ;
but all must sooner or later pay the debt they owe.’
Upon this, it is said, Jito permanently suspended
her breath, and her soul took flight to heaven.

One day the conversation turned on an expression
used by Guru Har Kai, that the vessel which
Baba Nanak had constructed for the salvation of
the world had almost foundered. Guru Gobind
Singh vowed that he would repair it for the deliver-
ance of his Sikhs. On that occasion he gave
the following instruction to his assembled Sikhs—
‘I have established the Khalsa for the advancement

152 _ THE SIKH RELIGION ©

of true religion. Let not my Sikhs live on religious
offerings. He who bound by greed obeyeth me not
in this, shall be born again as a hog. Religious
offerings have the same dissolving effect on men’s
minds as borax on gold.’ He then quoted the fol-
lowing lines from Gur Das :—

As it is the custom of Hindus to abstain from the flesh of
kine, |

As swine and interest are solemnly forbidden the Muham-
madans,

As it is sinful for a father-in-law to drink even water in
his son-in-law’s house,

As even a sweeper though hungry will not eat hare’s
flesh,1

As a fly gaineth no advantage but dieth in the clasp of
honey,

So is greed for sacred offerings which are like poison
coated with sugar.”

‘ Let those who are baptized according to my rites
bear arms and live according to their means. Let
them remain true to their sovereign in the battle-
field, and not turn their backs to the foe. Let
them face and repel their enemies, and they shall
obtain both glory in this world and the heroes’
heaven in the next. He who fleeth from the battle-
field shall be dishonoured in this world, and when
he dieth shall be punished for his cowardice, and
nowhere shall he obtain a state of happiness. Let
the members of the Khalsa associate with one
another and love one another irrespective of tribe
or caste. Let them hearken to the Guru’s instruc-
tion, and let their minds be thoroughly imbued
with it.’

1 The Shiah Muhammadans will not eat hare. In the Quran blood
is forbidden as food, and it is believed by Shiahs that blood does not
separate by any process from hare’s flesh. Lal Beg, the sweepers’

Pir, was a Shiah Muhammadan, ¢o they adopt his prejudice in this

matter.
2 War XXXV, 12.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 153

It is said that, as the Guru was one day hunting,
he came on a field of tobacco. He reined in his
horse and gave expression to his hatred of the plant.
He maintained that it burned the chest, induced ner-
vousness, palpitation, bronchitis, and other diseases,
and finally caused death. He therefore counselled
his Sikhs to abstain from the destructive drug, and
thus concluded his discourse—‘ Wine is bad, bhang
destroyeth one generation, but tobacco destroyeth
all generations.’

The custom of sale and barter of horses and other
animals at religious fairs prevailed even in the time
of the Guru. He went to a fair held in Kurkhetar
on the occasion of a solar eclipse in order to purchase
horses to replace those which had been stolen or
killed in the previous warfare. Among other ad-
mirers Madan Nath, a superior of Jogis, waited on
him. On seeing the Guru he remarked that he had
the external appearance of a lion, but that he was
inwardly a saint. The Guru explained that his
external appearance had been assumed with the
object of inspiring terror into the Turks, who had
inflicted great misery and hardship on his country.

CHAPTER XIX

Two Muhammadan generals, Saiyad Beg! and Alif
Khan, were on their way from Lahore to Dihlh.
They were each in command of five thousand men.
Raja Ajmer Chand having heard of them thought
he would try to secure their assistance to attack
the Guru. The generals on receiving a promise of
one thousand rupees a day promised Ajmer Chand
their assistance. Saiyad Beg, however, on subse-
quently hearing favourable accounts of the Guru

1 The word Saiyid (st) is different from sazjdd (s\j0), which
literally means a hunter, and forms the first part of the name of
the general above mentioned.

154 THE SIKH RELIGION

and his Sikhs, changed his determination and with-
drew from the Muhammadan army. The battle
which ensued began with great fury between the
Guru’s and Alif Khan’s troops. At a critical
moment Saiyad Beg approached the Sikhs, and said
that as they believed in the Guru, so did he, and
he would therefore fight on their side. Alif Khan,
on seeing that Saiyad Beg had joined the Sikhs,
concluded that he had no chance of victory, and
retired from the contest. He was hotly pursued by
the Sikhs and Saiyad Beg. On the return of the
latter from the pursuit, he alighted from his horse
and went to offer his obeisance to the Guru. Having
broken with the Emperor, whose servant he had
been, he threw in his lot with the Sikhs, gave them
all his wealth to assist them in their struggles. with
the Muhammadans, and remained with the Guru
as a trusty and powerful ally.

A Brahman appeared one day in the Guru’s court,
and with a loud voice invoked his assistance against
some Pathans who had forcibly abducted his bride
at Bassi near Hoshiarpur. The Guru directed his
son Ajit Singh to go with one hundred horse, fall
suddenly on the Pathans at night, and restore the
Brahman his bride. The expedition was carefully
planned and courageously executed. In the early
morning Ajit Singh produced before the Guru the
Brahman’s bride and the offending Pathans. The
latter received condign punishment.

Raja Ajmer Chand again summoned his allies
with the object of chastising the Guru. There
came to him Raja Bhup Chand, Raja Wazir Singh,
and Raja Dev Saran. Raja Ajmer Chand made
a. speech in which he warned his brother chiefs
of the fate in store for them from the Guru, and
advised them to join him in another expedition to
crush him. They all expressed themselves in favour
of immediate measures, and addressed the Guru a
joint letter to the effect that they had lived peace-

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH | 185

ably for some time, but found he would not cease
his aggression, and they were therefore obliged to
declare war against him. The Guru briefly replied—
‘My Sikhs have only come into collision with those
who wantonly annoyed them. The Khalsa are
ever awaiting battle. To fight and die is the
duty of the brave. Come and see the power of the
Khalsa.’

The hill chiefs on receiving this reply took the
field without delay. It is said that they marched
against Anandpur with ten thousand men. Saiyad
Beg had not been able to induce his large force
to remain with him, so the Guru’s available force
at this time did not exceed eight hundred men.
In the former battles of Anandpur the Sikhs appear
to have remained behind their battlements and
embrasures. On this occasion different tactics were
adopted. They met the enemy in the open field
outside Anandpur. The Sikhs fought with their
usual courage and determination. Raja Ajmer
Chand, on witnessing their prowess and the carnage
they caused, retired from the battle in despair.
The other hill chiefs continued the fight, but put
themselves in the rear of their troops. Alim Singh
and Ude Singh displayed their usual valour on
behalf of the Guru. They wished to charge the hill
hosts, but the Guru restrained them, and ordered
them to use their muskets and arrows from where
they stood. They obeyed the Guru, and plied their
offensive weapons with signal success. The hill troops
on seeing their own van stricken down retreated.

The Guru surveyed the battle from a distance.
He was delighted as he saw the enemy fleeing in
every direction. The Sikhs now flushed with victory
forgot his orders and pursued the retreating hill
troops. The Guru was displeased at the temerity
of his men, and mounting his horse rode back to
Anandpur. The Sikh force, on finding the Guru
had left them, lost heart, retreated, and were in

156 THE SIKH RELIGION

turn pursued by the enemy. On their return to
Anandpur they tried to obtain the Guru’s forgive-
ness, but he refused to speak to them. At last,
yielding to the entreaties of Naurang Singh, one of
his foremost warriors, he resolved to receive and
pardon them. He said the Guru was the Khalsa
and the Khalsa the Guru, and the old friendly and
affectionate relations were renewed. He then
ordered his troops to return to the field and oppose
the enemy. He took up his own bow and effected
the usual destruction in the hostile ranks. This
was the signal for the Sikhs to second his efforts
and fall on the hill army like tigers on deer. Then
ensued fearful carnage, upon which the hill troops
again took to flight. Their leaders tried to restrain
them, but in vain. The battle was at an end, and
both sides departed to their homes.

Raja Ajmer Chand, however, was not satisfied.
He proposed to his brother chiefs that they should
again make war on the Guru, this time with the
assistance of the imperial troops. They accordingly
sent an envoy to Aurangzeb, and prayed him to
protect them against Guru Gobind Singh. They
represented that they were ancient subjects of His
Majesty, and would give him large tribute as the
price of his assistance and protection.

Meantime there were great rejoicings in the
Guru’s camp, and the wounded were carefully
attended to. Bir Singh, Madan Singh, a Rajput
chief, and Sham Singh visited the Guru. Sham
Singh pointed out to him that the Muhammadans
and Hindus were very numerous, and how could the
Sikhs who were so few contend against them, much
less hope to obtain empire? The Guru replied,
‘What God willeth shall take place. When the
army of the Turks cometh, my Sikhs shall strike
steel on steel. The Khalsa shall then awake, and
know the play of battle. Amid the clash of arms
the Khalsa shall be partners in present and future

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 157

bliss, tranquillity, meditation, virtue, and divine
knowledge. Then shall the English come, and joined
by the Khalsa rule as well in the East as in the
West. The holy Baba Nanak shall bestow all
wealth on them. The English shall possess great
power, and by force of arms take possession of many
principalities. The combined armies of the English
and Sikhs shall be very powerful as long as they
rule with united councils. The empire of the
English shall vastly increase, and they shall in every
way attain prosperity. Wherever they take their
armies they shall conquer, and bestow thrones on
those who assist them. Then in every house shall
be wealth, in every house happiness, in every house
rejoicing, in every house religion, in every house
learning, and in every house a woman.’ The
English shall rule for a long time.’? At the con-
clusion of the Guru’s apocalypse the Sikhs respect-
fully bowed.

The Guru was asked to describe the state of the
baptized Sikhs, whereupon he gave Alim Singh as
an example. ‘He was’, the Guru said, ‘ originally
a Brahman, but on adopting the religion of arms
he now shineth like Indar. He ever worshippeth
the Sword. He never accepteth gifts or invitations
to feasts. I took away his sacrificial thread because
if he retained it, he would still be a Brahman, and
subject to Brahmanical superstitions.’

The Guru continued to instruct his Sikhs—‘ He
who weareth long hair without receiving baptism is
a hypocritical and foolish Sikh. I will not show
myself to him. It is best to adopt one religion and
not distract one’s mind with others. They who call
themselves my Sikhs and stray to other creeds are

1 Under Muhammadan rule the Muhammadans used often to de-
prive the Hindus of their wives and daughters. In many cases, too,
the subjects were too poor to purchase wives for themselves. The
Guru possibly also meant that his Sikhs should embrace domestic

lives, and cease to demean themselves by religious mendicancy.
2 Siraj Parkish, Rut V, Chapter 36.

158 THE SIKH RELIGION

sinners. Let no Sikh associate with, much less offer
presents to, those who worship Sarwar, Gugga,' and
similar pirs, or with the misguided men who by
order of their wives visit male and female Brahmans
to have their fortunes told. He who giveth alms
to Brahmans, who slandereth the Guru and _ his
Sikhs, shall lay up for himself suffering. Put away
from among you the hypocritical Brahman who,
though he receive my baptism, removeth his hair
in the fashion of the Hindus.

‘Let not any Sikh of mine worship Hindu or
Muhammadan cemeteries and places of cremation,
or give alms to one who weareth a religious garb
for ostentation. I have forsworn such a person, if
any there be, and let him who stupidly worshippeth
false gods forswear me. He who feedeth the traveller,
who giveth alms on the occasion of the Gurus’ anni-
versaries, and who hath faith in the Guru shall
hereafter go to the Gurus’ abode. Let not my
Sikhs look at Brahmans who reside at places of
pilgrimage, or at those who don religious garbs and
strut foppishly. Let my Sikhs abide apart, and be
ever full of thoughts of God.

‘He who giveth his daughter in marriage to a
Sikh and taketh no money for her, is a Sikh of mine,
and shall after his death reach mine abode. Let
Sikh men and women sit together and hold divine
discourse. Let them worship God themselves, and
teach their children to doso. My Sikhs may receive
a voluntary offering for reading the Granth, or for
copying it, but must not demand remuneration.
Let the Sikh priest who receiveth an offering of
money feed the poor before he feedeth himself. Let
not my Sikhs be covetous. They who disobey this
order shall receive punishment from God. I love

1 Gugga is the name of a saint who is supposed to have become
a serpent and vanished beneath the earth. In the Panjab he is
worshipped by Hindus of the lower classes on the ninth day of
Bhadon.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 159

neither religious garbs nor castes. Men’s observance
of the Sikh tenets is dear to me, but still dearer is
their observance with sincerity. Let my Sikh love
not the world, but pass his time as if he were to
die to-day or to-morrow. Let him be ever true to
his sovereign. Let him cherish his neighbour, and
seek after righteousness. Let him eat and worship
at fixed times. Let him shake off sloth and sing
the Gurus’ hymns. Hear me, O Sikhs, practise not
selfishness. Assist men whether of high or low
degree, but contract not friendship with the evil.
False is he who maketh promises without intention
of fulfilment.

‘Let him who calleth himself a true Sikh of mine,
accept baptism and do good acts, so shall his previous
sins all depart on his seeking the Guru’s protection.
Let him renounce the service of demons and sprites,
and not worship stones or false gods. The hypo-
crites who stop their noses under pretence of medita-
tion and count their beads are very impure. Why
do the fools into whose hearts God’s love entereth
not, wander to places of pilgrimage ? ’

On another occasion his Sikhs requested the
Guru to give them further instruction that would
aid them in their temporal affairs and ensure
their deliverance from transmigration. At that
moment the Guru was engaged in other affairs, and
he delegated Daya Singh to deliver the necessary
instruction. Daya Singh thus spoke, ‘ Act as follows
and you shall be happy—Clothe and feed the Sikhs
as far as your means allow, shampoo them, and
bathe them, wash their clothes, fan them when they
perspire, wipe their shoes, wash their feet, scour the
dishes from which they have eaten, draw them cool
water from the well, and cook their food with the
utmost attention and cleanliness. Let them perform
night and day these and other similar offices for
the Sikhs, commit to memory the Gurus’ hymns,
and repeat the True Name.

160 THE SIKH RELIGION

‘On seeing any person involved in trouble take
compassion on him, and remove his sufferings to the
best of your ability. The exercise of mercy and com-
passion is very meritorious. He who practiseth these
virtues becometh the greatest of the great, and the
primal supreme Being will be merciful unto him.

‘Speak the truth. This bringeth great comfort.
Renounce falsehood which bringeth great misery in
its train. On seeing another’s happiness be not
envious thereof; why attach sin to yourselves for
no sufficient reason ? In the first place, your jealousy
will cause you annoyance, and you shall gain nothing
therefrom ; and, in the second place, God will be
angry with you and say, “It is I who gave, and
yet this man is burning with envy.” There are
also other evils attendant on this passion.

‘Abandon covetousness, practise contentment,
covet not another’s wife, another’s wealth, or
another’s children. If you do, you shall assuredly
suffer. . My friends, practise not oppression on those
whom you know to be weaker than yourselves. Be
not proud of the possession of learning, beauty,
great intellect, untold wealth, or similar fleeting
advantages. Above all deem the bountiful Creator
One alone.

‘If he who doeth good acts practise pride, they
shall be as futile as the bathing of an elephant.
Indulge not in praise of yourselves or dispraise of
others. If you do, it will be a great sin. If ever
you make a gift, boast not of it, but rather strive
to conceal it. Speak civilly and satisfy everybody.
Use not harsh language and annoy no one. Obtain
wealth by honest means and share your meals with
strangers.

‘Wear not dirty clothes, so shall your bodies be
ever clean. Associate not with thieves, adulterers,
highway robbers, gamblers, ingrates, thags, deceivers,
or men of bad livelihood. Remember the sinner is
worse than the sin, for he is the cause thereof.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 161

When you see an evil man, avoid him at once like
red-hot iron which cannot be held in the hand.
Associate with the good, for in such association vice
is put toshame. Listen to the history of the lives of
the Gurus. Afterwards where there is discourse of
God, listen to it with rapt attention.

‘Bathe in holy Amritsar. Behold God’s temple
where the Gurus’ words are ever repeated. Sit
down therein respectfully, and allow your minds
to think of nothing but God. Ever look with
devotion on where His light is_ resplendent,
whether you go there on the occasion of the Gurus’
anniversaries, or visit the place every six months,
or once a year if you live at a distance. If he who
deemeth himself a Sikh behold not Amritsar, why
did he take birth in the world? Unprofitable was
his advent, and he shall afterwards regret his negli-
gence.’

The Guru kept fifty-two bards permanently in
his employ and others occasionally visited him.
They wrote on all the nine subjects which in the
opinion of Orientals are suitable themes for poetry ;?
but the composition of eulogies on the Guru occu-
pied most of their attention. The Guru once had
the curiosity to weigh their compositions. They
amounted to about two and a half hundredweight.
The Guru included them in a compilation which
he called Vidyadhar. He so valued the book that
he ever kept it by him—even when he went into
battle—but it was lost in one of his engagements.
Some of the bards’ compositions are preserved in
the Suraj Parkash, where they may be perused by
the curious

1 The nine subjects are love, mirth, pity, anger, heroism, terror,
hate, wonder, and contentment.

SIKH. V M

162 THE SIKH RELIGION

CHAPTER XX

Owing to the repeated representations of the hill
chiefs, the Emperor sent a large army under Saiyad
Khan to reduce the Guru to submission. The Guru
received intelligence that the imperial army had
arrived in Thanesar, and would soon reach Anandpur.
On hearing this he mustered his troops, and found
they were only five hundred strong. The rest of
his army had dispersed to their homes. Nothing
now remained for the Guru but to make the best
defence he could with his present force. In a few
days Saiyad Khan’s troops appeared in sight singing
a war hymn to stimulate their spirits.

Maimun Khan, a faithful Musalman who had
attached himself to the Guru, said that he was
indebted to him for many favours, and asked per-
mission to show his prowess. The Guru gave him
a bow, and told him he would do well to kill even
his own co-religionists on account of their misdeeds.
The brave and faithful Saiyad Beg also came
forward to continue his services to the Guru,
Both Musalmans went like tigers into the battle,
and were followed by the Sikhs. The latter
represented to the Guru that it was futile to con-
tend with such a large army as had now appeared.
The Guru in reply encouraged them, and they
advanced boldly against the enemy. ‘The early part
of the battle was signalized by a fierce single-handed
combat between a hill chief and Saiyad Beg. After
they had repeatedly missed each other, Saiyad Beg
at last struck off the hill chief’s head. On seeing this
Din Beg of the imperial army rushed at Saiyad Beg,
for whom he cherished a double hatred as the slayer
of the hill chief, and as a deserter from his sovereign,
and mortally wounded him. Saiyad Beg died
praising the Guru. Then ensued a general engage-
ment of both armies. The Sikhs performed pro-

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH _ 163

digies of valour, and the Musalmans are said to
have fallen to the earth like minarets toppling from
their heights. Maimun Khan charged on horseback
in every direction and committed great havoc among
the imperial troops.

An unexpected circumstance now occurred. Saiyad
Khan, the general of the imperial troops, had long
been a secret friend of the Guru, and when he heard
that an expedition was to be sent against him, con-
trived to be put in command of it, so that he might
at last be able to behold the great priest of the
Sikhs, and do him signal service. The Guru knew
what was passing in Saiyad Khan’s mind, and
advanced ostensibly to challenge him, saying, ‘ If
thou attack me not, I will not attack thee.’ Saiyad
Khan on obtaining the wish of his heart to behold
the Guru, said that he was the Guru’s servant and
slave, and that he would never fight against him.
The Guru replied, ‘I am a poor man. It is only
rich men who have slaves. To conquer in war is
ever held honourable.’

Saiyad Khan dismounted and fell at the Guru’s
feet. The Guru conferred on him the true Name
and the supreme reward of salvation. Saiyad Khan,
however, did not actively assist the Sikhs, but turned
aside from the battle as he was unable to restrain
his troops or divert their energies to the Guru’s
assistance. They made a fierce onslaught on the
Guru’s soldiers, who began to retire, overpowered
as they were by a multitudinous host. But at
a critical moment the Sikh war-cry was ragséd,
upon which the Sikhs rallied and presented a bold
front to the enemy. After Saiyad Khan’s defection
from the imperial cause, Ramzan Khan took com-
mand and fought with great bravery against the
Sikhs. The Guru seeing this let fly an arrow at him
which killed his horse.

The Guru on closely observing the combat saw
that there was no chance of retrieving his position,

M2

164 THE SIKH RELIGION

so he decided to evacuate Anandpur. The Muham-
madans then captured the city and plundered the
Guru’s property. On obtaining this booty they
proceeded in the direction of Sarhind. Some Sikhs
not yet satisfied with warfare asked the Guru's per-
mission to pursue them. The Guru replied that as
his Sikhs were subservient to him, so was he sub-
servient to God. He repeated on the occasion the
third slok of the Asa ki War. By this he meant
that it was God’s will that he should be defeated,
and as all creation feared God, so did he himself at
all times.

The Sikhs feeling their defeat, again pressed their
request. The Guru at last yielded, and allowed
them to pursue their enemies. The latter were un-
prepared for attack, and fell into great confusion on
finding themselves pursued by the very men whom
they already thought they had vanquished. The
Turks who turned to oppose the Sikhs were killed,
and only those who took to flight escaped the ven-
geance of the Guru’s pursuing army. In addition
to killing and dispersing the Muhammadans, the
Sikhs deprived them of all the booty they had
captured at Anandpur. The remnant of the Muham-
madan army finally made their way to Sarhind.
On this the Guru returned and took possession of
Anandpur.

The Emperor called on his fugitive troops to
account for their cowardice. They pleaded that
they had been waylaid by the Sikhs and taken at
an unfair advantage. This excuse seems to have
been accepted, for the Emperor then turned the
conversation in another direction, and asked what
sort of person the Guru was, and what forces he
possessed. A Muhammadan soldier gave highly
coloured accounts of the Guru’s beauty, sanctity,
and prowess. He was, he said, a young handsome
man, a living saint, the father of his people, and in
war equal to one hundred thousand men.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 165

The Emperor was much displeased on hearing
this panegyric of the Guru, and ordered that the
panegyrist should be excommunicated. The Court
qazi advised that the Guru should be brought to
the Emperor’s presence by some stratagem. Accord-
ingly the Emperor sent him the following message.
‘There is only one Emperor. Thy religion and mine
are the same. Come to see me by all means, other-
wise I shall be angry and go to thee. If thou come,
thou shalt be treated as holy men are treated by
monarchs. I have obtained this sovereignty from
God. Be well advised, and thwart not my wishes.’

To this the Guru replied, ‘ My brother, the Sove-
reign who hath made thee emperor hath sent me
into the world to do justice. He hath commissioned
thee also to do justice, but thou hast forgotten His
mandate and practisest hypocrisy. Wherefore how
can I be on good terms with thee who pursuest the
Hindus with blind hatred? Thou recognizest not
that the people belong to God and not to the emperor,
and yet thou seekest to destroy their religion.’
When dispatching this reply to the emperor the
Guru conferred a robe of honour on his envoy.

The Sikhs of the Malwa and Manjha districts
now thronged to the Guru in great numbers, and
began to study the science of war under his tutelage.
Raja Ajmer Chand was distressed on seeing the
power and glory of the Sikhs daily increase, and
prevailed on the other hill chiefs to join him in
another mission to the Emperor to make further
complaints against the Guru. The Emperor was at
that time in the south of India, and thither the
raja proceeded in person to lay the petition of the
allied chiefs before him. It described the founda-
tion of Anandpur by Guru Teg Bahadur, whom the
Emperor had executed, and the martial and trouble-
some proclivities of his son the present Guru Gobind
Singh. It then proceeded to give the rajas’ own
version of the Guru’s proceedings, and how he had

166 . THE SIKH RELIGION

asked them to embrace his new religion and join
them in waging war against the Emperor.

Aurangzeb fearing that the Guru would become
too powerful, and also displeased at the state of
unrest that prevailed in the Panjab, ordered all
available troops under the viceroys of Dihli, Sarhind,
and Lahore to be dispatched against the Guru.
The hill chiefs who complained should also assist in
repressing the common enemy. At the conclusion
of the campaign the Guru was to be captured and
brought before the Emperor. It would appear from
an interview which Raja Ajmer Chand subsequently
had with the Dihli viceroy, that the latter, in view
of the safety of the capital of the empire, was not
at the time in a position to dispatch any troops
against the Sikhs.

The Guru was informed by a faithful Sikh of the
result of Raja Ajmer Chand’s mission to the Emperor.
He harangued his troops on the duty of religious
warfare against the Muhammadans, and on this
subject he had much to say. From the time of
the persecution of Guru Arjan up to the present
the emperors had been open or covert foes of the
Gurus and their Sikhs. The Guru affirmed that
death on the battle-field was equal to the fruit of
many years’ devotion, and ensured honour and glory
in the next world.

The time for the Diwali fair was now approaching.
Sikhs came in large numbers to make offerings.
The Guru issued orders to absent Sikhs to come
with their arms and assist him. The Guru’s orders
were generally obeyed, and warlike preparations
began at Anandpur.

The hill chiefs who arrayed themselves against
the Guru were Ajmer Chand of Bilaspur, Ghumand
Chand of Kangra, Bir Singh of Jaspal, and the Rajas
of Kullu, Kionthal, Mandi, Jammu, Nurpur, Chamba,
Guler, Srinagar, Bijharwal, Darauli, and Dadhwal.
They were joined by the Ranghars and the Gujars,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH _ 167

and all formed a large and formidable host. The
imperial army, however, amounted to double their
number. Wazir Khan, who had been put in supreme
command by the Emperor, mustered his troops at
Sarhind for parade and inspection.

Some faithful Sikhs ever kept the Guru informed
of the movements of his enemies. He read in darbar
the last letter of information he had received, and
vowed to destroy his enemies and put an end to
the sovereignty of the Mughals. The Sikhs were
delighted at the prospect of battle, and congratu-
lated themselves on their good fortune in_ being
allowed to die for their Guru and their faith. Several
of them put on saffron-coloured clothes in token of
rejoicing, and said, ‘ We have only four days to live
in this world. Why should we not endeavour to
obtain the exalted dignity of martyrdom which will
ensure salvation ? ’

Every variety of warlike weapon was served out
to the Guru’s followers, and no one was left unarmed.
The Guru took the precaution of laying in supplies
for the maintenance of the garrison in the event of
a siege. He addressed his troops, ‘Consider the
hill chiefs as well’ as the Muhammadans your
enemies. Fight bravely, and they shall all flee
away.’ The Guru then repeated the following
quatrain of his own composition :—

Blest is his life in this world who repeateth God’s name
with his mouth and meditateth war in his heart.

The body is fleeting and shall not abide for ever; man
embarking in the ship of fame shall cross the ocean of the
world.

Make this body a house of resignation ; light thine under-
standing as a lamp ;

Take the broom of divine knowledge into thy hand, and
sweep away the filth of timidity.

The chronicler judiciously remarks that the Khalsa
ought to be congratulated because, though few in

168 THE SIKH RELIGION

number, they had confidence in themselves to fight
for their religion, and delighted by anticipation in
the approaching conflict.

CHAPTER XXI

Wazir Khan’s troops advanced from Sarhind like
a surging sea. Drums sounded and banners flew at
the head of every regiment. In similar formidable
array came the troops of Zabardast Khan, the vice-
roy of Lahore. The two viceroys joined their forces
at Ropar. There they were met by the troops of
the allied Hindu rajas, and all proceeded against
the Guru to Anandpur.

The Guru on seeing the enemy approach in a body
ordered his artillerymen to light their fuses and
discharge their cannon into the hostile army where
thickest. When fire was opened, the enemy made
a charge to seize the artillery, but were quickly
restrained by the fatal accuracy with which the
Guru’s men served their guns. Meanwhile the Sikh
cavalry advanced and discharged their muskets at
close quarters. They were well supported by the
infantry who manned the embrasures. The allied
army had no protection, and consequently fell in
heaps before the city.

The battle continued with terrific violence. The
sun was obscured by the smoke from the Guru’s
garrison guns. Heroes were all stained with blood,
and cries of ‘Strike, strike!’ ‘ Kill, kill!’ every-
where resounded. Riders lost control over their
horses, which fled in every direction, and the battle-
field presented a truly ghastly spectacle.

The Guru sent for his two brave generals, Ude Singh
and Daya Singh, encouraged them, and gave them
renewed orders. The two chiefs courageously ad-
vanced with their troops and cut down the enemy
as reapers a cornfield. Dust flew into the eyes

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH _ 169

of their opponents, and rendered them powerless for
action. They had no power to withstand the forces
now ranged on the Guru’s side, and consequently
fell in large numbers.

The two viceroys were astonished at the un-
wonted destruction of their armies. They rallied
their men, but again the same evil fate attended
them. At last it was resolved to storm the fortress.
The Muhammadan troops were told that the Guru
was only a faqir, that he had no power to offer long
resistance, and must soon capitulate. The carnage
began anew. Many brave Muhammadans were dis-
patched to wed the soul-delighting nymphs of
paradise. The contest continued with the greatest
obstinacy, and horse and foot for the space of three
hours were mingled in indiscriminate slaughter.

The Muhammadans hazarded different opinions as
to the cause of the success of their enemies. Some
said that the Guru was a miracle-worker, and that
supernatural forces fought on his side. Others
maintained that the Guru’s success was owing
to the fact that his men were protected behind
their ramparts. While such conversation was being
held, the viceroys asked the hill chiefs to show them
how they were to obtain victory. If the same ill
success attended them to the end, the Sikhs would
never allow them to escape.

The hill chiefs suggested that they should then
cease fighting, and next day bring cannon to batter
down the fort. ‘It is true,’ the hill chiefs said,
‘the Guru’s army is a low rabble, but very brave.’
On a muster being taken, it was found that nine
hundred of the Muhammadan troops lay dead on the
field of battle after the first day’s engagement.

Next day the Guru mounted his charger, and put
himself at the head of his troops. The viceroys
observed a warrior mounted on a sable steed with
a gold embroidered saddle. He carried a bow
painted green, and his crest set with jewels glittered

170 THE SIKH RELIGION

on his turban. They inquired of Raja Ajmer Chand
who it was, and he answered that it was the Guru.
Every effort was now made to destroy him, but the
first fire of the enemy was aimed too high and took
no effect. The Muhammadan gunners were then
ordered to fire low, and promised large rewards if
they killed the Guru. They were equally unsuccess-
ful when they fired low. The allied armies finding
their guns useless resolved to charge the Guru and
his Sikhs. ‘The Guru seeing this began to discharge
his arrows with marvellous effect. The fearful

carnage of the preceding day was again renewed. |
Horses fell on horses and men on men. The Hindus »

and the Muhammadans entered on mutual recrimina- —
tions, each sect blaming the other for its ill-success. —
Upon this they combined and made a further effort _

to conquer, but were so vigorously and successfully
repulsed, that they were obliged to suspend hostili-
ties for that day also.

The viceroys and the hill chiefs took counsel at |

night and resolved on the morrow to encompass the
city, and cut off all external supplies, so that the
Guru and his troops might be starved into sub-
mission. While they were thus discussing, they
apprehended a night attack from the Sikhs, and
accordingly kept vigil.

Next morning a watch before day the Guru and
his Sikhs were found at their devotions. When
divine service was finished, the Guru ordered his
men to remain behind their embrasures and barri-
cades, and not be tempted to advance or come to
close quarters with the enemy. Meantime the
Muhammadans and Hindus contented themselves
with watching the city gates and hindering all ingress
or egress. At the same time they remained at a
safe distance from the missiles of the Sikhs.

The allied forces made another assault on Anand-.

pur. They espied the Guru at a distance and again
ordered their artillerymen to direct their cannon

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 171

towards him. The Sikhs were much disconcerted
by the enemy’s fire, and requested the Guru to
take up a less exposed position. The Guru replied
that he wore the armour of the immortal God, and
consequently no weapon could harm him. God was
his protector and had stretched forth His hand to
save him from all assaults of his enemies.

While the Guru was thus speaking, cannon balls
from the enemy hurtled in the air. They were again
aimed high and missed the Sikhs. When the
artillerymen were ordered to lower the muzzles of
their guns, their fire fell short of the Sikhs, and
struck the base of the eminence on which the city
stood. The allied armies discharged their cannon
hundreds of times, but, whether they fired high or
low, their missiles failed to have the desired effect.
Thus the day passed until night terminated the
conflict.

On the morrow skirmishes were renewed on both
sides, and the Sikhs inflicted severe chastisement on
the enemy. The Guru called his son Ajit Singh,
and told him to hold that part of the city called
Kesgarh and not venture forth. He gave him
further orders to kill any one who approached, to
remain on the alert at night, and to keep his guns
loaded. The Guru directed Nahar Singh and Sher
Singh to hold the fort called Lohgarh. For this
purpose five hundred men were placed at their dis-
posal. Alim Singh with another detachment of five
hundred men was ordered to hold the fort of
Agampur'. Ude Singh also received command of
five hundred men to defend another part of the
city. Daya Singh was ordered to guard the northern
ramparts.

The Muhammadans and the hill chiefs had now
completely invested the city, and the Guru’s supplies
were failing. The enemy noticed that the Sikhs on

1 This was a fortification within Anandpur, and not the town so
called which is at a distance.

172 THE SIKH RELIGION

guard went twice a day from their embrasures to
pray and do homage to their Guru. The Guru in
turn kept an eye on the proceedings of the allied
armies. One day he saw the generals play-
ing Indian draughts. Raja Ajmer Chand and
others were watching the game. The Guru taking
up his bow discharged an arrow into their midst,
but without striking any one. They examined the
arrow and knew by its golden point that it had
been discharged by the Guru. They admitted that
only a miracle could have sent it such a distance.
The Guru knew by his occult power what they were
saying, and wrote them the following letter. ‘O
Viceroy, that was not a miracle. Miracle is a name
for the wrath of God. I was merely practising
archery. The brave men who have obtained skill
in it, conceal not their accomplishments. Every-
thing is in God’s hands, whether He desireth to
make what is difficult easy, or what is easy difficult.’
The Guru attached this letter to an arrow, and then
discharged it. It lodged in a branch of a tree under
which the allied generals were seated. On perusing
the Guru’s letter they were astonished that he could
have divined what they were saying; and it is
said that they admitted his supernatural power and
prayed to heaven to preserve them from his too
unerring shafts, and his unsurpassed knowledge of
warfare.

On one occasion it was observed that the enemy
had come very close to the city and far away from
their defences. Sher Singh accordingly suggested
to Nahar Singh that it would be expedient to make
a night attack, and thus take them unawares when
they should of necessity become an easy prey.
If the Sikhs waited until morning, the enemy
would be far away, and it would be impossible to
reach them. The night was dark and favoured the
enterprise. Nahar Singh did not at first approve of
the suggestion, but subsequently altered his mind.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 173

The Sikh troops were awakened at dead of night,
and arms served out to them. Having performed
their ablutions, they sallied forth two hours before
daybreak. Sher Singh commanded them to make
but one charge and then return. They did great
havoc among the Muhammadans, killing them in
numbers, and succeeded in returning to Anandpur
by daybreak. The enemy on being aroused could
not see whence destruction had overtaken them,
and began to turn their arms against one another.
Father attacked son, and son attacked father, and
with mutual reproaches there resulted internecine
slaughter.

The Muhammadan generals were greatly dis-
tressed on learning what had occurred. They blamed
Ajmer Chand for the disaster, and asked how he
could again show his face to the Emperor. He had
told the Emperor that the Sikhs were very few,
and now whence had so many men sprung forth on
a sudden ? The Muhammadan generals threatened
to leave Ajmer Chand and his people to the mercy
of the Sikhs, but Ajmer Chand and Bhup Chand
offered them large presents, and thus prevailed on
them to renew. the conflict.

Next day the allied forces advanced to take the
citadel by storm. The Sikhs on seeing this put
their two great guns called Baghan (tigress) and
Bijai-ghosh (sound of victory) in position. The
guns were then charged, the fuses lighted, and aim
taken at the enemy where most thickly massed
together. The tents and standards of the Muham-
madans were first blown away. Their two generals
on seeing this retreated. As the guns committed
further destruction, both the Muhammadan and the
hill armies took to flight. That evening the Guru
offered thanksgiving, beat the drum of victory, and
put his cannon into a place of shelter.

The Guru was informed that a man called Kanaiya
used with absolute impartiality to draw water both

174 THE SIKH RELIGION

for his Sikhs and the enemy. The Guru asked him
if it was so, and he replied in the affirmative. He
quoted the Guru’s own instruction that one should
look on all men with an equal eye. The Guru
mused on his reply, and dismissed him with the
compliment that he was a holy man. His followers,
called Sewapanthis, form an orthodox and honour-
able sub-sect of Sikhs who live by honest labour
and accept no alms or offerings of any descrip-
tion. The Sewapanthis are also called Adanshahis
from. Adanshah, a rich banker who devoted his
wealth and his leisure to the propagation of their
doctrines.

When provisions were running short, the Sikhs
made several night sorties and took supplies from
the enemy’s camp. On such occasions they were
often attacked, but they generally contrived to
return with scant loss. When any one of their
party was cut down, they took his body and carried
it into Anandpur. In one of these sorties a Sikh
fainted. The Muhammadans seized him, cut off his
hair, made him eat their food and repeat their creed,
and finally circumcised him. They then, strange to
say, allowed him to escape, probably because they
thought they had accomplished a sufficiently pious
work in forcibly converting him. He informed the
Guru of what had happened to him, and prayed to
be received again into the Sikh fold. The Guru
inquired if he had cohabited with a Muhammadan
woman. He repliedin the negative. The Guru then
ordered him to prepare sacred food and distribute it
among the Sikhs, and his reconversion should be
complete. The Guru explained that a Sikh who
was forcibly converted to Islam was still a Sikh,
but that a Sikh who became a Muhammadan from
motives of sensuality, should forfeit his happiness
here and hereafter.

Several of the inhabitants now deserted Anandpur
on account of the difficulty of maintaining them-

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 175

selves. Provisions became excessively dear, a pound
of flour selling for a rupee. The Guru's troops,
however, remained to endure hunger and every form
of hardship. They had already decided to sacrifice
their lives for him, and they could not leave him
in this extremity. Complaints were made to his
mother by some of the malcontents, but she only
ventured to speak to him when her own private
servants rebelled against their fate. She said, “ Thy
Sikhs who were foremost in the fight are now dying
of hunger, and the enemy are at thy gates. [ach
of thy soldiers hath now but a quarter of a pound
of corn daily. How can men fight on such a pit-
tance ? Their patience is exhausted.’ The Guru
replied, ‘Having obtained the order of the immor-
tal God, my object is to increase and not diminish
the numbers of my religion. It is by enduring
hunger and hardships my Sikhs become strong and
brave.’

One day there was an alarm that the hillmen
were advancing in force. The Guru having caused
his great drum to be sounded, proceeded to the spot
whither the assault was directed. Bullets and
arrows poured from both sides, and the Sikhs being
now reduced in numbers had to retreat. The Turks
and hillmen inflicted great damage on them as they
did so, and took from them a large quantity of
booty. The Sikhs struggled, but their efforts were
ineffectual against overpowering numbers. Ude
Singh and others went to the Guru, and told him
that the Sikhs were defeated and their property
plundered. At this critical moment all his troops
prayed to the Guru for protection. The Guru said
they ought to feel no pleasure in the possession of
wealth which was not permanent, and no sorrow
at its departure.

Until now the beleagured garrison had been supplied
with water from a hill stream. This was discovered
by Raja Ajmer Chand, and he cut off the supply.

176 THE SIKH RELIGION

When the Guru was informed of this, he said the
Satluj would for the future supply him with water,
and the enemy should gain no advantage from the
stream they had diverted. The Guru promised that
water should come in time, and the name of the
stream should be the Himaiti Nala, or stream of
assistance.

CHAPTER XXII

As the siege was protracted the hardships of the
troops and of the other inmates of Anandpur pain-
fully increased. ations were now reduced to less
than a quarter of a pound of corn daily, and some-
times none at all were served out. The Sikhs
occasionally made foraging expeditions at night, and
fought hard for small booty. When this was ex-
hausted, they ground the bark of trees and converted
it into bread. They also lived on leaves and what-
ever fruit and flowers they could collect. It is
related that, notwithstanding their terrible sufferings,
they never lost heart or relaxed in the defence of
their city.

The enemy heard of the Sikhs’ forays, and ap-
pointed several scouts to watch their operations.
One night, as the Sikhs sallied forth, they were
observed and information promptly given to the
allied army. No action, however, was taken until
the Sikhs on their return approached the city.
They were then attacked by both Hindus and Muham-
madans in great numbers. The Sikhs threw down
their bundles and determined not to die like jackals.
‘As long as there is breath in our bodies,’ they
said, ‘let us wield our swords and place ourselves
beyond the fear of transmigration.’ Although they
were faint with hunger, yet each of them killed two or
three of theenemy. Finally overpowered by superior
numbers, and unable to receive assistance from

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 177

within the city, they all perished fighting to the
last.

The rajas now formed a plan to induce the Guru
again to leave Anandpur. They promised that, in
the event of his doing so, their armies would with-
draw, and the Guru might afterwards return when-
ever he pleased. The Guru heeded not this pro-
posal. It was repeated several times, but the Guru
still refused to accept it. The Sikhs never heard
of these overtures until one day in darbar Raja
Ajmer Chand’s envoy produced his master’s letter.
Raja Ajmer Chand stated that it contained no
deception, but was honestly intended. It would, he
said, be well if the Guru and his troops evacuated
the city as early as possible. They might take all
their property with them. The Sikhs who heard
this proposal went to the Guru’s mother to urge
it on her, and she promised to use her influence
with him. She said, ‘ My son, this is a propitious
offer. Take us with thee and leave Anandpur. I am
thy mother, and I ask thee to obey me and seek
shelter elsewhere. Thus shalt thou restore life to
thy starving Sikhs. My son, fighting were perhaps
well if we had wherewithal to maintain ourselves;
but now we are involved in poverty and hardships
of every description. If thou let the opportunity
pass, it will not return again. The hillmen and the
Turks are prepared to swear that they will grant
us safe conduct, so it is well that we should depart.
Moreover, Khwaja Mardud hath now arrived from
the Emperor with a message, that he hath vowed
to capture thee or die in the effort. All the rajas
are on his side. Wherefore, my son, let us with-
draw from Anandpur. There is nothing more
precious or dearer than life. The Guru replied,
“Mother dear, the hillmen are idolaters and false.
Their intellect is like that of the stones they worship.
There is no reliance to be placed on their promises.
The Turks are equally evil. Their very falsehood

SIKH. \ N

178 THE SIKH RELIGION

will destroy them all. The Khalsa shall extend
and wreak vengeance on its enemies.’ The Guru
was unable to convince his mother or his Sikhs of
the wisdom of the course he was following. He
then hit on a plan by which they should be con-
vinced that the overtures made to him had been
treacherously intended.

The Guru sent for Raja Ajmer Chand’s Brahman
envoy, and told him he would evacuate Anandpur
if the allied armies would first allow the removal of
his property. He asked for pack-bullocks for the
purpose. These with the necessary sacks were readily
supplied him. The Hindus swore on the salagram
and the Muhammadans on the Quran, that they
would not deceive him or molest his servants de-
parting with his property. The Guru then ordered
his treasurer to collect all the old shoes, worn-out
clothes, bones of dead animals, broken utensils,
horse dung, and similar offal that could be found
in the Anandpur bazar, and load the sacks there-
with. On each sack was to be placed a piece of
brocade to make it appear that the contents were
valuable. To the bullocks’ horns were attached
torches, so that the excellence of the cloth with
which the sacks were covered, and also the depar-
ture of the bullocks might not escape the observation
of the enemy. It was arranged that the bullocks
with their loads were to start in the dead of night.
Naturally, the brilliancy of the procession did not
escape the enemy’s notice, and they rejoiced like a
parched field on receiving rain. Six thousand of them
were in ambush to plunder the supposed property of
the Guru. The Sikhs on discovering this discharged
their cannon and caused great destruction among
the serried ranks of the Hindus and Muhammadans.
The sacks were, however, all seized by the enemy,
and carefully guarded until morning, as it was then
too late to examine their contents. It was only on
the morrow the enemy discovered the Guru’s strata-

LIkE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 179

gem, and painfully realized the fact that they had
committed perjury for the sake of the sweepings of
the Anandpur market-place! The Guru availed
himself of the incident to demonstrate his own fore-
thought and the treachery of the enemy. He told
his troops that everything they had endured had
been by the will of God, and he quoted Guru Nanak—
‘Happiness is a disease, the remedy for which is
unhappiness.’

At last came an autograph letter from the Emperor
to the Guru—‘ I have sworn on the Quran not to
harm thee. If I do, may I not find a place in God’s
court hereafter! Cease warfare and come to me.
If thou desire not to come hither, then go whither-
soever thou pleasest.’ The Emperor’s envoy added
on his own account, ‘O Guru, all who go to the
Emperor’s court praise thee. On that account the
Emperor feeleth certain that an interview with thee
will add to his happiness. He hath sworn by
Muhammad and called God to witness that he will
not harm thee. The hill rajas have also sworn by
the cow and called their idols to witness, that they
will allow thee safe conduct. Bear not in mind any-
thing that hath occurred. The attack on thine oxen
was not prompted by any raja. The attackers have
been generally punished, and the ringleaders are in
prison. No one now, O true Guru, dareth do thee
harm, wherefore evacuate the fort, at any rate for
the present, and come with me to the Emperor.
Thou mayest afterwards do what thou pleasest.’
The Guru on hearing this said, ‘ You are all liars,
and therefore all your empire and your glory shall
depart. You all took oaths before this and then
perjured yourselves. Your troops, whose business
it was to fight, have become robbers, and therefore
you shall all be damned.’

The Sikhs went again to the Guru’s mother to
complain of his refusal to listen to reason. Upon
this she told him that if he did not leave Anandpur,

N2

180 THE SIKH RELIGION

he would be deserted by his Sikhs and even by his
family, and he would be then left alone to the
mercy of the hostile armies. Some Sikhs also made
a direct representation to him, and pleaded that
through hunger they were unable to endure any
longer the fatigue of the siege and the brunt of war.
And if they were now in their weak and emaciated

condition to make an effort to force their way ©

through the enemy’s ranks, they would all be inevi-
tably massacred. They therefore advised capitulation.

The Guru on hearing these representations said to
his Sikhs, ‘ My brethren, they who leave the garrison
now will all be killed, and I do not desire to be
held responsible. Wherefore give me a statement
in writing that you have totally renounced me, and
then you may act as you please. But if, on the
other hand, you wish to abide by my advice, I will
support you, and the immortal God will extend His
protecting arm over us all. Adopt whatever alter-
native you please.’ On hearing this the Sikhs and
the Guru’s mother hesitated. Her son was dear to
her, but so was her own life. She resolved, however,
that she would not separate from him. The Sikhs
too felt that having vowed never to leave the Guru,
they could not abandon him or make a formal
declaration that he was not their Guru, and they
were not his Sikhs.

When the Turks and the rajas heard from the
imperial envoy of the failure of his negotiations,
they decided to send the Guru’s mother an embassy
with a request that she and her grandchildren
should abandon the fort. This was in the hope that
when the Guru found himself alone he would follow
them. The envoy first proceeded to the Guru and
endeavoured to persuade him to evacuate. The
Guru replied that he could not rely on any promise
made by the idolatrous rajas or the hypocritical
Muhammadans. He then expatiated on the villanies
and inherent turpitude of Aurangzeb—a man who

—— = ——— =

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 181

had no regard for an oath, and whose god was
money, as was apparent from his persecution of
the King of Golkanda, against whom his operations.
were now directed.

The envoy seeing there was no hope from the
Guru then proceeded to the Guru’s mother, and
employed all his arguments to convince her that it
was expedient for the Guru and his Sikhs to leave
Anandpur—‘O lady, save thyself and all thy
family. What will it avail thee to remain here;
and if thou depart what harm will it do thee?
The Guru’s Sikhs are everywhere ready to receive
thee, and, whithersoever thou decidest to go, thou
mayest abide in happiness. This city will still be
thy property, but leave it now and end the quarrel.
Hundreds of thousands are waiting to behold thee.
Explain matters to thy son and persuade him to
obey thee. If not, then prepare to go thyself, and
he will follow thee of his own accord. If thou listen
not to this advice, great sufferings will result.’
The Guru’s mother promised to use all her efforts
to persuade her son, and said she would place
confidence in the oaths of the Turks and the hill
rajas.

The Sikhs, sore stricken with hunger, supported
the envoy’s representation. ‘O true Guru, knowing
us to be thine own, grant us the gift of life. If
thou agree not to this, let us retire to some forest
where the Turks cannot reach us. Here shut up
in this fort many have died, and many more will
die. No food can come to us from outside, and we
have now been fighting for a long time. O great
king, how can we who are famished with hunger
continue to do battle. Accept our advice. Oblige
us not to renounce thee, and expel us not from thy
faith. If thou adhere to thine own resolve, we must
part company, for life is dear to every one, and
what will a dying man not do? Nay, we pray thee
to assist thy sect and save our lives.’

182 THE SIKH RELIGION

The Guru replied, ‘My brethren, waver not. I |
only desire your welfare. You know not that these —
people are deceivers and design to do us evil. If
you hold out a little longer as you have done, you
shall have food to your heart’s content. I ask you
to wait only three weeks.’ When the Sikhs refused
to wait so long, the Guru asked them to wait at least
for five days, and the great God would send them
succour.1. The Sikhs refused to wait even a single
day, and said it was impossible for them to do so
in their dire distress. The Guru repeated his request,
and said that the enemy would then retire, and
they should all be happy. If his Sikhs were to
leave now they would inevitably be killed. ‘As
a child,’ continued the Guru, ‘on seeing fire, trieth
to grasp it while his parents restrain him, so, O dear
Khalsa, you are rushing to your destruction, while
I am endeavouring to save you.’

The Sikhs replied, “O great king, we cannot be
in a worse plight outside the city than we are within.
We shall all die of hunger here, and if we sally
forth we may escape and kill some of the enemy.
We cannot remain with thee an instant longer.’
These arguments were recommended for adoption
by the Guru’s mother—‘ My son, be not obstinate.
It is best to leave the fort and save thy people.
The Turks and the rajas will give thee solemn oaths
of safe conduct, and what more can they do? Now
is the time, my son ; thou shalt not again have this
opportunity. If the enemy come and take the fort
by storm, what wilt thou do ? Thy Sikhs are dying
of hunger, and they will all soon be dead.’

The Guru replied, ‘O mother dear, thou knowest
not the Turks and the hill rajas. I have already
shown thee their deceit, but yet thou art not satisfied.
Thou desirest to save thy family, but how will the

1 The Guru was then expecting reinforcements of the Malwa Sikhs

and hence his request for delay. In fact the reinforcements did come,
but arrived too late for the defence of Anandpur.

|

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 183

enemy allow you all to pass? Thou thinkest what is
good is evil, and what is evil is good.’ The Guru
then turning to the Sikhs said, ‘ My brethren, they
who desire to go may now renounce me and depart.’
On hearing this the Guru’s mother was greatly dis-
tressed, and rose and sat apart to give vent to her
grief. The Sikhs went and sat around her. The
Guru’s wives then came forth and joined the sorrow-
ing group. The Guru’s mother, wiping away her
tears, broke silence—‘ The Guru deemeth it not
proper to leave the fort. O holy Guru Nanak, dispel
my sorrow, assist us now, and give my son right
understanding that he may protect his people! I
have given him much advice, but he heedeth it not.
Even if the Sikhs renounce him and depart, he
telleth them they shall all be killed. What he saith
is never uttered in vain, and of this I have abundant
proof. Yet if we remain in Anandpur, the enemy
will soon come and put us all to death.’

The Sikhs began to reflect—‘ We have spent all
our lives in the Guru’s service. How can we leave
him now ? It is he who assisteth us both here and
hereafter. He asketh us to remain with him for
five days more. What will happen in five days?
We shall only lose our lives in vain. We will cer-
tainly go forth. It is better to fight and die than
to starve. We will not formally renounce the Guru.
Were we to do so, we should incur great obloquy,
and the seed of Sikhism would perish.’ After
much reflection and hesitation, however, the Sikhs
changed their minds and said, “It is better for us
to break with him, and write a document to the
effect that he is no more our Guru and we are no
more his Sikhs. If we again meet him alive, we
shall induce him to pardon us.’

The allied armies too, hearing that the Guru's
mother was in favour of evacuating the fort, lost
no time in their negotiations. They called a Saiyid
(or reputed descendant of Ali the Prophet’s son-in-

184 THE SIKH RELIGION

law), and a Brahman, both of whom were to swear,
on behalf of the allied armies, solemn oaths of safe
conduct for the Guru should he evacuate Anandpur.
The likeness of a cow was made in flour, a salagram

and a knife were placed in front of it, and these |
articles were sent to the Guru with a letter to the ©

effect that whoever meditated evil against him,
should be deemed a cow-killer or the worst form
of assassin. All the Hindu chiefs put their seals to
this letter.

The Saiyid took the Emperor’s letter and the
Ouran on his head and, accompanied by several
Muhammadan officers, proceeded to the Guru. The
Guru refused to listen to them. They then went
to Mata Gujari and repeated their representations.
They asked her to leave Anandpur, in which case
her son would assuredly follow. She was, however,
unable to prevail on him. Gulab Rai and Sham
Singh (Sham Das), grandsons of Suraj Mal addressed
the Guru and advised him to obey his mother. The
Guru still proved obdurate. Upon this his mother
prepared to depart with her two youngest grandsons,
Jujhar Singh and Fatah Singh. On seeing the
Guru’s mother take her departure, the Sikhs began
to waver in their allegiance to the Guru. Paper,
pens, and ink were produced for those who wished
to write letters of renunciation, and in the end only
forty Sikhs decided to remain with their religious
Chief and share his fortunes. The Guru told them
that they too might desert him. They refused, and
said that, if they did so, the service they had already
performed for him would prove unavailing. They
would either remain within the fort or force their
way out as the Guru directed. The Guru then knew
that the seed of his religion would germinate and
flourish. He kept the deeds of renunciation, and
also took from the envoys the documents they had
brought. He then cra them and requested
to be left alone.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH _ 185

When the Guru found himself alone, he set fire
to his tents and other inflammable articles. What
was non-inflammable he buried in the earth. He
now finally determined to leave Anandpur, and gave
orders to his men that they were all to march at
night and during the darkness proceed to the east
as far as their strength would allow them. When
the Guru’s mother, wives, and two youngest children
had set out, the Guru went to visit his father’s
shrine and entrusted it to one Gurbakhsh, a holy
Udasi, telling him that he should never suffer dis-
tress as long as he remained its custodian.

When the Guru was ready to depart, Daya Singh
and Ude Singh walked in front of him, the second
batch of baptized Sikhs on his left, Muhakam Singh
and Sahib Singh on his right. His sons Ajit Singh
and Zorawar Singh followed with bows and arrows.
Then came Bhai Himmat Singh carrying ammunition
and matchlocks. Gulab Rai, Sham Singh, and other
friends and relations of the Guru accompanied him.
The rest of the Guru’s servants and camp followers,
about five hundred in all, brought up the rear.

CHAPTER XXIII

The Guru marched by Kiratpur and thence to Nir-
moh. While at Nirmoh he gave Gulab Rai and
Sham Singh a letter to the Raja of Sirmaur, which
contained a request that he would give them a
village to abide in. From Nirmoh the Guru and
his party proceeded to Ropar. When the allied
troops attacked the rear guard under Ajit Singh,
Ude Singh asked and obtained permission to relieve
him. The enemy surrounded and killed the daunt-
less Ude Singh, the hero of many a desperate battle,
the bravest of the Guru’s brave warriors, believing
that he was the Guru himself.

The Guru sat down on the margin of a stream

186 THE SIKH RELIGION

called Sarsa to await the issue of the conflict. When
Ajit Singh delayed coming, the Guru sent Jiwan
Singh to fetch him. Jiwan Singh was killed in the
endeavour. Before arriving at Ropar, the Guru met
* his mother and two youngest children, and exhorted
them to proceed quickly on their journey. A Sikh
who resided in Dihli also met the Guru on the way,
and asked if he could perform any service for him.
The Guru said that he might take his family to
Dihli. The Sikh said he had a relation in Ropar
who would keep the Guru’s family there for the
present. The Guru’s mother met a Brahman, a
native of Kheri near Sarhind, and discharged cook
of the Guru, who offered to entertain her party, and
she decided to take her grandsons with her and
accept his shelter and protection. Her daughters-
in-law remained at Ropar for the night, and next
day set out for Dihli under the trusty Sikh’s pro-
tection.

The allied forces continued to harass the Guru’s
retreat. He left some of his men at Ropar to arrest
their progress, and went himself with thirty-five
chosen Sikhs towards Chamkaur. On the way at
a place called Baru Majara he received information
that a fresh contingent of the imperial army was close
at hand to capture him. In no wise dismayed he
continued his journey towards Chamkaur. On
arriving near that town he took refuge in a garden,
and was joined by five of the Sikhs he had left at
Ropar. All the others had been slain.

The Guru sent to a Jat agriculturist to ask him
for a place of rest. The Jat tried to put him off
with excuses, but the Guru placed him under arrest
for the moment. He then took the Jat’s house,
and turned it into a miniature fort where he
took shelter with his men. The allied forces could
find no trace of him, and were much distressed
at his disappearance. But the troops marching
from Dihli discovered the Guru’s residence and

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 187

proceeded thither. The united. forces now con-
centrated their attack on the Guru and were joined
by his ancient enemies the Ranghars and Gujars.

The Guru then addressed his men, ‘ You would
not listen to my advice to remain in Anandpur.
When you took your departure, you did not calcu-
late that this time of peril would ever arrive.
You trusted to the oaths of Muhammadans on the
Ouran and of the hillmen on their gods and cows,
and this is the result. There is no opportunity now
of employing the traditional means of dealing with
enemies. We can only defend ourselves. There are
hundreds of thousands against us. Die not the
death of jackals, but fight bravely as you have
hitherto done, and avenge the deceit practised by
those great sinners. The more you strive, the
greater shall be your reward. If you fall fighting
you shall meet me as martyrs in heaven. If you
conquer you shall obtain sovereignty, and in either
case your lot shall be envied by mortals.’

Having thus addressed his Sikhs, the Guru
appointed eight men to guard each of the four walls
of his extemporized fort. Kotha Singh and Madan
Singh held the door, he himself, his two sons,
Daya Singh and Sant Singh the top story. Alim
Singh and Man Singh were appointed sentinels.
Thus was made up the number of forty who accom-
panied the Guru. Five Sikhs went forth to contend
with the enemy. After fighting with great bravery
they were killed. Then Khazan Singh, Dan Singh,
and Dhyan Singh went forth, and after killing
several of the enemy, were killed themselves. The
brave Muhakam Singh, following the example of his
fellows, went forth and fell pierced by scores of
bullets.

While the Guru was lauding Muhakam Singh’s
valour, and saying that he should be emancipated,
Himmat Singh, who was one of the first Sikhs bap-
tized, asked permission to go forth to repel the

188 THE SIKH RELIGION

enemy. When he was slain the second batch of five
Sikhs baptized by the Guru went forth, and sold
their lives dearly. Ishar Singh and Deva Singh were
the next to contend with the Muhammadans. While
these were alive and fought, the enemy thought
they were endowed with supernatural power.

Daya Singh and others prayed the Guru to escape
by some means, and leave them to contend with
the enemy. If the Guru were saved, the seed of
religion would remain. Six more of the Guru’s
warriors, Muhar Singh, Kirat Singh, Anand Singh,
Lal Singh, Kesar Singh, and Amolak Singh asked
permission to go forth and try their strength with
the Turks. The six brave warriors were all killed.
Nahar Khan, one of the recently arrived imperial
officers, attempted to scale the little fort, but was
shot down by the Guru. Ghairat Khan, another
officer of the new army, then advanced, and was
also slain by the Guru. After this none of the
Muhammadan officers had the courage to attempt
the fatal ascent. They formed a plan, however. to
rush and seize the Guru. In this they utterly failed,
for the Guru shot them down in numbers and held
at bay the multitudinous Muhammadan host.

The Guru’s son Ajit Singh now asked permission
to go forth and fight single-handed with the enemy.
He said he was the Guru’s Sikh and son, and it was
incumbent on him to fight even under desperate
circumstances. The Guru approved of this proposal.
Ajit Singh took with him five heroes, namely, Alim
Singh, Jawahir Singh, Dhyan Singh, Sukha Singh,
and Bir Singh. Ajit Singh performed prodigies of
valour, and Muhammadans fell before him as shrubs
before the wind. His companions all fought bravely
and desperately. Zabardast Khan, the Lahore vice-
roy, was greatly distressed on seeing so many of
his men slain, and called on his army to at once
destroy the handful of Sikhs who were causing
such havoc in the imperial ranks. When the

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH _ 18q

swords of the Sikhs were broken and their arrows
spent, they spitted the enemy with their spears.
Ajit Singh broke his spear ona Muhammadan. The
enemy then made a fresh attack and fatally wounded
him,*defenceless as he was. He realized, however,
that he had acted as befitted his race. He fell and
slept the sleep of peace on his gory bed. The Guru
on his death said, ‘O God, it is Thou who sentest
him, and he hath died fighting for his faith. The
trust Thou gavest hath been restored to Thee.’
The five Sikhs who accompanied him were also slain.

Zorawar Singh, the Guru’s second son, on seeing
his brother’s fate could not restrain himself, and
asked his father’s permission to go forth and fight
as Ajit Singh had done and avenge his death. The
youth took five more Sikhs with him and proceeded
to commit havoc among the enemy. The chronicler
states that Zorawar Singh made his way through
the Muhammadan army as a crocodile through a
stream. The enemy dropped like rain in the month
of Sawan and Bhadon, until Zorawar Singh and his
five companions fell overpowered by numbers.

His remaining Sikhs, seeing that all hope was at
an end, again advised the Guru to effect his escape.
He agreed, seated near him Daya Singh, Dharm
singh, Man Singh, Sangat Singh, and Sant Singh,
who alone remained of the army, and proceeded to
entrust the Guruship to them. He said, ‘I shall
ever be among five Sikhs. Wherever there are five
Sikhs of mine assembled they shall be priests of
ali priests. Wherever there is a sinner, five Sikhs
can give him baptism and absolution. Great is the
glory of five Sikhs, and whatever they do shall not
be in vain. They who give food and clothing to
five Sikhs, shall obtain from them the fulfilment of
their desires.’ Saying this the Guru circumam-
bulated them three times, laid his plume and crest
in front of them, offered them his arms, and cried
out, ‘Sri Wahguru ji ka Khalsa! Sri Waghuru ji

190 THE SIKH RELIGION

ki fatah!’ Sant Singh and Sangat Singh offered to
remain in the fort while Daya Singh, Dharm Singh,
and Man Singh determined to accompany the Guru.
The Guru gave his plume to Sant Singh, clothed
him in his armour, and seated him in the upper
room which he was about to vacate. The Guru and
his three companions escaped during the night. He
told them, if perchance they separated from him,
they were to go in the direction of a certain star
which he indicated.

When the Guru was escaping he bade his men
stand firm. He said he was going to awaken the
enemy, so that they might not say he had absconded.
The Turkish sentries were immediately on the alert.
He discharged two arrows at them. The arrows at
first struck torches which they held in their hands
and then passed through their bodies. In the
darkness, which followed the extinction of the
lamps, the Guru and his companions escaped, but
did not travel together. He proceeded barefooted
on his journey, and on becoming tired sat down to
rest, on the margin of a lake in the Machhiwara
forest between Ropar and Ludhiana.

Sant Singh and Sangat Singh, who were left behind
in the little fort, inflicted great loss on the enemy.
The Muhammadans, however, succeeded in scaling
the building and believed they were going at last
to capture the Guru whose plume and arrow Sant
Singh wore. Khwaja Mardud gave orders that Sant
Singh and Sangat Singh should be beheaded and
their heads sent to regale the Emperor’s eyes. The
Muhammadans were much disappointed to subse-
quently learn that Sant Singh was not the Guru,
and that the Guru had escaped. They sent men to
the known abodes of all faqirs in the country to
search for him, but in vain.

After this the armies dispersed. Zabardast Khan
who was wounded in the recent battle retired to
his viceroyalty of Lahore, Wazir Khan departed

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH tor

for Sarhind, and Khwaja Mardud went with the
remnant of his army to reinforce the Emperor who
was still campaigning in the south of India.

The Guru’s three Sikhs followed the star he had
pointed out to them, and they all four met at the
place now called Bir Guru in the Machhiwara forest.
His Sikhs found him sleeping with a waterpot for his
pillow. They awakened him and told him that the
Muhammadan army would probably be on them by
daybreak. The Guru said he could not save him-
self, as his feet were blistered. He told the Sikhs
that they might seek shelter in a neighbouring
garden. Man Singh took the Guru on his back and
proceeded thither. The Guru found there a Sikh
called Gulaba, who treated him and his faithful
attendants with kindness and hospitality.

Gulaba gave the Guru shelter in a top story
which he had recently built to his house. The Guru
wanted meat the next day, and a he-goat was pro-
vided for him which he killed by shooting. Gulaba
was alarmed lest some of the neighbouring Brahmans
and Saiyids might have heard the report of the gun.
As a matter of fact one Brahman did hear it, and
suspected the presence of the Guru in the village.
He looked and saw the Guru on the top story of
Gulaba’s house. It turned out, however, that the
Brahman was friendly. He had previously visited
the Guru in Anandpur and enjoyed his hospitality.
He now in return put some sweets and a sacrificial
thread of the Hindus on a plate, and sent them as
an offering to the Guru. The offering of the sacri-
ficial thread was a delicate hint to the Guru that
the Brahman would like to lead him back to the
ancient religion of India. The Guru returned the
sweets and the thread with a present of five gold
muhars from himself. Gulaba consulted with his
brother as to the disposal of the Guru. They feared
for their own safety should it be further known that
he was among them.

192 THE SIKH RELIGION

To Gulaba’s house now came two Muhammadans,
Ghani Khan and Nabi Khan, who had previously
known and visited the Guru. On hearing that the
imperial troops were scouring the country in quest
of him, they determined to go and offer him their
humble services. The Guru requested them to
remain with him, and they readily consented.

Gulaba and his family spent an anxious night.
In the early morning he waited on the Guru with
a present of five gold muhars, which he meant as
a parting offering. He represented the danger he
had incurred in entertaining his guest, and begged
him to take compassion on him and arrange for his
departure.

It happened that while the Guru was in Gulaba’s
house a Sikh woman also came to visit him. She
had previously seen him and vowed that she would
spin and weave cloth for him, which she would keep
until his arrival in her village. The Guru had the
cloth dyed blue, and a robe and sheet made from
it in imitation of the dress of a Muhammadan pil-
grim. He then departed from Gulaba’s village. He
was borne on a litter which Ghani Khan and Nabi
Khan lifted in front, and Man Singh and Dharm
Singh in rear, while Daya Singh waved a chauri
over him, They informed all inquirers that they
were escorting Uch ka Pir. The expression Uch ka
Pir meant either high priest as a general religious
title, or priest of Uch, a well-known Muhammadan
city in the southern part of the Panjab. The Guru
and his carriers on arriving at Lal in the Patiala
State accidentally came on a detachment of the
imperial army which had been searching for him.
The general suspected that the pilgrim was no other
than the Guru, and determined to make trial of
him by what he ate. A sumptuous dinner was pre-
pared for the party. The Guru told his Sikhs that
they might eat what the Musalman cooks had
prepared, and they did so after touching the food

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH _ 193

with their swords. A friendly Saiyid from Nurpur
near Machhiwara who was at the time an officer in
the detachment, stated that the Guru was really
Uch ka Pir. Upon this the general gave an order
for the Guru’s immediate release.

CHAPTER XXIV

The Guru no longer travelled with the imperial
army, but proceeded to Kanech in the eastern part
of what is now the Ludhiana district.. There one
Fatah came to pay him his respects and ask if he
could do him any service. The Guru asked for his
best mare to aid him in his escape. Fatah, who had
not been sincere in his protestations of friendship,
put him off with excuses. It is said that when he
left the Guru and went home, he found the mare
had died of snake-bite. This was understood to be the
result of his hypocrisy and churlishness to the Guru.

The Guru thence proceeded to Hehar, also in the
Ludhiana district, where lived Kripal, the Udasi
Mahant who had so distinguished himself in the
battle of Bhangani. The Guru on meeting him dis-
missed Ghani Khan and Nabi Khan, after giving
them presents and a letter recommending them to
the consideration of the faithful. Though Kripal
had been previously so devoted to the Guru, he
now feared to entertain him lest the Muhammadans
should be informed that he was sheltering an out-
law. He accordingly advised the Guru to move on
towards the villages of amma and Jatpura.

On the way thither the Guru met a Muhammadan
called Kalha, a rich and important person who was
Chaudhri of Jagraon and Raikot, two considerable
towns of the Ludhiana district. Kalha entertained
him at Jatpura. The Guru requested him to send
a messenger to Sarhind to inquire the fate of his
mother and his two youngest sons. The Guru

O

SIKH. V

194 THE SIKH RELIGION

remained at Jatpura until the messenger’s return.
Jatpura is about fifty miles distant from Sarhind.
This distance the messenger is said to have traversed
in an incredibly short space of time.

The following is the messenger’s story, one of the
most painful in history. It has been already stated
that the Guru’s mother entrusted herself and the
two grandsons, who accompanied her, to a Brahman.
He with sweet words took them to his house and
induced them to put faith in him. When the Guru’s
mother went to sleep, he stole her money, which
she carried in a saddle-bag and buried it. He then
went to her and told her there were several thieves
prowling about the neighbourhood, and she must be
careful of her valuables. He said he gave her this
information so that she might not afterwards blame
him. She called her servant and told him what she
had heard. He almost immediately afterwards in-
formed her that her saddle-bag was missing. As no
one had entered the house but the lady’s party and
the Brahman, she interrogated the latter on the
subject. He pretended to be furious at suspicion
having been directed against him, and said that
that was the result of doing good and of enter-
taining homeless wayfarers and outlaws. He had
saved the Guru’s mother and children from death,
and the return they made him for his trouble and
hospitality was to charge him with theft as if he
were a vulgar malefactor. Then saying that he
could not trust her and her children, he ordered
them to leave his house.

The Brahman with loud cries proceeded to the
Chaudhri, or chief civil official of Kheri, and in-
formed him that the Guru’s mother and sons had
just come to his house, and both he and the Chaudhri
would obtain a large reward for delivering them to
the imperial authorities. The Brahman and the
Chaudhri then went to the next highest official, a
Ranghar, the governor of Murinda. He proceeded

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 195

with them to the Brahman’s house, and thence they
took the Guru’s mother and her two grandsons to
Wazir Khan, Viceroy of Sarhind. He ordered
them to. be confined in a tower. People thronged
next day to see them, and cursed and abused
the treacherous Brahman to their hearts’ content.
Wazir Khan ordered the children to be brought
before him. When the Guru’s mother heard the
order, it stung her like a sharp arrow.

One Suchanand Khatri, who had vainly sued for
one of the Guru’s sons as a husband for his daughter,
now came forward and said the children were cer-
tainly the progeny of the serpent, that is, sons of
the Guru, and that when they grew up they would
be as destructive as their father. The governor of
Murinda told Mata Gujari, in order to pacify her,
that he would send the children back after showing
them to Wazir Khan. Not believing him, she put
one of them at each side of her, and tried to conceal
them with her dress. The Guru’s son Jujhar Singh
on hearing the Ranghar’s voice stood up and said
to his grandmother, ‘ The Turks have ever been our
enemies. How can we escape from them? There-
fore let us go to the viceroy.’ Saying this he took
his younger brother Fatah Singh and went with the
Ranghar. When they reached the viceroy’s court,
the Ranghar, in order to add to their sufferings,
told them that their father, their two eldest brothers,
and their companions had all been killed in Cham-
kaur. He added, ‘ Your only hope of escape now
is to bow before the Viceroy and accept Islam ;
and perhaps he will spare your lives.’

Jujhar Singh when confronted with the viceroy
thus addressed him: ‘ My father, the holy Guru
Gobind Singh is not dead. Who can kill him? He
is protected by the immortal God. If any one say
that he can tear down heaven, how is that possible ?
Were a storm to attempt to drive a mountain before
it, could it ever do so? Were any one to try to

02

196 THE SIKH RELIGION

grasp the sun and moon, it would be a feat im-
possible to accomplish. Were the Guru to desire it,
he could destroy every trace of you, but he deemeth
it his first duty to obey the laws of heaven. When
we have dedicated our heads to our father who is
such a Guru, why should we bow them before a
false and deceitful sinner?’ On hearing this the.
people all cried out that the children ought to be
allowed to go unharmed. The misnamed Suchanand
now interposed, and repeated that these were the
offspring of a cobra, and from their heads to their
feet filled with venom. ‘See my friends,’ he said,
‘they have not the least fear, and are so proud that
they even insult and defy the Viceroy’.

Wazir Khan then reflected that if the children
became Muhammadans, it would be a gain and glory
to his faith. He told them that, if they would
accept his faith, he would grant them an estate,
marry them to the daughters of chiefs, and they
would become happy and be honoured by the
Emperor. Jujhar Singh then looking at his younger
brother said, ‘ My brother, the time to sacrifice our
lives, as our grandfather Guru Teg Bahadur did,
hath now arrived. What thinkest thou?’ Fatah
Singh replied, ‘ Brother dear, our grandfather parted
with his head but not with his religion, and he
ordered us to follow his example. Now. that we have
received the baptism of the spirit and the sword,
what care we for death ? Wherefore it is best that
we should give our lives, thus save the Sikh religion,
and bring down God’s vengeance on the Turks.’

Jujhar Singh again spoke on the same subject :
‘My brother, our grandfather Guru Teg Bahadur
spurned the Muhammadan religion. Here is this
noble family of ours—a man like Guru Gobind Singh
our father, a man like Guru Teg Bahadur our grand-
father, a man like Guru Har Gobind our great-
grandfather. We, who are their descendants, can-
not attach a stigma to their memories.’ The young

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 197

boy waxing still more angry, continued, ‘ Hear, O
viceroy, I spurn thy religion and will not part with
mine own. It hath become the custom of our family
to forfeit life rather than faith. O fool, why seekest
thou to tempt us with worldly ambition ? We will
never be led astray by the false advantages thou
offerest. The indignities inflicted by the Turks on
our grandfather shall be the fire to consume them,
and our deaths the wind to fan the flame. In this
way we shall destroy the Turks without forfeiting
our holy faith.’

The Muhammadan viceroy could not endure out-
spokenness of this description, and, in the words of the
chronicler, began to burn like sand in a fiery furnace.
He said he must put the children to death.: - They
had no fear of any one, and their words were liable
to cause disaffection and religious apathy in others.
Suchanand was ready to support the viceroy, and
suggested additional reasons for putting the children
to death. He said they had spoken insolently
before the Viceroy, and when they grew up they
would follow their father’s example and destroy
armies. What good could be expected from them ?
They would be always exciting revolts. They were
prisoners with no right of pardon; and, if they
were released, no one knew what they would do.
There were no means for their repression but death.

Then out spoke the Nawab of Maler Kotla, ‘O
Viceroy, these children are still drinking milk in the
nursery, and are too young to commit an offence.
They know not good from evil. Wherefore be
pleased to allow them to depart.’ This representa-
tion the Viceroy heeded not, but cast about for some
one to kill the children. His servants who were
present said they were willing to sacrifice their lives
for him, but they were not executioners. ‘ He turned
to right and left, but all his staff hung down their
heads in token of refusal and pity for the children.
At last looking behind him he espied a Ghilzai who,

198 THE SIKH RELIGION

with the cruelty of his race, offered to do the san-
guinary deed. It is a general belief among the Sikhs
that the children were bricked into a wall and suffered
to die in that position, but the authors of the Suraj
Parkash and of the Gur Bilas both state that
the children were put to death in the order of their
ages by the sword of the Ghilzai executioner. They
vied with each other as to who should first have
the honour of martyrdom. The two children Jujhar
Singh and Fatah Singh, aged nine and seven years
respectively, perished on the 13th of Poh, Sambat
1762°(A. D. 1705):

A rich Sikh called Todar Mal, as soon as he heard
of the imprisonment of the Guru’s children, hastened
to the viceroy with the intention of ransoming them,
but arrived too late. The children had been already .
put to death. He then proceeded to the Guru’s
mother Mata Gujari, who had not yet heard of the
execution of her grandchildren, but was at the same
time suffering extreme mental agony. She every
now and again would pray to the Gurus to protect
her little ones: ‘O Guru Nanak, may no hair of
my grandchildren’s heads be touched! O my son,
Guru Gobind Singh, pardon my sins and protect
me now! Woeisme! I know not what may happen
to my grandchildren to-day.’ Todar Mal sought
to break the sad intelligence to her, but his voice
was stifled in his throat. On seeing this, Mata
Gujarl became extremely alarmed, and standing up
at once said, ‘Tell me the truth. Why art thou
sorrowful ? When will they allow my grandsons to
return, and what questions have they put them ?’
Todar Mal then strengthening his resolve, addressed
her: ‘I have made my heart harder than a stone,
and come to tell thee of the death of thy grand-
children. O mother, the light of thine eyes, the
support of the world, the life of the Sikhs, the
darlings of the Guru have been to-day massacred
by the Turks.’ On receiving this news Mata Gujari

HUuvOHVLVa

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 199

was struck down as if a mountain had fallen on her.
Todar Mal began to fan her in her swoon with the
skirt of his dress.

On recovering consciousness to some extent she
began to call upon her grandsons, ‘O Jujhar Singh,
O Fatah Singh, after such love for me whither have
you gone? Take me with you. Who will call now me
mother or grandmother ? Who will come and sit cn
my lap ? How shall I now behold you ? O youthful
warriors, light of my courtyard, sun of my family,
I know not what your sufferings must have been
to-day. O my grandchildren, on whom I have
never turned my back even when asleep. To-day,
alas! alas! the Muhammadan tyrants have killed
you, the darlings of mine eyes, my beautiful ones.
I concealed my grandsons from the gaze of others,
and behold what hath happened to-day! What
have I done to you, O children, that you should
have abandoned me to misery ?’ Saying this, she
fell heavily to the ground, and gave up her spirit.
Todar Mal cremated the bodies of the Guru’s mother
and her grandchildren, and buried their ashes." A
Sikh temple, now called Fatahgarh, was subse-
quently erected on the spot.

When. the Turks heard that the Brahman who
had betrayed the Guru’s mother and children
possessed much wealth, they arrested him and all
his family, and forced him by torture to tell where
he had concealed his treasure. He pointed out the
spot where he had buried Mata Gujari’s money, but
it was not found there. The Turks believing that
he was only deceiving them continued to torture
him until his soul took flight to the infernal regions.

While the Guru was listening to the narrative, he
was digging up a shrub with his knife. He said,
‘As I dig up this shrub by the roots, so shall the
Turks be extirpated.’ He inquired if any one

1 Jn the Siraj Parkash it is stated that it was Tilok Singh and
Ram Singh who cremated the bodies of the Guru’s mother and sons.

200 THE SIKH RELIGION

except the Nawab of Maler Kotla had spoken on
behalf of the children. The messenger replied in
the negative. The Guru then said that after the
roots of the oppressive Turks were all dug up, the
roots of the Nawab should still remain. His Sikhs
should one day come and lay Sarhind waste.

Before the Guru had set out from Jatpura he pre-
sented his host Kalha with a sword to preserve in
memory of him. He was to honour it with incense
and flowers. As long as he did so, he and his family
should flourish, but, if ever he wore it, he should
lose his possessions. Kalha during his lifetime
treated the sword according to the Guru’s injunc-
tions, and so did his son after him. But his grand-
son put on the weapon, and employed it in the
chase. In endeavouring to kill a deer with it he
struck his own thigh and died of the wound. The
author of the Suraj Parkash wrote that this incident
actually occurred when he was a boy, and he still
remembered it.

CHAPTER XXV

The Guru continued his retreat from the Turks,
and proceeded on his litter from Jatpura to Dina.
On the way he met a Sikh who presented him with
a horse and saddle. On arriving at Dina, the Guru
met Shamira, Lakhmira, and Takht Mal, grandsons
of Jodh Rai, who had rendered material assistance
to Guru Har Gobind in the battle of Gurusar. Jodh
Rai’s family at first lived at Kangar. His grand-
sons had now left that village and gone to Dina.
The Guru represented to the young men that they
incurred danger in entertaining him, but they felt
no apprehension, and gave him hospitable treatment.
While there the Guru gathered some fighting men to
his standard. |

During the Guru’s stay at Dina he was visited
by Parm Singh and Dharm Singh, descendants of

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH — 201

Bhai Rupa, of whom mention has been made in the
life of the sixth Guru. Parm Singh and Dharm
Singh made the Guru an offering of a horse and
a dress. The Guru took special notice of Shamira,
and gave him the horse and the dress which Parm
Singh and Dharm Singh had presented him. The
Guru told Shamira that he should own land as far
as he could course his steed. Shamira mentioned
this in his household. His maternal uncle laughed
at the Guru’s promise, and said that if the Guru
had been able to work miracles, he would not now
be a fugitive. Shamira was partially convinced by
this argument, and merely coursed his steed round
his own village. As the result of his want of faith,
he only remained in possession of the land within
the circle he thus described.

The Viceroy of Sarhind heard that the Guru was
being entertained by Shamira and his brothers in
Dina. He wrote to Shamira on the subject, and
ordered him under pain of his highest displeasure
to arrest and surrender the Guru. Shamira replied
that he was only entertaining his priest, as the
Viceroy himself or any one else might do. The Guru
was merely visiting his Sikhs and molesting no one.
While sending this reply, Shamira feared that the
Viceroy would send troops and arrest the Guru, so
he sent a spy to obtain information of the Viceroy’ S
movements and proceedings. The Viceroy kept troops
ready, but did not send them immediately. Mean-
while the Guru enlisted several men and prepared
for his defence. The Guru’s stay at Dina appears
to have been somewhat protracted, for it was there
he wrote his celebrated ‘Zafarnama’, or Persian
epistle to Aurangzeb. It begins, as usual in such
compositions, with an

INVOCATION TO GOD

‘O Thou perfect in miracles, eternal, beneficent, Bestower
of grace, maintenance, salvation, and mercy; Dispenser

202 THE SEKH RELICS

of bliss, Pardoner, Saviour, Kemitter of sins, dear to the
heart, King of kings, Bestower of excellence, Indicator of
the way, without colour and without equal, Lord, who
giveth heavenly bliss to him who hath no property, no
retinue, no army, and no comforts. Distinct from the
world, powerful, whose light is everywhere diffused, Thou
bestowest gifts as if Thou wert present in person. Pure
Cherisher, Bestower of favours, Thou art merciful, and
Provider of sustenance in every land.. Thou art Lord of
every clime, the greatest of the great. Perfect in beauty,
merciful, Master of knowledge, Support of the unhappy,
Protector of the Faith, Fountain of eloquence, Searcher of
hearts, Author of revelation, Appreciator of wisdom, Lord
of intelligence, Diviner of secrets, Omnipresent God,
Thou knowest the affairs of the world. Thou resolvest its
difficulties, Thou art its great Organizer.

ADDRESS TO AURANGZEB

‘I have no faith in thine oath to which thou tookest the
one God as witness. I have not a particle of confidence in
thee. Thy treasurer and thy ministers are all false. He who
putteth faith in thine oath on the Quran is thereby a ruined
man. The insolent crow cannot touch him who hath
fallen under the shadow of the huma. He who taketh the
protection of a powerful tiger cannot be approached by
a goat, a buffalo, or a deer. Had I even secretly sworn on
the volume of my choice faith to accept thy religion, I
should not have had to withdraw my infantry and cavalry
from Anandpur.!

‘As to my defeat at Chamkaur, what could forty men do
when a hundred thousand came on them unawares? The
oath-breakers attacked them abruptly with swords, arrows,
and muskets. I was constrained to engage in the combat,
and I fought to the utmost of my ability. When an affair
passeth beyond the region of diplomacy, it is lawful to
have recourse to the sword. Had I been able to repose

1 The preceding part of this address refers to Anandpur; what
follows to Chamkaur.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 203

confidence in thine oath on the Quran, I would not have
abandoned my city. Had I not known that thou wert
crafty and deceitful as a fox, I would never on any account
have come hither. He who cometh to me and sweareth on the
Ouran ought not to kill or imprison me. Thine army came
clothed like blue-bottles, and all of a sudden charged with a
loud shout. Every soldier of thine who advanced beyond his
defences to attack my position, fell deluged in blood. Thy
troops who had committed no aggression received no injury at
our hands. When I saw that Nahar Khan entered the fight,
I quickly gave him the taste of my arrow. Many soldiers who
came with him and boasted of their prowess ignominiously
deserted the field of battle. Another Afghan officer ad-
vanced like a rushing flood, an arrow, or a musket ball.
He made many assaults, received many wounds and at last,
while in the act of killing two of my Sikhs, was killed himself.
Khwaja Mardud remained behind a wall and came not
forth like a man. Had I but seen his face, I would certainly
have bestowed an arrow on him too. At last many were
killed on both sides by showers of arrows and bullets, and
the earth became red as a rose. Heads and legs lay in
heaps as if the field were covered with balls and hockey-
sticks. The whizzing of arrows, the twanging of bows,
and a universal hubbub reached the sky. Men, the bravest
of the brave, fought like madmen. But how could forty
even of the bravest succeed when opposed by a countless
host ? When the lamp of day was veiled, the queen of night
came forth in all her splendour, and God who protected me
showed me the way to escape from mine enemies. There
was not a hair of my head touched, nor did I in any way
suffer.

‘Did I not know that thou, O faithless man, wert a wor-
shipper of wealth and perjurer ? Thou keepest no faith and
observest no religion. Thou knowest not God, and believest
not in Muhammad. He who hath regard for his religion
never swerveth from his promise. Thou hast no idea of what
an oath on the Quran is, and canst have no belief in Divine
Providence. Wert thou. to take a hundred oaths on the
Ouran, I would not even then trust thee in the slightest.

204 THE SIKH RELIGION

Hadst thou any intention of keeping thine oath, thou
wouldst have girded up thy loins and come to me. When
thou didst swear by Muhammad and called the word of
God to witness, it was incumbent on thee to observe that
oath. Were the Prophet himself present here, I would
make it my special object to inform him of thy treachery.
Do what is incumbent on thee, and adhere to thy written
promise. Thou shouldst have cheerfully fulfilled it, and
also the verbal promises of thine envoy. Everybody ought
to be a man of his word, and not utter one thing while he
meditateth another. Thou didst promise to abide by the
words of thy qazi. If thou hast spoken truly, then come
to me. If thou desire to seal thy promise on the Quran,
I will gladly send-it to thee for the purpose. If thou come
to the village of Kangar, we shall have an interview. Thou
shalt not run the slightest danger on the way, for the whole
tribe of Bairars! are under me. Come to me that we may
speak to each other, and that I may utter kind words to
thee.

‘I am a slave and servant of the King of kings, and ready
to obey His order with my life. Should His order reach
me, I will go to thee with all my heart. If thou have any
belief in God, delay not in this matter. It is thy duty to
know God. He never ordered thee to annoy others. Thou
art seated on an emperor’s throne, yet how strange are
thy justice, thine attributes and thy regard for religion !
Alas a hundred times! alas for thy sovereignty! Strange,
strange is thy decree! Promises not meant to be fulfilled
injure those who make them. Smite not any one mer-
cilessly with the sword, or a sword from on high shall
smite thyself. O man, be not reckless, fear God, He can-
not be flattered or praised. The King of kings is without
fear. He is the true Emperor of earth and heaven. God
is the master of both worlds. He is the Creator of all
animals from the feeble ant to the powerful elephant. He
is the Protector of the miserable and Destroyer of the reck-
less. His name is the Support of the unhappy. It is He
who showeth man the way hé ought to go. Thou art bound

1 From whom the Philkidn chiefs and people are descended.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH — 205

by thine oath on the Quran. Bring the matter to a good issue
according to thy promises. It is incumbent on thee to act
wisely, and be discreet in all thine actions. What though
my four sons were killed, I remain behind like a coiled?
snake. What bravery is it to quench a few sparks of life ?
Thou art merely exciting a raging fire the more. How well
spoke the sweet-tongued Firdausi,? ‘‘ Haste is the devil’s
work!”’ I would have gone many times to thee had thy
promise been kept when the bullocks were plundered. As
thou didst forget thy word on that day, so will God forget
thee. God will grant thee the fruit of the evil deed thou
didst design. It is good to act according to thy religion, and
to know that God is dearer than life. I do not deem thou
knowest God, since thou hast done acts of oppression.
Wherefore the great God knoweth thee not, and will not
receive thee with all thy wealth. Hadst thou sworn a
hundred times on the Quran, I would not have trusted
thee in the slightest even for a moment. I will not enter
thy presence, nor travel on the same road with thee, but,
if God so will it, I will proceed towards thee.

‘Fortunate art thou Aurangzeb, king of kings, expert
swordsman and rider. Handsome is thy person, and. intelli-
gent art thou. Emperor and ruler of the country, thou art
clever to administer thy kingdom, and skilled to wield
the sword. Thou art generous to thy co-religionists, and
prompt to crush thine enemies. Thou art the great dis-
penser of kingdoms and wealth. Thy generosity is profuse,
and in battle thou art firm as a mountain. Exalted is thy
position; thy loftiness is as that of the Pleiades. Thou
art king of kings, and ornament of the thrones of:the world.
Thou art monarch of the world, but far from thee is religion.

‘I wanted to kill the hillmen who were full of strife. They
worshipped idols, and I was an idol-breaker. Behold the
power of the good and pure God who by means of one man
killed hundreds of thousands. What can an enemy do when

1 Pechida, twisted, couvoluted. The more coils a snake has the
more poison it contains. The Guru here distinctly threatens the
Emperor,

2 A famous Persian poet, author of the Shah-7-Nama.

206 THE SIKH RELIGION.

God the Friend is kind? His function it is, as the great
Bestower, to bestow. He giveth deliverance and pointeth
out the way to His creatures. He teacheth the tongue to
utter His praises. In the hour of action he blindeth the
enemy. Herescueth the helpless and protecteth them from
injury. The Merciful showeth mercy to him who acteth
honestly. God bestoweth peace on him who heartily per-
formeth His service. How can an enemy lead astray him
with whom the Guide of the way is well pleased ? Should
tens of thousands proceed against such a person, the Creator
will be his guardian. When thou lookest to thine army and
wealth, I look to God’s praises. Thou art proud of thine
empire, while I am proud of the kingdom of the immortal
God. Be not heedless; this caravansary is only for a few
days. People leave it at all times. Behold the revolution
which passeth over every denizen and house in this faithless
world. Even though thou art strong, annoy not the weak.
Lay not the axe to thy kingdom. When God is a friend,
what can an enemy do even though he multiply himself
a hundred times ? If an enemy practise enmity a thousand
times, he cannot, as long as God is a friend, injure even a hair
of one’s head.’

The Guru sent the above to the Emperor by
Daya Singh and Dharm Singh, who had survived
the battle of Chamkaur and escaped to Dina with
the Guru. They disguised themselves as Muham-
madan pilgrims, and proceeded on their journey to
the south of India. On reaching Dihli they took
she‘ter in the Sikh temple and received the visits
of several admiring Sikhs. Next morning they set
out for Agra. Thence they crossed the river Cham-
bal and proceeded to Ujjain, whence they crossed
the Narbada and travelled by Burhanpur to Auran-
gabad. Thence they proceeded to Ahmadnagar,
where the Emperor was encamped. There Daya
Singh and Dharm Singh met a Sikh called Jetha
Singh, who told them it would be very difficult for
them to obtain an audience of the Emperor. They

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 207

said it did not matter, and asked him to summon
all the Sikhs who were there to meet them and hear
their story. Daya Singh and Dharm Singh told the
Sikhs of their mission, and read a letter specially
addressed to them by the Guru.

CHAPTER XXVI

Meanwhile the Guru was preparing for his defence
at Dina, but in order that the innocent villagers
might not suffer from warlike operations directed
against him, he pitched his tent in the neighbouring
forest. It would appear that he approached, if he
did not actually enter, the present village of Jalal,
for it is recorded that the inhabitants of that village
gave him supplies and a lance for defence. They
complained that the inhabitants of a neighbouring
village bore them enmity. There were always affrays
between the two villages, and the inhabitants of
Jalal were always worsted. The Guru told them to
obey and believe in him, and they should always
be victorious. They trusted him and obta‘ned several
victories. Subsequently, however, the inhabitants
of Jalal forgot their promises to the Guru, and stole
horses belonging to the Sikhs. The offenders were
punished and expelled from their village by those
whom they had wronged. They subsequently begged
the Sikhs’ pardon, and were allowed to dwell at
Gurusar'!, where the Guru had encamped.

The Guru thence proceeded to the village of
Bhagta in the present state of Faridkot. The village
had been called after Bhai Bhagtu, a grandson of
Bhai Bahilo, who was a distinguished Sikh in the
time of Guru Arjan. Bhagtu had five sons, Gurdas,
Tara, Bhara, Mihra, and Bakhta. They presented
a fully caparisoned steed to the Guru. Gurdas and

1 This is not the Guriisar the scene of Guru Har Gobind’s engage-
ment with the imperial army.

208 THE SIKH NEDIGION

Tara are the men we have already described as
masands of Ram Rai. By this time they had
returned to their native village. The Guru remained
in Bhagta for three days, and on the fourth travelled
to Wandar in the present district of Firozpur.
Thence he proceeded into a dense forest where he
met a nephew of Kapura, the Chaudhri of several
villages round Kot Kapura in the present state of
Faridkot. The nephew complained that his uncle
had expelled him. He was, he said, marching to do
battle with him, but, on hearing of the Guru’s arrival,
he first went to pay him his respects, that being
a more holy object than making war on his uncle.
The Guru said that Kapura’s troops would arrive
on the morrow, but his nephew must not at present
engage in a combat with them. His troops would
subsequently conquer those of Kapura. The nephew
following the Guru’s advice decided to remain at
home on the morrow. His wife, however, on seeing
him thus ingloriously inactive, asked for his sword
and turban, offered him her petticoat, and said she
would go and fight herself. This taunt roused her
husband to action. In disregard of the Guru’s
advice he went to battle and was killed by his
uncle’s forces.

The Guru thence proceeded to Bahiwal and
Sarawan and billeted his Sikhs on the villages.
One Sikh, named Maliagar Singh, was fed by a poor
villager on pilun, the tiny fruit of the jal-tree. He told
the Guru that he had had an excellent dinner. The
Guru on subsequently discovering that he had dined
on pilun and thus received only indifferent food,
complimented him on his contentment, and said
that Sikhs ought ever to act as he had done, and
never dispraise food offered them. The Guru con-
tinued, ‘ If any one come to a Sikh, and receive not
food from him, know that that Sikh hath sinned.
If any one beg food from a sikh, he too hath sinned
because of his greed.’

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 209

The Guru then visited Kot Kapura, and put up
outside the city under a pipal-tree, which is still
pointed out to the traveller. It is in a little pro-
montory in the centre of a lake formed by the
excavation of earth to build the town. Kapura
came to see him, and brought him a fully capari-
soned horse and other presents. Next day Kapura
again visited him and found him seated on one
couch, while his weapons were laid before him on
another. He reverenced arms because, he said,
they who wore them and practised their use became
brave and conquered their enemies.

The Guru begged Kapura’s permission to take
shelter in his fort. Kapura replied that he had no
power to withstand the imperial army, and no desire
to wander a fugitive like the Guru. The Guru then
said the Muhammadans would take his fort, put his
head into a bag of ashes, and then hang him. Kapura
left in anger, and going home closed the gates of
the fort, so that the Guru might not enter by sur-
prise.

The Guru heard that Wazir Khan’s army was
now in hot pursuit. He accordingly set out from
Kapura, and sought shelter in Dhilwan, a village
about four miles to the south-east of it. There
Prithi Chand’s descendants had been settled for
some time. One of them called Kaul, now a very
old man, visited the Guru and made him a present
of a suit of clothes. Upon this the Guru threw off
and burned the greater part of the blue dress which
he had been using for disguise. In the Asa ki War
occurs the line :—

Nil bastar le kapre pahire Turk Pathani amal kiya.
The Turks and Pathans put on blue clothes and reigned.
For this_the Guru read :—

Nil bastar le kapre phare ; Turk Pathani amal gaya.
I have torn the blue clothes which I wore ; the rule of the
Turks and Pathans is at an end.

SIKIN V P

210 THE SIKH RELIGION

The Guru meant the alteration as a curse on the
Turks and Pathans. It was deemed an impious act
to alter any part of the Granth Sahib. This the
Guru did not deny, but said he hoped that the
murder of his father and of his own children and
the grievous sufferings of his Sikhs were a sufficient
atonement. A piece of his blue clothes which the
Guru did not consign to the fire he preserved in
memory of his troubles. It is said to have subse-
quently suggested the blue dress of the Akalis or
Nihangs.

The Guru soon left Dhilwan and pitched his tent
in a forest between Maluka and Kotha. Thence he
proceeded to Jaito in the present state of Nabha.
There Kapura arrived on a hunting excursion. He
complained of perturbation of mind on account of
the curse the Guru had uttered. The Guru, how-
ever, refused to retract his words. On the contrary
he said that Kapura should ever remain a puppy
of the Muhammadans, and have great suffering in
consequence.

While the Guru was in this locality, a messenger
arrived with the news that Wazir Khan’s army was
marching hither, and would arrive in a few. days.
The Guru asked Kapura for a guide. Kapura sent
an officer called Khana and some troopers with
instructions to show him the way as far as Khidrana,
but not engage in any combat, and if possible hinder
the Guru from doing so. Next morning the Guru es-
caped to Ramiana in the Faridkot state. On the way
he found a man gathering the fruit of the wild caper.
The Guru tasted, but not relishing it, told the man to
throw it away. The man would not do so altogether.
The Guru said it had been his intention to banish
drought from that part of the country, but now he
could not do so owing to the man’s obstinacy and
disregard of his orders. From Ramiana the Guru
proceeded towards Khidrana.

All the contests and sufferings of the Guru became

/

AN AKALI

SIKH VP. 210

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 211

known in the Manjha, and the Sikhs who dwelt
there censured themselves for having listened to
Duni Chand and abandoned the Guru at Anandpur.
They now began to consider how they could make
reparation and assist their spiritual master in his dire
extremity. They were, however, of the opinion of
the Sikhs of Lahore that the Guru should adopt the
way of Baba Nanak and cease all hostilities. They
sent a large deputation to press their advice on him,
and promised that, if he accepted it, they would
use influence with the Emperor to pardon him ;
otherwise they would not consider themselves his
Sikhs or him their Guru.

The Guru on the way:to Khidrana arrived at
a village owned by a Khatri called Rupa, who
warned him off through fear of the Emperor’s dis-
pleasure. The Guru had a Bairar named Dan Singh
as his clerk and chamberlain. Dan Singh’s son.saw
the enemy approaching, and duly informed the
Guru. The Guru took no notice, but continued to
walk his horse.. The warning was repeated, but the
Guru heeded it not. The youth then struck the
Guru’s horse with the object of quickening his pace.
At this the Guru became angry and uttered words
of censure. Dan Singh interceded for his son.
The Guru replied that he treated Dan Singh’s
son as his own, and a father’s censure would
not affect his children. The Guru instanced the
case of a tigress removing her cubs from a burning
forest. When she takes them in her mouth, every
one thinks she is going to devour them, but this is
not so. Her act is prompted by love.”

The deputation of the Manjha Sikhs found the
Guru after much search. On hearing their repre-
sentation he said, ‘ If you were my Sikhs, you would
receive and not give me instruction. I do not
require you. You deserted me formerly. Who hath
sent for you now? You have come to adjust my
quarrels, but where. were you when I needed your

P 2

212 THE SIKH RELIGION

assistance ? You used no influence with the Emperor
when Guru Arjan was tortured to death, or when
Guru Teg Bahadur was beheaded. On this account,
my brethren, I cannot listen to your advice. When
I am again in difficulty, you will betray me as
before. Put on record that you renounce me and
go to your homes.’ Upon this the deputation drew
up a formal document to the effect that they re-
nounced the Guru unless he ceased to contend with
the Turks.

A Sikh who had been put on a tree to keep watch
said, ‘I see the enemy approaching, and they will
soon see us.’ The Guru took up his bow and arrows
and mounted his horse. He was advised by Kapura’s
guide to go to Khidrana, where there was water of
which he could hold possession, and where the
Muhammadans, if they ventured thither, would die
of thirst. The Guru said, ‘There is dust in the
eyes of the Muhammadans and earth in their mouths.
They may stare as much as they please, but when
I remember the holy Baba Nanak they cannot see
mie.’

Five of the Manjha Sikhs repented of their re-
nunciation of the Guru, and decided to return and
render him all assistance. They induced thirty-five
more of their number to return with them. The
Guru thus obtained an unexpected reinforcement of
forty good and earnest fighting men. They were
joined by a heroine named Bhago, who through zeal
for the Sikh cause had donned man’s attire and vowed
to suffer death if necessary on the bloodstained field
of danger on behalf of the Guru. The Guru and
his personal guard preceded them to Khidrana in
the present Firozpur district of the Panjab, but on
finding no water there, the tank having run dry,
moved on into the neighbouring forest, where they
deemed they should be in greater safety, and whence
they could more easily escape if overpowered. The
forty men of the Manjha on arriving at Khidrana

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 213

decided to cover the trees in the neighbourhood
with clothes, so that the enemy might think they
were encamped in great numbers, and not make
a sudden attack on them. Kapura appeared in the
enemies’ ranks. He overtly came to show them the
way by which he had instructed his officer to take
the Guru and his forty Sikhs to their destruction.

Wazir Khan ordered his army to charge the Sikhs
who stood to oppose him, and in whose ranks he
believed the Guru to be concealed. They received
the charge with the utmost bravery. The Muham-
madans were giving way when Wazir Khan rallied
them by asking if they were not ashamed to fly
before such a handful of men. Five Sikhs who
advanced to the front were riddled with bullets.
Ten more advanced on the imperial army, and
cleared the field wherever they went. When they
were cut down, the enemy took courage and advanced
nearer the remaining Sikhs. Eleven Sikhs then
rushed on the enemy and smote them down. They
were, however, unable to cope with superior numbers
and fell under the swords of the Muhammadans.
The woman Bhago fought heroically in their ranks,
disposed of several of her Muhammadan opponents,
and transmitted her name as an Indian heroine for
the admiration of future generations.

The Guru and his body-guard had taken up their
position on a sand hill about two miles distant. He
discharged arrows from there with fatal effect
against the Muhammadans who could not see from
what quarter destruction was raining on them. At
the conclusion of the engagement Wazir Khan
thought the Guru was killed, and ordered his men
to search for his body.

The tank at Khidrana, as already stated, having
become dry, Wazir Khan’s army was in great straits
for want of water. Kapura told him that it could
only be obtained at a distance of thirty miles in
front and ten miles in rear, and advised him to

214 THE SIKH RELIGION

march back and save the lives of his men and horses,
otherwise they would all perish. To such distress
was the Muhammadan army reduced, that they
abandoned their dead and wounded, and relinquished
their search for the body of the Guru. Wazir Khan
boasted that he had killed him, and that the Emperor
on. hearing the joyful intelligence would greatly
honour and reward him.

On finding that the Muhammadan army had
departed, the Guru went to see the. battle-field,
relieve the wounded, and perform the obsequies of
the slain. He went about wiping the faces of both
dead:and wounded, and extolling. their. unsurpassed
valour. Copious tears flowed from his eyes. He
said the dead had given up their lives for him, and
they should abide in bliss in the Gurus’ paradise.
He found Mahan Singh breathing heavily and
desiring a last sight of his spiritual master. The
Guru told him to open his eyes, and when he did
so his strength returned. The Guru invited him to
ask for any boon he desired from empire to salva-
tion. .Mahan Singh thought it was best to ask for
the cancellation of the deed of renunciation of the
Guru drawn up by the Manjha Sikhs. The Guru
at first refused, but on being pressed consented to
cancel it. He drew the document from his pocket
and destroyed it. Mahan Singh then breathed his
last.. The Guru ordered the Bairars he had recently
enlisted to collect the slain and cremate them. He
promised that all Sikhs who visited the place on
the first of Magh, the anniversary of the battle,
should become filled with the martial spirit of their
sires. Khidrana-has since that time been called
Muktsar, or the tank of salvation, because those
who fell on that spot were no more subject to trans-
migration.

In the process of collecting the. slain it was found
that another person showed signs of life. This was
the heroine Bhago. . The. Guru .addressed -her :

tit’d A HHIS

UVsSLAOWN

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 21s

‘Taking off thy woman’s dress thou didst come to
me with the Manjha Sikhs. It is well that thou
hast fought here. Blessings on thy life! Arise and
come with me.’ She detailed the story of. her
departure from her home in the company of the
Sikhs of the Manjha, and then continued: ‘I
obtained possession of a strong spear. When all the
Sikhs were dead the Turks advanced on me.
I spitted several of them. Others directed their
weapons against me, but thou didst extend thine
arm to save me. Now that I have seen thee I am
happy, and have no further desire than to abide
with thee.’

CHAPTER XXVII

The Guru thence proceeded to Saran and thence
to Nautheha. The inhabitants of the latter village
prayed him to leave them. He then went to Tahlian
Fatah Sammun, a village about twenty miles soutl.-
west of Muktsar, where he was welcomed...

Some Sikhs from Harike came to him with
an offering of a lungi and a khes. The Guru
put the khes on his shoulders and tied the lungi
round his loins, Man Singh remonstrated and re-
minded him of his own prohibition of the wearing
of a lungi in this fashion, and said he was liable to
a fine. The Guru replied, ‘I am dressed according
to the custom of the country. Jeha des teha bhes ;
ter lungt modhe khes—Every country hath its own
dress ;* a lungi for the loins and a khes (shawl)
for the shoulders.’

The Guru feeling his insecurity asked that a guard
should be provided for him. The warlike Sikhs put
some Dogars on guard. The Guru intended to

1 Although the Guru allowed his Sikhs to adopt the dress of every
country they inhabited, yet they must not wear hats but turbans to
confine the long hair they are strictly enjoined to preserve. They must
also put on a kachh (drawers), but over it they may wear trousers.

218 THE SIKH RELIGION

of the money which his pious follower had brought
him.

A Muhammadan faqir called Brahmi (Ibrahim),
who lived on a neighbouring mound, came to the
Guru with offerings, and asked to be baptized. The
Guru expressed his satisfaction at the proposal.
‘Thou art the first Moslem to be baptized according
to my rites. If any Moslem, whether of high or
low position, in good faith desire to join the Khalsa,
it is proper that he should be baptized and received
into our community. The Muhammadan was
accordingly baptized and received the name Ajmer
Singh."

The Guru thence went to the village of Sahib
Chand and thence to Kot Bhai. On his way he
baptized several people. From there he proceeded to
Rohila and then to Bambiha, where he remained
nine days. Thence he returned to Bajak.

When the Guru was in the neighbourhood of
Maluka and Kotha, one of the sect called Diwanas
(madmen),. who attempted forcible access to him,
was cut down by his sentry. While the Guru was
in Bajak, Ghudda, the Diwanas’ spiritual guide,
sought to avenge the death of his follower, and
accordingly sent fifty men of his sect to assassinate
the Guru. On learning, however, that the Guru had
a strong body-guard, forty-eight of them turned
back and only two, Sukkhu and Buddha, proceeded
to the Guru. They carried no weapons, but whiled
away their time on the journey with the music of
a sarangi. On reaching the Guru instead of trying
to kill him they began to play and sing for him.
They sang among others the following verses :—

The soul resideth in a frail body.
Parents are not for ever, nor doth youth abide.
We must all march onwards : why should man be proud ?
The Guru was much pleased with them, and they
1 Suraj Parkash, Ayan I, Chapter xviii.

LIFE.OF GURU GOBIND SINGH ~ 219

were equally pleased with him. To show their satis-
faction and the pleasure they felt in his company,
they took up his bed on their shoulders, and carried
it for more than a mile. The Guru gave them a
square rupee, and told them to preserve it in memory
of him and promised that they should obtain what-
ever their hearts desired. |

The Guru then proceeded to Jassi Baghwali and
thence towards Talwandi Sabo, now called Dam-
dama, in the Patiala state, halting on the way at
a place called Pakka. In Talwandi Sabo resided
his friend Dalla, who asked him why he had not
previously applied to him for assistance against .the
treacherous Muhammadans. He.said he could have
saved the Guru much suffering. Here the Guru met
some Sikhs who had come from Lahore with a
musket as an offering. He asked Dalla for two
men to serve as targets to make trial of the weapon.
All who heard him thought he was insane and made
no reply. The Guru then saw two Ranghreta Sikhs
and invited them to submit to the trial. When the
Guru called them they were tying on their turbans,
but, so eager were they to please him, that they
went before him with their turbans only half-bound,
and vied with each other as to who should first be
the subject of his experiment. The Guru said he
only wanted one of them, and further explained
that he merely desired to prove. the cowardice and
disloyalty of. Dalla’s soldiers, and show that, had
they been with him in Anandpur, they would have
deserted him in the hour of danger.

The Guru’s wives Mata Sundari and Sahib Kaur here
joined him in his wanderings. They wept copiously
on hearing the fate of the young children. The
Guru endeavoured to console them, and said, * Ajit
Singh, Zorawar Singh, Jujhar Singh, and Fatah
Singh have been sacrificed for their religion and
obtained eternal life, so why should the mothers
of such heroes. lament? Lo! the whole world is

220 THE SIKH RELIGION

transitory. There is first childhood, then youth
which diminisheth day by day, and at last old age,
when the body perisheth. In the presence of God
what is old age, what childhood, and what youth ?
They are all the same—equally of short duration.
The more we love our bodies, the more sufféring
we endure. Love:for the body is meaningless.
Only those who apply it to good works profit by
their lives. Your sons have gone with honour to
where bliss ever abideth. Having performed the
work of the immortal God they have now returned
to Him. Therefore accept God’s will as the best
and most advantageous portion. Instead of your
sons I present you with my Sikhs as a brave and
worthy offspring.’

Dayal Das, a grandson of Bhai Bhagtu, came
from Bhuchcho to visit the Guru. The Guru wished
to baptize him, but he refused, saying he was a Sikh
of the ancient fashion and wished to remain so.
Ram Singh, a great-grandson of Bhai Bhagtu, came
from Chakk Bhai to invite the Guru to go and stay
with him. The Guru promised that he would go
some day, and requested him to hold his house*in
readiness to receive him.

The woman Bhago who remained with the Guru
after the battle of Muktsar, in a fit of devotional
abstraction tore off her clothes and wandered half
naked in the forest. The Guru restrained her, gave
her the kachh or Sikh drawers, and allowed her
again to wear man’s costume. She attained a good
old age, and died in Abchalanagar (Nander) revered
by the Sikhs as a saint.

While the Guru was in Talwandi Wazir Khan
sent a peremptory note to Dalla to surrender him,
or he would dispatch an army and put them both
to death. Dalla replied that the Guru was his lie,
and he could not part with him. If Wazir Khan
sent an army, the Guru and Dalla would go into
the recesses of the forest, where, even if an army

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 221

penetrated, it would perish for want of water. In
fine Dalla manfully and courageously stated that he
intended the Guru should reside with him for ever.

One day the Guru, probably not wishing to com-
promise his friend Dalla, said he would like to see
the old fort of Bhatinda which had been founded
by Binaipal. He first, however, in pursuance of his
promise went to visit Ram Singh at Chakk Bhai.
Ram Singh informed Dayal Das of the Guru’s visit,
and suggested to him to prepare dinner for him in
Bhuchcho. He did so, but the Guru refused his
hospitality and proceeded to Bhagtu on his way to
Bhatinda. The Guru took up his residence on the
top of the fort where now is a small temple dedi-
cated to him. |

At night some Baloches sang of Sassi and Punnu.
Sassi-had been brought up by a washerman. Punnu
was a Baloch merchant who came to the Panjab
with merchandise for sale. He met Sasst, fell in
love with her, and remained with her, until his
brother came and took him forcibly away by night.
Sassi at daybreak hearing of his abduction followed
him, and on arriving at a sandy desert was so over-
come by the heat that she expired. The poet
represented that she had entered the earth in quest
of Punnu. Next day the Guru took occasion to
expatiate on love. He said, ‘Men may perform
devotion and penance for hundreds of thousands of
years, but it would be all in vain without the love
of God.’

The Bairars told the Guru a legend regarding the
founding of Bhatinda. One day, as Binaipal was
hunting, he saw a wolf and a goat struggling. The
goat was trying to save her young from the wolf.
On the very spot where the struggle between the
two animals took place Binaipal caused the fort to
be erected. The Bairars told the Guru that there
was a subterranean passage between Bhatinda and
Bhatner in Bikaner. The chroniclers do not state

220 THE SIKH RELIGION

who was in possession of the fort when visited by
the Guru.

The Guru thence proceeded to Samma and thence
returned to Talwandi Sabo. There his friend Dalla
again met him. Dayal Das had been following the
Guru for some time to present him with the sacred
food he had prepared for him, and thus secure the
Guru’s pardon. On arriving at Damdama Ram
Singh, who was in the Guru’s service, interceded for
Dayal Das, and the Guru was pleased to restore
him to his friendship.

Wazir Khan sent another letter to Dalla to arrest
the Guru, or he would plunder his country and put
him to death without mercy. Dalla replied, ‘O
viceroy, I fear thee not, however much thou threat-
enest me with thine army. Having destroyed it,
the Guru and I will retire into the forest where
thou shalt: have no power over us, and whence thou
shalt have to return when thy troops have perished
of hunger and thirst. I will by no means have the
Guru arrested to please thee. Nay, I will defend
him with my life.’

Zabardast Khan, the Viceroy of Lahore, plundered
a party of Sikhs who were going to make offerings
to the Guru. Wazir Khan, the viceroy of Sarhind,
plundered another party going on the same errand.
The Guru then repeated his exhortation to his Sikhs
to wear arms and diligently practise their use. In
the early days of Sikhism it was different. At that
time the Guru’s teaching was to remember the true
Name and not annoy anybody. Farid said, ‘ If any
one strike thee with his fists, strike him not back.’
With such teaching, the Guru said, the Sikhs had
become faint-hearted and ever suffered defeat. Now
that the times had altered, and the Sikhs were
obliged to defend themselves, he had established the

1 There is a tradition in Bhatinda that the fort was partially
destroyed by Shahab-ul-Din Ghori during his campaign for the recovery
of the Panjab.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH — 223

Khalsa, and whoever desired to abide in it should
not fear the clash of arms, but be ever ready for
the combat and the defence of his faith. At the
same time the Name was still to remain the chief
object of the Sikhs’ adoration.

CHAPTER XXVIII

While the Guru was at Damdama he dictated the
whole of the Granth Sahib to Bhai Mani Singh, and
added for the first time the hymns and sloks of his
father Guru Teg Bahadur with a slok of his own.’

It is said that the Guru used to have baptismal
water prepared and thrown among the bushes. He
explained that he did so in order that the Malwa
Sikhs might increase: in number and spring from
every forest shrub. He used also to have pens made
and scattered in different directions. By’ this he
meant that the inhabitants of the place should
become learned and expert penmen.

The Guru while at Damdama used in the after-
noon to go into the forest and sit under a jand-tree.
The place was hence called Jandiana. A_ temple
was subsequently erected there. At night the Guru
used to return to Damdama. It was while in this
neighbourhood he baptized Dalla and one hundred
other Sikhs.

1 Slok LIV. It may here be stated that there were three editions
of the Granth Sahib. The first was written by Bhai Gur Das, the
second by Bhai Banno, and the third by Bhai Mani Singh, under the
superintendence of Guru Gobind Singh. The first two are believed
to exist still, one being at Kartarpur in the Jalandhar District, and the
other at Mangat in the Gujrat District of the Panjab. Guru Gobind
Singh’s copy of the Granth Sahib was the most complete. It is un-
fortunately not now extant. It was either destroyed or taken away
as booty by Ahmad Shah Durani when he despoiled and profaned
the Golden Temple at Amritsar.

The Granth of the tenth Guru was really the Daswen Padshah ka
Granth. The large volume which now bears that title, was com-
piled from various materials twenty-six years after his demise.

224 THE SIKH RELIGION

The Guru sent for Tilok Singh and Ram Singh
who had performed the obsequies of his two sons
Ajit Singh and Zorawar Singh, fallen at Chamkaur.
They came to visit him and made him large offer-
Ings. The Guru was well pleased with them and
blessed them and their offspring. It may be here
mentioned that Ram Singh is the ancestor of the
Chief of Patiala, and Tilok Singh the ancestor of
the chiefs of Nabha and Jind.

One day the Guru said to Dalla, ‘ That is a fine
field of wheat I see.’ Dalla replied, ‘ That is grass,
OQ true Guru, wheat groweth not here. Had we
wheat the Muhammadans would oppress us. Say
that moth and bajra are growing here.’ Another
day the Guru said, ‘O Dalla, I see excellent sugar-
cane here.’ Dalla made the same reply as before
when the Guru said he had seen wheat. The Guru
said, ‘ Thou knowest not thine advantage. I desire
to make thy land as fertile as Sarhind. The Turks
whom thou fearest shall soon perish, and the soil
of Malwa in time bear wheat and sugar-cane.’
This prophecy has been fulfilled. Canals made by
the British Government have since fertilized that
part of the country.

It was here the Guru heard that Kapura had been

1 It is stated by several Sikh writers that Tilok Singh was present
at the battle of Chamkaur. Though inexperienced in war, he con-
ceived a desire to engage in it, and went into the thick of the combat.
A Pathin endeavoured to pierce him with a lance. He snatched the
lance from the Pathan’s hands and cut off his head with his sword.
He then took the head on the Pathan’s lance to the Guru. The Guru
on seeing him approach cried out, Ao, Zilok Sing, sang ke lare—
Come, Tilok Singh, Bridegroom of war.

Tilok Singh and Ram Singh had been hereditary Sikhs, and were
ever regarded affectionately by the Guru, as is evidenced by his letter
of the 2nd of Bhadon, Sambat 1753 (a. D. 1696), in which he wrote,
Mert tere upar bahut khushi hat, aur tera ghar mera hat, that is,
I am very well pleased with you, my house is yours, and your
house is mine. This letter is now preserved with other relics of the
Guru in the Sikh state of Nabha.

*° Moth and éajra are inferior Indian cereals only consumed by the
poorest classes.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH ~ 228

put to death by Isa Khan of Kot Isa Khan in the
Firozpur district. The cause and manner of hs
death were as follows :—Kaul, a descendant of
Prithi Chand, had established a religious fair at
Dhilwan ; Kapura attended it and became involved
in a drunken brawl with some of the pilgrims. Kaul
sent a great-grandson of his to interpose, but the
youth was killed. Another great-grandson whom
he dispatched on a similar errand met with the same
fate. On this Abhai Ram, the father of the youths
slain, became furious with Kapura, desired that the
Guru’s curse on him might speedily take effect, and
his line be extirpated. Isa Khan with all haste
employed a party of men to attack Kapura, whom
he suspected to be a friend of the Guru. The
latter tried to defend himself, but was worsted, and
then tried to conceal himself in a haystack. Isa
Khan dragged him forth, and made him a prisoner.
When taking him away he thought he would be
only an encumbrance, so he ordered him to be hanged
on the nearest tree. Kapura himself remembered
the Guru’s curse, that his head should be put into
a bag of ashes, so he requested that it should be
done before his execution, that the words of the
Guru might be fulfilled, and that he might be thus
saved from further transmigration.

On one occasion a question arose as to what the
earth rested on. The theories of the Hindus and
other sects were put forward. The Guru concluded
the discussion by saying that the earth was sup-
ported by the power of God who alone was true
and permanent. He on that occasion repeated the
sixteenth pauri of the Japji.

Daya Singh and Dharm Singh, whom the Guru
had sent with the Zafarnama to the Emperor, suc-
ceeded in delivering it, and were furnished with
a parwana of safe conduct for their return journey.
The perusal of the Zafarnama is said to have
sottened the Emperor’s heart and led him to repent ;

SIKH. V QO

226 THE SIKH RELIGION

hence his permission to the Guru’s messengers to
return to their own country in peace and safety.
They, however, received no verbal or written reply
to the Guru’s letter.

The Guru asked Dalla to accompany him to the
south of India. Dalla replied that he considered
his humble couch at Damdama was equal to the
throne of Dihli, and he pressed the Guru and his
Sikhs to remain with him. The Bairars in the
Guru’s service also endeavoured to dissuade him
from his contemplated journey. He refused to listen
to them, and on this several of them left his service.
The Guru was now left with only Dalla Singh ;
the two great-grandsons of Bhai Bhagtu, namely,
Ram Singh and his brother Fatah Singh; Param
Singh and Dharm Singh, descendants of Bhai Rupa;
and Bhai Mani Singh, the Sikh biographer and ar-
ranger of the Ad Granth and the tenth Guru's
Granth.

Their first march was to Kewal, thence to Jhorar,
thence to Jhanda, and thence to Sarsa. Param
Singh and Dharm Singh had a new bed provided
for the Guru at every march. Dalla Singh to every
one’s intense amazement absconded during the march
in the dead of night, and took with him a Sodhi
and several Bairars. The Guru dismissed Fatah
Singh on Ram Singh’s representation that his ser-
vices and assistance were required at home.

The Guru thence proceeded to Nauhar, a town
of Bikaner about twenty miles south-west of Sarsa.
Though the inhabitants were very rich, they do not
appear to have been forward in providing supplies
for the Guru and his few remaining followers. On
the contrary, there was great commotion in the town
because one of his Sikhs had accidentally killed
a pigeon. When the Guru went into the market-
place he saw that the inhabitants were very proud
of their wealth, and he foretold that it should all
soon vanish. In A.D. 1756 a Sikh expedition was

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 227

directed against Charupur (Chainpura), but on
finding the water on the march brackish, the soldiers
made a diversion and plundered Nauhar.

, Thence the Guru proceeded to Bahaduran. There
he gave Param Singh and Dharm Singh a horse
each and also arms for their defence. On arriving
at Sahewa (Saio) the Guru noticed that through
respect for him they were taking the arms on their
heads and walking beside their chargers as being
a Guru’s gifts. The Guru said that they should
obtain whatever they required, and that their tongues
should be to them as arms. On bidding them fare-
well he presented them with a religious work con-
taining the morning and evening divine services of
the Sikhs.

The Guru’s next march was to Madhu Singhana.
He thence proceeded to Pushkar, a place of pil-
grimage sacred to Brahma. A Brahman called
Chetan showed the Guru the sacred places of Ajmer.
The Guru while in that neighbourhood was often
severely heckled on the subject of his dress. People
said it was neither Hindu nor Muhammadan. The
Guru admitted the fact, and said it was the dress
of the third distinct sect which he had established.

Thence the Guru proceeded to Narainpur, generally
known as Dadudwara, where the saint Dadu had
lived and flourished. His shrine had by this time
descended to a Mahant called Jait, who quoted two
lines of Dadu to the Guru :—

Dadu, surrender thy claim to every worldly thing ; pass
thy days without claims.

How many have departed after trading in this grocer’s
shop ! 1

The Guru said these lines were applicable to the
invention of a religion, but ill suited to its preserva-
tion. Kather should the lines be read :—

1 That is, the world.
Q2

228 THE SIKH RELIGION

Asserting thy claim in the world plunder the wicked.
Extirpate him who doeth thee evil.

The Mahant quoted two other lines to the Guru :—

Dadu, taking the times as they come, be satisfied with
this Kal age.

If any one throw a clod or a brick at thee, lift it on thy
head.

The Guru would not admit the last line, and altered
it thus :—

If any one throw a clod or a brick at thee, angrily strike
him with a stone.

The Guru then explained the principles of his
own religion to the Mahant: ‘This age is very evil.
The wicked rule in it, and cause suffering to saints
and holy men. Tyrants therefore deserve to be
punished. They will not refrain as long as they
are pardoned. O Mahant, they who bear arms, who
remember the true Name and sacrifice their lives
for their faith, shall go straight to paradise. There-
fore I have established the Khalsa religion, given my
followers arms, and made them heroes.’

The Guru was censured by his staff for lifting his
arrow in salutation of Dadu’s shrine. Man Singh
quoted the Guru’s own written instructions, Gor
marhi mat bhul na mane—Worship not even by
mistake Muhammadan or Hindu cemeteries or places
of cremation. The Guru explained that he saluted
the shrine to test his Sikhs’ devotion and their
recollection of his instructions. The Guru, however,
admitted that he had technically rendered himself
liable to a fine, and cheerfully paid one hundred and
twenty-five rupees.

The Guru thence went to Lali, thence to Mag-
haroda, and thence to Kulait. Here he met Daya
Singh and Dharm Singh returning from their em-
bassy to Aurangzeb. It is probable the embassy
reached the Emperor when he was ill. The envoys

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 229

told the Guru that when they left the Emperor's
court they heard he had been seized with a colic.

The Guru thence proceeded to Baghaur. Here
he heard of Aurangzeb’s death and the accession of
his second son Tara Azim, called Muhammad Azim
Shah by Muhammadan historians. The inhabitants
of Baghaur refused supplies and quarrelled with the
Guru’s escort. A camel belonging to the Guru
trespassed on one of the town gardens. The gar-
deners beat the camel and abused the camel-driver.
Upon this the Sikhs went in a body and assaulted
the gardeners. This led to a counter assault and
fighting which lasted two days. By this time the
Sikhs had stormed and plundered the city, but the
fort remained to be captured. By the advice of
Ratan Singh, a Sikh whom the Guru must have
met on his travels, a cannon was placed on a hill
commanding the fort. After a brief cannonade the
occupants held out a flag of truce. Peace was pro-
claimed, but on the arrival of the raja of the place,
who had been absent when the fighting began,
hostilities were resumed. Dharm Singh killed the
raja’s commander-in-chief, and the Guru killed the
raja himself. The Baghaur army then fled, and
was pursued by the Sikhs until the Guru recalled
them. Upon this the Guru resumed his march. On
setting out he told the Sikhs that the Turks should
soon fight against one another, and that the usurper,
Tara Azim, should be killed.

CHAPTER XXIX

When Aurangzeb died, his eldest son, Bahadur
Shah, was engaged in a military expedition in
Afghanistan! When his younger brother Tara Azim
usurped the throne, Badadur Shah hastened back

1 The Emperor Aurangzeb had three sons, Bahadur Shah, Muham-
mad Azim Shah (called Tara Azim by the Sikhs), and Muhammad
Kam Bakhsh.

230 THE SIKH RELIGION

to India to claim and do battle for his heritage.
He consulted Nand Lal, a friend of his, as to how
he should be successful. Nand Lal advised him to
seek the Guru’s assistance. The Guru, on being
appealed to, promised him not only assistance but
sovereignty if he agreed to a request he was about
to make, and did not prove false like his father.
Bahadur Shah was pleased to accept these vague
conditions, and informed the Guru accordingly.

The Guru sent Dharm Singh with some trusty
Sikhs to render him all possible assistance, and,
feeling anxiety regarding the grave political cir-
cumstances of the country, deemed it advisable
to retrace his steps to the north in the hope of
meeting and conferring with the Emperor.

When Bahadur Shah had fully equipped his army,
he marched to Agra. Tara Azim, who was at the
time in distant Ahmadnagar, on hearing of his
brother’s operations, marched by Gualiar to con-
tend with him for empire. Bahadur Shah advanced
to meet him and encamped at Jaju near Dhaulpur
(Dholpur) where the opposing armies met.’ After
a fight of three days’ duration, not only Tara Azim,
but several of his principal officers were slain. Upon
this his army fled and victory remained with Bahadur
Shah. He, now undisputed monarch of India, re-
turned to Agra and dispatched Dharm Singh to
inform the Guru of his victory.

On the Guru’s arrival in Dihli he encamped on
the left bank of the Jamna. His Sikhs thought it
unsafe for him to enter that strong Muhammadan
and imperial centre. He erected a temple on the
spot where his father Guru Teg Bahadur had been
cremated. On hearing of Bahadur Shah’s victory
the Guru resolved to go to Agra to congratulate
him, and made arrangements to leave his wives in
Dihli under the protection of his Sikhs. Upon hear-
ing this Mata Sundari wept copiously. The Guru

1 Wagiat Hind.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 231

consoled her with the arguments and reflections he
had previously employed at Damdama on the tran-
sitoriness of human life and the bliss in which her
son abode as a mighty hero and religious martyr.

A goldsmith residing in Dihli came to the Guru
to pray him to grant him the favour of a son. One
day as the Guru went to the chase accompanied
among others by the goldsmith, they saw a woman
abandon her male infant in the forest. The Guru
told the goldsmith to take and rear the child. The
goldsmith said he could not afford a wet-nurse.
The Guru directed him to take some water, recite
Wahguru over it, and wash his wife’s breasts there-
with. When she took the child in her lap milk
would at once come in abundance. The goldsmith
accepted the Guru’s advice, and the promised result
was obtained. When the child was five years of
age, he was seen by Mata Sundari, who found in
him a marvellous likeness to her martyred son, and
duly adopted him.

Sahib Kaur importuned the Guru to allow her to
accompany him. At last he yielded to her entreaties.
Bahadur Shah sent a messenger to the Guru to ex-
pedite his departure. The messenger informed him
that the Emperor feared the bigotry of his co-
religionists were he himself to pay the first visit.

The Guru on the third day after his departure
from Dihli arrived at Mathura and encamped at
Suraj Kund, on the banks of the Jamna. He made
a tour through Bindraban and visited all its famous
and interesting places.

On his journey to Agra the Guru wanted water.
One of his Sikhs fetched it from the house of a
barren woman of the priestly class, and told the
Guru that, there being no children there, the water
must be pure. The Guru would not admit that
children defiled water, and asked it to be brought
him from some house, where there were sons and
daughters. On that occasion he said, ‘A hermit

232 THE SIKH RELIGION

is best when alone; pure is his body and pure
his mind; but where there is a householder with
a large family, his house is still purer, and so are
his body, mind, and understanding.’

The Guru duly met the Emperor Bahadur Shah in
Agra. The Emperor thanked him for such assist-
ance as he had given him in obtaining the throne,
made him costly presents, and invited him to spend
some time with him. The Guru was pleased to
accept the invitation.

One day as the Guru and a high officer were
seated together, a Saiyid of Sarhind asked the Guru
if he could perform a miracle. The Guru replied
that miracles were in the power of the Emperor. He
could raise a humble person to the highest office
and dignity, or degrade him therefrom. The Saiyid
said he knew that, but had the Guru himself the
power of working any miracles? Upon this the
Guru drew forth a gold coin and said that it was
a miracle, for everything could be purchased with it.
The Saiyid asked if he could show any further
miracles. In reply the Guru drew his sword, and
said that that also was a miracle. It could cut off
heads and confer thrones and empires upon those
who wielded it with dexterity. Upon this the
Saiyid hung down his head and asked no further
questions.

Some rajas of Rajputana came to visit the
Guru. He told them they did one very regret-
table thing, namely, they gave their daughters in
marriage to Muhammadan emperors and princes.
He made them swear that they would for the
future desist from the practice.

One day in conversation with the Guru the
Emperor maintained that if any one were to repeat
the Muhammadan creed, he should not be consigned
to hell. The Guru denied that the creed had that
efficacy. If any one after repeating it were to do
evil, the repetition of the creed would not avail him.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 233

The Emperor asked how he was to be assured of
that. The Guru replied, ‘ The creed is stamped on
thy rupee ; we shall see the effect thereof.’ The
Guru secretly sent a bad rupee to the market-place
to be changed. The money-changer applied to at
once rejected it as counterfeit. It was then taken
to the other money-changers with the same result.
The Guru then addressed the Emperor: ‘See, in
thine empire, even in thine own market-place, no
one hath paid any regard to thy creed engraved on
this rupee, so how shall it conduct men to heaven ?
Thou to-day enjoyest empire, and canst do what
thou pleasest. If here in thy presence this bad
rupee even with the creed on it cannot pass, how
can it be accepted by another monarch ? In God's
court gilding availeth not. The counterfeit and the
genuine are there distinguished, and men obtain the
reward or punishment due to their acts. Thy creed,
therefore, as in the present case, cannot avail thee
for admission into heaven without good works.
When all accounts are called for by the Great
Examiner, it is only those who show balances to
their credit who shall be delivered.’

The Guru and the Emperor’s conversation turned
on the subject of Hindu pilgrimages. The Guru
said he himself had no concern with them. Next
day when he visited the Emperor, the latter said
there were two ways—the Hindu and the Musal-
man—in the world, and inquired which the Guru
preferred to follow. The Guru said he was well
disposed towards both, and he instructed every one
as he found him. The Emperor replied: ‘ There is
one God and one faith. On what dost thou rely ?’
The Guru smiled and said, ‘ My brother, there are
three Gods.’ The Emperor inquired where that was
written, and added, ‘ A child born yesterday knoweth
there is only one God.’ The Guru continued, * Why
did thine ancestors hinder the Hindus from wor-
shipping Ram, Narayan, and tell them they must

234 THE SIKH RELIGION

only utter Maula Pak or Khuda’? Thou proclaimest
that heaven is made for Moslems and hell for the
Hindus. Hindus will not associate with any one
who adoreth Maula Pak or Khuda. Such is the
quarrel between the two sects. Know that my
religion is that regarding which there is no con-
troversy. The Hindus have a God whom Moslems
do not acknowledge, and I have a God whom neither
of them acknowledge.’

The Emperor one day preached the Guru a sermon
against Hindu superstitions. The Guru agreed with
him, but at the same time would not flatter the
Muhammadan religion. He said that as the Hindu
worshipped stones, so did the Muhammadans wor-
ship departed saints and even a black lifeless slab
at Makka; and as the Hindus when at prayer
turned their faces to the east, the Muhammadans
turned their faces to the west. The Muhammadans
supposed that their prophet could mediate for them,
but he had become ashes, and what advantage could
his ashes or those of his saints confer on men ? The
Guru thus found fault with both the Hindu and
Muhammadan religions, and said that he had struck
out a religion of his own, the basis of which was the
worship of the sole immortal God. ‘Some discus-
sion arose on the subject of the Guru’s discourse,
but he promptly answered all objections.

The Guru now explicitly stated the request he
had several times hinted that he desired to make.
It was to deliver up to him Wazir Khan who had
killed his children at Sarhind. The Emperor natur-
ally desired to know what the Guru proposed to do
with him. The Guru candidly replied that he
would have life for life, according to the law of
retaliation contained in the Emperor’s sacred book.
The Emperor shuddered on hearing this request, but
gave no direct refusal. He said he would reply
after consulting his ministers. At the same time

1 Muhammadan names of God.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH —— 235

he felt that if he surrendered a viceroy to the Guru,
a popular rebellion‘ and a mutiny of his Muham-
madan army would be the result. The Emperor
therefore requested the Guru to wait for a year
until his rule was more firmly established, and then
he would consider the request made. The Guru
on this reproached the Emperor with falsehood,
and said that a Sikh? should arise who should call
the false and counterfeit to account, who should
seize and kill the Emperor’s viceroys, priests, and
magistrates, and contribute to the ruin of the
Mughal empire.

Notwithstanding this blunt language and undis-
guised menace, the Emperor invited the Guru to go
with him on a visit to Jaipur and other cities. The
Guru promised to join him on the march. After
a few days he set out and overtook the Emperor.
They both visited Jodhpur and Chitaur. Each
raja sent his envoy to conciliate and do homage
to the Guru. At Chitaur there arose a quarrel
between the Sikhs and the Rajputs on account of
some grass the former had taken for their horses.
The Guru censured his Sikhs, and ordered them to
take nothing for the future without payment.

The Emperor and the Guru continued their
journey to the Narbada river. The quarrel between
the Sikhs and the Muhammadans was kept alive by
the Emperor’s escort, many of whom were relations
of the imperial soldiers slain by the Sikhs at Anand-
pur. The Guru sent Man Singh, one of his Five
Beloved, to adjust the difference between both
parties. While on his mission of peace the brave
Man Singh, one of the surviving heroes of Cham-
kaur, who had never parted from the Guru, was
assassinated by a fanatic. The Emperor was much
distressed on hearing of his death, and ordered
that his murderer should be seized and given up to
the Guru for punishment. The Guru pardoned him,

1 No doubt Banda was meant.

236 THE SIKH RELIGION

and thus gained great praise from the Muham-
madans for his mercy and clemency.

The Emperor and the Guru continued their march
to Burhanpur on the Tapti river. The inhabitants
had prepared a house there for the Guru, where he
passed some time. A holy man came to visit him
and said, “O Guru, I was present with thy father on
the bank of the Brahmaputra when thou wert born
in Patna. He said that thou shouldst afterwards
travel to the south of India. The prophecy having
now been fulfilled, I have come to meet and wel-
come thee.’ He then gave the Guru hospitable
entertainment.

The Emperor continued his journey and left the
Guru at Burhanpur. After some days the Emperor
wrote to him to join him, and he acceded to his
request. Both then proceeded to Puna and thence
to Nander on the margin of the river Godavari in
the present state of Haidarabad and about one
hundred and fifty miles north-west of its capital.

CHAPTER XXX

The original name of Nander was Nau Nand Dehra,
because it is said that nine rikhis dwelt there in
prehistoric times. It is supposed to occupy the
site of the ancient city of Tagara described by
the author of the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea.
In the middle of the fourth century it was still
a place of importance and the capital of a petty
kingdom. ‘Its fortifications have long since been
dismantled or have perished by lapse of time ; and
there is now no trace of any ancient buildings
save a few old temple. pillars preserved in a small
mosque near the court of the sub-collector. The
country is diversified by dale and hillock along the
lazily flowing Godavari.

The Guru arrived in Nander in Sawan (July-—
August), A.D. 1707, with some infantry and two or

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 237

three hundred cavalry equipped with lances. He
went to the hut of Madho Das, a Bairagi hermit.
Finding the Bairagi absent, and hearing that he
possessed such skill in magic that he could over-
throw any one who sat on his couch, the Guru
proceeded to sit thereon and make himself at
home. He shot one of the Bairagi’s goats and
cooked and ate the flesh. A disciple went to inform
the Bairagi of the Guru’s proceedings. It was a
sacrilege to kill an animal at the Bairagi’s seat, and
another sacrilege to take possession of the couch
which served him as athrone. He came to demand
an explanation of the intruder’s strange conduct.
The Bairagi represented that the place had been
first his guru’s seat, then his own, and he did not
desire to have it usurped by an unknown stranger,
who moreover committed violence and_ sacrilege.
The Guru replied that he had arrived fatigued in
Nander, and having heard of the Bairagi’s hospitality
and philanthropy, took the liberty of testing the
favourable accounts he had received. The Bairagi
accepted the Guru’s explanation, recognized from
his words and manner that he was a great man,
and called himself his Banda—slave—the name by
which he was subsequently known.

Banda, whose original name was Lachmandev, was
son of Ramdev Rajput and native of Rajauri in the
Himalayan State of Punch. Before he adopted a
religious role he had been a zamindar or cultivator.
In early years he practised the use of firearms and
was devoted to the chase. Once when he shot a
female deer he found two young ones in her womb.
He was so distressed at what he had done, that he
decided to renounce the world and became a disciple
of a faqir named Janki Prasad. As a wandering
mendicant he made his way to the source of the
Godavari at Nasik. He there made himself a hut
and began to perform austerities.

A Jogi called Luni visited him and instructed him

@

238 . THE SIKH RELIGION

in the science of Jog and incantations. Being thus
accomplished, he set out again on his travels, and
followed the source of the Godavari until he arrived
in Nander. There he became known as a holy man
in possession of many charms for the acquisition of
spiritual and temporal advantages. He used to
pray and perform penance on a little mound over-
looking the Godavari, and thence at intervals watch
its slow and dreamy motion as if it were loth to
lose itself in the open sea.

The Guru was pleased with the position and
seclusion of Nander, and decided to make it his
permanent abode. He used to sit in prayer and
meditation on a small stone structure on the margin
of the river. Near it is a little larger building
where the Granth Sahib was read. It is now and
has been for years in a state of dilapidation.

The Guru instructed Banda in the tenets of his
religion, and in due time baptized him according to
the new rites. On that occasion Banda received
the name Gurbakhsh Singh, but continued to be
known as Banda. He conceived a great affection
for the true religious guide he had at last found,
and one day asked him if there were any service he
could perform for him. The Guru after reflection
found that he had an account to settle with the
Muhammadans of the Panjab, and replied, ‘I have
come into the world to consolidate the faith and
destroy oppressors. Art thou prepared to assist
me?’ Banda promised to undertake any enterprise
suggested by the Guru. Upon this he was enjoined
to proceed to the Panjab and wreak vengeance on
the enemies of the Khalsa. ‘Thou hast called thy-
self my slave,’ said the Guru, ‘but thou shalt be
the most exalted of all.’

Saying this the Guru presented him with five
arrows and thus addressed him, ‘ As long as thou
remainest continent, thy glory shall increase. He
who is continent, turneth not away from the combat,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 239

and his opponents cannot withstand him. The
continent man succeedeth in everything. Once thou
forsakest the Khalsa principles and associatest un-
lawfully with woman, thy courage shall depart.’ He
then ordered Banda to proceed towards the Jamna,
wait at a little distance from Buria for reinforce-
ments which he would cause to be sent him, then
go to Sadhaura—Buria and Sadhaura are both in
the present district of Ambala—and plunder and
devastate it. The reason was that the Muham-
madans of the place had caused Budhu Shah and
his disciples to be executed by the Emperor for
the offence of having assisted the Guru at the battle
of Bhangani. When Banda had disposed of the
Guru’s enemies at Sadhaura, he was to proceed to
sack some more Muhammadan cities, then march
to Sarhind, and put its governor Wazir Khan to
death. The Guru gave him instructions to cut off
Wazir Khan’s head with his own hands, and not
entrust this pious duty to any subordinate. This
done Banda was commissioned to go to the hills and
search for the hill Rajas who had so often and so
cruelly persecuted the Guru, and mete out to them
the same justice as to the Mughal enemies of the
Khalsa.

With Banda the Guru dispatched Baba Buinod
Singh, his son Baba Kahn Singh—descendants of
Guru Angad—and Baz Singh, a descendant of Guru
Amar Das, who were all three to give Banda further
instructions in the new religion he had adopted.
With these the Guru sent five other Sikhs to assist
in the enterprise and support the martial fame of
the Khalsa.

After Banda’s departure the Guru lived at various
places in the immediate neighbourhood—at the
Shikar Ghat, or game ferry, whence he used to go
hunting, at the Nagina Ghat, where a Sikh presented
him with a valuable signet ring which he flung into
the river, at the Hira Ghat where he disposed in

240 THE SIKH RELIGION

a similar manner of a valuable diamond ring pre-
sented him by the Emperor while in Nander, and
at the spot now called the Sangat Sahib, where he
used to give religious instruction to his followers
and expound to them the Granth Sahib.

While at the Sangat Sahib, a Multani Sikh brought
the Guru an offering of a bow and two arrows. He
was much pleased, and put the bow to the test by
discharging one of the arrows from it. He sent one
of his followers to inquire where the arrow had
fallen. On being informed of the spot he said that
was where he wished to reside. The Muhammadans
objected, but their objection was overruled by the
Emperor, who made the Guru a present of the land.
He went and abode there, and made it the scene
of his propaganda. It is the place on which his
shrine was subsequently erected. -

After some time a Pathan one day came and
claimed from the Guru a sum of eleven thousand
rupees as the price of horses he had supplied him.
The Guru had not sufficient funds to discharge the
debt. He said that thirty years after his decease
the Sikhs should be in power, and the Pathan had
only to present the Guru’s acknowledgement of the
debt to their leaders, when he should receive the
amount many hundredfold. The debt was duly dis-
charged by the Sikhs under happier and more pros-
perous circumstances.

CHAPTER XXXI

The Guru feeling that his end was approaching
desired to send Sahib Kaur, to her co-wife Sundari
whom he had left in Dihl on his departure
to the south of India. He knew that she could
not endure the shock which his demise would cause
her. She at first refused to leave Nander, saying
that she had made a vow never to take her daily
food without seeing the Guru, and how could she

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH — 241

fulfil her vow if she were to part from him? The
Guru then gave her six weapons which had belonged
to his grandfather Guru Har Gobind, and told her
to look at them whenever she desired to behold
him. With these and other inducements he at last
persuaded her to depart. She was accompanied by
Bhai Mani Singh and both were enjoined to com-
fort and console Sundari.

The current Sikh account of the Guru’s death is
that he was stabbed by Gul Khan, a grandson of
Painda Khan, in revenge for the death of the
latter at the hands of Guru Har Gobind." More
probable is the account given in one of the re-
censions of Bahadur Shah’s lustory :—The Guru
was in the habit of constantly addressing as-
semblies of worldly persons, religious fanatics, and
indeed all varieties of people. One day an Afghan,
who frequently attended these meetings, was sitting
listening to him, when certain expressions which
were disagreeable to the ears of the faithful fell
from the Guru’s tongue. The Afghan was en-
raged and, regardless of the Guru’s digmity and
importance, stabbed him twice or thrice with a
poniard.

1 Thucydides, the Greek historian, cites a proverb to the effect that
the gratification of revenge is the sweetest feeling among mortals—
"Apa 8 éxOpors dpivarbar éxyevnodpevov apiv, Kal 7d Aeyopevov mov
wotorov etvaotc—and even one of the most Christian of poets thought it
not unbecoming his religion and philosophy to approve of the anger
of one of the denizens of his Inferno for his unavenged death. His
passion for revenge and his resentment at the inaction of his poetic
relative only enhanced pity and estimation for him—

ond’ ei sen gio
Senza parlarmi, st com’io stimo;
Ed in cid m’ha e’ fatto a sé piu pio.
Dante’s Lnferno.

Several Sikhs suppose that Gul Khan was specially deputed by
the Emperor Bahadur Shah to assassinate the Guru because he had
importuned him to fulfil a promise solemnly made, It has been
thought the Emperor believed that if he could remove the Guru from
his path, all troubles would be at an end.

SIKH. V R

242 THE SIKH RELIGION

The Emperor on hearing of the outrage dispatched
some of his most skilful surgeons to attend to the
Guru’s injuries ; and so skilfully did they perform
their duty that the Guru’s wounds were nearly
healed in a fortnight, after which the surgeons took
their leave as being nolonger required. Inashort time
the Emperor again sent to inquire after the Guru’s
health and made him several offerings which included
two bows. A discussion arose whether the Guru
could bend them. On this he took up one and on
bending it burst open his imperfectly healed wounds.
Blood began to flow copiously. The wound was
bound up by the Guru’s attendants, but this time it
was past medicament.

The Guru set apart five hundred rupees for the
preparation and distribution of sacred food and one
hundred rupees to purchase sandal-wood and what-
ever else was necessary for his obsequies. His Sikhs
came to him, and said that while he was alive they
had the benefit of his presence, but they required
instruction which might remind them of him hereafter
and guide them to salvation. The Guru replied, ‘O
dear and beloved Khalsa, the immortal God’s will can
never be resisted. He who is born must assuredly die.
Guru Arjan hath said, “ Everything we behold shall
perish.” Night and day are merely expressions of
time. It is the immortal God alone who ever
abideth. All other beings, however holy and exalted,.
must depart when the last moment allotted them
arriveth, for none can escape the primordial law of
corporeal dissolution. All this world, composed of the
five elements, is Death’s prey. When the materials
perish, how can the fabric remain ? God the Creator
and Cherisher of all is alone immortal. Brahma,
Vishnu, Shiv, and the other gods of the Hindus
perished at their appointed time. Of what account
is man ? Wherefore, O my friends, it is not good ‘to
be unduly enamoured of this fragile body. Know
that the light of the imperishable God whose attri-

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 243

butes are permanence, consciousness, and happiness,
shineth ever in you. Wherefore always abide in
cheerfulness, and never give way to mourning. God
is ever the same. He is neither young nor old. He
is not born, neither doth he die. He feeleth not pain
or poverty. Know that the true Guru abideth as He.
Creatures who are steeped in bodily pride are
very unhappy, and night and day subject to love and
hate. Ever entangled and involved in the deadly
sins, they perish by mutual enmity and at last find
their abode in hell. Yet for the love of such creatures
the Guru assumed birth to deliver them. He hath
instructed them in the true Name, and very
fortunate are they who have received and treasured
his instruction. By it they are enabled to save
themselves and others from the perils of the world’s
ocean. As when after drought rain falleth and there
is abundance, so the Guru, seeing human beings
suffering and yearning for happiness, came to bestow
it on them and remove their sorrows by his teaching.
And as the rain remaineth where it falleth, so the
Guru’s instruction ever abideth with his disciples.
The Sikhs who love the true Guru are in turn beloved
by him. O Khalsa, remember the true Name.
The Guru hath arrayed you in arms to procure you
the sovereignty of the earth. Those who have died
in battle have gone to an abode of bliss. I have
attached you to the skirt of the immortal God and
entrusted you to Him. Read the Granth Sahib or
listen to it, so shall your minds receive consolation,
and you shall undoubtedly obtain an abode in the
Guru’s heaven. They who remember the true Name
render their lives profitable, and when they depart
enter the mansions of eternal happiness.’

When the Sikhs came again to take their last fare-
well of the Guru, they inquired who was to succeed
him. He replied, ‘I have entrusted you to the
immortal God. Ever remain under His protection,
and trust to none besides. Wherever there are five

R 2

244 THE SIKH RELIGION

Sikhs assembled who abide by the Guru’s teachings,
know that I am in the midst of them. He who
serveth them shall obtain the reward thereof—the
fulfilment of all his heart’s desires. Read the history
of your Gurus from the time of Guru Nanak. Hence-
forth the Guru shall be the Khalsa and the Khalsa
the Guru. I have infused my mental and bodily
spirit into the Granth Sahib and the Khalsa.’

After this the Guru bathed and changed his dress.
He then read the Japji and repeated an Ardas or
supplication. While doing so, he gave instruc-
tions that no clothes should be bestowed as alms
in his name. He then put on a muslin waist-
band, slung his bow on his shoulder and took
his musket in his hand. He opened the Granth
Sahib and placing five paise and a coco-nut before it
solemnly bowed to it as his successor. Then uttering
‘“Wahguru 31 ka Khalsa! Wahguru qv kt fatah!’
he circumambulated the sacred volume and said,
‘O beloved Khalsa, let him who desireth to behold
me, behold the Guru Granth. Obey the Granth
Sahib. It is the visible body of the Guru. And
let him who desireth to meet me diligently search
its hymns.’ ,

The Guru went to an enclosure formed of tent
walls where his bier had been erected. In the end
of the night—a watch before day—he lay on his
bier, and directed all his Sikhs except Bhai San-
tokh Singh,’ who was specially attached to him, to
go to their homes. He then gave his last orders to
hislast attendant. ‘ Keep my kitchen ever open, and
receive offerings for its maintenance. If any one
erect a shrine in my honour, his offspring shall perish.’
Bhai Santokh Singh represented that the Sikhs were
few at Nander, and how were offerings to be obtained?
The Guru replied, ‘O Bhai Santokh Singh, have
patience. Singhs of mine of very great eminence
shall come here and make copious offerings. Every-

1 This is a different man from the author of the S#raj Parkash,

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH ~— 245

thing shall be obtained by the favour of Guru
Nanak.’ He then, in grateful acknowledgement of
the spiritual benefactions of the founder of his
religion, uttered a Persian distich, the translation
of which 1s :—

Gobind Singh obtained from Guru Nanak
Hospitality, the sword, victory, and prompt assistance.!

The Guru then breathed his last. The Sikhs made
preparations for his obsequies as he had instructed
them, the Sohila was solemnly chanted, and sacred
food distributed.

While all were mourning the loss of the Guru
a hermit arrived and said, ‘ You suppose that the
Guru is dead. I saw. him this very morning riding
his bay horse. When I bowed to him he said,
‘“Come, O hermit, let me behold thee. Very happy
am I that I have met thee at the last moment.”
I then asked him whither he was wending his way.
He smiled and said he was going to the forest on
a hunting excursion. He had his bow in his hand,
and his arrows were fastened with a strap to his
waist.’

The Sikhs who heard this statement arrived at the
conclusion that it was all the Guru’s play, that he
dwelt in uninterrupted bliss, and that he showed
himself wherever he was remembered. He had
merely come into the world, they said, to make trial
of their faith, and remove the ills of existence.
Wherefore for such a Guru who had departed bodily
to heaven, there ought to be no mourning. The
ashes of his bier were collected and a platform built
over them. The Khalsa, to whom the Guruship had
been entrusted, declared that all those who visited
the spot should receive due spiritual reward.

The Guru departed from the scene of his earthly

1 These lines were impressed on a seal made by the Sikhs after the
Guru’s demise, and were adopted by Ranjit Singh for his coinage
after he had assumed the title of Maharaja.

246 THE SIKH RELIGION

triumphs and reverses on Thursday, the fifth day of
the bright half of Kartik, Sambat 1765 (A.D. 1708),
having exercised spiritual and temporal sovereignty
over the Sikhs for three and thirty years, and resided
in Nander for fourteen months and ten days.

The Sikh temple at Nander, called Abchalnagar,
is an imposing structure with a cupola and two
minarets. The interior is surrounded by a wall of
martial implements emblematic of the militant side
of the Guru’s character. It was built by Maharaja
Ranjit Singh in 1832 in defiance of the Guru’s
interdiction. Additions are being continually made
to the edifice by the contributions of devout Sikhs.’

CHAPTER XXXII

We now proceed to continue the history of Banda.
Having set out for the Panjab in accordance with the
Guru’s instructions, and in due time taken up his post
on an eminence near Buria, he found there the rein-
forcements promised by the Guru. They came in
numbers and clamoured for food. To supply them-
selves they were obliged to resort to forcible measures.
Upon this there arose a violent altercation between
the Sikhs and the villagers, in which the latter were

1 The state of Haidarabad has set aside the revenue of five villages,
namely, Bishanpuri, Bari, Bansari, Masor, and Eki, for the mainte-
nance of the shrine. The yearly revenue of these villages amounts to
about eighteen thousand rupees. The Sikh custodians of the shrine
receive a similar sum from the State for their own maintenance.

It may here be mentioned that all places of worship in the Haidar-
abad territory receive state assistance. A Hindu temple at the
capital receives an annual subsidy of seventy thousand rupees. In
every village Hindu as well as Muhammadan temples are treated as
objects of the Nizim’s munificence. Even Christian and Parsi
churches have to acknowledge his bounty.

“There are twelve hundred Sikhs, including cavalry and infantry,
commanded by twelve Risaldars, in the Nizim’s army. The Risaldars
reside at Nander each in turn for a whole year to protect the shrine
and the Sikhs who have gathered round it from different countries.
There are also three or four hundred Sikhs in the State Constabulary.

fi

home Gooedasé

¥
rs)

POTOHUSETITIITE

THE SIKH TEMPLE (HAZUR SAHIB) AT NANDER

P. 246

SIKH V

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 247

put to the sword. The inhabitants of two or three
other villages were similarly treated.

On seeing the licence granted to Banda’s troops
all the robbers of the country flocked to his standard.
An outcry everywhere arose, and the people went
in large numbers to complain to the governor of
Mustafabad—a city five or six miles to the west of
Buria—where were two thousand imperial troops
under arms and ready for any emergency. These
were dispatched with two large guns against Banda,
whereupon many of his mercenary recruits deserted
him. He encouraged all who remained, and promised
them protection and pecuniary assistance. He then
pulled forth one of the Guru’s arrows, drew a line
on the ground with it, and said that no bullet or
arrow should cross the demarcation thus made.
Upon this his troops rallied and made such a success-
ful defence that the Muhammadans all fled, leaving
their cannon behind them. After this victory several
of the deserters returned, and rejoined Banda’s
army. His forces then proceeded to Mustafabad
and laid it waste.

Banda’s next expedition was against Sadhaura.
The imperial troops stationed there came forth to
oppose him, but were easily defeated. They fled
and took shelter behind their city walls. Banda’s
forces with great bravery captured the fort, and
levelled it with the ground. Then ensued a general
massacre of the inhabitants. Banda next marched
and laid siege to Samana, a considerable town in
the state of Patiala. Here there was a sanguinary
battle. The city was sacked, and the male inhabi-
tants put to the sword.

He then proceeded to Sarhind. On the march
his troops took supplies forcibly from villagers.
Wazir Khan on hearing that Banda was marching
against him sent to the viceroy of Lahore for assist-
ance. Banda plundered Ambala on the way. He
then marched to Banur where he was encountered

248 THE SIKH RELIGION

by Wazir Khan’s army, which had marched from
Sarhind to oppose him. The battle began on the
following day. When several of the Muhammadans
were slain, Wazir Khan and Banda engaged in single
combat. .Banda thus addressed him, ‘O sinner,
thou art the enemy of Guru Gobind Singh. Thou
hast shown him no respect, but on the contrary
hast put to death his innocent children, and thereby
committed a grievous and unpardonable crime, the
punishment for which I am now going to deal thee.
Thine army and thy country shall be destroyed at
my hands.’ Upon this Banda struck off his head
with one blow of his sword. Then the whole of the
Muhammadan army fled followed by the Sikhs, who
possessed themselves of their horses, arms, tents,
cannon, and other munitions of war, and then
advanced in triumph to Sarhind. There they effected
a general massacre. The Sikhs captured Suchanand
who had instigated the murder of Guru Gobind
Singh’s children. They put an iron ring in his nose,
and passing a rope through it, led him round the
streets to beg. At every shop he was shoe-beaten
until he died. Such of the inhabitants as were not
killed prostrated themselves before the conqueror.
He was not disposed to mercy, but gave an order.
to raze the city to the ground and plough up its
site. In the process large treasure was found which
materially assisted him in his further career of
rapine, bloodshed, and devastation.

Banda then went on an expedition to the east
and plundered most of the hill rajas’ states. After
this he made a pilgrimage to Anandpur, and per-
formed reverent worship at the shrine of Guru Teg
Bahadur. He then made pilgrimages to the places
hallowed by the visits of Guru Gobind Singh. The
Raja of Chamba, in order to conciliate him, sent him a
supremely beautiful girl. She had large eyes, her
limbs were graceful and delicate, and she is described
by the enthusiastic chronicler as the very image of

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH ~— 249

the goddess of love. Banda on seeing her, parted
with his caution, and completely forgot the Guru’s
injunctions. He dived into the ocean of sensuality,
and thought not of the fate that awaited him on the
forfeiture of his continence.

Having subjected all the hill chiefs, Banda planned
a tour in the Bist Doab, and proceeded to Jalandhar
where he killed the Muhammadan male inhabitants.
The Muhammadan women were converted to Sikhism,
and became wives of the Sikh soldiers by the cere-
mony of Anand.’ He thence went into the Manjha
and plundered Batala. Thence he marched to
Lahore and put its viceroy Aslam Khan and all his
principal officers to the sword. He there heard that
troops sent by the Emperor Bahadur Shah were
marching against him. He proceeded to meet them
as far as Ludhiana and defeated them. He thence
went on a pilgrimage to the shrine of Guru Nanak in
the Gurdaspur district, where he met Bhai Ram Kaur,
sixth in descent from Bhai Budha. Banda induced
him to remain with him, probably with the object
of persuading him, in imitation of his pious ancestor,
to invest him with the dignity of Guru.

Banda had by this time obtained supreme power
from the neighbourhood of Dihli on the south to
Lahore on the north. He appointed his own police,
levied revenue, and ruled the country. Baba Binod
Singh, whom the Guru had sent with him, gave him
great assistance in administration. He endeavoured
to dissuade him from the Chamba /zaison and
another of a disreputable character which Banda
had also contracted. On one occasion when Baba
Binod Singh remonstrated in open darbar with him
for his departure from ascetic principles and the
injunctions of the Guru, an altercation arose of such
a violent character that Binod Singh drew his sword
and would have cut off his head had not Kahn
Singh interposed. Kahn Singh then foretold the

1 Panth Parkash.

250 THE SIKH RELIGION

departure of Banda’s glory and his ignominious
death.

Banda next paid a visit to the great temple at
Amritsar. He gave out that he had been empowered
by the Guru to claim succession to the Guruship.
The Sikhs then reflected that he did not live ac-
cording to the rules prescribed for the Khalsa. In
‘order to make trial of him, they put meat before
him, at which he, as the result of early prejudice,
became horrified. He fell into a passion with the
Sikhs who had thus made trial of him, and they —
in turn grew enraged with him for refusing meat ©
allowed by their religion and for his manifold irregu-
larities. The result was that the Sikhs divided into
two factions. Those who rejected Banda were
called the Tat Khalsa, or real Sikhs, and those who |
accepted him, the Bandai Khalsa or followers of
Banda. For the Sikh salutation, Wahguru y1 ka
Khalsa! Wahguru 41 ki fatah! he substituted Fatah |
Darshan ‘ Victory to the sect’, an alteration which
was deemed apostasy from the orthodox faith.

Another cause of the dissatisfaction of the Sikhs
with Banda was that he disregarded a letter of
Mata Sundari to the effect that he had now accom-
plished the mission imposed on him by the Guru,
namely, to bring the Governor of Sarhind to justice,
and it was time for him to arrest his career of carnage
and spoliation. Banda said that as Mata Sundari
was only a woman she was not competent to
give him advice or orders. Many Sikhs thinking
that this was a slight to the Guru’s wife, deserted
Banda, and from that time his power began rapidly
to decline.

When the defeat of the army sent by the Emperor
against Banda was heard of in Nander it was attri-
buted to the Emperor’s failure to keep his promise
to the Guru.

Banda continued to pursue his violent career until
Bahadur Shah, himself at the head of a powerful

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 251

avenging army, proceeded against him. Banda not
deeming his troops sufficient to cope with the im-
perial host fled to the mountains and took refuge
in a fort called Lohgarh. The imperial army be-
sieged him but the wily chief escaped in a desperate
sally. A Hindu who remained behind to personate
him was sent by the Subadar’s orders to be executed
in Dihli. Very soon after this the Emperor died
in Lahore, and then ensued the usual Oriental
scramble for the throne. His eldest son Jahandar
Shah, who has been described as a drunken profligate,
succeeded, but was murdered by his nephew Farrukh
Siyar, son of Bahadur Shah’s second son Azim-ul-
‘Shan. While this struggle was in progress, Banda
came forth from his hiding-place and again com-
menced his depredations.

Bayazid Khan, the new viceroy of Sarhind, went
forth with his troops to oppose Banda, but was killed
while at his prayers by a follower of the outlaw. On
this the Emperor Farrukh Siyar sent Abd-ul-Samad
Khan, also known as Diler Jang, to arrest Banda’s
progress. When Diler Jang thought his troops had
surrounded Banda, there was no Banda to be seen.
He and his followers had again fled and disappeared
in the mountains. Diler Jang took up his quarters
at Lahore to await the outlaw’s reappearance.
After a year Banda again emerged from his fastnesses
and took possession of Kalanuar and Santokhgarh.
He sent letters in all directions inviting the Sikhs
to join his standard. In two months he received
considerable reinforcements and defeated Sher Mu-
hammad Daim, the general commanding at Ambala.
The latter then went to Diler Jang at Lahore to com-
plain of Banda’s lawlessness and tyranny and concert
more stringent measures for hisrepression. Diler Jang
sent the Ambala general’s complaint to the Emperor.
Upon this the Emperor ordered Mir Ahmad Khan,
the general commanding at Aurangabad, to join
his forces with those of Diler Jang and the other

252 THE SIKH RELIGION

generals in the Panjab and all proceed against
Banda. The latter took refuge in Gurdaspur, and
strongly entrenched himself. The Muhammadan
army besieged him. The Sikhs were reduced to
such extremities that they killed for food all animals
in their possession. Baba Binod Singh, who had
hitherto accompanied Banda, now abandoned him.
Banda, when rendered totally helpless, sent a letter
under flag of truce to Diler Jang offering to sur-
render if his life were spared, and his troops treated
with consideration. Diler Jang promised to in-
tercede with the Emperor for him, and held out
hopes of his pardon. When Banda gave up his
arms, he was not allowed an interview with Diler Jang,
but placed at once with all his followers under
restraint. They were all sent to Dihl with many
circumstances of disgrace—Banda himself being put
into an iron cage—to be disposed of by the Emperor.

Here English testimony is available. The members
of an English mission who went from Calcutta to
Dihli in 1715 to petition the Emperor for certain
privileges, have left on record that they saw a
procession of eight hundred Sikh prisoners marched
through Dihli with two thousand bleeding heads
borne aloft on poles. The Sikhs vied with one
another for precedence in death.

While the executions were in progress, the mother
of one of the prisoners, a young man just arrived
at manhood, having obtained some influential sup-
port, pleaded the cause of her son with great feeling
and earnestness before the Emperor. She repre-
sented that her son had suffered imprisonment and
hardship at the hands of the sect. His property
was plundered, and he was made prisoner. While
in captivity, he was, without any fault of his own,
introduced into the sect, and now stood innocent
among those sentenced to death. Farrukh Siyar
pitied the woman, and mercifully sent an officer
with orders to release the youth. She arrived

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH ~~ 253

with the order of release just as the executioner
was standing with his bloody sword upheld over
the young man’s head. When she showed the
imperial order the youth broke out into complaints,
saying, ‘My mother speaketh falsely : I with heart
and soul join my fellow-believers in devotion to
the Guru: send me quickly after my companions.’
Needless to say his request was cheerfully granted.

Here Baba Kahn Singh and Baba Baz Singh,
whom the Guru had sent with Banda, succeeded
in effecting their escape. Ghulam Husain Khan,
author of the Szyar ul Mutaakharin, states that
Banda’s son was put on his lap, and Banda was
obliged to cut his throat in the manner of Muham-
madan sacrifice. He did so, not unwillingly, lest
the child should afterwards be circumcised and made
a Muhammadan. |

Muhammad Amin Khan, when he had an inter-
view with Banda, said to him, ‘The marks of sense
and intelligence are visible on thy countenance: how
is it thou hast never thought about the recompense
of thy deeds, and that in a short span of life with
a dreadful futurity thou hast been guilty of such
cruelty and of such detestable actions to Hindus
and Musulmans?’ He replied, ‘In all religions
and sects, whenever disobedience and rebellion
among mortal men passeth all bounds, the Great
Avenger raiseth up a severe man like me for the
punishment of their sins and the due reward of
their deeds.

When He wisheth to desolate the world,
He placeth dominion in the hands of a tyrant. |

‘When He desireth to give the tyrant the recompense
of his works, He sendeth a powerful man like thee
to prevail over him, and to give him his due reward
in this world: as thou and I can see.’ On this
Banda’s flesh was torn from his body by red-hot
pincers, and he expired under the horrible torture.

254 THE SIKH RELIGION

During his execution he uttered the following
warning to his fellow creatures :—

Who hath not suffered for his acts?

Who hath not reaped what he hath sown ?

Forget not that you shall obtain retribution for your
deeds.

Wheat springeth from wheat, and barley from barley.t

Though such was the fate of Banda, yet Guru
Gobind Singh had infused such martial spirit into
his Sikhs, that they not long after obtained possession
of the Panjab, and put an end to Muhammadan
supremacy.

CHAPTER XXXIII

Mata Sahib Kaur, the Guru’s youngest wife, died
of grief very soon after her husband. She was
cremated at the shrine of Guru Har Krishan in Dihli.
When Ajit Singh, the boy adopted by Mata Sundari,
the Guru’s remaining wife, grew up, she provided
him with a wife. He begot a son called Hathi Singh.
Ajit Singh imitated the late Guru as much as possible.
He used to hold court, call himself a guru, and enter-
tain a retinue. He endeavoured to obtain from
Mata Sundari the arms belonging to Guru HarGobind,
which the late Guru had given to Sahib Kaur on her
departure from Nander. Ajit Singh believed that
if he wore them, every one would hail him as Guru.
When he made his demand for the arms he was
sharply reproved by Mata Sundari. On this he
drew his dagger to kill her, but some friends inter-
posed. Mata Sundari then cursed him, said he
should forfeit his faith, and die an untimely death.
One day as he was riding in the bazar his herald
said to him, ‘O guru, behold the Muhammadans
praying.” The Muhammadans overheard this, and,

1 The Persian historian, Khafi Khan, gives many other details

of Banda’s career in the Panjab, but they are not generally accepted
by the Sikhs.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH = 255

believing that he ridiculed their religion, reported to
the Emperor that under a Muhammadan administra-
tion the Sikhs were mocking the faithful. The
Emperor at the instigation of the qazis ordered Ajit
Singh to cut off his hair and appear thus humbled
before him. If he failed in this, the Emperor reserved
to himself the right to punish him as he thought fit.
Ajit Singh, fearing death, cut off his hair, and grovelled
before the Emperor. Mata Sundari was enraged on
hearing of this act of apostasy, and told him never
again to show her his face. She drew up a
document to the effect that, though she had adopted
and cherished Ajit Singh as a son, she now re-
nounced him. She then entrusted Guru Har Gobind’s
arms to the faithful Sikhs of Dihli, and expressed her
desire to live no longer in such an evil and ill-omened
city. The Sikhs, however, prevailed on her to alter
her determination. Ajit Singh now abandoned by
the Sikhs went to beg at Mata Sundari’s door. She
sent him money, but would never consent to see
him. |

A Muhammadan fagir on whom Ajit Singh when
in good circumstances used to bestow money, one
day met him in the Dihli bazar, and asked for alms.
Ajit Singh in his poverty could only give him a few
copper coins. The faqir was not satisfied, but fol-
lowed him to his house, and further importuned
him. He would not leave but dogged his steps as
he went shooting during the afternoon. Ajit Singh
complained to his servants of the annoyance the
beggar was causing him, whereupon they beat the
man so severely that he died. They disposed of
his body by throwing it into a well for the purpose
of concealment.

The faqir’s fate gradually became known, and
the Emperor ordered Ajit Singh to be arrested and
brought before him. Ajit Singh refused to obey the
order, and put himself in a posture of defence. His
house was besieged, and his adherents fought bravely |

256 THE SIKH RELIGION

to protect him. He contrived to send his wife and
son Hathi Singh, both disguised in soiled clothes, to
MataSundari. He then succeeded in escaping from his
house and concealed himself in astrawstack belonging
to Hindus who lived near. The owner of the stack
discovered him and on hearing that a proclamation
had been issued for his arrest, informed the authorities.
Ajit Singh was seized, tied to an elephant’s tail, and
dragged through the city. Ata turning in one of the
streets the elephant trod on his head, upon which his
brains oozed out.

Mata Sundari, thinking her position unsafe in
Dihli on account of having received Ajit Singh’s
wife and son, put into execution her long-cherished
project of abandoning that city and proceeded
with her charge to Bhagatgarh. The head man of
the place would not allow her, through fear of the
Emperor, to remain in his city. She thence went to
Mathura, where she was received with great distinc-
tion. The governor of the city induced the Raja of
Jaipur to grant her the revenue of two villages and
also a suitable place of residence. In Mathura Hathi
Singh grew up to manhood, adopted his father’s
style, and maintained a retinue of sixty mounted
orderlies. He tried to compose hymns but inspiration
failed him. He then abstracted some from the
Granth Sahib, and wherever the name Nanak occurred
inserted hisown. Mata Sundari on being informed of
this became very wroth, abandoned Hathi Singh
and his mother at Mathura, and returned to Dihli.
During the invasion of Ahmad Shah, Hathi Singh
fled from Mathura to Burhanpur, where he subse-
quently died, leaving no male issue.

When Mata Sundari arrived in Dihli she by the
kind offices of Raja Ram, the Emperor's minister,
obtained possession of her house and property, which
had been seized by the Muhammadans after her
departure. She spent the remainder of her days
there, and died in comparative worldly comfort in

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH ~— 257

Sambat 1804 (A.D. 1747). Her body was cremated
near the shrine of Guru Har Krishan.

It will be remembered that when the Guru
evacuated Anandpur, he sent Gulab Rai and Sham
Singh with a letter to the Raja of Nahan requesting
him to grant them the means of subsistence. The
raja gave them two villages. Gulab Rai afterwards
purchased Anandpur for sixty thousand rupees from
the Kahlur Raja and returned to live there. He
caused himself to be worshipped by the Sikhs and
carried his unseemly pretensions so far as to actually
instal himself in the Guru’s seat. Sadhu Gurbakhsh,
who had been an attendant on the Guru and had by
him been left in charge of Guru Teg Bahadur’s shrine,
remonstrated against the usurpation, whereupon
Gulab Rai became very angry, and addressed him
in offensive language. Gurbakhsh then cursed him
saying, “Thou and thy line shall perish!’ In a short
time Gulab Rai and his two sons died. After that
Gulab Rai’s widow took theofferings of the Sikhs, and
remained in possession of Anandpur. When she was
on the point of death she appointed Surjan Singh,
Sham Singh’s son, now old and experienced, as heir
of Anandpur. His descendants still occupy that
city, and receive a yearly revenue from the Indian
government and the Sikh states.

A Sikh writer called Gurdas, who lived long after
the time of Guru Gobind Singh, wrote a War in his
praise which the Sikhs appended to the compositions
of Bhai Gur Das, and which now appears as the
forty-first War. The following pauris are extracted
from it :—

PAURI 15
Guru Gobind was manifested as the tenth avatar.

He repeated the name of the Creator who is unseen,
eternal, and stainless.

He established the Khalsa, a sect of his own, and gave it
great glory.

SIKH. V S

258 THE SIKH RELIGION

Wearing long hair he grasped the sword and smote all his
enemies.

He put on the kachh of continence and practised arms.

He established the Sikh war-cry and was victorious in
mighty battles.

He caused all demon enemies to be surrounded and
trampled upon.

Then his endless praise was gradually proclaimed through-
out the world.

Thus arose the race of Singhs who wore blue clothes,

Who killed all the hostile Turks, and repeated God’s name.

No one could withstand them, so the Turkish leaders
decamped :

Rajas, kings, and amirs all became the dust beneath the
Singhs’ feet.

Great hills trembled when they heard their victorious
drums. ,

There was then great commotion throughout the whole
world ; the enemy abandoned their homes,

And perished in the great confusion and trouble that
ensued.

There is none so great a destroyer of fear as the true Guru.

He handled and displayed such a sword as none could
withstand.

Well done! well done Gobind Singh! thou wert at once
Guru and disciple ! |

PAURI 16

By the order of the immortal God the great Guru obtained
inspiration.

Then he gradually established the Khalsa, whole-bodied !
and manly.

Then arose the roaring of the Singhs (lions) which terrified
the whole world.

They levelled with the earth the shrines of Hindus and
Muhammadans.

1 Sabit. Not circumcised like the Muhammadans, and not cutting
their hair or shaving like the Hindus.

LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 259

They cancelled the Veds, the Purans, the six Hindu
systems and the Quran.

They abolished the call to prayer and the prayer-carpet of
the Muhammadans and killed the Turkish monarchs.

Temporal and spiritual leaders all hid themselves or became
converted to Sikhism.

The Mullas and the Qazis grew weary of reading, but
found not God’s secret.

Hundreds of thousands of Pandits, Brahmans, and
Astrologers had become entangled in worldly affairs.

Worshipping stones and temples they had become exceed-
ingly superstitious.

Both the Hindus and the Muhammadans were altogether
engaged in deception.

Consequently a third religion, the Khalsa, arose and
became renowned.

The Singhs by the order of Guru Gobind Singh seized the
sword and wielded it.

They killed all their enemies and caused the name of the
Immortal God to be repeated.

Then God’s order was promulgated in the world.

The drum of victory resounded and drowned the cry of
SOITOW.

The great sagacious Guru established a third sect.

Well done! well done Gobind Singh! thou wert at once
Guru and disciple !

260 THE SIKH RELIGION

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND
SINGH

In the year A.D. 1734 while in Amritsar Bhai Mani
Singh compiled the compositions and translations of
Guru Gobind Singh and of the bards who were
associated with him. The compilation was subse-
quently known as the Granth of the tenth Guru,
though Mani Singh did not give it that title.’ We

1 After Mani Singh’s execution the Sikhs took the volume for
examination and approval to a village in the Patiala State called
Talwandi Sabo, now known among the Sikhsas Damdama. Damdama
was selected for examination of the volume as several learned Sikhs
resided there, and that distant village was also deemed a place of
safety.

Several intelligent Sikhs were of opinion that the tales and transla-
tions in the volume, as at present found, ought not to have been
included in it, for many of them are of Hindu origin, others not fit for
perusal, and none comparable with the hymns contained in the Ad
Granth. ‘The Sikhs therefore maintained that the Azkayat or Persian
tales, and the whole of the Zrza Charitar, or stories illustrating the
deceit of women, should be omitted, and included ina separate volume,
which might be read, not for a religious purpose, but for the entertain-
ment and delectation of the public.

While this discussion was in progress, one Mahtab Singh of
Mirankot arrived from Bikaner at Damdama. He had vowed to kill
one Massa Ranghar, a Muhammadan official, who had obtained pos-
session of the Golden Temple, and who used the place as a theatre
for dancing women; and he was on his way to Amritsar to carry
out his design. Mahtab Singh vowed that if he succeeded and re-
turned to Damdama, Mani Singh’s Granth should remain in one
volume as he had arranged it. If, on the contrary, Massa killed
him, the Granth might be arranged according to the wishes of the
objectors. Mahtab Singh slew Massa Ranghar, returned in triumph
to Damdama, and Mani Singh’s Granth was allowed to remain accord-
ing to his design.

There are many obvious defects in the arrangement of the tenth
Guru’s Granth as it stands. For instance, there are several questions
put in doharas 201 to 210 of the Akal Usiat to which no answer is
given. Chhands 211 to 230 are obviously out of place, and belong to

EE —EE———— eee NL ee

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 261

now proceed to give translations from it of such
doctrinal and historical portions as we believe to
represent the Guru’s own opinions and acts.

Jap}

There is one God, the true, the great, and the
bounteous :—

The tenth Guru spoke with his holy mouth 7—

God hath no quoit® or marks, no colour, no caste, no
lineage, .

No form, no complexion, no outline, no costume ; none
can in any way describe Him.

He is immovable, fearless, luminous, and measureless in
might ;

He is accounted King of kings, Lord of millions of Indars ;

He is Sovereign of the three worlds, demigods, men, and
demons; the woods and dales declare Him indescribable.

O Lord, who can tell all Thy names? the wise call Thee
special names according to Thy deeds.

AKAL USTAT

(Praise of the Immortal)
May we have the protection of the immortal Being ! 4

the second Chandi Charitar; and the last Chhand of the Akal Ustat
is not complete. The Gyan Parbodh too has been left incomplete.
There are besides many defects of arrangement.

1 The Japji of Guru Gobind Singh is held by the Sikhs in the same
estimation as the Japji of Guru Nanak. The Hindus have a work
entitled Vishnu Sahasar Nam—vVishnv’s thousand names. The Japji
was composed to supply the Sikhs with a similar number of epithets
of the Creator.

* This line is Bhai Mani Singh’s composition.

3 Chakr. This word is also applied to depressions in the body
noticed for mystical, astrological, or cheiromantic purposes.

4 The tenth Guru invented_new names_for God—Akal (the
Immortal), Sarbloh (All-steel), Mahanloh (Great-steel), Sarbkal (All-
death), Mahankal (Great-death), Asidhuj, Asiketu, and Kharagketu
(having the sword on His banner), Asipani (sword in His hand), that is,
God as the impersonation and source of bravery.

a a

elreccky

262 THE SIKH RELIGION

May we have the protection of All-steel !
May we have the protection of All-death !
May we have the protection of All-steel !

I bow to the one primal God

Who extended sea and land, the nether regions, and the
firmament.!

He is the primal Being, unseen, and immortal ;

His light is manifest in the fourteen worlds.

He is contained in the ant as in the elephant ;

He deemeth the rich and the poor alike ;

He is unequalled, unseen, and eternal ;

He is the Searcher of all hearts ;

He is invisible, indestructible, and without distinguishing
dress ? ;

He is without passion, colour, form, or outline ;

He is devoid of caste marks of every kind ;

He is the primal Being, peerless and changeless ;

He hath no enemy, no friend, no father, no mother ;

He is far from all and near all ;

His dwelling is in sea and land, the nether and upper
regions.

Boundless is His form, and boundless His voice ;

In the shelter of His feet dwelleth Bhawani 3;

Brahma and Vishnu have not found His limits ;

The four-faced Brahma pointeth out that God is indes-
cribable.

He made millions of Indars and Bawans ;4

He created and destroyed Brahmas and Shivs.

The fourteen worlds He made as a play,

‘And again blended them with Himself.

He made endless demons, deities, serpents,

Celestial singers, Yakshas, excellent and beautiful.

.He is spoken of in the past, the future, and the present,

And He knoweth the secrets of every heart.

1 This is the traditional meaning of mahial, but it receives no sup-
port from dictionaries. See Pandit Tara Singh’s Mirnai Sagar.

2 Anbhekh. The word also means without form.

3’ Parbati or Durga, the consort of Shiv.
4 Bawan was the dwarf incarnation of Vishnu.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 263

He is not attached to any one love ;

He is contained in the light of all souls ;

He recognizeth all people and all places ;

He is free from death and immortal ;

He is the invisible, imperceptible Being, distinct from all
the world.

He is immortal, undecaying, imperishable, and of change-
less purpose,

He is the Destroyer and Creator of all ;

He is the Remover of sickness, sorrow, and sin.

He who with single heart meditateth on Him even for
a moment

Shall not fall into Death’s noose.

Thou art without sorrow, without form, yet beautiful, the
King of kings, the Giver of great gifts.

The Preserver of life, the Giver of milk and sons, the
Remover of sickness and sorrow, sometimes honourable and
inspiring great honour.

Thou art a student of science, an unrivalled incarnation,
Thou appearest as a Sidh, Thou art the glory of purity.

Thou art the net! of youth, the death of Death, the torment
of enemies, the life of friends.

The following ten Sawaiyas, or quatrains, are
recited at the administration of the pahul or baptism
according to the rites of the tenth Guru :—

I

I have wandered and in their own homes seen crowds of
Saravagis, Sudhs ?, Sidhs, Jogis, and Jatis,

Brave demons, demigods feasting on nectar, and crowds of
saints of various sects.

1 This is said to mean—Thou attractest the world by Thy beauty.
2 Sudhs mean the clean in contradistinction to the Saravagis who are
reputed to be dirty in their habits.

264 THE SIKH RELIGION

[ have seen the religions of all countries, but none appeared
to be that of the Lord of life.

Without a particle of the love and favour of God they are
only worth a ratti 1.

I]

Emperors before whom strong armed kings used to lowly
bow their heads in countless numbers ; 2

Who possessed proud elephants with golden trappings,
incomparable, tall, painted with bright colours ;

Millions of horses which bounded like deer, and were
fleeter than the wind—

What mattered it how great those emperors were? they
at last departed barefooted. |

Ill

Though they roamed and conquered all countries beating
their various drums ;

Though many beautiful elephants trumpeted loud, and
thousands of horses of royal breed neighed for them—

Who can number such kings in the past, the future, and
the present ? They cannot be counted—

Yet without worshipping the name of God the Lord of
wealth, they went at last to their final home.

IV

Men bathe at places of pilgrimage, exercise mercy, curb
their passions, bestow gifts, exercise abstinence, and _per-
form various special ceremonies—

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, and the other books of
the Musalmans, the earth and heaven all have I seen ;

Thousands of fasters, Jatis who practised continence, all
have I carefully observed :

1 The seed of the Abrus precatortus (N. O. Leguminosae) used in
India as a small weight (see Vol. I, p. 138, n. 1).
* Also translated—regardless of their own position.

“nee matagay. se meme +

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 265

Yet without worshipping the name of the one God and
loving Him even kings are of no account.

V

Trained soldiers, powerful, irresistible, well accoutred with
coats of mail crush their enemies ;

Filled with high martial spirit they would put mountains
to flight, themselves unshaken ;

They would shatter their enemies, destroy rebels, crush
the pride of furious elephants ;

Yet without the favour of God, the Lord of wealth, they
should all depart at last and leave the world.

VI

Countless heroes very valiant without hesitation face the
edge of the sword,

Subdue countries, crush rebels, and the pride of furious
elephants,

Break powerful forts and even without fighting } conquer
in every direction—

But their efforts avail not ; the Lord is the Commander of
them all—the suppliants are many while there is but one
Giver.

Vil

Even the demons, gods, serpents, and ghcsts who repeat
God’s name in the past, future, and present ;

All the beings which in sea and land every moment set
up God in their hearts,

Shall find their good deeds and glory increase; they
shall hear the voices of gratulation and the multitude of
their sins shall depart.

The congregations of saints wander happy in the world ;
all their enemies on beholding them are cowed.

1 Subatanht. Also translated—at a word, rapidly.

266 THE SIKH RELIGION

VIII

Lords of men, and elephants, rulers who reign in the
three worlds,

Who perform millions of ablutions, make gifts of elephants
and other animals, and marry brides at various splendid
swayamvars 1—

They with Brahma, Shiv, Vishnu, and Indar shall at last
be entangled and fall into Death’s noose ;

But they who touch the feet of the Lord of wealth shall
not again resume a body.

IX

What availeth it to sit closing both eyes and meditating
like a crane ?

This world is lost, and the next also for those who go
about bathing in the seven seas.

They pass their lives in vain, dwelling in the midst of
sin?

I speak verily; hear me all ye people—they who love
God have obtained Him.

Xx

Some worshipping stones put them on their heads, some
suspend lingams from their necks.

Some see God in the south, some bow their heads to the
west.

Some fools worship idols, others busy themselves with
worshipping the dead. |

The whole world entangled in false ceremonies hath not
found God’s secret.

God is not subject to birth or death,
He is acquainted with the excellent fourteen sciences,?

1 Assemblages in ancient times at which young women selected
their husbands.

2 Also translated—sitting in the company of the vicious.

3 These included all ancient Indian knowledge. Different writers
have given different lists of them. |

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 267

He is without stain and infinite,

He is of unfading brightness and generous,

His form is not quickly recognized,

He is head of the saints of the whole world,

He is the highest object of praise; by Him the earth
and sun are supported ;

He is the treasury of the eighteen supernatural powers,*

He is the Dispeller of sorrow in all the worlds,

He is not subject to time, to death, or to karma,

He is versed in all religious ceremonies,

His glory is infrangible and unequalled,

He established all establishment,

He is without sorrow, indivisible, and impenetrable.

Brahma by his four Veds sings His praises,

The Veds speak of Him as indescribable,

Brahma speaks of Him as endless—

His glory is unknowable and unequalled.

Indivisible, immeasurable, and unestablished . by any
one

He made the extension of the world :

He created it with the utmost thought.

His form is endless and infrangible,

His glory is peerless and dazzling,

He is invisible and noble,

He made millions of Indars and kings;

Many Brahmas and Vishnus who meditate on Him,

Many Rams, Krishans, and prophets—

No one is acceptable without devotion.

There are many oceans, mountains great as Bind,?

Many fishes, tortoises, and serpents,°®

1 There are generally only eight s¢dhis or supernatural powers enume-
rated—anuma, to become so small as to be invisible ; mahzma, to be
able to increase one’s size indefinitely; guruzwata, to make oneself
heavy ; /aghuma, to make oneself light ; prap/z7, to go wherever one
pleases ; wasz karna, to be able to reduce others to subjection ; zsh/a,
to obtain glory or regal greatness ; 4am, to be able to satisfy all one’s
desires. A list of the eighteen supernatural powers may be left to
the reader’s imagination.

2 Bindhiachal, a holy peak of the Himalayas.

3 The Sheshnag of the Hindus.

268 THE SIKH RELIGION

Many deities and sons of Brahma,

Many incarnations of Krishan and Vishnu,

Many Indars to sweep before His door,

Many Veds and Brahmas,

Many Rudars! and Bawans,

And many unequalled Rams and Krishans.

Many men recite amatory poetry,

Many tell the secrets of the Veds,

Many recite the Shastars and Simritis,

And some read the Purans.

Many perform fire sacrifices,

Many painful penances with bodies reversed,

Many lift their arms in the fashion of the Sanyasis.

Some don the garb of Jogis and abandon the world,

Some perform the niwali feat,

Some practise painful fasting,

Some go on pilgrimages and give boundless alms,

Some are generous in their worldly acts,

Some perform unequalled burnt offerings,

Some obtain regal state and dispense justice,

Some act according to the Shastars and the Simritis,

And some in opposition to the Veds.

Many wander in different countries,

And many remain fixed in one place.

Some pray in water,

Some endure five fires on their bodies,

Some dwell in the forest,

Some perform the endless duties of a family man,

Some are generous in the fashion of kings,

Some are free from sickness and error,

Some perform good and others bad acts,

Some pose as Shaikhs, others as Brahmans,

Some perform the duties of kings in an incomparable
manner,

Some are free from bodily and mental suffering,

Some are subject to the service of a special god,

Some are poor, others the sons of kings,

1 Rudar was the god who wielded the thunder.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 269

And some are the incarnations of Vyas.
Many Brahmas read the Veds,

And many Sheshnags repeat God’s name.
Some are Bairagis, others Sanyasis,

And some wander in the guise of Udasis.
Know that all these things are vain,

And that all such religion is fruitless.
Without the support of the One Name
Deem all religious ceremonies as superstition.

God is in the water, God is in the dry land,

God is in the heart, God is in the forest,

God is in the mountain, God is in the cave,

God is in the earth, God is in heaven,

God is here, God is there,

God is in space, God is in time,

God is invisible, God is without a garb,

God is without sin, God is without enmity,

God is deathless, God is uncherished,

God is impenetrable, God is invulnerable.

God is not moved by charms or spells ;

God has His own light, He cannot be moved by incanta-
tions.

God is without caste, God is without lineage,

God is without friends, God hath no mother,

God feeleth no physical or mental suffering.

God is without doubt, God hath no karma,

God is invincible, God is fearless,

God is infrangible, God is indissoluble.

God cannot be punished, God is radiant,

God is transcendent, God 1s inscrutable.

a ——

Repeat God’s name, establish God’s name in thy heart :
Do penance unto God, and repeat His name.

Thou, O God, art in the water, Thou art in the dry land,
Thou art in the river, Thou art in the sea,

1 Abdbhed is often translated inscrutable.

THE SIKH RELIGION

art in the tree, Thou art in its leaves,
art in the earth, Thou art in the firmament.
name is repeated again and again, Thy name is
-__ Jin man’s heart.
Thou art space, Thou art time,
Thou art the occupant, Thou art the place,
Thou art unborn, Thou art fearless,
Thou art impalpable, Thou art indestructible,
Thou art continence, Thou art fasting,
Thou art deliverance, Thou art wisdom,
Thou alone art, Thou alone art.

The following is a satire on various penances and
austerities practised by Hindu sects in India :—

Swine eat filth ; elephants and donkeys bespatter them-
selves with dust ; jackals live at places of cremation :

Owls live in tombs; deer wander alone in the forest ;
trees ever die in silence.

The man who restraineth his seed should only have the
credit of the hermaphrodite; monkeys ever wander bare-
footed.

How shall the wretch who is subject to a woman and
devoted to lust and wrath, be saved without the knowledge
of the one God ?

It is known that demons live in the forest, all children
on earth drink milk, and serpents live on air.

They who eat grass and renounce the desire of wealth,
are no more than calves and oxen.

They who fly in the heavens have only the attribute of
birds; they who engage in meditation resemble cranes,
cats, and wolves.

All great gyanis who knew, but asserted not themselves,
never allowed such deceit as the above to enter their hearts
even by mistake.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 271

They who live in the earth should be called the offspring
of worms; they who live in the heavens should be called
birds.

They who eat fruit should be called the offspring of
monkeys ; they who wander unseen should be accounted
as ghosts.

They who float on water are like gangeris ;* they who
eat fire like chakors ;

They who worship the sun have the attribute of the
lotus ; they who worship the moon of water-lilies.

The tortoise, the fish, and the shark may all be called
Narayan?; if you speak of God as Kaulnabh, the lake in
which there is a lotus is also Kaulnabh.’

If you speak of God as Gopinath, all Gujars are Gopinaths,
all cowherds Gopals; if you call God Rikhikesh, that is
a name taken by superiors of religious orders.

If you call God Madhav, that is the bumble-bee ; Kaniya
is the name of the woodpecker ; if you speak of God as the
Destroyer of Kans, you speak of the myrmidons of Death.

Fools utter names, but know not their meanings, and
worship not Him by whom man is protected.

God is the Protector and Destroyer of the world, Com-
passionate to the poor, Punisher of enemies, ever the
Cherisher, and free from Death’s noose.

Jogis, wearers of matted hair, celibates, the true, great
Brahmacharis who undergo hunger and thirst in their
divine meditation,

They who perform the niwali feat, who sacrifice to water,
fire, and wind, who hold their heads down, who stand or
one leg and never sit,

Men, serpents, deities, and demons find not God’s secrets ;
the Veds and the books of the Musalmans say that God is
indescribable.

1 Small black flies on Indian rivers.

2 God who moves in the waters.

3 One of the names of Vishnu. He was supposed by the Hindus
to have a lotus in his navel.

272 THE SIKH RELIGION

Peacocks skip about dancing, the thunder roareth and
the lightning presenteth many phases.!

If God be obtained by being cold or hot, there is nothing
colder than the moon, nothing hotter than the sun, 7f by
being a raja God may be obtained, there is no king equal to
Indar who filleth the whole world.

Nowhere can be found a penitent like a Shiv, a reader
of the Veds like primal Brahma, or penitents like the sons
of Brahma ;

Yet without divine knowledge they are all subject to the
noose of Death and ever wander through the cycle of the
ages.

One Shiv was born, one died, and one was born again ;
there have also been many incarnations of Ram Chandar
and Krishan.

How many Brahmas and Vishnus have there been! how
many Veds and Purans! how many collections of Simritis
have been and passed away !

How many preachers and Madars!? how many Castors
and Polluxes! how many Ansavatars® have succumbed to
death !

How many priests and prophets have there been! they
are so many that they cannot be counted ; from dust they
sprang and to dust they returned.

Jogis, Jatis, Brahmacharis‘, and very great kings, the
shadow of whose umbrellas extended for many miles,

Who wandered subduing kingdoms and crushing the pride
of very great kings,

Sovereigns like Man* and lords of the umbrella like

1 The reference is to dancing and roaring faqirs.

2 Monadi Madér—Monadi is understood to be the Arabic mundd?,
a proclamation or preaching. Madar was a celebrated Muhammadan
saint. If momzin-t-din madar be read, the translation will be—How
many orthodox Muhammadans and supporters of the faith!

3 An incomplete incarnation of Vishnu.

4 Brahmacharis are young men who preserve continence during
their studentship. Manu, the Hindu law-giver, fixes its limit at
twenty-five years of age.

> Mandhatri, a son miraculously born to Yuvanashwa of the line of
Ikshwaku, and author of a hymn in the Rig Veda.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 273

Dilip,’ great kings who prided themselves on the strength
of their arms,

Proud men like Dara,? like the kings of Dihli, and like
Durjodhan, having enjoyed the earth in their turn at
last were blended with it.

Artillerymen, huntsmen wearing decoy dresses, and
they who eat opium bow their heads many times.

What availeth it that men perform prostrations of different
kinds to God ? they are like wrestlers practising the exercise
of dand.’

What availeth it that men lie with their faces turned
up? If they do not heartily bow to the supreme God, they
are only as sick men.

How can he who is the slave of worldly desires and ever
clever in obtaining wealth, obtain the one Lord of the world
without faith in Him ? :

eee

He into whose ear an earwig hath entered shaketh his
head ; he who hath lost a friend or son beateth his head in
mourning.

For grazing on akk, eating fruits and flowers, and ever
wandering in the forests, there is no animal like a goat.

What if a sheep rub its head against trees and thus take
off tts hair? as for eating earth, call the leech and ask it.

How can he who is a slave to worldly desires and addicted
to lust and wrath, find God without faith ?

The peacocks dance, the frogs croak, and the clouds ever
thunder ;

The tree ever standeth on one leg in the forest; as for
those who take not life, the Saravagi bloweth on the ground
before putting his feet on it ;

1 He belonged to the solar race, and was ancestor of Ram Chandar.

2 Darius.

3 An oriental exercise in which a man first lies down flat on the
ground, then leans on his hands so as to lift his body, and again
depresses it so as almost to touch the ground with his chest.

SIKH. V T

274 THE SIKH RELIGION

The stones through several ages remain in one place; the
ravens and the kites travel from country to country.

How can the wretch who is without divine knowledge
and who is never absorbed in the great Benefactor, be saved
without faith in Him ?

=

Like an actor man sometimes poseth as a Jogi or Bairagi ;
sometimes he assumeth the guise of a Sanyasi.

Sometimes he appeareth to live on air, sometimes he
sitteth in an attitude of contemplation, sometimes in his
infatuation for pelf he singeth many praises of men.

Sometimes he is a Brahmachari, sometimes he produceth
a garden in his hand, sometimes he holdeth a fakir’s staff
and deceiveth men’s senses. __

He who is subject to worldly desires danceth with
gestures; but being devoid of divine knowledge, how
shall he obtain heaven ?

In the cold season the jackal barketh five times, and the
elephant and the donkey utter various cries.

What availeth it to be cut in twain by the saw at Banaras?
thieves cut men in pieces and kill them with axes.

What availeth it that a fool hath put a halter round his
neck and drowned himself in the Ganges ? Thags put men
to death by putting halters round their necks.

Without meditation on divine knowledge fools are drowned
in hell’s river; and without faith how can there be any
such meditation ?

If any one were to obtain by penance the Lord who
suffereth not pain, the wounded man suffereth pain of
many kinds.

If any one were by repeating God’s name to obtain God
who cannot be obtained by lip-worship?!, the warbler ever
uttereth ‘Tu hi! tu hi!’

If any one were to obtain God by flying in the heavens,
the bird called anal wandereth in the firmament.

1 Ajap Dev, also translated—God who repeats no name.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 275

If salvation be obtained by burning oneself in the fire,
why should not the Sati and also the serpent which liveth
in hell be saved ? }

The following is a homily on the equality of men
and on the Hindu and Muhammadan forms of
worship :—

One man by shaving his head is accepted as a Sanyasi,
another as a Jogi or a Brahmachari, a third as a Jati.

Some men are Hindus and others Musalmans ; among the
latter are Rafazis,? XImams, and Shafais—know that all men
are of the same caste.

Karta (the Creator) and Karim (the Beneficent) are the
same, Razak (the Provider) and Rahim (the Merciful) are
the same; let no man even by mistake suppose there is
a difference.®

Worship the one God who is the one divine Guru for all ;
know that His Form is one, and that He is the one light
diffused in all.

The temple and the mosque are the same; the Hindu
worship and the Musalman prayer are the same; all men
are the same ; it is through error they appear different.

Deities, demons, Yakshas, heavenly singers, Musalmans,
and Hindus adopt the customary dress of their different
countries.

All men have the same eyes, the same ears, the same
body, the same build,4a compound of earth, air, fire, and
water.

Allah and Abhekh are the same; the Purans and the

1 The Guru rejects the belief that a widow who cremates herself
with her husband’s corpse obtains salvation. The second part of the
line may also be translated—If salvation were obtained by dwelling
beneath the earth, the snake which dwelleth in the nether regions
should also be saved.

* Certain Shiahs or followers of Ali who renounced their allegiance
to Zaid, grandson of Husain.

3 There is not one God for the Hindus and another for the
Musalmans.

4 Ban, also translated—customs, habils.

t@2

276 THE SIKH RELIGION

Quran are the same; they are all alike; it is the one God
who created all.

The following gives the Sikh conception of the
manner in which souls emanated from God and are
again absorbed in Him :—

As from one fire millions of sparks arise; though rising
separately, they unite again in the fire ;

As from one heap of dust several particles of dust fill
the air, and on filling it again blend with the dust;

As in one stream millions of waves are produced; the
waves being made of water all become water ;

So from God’s form non-sentient and sentient things}
are manifested, and, springing from Him, shall all be united
in Him again.

How many tortoises and fishes and how many eaters of
them! how many excellent young animals become strong-
winged and fly !

How many birds of prey in the firmament eat the excellent
birds! and how many animals eat and digest the birds of
prey when they see them !

What mattereth it whether things live in water or land,
or fly in the firmament ? God made them and will destroy
them all.

As light blendeth with darkness and darkness with light,
so all things have sprung from God and shall be united in
Him.

How many go about howling! how many die weeping !
how many are drowned in the water! how many are burnt
in the fire !

How many dwell by the Ganges! how many in Madina
and Makka! how many wander as anchorets !

How many undergo the pain of being cut by the saw!
how many of burying themselves in the earth! how many
of being impaled.

© Abhiilbhut, also translated—incorporeal and corporeal beings.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 277

How many fly in the firmament! how many dwell in
water! but they shall all be burnt in the fire? for want of
divine knowledge.

_ The demigods have grown weary searching for God; the
archdemons have grown weary striving with Him; the
wise have grown weary exercising their wisdom ; they who
repeat His name have grown weary of watching.

Men have grown weary of grinding and applying sandal
to themselves ; they have grown weary of applying excellent
atar of roses ; they have grown weary of worshipping stones
and offering them pudding.

They have grown weary of visiting cemeteries and Jogis’
places of burial, they have grown weary of smearing walls
and of being marked with the brand of zdols?

The celestial musicians have grown weary of singing; all
the Kinnars have grown weary of their penance, but none
of them hath found God.

ee a

The following is Guru Gobind Singh’s conception
of the divinity :—

God is without passion, without colour, without form,
without outline ;

He is without worldly love, without anger, without enmity,
without jealousy ;

He is without karma, without error, without birth, and
without caste ;

He hath no friend, no enemy, no father, no mother ;

He hath no worldly love, no house, no desires, no home ;

He hath no son, no friend, no enemy, no wife ;

He is invisible, without distinguishing dress, and unborn ;

He is ever the Bestower of supernatural power and
wisdom ; He is of size beyond measure.

His form and outline cannot be known,

Nor where He dwelleth, nor in what disguises He
wandereth,

1 Jak=zakka (83). The gyanis translate obstinacy.

2 In Dwaraka men are branded with a hot iron bearing the ensigns
of Vishnu.

278 THE SIKH RELIGION

Nor what His name is, nor what He is called.

How shall I describe Him ? He cannot be described.
He hath no disease, or sorrow, or worldly love, or mother,
No karma, no superstition, no birth, no caste ;

He hath no jealousy, no garb, and is unborn.

I bow to Him as one! I bow to Him as one!

He is beyond all things, and from the beginning the
Dispenser of wisdom.

He is indivisible, indestructible, primal, peerless, and
imperishable.

He hath no caste, or lineage, or form, or colour.

I bow to the primal and infrangible One.

How many millions of worms like Krishan

He created, built, fashioned, again destroyed, and created !

He is unfathomable, fearless, primal, unrivalled, imperish-
able.

He is beyond all things, from the beginning, and perfect
is His splendour.

He feeleth nor mental nor bodily pain: He is unfathom-
able.

His glory is infrangible ; He is from the beginning, and
His majesty is indestructible.

He hath no birth, no death, no caste, no pain.

He is infrangible, radiant, unamercible,1 impossible to be
controlled ;

He hath no worldly love, nohome; He hath affection for
men and is His own master.

He is powerful, cannot be anywhere contained, radiant,
the Torturer of enemies.

He cannot be depicted in the past, the present, or the
future.

He is not rich or poor ; He hath no form or outline.

He feeleth not covetousness or mental anxiety; He is
not formed out of the elements ; He belongeth to no sect.

He hath no enemy, no friend, no worldly love, no home.

1 He is not liable to be fined like mortals as a punishment.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 279

He is eternal and ever contained in all things ; He beareth
love to all.

He hath no lust, no wrath, no avarice, no worldly love ;

He is unborn, indestructible, primal, peerless, in-
visible ;

He is not subject to birth or death; He hath no caste,
no pain ;

He hath no sickness, no sorrow; He is fearless, and with-
out affliction.!

He is impenetrable, indivisible, without karma, and with-
out death.

He cannot be destroyed or defamed; He is bright and
without a cherisher ;

He hath no father, no mother, no caste, no body ;

He hath no worldly love, no home, no doubt, no fear ;

He hath no form, there is no king over Him, He hath
no body, no acts attach to Him ;

He hath no fear; He cannot be killed or pierced; He
hath no doubts.

He is eternal, ever perfect, and of size beyond measure.

I bow to Him as one! I bow to Him as one!

His glory is inexpressible ; He is from the beginning,

He is unassociated, imperishable, imperceptible, and un-
established.

I bow to Him as one! I bow to Him as one!

He hath no worldly love, no home, no grief, no relation.

He is afar off, pure, undefiled, none can behold Him.

He hath no caste, no lineage, no friend, no minister.

I bow to the one independent Being! I bow to the one
independent Being !

He hath no religion, no superstition, no shame, no rela-
tiom,
No armour, no shield, no karma, no fear,

1 Bikhad; in wodern Panjabi this word means a quarrel.

280 THE SIKH RELIGION

No enemy, no friends, no son.
I bow to the primal Being ; I bow to the primal Being.

The bodies of some undergo cold, heat, and rain,

Some sit in one posture for an age,

Some make efforts to study the science of Jog.

Men strive but even then find not God’s limits.

Some with their arms raised wander in different countries 7

Some scorch themselves between the sun and surrounding
fires ;

Some recite the Simritis, the Shastars, the Veds :

Some expound amorous poetry, others the books of the
Muhammadans ;

Some perform fire sacrifice, some live on air ;

Some millions eat carrion ;

Some consume vegetables, some milk, some leaves ;

But even so God becometh not manifest unto them.

The following sawaiyas also are sometimes read at
the administration of the pahul.

I

God ever cherisheth the poor, saveth saints, and destroyeth
enemies.

Birds, beasts, mountains, snakes, and kings—all he ever
-cherisheth.

He cherisheth animals in sea and land; he considereth
not their evil acts.

Compassionate to the poor, an ocean of mercy, He be-
holdeth man’s sins, but wearieth not of giving.

I]

He destroyeth misery and sin; He crusheth an army of
evil men in a moment ;

He breaketh those unbreakable by human power; he
smiteth the very valiant, but cherisheth love for those
who truly love Him.

Vishnu, the lord of Lakshmi, cannot find His limit ; the

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 281

Veds and the books of the Musalmans cannot utter His
secret.

The Beneficent One ever beholdeth men’s secrets; yet
He becometh not angry, and withholdeth not their daily
bread.

III

He made worms, moths, deer, serpents, the past, the
future, and the present.

The demigods and demons were Cnimnit through their
pride; they knew not God’s secret, and were led astray
by error.

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, and other Muhammadan
books have grown weary of taking God’s account, but they
have not found it.

Without the light of true love hath any one obtained the
honour of finding God ?

IV

He is primal, endless, unfathomable, without enmity, and
fearless in the past, future, and present.

He is without end, One out of many, without blemish,
sin, or stain, and indestructible.

He is the Creator and Destroyer of worlds; He sup-
porteth life on sea and land.

Compassionate to the poor, a mine of mercy, beautiful is
the holy Lord of wealth.

V

He hath not lust, or wrath, or covetousness, or worldly
love, or sickness, or sorrow, or enjoyment, or fear.

He is without a body ; He beareth love to all, yet is He
devoid of sensual love; He is homeless and indestructible.

To those who know Him He giveth; to those who know
Him not He also giveth; He giveth to the earth; He
giveth to the heavens.1

O man, why waverest thou ? the beautiful and holy Lord
of wealth will care for thee.

1 Zaman is here understood to be for dsman.

282 THE SIKH RELIGION

VI

He preserveth men in many ways—from sickness, from
sorrow, from water, and from sprites.

When enemies aim blows at us, none of them may reach
our bodies,

For He holdeth out His hand to protect us and hinder
the army of sin from approaching us.

What else need I say to thee, O man; God protecteth
thee with the screen of the womb.

Vil

The Yakshas, serpents, demons, demigods, all meditate
on Thee, the Inscrutable One.

On earth, in heaven, and in the nether regions of hell },
Yakshas, serpents, all bow their heads unto Thee ;

But they cannot find the limit of Thy glory; the Veds
describe Thee as indescribable.

All the demigods who searched for Thee have grown
weary of their search; they have not found Thee, O God.

VIII

Beings like Narad, Brahma, Rumna2? the Rikhi all com-
bine to sing Thy praises.

The Veds and the books of the Musalmans have not
found Thy secret ; all have grown weary in their search:
God hath not been found by any one.

Shiv, the lord of Uma,’ cannot find Thy limit. The Sidhs
with their spiritual leaders and the sons of Brahma meditate
on Thee.

O men, meditate in your hearts on Him whose immeasur-
able power is diffused:throughout the whole world.

IX
The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, and other Musalman
1 There are said to be seven hells. Patal is the seventh and lowest.

2 Also known as Lomash, who was remarkable for his long life.
3 One of the names of Parbati.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 283

books, have not found His secret; all kings’ have grown
sore weary searching for 1.

They could not find the secret of the Inscrutable ; after
great travail they proclaimed Him invulnerable.

Thou, O Lord, hast no passion, no form, no outline, no
colour, no relation, no sorrow, no companion.

Thou wast in the beginning and yet hadst no beginning ;
Thou art unfathomable, without distinguishing dréss,? and
without jealousy: he who repeateth Thy name shall save
his relations.

Xx

Men have performed millions of ablutions at places of
pilgrimage ; they have made many offerings and endured
great fasts.

Putting on the dress of great penitents and wearing long
hair, they have wandered in many countries, but they have
not found the Beloved God.

They have made millions of attitudes of contemplation
and prostrations, many offerings of their limbs to tutelary
divinities,? and blackened their faces ;

But without meditating on the name of the Compassionate
to the poor, the Deathless, they have at last gone to Death’s
abode.

Thou art the Discharger of arms, the Holder of the earth
and the umbrella, the Betrayer of kings, the great Tor-
mentor of enemies ;

The Bestower of gifts, the great Enhancer of honour, the
Giver of a resting-place, the Cutter of Death’s noose ;

Conqueror in the fight, Remover of obstacles, great Be-
stower of wisdom, Thou art honoured even among the most
honoured.

Thou art learned in divine knowledge ; Thou art the great
Giver of wisdom, the Destroyer of the god of death.

1 Such as Harischandar, and others.

2 Without the distinguishing dress of a religious sect.

3 Bahu nias kare, also translated—(a) made many renunciations,
(J) made many efforts.

284 THE SIKH RELIGION

The dwellers of the East know not Thy limit, the goddess
Hingula? who dwelleth in the Himalayas meditateth on
Thee ; the Gurdezis of Ghor? sing the praises of Thy name.

The Jogis practise Jog to be united with Thee; how
many suspend their breath ¢o obtain Thee. The Arabs of
Arabia worship Thy name.

The Firangis of France worship Thee, the Kandharis and
Qureshis know Thee, the residents of the West Tecognize
Thee as the object of their love.

The Marathas, the Magadhis 3 heartily do Thee penance,
the natives of Tilang 4 fix Thee in their hearts, and recognize
Thee as the abode of religion.

Like milk in Giese like buttermilk in Chhatraner,
like moonlight on the banks of the Jamna,

Like a female swan in Turkey of the Shiahs, like a diamond
in Husainabad, like the stream of the Ganges when it
blendeth with the seven seas,

Like quicksilver in Palaugarh, like silver in Rampur, like
saltpetre in Surangabad,

Like the champa flower in Chanderikot, like moonlight
in Chandagarh, Thy rer flourisheth like the malati flower.®

Like crystal in a ——— and Kashipur, like
a mirror: in Surangabad,

Like snow in the Himalayas, like Shiv’s necklace ® in
Halbaner, like a swan in Hajipur on seeing which the heart
is fascinated ;

Like white sandal in Champawati, like the moon in Chan-
dragir, like moonlight in Chandagarh,

Like the Ganges on Shiv’s head, like cranes in Bulanda-
bad shineth the light of Thy praises.

1 Hingula is another of the names of Parbati or Durga.

2 A mountainous tract of Afghanistan south-east of Harat.

3 Natives of the country of Magadha, now South Bihar.

4 The Telegu country on the “east coast of India between Urisa
(Orissa) and Madras.

5 A kind of jasmin with fragrant white blossoms.

6 Har har. “Shiv was believed to wear a white snake as a necklace.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 285

The Persians, the English, the double-faced men of France,
the mirdang 1—players of Makran sing Thy praises.

The inhabitants of Bhakhar, of Kandhar, and of Ghor,
the Gakhars, the Gurdezis, and those who live on air medi-
tate on Thy name.

In the east in Palau, in Kamrup, and Kamaun, wherever
man goeth there Thou presidest.

Thy glory is perfect; written and spoken incantations
cannot affect Thee, O Lord, and none can find the limit of
Thy praises.

God is peerless, imperishable ; His throne is immovable ;

He is peerless, endless ; His praise is unrivalled ;

He is indestructible and the invisible Lord.

He is everywhere king ; He blossometh in the forests and
the glades.

His splendour is like the spring everywhere diffused.

The Great One pervadeth the woods and glades, birds
and quadrupeds.

He everywhere blossometh, He is beautiful and wise ;

He blossometh like flowers, and glittereth like the peacock.

Cupid on recognizing Him waveth a chauri over Him.

His power is perfect, He is the Bestower of food, the
Merciful,

The Treasury of favour, the Perfect, the Bounteous.

Wherever we look there appeareth His splendour.

He is free from anger and a treasury of favour.

He everywhere blossometh ; He is beautiful and wise.

He is the great king of the woods and glades, of sea and
land.

His splendour appeareth everywhere ; He is the treasury
of favour.

His light dazzleth, His glory is perfect.

The sky and the earth repeat His name.

Over the seven heavens and the seven hells

His net of karma is spread unseen.

1 A small drum or tambourine.

286 THE SIKH RELIGION

VICHITAR NATAK
I

Guru Gobind Singh addresses God as a sword to
destroy his enemies.

I bow with love and devotion to the Holy Sword.
Assist me that I may complete this work.

Thou art the Subduer of countries, the Destroyer of the
armies of the wicked, in the battle-field Thou greatly adornest
the brave.

Thine arm is infrangible, Thy brightness refulgent, Thy
radiance and splendour dazzle like the sun.

Thou bestowest happiness on the good, Thou terrifiest the
evil, Thou scatterest sinners, I seek Thy protection.

Hail! hail to the Creator of the world, the Saviour of
creation, my Cherisher, hail to Thee, O Sword !

I bow to Him who holdeth the ara in His hand: @
bow to the Fearless One ;

I bow to the God of gods who is in the present and the
future.

I bow to the Scimitar, the two-edged Sword, the Fal-
chion, and the Dagger.

Thou, O God, hast ever one form; Thou art ever un-
changeable.

I bow to the Holder of the mace

Who diffused light through the fourteen worlds.

I bow to the Arrow and the Musket,

I bow to the Sword, spotless, fearless, and unbreakable ;

I bow to the powerful Mace and Lance

To which nothing is equal.

I bow to Him who holdeth the discus,

Who is not made of the elements and who is terrible.

I bow to Him with the strong teeth ;

I bow to Him who is supremely powerful,

I bow to the Arrow and the Cannon

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 287

Which destroy the enemy.

I bow to the Sword and the Rapier

Which destroy the evil.

I bow to all weapons called Shastar (which may be held).

I bow to all weapons called Astar (which may be hurled
or discharged).

Thou turnest men like me from blades of grass into
mountains; than Thou there is none other cherisher of the
poor.

O God, do Thou Thyself pardon mine errors; there is
none who hath erred like me.

The houses of those who have served Thee are all seen
filled with wealth.

In this Kal age and at all times there is great confidence
in the powerful arm of the Sword,

Which in one moment destroyed millions of demons like
Sumbh and Nisumbh ;!

Which in an instant subdued demons such as Dhumar-
lochan, Chand, Mund, and Mahikh ;

Which in a trice repelled demons such as Chamar Ran-
chichhar and Raktichhan—

What careth Thy slave since he hath found a good Lord
lie Thee ?

Which crushed millions like Mund, Madhu, Kitabh, Mur,
and Agh ;

They who never sought shelter in the battle-field and
who retreated not even two paces when blows were dealt
around them,

The demons who could not be drowned in the sea, and
who could not be burnt by fiery arrows,

On beholding thy flash, O Sword, cast aside shame and
fled.

1 See that part of the J/arkandeya Puran which treats of the exploits
of Chandi. The names of the demons mentioned in these quatrains
will be found there.

288 THE SIKH RELIGION

Thou in a moment didst destroy such heroes as Rawan,
Maharawan 1}, Kumbhkaran 2,

Meghnad, and Akampan, in waging war with whom even
Death grew wearied—

Kumbh, Akumbh, who having conquered the whole world
washed their arms in the seven seas.

They who were invulnerable and huge were all wounded
and killed by the sword in the hand of God.

If any one flee to save himself from the Destroyer, say
in what direction shall he flee.

Can man run away from God who stoppeth him with
a drawn sword thundering and brandishing it ?

No contrivance hath been made by which man may escape
from the wound God inflicteth.

Why, O fool, seekest thou not cheerfully the asylum of
Him from whom thou canst not escape ?

Thou hast millions of times repeated the names of Krishan
and Vishnu, and fully meditated on Ram Chandar and the
Prophet ;

Thou hast repeated Brahma’s name and established Shiv
in thy heart, but none of them will save thee.

Thou hast performed millions of penances for millions of
days, but none of them will avail thee a kauri.

Incantations to obtain thy desires will not be worth thee
half a paisa; none of them will save thee from the stroke
of Death.

Why performest thou false penance to the gods? it will
not avail thee a kauri.

How can they save thee when they cannot protect them-
selves from the stroke of Death ?

They will suspend thee in the fiery pit of terrible wrath
as they are suspended themselves.

1 A first cousin of Rawan. * Rawan’s brother.
3 Rawan’s sons.
* They never again expected to find an adversary.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 289

Think, think even to-day in thy heart, O fool, without
the favour of God nothing can avail thee.

It is not by the practice of perpetual silence, nor by the
ostensible relinquishment of pride, nor by the adoption of
a religious dress, nor by shaving the head,

Nor by wearing a wooden necklace, nor by twisting matted
hair round the head that God is found.

I speak the truth, hear it attentively—without entering
the protection of the Compassionate to the poor

And loving Him can God be found? the Merciful One
is not pleased with circumcision.

Were I to make all the islands my paper, and the seven
seas my ink ;

Were | to cut down all trees, and turn them into pens
for writing ;

Were I to make Saraswati dictate for millions of ages ;
were I to write with the hand of Ganesh,

O Thou who holdest the destroying sword, I could not
please Thee even a little without offering Thee homage.

II

Thy greatness is endless and boundless ;

No one hath found its limits.

Thou art God of gods, King of kings,
Compassionate to poor, and Cherisher of the lowly.

The dumb would recite the six Shastars, cripples would
climb mountains,

The blind would see, and the deaf hear, if God would
only show favour.

How can my feeble intellect, O God,
Describe Thy greatness ?

I cannot utter Thy praises,

Do Thou correct this work :

SIKH. V 105

290 THE SIKH RELIGION

How far can this worm speak °

It is only Thou, O God, who knowest Thine own praises.

As a son knoweth not the time of his father’s birth,

How can I tell Thy secret ?

Thy greatness becometh Thee ;

It cannot be described by others.

Thou knowest Thine own works, O God.

How shall high or low describe Thee ?

Sheshnag whom Thou didst create with a thousand heads,

Whom two thousand tongues? adorn,

Until now is uttering Thy boundless names ;

Yet even still he cannot find their limit.

How far can any one describe Thy works ?

The intellect is perplexed in trying to understand them.

Thy subtile form cannot be described ;

I shall describe Thy great form.

When I have obtained Thy love and service,

Then shall I put aside all other narratives and describe
Thee.

I shall now relate my own history,
And how the Sodhi family originated.

At first when God extended Himself,
The world was created by Him.

The man who doeth good deeds

Is called a demigod in the world ;

He who doeth bad deeds in the world
Is styled a demon.

Kalsain was the first king ;

His strength and form were unsurpassed, incomparable,
and unrivalled.

Kalket was the second king ;

Krurbaras was appointed the third king in the world ;

Kaldhuj was the fourth king who graced sovereignty.

In this line Raghu was born,

From whom the Raghu race was descended.

1 It is wiitten in Hindu books that Sheshnag has two tongues in
each head.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 2o1

From them an excellent son Aj was born,

A great charioteer and archer.

When he assumed the garb of a Jogi,

He bestowed his empire and throne on Dasarath,

Who also became a great archer.

He felt desire and married three wives.

His first son was the prince Ram,

The second Bharat, the thivd Lachhman, and the fourth
Shatrughan.

They ruled for a long time ;

They then died and went to heaven.

Sita’s sons, Lahu! and Kushu, afterwards both became
kings,

And graced kingdoms and thrones.

On their marriage with the daughters of the king of the
Panjab,

They performed various sacrifices.

They built there two cities,

One Kasur, the second Lahaur (Lahore).

Both became very famous.

Ceylon and Amrawati, the city of Indar, became ashamed
on beholding them.

Kushu and Lahu reigned for a long time,

But were at length caught in the noose of Death.

Their sons and grandsons

Also ruled in this world.

How far shall I tell their history ?

I cannot even recount their names.

It is related that Kalket 2 and Kalrai°

Had innumerable sons in their homes.

Kalket possessed peerless strength,

And expelled Kalrai from the city.

He fled to the Sanaudh * country

Where he married a king’s daughter.

1 Lav in the Ramayan,

2 Descended from Kushu. 3 Descended from Lahu.

4 Near Banaras, Its inhabitants, the Sanaudhis, were afterwards
called Sodhis.

U2

292 THE SIKH RELIGION

The son born in his house of that marriage

He named Sodhi Rai.

The Sodhi race began from that time.

It was made by the supremely pure Creator.

The sons and grandsons who sprang from Sodhi Rai

Were all called Sodhis in this world.

They became very distinguished among men,

And their wealth increased day by day.

They exercised independent sway

And conquered the kings of many countries.

They enforced religion everywhere,

Caused umbrellas to wave over their heads,

And on many occasions performed sacrifices at royal
coronations.

Afterwards dissension arose among them,

And no holy man could arrest its progress.

Heroes and invincible warriors went about caparisoned,

Took arms and went to fight in the field of battle.

For wealth and land ancient is the struggle,}

To compass which men willingly die.

Worldly love and pride have extended quarrels ;

Lust and wrath have conquered the whole world.

Nobody can compute the time

When enmity, dissension, and pride were diffused.
In this world their basis is greed,

By the desire for which every one killeth himself.

III

The Sodhis returned to the Panjab and waged war with
the descendants of Kushu who had been left behind. The
descendants of Kushu being defeated fled to Banaras, where
they became readers of the Veds.

IV

Those of the expelled descendants of Kushu who read the
Veds were called Bedis.

* Compare the Hindustani proverb—zan, zamin, zar, tinen jhagre ka
ghar ‘Women, land, and money are the sources of strife among men.’

~

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 293

They carefully attended to their religious duties.

The king of the Panjab dispatched them a conciliatory
letter

To forget the enmity that prevailed among them.

The raja’s messenger arrived in Banaras,

And explained the contents of the missive to all the
Bedis.

Upon this all the readers of the Veds proceeded to the
Panjab,

And on their arrival made obeisance to the king.

He caused them to recite the Veds.

While all his brethren were seated near him in the assembly,

They recited the Sam Ved, the Yajur Ved,

Then the Rig Ved, making gesticulations with their
hands,

And finally the Atharav Ved.

The raja was pleased

And gave them all his possessions.

He elected to live in the forest

To remove his great sins.

On giving them his kingdom

He assumed the garb of a Rikhi.

The people tried to restrain him,

But he dismissed all regret,

And, relinquishing wealth and place,

Became absorbed in God’s love.

The Bedi chief was pleased on obtaining the kingdom,

And in the joy of his heart blessed the Sodhi king, saying,

‘When I come in the Kal age under the name of Nanak,

I will make thee worthy of worship in the world, and
thou shalt attain the highest dignity.

Thou hast heard the three Veds from us,
On hearing the fourth Ved thou gavest thy territory.
Having assumed three births},

1 When I have become Guru Nanak, Guru Angad, and Guru Amar
Das.

204 THE SIKH RELIGION

In my fourth I will make thee Guru.’

On the one hand the Sodhi king went to the forest,

On the other the Bedi king was happy in his sovereignty.
How far shall I amplify this story ?

I very much fear to swell my book.

V

Afterwards again quarrels increased among the Bedis,
Which no one could adjust.

It was the will of God

That sovereignty should pass from their family.

Only twenty villages remained to the Bedis,
Which they began to till.

A long time passed_in that way

Until the epoch for the birth of Nanak arrived.

Nanak Rai, born in the line of those Bedis,
Conferred happiness on all his disciples, and assisted them
in this world and the next.

He established religion in the Kal age,
And showed the way unto all holy men.
Sin never troubleth those
Who follow in his footsteps.
God removeth all suffering and sin
From those who embrace his religion :
Pain and hunger never annoy them, ©
And they never fall into Death’s noose.
Nanak assumed the body of Angad,
And made his religion current in the world.
Afterwards Nanak was called Amar Das,
As one lamp is lit from another.
When the time for the fulfilment of the blessing came,
Then Ram Das Sod became Guru.
Amar Das gave him the Guruship according to the ancient
blessing,
1 The reference is to Guru Ram Das.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 295

And took the road to paradise himself.

The holy Nanak was revered as Angad,

Angad was recognized as Amar Das,

And Amar Das became Ram Das. _

The pious saw this, but not the fools,

Who thought them all distinct ;

But some rare person recognized that they were all one.

They who understood this obtained perfection—

Without understanding perfection cannot be obtained.

When Ram Das was blended with God,

He gave the Guruship to Arjan.

When Arjan was going to God’s city

He appointed Har Gobind in his place.

When Har Gobind was going to God’s city,

He seated Har Rai in his place.

Har Krishan his son afterwards became Guru.

After him came Teg Bahadur,

Who protected the frontal marks and sacrificial threads
of the Hindus,

And displayed great bravery in the Kal age.

When he put an end to his life for the sake of holy men,

He gave his head but uttered not a groan.

He suffered martyrdom for the sake of his religion ;

He gave his head but swerved not from his determination.!

God’s people would be ashamed

To perform the tricks of mountebanks and cheats.’

Having broken his potsherd on the head * of the King of
Dihli, he departed to paradise.
None came into the world who performed such deeds as he.

1 Sirar. If this is a Panjabi word, its meaning is as we have given.
Among the Sikhs, however, there is current what purports to be the
Persian original of the line, as spoken by Guru Teg Bahadur himself
on the eve of his execution—

arte a Lm pr re eols
which is generally translated—I gave my head but not God's secret.
2 That is, Guru Teg Bahadur might have performed a miracle and
saved himself, but he scorned to do so.
8 Having made the King of Dihli responsible for his death.

296 THE SIKH RELIGION

At his departure there was mourning in this world :
There was grief through the world, but joy in paradise.

VI
Guru Gobind Singh nowspeaks regarding himself:—

I shall now tell my own history,

How God brought me into the world as I was performing
penance

On the mountain of Hem Kunt,!

Where the seven peaks are conspicuous—

The place is called the Sapt Shring 2—

Where King Pandu practised Jog.

There I performed very great austerities

And worshipped Great-death.

I performed such penance

That I became blended with God.

My father and mother had also worshipped the Unseen
One,

And strove in many ways to unite themselves with Him.

The Supreme Guru was pleased

With their devotion to Him.

When God gave me the order

I assumed birth in this Kal age.

I did not desire to come,

As my attention was fixed on God’s feet.

God remonstrated earnestly with me,

And sent me into this world. with the following orders :—

‘When I created this world

I first made the demons, who became enemies and op-
pressors.

They became intoxicated with the strength of their arms,

And ceased to worship Me, the Supreme Being.

I became angry and at once destroyed them.

In their places I established the gods :

+ In Sanskrit Hemakuta, the golden peak, a chain of mountains
between the Himalayas and Mount Meru.
2 Meaning seven horns.

,
COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 297

They also busied themselves with recezving sacrifices and
worship,

And called themselves supreme beings.

Mahadev called himself the imperishable God.

Vishnu too declared himself to be God ;

Brahma called himself the supreme Brahm,

And nobody thought Me to be God.

Then I made the eight Sakhis?

Who were appointed to keep watch over creatures.

They told people to worship them,

And said, ‘“‘ There is no God but us.”’

They who did not recognize the Primal Essence,

Worshipped them as God.

How many worshipped the sun and moon !

How many made burnt offerings ! how many worshipped
the wind !

Some recognized a stone as God.

How many bathed in the water according to Shastrik rites!

How many, recognizing Dharmraj as their supreme judge,

Performed religious ceremonies through fear !

They whom I appointed to watch over creatures,

On coming into this world called themselves God.

They altogether forgot My orders,

And became absorbed each in his own praise.

When they did not recognize Me,

Then I created men.

They too fell under the influence of pride,

And made gods out of stones.

Then I created the Sidhs and the Sadhs,

But they too found not the Supreme Being.

Whoever was clever in the world

Established his own sect,

And no one found the Creator.

Enmity, contention, and pride increased.

Men began to burn trunk and leaves in their own fire,?

a

ae

1 These are believed to be the Dikpals or regents of the eight points
of the compass.

2 An Indian idiom for anarchy. Big and little perished by their
own contentions.

298 THE SIKH RELIGION :

And none of them went My way.

They who obtained a little spiritual power

Struck out their own way.

None of them recognized the Supreme Being,

But became mad boasting of themselves.

None of them recognized the Real Essence,

But each became absorbed in himself.

Then I created the supreme Rikhis

Who afterwards made their own Simritis current.

They who were smitten by the Simritis

Abandoned My worship.

They who attached their hearts to My feet

Did not walk in the way of the Simritis.?

Brahma made the four Veds

And caused all to act according to them ;

But they whose love was attached to My feet

Renounced the Veds. |

They who abandoned the tenets of the Veds and of other
religious books,

Became devoted to Me, the supreme God.

They who follow true religion

Shall have their sins of various kinds blotted out.

They who endure bodily suffering

And cease not to love Me,

Shall all to go paradise,

And there shall be no difference between Me and them.

They who shrink from suffering,

And, forsaking Me, adopt the way of the Veds and Simritis

Shall fall into the pit of hell,

And continually suffer transmigration.

Afterwards I created Dattatre

Who also struck out his own path.

He pared not his finger nails, he decorated his head with
matted hair,?

And paid no heed to My worship.

Then I created Gorakh

1 The Simritis purport to follow the Veds.
2 The milk of the leaves of the banyan-tree is used by faqirs to wet
the hair. It is then smeared with ashes.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 299

Who made great kings his disciples,

And tearing their ears put rings in them :
But he thought not of the way of My love.
Then I created Ramanand

Who wore the garb of a Bairagi,

Put a wooden necklace on his neck,

And paid no heed to My worship.!

They who were created by Me

Struck out their several paths.

I then created Muhammad,

And made him king of Arabia.

He too established a religion of his own,
Cut off the foreskins of all his followers,
And made every one repeat his name ; *
But no one fixed the true Name in man’s heart.
All these were wrapped up in themselves,
And none of them recognized Me, the Supreme Being.
I have cherished thee as My son,

And created thee to extend My religion.
Go and spread My religion there,

And restrain the world from senseless acts.’

I stood up, clasped my hands, bowed my head, and
replied :—

‘ Thy religion shall prevail in the world when Thou vouch-
safest assistance.’

ee eee

On this account God sent me.

Then I took birth and came into the world.
As He spoke to me so I speak unto men:

I bear no enmity to any one.

All who call me the Supreme Being

Shall fall into the pit of hell.

Recognize me as God’s servant only :

1 This is not the Ramanand whose hymn is found in the Granth
Sahib. The author of that hymn lived long after this, and subsequent
to the era of Muhammad. He was the Guru of Kabir who flourished
in the fifteenth century a.p.

2 Muhammad, rasul Alla,

300 THE SIKH RELIGION

Have no doubt whatever of this.

I am the slave of the Supreme Being,

And have come to behold the wonders of the world.
I tell the world what God told me,

And will not remain silent through fear of mortals.

As God spoke to me I speak,

I pay no regard to any one besides.

I am satisfied with no religious: garb ;

I sow the seed of the Invisible.

I am not a worshipper of stones,

Nor am I satisfied with any religious garb.

I will sing the Name of the Infinite,

And obtain the Supreme Being.

I will not wear matted hair on my head,

Nor will I put on earrings ; .
I will pay no regard to any one but God.
What God told me I will do.

I will repeat the one Name

Which will be everywhere profitable.

I will not repeat any other name,

Nor establish any other God in my heart.

I will meditate on the name of the Endless One,
And obtain the supreme light.

I am imbued with Thy name, O God ;

I am not intoxicated with any other honour. |
I will meditate on the Supreme,

And thus remove endless sins.

I am enamoured of Thy form ;

No other gift hath charms for me.

I will repeat Thy name,

And avoid endless sorrow.

Sorrow and sin have not approached those
Who have meditated on Thy name.

They who meditate on any one else

Shall die of arguments and contentions.

The divine Guru sent me for religion’s sake :
On this account I have come into the world—
‘Extend the faith everywhere ;

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 301

Seize and destroy the evil and the sinful.’
Understand this, ye holy men, in your souls.

I assumed birth for the purpose

Of spreading the faith, saving the saints,

And extirpating all tyrants.

All the first incarnations

Caused men to repeat their names.

They killed no one who had offended against God,
And they struck out no path of real religion.

The Ghauses! and Prophets who existed

Left the world talking of themselves.

None of them recognized the great Being

Or knew anything of real religion.

Nothing is to be obtained by putting hopes in others ;
Put the hopes of your hearts in the One God alone.
Nothing is obtained by hoping in others ;

Put the hopes of your hearts in Him.

Some millions read the Purans together ;

How many silly persons recite the Quran !

But these books shall be of no assistance at last,
And shall save no one from Death’s toils.

Why not, O brethren, repeat the name of Him
Who will aid you at the last moment ?
Consider spurious religion as superstition.

No such things will avail you.

On this account God created me ;

Having communicated to me the secret,?

He sent me into the world.

I shall proclaim to all men what He told me.

I will repeat God’s name,

And all my affairs shall prosper.
I will not close mine eyes,?

Or do anything for show.

1 Muhammadan saints of excessive devotion.
2 That spurious religion is of no avail.
3 As some Indian faqirs do.

302 THE SIKH RELIGION

They who wear a religious garb

Are deemed naught by the saints of God.
Understand this, all men, in your hearts,
That God is not obtained by hypocrisy.
They who act for the sake of display,

Shall not obtain salvation in the next world ;
And it is only for life their affairs prosper.
Kings on seeing their acting worship them;
But God is not to be found by mummery.
Yet every one wandereth about thus searching for Him.
He who keepeth his heart in subjection
Recognizeth the Supreme Being.

They who by wearing a religious garb keep the people
of the world in subjection,

Shall at last be cut with the shears of Death and take
up their abode in hell.

They who present appearances to the world,

Experience extreme pleasure in fleecing ® others.

Spurious, and not worth a kauri, is the religion

Of those who practise suspension of breath by stopping
their noses.

They who practise spurious religion in the world

Shall fall into the pit of hell.

He who can in no way subdue his heart

Shall not go to heaven by gesticulation.

What God Himself told me I proclaim to the world.
They who meditate on Him shall go to heaven at last.

God and God’s servant are both one—deem not that
there is any difference between them—
As waves produced from water are again blended with it.

1 Also translated—Since God is not to be found by mummery, why
should everybody wander about thus searching for Him?

2 Also translated—In shaving the heads of others and then making
them their disciples.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 303

God remaineth apart from those

Who indulge in wrangling and pride.

He is not found in the Veds or the books of the Muham-
madans.

Know this in your hearts, O saints of God.

They who practise hypocrisy by closing their eyes

Should be treated as blind men.

Since the road is not seen by closing one’s eyes,

How can such persons, my brethren, meet the Infinite ? *

How far could any one amplify this ?

Men would grow weary trying to understand it.

Though one had a million tongues,

Even then he would fail to recount God’s praises.

Vil

My father departed for the East

And bathed at various places of pilgrimage.

When he arrived at the Tribeni (Priyag),

He passed his days in meritorious works and alms.
There was I conceived.

I was born in Patna city,

And afterwards taken to the Panjab,

Where nurses of different kinds fondled me,

And tended my body in every way.

I received instruction in various forms.

When I arrived at the age to perform my religious duties,
My father departed to God’s city.

Vill

When I obtained sovereignty,
I promoted religion to the best of my power.

I hunted various sorts of game in the forest,
And killed bears, nilgaus,? and elks,

I afterwards left that country,

And proceeded to the city of Paunta.

1 Who cannot be seen at all.
2 The Indian antelope.

304 THE SIKH RLLIGION

I enjoyed myself on the bank of the Kalindri (Jamna),
And saw amusements of every kind.

There I selected and killed many lions,

And slew many nilgaus and bears.

Fatah Shah who was the king became angry with me,
And came to blows with me without cause.

Here follow in the Vichitar Natak an account of
the battle of Bhangani ; the dispatch of Mian Khan
and Alif Khan to Jammu and Nadaun respectively to
collect revenue ; the victory gained with the Guru’s
assistance by Raja Bhim Chand over Alif Khan ;
the dispatch of General Dilawar Khan against the
hill chiefs and of his son against the Guru, who
was left unmolested owing to the son’s flight ;
the dispatch by Dilawar Khan of Husain Khan to
reduce the Guru to subjection ; the failure of Husain
Khan to carry out his orders; his attack on the
weaker of the hill chiefs ; the victory of Gopal, King
of Guler, and of Ram Singh, King of Jaswan, over
Himmat, one of Husain Khan’s officers, whom they
put to death; the single-handed combat between
Raja Ram Singh and Jujhar Singh, Raja of Chander,
in which the latter was slain; the dispatch by
Aurangzeb of his son to the Panjab, where the
masands, fearing that he would attack the Guru,
deserted him and fled to the highest mountains ;
the dispatch of an officer named Mirza Beg to support
the young prince and the subsequent expedition of
an army under four other officers who, believing that
the masands were men of wealth, destroyed their
houses and plundered their property. All these
details have been given at length in the Guru's life.

IX
They who turn away from the Guru
Shall have their houses demolished in this world and the
next.
They shall be laughed at here, have no dwelling hereafter,

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 305

And be debarred from all hope.

Sorrow and hunger shall ever attach to those

Who forsake the service of the Saint.

Nothing that they do shall succeed in this world,

And at last they shall fall into the pit of hell.

They who turn and fly from the Guru’s feet,

Shall have their faces blackened in this world and the
next.

The successors of both Baba Nanak and Babar
Were created by God Himself.

Recognize the former as a spiritual,

And the latter as a temporal king.

Babar’s successors shall seize and plunder those
Who deliver not the Guru’s money.

They who love the Guru’s feet

Shall never see misery.

Wealth and supernatural power shall enter their houses,
And sin and suffering not touch even their shadows.

What is a wretched enemy?! to him whom the Friend
preserveth ?

An enemy could not even touch his shadow; the fool
would lose his labour.

Who can meditate anything against those who enter the
Saint’s protection ?

God preserveth them as the tongue is preserved among
the teeth ; He destroyeth their enemies and allayeth their
suffering.

What can a miserable enemy do to him whom the Friend
preserveth ?

He cannot even touch his shadow; the fool shall pass
away.

1 Or—What are the designs of an enemy against him?
SIKH. V x

bap |

306 THE SIKH RELIGION

Xx

All-death saveth all His saints ;

He hath tortured and destroyed all sinners ;

He hath shown wonderful things to His saints,
And saved them from all misery.

Knowing me to be His slave He hath aided me ;
He hath given me His hand and saved me.

GYAN PRABODH

Neither the Veds, nor Brahma knoweth God’s secret,

Neither Vyas nor his father Parasar, nor his son Shukdev,
nor the sons of Brahma, nor Shiv knoweth God’s limit.

All four sons of Brahma know not God’s time.

Lakhs of Lakshmis, lakhs of Vishnus, and many Krishans
declare Him indescribable.

Thou art incomprehensible, O God, and fearless ; Thou
art most powerful, the Creator of sea and land.

Thou art the unshaken, endless, unequalled, immeasurable
Lord ; Pure One, I seek Thy protection.

Here follow in the tenth Guru's Granth transla-
tions and abridgements of tales from the Purans
on the twenty-four Hindu incarnations. The follow-
ing is the Guru’s introduction to them :—

O God, Thou art the Creator and the Destroyer ;

Thou killest and puttest the blame on the heads of others.!
Thou dwellest apart and none can find Thee ;

Wherefore Thou art called the Endless One.

They who are called the twenty-four incarnations

Have not found even a trace of Thee, O God.

On seeing Thy saints distressed Thou becomest uneasy ;

1 Compare the Panjabi proverb :—
Lain dia ap;
Nam dhardaia tap.
Death cometh to take one,
But he is called by the name of fever.
The meaning of the verse in the text is, that all acts ultimately proceed
from God, though they appear to be done by His human instruments.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 307

Wherefore Thou art styled the kinsman of the poor.

At last Thou shalt destroy the whole world ;

Wherefore the world calleth Thee Death.

Thou aidest all the saints as occasion requireth ;

Wherefore they call Thee their helper.

On beholding the poor, Thou art compassionate to
them ;

So we deem Thee the Friend of the poor.

Since Thou sheddest the juice of favour on the saints,

The world calleth Thee the Ocean of favour.

Thou ever removest the troubles of the saints ;

Wherefore Thou hast obtained the name of the Remover
of trouble.

Thou hast come to dispel the sorrows of the saints ;

Wherefore, O God, Thou art called the Dispeller of sorrows.

Thou remainest endless; Thy end cannot be found ;

Wherefore Thou hast obtained the name of the Endless
One.

Thou didst appoint the forms of all things in the world ;

Wherefore Thou art called the Creator.

No one hath ever seen Thee anywhere ;

Wherefore Thou art called the Unseen.

Thou wert never born in the world ; 4

Wherefore every one describeth Thee as Unborn.

Brahma and the rest all grow weary of searching for Thine
origin.

Vishnu and Shiv—what are the wretched beings ?

After consideration and deliberation God made the moon
and sun ; |

Wherefore He is known as the Creator.

Ever without a garb He remaineth without a garb ;

Wherefore the world calleth Him the Garbless.

Invisible is His form, no one knoweth Him ;

On this account he is called the Unseen.

His form is incomparable and unequalled ;

He hath no concern with garbs or no garbs.

He bestoweth on all but beggeth from none

Wherefore He is recognized as the Provider.

? This is an explanation of the word ajond in the Jap/t.
x 2

308 THE SIKH RELIGION

He is not concerned with celestial appearances or omens ;

This fact is known to the whole world.

He is not appeased by incantations, written or spoken,
or by charms.

No one hath found Him by adopting a garb.

Men are entangled with their own affairs ;

No one knoweth the Supreme God.

Some (Hindus) go to places of cremation ; others (Musal-
mans) to cemeteries ;

But God is at neither.

They who visit either are ruined by worldly love and
contention,
' And the Lord remaineth separate from them.

What is a Hindu or a Musalman to him ©

From whose heart doubt departeth ?

The Muhammadans use tasbis,1 the Hindus malas ;!

The former read the Quran and the latter the Purans.

Fools have died over the discussion ;

They were not imbued with God’s deep love.

They who are imbued with love for the one God,

Disregard human opinion and are happy.

They who recognize the Primal Being as the one God,

Allow no other belief to enter their hearts.

They who cherish any other belief,

Shall be debarred from meeting the Friend.

He who knoweth the one Supreme Being even a little,

Knoweth the Real Thing.

All the Jogis and Sanyasis,

The multitudes of Shaven-heads and Musalmans,

Have plundered the world by their garbs.

The holy men whose support is God’s name remain un-
known.

The unholy practise hypocrisy for the sake of their bellies :

Without hypocrisy they can obtain naught.

The men who meditate on the one Being

Never practise hypocrisy on any one.

Without hypocrisy they would obtain nothing,

For no one would bow before any of them.

1 Muhammadan and Hindu names of rosaries,

~

~

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 309

If no one had a belly,

Who would describe any one as rich or poor ?

They who have concluded that God is one

Never practise hypocrisy on any one.

They give their heads, but abandon not their determina-
tion :+

They regard their bodies as nothing.

Men who split their ears are called Jogis ;

With great deceit they betake themselves to the forest.

They who know not the virtue of the One Name,

Belong neither to the forest nor to the household.

In the beginning God was the father of the whole world ;

From Him light first proceeded.

I have not sufficient ability to tell the tale,

Or to mention the names of the different creatures He
created.

Things strong and weak were produced ;

Things high and low were shown separately.

The primal light which is called the one God,

He at last infused into all His creatures.

Know that the light of the one God

Is in all the souls which are in this world.

The whole world shall be blended with God,

Who is described as Kalrup.

Whatever is visible and perceptible by the senses

Man considereth Maya.

The one God is contained in all things,

But He established them all separately.

And He pervadeth them all unseen :

He will call them all separately to account.

They who have considered Him as One

Have obtained the real thing?

The form of the one God is unequalled :

He is sometimes poor, sometimes a prince or a king.

He hath given to all men their several entanglements ;

He is separate from them, and none of them hath found
Him.

1 As Guru Teg Bahadur did.
2 Absorber by death. 3 Deliverance.

310 THE SIKH RELIGION

He created all things separately,

And will destroy them all separately.

God accepteth not censure from any one ;!
It is He who casteth censure on others.

We now give the Guru’s remarks on the transla-
tions and abridgements of the stories of the Hindu
incarnations.

RAM AVATAR

Since I have embraced Thy feet I have paid regard to
none besides.”

The Purans of Ram (the God of the Hindus) and the
Quran of Rahim (the God of the Musalmans) express various
opinions, but I accept none of them.

The Simritis, the Shastars, and the Veds all expound
many different doctrines, but I accept none of them.

O holy God, by Thy favour it is not I who have been
speaking ; all that hath been said hath been said by Thee.

Forsaking all other doors I have clung to Thine.
It is to Thine honour to protect me whose arm Thou hast
grasped ; Gobind is Thy slave.®

KRISHAN AVATAR

I do not at the outset propitiate Ganesh ; 4
I never meditate on Krishan or Vishnu ;

1 For destroying him.

2 Literally—I have not brought any one under my eye.

3 The Guru, with the joy of an author at the end of his toil, was
pleased to note the date and place of the conclusion of his Ws/ory of
Ram—

On the first day of the dark half of Har, a day of pleasure to me,

In the Sambat year seventeen hundred and fifty-five,

At the base of the lofty Naina Devi, on the margin of the Satluj
waters,

Through God’s help I finished the history of Ram—
that is, the translation of the Ram Ava/ar into Hindi from Sanskrit.

4 As is usual in Hindi literary works. The Guru no doubt meant
these verses as an introduction to his Hindi translation of the Krishan
Avatar, which forms the tenth chapter of the Bhagwat.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 311

I have heard of them but I know them not ;

It is only God’s feet I love.

Great-death, be Thou my protector ;

All-steel, I am Thy slave.

Deeming me Thine own, preserve me ;

Think of mine honour, whose arm Thou hast taken.

Deeming me Thine own, cherish me,

Single out and destroy mine enemies.

May both my kitchen and my sword prevail in the
world ! 3

Preserve me and let none trample on me ;

Be Thou ever my cherisher !

Thou art the Lord, I am Thy slave.

Deeming me Thine own, be gracious unto me ;

Perform everything for me Thyself ;

Thou art the King of kings ;

It is Thou alone who cherishest the poor ;

Deeming me Thy slave, bestow Thy favour on me ;

I have arrived and am lying weary at Thy door.

Thou art my Lord, I am Thy slave.

Deeming me Thy slave, reach me Thy hand and save me ;

Destroy all mine enemies.

They who loved not God, while performing great penance,
who endured self-torment, excessively heated their bodies,

Went to Banaras, and read the Veds very many times,
obtained not the Real Thing.

They gave alms so that Vishnu might come into their
power, but they lost all their wealth.

They who loved God with hearty affection found Him.

mass

What availeth it if a crane sit closing his eyes and dis-
playing a religious garb to the world ?

1 The pot to feed the poor and the stranger, regardless of caste and
religion, and the sword to destroy the oppressors of humanity. An
inscription on a sword in the possession of the Raja of Nabha is,
Badhe degh te ya tegh fe, that is, man becomes great either by entertain-
ing his friends or destroying his enemies.

312 THE SIKH RELIGION

If man ever go about bathing in water like a fish, how
shall he obtain possession of God ?

If man croak day and night like a frog and fly like a bird,
how shall he obtain possession of God ?

Siam? and all these saints say, hath any one without love
pleased God ?

Of those who through greed of wealth continued to loudly
sing and recite God’s praises,

And who danced but gave not their hearts thereto, hath
any found the way to God’s wonderful world ?

They excited laughter in the world, and knew not the
essence of wisdom even in their dreams.

The poet Siam asketh if God hath been obtained by any
one without love.

Several meditated in the forest, and returned home weary.

Sidhs in meditation and Munis in deep research have
sought for God, but found Him not.

Siam saith, all the Veds and the Muhammadan books
and the wisdom of the saints have thus decided.

Hearken, O saints, the poet speaketh, they who search
with love obtain God.

I am the son of a brave man, not of a Brahman; how
can I perform austerities ?

How can I turn my attention to Thee, O Lord, and for-
sake domestic affairs ?

Now be pleased to grant me the boon I crave with clasped
hands,

That when the end of my life cometh, I may die fighting
in a mighty battle.

Blest is his life in this world who repeateth God’s name
with his mouth and meditateth war in his heart.
( 1 Some suppose that Sidm is the Guru’s /ekhallas or nom de plume.

_\ Others maintain that it was the real name of one of the fifty-two bards
's Guru entertained,

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 313

The body is fleeting and shall not abide for ever; man
embarking in the ship of fame shall cross the ocean of the
world.

Make this body a house of resignation ; light thine under-
standing as a lamp ;

Take the broom of divine knowledge into thy hand, and
sweep away the filth of timidity.

PARASNATH AVATAR

O thoughtless fool, why knowest thou not thy Maker ?

O man, why knowest thou not God ?

O heedless beast bound with worldly love, they on whom
thou reposest confidence—

Ram, Krishan, and the Prophet—whose names thou con-
tinually utterest on rising—

Where live they now in the world,! and why singest
thou their praises ¢

Why recognizest thou not Him who is now and ever
shall be ?

Why idly worship stones; will they yield thee any
return ?

Worship Him by whose worship thy work shall be accom-
plished,

And by taking whose name all thy desires shall be fulfilled.

O Jogi, Jog consisteth not in matted hair.

Why wear thyself out and kill thyself wandering ? Con-
sider this in thy mind.

The man who knoweth the supreme divine knowledge
shall obtain the great reward ;

He shall then restrain his mind in one place, and not
run wandering from door to door.

What availeth it to leave one’s home, run away, and
dwell in a forest,

When one’s heart ever remaineth at home? Such a per-
son is not an Udasi.

1 That is, they were mortal like others, and what is the use of
worshipping them ?

314 THY SIR RELIGION

Boasting of thy religious fervour, thou deceivest the
world by the exercise of great deception.

Thou thinkest in thy heart that thou hast abandoned
worldly love, but worldly love hath not abandoned thee.

O man with the garb, religion consisteth not in wearing
a garb.

It consisteth not in wearing matted hair and Jong nails,
or in smearing ashes on the body, or dyeing thy raiment.

If man obtain Jog by dwelling in the forest, the bird ever
dwelleth there.

The elephant ever throweth dust on his head; consider
this in thy heart.

Frogs and fishes ever bathe at places of pilgrimage.

The cat, the wolf, and the crane meditate; what know
they of religion ?

As thou endurest pain to deceive men, do so also for
God’s sake,

Thus shalt thou know great divine knowledge and quaff
the supreme nectar.

The following thirty-three sawaiyas are also read
in Abchalangar and other places while the Sikh
baptismal water is being prepared. Several orthodox
Sikhs say that these are the sawaiyas which ought
always to be read at the baptism, and of this indeed
there is internal evidence.

I

He who repeateth night and day the name of Him whose
enduring light is unquenchable, who bestoweth not a thought
on any but the one God ;

Who hath full love and confidence in God, who putteth
not faith even by mistake in fasting, or worshipping ceme-
teries, places of cremation, or Jogis’ places of sepulture ;

Who only recognizeth the one God and not pilgrimages,
alms, the non-destruction of life Hindu penances, or
austerities ;

1 As practised by the Jains.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 315

And in whose heart the light of the Perfect One shineth,
he is recognized as a pure member of the Khalsa.

II

God is true, Eternal, true to His promise; He is from
the beginning, without beginning, unfathomable, and in-
vincible.

Bounty, mercy, self-control, austerities, daily ceremonies,
continence, fasting, clemency, religious observances are all
contained in the name of the Immutable One. =

He is from the beginning, pure, without a beginning,
infinite,! endless, without enmity, without fear.

He hath form, and is without form or outline; He
groweth not old, He is compassionate and merciful to the
poor,

II!

God is from the beginning, without enmity, without garb,
great, true, refulgent, and resplendent.

He filleth the inmost hearts of all; meditation on Him,
the Real Thing, curbeth natural inclinations.

Thou wert in the beginning, before the ages, before the
world ; O God, Thou art all-pervading and dwellest in every
heart,

Compassionate to the poor, merciful mine of mercy, from
the beginning, unborn, invincible, indestructible.

IV

In the beginning, indestructible, imperishable, ever-
lasting :—O God, the Veds and the books of the Musalmans
have found not Thy secret.

Compassionate to the poor, merciful, Ocean of mercy,
true, everlasting, diffused in every heart, ~

Sheshnag, Indar, Ganesh, and Shiv have searched the
Veds, but found not Thy depth.

O foolish man, say why hast thou forgotten God who is
ever manifest ?

1 Anahad. If anahat be read it must be translated invulnerable or
invincible.

316 THE SIKH RELIGION

V

God is immovable, from the beginning, stainless, in-
finite, true, and everlasting.

He is adored as primaeval, unconceived, unborn, free
from old age, supremely pure, illimitable.

He is well known! as the self-existent, renowned in the
whole world, One, yet in different places.

O base man, why recognize not God who is without stain ?

Vi

O Creator, thou art imperishable, from the beginning,
without blemish, without limits, true, and eternal.

Thou ever providest sustenance for all animals which are
in sea and land.

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, describe Thee in various
ways.

In the rest of the world there is at last naught but
Thee; O divine One, Thou art Sovereign Ruler over ail.

VII

Thou art known as from the beginning, unfathomable,
imperishable, indivisible, invisible, invincible, and illimitable.

Thou art in the past, the future, the present ; Thou art
adored in every place.

Demigods, demons, Sheshnag, Narad, and Saraswati
recognize Thee as true and eternal.

The Purans and the Quran know not the secrets of the
Compassionate to the poor, the Ocean of mercy.

Vill
O true and eternal One, perpetual is Thy dominion ; it
is Thou who madest the Veds and the Quran.
Thou didst appoint demigods, demons, Sheshnag the past
and the present.
From the beginning, before the ages, the stainless, the
indestructible, Thy light is seen, though Thou art unseen.

1 Sidh. Some translate this word miracles.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 317

O foolish man, who hath come to tell thee of the in-
visible God ? }

IX

Demigods, demons, Sheshnag, serpents, famous Sidhs
have done great penance ;

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, all have grown weary
singing Thy praises, O God, but Thou art not known unto
them.

Thou knowest all hearts on earth, in heaven, in the
nether regions, and in every direction.

Thy praises fill the earth; they entering my heart told
me this.

Xx

The Veds and the books of the Musalmans have not
found God’s secret; all the Sidhs have grown weary con-
templating Him.

The Simritis, Shastars, Veds, and Purans all describe
Him in various ways ;

But God who was in the beginning, and who had no
beginning, whose story is unfathomable, cannot be known.
He saved such as Dhru, Prahlad, and Ajamal.

The courtesan was saved by repeating God’s name; that
name is my support, the object of my thoughts.

XI

All recognize that God was in the beginning, that He had
no beginning, that He is unfathomable, eternal, and perfect.

The Gandharbs,2 the Yakshas, Sheshnag, the earth-
dwelling serpents, the firmament, and the four quarters of
the world know God.

The visible and invisible worlds, the eight directions, the
demons as well as the demigods all worship God.

O man of ignorant mind, through regard for-whom hast
thou forgotten the Omniscient, the Self-existent, the
Treasure ?

1 The answer to this is found in the last line of the following
sawaiya. 2 Heavenly musicians.

318 THE SIKH RELIGION

XII

Some fasten an idol firmly to their breasts; some say
that Shiv is God ;

Some say that God is in the temple of the Hindus ; others
believe that He is in the mosque of the Musalmans ;

Some say that Ram is God; some say Krishan; some
in their hearts accept the incarnations as God ;

But I have forgotten all vain religion and know in my
heart that the Creator is the only God.

XIII

Ye say that God is unconceived and unborn; how could
He have been born from the womb of Kausalya ?

If He whom we call Krishan were God, why was he sub-
ject to death ?!

Why should God whom ye describe as holy and without
enmity have driven Arjan’s chariot ? ?

Worship as God Him whose secret none hath known or
shall know.

XIV

Say if Krishan were the Ocean of mercy, why should the
hunter’s arrow have struck him ? 3

If he can save other families, why did he destroy his own ?

Say why did he who called himself the eternal and the
unconceived, enter into the womb of Devaki ?

Why did he who had no father or mother call Vasudev 4
his father ?

XV
Why call Shiv God, and why speak of Brahma as God ?

‘In this line in the original the first Kal means God, and the
second death.

* Krishan, who was Arjan’s charioteer, proclaimed himself to
be God.

8 It is supposed that the hunter was an incarnation of Bali whom
Ram Chandar had slain. Krishan was supposed to be an incarnation
of Ram Chandar.

4 Father of Krishan.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 319

God is not Ram Chandar, Krishan, or Vishnu whom ye
suppose to be lords of the world.

Shukdev, Parasar, and Vyas erred in abandoning the one
God and worshipping many gods.!

All have set up false religions; I in every way believe
that there is but one God.

XVI

Some worship Brahma as God, others point to Shiv as God ;

Some say that Vishnu is the Lord of the world, and
that by worshipping him all sins are erased.

Think on this a thousand times, O fool, at the last hour
all thy gods will forsake thee.

Meditate on Him in thy heart who was, is, and ever
shall be.

XVII

He who made millions of Indars, He who made and
destroyed some millions of Bawans,

Demons, demigods, serpents, Sheshnags, birds and beasts
innumerable,

To whom till to-day Shiv and Brahma are doing penance
without finding His limit,

He whose secrets the Veds and the Quran have not

penetrated, is the great Being whom the Guru? hath shown
me.

XVIII

O man, by attitudes of contemplation, matted hair,
and the overgrown nails of thy hands thou deceivest all
people.

Thou goest about with ashes smeared on thy face and
cheatest all the demigods and the demons.

Addicted to avarice thou wanderest from house to house ;
the means by which Jog is obtained thou hast all forgotten.

Thou hast lost all shame and succeeded in nothing ; with-
out love God cannot be obtained.

1 Also translated—The abandonment of one God and the worship
of several gods have been shown by Shukdev, Parasar, and Vyas to
be vain. * Guru Teg Bahadur.

320 THE SIKH RELIGION

XIX

O foolish man, why play the hypocrite? thou losest
thine honour by practising hypocrisy.

O cheat, why cheat people? this world is lost to thee
and so is the next.

Where the Compassionate to the poor dwelleth, there
shalt thou find no place.

Think, O think, thou thoughtless and great fool, the
Unseen is not found by assuming garbs.

AX

Why worship a stone? God is not in a stone.

Worship Him as God, by the worship of whom all thy
sins shall be erased,

And by uttering whose name thou shalt be freed from all
thy mental and bodily entanglements.

Make the meditation of God ever thy rule of action ; no
advantage can be obtained by the practice of false religion.

XXI

False religion is without fruit ; by the worship of stones
thou hast wasted millions of ages.

How can perfection be obtained by touching stones?
nay, strength and prosperity thus decrease, and the nine
treasures are not obtained.

Time passeth away while saying to-day, to-day: thou
shalt not accomplish thine object ; art thou not ashamed ?

O fool, thou hast not worshipped God, so thy life hath
been passed in vain.

XXII

If for ages thou do penance to a stone, it will never
rejoice thee.

O fool, it will never generously lift its arm to requite thee.

Say what confidence can be placed in it? when trouble
ariseth, it will not come to save thee.

' O ignorant and obstinate man, be assured that thy fale
religion ° and superstition will ruin thee. —

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 321

XXITT

All are bound in the meshes of Death; no Ram or Moslem
prophet was able to save himself.

God having created destroyed, and will again create and
destroy demons, demigods, and Sheshnags.

They who were wen incarnations in the world at last died
before men’s eyes! in remorse.

O fickle man, why not run to touch the feet of God above.

XXIV

Brahma appeared by God’s order and taking his staff and
waterpot wandered upon earth.

We know that Shiv was born at the appointed time, and
visited all countries.

The world was created and destroyed at the appointed
time ; wherefore let all recognize God.

Renouncing all the subtleties of the Veds and the Quran,
I worship God alone, the Treasury of mercy.

XXV

O blockhead, thy life hath passed in thy present occupa-
tions; thou hast not thought in thy heart of the merciful God.

Abandoning shame thou hast grown shameless, and
leaving thy proper work hast done useless work for thyself.

When thou hadst horses and great royal elephants, thou
foolishly thoughtest to ride on donkeys.?

Thou didst not worship God, O fool, and so didst shame-
fully spoil thy good business.

XXVI

Thou hast for long read the Veds and the books of the
Musalmans, but not found a secret in them.®

Thou hast wandered in various places to worship, but
the one God thou hast never seated in thy heart.

Thou hast bowed thy head to stones and cemeteries, but
obtained naught.

1 Literally—on earth.
2 Leaving God thou hast turned to idolatry.
3 That is, they have no secret.

SIKH. V Y

322 THE SIKH RELIGION
| O foolish man, forsaking the manifest God, why art thou
entangled in thine obstinacy?

XXVIT

If any one go to a monastery of Jogis, they will ask him
to repeat the name of Gorakh ;

If any one go to a monastery of Sanyasis, they will say
that only Dattatre is true, and they will give him his
name as the spell of initiation ;

If any one go to the Musalmans, they will seize and
convert him to the faith of Muhammad—

Every sect deemeth that the Creator is with itself alone ;
but no one can disclose the Creator’s secrets.

XXVIII
If any one go to the Jogis they will tell him to give every
thing—house and property—to them ;
If any one haste to the Sanyasis, they will tell him te part
with his house in the name of Dattatre ;
If any one go to the masands, they will tell him to bring
all his property at once and give it to them.
Every one saith, ‘Bring me, bring me,’ but nobody will
show me God.
XXIX
If any one serve the masands, they will say, ‘ Fetch and
give us all thine offerings.
*Go at once and make a present to us of whatever pro-
perty is in thy house.
‘Think on us night and day, and mention not others
even by mistake.’
If they hear of any one giving, they run to him even at
night,! they are not at all pleased at not receiving.

XXX

They put oil into their eyes to make people believe that
they are shedding tears.

1 Also translated—The night long they pretend to worship.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 323

If they see any of their own worshippers wealthy, they
serve up sacred food and feed him with it.

If they see him without wealth, they give him nothing,
though he beg for it ; they will not even show him their faces.

Those beasts plunder men, and never sing the praises of
the Supreme Being.

XXXI

They close their eyes like cranes and offer the world a
spectacle of deceit.

They go about with their heads bowed down like poachers ;
cats on seeing such attitudes would be ashamed.

The more they go about clinging to the hope of wealth, the
more they lose this world and the next.

Thou hast not repeated God’s name, O fool; why art
thou entangled in thy domestic affairs ?

XXXIT

Why impress false religion on the world? It will be of
no service to it.

Why run about for the sake of wealth ? thou shalt not
be able to fly from Death’s myrmidons.

Son, wife, friends, disciple, companions—none of these
will bear witness for thee.

Think, O think, thou thoughtless and great brute, thou
shalt at the last moment have to depart alone.

XXXII

Hear, O fool, when life leaveth thy body, thy wife crying
out ‘ Ghost, ghost ’, will flee thee.

Thy son, thy wife, thy friends, and companions will give
orders to remove thee quickly.

When life leaveth thy body all thy mansions, storehouses,
lands, and forts! will become the property of others.

Think, O think, thou thoughtless and great brute, thou
shalt at the last moment have to depart alone.

ema

1 Also translated—hoarded and buried savings,
= 2

324 THE SIKM ®ELEWOe

HAZARE SHABD

O man, practise asceticism in this way :—

Consider thy house altogether as the forest, and remain
an anchoret at heart.

Make continence thy matted hair, union with God thine
ablutions, thy daily religious duties the growth of thy nails,

Divine knowledge thy spiritual guide; admonish thy
heart and apply God’s name as ashes to thy body.

Eat little, sleep little, love mercy and forbearance.

Ever practise mildness and patience, and thou shalt be
freed from the three qualities.

Attach not to thy heart lust, wrath, covetousness, obsti-
nacy, and worldly love.

Thus shalt thou behold the Real Soul of this world, and
obtain the Supreme Being.

O man, practise Jog in this way :—

Make truth thy horn, sincerity thy necklace, and apply
meditation as ashes to thy body ;

Make restraint of thy heart thy lyre, and the support of
the Name thine alms ;

Play the primal essence as thy strings, and thou shalt
hear God’s sweet song.

By the practice of the songs of divine knowledge, waves
of melody and exquisite pleasure shall be produced.

The demons and the demigods in their celestial chariots
will be astonished and the munis intoxicated with delight.

Admonish thy heart, don the garb of self-restraint, and
utter God’s name inaudibly,

So shall thy body ever remain like gold, and Death
never approach thee.

O mortal, touch the feet of the Supreme Being.

Why sleepest thou the sleep of worldly love? be some-
times wakeful and alert.

Why instruct others, O beast, since thou hast no know-
ledge thyself ?

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 325

Why ever accumulate sin ? even now lay aside the love
of it.

Deem such things simply as errors and love ¢ruly religious
acts.

Ever lay up the remembrance of God ; renounce and flee
from mortal sin. |

By this means shalt thou not encounter sorrow or sin,
and escape from Death’s noose.

If thou desire ever to have happiness of every kind, be
absorbed in God’s love.

———

O God, my honour resteth with Thee.

It is Thou who art the blue-throated, man-lion, moving
in the water, blue-robed, wearing a necklace of flowers.!

It is Thou who art the primal Being, supreme God, Lord,
pure, living on air ;

It is Thou who art the Lord of Lakshmi, great Light,
Destroyer of the pride of Madhu, Bestower of salvation,
Destroyer of Mur.”

It is Thou who art changeless, undecaying, sleepless,
without evil passions, Preserver from hell,

Ocean of mercy, Seer of the past, present, and future,
Effacer of evil acts.

It is Thou who hast the bow in the hand, who art patient,
Supporter of the earth, changeless, Wielder of the sword.

I of feeble intellect have taken the protection of Thy
feet ; take my hand and save me.

O man, worship none but God, not a thing made by Him.

Know that He who was in the beginning, unborn, in-
vincible, and indestructible is God.

What if Vishnu coming into this world killed some of
the demons,

And exercising great deceit induced every one to call
him God ?

How can he who himself did not escape from the stroke
of the sword of death,

1 The gyanis translate danwari—dweller in the forest.

2 The names in this and the preceding lines of this hymn are epithets
of Shiv, Vishnu, Balbhadar (brother of Krishan), and Krishan,

326 THE SIKH RELIGION

Be deemed God the Destroyer, the Fashioner, the Omni-
potent, the Eternal ?

Hear, O fool, how can he who was drowned in the ocean
of the world save thee ?

Thou shalt only escape from Death’s noose when thou
seizest the feet of Him who existed before the world.

When the Guru left Damdama, his disciples sent
a messenger after him to tell him of their sad plight.
The following is the complaint as versified by the
Guru. Others say that the hymn was addressed to
God by the Guru himself :—

Tell the dear Friend the condition of His disciples—

Without Thee the wearing of our blankets is a disease to
us, and dwelling in our houses is as if we dwelt with serpents.

Our water-pots are stakes of torture, our cups are daggers ;
Thy turning away from us is like what animals endure
from butchers.

Our Beloved’s pallet would be pleasant to us; living in
towns is like living in a furnace.

God alone is the Creator,

The beginning and the end of all things, endless, the
Fashioner, and the Destroyer,

To whom blame and praise are the same, who hath no
enemy, no friend.

What necessity had He to become the driver of Arjan’s
chariot ?

The Bestower of salvation hath no father, mother, caste,
son, or grandson.

Why should He have come into the world to be called
the son of Devaki ?

When He who created demigods, demons, the eight
directions, and all extension,

Is called by the name of Murar, what glory is it to Him ?

1 That the Guru was a decided monotheist is proved by all his
writings.

=

~

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 327

How can God be in human form ?

Sidhs have grown weary sitting in contemplation of Him,
but they have not been able to see Him in any way.

Such persons as Narad, Vyas, Parasar, and Dhru have
deeply meditated on Him.

The Veds and the Purans have grown weary and aban-
doned their purpose, since they could form no concepticn
of Him.

Demons, demigods, fiends, sprites, describe Him as in-
describable.

The faithful consider Him as the subtilest of the subtile,
and again pointed Him out as the largest of the large.!

The one God having made the earth, the heaven, and
all the nether regions they call many.

He who entereth God’s asylum shall be saved from
Death’s noose.

I recognize none but the one God :

I know God as the Destroyer, the Fashioner, the Omni-
potent and Eternal Creator.

What availeth it to men to worship stones in various
ways with great love and devotion ?

The hand groweth weary by touching stones, and no
spiritual power is obtained.

Rice, incense, lamps are offered to stones, but they eat
nothing.

What spiritual power is in them, O fool? what blessing
can they bestow on thee ?

If they had life, they might give thee something ;_ be
assured of this in thought, word, and deed—

Except in the protection of the one sole God nowhere
is salvation.

Without God’s name thou canst not be saved.

How shalt thou flee from Him who holdeth the fourteen
worlds in His power ?

Ram and Rahim whose names thou repeatest cannot
save thee.

1 Since He exists in everything.

328 THE SIKH RELIGION

Brahma, Vishnu, Shiv, the sun and moon are all in the
power of Death.

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, all sects, Indar, Shesh-
nag, the kings of the Munis,

Meditated for many ages on Him who is called the In-
describable, but could form no conception of Him.

Why should He whose form and colour are not known
be called black ? 1

When thou shalt seize and cling to God’s feet, thou shalt
be freed from the noose of Death.

PRAYER
CHAUPAI

O God, give me Thy hand and protect me,

And all my desires shall be fulfilled.

May my heart be ever attached to Thy feet !

Deem me Thine own and cherish me ;

Destroy all mine enemies ;

O Creator, may my family and all my servants and
disciples live in peace !

Destroy all mine enemies to-day,

And all my hopes shall be fulfilled.

May the thirst for repeating Thy name abide with me;

And may I not, forsaking Thee, meditate on any one
besides !

May I obtain from Thee whatever boon I crave !

Save my servants and my disciples ;

Single out mine enemies and smite them.

Remove from me the fear of the hour of death.

Be Thou always on my side; __

O Thou with the sword on Thy banner, protect me ;

Preserve me, O Thou Preserver,

Beloved Lord, Protector of the saints,

Friend of the poor, Destroyer of tyrants—

Thou art Lord of the fourteen worlds.

At the proper time Brahma obtained a body,

At the proper time Shiv became incarnate,

? The reference here is to the Hindu gods Vishnu and Krishan.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 329

At the proper time! Vishnu appeared—

That was all the play of God.

My obeisance to that God

Who made Shiv a Jogi,

Who made Brahma the king of the Veds,

And who fashioned all the world.

Know that He is my Guru

Who made the whole world,

Who created demigods, demons, and Yakshas,

Who is the only God incarnate from beginning to end,

My obeisance to Him alone

Who Himself adorneth all His subjects,

Who bestoweth divine attributes and happiness on His
servants,

Who destroyeth their enemies in a moment,

Who knoweth what is within every heart,

And the sufferings of the good and bad.

He is pleased as He casteth a look of favour on all

From the ant to the huge elephant.

He is grieved when His saints are grieved,

And happy when His saints are happy.

He knoweth every one’s sufferings

And every secret of man’s heart.

When the Creator projected Himself,

His creatures assumed endless shapes ;

Whenever Thou drawest creation within Thyself, O Lord,

All embodied beings are absorbed in Thee?

All creatures endowed with speech °®

Speak of Thee according to their understanding.

Thou dwellest apart from everything ;

1 The expression a/ paZ in this and the two preceding lines is also
translated—having first died.

2 <The universe comes from God, lives in Him, and returns to
Him’ is an expression commonly used in the Upanishads and
Mahabharat. \n the Bhagavat Gita creation is represented as
evolving from God as the world at the approach of day slowly
emerges from the darkness of night, and again dissolving or vanishing
in Him as the world disappears after evening twilight.

3 Badan, the mouth, literally—all things in creation which have
a mouth.

330 THE SIKA RELIGION

The wise and the learned know the secret of this.!

O Formless One, Thou art changeless and independent ;

Thou art the Primal One, stainless, without beginning,
self-existent. :

The fool boasteth that he knoweth the secrets of Him

Whose secrets are not known even to the Veds.

The great fool supposeth that God is a stone,

And knoweth not the difference between them ;

He ever calleth the Eternal God Shiv,

And knoweth not the secrets of the Formless One.

Men according to their different understandings

Give different descriptions of Thee, O God.

Thine extension cannot be conceived,

Nor how Thou didst first fashion creation.

Thou hast but one form, and that form is incomparable.

Thou art in different places a poor man, a lord, or a king ;

Thou madest life from eggs, wombs, and perspiration,

And again Thou madest a mine of vegetables.

Sometimes Thou sittest as monarch on the lotus flower,

Sometimes as Shiv Thou gatherest up creation.

Thou didst display the whole creation as a miracle; |

Thou art the Primal One from the beginning of time;
Thy form was uncreated.

O God, protect me now ;

Save those who are my disciples,

And destroy those who are not.

The enemies who rise in rebellion,

And all infidels destroy Thou them in the battle-field.

The enemies of those who sought Thy protection,

O God, have died in misery.

Thou hast removed all the troubles of those

Who fall at Thy feet. ;

Death shall never approach those

Who even once meditate on Thee, O God ;

1 Also translated—Thou knowest the secret of divine knowledge and
of the world. Others suppose that ded and am are epithets of Hindus
and Musalmans respectively.

2 That is, as Brahma, through whose agency, according to the
Hindus, the world was created.

COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 331

They shall be protected at all times,

And their enemies and their troubles shall instantly vanish.

Thou removest in an instant the sufferings of those

Whom Thou beholdest with a look of favour.

They possess in their homes all temporal and spiritual
blessings,}

And no enemies can touch even thei shadows.

Him who even once remembereth Thee

Thou savest from the noose of Death.

He who repeateth Thy name

Shall be free from poverty and the assaults of enemies.

O, Thou with the sword on Thy banner, I seek Thy
protection ;

Give me Thine own hand and save me ;

Be Thou everywhere my helper,

And save me from the designs of mine enemies.

After the completion of the morning and evening
obligatory divine services and of the uninterrupted
reading or chanting of the Granth Sahib the Sikhs
repeat a prayer or supplication called—

ARDAS,

which may now suitably end our presentation of the
Lives and Writings of the ten Gurus :—

SRI WAHGURU JI KI FATAH!

Having first remembered the Sword meditate on Guru
Nanak ;

Then on Guru Angad, Amar Das, and Ram Das; may
they assist us !

Remember Arjan, Har Gobind, and the holy Hari Rai ;

Meditate on the holy Hari Krishan, a sight of whom
dispelled all sorrow.

Remember Teg Bahadur, and the nine treasures shall
come hastening to your homes.

Ye holy Gurus, everywhere assist us.

May the tenth king, the holy Guru Gobind Singh, every-
where assist us.

1 Ridh sidh, \iterally—wealth and supernatural power.

332 THE SIKH RELIGION

God Himself knoweth, He Himself acteth; it is He who
adjusteth.
Standing in His presence, Nanak, make supplication.

Sikhs of the true Immortal God, turn your thoughts
to the teachings of the Granth Sahib and the deeds of the
Khalsa ; utter Wahguru !

Meditating on the Deathless One, endowed with all power,
compassionate, and just, utter Wahguru !

Meditating on the deeds of those who worshipped the
Name, plied the sword, ate and distributed their food in
companionship, and overlooked others’ faults, O Khalsa,
utter Wahguru !

O Deathless Creator, illimitable, this creature forgetting
Thy name is so attached to worldly goods, that he hath
forgotten the Real Thing. Without Thy supreme mercy
how shall we cross the ocean of the world? O great King,
lust, wrath, greed, worldly love, jealousy, and other evil
passions greatly trouble our minds, but on coming towards
Thee worldly maladies and afflictions are healed and dis-
pelled. Show us such favour that we may by word and
deed be Thine, and that in all things we may obtain Thine
assistance and support.

Grant to Thy Sikhs the gift of Sikhism, the gift of the
Gurwu’s instruction, the gift of faith, the gift of confidence
in Thee, and the gift of reading and understanding the holy
Granth Sahib.

May the Sikh choirs, mansions, and banners ever abide!
Victory to the faith! May the minds of the Sikhs be humble
but their intellects exalted! Utter Wahguru! Wahguru !!
Wahguru ! !!

We offer this Ardas in Thy presence and at Thy lotus
feet. Pardon our errors and mistakes. May all Sikhs who
read and hear the Gurus’ hymns be profited !

Through Nanak, may Thy name, O God, be exalted,

And all prosper by Thy grace!

Sri Wahguru ji ka Khalsa! Sri Wahguru ji ki Fatah !

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB!

SRI RAG

Slow.

Stee eee ee

—~ ae” — —tere—

re.

5 - i ci

J oa pa eee ee a

(ete te
ee

1 As stated in the Life of Guru Nanak, these Rags are sung
differently in different provinces of India. Of eight of them we have
given alternative versions extracted from Raja Sir Surindra Mohan
Tagore’s collection of Indian airs made for the Coronation of the
King-Emperor. The Raja’s music is in a high pitch adapted for
musical instruments ; the Gurus’ Rags are in a low pitch adapted for
the voice.

334 THE SIKH RELIGION

45-5; ——— [= —
6S =

Se ee RS SR emer re ene ee RT

9 — ++ . >
-@ eo

_ aaa > [=

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 335

330 THE SIKH RELIGION

2 ——— = = ——————e
oe -o-

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 337

DEVGANDHARI

338 THE SIKH RELIGION

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 339

._ TODI

340 THE SIKH RELIGION

TILANG

Moderato.

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 341

GAUND
Moderato.
————— == |

342 ’ THE SIKH RELIGION

The following is another version of this Rag :—

See ee 2 = a
= = | ae
ve . oo : _————

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 343

344 THE SIKH RELIGION

TUKHARI

KEDARA

3.46 THE SIKH RELIGION

eo oo =
#°- = 5

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 347

The following is another version of this Rag :—

|

348 THE SIKH RELIGION

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 349

The following is another version of this Rag :—

a
SS ae
-—"= {5} J} 8 ,
fas a —— ae 7 ;
_—— a
Nee ee ‘’ —_Z

350 THE SIKH RELIGION

‘“KALIAN

THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 351

PRABHATI

ee i = a i
oat ower © ee: <— —ae
~

END OF VOL. V

OXFORD
PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

BY HORACE HART, M.A.

PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY

as
- —
: = _ '
. a ‘ - -
of ’ £ -f1 e
a '
- - ' -" ‘
- . . ‘ i = -
. ‘ = ‘
- ' s-
a : x : -
i - “ 1 on = - . ‘ ' ° ' b 3 id
| . ' at
: - * ~ - = a =
- - ' -
: a - -
a ' ' - “
: -- = - - eo
ri = = -~- ~ ' : e ’
- band =
; y ' - ‘
= - ' - ' ; ' ‘ ‘ ' - - 8 :
= - *? A '
-_ - = a - - ~“- -
"y , e - —_ ' . ' rainy ' : 4 ‘ ' . ‘ =
ee '. i ‘ + * -~“
P : — ' =
~~ ’ - os - , ' ‘ = - eer . -
ae wets ‘ ' ' 1a « - . - - . Ps - ~ = nite
= 28 ' 7 = ~ - ‘ i. — - = - -
a ied ‘ a ~
- nih + - ‘ ; ‘ - ‘ i ‘ ' ~ - = = :
. ee — -—— ‘o - = - - ‘ ' en | i ie we
> = ’ - 1 = a ° et. “= - aos z - = - - ~s 4 ry e :
i - a 1 mee we “ ef, .¢ : = , ' ad ' “=
, e- - Pest, i » ¥ a= ’ '’ ' ‘ +7 na | . ‘ - a . i i '
- - - « . . * = ' = sl - . -
i oe et ~ = ‘ ~ ‘ : - = ' an pa as - .
——_— - _ - . ° > = = - ' ®
— = ' . Se - - ‘ - a) ' - --
= er - —_— - =~ “ - - - . > ‘ i = -
= be : ‘ 4 i - - = . - ~~ - = ‘ . - =
+ mee ‘ - - - i =, —T oat ” «. — . - of [oe sent te =
= = . =. - - “- © - -, ' - i v? - ‘ -~ «« - ‘ — 2 -
¥ ee - a & i . | e - ad + A - - ' ' ' ‘ - oan or - o
oT om ‘ =d . — . - - " ~ls 8 ~ 1
' ._ UJ - -~—- - - - i = Ma is U e
- ~ i ‘ ee ‘ if wo - ' ‘@ - - - --- - - - o's
ue .- — - -~ - -—~*-— = - ‘ . = = a = -* -
o- > m § - = = od it ? Y z ee oe _ ts
t ' ° @ jue - om - - 7 ¢ . “- ~- -
- o o's am ‘n'ns et oe td :
% . ‘ St -
= =i : ‘ ~~ - aoe: - - - - . - - L 7 ” = =
ae ee -- -~ - - a Oe ot me - '
” ‘' ' | a - ' ~~ - .? = “—- * .
» a ‘ - —« a ~ -—-*- - . - ‘e *% -2a * -
we oe OWS", a . ” 4 - ‘ ’ ' + a = gine 9 | ~ = ‘
- - * ' > ter ‘ i i ‘ - ‘ = - _——_—-—
~~ ' Se ee ee a “_- ie Ca - . - ad 7 i _f- - -_ <0
a oe ' : se re ‘ ' ‘ co i 6 s: : . _ - - ~
ete ee -— Fer ‘gale on >, ee be ‘ 4 - _ - - - o- - iu thet ae hg ~s
- -——~ - +.0\@ 64) =t°= ' . . - ae z . ~ ~ ~_<z = ‘
= a ‘ le ' ' ote ‘ : z ed * — = 2 a ~- ,- -
a - - —_ - a a ~ rr) = = ' - - * * ‘ - t= = : -—
. mee - a a ee ' ‘ ‘ ‘ - 5s *- - ' - rt sur * - =
oa “= ul ‘= - ¢£ -. - re | i. - - ' a] ~~ we 4 - _
: . ‘ ed ee - - ‘ i 4 we °° - Cal |
“1 we = if ate '«* it , : ‘ ripe s ' ' - ' = 4 . - ' -
i ; - ' . 4 - - - ‘ - - - o = u's :
= - - - oa “ales! = pe ce} oe ‘ - ‘ -- ‘ i - on | a -— ——, ou
a “i wo “~* we ° - y= “xs - ” . om emt +. « af. --t **
mr eu - 4s == te a - ~ a ’ w i =i 2 vm! ch Tr 4,5 =
i - eft=- ¢ oe yee ho ‘ yi ‘ ‘ _—— i ' “age ya = 24, tow
eu *rg-t ™ — » OO ie : ‘ 7? er | 4 oi - ~ ‘s - ee - -
—— ono: ” 4 00 ~~ rr - - = - - - r oo tor ' ge ' ng, od }
te ke ' oe) 440ee 2s bie « ' - ; “«- -? ; - - . . x= - a | _ al
rH) ms - - ee ee Se = - - = ” =) ' ’ Ler  -
oe - _— a - 4 le 1 - ' ' ' ' ’ s oe
= i ry Lam 42°,4°44" = i ‘ . ‘ a a4 = - - ie - ‘ —_
: — —— rays ’ as = -~—™ | -“s . * -“« - « - te - - 7 ' A . oo . - ”
<p tes" orl ete Fe SOO rae oer ("wi ae - — ' ae. I - ; “= = c
ee = ye! a” 2 .» a) » ll - ‘ ‘ ° -~-* ‘ “1 ' i = 6 2
me -— a ~ ee a? ee ee) en 4 os -_ . - t+ ” ™ b a = ” -
-_- = - ies - oe = ‘ = ‘ ' b i ‘ i * = ad ie “i
ae ‘ w 8 igeee _e* | Mele ~~ s 48 ~~ - ‘ - - = - 20 Li, *- ~, |
” = oe fe =o ea 1 oe tn om 5. © ' is -- 7t , - | ‘ i pe mae ~*
ois we ea ee ON een ee -« 7 ‘ “ _— DaMeret, a
~~. - ss we rete we ee oe ie — owes ne ~~ Oe te ' — - - -F - ‘ ec es :
ame ul 0 Ne es we a te an ee ae ad¢ X Utne i. bres | a= e “_—- ” oe eee
, 1 bh ets. ft Ae te vere a 9 -4A 4 ;% ” en ee - ‘ eo os (+ =
“ —— O @) tOeh ome ere — au er ae . a ou: a= . - 4» ms ~—_ al « -*er
ee a ee te on, 5 om <1 ete | meebo are — | oo i _"* - — ‘6 eee
mgt J er Pn Bee ~~ = ' 4 me. y lage -_ i a: duel it ‘ " s* i ®
me a eS “a - ea ~* J Le ‘is ~ == - ' . > ee = ==
. oeyie~w Se +? ih er *s m mrs 5 + wipe tte 8 ‘ ; = = ~~ - -_ = ‘
- Ae; a ln ow « swe (ThE me | on - - “ A he) ” . - mt we Le ‘1 © we Fi .
ha Se ea =p (tate ee 0 1 of & = ye = if «< - -- ‘ “= -_
soe © 46 ate sm ° ‘ 39-2" a onm.« CO T.. 4," > .*- ' ‘ ” “ - - ' ' >? ae re Roi re
ee ee ee wet olf * a ee Re ae 0 tO t= bese LAS 0 _— — ' ' ee TT
— ox ee CL ee ee ee 7m) ie eA « i= 7 as 7 ae, = : . «oe wie gh" =
ve ine Y ie te te c - LL, * - ” ‘a “= , j - _—_— = : é ras |
- «wie #* ‘ AAS sya —_~ Saad = cat - Me. a 7 vy = © ie y A * aa? . ' ” ml) 4 va ee pe eS eS eS ge
10) Megeec sao “si ee te < itive ¢ 8 <t 0 ep ae st + _ ry _ arn \ - - - oe Seal ' ' a4 dO aa
a ~*~ _ -™ i - ~ . 7 fala’ 7 —« . i i a ’ e. ore —
Vee 6 1 tee? ay = Net «ft oe ee . - Bae NS be 21 a Y ah
ae er wor <4 > *eerh § & 4 4" ay Ln | on é , - a = &h Hew
§Q:0-.— = Tl) ae ee - ™~ Pre -_—™ « - a A > -" / i - - ~ 1) - = ad _—" bd Ca
in Me BT tT be =* t OVE Me ewot = Ret & - ‘ : dy Yee, - ‘ i Ul * ' - ag Ma - =-_"* hey:
6.¢ 7 “s Ve gt te hs 4 Le oO a ‘ . - pi atk FL ~
eo a — en a ee ott oe Oot Daye - 6a) es a af a i | ‘ in “ si: - ‘ a -——— ’
Ques (Vees ie ves uP 36 oe "e AB iy +e ' - ii- = Le ‘ — * ¥, 2) 0
a wta"ee! Se aweonr ese “Le dlie - oe bs = - 1 ge A -~ rs . » se - -- e
ere Pe ee Fs . - ‘TY | o-—s. we ' - - "6 Sa etl ea
(ot es | Dies + 086s woe © 5 O8 5, a8 “+ > ’ —, it ie a1 + an “ee ’ ; a”. ‘ J! . ow /=
-_ ns ‘ r a a o - o ' P c
* => ee : bbe] none) « » a —— 1.) >» Ae a . 7 i de ee “a A ger t ¢ mee, i ee