Unspoken Sermons, First Series (George MacDonald, 1867)
==========================================================
MacDonald's 1867 Unspoken Sermons, First Series — the sermons behind the fantasies; universalist hope in pulpit form. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

qin 


“iii 


at Claremont 


ith | 


LARA € AZ i 


The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


aK Lu» 


UNSPOKEN. SERMONS. 


Ballantyne Press 


BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO. 
EDINBURGH AND LONDON 


ea.” 
M2 
Vv. \ 


a 4 
K TEa Arrepa 


UNSPOKEN SERMONS 


POLLS LESS, 


BY 


GEORGE MAC DONALD, LL.D. 


AUTHOR OF ‘THE MIRACLES OF OUR LORD,’ ‘A BOOK OF STRIFE, IN 
THE FORM OF THE DIARY OF AN OLD SOUL,’ ETC. 


Comfort ye, comfort ye my people 


LONDON 
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND .CO. 
AND NEW YORK: 15 EAST 16th STREET 


1890 


All rights reserved 


Sy the same Author. 


== 


Unspoken Sermons. Second Series. Crown 
8vo, 35. 6d. 


Unspoken Sermons. Third Series. Crown 
8vo, 75. 6d. 


The Miracles of Our Lord. Crown 8vo, 
35. 6d. 


A Book of Strife, iv rHE ForM oF THE 
DIARY OF AN OLD SOUL: Poems. 12mo, 6s. 


Lonpon: LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO. 


Theology Library 


SCHOOL. OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


These Lars of Corn, 


GATHERED AND RUBBED IN MY HANDS UPON 


BROKEN SABBATHS, 
I OFFER FIRST TO MY WIFE, 


AND THEN TO MY OTHER FRIENDS. 


CONTE Nel S: 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST . 

THE CONSUMING FIRE 

THE HIGHER FAITH ) 

IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN 

THE NEW NAME 

THE HEART WITH THE TREASURE 
THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS 
THE ELOI 

THE HANDS) OF THE FATHER 

LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR 


LOVE THINE ENEMY 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING 


PAGE 


27 

50 

66 
109 
118 
125 
163 
180 
189 
217 


232 


THE.-CHILD;IN THE. MIDST. - 


And he came to Capernaum: and, being in 
the house, he asked them, What was it that 
ve disputed among yourselves by the way? 
But they held their peace: for by the way 
they had disputed among themselves who 
should be the greatest, And he sat doum, 
and called the twelve, and saith unto then, 
Tf any man desire to be first, the same shall 
be last of all, and servant of all. And he 
took a child, and set him in the midst of 
them: and when he had taken him in his 
arms, he said unto them, Whosoever shall 
receive one.of such children in-my name, 
receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive 
nue, receiveth not me, but him that sent 
72@.—MARK ix. 33-37- 8 “G 


F this passage in the life of our Lord, the account 

given by St Mark is the more complete. But 

it may be enriched and its lesson rendered yet more 
evident from the record of St Matthew: 


“Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and 
A 


ee ne 


2 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. Whosoever shall humble himself 
as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom 
of heaven. And whoso shall receive one such little 
child in my name receiveth me. But whoso shall 
offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it 
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about 
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of 


the sea.” 


These passages record a lesson our Lord gave his 
disciples against ambition, against emulation. It is 
not for the sake of setting forth this lesson that I 
write about these words of our Lord, but for the sake 
of a truth, a revelation about God, in which his great 
argument reaches its height. 

He took a little child—possibly a child of Peter; 
~ for St Mark says that the incident fell at Capernaum, 
and ‘in the house,”—a child therefore with some of 
the characteristics of Peter, whose very faults were 


those of a childish nature. We might expect the 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. 3 


- 


child of such a father to possess the childlike coun- 
tenance ard bearing essential to tne conveyance of 
the lesson which I now desire to set fortn as contained 
in the passage. 

For it must be confessed that there are children who 
are not childlike. One of the saddest and not least 
coramon sights in the world is the face of a child 
whose mind is so brimful of worldly wisdom that the 
human childishness has vanished from it, as well as 
the divine childlikeness. For the chi/d/ike is the divine, 
and the very word “marshais me the way that I was 
going.” Put I must deiay my ascent to the final argu- 
ment in order to remove a possible difficulty, which, 
in turning us towards one of the grandest truths, turr.s 
us away from the truth which the Lord had in view 
here. 

The difficulty is this: Is it like the Son of man to 
pick out the beautiful child, and leave the common 
child unnoticed? What thank would he have in that? 


Do not even the publicans as much as that? And 


é ' UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


do not our hearts revolt against the thought of it? Shall 
the’ mother’s heart cleave closest to the deformed of 
her little ones? and shall “Christ as we believe him” 
choose according to the sight of the eye?» Would he 
turn away from the child born in sin and taught ini- 
quity, on whose pinched face hunger and courage and 
love of praise have combined to stamp the cunning 
of avaricious age, and take to his arms the child of 
honest parents, such as Peter and his wife, who could 
not help looking more good than the other? ‘That 
were not he who came to seek and to save that 
which was lost. Let the man who loves his brother 
say which, in his highest moments of loye to God, 
which, when he is nearest to that ideal humanity 
whereby a man shall be a hiding-place from the wind, 
he would clasp to his bosom of refuge. Would it 
not be the evil-faced child, because’ he needed it most? 
Yes; in God’s name, yes. For'is not that the divine 
way? Who that has read of the lost sheep, or the 


found prodigal, even if he had no spirit bearing wit- 


ene 
THE CHILD 1N THE MIDS‘. 5 


ness with his spivit, will dare to say that it is not the 
divine way? Often, no doubt, it will affear otherwise, 
for the childlike child is easier to save than the other, 
and may come first. But the rejoicing in heaven is 
greatest over the sheep that has wandered the farthest 
—perhaps was born on the wild hill-side, and not in 
the fold at all. For such a prodigal, the elder brother 
in heaven prays thus—“ Lord, think about my poor 
brother more than about me, for I know thee, and 
am at rest in thee. I am with thee always.” 

Why, then, do I think it necessary to say that this 
child was probably Peter’s child, and certainly a child 
that looked childlike because it was childlike? No 
amount of evil can de the child. No amount of evil, not 
to say in the face, but in the habits, or even in the heart 
of the child, can make it cease to be a child, can annihi- 
late the divine idea of childhood which moved in the 
heart of God when he made that child after his own 
image. It is the essential of which God speaks, the real 


by which he judges, the undying of which he is the God. 


6 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


Heartily I grant this. And if the object of our Lord 
in taking the child in his arms had been to teach love 
to our neighbour, love to humanity, the ugliest child he 
could have found, would, perhaps, have served his pur- 
pose best. The man who receives any, and more plainly 
he who receives the repulsive child, because he is the off- 
spring of God, because he is his own brother born, must 
receive the. Father in thus receiving the child. Whoso- 
ever gives a. cup of cold water to a little one, refreshes 
the heart of the Father. To do as God does, is to re- 
ceive. God ; to doa service to one ot his children is to 
receive the Father. Hence, any human being, especially 
if wretched and woe-begone and outcast, would do as 
well as a child for the purpose of setting forth this love 
of God to the human being. Therefore something more 
is probably intended here. ‘The lesson will be found to 
tie not in the humanity, but in the childhood of the child. 

Again, if the disciples could have seen that the essen- 
tial childhood was meant, and not a blurred. and_ half. 


obliterated childhood, the most selfish child migiit have 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. 7 


done as well, but could have done no better than the one 
we have supposed in whom the true childhood is more 
evident. : But when the child was employed as a mani- 
festation, utterance, and sign of the truth that lay in his 
childhood, in order that the eyes as well as the ears 
should be channels to the heart, it was essential—not 
that the child should be beautiful but—that the child 
should be childlike ; that those qualities which wake in 
our hearts, at sight, the love peculiarly belonging to 
childhood, which is, indeed, but. the perception of the 
childhood, should at least glimmer out upon the face of 
the chosen type. Would such an unchildlike child as we 
see sometimes, now in a great house, clothed in purple 
and lace, now in a squalid close, clothed in dirt and rags, 
have been fit for our Lord’s purpose, when he had to say 
that his listeners must become like this child? when the 
lesson he had to present to them was that of the divine 
nature of the child, that of childlikeness? Would there 
not have been a contrast between the child and our Lord’s 


nords, ludicrous except for its horror, especially seeing 


le a i ag SE ac a A 


8 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


ee oe 


he set forth the individuality of the child by saying, “ this 
little child,” “one of such children,” and “these little 
ones that believe in me?” Even the feelings of pity and 
of love that would arise in a good heart upon further con- 
templation of such 2 child, would have turned it quite 
away from the lesson our Lord intended to give. 

- That this lesson did lie, not in the humanity, but in 
the childhood of the child, let me now show more fully. 
The disciples had been disputing who should be the 
greatest, and the Lord wanted to show thein that such a 
dispute had nothing whatever to do with the way things 
went in his kingdom. Therefore, as a specimen of his 
subjects, he took a child and set him before them. It 
was not, it could not be, in virtue of his humanity, it was 
in virtue of his childhood that this child was thus pre- 
sented. as representing a subject of the kingdom. It 
was not to show the scope but the nature of the king- 
dom. He told them they could not enter into the king- 
dem save by becoming little children—by humbling 


themselves, For the idea of ruling was excluded where 


= : 
THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. 9 


childlikeness was the one essential quality. It was to 
be no more who should rule, but who should serve 3 no 
more who should look down upon his fellows from the 
conquered heights of authority—even of sacred authority, 
but wno should look up honouring humanity, and minis- 
tering unto it, so that humanity itself might at length 
be persuaded of its own honour as a temple of the living 
God.- It was to impress this lesson upon them that he 
showed them the child. Therefore, I repeat, the lesson 
lay in the childhood of the child. 

But I now approach my especial object 3 for this 
lesson led to the enunciation of a yet higher truth, 
upon which it was founded, and from which indeed it 
sprung. Nothing is required of man that is not first 
in God. It is because God is perfect that we are re- 
quired to be perfect. And it is for the revelation of 
God to all the human souls, that they may be saved 
py knowing him, and so becoming like him, that this 
child is thus chosen and set before them in the gospel. 


He who, in giving the cup of water or the embrace, 


OS TS 
CASK gen <i ee 


To UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


comes into contact with the essential childhood of the 
child—that is, embraces the chz/dish humanity of it, 
(not he who embraces it out of love to humanity, or 
even love to God as the Father of it)—is partaker of 
the meaning, that is, the blessing, of this passage. It 
is the recognition of the childhood as divine that will 
show the disciple how vain the strife after relative place 
or honour in the great kingdom. 

For it is Zz my name. This means as representing 
me; and, therefore, as being like me. Our Lord could 
not commission any one to be received in his nam2 
who could not more or less represent him; for there 
would be untruth and unreason. Moreover, he had 
just been telling the disciples that they must become 
like this child; and now, when he tells them to re- 
ceive such a little child in his name, it must surely 
imply something in common between them all—some. 
thing in which the child and Jesus meet—something 
in which the child and the disciples meet. What else 


can that be than the spiritual childhood? Zz my names 


a ee ee ee 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. II 


- 


does not mean decause [ will it. An arbitrary utter- 
ance of the will of our Lord would certainly. find ten 
thousand to obey it, even to suffering, for one that 
will be able to receive such a vital truth of his char- 
acter as is contained in the words; but it is not 
obedience alone that our Lord will have, but obedi- 
ence to the “2th, that is, to the Light of the World, 
truth beheld and known. Jn my name, if we take all 
we can find in it, the full meaning which alone will 
harmonize and make the passage a whole, involves a 
revelation from resemblance, from fitness to represent 
and so reveal. He who receives a child, then, in the 
name of Jesus, does so, perceiving wherein Jesus and 
the child are one, what is common to them. He 
must not only see the zdea/ child in the child he re- 
ceives—that reality of loveliness which constitutes true 
childhood, but. must perceive that the child is like 
Jesus, or rather, that the Lord is like the child, and 
may be embraced, yea, is embraced, by every heart 


childlike enough to embrace a child for the sake of 


I2 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


his childness. I do not therefore say that none but 
those who are thus conscious in the act partake of 
the blessing. But a special sense, a lofty knowledge 
of blessedness, belongs to the act of embracing a child 
as the visible likeness of the Lord himself. For the 
blessedness is the perceiving of the truth—the bless- 
ing is the truth itself—the God-known truth, that the 
Tord has the heart of a child. The man who per- 
céives this knows in himself that he is blessed—blessed 
because that is true. 

But the argument as to the meaning of our Lord’s 
words, 7 my name, is incomplete, until we follow our 
Jord’s enunciation to its second and_ higher stage : 
“He that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me.” 
It will be allowed that the connection between the first 
and second link of the chain will probably be the sane 
as the connection between the second and thira. I 
do not say it is necessarily so; for I aim at no legical 
certainty. I aim at showing, rather than at proving, 


to my reader, by means of my sequences, the idea 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. 13 


to which I am approaching. For if, once he behoids 
it, he cannot receive it; if it does not shew itself to 
him to be true, there would not only be little use 
in convincing him by logic, but I allow that he. can 
easily suggest other possible connections in the chain, 
though, I assert, none so symmetrical. What, then, 
is the connection between the second and third? 
How is it that he who receives the Son receives the 
Father? Because the Son is as the Father; and he 
whose heart can perceive the essential in Christ, has 
the essence of the Father—that is, sees and holds to 
it by that recognition, and is one therewith by recog- 
nition and worship. What, then, next, is the con- 
nection between the first and sééondt I think the 
same. “He that sees the essential in this child, the 
pure childhood, sees that which is the essence of me,” 
grace and truth—in a word, childlikeness. It follows 
not that the former is perfect as the latter, but it is 
the same in kind, and therefore, manifest in the child, 


reveals that which is in Jesus. 


14 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 

Then to receive a child in the name of Jesus is to 
receive Jesus; to receive Jesus is to receive God; 
therefore to receive the child is to receive God him- 
self. 

That such is the feeling of the words, and that such 
was the feeling in the heart of our Lord when he spoke 
them, I may show from another golden thread that may 
be traced through the shining web of his golden words. 

‘What is the kingdom of Christ? A rule of love, of 
truth—a rule of service. The king is the chief servant 
in it. “The kings of the earth have dominion: it 
shall not be so among you.” “The Son of Man came 
to minister.” “My Father worketh hitherto, and I 


work.” 


The great Workman is the great King, labour- 
ing for his own. So he that would be greatest among 
them, and come nearest to the King himself, must be 
the servant of all. It is “ike hing like subject in the 
kingdom of heaven. No rule of force, as of one kind 
over another kind. It is the rule of Aina, of nature, ot 


deepest nature—of God. If, then, to enter into this 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST, 15 
kingdom, we must become children, the spirit of chil- 
dren must be its pervading spirit throughout, from 
lowly subject to lowliest king. The lesson added by 
St Luke to the presentation of the child is: “ For he that 
is least among you all, the same shall be great.” And 
St Matthew says: “ Whosoever shall humble himself as 
this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of 
heaven.” Hence the sign that passes between king and 
subject. The subject kneels in homage to the kings 
of the earth: the heavenly king takes his subject in 
his arms. This is the sign of the kingdom between 
them. This is the all-pervading relation of the king- 
dom. 

To give one glance backward, then : 

To receive the child because God receives it, or for 
its humanity, is one thing; to receive it because it is 
like God, or for its childhood, is another. The former 
will do little to destroy ambition. Alone it might argue 
only a wider scope to it, because it admits all men to 


the arena of the strife. But the latter strikes at the very 


16 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, © 


root of emulation. As soon as even service is done for 
the honour and not for the service-sake, thé doer is that 
moment outside the kingdom. But when we receive the 
child in the name of Christ, the very childhood that we 
receive to our arms is humanity. We love its huma- 
nity in its childhood, for childhood: is the deepest heart 
of humanity—its divine heart; and so in the name of 
the child we receive all humanity. Therefore, although 
the lesson is not about humanity, but about childhood, 
it returns upon our race, and we receive. our race with 
wider arms and deeper heart. There is, then, no other 
lesson lost by receiving this; no heartlessness showr. 
in insisting that the child was a lovable—a childlike 
child. 

If there is in heaven a picture of that wonderful 
teaching, doubtless we shall see represented in it a dim 
childhood shining from the faces of all that group of 
disciples of which the centre is the Son of God with a 
child in his arms. The childhece. dim in the faces of 


the men, must be shining trustfully clear in the face of the 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. 17 
child. But in the face of the Lord himself, the childhood 
will be triumphant—all his wisdom, all his truth up- 
holding that radiant serenity of faith in his father. 
Verily, O Lord, this childhood is life. Verily, O Jord, 
when thy tenderness shall have made the world great, 
then, children like thee, will all men smile in the face 
of the great God. 

But to advance now to the highest point of this teach- 
ing of our Lord: “ He that receiveth me receiveth him 
that sent me.” To receive a child in the name of God 
is to receive God himself; How to receive him? 
As alone he can be received,—by knowing him as 
he is. To know him is to have himin us. And that 
we may know him, let us now receive this revelation of 
him, in the words of our Lord himself, Here is the 
argument ‘of highest import founded upon the teaching 
of our master in the utterance before us. 

God is represented in Jesus, for that God is like 
Jesus: Jesus is represented in the child, for that Jesus 


is like the child. Therefore God is represented in the 
B 


18 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


child, for that he is like the child. God is child-like. 
In the true vision of this fact lies the receiving of God 
in the child. 

Having reached this point, I have nothing more to do 
with the argument ; for if the Lord meant this—that is, 
if this be a truth, he that is able to receive it will receive 
it: he that hath ears to hear it will hear it. -For our 
Lord’s arguments are for the presentation of the truth, 
and the truth carries its own conviction to him who is 
able to receive it. 

But the word of one who has seen this truth may help 
the dawn of a like perception in those who keep their 
faces turned towards the east and its aurora; for men 
may have eyes, and, seeing dimly, want to see more. 
Therefore let us brood a little over the idea itself, and 
see whether it will not come forth so as to commend 
itself to that spirit, which, one with the human spirit 
where it dwells, searches the deep things of God. For, 
although the true heart may at first be shocked at the 


truth, as Peter was shocked when he said, “That be 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. bas) 


far from thee, Lord,” yet will it, after a season, receive 
it and rejoice in it. 

J.et me then ask, do you believe in the Incarnation? 
And if you do, let me ask further, Was Jesus ever less 
divine than God? I answer for you, Never. He was 
lower, but never less divine. Was he not a child then? 
You answer, “ Yes, but not like other children.” I ask, 
“Did he not look like other children?” If he looked 
like them and was not like them, the whole was a de- 
ception, a masquerade at best. I say he was a child, 
whatever more he might be. God is man, and ia- 
finitely more. Our Lord became flesh, but did not 
become man. He took on him the form of man: he 
was man already, And he was, is, and ever shall be 
divinely childlike. He could never have been a child 
if he would ever have ceased to bea child, for in him 
the transient found nothing. Childhood belongs to the 
‘divine nature. Obedience, then, is as divine as Wul, 
Service as divine as Rule. How? Because they are one 


in their nature; they are both a doing of the truth. 


20 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 
The love in them is the same. The Fatherhood and 
the Sonship are one, save that the Fatherhood looks 
down lovingly, and the Sonship looks up lovingly. Love 
is all, And God is all in all. He is ever seeking to 
get down to us—to be the divine man to us. And we 
are ever saying, “ That be far from thee, Lord!” We 
are careful, in our unbelief. over the divine dignity, of 
which he is too grand to think. Better pleasing to God, 
-it needs little daring to say, is the audacity of Job, who, 
rushing into his presence, and flinging the door of his 
presence-chamber to the wall, like a troubled, it may be 
angry, but yet faithful child, calls aloud in the ear of 
him whose perfect Fatherhood he has yet to learn; 
“Am Ia sea or a whale, that thou settest a watch over 
me?” 

Let us dare, then, to climb the height of divine truth 
to which this utterance of our Lord would lead us, 

Does it not lead us up hither: that the devotion of 
God to his creatures is perfect? that he does not think 


about himself but about them? that he wants nothing 


ee 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. 25. 


— —— - —_. 


for himself, but finds his blessedness in the outgoing of 
blessedness ? 

Ah! it is a terrible—shall it be a lonely glory this? 
We will draw near with -our human response, our aban- 
donment of self in the faith of Jesus. He gives himself 
to us—shall not we give ourselves to him? Shall we not: 
give ourselves to each other whom he loves ? 

For when is the child the ideal child in our eyes and 
to our hearts? Is it not when with gentle hand he takes 
his father by the beard, and turns that father’s face up 
to his brothers and sisters to kiss? when even the 
lovely selfishness of love-seeking has vanished, and the 
heart is absorbed in loving ? 

In this, then, is God like the child: that he is simply 
and altogether our friend, our father—our more than’ 
friend, father, and mother—our infinite love-perfect God. 
Grand and strong beyond all that human imagination 
can conceive of poet-thinking and kingly action, he is 
delicate beyond all that. human tenderness can con- 


ceive of husband or wife, homely beyond all that human 


22 ‘ UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


heart can conceive of father or mother. He has not 
two thoughts about us. With him all is simplicity of 
purpose and meaning and effort and end—namely, that 
we should be as he is, think the same thoughts, mean 
the same things, possess the same blessedness. It is so 
plain that any one may see it, every one ought to see it, 
every one shall see it. It must be so. He is utterly 
true and good to us, nor shall anything withstand his 
will. 

How terribly, then, have the theologians misrepre- 
sented God in the measures of the low and showy, not 
the lofty and simple humanities! Nearly all of them re- 
present him as a great King on a grand throne, think- 
ing how grand he is, and making it the business of his 
being and the end of his universe to keep up his glory, 
wielding the bolts of a Jupiter against them that take 
his name invain. They would not allow this, but follow 
out what they say, and it comes much to this. Brothers,. 
have you found our king? There he is, kissing little 


children and saying they are like God. There he is at 


eee — nk aes _=c__ SS 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST, 23 


table with the head of a fisherman lying on his bosom, 
and somewhat heavy at heart that even he, the beloved 
disciple, cannot yet understand him well, The simplest 
peasant who loves his children and his sheep were—no, 
not a truer, for the other is false, but—a true type of our 
God beside that monstrosity of a monarch. 

The God who is ever uttering himself in the change- 
ful profusions of nature ; who takes millions of years, 
to form a soul that shall understand him and be 
blessed ; who never needs to be, and never is, in 
haste; who welcomes the simplest thought of truth 
or beauty as the return for seed he has sown upon 
the old fallows of eternity ; who rejoices in the response 
of a faltering moment to the age-long cry of his wisdom 
in the streets; the God of music, of painting, of build- 
ing, the Lord of Hosts, the God of mountains and 
oceans ; whose laws go forth from one unseen point 
of wisdom, and thither return without an atom of 
loss; the God of history working in time unto chris- 


tianity; this God is the God of little children, and 


24 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


he alone can be perfectly, abandonedly simple and 
devoted. The deepest, purest love cf a woman has 
its well-spring in him. Our longing desires can no 
more exhaust the fulness of the treasures of the God- 
head, than our imagination can touch their measure. 
Of him not a thought, not a joy, not a hope of 
one of his creatures can pass unseen; and while 
one of them remains unsatisfied, he is not Lord over | 
all. 

Therefore, with angels and with archangels, with 
the spirits of the just made perfect, with the little 
children of the kingdom, yea, with the Lord him- 
self, and for all them that know him not, we praise 
and magnify and laud his name in itself, saying 
Our Father. We do not draw back for that we are 
unworthy, nor even for that we are hard-hearted and 
care not for the good. For it is his childlikeness that 
makes him our God and Father. The perfection of 
his relation to us swallows up all our imperfections, 


all our defects, all our evils; for our childhood is 


THE CHILD IN THE MIDST. 25 


born of his fatherhood. That man is perfect in 
faith who can come to God in the utter dearth of 
his feelings and his desires, without a glow or an 
aspiration, with the weight of low thoughts, failures, 
neglects, and wandering forgetfulness, and say to him, 
“Thou art my refuge, because thou art my home.” 

Such a faith will not lead to presumption. The man 
who can pray such a prayer will know better than 
another, that God is not mocked; that he is not a 
man that he should repent; that tears and entreaties 
will not work on him to the breach of one of his 
laws; that for God to give a man because he asked 
for it that which was not in harmony with his laws 
of truth and right, would be to damn him—to cast 
him into the outer darkness. And he knows that out 
of that prison the childlike, imperturbable God will 
let no man come till he has paid the uttermost 
farthing. 

And if he should forget this, the God to whom 


he belongs does not forget it, does not forget him 


26 UNSPOKEN SERMONS,» 

Life is no series of chances with a few providences 
sprinkled between to keep up a justly failing belief, 
but one providence of God; and the man shall not 
live long before life itself shall remind him, it may 
be in agony of soul, of that which he has forgotten. 
When he prays for comfort, the answer may come in 
dismay and terror and the turning aside of the Father’s 
countenance ; for love itself will, for love’s sake, turn 
the countenance away from that which is not lovely ; 
and he will have to read, written upon the dark wall 
of his imprisoned conscience, the words, awful and 


glorious, Our God is @ consuming fire, 


_ THE CONSUMING FIRE. 


Our God is a consuming fire. —Hepraws 
xii 29. 

NOREEN G is inexorable but love. Love which 
will yield to prayer is imperfect and poor. Nor 
is it then the love that yields, but its alloy. For if at 
the voice of entreaty love conquers displeasure, it” is 
love asserting itself, not love yielding its claims. It is 
not love that grants a boon unwillingly ; still less is it 
love that answers a prayer to the wrong and hurt of him 

who prays. Love is one, and love is changeless. 

For love loves unto purity. Love has ever in view 
the absolute loveliness of that which it beholds. Where 
loveliness is incomplete, and love cannot love its fill of 
loving, it spends itself to make more lovely, that it may 


love more; it strives for perfection, even that itself may 


28 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


be perfected—not in itself, but in the object. As 
it was love that first created humanity, so even human 
love, in proportion to its divinity, will go on creating 
the beautiful for its own outpouring. There is nothing 
eternal but that which loves and can be loved, and love 
is ever climbing towards the consummation when such 
shall be the universe, imperishable, divine. 

Therefore all that is not beautiful in the beloved, all 
that comes between and is not of love’s kind, must be 
destroyed. 

And our God is a consuming fire. 

If this be hard to understand, it is as the simple, abso- 
lute truth is hard to understand. It may be centuries of 
ages before a man comes to see a truth—ages of strife, of 
effort, of aspiration. But when once he does see it, it is so 
plain that he wonders he could have lived without see- 
ing it. That he did not understand it sooner was simply 
and only that he did not see it. To see a truth, to know 
what it is, to understand it, and to love it, are all one. 


There is many a motion towards it, many a misery for 


THE CONSUMING FIKF. 29 
Oe aE ae 
want of it, many a cry of the conscience against the 
neglect of it, many a dim longing for it as an unknown 
need before at length the eyes come awake, and the 
darkness of the dreamful night yields to the light of the 
sun of truth. But once beheld it is for ever. To see 
one divine fact is to stand face to face with essential 
eternal life. 

For this vision of truth God has been working for ages 
of ages. For this simple condition, this apex of life, upon 
which a man wonders like a child that he cannot make 
other men see as he sees, the whole labour of God’s 
science, history, poetry—from the time when the earth 
gathered itself into a lonely drop of fire from the red rim 
of the driving sun-wheel to the time when Alexander John 
Scott worshipped him from its face—was evolving truth 
upon truth in lovely vision, in torturing law, never lying, 
never repenting ; and for this will the patience of God 
labour while there is yet a human soul whose eyes have 
not been opened, whose child-heart has not yet been 


born in him. For this one condition of humanity, this 


30 UNSPOKEN SERMONS.- 

simple beholding, has all the outthinking of God flowed 
in forms innumerable and changeful from the foundation 
of the world; and for this, too, has the divine destruc- 
tion been going forth; that his life might be our life, 
that in us,.too, might dwell that same consuming fire 
which is essential love. 

Let us look at the utterance of the apostle which 
is crowned with this lovely terror: “Our God is a 
consuming fire.” 

“Wherefore, we receiving a kingdom which cannot 
be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve 
God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, for 
our God is a consuming fire.’"—We have received a 
kingdom that cannot be moved—whose nature is im- 
movable: let us have grace to serve the Consuming 
Fire, our God, with divine fear ; not with the fear that 
cringes and craves, but with the bowing down of all 
thoughts, all delights, all loves before him who is the 
life of them all, and will have them all pure. The 


_kingdom he has given us cannot be moved, because 


THE CONSUMING FIRE, 31 


it has nothing weak in it: it is of the eternal world, 
the worid of being, of truth. We, therefore, must 
worship him with a fear pure as the kingdom is 
unshakeable. He will shake heaven and earth, that 
only the unshakeable may remain, (verse 27): he is a 
consuming fire, that only that which cannot ke con- 
sumed may stand forth eternal. It is the nature of 
God, so terribly pure that it destroys all that is not 
pure as fire, which demands like purity in our wor- 
ship. He will have purity. It is not that the fire 
will burn us if we do not worship thus; but that the 
fire will burn us until we worship ‘thus; yea, will go 
on burning within us after all that is foreign to it has 
yielded to its force, no longcr with pain and con- 
‘suming, but as the highest consciousness of life, the 
presence of God. When evil, which alone is consum- 
able, shall have passed away in his fire from the 
dwellers in the immovable kingdom, the nature of 
man shall look the nature of God in the face, and 


his fear shall then be pure; for an eternal, that is a 


———_———— ee ee 


32 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


holy fear, must spring from a knowledge of the nature, 
not from a sense of the power. But that which can- 
not be consumed must be one within itself, a simple 
existence ; therefore in sucha soul the fear towards 
God will be one with the homeliest love. Yea, the 
fear of God will cause a man to flee, not from him, 
but from himself; not from him, but to him, the 
Father of himself, in terror lest he should do Him 
wrong or his neighbour wrong. And the first words 
which follow for the setting forth of that grace where- 
by we may serve God acceptably are these — “ Let 
brotherly love continue.” To love our brother is to 
worship the Consuming Fire. 

The symbol of the consuming fire would seem to have 
been suggested to the writer by the fire that burned on 
the mountain of the old law. That fire was part of the 
revelation of God there made to the Israelites. Nor 
was it the first instance of sucha revelation. The symbol 
of God’s presence, before waich Moses had to put off 


his shoes, and to which it was not safe for him to draw 


THE CONSUMING FIRE, ‘3% 
near, was.a fire that did not consume the biish in which it 
burned. Both revelations were of terror. But the same 


symbol employed by a writer of the New Testament 


-should mean more, not than it meant before, but than 


it was before employed to express; for it could not 


have been employed to express more than it was pos- 


‘sible for them to perceive. What else than terror could 


a nation of slaves, into whose very souls the rust of their 
chains had eaten, in whose memory lingered the smoke 
of the flesh-pots of Egypt, who, rather than not eat of 
the food they liked best, would haye gone back to the 
house of their bondage—what else could such a nation 
see in that fire than terror and destruction? How 
should they think of purification by fire? They had 
yet no such condition of mind as could generate such a 
thought. And if they had had the thought, the notion of 
the suffering involved would soon have overwhelmed the 
notion of purification. Nor would such a nation have 


listened to any teaching that was not supported by 


‘terror. Fear was that for which they were fi. They 


Cc 


34 . UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


had no worship for any being of whom they had not 
to be afraid. . 

Was then this show upon Mount Sinai a device to 
move obedience, such as bad nurses employ with 
children? a hint of vague and false horror? Was it 
not a true revelation of God? 

If it was not a true revelation, it was none at all, and 
the story is either false, or the whole display was a poli- 
tical trick of Moses. ‘Those who can read the mind of 
Moses will not easily believe the latter, and those who 
‘understand the scope of the pretended revelation, will 
see no reason for supposing the former. That which 
would be politic, were it a deception, is not therefore 
excluded from the possibility of another source. Some 
people believe so little in a cosmos or ordered world, that 
the very argument of fitness is a reason for unbelief. 

At all events, if God showed them these things, God 
showed them what was true. It was a revelation of 
himself. He will not put on a mask. He puts on a 


face. He will not speak out of flaming fire if that flam- 
Y 


THE CONSUMING FIRE 35 


ing fire is alien to him, if there is nothing in him for 
that flaming fire to reveal Be his children ever so 
brutish, he will not terrify them with a lie. 

It was a revelation, but a partial one; a true symbol, 
not a final vision. 

No revelation can be other than partial. If for true 
revelation a man must be told all the truth, then farewell 
to revelation ; yea, farewell to the sonship. For what 
revelation, other than a partial, can the highest spiritual 
condition receive of the infinite God? But it is not 
therefore untrue because it is partial. Relatively to a 
lower condition of the receiver, a more partial revelation 
might be truer than that would be which constituted a 
fuller revelation to one in a higher condition ; for the 
former might reveal much to him, the latter might 
reveal nothing. Only, whatever it might reveal, if its 
nature were such as to preclude development and 
growth, thus chaining the man to its incompleteness, 
it would be but a false revelation fighting against all the 


“divine Jaws of human existence. The true revelation 


36 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


rouses the desire to know more by the truth of its in- 
completeness. 

Here was a nation at its lowest : could it receive any- 
thing but a partial revelation; a revelation of fear? How 
should the Hebrews be other than terrified at that 
‘which was opposed” 'to’ all they knew of themselves, 

‘beings. judging it g00d to honour a golden calf? Such 
as they were, they did well to be afraid: ‘They were 
‘in a better condition, acknowledging if only:a terror 
‘above them, flaming on that unknown mountain 
‘height, than stooping to worship the idol below them. 
Fear is nobler than ‘sensuality. Fear is better than 
no God, better than a god made with hands. In that 
fear lay deep hidden the sense of the infinite. The 
worship of fear is true, although very low ; and though 
not acceptable to God in itself, for only the worship 
‘of spirit and of. truth is acceptable to him, yet even in 
his sight it is precious. For he regards men not as 
they are merely, but as they shall be; not as they 


‘shall be merely, but as they are now growing, or 


THE CONSUMING FIRE 37 


— 


capable of growing, towards that image after which he 
made them that they might grow to it. Therefore a 
thousand stages, éach in itself all but valueless, are of 
inestimable. worth as the necessary and connected: 
gradations of an infinite progress. A condition which, 
of declension would indicate a devil, may of growth 
indicate a saint. So far then the revelation, not being 
final any more than completé, and calling forth the best. 
of which they were now capable, so making future and, 
higher revelation possible, may have been a true one. 

. But.we ‘shall find that this very xevelation of fire is 
itself, in a higher sense, true to the mind of the 
rejoicing saint as to the mind of the trembling sinner. 
For the former sees farther into the meaning of the 
fire, and knows better what it will do to him. It is 
a symbol which needed not to be superseded, only 
unfolded. While men take part wth their sins, while 
they feel as if, separated from their sins, they would 
be no longer themselves, how can they understand 


that the lightning word is a Saviour—that word which 


338 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


pierces to the dividing between the man and the evil, 
which will slay the sin and give life to the sinner? 
Can it be any comfort to them to be told that God 
loves them so that. he will burn them clean. Can the 
cleansing of the fire appear to them attything beyond 
what it must always, more or less, be—a process of 
torture? They do not want to be clean, and they 
cannot bear to be tortured. Can they then do other, 
or can we desire that they should do other, than fear 
God, even with the fear of the wicked, until they 
learn to love him with the love of the holy. To 
them Mount Sinai is crowned with the signs of ven- 
geance. And is not God ready to do unto them even 
as they fear, though with another feeling and a 
different end from any which they are capable of 
supposing? He is against sin: in so far as, and while, 
they and sin are one, he is against them—against 
their desires, their aims, their fears, and their hopes ; 
and thus he is altogether and always for them. That 


thunder and lightning and tempest, that blackness 


THE CONSUMING FIRE, 39 


torn with the sound of a trumpet, that visible horror 
billowed with the voice of words, was all but a faint 
image to the senses of the slaves of what God thinks’ 
and feels against vileness and selfishness, of the un- 
rest of unassuageable repulsion with which he regards 
such conditions; that so the stupid people, fearing 
somewhat to do as they would, might leave a little 
room for that grace to grow in them, which would at 
length make them see that evil, and not fire, is the 
fearful thing ; yea, so transform them that they would 
gladly rush up into the trumpet-blast of Sinai to 
escape the flutes around the golden calf. Could they 
have understood this, they would have needed no 
Mount Sinai. It was a true, and of necessity a par- 
tial revelation—partial in order to be true. 
Even Moses, the man of God, was not ready to 
receive the revelation in store; not ready, although 
from love to his people he prayed that God would 
even blot him out of his book of life. If this means 


that he offered to give himself as a sacrifice instead of 


40 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, = 


them, it would show reason enough why he could not: 
be glorified with the vision of the Redeemer. ‘For so 
he would think to appease God, not seeing that God 
was as tender as himself, not seeing that God is the 
Reconciler, the Redeemer, not seeing that the sacrifice 
of the heart is ‘the atonement for which alone he 
cares. . He would be blotted out, that their names 
might be kept in. Certainly when God told him that he 
that had sinned should suffer for it, Moses could not 
see that this was the kindest thing that God could do, 
But I doubt if that was what Moses meant. It seems 
rather the utterance of a divine despair :—he would not 
survive the children of his people. He did not care 
for a love that would save him alone, and send to the 
dust those thousands of calf-worshipping brothers and 
sisters. But in either case, how much could Moses 
have understood, if he had seen the face instead of 
the back of that form that passed the clift of the rock 
amidst the thunderous vapours of Sinai? Had that 


form turned and that face looked upon him, the face 


THE CONSUMING FIRB 4r. 


of him who was more man than any man; the face 
through which the divine emotion would, in the ages 
to come, manifest itself to the eyes of men, bowed, 
it might well be, at such a moment, in anticipation 
of the crown with which the children. of the people 
for whom Moses pleaded with his life, would. one day 
crown him ; the face of him who was bearing and was 
yet to bear their griefs and carry their sorrows, who’ 
is now bearing our griefs and carrying our sorrows; 
the face of the Son of God, who, instead of accepting 
the sacrifice of one of his creatures to satisfy his 
justice or support his dignity, gave himself utterly 
unto them, and therein to the Father by doing his 
lovely will; who suffered unto the death, not that men 
might not suffer, but that their suffering might be like 
his, and lead them up to his perfection ; if that face, I 
say, had turned and looked upon Moses, would Moses 
have lived? Would he not have died, not of splendour, 
not of sorrow, (terror was not there,) but of the actual 


sight of the incomprehensible? If infinite mystery had 


42 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


not slain him, would he not have gone about dazed, 
doing nothing, having no more any business that 
he could do in the world, seeing God was to him 
altogether unknown? For thus a full revelation would 
not only be no revelation, but the destruction of all 
revelation. 

“May it not then hurt to say that God is Love, all 
love, and nothing other than love? It is not enough 
to answer that such is the truth, even granted that it is. 
Upon your own showing, too much revelation may hurt 
by dazzling and blinding.” 

There is a great difference between a mystery of God 
that no man understands, and a mystery of God laid 
hold of, let it be but by one single man. The latter is 
already a revelation; and, passing through that man’s 
mind, will be so presented, it may be so febly pre- 
sented, that it will not hurt his fellows. Let God 
conceal as he will: (although I believe he is ever 
destroying concealment, ever giving all that he can, 


all that men can receive at his hands, that he does. 


THE CONSUMING FIRE, 43 


not want to conceal anything, but to reveal every- 
thing,) the light which any man has received is not 
to be put under a bushel; it is for him and his 
fellows. In sowing the seed he will not withhold 
his hand because there are thorns and stony places 
and waysides. He will think that in some cases 
even a bird of the air may carry the matter, that 
the good seed may be too much for the thorns, that 
that which withers away upon the stony place may 
yet leave there, by its own decay, a deeper soil for 
the next seed to root itself in. Besides, they only 
can receive the doctrine who have ears to hear. If 
the selfish man could believe it, he would misinterpret 
it; but he cannot believe it. It is not possible that 
he should. But the loving soul, oppressed by wrong 
teaching, or partial truth claiming to be the whole, 
will hear, understand, rejoice. 

For, when we say that’God is Love, do we teach 
men that their fear of him is groundless?. No. As 


much as they fear will come upon them, possibly far 


a UNSPOKEN SERMONS. - 


more. But there is’ something beyond their fear,— 
a divine fate which they cannot withstand, bécause it 
works along with the human individuality which the 
divine, individuality has created in them. The wrath 
will consume ‘what they ca/7 themselves; so that the 
selves God made shall appear, coming out with ten- 
fold consciousnéss of being, ahd bringing with them 
all that made the blessedness of the life the ten tried 
to lead without God. They will know that now first are 
they fully themselves. ° The avaricious, weary, selfish, 
suspicious old man shall have_passed’ away. The 
young, ever young self, will remain. That which 
they zhought themselves shall have vanished: that 
which they /e/¢ themselves, though they misjudged 
their own feelings, shall remain—remain glorified in 
repentant hope. For that which cannot be shaken 
shall remain. That which is immortal in God Lae 
remain in man. The death that is in them shall be 
consumed, 


It is the law of Nature—that is, the law of God— 


THE CONSUMING FIRE. a5 


that all that is destructible shall be déstroyed.: When 
that which is immortal buries itself in the destructible 
—when it receives all the messages from without, 
through the surrounding region of decadence, and 
none from within, from the eternal doors—it cannot, 
though immortal still, know its own immortality. The 
destructible must be burned out of it, or begin to be 
‘burned out of it, before it can partake of eternal life. 
When that is all burnt away and gone, then it has eter- 
nal life. Or rather, when the fire of eternal life: has 
possessed a man, then the destructible is gone utterly, 
and he is pure. Many a man’s work must be burned, 
that by that very burning he may be saved—“so as 
by fire.” Away in smoke go the lordships, the Rabbi- 
hoods of the world, and the man who acquiesces in 
the burning is saved by the fire; for it has destroyed 
the destructible, which is the vantage point of the 
deathly, which would destroy both body and soul in 
hell. If still he cling to that which can be burned, 


the burning goes on deeper and deeper into his bosom, 


46 UNSPOKEN SERMONS.” 


till it reaches the roots of the falsehood that enslaves 
him—possibly by looking like the truth. 

The man who loves God, and is not yet ptre, courts 
the burning of God. Nor is it always torture. The 
fire shows itself sometimes only as light—still it will 
be fire of purifying. The consuming fire is just the 
original, the active form of Purity,—that which makes 
pure, that which is indeed Love, the creative energy 
of God. Without purity there can be as no creation 
so no persistence. That which is not pure is cor- 
ruptible, and corruption cannot inherit incorrup- 
tion. 

The man whose deeds are evil, fears the burning. Dut 
the burning will not come the less that he fears it or 
denies it. Escape is hopeless. For Love is inexorable. 
Our God is a consuming fire. He shall not come out 
till he has paid the uttermost farthing. 

If the man resists the burning of God, the consuming 
fire of Love, a terrible doom awaits him, and its day 


‘will come. He shall be cast into the outer darkness 


THE CONSUMING FIRE. 47 


wno hates the fire of God. What sick dismay shall then 
seize upon him! For let a man think and care ever so 
little about God, he does not therefore exist without 
God. God is here with him, ‘upholding, warming, de- 
lighting, teaching him—making life a good thing to him. 
God gives him himself, though he knows it not. But 
when God withdraws from a man as far as that can be 
without the man’s ceasing to be; when the man feels 
himself abandoned, hanging in a ceaseless vertigo of 
existence upon the verge of the gulf of his being, without 
support, without refuge, without aim, without end—for 
the. soul has no weapons wherewith to destroy herself— 
with no inbreathing of joy, with nothing to make life 
good ;—then will he listen in agony for the faintest sound 
of life from the closed door; then, if the moan of suffer- 
ing humanity ever reaches the ear of the outcast of dark- 
ness, he will be ready to rush into the very heart of the 
Consuming Fire to know life once more, to change this 
terror of sick negation, of unspeakable death, for that 


‘region of painful hope. Imagination cannot mislead us 


48 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


into too much ‘horror of being without God—that one 
living death.” Is not this 


to be worse than worst 
Of those that lawless and incertain thoughts 
ares howling ? 


But with this divine difference : that the outer dark. 
ness is but the most dreadful form of the consuming 
fire—the fire ont light—the darkness visible, the 
black flame. God hath withdrawn himself, but not lost 
his hold. His face i is faned: away, but his hand i is laid 
Ror him still. His heart has ceased to beat into the 
man’s heart, but he keeps him alive by his fire. And 
that fire will 5) ena and burning on in him, as in 
the ener sae who is not yet pure as he is pure. | 

But at length, O God, wilt thou not cast Death and 
Hell into the re oF Fire—even into thine own con- 
suming self? Death shall then die everlastingly, 


And Hell itself will pass away, 
And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day. 


Then indeed wilt thou be all in all. For then our poor 


brothers and sisters, every one—O God, we trust in 


THE CONSUMING FIRE. 49 


—— 


thee, the Consuming Fire—shall have been burnt clean 
and brought home. -For if their moans, myriads of ages 
away, would turn heaven for us into hell—shall a man be 
more merciful than God? Shall, of all his glories, his 
mercy alone not be infinite? Shall a brother love a 
‘brother miore than The Father loves a son ?—more than 
The Brother Christ loves his brother? Would he not 
die yet again to save one brother more? 

As for us, now will we come to thee, our Consuming 
Fire. And thou wilt not burn us more than we can 
bear. ‘But thou wilt bun us. And although thou seem 
to slay us, yet will we trust in thee even for that which 
thou hast not spoken, if by any means at length we 
‘may attain unto the blessedness of those who have not 


seen ana yet have believed. 


THE HIGHER FAITH. 


Fesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thot 
hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed ara 
they that have not seen, and yet have be- 
Hieved.—Joun xx. 29. 


Pas aspiring child is often checked by the dull 

disciple who has learned his lessons so imper- 
fectly that he has never got beyond his school-books. 
Full of fragmentary rules, he has perceived the principle 
of none of them. The child draws near to him with 
some outburst of unusual feeling, some scintillation of a 
lively hope, some wide-reaching imagination that draws 
into the circle of religious theory the world of nature, 
and the yet wider world of humanity, for to the child 
the doings of the Father fill the spaces; he has not yet 
learned to divide between God and nature, between 


Providence and grace, between love and benevolence ;— 


Ser 


THE HIGHER FAITH. 5t 


the child comes, I say, with his heart full, and the 
answer he receives from the dull disciple is—“ God has 
said nothing about that in his word, therefore we have 
no right to believe anything about it. It is better 
not to speculate on such matters. However desirable 
it may seem to us, we have nothing to do with it. It 
is not revealed.” For such a man is incapable of sus- 
pecting, that what has remained hidden from him may 
have been revealed to the babe. With the authority, 
therefore, of years and ignorance, he forbids the child, 
for he believes in no revelation but the Bible, and in 
the word of that alone. For him all revelation has 
ceased with and been buried in the Bible, to be with 
difficulty exhumed, and, with much questioning of the 
decayed form, re-united into a rigid skeleton of meta- 
physical and legal contrivance for letting the love of 
God have its way unchecked by the other perfections of - 
his being. 

But to the man who would live throughout the whole 


divine form of his being, not confining himself to one 


52 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, | 


brokén corner of his kingdom, and leaving the rest to 
the demons that haunt such. deserts, a thousand ques- 
tions will arise to which the Bible does not even allude. 
Has he indeed, nothing to do with such? Do they lie 
beyond the sphere of his responsibility? ‘Leave them,” 
says the dull disciple. ‘I cannot,” returns the man: 
“Not only does that degree of peace of mind without 
which action is impossible, depend upon the answers to 
these questions, but my conduct itself must correspond 
to these answers.” — “Leave them at least till God 
chooses to explain, if he ever will.” “No. Questions 
imply answers. He has put the questions in my heart; 
he holds the answers in his, -I will seek them from 
him: . I will wait, but not till I have knocked. I 
will be patient, but not till I have asked. I will seek 
until I find. He has something for me. My prayer 
shall go up unto the God of my life.” 

Sad, indeed, would the whole matter be, if the Bible 
had told.us everything God-meant-us to believe. But 


herein is the Bible itself greatly-wronged. It nowhere 


THE HIGHER FAITH. 53 


—) 
lays claim to be regarded us the Word, the Way, the ( 
Truth. The Bible leads us to Jesus, the inexhaustible; 
the ever unfolding Revelation of God. "It is Christ “in 
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom: and know- 
ledge,” not the Bible, save as leading to him. And 
why are we told that these treasures dre 47d in him who 
is the Revelation of God? Is it that we should despair of 
finding them and cease to seek them? Are they not hid 
in him that they may be revealed to us in due time— 
that is, when we are in need of them? Is not their hid- 
ing in him the mediatorial step towards their unfolding 
in us? Is he not the Truth ?—the Truth to men? Is 
he not the High Priest of his brethren, to answer all the 
troubled questionings that arise in their dim humanity } 
For it is his heart which 

Contains of good, wise, just, the perfect shape. 
Didymus answers, “No doubt, what we know not 
now, we shall know hereafter.” Certainly there may 
be things which the mere passing into another stage of 


existence will illuminate; but the questions that come 


54 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


here, must be inquired into here, and if not answered 
here, then there too until they be answered. ‘There is 
more hid in Christ than we shall ever learn, here or there 
either; but they that begin first to inquire will soonest 
be gladdened with revelation ; and with them he will be 
best pleased, for the slowness of his disciples troubled 
him of old. To say that we must wait for the other 
world, to know the mind of him who came to this 
world to give himself to us, seems to me the foolishness 
of a worldly and lazy spirit. The Son of God és the 
Teacher of men, giving to them of his Spirit—that Spirit 
which manifests the deep things of God, being to a man 
the mind of Christ. The great heresy of the Church of 
the present day is unbelief in this Spirit. The mass of 
the Church does not believe that the Spirit has a reve- 
lation for every man individually—a revelation as dif- 
ferent from the revelation of the Bible, as the food in the 
moment of passing into. living brain and nerve differs 
from the bread and meat. If we were once filled with 


the mind of Christ, we should know that the Bible had 


a a a ee 


THE HIGHER FAITH. 55 


done its work, was fulfilled, and had for us passed 
away, that thereby the Word of our God might abide 
for ever. The one use of the Bible is to make us look 
at Jesus, that through him we might know his Father 
and our Father, his God and our God. Till we thus 
know Him, let us hold the Bible dear as the moon of 
our darkness, by which we travel towards the east ; not 
dear as the sun whence her light cometh, and towards 
which we haste, that, walking in the sun himself, we may 
no more need the mirror that reflected his absent 
brightness. 

But this doctrine of the Spirit is not my end now, 
although, were it not true, all our religion would be 
vain, that of St Paul and that of Socrates. What I 
want to say and show, if I may, is, that a man will 
please God better by believing some things that are 
not told him, than by confining his faith to those 
things that are expressly said——said to arouse in us the 
truth-seeing faculty, the spiritual desire, the prayer for the 


good things which God will give to them that ask him, 


56 UNSPOKEN: SERMONS. 

“But is not this dangetous doctrine? Will not a 
man’ be taught thus to believe. the things he likes: 
best, even to pray for that which he. likes best? And 
will he not grow artogant in his confidence?” 

If it be true that the Spirit strives with our spirit; 
it it be true that God teaches mén, we may safely’ 
leave those dreaded results to him. If the man is 
of the Lord’s’ company, he is safer with him than 
with thosé who would secure their safety by hang 
ing on thé ‘outskirts and daring nothing. If he is not 
taught of God in that which he hopes for, God will let’ 
him know it. He will receive something élse than he 
prays for. If he can pray to God for anything not 
good, the answer will come in the flames of that con- 
suming fire. These will soon bring him to some of 
his spiritual senses. But it will be far better for him 
to be thus sharply tutored, than to go on a snail’s 
pace in the journey of the spiritual life. And for 
atrogance, I have seen nothing breed it faster or in 


more offensive forms than the worship of the letter. 


THE HIGHER FAITH. 57 


And to whom shall a man, whom the blesséd God 
has made, look for what he likes best, but to that 
blessed God? If we have been indeed enabled ‘tc 
see that God is our Father, as the Lord taught us, 
let us advance from that truth to understand that. he 
is far more than father—that his nearness to us is be 
yond the embodiment of the highest idea of father ; 
that the fatherhood of God is but a step towards the 
Godhood for them that can receive it} What a man 
likes best may be God’s will, may be the voice of the 
Spirit striving with his spirit, not against it; and if, 
as I have said, it be not so—if the thing he asks 
is not according to his will—there is that consum- 
ing fire. The danger lies, not in asking from God 
what is not good, nor even in hoping to receive it 
from him, but in not asking him, in not having 
him of our council. Nor will the fact that we dare 
not inquire his will, preserve us from the necessity of 
acting in some such matter as we call unrevealed, and 


where shall we find ourselves then? Nor, once more, 


58 UNSIOKEN SERMONS. 


for such a disposition of mind is it likely that the 
book itself will contain much of a revelation. 

The whole matter may safely be left to God. 

But I doubt if a man cam ask anything from God 
that is bad. Surely one who has begun to pray to 
him is child enough to know the bad from the good 
when it has come so near him, and dares not pray 
for that. If you refer me to David praying such fear- 
ful prayers against his enemies, I answer, you must 
read them by your knowledge of the man himself and 
his history. Remember that this is he who, with 
the burning heart of an eastern, yet, when his grea 
est enemy was given into his hands, instead of taking 
the vengeance of an eastern, contented himself with 
cutting off the skirt of his garment. It was justice 
and right that he craved in his soul, although his 
prayers took a wild form of words. God heard him, 
and gave him what contented him. In a good man 
at least, “revenge is,” as Lord Bacon says, “a kind 


of wild justice,” and is easily satisfied. The heart's 


ne eceinees = 


THE WIGHER FAITH, 59 


desire upon such a one’s enemies is best met and granted 
when the hate is changed into love and compassion. 

But it is about hopes rather than prayers that I wish 
to write. 

What should I think of my child, if I found that he 
limited his faith in me and hope from me to the few pro- 
mises he had heard me utter! The faith that limits it- 
self to the promises of God, seems to me to partake of 
the paltry character of such a faith in my child—good 
enough for a Pagan, but for a Christian a miserable and 
wretched faith. Those who rest in such a faith would 
feel yet more comfortable if they had God’s bond in- 
stead of his word, which they regard not as the out- 
come of his character, but as a pledge of his honour. 
They try to believe in the truth of his word, but the 
tryth of his Being, they understand not. In his oath 
they persuade themselves that they put confidence : in 
himself they do not believe, for they know him not 
Therefore it is little wonder that they distrust those 


swellings of the heart which are his drawings of the man 


60 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. _ 


towards him, as: sun and moon heave the ocean mass 
heavenward. Brother, sister, if such is your faith, you 
will not, must not stop there. You must come out of 
this bondage of the law to which you give the name of 
grace, for there is little that is gracious in it) You will yet 
know the dignity of your high calling, and the love of 
God that passeth knowledge. He is not afraid of your 
presumptuous approach to him: It is you who are 
afraid to come near him. He is not watching over his 
dignity. It is you who fear to be sent away as the 
disciples would have sent away the little children. It is 
you who think so much about your souls and are so 
afraid of losing your life, that you dare not draw near to 
the Life of life, lest it should consume you. 

Our God, we will trust thee. Shall we not find thee 
equal to our faith? One day, we shall laugh ourselves to 
scorn that we looked for so little from thee; for thy 
giving will not be limited by our hoping. 

O thou of little faith! “in everything,’"—I am quoting 


your own Bible ; nay, more, I am quoting a divine soul 


THE HIGHER FAITH, 61 


that knew his master Christ, and in his strength op- 
posed apostles, not to ‘say christians, to their faces, be- 
‘cause they could not believe more than’a little in God ; 
could believe only for themselyes and not for their 
fellows ; could believe for the few of the chosen nation, 
for whom they had God’s ancient word, but could not 
believe for the multitude of the nations, for the millions 
of hearts that God had made to search after him and 
find him ;—“In everything,” says St Paul, “In every- 
thing, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let 
your requests be made known unto God,” For this every- 
thing, nothing is too small. That it should’ trouble us 
is enough. There is some principle involved in it worth 
the notice even of God himself, for did he not make us 
so that the thing does trouble us? And surely for 
this everything, nothing can be too great. When the 
Son of man cometh and findeth too much faith on the 
eaith—may God in his mercy slay us. Meantime, we 
will hope and trust. 


Do you count it a great faith to believe what God has 


62 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


said? It seems to me, I repeat, a little faith, and, if 
alone, worthy of reproach. To believe what he has not 
said is faith indeed, and blessed. For that comes of 
believing in Him.. Can you not believe in God him- 
self? Or, confess,—do you not find it so hard to be- 
lieve what he has said, that even that is almost more 
than you can do? If I ask you why, will not the true 
answer be—“ Because we are not quite sure that he 
did say it”? If you believed in God you would find 
it easy to believe the word. You would not even need 
to inquire whether he had said it: you would know that 
he meant it, 

jee Let us then dare something. Let us not always be 
unbelieving children. Let us keep in mind that the 
Lord, not forbidding those who insist on seeing before 
they will believe, blesses those who have not seen and 
yet have believed—those who trust in him more than 
that—who believe withous the sight of the eyes, with- 
out the hearing of the ears. They are blessed to whom 


a wonder is not a fable, to whom a mystery is not a 


THE HIGHER FAITH. 63 


mockery, to whom a glory is not an unrealit) who are 
content to ask, “Is it like Him?” It is a dull-hearted, 
unchildlike people that will be always putting God in 
mind of his promises. Those promises are good to 
reveal what God is; if they think them good as bind- 
ing God, let them have it so for the hardness of their 
hearts. They prefer the Word to the Spirit: it is theirs. 

Even such will leave us—some of ets will, if not 
all—to the “uncovenanted mercies of God.” We de- 
sire no less; we hope for no better. Those are the 
mercies beyond our height, beyond our depth, beyond 
our reach. We know in whom we have believed, and 
we look for that which it hath not entered into the heart 
of man to conceive. Shall God’s thoughts be surpassed 
by man’s thoughts? God’s giving by man’s asking? 
God’s creation by man’s imagination). No. Let us 
climb to the height of our Alpine desires ; let us leave 
them behind us and ascend the spear-pointed Himma- 
lays of our aspirations; still shall we find the depth 


of God’s sapphire above us; still shall we find the 


64 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. . 


heavens higher than the earth, and his thoughts and 
his ways higher than our thoughts and our ways. 

Ah Lord! be thou in all our being; as not in the 
Sundays of our time alone, so not in the chambers of 
our hearts alone. We dare not think that thou canst 
not, carest not ; that some things are not for thy be- 
holding some questions not to be asked of thee. For 
are we not all thine—utterly thine? That which a 
‘man speaks not to his fellow, we speak to thee. Ow 
very passions we hold up to thee, and say, “ Behold, 
Lord! ‘Think about us; for thus thou hast made us.” 
We would not escape from our history by fleeing into 
the wildernées, by hiding our heads in’ the sands of for- 
getfulness, or the repentance that comes of pain, or the 
lethargy of hopelessness. We take it, as our very life, 
in our hand, and flee with it unto thee. Triumphant 
is the answer which thou holdest for every doubt. It 
may be we could not understand it yet, even if thou 
didst speak it “with most miraculous organ.” But 


thou shalt at least find faith in the earth, O Lord, if 


THE HIGHER FAITH. 65 


thou comest to look for it now—the faith of ignorant 
but hoping children, who know that they do not know, 
and believe that thou knowest. 

And for our brothers and sisters, who cleave to what 
they call thy word, thinking to please thee so, they 
are in thy holy safe hands, who has taught us that 
whosoever shall speak a ee against the Son of man, tt 
shall be forgiven him ; though unto him that blasphemeth 


against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven. 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 


And whosoever shall speak a word against 
the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: 
but unto him that blasphemeth against the 
Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.—LuKe 
ae Yo 

WG belonging to the region of thought 
and feeling is uttered in words, is of necessity 
uttered imperfectly. For thought and feeling are in- 
finite, and human speech, although far-reaching in scope, 
and marvellous in delicacy, can embody them after all 
but approximately and suggestively. Spirit and Truth 
are like the Lady Una and the Red Cross Knight ; 
Speech like the dwarf that lags behind with the lady’s 
“bag of needments,” 
Our Lord had no design of constructing a system of 


truth in intellectual forms. The truth of the moment in 


If SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 67 


its relation to him, The Truth, was what he spoke 
He spoke out of a region of realities which he knew 
could only be suggested—not represented—in the forms 
of intellect and speech. With vivid flashes of life and 
truth his words invade our darkness, rousing us with 
sharp stings of light to wit our awaking, to arise from 
the dead and cry for the light which he can give, not 
in the lightning of words only, but in indwelling presence 
and power. 

How, then, must the truth fare with those who, hay- 
ing neither glow nor insight, will build intellectual sys- 
tems upon the words of our Lord, or of his disciples? 
A little child would better understand Plato than they 
St Paul. The meaning in those great hearts who knew 
our Lord is too great to enter theirs. The sense 
they find in the words must be a sense small enough 
to pass through their narrow doors. And if mere 
words, without the interpreting sympathy, may mean, 
as they may, almost anything the receiver will or can 


attribute to them, how shall the man, bent at best on. 


638 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


the salvation of his own soul, understand, for instance, 
the meaning of that apostle who was ready to encounter 
banishment ‘itself from the presence of Christ, that the 
beloved brethren of his nation might enter in? To men 
who. are not simple, simple words are the most inexplic- 
able of riddles. 

_- If we are bound to search after what our Lord means 
—and he speaks that we may understand—we are at least 
equally bound to refuse any-interpretation which seems 
to us unlike him, unworthy of him. He himself says, 
“Why -do ye not’ of your own selves judge what is 
right ?” In thus. refusing, it may happen that, from 
ignorance or misunderstanding, we refuse the verbal 
form-of its true interpretation, but we cannot thus refuse 
the spirit and the truth of it, for those we could not 
have seen without being in the condition to recognize 
them as the mind of Christ. Some misapprehension, I 
say, some obliquity, or some slavish adherence to old 
prejudices, may:thus cause us to.refuse the true inter- 


pretation, but we are none the less bound to. refuse and 


IT SHALL NOT. BE FORGIVEN. 69 


wait for more light. To accept that as the will of our 
Lord which to us is inconsistent with what we have 
learned to worship in him already, is to introduce dis- 
cord into that harmony whose end is to unite our hearts, 
and make them whole. 

“Ts it for us,” says the objector who, by some 
sleight of will, believes in the word apart from. the 
meaning for which it stands, “to judge of the char- 
acter of our Lord?” I answer, “ This very thing he 
requires of us.” He requires of us that we should 
do him no injustice. He would come and dwell 
with us, if we would but open our chambers to re- 
ceive him. How shall we receive him if, avoiding 
jucgment, we hold this or that daub of authority or 
tradition hanging upon our walls to be the real like- 
ness of our Lord? Is it not possible at least that, 
judging unrighteous judgment by such while we 
flatter ourselves that we are refusing to judge, we 
may close our doors against the Master himself as an 


impostor, not finding him like the picture that hangs 


72 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


ir. our oratory. And if we do not judge—humbly 
and lovingly—who is to judge for us? Better to 
refuse even the truth for a time, than, by accepting 
into our intellectual creed that which our heart can- 
not receive, not seeing its real form, to introduce 
hesitation into our prayers, a jar into our praises, 
and a misery into our love. If it be the truth, we 
shall one day see it another thing than it appzars 
now, and love it because we see it lovely; for al/ 
truth is lovely. “Not to the unregenerate mind.” 
But at least, I answer, to the mind which can love 
that Man, Christ Jesus; and that part of us which 
loves him let us follow, and in its judgments let us 
trust ; hoping, beyond all things else, for its growth 
and enlightenment by the Lord, who is that Spirit. 
Better, I say again, to refuse the right Jorm, than, by 
accepting it in misapprehension of what it really is, to 
refuse the spirit, the truth that dwells therein. Which 
of these, I pray, is liker to the sin against the Holy 


Ghost? To mistake the meaning of the Son of man 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 4 71 


may well fill a man with sadness. But to care so 
little for him as to receive as his what the noblest 
part of our nature rejects as low and poor, or selfish 
and wrong, that surely is more like the sin against 
the Holy Ghost that can never be forgiven; for it 
is a sin against the truth itself, not the embodiment 
of it in him. 

Words for their full meaning depend upon their 
source, the person who speaks them. An utterance 
may even seem commonplace, till you are told that 
thus spoke one whom you know to be always think- 
ing, always feeling, always acting. Recognizing the 
mind whence the words proceed, you know the scale 
by which they are to be understood. So the words 
of God cannot mean just the same as the words of 
man. ‘Can we not, then, understand them?” Yes, 
we can understand them—we can understand thern 
more than the words of men. Whatever a good word 
means, as’ used by a good man, it means just in- 


finitely more as used by God. And the feeling or 


72 : UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


thought. expressed by that word takes higher and 
higher forms in us. as we become capable of under- 
standing him,—that is, as we become like him. - 

. I am far less anxious to show what the sin against 
the Holy Ghost means, than to show what the non- 
forgiveness means; though I think we may arrive at 
some understanding of both. I cannot admit for a. 
moment that there is anything in the Bible too mys- 
terious to be looked into; for the Bible is a revéa- 
tion, an unveiling. True, into many things uttered 
there I can see only a little way. But that little way 
is the way of life; for the depth of their mystery is 
God. And even setting aside the duty of the matter, 
and seeking for justification as if the duty were 
doubtful, it is reason enough for inquiring into such 
passages as this before me, that they are often tor- 
ture to human minds, chiefly those of holy women 
and children. I knew a child who believed she had 
committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, because 


she had, in her toilette, made an improper use of 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 73 


a pin. Dare not to rebuke me for adducing the 
diseased fancy of a child in a weighty matter of 
theology. ‘Despise not one of these little ones.” 
Would the theologians were as near the truth in 
such matters as the children. Déseased fancy/ The 
child knew, and was conscious that she knew, that she 
was doing wrong because she had been forbidden. 
There was rational ground for her fear. Tow would 
Jesus have received the confession of the darling? 
He would not have told her she was silly, and 
“never to mind.” Child as she was, might he not 
have said to her, “I do not condemn thee: go and 
sin no more”? 

To reach the first position necessary for the final 
attainment of our end, I will inquire what the divine 
forgiveness means. And in order to arrive at this 
naturally, I will begin by asking what the human 
forgiveness means ; for, if there be any meaning in the 
Incarnation, it is through the Human that we must 


climb up to the Divine. 


74 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


I do not know that it is of much use to go back 
to the Greek or the English word for any primary 
idea of the act—the one meaning @ sending away, 
the other, a giving away. It will be enough if we 
look at the feelings associated with the exercise of 
what is called forgiveness. 

A man will say: “TI forgive, but I cannot forget. 
Let the fellow never come in my sight again.” To 
what does such a forgiveness reach? To the remis 
sion or sending away of the penalties which the 
wronged believes he can claim from the wrong-doer. 

But there is no sending away of the wrong itself 
Srom between them. 

Again, a man will say: “He has done a very 
mean action, but he has the worst of it himself in 
that he is capable of doing so. I despise him too 
much to desire revenge. I will take no notice of it. 
I forgive him. I don’t care.” 

Here, again, there is no sending away of the wrong 


from between them—no remission of the sin. 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 75 

A third will say: “I suppose I must forgive him; 
for if I do not forgive him, God will not forgive me.” 

This man is @ “Zi/t/e nearer the truth, inasmuch as 
a ground of sympathy, though only that of common sin, 
is recognized as between the offender and himself. 

One more will say: “He has wronged me griev- 
ously. It is a dreadful thing to me, and more dread- 
ful still to him, that he should have done it. He has 
hurt me, but he has nearly killed himself. He shall 
have no. more injury from it that I can save him, 
I cannot feel the same towards him yet; but I will 
try to make him acknowledge the wrong he has done 
me, and so put it away from him. Then, perhaps, 
I shall be able to feel towards him as I used to feel. 
For this end I will show him all the kindness I can, 
not forcing it upon him, but seizing every fit oppor- 
tunity; not, I hope, from a wish to make myself great 
through bounty to him, but because I love him so 
much that I want to love him more in reconciling 


him to his true self. I would destroy this evil deed 


76 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


that has come between us. I send it away. And 
I would have him destroy it from between us too, 
by abjuring it utterly.” 

Which comes nearest to the divine idea of forgive- 
ness? nearest, though with the gulf between, where- 
with the heavens are higher than the earth? 

For the Divine creates the Human, has the crea- 
tive power in excess of the Human. It is the Divine 
forgiveness that, originating itself, creates our forgive- 
ness, and therefore can do so much more. It can 
take up all our wrongs, small and great, with their 
righteous attendance of griefs and sorrows, and carry 
them away from between our God and us. 

Christ is God’s Forgiveness. 

Before we approach a little nearer to this great 
sight, let us consider the human forgiveness in a 
more definite embodiment—as between a father and - 
a son. For although God is so much more to us, 
and comes so much nearer to us than a father can 


be or come, yet the fatherhood is the last height of 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 77 


the human stair whence our understandings can see 
him afar off, and where our hearts can first know that 
he is nigh, even in them. 

There are various kinds and degrees of wrong- 
doing, which need varying kinds and degrees of for- 
giveness. An outburst of anger in a child, for 
instance, scarcely wants forgiveness. The wrong in 
it may be so small, that the parent has only to in- 
fluence the child for self-restraint, and the rousing of 
the will against the wrong. The father will not feel 
that such a fault has built up any wall between him 
and his child. But suppose that he discovered in 
him a habit of sly cruelty towards his younger 
brothers, or the animals of the house, how differently 
would he feel! Could his forgiveness be the same 
as in the former case? Would not the different evil 
_ require a different form of forgiveness? I mean, would 
not the forgiveness have to take the form of that kind 
of punishment fittest-for restraining, in the hope of 


finally rooting out, the wickedness? Could there be 


78 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


true love in any other kind of forgiveness than this! 
A passing-by of the offence might spring from a 
poor human kindness, but never from divine Jove. 
It would not be remission. Forgiveness can never be 
indifference. Forgiveness is love towards the un- 
lovely. 

Let us look a little closer at the way a father 
might feel, and express his feelings. One child, the 
moment the fault was committed, the father would 
clasp to his bosom, knowing that very love in its own 
natural manifestation would destroy the fault in him, 
and that, the next moment, he would be weeping. 
The father’s hatred of the sin would burst forth in 
his pitiful tenderness towards the child who was so 
wretched as to have done the sin, and so destroy it. 
The fault of such a child would then cause no in- 
terruption of the interchange of sweet affections. The 
child is forgiven at once. But the treatment of another 
upon the same principle would be altogether different. 


If he had been guilty of baseness, meanness, selfish- 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN, 79 


ness, deceit, self-gratulation in the evil brought upon 
others, the father might say to himself; “I cannot 
forgive him. This is beyond forgiveness.” He might 
say so, and keep saying so, while all the time he was 
striving to let forgiveness find its way that it might 
lift him from the gulf into which he had fallen. His 
love might grow yet greater because of the wandering 
and loss of his son. For love is divine, and then 
most divine when it loves according to meeds and not 
according to merits. But the forgiveness would be 
but in the process of making, as it were, or of draw- 
ing nigh to the sinner. Not till his opening heart 
received the divine flood of destroying affection, and 
his own affection burst forth to meet it and sweep 
the evil away, could it be said to be finished, to have 
arrived, could the son be said to de forgiven. 

God is forgiving us every day—-sending from be- 
tween him and us our sins and their fogs and darkness. 
Witness the shining of his sun and the falling of his 


rain, the filling of their hearts with food and gladness, 


80 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 

that he loves them that love him not. When some 
sin that we have committed has clouded all our 
horizon, and hidden him from our eyes, he, forgiv- 
ing us, ere we are, and that we may be, forgiven, 
sweeps away a path for this his forgiveness to reach 
our hearts, that it may by causing our repentance 
destroy the wrong, and make us able even to forgive 
ourselves. For some are too proud to forgive them- 
selves, till the forgiveness of God has had its way 
with them, has drowned their pride in the tears of 
repentance, and made their heart come again like 
the heart of a little child. 

But, looking upon forgiveness, then, as the perfect- 
ing of a work ever going on, as the contact of God’s 
heart and ours, in spite and in destruction of the 
intervening wrong, we may say that God’s love is 
ever in front of his forgiveness. God’s love is the 
prime mover, ever seeking to perfect his forgiveness, 
which latter needs the human condition for its con 


summation. The love is perfect, working out the 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. &1 


forgiveness. God’ loves where he cannot yet forgive— 
‘where forgiveness in the full sense is as yet simply 
impossible, because no contact of hearts is possible, 
because that which lies between has not even begun 
to yield to the besom of his holy destruction. 

Some things, then, between the Father and his chil- 
dren, as between a father and his child, may compara- 
tively, and in a sense, be made light of—I’ do not 
mean made light of in themselves: away they must go 
—inasmuch as, evils or sins though they be, they yet 
leave room for the dwelling of God’s. Spirit in the heart, 
forgiving and cleansing away the evil. When a man’s 
-evil is thus fading out of him, and he is growing better 
and better, that is the forgiveness coming into him more 
and more. Perfect in God’s will, it is having its perfect 
work “in the mind of the man. When the man hath, 
with his whole nature, cast away his sin, there is- no 
room for forgiveness any more, for God dwells in him, 
and he in God. With the voice of Nathan, “Thou art 


the man,” the forgiveness of God laid hold of David, 
F 


ee 


82 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


-the heart of the king was humbled to the dust; and 
when he thus awoke from the moral lethargy that had 
fallen upon him, he found that he was still with God. 
_“ When I awake,” he said, “I am still with thee.” 

But there are two sins, not of individual deed, but 
of spiritual condition, which cannot be forgiven ; that is, 
-as it seems to me, which cannot be excused, passed by, 
made little of by the tenderness even of God, inas- 
much as they will allow no forgiveness to come into 
the soul, they will permit no good influence to go on 
working alongside of them; they shut God out alto- 
‘gether. Therefore the man guilty of these can never 
receive into himself the holy renewing saving influ- 
ences of God's forgiveness. God is outside of him in 
every sense, save that which springs from his creating 
‘relation to him, by which, thanks be to God, he yet 
keeps a hold of him, although against the will of the 
man who will not be forgiven. The one of these sins 
is against man ; the other against God. 


The former is unforgivingness to our neighbour; the 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 83 


shutting of him out from our mercies, from our love— 
so from the universe, as far as we are a portion of it— 
the murdering therefore of our neighbour. It may be 
an infinitely less evil to murder a man than to refuse 
to forgive him. The former may be the act of a mo- 
ment of passion: the latter is the heart’s choice. It 
is spiritual murder, the worst, to hate, to brood over the 
feeling that excludes, that, in our microcosm, kills the 
image, the idea of the hated. We listen to the voice 
of our own hurt pride or hurt affection (only the latter 
without the suggestion of the former, thinketh no evil) 
to the injury of the evil-doer. In as far as we can, we 
quench the relations of life between us; we close up the 
passages of possible return. This is to shut out God, 
the Life, the One. For how are we to receive the forgiv- 
ing presence while we shut out our brother from our por- 
tion of the universal forgiveness, the final restoration, 
thus refusing to let God be All in all? If God appeared 
to us, how could he say, “TI forgive you,” while we 


remained. unforgiving to our neighbour? Suppose it 


184 Zi UNSPOKEN SERMONS.> +> 


possible that he should say so, his forgiveness would 
be no good to us while we were uncured of our unfor- 
givingness. It would not touch us. It would not come 
near us. Nay, it would hurt us, for we’ should think 
ourselves safe and well, while the horror of disease was 
eating the heart out of us. Tenfold the forgiveness lies 
in the words, “If ye forgive not men‘ their trespasses, 
neither will your heavenly Father forgive -your_tres- 
passes.”". Those words are kindness indeed. God holds 
the unforgiving man with his hand, but turns his face 
away from him. If, in his desire to see the face of his 
Father, he turns his own towards his brother, then the 
face of God turns round and seeks his, for then the man 
may look upon God and»not die. With our forgiveness 
to our neighbour, in flows the consciousness of God's 
forgiveness to us; or even with the effort, we become 
capable of believing that God can forgive us. - No man 
who will not forgive his neighbour, can believe that 
God is willing, yea, wanting to forgive him, car believe 


that the dove-of God’s peace is hovering over-a chaotic 


IT SHALL NOT RE FORGIVEN, 85 


heart, fain to alight, but finding no rest for the sole of its 
foot. For God to say to such a man, “I cannot forgive 
you,” is love as well as necessity. If God said, “I for. 
give you,” to a man who hated his brother, and if (as is 
impossible) that voice of forgiveness should reach the 
man, what would it mean to him? How would the man 

interpret it? Would it not mean to him, “ You may go 
| on hating. Ido not mind it. You have had great pro- 
vocation, and are justified in your hate”? No doubt God 
takes what wrong there is, and what provocation there 
is, into the account; but the more provocation, the 
more excuse that can be urged for the hate, the more 
reason, if possible, that the hater should be delivered 
from the hell of his hate, that God’s child should be 
made the loving child that he meant him to be. The 
man would think, not that God loved the sinner, 
but that he forgave the sin, which God never 
does. very sin meets with its due fate—inexorable 
expulsion from the paradise of God’s Humanity. He 


loves the sinner so much that he cannot forgive 


$5 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


him in any other way than by banishing from his bosom 
the demon that possesses him, by lifting him out of 
that mire of his iniquity. 

No one, however, supposes for a moment that a man 
who has once refused to forgive his brother, shall there- 
fore be condemned to endless unforgiveness and unfor- 
givingness. What is meant is, that while a man con- 
tinues in such a mood, God cannot be with him as his 
friend; not that he will not be his friend, but the 
friendship being all on one side—that of God—must 
take forms such as the man will not be able to recog- 
nize as friendship. Forgiveness, as I have said, is not 
love merely, but love conveyed as love to the erring, so 
establishing peace towards God, and forgiveness towards 
our neighbour. 

To return then to our immediate text: Is the re- 
fusal of forgiveness contained in it a condemnation 
to irrecoverable impenitence? Strange righteousness 
would be the decree, that because a man has done 


wrong—let us say has done wrong so often and so 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 87 


much that he zs wrong—he shall for ever remain 
wrong! Do not tell me the condemnation is only 
negative—a leaving of the man to the consequences 
of his own will, or at most a withdrawing from him 
of the Spirit which he has despised. God will not 
take shelter behind such a jugglery of logic or me- 
taphysics. He is neither schoolman nor theologian, 
but our Father in heaven. He knows that that in 
him would be the same unforgivingness for which 
he refuses to forgive man. The only tenable ground 
for supporting such a doctrine is, that God cannot 
do more; that Satan has overcome; and that Jesus, 
amongst his own brothers and sisters in the image 
of God, has been less strong than the adversary, the 
destroyer. What then shall I say of such a doctrine 
of devils as that, even if a man did repent, God 
would not or could not forgive him? 

Let us look at “¢Ke unpardonable sin,” as this 
mystery is commonly called, and see what we can 


find to understand about it 


88 . UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


All-sin is unpardonable. There is no compromise 
to be made with it. We shall not come out except 
clean, except having paid the uttermost farthing. | But 
the special unpardonableness of those sins, the one 
of which I have spoken. and that which we are now 
considering, lies in. their shutting out God from his 
genial, his especially spiritual, influences upon the man. 
Possibly in the case of the former sin, I may have 
said this. too strongly; possibly the- love of God may 
have some part even in the man who will not forgive 
his Lrother, although, if he continues unforgiving, that 
part must decrease and die away; possibly resentment 
against our brother, might yet for a time leave room 
for some divine influences by its side, although either 
the one or the other must speedily yield; but the 
man who denies truth, who consciously resists duty, 
who says there is no truth, or that the truth he sees 
is not true, who says that which is good is of Satan, 
or that which is bad is of God, supposing him to know 


that it is good or is bad, denies the Spirit, shuts out 


ooo ss <= 
re ee 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN, 89 
the Spirit, and therefore cannot be forgiven, For 
without the Spirit no forgiveness can enter the man 
to cast out the satan. Without the Spirit to witness 
with his spirit, no man could know himself forgiven, 
even if God appeared to him and said so. ‘The full 
forgiveness is, as I have said, when a man feels. that 
God is forgiving him; and this cannot be while he 
opposes himself to the very essence of God’s will. 

As far as we can see, the men of whom. this was 
spoken were men who resisted the truth with some 
amount of perception that it was the truth; men 
neither led astray by passion, nor altogether blinded 
by their abounding prejudice; men who were not 
excited to condemn one form of truth by the love 
which they bore to another form of it; but men so 
sct, from selfishness and love of influence, against 
one whom they saw to be a good man, that they de- 
nied the goodness of what they knew to be good, in 
order to put down the man whom they knew to be 


good, because He had spoken against them, and was 


go UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


ruining their influence and authority with the people 
by declaring them to be no better than they knew 
themselves to be. Is not this to be Satan? to be in 
hell? to be corruption? to be that which is damned? 
Was not this their condition unpardonable? How, 
through all this mass of falsehood, could the pardon 
of God reach the essential humanity within it? Cry- 
ing as it was for God’s forgiveness, these men had 
almost separated their humanity from themselves, had 
taken their part with the powers of darkness.  For- 
giveness while they were such was an impossibility 
No. Out of that they must come, else there was no 
word of God for them. But the very word that told 
them of the unpardonable state in which they were, 
was just the one form the voice of mercy could take 
in calling on them to repent. They must hear and be 
afraid. I dare not, cannot think that they refused the 


truth, knowing all that it was; but I think they re- 


fused the truth, knowing that it was true—not carried 


away, as I have said, by wild passion, but by cold 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN, gt 


selflove. and envy, and avarice, and ambition; not 
merely doing wrong knowingly, but setting their whole 
natures knowingly against the light. Of this nature 
must the sin against the Holy Ghost surely be. “ This 
is the condemnation,” (not the sins that men have 
committed, but the condition of mind in which they 
choose to remain,) “that light is come into the 
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, 
because their deeds were evil.” In this sin against 
the Holy Ghost, I see no single act alone, although 
it must find expression in many acts, but a wilful 


condition of mind, 


As far removed from God and light of heaven, 
As from the centre thrice to the utmost pole. 


For this there could be no such excuse made as that 
even a little light might work beside it; for there 
light could find no’ entrance and no room; light 
was just what such a mind was set against, almost 
because it was what it was. ‘The condition was 


utterly bad. 


92 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


. But can a’ man really fall into such a condition 
of spiritual depravity ? 

_ That is my chief difficulty. But { think it may be. 
And wiser people than I, have thought so. I have dif- 
ficulty in believing it, I say; yet I think it must be. 
so. But I do not believe that it is a fixed, a final con- 
dition. 1 do not see why it should be such any more 
than that of the man who does not forgive his neigh 
bour. If you say it is a worse offence, I say, Is it 
too bad for the forgiveness of God? 

But is God able to do anything more with the man? 
Or how is the man ever to get out of this condition? 
If the Spirit of God is shut out from his heart, how 
is he to become better? 

The Spirit of God is the Spirit whose inffuence is 
known by its witnessing with our spirit, But may 
there not be other powers and means of the Spirit 
preparatory to this its highest office with man? God 
who has made us can never be far from any. man who 


draws the breath of life—nay, must be in him: not 


en 


IT SHALL NOT, BE FORGIVEN, 93 


necessarily in his heart, as ‘we say, but. still in him. 
May not then one day’some terrible convulsion from 
the centre of his being, some fearful earthquake from 
the hidden gulfs of his nature, shake such a'man so 
that through all the deafness of his death, the voice 
of the Spirit may be faintly heard; the still small voice 
that comes -after the tempest and the earthquake ? 
May there not be a fire that. even such can feel? 
Who shall set bounds to the consuming of the fire 
of our God, and the purifying ‘that dwells therein? 

' The only argument that I can think of, which would 
with me have weight against this conclusion, is, ‘that 
the revulsion of feeling’ in any one who had thus 
‘sinned against the truth, when once brought to acknow- 
ledge his sin, would be so terrible that life would never 
more be endurable, and the kindest thing God’ could 
do would be to put’such a man out-of being, because 
it had been a better thing for him never to have been 
born. . But he who could make. such a man repent, 


could: make him so sorrowful and lowly, and ‘so glad 


‘94 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


that he had repented, that he would wish to live ever 
that he might ever repent and ever worship the glory 
he now beheld. When a man gives up self, his past 
sins will no longer oppress him. It is enough for the 
good of life that God lives, that the All-perfect exists, 
and that we can behold him. 
“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they 
do,” said the Divine, making excuse for his murderers, 
not after it was all over, but at the very moment when 
he was dying by their hands. Then Jesus nad forgiven 
them already. His prayer the Father must have heard, 
for he and the Son are one. When the Father succeeded 
in answering his prayer, then his forgiveness in the hearts 
of the murderers broke out in sorrow, repentance, and 
faith, Here was a sin dreadful enough surely—but 
easy for our Lord to torgive. All that excuse for the 
misled populace! Lord Christ be thanked for that! 
That was like thee! But must we believe that Judas, 
who repented even to agony, who repented so that his 


high-prized life, self, soul, became worthless in his eyes 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 95 
and met with no mercy at his own hand,—must we 
believe that he could find no mercy in such a God? 
I think, when Judas fled from his hanged and fallen 
body, he fled to the tender help of Jesus, and found it 
—I say not how. He was in a more hopeful condition 
now than during any moment of his past life, for he had 
never repented before. But I believe that Jesus loved 
Judas even when he was kissing him with the traitor’s 
kiss; and I believe that he was his Saviour still. And 
if any man remind me of his words, “It had been good 
for that man if he had not been born,’ I had not 
forgotten them, though I know that I now offer nothing 
beyond a conjectural explanation of them when I say: 
Judas had got none of the good of the world into 
which he had been born. He had not inherited the 
earth. He had lived an evil life, out of harmony with 
the world and its God. Its love had been lost upon 
him. He had been brought to the very Son of God, 
and had lived with him as his own familiar friend ; 


‘and he had not loved him more, but less than him- 


06 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


self. Therefore’ it had been all useless. “It had been 
good for that man if he had not been born ;” for it 
was all to try ovér again, in some other way—mferior 
pethaps, in some other world, in a lower school. He 
had to be sent down the scale of creation which is 
ever ascending towards its. Maker. But I will not, 
cannot believe, O my Lord, that thou wouldst not 
forgive thy enemy, even when he repented, and did 
thee right... Nor will I. believe that thy holy death 
was powerless to save thy foe —that it could not 
reach to Judas. Have we not ‘heard of those, thine 
own, taught of thee, who could easily forgive their 
betrayers in thy name? And if thou forgivest, will 
not thy forgiveness ‘find its way at last in redemption 
and’ purification ? 

Look for a moment at the clause preceding my text: 
“He that denieth me before men shall be denied be- 
fore the angels of God.” What does*it mean? Does 
it mean—“Ah! you are mine; but not of my sort. 


You denied me. Away to the outer darkness”? Not 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 97 
so. Tt shall be forgiven to him that speaketh against 
the Son of man ;” for He may be but the truth revealed 
without him. Only he must have shame before the 
universe of the loving God, and may need the fire 
that burneth and consumeth not. 

But for him that speaketh against the Spirit of Truth, 
against the Son of God revealed within him, he is be- 
yond the teaching of that Spirit now. For how shall 
he be forgiven? The forgiveness would touch him ne 
more than a wall of stone. Let him know what it is 
to be without the God he hath denied. Away with 
him to the Outer Darkness! Perhaps ¢hat will make 
him repent. 

My friends, I offer this as only a contribution to- 
wards the understanding of our Lord’s words. But if 
we ask him, he will lead us into all truth. And let 
us not be afraid to think, for he will not take it ill. 

But what I have said must be at least a part of the 


truth. 


No amount of discovery in his words can tell us 
G 


93 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


more than we have discovered, more than we have 
seen and known to be true. For all the help the best 
of his disciples can give us is only to discover, to see 
for ourselves. 

And beyond all our discoveries in his words and 
being, there lie depths within depths of truth that 
we cannot understand, and yet shall be ever going 
on to understand. Yea, even now sometimes we 
seem to have dim glimpses into regions from which 
we receive no word to bring away. 

The fact that some things have become to us so 
much more simple than they were, and that great 
truths have come out of what once looked common, 
is ground enough for hope that such will go on to 
be our experience through the ages to come, Our 
advance from our former ignorance can measure but 
a small portion of the distance that lies, and must 
ever lie, between our childishness and his manhood, 


between our love and his love, between our dimness 


and his mighty vision. 


IT SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN. 99 


To him ere long may we all come, all children, 
still children, more children than ever, to receive from 
his hand the white stone, and in the stone a new name 


written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it. 


THE NEW NAME, 


To hime that overcometh, I will give a white 
stone, and in the stone a new name written, 
which no man knoweth saving ke that re- 
cerveth ¢¢.—REv. ii. 17. 


Ay ea the Book of the Revelation be written 

by the same man who wrote the Gospel ac- 
cording to St John or not, there is, at least, one ele- 
ment common to the two—the mysticism. 

I use the word mysticism as representing a cer- 
tain mode of embodying truth, common, in various 
degrees, to almost all, if not all, the writers of the 
New Testament. The attempt to define it thoroughly 
would require an essay. I will hazard but one sug- 
gestion towards it: A mystical mind is ‘one which, 


having perceived that the highest expression of which 


THE NEW NAME. To! 


the truth admits, lies in the symbolism of nature and 
the human customs that result from human necessities, 
prosecutes thought about truth so embodied by deal- 
ing with the symbols themselves after logical forms. 
This is the highest mode of conveying the deepest 
truth ; and the Lord himself often employed it, as, 
for instance, in the whole passage ending with the 
words, “If therefore the light that is in thee be dark- 
ness, how great is the darkness!” 

The mysticism in the Gospel of St John is of the 
simplest, and, therefore, noblest nature. No dweller in 
this planet can imagine a method of embodying truth 
that shall be purer, loftier, truer to the truth embo- 
died. There may be higher modes in other worlds, 
or there may not—I cannot tell; but of all our modes 
these forms are best illustrations of the highest. Ap- 
parently the mysticism of St John’s own nature enabled 
him to remember and report with sufficient accuracy 
the words of our Lord, always, it seems to me, of a 


recognizably different kind from those of any of the 


102 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


writers of the New Testament—chiefly, perhaps, in the 
simplicity of their poetical mysticism. 

“But the mysticism in the Book of the Revelation is 
more complicated, eee gorgeous, less poetic, and 
occasionally, I think, perhaps arbitrary, or approach- 
ing the arbitrary; reminding one, in a word, of the 
mysticism of Swedenborg. Putting aside both histori- 
cal and literary criticism, in neither of which with regard 
to the authorship of these two books have I a right 
even to an opinion, I would venture to suggest that 
possibly their difference in tone is just what one 
might expect when the historian of a mystical teacher 
and the recorder of his mystical sayings, proceeds 
to embody his own thoughts, feelings, and inspira- 
tions; that is; when the revelation flows no longer 
from the lips of the Master, but through the disciple’s 
own heart, soul, and brain. For surely not. the most 
idolatrous of our Bible-worshipping brothers and sisters 
will venture to assert that the Spirit of God could 


speak as freely by the lips of the wind-swayed, reed- 


THE NEW NAME, 103 


like, rebukable Peter, or of the Thomas who could 
believe his own eyes, but neither the word of his 
brethren, nor the nature of his Master, as by the lips 
of Him who was blind and deaf to everything but the 
will of him that sent him. 

Truth is truth, whether from the lips of Jesus or 
Balaam. But, in its deepest sense, the truth is a con- 
dition of heart, soul, mind, and strength towards God 
and towards our fellow—not an utterance, not even a 
right form of words; and therefore such truth coming 
forth in words is, in a sense, the person that speaks. 
And many of the utterances of truth in the Revelation, 
commonly called of St John, are not merely lofty in 
form, but carry with them the conviction that the writer 
was no mere “trumpet of a prophecy,” but spoke that 
he did know, and testified that he had seen. 

In this passage about the gift of the white stone, I 
think we find the essence of religion. 

What the notion in the mind of the writer with 


regard to the white stone was, is, I think, of com- 


104 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


paratively little moment. I take the stone to belong 
more to the arbitrary and fanciful than to the true mys- 
tical imagery, although for the bringing out of the mys- 
tical thought in which it is concerned, it is of high 
and honourable dignity. For fancy itself will subserve 
the true imagination of the mystic, and so be glori- 
fied. I doubt if the writer himself associated any 
essential meaning with it. Certainly I will not allow 
that he had such a poor notion in it as that of a 
voting pebble—white, because the man who receives 
it is accepted or chosen. The word is used likewise 
for a precious stone set as a jewel. And the writer 
thought of it mystically, a mode far more likely to in- 
volve a reference to nature than to a political custom. 
What his mystic meaning may be, must be taken 
differently by different minds. I think he sees in its 
whiteness purity, and in its substance indestructibility. 
But I care chiefly to regard the stone as the vehicle 
of the name, —as the form whereby the name is re- 


presented as passing from God to the man, and what 


THE NEW NAME, Tos 


is involved in this communication is what I wish to 
show. If my reader will not acknowledge my repre- 
sentation as St John’s meaning, I yet hope so to set 
it forth that he shall see the representation to be true 
in itself, and then I shall willingly leave the interpre- 
tation to its fate. 

I say, in brief, the giving of the white stone with 
the new name is the communication of what God 
thinks about the man to the man. It is the divine 
judgment, the solemn holy doom of the righteous 
man, the “ Come, thou blessed,”. spoken to the indi- 
vidual. | 

In order to see this; we must first understand what 
is the idea of a name,—that is, what is the perfect 
notion of a name. For, seeing the mystical energy 
of a holy mind here speaks of God as giving some- 
thing, we must understand that the essential thing, and 
not any of its accidents or imitations, is intended. 

A name of the ordinary kind in this world, has no- 


thing essential in it. It is but a label by which one 


106 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


man and a scrap of his external history may be known 
from another man and a scrap of his history. The 
only names which have significance are those which 
the popular judgment or prejudice or humour bestows, 
either for ridicule or honour, upon a few out of the 
many. Each of these is founded upon some external 
characteristic of the man, upon some predominant 
peculiarity of temper, some excellence or the reverse 
of character, or something which he does or has done 
well or ill enough, or at least, singularly enough, to 
render him, in the eyes of the people, worthy of such 
distinction from other men. As far as they go, these 
are real names, for, in some poor measure, they ex- 
press individuality. 

The true name is one which expresses the character, 
the nature, the being, the meaning of the person who 
bears it. It is the man’s own symbol,—his soul’s 
picture, in a word,—the sign which belongs to him 
and to no one else. Who can give a man this, his 


Own name? God alone. For no one but God sees 


THE NEW NAME. 107 


what the man is, or even, seeing what he is, could 
express in a name-word the sum and harmony of what 
he sees. To whom is this name given? To him that 
dvercometh. When is it given? When he has over- 
come. Does God then not know what a man is going 
to become? As surely as he sees the oak which he 
put there lying in the heart of the acorn. Why then 
does he wait till the man has become by overcoming 
ere he settles what his name shall be? He does not 
wait; he knows his name from the first. But as— 
although repentance comes because God pardons— 
yet the man becomes aware of the pardon only in the 
repentance ; so it is only when the man has become 
his name that God gives him the stone with the name 
upon it, for then first can he understand what his name 
signifies. It is the blossom, the perfection, the comple- 
tion, that determines the name; and God foresees that 
from the first, because he made it so; but the tree of the 
soul, before its blossom comes, cannot understand what 


blossom it is to bear, and could not know what the 


108 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


word meant, which, in representing its own unarrived 
completeness, named itself. Such a name cannot be 
é given until the man zs the name. 

God’s name for a man must then be the expression 
in a mystical word—a word of that language which 
all who have overcome understand—of -his own idea 
of the man, that being whom he had in his thought 
when he began to make the child, and whom he 
kept in his thought through the long process of 
creation that went to realize the idea. To tell the 
name is to seal the success—to say, ‘In thee also 
T am well pleased.” 

But we are still in the region of symbol. For 
supposing that such a form were actually observed 
between God and him that overcometh, it would be 
no .less a symbol—only an acted one. We must 
therefore look deeper still for the fulness of its mean- 
ing. Up to this point little has been said to justify 
our expectations of discovery in the text. Let us, 


I say, look deeper. We shall not look long before we 


THE NEW NAME, 109 


find that the mystic symbol has for its centre of sig- 
nificance the fact of the personal individual relation 
of every man to his God. That every man has affairs, 
and those his first affairs, with God, stands to the 
reason of every man who associates any meaning or 
feeling with the words, Maker, Father, God. Were 
we but children of a day, with the understanding that 
some one had given us that one holiday, there 
would be something to be thought, to be felt, to be 
done, because we knew it. For then our nature 
would be according to our fate, and we could worship 
and die. “But it would be only the praise of the dead, 
not the praise of the living, for death would be the 
deepest, the lasting, the overcoming. We should have 
come out of nothingness, not out of God. He could 
only be our Maker, not our Father, our Origin. But 
now we know that God cannot be the God of the 
dead—must be the God of the living ; inasmuch as to 
know that we died, would freeze the heart of worship, 


and we could not say Our God, or feel bim worthy of 


110 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


such worth-ship as we could render. To him who 
offers unto this God of the living his own self of 
sacrifice, to him that overcometh, him who has brought 
his individual life back to its source, who knows that 
he is one of God’s children, ‘27s one of the Father’s 
making, he giveth the white stone. To him who 
climbs on the stair of all his God-born efforts and 
God-given victories up to the height of his being 
—that. of looking face to face upon his ideal self in 
the bosom of the Father—God’s him, realized in him 
through the Father’s love in the Elder Brother’s de- 
votion—to him God gives the new name written. 

But I leave this, because that which follows em- 
braces and intensifies this individuality of relation in 
a fuller development of the truth. For the name is 
one “which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth 
it.” Not only then has each man his individual rela- 
tion to God, but each man has his peculiar relation 
to God. He is to God a peculiar being, made after 


his own fashion, and that of no one else; for when 


THE NEW NAME Mt! 


he is perfected: he shall receive the new name which 
no one else can understand. _Hence he can ‘worship 
God as no man else can worship him, — can under- 
stand God as no man else can understand him. This 
or that man may understand God more, may under- 
stand God better than he, but no.other man can 
understand God as he understands him. God give 
me grace to be humble before. thee, my brother, that 
I drag not my simulacrum of thee before the judgment- 
seat of the unjust judge, but look up to thyself for 
what revelation of God thou and no one else canst 
give. As the fir-tree lifts up itself with a far different 
need from the need of the palm-tree, so does each man 
stand before God, and lift up a different humanity to 
the common Father. And for each God has a different 
response. With every man he has a secret—the secret 
of the new name. In every man there is a loneliness, 
an inner chamber of peculiar life into which God only 
can enter. I say not it is the innermost chamber—but a 


chamber into which no brother, nay, no sister can come, 


112 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


From this it follows that there is a chamber also 
—(O God, humble and accept my speech)—a cham- 
ber in God himself, into which none can enter but the 
one, the individual, the peculiar man, — out of which 
chamber that man has to bring revelation and strength 
for his brethren. This is that for which he was made 
—to reveal the secret things of the Father. 

By his creation, then, each man is isolated with God ; 
each, in respect of his peculiar making, can say, “my 
God;” each can come to him alone, and speak with 
him face to face, as a man speaketh with his friend. 
There is no massing of men with God. When he speaks 
of gathered men, it is as a spiritual Jody, not a mass, 
For in a body every smallest portion is individual, 
and therefore capable of forming a part of the body. 

See, now, what a significance the symbolism of our 
text assumes. Each of us is a distinct flower or tree 
in the spiritual garden of God,—precious, each for 
his own sake, in the eyes of him who is even now 


making us,—each of us watered and shone upon and 


THE NEW NAME, 1¥3 


filléd with life. for the sake of his flower, his com- 
pleted béing, which will blossom out of him at Jast 
to the glory and pleasure of the great gardener. For 
each has within him a secret of the Divinity; each is 
growing towards the revelation of that secret to him- 
self, and so to the full reception, according to his 
measure, of the divine. Every moment that he is 
true to his true self, some new shine of the white 
stone breaks on his inward eye, some fresh channel 
is opened upward for the coming glory of the flower, 
the conscious offering of his whole being in beauty to 
the Maker. Each man, then, is in God’s sight worth. 
Life and action, thought and intent, are sacred. And 
what an end lies before us! To have a consciousness 
of our own ideal being flashed into us from the thought 
of God! Surely for this. may well give way all our 
paltry self-consciousnessés, our self-admirations and 
selfworships! Surely to know what he thinks about us 
will pale out of our souls all our thoughts about our- 


selves! and we may well hold them loosely now, and 
H 


IT4 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


be ready to let them go. Towards this result St Paul 
had already drawn near, when he who had begun the 
race with a bitter cry for deliverance from the body 
of his death, was able to say that he judged his own 
self no longer. 

“But is there not the worst of all dangers involved 
in such teaching—the danger of spiritual pride?” If 
there be, are we to refuse the spirit for fear of the 
pride? Or is there any other deliverance from pride 
except the spirit? Pride springs from supposed suc- 
cess in the high aim: with attainment itself comes 
humility. But here there is no room for ambition. 
Ambition is the desire to be above one’s neighbour; 
and here there is no possibility of comparison with 
one’s neighbour: no one knows what the white stone 
contains except the man who receives it. Here is room 
for endless aspiration towards the unseen ideal; none 
for ambition. Ambition would only be higher than 
others; aspiration would be high. Relative worth is 


not only unknown—to the children of the kingdom it 


THE NEW NAME, m5 


is unknowable. Each esteems the other better than 
himself. How shall the rose, the glowing heart of 
the summer heats, rejoice against the snowdrop risen 
with hanging head from the white bosom of the snow? 
Both are God’s thoughts; both are dear to him; both 
are needful to the completeness of his earth and the re- 
velation of himself. “God has cared to make me for 
himself,” says the victor with the white stone, “and has 
called me that which I like best; for my own name must 
be what I would have it, seeing it is myself. . What 
matter whether I be called a grass of the field, or an 
eagle of the air? a stone to build into his temple, or 
a Boanerges to wield his thunder? I am his; his idea, 
his making; perfect in my kind, yea, perfect in his 
sight ; full of him, revealing hirn, alone with him. Let 
him call me what he will. The name shall be precious 
as my life. I seek no more.” 

Gone then will be all anxiety as to what his neigh- 
bour may think about him. It is enough that God 


thinks about him. To be something to God—is not 


116 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


that praise enough? ‘To be a thing that God cares 
for and would have complete for himself, pecause it is 
worth caring for—is not that life enough ? 

Neither will he thus be isolated from his fellows. For 
that we say of one, we say of all. It is as ome that the 
man has claims amongst his fellows. Each will feel the 
sacredness and awe of his neighbour’s dark and silent 
speech with his God. Each will regard the other as 
a prophet, and look to him for what the Lord hath 
spoken. Each, asa high priest returning from his 
Holy. of Holies, will bring from his communion some 
glad tidings, some gospel of truth, which, when spoken, 
his neighbours shall receive and understand. Each 
will behold in the other a marvel of revelation, a pre- 
sent son or daughter of the Most High, come forth 
from him to reveal him afresh. In God each will draw 
nigh to each, 

Yes, there will be danger — danger as everywhere ; 
but he giveth more grace. And if the man who has 


striven up the heights should yet fall from them into 


THE NEW NAME. 417 


the deeps, is there not that fire of God, the consuming 
fire, which burneth and destroyeth not? 

To no-one who has not already had some speech 
with God, or who has not at least felt some aspiration 
towards the fount of his being, can all this appear other 
than foolishness. So be it. 

But, Lord, help them and us, and make our being 
‘grow inte thy likeness. If through ages of strife and 
ages of growth, yet let us at last see thy face, and 
receive the white stone from thy hand. That thus we 
may grow, give us day by day our daily bread. Fill 
us with the words that proceed out of thy mouth. 
Help us to lay up ¢veasures in heaven where neither moth 


‘nor rust doth corrupt. 


THE HEART WITH THE TREASURE. 


Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, 
where nwoth and rust doth corrupt, and where 
thieves break through and steal, But lay 
up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where 
seither moth nor rust doth corrupi, and 
where thiewes do not break through nor steal, 
For where your treasure is, there will your 


keart be alson— Matt. vi. 19, 20, 21, 


pee understand the words of our Lord is the busi- 
ness of life. For it is the main road to the un- 
derstanding of The Word himself. And to receive him 
is to receive the Father, and so to have Life in our- 
selves. And Life, the higher, the deeper, the simpler, 
the original, is the business of life. 
The Word is that by which we live, namely, Jesus 
himself ; and his words represent, in part, in shadow, 


in suggestion, himself. Any utterance worthy of being 


THE HEART WITH THE TREASURE, 119 


called @ truth, is human food: how much more Zhe 
Word, presenting no abstract laws of our being, 
but the vital relation of soul and body, heart and 
will, strength and rejoicing, beauty and light, to Him 
who first gave birth to them all! The Son came forth 
to be, before our eyes and in our hearts, that which he 
had made us for, that we might behold ¢he ¢ruth in 
him, and cry out for the living God, who, in the 
highest sense of all is The Truth, not as understood, 
but-as understanding, living, and being, doing ard 
creating the truth. “I am the truth,” said our Lord; 
and by those who are in some measure like him in 
being the truth, the Word can be understood. Let us 
try to understand him. 

Sometimes, no doubt, the Saviour would have spoken 
after a different fashion of speech, if he had come to 
Englishmen, instead of to Jews. But the lessons he 
gave would have been the same ; for even when ques- 
Honed about a matter for its passing import, his re- 


ply contained the enunciation of the great human 


120 ‘ UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


principle which lay in it, and hat lies changeless in 
every variation of changeful circumstance. With the 
light of added ages of -Christian experience, it ought 
to be easier for us to understand his words than it 
was for those who heard him. 

What, I ask now, is here the power of his word 
For: For where your treasure is, there will your heart 
te also? The meaning of the reason. thus added 
is not obvious upon its surface. It has to be sought 
for because of its depth at once and its simplicity. 
But it is so complete, so imaginatively comprehensive, 
so immediately operative on the conscience through 
its poetic suggestiveness, that when it is once under- 
stood, there is nothing more to be said, but every- 
thing to be done. 

“Why not lay up for ourselves treasures upon 
earth %” 

“Because there the moth and rust and the thief 
come.” 


“And so we should lose those treasures!” 


THE HEART WITH THE TREASURE. 121 


“Ves; by the moth and the rust and the thief.” 

. “Does the Lord then mean that the veason for not 
laying up such treasures is their transitory and cor- 
ruptible nature }” 

“No. He adds a Mor; ‘For where your treasure 
is, there will your heart be also.’” 

“Of course the heart will be where the treasure is; 
but what has that to do with the argument?” 

This: that what is with the treasure must fare as the 
treasure ; that the heart which haunts the treasure-house 
where the moth and rust corrupt, will be exposed to 
the same ravages as the treasure, will itself be rusted 
and rhoth-eaten. 

Many a man, many a woman, fair and flourishing 
to see, is going about with a rusty moth-eaten neart 
within that form of strength or beauty. 

“But this is only a figure.” 

True. But is the reality intended, less or more 
than the figure? Does not the rust and the moth 


mean more than disease? And does not the heart 


122 UNSPOKEN SERMONE. 


mean more than the heart? Does it not mean a 
deeper heart, the heart of your own self, not of your 
body? of the se/f that suffers, not pain, but misery ? 
of the self whose end is not comfort, or enjoyment, 
but blessedness, yea, ecstasy? a aeart which is the 
inmost chamber wherein springs the divine fountain of 
your being? a heart which God regards, though you 
may never have known its existence, not even when 
its writhings under the gnawing of the moth and the 
slow fire of the rust have communicated a dull pain 
to that outer heart which sends the blood to its ap- 
pointed course through your body? If God sees that 
heart corroded with the rust of cares, riddled into 
caverns and films by the worms of ambition and greed, 
then your heart is as God sees it, for God sees things 
as they are. And one day you will be compelled to 
see, nay, to feed your heart as God sees it; and to 
know that the cankered thing which you have within 
you, a prey to the vilest of diseases, is indeed the 


centre of your being, your very heart. 


THE HEART WITH THE TREASURE, 123 


Nor does the lesson apply to those only who worship 
Mammon, who give their lives, their best energies to 
the accumulation of wealth: it applies to those equally 
who in any way worship the transitory; who seek the 
praise of men more than the praise of God; who ‘vould 
make a show in the world by wealth, by taste, by intel- 
lect, by power, by art, by genius of any kind, and so 
would gather golden opinions to be treasured in a store- 
house of earth. 

Nor to such only, but surely to those as well whose 
pleasures are of a more evidently transitory nature still, 
such as the pleasures of the senses in every direction— 
whether lawfully or unlawfully indulged, if the joy of 
being is centred in them—do these words bear terrible 
warning. For the hurt lies not in this—that these plea- 
sures are false like the deceptions of magic, for such 
they are not: pleasures they are; nor yet in this—that 
they pass away, and leave a fierce disappointment be- 
hind: that is only so much the better; but the hurt 


lies in this — that the immortal, the infinite, created 


124 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


in the image of the everlasting God, is housed with 
the fading and the corrupting, and clings to them as 
its good—clings to them till it is infected and inter- 
penetrated with their proper diseases, which assume 
in it a form more terrible in proportion to the superi- 
ority of its kind, that which is mere decay in the one 
becoming moral vileness in the other, that which fits 
the one for the dunghill casting the other into ‘the 
outer darkness; creeps, that it may share with them, 
into a burrow in the earth, where its budded wings 
wither and damp and drop away from its shoulders, 
instead of haunting the open plains and the high- 
‘uplifted table-lands, spreading abroad its young pin- 
ions to the sun and the air, and strengthening them 
in further and further flights, till at last they should 
become strong to bear the God-born into the presence 
of its Father in Heaven. Therein lies the hurt. 

He whose heart is sound because it haunts the trea- 
sure-house of heaven may Je tempied of the devil, but will 


be first Zed up of the Spirit into the wilderness. 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS. 


Then was Fesus led up of the Spirit into the 
wilderness, to be tempted of the devil. And 
wnen he had fasted forty days and forty 
nights, he was afterward an hungred. And 
when the tempter came to him, he said, If 
thou be the Son of God, command that these 
stones be made bread. But he answered and 
said, It is written, Man shall not live by 
bread alone, but by every word that proceed- 
eth out of the mouth of God. Then the devil 
taketh hint up into the holy city, and setteth 
him on a pinnacle of the temple, and saith 
unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy- 
self down; for tt is written, He shall give 
his angels charge concerning thee, and in their 
hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time 
thou dash thy foot against a stone. Fesus 
said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt 
not tempt the Lord thy God. Again, the 
devil taketh him up into an exceeding high 
piountain, and showeth him all the kingdons 
oY the world, and the glory of them; and 
saith unto him, All these things will I give 
thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. 


¥26 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


Then saith Yesus unto him, Get thee hence, 
Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship 
the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou 
serve. Then the devil leavethhim:; and, bee 
hold, angels came and ministered unto him— 


Matt. iv. 1-12. 


te narrative must have one of two origins. 

Either it is an invention, such as many tales 
told of our Lord in the earlier periods of Christianity ; 
or it came from our Lord himself, for, according to 
the story, except the wild beasts, of earthly presence 
there was none at his Temptation. 

As to the former of the two origins: The story bears 
upon it no sign of human invention. The man who 
could see such things as are here embodied, dared not 
invent such an embodiment for them. To one in doubt 
about the matter it will be helpful, I think, to compare 
this story with the best of those for which one or 
other of the apocryphal gospels is our only authority 
—say the grand account of the Descent into Hell in 
the Gospel according to Nicodemus. 


If it have not this origin, there is but the other that 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, 127 
it can have—Our Lord himself. To this I will return 
presently. 

And now, let us approach the subject from another 
side. 

With this in view, I ask you to think how much God 
must know of which we know nothing. Think what an 
abyss of truth was our Lord, out of whose divine dark- 
ness, through that revealing countenance, that uplifting 
voice, those hands whose tenderness has made us great, 
broke all holy radiations of human significance. Think 
of his understanding, imagination, heart, in which lay 
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Must he not 
have known, felt, imagined, rejoiced in things that 
would not be told in human words, could not be 
understood by human hearts? Was he not always 
bringing forth out of the light inaccessible? Was not 
his very human form a veil hung over the face of the 
truth that, even in part by dimming the effulgence of 
-the glory, it might reveal? What could be conveyed 


must be thus conveyed: an infinite More must lie be- 


128 -UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


hind. And even of those things that might be par- 
tially revealed to men, could he talk to his Father 
and talk to his disciples in altogether the same forms, 
in altogether the same words? Would what he said 
to God on the mountain-tops, in the dim twilight or 
the gray dawn, never be such that his disciples’ could 
have understood it no more than the people, when 
the voice of God spoke to him from heaven, could 
distinguish that voice from the inarticulate thunderings 
of the element ? 

There is no attempt made to convcy to us even the 
substance of the battle of those forty days. Such a 
conflict of spirit as for forty days absorbed all the 
human necessities of Zhe JZan in the cares of the 
Godhead could not be rendered into forms intelligible 
to us, or rather, could not be in itself intelligible to 
us, and therefore could not take any form of which 
we could lay hold. It is not till the end of those 
forty days that the divine event begins to dawn out 


from the sacred depths of the eternal thought, becomes 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, 129. 
human enough to be made to appear, admits of utter- 
ance, becomes capable of being spoken in human forms 
to the éars of men, though ‘yet only in a dark saying, 
which he that hath ears to hear may hear, and he that 
hath a heart to understand may understand. For the 
mystery is not left behind, nor can the speech be yet 
clear unto men. 

At the same moment when the approaching event 
comes within human ken, may from afar be dimly descried 
by the God-upheld imtelligence, the same humanity seizes 
on the Master, and he is an hungred, The first sign 
that he has come back to us, that the strife is ap- 
proaching its human result, is his hunger. On what 
a sea of endless life do we float, are our poor neces- 
sities sustained—not the poorest of them dissociated 
from: the divine! Emerging from the stornis of the 
ocean of divine thought and feeling into the shallower 
waters that lave the human shore, bearing with him 
the treasures won in the ‘strife, eur Lord is straightway 


an hungred; and from this moment ‘the temptation 
et I 


130 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


is human, and can be in some measure understood 
by us. 

But could it even then have been conveyed to the 
human mind in merely intellectual forms? Or, grant- 
ing that it might, could it be so conveyed to those 
who were only beginning to have the vaguest, most 
error-mingled and confused notions about our Lord 
and what he came to do? No. The inward ex- 
periences of our Lord, such as could be conveyed 
to them at all, could be conveyed to them only in 
a parable. For far plainer things than these, our 
Lord chose this form. The form of the parable is the 
first in which truth will admit of being embodied. 
Nor is this all: it is likewise the fullest; and to 
the parable will the teacher of the truth ever return. 
Is he who asserts that the passage contains a simple 
narrative of actual events, prepared to believe, as 
the story, so interpreted, indubitably gives us to 
understand, that a visible demon came to our Lord 


and, himself the prince of worldly wisdom, thought, 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, 13! 


' by quoting Scripture after the manner of the priests, 
to persuade a good man to tempt God; thought, 
by the promise of power, to prevail upon him to cast 
aside every claim he had upon the human race, in 
fallmg down and worshipping one whom he knew to 
be the adversary of Truth, of Humanity, of God? 
How could Satan be so foolish? or, if Satan might 
be so foolish, wherein could such temptation so pre- 
sented have tempted our Lord? and wherein would 
a victory over such be a victory for the race? 

Told as a parable, it is as full of meaning as it 
would be bare if received as a narrative. 

Our Lord spake then this parable unto them, and 
so conveyed more of the truth with regard to his 
temptation in the wilderness, than could have been 
conveyed by.any other form in which the truth he 
wanted to give them might have been embodied. Still 
I do not think it follows that we have it exactly as 
he told it to his disciples. A man will hear but what 


he can hear, will see but what he can see, and, 


132 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


telling the story again, can tell but what he laid hold 
of, what he seemed to himself to understand. His 
effort. to reproduce the impression made upon his 
mind will, as well as the impression itself, be liable 
to numberless altering, modifying, even, in a measure, 
discomposing influences. But it does not, therefore, 
follow that. the reproduction is false. The mighty 
hosts of life-bearing worlds, requiring for-the freedom 
of their courses, and the glory of.their changes, such 
awful abysses of space, dwindle in the human eye to 
seeds of light sown upon a blue plain. How faint: in 
‘the ears of man is the voice of. their sphere-born 
thunder of adoration! Yet are they lovely indeed, utter- 
ing speéch and teaching knowledge. So this story may 
not be just as the Lord told it, and yet may contain in its 
mirror as much of the truth as we are able to receive, 
and as will afford us sufficient scope for a life’s discovery. 
The modifying influences of the human channels may be 
essential to God’s revealing mode. It is only by seeing 


them first from afar that we learn the laws of the heavens 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS. 133 


And now arises the question upon the right answer to 
which depends the whole elucidation of the story: 
How could the Son of God be tempted ? | 

If any one say that he was not moved by those temp- 
tations, he must be told that then they were no temp- 
tations to him, and he was not tempted; nor was his 
victory of more significance than that of the man who, 
tempted to bear false witness against his neighbour, 
abstains from robbing him of his goods. For human 
need, struggle, and hope, it bears no meaning; and we 
must reject the whole as a fantastic folly of crude in- 
vention; a mere stage-show; a lie for the poor sake 
of the fancied truth ; a doing of evil that good might 
come; and, with how many fragments soever of truth 
its mud may be filled, not in any way to be received 
as a divine message. 

But asserting that these were real temptations if 
the story is to be received at all, am I not involving 
myself in a greater difficulty still? For how could 


the Son of God be tempted with evil—with that which 


134 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


must to him appear in its true colours of discord, its 
true shapes of deformity? Or how could he then be 
the Son of his Father who cannot be tempted with evil? 

In the answer to this lies the centre, the essen- 
tial germ of the whole interpretation: He was not 
tempted with Evil. but with Good; with inferior 
forms of good, that is, pressing in upon him, while 
the higher forms of good held themselves aloof, biding 
their time, that is, God’s time. I do not believe that 
the Son. of God could be tempted with evil, but I do 
believe that he could be tempted with good—to yield 
to which temptation would have been evil in him 
—ruin’ to the universe. 

But does not all evil come from good? 

Yes; but it has come /rom it. It is no longer 
good. A good corrupted is no longer a good. Such 
could not tempt our Lord. Revenge may originate 
in a sense of justice, but it is revenge not justice; 
an evil thing, for it would be fearfully unjust. Evil 


is evil whatever it may have come from. The Lord 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS. 135 
could not have felt tempted to take vengeance 
upon his enemies, but he might have felt tempted 
to destroy the wicked from the face of the earth-— 
to destroy them from the face of the earth, I say, 
not to destroy them for ever. To that I do not 
think he could have felt tempted. 

But we shall find illustration enough of what I 
mean in the matter itself. Let us look at the in- 
dividual temptations represented in the parable. 

The informing idea which led to St Matthew’s ar- 
rangement seems to me superior to that showing itself 
in St Luke’s. In the two accounts, the closes, while 
each is profoundly significant, are remarkably different. 

Now let us follow St Matthew’s record. 

“And we shall see how the devil tempted him / 
evil, but not with evil. 

First, He was hungry, and the devil said, Make bread 
of this stone. 

The Lord had been fasting for forty days—a fast 


impossible except during intense mental absorption. 


136 ; UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


Let no one think to glorify this fast by calling it mira- 
culous. . Wonderful such fasts are on record on the 
part. of holy men; and inasmuch as the Lord was 
more of a man than his brethren, insomuch might 
he -be farther withdrawn in the depths of his spiritual 
humanity from the outer region of his physical nature. 
So much the slower would be the goings on of that 
nature; and fasting in his case might thus be extended be- 
yond the utmost limits of similar fasts in others. This, 
I believe, was all—and this a/ infinite in its relations. 
This is the grandest, simplest, and most. significant, 
and, therefore, the divinest way of regarding his fast. 
Hence, at the end of the forty days, it was not hun- 
ger alone that made food tempting to him, but that 
exhaustion of the whole system, wasting itself all the 
time it was forgotten, which, reacting on the mia 
when the mind was already worn out with its own 
tension, must have deadened it so, that (speaking after 
the experience of his brethren, which alone will ex- 


plain his,) it could for the time see or feel nothing of 


THE TEMPTATION IN TILE WILDERNESS. 137. 


the spiritual, -and could only Jdelieve in the unfelt, 
the unseen. What a temptation was here! There 
is no sin in wishing to eat; no sin in procuring 
food honestly that one may eat. But it risés even 
into an awful duty, when a man knows that to eat 
will restore the lost vision of the eternal; will, operat- 
ing on the brain, and thence on the mind, render the 
man capable of hope as well as of faith, of glad- 
ness as well as of confidence, of praise as well as 
of patience. Why then should he not eat? Why 
should he not put forth the power that was in him 
that he might eat? Because such power was his, 
not to take care of himself, but to work the work of 
him that sent him. Such power was his not even to 
honour his Father save as his Father chose to be 
honoured, who is far more honoured in the ordinary 
way of common wonders, than in the extraordinary 
way of miracles. Because it was God’s business to 
take care of him, his to do what the Father told him 


to do. To make that stone bread would be to take 


138 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


the care out of the Father’s hands, and turn the divinest 
thing in the universe into the merest commonplace 
of self-preservation. 

And in nothing was he to be beyond his brethren, 
save in faith. No refuge for him, any more than for 
them, save in the love and care of the Father. Other 
refuge, let it be miraculous power or what you will, 
would be but hell to him. God is refuge. God is life. 

“Was he not to eat when it came in his way? And 
did not the bread come in his way, when his power 
met that which could be changed into it?” 

Regard that word changed. The whole matter lies 
in that. Changed from what? From what God had 
made it. Changed into what? Into what he did not 
make it. Why changed? Because the Son was hun- 
gry, and the Father would not feed him with food con- 
venient for him! The Father did not give him a 
stone when he asked for bread. It was Satan that 
brought the stone and told him to provide for himself. 


The Father said, That is a stone. The Son would 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, 139 


not say, That is a loaf. No one creative jia¢ shall 
contradict another. The Father and the Son are of 
one mind. The Lord could bunger, could starve, but 
would not change into another thing what his Father 
had made one thing.* 

If we regard the answer he gave the devil, we 
shall see the root of the matter at once: “ Man 
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word 
that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.” Yea 
even by the word which made that stone that stone. 


Everything is all right. It is life indeed for him to 


* There was no such change in the feeding of the multitudes, The fish 
and the bread were fish and bread before. I think this is significant as regards 
the true nature of a miracle, and its relation to the ordinary ways of God, 
There was in these miracles, and I thinkin all, only a hastening of appear- 
ances; the doing of that in a day, which may ordinarily take a thousand 
years, for with God time is not what it is with us. He makes it, And the 
hastening of a process does not interfere in the least with cause and effect in 
the process, nor does it render the process one whit more miraculous. In- 
deed, the wonder of the growing corn is to me greater than the wonder of 
feeding the thousands. It is easier to understand the creative power going 
forth at once—immediately—than through the countless, the lovely, the 
seemingly forsaken wonders of the corn-field. To the merely scientific man 
all this is pure nonsense, or at best belongs to the region of the fancy. 
The time will come, I think, when he will see that there is more in it, namely, 


a higher reason, a loftier science, how incorrectly soever herein indicated, 


¥40 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


leave that a stone, which the Father had made a 
done It would be death to him to alter one word 
that He had spoken. 

“Man shall not live by bread alone.” There are 
other ways of living besides that which comes by bread. 
A man will live by the word of God, by what God says 
to him, by what God means between Him and him, 
by the truths of being which the Father alone can re- 
veal to his child, by the communion of love between 
them. Without the bread he will die, as men say; but 
he will not find that he dies. He will only find that 
the tent which hid the stars from him is gone, and 
that he can see the heavens; or rather, the earthly 
house will melt away from around him, and he will 
find that he has a palace-home about him, another 
and loftier word of God clothing upon him. So the 
man lives by the word of God even in refusing the 
bread which God does not give him, for, instead of 
dying because he does not eat, he rises into a higher 


life -even of the same kind. 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, I4t 


‘For I have been speaking of the consciousness of 
existence, and not of that higher spiritual life on which 
all other life depends. That of course can for no 
one moment exist save from the heart of God. . When 
a man tries to live by bread and not’ by the word that 
comes out of that heart of God, he may think he lives, 
but he begins to die or is dead. Our Lord says, “I 
can do without the life that comes of bread: without 
the life that comes of the word of my Father, I. die 
indeed.” Therefore he does not think twice about 
the matter. That God’s will be done is all’ his care. 
That done, all will be right, and all right with him, 
whether he thinks about himself ‘or not. . For. the 
Father does not forget the child who isso busy trust- 
img in him, that he cares not even to pray for him- 
self, 

In the higher aspect of this first temptation, arising 
from the fact that a man cannot féel the things he believes 
except under certain conditions of physical well-being 


dependent upon food, the answer is the same: A man 


142 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


does not live by his feelings any more than by 
bread, but by the Truth, that is, the Word, the Will, 
the uttered Being of God 

I am even ashamed to yield here to the necessity 
of writing what is but as milk for babes, when I would 
gladly utter, if I might, only that which would be as 
bread for men and women. What I must say is this: 
that, by the Word of God, I do not understand Zhe 
Bible. The Bible is a Word of God, the chief of his 
written words, because it tells us of The Word, the 
Christ ; but everything God has done and given man 
to know is a word of his, a will of his; and inasmuch 
as it is a will of his, it is a necessity to man, without 
which he cannot live: the reception of it is man’s life. 
For inasmuch as God’s utterances are a whole, every 
smallest is essential: he speaks no _ foolishness— 
there are with him no vain repetitions. But by she 
word of the God and not Maker only, who is God 
Just because he sfeaks to men, I must understand, in 


the deepest sense, every revelation of Himself in the 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, 143 


heart and consciousness of man, so that the man knows 
that God is there, nay, rather, that he is here. Even 
Christ himself is not The Word of God in the deepest 
sense fo a man, until he is this Revelation of God to 
the man,—until the Spirit that is the meaning in the 
Word has come to him,—until the speech is not a 
sound as of thunder, but the voice of words; for a 
word is more than an utterance—it is a sound to be 
understood. No word, I ‘say, is fully a Word of God 
until it is a Word /o man, until the man therein re- 
cognizes God. This is that for which the word is 
spoken. The words of God are as the sands and the 
stars,—they cannot be numbered; but the end of all 
and each is this—to reveal God. Nor, moreover, can 
the man know that any one of them is the word of 
God, save as it comes thus to him, is a revelation of 
God in him. It is 7 him that it may be zz him; but 
till it is zz him he cannot Avow that it was fo him. 
God must be God zz man before man can know 


that he is God, or that he has received aright, 


ee 


144 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


and for that for which it was spoken, any one of 
his words.* : : 

If, by any will of God—that is, any truth in him— 
we live; .we live. by it tenfold when that will has 
become a word to, us...When we-receive it, his will 
becomes our. will, and so we live by God. But the 
word of God once: understood, a man must live by 
the faith of what God is, and not by his own feelings 
even in regard to God. It is the Truth itself, that 
which God is, known by,what gceth out of his mouth, 
that man lives by. ..And, when he can no longer 
fed the truth, he shall not, therefore die. He lives 
because God is true; and he is able to know that 
he lives because -he:knows, having once understood 
the word, that. God: is truth. He believes in the God 
of former vision, lives by that word therefore, when 


all is dark and there is no vision. © 


* No doubt the humbte spirit: will receive the testimony: of every one 
whom he reveres, and look in. the direction indicated for a word from 
the Father; but till he thus receives it in his heart, he cannot know what 
the word spoken of is. 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS. 145 


We now come to the second attempt of the Enemy. 

“Then if God is to be so trusted, try him. Fain would 
I see the result. Shew thyself his darling. Here is the 
word itself for it: He shall give his angels charge con- 
cerning thee; not a stone shall hurt thee. Take him 
at his word. Throw thyself down, and strike the con- 
viction into me that thou art the Son of God. For 
thou knowest thou dost not look like what thou sayest 
thou art.” 

Again. with a written word, in return, the Lord meets 
him. And he does not quote the scripture for logical 
purposes—to confute Satan intellectually, but as giving 
even Satan the reason of his conduct. Satan quotes 
Scripture as a verbal authority; our Lord meets him 
with a Scripture by the truth in which he regulates his 
conduct. 

If we examine it, we shall find that this answer con- 
tains the same principle as the former, namely this, 
that to the Son of God the will of God is Life. It 


was a temptation to shew the powers of the world that 
K 


146 : UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


he was the Son of God; that to him the elements were 
subject; that he was above the laws of Nature, because 
he was the Eternal Son; and thus stop the raging of 
the heathen, and the vain imaginations of the people. 
It would be but to shew them the truth. But he was 
the Sox of God: what was his father’s will? Such was 
not the divine way of convincing the world of sin, of 
righteousness, of judgment. If the Father told him to 
cast himself down, that moment the pinnacle pointed 
naked to the sky. If the devil threw him down, let 
God send his angels; or, if better, allow him to be 
dashed to pieces in the valley below. But never will 
he forestall the divine will. The Father shall order 
what comes next. The Son will obey. In the path of 
his work he will turn aside for no stone. ‘There let the 
angels bear him in their hands if need be. But he will 
not choose the path because there is a stone in it. He 
will not choose at all: He will go where the Spirit 
ceads him. 


» I think this will throw some light upon tne words of 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, 147 


our Lord, “If ye have faith and doubt not, if ye shall 
say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou 
cast into the sea; it shall be done.” Good people, 
amongst them John Bunyan, have been tempted to 
tempt the Lord their God upon the strength of this 
saying, just as Satan sought to tempt our Lord on the 
strength of the passage he quoted from the Psalms. 
Happily for such, the assurance to which they would 
give the name of faith generally fails them in time. 
Faith is that which, knowing the Lord’s will, goes 
and does it; or, not knowing it, stands and waits, 
content in ignorance as in knowledge, because God 
wills; neither pressing into the hidden future, nor care- 
less of the knowledge which opens the path of action. 
It is its noblest exercise to act with uncertainty of the 
result, when the duty itself is certain, or even when a 
course seems with strong probability to be duty.* But 
to put God to the question in any other way than by 


* In the latter case a man may be mistaken, and his work will be burned, 
but by that very fire he will be saved. Nothing saves a man more than the 
burning of his work, except the doing of work that can stand the fire, 


148 UNSPOKEN ‘SERMONS, 


saying, What wilt thou have me to do? is an attempt ta 
compel God to declare himself, or to hasten his work. 
This probably was the sin of Judas. It is presumption 
of a kind similar to the making of a stone into bread, 
It is, as it were, either a forcing of God to act where he 
has created no need for action, or the making of a case 
wherein he shall seem to have forfeited his word if he 
does not act.. The man is therein dissociating himself 
from God so far that, instead of acting by the divine will 
from within, he acts in God’s face, as it were, to see 
what he will do. Man’s first business is, “ What does 
God want me to do?” not “ What will God do if I do 
so and so?” ‘To tempt a parent after the flesh in such 
a manner would be impertinence: to tempt God so is 
the same vice in its highest form—a natural result of that 
condition of mind which is worse than all the so-called 
cardinal sins, namely, spiritual pride, which attributes 
the tenderness and love of God not to man’s being and 
man’s need, but to some distinguishing excellence in 


the individual himself, which causes the Father to love 


—_. 
ee a = 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS. 149 


him better than his fellows, and so pass by his. faults 
with a smile. Not thus did the Son of God regard his 
relation to his Father. . The faith which will remove 
mountains is that confidence in God which comes from 
seeking nothing but his will. A man who was thus 
faithful would die of hunger sooner than say to the 
stone, Be bread; would meet the scoffs of the unbeliev- 
ing without reply and with apparent defeat, sooner than 
say to the mountain, Be thou cast into the sea, even if he 
knew that it would be torn from its foundations at the 
word, except he knew first that God would have it so. 
And thus I am naturally brought to consider more 
fully how this should be a real temptation to the Son of 
Man. It would be good to confound his adversaries ; 
to force conviction upon them that he was the God- 
supported messenger he declared himself. Why should 
he have adversaries a moment longer to interfere be- 
tween him and the willing hearts which would believe 
if they could? The: answer to all this was plain to our 


‘Lord, and is plain to.us now: It was not the way of the 


150 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


Father’s will. It would not fall in with that gradual 
development of life and history by which the Father 
works, and which must be the way to breed free, God- 
loving wills. It would be violent, theatrical, therefore 
poor in nature and in result,—not God-like in any way. 
Everything in God’s doing comes harmoniously with 
and from all the rest. Son of Man, his history shall be 
a man’s history, shall be The Man’s history. Shall that 
begin with an exception? Yet it might well be a temp- 
tation to Him who longed to do all he could for men. 
He was the Son of God: why should not the sons of 
God know it? 

But as this temptation in the wilderness was an epi- 
tome and type of the temptations to come, against which 
for forty days he had been making himself strong, revolv- 
ing truth beyond our reach, in whose light every com- 
monest duty was awful and divine, a vision fit almost to 
oppress a God in his humiliation, so we shall under- 
‘stand the whole better if we look at his life in relation 


to it. As he refused to make stones bread, so through- 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS. 1§t 


out that life he never wrought a miracle to help himself; 
as he refused to cast himself from the temple to con- 
vince Satan or glory visibly in his Sonship, so he 
steadily refused to give the sign which the human 
Satans demanded, notwithstanding the offer of convic- 
tion which they held forth to bribe him to the grant. 
How easy it seems to have confounded them, and 
strengthened his followers! But such conviction would 
stand in the way of a better conviction in his disciples, 
and would do his adversaries only harm. For neither 
could not in any true sense be convinced by such a 
show: it could but prove his power. It might prove 
so far the presence of a God; but would it prove that 
God? Would it bring him nearer to them, who could 
not see him in the face of his Son? To say Zhou art 
God, without knowing what the Zou means—of what 
use is it? God is a name only, except we know God, 
Our Lord did not care to be so acknowledged. 

On the same principle, the very miracles which from 


their character did partially reveal his character to 


152 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


those who already had faith in him, he would-not do 
where unbelief predominated. He often avoided cities 
and crowds, and declined mighty works because of un- 
belief. Except for the loving help they gave the dis- 
tressed, revealing him to their hearts as the Redeemer 
from evil, I doubt if he would have wrought a single 
miracle. I do not think he cared much about them. 
Certainly, as regarded the onlookers, he did not expect 
much to result from those mighty deeds. A mere 
marvel is practically soon forgotten, and long before 
it is forgotten, many minds have begun to doubt the 
senses, their own even, which communicated it. In- 
ward sight alone can convince of truth; signs and 
wonders never. No number of signs can do more 
than convey a probability that he who shews them 
knows that of which he speaks. They cannot con- 
vey the truth. But the vision of the truth itself, in 
the knowledge of itself, a something altogether be- 
yond the region of signs and wonders, is the power 


of God, is salvation. This vision was in the Lord’s face 


THE TEMPTATION IN’“THE WILDERNESS. ($3 


and form to the pure in heart who were able to see 
God ; but not in his signs and wonders to those who 
sought after such. Yet it is easy to see how the tempta- 
tion might for a moment work upon a mind that longed 
to enter upon its labours with the credentials of its 
truth. How the true heart longs to be received by its 
brethren—to be-known in its truth! But no. The 
truth must show itself in God’s time, in and. by the 
labour. The kingdom must come in God’s holy human 
way. Not by a stroke of grandeur, but by years.of love, 
yea, by centuries of seeming bafflement, by sons of 
labour, must he grow into the hearts of the sons. and 
daughters of his Father in heaven. The Lord himself 
will be bound by the changeless laws which are the 
harmony of the Father’s being and utterance. He will 
be, not seem. He will be, and thereby, not therefore, 
seem.. Yet, once more, even on him, the idea of assert- 
ing the truth in holy power such as he could have put 
forth, must have dawned in grandeur. The thought was 


zood: to have yielded to it would have been the loss 


154 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


of the world ; nay, far worse—ill inconceivable to the 
human mind—the God of obedience had fallen from his 


throne, and. all is blackness. 


But let us not forget that the whole is a faint parable 
—faint I mean in relation to the grandeur of the reality, 
as the ring and the shoes are poor types (yet how 
dear !) of the absolute love of the Father to his prodigal 
children. 

We shall now look at the third temptation. The first 
was to help himself in his need; the second, perhaps, 
to assert the Father; the third to deliver his brethren. 

To deliver them, that is, after the fashion of men— 
from the outside stil. Indeed, the whole Temptation 
may be regarded as the contest of the seen and the un- 
seen, of the outer and inner, of the likely and the true, 
of the show and the reality. And as in the others, the 
evil in this last lay in that it was a temptation to save 
his brethren, instead of doing the will of his Father. 

Could it be other than a temptation to think that 


he might, if he would, lay a righteous grasp upon the. 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS. 155 


reins of government, leap into the chariot of power, 
and ride torth conquering and to conquer? Glad 
visions arose before him of the prisoner breaking 
jubilant from the cell of injustice; of the widow lift- 
ing up the bowed head before the devouring Pharisee ; 
of weeping children bursting into shouts at the sound 
oi the wheels of the chariot before re oppression 
and wrong shrunk and withered, behind which sprung 
the fir-tree instead of the thorn, and the myrtle instead 
of the brier. What glowing visions of holy vengeance, 
what rosy dreams of human blessedness—and all from 
his hand—would crowd such a brain as his!—not like 
the castles-in-the-air of the aspiring youth, for he builds 
at random, because he knows that he cannot realize; 
but consistent and harmonious as well as grand, be- 
cause he knew them within his reach. Could he not 
mould the people at his will? Could he not, trans- 
figured in his snowy garments, caJ) aloud in the streets 
of Jerusalem, “ Behold your King?” And the fierce 


warriors of his nation would start at the sound; the 


156 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


ploughshare would be beaten into the sword, and the 
pruning-hook into the spear and the nation, rushing 
to his call, learn war yet again indeed,—a grand, holy 
war—a crusade—no; we should not have had shat 
word ; but a war against the tyrants ‘of the race—the 
best, as they called themselves—who trod upon their 
brethren, and would not suffer them even to look to 
the heavens.—Ah! but when were his garments white 
as snow? When, ‘through them, glorifying them as 
it'passed, did the light stream from: his glorified body ? 
Not when he looked to such a ‘conquest ; but when, 
on a mount like this, he “ spake of the decease 
that he should accomplish at Jerusalem”! Why should 
this be “the sad end of the war’? “Thou shalt 
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou 
serve.” Not even thine own visions of love and 
truth, O Saviour of the world, shall be thy guides to 
thy goal, but the will of thy Father in heaven. 

But how would he, thus conquering, be a servant of 


Satan? Wherein would this be a falling-down and a 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, 157 


worshipping of him (that is, an acknowledging of the 
worth of him) who was the lord of misrule and its 
pain? 

I will not inquire whether such an enterprise could 
be -accomplished without the worship of Satan,— 
whether men could be managed for such an end with- 
out more or less of the trickery practised by every 
ambitious leader, every self-serving ‘conqueror— with- 
out double-dealing, tact, flattery, finesse. I will: not 
inquire into this, because, on the most distant sup- 
position of our Lord being the leader of his country’s 
-armies, these things drop out of sight as impossibilities, 
If these were necessary, such a career for him refuses 
to be for a moment imagined, But I will ask whether 
_to know better and do not so well, is not a serving of 
Satan ;—whether to lead men on in the name of God 
as towards the best when the end is not the best, is not 
a serving of Satan ;—whether to flatter their pride by 
~making them conquerors of the enemies of their nation 


instead of their own evils, is not a serving of Satan ; — 


183 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


in a word, whether, to desert the mission of God, who 
knew that men could not be set free in that way, and 
sent him to be a man, a true man, the one man, 
among them, that his life might become their life, 
and that so they might be as free in prison or on 
the cross, as upon a hill-side or on a throne,—whether, 
so deserting the truth, to give men over to the lie of 
believing other than spirit and truth to be the worship 
of the Father, other than love the fulfilling of the law, 
other than the offering of their best selves the service 
of God, other than obedient harmony with the primal 
love and truth and law, freedom,—whether, to desert 
God thus, and give men over thus, would not have 
been to fall down and worship the devil. Not all the 
sovereignty of God, as the theologians call it, dele- 
gated to the Son, and administered by the wisdom of 
the Spirit that was given to him without measure, 
could have wrought the kingdom of heaven in one 
corner of our earth. Nothing but the obedience of 


the Son, the obedience unto the death, the absolute 


THE TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS. t§9 


doing of the will of God because it was the truth, 
could redeem the prisoner, the widow, the orphan. But 
it would redeem them by redeeming the conquest-ridden 
conqueror too, the stripe-giving jailer, the unjust judge, 
the devouring Pharisee himself with the insatiable 
moth-eaten heart. The earth should be free because 
Love was stronger than Death. Therefore shou!d fierce- 
néss and wrong and hypocrisy and God-service play 
out their weary play. He would not pluck the spread- 
ing branches of the tree; he would lay the axe to its 
root. It would take time; but the tree would be 
dead 2t last—dead, and cast into the lake of fire. 
It would take time; but his Father had time enough - 
and to spare. It would take courage and strength 
and self-denial and endurance; but his Father could 
give him all. It would cost pain of body and mind, 
yea, agony and torture; but those he was ready to 
take on himself. It would cost him the vision of 
many sad and, to all but him, hopeless sights; he 


must: see tears without wiping them, hear sighs with- 


160 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


out changing them into laughter, see the dead lie, 
and let them lie; see Rachel weeping for her chil 
dren and refusing to be comforted; he must look on 
his brothers and sisters crying as children over their 
broken toys, and must not mend them; he must go 
on to the grave, and they not know that thus he was 
setting all things right for them. His work must be 
one with and completing God’s Creation and God’s 
History. The disappointment. and sorrow and fear 
he could, he would bear. The will of God should be 
done. Man should be free,—not merely man as he 
thinks of himself, but man as God thinks of him. 
The divine idea shall be set free in the divine bosom; 
the man on earth shall see his angel face to face: 
He shall grow into the likeness of the divine thought, 
free not in his own fancy, but in absolute divine fact 
of being, as in God’s idea. The great and beautiful 
and perfect will of God must be done. 

“Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt wor: 


ship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” 


THF TEMYTATION IN THE WILDERNESS, 16r 


— ——uwqc— —_- 


It was when Peter would have withstood him as he 
set his face steadfastly to meet this death at Jerusalem, 
that he gave him the same kind of answer that he now 
gave to Satan, calling him Satan too. 

“Then the devil leaveth him, and. behold angels came 
and ministered unto him.” 

So saith St Matthew. They brought him the food 
he had waited for, walking ia the strength of the word. 
He would have died if it ha<i not come now. 

“And when the devil had ended all the temptation, 
he departed from kim for a season.” 


So saith St Luke. 


Then Satan ventured once more. When? 

Was it then, when at the last moment, in the agony 
of the last faint, sic Tord cried out, “Why hast thou 
forsaken me?” when, having done the great work, 
having laid it aside clean and pure as the linen cloth 
that was ready now to infold him, another cloud 
than that on the mount overshadowed his soul, and 


out of it came a voiceless persuasion that, after all 
L 


162 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


was done, God did not care for his work or for 
him ? 

Even in those words the adversary was foiled—and 
for ever. For when he seemed to be forsaken, his cry 


was still, “ JZy God! my God!” 


THE ELOL 


My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 

mel” Sr Matruew xxvii. 46. 
I DO not know that I should dare to approach 
this, of all utterances into which human breath 
has ever been moulded, most awful in import, did I 
not feel that, containing both germ and blossom of 
the final devotion, it contains therefore the deepest 
practical lesson the human heart has to learn. The 
Lord, the Revealer, hides nothing that can be re- 
vealed, and will not warn away the foot that treads 
in naked humility even upon the ground of that 
terrible conflict between him and Evil, when the 
smoke of the Lattle that was fought not only with gar- 
ments rolled in blood but with burning and fuel of 


fire, rose up between him and his Father, and for 


164 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


the one terrible moment ere he broke the bonds of 
ie and walked weary and triumphant into his arms, 
hid God from the eyes of his Son. He will give us 
even to meditate the one thought that slew him at 
last, when he could bear no ‘more, and fled to the 
Father to know that he loved him, and was well- 
pleased with him. For Satan had come at length 
yet again, to urge him with his last temptation; to 
tell him that although he had done his part, God 
had forgotten his; that although he had lived by 
the word of his mouth, that mouth had no word 
more to speak to him; that although he had refused 
to tempt him, God had left him’ to be tempted more 
than he could bear; that although he had worshipped 
none other, for that worship God. did not care. The 
Lord hides not his sacred sufferings, for truth is light, 
and would be light in the minds of men. The Holy 
Child, the Son of the Father, has nothing to conceal, 
‘but all the Godhead to reveal. ‘Let us then put off our 


shoes, and draw near, and bow the head, and kiss those 


THE ELOI 165 


_ 


feet that bear for ever the Scars of our victory. In 
those feet we clasp the safety of our suffering, our 
sinning brotherhood. 

It is with the holiest fear that we should approach 
the terrible fact of the sufferings. of our.Lord. Let no 
one think that those were less because he was more. 
The more delicate the nature, the more alive to all 
that is lovely and true, lawful and right, the more 
does it feel the antagonism of pain, the inroad of 
death upon life; the more dreadful is that breach of 
the harmony of things whose sound is torture. He 
felt more than man could feel, because he had a larger 
feeling. He was even therefore worn out sooner 
than another man would have been. These sufferings 
were awful indeed when they began to invade the 
region about the will; when the struggle to keep con- 
sciously trusting in God began to sink in darkness; 
when the Will of The Man put forth its last deter- 
mined effort in that cry after the vanishing vision of 


the Father: MZ4y God, my Ged, why hast thou forsaken 


- 


166 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


me? Never had it been so with him before. Never 
before had he: been unable to see God beside him. 
Yet never was God nearer him than now. For never 
was Jesus more divine. He could not see, could not 
feel him near; and yet it is “JZy God” that he 
cries. 

~ Thus the Will of Jesus, in the very moment when 
his faith seems about to yield, is finally triumphant. 
It has no jeding now to support it, no beatific vision 
to absorb it. It stands naked in his soul and tor- 
tured, as he stood naked and scourged before Pilate. 
Pure and simple and surrounded by fire, it declares 
for God. The sacrifice ascends in the cry, ALy God. 
The cry comes not out of happiness, out of peace, out 
of hope. Not even out of suffering comes that cry. 
It was a cry in desolation, but it came out of Faith, 
It is the last voice of Truth, speaking when it can but 
cry. The divine horror of that moment is unfathomable 
by human soul, It was blackness of darkness. And 


yet he would believe. Yet he would hold fast. God 


THE ELOIL 169 


_ 


was his God yet. Jy God—and in the cry came forth 
the Victory, and all was over soon. Of the peace 
that followed that cry, the peace of a perfect soul, 
large as the universe, pure as light, ardent as life, 
victorious for God and his brethren, he himself alone 
can ever know the breadth and length, and depth 
and height. / 

Without this last trial of all, the temptations of our 
Master had not been so full as the human cup could 
hold; there would have been one region through which 
we had to pass wherein we might ‘call aloud upon our 
Captain-Brother, and there would be. no voice or hear- 
ing: he had avoided the fatal spot! The temptations 
of the desert came to the young, strong man with his 
road before him and the presence of his God around 
him; nay, gathered their very force from the exuber- 
ance of his conscious faith. ‘‘ Dare and do, for God is 
with thee,” said the devil. “I know it, and therefore 
I will wait,” returned the king of his brothers. And 


now, after three years of divine action, when his course 


1168 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


is run, when the old age of finished work is come, when 
the whole frame is tortured until the regnant brain falls 
whirling down the blue gulf of fainting, and the giving 
up of the ghost is at hand, when the friends have for- 
saken him and fled, comes the voice of the enemy agaia 
at his ear: “ Despair and die, for God is not with thee. 
All is in vain. Death, not Life, is thy refuge. Make 
haste to Hades, where thy torture will be over. Thou 
hast deceived thyself, He never was with thee. He was 
the God of Abraham. Abraham is dead. Whom 
makest thou thyself ” “My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me?” the Master cries. For God was 
his God still, although he had forsaken him—forsaken 
his vision that his faith might glow out triumphant; for- 
saken imself? no; come nearer to him than ever; 
come nearer, even as— but with a yet deeper, more 
awful pregnancy of import—even as the Lord himself 
withdrew from the bodily eyes of his friends, that he 
might dwell in their profoundest being. 


I do not think it was our Lord’s deepest trial when 


THE ELOL ; 169 


in the garden he prayed that the cup might pass from 
him, and prayed yet again that the will of the Father 
might be done. For that will was then present with 
him. He was living and acting in that will. But now 
the foreseen horror has come. He is drinking the dread 
cup, and the Will has ‘vanished from his eyes. Were: 
that Will visible in his suffering, his will could bow with: 
tearful gladness under the shelter of its grandeur. But 
now his will is left alone to drink the cup of The Will 
in torture. In the sickness of this agony, the Will ot 
Jesus arises perfect at last ; and of itself, unsupported 
now, declares—a naked consciousness of misery hung 
in the waste darkness of the universe — declares for 
God, in defiance of pain, of death, of apathy, of self, 
of negation, of the blackness within and around it ; calls 
aloud upon the vanished God. 

This is the Faith of the Son of God. God withdrew, 
as it were, that the perfect Will of the Son might arise 
and go forth to find the Will of the Father. 

_Is it possible that even then he thought of the lost 


170 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


sheep who could not believe that God was their Father ; 
and for them, too, in all their loss and blindness and 
unlove, cried, saying the word they might say, knowing 
for them that God means Father and more,‘and know- 
ing now, as he had never known till now, what a fearful 
thing it is to be without God and without hope? I dare 
not answer the question I put. 

But wherein or what can this Alpine apex of faith 
have to do with the creatures who call themselves Chris- 
tians, creeping about in the valleys, hardly knowing 
that there are mountains above them, save that they. 
take offence at and stumble over the pebbles washed 
across their path by the glacier streams? I will tell 
you. We are and remain such creeping Christians, be- 
cause we look at ourselves and not at Christ ; because 
we gaze at the marks of our own soiled feet, and the 
trail of our own defiled garments, instead of up at the 
snows of purity, whither the soul of Christ clomb. 
Each, putting his foot in the footprint of the Master, 


and so defacing it, turns to examine how far his neigh- 


THE ELOL 171 


bour’s footprint corresponds with that which he still 
calls the Master's, although it is but his own. Or, 
having committed a petty fault, I mean a fault such 
as only a petty creature could commit, we mourn over 
the defilement to ourselves, and the shame of it before 
our friends, children, or servants, instead of hastening 
to make the due confession and amends to our fellow, 
and then, forgetting our paltry self with its well-earned 
disgrace, lift up our eyes to the glory which alone will 
quicken the true man in us, and kill the peddling crea- 
ture we so wrongly call our se¢/f The true self is. that 
which can look Jesus in the face, and say AZy Lord. 
When the inward sun is shining, and the wind of 
thought, blowing where it lists amid the flowers and 
leaves of fancy and imagination, rouses glad forms and 
feelings, it is easy to look upwards, and say My God. 
It is easy when the frosts of external failure have braced 
the mental nerves to healthy endurance and fresh effort 
after labour, it is easy then to turn to God and trust in 


him, in whom all honest exertion gives an ability as well 


172 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


as a right to trust. It is easy in pain, so long as it does 
not pass certain undefinable bounds, to hope in God 
for deliverance, or pray for strength to endure. But 
what is to be done when all feeling is gone? when a 
man does not know whether he believes or not, whether 
he loves or not? when art, poetry, religion are nothing 
to him, so swallowed up is he in pain, or mental de- 
pression, or disappointment, or temptation, or he knows 
not what? It seems to him then that God does not 
care for him, and certainly he does not care for 
God. If he is still humble, he thinks that he is 
so bad that God cannot care for him. And he then 
believes for the time that God loves us only because 
and when and while we love him; instead of believ- 
ing that God loves us always because he is our God, 
and that we live only by his love. Or he does not 
believe in a God at all, which is better. 

So long as we have nothing to say to God, nothing 
to do with him, save in the sunshine of the mind when 


we feel him near us, we are poor creatures, willed upon, 


THE ELOL. ..u 173 


not willing ; reeds, flowering reeds, it may be, and 
pleasant to behold, but only reeds blown about of 
the wind; not bad, but poor creatures. 
* And how in such a condition do we generally act? 
Do we not sit mourning over the loss of our feelings ? 
or worse, make frantic efforts to rouse them? or, 
ten times worse, relapse into a state of temporary 
atheism, and yield to the pressing temptation? or, paee 
heartless, consent to remain careless, conscious ‘of evil 
thoughts and low feelings alone, but too lazy, too con- | 
tent to rouse ourselves against them? We know we 
must get rid of them some day, but meantime—never 
mind; we do not fed them bad, we do not feel anything 
else good; we are asleep and we know it, and we can- 
not be troubled to wake. No impulse comes to arouse 
us, and so we remain as we are. 

God does not, by the instant gift of his Spirit, make 
us always feel right, desire good, love purity, aspire after 
him and his will. Theretore either he will not, or he 


cannot. If he will not, it must be because it would not 


N74 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


be well to do so. If he cannot, then he would not if 
he could; else a better condition than God’s is con- 
ceivable to the mind of God—a condition in ae he 
could save the creatures whom he has made, better than 
- he can save them. The truth is this: He wants to 
make us in his own image, choosing the good, refusing 
the evil. How should he effect this if he were a/ways 
moving us from within, as he does at divine intervals, 
towards the beauty of holiness? God gives us room /0 
be; does not oppress us with his will; “stands away 
from us,” that we may act from ourselves, that we may 
exercise the pure will for good. Do not, therefore, 
imagine me to mean that we can do anything of our- 
selves without God. If we choose the right at last, 
it is all God’s doing, and only the more his that it is 
ours, only in a far more marvellous way his than if he 
had kept us filled with all holy impulses precluding the 
need of choice. For up to this very point, for this very 
point, he has been educating us, leading us, pushing us, 


driving us, enticing us, that we may choose ‘him and his 


ee 
* <<< $—_$__.. 


THE ELOl, 175 


will, and so be tenfold more his children, of his own 
best making, in the freedom of the will found our own 
first in its loving sacrifice to him, for which in his grand 
fatherhood he has been thus working from the founda- 
tions of the earth, than we could be in the most ecstatic 
worship flowing from the divinest impulse, without this 
willing sacrifice. For God made our. individuality as 
well as, and a greater marvel than, our dependence ; 
made our afariness from himself, that freedom should 
bind us divinely dearer to himself, with a new and in- 
scrutable marvel of love; for the Godhead is still at the 
root, is the making root of our individuality, and the 
freer the man, the stronger the bond that binds him to 
him who made his freedom. He made our wills, and 
is striving to make them iree; for only in the perfection 
of our individuality and the freedom of our wills can we 
be altogether his children. This is full of mystery, but 
can we not see enough in it to make us very glad and 
very peaceful? 


Not in any other act than one which, in spite of im- 


ooo 


176 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


pulse or of weakness, declares for the Truth, for God, 
does the will spring into absolute freedom, into true life. 
' See, then, what lies within our reach every time that 
wé aré thus lapt in the folds of night. The highest 
condition of the human will is in sight, is attainable. 
I say not the highest condition of the Human Being ; 
that surely lies in the Beatific Vision, in the sight of 
God. But the highest condition of the Human Will, 
as distinct, not as separated from God, is when, not 
seeing God, not seeming to itself to grasp him at all, 
it yet holds him fast. It cannot continue in this con- 
dition, for, not finding, not seeing God, the man would 
die ; but the will thus asserting itself, the man has passed 
from death into life, and the vision is nigh at hand, 
Then first, thus free, in thus asserting its freedom, is 
the individual will one with the Will of God; the child 
is finally restored to the father; the childhood and the 
fatherhood meet in one; the brotherhood of the race 
arises from the dust; and the prayer of our Lord is 


answered, “I in them and thou in me, that they may be 


THE ELOL 177 


made perfect in one.” Let us then arise in God-born 
strength every time that we feel the darkness closing, 
or become aware that it has closed around us, and say, 
**T am of the Light and not of the Darkness.” 

Troubled soul, thou art not bound to feel, but thou 
art bound to arise. God loves thee whether thou feelest 
or not. Thou canst not love when thou wilt, but thou 
art bound to fight the hatred in thee to the last. T. ry 
not to feel good when thou art not good, but cry to 
Him who is good. He changes not because thou 
changest. Nay, he has an especial tenderness of love to- 
wards thee for that thou art in the dark and hast no light, 
and his heart is glad when thou dost arise and say, “I 
will go to my Father.” For he sees thee through all 
the gloom through which thou canst not see him. Will — 
thou his will. Say to him: “My God, I am very dull 
and low and hard; but thou art wise and high and 
tender, and thou art my God. I am thy child. Forsake 
me not.” Then fold the arins of thy faith, and wait in 


quietness until light goes up in thy darkness. Fold the 
M 


178 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


arms of thy Faith I say, but not of thy Action: bethink 
thee of something that thou oughtest to do, and go and 
do it, if it be but the sweeping of a room, or the pre- 
paring of a meal, or a visit to a friend. Heed not thy 
feelings: Do thy work. 

As God lives by his own will, and we live in him, 
so has he given to us power to will in ourselves... How 
much better should we not fare if, finding that we are 
standing with our heads bowed away from the good, 
finding that we have no feeble inclination to seek the 
source of our life, we should yet q2/7 upwards toward 
God, rousing that essence of life in us, which he has 
given us from his own heart, to call again upon him 
who is our Life, who can fill the emptiest heart, rouse 
the deadest conscience, quicken the dullest feeling, and 
strengthen the feeblest will ! 

Then, if ever the time should come, as perhaps it 
must come to each of us, when all consciousness of 
well-being shall have vanished, when the earth shall be 


but a sterile promontory, and the heavens a dull and 


e. 


THE ELOI. 179 


pestilent congregation of vapours, when man nor woman 
shall delight us more, nay, when God himself shall be 
but a name, and Jesus an old story, then, even then, 
when a Death far worse than “ that phantom of grisly 
bone” is griping at our hearts, and having slain love, 
hope, faith, forces existence upon us only in agony, 
then, even then, we shall be able to cry out with our 
Lord, ‘“‘ My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me ?” 
Nor shall we die then, I think, without being able to 
take up his last words as well, and say, “ Father, into 


thy hands I commend my spirit.” 


THE HANDS OF THE FATHER. 


“ Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit.’ 
—Sr Luxe xxiii, 46. 

NES ea St Matthew nor St Mark tells us of 
any words uttered by our Lord after the Zo. 
They both, along with St Luke, tell us of a cry with 
a loud voice, and the giving up of the ghost; between 
which cry and the giving up, St Luke records the words, 
“ Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit.” St 
Luke says nothing of the Eloi prayer of desolation. St 
John records neither the Z/oz, nor the Father into thy 
hands, nor the loud cry. He tells us only that after 
Jesus had received the vinegar, he said, ‘‘ /¢ zs finished,” 

and bowed his head, and gave up the ghost. 
Will the Lord ever tell us why he cried so? | Was it 
the cry of relief at the touch of death? Was it the cry 


THE HANDS OF THE FATHER. 18t 


of victory? Was it the cry of gladness that he had 
endured to the end? Or did the Father look out 
upon him in answer to his AZy God, and the blessed- 
ness of it make him cry aloud because he could not 
smile? Was such his condition now that the greatest 
gladness of the universe could express itself only in a 
loud cry? Or was it but the last wrench of pain ere 
the final repose began? It may have been all in one. 
But never surely in all books, in all words of thinking 
men, can there be so much expressed as lay eats 
lated in that cry of the Son of God. Now had he 
made his Father Lord no longer eae might of mak- 
ing and loving alone, but Lord in right of devotion 
and deed of love. Now should inward sonship and 
the spirit of glad sacrifice be born in the hearts of 
men ; for the divine obedience was perfected by suffer. 
ing. He had been amongst his brethren what he would 
have his brethren be. He had done for them what he 
would have them do for God and for each other. God 


was henceforth inside and beneath them, as well as 


182 UNSFOKEN SERMONS. 
around and above them, suffering with them and for 
them, giving them all he had, his very life-being, his 
essence of existence, what best he loved, what best 
he was. He had been among them, their God-brother. 
And the mighty story ends with a cry. 

Then the cry meant, /¢ zs finished; the cry meant, 
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. Every 
highest human act is just a giving back to God of that 
which he first gave to us. “Thou God hast given 
me: here again is thy gift. I send my spirit home.” 
Every act of worship is a holding up to God of what 
God hath made us. “ Here, Lord, look what I have 
got: feel with me in what thou hast made me, in this 
thy own bounty, my being. I am thy child, and know 
not how to thank thee save by uplifting the heave- 
offering of the overflowing of thy life, and calling 
aloud, ‘It is thine: it is mine. I am thine, and there- 


fore I am mine.’” 


The vast operations of the spiritual 
as of the physical world, are simply a turning again to 


the source. 


THE HANDS OF THE FATHER, 183 


—___ __ 


Koss 
| The last act of our Lord in thus commending his 


spirit at the close of his life, was only a summing up 
of what he had been doing all his life. He had been 
offering this sacrifice, the sacrifice of himself, all the 
years, and in thus sacrificing he had lived the divine 
life. Every morning when he went out ere it was day, 
every evening when he lingered on the night-lapt moun- 
tain after his friends were gone, he was offering himself 
to his Father in the communion of loving words, of 
high thoughts, of speechless feelings; and, between, he 
turned to do the same thing in deed, namely, in loving 
word, in helping thought, in healing action towards his 
fellows; for the way to worship God while the daylight 
lasts is to work; the service of God, the only “divine 
service,” is the helping of our fellows. | 

I do not seek to point out this pomecalia: of our 
spirits to the Father as a duty: that is to turn the 
highest privilege we possess into a burden grievous to 
be borne. But I want to shew that it is the simplest 


blessedest thing in the human world. 


' 184 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


For the Human Being may say thus with himself: 
“Am I going to sleep—to lose consciousness—to be help- 
less for a time—thoughtless—dead? Or, more awful 
consideration, in the dreams that may come may I not 
be weak of will and scant of conscience ?—Father, into 
thy hands I commend my spirit. I give myself back to 
thee. Take me, soothe me, refresh me, ‘make me over 
again.’ Am I going out into the business and turmoil 
of the day, where so many temptations may come to do 
less honourably, less faithfully, less kindly, less diligently 
than the Ideal Man would have me do ?—Father, into 
thy hands. Am I going to doa good deed? Then, of all 
times,—Father, into thy.hands; lest the enemy should 
have me now. Am I going to do a hard duty, from 
which I would gladly be turned aside,—to refuse a 
friend’s request, to urge a neighbour’s conscience ?— 
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. Am I in 
pain? Is illness coming upon me to shut out the giad 
visions of a healthy brain, and bring me such as are 


troubled and untrue !—Take my spirit, Lord, and see, as 


THE HANDS OF THE FATHER. 185° 
thou art wont, that it has no more to bear than it can 
bear. Am I going to die? Thou knowest, if only from the 
cry of thy Son, how terrible that is; and if it comes not 
to me in so terrible a shape as that in. which it came to 
him, think how poor to bear I am beside him. Ido 
not know what the struggle means ; for, of the thousands 
who pass through it every day, not one enlightens: !us 
neighbour left behind; but shall I not long with spony 
for one breath of thy air, and not receive it? shall 1 
not be torn asunder with dying?—I will question no 
more: Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. 
For it is thy business, not mine. Thou wilt know every 
shade of my suffering; thou wilt care for me with thy 
perfect fatherhood; for that makes my sonship, and 
inwraps and infolds it. As a child I could bear great 
pain when my father was leaning over me, or had his 
arm about me: how much nearer my soul cannot thy 
hands come !—yea, with a comfort, father of me, that 
I have never yet even imagined; for how shall my 


imagination overtake thy swift heart? I care not for 


186 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


the pain, so long as my spirit is strong, and into thy 
hands I commend that spirit. If thy love, which is 
better than life, receive it, then surely thy tenderness 
will make it great.” 

Thus may the Human Being say with himself. 

Think, brothers, think, sisters, we walk in the air of 
an eternal fatherhood. Every uplifting of the heart is 
a looking up to The Father. Graciousness and truth are 
around, above, beneath us, yea, zz us. When we are 
least worthy, then, most tempted, hardest, unkindest, 
let us yet commend our spirits into his hands. Whither 
else dare we send them? How the earthly father would 
love a child who would creep into his room with angry, 
troubled face, and sit down at his feet, saying when 
asked what he wanted: “I feel so naughty, papa, and 
I want to get good”! Would he say to his child: ‘‘ How 
dare you! Go away, and be good, and then-come to 
me?” And shall we dare to think God would send us 
away if we came thus, and would not be pleased that 


we came, even if we were angry as Jonah? Would we 


THER HANDS OF THE FATHER. 187 


not let ail the tenderness of our nature flow forth upon 
such a child? And shall we dare to think that if we 
being evil know how to give good gifts to our children, 
God will not give-us his own spirit when we come to 
ask him? Will not some heavenly dew descend cool 
upon the hot anger? some genial rain-drop on the dry 
selfishness? some glance of sunlight on the cloudy 
hopelessness? Bread, at least, will be given, and not 
a stone; water, at least, will be sure, and not vinegar 
mingled with gall. 

Nor is there anything we can ask for ourselves that 
we may not ask for another. We may commend any 
brother, any sister, to the common fatherhood. And 
there will be moments when, filled with that spirit which 
is the Lord, nothing will ease our hearts of their love 
but the commending of all men, all our brothers, all ou 
sisters, to the one Father. Nor shall we ever know that 
repose in the Father’s hands, that rest of the Holy 
Sepulcnre, which the Lord knew when the agony of 


death was over, when the storm of the world died away 


188 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


behind his retiring spirit, and he entered the regions 
where there is only life, and therefore all that is not 
music is silence, (for all noise comes of the conflict of 
Life and Death)—we shall never be able, I say, to rest 
in the bosom of the Father, till the fatherhood is fully 
revealed to us in the love of the brothers. For he cannot 
be our father save as he is their father; and if we do 
not see him and feel him as thcir father, we cannot 
know him as ours. Never shall we know him aright 
until we rejoice and exult for our race that he is ¢he 
Father. He that loveth not his brother whom he hath 
seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? 
To rest, I say, at last, even in those hands into which 
the Lord commended his spirit, we must have learned 


already to love our neighbour as ourselves, 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 


Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself —St 
MATTHEW xxii. 39. 


od Races original here quoted by our Lord is to be 
found in the words of God to Moses, (Leviticus 
xix. 18:) “ Zhou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge 
against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself: I am the Lord.” Our Lord never 
thought of being original. The older the saying the 
better, if it utters the truth he wants to utter. In-him 
it becomes fact: The Word was made flesh And 
so, in the wondrous rieeting of extremes, the words 
he spoke were no more words, but spirit and life. 
The same words are twice quoted by St Paul, and 
once by St James, always in a similar mode: Love 


they represent as the fulfilling of the law. 


190 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


Is the converse true then? Is the fulfilling of the 
law love? The apostle Paul says: “Love worketh 
no ill to his neighbour, therefore love is the fulfilling 
of the law.” Does it follow that working no i/ is love? 
Love will fulfil the law: will the law fulfil love? No, 
verily. If a man keeps the law, I know he is a lover 
of his neighbour. But he is not a lover because he 
keeps the law: he keeps the law because he is a 
lover. No heart will be content with the law for love. 
The law cannot fulfil love. 

“But, at least, the law will be able to fulfil itself, 
though it reaches not to love.” 

I do not believe it. I am certain that it is impossible 
to keep the law towards one’s neighbour except one 
loves him. The law itself is infinite, reaching to such 
delicacies of action, that the man who tries most will 
be the man most aware of defeat. We are not made 
for law, but for love. Love is law, because it is in- 
finitely more than law. It is of an altogether higher 


region than law—is, in fact, the creator of law. Had 


oo oe Eee ee ee eee ee 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR, Igt 


it not been for love, not one of the sfa/t-nots of the 
law would have been uttered. True, once uttered, 
they shew themselves in the form of justice, yea, even 
in the inferior and worldly forms of prudence and self 
preservation; but it was love that spoke them first. 
Were there no love in us, what sense of justice could 
we have? Would not each be filled with the sense 
of his own wants, and be for ever tearing to ekiestA? 
I do not say it is conscious love that breeds justice, 
but I do say that without love in our nature justice 
would never be born. For I do not call that: justice 
which consists only in a sense of our own rights. 
True, there are poor and withered forms of love which 
are immeasurably below justice now; but even now 
they are of speechless worth, for they will grow into 
that which will supersede, because it will necessitate, 
justice. 

Of what use then is the law? To lead us to Christ, 
the Truth,—to waken in our minds a sense of what 


our deepest nature, the presence, namely, of God i 


192 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


us, requires of us,—to let us know, in part by failure, 
that the purest effort of will of which we are capable 
cannot lift us up even to the abstaining from wrong 
to our neighbour. What man, for instance, who loves 
not his neighbour and yet wishes to keep the law, 
will dare be confident that never by word, look, tone, 
gesture, silence, will he bear false witness against that 
neighbour? What man can judge his neighbour aright 
save him whose love makes him refuse to judge him? 
Therefore are we told to love, and not judge. It 
is the sole justice of which we are capable, and that 
perfected will comprise all justice. Nay more, to re- 
fuse our neighbour love, is to do him the greates{ 
wrong. But of this afterwards. In order to fulfil the 
commonest law, I repeat, we must rise into a loftier 
region altogether, a region that is above law, because 
it is spirit and life and makes the law: in order to 
keep the law towards our neighbour, we must love our 
neighbour. We are not made for law, but for grace— 


or for faith, to use another word so much misused. 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 193 


We are made on too large a scale altogether to ‘have 
any pure relation to mere justice, if indeed we can 
say there is such a thing. It is but an absttact idea 
which, in reality, will not be abstracted. The law comes 
to make us long for the needful grace,—that is, for the 
divine condition, in which love is all, for God is Love. 
Though the fulfilling of the law is the practical form 
love will take, and the neglect of it is the conviction 
of lovelessness; though it is the mode in which a 
man’s wz/7 must begin at once to be love to his neigh- 
bour, yet, that our Lord meant by the love of our 
neighbour, not the fulfilling of the law towards him, 
but that condition of being which results in the ful- 
filling of the law and more, is sufficiently clear from 
his story of the good Samaritan. “Who is my neigh- 
bour?” said the lawyer. And the Lord taught him that 
every cne to whom he could be or for whom he could dq 
anything was his neighbour ; therefore, that each of the 
race, as he comes within the touch of one tentacle of our 


nature, is our neighbour. Which of the inhibitions of 
N 


194 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


the law is illustrated in the tale? Not one. The 
love that is more than law, and renders its breach 
impossible, lives in the endless story, coming out in 
active kindness, that is, the recognition of kin, of ind, 
of nighness, of neighbourhood; yea, in tenderness and 
loving-kindness—the Samaritan-heart akin to the Jew- 
heart, the Samaritan hands neighbours to the Jewish 
wounds, 

Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 

So direct and complete is this parable of our Lord, 
that one becomes almost ashamed of further talk about 
it. Suppose a man of the company had put the same 
question to our Lord that we have been considering 
had said, “But I may keep the law and yet not 
love my neighbour,” would he not have returned: 
“Keep thou the law thus, not in the letter, but in 
the spirit, that is, in the truth of action, and thou 
wilt soon find, O Jew, that thou lovest thy Samaritan”? 
And yet, when thoughts and questions arise in our 


minds, he desires that we should follow them. He 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 195 
will not check us with a word of heavenly wisdom 
scornfully uttered. He knows that not even Ais words 
will apply to every question of the willing soul; and 
we know that his spirit will reply. When we want 
to know more, that more will be there for us. Not 
every man, for instance, finds his neighbour in need 
of help, and he would gladly hasten the slow results 
of opportunity by true thinking. Thus would we be 
ready for further teaching from that Spirit who is the 
Lord. 

“But how,” says a man, who is willing to recog- 
nize the universal neighbourhead, but finds himself un- 
able to fulfil the bare law towards the woman even 
whom he loves best,—“ How am I then to rise into 
that higher region, that empyrean of love?” And, 
beginning straightway to try to love his neighbour, 
he finds that the empyrean of which he spoke is no 
more to be reached in itself than the law was to be 
reached in itself. As he cannot keep the law without 


hrst rising into the love of his neighbour, so he cannot 


196 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 

love his neighbour without first rising higher still The 
whole system of the universe works upon this law— 
the driving of things upward towards the centre. The 
man who will love ‘his neighbour can do so by no 
immediately operative exercise of the will It is the 
man fulfilled’ of God from whom he came and by 
whom he is, who alone can as himself love his neigh- 
bour who came from God too and is by God too. 
The mystery of individuality and consequent relation 
is deep as the beginnings of humanity, and the ques- 
tions thence arising can be solved only by him who 
has, practically, at least, solved the holy necessitiés 
resulting from his origin. * In God Blane can man 
meet man.. In him alone the converging lines of 
existence touch and cross not. When the mind of 
Christ; the life of the Head, courses through that atom 
which the man is of the slowly revivifying body, when 
he is alive too, then the love of the brothers is there 
as conscious life. From Christ through the neighbours 


somes the life that makes him.a part of the body. 


—s 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 197 


It is possible to love our neighbour as ourselves, 
Our Lord sever spoke hyperbolically, although, indeed, 
that is the supposition on which many. unconsciously 
interpret his words, in order to be able to persuade 
themselves that they believe them. We may see that 
it is possible before we attain to it; for our percep- 
tions of truth are always in advance of our condition: 
True, no man can see it perfectly until he is it; but 
we must see it, that we may be it. Aman who knows 
that he does not yet love his neighbour as himself may 
believe in such a condition, may even see that there 
is no other goal of human perfection, nothing else to 
which the universe is speeding, propelled by the Father’s 
will, Let him labour on, and not faint at the thought 
that God’s day is a thousand years: his millennium 
is likewise one day—yea, this day, for we have him, 
The Loye, in us, working even now the far end. 

But while it is true that only when a man loves God 
with all his heart, will he love his neighbour as himself, 


yet there are mingled processes in the attainment of 


398 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


ae 


this final result. Let us try to aid such operation of 
truth by looking farther. Let us suppose that the man 
who believes our Lord both meant what he said, and 
knew the truth of the matter, proceeds to endeavour 
obedience in this of loving his neighbour as himself. 
He begins to think about his neighbours generally, and 
he tries to feel love towards them. He finds at once 
that they begin to classify themselves. With some he 
feels no difficulty, for he loves them already, not in- 
deed because they ave, but because they have, by 
friendly qualities, by showing themselves — lovable, 
that is loving, already, moved his feelings as the wind 
moves the waters, that is without any self-generated 
action on his part. And he feels that this is nothing 
much to the point; though, of course, he would be 
farther from the desired end if he had none such to 
love, and farther still if he loved none such. He re- 
calls the words of our Lord, “If ye love them which 
love you, what reward have ye?” and his mind fixes 


upon—let us say—one of a second class, and he tries 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR, 199 


—_— 


to love him. The man is no enemy—we have not 
come to that class of neighbours yet—but he is dull, 
uninteresting—in a negative way, he thinks, unlovable, 
What is he to do with him? With all his effort, he 
finds the goal as far off as ever. 

Naturally, in his failure, the question arises, “Is it 
my duty to love him who is unlovable?” 

Certainly not, if he is unlovable. But that is a 
begging of the question. 

Thereupon the man falls back on the primary foun- 
dation of things, and asks— 

“‘ How, then, is the man to be loved by me? Why 
should I love my neighbour as myself?” 

We must not answer “Because the Lord says so.” 
It is because the Lord says so that the man is inquir- 
ing after some help to obey. No man can love his 
neighbour merely because the Lord says so. The Lord 
says so because it is right and necessary and natural, 
and the man wants to feel it thus right and necessary 


and natural. Although the Lord would be pleased with 


200 -UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


any man for doing a thing because he said it, he would 
show his pleasure’ by making the man more and more 
dissatisfied until he knew why the Lord had said it. He 
would make him see that he could not in the deepest 
sense—in the way the Lord loves—obey any command 
until he saw the reasonableness of it. Observe I do 
not say the man ought to put off obeying the command 
until he see its reasonableness: that is another thing 
quite, and does not lie in the scope of my present sup- 
position. It is a beautiful thing to obey the rightful 
source of a command: it is a more beautiful thing to 
worship the radiant source of our light, and it is for 
the sake of obedient vision that our Lord commands 
us. For then our heart meets his: we see God. 

Let me represent in the form of a conversation what 
might pass in the man’s mind on the opposing sides 
of the question.—“ Why should I love my neighbour ?” 

“He is the same as I, and therefore I ought to 
love him.” 


“Why? IamI. He is he.” 


— oo 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 201, 


“He has the same thoughts, feelings, hopes, sorrows, 
joys, as I.” 

“Yes ; but why should I love him for that? He 
must mind his, I can only do with mine.” 

“ He has the same consciousness as I have,” As 
things look to me, so things look to him.” 

“Yes ; but I cannot get into his consciousness, nor 
he into mine. I feel myself, I do not feel him. My 
life flows through my veins, not through his. ‘Lhe 
world shines into my consciousness, and I am not 
conscious of his consciousness. I wish I could love 
him, but I do not see why. Iam an individual; he is 
an individual. My self must be closer to me than he 
can be. Two bodies keep me apart from his self. I 
am isolated with myself.” 

Now, here lies the mistake at last. While the thinker 
supposes a duality in himself which does not exist, he 
falsely judges the individuality a separation. On the 
contrary, it is the sole possibility and very bond of 


love. Otherness is the essential grovnd of affection, 


oe 


202 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


But in spiritual things, such a unity is pre-supposed 1n 
the very contemplation of them by the spirit of man, 
that wherever anything does not exist that ought to 
be there, the space it ought to occupy, even if but a 
blank, assumes the appearance of a separating gulf. 
The negative looks a positive. Where a man does not 
love, the not-loving must seem rational, For no one 
loves because he sees why, but because he loves. No 
human reason can be given for the highest necessity of 
divinely created existence. For reasons are always 
from above downwards. A man must just feel this 
necessity, and then questioning is over. It justifies 
itself But he who has not felt has it not to argue 
about. He has but its phantom, which he created 
himself in a vain effort to understand, and which he 
supposes to be it. Love cannot be argued about in its 
absence, for there is no reflex, no symbol of it near enough 
to the fact of it, to admit of just treatment by the algebra 
of the reason or imagination. Indeed, the very talking 


about it raises a mist between the mind and the vision 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 2043 


of it. But let a man once love, and all those difficulties 
which appeared opposed to love, will just be so many 
arguments for loving. 

Let a man once find another who has fallen among 
thieves; let him be a neighbour to him, pouring oil 
and wine into his wounds, and binding them up, and 
setting him on his own beast, and paying for him at 
the inn; let him do all this merely from a sense of 
duty; let him even, in the pride of his fancied, and 
the ignorance of his true calling, bate no jot of his 
Jewish superiority; let him condescend to the very 
baseness of his own lowest nature; yet such will be 
the virtue of obeying an eternal truth even to his poor 
measure, of putting in actuality what he has not even 
seen in theory, of doing the truth even without believing 
it, that even if the truth does not after the deed give the 
faintest glimmer as truth in the man, he will yet be ages 
nearer the truth than before, for he will go on his way 
loving that Samaritan neighbour a little more than his 


Jewish dignity will justify. Nor will he question the rea- 


~- = = Z = 


204 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 

sonableness of so doing, although he may not care to 
spend any logic upon its support. How much more if 
he be a man who would love his neighbour if he could, 
will the higher condition unsought have been found 
in the action! For man is a whole; and so soon as 
he unites himself by obedient action, the truth that is 
in him makes itself known to him, shining from the 
new whole. For his action is ‘his response to his maker’s 
design, his individual part in the creation of himself, his 
yielding to the All in all, to the tides of whose harmoni-~ 
ous cosmoplastic life all his being thenceforward lies 
open for interpenetration and assimilation. When will 
once begins to aspire, it will soon find that action must 
precede feeling, that the man may know the foundation 
itself of feeling. 

With those who recognize no authority as the ground 
of tentative action, a doubt, a suspicion of truth ought 
to be ground enough for putting it to the test. 

The whole system of divine education as regards the 


relation of man and man, has for its end that a mat 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 205 


should love his neighbour as himself. It is not a 
lesson that he can learn by itself, or a duty the obliga- 
tion of which can be shown by argument, any more 
than the difference between right and wrong can be 
defined in other terms than their own. 

“But that difference,” it may be objected, “ mani- 
fests itself of itself to every mind: it is self-evident; 
whereas the loving of one’s neighbour is mo¢ seen to be 
a primary truth; so far from it, that far the greater 
number of those who hope for an eternity of blessed- 
ness through him who taught it, do not really believe 
it to be a truth; believe, on the contrary, that the 
paramount obligation is to take care of one’s self at 
‘much risk of forgetting one’s neighbour.” 

But the human race generally has got as far as the 
recognition of right and wrong; and therefore most 
‘men are born capable of making the distinction. The 
race has not yet lived long enough for its latest off 
spring to be born with the perception of the truth of 


love to the neighbour. It is to be seen by the present 


206 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


individual only after a long reception of and submission 
to the education of life. And once seen, it is believed. 
The whole constitution of human society exists for 
the express end, I say, of teaching the two truths by 
which man lives, Love to God and Love to Man. I 
will say nothing more of the mysteries of the parental 
relation, because they belong to the teaching of the 
former truth, than that we come into the world as we 
do, to look up to the love over us, and see in it a 
symbol, poor and weak, yet the best we can have or 
receive of the divine love.* And thousands more 
would find it easy to love God if they had not such 
miserable types of him in the self-seeking, impulse- 
driven, purposeless, faithless beings who are all they 
have for father and mother, and to whom their children 
are no dearer than her litter is to the unthinking dam. 


What I want to speak of now, with regard to the 


*It might be expressed after a deeper and truer fashion by saying that, God 
making human affairs after his own thoughts, they are therefore such as to be 
the best teachers of love to him and love to our neighbour, This is an im- 
measurably nobler and truer manner of regarding them than as a scheme ar 
plan imvented by the divine intellect 


a re 
LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR, 207 


second great commandment, is the relation of brother- 
hood and sisterhood. Why does my brother come of 
the same father and mother? Why do I behold the 
helplessness and confidence of his infancy? Why. is 
the infant laid on the knee of the child? Why do 
we grow up with the same nurture? Why do we be- 
hold the wonder of the sunset and the mystery of the 
growing moon together? Why do we share one bed, 
join in the same games, and attempt the same exploits? 
Why do we quarrel, vow revenge and silence and end- 
less enmity, and, unable to resist the brotherhood within 
us, wind arm in arm and forget all within the hour? 
Is it not that Love may grow lord of all between him 
and me? Is it not that I may feel towards him what 
there are no words or forms of words to express—a love 
namely, in which the divine self rushes forth in utter 
self-forgetfulness to live in the contemplation of the 
brother—a love that is stronger than deatk,—glad and 
proud and satisfied? But if love stop there, what will 


be the result? Ruin to itself; loss of the brotherhood 


208 -UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


He who loves not his brother for deeper reasons than 
those of a common parentage will cease to love him 
at all. The love that enlarges not its borders, that is 
not ever spreading and including, and deepening, will 
contract, shrivel, decay, die. I have had the sons of 
my mother that I may learn the universal brotherhood. 
For there is a bond between me and the most 
wretched liar that ever died for the murder he would 
not even confess, closer infinitely than that which springs 
only from having one father and mother. That we are the 
sons and the daughters of God born from his heart, 
the outcoming offspring of his love, is a bond closer 
than all other bonds in one. No man ever loved his 
own child aright who did not love him for his humanity, 
for his divinity, to the utter forgetting of his origin from 
himself. ‘The ‘son of my mother is indeed my brother 
by this greater and closer bond as well; but if I re- 
cognize that bond between him and me at all, I re- 
cognize it for my race. True, and thank God! the 


greater excludes not the less; it makés all the weaker 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR, 209 


bonds stronger and truer, nor forbids that where all 
are brothers,.some should be those of our bosom. 
Still my brother according to the flesh is my tirst neigh- 
bour, that we may be very nigh to each other, whetner 
we will or no, while our hearts are tender, and so 
may learn bvotherhood. For our love to each other is 
but the throbbing of the heart of the great brother- 
hood, and could come only from the eternal Father, 
not from our parents. Then my second neighbour 
appears, and who is he? Whom I come in contact 
with soever. He with whom I have any transactions, 
any human dealings whatever. Not the man only with 
whom I dine; not the friend only with whom I share 
my thoughts; not the man only whom my compassion 
would lift from some slough; but the man who makes 
my clothes; the man who prints my book; the man 
who drives me in his cab: the man who begs from me 
in the street, to whom, it may be, for brotherhood’s 
sake, I must not give; yea, even the man who conde- 


scends to me. With all and each there is a chance 
o 


219 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


of doing the part of a neighbour, if in no other way 
yet by speaking truly, acting justly, and thinking kindly. 
Even these deeds will help to that love which is born 
of righteousness. All true action clears the springs of 
right feeling, and lets their waters rise and flow. A man 
must not choose his neighbour; he must take the neigh- 
bour that God sends him. In him, whoever he be, 
lies, hidden or revealed, a beautiful brother. The 
neighbour is just the man who is next to you at the 
moment, the man with whom any business has brought 
you in contact. 

Thus will love spread and spread in wider and 
stronger pulses till the whole human race will be to 
the man sacredly lovely. Drink-debased, vice-de- 
featured, pride-puffed, wealth-bollen, vanity-smeared, they 
will yet be brothers, yet be sisters, yet be God-born 
neighbours. Any rough-hewn semblance of humanity 
will at length be enough to move the man to reverence 
and affection. It is harder for some to learn thus than for 


others. There are whose first impulse is ever to repel 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 21L 


and not to receive. But learn they may, and learn 
they must. Even these may grow in this grace until a 
countenance unknown will awake in them a yearning 
of affection rising to pain, because there is for it no 
expression, and they can only give the man to God and 
be still. 

And now will come in all the arguments out of which 
the man tried in vain before to build a stair up to the 
sunny heights of love. “Ah brother! thou hast a soul 
like mine,” he will say. ‘Out of thine eyes thou lookest, 
and sights and sounds and odours visit thy soul as mine, 
with wonder and tender comforting. Thou too lovest 
the faces of thy neighbours. Thou art oppressed with 
thy sorrows, uplifted with thy joys. Perhaps thou 
knowest not so well as I, that a region of gladness 
surrounds all thy grief, of light all thy darkness, of 
peace all thy tumult. Oh, my brother! I will love thee. 
I cannot come very near thee: I will love thee the 
more. It may be thou dost not love thy neighbour; it 


may be thou thinkest only how to get from him, how to 


—————S$}§ ———————_——_—_ 


212 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


gain by him. How lonely then must thou-be! how 
shut up in thy poverty-stricken room, with the bare walls 
of thy selfishness, and the hard couch of thy unsatis. 
faction! I will love thee the more. Thou shalt not 
be alone with thyself. Thou art not me; thou art 
another life—a second self; therefore I can, may, and 
will love thee.” 

When once to a man the human face is the human 
face divine, and the hand of his neighbour is the hand 
of a brother, then will he understand what St Paul 
meant when he said, “I could wish that myself were 
accursed from Christ for my brethren.” But he will 
no longer understand those who, so far from feeling the 
love of their neighbour an essential of their being, 
expect to be set free from its law in the world to come. 
‘There, at least, for the glory of God, they may limit 
its expansive tendencies to the narrow circle of their 
heaven. On its battlements of safety, they will regard 
hell from afar, and say to each other, ‘Hark! Listen to 


their moans. But do not weep, for they are our neigh- 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR, 213 


bours no more.” St Paul would be wretched before 
the throne of God, if he thought there was one man 
beyond the pale of his mercy, and that as much for 
God’s glory as for the man’s sake. And what shall 
we say of the man Christ Jesus? Who, that loves 
his brother, would not, upheld by the love of Christ, 
and with a dim hope that in the far-off time there 
might be some help for him, arise from the company 
of the blessed, and walk down into the dismal regions 
of despair, to sit with the last, the only unredeemed, 
the Judas of his race, and be himself more blessed in 
the pains of hell, than in the glories of heaven? Who, 
in the midst of the golden harps and the white wings, 
knowing that one of his kind, one miserable brother 
in the old-world-time when men were taught to love 
their neighbour as themselves, was howling unheeded 
far below in the vaults of the creation, who, I say, 
would not feel that he must arise, that he had no choice, 
that, awful as it was, he must gird his loins, and ge 


down into the smoke and the darkness and the fire, 


214 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


travelling the weary and fearful road into the far country 
to find his brother?’—who, I ean, that had the mind 
ot Christ, that had the love of the Father? 

But it is a wild question. God is, and shall be, All 
in all. Father of our brothers and sisters! thou wilt 
not be less glorious than we, taught of Christ, are able 
to think thee. When thou goest into the wilder- 
ness to seek, thou wilt not come fFome until thou 
hast found. It is because we hope not for them in 
thee, not knowing thee, not knowing thy love, that 
we are so hard and so heartless to the brothers and 
sisters whom thou hast given us. 

One word more: This love of our neighbour is the 
only door out of the dungeon of self, where we mope 
and mow, striking sparks, and rubbing phosphores- 
cences out of the walls, and blowing our own breath 
in our own nostrils, instead of issuing to the fair sun- 
light of God, the sweet winds of the universe. The 
man thinks his consciousness is himself; whereas his 


life consisteth in the inbreathing of God, and the 


LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR. 215 


consciousness of the universe of truth. To have himself, 
to know himself, to enjoy himself, he calls life ; whereas, 
if he would forget himself, tenfold would be his life in 
God and his neighbours. The region of man’s life is 
a spiritual region. God, his friends, his neighbours, 
his brothers all, is the wide world in which alone 
his spirit can find room. Himself is his dungeon. 
If he feels it not now, he will yet feel it one day— 
feel it as a living soul would feel being prisoned in 
a dead body, wrapped in sevenfold cerements, and 
buried in a stone-ribbed vault within the last ripple of 
the sound of the chanting people in the church above. 
His life is not in knowing that he lives, but in loving 
all forms of life. He is made for the All, for 
God, who is the All, is his life. And the essential 
joy of his life lies abroad in the liberty of the All. 
His delights, like those of the Ideal Wisdom, are with 
the sons of men. His health is in the body of which 
the Son of Man is the head. ‘fhe whole region of 


iife is open to him—nay, he must live in it or perish 


216 -UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


Nor thus shall a man lose the consciousness of 
well-being. Far deeper and more complete, God and 
nis neighbour will flash it back upon him — pure as 
life.. No more will he agonize “with sick assay” 
to generate it in the light of his own decadence. 
For he shall know the glory of his own being in the 
light of God and of his brother. 

But he may have begun to love his neighbour, with 
the hope of ere long loving him as himself, and 
notwithstanding start back affrighted at yet another 
word of our Lord, seeming to be another law yet 
harder than the first, although in truth it is not another, 
for without obedience to it the former cannot be at- 
tained unto. He has not yet learned to love his 
neighbour as himself whose heart sinks within him 


at the word, J say unto you, Love your enemies. 


LOVE THINE ENEMY. 


Ve have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy; 
but I say unto you, Love your enemtes, bless 
them that curse you, do good to them that 
hate you, and pray for them which despite- 
Sully use you and persecute you; that ye 
may be the children of your Father which ts 
in heaven ; for he maketh his sun to rise on 
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on 
the just and on the unjust. For if ye love 
them which love you, what reward have ye? 
do not even the publicans the same? And if 
ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more 
than others? do not even the publicans so? 
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father 
which is in heaven ts perfect,—ST. MATTHEW 


v. 43-48, 
S not this at length 700 much to expect? Will a man 
ever love his enemies? He may .come to do 


good to them that hate him; but when will he pray 


for them that despitefully use him and persecute him ? 


218 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


When? When he is the child of his Father in heaven. 
Then shall he love his neighbour as himself, even 
if that neighbour be his enemy. In the passage 
in Leviticus (xix. 18,) already referred to as quoted by 
our Lord and his apostles, we find the neighbour and 
the enemy are one. “Thou shalt not avenge, nor 
bear any grudge against the children of thy people, 
but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the 
Lord.” 

Look at the glorious way in which Jesus interprets 
the scripture that went before him. “J am the Lord,” 
—‘“That ye may be perfect, as your Father in heaven 
is perfect.” 

Is it then reasonable to love our enemies? God 
does ; therefore it must be the highest reason. But is it 
reasonable to expect that man should become capable 
of doing so? Yes; on one ground: that the divine 
energy is at work in man, to render at length man’s 
doing divine as his nature is. For this our Lord 


prayed when he said: “That they all may be one. 


LOVE THINE ENEMY. 219 


as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they 
also may be one in us.” Nothing could be less likely 
to human judgment: our Lord knows that one day it 
will come. 

Why should we love our enemies? ‘The deepest 
reason for this we cannot put in words, for it lies in 
the absolute reality of their being, where our enemies 
are of one nature with us, even of the divine nature. 
Into this we cannot see, save as into a dark abyss. 
But we can adumbrate something of the form of this® 
deepest reason, if we let the thoughts. of our heart 
move upon the face of the dim profound. 

“ Are our enemies men like ourselves?” let me begin 
by asking. “Yes.” “Upon what ground? The ground 
of their enmity? The ground of the wrong they do 
us?” “No.” “In virtue of cruelty, heartlessness, in- 
justice, disrespect, misrepresentation?” “Certainly not. 
TTumanum est errare is a truism; but it possesses, like 
most truisms, a latent germ of worthy truth. The very 


word evrare is a sign that there is a way so truly the 


220 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


human that, for a. man to leave it, is to wander. If it 
be human to wander, yet the wandering is not humanity. 
The very words humane and humanity denote some 
shadow of that loving-kindness which, when perfected 
after the divine fashion, shall include even our enemies. 
We do not call the offering of human sacrifices, the 
torturing of captives, cannibalism—humanity. Not 
because they do such deeds are they men. Their 
humanity must be deeper than those. It is in virtue 
of the divine essence which is in them, that pure 
essential humanity, that we call our enemies men 
and women. It is this humanity that we are to love 
—a something, I say, deeper altogether than and in- 
dependent of the region of hate. It is the humani_; 
that originates the claim of neighbourhead ; the neigh- 
bourhood only determines the occasion of its exercise.” 
“1s this humanity in every one of our enemies?” 
“Else there were nothing # love.” “Is it there in 
very deed?—Then we must love it, come between 


us and it what may.” 


LOVE THINE ENEMY. 221 


’ But how can we love a man or a woman who is cruel 
and unjust to us?—who sears with contempt, or cuts 
off with wrong every tendril we would put forth to 
embrace?—who is mean. unlovely, carping, uncertain, 
self-righteous, self-seeking, and self-admiring ?—who can 
even sneer, the most inhuman of human feults, far 
worse in its essence than mere murder? 

These things cannot be loved. The best man hates them 
most; the worst man cannot love them. But are these 
the man? Does a woman bear that form in virtue of 
these? Lies there not within the man and the woman 
a divine element of brotherhood, of sisterhood, a some- 
thing lovely and lovable,—slowly fading, it may be,— 
dying away under the fierce heat of vile passions, or 
the yet more fearful cold of sepulchral selfishness— 
but there? Shall that divine something, which, once 
awakened to be its own holy self in the man, will loathe 
these unlovely things tenfold more than we loathe them 
now—shall this divine thing have no recognition from 


aus? It is the very presence of this fading humanity 


222 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


that makes it possible for us to hate. If it were an 
animal only, and not a man or a woman that did us hurt, 
we should not hate: we should only kill. We nate 
the man just because we are prevented from loving 
him. We push over the verge of the creation—we damn 
—just because we cannot embrace. For to embrace is 
the necessity of our deepest being. That foiled, we 
hate. Instead of admonishing ourselves that there is 
our enchained brother, that there lies our enchanted, 
disfigured, scarce recognizable sister, captive of the 
devil, to break, how much sooner, from their bonds, 
that we love them !—we recoil into the hate which 
would fix them there; and the dearly lovable reality 
of them we sacrifice to the outer falsehood of Satan’s 
incantations, thus leaving them to perish. Nay, we 
murder them to get rid of them. we Aate them. Yet 
within the most obnoxious to our hate, lies that which, 
could it but show itself as it is, and as it will show 
itself one day, would compel from our hearts a devotion 


of love. It is not the unfriendly, the unlovely, that we 


LOVE THINE ENEMY. 223 


are told to love, but the brother, the sister, who is 
unkind, who is unlovely. Shall we leave our brother 
to his desolate fate? Shall we not rather say, “With 
my love at least shalt thou be compassed about, for 
thou hast not thy own lovingness to infold thee ; love 
shail come as near thee as it may; and when thine 
comes forth to meet mine, we shall be one in the 
indwelling God”? 

Let no- one say I have been speaking in a figure 
merely. That I have been so speaking I know. But 
many things which we see most vividly and certainly 
are more truly expressed by using a right figure, than 
by attempting to give them a clear outline of logical 
expression. My figure means a truth. 

If any one say, “Do not make such vague distinctions. 
There is the person. Can you deny that that person is 
unlovely? How then can you love him?” I answer, 
“That person, with the evil thing cast out of him, will be 
yet more the Jerson, for he will be his real self. The 


thing that now makes you dislike him is separable from 


224 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


him, is therefore ’not he, makes himself so much less 
himself, for it is working death in him. Now he is in 
danger of ceasing to be a person at all. When he is 
clothed and in his right mind, he will be a person in- 
deed. You coudd not then go on hating him. Begin to 
love him now, and help him into the loveliness which 
is his. Do not hate him although you can. The per- 
sonalty, I say, though clouded, .besmeared, defiled 
with the wrong, lies deeper than the wrong, and indeed, 
so far as the wrong has reached it, is by the wrong 
injured, yea, so far, it may be, destroyed. 

But those who will not. acknowledge the claim of 
love, may yet acknowledge the claim of justice. There 
are who would shrink with horror from the idea of 
doing injustice to those, from the idea of loving whom 
they would shrink with equal horror. But if it is impos- 
sible, as I believe, without love to be just, much more 
cannot justice co-exist with hate. The pure eye for 
the true vision of another’s claims can only go with 


the loving heart. The man who hates can hardly be deii- 


LOVE THINE ENEMY. 225 


cate in doing justice, say to his neighbour's love, to 
his neighbour's predilections and peculiarities. It is 
hard enough to be just to our friends; and how 
shall our enemies fare with us? For justice Ge- 
mands that we shall think rightly of our neighbour as 
certainly as that we shall neither steal his goods nor 
bear false witness against him. Man is not made for 
justice from his fellow, but for love, which is greater 
than justice, and by including supersedes justice. dere 
justice is an impossibility, a fiction of analysis. It 
does not exist between man and man, save relatively 
to human /aw. Justice to be justice must be much 
more than justice. Love is the law of our condition, 
without which we can no more render justice than a 
man can keep a straight line walking in the dark. ‘The 
eye is not single, and the body is not full of light. No 
man who is even indifferent to his brother can recog- 
nize the claims which his humanity has upon him, 
Nay, the very indifference itself is an injustice. 


I have taken for granted that the fault lies with the 
. P 


226 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


enemy so considered, for upon the primary rocks 
would I build my foundation. But the question must 
be put to each man by himself, “Is my neighbour 
indeed my enemy, or am I my neighbours enemy, 
and so take him to be mine ?+~—awful thought! Or, if 
he be mine, am not I his? Am I not refusing to 
acknowledge the child of the kingdom within his 
bosom, so killing the child of the kingdom within my 
own?” Let us claim for ourselves no more indulgence 
than we give to him. Such honesty will end in severity 
at home and clemency abroad. For we are account- 
able for the ill in ourselves, and have to kill it; for 
the good in our neighbour, and have to cherish it. 
He only, in the name and power of God, can kill the 
bad in him ; we can cherish the good in him by being 
good to it across all the evil fog that comes between 
our love and his good. 

Nor ought it to be forgotten that this fog is often 
the result of misapprehension and mistake, giving rise 


to all kinds of indignations, resentments, and regrets, 


LOVE THINE ENEMY, 227 


Scarce anything about us is just as it seems, but at 
the core there is truth enough to dispel all falsehood 
and reveal life as unspeakably divine. O brother, 
sister, across this weary fog, dim-lighted by the faint 
torches of our truth-seeking, I call to the divine in 
thee, which is mine, not to rebuke thee, not to rouse 
thee, not to say “Why hatest thou me?” but to say 
“TI love thee; in God’s name I love thee.” And I 
will wait until the true self looks out of thine eyes, 
and knows the true self in me. 

But in the working of the Divine Love upon the 
race, my enemy is doomed to cease to be my enemy, 
and to become my friend. One flash of truth towards 
me would destroy my enmity at once; one hearty 
confession of wrong, and our enmity passes away ; 
from each comes forth the brother who was inside 
the enemy all the time. For this The Truth is at 
work, In the faith of this, let us love the enemy now, 
accepting God’s work in reversion, as it were ; let us 


believe as seeing his yet invisible triumph, clasping 


228 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


and holding fast our brother, in defiance of the 
changeful wiles of the wicked enchantment which 
would persuade our eyes and hearts that he is not 
our brother, but some horrible thing, hateful and 
hating. 

But again I must ask, What if we are in the wrong 
and do the wrong, and hate because we have injured ? 
What then? Why, then, let us cry to God as from 
the throat of hell; struggle, as under the weight of 
a spiritual ineubus 4 ACrY; as knowing the vile disease 
that cleaveth fast unto us; cry, as possessed of an evil 
spirit ; cry, as one buried alive, from the sepulchre of 
our evil consciousness, that He would take pity upon 
us the chief of sinners, the most wretched and vile of 
‘men, and send some help to lift us from the fearful 
pit and the miry clay. Nothing will help but the 
Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, the 
spirit of the Father and the Brother casting out and 
revealing. It will be with tearing and foaming, with 


a terrible cry and a lying as one dead, that such a 


LOVE THINE ENEMY. 229 


demon will go out. But what a vision will then arise 
in the depths of the purified soul! 

“Be ye therefore perfect, even as your father which 
is in heaven is perfect.” ‘Love your enemies, and ye 
shall be the children of the highest.” It is the divine 
glory to forgive. 

Yet a time will come when the Unchangeable will 
cease to forgive; when it will no more belong to. his 
perfection to love his enemies; when he will look 
calmly, and have his children look calmly too, upon 
the ascending smoke of the everlasting torments 
of our strong brothers, our beautiful sisters! Nay, 
alas! the brothers are weak now; the sisters are ugly 
now! 

O brother, believe it not. “O Christ!” the re-- 
deemed would cry, “where art thou, our strong Jesus? 
Come, our grand brother. See the suffering brothers 
down below! See the tormented sisters! Come, 
Lord of Life! Monarch of Suffering! Redeem them. 


For us, we will go down into the burning, and see 


230 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


whether we cannot at least carry through the howling 
flames a drop of water to cool their tongues.” 

Believe it not, my brother, lest it quench forgiveness 
in thee, and thou be not forgiven, but go down with 
those thy brothers to the torment; whence, if God 
were not better than that phantom ‘how callest God, 
thou shouldst ever come out; but whence assuredly 
~ thou shalt come out when thou hast paid the_ utter- 
most farthing; when thou hast learned of God in hell 
what thou didst refuse to learn of him upon the 
gentle-toned earth; what the sunshine and the rain 
could not teach thee, nor the sweet compunctions 
of the seasons, nor the stately visitings of the morn 
_and the eventide, nor the human face divine, nor the 
word that was nigh thee in thy heart and in thy mouth 
—tbe story of Him who was mighty to save, because 
he was perfect in love. 

O Father, thou art All-in-all, perfect beyond the 
longing of thy children. and we are all and altogether 


thine. Thou wilt make us pure and loving and free. 


LOVE THINE ENEMY, 231 


We shall stand fearless in thy presence, because 
perfect in thy love. Then shall thy children be of 
good cheer, infinite in the love of each other, and 
eternal in thy love. Lord Jesus, let the heart of 
a child be given to us, that so we may arise from 
the grave of our dead selves and die no more, but 


see face to face the God of the Living. 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING. 


He isnot a God of the dead, But of the living + for 
all live unto him—St Luxe xx. 33 

i is a recurring cause of perplexity in our Lord’s 
teaching, that he is too simple for us; that while 

we are questioning with ourselves about the design of 
Solomon’s carving upon some gold-plated door of the 
temple, he is speaking about the foundations of 
Mount Zion, yea, of the earth itself, upon which it 
stands. If the reader of the Gospel supposes that 
our Lord was here using a verbal argument with the 
Sadducees, namely, “I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob; therefore they are,” he will be astonished 
that no Sadducee was found with courage enough to 


reply: “ All that God meant was to introduce himself 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING. 233 


to Moses as the same God who had aided and protected. 
his fathers while they were alive, saying, I am ‘he that 
was. the God of thy fathers. They found me faithful. 
Thou, therefore, listen to me, and thou too shalt find 
me faithful wto the death.” © 

But ho such reply suggested itself even to the 
Sadducees of that day, for their eastern nature could 
see argument beyond logic. Shall God call himself 
_ the God of the dead, of those who were alive once, 
but whom he either could not or would not keep alive? 
Is that the Godhood, and its relation to those who 
worship it? The changeless God of an ever-born and 
evet-perishing torrent of life; of which each atom 
cries with burning heart, JZy God/ and straightway 
passes into the Godless cold! “Trust in me, for I 
took care of your fathers once upon a time, though 
they are gone now. Worship and obey me, for I will 
be good to you for threescore years and ten, or there- 
abouts; and after that, when you are not, and the 


world goes on all the same without you, I will call 


234 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


myself your God still.” God changes not. Once God 
he is always God. If he has once said to a man, 
“T am thy God, and that man has died the death ot 
the Sadducee’s creed,” then we have a right to say 
that God is the God of the dead. 

- “And wherefore should he not be so far the Gcd 
of the dead, if during the time allotted to them here, 
he was the faithful God of the living?” What God- 
like relation can the ever-living, life-giving, changeless _ 
God hold to creatures who partake not of his life, 
who have death at the very core of their being, are 
not worth their Maker’s keeping alive? To let his 
creatures die would be to change, to abjure his God- 
hood, to cease to be that which he had made himself. 
If they are not worth keeping alive, then his creating 
is a poor thing, and he is not so great, nor so divine 
as even the poor thoughts of those his dying creatures 
have been able to imagine him. But our Lord says, 
“All live unto him.” With Him death is not. ‘hy 


life sees our life, O Lord. All of whom az can be said, 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING. 23 


GN 


are present to thee. Thou thinkest about us, eternally 
more than we think about thee. The little life that 
burns within the body of this death, glows unquench- 
able in thy true-seeing eyes. If thou didst forget us 
for a moment then indeed death would be. But unto 
thee we live. The beloved pass from our sight, but 
they pass not from thine. This that we call death, is 
but a form in the eyes of men. It looks something 
final, an awful cessation, an utter change. It seems 
not probable that there is anything beyond. But if 
God could see us before we were, and make us after 
his ideal, that we shall have passed from the eyes of 
our friends can be no argument that he beholds us 
no longer. “All live unto Him.” Let the change 
be ever so great, ever so imposing; let the unseen 
life be ever so vague to our conception, it is not 
against reason to hope that God could see Abraham, 
after his Isaac had ceased to see him; saw Isaac 
after Jacob ceased to see him; saw Jacob after some 


of the Sadducees had begun to doubt whether there 


236 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


ever had been a Jacob at all. He remembers them; 
that is, he carries them in his mind: he of whom God 
thinks, lives. He takes to himself the name of Zheir 
God. The Living One cannot name himself after the 
dead; when the very Godhead lies in the giving of 
life. Therefore they must be alive. If he speaks of . 
them, remembers his own loving thoughts of them, 
would he not have kept them alive if he could; and 
if he could. not, how could he create them? Can it 
be an easier thing to call into life than to keep alive? 

“ But if they live to God, they are aware of God. And 
if they are aware of God, they are conscious of their 
own being: Whence then the necessity of a resurrec- 
tion 2” 

For their relation to others of God’s children in 
mutual revelation ; and for fresh revelation of God to 
all.—But let us inquire what is meant by the resurrec- 
tion of the body. ‘With what body do they come?” 

Surely we are not required to believe that the same 


body is raised again. That is against science, common 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING, 337 


sense, Scripture. St Paul represents the matter quite 
otherwise. One feels ashamed of arguing such a puerile 
point. Who could wish his material body which has 
indeed died over and over again since he was born, 
never remaining for one hour composed of the same 
matter, its endless activity depending upon its endless 
change, to be fixed as his changeless possession, such 
as it may then be, at the moment of death, and sécured 
to him in worthless identity for the ages to come? 
A man’s material body will be to his consciousness at 
death no more than the old garment he throws aside 
at night, intending to put on a new and a better in 
the morning. To desire to keep the old body seems 
to ine to argue a degree of sensual materialism ex- 
cusable only in those pagans who in their Elysian 
fields could hope to possess only such a thin, fleeting, 
dreamy, and altogether funebrial existence, that they 
might well long for the thicker, more tangible bodily 
being in which they had experienced the pleasures of 


‘a tumultuous life on the upper world. As weil might 


238 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


a Christian desire that the hair which has been shorn 
from him through all his past life should be restored 
to his risen and glorified head. 

Yet not the less is the doctrine of the Resurrection 
gladdening as the sound of the silver trumpet of its 
visions, needful as the very breath of life to our long- 


ing souls. Let us know what it means, and we shall 


see that it is thus precious. 

Let us first ask what is the use of this body of ours. 
It is the means of Revelation to us, the camera in which 
God’s eternal shows are set forth. It is by the body that 
we come into contact with Nature, with our fellow-men, 
with all their revelations of God tous. It is through 
the body that we receive all the lessons of passion, of 
suffering, of love, of beauty, of science. It is through 
the body that we are both trained outwards from our- 
selves, and driven inwards into our deepest selves to 
find God. ‘There is glory and might in this vital evanes- 
cence, this slow glacierlike flow of clothing and re- 


vealing matter, this ever uptossed rainbow of tangible 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING. 239 


ee —~. 


humauity. It is no less of God’s making than the 
spirit that is clothed therein. 

We cannot yet have learned all that we are meant to 
learn through the body. How much of the teaching 
even of this world can the most diligent and most 
favoured man have exhausted before he is called to 
leave it! Is all that remains to be lost? Who that 
has loved this earth can but believe that the spiritual 
body of which St Paul speaks will be a yet higher 
channel of such revelation? The meek who have 
found that their Lord spake true, and have indeed in- 
herited the earth, who have seen that all matter is 
radiant of spiritual meaning, who would not cast a 
sigh after the loss of mere animal pleasure, would, I 
think, be the least willing to be without a body, to be 
unclothed without being again clothed upon. Who, 
after centuries of glory in heaven, would not rejoice to 
behold once more that patient-headed child of winter 
and spring, the meek snowdrop? In whom, amidst 


the golden choirs, would not the vision of an old sun- 


240 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


_ set wake such a song as the ancient dwellers of the 
earth would with gently. flattened palm hush their 
throbbing harps to hear? 

All this revelation, however, would render only a 
body necessary, not this body.» The fulness of the 
word Lesurrection would be ill met if this were all. We 
need not only a body to convey revelation to us, but 
a body to reveal us to cthers. The thoughts, feelings, 
imaginations which arise in us, must have their gar- 
ments of revelation whereby shall be made manifest 
the unseen world within us to our brothers and sisters 
around us ; else is each left in human loneliness. Now, 
if this be one of the uses my body served on earth be- 
fore, the new body must be like the old. Nay, it must 
be the same body, glorified as we are glorified, with 
all that was distinctive of each from his fellows more 
visible than ever before. The accidental, the non- 
essential, the unrevealing, the incomplete will have 
vanished. That which made the body what it was in 


the eyes of those who loved us will be tenfold there, 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING 243 


Will not this be the resurrection of the body? of the 
same body though not of the same dead matter? 
Every eye shall see the beloved, every heart will cry, 
‘““My own again!—more mine because more himself 
than ever I beheld him!” For do we not say on earth, 
“He is not himself to-day,” or “She looks her own 
self ;” “ She is more like herself than I have seen her 
for long”? And is not this when the heart is glad and 
the face is radiant? For we carry a better likeness of 
our friends in our hearts than their countenances, save 
at precious seasons, manifest to us. 

Who will dare to call anything less than this a resur- 
rection? Oh, how the letter killeth! There are who 
can believe that the dirt of their bodies will rise the 
same as it went down to the friendly grave, who yet 
doubt if they will know their friends when they rise 
again. And they call ¢4a¢ believing in the resurrection ! 

What! shall a man love his neighbour as himself, 
and must he be content not to know him in heaven? 


Better be content to lose our consciousness, and 
Q 


242 UNSPOKEN SERMONS. 


know ourselves no longer. What! shall God be 
the God of the families of the earth, and shall the 
love that he has thus created towards father and 
mother, brother and sister, wife and child, go moaning 
and longing to all eternity; or worse, far worse, die. 
out of our bosoms? Shall God be God, and shall this 
be the end? 

Ah, my friends! what will resurrection or life be 
to me, how shall I continue to love God as I have 
learned to love him through you, if I find he cares 
so little for this human heart of mine, as to take 
from me the gracious visitings of your faces and forms? 
True, I might have a gaze at Jesus, now and then; 
but he would not be so good as I had thought him. 
And how should I see him if I could not see yout 
God will not take you, has not taken you from me 
to bury you out of my sight in the abyss of his own 
unfathomable being, where I cannot follow and find 
vou, myself lost in the same awful gulf. No, our 


God is an unveiling, a revealing God.. He will raise 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING. 243 


you from the dead, that I may behold you; that that 
which vanished from the earth may again stand forth, 
looking out of the same eyes of eternal love and truth, 
holding out the same mighty hand of brotherhood, 
the same delicate and gentle, yet strong hand of sister- 
hood, to me, this me that knew you and loved you 
in the days gone by. I shall not care that the matter 
of the forms I loved a thousand years ago has retuned 
to mingle with the sacred goings on of God’s science, 
upon that far-off world wheeling its nursery of growing 
loves and wisdoms through space; I shall not care 
that the muscle which now sends the ichor through 
your veins is not formed of the very particles which 
once sent the blood to the pondering brain, the flash- 
ing eye, or the nervous right arm; I shall not care, 
I say, so long as it is yourselves that are befoie me, 
beloved ; so long as through these forms I know that 
I look on my own, on my loving souls of the ancient 
time; so long as my spirits have got garments of 


revealing after their own old lovely fashion, garments 


244 UNSPOKEN SERMONS, 


to reveal themselves to me. The new shall then be 
dear as the old, and for the same reason, that it re- 
veals the old love. And in the changes which, thank 
God, must take place when the mortal puts on immor- 
tality, shall we not feel that the nobler our friends 
are, the more they are themselves; that the more the 
idea of each is carried out in the perfection of beauty, 
the more like they are to what we thought them in 
our most exalted moods, to that which we saw in them 
in the rarest moments of profoundest communion, to 
that which we beheld through the veil of all their im- 
perfections when we loved them the truest? 

Lord, evermore give us this Resurrection, like thine 
own in the body of thy Transfiguration. Let us see 
and hear, and know, and be seen, and heard, and 
known, as thou seest, hearest, and knowest. Give us 
glorified bodies through which to reveal the glorified 
thoughts which shall then inhabit us, when not only 
shalt thou reveal. God, but each of us shall reveal 


thee. 


THE GOD OF THE LIVING, 245 


And for this, Lord Jesus, come thou, the child, 
the obedient God, that we may be one with thee, 
and with every man and woman whom thou hast 


made, in the Father. 


*RINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO, 
EDINBURGH AND LONDON 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


BV Macdonald, George, 1824-1905. 
4253 Unspoken sermons : first [C -third] geries 
M36 George Macdonald. -- London ; New York : Lo: 
y,\ mans, Green, 1890-1907. 

3v. 3; 20cm. 


Vol.2: new ed. 


1. Sermons, English. I. Title. 


& CCSC/mmb
