The Historical, Political, and Diplomatic Writings of Niccolò Machiavelli, Vol. 3 (Niccolò Machiavelli (Christian E. Detmold, trans.), 1513)
==========================================================
Machiavelli's complete works in Detmold's translation (1882-91, 4 vols.) - Discourses, Florentine Histories, Art of War, the comedies, letters and diplomatic writings; the founder of modern political science entire. Vol. 3 of 4.

HISTORICAL, POLITICAL, AND DIPLOMATIC

WRITINGS

OF

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI

TRANSLATED FROM THE ITALIAN

BY

CHRISTIAN E. DETMOLD

IN FOUR VOLUMES

Vot. III.

BOSTON
~ JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY
1882

Copyright, 1882,
By CHRISTIAN E. DETMOLD.

All rights reserved.

UnIversiTy Press:
JouN Witson anp Son, CAMBRIDGE.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME IIL.

MISSIONS.

MISSION TO THE LORD oF PiomBino, NOVEMBER 20, 1498 .
MISSION TO THE COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA, JULY 12, 1499 .

COMMISSION TO THE ARMY IN THE FIELD AGAINST THE PISAns,
Juty, 1500

MISSION TO THE CouRT OF FRANCE, JULY 18, 1500 .

MIssION TO THE DUKE OF VALENTINOIS, OCTOBER 5, 1502
MIssION TO SteNNA, APRIL 26, 1503 .

MISSION TO THE CouRT OF Rome, OcToBER 24, 1503

SECOND MISSION TO THE CouURT OF FRANCE, JANUARY 14, 1504
MISSION TO GIANPAOLO Bagauioni, Apri 8, 1504. . .

MIssION TO THE MARrQuiIs oF MANTUA, JOHN FRANcIs II. oF
GonzaGA, May 4, 1505 .

SECOND Mission To Srenna, JuLy 16, 1505.

SECOND MISsION TO THE ARMY BEFORE Pisa, AUGUST 19, 1505.

Pace

MISSIONS.

VOL. III. 1

MISSION TO THE LORD OF PIOMBINO*

LETTER OF THE MAGISTRACY OF THE TEN TO THE LORD
OF PIOMBINO.

NoveMBeER 20, 1498.

THE entire faith and the very high estimation in which we
hold your illustrious Lordship, induce us confidently to ask
you to consent to do what our commissioners will ask of you,
namely :— Having to withdraw our Captain-General with his
troops from the neighborhood of Pisa, for the purpose of
sending him to Arezzo, and desiring to replace these troops
by others, and in the absence of our general to have a chief
capable of properly commanding them, and not knowing to
whom we could better confide this responsibility, we have
concluded to commit it to your charge, feeling assured that
the affection which you bear us will induce you to accept it

* Jacopo IV. d’ Appiano, Lord of Piombino, like all the petty lords of his
time, sold his sword to whoever paid him best; and thus, after having for some
time served the Pisans, he turned against them and engaged in the service of
the Florentine republic. His condotta dates from 26 August, 1498, and was
made jointly by the Florentine republic and the Duke of Milan. It was for two
years, with the option on the part of the Condottiere to extend it for a third year.
D’ Appiano was to bring with him two hundred men-at-arms, and was to receive
as his pay 22,400 florins for each year of service, with the customary reservation of
seven per cent. The Condottiere had obligated himself to be ready with his men
within fifteen days of the first payment in advance, or anticipation, as it was then
called. But he was not true to the sworn terms of the agreement, and delayed
his departure for the camp until the last days of the following February. And
hardly had he reached Pontedera when he demanded an increase of compensa-
tion. It is to this point that the mission of Machiavelli has reference; but being
so near the city of Florence there was no correspondence on the subject. The
result, however, is known from later documents, which show that the Florentine
secretary succeeded in making the Lord of Piombino abandon his pretension to
higher pay; but not the augmentation of his force by forty men-at-arms, which
was conceded to him with the consent of the Duke of Milan in the latter part of
May, with a corresponding increase of compensation.

+ MISSION TO THE

willingly, and that you will with the utmost possible prompti-
tude proceed with your troops to the Pisan territory. And we
feel convinced that, when you are once on the spot with your
troops, our interests there will be fully protected.

And so that you may have some one to guide you there, we
send you our most valued citizen, Niccolo Machiavelli, to ac-
company and guide you by the most convenient route. And
we beg you most earnestly to comply with our request and ex-
pectations with your accustomed promptitude and prudence,
fecling assured that you will do so cheerfully, as the charge
which we ask you to accept is a most honorable one, etc., etc.

MISSION OF MACHIAVELLI TO THE SAME.
INSTRUCTIONS.

You will proceed to Pontedera, where you will present your-
self to the illustrious Lord of Piombino; and after having
presented our letters of credence, you will explain to him that
you have been sent by us because we had been informed by his
chancellor, who is here, and through our ambassadors at Milan,
that it is his Lordship’s desire to receive from us, besides the
sum stipulated in the contract for his engagement, the addi-
tional sum of five thousand ducats; alleging that this was
promised him, and that it would be no more than proper inas-
much as his lordship is in no way inferior to the Count Rinuc-
cio. In relation to which demand we have judged that you
could better explain by your personal presence what we have
to say on the subject; which in fact amounts to this, that we
are sincerely desirous of satisfying his Lordship generally in
every respect, because of the good faith and affection which
he has manifested towards our republic, and which we appre-
ciate highly. You will enlarge upon this in the most effective
manner, so as to show our favorable disposition towards his
Lordship, but you will do it in vague and general terms, so as
not to commit us to any positive obligation whatever.

As regards this demand for an increase of compensation, you
will say that, so soon as we received notice of it, we examined
the register of our military engagements, where we found in

LORD OF PIOMBINO. 5

the second chapter that his Lordship had agreed with his Ex-
cellency the Duke of Milan and our magistracy that his com-
pensation for the engagement was to be 2,400 ducats, and as
much more as our magistracy might deem proper. And that
upon this point we beg his Lordship to content himself with
what at one time had been satisfactory to him. And although
this matter was left to our discretion yet we trust that his
Lordship will take into consideration the circumstances in
which we find ourselves, but that he may count upon our good
will; and that he will excuse us on account of the many con-
siderations which we are obliged to have in this matter. And
thus you will offer to his Lordship for another time all that is
due to his valor and good conduct, and to the love we bear
him; keeping however in your language always within the
limits of friendly expressions, from which he may know our
good feelings towards him and may hope to realize them.
But above all you must have patience if he should threaten a
rupture, and let him run on, and then reply and use your best
efforts to induce him also to have patience.

It may also happen that his Lordship will claim from you the
additional forty men-at-arms provided for in the third clause
of his engagement. To which you will reply that, as his en-
gagement was in common between us and his Excellency the
Duke of Milan, it would not seem proper for us to make any
alterations or additions to it without the concurrence of his
Excellency, because of his interest in the matter. But that
we will write to Milan about it and await a reply, which we
doubt not will be in accordance with his Lordship’s desire.
And so far as we are concerned in this matter you will assure
his Lordship that we shall strive in every way to meet his
wishes; and you will excuse this delay on account of the ne-
cessity above stated of having the concurrence of the Duke of
Milan, because of his interest in the matter. |

With these considerations you will carry out the first and
second part of your commission; and you will do so in such
manner as at the moment may seem most suitable to you.

DECEMVIRI LIBERTATES ET BALIA
Rep. For.
Ex Pauatio Fiorentino, 24 March, 1499.

MISSION TO THE COUNTESS CATHARINE
SFORZA.*

INSTRUCTIONS

GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI ON BEING SENT TO FURLI, TO
THEIR EXCELLENCIES THE COUNTESS SFORZA AND HER ELDEST
SON, SIGNOR OTTAVIANO.

Resotvep on, 12 Jury, 1499.

You will proceed to Furli and present yourself to the illus-
trious Lady Catharine and to his Excellency the Signor Otta-
viano, her eldest son, and after having offered your homage to
them, and presented our letters of credence, with which you will
be furnished, to both of them jointly and to each separately, you

. * The Florentine republic, having resolved in 1498 to terminate the war
against Pisa, not only made great efforts to collect a numerous army, and en-
gaged in their pay the most renowned and powerful Condottieri of Italy, but
they acted with the greater energy in this, as there was a probability of their
being obliged to fight against the Venetians, who had declared in favor of Pisa.
Amongst the captains thus taken into their pay by the Florentines was Otta-
viano Riario, Lord of Furli; a young man of only nineteen years at the time.
His mother, the Countess Catharine, was the natural daughter of the Count Fran-
cesco Sforza, who afterwards became Duke of Milan. Her first husband was the
Count Girolamo Riario, Lord of Furli and Imola; after his death she married
Feo di Savona; and after him Giovanni de’ Medici, son of Piero Francesco, who
died at Furli, 14 September, 1498, and by whom she had a son called Giovanni
Lodovico, who afterwards became celebrated as Giovanni delle Bande Nere, and
who was the father of the Grand Duke Cosimo I. It was on account of her alli-
ance with the Medici family that she showed herself friendly to the Florentines ;
and at the request of Andrea de’ Pazzi, Florentine commissioner in the Romagna,
she permitted Ottaviano, her young son by her first marriage with Girolamo
Riario, to enter the service of the Florentine republic; and on the 9th of June,
1498, the agreement for his condotta was duly signed at Florence by Sir Filippo
Roffia da San Miniato as procurator for the young Count Ottaviano Riario; the
engagement being for one year, with the option on the part of the Florentine
republic of extending it for another year, and was to begin in the month of June,
1498. The Signor Ottaviano was to furnish one hundred men-at-arms and one
hundred light horse, and was to receive fifteen thousand florins, which was to

MISSION TO THE COUNTESS SFORZA. T

will state the object of your mission; which you will explain
has been resolved upon in consequence of their agent’s having
asked of us a renewal for this year of the Signor Ottaviano’s
engagement. Upon this subject you will point out to them

cover all provisions, etc., with the customary reservation of seven per cent, and
four months’ notice in advance in case the Florentine Signoria wished to extend
the condolta for a second year. The stipulations of the agreement were faith-
fully carried out by the Florentine government ; and towards the end of January,
1499, they notified the Signor Ottaviano that they desired to continue the con-
dotta for another year. The Signor Ottaviano, however, declined this, on the
ground that the Florentines had not observed the stipulations of the agreement,
inasmuch as he had already served eight months and had not yet received the
advance pay to which he was entitled, and that therefore he did not consider
himself bound to serve for a second year.

The Ten of Liberty dropped the negotiation, but not so the Lady Catharine
of Furli, who, when she found that Cesar Borgia was about to make war upon
the despots of the Romagna, and to begin it with an attack upon Furli, felt
the necessity of surrounding herself with powerful allies, and therefore herself
asked of the republic that which she had refused six months before ; pretending
that she had been called upon by her uncle Lodovico il Moro to aid him, he being
seriously threatened by the army of King Louis XII. of France. She accord-
ingly addressed a letter to the Florentine Signoria, stating that her uncle, the
Duke of Milan, had applied to her for fifty men-at-arms, and a like number of
mounted crossbowmen, but being under an engagement to serve the Florentine
republic another year, if they required it, she begged them to inform her of their
final intentions, ete.

Immediately upon receipt of this letter the Signoria resolved to send Niccolo
Machiavelli as ambassador to the Countess Catharine to bring this matter to a
conclusion, and for that purpose gave him the above instructions.

Machiavelli had scarcely started from Florence when the Priors of Liberty, etc.
sent an express messenger after him, with the following additional instructions : —

**PRIORES LIBERTATIS ET VEXILLIFER JUSTITIZ PopuLl FLORENTINI.

“SPECTABILIS VIR, ETC. :—

“In passing by Castrocaro you will have sent here, in accordance with our in-
structions, all the powder that may be there; and should this not already have
been done, we desire you to have it done immediately. And then by way of
securing an abundance of powder you will request the most illustrious Lady
Catharine of Furli to let us have ten or twelve thousand pounds of powder,
either as a loan or as a purchase, as may seem best to her Excellency. And fur-
thermore, as we have lately had the news from the camp of the last reduction in
the number of the infantry, and seeing that we have always been well served
by the men from that country, you will make known to her Excellency that we
desire that she should select five hundred good infantry under good captains,
and with the pay lately agreed upon of fourteen lire and seventeen soldi, to be
at our camp on the 28th of the present month, where they will receive their pay.
These last two commissions respecting the powder and the infantry, you will
treat in such manner as will carry them in the earliest and best way into effect.
But should any difficulty arise on the subject, you will write to us immediately
by the same courier that brings you this. £t bene vale!

“ MARCELLUS VIRGILIUS.
‘*ExX PALATIO NOSTRO die Julii 1499.”

8 MISSION TO THE

that we do not consider ourselves bound to do so, having at
the proper time, through our commissioner, Andrea de’ Pazzi,
made their Excellencies understand the reasons which we be-
lieved would readily justify our refusal.

You will also recall the fact, that when, on the last day of
January, our commissioner urged the Signor Ottaviano to give
his consent to such a renewal, his Excellency replied, “ Non
“teneri, nec obligatum esse, cum pro parte Magistratus Decem-
“virorum, ete., non fuerint sibi servata capitula conduct
“sue.” This refusal on his part was formally drawn up by
a certain Ser Spinucci of Furli; and was moreover confirmed
on the same day by letters from the said Signor Ottaviano, and
by several letters from Andrea de’ Pazzi, in which he wrote in
behalf of the illustrious Lady Catharine that she would on no
account give her consent to such an engagement. Whence we
concluded that his Excellency was under no obligations to us,
nor we to him; it seeming to us that the efforts we had made,
and the written replies thereto, were sufficient evidence that
their Excellencies would on no account accept a renewal of the
engagement. Added to this is the fact that our ambassadors
at Milan had written several times that her Excellency the
Countess had written to that most illustrious prince, in reply
to his letters in which he advised her to accept the engage-
ment, that she would under no consideration give her consent ;
alleging that she was badly compensated, etc., and that she
hoped, in the event of her obtaining more favorable condi-
tions elsewhere, his Excellency would not deprive her of that
advantage.

All these circumstances constrain us to think that both by
words and by acts their Excellencies will not continue their
engagement any longer. And moreover, that, even if all these
reasons did not exist, the fact that his Excellency did not
accept within four months the conditions which we offered
makes it impossible for us now, after a lapse of so much time,
to come back to the terms of an engagement which has abso-
lutely expired. In this wise you will clearly justify our course,
so that his Excellency may understand that we have acted with
good reason in this matter, as the above argument will show.
And you will immediately add that, notwithstanding all this,
we have an earnest desire to meet the wishes of his Excellency,
and to satisfy him as far as we possibly can at this time; and

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 9

with the view to showing him our gratitude for all he has done
for our republic, we have determined to accord to their Ex-
cellencies such an engagement at the expiration of the present
term. But owing to the present state of things, and the great
number of men-at-arms which we have still in our service, we de-
sire that such an engagement should be on a peace footing, and .
for one year, at a compensation of ten thousand ducats. And
we think that such an engagement ought to satisfy his Excel-
lency, if not by its importance, at least by its stability, for in this
way it may last longer than if we maintained it at the same
rate of compensation and the same number of men-at-arms as
heretofore. And moreover we believe that, in accepting our
proposition, his Excellency will be influenced less by a desire
to advance his own interests than to gratify our republic, and —
by the wish to secure our affection more and more by adding
to his past services this new proof of his liberality.

You will also point out to his Excellency, that, if such an
engagement is not altogether in accordance with his wishes,
yet it will not be without dignity nor without the prospect of
improvement, when once our republic shall have recovered all
her territory and is restored to her proper state and power.
And should his Excellency refer to the increase of compensa-
tion conceded by us to some of our other Condottieri, you
will have ample reasons for explaining to him that the circum-
stances at the time demanded this, assuring him at the same
time that, if we had to do so now, it would not be on so large
a scale, nor should we have the same considerations for these
Condottieri now as we were obliged to have at the time, when
our affairs were in the condition in which they were then.
And should reference be made by his Excellency to the loss of
rations, you will in reply observe that two months of such an
engagement have already expired, which is clear gain to his
Excellency, and that we could easily compensate him for such
loss. | 7

Upon these several points you will enlarge in the most
effective language and in the best terms that may suggest
themselves to you; so as to convince his Excellency of our
sincere desire for an opportunity to benefit him, and to ac-
knowledge the services which he has rendered to our republic,
as also of our entire confidence in him. At the same time, you
will point out the necessity of the union of our states, employ-

10 MISSION TO THE

ing the most acceptable language in your endeavor to persuade
him to that effect.

You will not omit to write to us promptly an account of
your proceedings, so that we may reply at once and remove
any difficulties that may arise. And you must shape your
proceedings so that his Excellency will not take it amiss if we
do not at all times meet our payments at the moment they are
due. For this purpose you will explain to him, that we propose
to make this engagement with him from no necessity of our
own, but merely to gratify his desire; and that, weighed down
as we are with such heavy charges, we may find ourselves
obliged occasionally to defer our payments, in respect to which
you will make our excuses in such terms as will be acceptable
to his Excellency.

CREDENZIALE.

Intustrisus ET Excettentrs. D. D. Cataarty® Srorti2, VICECOMITI, ETC.,
ET D. Octaviano DE Riario, ImoLa Furtivugue D. D. et amicis cLA-
RISSIMIS,

Illustres et excellentes Domini, amici clarissimi. Mittimus
ad excellentias vestras Nicolaum Machiavellum, civem et secre-
tarium nostrum, qui, ut ili mandavimus, coram multa exponet,
in quibus habere illi certissimam optamus fidem, non secus ac
nobis loquentibus. Bene valete.

Ex Paxatio nostro die 12 Julii 1499.

Priores LIBERTATIS ET
Por. Fror
VEXILLIFER JUSTITLE

MARCELLUS.

LETTER I.

Macniricent and Intustrious Srenort, ETC., ETC.

I arrived here yesterday evening Avon ie twenty-second
hour, and reported myself immediately to his Magnificence the
Captain-General, and communicated to him your Lordships’
wishes in relation to the powder, balls, and saltpetre. He re-
plied that all the iron balls here, both large and small, had been

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 11

sent last year to be employed in the siege of Vico; and that the
powder that had been left here by the French, amounting only
to about fifteen or twenty pounds, had been destroyed two
years ago, having been set on fire by a stroke of lightning, and
that the explosion had shattered that part of the citadel where
the powder had been stored. I then sent for Farragano to
obtain information respecting the saltpetre, in accordance with
the instructions given me by your Lordships’ purveyor. He
told me that he had only one hundred pounds, but that he had
a friend in the country who had about six hundred pounds of
powder ; and although this is but a small quantity, yet I send
it to your Lordships by the bearer of this, so that this trip shall
not have been entirely in vain; and I beg that you will have
him paid promptly at the rate of forty florins per one thousand
pounds, which I have promised him. Upon weighing this pow-
der we found it to be five hundred and eighty-seven pounds ;
the teamster who brings it to you is called Tommaso di Mazolo,
to whom you will please pay the value of the powder according
to my promise to him; | have paid him for carrying it to you
the sum of eight florins and three soldi.

In regard to what has passed between Ser Guerrino del Bello
and our commander touching the attempt of the latter to arrest
Marchione Golferelli, as well as the other occurrences here, I
have learned the following from persons of different conditions,
so that I believe it to be true ; namely, that your Lordships’ pre-
decessors having written to the commander here that they had
some apprehensions lest Dionigio Naldi should enter the place
during the night for the purpose of doing some mischief to the
Corbizo family, and that a certain Marchione Golferelli was to
aid him in this, the commander resolved to lay his hands upon
this Marchione; but having been brought by the sergeants
almost within the palace courtyard, he was rescued by two of
his relatives, who carried him away with them to Furli. And
as they believed that this attempted arrest of Marchione’s had
been suggested by the Corbizzo family, they cancelled the truce
that had for years subsisted between the two families.

Respecting this matter of Ser Guerrino, I called on his father,
Bello, who does not attempt to excuse the disobedience of his
son, but complains of the inhumanity of the captain in requir-
ing him to send away out of his house in the night four of his
friends and relatives. For he believed that his loyalty was so

1 MISSION TO THE

well known that no one could have a doubt upon that point ;
and that at the time when the enemy was all around them he
had received at different times thirty of his friends in his
house, and had never been blamed, but rather commended for
it by the commissioner, and therefore he recommended him-
self and his son to your Lordships. This Bello, according to
what I learn from the chief priest Farragano, and from a num-
ber of other inhabitants of this place, is a worthy and peace-
ful man, who has never openly taken sides with cither party,
but has always been rather a peace-maker than a fomenter of
troubles. Taking now a gencral view of things in this country,
it seems to me that the people are very united, and that there
is no open enmity between any of its inhabitants.

Since the death of Corbizzo some little jealousy appears to
have sprung up amongst them, as each desires to exercise the
same influence which he had; but unless this feeling is pur-
posely stimulated by some one, it is not likely to produce any
bad results. The only thing is a very strong feeling of appre-
hension lest this Dionigio Naldi, with the aid of the Lady
Catharine, should do them some mischief. For although this
lady is on terms of friendship with your Lordships, yet they
cannot rely upon nor trust her, and thus the inhabitants of
the place as well as the country are kept in a constant state
of anxicty. It was only yesterday that some fifteen or twenty
crossbowmen of the Lady Catharine’s went to a place about a
mile from here, called Salutare, belonging to your Lordships,
and wounded three men and carried one away with them after
having robbed his house. Similar outrages are committed
every day, and it was only yesterday that a number of coun-
try people complained to me, saying, “ Our lords have aban-
“doned us; they have too many other things on their hands.”
Your Lordships will doubtless, with your great prudence, take
such measures in this matter as the honor of our republic
demands, and as will give satisfaction to these your most
faithful subjects.

There is nothing else of interest to communicate. I shall
leave immediately for Furli to execute the commission given
me by your Lordships, to whom I commend myself most hum-
bly. Que feliciter valeant.

Minimus servitor,

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Castrocaro, 16 July, 1499.

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 13

LETTER II.

Maentricent SiGNoRI: —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday morning from Castro-
caro, reporting what I had done in relation to the balls, pow-
der, and saltpetre, and the condition of things generally there.
I went afterwards on the same day, at ‘an early hour, to Furli;
but finding the illustrious Lady Catharine occupied with some
of her own affairs, I did not obtain an audience until about the
twenty-second hour. No one was present but her Ladyship
and Messer Giovanni da Casale, the Duke of Milan’s Chargé
d’Affaires here. Her Ladyship’s son Ottaviano had gone on
a pleasure trip to Furlimpiccolo.

After having presented myself to her Excellency, I explained
to her your Lor dships’ commission, employing the most suita-
ble expressions to convince her in the first instance of your
Lordships’ earnest desire that the time might come when you
could show effectually how highly you valued those who had
loyally served our republic, and who, regardless of everything
else, had shared her varying fortunes, as her Excellency had
ever done. And that if the refusal to accept her services now
seemed contrary to these assurances, and if we had contested
with her agents our being bound and held by an annual en-
gagement, her Ladyship might be assured upon this point, as
was proved by the several letters of your Lordships which
showed that the reason of it was the impossibility of providing
the means, because of the heavy charges to which our republic
was already subjected. And as to our efforts to explain that
we were not bound to a renewed engagement, I pointed out to
her Ladyship that it had never been your intention to refuse
to do anything that might be agreeable to her, and that the
only reason why your Lordships wished to explain that you
were not bound was to make her Excellency understand that
nothing, not even the necessity of the evil times, induced you
to offer her a renewal of the engagement, but that you do it
solely from the affection you have for her, because of her great
merits. And that for this reason you had sent me to her Ex-
cellency to make known to her that, although your Lordships
were not bound, yet in recognition of the valuable services which
she had rendered to our republic you were willing to accord an

14 MISSION TO THE

engagement to her son; but that, on account of the number of
men-at-arms which you had ae in your service, you wished
such an engagement to be on a peace footing, and the compen-
sation for this year not to exceed ten aiereennG ducats.

Nor did I fail to demonstrate to her Excellency, with the best
arguments that suggested themselves to me, that such an en-
eagement ought to be satisfactory to her; saying that her ac-
ceptance of it would bean addition to her many other merits,
and that time would prove that she had not served an coer
ful Signoria; and that she would never have occasion to repent
ae ndded this to her other services to our republic. Her
Excellency replied that your Lordships’ words had always been
satisfactory to her, but that your actions had not always pleased
her, and that she had never received compensation commen-
surate with the value of her services. Nevertheless, knowing
that gratitude was one of the characteristics of your illustrious
republic, she could not believe that you would now begin to
show yourselyes ungrateful to one who had for a great while
back done more for you than perhaps any of your other allies,
by exposing her dominions, without any obligations on her
part, to the rapacity of the Venetians, her most powerful neigh-
bors. And that therefore she was willing to abide by the hopes
which your Lordships held out to her. Nor would she dispute
whether your Lordships were bound or not to renew the en-
gagement, but she desired time for replying to the propositions
made to her, inasmuch as it seemed but reasonable to her not
to decide at a moment’s notice a matter which you had with so
much prudence discussed and consulted about for some time.
And having replied to this in becoming terms, I begged her
Excellency to hasten her decision, and took my leave.

Later in the day, at about the sixteenth hour, Messer Anto-
nio Baldraccani, first secretary of her Excellency the Countess,
came to see me, and told me that the illustrious Duke of Milan
had written some five or six days ago to her Excellency, asking
her to send him for his own use fifty men-at-arms and fifty
mounted crossbowmen. That her Excellency had written on
Sunday last. to your Lordships on the subject, but had as yet
received no reply. And he added that on that very day a
letter had been received by her Mxcellency from the aforesaid
Duke of Milan, begging her that, inasmuch as she had not
come to terms with the Florentine Signoria about a renewal

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 15

of her engagement for the year, she ought to enter his service
on the same terms and conditions as she had last year from
your Lordships. The aforesaid secretary also told me that
letters had been received the evening before from the curate
of Cascina, saying that eight deputies, members of the Council
of EHighty, had given him to understand that they wanted to
re-engage the Signor Ottaviano on two conditions. The first
was the same which I had already explained to her Excellency ;
and the second was that she should consent to pledge her state,
which the said curate demonstrated to the deputies that her
Excellency could never agree to. Moreover the said secretary
stated that her Excellency was in doubt what course to take,
and therefore could not give a prompt reply. The reason of
this was that it seemed disgraceful for her and her son to ac-
cept the conditions offered by your Lordships, because others,
who had not rendered you the same services as herself, had
their compensation increased, whilst that of herself and her
son was diminished; and she could not believe that your Lord-
ships made so little account of her as never to give her any-
thing but fair words. And in fact she did not know how to
excuse herself to the Duke of Milan if she accepted the condi-
tions offered by you, which were so little creditable, and re-
fused his, which were in the highest degree honorable. At the
same time it seemed to her that she was under obligations to
the Duke of Milan both by blood as well as by the numberless
benefits she had received from that prince; and for that rea- |
’ gon she was at a loss, and could not decide so promptly upon
a reply, but wanted me to write to your Lordships, so that
you might in the mean time write back what you thought of
the matter.

In answer to the first part, touching the demand by the Duke
of Milan for men, and the other propositions, I said, that as
your Lordships had received no notice of this before my de-
parture, you could not have given me any instructions on the
subject, and therefore I could do nothing but write to your
Lordships and await your reply. Respecting what the curate
of Cascina had written about pledging her state, etc., | could
also say nothing, but wondered much that, if this matter had
been decided upon before my departure, no instructions were
given me about it, or that I was not afterwards written to on the
subject ; and therefore I had also nothing to say on this point,

16 MISSION: 10 TEE

but would write the same as in relation to the other matter.
To this Messer Baldraceani replied that this latter point was
of no importance, for if we were agreed about the other mat-
ters this would present no difficulties whatsoever; for her Ex-
cellency did not care to give any written obligation upon this
point, but that she intended to fulfil her promises without any
writings, the same as she had done in the last year. In my
reply to this I observed, with regard to the embarrassment in
which her Excellency found herself in deeming it discreditable
for her to have the terms of her engagement reduced, whilst
those of others were increased, as also in reference to the con-
siderations which he thought she ought to have for the Duke
of Milan, and the offers made by him, etc., etc., that if her
Excellency would carefully weigh the reasons that obliged
your Lordships to increase the pay of your other Condottieri
who are carrying on the war for our republic, and those which
influence them now to offer to re-engage her Excellency, she
would find that her acceptance of the proffered engagement,
so far from being discreditable, as she alleged, would be in
the highest degree honorable. For whilst your Lordships were
constrained to the former by the exigencies of the times, you
were prompted to the latter by nothing else than the regard
and affection which you had for her Excellency, and therefore
your propositions to her were the more honorable and worthy
of acceptance, as they were entirely voluntary. Moreover, his
Excellency the Duke of Milan could not and should not com-
plain if her Ladyship declined his propositions, although some-
what more advantageous, and accepted those of your Lordships,
which for the moment seem less brilliant; first because of the
friendly relations existing between his Excellency and our re-
public, which should make him look upon every advantage to
your Lordships as for the common benefit; and secondly be-
cause in a certain measure the Signor Ottaviano was still in
our pay, and the terms offered him now were in no wise in
contradiction with his engagement of last year.

After having thus replied to each other, as the subject re-
quired, the secretary reiterated the conclusion that the Count-
ess Catharine could not decide so promptly, and therefore it
would be well that I should inform your Lordships of all that
had been said and done; and that he would in the same way
communicate all that I had said to her Excellency the Count-

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 17

ess, although I had the privilege of communicating at all times
personally with her Excellency. And on leaving me he said
that he had forgotten to tell me on the part of the Countess
that she desired much to know what compensation your Lord-
ships intended to give her for former services; and that I
should, on her part, beg you to send some reply upon these
points. For if you came to some favorable conclusion upon
that matter, she would regard it as an evidence of your dispo-
sition, and could then with greater confidence and_ security
enter your service.

Having been here but so short a time, I shall not presume to
say much of the state of things here; but according to what
those Florentines who are near the Countess tell me, her Ex-
cellency could not be better disposed towards our republic than
what she is. There is here a certain Messer Giovanni da
Casale, Chargé d’Affaires of the Duke of Milan, of whose char-
acter and condition I shall not attempt to say anything, as he
was last winter with the ducal troops in the Casentino. It
will be enough for you to know that since he is here, which is
now two months, he seems to rule everything.

Valeant Dominationes vestre.

Forut, 17 July, 1499.

P. S.— Yesterday I demanded of her Excellency on the part
of your Lordships the balls and saltpetre, under the conditions
prescribed by you. Her Excellency replied that she had nei-
ther, and was herself greatly in need of them.

Iterum valeant EF. EH. N. V.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

LETTER III.

MaGniFIceNnT SIGNORI: —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday at length, by the courier
Ardingo, what I had done in execution of the commission in-
trusted to me, and await your reply with impatience. This
morning I received through Tommaso Totti, a letter from your
Lordships urging me in relation to the powder and saltpetre

which I was to obtain at Castrocaro. Having reported fully on
VOL. IIL 2

18 MISSION TO THE

this subject on the 16th instant, I shall not enlarge upon it any
further; but as your Lordships had charged me also to ask her
Excellency for powder and men, | presented myself immediately
before her and communicated again to her Ladyship your wishes
and the pleasure which her compliance with your request would
ive you. She replied that she had no saltpetre at all, and but
little powder ; but that by way of not failing to do what was pos-
sible she would be glad to give you ten thousand out of the twenty
thousand pounds of saltpetre which Leonardo Strozzi had pur-
chased for her account at Pesaro, and she charged Risorbolo to
write to the said Leonardo what she wished done in the matter.
I spared no efforts to dispose her Excellency favorably to your
requests, but could obtain nothing more from her. Your Lord-
ships will therefore have to see Leonardo Strozzi, and can ar-
range with him so that you may send your teams at once to
Pesaro to bring the saltpetre away. Or if you prefer, you can
write and send me an order from Leonardo to have the salt-
petre delivered to my order; and I will arrange to have it trans-
ported to Castrocaro, where your Lordships’ teamsters can come
and take it. This was the course adopted last year, as is well
known to your minister, Guaspare Pasgni.

Respecting the troops, her Excellency told me that she was
quite willing to permit her subjects to engage in your Lordships’
service, but that it was not possible to make them march with-
out money. Your Lordships must, therefore, send means to
raise the troops, whilst her Excellency will endeavor to send
you only picked men, well armed and loyal, and will expedite
them promptly. If, therefore, your Lordships are in want of
troops, you must at once send five hundred ducats, so that one
may be given to each man; and I believe that within two weeks
from now they would be on Pisan territory, but not sooner.
Your Lordships will decide what arrangement will suit you
best, and advise me accordingly, and I shall execute your com-
mands with the utmost diligence.

When I communicated your Lordships’ letters to the illustri-
ous Countess this morning, and before I had time to add a word,
she said: “I have good news this morning, for I see that your
“ Signoria are going to make earnest of it; they are collecting
“ troops, for which I commend them, and am the more pleased
“at it as I was before dissatisfied by their tardiness, and the
“‘ seemingly irreparable loss of time.” I thanked her Excellency

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 19

most sincerely, and then assured her that this tardiness had
been caused altogether by necessity. Her Excellency readily
admitted this, adding that she wished that her states were so
situated that she could stir up all her troops and subjects in
your favor, as that would show to the whole world that in espous-
ing your cause she had been influenced solely by her affection
for and entire faith in your Lordships. But she desired some
acknowledgment for this, and that she should not be wounded
in her honor, which she prized above all else. This she thought
would be becoming in your Lordships, not so much on her own
account as for the example which you would thereby give to
your other adherents of your not being ungrateful for services
received. I replied to the best of my ability, but could not help
observing that mere words and arguments will not go far in
satisfying her Excellency, unless supported, in part at least, by
acts. And I truly believe that if your Lordships were to make
some acknowledgment to the Countess for past services, or in-
crease the compensation under the new engagement, you will
be sure to preserve her Ladyship’s friendship. For she could
not be better disposed towards our republic than what she is, of
which I have every day the most striking indications. It has
seemed to me proper to write all these particulars so that your
Lordships may the better judge what I wrote you yesterday.
Que feliciter valeant.
Humilis servitor,

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Fort, 18 July, 1499.

P. S.— Enclosed is the letter which her Excellency had
written to Leonardo Strozzi about the saltpetre.

P. S.—One of the secretaries of the Countess has been to
see me, and informed me on the part of her Excellency that
two kinds of troops may be raised in her dominions. The
one is a corps of fifteen hundred men, which she has armed
for her own service as may be needed. Of these she cannot
send any to your Lordships, unless they are paid a whole
month in advance. Her Excellency would pay them herself,
or hold herself responsible for such as do not serve the full
time of a month. She wants eighteen lire per man; so if your
Lordships want any of them you will have to send fifteen
hundred ducats for five hundred men, which her Excellency

20 MISSION TO THE

promises shall be good men and well armed, and shall be sent at
once. The other kind of troops are such as are in the habit of
engaging with any one for pay, but are not enrolled by her
Excellency. Of these the Countess leaves you to hire at your
pleasure, and at such rates of pay as you can agree with them
for. Your Lordships will in your high wisdom take such as
you may deem most suited for your purpose. 1am ready with
all diligence to execute whatever commission your Lordships
may charge me with.
Iterum valeant, die qua in literis.

LETTER IV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 17th by the courier Ar-
dingo, that the illustrious Lady Catharine was in doubt as to
what course to take; for on the one hand your Lordships want-
ed to reduce the conditions of the new engagement, and on the
other the Duke of Milan offered her the same terms as under the
former engagement; and that her Excellency therefore wanted
me to write to your Lordships, so that you might understand
the whole case, and might show more consideration for her
’ honor, and satisfy her in proportion to the services she had
rendered, etc., etc. She awaits your reply with eagerness, and
as it has not yet been received, it seemed to me well to send
the bearer of this, and to beg your Lordships to reply promptly,
unless you have already done so, and let me know your final
decision; so that, whether I conclude an arrangement with her
Excellency or not, I may return to your Lordships’ feet.

I believe the way to content her Excellency would be first to
assure her that she will be compensated for her former services,
upon which point she has been greatly dissatisfied, and then to
increase the pay for this year to twelve thousand florins. This
at least is my opinion, in which however I may be mistaken; for
her Hxcellency has always stood much upon her honor, and has
never intimated to me that she would accept any less than what
the Duke of Milan has offered her; and it is difficult to judge
by her disposition whether she is more favorably inclined to the
Duke of Milan or to your republic. For, to begin with, I see

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 21

her court filled with Florentines, of whom it may be said that
they almost entirely control her government; and then I see
her naturally well inclined towards our city, and manifest the
most earnest desire to have the love of our citizens, for which
there are the most palpable reasons, for having a son by Gio-
vanni de’ Medici, she hopes to have the usufruct of his posses-
sions, and expects every day to assume his guardianship. And
finally, what is most important, she sees the Duke of Milan
attacked by the king of France, and does not know what secu-
rity there would be for her to attach herself to him under these
circumstances, all of which her Excellency knows very well.

These are the considerations upon which I found the opinion
that she will accept our conditions, even though they be not
liberal. On the other hand, I see near her Excellency the Duke
of Milan’s agent Messer Giovanni da Casale, who is very highly
esteemed, and seems to rule everything here. This is of great
importance, and may easily sway the undecided mind of the
Countess to whatever side he pleases.

In fact, were it not for the influence of this fear of the king
of France, I should be inclined to believe that even on equal
terms she would leave us, particularly as she supposes that she
would not thereby forfeit your Lordships’ friendship because of
your amicable relations with the Duke of Milan.

I have thought it proper to make this statement to your Lord-
ships, so that you may know what impediments present them-
selves here to my success, and so that you may come to some
positive decision, if you have not already done so. Her Excel-
lency awaits your reply impatiently, for she is every day tor-
mented by the Duke.

There was a review here yesterday of five hundred infantry,
whom her Excellency sends to the Duke of Milan under com-
mand of Dionigio Naldi. A couple of days ago there was also
a muster of fifty mounted crossbowmen, equally destined for
Milan. These will leave here within the next few days with one
of the Duke’s secretaries, who came here to enlist and pay them.
I am under the impression that your Lordships have changed
your mind respecting the infantry which you wanted to obtain
from the Countess; which seems to me the wiser course, as you
have been able to obtain them from elsewhere more conve-
niently. Should your Lordships, however, still be in want of
them, then you can have good and faithful troops from here,

22 MISSION TO THE

well disciplined and ready to start immediately. In that case,
however, it will be necessary to send the money for a month’s
pay, as I have already stated in my last letter to your Lordships,
to whom I recommend myself ever so much.
Humilis servitor,
Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.
Furi, 22 July, 1499.

LETTER V.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote yesterday that I had despatched an express to your
Lordships, as a reply to my letter of the 17th seemed to me to
be unduly delayed. Since then your Lordships’ courier Ardingo
arrived, bringing me your letters of the 19th and 20th instant.
So soon as I had perused their contents, I presented myself
before her Excellency, and communicated to her in the most
becoming terms what your Lordships have charged me with
touching the propositions made to her Excellency by the Duke
of Milan. After that, I stated to her the offers made by your
Lordships, and endeavored to make her understand that you
would certainly never fail to do all that might inure to the
honor, safety, and advantage of her Excellency, employing such
arguments as I thought necessary and proper to persuade her,
etc. To which her Excellency replied that all her hopes were
in your Lordships; and that the only thing that caused her pain
in this whole matter was the dishonor which she feared she
would incur, and the respect which she felt she ought to observe
towards her uncle. But that, knowing now the final resolves
of your Lordships, she would endeavor to come to a prompt
decision, and remove, so far as in her power, all difficulties that
might interpose. After having replied in a becoming manner,
and referred to your Lordships’ letter of the 19th, in relation to
the outrage committed upon some of your subjects, I begged her
Ladyship to come to a speedy decision, and took my leave.

Later in the day, Messer Baldraccani called to see me, and,
after having made-excuses for her Excellency’s not having per-
sonally informed me of her intentions, alleging that it was
owing to her being indisposed, and most unhappy on account of

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 93

the serious illness of her son Lodovico, by Giovanni de’ Medici,
he communicated to me, on behalf of her Excellency, that she
did not regret having, regardless of all else, thrown herself into
your Lordships’ arms, in whom she placed all confidence and
hope. That she consented to accept the engagement on a peace
footing for one year, on the basis of your Lordships’ last offer
of twelve thousand ducats. But for the sake of being able
more completely to justify her taking this step before the whole
world, and with the more honor and credit to her government,
her Excellency desired that your Lordships would bind your-
selves to defend, protect, and maintain the integrity of her do-
minions, which she was fully assured your Lordships would do
anyhow, without any special obligation to that effect. Yet that
she greatly desired such an obligation from your Lordships,
which she knew you would not refuse her, as it would be in the
highest degree honorable for her, and in no way prejudicial to
your Lordships. And, lastly, Messer Baldraccani said that her
Excellency desired to have a settlement, if not in full, then at
least in part, for her former services; that she needs it for her
many wants and urgent necessities, and that she cannot believe
that the charges which you have to provide for are so heavy
as to be an obstacle to such a settlement; and therefore she
charged me most emphatically to write to your Lordships, and
urge this matter on her behalf.

As to the first point, namely, the acceptance of an engage-
ment for a year, etc., | replied in the most amicable manner,
saying that I felt sure that the good opinion which her Excel-
lency had of our republic would even increase with time and
experience. But as tothe obligation which her Ladyship asked
for, I regarded it as superfluous for the very reasons alleged by
her Excellency herself. And as I had no authority to conclude
anything not comprised in my commission, her Excellency
might for the present accept the engagement, and afterwards
write to her agent at Florence to present her demands, which
I believed would be favorably received.

Messer Antonio replied that her Excellency wished to close
the entire business at one and the same time, and that there-
fore she had. requested that I should write to your Lordships
to send me the necessary powers, promising at the same time
to ratify any agreement that might be made by me in your
name. All the arguments I could present to the contrary could

24 MISSION TO THE

not induce her to alter her decision; and I am therefore obliged
to submit to you the demands made by her Excellency as they
have been presented to me; so that your Lordships may in
your supreme wisdom decide, and promptly advise me of, your
ultimate resolve, and so that I may be enabled to return to
Florence, which is my most earnest desire.

Respecting the indemnity for former services, I observed that
her Excellency had spoken to me some days ago about it, and
that | had written to your Lordships on the subject, and that
you had replied; and therefore it seemed to me superfluous to
repeat the same thing over again, particularly as I knew your
favorable disposition, as well as the difficulties which prevent
you from doing anything in the matter now. Nevertheless, by
way of satisfying her Excellency, | would write once more very
urgently on the subject.

Yesterday, when I complained to the Countess on behalf of
your Lordships of the outrage committed by some of her arch-
ers upon your people at Salutare, she made me the most strenu-
ous excuses, saying that she had directed her men to go and
gather the harvest of a certain Carlo Buosi, who cultivated a
farm on her territory ; that this Carlo had been killed not long
since by Dionigio Naldi to revenge the Signor Ottaviano; and
that when the country people saw her archers carry off the
harvest, they had shouted to them that they would be cut to
pieces, and otherwise overwhelmed them with insulting words,
so that the archers felt themselves as it were constrained to
resent this abuse. Her Excellency added, that she was never-
theless grieved at heart about it, and as proof of it she had at
once ordered the leader of her archers, who had begun the dis-
turbance, to be disarmed and dismissed from her service; and
this has been done.

I recommend myself most humbly to your Lordships.

Que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Furu, 23 July, 1499.

P. S.— The fifty mounted crossbowmen which the Duke had
taken into his pay leave to-morrow for Milan.

COUNTESS CATHARINE SFORZA. 25

LETTER VI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

Yesterday I received by your Lordships’ courier Ardingo your
two letters of the 19th and 20th, and hope to-morrow to close
the engagement with the illustrious Lady Catharine, in accord-
ance with your latest instructions ; and after that I expect also
to arrange the business of your subjects at Salutare in a man-
ner entirely satisfactory to your Lordships. I cannot enlarge
upon these matters now, as the messenger is in the greatest
haste to depart. I will only add, that, so soon as these matters
are settled, I shall return to your Lordships, to whom I recom-
mend myself most humbly.

Humilis servitor,
NiccoLo Mac#IAVELLI.

Fourut, 23 July, 1499.

LETTER VIL.

Maentricent S1enorti : —

I had written the enclosed yesterday, and was just about to
despatch the bearer of this, Ardingo, when Messer Giovanni da
Casale came to see me, and told me on the part of her Excel-
lency that I need not write, as her Excellency the Countess
was satisfied not to ask any further obligations from your Lord-
ships, feeling perfectly assured that you would not act differ-
ently in your dealings with her than what she would have
done towards your Lordships; and requesting me to come to
her Excellency this morning for the purpose of signing the
engagement, etc.

Fully persuaded that the business would actually be closed,
and the curate of Casina being about to despatch an express
to Lorenzo di Pier Francesco, I availed myself of that op-
portunity to write to your Lordships expressing my belief
that the matter was as good as concluded. This morning,
then, fully persuaded that everything would be closed accord-
ing to the understanding, and being with Messer Giovanni
in presence of her Excellency, she said to me that she had

26 MISSION TO THE COUNTESS SFORZA.

reflected upon the matter during the night, and thought that
it would be more for her honor in attaching herself to your
Lordships, if you were to declare that you would obligate your-
selves to defend her dominions, as her secretary had previously
explained to me. She had therefore resolved again to ask me
to write to your Lordships about it. Her Ixcellency added,
that, if she had given me to understand differently through
Messer Giovanni, I must not be astonished at it, for the more
matters of that kind were examined, the better were they un-
derstood. I could not but feel disappointed at this sudden
change, and manifested my feelings both by words and ges-
tures, saying that your Lordships would also be greatly sur-
prised, as I had written you that her Excellency was satisfied
upon every point without exception. But as I could get noth-
ing else from her Excellency, I feel constrained to send you
the enclosed, and to inform you specially by this of what has
taken place, so that your Lordships may judge of it, and
promptly decide what is to be done.

To-morrow I purpose going to Castrocaro, to see if I can
secure the Corbizzos against Dionigio Naldi and his partisans ;
her Excellency, the Lady Catharine, has offered to do her best
to aid me in this matter. Whatever the result may be, I will
advise your Lordships, to whom I humbly recommend myself.
Que bene valeant.

Niccoto MACHIAVELLI.
Furut, 24 July, 1499.

* After the departure of Machiavelli, the Lady Catharine sent an envoy to
Florence with the following credentials : —

“To THE ILLUSTRIOUS AND MAGNIFICENT LORDS, PRIORS, ETC., ETC. :—

“In compliance with the promise given to your commissioner, Messer Niccolo
“Machiavelli, send to your Lordships the worthy Messer Joanni, my auditor,
“who is to explain to your Lordships the matter with which he is charged in my
“name. I beg your Lordships will deign to accord to him your confidence, the
“same as you would do to me were I personally in presence of your Lordships,
“to whom I do not cease to recommend myself.

“CATHARINE SFORZA,
Countess of Riario, Furli, and Imola,
“ FURLI, 3 August, 1499,”

COMMISSION TO THE ARMY IN THE FIELD
AGAINST THE PISANS.*

LETTER I.
FROM LUCA DEGLI ALBIZZI TO THE SIGNORIA OF FLORENCE.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUsTRIOUS SIGNORI : —

WE are now at the fourteenth hour, and have as yet no fur-
ther news from the Gascons, as M. Samper has not returned
from there, although we expect him at every moment. Every-
thing remains in confusion and uncertainty, and things augur
badly for us, for at every moment we hear of some fresh at-

* On the refusal of the Pisans to accept the decision given by the Duke of Fer-
rara as umpire in the peace negotiations between the Venetian and Florentine
republics, the Signoria of Florence determined to resume the war with increased
vigor, so as to bring these rebellious subjects once for all to submission. ‘They
therefore engaged fresh troops, and gave the supreme command of them to
Paolo Vitelli, and the principal charges to his brother Vitellozzo and the Count
Rinuccio da Marciano. As Vitelli had proposed to begin this enterprise with
the capture of Cascina, the Signoria convoked the Council to hear their opinions
and then to decide upon the matter. The Council approved the plan proposed
by Vitelli, and twelve days after the meeting of the Council Cascina was recov-
ered by the Florentines. This enabled the army to advance and approach the
walls of Pisa, after having assaulted and taken the castle of Stampace. But
Paolo Vitelli, who commanded the expedition, did not know how to take advan-
tage of the terror of the enemy, and permitted the victory, which he held in his
hands, to escape him; for Pisa would undoubtedly have been taken if Paolo had
dared to push forward. But by his temporizing he afforded the Pisans the op-
portunity to recover their courage, so that they obliged him to abandon the
castle of Stampace, and to withdraw from before the walls of Pisa; for it was
not long before, aided by sickness produced by the malaria, the Pisans had the
satisfaction of seeing Vitelli raise the siege of their city. The Signoria suspect-
ing their commander of treason, had him arrested at Cascina, and thence brought
to Florence, where after two days he was beheaded. Thus terminated the dis-
creditable campaign of 1499; but it was resolved to resume the war in the fol-
lowing year under better auspices. The Signoria, anxious to secure the help of
powerful allies, sent Pietro Soderini as ambassador to Georges d’Amboise, Cardi-

28 COMMISSION TO THE

tempt or outrage against us; and no sooner is one disposed of
than four others occur,— enough to convince any one that
they are endless. Moreover, a number of Germans came into
my chamber this morning, saying that at the time when the
Emperor came to Pisa they were three months in our service,
and that one hundred and thirty of their companions under
command of a captain called Antonio Buner had never been
paid; and with insulting and threatening language they de-
manded immediate payment from me. I told them that I
knew nothing whatever of the matter; but if they would de-
pute two of their number I would give them letters to your
Lordships so that you could settle with them. But they re-
fused this, and the only arrangement I could make with them,
after much abusive language on their part, was that I should
write to your Lordships; and if within forty-eight hours they
were paid they would be satisfied; if not, they would pay them-
selves with my blood. M. Saliente and some other French-
men happened to come in at the time; they seemed frightened
to death, and were as much alarmed by this crowd as I was
myself. They excused themselves, and comforted me with
fresh water, and approved the proposition that I should write
you. Beaumont seemed utterly disheartened, and manifests
great regret at this occurrence; but he sees no remedy for it,
and seems really distressed that both his good will and his
ability are of no avail. The captain of the Swiss seems full of
good intentions, but brings forth nothing. All this, however,
may be merely pretended, and may have no other object than
the justification of the king at our expense.

nal of Rouen and governor of Milan for Louis XII., king of France, requesting
him to let them have a portion of his troops to aid them in recovering Pisa.
D’Amboise yielded to their request, and agreed to send them five thousand Swiss
infantry and five hundred lances, the latter to be paid by the king, and the
former by the Florentines, who were also to supply the artillery and whatever
else might be necessary for a siege. The Seigneur de Beaumont was appointed
captain of this force, at the request of the republic, who had on former occa-
sions experienced his friendship. This auxiliary corps lost much precious time
on the road to Pisa; and no sooner had they arrived at the Florentine camp
than difficulties arose between these troops and the Florentine commissioners,
Giovan Battista Ridolfi and Luca degli Albizzi, to whom Machiavelli had been
sent as an adjunct in the beginning of June. The Gascons mutinied, and the
Swiss insulted Commissioner Luca degli Albizzi, held him prisoner, and under
false pretences extorted from him the sum of thirteen hundred ducats; and the
whole expedition proved a complete failure.

The letters to the Florentine government in relation to this mission were
written in part by the commissioners, and in part by Machiavelli.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 29

As for myself, I augur very ill of the situation, and should
deem it well if your Lordships would consider whether, with-
out prejudice to our republic, | might think of my own safety ;
for what has not yet taken place may occur at any moment.
I beg your Lordships, however, not to attribute this suggestion
to cowardice on my part, for I am resolved to face any danger
that may be deemed for the interest of our republic.

All these proceedings tend only to make us despair of Pisa,
and to apprehend even worse, and therefore, as I have several
times written to your Lordships, it is well to watch the whole
of this game, and amongst many evils to choose the least, and
above all promptly to apply the remedies that can be thought
of, so as to produce an immediate effect. Weigh all this care-
fully, and confine yourselves to such measures and dispositions
as the times demand; and believe him who tells you in good
faith that the eye speaks the truth, rather than the ear.

Your Lordships must understand that I had been notified
some days before of the above-mentioned trouble with the
Swiss ; but not wishing to annoy your Lordships, and believing
that I should be able to defend myself against such dishonesty,
I did not inform your Lordships of it before; nor should I
have said anything on the subject now, but that I recognize the
manifest danger.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Lucas ANTONIO DEGLI ALBIZZ1I,

Commissioner- General.
From THE Camp BEFORE Pisa, July 8, 1500,

at the 144 hour.

P. 8.— For God’s sake do not forget the provisions, for that
would be the completion of our ruin. De Beaumont must also
be provided for; he has begun to importune me, and never
sees me without worrying me on that point.

LETTER II.

Maentricent S1GNoRI: —

The commissioner wrote you yesterday evening the condi-
tion of things in which we find ourselves here; and to-day at
three o’clock there came about one hundred Swiss to his quar-

30 COMMISSION TO THE

ters, and demanded pay for the company of Gianotto; saying
that they would not leave without being paid. The commis-
sioner could not pacify them with words or promises, so that
after much disputing they have carried him off prisoner. Since
then I have heard nothing further, for I have remained at the
station of San Michele, so as to be able to give your Lordships
this information, that you may take measures to prevent one
of your citizens, with so many of his people, all your subjects,
from being carried off, and by whom!  Valete !
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
From THE Camp BEFORE Pisa, 9 July, 14th hour.

LETTER III.
FROM GIO. BATTISTA BARTOLINI TO THE SIGNORIA OF FLORENCE.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUSTRIOUS SIGNORI : —

I wrote to your Lordships at the sixteenth hour, and sent it
by the same courier that brought me the news of the carrying
off of the commissioner by the Swiss, so that he might in his
own words relate to you what he has told me; for having
nothing else to communicate, I should not have ventured to
have written you expressly about this matter. We are now
at the twentieth hour, and I have heard nothing positive ex-
cept that a little while ago Piero Pucci returned with another
courier, and told me with his own lips that the commissioner
had been liberated, but he could give me no further particu-
Jars. He said also that he had been told in camp to stop the
provisions here in Cascina, as the camp was to be moved to-
morrow to San Giovanni della Vena. Not having any other
positive information on this point, I should not have men-
tioned it to your Lordships were it not for the importance of
this place, which is well known to you, and therefore it seemed
to me dangerous to leave it badly supplied with everything, as
I have already several times written to your Lordships.

Borgo Rinaldi has arrived, but he has only a few men, and
these without arms. I have anyhow urged him to make up
his company. Believing the Signor Piero in Florence, I have
urged him also to the same effect, as your Lordships know.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 31

But I fear that unless they act promptly we shall not be in
time. We have neither cuirasses, long lances, nor bucklers,
nor any ammunition except a few barrels of powder, which I
have retained here since yesterday. Everything else is abso-
lutely wanting. I beg your Lordships to provide these things
if you think proper, and very promptly.

There is a post here of some eight or ten archers, sent here
by M. de Beaumont, at the request of Gio. Battista Ridolfi and
Luca degli Albizzi, as before mentioned, for the purpose of pro-
tecting the country against the outrages of the brutal camp
followers. Up to the present these men have kept good and
diligent watch; if I receive some infantry now, so that I can
myself protect the country, I do not know whether or not to
discharge this post of archers. I believe that the troops
which I expect will arrive before I can receive a reply from
your Lordships, in which case I will do the best under the cir-
cumstances until I shall receive your wiser decision. But I
beg you will send me your instructions, and, if received in
time, I will conform to them. but above all things I entreat
you to send provisions, and that quickly, as otherwise I greatly
mistrust the people of the country, particularly in view of the
treatment we have experienced at the hands of these troops.
Moreover, if the camp is moved to-morrow to San Giovanni, we
‘shall have the Pisans full of courage and confidence after us.

Knowing these things now, I hope your Lordships will weigh
them well and provide for them. I recommend myself most
humbly to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Cascrna, 9 July, 1500.

P.S. At the 20th hour. — Letters from the commissioner in-
form us that the army will be to-morrow morning at Campi,
the other side of the Caprona, whence they are to make their
first movement. He directs me to be sure and have a sup-
ply of provisions ready. I shall do my utmost in the mat-
ter. He moreover charges me to urge Borgo, and the Signor
Pietro Guagni and Carlo da Cremona, and Messer Bandino, to
have their companies ready and in order; and that your Lord-
ships urge the Signor Piero in Florence to the same effect.

G. B. BartTo.int,
Commissioner-General.

32 COMMISSION TO THE

(OD EER LY.

COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN BY ME, LUCA DI ANTONIO DEGLI
ALBIZZI, TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS AND MAGNIFICENT SIGNORIA,
9 JULY, 22° HOUR.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I know not whether in the last hour of my life (which God -
grant may be soon!) I shall suffer one fourth of the pain and
affliction which I feel at this time; not so much on account of
the perils to which I have been, and am still exposed, nor on
account of my seizure and detention, but because I see from
the letters of your Lordships, and particularly the one of the
8th, written at the fourth hour, that you have not as much
faith in me as I had supposed that I deserved; but that I have
been abandoned by all, like one forsaken and lost. My sins
and ill fortune will it so; but God perhaps will succor him
who is so unjustly abandoned! Having fully pointed out to
your Lordships the dangers, and you knowing perfectly your-
selves the wretched conduct of these men so recently towards
the king of France and the Duke of Milan, it was not to be
supposed that any expedients would moderate the dishonest
demands of these Swiss. But it has pleased your Lordships
to have it so, and although for the moment out of prison, yet
I continue to be obliged to dispute my life, for at every mo-
ment there are fresh menaces and impositions, and new dan-
gers, all on account of our republic, and whether just or
unjust, I alone have to suffer without so much as being pitied!
May God comfort me by death, if in no other way !

Niccolo Machiavelli has informed you of my capture; after
that I was led on foot half a mile or more in the direction of
Pisa, and taken before the captain of the Swiss, where after
a long altercation, and being threatened with their halberds,
I was told that before they would let me get out of their
hands they meant that some four or five hundred of their
companions who had come from Rome, allured by the pros-
pects held out to them by your Lordships, should be paid, and
that I should guarantee it; and if not promptly done, they
would not content themselves merely by keeping me prisoner.
I recalled to them the honor of the king, the good treatment

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 33

they had received, and that they would be settled with by your
Lordships, and therefore they ought not to maltreat me per-
sonally; but neither reason nor the manifest impossibility of
my doing anything could move them in the least. So that
after much contention and threatening I was told that, if I
did not settle with them, not only my person, but our whole
republic, would suffer in consequence; and that they had the
means of paying themselves with our artillery if they chose
to do so. Seeing no help, and being utterly without any
means wherewith to satisfy them, I begged their captain to
guarantee my promises to them, which he did; but it is evi-
dent that he will have to be paid before I can leave him. I
will do my utmost to procure the means, and if Pellegrino has
nothing left, I must see whether I can have recourse to Lodo-
vico Morelli, and to what little money may remain in the hands
of Bernardo Pacini, which, however, would derange everything,
unless your Lordships provide otherwise; for I had intended
that money for the re-establishment of the garrisons of Cas-
cina and Vico; but I shall do as best I can. Although it was
agreed in my arrangement with the captain of the Swiss that
the artillery should be brought to me all safe to Cascina, yet I
am not certain whether it will be done.

- These men intend breaking up in the night and moving
towards San Giovanni alla Vena, where they are to remain
to-morrow, and then go by the Lucca road to Pietrasanta, to
remain until they learn the pleasure of his Majesty the king.
I understand that the Gascons are waiting for them on Luc-
chese territory ; and if I am permitted, I shall remain at Vico
or Cascina and wait there for my leave from your Lordships.
Upon this point I ought reasonably to have no apprehensions,
my hope being mainly in your Lordships’ good will; nor do I
reply to your third and last letter, for both the times and cir-
cumstances favor those at whose discretion we happen to be.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Although I wrote yesterday at Cascina and Vico urging the
completion of the companies, yet I entreat your Lordships to
provide for them at once, whilst we are in danger. And so
soon as these troops have left here the Lord of Piombino should
concentrate all his forces at Cascina; and if you have other
troops at your service they should be sent to Vico, so as to
establish a reasonable garrison there. And when Cascina shall

VOL. II. 3

84 COMMISSION TO THE

have been properly provided for, then all the suspected persons
whom your Lordships have lately sent away from Florence
should be removed from there.

LETTER V.

THE MAGISTRACY OF THE TEN TO GIOV. BATTISTA BARTOLINI, COM-
MISSIONER AT CASCINA, JULY 9, 1500.

A terter from Niccolo Machiavelli informs us this morning
that the Germans have carried off Luca degli Albizzi. Sensible
of the discredit and danger which this may cause us, we have
deliberated all day as to the means of providing for your safety
and of that of the other places near you. Besides remedying
these evils as far as we can, we have at once sent the Signori
Piero and Borgo Rinaldi in that direction, and have called
Messer Criaco and the Count Checco to reorganize their com-
panies, for which the necessary funds will be ready. Accord-
ing to their promises there will be no delay, and we believe
that by to-morrow or the day after at furthest troops enough
will be ready to suffice for the protection and defence of Cas-
cina. Meantime you must do your utmost to hold the place,
and so far as in your power provide also for the necessities of
the other places, or at least write and advise them as to what
they should do. And inasmuch as the charge of all this may
be too heavy a burden for one man, in the midst of all these
troubles and disorders, we have to-day sent Piero Vespucci
with the authority of a commission with whom yourself and
such other of our citizens as may be there will consult as to
the best course to pursue.

Of the capture of our commissioner we have but a very brief
account from Niccolo Machiavelli, given in a few words, as in-
deed at the date of his letter he could say no more. He does
not tell where they have taken the commissioner to, and whether
any other persons have been carried off at the same time; nor
what has become of the artillery, or of the four hundred Ger-
mans who had gone in the direction of Livorno; nor does he
say whether any others left the camp at the same time, or what
the men-at-arms intend to do, or what course the captain has

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 35

decided to take. It would be well for you to give us a full
account of all this as soon as possible. We desire also to know
what has become of such of our citizens as were in camp at the
time, for their relatives are in the extremest degree anxious on
the subject.

LETTER VI.

THE MAGISTRACY OF THE TEN TO LUCA DEGLI ALBIZZI, IN CAMP,
10 JULY, 1500.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

As much as we were grieved yesterday on hearing of your
capture, through Machiavelli, and afterwards through Giov.
Battista Bartolini, which made us fear that all our other citi-
zens in your neighborhood had probably shared the same fate,
just so much are we elated to-day by the news of your libera-
tion, from which we conclude that the others are safe and free.
And although the defection of those troops placed us in the
most precarious position possible, because of the discredit and
dishonor which it has brought us, yet the discomforts, injuries,
and danger to which you have been exposed aggravates the
matter so much that we regard it as a great change from bad
to good to know that you are safe and well.

We could wish to repair all the other misfortunes in the
same way, but as that is impossible, we must accommodate our-
selves to circumstances, and think for the present only of con-
solidating our affairs in those parts. For this purpose it seems
to us desirable if possible to have all the artillery and munitions
which we had sent you brought back here, and to have them
withdrawn to Pontedera for greater security. Also, without
loss of time, to withdraw all the artillery and the remainder of
the munitions that are still in the hands of the French, and to
make every effort to provide for the defence of Cascina; which
we have so much at heart that we shall not lose an hour in de-
spatching some infantry there. We should have done so already
this evening, had it not been that the danger which threatens
Pescia is even more pressing. We learn from several sources
that the Gascons are marching on that place, together with

36 COMMISSION TO THE

some other troops to the number of four thousand, and some
hundreds of cavalry ; which surprises us the more, as up to this
hour we had not heard that any men-at-arms had left the camp.
You can well imagine how much we regret this, which we are
greatly inclined to attribute to some intrigue of the Lucchese.
But we should not have attached any credit to this, knowing
how fear makes these people exaggerate everything, were it
not that we knew that some one from Lucca had told the same
thing at Pescia,‘and under the influence of fear had withdrawn
all his effects from there, which only a few days before he had
stored there from fear of the French. We have sent some offi-
cers there with their companies, and think of nothing else than
to provide for the safety of the two places, but first for that
which is hardest pressed.

It would be well for you to notify M. de Beaumont of all
this, and to try and get a reply from his Lordship as to the
matters that have been intrusted to Piero Vespucci, and re-
specting which we also wrote to you this morning; and more
especially with regard to the offer of troops. We should like
to have a reply from him in writing, which we charge you by
all means to obtain from him if possible; and you will renew
to him the same proposition for troops to serve during the
siege; so that the engagement of these troops be made with his
consent, and that we may avail ourselves of their service to suit
our purpose.

So long as the revolted troops remain in your vicinity, which
will probably be not more than a few days, it seems to us that
it will not do for you to leave, as that would expose our affairs
to complete ruin; but whenever they depart you can advise us
and have our reply in a few hours. |

As we have no particulars from you as to the cause or the
manner of your detention, nor as to the means of your release,
nor any other details on the subject, we cannot definitely in-
struct you as to the course to be pursued when those troops
leave, and if they should require you to go with them, either
for the reasons that prompted your capture, or for any other
reason. We must therefore leave this matter entirely to your
own judgment; and fully persuaded that you will do nothing
without having thoroughly examined all the circumstances and
consequences, we can but approve in advance all that you may
decide upon doing.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 87

Your determination to call to your aid the Lord of Piombino
seems to us in the highest degree commendable. We shall write
to him this evening, to mount and proceed with all his men in
your direction, and if possible to push on to Cascina; and if
that cannot be done, then at least go to Pontedera, and to make
every effort to send from there as many men as possible to
Cascina, and to conform in all respects to whatever orders you
may give him.

We have again written to-day in all directions for provisions,
and especially to the Vicars of ————, and have given them
hopes that these hardships and annoyances will not continue
long. It does not seem to us advisable to withdraw any men
from Cascina, until there is a sufficient garrison of infantry to
enable us to do it more safely and more creditably.

We have forgotten to tell you that, in case Beaumont should
leave with the troops, and should wish to have some one of our
people accompany him, as you cannot go with him, you must
try to send Pellegrino or Francesco della Casa.

We wish very much to know the particulars of your capture
and detention, as also the cause and the means of your release,
if you can give us this information without danger to yourself
or ourselves; but if you think it not safe to communicate it by
letter, then send us some confidential person who is fully in-
formed on that subject, as well as on all other matters that we
ought to know.*

Bene vale !

LETTER VIL.

COPY OF A LETTER FROM HIS MOST CHRISTIAN MAJESTY KING
LOUIS XII. OF FRANCE TO THE SIGNORI OF FLORENCE, DATED
AT ROUEN, 27 JULY, 1500.

Louis, Kine or FRANCE, ETC., ETC.: —

VeRY DEAR FrIENDS,— We have been informed only a few
days since of the great disorders that have occurred in the
army engaged in the siege of Pisa, in consequence of the mu-

* Besides the letters which we have given above, there exist a great many
others that have reference to these events, and particularly to the measures to
which the republic of Florence had to resort, not so much for the purpose of re-

38 COMMISSION TO THE

tiny and quarrel of several ill-disciplined bodies of infantry
forming part of that camp; and who without any cause have
risen and left the camp and the siege without the knowledge
or consent of M. de Beaumont, our lieutenant, or that of any
of the captains or men of rank who were in the camp; which
occurrence has caused us as much regret as anything that
could possibly have happened. And inasmuch as, besides the
injury which it has caused you, it touches our honor and repu-
tation, we are absolutely determined and resolved to remedy
and provide for what has occurred in such manner as fully
to maintain our power and authority. And to effect this pur-
pose we have decided to leave nothing undone, as you shall see
and know very soon by the result. We have therefore sent
our Major-domo Corcou,* whom amongst other things we have
directed to make us an exact and true report upon this affair,
and how these disorders originated and progressed, so that we
may provide against them as becomes our honor and to your
satisfaction. For the present we have thought, and have so
communicated to your ambassadors here, that for the good of
the cause, and for the re-establishment of our army, it would
be best that some one else should select some suitable spot on
your territory where the army might stop and go into camp,
without retreating any further this way. And for this purpose
we have written to and especially enjoined upon M. de Beau-
mont and all his captains, as they value their lives, not to
move, nor leave or abandon the army, without having fresh
orders from us. |

We have equally written and made known to your neigh-
bors, that the matter of Pisa touches us personally, and that
their giving aid, comfort, and support to its inhabitants will
cause us to regard them as our declared enemies. That we

establishing their forces before Pisa (for they had decided not to avail them-
selves any longer of the French army) as for the protection of her own territory
against any attempt on the part of the mutinous troops. But we forbear from
publishing them, as they do not appertain directly to Machiavelli’s commission.

Nevertheless, we give the letter from the king of France to the Florentines,
which shows the real disposition of that monarch on hearing of the unworthy
conduct of his troops. This good feeling was afterwards changed by the false
and evil reports of his agents, which gave rise to the subsequent mission of
Machiavelli to the Court of France. The original of this letter has not been
found. The one we give is the translation which exists in the Archivi delle
Riformazione.

* Duplessis, Seigneur de Courcon.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 39

have had them advised of this, so that henceforth they may
avoid doing so, otherwise we shall provide such remedies as
we may deem proper.

You must conclude anyhow to settle this matter in such
manner that it shall be terminated with honor to ourselves, and
with advantage to yourselves and your republic. And finally
we beg you to show your spirit in a matter that concerns you
so closely; and to employ all your forces and power to that
effect. And be assured that in acting thus we make no doubt,
and apprehend no difficulty, but what you will in a short time
oblige the city of Pisa to return to her duty.

All that we have said and declared in this letter we have
also caused to be said and declared to your ambassadors, so
that they may also communicate it to you, etc., etc.

Addio, dear lords and friends.

MISSION TO THE COURT OF FRANCE*

18 Jury, 1500.

COMMISSION.

Maentrict DomINnI, ETC., ETC. : —

Intelligentes multis de causis oportere non literis tantum,
sed per eos etiam, qui in Castris Gallicis fuissent, excusare,
purgareque multa que objicerentur R. P. obque recessum esset
ab obsidione Pisanze urbis, elegerunt Franciscum Casam, et
Nicolaum Machiavellum secretarium secum, ambos nobilissimos
cives Florentinos, dederuntque illis in sua hac legatione ea
mandata, que infra scripta sunt, et cum salario unoquoque die,
videlicet Francisco Case librarum octo florenorum parvorum,
et Nicolao Machiavello, ultra ejus salarium ordinarium, ad
rationem florenorum viginti largorum in grossis unoquoque
mense.

Franciscus reversus est die 6 Martii 1500.

Nicolaus reversus est die 14 Januarius 1500.

You will proceed with all possible despatch, even to riding
post, if your strength permits it, to Lyons, or wherever you learn
that his most Christian Majesty is to be found. Upon arrival,
you will at once call upon our ambassadors there, Messers Fran-
cesco Gualterotti and Lorenzo Lenzi, and communicate to them

* This mission had its cause in the events referred to in this commission.
Buonaccorsi refers to it on page 34 of his Diary; and the account he gives of it
merits being reproduced here, on account of the light it throws upon the whole
affair: —

“After the occurrences at Pisa which we have related, the republic was
“advised to send messengers to the king for the purpose of explaining to him
“that it was not the fault of the republic that the troops had not persisted in
“the enterprise against Pisa; for these troops had left the camp in a manner
“so discreditable to the honor of the king, that it was to be apprehended that
“their commander and captains would throw the blame of it upon the republic

MISSION TO THE COURT OF FRANCE. 41

‘our present instructions, and confer with them as to whether
there is anything to be added or left out; also as to your mode
of proceeding in urging one thing more than another. You
will then present yourselves, together with our ambassadors,
before his Majesty, the king, and, after the customary formali-
ties of the first audience, you will expose to him in our name
the substance of the instructions you will receive from us;
although we do not believe that we can give you more clear
and positive information than what you already possess touch-
ing the events of which you have yourselves been witnesses,
and in connection with which you were in great part the agents
and executors of all that had to be done on our part.

The whole of this matter consists of two parts, viz.: first, to
complain of the disturbances that have taken place, and to
make known their cause and the names of their originators ;
and, secondly, to defend and exculpate us from the imputations
that may be brought against us. But upon this latter part you
will not touch unless obliged by necessity to repel the charges
they may make in relation to what we ought to have done under.
the circumstances, etc., etc. You will, therefore, limit your-
selves in your first exposition to enumerating all the reasons

“of Florence, as in fact they did. Francesco della Casa and Niccolo Machia-
“velli were therefore appointed for that purpose, as they had been personally
“witnesses of the occurrences. They were kindly received by the king, who re-
“plied to their address, that he would show how greatly he was displeased at
“such conduct on the part of his troops; and for this purpose he resolved to
“send one of his Major-domos, called M. de Corcou, to investigate the affair
“on the spot, and to make full report to him of the same. The said M. de
“Corcou came and wanted the troops to return to camp before Pisa, and to
“carry on the war effectually. But this was refused, although he maintained
“that that was the only way to press the Pisans and oblige them to surrender,
“This refusal was caused by the fears which everybody entertained in conse-
“quence of the previous conduct of the French troops. M. Corcou left Flor-
“ence most unfavorably disposed towards that republic ; he reported such a mass
“of falsehoods to his Majesty the king, as to arouse his indignation against the
“Florentines to the highest degree; so that he sent for the two envoys on the
“15th of October, and complained bitterly to them at having been thus dishonored.
“ He asked them what course he ought to pursue in their judgment; for having
“been obliged to pay a considerable sum of money to the Swiss to make them
“return to their own country without robbing the Florentine merchants, he de-
“manded the reimbursement of this sum anyhow. For this purpose the king
“wanted to send one of his chamberlains, named Edouard Buliot, to the Signoria,
“to come to some understanding on these matters. All the replies and argu-
“ments of the Florentine envoys were of no use, for his Majesty remained firm
“in his demands. The envoys wrote to the Signoria of the king’s displeasure,
“and, seeing no way of avoiding it, the Signoria assumed this expense, and sent
“a new ambassador, which was Pier Francesco Tosinghi.”

42 MISSION TO THE

that have constrained Monseigneur de Beaumont to despair of
success, and finally to abandon the siege of Pisa. And these
were, according to our judgment, the lack of obedience of the
troops to the orders of the commander-in-chief, the intrigues
which at first were carried on by the captain of the Swiss with
the Pisans, and afterwards by certain Italians of the party of
the Trivulzi and the Pallavicini, by order of Messer Gianjacopo,
who, seeing how much our city, after recovering all her posses-
sions, could do to aid in the preservation of the duchy of Milan,
had taken this means of thwarting an undertaking which he
did not approve of ; and perhaps he also contemplated in this
way to interrupt the attempt against the kingdom of Naples.
It is thus that nearly all the others excepting Beaumont and
Samplet have acted; and that the governor of Asti and Mon-
signore di Buno (on account of Entraghes) have revived all the
old passions of Italy. To this statement you will be careful to
add the full particulars of what you have witnessed yourselves,
and of which you have a distinct recollection, but of which it is
impossible for us to give particular details. You must add,
furthermore, all that has been done in favor of the Pisans by
the people of Lucca, Genoa, and Sienna, of which we have no
positive evidence, although we know that ambassadors from
these cities were kept in camp to create disturbances and to
keep the army in suspense. You will on no account omit to
say that these men have often been seen to enter Pisa in secret;
and especially Rinieri della Sassetta, who has been pointed out
to us as the agent and special favorite of the Pallavicini, to
whom, together with all the others who were unfriendly to our
enterprise against Pisa, we attribute the defection of the Gas-
cons, and which had no other cause than that, and was the
manifest origin of the ruin of this enterprise. For after that
the Swiss became turbulent, and refused to perform all service,
in consequence of which the camp had to be broken up. The
object of stating all this to his Majesty is to demonstrate to
him that the failure of the enterprise can in no way be attrib-
uted to us.

You may begin your statement with the departure of the
troops from Piacenza, and show that, until their arrival under
the walls of Pisa, all that could be done was done by us; and
then you can go on immediately to state the above-mentioned
circumstances, and add all that you can remember as having

COURT OF FRANCE. 43

contributed to the failure of the enterprise. Let that be the
substance of your first audience, and be careful to avoid seem-
ing to excuse us in any way, unless it be that we are reproached
with having neglected to throw a bridge over the river Osole, or
with having allowed the army to remain without provisions
and ammunition as well as pioneers. Your reply upon these
points will not be difficult, however, for the bridge could not be
constructed for want of an escort, which it was their business
to furnish ; and as regards munitions, you are yourselves aware
that they were furnished in more than double the quantity that
their bombardiers had asked for, of which we still have their
own letters as proof. In fact, they have never been short of
ammunition, unless it was after it became manifest that the
success of the enterprise was despaired of. And, moreover,
they declared that they would not burn an ounce of their own
powder, although it was agreed at Milan that they were to let
us have all the powder and balls which they had, on condition
that our commissioner paid them for it, or returned them an
equal quantity. And finally as to the pioneers, notwithstanding
the bad treatment to which they were subjected in being obliged
to plant batteries by daylight, yet our commissioner had offered
and agreed with the master of artillery, in case he should be in
want of pioneers, to supply them at our expense from amongst
those who were in camp, without any reclamation whatever for
their pay; and this offer was accepted, and had satisfied them.
As regards the matter of provisions, you have so large a field
for explanation in the frequent and manifest dishonesty of the
French, that this point will be more easily excused than any
other; and you must not fail to relate the greater part of the
particular instances that have occurred, which was so frequent
a subject of our letters to the camp.

It will, furthermore, be proper for you to speak of the cap-
ture of our commissioner, of the persons guilty of this outrage,
and of the manner in which it was done, and of the outrages
and insults we have had to bear, even from the lowest private
soldier. In fact, you must make a summary of all these mat-
ters, which will go to prove that we have been treated by them
more like enemies than friends, amplifying or extenuating these
matters as will best serve our cause. And upon this point you
must not forget to say that the detention of Gianotto da San
Martino and of his troops was entirely by order of Beaumont ;

44 MISSION TO THE

and for our entire justification upon this point you will take his
letter with you, as well as copies and originals of other writings
that will serve for our vindication.

We deem it unnecessary to add anything more for your
information to this commission ; for all the knowledge we have
has been obtained from the camp, where you were personally
present, and could therefore see and know all the facts better
than ourselves. You will therefore enlarge upon these facts
as much as may seem necessary to you, without departing from
the course which we have indicated to you above; namely, you
will first explain all the causes that have given rise to these
disorders ; and then you will show all that has been done by
us since the departure of the troops from Piacenza, both for the
payment of the stipend, as well as everything else; and when
necessary, you will repel and vindicate us from all charges of
having been the authors of these disorders that have led to the
failure of the enterprise.

And although we have refrained from blaming the com-
mander, not wishing to incur his enmity, nevertheless when,
speaking before his Majesty the king, or other personages of
importance, the opportunity presents itself of successfully lay-
ing the blame upon him, you will do so energetically, and must
not hesitate to charge him with cowardice and corruption. You
will also state that he had constantly in his tent with him, and
at his table, either one or both of the ambassadors from Lucca,
through whom the Pisans obtained information and advice of
all our plans and our doings. But until such an opportunity
occurs, you must speak of the commander in an honorable man-
ner, and throw all the blame upon others, and avoid particu-
larly saying anything against him in presence of the Cardinal
@’Amboise ; for we do not wish to lose his good will, unless we
can thereby gain a corresponding advantage in another direc-
tion. Our ambassadors can give you all the information, not
only upon this point, but also whether it will do for you to
speak openly of Trivulzio and the others, in which matters they
can best guide you, for they know the favors and disfavors of
the court much better than we do.

You may add in justification of the non-construction of the
bridge over the river Osole, that the troops had hastened their
march, and arrived there on the very day when they were
expected to reach the bridge over the Serchio.

COURT OF FRANCE. 45

Touching the Lucchese, you will state that one of their am-
bassadors accompanied the Gascons at the time of their defec-
tion; and that, whilst the French held the mouth of the river
Arno, they constantly permitted provisions and troops and mu-
nitions of war, etc. to reach Pisa by way of the river; and par-
ticularly that Tarlatino of Citta di Castello entered Pisa in that
way with a number of companions; and immediately upon his
arrival was placed at the head of all the infantry that was
there.

—_——_—__@—__—_—

REGI FRANCORUM.

Die 17 Julii 1500.

CHRISTIANISSIME Rex, ETC. — Mittimus ad Christianissimam
Majestatem Vestram Franciscum della Casa et Nicolaum Machi-
avellum, nobilissimos cives nostros, quibus mandavimus multa
exponere illi nostro nomine de his que pertinunt ad bellum
quod gestum est contra Pisanos: quibus precamur fidem habere
certissimam, et quia nostro nomine loquentur, et quia presentes
in castris omnia viderunt, poteruntque ob id certissime omnia
renuntiare Majestati Vestre.

PATENTES

PRO NICOLAO MACHIAVELLO ET FRANCISCO DELLA CASA, AD
CHRISTIANISSIMAM REGIAM MAJESTATEM.

Die quo supra (17 Julii 1500).

In sending at the present time, on account of certain impor-
tant matters of ours, our respectable and most valued citizens
Francesco della Casa and Niccolo Machiavelli to the court of the
Most Christian King, we beg the friends, confederates, and well-
wishers of our republic, and command our subjects, that both
in going and returning you will receive them with all their
servants, goods, and equipage, and treat them in the most
friendly manner everywhere within your dominion, without
payment of any tolls or taxes. And in case they should require
any guides, escorts, or any other favors for their safe convey-
ance to where they wish to go, we pray you promptly to comply

46 MISSION TO THE

with their requests. Your doing so will be appreciated by us
in the highest degree, and in similar or more important occa-
sions we offer you the same service at your good will and
pleasure.

INSTRUCTIONS

GIVEN TO FRANCESCO DELLA CASA AND NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI
BY LORENZO LENZI, AMBASSADOR, ETC., ETC.

In consequence of the absence of Messer Francesco Gualte-
rotti, and the departure of the king from here, I shall not be
able to present you to his Majesty, and therefore deem it neces-
sary to give you the following instructions, namely : —

You will follow the court, and upon your arrival there you
will present yourselves to the Cardinal d’Amboise and make
known to him the object of your mission. Say to him that you
have come for the purpose of explaining to his Majesty all that
has occurred in the camp before Pisa; but that before doing so
you desire to render a full and particular account of it to his
Eminence, so that you may afterwards communicate so much
of it to his Majesty and the Council as his Eminence may deem
proper. In fact, that you are prepared to follow his advice in
all things, inasmuch as our republic looks upon his Eminence
as her chief protector and benefactor. Ask him to present you
to his Majesty whenever he thinks it best, and to direct you
what, in his judgment, it will be proper for you to communicate
to his Majesty, as well as the manner of doing it. And in your
language to his Eminence be prodigal of assurances of our hav-
ing the most unlimited confidence in him; in short, do all that
can be done to preserve his favorable disposition towards our
republic, and to derive from it all the advantages possible.

When you enter upon the particulars of the troubles that
occurred in the camp, you must avoid as much as possible lay-
ing the blame upon M. de Beaumont, particularly in those mat-
ters that cannot be laid to our charge. You may say that the
trouble arose from his not having influence enough in camp,
and from the natural gentleness of his character, which caused
him not to be sufficiently feared as he should have been. But
that his intentions always had been most excellent, and that he

COURT OF FRANCE. 47

always manifested the greatest anxiety and displeasure at seeing
things go as they did, to our disadvantage and to the discredit
of his Majesty ; and that, so far as his talents and labors could
produce any good effect, he never relaxed his efforts nor his
diligence; and that the malignity of others was the sole cause
of all the disorders. You must reiterate that it was the envy
and bad conduct of those Italians who were in the camp; and
whom you may blame regardlessly, for you will be addressing
your remarks to his Eminence the Cardinal d’Amboise, and in
presence of Monseigneur d’Alby and the Maréchal de Gies.

And when you happen to be alone with his Eminence d’Am-
boise, you may incidentally state that the conduct of these
Italians had been so bad that there could be no doubt but they
were acting under orders from outside of the camp. You may
point out to his Eminence some of the instances mentioned in
your commission, and especially the fact that they had engaged
Rinieri della Sassetta, one of our rebels, and employed him in
the intrigues with the Pisans, in which a great many of the
Lombards participated. In the same way you may refer to
the insolence and brutality of the infantry, and the waste of
provisions of which they were guilty, and from which all the
other troubles originated. Do not fail to testify to the good
conduct of Saliente. And another matter to which I must call
your particular attention is, that if his Eminence d’Amboise
should say to you, when you are alone with him, or in the pres-
ence of the king or any other persons, that M. de Beaumont
had been appointed to the command of the army at the request
of Pietro Soderini, and with our concurrence ; then admit that
you have heard that this was so, and that it could only have
been of advantage for us; for it is most important to preserve
the good will of the Cardinal for objects of greater magnitude,
or when we may need him to relieve us from even heavier
charges.

You will add that you have heard that, notwithstanding what
has occurred, his Majesty is disposed to persevere in carrying
on the war against the Pisans, and against all who give them
aid and support, or attempt in any way to injure us. So that
the siege is to be recommenced, and that for that reason it had
lately been agreed with us Ambassadors that the camp shall be
located in a healthy place in the vicinity of Pisa, and where it
can be conveniently supplied with provisions and other neces-

48 MISSION TO THE

saries for making fair war against Pisa, until the siege is re-
sumed; but that you are ignorant as to the present whereabouts
and the condition of the camp, as well as what Florence may
be able to do; knowing that since the departure of the troops
the Pisans have ravaged the country to our detriment and dis-
honor, which would not have occurred but for the fact that our
reliance upon the troops of his Majesty made us disband our
own, so as the better to be able to provide for the pay of the
army and the other expenses of the war. That it is necessary
promptly to put an end to these insults, and for that reason,
although without having been asked to do so by our Signoria, we
have resolved to ask of his Majesty as soon as possible to give
orders to his commander and his troops, whenever requested by
the Florentine government, to send two hundred lances, but not
Italians, to go and remain on Pisan territory; where they are
to be quartered in a convenient and healthy situation, the same
as has been specified for the whole army, and for the purpose of
obtaining the same results. And you may say that you expect
to find his Majesty well disposed to do this, as you have heard
from your Ambassadors that his Majesty had said to them that,
believing his army had crossed the Alps, he intended to send
one hundred fresh lances into the Pisan territory for the pur-
pose of carrying his objects into execution. But that in your
judgment this number would be insufficient to make itself
feared ; and that their coming would be rather late, inasmuch
as the Pisans had taken fresh courage. Nevertheless, this num-
ber would be better than the whole army, for, whilst they would
answer the immediate purpose, it would be easier to supply
them with provisions, and they would be a less heavy charge;
and moreover, if the whole army were there, it would be a
shame not to press the place more closely; whilst the small
number would seem to be there merely to prevent further in.
sults, until the siege could be really resumed in earnest. It
would also show that his Majesty had no thought of abandon-
ing the enterprise, which would comport with his dignity as
well as our interests. You must also ask his Majesty to allow
Giovanni Bentivogli to come to our aid with his forces, he be-
ing animated by the desire to do so in honor of his Majesty
and for our benefit, whenever his Majesty will deign to permit
it, for he deems it his duty to do nothing without his Majesty’s
consent.

COURT OF FRANCE. 49.

The persons upon whose influence with his Most Christian
Majesty we can most depend are, first, the Cardinal d’Amboise,
Monseigneur d’Alby,—in fact, I may say the whole house of
Amboise; the Maréchal de Gies, and Monseigneur General
Robertet, whom you will see as often as you can, and let him
see that you have full faith in him, which you will find to your
advantage.

I had forgotten to name the Grand Chancellor, who, although
he has the reputation of being favorably inclined towards the
Lucchese, yet is our friend, and you may safely trust him.
Show equal confidence to Messer Jacopo da Trivulzi, and when
you come to discuss matters with him, give him to understand
that you intend to follow his counsels, and recommend our city
to him. The same with Ligny; when you have occasion to talk
with him, show him confidence, and use all means to dispose
him favorably towards us, or at any rate as little unfavorably
as possible.

You have been informed of what the Cardinal has lately
written, showing that he is inclined to accept the excuses of
the Lucchese. It is possible that on your arrival you may find
that this matter has not yet been finally disposed of; if this be
so, then let his Eminence know the manner in which the Luc-
chese have conducted themselves towards us, making it appear
as bad as you can, without, however, manifesting any passion.
And having done all this, you will say to his Eminence that our
Signoria will approve whatever he may decide; but if, with re-
gard to the reinforcements asked for the enterprise against
Pisa, his Eminence should be of the opinion that things ought
to be left as they are until after the capture of the city, then I
think you should insist upon such reinforcements, which would
act as a stimulant to keep the Lucchese in greater fear, and
make them more circumspect. The same with the Pisans, and
such as are disposed to aid them, for they also would feel more
restrained by a greater terror than if all the troops were re-
called, which would reanimate the courage of the Pisans and of
their allies.

Above all, do not dispute upon any of the points on which
you see that his Eminence has formed a definite judgment; and
when you find him decided upon any particular course, approve
all he has done, for the power and good will of the king of
France will make up for all that we might lack. And do not

VOL. III. 4

50 MISSION TO THE

fail to say to the Cardinal d’Amboise that the report which has
been made to him in relation to the conduct of the Lucchese
may be the result of ignorance of the individual who made it,
or he may have been influenced by some other motive. Never-
theless, after you have done all you can in the matter, you
must conform to the will of his Eminence.

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUSTRIOUS SIGNORI, ETC., ETC. : —

Having but just now heard of the departure of the courier,
we have no time to write to your Lordships other than most
briefly to inform you that, after travelling with the utmost
speed, we arrived here on Sunday the 26th of this month, but
found that the king had left. To enable us therefore to exe-
cute your Lordships’ commission, and some other instructions
given us by your Ambassador Lorenzo Lenzi, with regard to
the troops of Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, etc., we propose
mounting horses here to-morrow, it being impossible to follow
the king by post, and to proceed as rapidly as possible to such
place as will be most suitable for having an audience of his
Majesty. We shall use all diligence and care faithfully to
make known to him all that you have charged us with; and
will then report fully and at length to your Lordships, which
it is not in our power to do to-day.

Valeant Dominationes vestre.

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA et
Lyons, 28 July, 1500. Niccoto MACHIAVELLI.

LETTER II.

Maentricent SIGNoRI: —

As the courier of yesterday could not wait we had to write
but very briefly to your Lordships, but stated amongst other
things the causes of our having arrived here a little later per-
haps than your Lordships could have desired. The cause of

COURT OF FRANCE. 51

this delay was an unforeseen accident, which obliged us to stop
on the road. On arriving here we found that Messer Fran-
cesco Gualterotti had left with the court, as stated in our letter
of yesterday, and had taken the road to San Antonio. Your
Lordships may judge of our disappointment; particularly as it
obliged us to execute our commission as though we ourselves
were ambassadors.

We communicated to his Magnificence Lorenzo Lenzi the
object of our coming and of the commission with which we
had been charged by your Lordships, all of which he listened
to with attention, and examined with his habitual prudence.
Our justification as to the raising of the siege of Pisa seemed
to him complete, and calculated to confute all attempts to
blame us, whenever heard and examined. His Magnificence
afterwards explained to us the position of the affairs of our
republic with his Majesty, and stated what he had written to
your Lordships, in consequence of the determination of the
king to keep his men-at-arms and infantry in healthy loca-
tions on Pisan territory, and convenient for attacking the
Pisans at any moment, until he should return from Troyes,
whither he had gone now to have an understanding with the
Emperor of Germany’s ambassador for the reorganization of
his army and a fresh attempt at the capture of Pisa. He
stated that all this had been communicated by himself and
his colleague to your Lordships; but as in your reply you had
declined this proposition, they did not deem it proper to lay it
before the king, but had decided at once to write you again,
suggesting to your Lordships once more carefully to examine
the matter, and that they are still awaiting your reply, which
his Majesty also desires to have; for every time that he has
seen D’Amboise he has asked after the ambassadors.

We have said, in answer to all this, that we thought the
probable reason of the coldness of your reply, and your non-
acceptance of the king’s offer, was the want of success in the
siege of Pisa, which had disappointed the general expectation,
and had brought little honor to the king and great injury to
our republic. So that your Lordships, from the experience
you have had, can never again have confidence in those troops ;
and that the collecting of five hundred men-at-arms and three
thousand infantry around Cascina, according to the latest re-
solve of the king, would be impossible, in view of their charac-

52 MISSION TO THE

ter, etc., etc. ; for they could not be supplied with provisions for
any length of time. Adding that it would not redound to his
Majesty’s honor that so large a number of his troops should re-
main here merely to ravage an already wasted and exhausted
country, without laying regular siege to a city that had been
many times besieged and closely pressed by your Lordships
with a less numerous force.

These considerations, we said, might possibly have caused
your Lordships not to listen to what your ambassadors had
written ; and we enlarged upon this in such manner, narrating
the events of recent occurrence, and the spirit and disposition
of these troops, that he remained silent, and almost changed
his views. And in the discussion as to the means of satisfying
the king, to whom we would have to speak before receiving
your Lordship’s answer, the ambassador was of opinion, that,
since his Majesty was inclined to temporize with his troops on
Pisan territory until a regular resumption of the siege could
be organized, we ought to point out to his Majesty that this
could be done equally well with a much less number of men-
at-arms, and without infantry. That in fact, if his Majesty
thought proper to leave, or, in’case they should already have
left, to send back two hundred of his lances, to be stationed
between Cascina and Vico, and who could scour the country
daily up to the very walls of Pisa, being supported by our in-
fantry, his Majesty would gain time, as has been said, until a
reorganization of the entire enterprise; and your Lordships
would profit by the king’s credit, without incurring any fur-
ther expense for men-at-arms, whilst the king would consider
himself in a manner interested in the success of the enterprise
from seeing his name connected with it, and consequently his
honor. The ambassador thought that his Majesty would read-
ily consent to this, having already offered one hundred lances
in support of your interests, when under the impression that
his army had already passed through the territory of Parma,
as had been reported to him. Adding, however, that all this
ought not to be asked of his Majesty until your Lordships had
decided whether you would avail yourselves of this support.
Now although we charge ourselves very reluctantly with this
commission, as not being comprised in your orders to us, yet,
being only conditional, we shall execute it so soon as the op-
portunity is given to us to be with the king or the Cardinal

COURT OF FRANCE. 53

d’Amboise. And we will endeavor to obtain letters to these
captains, instructing them to place two hundred lances at
your disposal, if you request it. Your Lordships, however,
can examine the whole subject, and will then communicate to
us your decision at length. We have nothing else of interest
to mention from here to-day.

We leave here positively to-morrow to follow the court ; we
have been obliged to defer our departure in consequence of our
having arrived here denuded of everything, and having to pro-
cure at the same time horses, wearing apparel, and servants.
All this has become very difficult because of the recent depart-
ure of the court; they having stripped the whole country
around of all means of travel and transport. Thus the small
compensation which we receive, and the heavy expenses to
which we are subjected with little prospect of being reim-
bursed, cause us no little anxiety. But we have every degree
of confidence in your Lordships’ discretion and kindness.

In passing through Bologna we had an interview with Messer
Giovanni Bentivogli in accordance with your Lordships’ instruc-
tions; and after having spoken to him about the mules that
had been taken, etc., etc., we offered him on behalf of your
Lordships all our good offices during the expedition; which
his Lordship accepted in a suitable manner, thanking us and
offering his own in return. We shall do what we can to ren-
der him service, and so that he may be permitted to come to
your assistance, in accordance with your late instructions to
the ambassadors; for Lorenzo Lenzi is, to our great regret,
positively determined not to follow the court, but to return to
Florence.

It remains for us to inform your Lordships that we met
between Parma and Piacenza several thousand Swiss, who
had formed part of the army, and who were now returning
home. Although this fact ought to have been made known
to you by Pellegrino Lorini, yet we deem it well not to omit
mentioning it, so that your Lordships may avail of the infor-
mation when occasion offers.

We recommend ourselves to your Lordships, que bene
valeant.

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CSA,
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Lyons, 29 July, 1500.

54 MISSION TO THE

LETIER HL

MaGnIFIcent SIGNORI : —

By the enclosed we have informed your Lordships of what
had occurred up to that time. The present is to let you know
that at this very moment, it being the twenty-first hour, we are
about to leave for the court; so that we may communicate to
his Majesty the king the object of the mission which your
Lordships have confided to us. We shall endeavor with the
utmost celerity to make up for the time which we were un-
avoidably obliged to lose in putting ourselves in proper condi-
tion, and to supply ourselves with all the necessaries for the
purpose of proceeding, which involved many difficulties and
much expense, as already stated in the enclosed.

It remains for us now most respectfully to remind your
Lordships that it may readily happen that we shall have to
despatch special couriers to you for matters of great impor-
tance; but which we shall not be able to do, being without
money or credit. It becomes necessary therefore that your
Lordships should think of ordering either Nasi or Dei, or some
other of the merchants, to forward our despatches, with promise
of prompt compensation for such service; for unless this is
done we shall be helpless, and might be charged with neglect
without any fault of ours. We shall be equally embarrassed,
in consequence of our being destitute of money, by the couriers
whom your Lordships may think proper to despatch to us.
We have deemed it proper to make this state of things known
to you, so that your Lordships may have compassion on us.
We can but do our best to perform our duty, and the impossi-
bility of doing it will always serve as our justification in the
eyes of everybody.

Bene valeant Dominationes vestre !

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA Casa,

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Lyons, 30 July, 1500.

COURT OF FRANCE. 55

LETTER IV.

MaenirFicent SIGNORI : —

Your Lordships know what salary was assigned to me on
our departure from Florence, and also the amount accorded to
Francesco della Casa. Doubtless this was done under the be-
lief that in the natural course of things I would have occasion
to spend less money than Francesco. Such however has not
been the case; for not finding his Most Christian Majesty at
Lyons, I had to provide myself with horses, servants, and
clothing, the same as he; and thus following the court has
obliged me to incur the same expenses as Francesco. It seems
to me, therefore, beyond all human and divine reason that I
should not have the same emoluments. If the expenses which
I incur seem to your Lordships too great, then I would observe
that they are quite as useful as those of Francesco’s, or that
the twenty ducats allowed me per month are simply thrown
away. If in your opinion the latter is the case, then I beg
your Lordships to recall me; but if it be not so, then I trust
your Lordships will take such measures that I may not ruin
myself, and that at least I may be credited in Florence with
the amounts for which I am compelled to become indebted
here. For I pledge you my faith that up to the present mo-
ment I have spent already forty ducats of my own, and have
requested my brother at Florence to make me an advance of
seventy ducats more. |

I recommend myself again to your Lordships, and beg that
a, faithful servant of yours may not, without any fault of his
own, be subjected to shame and loss in the performance of ser-
vices that bring to others profit and honor.

Humilissimus servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
From St. Pierre, 5 August, 1500.

56 MISSION TO THE

LETTER V.

Maeniricent SIGNORI : —

As we informed you by our last, we left Lyons on the 80th ul-
timo, and made every effort to join the court, with all the speed
that our wretched horses would permit, having been obliged to
buy such as we could get. We should have succeeded ere this
in overtaking the court, had it not been that his Majesty has
travelled more rapidly than usual, and has varied his route
because of the sickness that prevails in this country; so that
in several instances where we attempted to take a shorter and
more direct road for the purpose of gaining time, we have actu-
ally gone farther away from him. Nevertheless we reached to-
day this little town of St. Pierre le Moutier, about five leagues
from Nevers, where we were told we should find the king, so
that we hope confidently to overtake his Majesty to-morrow.
We shall as soon as possible execute your Lordships’ com-
mission; also the additional instructions given us by our am-
bassador, and which we communicated to your Lordships in
our last. And so soon as we shall have been able to do this, we
shall immediately notify your Lordships of the result, sending
our letter to Rinieri Dei at Lyons, for which we shall pay with
what little money may remain in our purses; for the sum
which you have given us has enabled us to pay only about two
thirds of the expenses which we have incurred thus far.

We take our chance in sending you this letter, as we de-
sire that your Lordships shall be informed day by day of our
progress, and because we know how disagreeable it would be
for your Lordships if there were any delay in receiving our
reports, even if there be nothing of importance to commu-
nicate.

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,
NiccoLO MACHIAVELLI.

St. Prerre LE Movtier, 5 August, 1500.

COURT OF FRANCE. 57

LETTER VI.

Maentricent Sienorr: —

Since our departure from Lyons, we have written you twice
from different places, and advised your Lordships of the causes
that have delayed our joining the court, which we will not now
reiterate, partly because we do not wish to weary your Lord-
ships, and partly because we assume that our letters have
reached you safely, although we sent them at a venture. Since
then we have continued our route in disregard of all the fa-
tigue and fear of sickness which prevails in this country; and
with God’s help we have arrived here, where we found his
Majesty with a very small court, on account of the limited size
of the place. Immediately after dismounting we presented
ourselves before his Eminence the Cardinal d’Amboise; and
although we had no letters for him from your Lordships, which
it would have been well for us to have had, we exposed to him
summarily on your behalf and on the part of the ambassadors
the cause of our coming, and recommended your interests to
him, as your only protector, in whom your Lordships always
had and continued to have the most entire confidence.

His Eminence replied briefly, showing by his remarks that
there was no great occasion for vindicating your conduct as
regards the occurrences in camp, which were already an old
affair ; but that it was of much greater importance to think of
repairing the losses in honor and profit which his Majesty as
well as yourselves had experienced in consequence. And then
he began immediately to question us as to what we thought of
recommencing the enterprise. To this we could make no re-
ply, for we arrived at that very moment at the king’s quarters.
His Majesty, having just dined, was taking a little repose; but
a few moments afterwards he arose, and, having learnt from
the Cardinal d’Amboise the object of our coming, he had us
called, and after we had presented our credentials, his Majesty
made us enter an adjoining cabinet, where he gave us most
graciously avery satisfactory audience; to which none of the
French seigneurs were admitted except his Eminence the Car-
dinal d’Amboise and Robertet. All the other lords of the
council being absent, Messer Gianjacopo Trivulzio, the Bishop
of Novara, and two others of the Palavicini, were called in, as

58 MISSION TO THE

they happened to be there, and remained throughout the whole
audience. :

In conformity with your Lordships’ instructions we began by
submitting that inasmuch as the enterprise against Pisa and
the siege of the city had, to our great prejudice and the great
discredit of his Majesty’s army, an entirely different issue from

-his other most fortunate and successful enterprises, and as we
had ourselves been present at all the events that had occurred
in camp, we had been sent by your Lordships to explain to his
Majesty that the cause of the raising of the siege of Pisa was
in no way chargeable to any act or neglect on your part. We
then related, according to our instructions, all the details as
far as seemed to the purpose, and more particularly all that re-
lated to the departure from camp of the Gascons, the outrages
of the Swiss, and the carrying off of our commissioner, and to
the constant parleying of the French commander with the en-
emy. We also mentioned the insulting manner in which your
Lordships and all the Florentines had been spoken of, and
how all this had inspired the Pisans with fresh courage to
defend themselves, contrary to the expectations of everybody ;
and how all this had been the’ chief cause of the ruin of the
enterprise. It did not seem to us advisable, notwithstand-
ing your orders upon this point, specially to accuse any Ital-
ians; for the individuals whom we have named being pres-
ent, we thought that such a public accusation would be likely
to make us more enemies, rather than prove of advantage to
our cause.

' The king and D’Amboise replied that the failure of the en-
terprise against Pisa was as much due to your shortcomings
as to those of the king’s army; and when we answered that we
really did not know wherein your Lordships had been wanting,
they alleged the lack of provisions, munitions, and of many
other things, observing at the same time that it was not worth
while to say anything more about the matter, as it would only
lead to endless recriminations.

Nevertheless, deeming it our duty to avail of the occasion
to vindicate ourselves from such charges, we said that your
Lordships had never failed to furnish the most abundant sup-
ply of provisions, and that there never had been any deficiency,
but that they had been wantonly wasted, and that those who
had brought them into camp had been overwhelmed with all

COURT OF FRANCE. 59

sorts of insults and bad treatment; and that if at any time it
had seemed to any one that there was not a sufficient abun-
dance, it was solely due to the injudicious distribution and the
waste to which we had referred; and when we offered to give
some special details upon this point, they cut us short in our
statement.

As to the ammunition and the pay, in the furnishing of
which we were accused of having been tardy, etc., we replied, as
to the first point, that your Lordships had supplied more than
what the king’s chief of artillery had called for; and as to the
second, that the money had arrived in camp at the proper
time, but that the paying of the troops had been deferred some
five or six days because the captains of the companies had
themselves so ordered it, as they did not care to have the
troops paid any sooner. Respecting the Gascons, his Majesty
showed several times in the course of his remarks that he
was cognizant of their perfidy and treason, and that he should
not fail to have them punished. And when we remarked that
they had gone off by sea, his Majesty said that he had or-
dered their arrest and punishment on their arrival in their
own country.

In relation to the carrying off of our commissioner, of which
we spoke very fully, characterizing the act as brutal and infa-
mous, they only said that the Swiss were in the habit of acting
thus, and of practising similar extortions. His Majesty finally
cut the discussion short by admitting that his troops had not
done their duty, but that there had been equal remissness on
our part; adding that Beaumont had not always made himself
obeyed as he ought to have done, and that, if there had been
another commander who had more thoroughly enforced obe-
dience, the enterprise would not have failed. Having been
advised by our ambassador that the Cardinal d’Amboise held
Beaumont in great affection, and that the least censure of
Beaumont would be displeasing to the Cardinal, we were very
careful, whilst admitting on the one hand that there had been
great lack of discipline, beyond all reasonable limits, which in
fact had been the cause of all the disorders, to say on the
other hand that we had always found Beaumont extremely jeal-
ous of his Majesty’s honor, and very friendly to our country, and
that, if the others had shown an equal good will and disposi-
tion with Beaumont, we should doubtless have been victorious.

60 MISSION TO THE

And thus we succeeded in satisfying the Cardinal, to whom
we knew that what we had said of Beaumont would be most
agreeable, and at the same time not contradicting the king’s
conclusions as to want of discipline, etc., etc.

As it seemed to his Majesty that enough had been said on
these matters, he turned towards us and said: “ Since now this
“enterprise has ended in a manner so prejudicial to yourselves,
“and so little creditable to myself, and with a view to prevent
“my army from ever experiencing a similar check, it is neces-
“sary to come to some decision as to what had best be done
“‘for the recovery of my honor, and at the same time your in-
“terests. Some days ago already I made my views known to
“your Signoria through their ambassadors, and also through
“one of my couriers whom I despatched for that purpose to
“Tuscany. I have thus far done all I possibly can, and wish
“to do the same for the future, and only ask you to let me
“have your answer.”

To this we replied that we had no orders from your Lordships
upon that point, and that our instructions were confined to the
events that had occurred in camp, and at which we had been
personally present. But that our opinion was, that the people
of Florence, who had been involved for so many years in a
continual and most onerous war, seeing the unhappy and un-
expected issue of this last enterprise, had become impressed
with the idea that, owing either to their ill fortune or to their”
numerous enemies, both within and without Italy, they had
nothing more to hope for; that they had lost all confidence,
and consequently the courage and the strength necessary for
venturing upon another enterprise. But that if once his Ma-
jesty restored Pisa to our hands, so that we could see a cer-
tain reward for the expenses which we should have to incur
anew, in that case we confidently believed that your Lord-
ships would justly and amply compensate his Majesty for his
outlays.

At these words the king, the Cardinal, and the other persons
present began all to cry out, saying that it would be very unseem-
ly for the king to make war for our benefit and at his expense.
We at once replied that such was in no way our intention,
but that we meant that his Majesty should be fully reimbursed
for all the expenses incurred after having placed Pisa in our
hands. To which it was answered, that the king would always

COURT OF FRANCE. 61

do his duty according to the stipulations of the treaty ;* and
that, if your Lordships failed in yours, his Majesty would be
excused by the whole world. The king himself added, that
Pisa and Montepulciano were as much in his power as Pietra-
santa and Mutrone, if he wished to keep them for himself;
giving us to understand thereby that, if he did not keep them,
it was merely from his desire strictly to keep his engagements.
Thereupon Messer Gianjacopo Trivulzio turned towards us and
said that, if we allowed this opportunity to be lost, which the
king’s will and disposition, as well as other circumstances,
rendered so favorable, your Lordships would in all probability
never be able to recover your losses, and especially not by
these means. We made no reply to this except that what we
had suggested was our individual opinion, and that we had no
instructions upon this point from your Lordships. Whefeupon
the king and D’Amboise remarked that, inasmuch as we had
left Florence before the arrival there of the king’s courier, it
was not surprising that we had received no instructions upon
that point. .

We suggested that we should receive within a very few days
a reply from your Lordships to his Majesty’s letter, whereupon
the king said, that without such a reply and a definite decision
on your part it would be impossible to proceed any further in
this matter; and that it was important that your Lordships
should decide at once, so that he might know whether or not
to disband the infantry, which remained on the ground at your
Lordships’ disposal, giving us to understand at the same time
that the expense thereof was at your charge; and that whilst
awaiting your Lordships’ reply we might go on to Montargis,
where he would be himself within three days. And with that
conclusion we took our leave.

In our reply touching the matter of Pisa we conformed

* The treaty with the king of France was concluded at Milan, 12 October,
1499, by Monsignore Cosimo de’ Pazzi, Bishop of Arezzo, and Pietro Soderini,
who afterwards became perpetual Gonfalonier. The republic of Florence obli-
gated herself by this treaty to defend the French possessions in Italy, with four
hundred men-at-arms and three thousand infantry; also to aid the king of
France in the conquest of Naples with five hundred men-at-arms and a subsidy
of fifty thousand florins. And the king of France, on his part, bound himself to
defend the Florentines, against whoever might attack them, with six hundred
lances and four thousand infantry ; and to put them in possession of Pisa again,
and all the other places which they had lost by the coming of Charles VIII. into
Italy, excepting such as were held by the Genoese.

62 MISSION LO. 1 ih

strictly to your Lordships’ intentions; for although no in-
structions had been given us upon this point, yet having read
at Lyons your Lordships’ last letters to our ambassadors,
which, in fact, we had here with us, and which state that a
reply upon this point would be expressly sent to his Majesty,
we availed ourselves of the occasion respectfully to make such
reply to him, being convinced that it could not in any way
affect whatever new decision your Lordships may have made.
We hope most earnestly that our conduct may be satisfactory
to your Lordships.

This is all we have to communicate to your Lordships, up
to the present, in relation to the execution of our commission.
We should have enlarged more amply upon certain points but
for the consideration which we were obliged to have for the
Italians who were present, and also because we knew that
such discussions could not but be disagrecable to the king and
D’Amboise; first, because they regarded this whole matter as
a thing of the past, and as it were already digested ; and next,
because we should have made them hear some particulars little
creditable to their honor and government. Nevertheless, we
thought that we ought not to leave any important particulars
unnoticed, except such as we have referred to above; and these
we shall relate to the king and the Cardinal on some other
and more suitable occasion. We mean more especially the
matter of the Lucchese, respecting which we had given some
intercepted letters to Robertet, who advised us to have such
portions of them as it was proper to make known translated
into French, showing thus that he attached some importance
to them. It was from him also that we learnt that the Luc-
chese ambassadors had been recalled on the day previous, so
that they might appear at court.

Your Lordships had also written to our ambassadors to
obtain permission from the king for Messer Giovanni Benti-
vogli to come with his troops to your assistance. Lorenzo
Lenzi had also directed us to ask his Majesty to leave two
hundred lances for the protection of your interests, but we
did not think it advisable to speak of this matter in the pres-
ence of the other Italians; but we took General Robertet aside,
and made your Lordships’ wishes known to him with regard
to Messer Giovanni’s troops, but did not mention anything
else to him. He replied, that he hardly thought such a feeble

COURT OF FRANCE. 63

assistance would be needed by us, as the king’s troops were
at Pietrasanta, and in condition to make effectual war, and
that only quite lately one hundred more lances had been sent
there. Nevertheless so soon as his Majesty comes to Mon-
targis we shall speak to him and D’Amboise about this matter ;
and unless we should receive contrary orders from your Lord-
ships, we shall endeavor to obtain the permission and the num-
ber of troops you ask for.

Having arrived only to-day, we are unable to say anything
as to what is going on here. The reason why his Majesty has
given up his visit to Troyes, and has come here instead, is not
clearly known; although we had heard on the road that the
Emperor’s ambassadors, who were to have gone there, will not
go. We shall endeavor to ascertain the truth more fully, and
will inform your Lordships in our next letters.

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,

NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI.
Nevers, 7 August, 1500.

P. S.— We have kept this letter until to-day, 10th August,
as we had no opportunity of sending it sooner, although we
made every effort to do so. We send it now, by some one who
is going to Lyons, to Rinieri Dei, who is to forward it by first
express. We are now at Montargis, where his Majesty also
arrived this morning; but we have as yet no further news to
communicate to your Lordships, to whom we again recom-
mend ourselves.

LETTER VIL.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC., ETC. :—

[The beginning of this letter is a copy of the preceding one,
after which it continues : —]

To here is a copy of our last letter of the 7th, which we
could not send until the 10th from Montargis. In the ex-
ecution of so much of your Lordships’ orders as had not
already been attended to, we called upon the Cardinal d’Am-
boise, and were fortunate in having a good long audience

64 MISSION TO THE

from him. We had translated the intercepted letter of Piero
da Poggio of Lucca into French, and begged his Eminence to
read and cxamine it, as he would find in it many particulars
that would prove to him in the most evident manner that the
Lucchese had manifestly acted adversely to his Majesty the
king. Seeing that the Cardinal did not care to read it, we began
to relate to him some of the main points of the letter, but his
Eminence promptly objected, and said that a report from Beau-
mont and the other captains proved that the Lucchese had
never acted adversely to his Majesty, but had served him more
effectually, and with a better will, than the Florentines, and
more especially in the matter of provisions. To this we replied,
that it seemed very strange to us that the Lucchese, with a
show of fair words and by the influence of some friends, should
prevail over truth itself; that in fact we had always striven
to uphold the honor of the king, whilst the conduct of the Luc-
chese had been directly the reverse, and more especially in the
affair of Pisa. We wanted again to submit to his Eminence
the translation of the letter mentioned above, but he declined ;
and when we offered to leave it with him, he cared not to
accept it.

On our observing to the Cardinal that we had learnt that the
Luechese ambassadors had been called back to the court, he
answered promptly that, not having found them at fault in
any way, he deemed it proper to have them recalled. His Emi-
nence then began to tell us that, when Corcou was at Florence,
he had made known to your Lordships how favorably the king
was disposed towards our republic, and most particularly in
relation to the matter of Pisa; and then he complained that
your Lordships had been reluctant to take any measures for
the success of that enterprise; and, further, that you had been
unwilling, or cared not, to have his Majesty’s troops in garrison
within the Florentine territory ; and, moreover, that you had
refused to pay what was due to the Swiss, although it was pro-
vided in their engagement that they should have pay for their
return home; and, finally, his Eminence charged the ill success
of the expedition against Pisa entirely to our short-comings.
To these charges we replied, first, that our republic was ex-
hausted by the many protracted wars, and, moreover, that the
people of Florence could not and ought not to have any con-
fidence in such ill-disciplined troops, who had shown them-

COURT OF FRANCE. 65

selves so ill disposed towards our republic. His Eminence
answered the same as he had done on a former occasion, that,
besides the insufficient measures taken by the Florentines, they
were not even united amongst themselves. We expressed our
astonishment that he should hold such an opinion, which was
altogether erroneous. The Cardinal said that he had been so
informed by all the Frenchmen who had been at Florence.
We assured him that they could not have heard or known any-
thing of the kind, as our republic was perfectly united upon all
important matters, and most particularly in the desire to re-
cover Pisa, as was proved by the energetic measures adopted
in raising and sending the money required for that purpose,
and which could only be obtained by the concurrence of two
thirds of all the citizens of Florence. We begged his Eminence
to reflect well upon the character of the individuals who had
made such statements to him, as also upon the nature of the
things reported to him. As to the pay of the Swiss, we ob-
serv ed that your Lordships were not bound to pay one for
they had not performed the service required of them, and had
refused to mount guard or stand sentinel, and, moreover, had
nearly all disbanded. To which the hehe roored that your
Lordships ought to pay them; for if you did not, the king
would have to do it with his own means, which would make
him greatly dissatisfied with your conduct. Respecting the
complaint that the enterprise failed in consequence of your
short-comings, we recalled to him very briefly the disorders
that had broken out in camp, and closed by saying that, if
his Majesty had not been informed that a great part of the
wagons had been stolen, and the remainder badly distributed,
then the truth had been studiously withheld from him. We
urged again that we had come here prepared to submit to the
strictest investigation, for the purpose of proving the truth that
your Lordships had always supplied abundance of everything
that was needed. His Eminence answered by declaring any
further discussion useless, and that he was astonished at your
Lordships’ unwillingness to do anything to recommence the
enterprise, and at the proposition that the king should restore
Pisa to you at his own expense. We expressed at once our
conviction that your Lordships intended to do your duty in the
matter to the utmost extent of your ability ; but since the late
attempt had resulted in the manner known to his Eminence, it
VOL. III. 5

66 MISSION- LO. THE

was not to be wondered at that the republic of Florence, fed so
long with vain hopes, should mistrust the future, and that con-
sequently she lacked men and money to undertake a fresh
enterprise ; but that it was a small matter for his Majesty the
king to make so inconsiderable a war at his own expense, pro-
vided only that in the end he was victorious, which could not
fail to be the case, especially when it became known that the
enterprise was carried on absolutely in his Majesty’s name and
at his expense; for that would keep any of our neighbors or
enemies from venturing to interfere at the risk of offending his
Majesty. We concluded by saying to his Eminence, that, if the
king would assume the enterprise from the beginning as his
own, it would not only be more easy, but most certain of suc-
cess; that it would redound more to the honor of his Majesty,
and would give greater satisfaction to your Lordships, and
really without any burden of expense to his Majesty, as it was
always your intention to reimburse the king, in strict accord-
ance with the treaty stipulations, immediately upon the resti-
tution to them of the city of Pisa.

All these arguments produced no effect upon his Eminence,
who constantly replied that the king would never agree to such
a proposition. Robertet also told us, that such a proposition
on the part of your Lordships seemed almost as if made in
derision of the king, and that his Majesty was so dissatisfied
and ill content with your disposition that really he did not see
any person at court who, under the circumstances, could re-
main your friends, or could support your interests. Subse-
quently we stated to his Eminence that, in addition to the
other causes that discouraged the people of Florence, was the
non-restitution of Pietrasanta, which was now in his Majesty’s
possession. To which he replied, that he had informed Pietro
Soderini that the reason of this non-restitution was a promise
made to the Lucchese not to restore Pietrasanta to your Lord-
ships until after the taking of Pisa. We said that of all others
that was precisely the reason that induced the Lucchese to put
every obstacle in the way of our recovering Pisa; and, more-
over, that his Majesty the king had obligated himself to restore
Pictrasanta to your hands before ever he made any promise to
the Lucchese, and that the first pledge and obligation ought to
have precedence. His Eminence assured us that all of his
Majesty’s obligations would be fulfilled, provided your Lord-

COURT OF FRANCE. 67

ships would do their duty in recovering Pisa; but if you would
not, then the king would hold you responsible.

We asked his Eminence to obtain from the king the author-
ization and letters to Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, so that he
may come to your aid with his men-at-arms and infantry, as
requested by your Lordships. He said that he would do it
with pleasure, and has ordered the letters asked for to be writ-
ten; and so soon as we receive them we will forward them to
your Lordships, to whom we humbly recommend ourselves.

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CaSa,

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Montareis, 11 August, 1500. ;

LETTER VIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Uncertain whether your Lordships have received the pre-
vious letters which I have addressed to you on my own ac-
count, | venture once more to write to your Lordships, so as
not to be wanting to myself in the straits in which Iam. At
our departure from Florence, your Lordships assigned to Fran-
cesco della Casa eight lire per day, and only four lire to me. I
doubt not that your Lordships had good reasons for doing so,
but that you did not suppose that things would happen as they
have done. Now you must know, Magnificent Signori, that I
follow the court at my own expense, and that in every way I
am obliged to spend just as much as Francesco. I therefore
entreat your Lordships either to accord to me the same salary
as Francesco, or that you will recall me, so that I may not im-
poverish myself, which I am sure cannot be your Lordships’
wish. I have already spent forty ducats of my own, and have
given orders on my brother Totto for seventy ducats more.
Again I recommend myself most earnestly to your Lordships.

: Servitor humilissimus

NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI.
Montarais, 12 August, 1500.

68 MISSION TO THE

LETTER IX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

We had not yet sent off the enclosed, which is in part a copy
of one of our previous letters, when we received by the courier
Bolognino, who had been sent by Nasi to Lyons, your Lord-
ships’ last letters of 5th instant, with two enclosures, the one
for his Most Christian Majesty, and the other for his Eminence
the Cardinal d’Amboise; also copies of your correspondence
wilh Corcou and Beaumont; also the deposition of the wit-
nesses in relation to the Lucchese. After carefully reading
and examining them all, we called at once upon the Cardinal,
his Majesty the king having left three hours before to hunt
some three leagues from here, whence, according to what some
persons say, he is going about seven leagues farther to a prop-
erty belonging to the Grand Admiral, to remain some days for
his pleasure, after which he will return here. It is difficult,
however, to get at the exact truth, owing to the natural uncer-
tainties of the court.

After presenting ourselves before his Eminence the Cardinal,
we handed him the letters from your Lordships, and informed
him that you had advised us of your having sent commissioners
towards Pescia, to arrange with Corcou and the other captains
for the distribution of the quarters to the men-at-arms of his
Majesty on Florentine territory; adding, so far as circum-
stances would permit, such remarks as seemed to us suitable to
make this matter more acceptable to him; for we found him
closely engaged with Monseigneur d Alby. We have stated in
the enclosed how his Eminence had spoken to us, at our in-
terview with him yesterday, of the answer which Corcou had
reported as haying been made to him by your Lordships, and
how he had complained to him of the want of confidence which
we had shown him, as well as of many other things, all which
we have reported in the enclosed. We deemed it proper to say
in reply to his Eminence, that Corcou had doubtless misinter-
preted your Lordships’ reply, since you had proposed that the
men-at-arms should be quartered in a healthy locality upon
Pisan territory, whence they could press the Pisans closely ;
and where they would be amply supplied with everything, and
would in all respects be well cared for by your Lordships; and

COURT OF FRANCE. 69°

that you had always left it to Corcou to decide what course
to pursue, he being better acquainted with the king’s will than
any one else. His Eminence seemed well satisfied with your
having sent commissioners for assigning quarters to the men-
at-arms; nevertheless, he intimated to us that he expected
letters from the captains upon this matter, and that they would
undoubtedly go fully into details on this subject. And as to
our suggestion respecting Corcou’s having misinterpreted the
reply, etc., and that consequently he could not make it fairly —
known here, his Eminence manifested some displeasure, saying
that Corcou was a man of honor and sagacity, and greatly be-
loved by the king on account of his good qualities. We found
no difficulty in removing this little irritation by assuring his
Eminence that your Lordships had an equally good opinion of
Corcou, but that even a man of honor and intelligence might
easily misunderstand a matter of that kind. His Eminence
admitted this; nevertheless he deferred his final judgment un-
til he should have received the next letters from Corcou and
the other captains.

After that, we broached the Lucchese business and the testi-
mony of the witnesses given in presence of the king’s officers.
We pointed out. to his Eminence that this examination had
been made with all due solemnity, and that the evidence was
of a character that left no doubt as to the perfidy of the Luc-
chese, and of the aid given by them to the Pisans; so that the
king might without hesitation restore Pietrasanta to our hands,
even if he had to make more account of the obligation which
he had contracted with the Lucchese than of that which he had
concluded with your Lordships, — which, however, could not
and ought not in reason to be done. And holding this deposi-
tion of the witnesses in our hands, we wanted to submit it
to his Eminence, who however declined to look at it, and re-
peated to us the same language he had used the day before,
and which we have reported to your Lordships in the enclosed ;
namely, that Beaumont and all the other captains affirmed the
very contrary of what we had stated; and that we, being a
party concerned, ought not to be believed; and that, even if
the aforementioned captains had in their letters confirmed and
justified our statements, the Lucchese ought certainly to be
made sensible of the error of their conduct, but that your
simple averment was not sufficient.

TO MISSION TO THE

Thus your Lordships see what foundations you will require
if you wish to build up anything good and solid in relation to
this affair. It seems to us that in this as in all other matters
which we may have to attend to here, for the purpose of satis-
fying the king or of serving your interests, we shall have to
depend entirely upon the reports made by the captains; so
that it is of the utmost importance to dispose these officers
favorably to your Lordships. The contrary might be very
prejudicial to your interests, as the experience with regard to
Pictrasanta will prove to your Lordships; for it has not been
of the least service for us to mect all the objections to its res-
toration to us, or to demonstrate that the investigation and ex-
amination of witnesses was authentic, and resulted from a
public act made in due form. In fact, all that we could say,
and all the proofs we could adduce, led to no other conclusion
than what we have reported to your Lordships.

We did not deem it well to speak to his Eminence in rela-
tion to the pay of the artillery and of the Swiss, nor did he
ever say anything to us about it; but the very first time that
he mentions these matters, which we believe will be very soon,
we shall reply in accordance with your Lordships’ latest in-
structions. Nothing else occurs to us in response to your
letters. It is said that his Eminence intends leaving here to-
morrow to join the king, and that both will then return here.
We shall not lose sight of his Eminence, and shall govern our-
selves in our dealings with him according to circumstances,
and as events may suggest.

Although it may seem presumptuous for us to speak of mat-
ters here, having but so recently come here, yet we shall write
to your Lordships all we can learn of any interest, trusting
that you will pardon us if our information should in some in-
stances not prove entirely correct. His Majesty’s court here
is very small compared with that of his predecessor; and of
this small number one third are Italians, which is ascribed to
the fact that the distribution of favors is not as abundant as
the courtiers could desire. The Italians are all dissatisfied,
some for one reason, some for another, beginning with Messer
Gianjacopo, who seems to think that he is not treated with the
consideration due to his reputation. He makes no secret of
this to any one, for, happening to mect him the other day in
church, and knowing his disposition of old, we entered into

COURT OF FRANCE. Vek

conversation with him; and when we touched upon the Pisan
business he expressed himself in terms of great affection
towards us, and laid all the blame of that failure upon the
French, adding in a formal manner the following words: “ In
“saying that errors were committed by all parties, the French
“attempt to make others share the responsibility of the faults
“which were exclusively their own.”

We shall say nothing of the other Milanese, for they all
seem to think the same as their chief. The Neapolitans here,
of whom a good many are banished from their own country,
despairing of the renewal of an attempt upon Pisa, are in the
highest degree dissatisfied ; for, according to common report,
both the king and queen are opposed to their projects. True
his Majesty the king was quite ready for another expedition,
but since the Pisan affair proved a failure, he is not quite so
anxious for it; for he had counted that, Pisa once taken, he
would be able, with the money obtained from your Lordships,
and with the help offered him by the Pope and the Orsini, and
above all by the influence of his own reputation, to push his
army at once against Naples. But as the Pisan affair had
quite a different result from what he anticipated, he is more
disposed to listen to terms of accommodation than to engage
in a new enterprise; and there are already rumors that Nea-
politan ambassadors are already on the way for that purpose.

The Venetian ambassador solicits the king’s aid against the
Turk, pointing out the danger to which they are exposed, and
alleging the loss already of a good many places, and altogether
exaggerating the alarm and danger far beyond what it is sup-
posed to be in reality; but up to the present he has not suc-
ceeded in obtaining any encouragement.

It is said that the Pope also asks his Majesty’s support most
urgently in his attempt to take Faenza, with the view of adding
that place to Furli and Imola for his son, the Duke Valentino ;
but the king does not seem disposed to do anything for him,
deeming that he has already done enough for his Holiness.
Nevertheless, he does not deprive him of all hope, and goes on
encouraging the same as he has always done; whilst the Vene-
tians and some other persons of the court do all they can to
encourage the Lord of Faenza. There is moreover an emissary
of Vitellozzo’s here, who spreads reports everywhere of the
damage which Vitellozzo will shortly inflict upon your Lord-

fe MISSION TO: THE

ships, whenever the Pope or any other power shall declare war
against Florence. This individual is constantly on the look-
out for some dissension between his Majesty the king and
your Lordships, that will permit him to push on his intrigues ;
and he intimates that the Pope would really be more disposed
to favor Vitellozzo’s projects than the attempt upon Facnza,
if he could be convinced that the court here would counte-
nance it.

There is nothing else going on here worthy of your Lord-
ships’ attention, unless it be the rumor that his Majesty,
accompanied by a few persons of the court, will devote him-
self for a few days to hunting and other pleasures. Nothing
more is heard of the Ambassador of the Empire, who was to
have had an interview with his Majesty at Troyes; and it is
said even that he will not come at all. It is also reported as
a positive fact that the Archduke has been made a Prince of
Spain,* which gives force to the suspicion that it will not be
so easy to come to terms with the Emperor, and that his Ma-
jesty the king will think less of an attempt upon Naples.

There is here in the house of the Pope’s ambassador, a cer-
tain Messer Astorre from Sienna; and so far as we have been
able to find out, he is kept there by Pandolfo Petrucci. It is
said that he openly expresses the confident hope of arranging
the Pisan business, and on better terms even than what could
have been done some time ago; adding that Montepulciano
and its territory will remain theirs. We shall take the great-
est pains to discover this intrigue, and if we find that there is
really some truth in it we will make it a point to remind the
Cardinal of our treaties, and of the honor of the king.

There is not a single Florentine merchant here, nor any
other person of whom we could avail ourselves to procure us
either money, of which we stand in great need, or to despatch
couriers, or forward our letters. Your Lordships will hold us
excused, therefore, if you do not receive communications from
us as promptly and as often as you could desire. It is impor-
tant, so long as we are kept here, that your Lordships should
provide for this service in such manner as you may deem best ;
for even before leaving Lyons we had already spent all the
money we had received from your Lordships, so that at pres-

* This was the Archduke Philip, nephew of the Emperor Maximilian, and
father of Charles of Austria, afterwards the Emperor Charles V.

COURT OF FRANCE. 73

ent we are living upon our own means, and upon what our
friends at Lyons could furnish us. We recommend ourselves
to your Lordships’ good graces. |

We had not yet closed this letter, when news came that his
Majesty, in running his horse this morning, had a fall, and has
injured one of his shoulders. All his equipages have been sent
back here, and he himself is expected to-morrow. In our next
we will further report upon the consequences of this accident,
and again recommend ourselves to your Lordships, gue bene

valeant. :
Servitores

FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,

Niccoto MacHIAVELLI.
Montarais, 12 August, 1500.

P. S.— Deeming this letter of importance, and having no
other means of sending it, we have sent Bolognino back to
Lyons, and directed this letter to the care of Nasi, who will
forward it to your Lordships, and whom we have instructed to
pay Bolognino seven scudi. We beg your Lordships will have
this amount reimbursed to him, so that we may have credit
with him on future occasions.

Die qua in literis, ete., ete.

DEELER x.
MaGniricent Signor: —

Two days since we wrote at length to your Lordships advis-
ing you of the receipt of your letters and instructions of the
oth instant, and rendering an account of all we have done here
up to that time. To insure the safe arrival of that despatch
we sent it by an express, to whom we promised seven scudi
for that service. It does not seem necessary, therefore, to re-
peat now what we reported in that communication. Up to the
present we have not been able to deliver your Lordships’ letter
to his Majesty the king, who, as we have already informed
you, met with an accident whilst running his horse in hunting.
The horse fell on him and sprained his Majesty’s shoulder,
causing him a good deal of pain, so that he has been obliged
to remain at a little village some six miles from here, where

74 MISSION TO THE

we believe he lies still confined to his room and bed. It seems
certain, however, that this accident has had no other bad con-
sequences, and that his Majesty intends to return here within
a couple of days. Meantime, letters ought to arrive from Cor-
cou and Beaumont respecting the Lucchese affair. We shall
endeavor to learn the nature of the report they may have on
this matter, and shall do what we may judge for the best in
relation thereto.

We recommend ourselves to your Lordships, gue bene vu-

ut. ;
lea Servitores

FRANCESCO DELLA CaS,
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Montareis, 14 August, 1500.

LETTER XI.
MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Since our last of the 12th from Montargis, we wrote very
briefly on the 14th, but have ho letters to acknowledge from
your Lordships since the one of the 5th instant. His Majesty
the king has been obliged, in consequence of his fall, to remain
ever since at some of the small villages along the road here.
At first he had to remain quiet in bed, after which he had him-
self carried in a litter, so that it was only yesterday that he
was well enough to return here, although his shoulder is not
yet entirely well, but has to be kept bandaged. The whole
court is now here, the Maréchal de Gye, the Admiral, and
the Grand Chancellor having arrived, together with many other
lords. We have presented ourselves several times within the
past few days before his Majesty, and have not failed to call
at least every other day upon his Eminence the Cardinal
d’Amboise, in whatever place he happened to be at the time;
although we did not care much to speak to him for some days
past, knowing that he was not well pleased because the men-
at-arms were not in garrison on Florentine territory. But
having been informed by your Lordships’ last letters that you
had sent commissioners to Pescia to receive those troops, we
hope they have succeeded in quartering them on Florentine
territory, and that this act of your Lordships has so gratified

COURT OF FRANCE. 75

the captains of these troops, that they will have sent more
favorable reports from there than what they have done hither-
to. It was in this hope that at any moment letters might ar-
rive from these captains expressive of their satisfaction, which
would placate the king and the Cardinal, that we thought it
best for a day or two not to press our own business, feeling
convinced that had we done so we should, as usual, have re-
ceived an unfavorable reply and unsatisfactory conclusions.

In a conversation which we have since had with Robertet,
however, we learned that the men-at-arms were this side of
Pontremoli, and refused to return to Pisa; and that his Majesty
the king was much dissatisfied with your Lordships, and that
there was no chance for your friends to say anything in your
favor.

We expressed our astonishment at this assertion, after your
Lordships’ letter of the 5th, and said that the refusal of the
troops to return to Pisa could in no way be laid to your charge,
and that before pronouncing such a judgment matters ought to
be thoroughly understood ; but all we could say was of no use,
and Robertet persisted in his opinion that the fault lay with
your Lordships, and added some very unpleasant expressions as
to dissensions existing amongst your Lordships, and intimating
that there was a party in Florence who wanted the return of
Piero de’ Medici, and not Pisa,—words not to be disregarded
as coming from the mouth of a secretary of state. We said
all we possibly could, and which was not a little, to refute
this assertion, but it produced no effect upon him. During
this conversation Robertet pointed out to us a Pisan who hap-
pened to pass at that moment, and who has been a long while
in France, but whom we have never seen since. We do not
know by whom he is specially protected, unless it be that he
enjoys the favor of all your enemies here, and they are more
numerous than your friends. It is quite possible that this
individual has returned to Pisa charged with some fresh in-
trigue. We shall do our best to find out, and will then
promptly inform your Lordships.

Since this conversation with Robertet we had an interview
with D’Amboise, now six days ago, and found him of the same
mind as regards his unwillingness to engage in a fresh war,
and as to the pay of the Swiss, and the refusal to receive the
men-at-arms. It was of no use for us to attempt to refute

76 MISSION TO THE

these charges, which we had already done so often; for he
came back immediately to the Swiss whom his Majesty the
king had been obliged to pay out of his own resources. And
thus we parted from his Eminence, without being able to get
anything more from him.

As already stated, his Majesty has returned here now with
all the court, and by a singular coincidence Corcou arrived here
on the same day. So soon as we heard of his arrival, we
thought it important to have an interview with him before
presenting ourselves again before D’Amboise, so as to learn
Corcou’s opinions, and judge therefrom in what manner to
approach his Eminence again. Accordingly we called upon
Corcou and assured him that your Lordships had the most
entire confidence in him, and that you hoped that he had
made a good report as to your Lordships’ favorable disposi-
tion and attachment to his Majesty the king; adding all we
thought proper to incline him favorably to us.

He replied that he was well affeetioned to your Lordships
on account of the great honor which you had shown him; but
that he could not say anything else to his Majesty than the
official answer to him of your Lordships, and what you had
communicated to him in writing. He dwelt particularly upon
the payment of the Swiss, saying that the king had been
greatly displeased at having been obliged to pay them out of
his own purse. Having replied to this in the same way in
which we had before met this charge, he accused the Swiss
of gross brutality, and attributed their dishonesty to their
habits ; but soon returned to his first complaint, that the king
had been obliged to pay them. Ile then added, that you had
never been willing to receive the men-at-arms in garrison on
Florentine territory, although these troops had been specially
asked for from his Majesty by your Lordships’ ambassadors,
and complained that he himself had made a useless voyage to
Florence on that account. And when we said in reply, that
your Lordships had never refused quarters to the king’s men-
at-arms, but had hesitated only as regards the infantry, in con-
sequence of the experience you had had with them, he said that
it could not reasonably be expected that men-at-arms would
vo into quarters on foreign territory without infantry, and
that fifteen hundred infantry ought not to have caused your
Lordships any apprehensions; but that the réal cause of all

COURT OF FRANCE. rari

the difficulties was the want of unity in Florence, where one
party wanted Pisa, and the other party did not want it.

As this opinion seemed to have been generally disseminated
at court, and was calculated to produce very bad effects, we
made every possible effort to refute it, and to eradicate it from
Corcou’s mind by the fullest and most earnest arguments, even
to saying to him that such a statement exposed him to have
his sound judgment called into question. We almost suc-
ceeded in convincing him, or at any rate we thought that we
had produced a good effect upon him. But we must not omit
to tell your Lordships that in the course of this discussion
Corcou said: “ What has lost you Pisa is, that you did not
“spend some eight or ten thousand ducats amongst all these
“lords and captains. In similar affairs, you must keep your
“‘money-bags open; for in that way you spend but once, whilst
“otherwise you spend six times.”

After leaving Corcou we resolved to speak with the Cardinal
d’Amboise, and took occasion to call upon his Eminence, to
whom we said that now, since Corcou had arrived, both his
Majesty the king and his Eminence must have heard from him
how things had happened ; as also your Lordships’ good disposi-
tion towards his Majesty and his men-at-arms, and likewise the
bad conduct of the others, and especially that of the Lucchese.
His Eminence interrupted our remarks abruptly, and said:
“Yes, we have heard everything, and, by my faith, until now
“T have always done you all the good I possibly could; but
“now, since your conduct is so bad, I really know not what
“more to do for you; and his Majesty thinks it very strange
“that he should be obliged to pay the Swiss for your Lord-
“ships.” We replied, that, if his Eminence would listen to our
justification, he, as well as his Majesty the king, would find
that our republic had always done her duty in all respects;
and that the refusal to resume the war against Pisa resulted
from the impossibility of doing so, to which the republic found
herself reduced, partly because she was overwhelmed and ex-
hausted, and partly from the lack of confidence in the army,
which on every occasion had manifested hostility rather than
friendship for our republic. We then spoke of the payment of
the Swiss, to which the king seemed to attach more importance
than to all else, and said that this matter might be adjusted in
a reasonable manner, if his Eminence would favor us with his

78 MISSION. TO THE

aid and advice. To which he replied: “ Neither that nor any
“other means can now arrange your difficulties in a way that
“ would be satisfactory.” We reiterated our entreaties that his
Eminence would not withhold his protection from your Lord-
ships without reason; and not by such words to discourage a
people who had always been faithful friends of France, and
who had suffered, and in such various ways, for that devotion,
that they merited commendation and support rather than dis-
favor and discouragement, which would only benefit those who
wished no good to his Eminence, and still less to his Majesty
the king of France. For what could the other peoples of Italy
hope for from his Majesty when his devoted friends, the Flor-
entines, who had spent and suffered so much on his account,
were treated so badly by his Majesty ?

We concluded by saying that your Lordships were more
willing and better disposed than ever to render any service
and pleasure to the crown of France. To all this the Cardi-
nal replied that these were mere words, and that he had no
confidence in all our arguments, and was in short extremely
dissatisfied with your Lordships; and this was said by him
so loud that all the bystanders could hear it; and thereupon
he immediately mounted his horse to follow his pleasure.

The reason of our not yet having had an audience of the
king, nor presented your Lordships’ letter, was the accident
which his Majesty had, on account of which he refrained for
some days from all business, and remained for his pleasure in
some villages in the woods, and in other places, where no
lodgings could be had for any one else; and sinee his return
here we thought it might seem inopportune to present your
Lordships’ letter. Ilis Majesty is constantly and closely sur-
rounded by a few persons, except when he rides out, so that
it is difficult to find a convenient moment for approaching him;
and all business is devolved upon the Cardinal d’Amboise.
We shall, nevertheless, watch the first opportunity of speaking
to his Majesty, and will endeavor, in as suitable a manner as
the occasion may permit, to impress him most efficiently with
your Lordships’ devotion and good will towards him, and to
efface from his mind whatever unfavorable opinion he may
have formed in consequence of the reported dissensions and
want of unity amongst the Florentines that have reached his
Majesty’s cars from various sources; and of the result your
Lordships shall be duly informed.

COURT OF FRANCE. 79

The letter of license for Messer Giovanni Bentivogli has not
yet been prepared, nor have we asked for it again; for when
this matter was touched upon in our conversation with Rober-
tet, we asked whether his Eminence of Amboise had ordered
the letter to be written, he replied, that he had not; and that
the Cardinal did not intend to have it done; and that, if we
would speak to him ourselves on the subject, we would find
that he had changed his mind. We therefore deemed it best
to say nothing about it now to D’Amboise, as your Lordships
have yet to decide whether you will receive the French men-
at-arms in garrison, for his Eminence might have formed an
erroneous conjecture as to your Lordships’ intentions, and
might suppose that you preferred to employ Italian troops in-
stead of French. We shall not renew the request without
further instructions.

Nor have we said anything about Pietrasanta; for the an-
swer we received upon that point, and which we have com-
municated to your Lordships, discouraged us from bringing
this matter up again. We are constantly after Corcou, trying
to induce him to serve us in this matter, as the investigation
that had been ordered to be made on the spot was made in
his presence; also to see whether we can, with the assistance
of Robertet, who has much influence over him in this as well
as in other matters, obtain any advantageous results. We
shall do our best to that effect, although the ambassador from
Lucca has returned, and has been well received. All this
comes from knowing how to acquire amicos de mammona int-
quitatis, whilst your Lordships believe that you need no other
help but justice and reason, ete.

We have had a long conference with the Grand Chancellor,
and related to him the entire course of things, and how the
whole Pisan affair occurred; we also told him of your Lord-
ships’ offer for recovering the honor of the king’s troops, and
for repairing the damage which you had suffered, and the rea-
sons why you could do no more. His Lordship was very glad
to see us, and listened most graciously to all we had to say. -
But as to the last point he remarked that he could say nothing
except that his Majesty would certainly fulfil the promise he
had made to furnish us the men-at-arms; but as to restoring
Pisa to our possession, that depended altogether upon fortune,
and therefore his Majesty could make no promise upon that

80 MISSION, OEE

point. But he added that, whenever opportunity occurred, he
would always favor our cause the same as he had ever done
in the past. We begged him to continue the same good will
towards our republic, and said that your Lordships regarded
him as a real benefactor, ete. We have had an interview with
this minister since then, during which he told us that he had
not yet had an opportunity to speak with his Majesty in rela-
tion to our business; but this did not seem likely, and we be-
lieve that he did not wish to make any other answer, having
found his Majesty not well disposed towards your Lordships.

We shall endeavor to see his Lordship again, and shall not
fail in our duty, sparing no effort, regardless of cither fatigue
or discomfort; and if we do not accomplish anything, it will
be because we cannot or know not how, in which case we hope
your Lordships will hold us excused.

Your Lordships’ letters recommending Bartolommeo Ginori *
have been received by us and presented to his Majesty, who had
already made him come to court and ordered the marshals to
hear his complaints, and to have justice done him. Yesterday
Bartolommeo appeared before them, and they took him from the
hands of Talaru and placed him in those of the king. We shall
do what we can for him, and shall employ what credit we may
yet have here in his behalf, and believe that we may hope for
a good result. ;

Nothing more is said about the treaty between his Majesty
and Pandolfo Petrucci. We believe the reason of this is that
it is no longer desired.

Two days ago an ambassador from the Swiss arrived here
in relation to the matter of Bellinzona. He had a long audi-
ence, but the result is not yet known.

It is also said that his Majesty the king has concluded a
truce with the Emperor, to last until next March; and although
some personage of importance speaks of it as really true, yet
we hear on the other hand that it is doubted by many; thus
we can neither affirm nor deny it.

We recommend ourselves to the good graces of your Lord-
ships, gue bene valeant.

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,
Merton, 26 August, 1500. NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

* This Ginori had been taken prisoner and plundered by the Count de Ligny
in Savoy, whilst going from Naples to France on commercial business.

COURT OF FRANCE. 81

LETTER XII.

Maentricent S1GNORT: —

From our preceding letters your Lordships will have seen the
condition of our affairs here; and our latest despatch will have
informed you that his Majesty is not at all satisfied with your
Lordships, particularly upon two points to which he attaches
most importance. The first is your having refused to resume
the war against Pisa, and the second, your not having paid the
Swiss. To these may be added a third, which to some extent
is also deemed important, and that is your refusal to receive
French troops in garrison. Whenever either of these subjects
is discussed, it gives rise to complaints in such manner and
terms as we have already made known to your Lordships. And
although all these matters could easily be explained, as your
Lordships have endeavored to do at Florence with Corcou, and
as we in compliance with your orders have striven to do here,
yet we are never listened to when opportunity occurs for us to
speak on these subjects; nor do we see any chance for bettering
this state of things, unless something quite unforeseen should
occur. For as to the first point, we do not believe that his
Majesty will ever assume the entire burden of a fresh war ;. the
reason for our thinking so is, first, the king’s indisposition to
send money; and secondly, his whole conduct hitherto with
regard to the affairs of Italy, being ever anxious to draw all he
can from this country, but never willing to spend anything
there, seeming to attach more importance to immediate profit
than to ultimate results. This causes his Majesty to attach
little importance to what your Lordships offer him after he
shall have taken Pisa; so that when his Majesty was spoken to
on that point he treated it as a jest. And there is the more
reason to believe that he will not do it, as (you may venture
nineteen sous to a lira) peace will either be made with Naples,
or the new enterprise will be deferred for a long time to
come, which would cause his Majesty to think no more of the
fifty thousand florins, etc., etc. And there are several grounds
for looking upon such a peace as probable; first, the will of the
queen, who is said to be most favorably inclined to it, and, ac-
cording to report, spares no pains to bring it about; and it
is also said that the majority of the council is of the same mind,

VOL. IIL, 6

82 MISSION TO THE

deeming the conquest difficult, and the maintaining it still more
so, referring to the experience of the past, as well as to other
reasons which your Lordships will readily find out. It is, more-
over, supposed that such an attempt might arouse the Turk, who
certainly would oppose it most determinately; and that the
apprehension of the loss of Naples would induce the Emperor
and the Empire to take measures such as even the conquest of
Milan did not cause them to take. For King Frederick con-
stantly keeps ambassadors near his Majesty, who fears the war
and earnestly desires peace. These imperial ambassadors have
not yet come to Troyes, and when they do come, it is under-
stood that their demands will be so great that they will not be
acceded to.

Your Lordships will have heard that the king of Spain has
raised troops for the purpose of supporting King Frederick, and
that he has created the Archduke a Prince, all of which facts in-
dicate the same purpose. And then comes his Majesty’s aver-
sion to spending money, and his extreme prudence, which makes
him move very slowly in all doubtful matters. Moreover, his
Majesty has seen lately, in the case of Pisa, that where force is
necessary neither chalk* nor reputation will suffice ; and that,
if he found the enterprise in itself difficult, the help of the Turk
or of others would render it next to impossible, and would ex-
pose him to the risk of being obliged to withdraw in a manner
that would be anything but honorable for him, and expose him
to the loss of all his possessions in Italy; being unable to sup-
port such heavy expenses for so long a time, or to be disas-
trously defeated.

But even if all this were not true, or had not been properly
understood, or still worse explained, which is quite possible, yet
this much is true beyond all question, — that the seerctary of
Naples is here and labors incessantly to bring about a peace.
And if onee they listen to any one here who promises and gives,
it is difficult not to believe that they will take what is offered.
Thus to return to our own matter. Even if such a peace be one
of the things that will be, or if the enterprise against Pisa is to
be deferred for a long time to come, which we leave to your

* Alluding to the expression applied to the descent of Charles VIII. into
Italy, that he conquered it with a piece of chalk ; that is, sending his quartermaster
ahead, who merely marked with a piece of chalk the houses where the French
troops were to be quartered.

COURT OF FRANCE. 83

Lordships’ wisdom to decide, the fifty thousand florins are not
likely to influence the king to engage in that enterprise for his
own account. If, therefore, your Lordships’ views on this point
are not changed, his Majesty of France cannot remain satisfied;
and we are rather apprehensive, from some remarks made by
the Cardinal d’Amboise and by Robertet, lest his Majesty, for
the purpose of repairing the honor of his arms, attempt some
measure adverse to your interests and necessities.

As to the payment of the Swiss, which seems to be the thing
that irritates his Majesty the most, and the refusal to receive
the French troops in garrison, we have made such answer as we
have stated in the enclosed, and which has been accepted, as the
enclosed will also inform your Lordships. According to our
judgment your Lordships ought to satisfy the demands of the
Swiss, or you will have to think how you will defend yourselves
against the anger which his Majesty will feel against you; and
which, in our opinion, will increase of itself, and from being
fomented and kept alive by your enemies. Nor must your
Lordships imagine that well-digested letters or arguments will
be of service in the matter, for they are not even listened to.
It is idle to recall to the French here the good faith with which
our republic has always acted towards the crown of France, or
the services rendered to some of her former sovereigns, or the
large sums of money which we have spent and the dangers
we have borne on their account, and how many times we have
in return been fed by them with vain hopes; or to point to
more recent occurrences, and to the ruinous damage which our
republic suffered in consequence; or what his Majesty might
still count upon from you if you were strong, and what security
your power and greatness would give to his Majesty’s posses-
sions in Italy, and how it would insure the good faith of the
other Italian states. But it is all useless, for they hold a very
different language about all these things from what you do, and
view them with another eye altogether from that of persons who
are not of this court; for they are blinded by their power and
their immediate advantage, and have consideration only for
those who are either well armed, or who are prepared to pay. It
is this that does your Lordships so much harm, for they imagine
you lacking both these qualifications. As regards the first point
of being well armed, they see that ordinarily you are without
troops. And as to the second, namely, the question of their own

84. MISSION TO THE

advantage, they have given up all hope, for they believe that
you consider yourselves as having been badly served by them,
and that you have lost all confidence in them in consequence
of their conduct in the late affair of Pisa. They call you Ser
Nihilo (Signor Nothing), and baptize your inability discord
amongst yourselves; and the ill conduct of their troops they
ascribe to your bad government. And this opinion is gaining
eround, according to our judgment, in consequence of the de-
parture of your ambassadors from here, and the fact that noth-
ing is heard of the coming of new ones, which they charge to
our want of union, or to a wish on our part to alienate ourselves
from them entirely. We therefore beg your Lordships, with all
due respect, to give attention to this, and to think of remedying
it seasonably ; for our mission here is evidently not agreeable to
them, and our rank and quality insufficient to save a sinking
cause. But if your Lordships really desire to maintain your
relations with this court, then we deem it absolutely indispensa-
ble for you to send fresh ambassadors here. At the same time,
we beg you to understand distinctly that they will be of little
use, unless they come with instructions to pay the Swiss, and
with means enough to make friends; for there is no one here
that does not understand his own interests, or who has not
managed to secure for himself some patron to whom he ean re-
sort when occasion requires. In truth, your Lordships are the
only ones who have deprived yourselves of such support; and
even the king’s friendship for you, as well as that of the Cardi-
nal, needs to be sustained if you desire to preserve it; for it has
been shaken in various ways by your many enemies, as well as
by the ill fortune of our republic. But under any circumstances,
and however they may come, we hold the sending of ambassa-
dors here as indispensable, if you desire to advance your cause
here in any way.

Meantime we beg your Lordships to be pleased to instruct us
as to the course which we shall pursue, and what attitude we
shall assume in relation to that point which seems to us so im-
portant and delicate, and which demands a prompt remedy.
Valete !

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,
Niccoto MACHIAVELLI.
Metun, 27 August, 1500.

COURT OF FRANCE. 85

LETTER XIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

When your predecessors first decided upon sending us here,
in the belief that we should find his Majesty the king at Lyons,
and your ambassadors near him, they provided us with just
sufficient means to execute our commission, and return to Flor-
ence in a few days; and it was more particularly to me, Fran-
cesco, that the Signori said that we were not to remain here.
The very opposite, however, has happened. In the first in-
stance, we found that the king had already left Lyons; and
then, being denuded of everything, we were obliged to incur the
expense of supplying ourselves in two days with such horses
as we could find, to provide ourselves with clothing, and to
hire servants. And, without the advantage of travelling in
the company of ambassadors, we had to follow the court, and
continue to follow it still at an expense of one half more than
we should have needed to incur if the court had been at
Lyons. It would have been a great relief to us if we had been
in the company of ambassadors; for as it is, we are obliged to
keep two more servants. We do not live in hostelries, but in
private houses, where we have to supply all the provisions and
other necessaries, and have the cooking done ourselves. And
besides, there are always other extraordinary expenses, such
as quartermasters, porters, and couriers, etc., etc., which alto-
gether make up a sum which in our position is very heavy for
us. Being thus under the necessity of applying to your Lord-
ships for assistance, we have deemed it proper to inform you
of the particulars of our situation; and therefore beg your
Lordships most respectfully and confidently to take into con-
sideration, first, that with the salary allowed us of eight lire
per day for each, it is impossible for us to supply our wants
without adding a portion of our own means. Your Lordships
will also bear in mind that at our departure from Florence each
of us received only eighty lire, of which'we each spent thirty
lire for our voyage to Lyons, and having there to provide our-
selves with horses, clothing, and other necessaries, we were
obliged to borrow money from our friends to enable us to re-
sume our route, and after having spent that, we have been forced
to recur to Paris for further loans from others. And if these

86 MISSION TO THE

should fail us before your Lordships order funds to be sent to
us, we shall suddenly find ourselves without money and with-
out credit, and your Lordships may judge of the situation in
which we should then find ourselves placed.

We therefore entreat your Lordships, most humbly, to send
without delay sufficient means for our necessities during the
time that your Lordships may determine that either one or
both of us shall remain here in your service. Your Lordships
will bear in mind that we have neither the means nor the
eredit of our own that would permit us, like so many other
ambassadors, to maintain ourselves here for months, or even
weeks, without receiving the means of subsistence from your
Lordships, to whom we recommend ourselves.

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,
Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.
ME tvy, 29 August, 1500.

LETTER XIV.

Macnirtcent Signor: —

To-day is the 2d of September, and we have not yet de-
spatched the enclosed, being unwilling to send them at a ven-
ture, and yet unable to despatch them by a special messenger,
such is the penury to which our ordinary mode of living has
reduced us; and unless your Lordships promptly supply us
with means, we shall be compelled to leave here. Our neces-
sary expenses are one scudi and a half per day for each; we
have already laid out for clothing, and in establishing our-
selves here, more than one hundred scudi each, and are now
actually without a single penny, and have in vain attempted
to use our credit, public and private. So that your Lordships
must excuse us if, in the event of our not receiving funds,
we find ourselves obliged to return to Florence; for we pre-
fer being at the discretion of fortune in Italy rather than in
eaiee. = 4

Since our writing the enclosed, we hear from all sides, O
Magnificent Signori, that his Majesty is greatly dissatisfied
with us. The principal reason of this is, that his arms remain

COURT OF FRANCE. 87

dishonored in Italy on your account, and because he finds, ac-
cording to the answer given by your Lordships to Corcou, that
he will not be able to repair this dishonor at your expense;
and moreover he has had to pay thirty thousand francs to the
Swiss, and for artillery and other things, out of his private
purse ; whilst according to the terms of the agreement and the
convention concluded at Milan between the Cardinal d’Amboise
and Pietro Soderini, all these items should have been paid by
your Lordships. His Majesty’s irritation on that account has
increased to that degree, that it has encouraged a number of
your enemies to propose various measures to his Majesty that
would be adverse to your interests and necessities. These
propositions have all found favor with the king, so that a few
days since it was discussed in council, whether it might not be
well to accept the proposition made by the Pisans to surrender,
on condition that they should not be subjected to the rule of
your Lordships. If this negotiation has not been actually con-
cluded, supported as it is by all the Italians here, it is owing
rather to a regard for your Lordships’ rights, which has caused
it to remain in suspense, than to the interposition of any friend
who may have remained true to you here. For amongst the
entire court, since his Majesty’s dissatisfaction with you has
become manifest, you have scarcely a single friend left, but
everybody seeks to injure your cause to the extent of his power
to do so.

Although we were of our own knowledge cognizant of this
unfriendly disposition, from the several conferences which we
have had with the Cardinal d’ Amboise, as mentioned in our
several despatches to your Lordships, yet we have become still
more sensible of it from the reports that reach us from all
sides; so that if your Lordships do not take measures to cor-
rect it, you will find yourselves very soon in such a position
with regard to the king, that you will have to think more of
protecting and defending your possessions, and even your per-
sonal liberty, than of recovering the territory you have lost.

This state of things has been made known to us, amongst
others, by Robertet, who is the only person that has remained
our friend; but we shall lose him too very soon, unless we
sustain his friendship with something more substantial than
words. The same with some other gentlemen; and even Mes-
ser Gianjacopo Trivulzio called us aside one morning whilst

88 MISSION TO THE

at court, and said: “I am sorry to see your republic in such
“imminent danger, for if you do not promptly apply some
“remedy, you will be obliged to think how to defend your-
“selves against the anger of the people here; for it is their
“nature to take very sudden resolves, and they never for-
“oive those whom they have once offended, but will continue
“rather in their hostility; so look to your interests, and that
“promptly.” And he said this with much earnestness, so that
from all we have seen and heard we cannot doubt but what
he spoke from the heart.

We have been cautioned in the same way by others, on
whom we can rely, but who were afraid to speak to us in
public, fearing lest they should be remarked as being your
friends. These have told us, amongst other things, that it
had been reported to his Majesty the king that your Lordships
had sent ambassadors to the Emperor and to the king of Na-
ples, with offers of money, for the purpose of stirring them up
against his Majesty of France; and that his Eminence the Car-
dinal d’ Amboise had several times said that you had broken
your word; and that you would yet be forced, to your shame
and damage, to repay his Majesty the amount which he had
paid to the Swiss.

All these things seemed to us of great moment, and, unless
promptly remedied, as calculated to embroil you with his Ma-
jesty beyond the chance of reconciliation. We made great
efforts, therefore, to have an audience of the Cardinal d’Am-
boise, where we should be listened to quietly, and with that
attention which the case really deserves. Although we have
failed thus far to obtain such an audience as we desired, yet
we took occasion to meet and converse with his Eminence;
and began by complaining of the malice of your Lordships’
enemies, who were not ashamed to defame you to his Majesty
beyond all reason, by telling him that you had sent ambassa-
dors to the Emperor and King Frederick with offers of money
for the purpose of turning them against him, a proceeding so in-
eredible that we could not believe that either his Majesty or his
Eminence would attach the least credence to it; for the long-
continued fidelity of your Lordships to his Majesty, as well as
the experience which he had had so lately of your good faith,
did not deserve that such a calumny should have been believed ;
but as such a report had reached our ears, we desired to speak to

COURT OF FRANCE. 89

his Majesty on the subject, more for the purpose of performing
our duty than because we believed that you needed such a justi-
fication. After that we added, that from the several conversa-
tions which we had had with his Eminence, and from what we
had heard from various quarters, it appeared that his Majesty
the king was dissatisfied with your Lordships, and was éngaged
in negotiations that did not comport with our friendship and
the loyalty which we had always manifested towards the crown
of France; that no notice whatever had been given us of these
proceedings, at which we were astonished, for we believed that
his Majesty ought to have complained in an amicable way of
any supposed short-comings on the part of your Lordships,
and that he would have spoken his mind openly and freely
about it, and would have listened to your Lordships’ expla-
nations; and that if there had really been any remissness of
duty on your part, that in such case his Majesty would take
every occasion to assert his rights against your Lordships.
And therefore we entreated his Eminence to be pleased to tell
us what was really going on, and to enlighten us upon those
points upon which we had to report to your Lordships.

His Eminence made no answer whatever to the first part of
our remarks, as to your having sent ambassadors to the Em-
peror, etc., but complained at great length that he had been
much pained by your Lordships’ conduct, which had deprived
him of all means of helping you; for that you had neither been
willing to resume the war, nor to receive the French troops in
garrison, nor to pay the Swiss; so that his Majesty’s interests as
well as his honor had suffered damage in consequence. When
we attempted to reply to this, his Eminence added: “ We have
“already heard and know what you would say; we have also
“seen the answer you have made to Corcou.” And when we
urged his Eminence to inform us as to what we ought to write
to your Lordships, ete., he said: “Speak to Corcou about it; he
“happens luckily to be here, and will tell you what is necessary
“for you to know.”

We therefore went to see Corcou, and he concluded that you
must either pay back to his Majesty the thirty-eight thousand
francs which he has disbursed on your account, or have him
for your enemy forever. And although we said all we could,
— that this was unreasonable, and that it would be useless to
write this to your Lordships,—yet he remained firm in his

90 MISSION TO THE

decision. And seeing thus how much importance they attach
to this matter, we said that we would write to your Lord-
ships on the subject; and Corcou promised to try and induce
the Cardinal d’Amboise to await your Lordships’ reply ; and
thus we left him.

You see thus, O Magnificent Signori, in what condition our
affairs are here; and in our judgment it will really depend
upon your answer, whether we shall have the king’s friend-
ship or enmity. Do not imagine that reasons and arguments
will be of any avail with him, for they would not be listened
to, as we have already explained in the accompanying letters.
And so important has it seemed to us to preserve his Majesty’s
friendship, that if I, Francesco, had not felt so seriously indis-
posed that I believed I should be obliged to leave the court for
the purpose of taking care of my health, one of us two would
have come by the diligence to Florence, to tell you by word of
mouth, and so to say to make you touch with your fingers,
what we cannot make so plain to you by writing.

We must not omit, however, to tell you, that we learn from
a good source that there are intrigues on foot to induce his
Majesty to take Pisa for himself after having first caused all
its territory to be restored; and to form a state out of it by
adding Pietrasanta, Livorno, and Piombino, and in course of
time also Lucca, and to establish a governor of his own there ;
which they think can-easily be done and maintained, as a por-
tion of the constituent parts are well disposed for such an
arrangement, being contiguous to the state of Milan. They
see another advantage in the fact that the Pisans have offered
an immediate payment of one hundred thousand francs, con- —
tributed by your enemies, and afterwards a regular yearly rey-
enue. This project is furthermore regarded as a step towards
the taking of the kingdom of Naples, whenever that attempt
shall be made. We believe that this project has its origin with
and is being urged by your many enemies, and that it may
easily be accomplished because of the king’s dissatisfaction with
your Lordships, and because of the immediate advantage which
he would derive from it. And moreover, amidst the general
hatred of your Lordships, it is supposed that his Majesty can
only gain in doing what would be a great injury to you.

In accordance with your Lordships’ wishes, we have written
without reserve, and very fully, about matters here, as we see

COURT OF FRANCE. 91

and understand them; and if we have expressed ourselves too
boldly upon any one point, it was because we preferred rather
to harm ourselves by thus erring, than not to write, and thereby
risk of failing in our duty to our republic. And we have ven-
tured to do so because of our confidence in the wisdom of your
Lordships, who, after careful examination of our communica-
tions, can form a more correct judgment upon the points in
question, and can thus come to a wiser decision.

We beg most respectfully to remind your Lordships of the
importance of promptly sending ambassadors here, so that your
next despatches may inform us of their coming, and that they
may be in time to achieve some good results; for we ourselves
can do no more in the business here than what we have done,
and have, indeed, played our last stake. Nor would we like to
find ourselves present here at the breaking up of a friendship
which we have so earnestly solicited, and nursed at such ex-
pense, and maintained with so much hopefulness. And until
we receive orders from your Lordships that will permit our
presenting ourselves at court, we shall avoid all conversation
with them upon other points; for having really nothing to tell
them, they might think that we are merely mocking them.
We shall simply show ourselves, so that they may know that
we are here, and that they may call us if there should be
occasion for it.

His Eminence, D’Amboise, leaves to-morrow for Rouen, and
will remain there some ten or twelve days. It would be well
if on his return we could present to him your Lordships’
answer, which we beg you will send to us; and that we may
then also be able to say to him that your ambassadors are on
the way here, which is so essential.

Messer Giulio Scurcigliato, a Neapolitan, has had a long con-
versation with his Eminence, the Cardinal, in relation to your
Lordships’ affairs, of which we shall say nothing more, as he
will write you himself very fully at Florence. Since then we
have heard that the truce between the king and the Emperor
has been publicly proclaimed at Milan.

We commend ourselves to your Lordships.

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Metvn, 3 September, 1500.

92 MISSION TO THE

P. S.— Whilst in the act of sealing this letter, Ugolino came
to us to say that a friend of his, who had agreed to co-operate
with him in the expediting of our despatches, had changed his
mind, so that we were obliged to promise him twenty-five sun
scudi. We must therefore beg your Lordships promptly to
pay that amount to Giovanni di Niccolo Martelli, so that we
may be able to command his services on future occasions, and
not be obliged to pay him out of our own means. He has
promised to have this despatch delivered within seven days.

LETTER XV.

MaGniFicent SIGNORI : —

It is now evening, and we have not yet been able to come to
any agreement with the party who had proposed to unite in
despatching this courier, nor do we know whether we shall
succeed in coming to terms with him, nor the hour at which
the courier is likely to start to-morrow.

We cannot think of anything more to say to your Lordships,
unless it be to urge once more the sending of the ambassadors,
and to decide about paying the thirty-cight thousand frances.
For, on returning from accompanying the Cardinal, who started
to-day after dinner for Rouen, we met Robertet, and questioned
him with regard to our affairs. To which he replied: “ They
“have improved somewhat since our last conversation; but do
“not fail to write to your Signoria that they must not think of
“ doing otherwise than paying the money which his Majesty has
“paid for your account. Say to them also, that, whatever they
‘may decide upon, the most important thing is to send ambas-
“ sadors here, or at least one, who, however, should be the first
“and most reputed citizen of Florence; and that his having
“started should be made immediately known here, so that it
‘may in a measure remove the ill feeling and the umbrage
“oiven by the abrupt departure from here of the former am-
“bassadors. . Write most strenuously upon this point, for it is
“of the utmost importance.”

We replied that the ambassadors would be sent, and made
excuses for the departure of the former ones; and told him
that we would write to you about it, as also about the money,

COURT OF FRANCE. 93

although we hardly knew what to write you upon this latter
point, owing to the events that had occurred since. And as
we wanted to touch upon the Pietrasanta affair, Robertet said,
“ All can yet be arranged, if you will only hasten the coming
“of the ambassadors.” We have deemed it proper to commu-
nicate all this fully to your Lordships, so that you may be able
to decide the better as to the course to be adopted.

It is now three o’clock in the night, and with the help of
God we have arranged to despatch this courier by our paying
half the cost. Thus, your Lordships will pay to Giovanni Mar-
telli thirty-five scudi, that being the amount which Ugolino
Martelli has advanced to us. What we have written in the
enclosed upon this point is hereby cancelled. Thus, your Lord-
ships will have to pay only thirty-five scudi, which we trust you
will be pleased to do, so that the favor conferred upon us here
may not be paid with ingratitude; and so that we may not
have to remain debtors to Ugolino, to whom we have pledged
ourselves personally.

And thus we recommend ourselves to your Lordships, que
bene valeant.

Metvy, at the 3d hour of night, and
3d day of September, 1500.

The present courier will leave early to-morrow, and promises
to be in Florence within seven days.
Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA Casa,
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

LETTER XVI.

MacniFIcent SIGNORI: —

On the 5th of the present month we received two letters
from your Lordships, the one of the 14th ultimo, and the other
of the 80th, together with a copy of a letter from Beaumont to
your Lordships. From these we learn your wishes, and the
steps you want us to take with regard to the affair of the Mar-
quis of Massa, and the restitution of Pictrasanta.

We believe, Magnificent Signori, that, before the arrival of

94 MISSION TO THE

your letters here, your Lordships will have received our de-
spatches of the 26th and 27th ultimo, and of the 8d of the pres-
ent month, which were sent to you by a special courier through
the agency of Martelli, under cover to Ser Antonio della Valle,
and at the cost of thirty-five scudi. We do not deem it worth
while to send a copy of it, but merely, by way of precaution, will
briefly repeat the substance of it; which was to the effect that
his Majesty of France was much irritated against your Lord-
ships because of your inability to resume the war against Pisa,
and that thus he was prevented from retrieving the honor of
his arms at your expense; and then that he had been obliged
to spend his own money to pay the Swiss, and the artillery, and
the Gascons, all of which should have been paid by you. This
is the sum and substance of all that has to be settled here;
and unless these points are satisfactorily arranged, it will be
impossible to attempt any new negotiations, or, even if begun,
to conclude them satisfactorily.

We desire to point out to your Lordships, that to the above
two causes of discontent on the part of his Majesty a third
must be added, which is no less important than the others;
and this is the suspicion which his Majesty has conceived that
you are not willing to take any other course. This doubt has
been excited in his Majesty’s mind by the unfortunate issue of
the attempt upon Pisa, and makes him think that you may
consider yourselves as having been badly served in that affair ;
and that it was in consequence of this that your ambassadors
left, so to say, ex abrupto, and that nothing is heard of the com-
ing of any new ones. These things have been suggested by
your enemies here, and so plausibly that more importance has
been attached to them than what their nature would otherwise
merit. And more than all others have the Italians been active
in this; for they may be said to labor without restraint to put
your Lordships in disgrace with his Majesty, and to compass
your ruin. The story of your having sent ambassadors to the
Emperor of Germany had its origin in the sanctuary of Mon-
seigneur d’Arles, the Pope’s ambassador. In fact, they hare
stretched the cord so tight that, if we had not labored with the
Cardinal d’Amboise as we have done, and of which we have
sent full report to your Lordships, his Majesty would most
probably have decided ere this upon some measures detrimen-
tal to your interests, which it would have been difficult, if not

COURT OF FRANCE. 95

impossible, to avert or counteract. And yet matters remain in
suspense for the present, for no reason but to ascertain your
intentions, which, according to our judgment, should have for
their first object the determination to pay the sum which the
king claims to have expended for your account; and next to
send ambassadors here whose departure from Florence should
be immediately notified to this court. And the sooner they
start actually to come here, the sooner shall we be able to begin
negotiations touching your Lordships’ interests. Meantime we
can give you the assurance that everything will remain quiet
until the arrival of such ambassadors.

So soon, therefore, as we received your Lordships’ letters of
the 14th and 30th of last month, we presented ourselves at
court, not in the expectation of effecting anything in the Pietra-
santa matter, or in that of the Marquis of Massa,* but for the
purpose of acquainting his Majesty with what you had written
us from Librafatta, so that he might know it first from us,
rather than from any one else, for we had been told that the
Lucca ambassador had received a courier at the same time with
us. And by way of disposing his Majesty more favorably to-
wards us, and inducing him to give us a more favorable hear-
ing, we thought it well in our address to mention the coming of
ambassadors from your Lordships. And although you merely
inform us in your letter of the 14th of the election of Luca
degli Albizzi, and make no further reference to it in yours of
the 80th, yet this seemed to us so important a matter that, see-
ing no better way of gaining time, we assumed the authority of
stating to his Majesty that we had letters from your Lordships,
informing us of the selection of the ambassadors, and of their

* This Marquis was the Signor Alberico Malaspina, Marquis of Massa, who,
in virtue of the conventions or agreements concluded at Milan on the 12th of
October, 1499, was on the following 17th of February proclaimed amongst the
allies and confederates of the republic of Florence, together with Jacopo IV.
d’ Appiani, Lord of Piombino, and Morello Malaspina, Marquis of Treschietto.

The French on their passage through Lunigiana, when on the way to the
siege of Pisa, had spoliated him of part of his possessions, in disregard of the
above-named conventions. Buonaccorsi speaks of this fact in his Diary, on page
31, in the following terms: “ Giovanni Battista Ridolfi and Luca di Antonio degli
“ Albizzi were sent to encounter these troops, who had halted at Massa in the
“Lunigiana territory, and had already spoliated this poor Marquis, who was an
“ally and confederate of the republic, of two of his properties, at the instigation
“of his brother, the Marquis Gabriello, who was his enemy, and to whom these es-
“tates had been given. This proceeding caused the worst apprehensions, seeing
“that even on their very first arrival the French began to offend their friends.”

96 MISSION TO THE

early departure, and that we had every reason to believe that
they would certainly be on the way hither by the middle of the
present month. After that we told his Majesty of the loss of
Librafatta; and to save our credit as much as possible, we said
that, although your Lordships had been deprived of your men-
at-arms from having relied with too much confidence upon his
Majesty’s troops, and that since their withdrawal you had not
had the time to reorganize your forces, yet the Pisans never
could have taken Librafatta without the treachery of the castel-
lan in charge of it, and the aid and support of the Lucchese,
who in that affair, as in all other instances, had manifested their
bad disposition and evil-mindedness towards us, caring little at
the same time whether they offended his Majesty or not, as was
seen but a short time ago, when his Majesty’s army was before
the walls of Pisa; that his Majesty could by a single blow
make them sensible of the mistake they have made, and at the
same time relieve our republic from the wretched situation in
which it is placed by the restitution of Pictrasanta. And here
we pointed out to his Majesty the good that would result from
it, in such terms as the time and the nature of the audience ad-
mitted; recommending to him at the same time our republic,
and assuring him of your constant good faith, and of the ma-
lignity of those who were not ashamed boldly to accuse your
Lordships of having sent ambassadors to the Emperor of Ger-
many; but as this would have been altogether a most unreason-
able act, we did not deem it worth while to say anything more
in excuse of your Lordships.

His Majesty graciously replied, that if your ambassadors
were ready to start he would receive them with pleasure, for
he should then know that your Lordships felt the same to-
wards him now as you had always done in the past, and as you
had said you desired to do in the future. But that he should
still be more convinced on the subject when he should see
that he was not to suffer any loss, by having to pay what,
according to the stipulations of the convention, should be paid
by you. In speaking of this blessed money which he has paid
to the Swiss and others for your account, after the raising of
the siege of Pisa, his Majesty made use of expressions that
should be seriously weighed, coming as they do from the mouth
of so powerful a person ; for he said, “If your Lordships were
“to refuse to pay this money, I should consider that they are

COURT OF FRANCE. 97

“no friends of mine, and should protect myself by all the
“means at my command.” When we wanted to reply to his
Majesty, and relate to him the dishonesty and bad conduct of
the Swiss, he replied, “that he was himself very ill satisfied
“with them; that he had been subjected by them to paying
“tribute; that he had been obliged to have patience with
“them, and that your Lordships ought now to do the same.”
Coming back, however, always to the money which he had
disbursed, he said “that he could not have done otherwise
“without disturbing and spoiling the negotiations now being
“carried on in Germany, which he had much at heart and
‘desired to settle, so that it was really necessary that your
“ Lordships should satisfy him upon that point.” We replied
that those ambassadors would soon be here, and we believed
that your Lordships would, in accordance with your invaria-
ble practice, always do what was right and reasonable; and
that we hoped his Majesty would be pleased to await their
coming, so as to be able to judge fairly of their disposition.
To this his Majesty replied, that he was well satisfied, and that
we might now dismiss the Pietrasanta affair, as well as the
other matters that remained to be settled; and thereupon we
took our leave. We did not think it advisable to bring up the
affair of the Marquis of Massa, for the reason that nothing
relating to your Lordships’ interests or to those of your adhe-
rents, would be listened to here, until the departure of the
ambassadors is positively known here, owing to the doubts
entertained of your real intentions. Moreover, as the Cardinal
d’Amboise is not here, nothing would be concluded without
him, even if all else were favorable for us. Therefore it
seemed to us prudent to defer a discussion of that subject
until a more suitable time, when it could be done with greater
advantage and less risk for your Lordships.

Since then we have had a long conference with Monseigneur
d’Alby, of the same tenor as that with his Majesty the king.
His Lordship professed quite an affectionate regard for our
republic, and a readiness to do anything that might be to our
advantage, but said that, if your Lordships wished that he and
your other friends should be able to do. so, then you must make
up your minds to refund the king the money which he has
paid out for your account, and arrange so that something
positive should be heard as to the coming of the ambassadors.

VOL. III. 7

98 MISSION TO THE

And then he enlarged upon the subject, showing how much
umbrage it had given to his Majesty that your former am-
bassadors had left at the very time when ambassadors should
have been sent, if none had been here; and that the king had
on several occasions said, “The Florentines are drawing off
“from me, and I am sorry for them.” We replied to his re-
marks about the money the same as we had replied to his
Majesty, and excused the going away of the ambassadors ;
saying at the same time that he would see that your Lord-
ships would send others, and men of such high character that
his Majesty would be convinced that your Lordships desired
to be regarded as good children to him, the same as they had
ever been. He evinced great pleasure at hearing this, and
thus we left him, unable to obtain any other answer from
him in relation to the Pictrasanta affair than what we had
already obtained from the king; unless it be that a person
familiar with all the secrets had intimated to him that, by
agreeing to refund to his Majesty the money which he had
paid out, we might possibly obtain Pietrasanta; and he gave
us to understand that it was almost as good as done, provided
there was no delay in the coming of the ambassadors.

This is all we have been able to do in the matter; nor will
it be in our power to do more, for the reasons explained in our
former despatch, and repeated in this. We ask the indulgence
of the Almighty and of your Lordships on that account; for
to remove the impression that has been created here by our
disunion, by our alienation from France, and by our weakness,
requires new remedies, and greater authority than we possess.
We shall continue, as we have done heretofore, to do our best
to prevent the conclusion of any treaty with the Lucchese, or
any one else, before the arrival of your ambassadors; but it
is essential that we should hear within ten or fifteen days that
they have actually started, and that we should be able to
show a letter to that effect to his Majesty the king; for when
the Cardinal @Amboise returns, who ought to be here within
that time, and does not find that your ambassadors are really
on the way hither, it may easily happen that they will not be
able to accomplish any good when they do arrive. We beg your
Lordships in your wisdom to think of this, and to do what
will be of greatest advantage to our republic; also to excuse
our presumption on account of our devotion, which makes

COURT OF FRANCE. 99

us speak as we have done. We learn, moreover, to-day that
Monsignore di Ligni is coming here in the course of a few
days. Some say that he will be accompanied by Piero de’ Med-
ici; so that if this enemy joins the others, who are already
quite powerful enough, and if your Lordships do not take care
to prevent his Majesty from giving ear to them, the danger to
our republic will be increased twofold.

We know nothing of what Monseigneur de Beaumont has
had to communicate to your Lordships by his envoy to you,
Salient, and therefore can say nothing on the subject; but
should anything come to lght in relation to it, we will at
once inform your Lordships.

The affairs of Italy are more discussed here than those of
any other country, and yet we have nothing new to write, for
we do not deem it necessary to make your Lordships read
again what you know already. In truth, nothing new has
occurred here, unless it be the report that ambassadors from
the Emperor of Germany are now on the way here; but they
are said to be men of little importance, and are not the same
that were at first nominated, and to meet whom the king had
left Lyons to go to Troyes.

The ambassadors of the king of Naples, however, are said to
be coming, notwithstanding that they have been several times
ordered to return home, and are in doubt whether to come or
return ; although at present their coming seems to be the most
likely. We shall know by to-morrow what the result will be.
Bene valete !

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,
NiccoLo MaccHIAVELLI.
Metuy, 8 September, 1500.

LETTER XVII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, bd OB ingracs

Our last of the 8th instant was a reply to two of your
Lordships’ communications of the 14th and 30th ultimo; and
although we suppose that our despatch has reached your hands
safely, yet we deem it well to send a duplicate. Nothing spe-

100 MISSION. 10. Piri

cial has occurred since, nor have we anything else to write
beyond what we have already said to your Lordships; namely,
that if you wish to preserve the friendship of his Majesty of
France, you must make up your minds to reimburse him the
amounts which he claims to have paid out for your account to
the Swiss and the other troops employed in the siege of Pisa.
And this comes to our ears from so many quarters that in our
judgment there is really no other remedy; for in matters of
this kind his Majesty would demand the same satisfaction, if
the amount were only one hundred francs, as he does for the
thirty-eight thousand franes which he claims. And so long
as his Majesty has such a subject of complaint against your
Lordships, it will be useless to argue, or to think of obtaining
the least thing in your favor. After this it is of the utmost
importance that the ambassadors should come here to remove
the opinion entertained here, and which has been suggested to
the court here, as to your Lordships’ alienation from the king
and the want of union amongst yourselves, to which two causes
the departure of the former ambassadors and the non-arrival of
the new ones are attributed. Every day fresh rumors are set
afloat here ; at one moment it is that you have sent ambassa-
dors to the Turk, at another it is to the Emperor of Germany.
We do our best to contradict these reports everywhere, but
shall not be able to do so any more, if the departure of your
ambassadors to his Majesty is delayed any longer. We desire
to do our duty in calling your Lordships’ attention to this, and
to repeat doing so very often, so that in any event we may
never be charged with having neelected our mission in this
particular. And we tell your Lordships frankly that our
labors here can be of no further advantage, for which we have
given you the most conclusive reasons.

At another interview which we have had with Monscigneur
d’ Alby, for the purpose of contradicting the report that your
Lordships had sent ambassadors to the Emperor, etc., he de-
clined to speak on any other subject except the money which
his Majesty had paid out for your account, and to inquire of
us whether the ambassadors had yet left Florence to come
here. We desire, moreover, not to fail to remind you, with
all due respect for your Lordships, of the importance of mak-
ing some one here your friend, who from other motives than
mere natural affection will watch your Lordships’ interests

COURT OF FRANCE. 101

here, and will occupy himself in your behalf, and of whose
services those who may be here as your agents may avail
themselves for your advantage. We will not discuss here any
further why and how necessary this is. You have in Florence
many distinguished and wise citizens, who have been here as
ambassadors, and who can give you better reasons than we
can for such a measure. But we will only say upon this point,
that it is with just such weapons that the Pisans defend them-
selves, and that the Lucchese attack you; and that the Vene-
tians and King Frederick, as well as all others who have any
business to transact at this court, help themselves; and who-
ever does not do the same may be said to think of gaining a
lawsuit without paying an attorney.

Corcou has returned here; we leave it to your Lordships
to judge of his reason for coming back. He has made such a
report of the state of things at Florence, that, if Messer Giulio
Scurcigliati, on whom, as a disinterested party, some reliance
can be placed, had not arrived since then, affairs there would
seem to be turning to everybody’s advantage except that of
your Lordships. As this Messer Giulio will have fully re-
ported to you of all he has done, we will not weary you with
giving an account of it, but shall confine ourselves merely to
his request to recommend to your Lordships a lawsuit that is
pending between himself and the heirs of Paolo Antonio Ban-
dini, in relation to which his Majesty will also write you.

As we have already stated in our previous letter, ambassa-
dors from Germany are on the way here; but they are per-
sonages of less importance than what was reported a couple
of months ago. His Majesty the king leaves to-morrow for
Blois; we shall follow him there, hoping for the news that
your Lordships’ ambassadors have really started. We shall
continue with the utmost diligence to do all in our power for
your advantage, and humbly recommend ourselves to your
Lordships, gue bene valeant. |

Servitores
FRANCESCO DELLA CASA,
NiccoLO MACHIAVELLI.
ME ton, 14 September, 1500,

102 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XVIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC.: —

On the 14th instant Francesco della Casa and myself wrote
you our last joint despatch from Melun, and sent it with a duphi-
cate of our previous one of the 8th, which was in reply to your
Lordships’ two letters of the 16th and 30th ultimo. These were
sent by royal post to Lyons to Francesco Martelli, under cover
directed to Giovanni Martelli; we presume they have reached
you, as also the original sent in the same way. From these let-
ters, as well as from our previous one, which we sent by express
messenger on the 8d instant, we think your Lordships will have
fully understood the condition in which our affairs here are at
the present time; also the extent of our ability to be of use
here, and how very necessary it is to have started the ambas-
sadors from Florence; also what determination you ought to
come to with regard to the thirty-cight thousand frances, and
whether it is your wish to temporize in this matter in the
hope of obtaining anything from his Majesty. You will have
learnt also how much importance the king attaches to this
matter, and in what manner he speaks of it. We are in
hourly expectation of letters that will bring us the informa-
tion that your ambassadors have really started; for we are
daily questioned upon this subject, and could have desired, as
we have stated to your Lordships, to have been able to show
such letters. to the Cardinal d’Amboise on his return, so as
to remove the dangers to which we are daily exposed of the
kine’s concluding some treaty prejudicial to the interests of our
republic, and to close the mouths of your enemies, who employ
every argument to prove to his Majesty that your Lordships
are ready to turn their backs upon him on the first occasion ;
adding thereto the statement that you have sent an envoy to
the Emperor of Germany, and have come to a secret under-
standing with the king of Naples; all of which it is easy to
make his Majesty believe, for the reasons given in our former
despatches. _

His Majesty left Melun on the 14th instant to come here, as
we wrote to your Lordships in our last; and Francesco della
Casa went at the same time to Paris, being troubled with a
slight fever, which he desired to have cured before the malady

COURT OF FRANCE. 103

should become permanent; but according to what he writes me,
he will be back very shortly. The king arrived here six days
ago, and to-day the Cardinal d’Amboise also came, having been
absent from here and at his own home since the 3d of this
month. When I heard yesterday morning that his Eminence
was coming, I thought it well promptly to mount and meet him
where he was to lodge over night, both by way of showing him
the courtesy of riding out to meet him, as also to have the
opportunity of conversing with him at my convenience. It was
thus that I came last night to a village about eight leagues
from here, but as it was already late, I deferred speaking to
his Eminence until this morning; and then I accosted him on
the road, and in the most suitable and affectionate words that
occurred to me I made known to him the sad condition in which
your Lordships found yourselves, on account of the heavy ex-
pense which you had been obliged to incur in the past solely on
account of France, and lately also in aiding his Majesty in his
enterprise against Milan, and since then in the attempt upon
Pisa; and that, whilst you were hoping at least to have his
Majesty’s sympathy and to be able again to begin to recover your
forces and your credit, you find yourselves daily assailed and
discouraged by various calumnies, your reputation blackened,
and all sorts of plots set on foot against you; so that every
Italian here is encouraged to raise his hand against our re-
public. I related to him the loss of Librafatta, and that Vitel-
lozzo, Baglioni, and the Orsini were up in arms, and that it was
the general belief that they intended to employ.them against
your Lordships. And therefore I begged his Eminence not to
withdraw his protection from you, but rather to persist in per-
suading his Majesty the king to treat you like his own children,
and to do so in a manner that would make it known to every-
body ; and thereby to restore your credit and reputation, which
it would be easy to do by the mere restitution to us of Pietra-
santa, etc.

His Eminence replied with some feeling and at length, and
argued that there had been no default on the part of his Ma-
jesty in complying with the terms of the treaty, and that he
had loaned you his men-at-arms, and had offered to resume the
attempt upon Pisa de novo, and afterwards to maintain troops
on the Pisan territory; but that none of his propositions had
been accepted by your Lordships; and that as to Librafatta

104 MISSION TO THE

you had only to blame yourselves, and not his Majesty, who had
really good cause for complaining because of the money which
he had to pay for your account, contrary even to the treaty stip-
ulations. And then his Eminence went on speaking at length,
and said that your Lordships did not act prudently, and would
not make reparation in time, and that by and by you would
not be able to do so. He asked whether the ambassadors had
started, and the causes why their coming had been delayed so
long, ete., ete. To all this I replied as fully as possible, earnestly
contesting every point excepting the subject of the money, upon
which he would listen to no argument, so that I was constrained,
for the sake of not leaving the matter in dangerous suspense, to
tell his Eminence that I had had an audience of his Majesty,
and that, when the king complained of having been obliged to
make this payment, I had begged his Majesty to be pleased to
await the arrival of your ambassadors before coming to any
determination, so that he might hear from them the justification
of your Lordships and your devotion to his Majesty ; and that,
as the king had promised to be satisfied with this, I begged his
Eminence to do the same, for I felt persuaded that the ambas-
sadors had certainly started before this.

Thus your Lordships will see how your interests remain
in suspense until the coming of your ambassadors. There
was no other way of gaining time, and even this delay will
quickly expire if they are not already on the way. Anyhow
it cannot be said that we have failed to bring this matter to
your notice, having written so often and so urgently to your
Lordships about it, and pointed out to you that it was impos-
sible for us to take any other course; and that, if your Lord-
ships do not consent to the repayment of these thirty-eight
thousand frances, all other thoughts of obtaining anything from
his Majesty will be in vain; and that henceforth you will have
to look upon him as your enemy. It may very possibly happen
that, if we succeed in gaining time, the restitution of Pietra-
santa may take place. Thus if your Lordships should fail either
to send ambassadors here, or to advise us how we shall bear
ourselves in this strait, and how we are to gain time in these
matters, being without a single friend at court, having lost the
favor of the king, who is surrounded by so many of your worst
enemies, who present to him daily new projects, pointing out to
him your weakness and the great advantages which he would

COURT OF FRANCE. 105

derive from creating a state for himself around Pisa (as we
have explained to you in previous despatches) and placing a
governor there of tried fidelity, who, unable to maintain him-
self there except with the support of his Majesty, would of
necessity be most loyally devoted to the king, — that then your
Lordships, surrounded by the states of the king, would, with-
out waiting for other forces, come to his Majesty.with chains
around your necks and lay a carte blanche at his feet. All these
things are listened to, and there is danger lest they be carried
into effect, as I have been given to understand by some one here.
And what increases my apprehensions is, that, being lately at
court, N. N. approached me, saying, “I have something to tell
you; try aud come to my house to-day.” I went there, and,
finding him reticent and indisposed to say anything on any par-
ticular subject, I asked him why he had requested me to come
to him, whereupon he said, “ Are your ambassadors coming ?”
and when I replied that I believed they had started, he said,
“Tf they are really coming they may be productive of good, and
“may prevent some acts. that would be prejudicial to your Sig-
“noria.” But with my utmost efforts I could not draw anything
more from his lips. I am greatly afraid, therefore, lest some
secret intrigue is going on which the king may have so much
at heart that this person was afraid to confide it to me. I have
deemed it proper to write you all this exactly, so that your
Lordships may judge of it more correctly than I can; and in
any event to urge the coming of your ambassadors.

As already stated in our previous despatch, Italian affairs are
much talked of here, and especially the army which the Pope
has collected. But no one is able to say what direction it is
going to take; whether it will march to the Romagna to attack
Faenza, Rimini, and Pesaro, or whether it is intended to meet the
Colonnesi. The latter is most generally believed, because that
would best please his Majesty of France, and would also serve
a better purpose with regard to the king of Naples; for if war
be made against the allies of the latter, he would be compelled
to defend them ; and being thus weakened, it would be easier for
his Majesty of France to make satisfactory terms with the king
of Naples. Or if he should attempt the conquest of the kingdom
of Naples, he would find success more easy. All of these mat-
ters I think must now be quite clear to your Lordships.

Respecting the coming of the ambassadors of the Emperor of

106 MISSION TO THE

Germany there are various reports; up to the present, it is not
even known whether they have set foot on French soil. And it
is evident that there is a slight fecling of uneasiness here with
regard to Germany, which accounts for their giving just now
less attention to Italian affairs, which may enable us more easily
to temporize in your Lordships’ matters.

The departure of Monsecigneur de Ligny from Lyons for Genoa
has for some days kept all minds in a state of suspense, and is
variously interpreted. Some say that he has been sent by the
king on some particular business of his own, and perhaps hay-
ing reference to Pisa; others say that he has gone entirely on
his own account, being in love with the daughter of the gover-
nor of Genoa; and upon this point more things are said here
than I could venture to affirm. But whether it be the one
thing or the other, I shall leave to the better judgment of your
Lordships, que bene valeant.

Servitor |
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buois, 26 September, 1500. Secretary.

LETTER XIX.

Macniricent Sr¢Nort: —

My last despatch to your Lordships was of the 26th ultimo.
I therein related to you the arrival here of his Most Christian
Majesty, and that I was left alone here in consequence of Fran-
cesco della Casa having gone sick to Paris; also that the Car-
dinal d’Amboise had returned, and my efforts in your behalf
with his Eminence; and how essentially necessary it was that
your ambassadors should come, if you wished to prevent alto-
ecther, or at least delay, the carrying into effect of some pro-
jects with regard to Pisa, as well as other intrigues carried on
here to your prejudice.

I judge that my letters have reached you safely, for I scent
them to Rinieri Dei at Lyons by a special messenger, who was
despatched by the agent of Messer Giovanni Bentivogli. Sinee
then I have received your Lordships’ last of the 20th ultimo,
by the hands of one of the Prefect’s men, specially sent here
for the reasons mentioned in your Lordships’ letter to me. So

COURT OF FRANCE. 107

soon as I received it, I presented myself first before the king,
and afterwards before the Cardinal d’Amboise, and communi-
cated to them your Lordships’ instructions to me; and ex-
plained to them that the necessity of defending yourselves had
obliged you to take men-at-arms into your pay, and to claim
the services of the Prefect,* in conformity with the treaties
between your Lordships and his Majesty the king. And al-
though the Prefect’s envoy had already spoken both to the king
and the Cardinal, yet his Majesty sent me back to the latter,
not forgetting, however, first to ask me whether the ambassa-
dors were coming, and to complain about the money which he
had paid out. I replied in the very words of your Lordships’
letter; namely, that you informed me that you would not write
me again except through the ambassadors, adding, however,
that I was firmly persuaded that they would certainly present
themselves before his Majesty within the month of October.
His Eminence the Cardinal spoke to me at length, and whilst
doing so, he took Monseigneur d’Alby, who was present, by the
arm, so that his Lordship might hear him, and said: “The
“conduct of the Florentines begins to be inexplicable. We
“offered to keep for their defence five hundred men-at-arms
“and fifteen hundred infantry, but they would not have them ;
“we then offered them one hundred, or two hundred, or as
“many as they might deem necessary, but they declined them,
“and now they go begging for help from others.” And then
he turned to me and said, “Secretary, I really know not what
“to say to you.” When I attempted to reply to the charge
that we had refused their men-at-arms, etc., he added, that we
knew well how to give reasons for our conduct, but that his
Majesty had nevertheless been obliged to pay the money which
ought to have been paid by your Lordships. And then he
asked me whether the ambassadors were coming, to which I
answered the same as I had done to his Majesty the king;
namely, that they ought to be here in the course of the present
month, if not sooner; and that they would prove that our

* This was Giovanni della Rovere, Prefect of Rome and Lord of Sinigaglia.
In virtue of the fifteenth article of the treaty with the king of France, men-
tioned elsewhere, this Prefect was to be Captain-General of the Florentine forces.
This article was inserted into the treaty at the instance of the Cardinal Giu-
liano della Rovere, brother of the Prefect, and generally called the Cardinal of
San Pietro in Vincola, and who afterwards became Pope, under the name of
Julius II. ’

108 MISSION TO THE

fidelity to his Majesty had increased rather than otherwise, and
could not but continue to increase; and that they would excul-
pate your Lordships from all the calumnies that were daily
originated by those who wished no good to your Lordships, and
still less to the honor of his Majesty the king. And when I
finally asked his Eminence what I should write to your Lord-
ships in regard to the Prefect, he replied that an agent of the
Prefect’s had arrived, and that they would give him their an-
swer, which was all I could get out of his Eminence. I have
nothing further to write to your Lordships on this subject; but
as this agent is about to return to the Cardinal San Pictro in
Vincola, and will be the bearer of this letter, your Lordships
will be able to get full information from Pietro Soderini. But
I must not omit to tell your Lordships that, after my conversa-
tion with the Cardinal d’Amboise, Robertet called me aside,
and told me how much he had always had your interests at
heart, and how he had always labored for your advantage, and
that he had ever been ready to exert himself in your favor, and
how grieved he was to see that you had abandoned your own
cause; for that in so important and urgent a matter as the
present, your not having ambassadors here gives offence to
everybody, and is regarded as the result either of disunion
amongst yourselves, or of discontent with the state of things
here, or because you have not becn well informed on the sub-
ject. For reason alone demanded that the ambassadors should
have been sent here by post, so as to prevent the adoption by
his Majesty of some unfriendly resolution, which is daily urged
upon him. To all this I answered as for the moment seemed
to me most suitable, affirming again that the present month
would not pass without seeing the ambassadors here; and that
everything would be satisfactorily arranged, provided there was
no determination to wrong your Lordships anyhow, which I did
not believe, ete., etc.

As I have already said in my former letter, Italian affairs
are more talked about than anything else, and more particularly
the Pope’s enterprise, which, as I wrote you in my last, was
believed to be intended against the Colonnesi. But now we
understand that it is just the contrary, and that the purpose is
to march to the Romagna. I can say nothing further on the
subject, but your Lordships are in a position to know the truth
of the matter better than myself. I will merely say that every-

COURT OF FRANCE. ; 109

thing is conceded to the Pontiff, more from an unwillingness
on the part of the king to oppose the Pope’s unbridled desires,
than from any wish to see him victorious; for Messer Giovanni
Bentivogli has been written to, with the king’s special approval,
to do all in his power for the defence of Faenza, and to act in
the matter as a good relative, etc., etc.

I have nothing new to write to your Lordships respecting the
embassy from Germany, for we do not yet know exactly when
it is likely to arrive; his Majesty himself is altogether in doubt
about it. The only thing of interest is that the Venetian am-
bassador is here to solicit aid against the Turk, more especially
now since the loss of Modone and Corone is clearly known.
Long consultations have been held on the subject, but as yet it
is not known what conclusion has been come to. It was pro-
posed to levy a tithe upon the priests, which formerly had been
entirely consumed by the receivers, and which his Majesty in-
tends to revive. With all this the Venetian ambassador is not
very well satisfied.

Your Lordships must have heard that the Grand Turk has
sent ambassadors to his Majesty here, to reply to the com-
plaints which the king had communicated to the Turk through
a herald, and how the Grand Master of Rhodes had placed
this herald on the footing of an ambassador, by way of giving
him more importance. Upon their arrival at Venice, the Turk-
ish ambassadors were dismissed by his Majesty, at the request
of the Venetians, who gave them to understand that they would
not be welcome without full power to conclude a peace; and
that they must not advance any further, but return whence
they had come. His Majesty has since then repented this very
much, having been informed that the Venetians had urged this
advice upon him, so that he might not hear of the intrigues
they were carrying on with the Turk adverse to his Majesty.
The Grand Master of Rhodes was also greatly irritated, inas-
much as it was mainly upon his solicitations that the Turk
had sent this embassy, and it is said that he has sent one of
his knights here to accuse the Venetians, and to treat them as
enemies. This is the reason why the aid asked by the Vene-
tians of his Majesty is deferred, and that it will certainly not
be rendered in time for this year.

I mention this matter very briefly, so as not to weary your
Lordships’ patience, as I take it for granted that you have

110 MISSION 10 “Lh

received from other sources more detailed and accurate ac-
counts of the greater part of this affair.

TI recommend myself most humbly to your Lordships, que
bene valeant.

Buois, 2 October, 1500.

P. S.—I can but rejoice at the re-establishment of the Ma-
gistracy of the Ten, and thank God for it. Let us hope much
vood from it; for from a better government we have the right
to hope for happier results. I shall avail myself of this infor-
mation as I may judge best for the credit of our republic.

Lterum valete !

Servitor
Niccolo MAaAcHIAVELLI.

LETTER XX.

MacniFicent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

My last was of the 2d instant, and was sent by the agent of
the Prefect; and although I have at this moment nothing spe-
cial to communicate to your Lordships, beyond what I have
urged upon you in every despatch, and have actually persuaded
myself that your ambassadors are on the way here, nevertheless
their coming seems to me of such supreme importance that I
do not hesitate to weary your Lordships with the same story by
every messenger that leaves here. And what makes me do so
with even increased energy is, to see your enemies every day
inventing some new schemes for their own advantage. Not
more than a couple of days since, a report was spread at court
that your Lordships had recalled, under heavy penalties, all
the Florentine merchants that are in France; and this re-
port was confirmed by some Frenchmen just up from Lyons.
And although such things carry their justification with them
so far as you are concerned, nevertheless they are heard, and
together with other rumors that are set afloat every day they
produce a bad impression. Until now we have kept these ru-
mors in check by assuring the court of the near arrival of the
ambassadors, through whom his Majesty will learn the good
spirit that animates you in all things possible and reasonable

COURT OF FRANCE. | nD

for your Lordships. This has in part satisfied them, but if the
actual departure of the ambassadors from Florence does not
become known here very soon, I cannot foresee the conse-
quences, but doubt much whether it will be anything to your
advantage. On the other hand, however, if they do come, then
I shall hope for good results, if anything good can be hoped
for from here; for his Majesty the king has been very much
annoyed for the last few days by the German affairs; for the
embassy that was expected from there with so much solemnity
will either not come at all, or will be reduced to a simple
herald, or some other personage of similar rank. Since then
we see manifest signs. of doubts and suspicions; such as the
ordering of three hundred lances into Lombardy again; the
drawing closer to the Pope, and attaching more importance to
it than usual; and where, as I stated in my last, Giovanni
Bentivogli had been directed to act like a good relation with
regard to Faenza, he has now been written to just the contrary,
with special injunctions not to render any assistance whatever
to that city. Moreover, they greatly favor the requests made
by the Pope of the Venetians, namely, that they confer upon
his son the Duke Valentino the title of Captain-General of
their armies and the rank of gentleman, and give him a palace
in Venice; all of which they hope to obtain. His Majesty’s
conduct towards the Venetians is very much in the same style;
he promises them more decidedly than he has ever done before
to render them assistance against the Turk. And therefore I
believe that the same causes will also place your Lordships
upon a more favorable footing with his Majesty, provided that
your ambassadors arrive here promptly; for the above-men-
tioned apprehensions with regard to Germany will not fail in
their effects, nor are they likely to be removed, provided you
will take advantage of this chance, as seems to me most reason-
able. But if it does not very soon become known that your
ambassadors are really coming, then his Majesty will be more
inclined to believe the calumnies of your enemies than our
justifications. Everything depends upon the faith which his
Majesty may have as to their coming or not; and should he
once think that you are his enemies, then he will take care
that you shall not be able to injure him. I therefore pray your
Lordships, with the utmost respect, that you will not fail of
your duty to our republic in this matter; and that you will not

ae MISSION TO THE

be satisfied to have the ambassadors come in the ordinary way,
but that they come by post at least as far as Lyons, for the
importance of the matter merits every possible effort.

For the past three or four days it has been rumored that his
Majesty will leave here to go to Nantes, — not to remain there
however very long, his intention being to proceed to Lyons;
but I cannot say anything positive upon this or many other
subjects, because the plans and resolutions are changed almost
every hour. Your Lordships will therefore pardon me if you
should find some contradictions in my letters.

I shall not write at length about relieving my own necessi-
ties, for your Lordships know that on my leaving Florence I
had but eighty ducats, of which I spent thirty to come here
by post. At Lyons I had to renew my entire outfit, and have
to keep here three horses at the hostelry; and without money
nothing can be done.

I recommend myself most humbly to your Lordships, gue
bene valeant.

Servitor
NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI
Buiors, October 8, 1500. apud Chiistianissimum.
PRR Siaiwiee, caer ne taal

LETTER XXI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. :—

My last was of the 7th instant, in which I reported to your
Lordships all that had occurred of interest up to the day. I
had previously sent two other despatches, one of the 20th ulti-
mo, and the other of the 2d instant; which I presume have
safely reached your hands. Since then I have received your
Lordship’s letters of the 26th ultimo, with report of the state
of things in Florence. After carefully reading and examining
their contents, and particularly all that relates to the coming
of the ambassadors, and to the calumnies circulated about your
Lordships, and to the arrangements of the Genoese for seizing
Pictrasanta, I called upon his Eminence the Cardinal d’Am-
boise, as his Majesty had gone to a village some eight leagues
from here, where he was going to pass the evening. And al-
though it was hardly worth while to take much trouble to

COURT OF FRANCE. 113

justify your Lordships from the calumnies, having already
done so on previous occasions, to the extent that both his
Majesty the king and the Cardinal had promised me to await
the arrival of your ambassadors to know the truth and come
to some decision, and that I could rather have wished to be
able to announce the positive departure of the ambassadors
from Florence; nevertheless, encouraged by your Lordships’
letters, I made it a point to declare to his Eminence your Lord-
ships’ disposition, intentions, and desires; and demonstrated to
him also how utterly without foundation were the calumnies
spread about your Lordships, and in what evil disposition they
had their origin; and in fact, that it was the calumniators,
rather than the calumniated, who ought to be looked after. I
furthermore said to his Eminence, that the future would prove
the truth of all this, even if the past were insufficient to do so;
and that his Majesty the king, as well as his Eminence himself,
would be fully satisfied upon all these points, when your Lord-
ships’ ambassadors should arrive here; and that these ambas-
sadors were on the point of starting, and would assuredly be
here in the course of this month. Ibegged his Eminence, at the
same time, to keep his Majesty in his present favorable disposi-
tion, and to abide the arrival of the ambassadors, and not to lis-
ten to evil tongues, nor to come to any decision for the present,
as in fact his Eminence had on a former occasion promised.

I then proceeded to speak of the Pietrasanta affair, and re-
lated to his Eminence the reports started by the Genoese, of
their having a concession, etc.; I told him of the attempt
which their commissary had made, and the injuries which your
vassals had suffered at his hands. His Eminence listened pa-
tiently to all I said, without particularly replying to any one
point; but suddenly he entered upon the same subject upon
which he had already spoken to me several times, as reported
by me to your Lordships; namely, that his Majesty was ex-
ceedingly displeased by your having refused to resume the war
against Pisa, by your declining his offer of men-at-arms, and
by your unwillingness to refund the money which he had paid
to the Swiss and for artillery, etc., etc.; and that for that rea-
son no thought could be given to your affairs, nor could any-
thing be said in your favor. I replied, that as to your refusal
to resume the war against Pisa, and the non-acceptance of the
troops, I had no other excuse to offer than what I had already

VOL. III. 8

114 MISSION TO THE

presented on former occasions; namcly, as to the first, the
actual impossibility of your doing so; and as to the latter, the
bad disposition of those very troops; and I added that these
excuses were so well founded, that neither his Majesty the
king nor his Eminence himself could or ought to think differ-
ently. And as to the third point of complaint, namely, the
money, that I had entreated his Majesty to await the arrival
of the ambassadors, who were ready to start, and had instruc-
tions to satisfy his Majesty ; and that if he wished to see your
Lordships’ letters on that subject, I was prepared to show them
to him. To this his Eminence replied in the precise following
words: ‘ Dixisti, verum est; sed erimus mortul antequam ora-
“tores veniant; sed conabimur ut alii prius moriantur.” * And
when I replied that the time was short, and that there could be
no loss by waiting, he said, “ Come back here to-day at three
“’clock in the afternoon, and you shall then know the king’s
“intentions, and the course which these things must take.”

The Cardinal left his house whilst talking to me, and contin-
ued his remarks on the way to church; and when we reached
the chapel we found Messer Giulio Scurciglati there wait-
ing for the Cardinal, who, so soon as he saw him, called him,
and said that he wished him to be present at this last inter-
view between us, and that he would be obliged to him if he
would return with me to his house at three o’clock ; for know-
ing his devotion to your Lordships, he wanted him to be pres-
ent and hear what was said. And thereupon I took my leave,
his Eminence being very angry at what I had told him about
Pietrasanta; and he immediately directed Robertct to write to
Genoa and give orders that no Genoese should be allowed to
enter Pietrasanta; and also to write to Beaumont to give strict
orders to the commandant of the citadel to be well upon his
guard, and under no circumstances to have any dealings with
the Genoese. To the first letter he added a paragraph about
the restitution of the stolen cattle, and to enjoin upon the
people the preservation of good relations with their neighbors,
etc. However, I shall endeavor to obtain a special letter upon
this subject, and will send it to your Lordships.

In accordance with the Cardinal’s request, I returned to his
house at three o’clock, and presented myself before his Emi-

* “Tt is true you say so, but we shall be dead before these ambassadors come};
we will endeavor, however, that others shall die before.”

COURT OF FRANCE. 115

nence, and found Messer Giulio there. His Eminence spoke
for more than half an hour, beginning with complaints of your
obstinacy before the first treaty was concluded with his Ma-
jesty of France; and how badly your Lordships afterwards ob-
served the stipulations of that treaty; and how tardy you had
always been in all matters; and blaming us in a measure for
the money spent in the recovery of Milan, after the revolt of
that city. After that he came to the new treaty made with
Pietro Soderini at Milan, and to the army that had been di-
rected against Pisa; and how, from his affection for you, his
Majesty’s arms had suffered dishonor in that affair; and how
you had always lagged behind on every occasion of danger,
although you had shown yourselves very brave in refusing to
pay one farthing of the money for the Swiss and the artillery,
etc., leaving it all to be paid by his Majesty. And finally he
concluded by saying, that he was willing to forget all the other
things, but that it was indispensable for your Lordships to de-
cide upon refunding that money to his Majesty; that there
was not a day but what the Lucchese, the Genoese, and the
Pisans came about his Majesty’s ears with offers of large sums
of money, without agreement or obligations of any kind; which
his Majesty could not but admire, seeing on the one hand their
excellent disposition, and noting on the other hand your obsti-
nacy, first in refusing to pay despite your obligations under the
treaty, and your delay now in putting off to do anything under
pretence of waiting for the new ambassadors. “ But I tell
“vou,” said he, “from the affection which I have for your re-
“public, although of course not equal to that which I have for
“the king, that these ambassadors of yours can neither nego-
“tiate, nor will they be listened to upon any point, unless pay-
“ment is first made of the amount due to his Majesty ; and if it
“is not understood that such is your intention, write therefore
“at once to your Signoria, for we do not wish to remain any
“longer in suspense upon this point, and let them understand
“that, whether they choose to be friends or enemies, in any
“event they will have to pay. But if you remain our friends,
“as you will if you are wise, his Majesty will pass Christmas
“at Lyons, and Easter at Milan. Up to the present he has
“sent two thousand lances into Italy, and over six thousand
“infantry, of those who have already been there; and we shall
‘see whether Pisa will resist him, and whether those who op-

116 MISSION TO THE

“nose him are stronger than he is. His friends will know
“then that he is king, and that his promises will be strictly
“carried out.” And then, turning to Robertet, his Eminence
told him to have the accounts got ready, and to give them to
me, so that I might forward them to your Lordships.

Your Lordships will judge whether it would have been pos-
sible for me to have made a reply to such a proposition, even
if 1 had been able to constrain them to listen to me with
patience. Therefore I judged it best to confine my remarks
to touching upon the most necessary points; I could not,
however, refrain from saying that the fact of his Eminence
complaining of all your Lordships’ actions, and particularly
of those that really deserved the highest encomiums, encour-
aged me also to complain of the Pietrasanta business, and
that the restitution of that place to your Lordships had not
been made according to the terms of the treaty. This stirred
and vexed his Eminence, who said that that was another busi-
ness altogether; but that all this would be arranged provided
your Lordships did not fail in the performance of your obli-
gations. I continued the conversation, and said that I would
attempt no further justification’ of your Lordships, nor weary
myself by repeating what had been so often discussed and
demonstrated, namely, that no default had ever been made
by your Lordships in the performance of your engagements ;
nor would I say anything more respecting the last point, upon
which depended his Majesty’s favorable or unfavorable dispo-
sition towards us, than what I had always said until now,
namely, that the ambassadors were coming, and would give
full satisfaction to the king, provided he demanded nothing
unreasonable or impossible. For to demand either the one or
the other could only be regarded as an attempt to injure our re-
public, which I could not believe was intended, because it would
be injuring the best friends which his Majesty had in all Italy.
I begged his Eminence not to give so ready an ear to the prom-
ises of the Genoese, the Lucchese, and the Pisans; and said
that he ought not to listen to anything but what was to the
honor of his Majesty the king, and to such promises as were
likely to be fulfilled; and that he ought to consider whether a
small present advantage was preferable to a great and con-
tinued benefit. But that I would report everything fully to
your Lordships; and that the reply would be in the same

COURT OF FRANCE. u Bay

spirit that had always been manifested by our republic, which
by the heavy and fruitless expenditures to which she had been
so long subjected ought to have extinguished all jealousy hence-
forward, and ought to excite compassion instead.

His Eminence replied to the last part of my remarks, that his
Majesty the king regretted the sufferings to which our republic
had been exposed, but could take no other action than what
he had done; nor could it be reasonably expected that he
should submit to a loss by paying out his own money. He
advised me to write you at once, and that they would await
your reply provided it was not delayed too long; that they
wanted acts, having no longer any faith in words; and that
the king’s friendship could only be preserved by your paying
the amount in question, whilst to refuse it would provoke his
enmity. And thereupon I took my leave.

Magnificent Signori, the enclosed memorandum will show
you the amount that is claimed, and the reasons why you are
held responsible for it. You will find that it comprises the
amount which you are to pay for account of the Signor Lo-
dovico, and for which you are held responsible the same as
for the other items.* I have taken the memorandum just
as it was brought to me, not wishing to examine the calcula-
tions, nor to make any further objections, as it would have
been of no use to have done so, but might rather have made
the condition of our case worse in some respects. I could
truly wish this letter had wings, so as to enable me to have a
prompt reply; but know not how to manage, having never
received any instructions as to what to do in case it should
become necessary to send a special courier. I shall pray the
Almighty to aid me, and if I can find any one who will carry
this despatch, I shall devote to it what little money I may
yet have.

I have nothing further to say to your Lordships, unless it be
to entreat you, with the utmost respect, to let me have your
answer promptly, and, if you resolve to pay, then to prove it by
deeds; for I doubt whether they will wait much longer, mainly
on account of German affairs, which cause them a good deal

* The Signor Lodovico Sforza, Duke of Milan, and surnamed “Il Moro,”
had loaned certain sums of money to the republic of Florence to enable them
to carry on the war against Pisa. According to Article 14 of the treaty con-

cluded at Milan in 1499, the Florentines promised to pay to the king of France
whatever amount they might owe at the time to the deposed Duke Lodovico.

118 MISSION TO THE

of apprehension here, as mentioned in a former letter, and
which has made them draw nearer to the Venetians and to
the Pope. I want to sce now how they will behave towards
your Lordships, and how they will employ the money which
they demand of you, or what they may obtain from others in
the event of your refusing to pay; and how, in case you de-
clare yourselves their enemies, they will act so as to render
you harmless. But they are not willing at the same time to
be in uncertainty as to your intentions, and leave Pisa open
for any one to go in who may be disposed to make war upon
them. Your Lordships will also remember, from all we have
written, and from the conduct of the court since we have been
here, that neither the king nor the Cardinal ever descended
actually to ask us for the money, or to name their conditions
to us as they are doing at present; but that they only com-
plained to us on the subject on every occasion and in every
place, and that they have entertained the Lucchese, have had
dealings and close relations with the Pisans and the Genoese,
and openly threatened your Lordships. It was this that in-
duced me to go to the Cardinal and to express to him my sur-
prise at his pretended dissatisfaction, and at the treaties that
were being negotiated without reference or notice to your
Lordships. And when I pressed his Eminence warmly as to
what I should write to your Lordships, he refused to give me
a definite reply, and referred me to Corcou, as I wrote you
fully in my letter of the 8d of September. Then came your
Lordships’ letters of the 80th of August, which afforded me the
opportunity to speak of the coming of your ambassadors; and
since then all my efforts have been devoted to urging your
Lordships to hasten their departure, and to keeping matters
here in suspense until their arrival. And what has occurred
since then is reported above in this despatch. I have not
deemed it amiss to make this little recapitulation, so that
your Lordships may form a better idea of the state of things
here, and may thus be enabled to determine what course will be
for the greatest advantage to our republic.

I have no further news to communicate, unless it be that
two days since there arrived here an ambassador from the
Marquis of Mantua, together with one from the Marquis of
Ferrara, and likewise an ambassador from the king of Naples.
From this your Lordships will not fail in your wisdom to see

e

COURT OF FRANCE. 119

that they all have more fear of this king than faith in each
other; notwithstanding that Mantua is situated in a lake, and
that the king of Naples has the Turk for his neighbor and is
on good terms with the Emperor of Germany. I must there-
fore beg your Lordships again, with the utmost respect, to
reflect well upon your answer, and to let me have it as quickly
as possible. And yet Robertet has intimated to me that his
Majesty the king will send some one to settle these matters ;
but as the Cardinal has not said anything to me on the subject,
I cannot affirm the truth of it. Nor should I advise your Lord-
ships to delay your answer on that account, for I am in daily
fear lest something be resolved upon here that would make
your answer come too late, and that thus you might be obliged
to pay the amount in question without deriving any advantage
from it, and without preserving the king’s friendship; and in
that case our ambassadors would have to come here on wings
to be able to ameliorate our situation in any degree, even if
that be possible. Above all things, therefore, is it essential to
act with the utmost promptitude, and hasten the time of the
ambassadors’ departure.

Being unable to find any one willing to share in the expense
of sending a special courier, or to pay the whole cost of it my-
self, I have been obliged to despatch it by the king’s post, and
to direct it to Nasi at Lyons, at the cost of one franc; and
have written him, for the love which he bears to our republic,
promptly to forward it by special messenger, in case no regu-
lar courier is despatched from Lyons; and that your Lord-
ships will reimburse him for it, and in case you do not, then
to charge the cost of it tome. I pray your Lordships, there-
fore, to repay Nasi the amount which he has expended, and of
which he will inform you; so that he may be willing to render
us similar service on future occasions, and so that I may not
be afraid to ask it of him, or that I may not have to pay it out
of my private means.

I recommend myself to the good graces of your Lordships,
que bene valeant.

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secretary, etc.
Bois, 11 October, 1500,

120 WEES LOIN Ode

LETTER XXII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI:—

This is the 14th of the month, and his Most Christian
Majesty has resolved to send Odoardo Bugliotto, one of his
body servants, and bearer of this, to learn more fully your
Lordships’ intentions with regard to the money which he
claims from you, as I have explained at length to your Lord-
ships in my despatch of the 11th instant, which, for want of
other facilities, I sent by the royal post to Nasi at Lyons, with
instructions to forward it with all possible speed to your Lord-
ships. There is no occasion for me to repeat what | have
written before, inasmuch as the bearer of this will inform you
fully as to the king’s intentions, and will supply any omissions
I may have made. I will only repeat what the Cardinal d’Am-
boise told me, viz.: “That, friends or enemies, we would have
“to pay, and that thus your real intentions would be made
“known by your acts, for words and promises would no longer
“satisfy them.” Assuming that your Lordships have received
my letters, and moreover as you'will hear what the bearer of
this will have to say, your Lordships will decide with your
habitual prudence as to the course which it will be best to
pursue. But I beg your Lordships, amongst other things in
connection with this matter, to take some measures that will
oblige the person who comes to you, if he cannot or will not
favor your cause in any other way, at least to write the truth
when he reports to the king. For the unfavorable reports that
have been sent here on previous occasions are to a great de-
gree the reasons that have provoked the anger of the king,
and of the bad condition in which your interests are here at
present.

Nothing further occurs to me to write, except to recommend
myself humbly to the good graces of your Lordships, gue bene

valeant. ;
Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buots, 14 October, 1500. Secretary,

His Majesty the king leaves this morning for Nantes,
where he will remain a few days, and then return by way of
Lyons, etc.

COURT OF FRANCE. 121

LETTER XXIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

Having written to your Lordships on the 11th instant, and
stated at length all that his Eminence the Cardinal had said
to me respecting the money they claim that your Lordships
ought to pay, etc.; and having since then repeated the same
in my despatch of the 14th, sent by the hands of Odoardo
Bugliotto, who was sent to Florence by the king for a similar
purpose, I should not have had occasion to write again to your
Lordships, were it not that your despatch of the 8d instant
had been received, which informs me of the nomination of
Pier Francesco Tosinghi, and that he is to start on the 10th
or 12th instant. Nothing could have given me more pleasure
to learn, for the reasons which I have so repeatedly written to
your Lordships, as well as on account of the distinguished
character of the man, from whom we may hope for such fruit
as it may still be possible to gather on this soil. And although
since it was decided to send Odoardo to Florence 1 have not
been so harassed every day about the delay in the arrival of
the ambassadors, yet it seemed to me well to inform his Emi-
nence the Cardinal what your Lordships have written me,
namely, that the ambassador was to start, and must at the
present moment be near Lyons; adding such words of my own
as seemed to me suited to calm his feelings. His Eminence
replied to me, in a few words, that it was well, and that the
ambassador ought to hasten his journey. He asked me why
there was only one ambassador, which I readily explained,
although I do not know but what they may take umbrage at
it; for your Lordships’ enemies here will not fail to comment
upon it in a dozen different ways. But I shall continue to be
on my guard, and shall spare no efforts to justify your Lord-
ships, if need be. His Eminence subsequently asked me again
to write and urge you to come to a good resolution with regard
to the money due to his Majesty, and to prove it by acts; as-
suring me that they had no longer any faith in fair words or
promises, and that they should clearly know what to expect,
so soon as they should hear from Bugliotto. I replied that I
would do so with the utmost diligence, although it seemed to
me unnecessary to urge your Lordships to do what was proper,

yy MISSION TO THE

or what you possibly could do in the interest of the king; to
which his Eminence replied, that it would have to be proved
by facts.

Your Lordships request me to ascertain the condition of
Messer Giovanni Bentivogli’s affairs here. Now, as all doubts
as to the preservation of his state arise from the enterprise
which the Pope is carrying on against the Romagna, I will
begin my explanations with that. Your Lordships will re-
member that, soon after our first arrival here, we informed
you how the Pope pressed the king to aid him in this attempt
against the Romagna, and how the king procrastinated and
kept the Pope along with promises. For being at that time
still more hopeful as to the affairs of Germany, his Majesty
wanted the Pope to employ his power against the Colonnesi,
as was then generally believed, for the reasons which we
wrote you in some of our former communications. And the
king had given his consent that, if the Pope should neverthe-
less attempt this attack upon the Romagna, Messer Giovanni
Bentivogli should act the part of a relative, inasmuch as his
Majesty had not yet charged the Venetians, as he has done
since, to give up the protection of the Romagna. But as since
then the ambassadors of the German Emperor have not ar-
rived, and as his Majesty is in daily apprehension of being
attacked, he was, as it were, forced to consent to the Pope’s
carrying out his plans against the Romagna. For in all the
possible events that may occur in Italy, his Majesty counts
more upon the Pope than upon any of the other Italian poten-
tates ; partly because the Pontiff has always proved himself
better armed than any other, and has suffered less from wars
hitherto, and has fewer obstacles to surmount, and is moreover
head of the Church, ete., ete. The Cardinal d’Amboise aims
also at the same mark ; for -he, being really the man that gov-
erns, has drawn upon himself the envy and enmity of all the
other powerful lords, and therefore hopes through the Pope’s
influence so to increase his own credit as to be able the better
to resist the envy of the others. It is said, even, that in the
creation of the new legates on account of the Turkish affairs
the Pope will name the Cardinal his legate for France.

The Venetians also, being afraid of the Turk, and advised by ~
the king to give up the protection of the towns of the Romagna,
have done so readily ; hoping that the Pope would move all

COURT OF FRANCE. 123

Christian potentates in their favor. They judge moreover,
that they will not lose much if those towns were to fall into
the hands of the Duke Valentino, as they have taken him
under their protection, and have adopted him as their son,
and, as is generally supposed, will make him Captain-General
of their forces.

Now the well-known insatiable rapacity of the Pope makes
everybody here suppose that the same reasons that have made
his Majesty and the Venetians yield their consent to the Pope’s
attempt upon the Romagna will also cause them to consent
to his attempt upon Messer Giovanni Bentivogli. And fearing
this, Messer Giovanni, ‘together with the Duke of Ferrara, have
made the greatest efforts to induce his Majesty to consent to
their rendering assistance to their friends of the Romagna;
and it is only quite lately that Monseigneur d’Aubigny, at their
request, sent one of his men here expressly for that purpose ;
who, however, could obtain no further answer from his Ma-
jesty, than that he could not interfere, as it was a matter of
the Church, and that he could not consent to his allies making
any opposition to her. And quite lately, when the envoy of
Messer Giovanni spoke to his Majesty on the subject, and
pointed out to him the danger to which his lord would be ex-
posed, unless he could depend upon his Majesty’s protection
in the event of the Pope’s succeeding in his present under-
_ taking, he obtained, after much talking, the following reply:
“That when it had come to the point that the Pontiff was act-
“ ually about to attack Messer Giovanni, that then his Majesty
“would hear the reasons of the Pope and of Messer Giovanni,
“and would then decide against whoever was in the wrong.”
This is in fact all that can be learnt here in relation to Mes-
ser Giovanni’s affairs; and as I have it from the best author-
ity, I believe it to be the truth.

I have not yet said anything to your Lordships about Agos- |
tino Semenza, for the reason that several days ago Giulio.
Scurcigliati received letters from Messer Antonio Cola, an
agent of the Prefect of Rome, informing him of the coming
of this envoy, but giving at the same time much more impor-
tance to his mission, and a reply highly favorable to affairs
here. But as I reported that information fully in a former
communication, it seems to me not worth while to bring it up
again now.

ge! MISSION TO THE

I stated to Messer Giulio your Lordships’ favorable disposi-
tion towards him, on account of the good services which he
has rendered, ete. He thanks your Lordships, and entreats
you again to expedite his business. He has never himself
written to your Lordships, but has always made every occur-
rence of interest here promptly known to his particular friends
in Florence.

Since his Majesty’s arrival here a number of high person-
ages have come here, amongst them Monscigneur de Ligny,
Monscigneur de la Tremouille, the Prince of Orange, etc., but
not a word has been said about German affairs ; nevertheless,
there are great apprehensions upon that point; and so soon
as the Ogni Santi (All Saints) is over, the court will at once
move from here to Lyons.

The ambassadors from Naples are supposed to have arrived
at Lyons, and the marriage between the Princess, daughter of
King Frederick, and Monsignor della Roccia, is regarded as
definitely arranged. The Cardinale di San Severino is ex-
pected here.* Beyond this I have nothing to write, but to
recommend myself to the good graces of your Lordships,
que bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

From Nantes In Brittany, 25 October, 1500.

P. S.—I was just about to seal this despatch when Ugolino
Martelli received a letter from Lyons, informing him, amonest
other things, that the thirty-five seudi, which he had to pay for
expediting my despatch of the 8d September from Melun, had
not yet been refunded to him; and that Giovanni Martelli had
written that he had as much as given it up. He complains
very much to me about it, and I can only say in reply, that he
is entirely right, and that I would write to your Lordships
about it. I entreat you, therefore, so to arrange this matter
that I may not have to pay it myself; and that, should occa-
sion arise, | may not be compelled to do as it happened to me
once at Blois, where I was obliged to send an important de-
spatch by the king’s post as far as Lyons. Valete /

* Federigo di San Severino of Milan, with the tithe of Cardinale di San
Teodore.

COURT OF FRANCE. 125

LETTER XXIV.

MacGnIFICENT AND ILLUsTRIOUS SIGNORI, ETC., ETC. : —

Although I hardly think it necessary to ask your Lordships
for my leave, firmly believing that you will have sent it to me
by the ambassador, as my remaining here after his arrival
would be superfluous; nevertheless the necessity for my being
at Florence is so urgent that, in case my leave should not have
been sent, I do not wish to be wanting to myself, and therefore
entreat your Lordships with the utmost respect to be pleased
to grant me that favor. For, as you are aware, my father died
a month before my departure, and since then I have lost a
sister; and my private affairs are so unsettled and without
order, that my property is in every way actually going to
waste. I hope, therefore, that your Lordships will kindly
grant my request, so that I may in some measure restore or-
der to my own affairs. I should want to remain in Florence
only one month, after which I am willing either to come back
to France, or to go to any other place where it may please your
Lordships to send me. I recommend myself most humbly to
your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Nantes, 25 October, 1500.

LETTER XXY.

MaGniFicent SIGNORT: —

Since writing my last of the 27th ultimo, I have received
your Lordships’ letter of the 21st, which refers to some par-
ticulars of a despatch of the 10th which has not yet come to
hand. I am therefore at a loss how to execute your Lordships’
orders. I have determined, nevertheless, to speak to the king
and the Cardinal about your Lordships’ apprehensions on ac-
count of the rumors that have reached you from many quarters
as to the evil disposition of the army of the Duke Valentino
towards your Lordships; and how seriously this matter dis-
turbs you, being without any organized force of men-at-arms.

126 MISSION TO-1ik

I therefore relied altogether upon his Majesty, and entreated
him to be pleased to aid you with such means as he might
deem necessary ; and that on your part you would not fail to
do everything in your power to save your liberty; and that if
you were assailed by the Orsini and the Vitelli, you would seek
to defend yourselves. His Majesty, being at the moment very
much occupied, made no reply except that I should speak to
the Cardinal d’Amboise about it. I therefore went immedi-
ately to see his Eminence, and spoke to him in the same sense
as I had done to his Majesty ; adding such further remarks in
favor of your cause as the time permitted. He replied that he
did not believe that the Pope would attempt to engage in any
enterprise in Italy, without first conferring with his Majesty
the king on the subject; and as he had not done so, he did
not think the Pope would make any such attempt. But should
he yet consult his Majesty, or attempt such an attack inde-
pendently, then in the first case his Majesty would not give his
consent, and in the latter he would lend you his assistance,
provided you maintained your friendly relations with his Ma-
jesty. And then he began to complain again of the delay in
the coming of your ambassadors; etc., etc. And as to the part
of the Colonnesi, he reflected a moment, and then said, “ Pre-
“serve the friendship of the king, and then you will not need
“his assistance; but if you lose his good graces, all the help
“will not suffice you.”

I replied in a becoming manner; but respecting the Lucchese
it seemed to me best neither to touch upon that subject nor to
make any further reply, for I did not want to irritate them
more than what they are already until the arrival of your am-
bassador, hoping that his instructions may be satisfactory to
the king, and that then we may be able to discuss the point
in question more freely, particularly as, according to the time
of his departure from Florence, the ambassador ought shortly to
be here. .

Afterwards, on All Souls’ Day, came your Lordships’ letter
of the 10th ultimo, and, after carefully studying its contents, I
returned again to the Cardinal, and explained to him briefly the
causes of your apprehensions; and that it would be easy for
the Duke Valentino, after once having taken Faenza, to make
an attack upon Florence, and, having one of your rebels with
~ him, it would not be difficult for him to make a hostile at-

COURT OF FRANCE. 127

tempt against your liberties. Such an act would prove an
injury to your Lordships and a dishonor to his Majesty. And
we being his Majesty’s most devoted and trusted friends, it
would be very proper for his Eminence to write to the Pope
and to the Duke Valentino that whatever they might attempt
against your Lordships would be the same as if they attempted
it against his Majesty.

Thereupon his Eminence took me by the hand and led me to
the Grand Chancellor and the Marquis of Rothelin, who were
near by, and then began again, as he had done several times
before, to speak of all the trouble he had taken for your Lord-
ships’ benefit, and of the dishonor to which the king had been
subjected from his affection for you; but that you had broken
the treaties by refusing to pay the money due by you to the
Swiss, etc.; and that now, being afraid of the Pope, you claimed
the aid and support of the king, which his Majesty, however,
would not grant unless it was clearly understood whether or
not you intended to remain his friends. For to write any-
thing in your favor would be acting adversely to the people of
Lucca, Sienna, and your other enemies, whom his Majesty did
not want to become his enemies when your Lordships ceased
to be his friends.

I replied to the first point the same as I had already done
several times; and as to the others, I said that there was no
reason to have any doubts as to your Lordships’ friendship,
any more than there was for having any particular considera-
tion for either the Lucchese or the Siennese, when the ques-
tion was as to his Majesty’s giving you his aid and support;
for that I could not recall either the one or the other having
rendered his Majesty any special service. Nor did I know
what they had been able to do in time of peace or in war, nor
what service could be hoped for from them now. But that I
well knew what your Lordships had done for the present king,
as well as for his predecessor; and that in their time of ad-
versity, when the fidelity of friends is put to the test, you
alone of all the Italian powers had remained faithful; that
you did not deserve to be treated thus, and that a Most Chris-
tian King ought not to allow your Lordships to be subjected to
it. The Cardinal replied to me merely in the following words:
“Write to your ambassador to come at once, or to send his
“instructions to you, so that we may know the intentions of

128 MISSION TO THE

“your government. After that we shall not fail on our part to
“do all that ought to be done for your Signoria.” I told him
of the Pope’s envoy that had been sent to Pisa on the 12th, to
which he answered in an excited manner, that that was noth-
ing, and that I had better do what he had recommended, ete.

The day after, which was yesterday, Robertet came to meet
me, saying, “I have special orders from his Majesty and from
“the Cardinal to write to Monseigneur d’Aubigny at Milan, and
“to our ambassador at Rome, and to charge the one to signify
“to the Pope, and the other to the Duke Valentino, how dis-
“pleased his Majesty was to learn that there was talk in the
“army which was at present in the Romagna of going with
“rebels and other enemies to attack the Florentines, which his
“Majesty would not in any way permit.” In short, he told me
that he was instructed to write as strongly as possible in favor
of your Lordships. I asked him to give me that letter, but he
said that he had no instructions to that effect, and that he
thought it was better so, as otherwise it might appear as
though we had begged for such action.

This is all I have to communicate to your Lordships in reply
to your last letter, nor is there-anything else new here, except
that his Majesty the king leaves to-day for Tours, where he is
to give an audicnce to the ambassadors from Germany.

| Bene valete !
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLT,
Nantzs, 4 November, 1500. Secrelary.

LETTER XXVIL*

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC.: —

On the 4th instant I wrote to our illustrious Signoria in
reply to two of their despatches of the 11th and 21st ultimo.
His Majesty the king having since then left Nantes for Tours,
IT resolved not to separate myself from the court (although
they went by cross-roads); thinking that your Lordships’ an-
swer to the propositions which Qdoardo Bugliotto had gone to

* This letter is directed to “The Ten of Liberty and Peace,” who had been
re-established, as stated elsewhere.

COURT OF FRANCE. 129

submit on the part of his Majesty to our illustrious Signoria
might arrive during this time. And this happened just as I
had supposed; for just as his Majesty reached Champagne, a
small village about ten leagues from Tours, the letters from
your Lordships arrived, with the answer given by our illus-
trious Signoria to Odoardo. But as I arrived on the 18th at
about two o’clock in the night, I put off until morning to
ask for an audience and to speak in accordance with your
Lordships’ instructions. The next morning I went to court,
and by chance found his Eminence the Cardinal d’Amboise
alone and unoccupied. I deemed it best to seize this opportu-
nity, notwithstanding my intention to speak first to his Ma-
jesty the king, and approaching his Eminence I told him that
I had received letters from your Lordships, with a copy of the
answer given to Odoardo; but that it was hardly worth while
to repeat it to him, as his Majesty had been fully informed of
it by Odoardo himself. I added that your Lordships felt per-
suaded that their answer and resolution would not be entirely
satisfactory to his Majesty, considering the necessities to which
circumstances had exposed him. But considering, on the other
hand, the anxieties which your Lordships had experienced, and
to which you were still exposed, and the heavy expenses which
your Lordships had borne, and were still compelled to bear
from not being able to recover your possessions, and from your
desire to sustain the name and fame of France in Italy, you
could not believe but what his Most Christian Majesty would
accept their resolution, and would be satisfied to bear for a
short time the delay in the payment of a portion of the amount
claimed, in recognition of the services which our republic had
rendered to him. And if to this were added the restitution of
Pietrasanta, which would be no more than reasonable, and
which your Lordships’ fidelity had so well merited, and to
which a strict observance of the treaty stipulations and the
malevolence of the Lucchese fairly entitled you, it would com-
pletely resuscitate our republic, and would encourage the
Florentine people to devote their substance and their blood
to the service of his Most Christian Majesty ; and would so
restore their credit and reputation, that neither the Pope nor
the Venetians would venture to assail their state or their liber-
ties, as they are now presuming to do. I enlarged upon these
points as much as the subject and the patience of the Cardinal
NOLS sii:

130 MISSION TO THE

would permit. His Eminence replied that it was true that, by
your answer to Odoardo, your Lordships confessed your in-
debtedness to his Majesty, and had ordered an immediate pay-
ment of ten thousand ducats at Milan; but that this did not
satisfy his Majesty, who had suffered great inconvenience from
having disbursed this money for your account; and that it
would be of no use to argue in favor of your Lordships, unless
the whole amount had actually been paid; and that myself, as
well as the ambassador, whenever he should arrive, must ex-
pect an unfavorable answer from the king. As his Eminence
afforded me the time to do so, I replied by showing him at
length that his Majesty’s displeasure, if real, was nevertheless
very unreasonable; not because he wanted to have back what
belonged to him, but in failing to look at it in the way a father
should towards his sons, which would be to accept their acts,
not according to his wishes, but according to their ability. I
enlarged upon this view of the matter with such arguments as
the nature of the case suggested; but could obtain no other
conclusion from his Eminence than that this money was re-
quired by his Majesty to pay the men-at-arms which he had in
Lombardy ; still, if your Lordships wanted a little time on a
portion of this money, they would have to come to an under-
standing about it with Monsecigneurs d’Aubigny and de Chau-
mount, governors at Milan; and if they were willing to wait a few
months, his Majesty would also be satisfied. I observed that
this was not the answer which I had anticipated, and which
our republic had confidently counted upon. And as 1 knew
that it would only humiliate and discourage your Lordships,
I was not willing to communicate it; for I felt persuaded that
your Lordships, deprived of all hope of achieving any good,
would give yourselves up to despair; and believing that such
an answer would neither be of advantage to his Majesty nor to
your Lordships, I was not willing to write it; but would rather
wait in the hope of a different response, such as your Lordships
merited for your good faith, as well as for the actual services
rendered to his Most Christian Majesty. Unable to obtain any-
thing else from his Eminence, I took my leave, and the same
morning saw his Majesty the king, and spoke to him in the
same spirit; and in the most earnest and effective language
that I could command, I pointed out to his Majesty how faith-
ful your Lordships had ever been to him, and how sincere your

COURT OF FRANCE. aisg!

desire was to satisfy him; and how easy it was for his Majesty
to show his affection for your Lordships. I also explained the
reasons that made the immediate payment of the amount due -
to his Majesty quite impossible at this moment, etc. But not
to weary your Lordships by repeating the same thing over and
over again, I will merely state that I omitted to say nothing that
I thought would be of service for his Majesty to hear on this
subject. But I could obtain nothing from him except the usual
complaints as to the money paid out by him, and the dishonor
to his arms by our fault. And although I replied in a becom-
ing manner to all these complaints, yet I failed to convince his
Majesty upon any one point, nor did I succeed in gaining any
other fruit from this interview.

After that we came on to Tours on the same day, and there
had a conversation with a friend from whom I have been in
the habit of obtaining secret information about the Pope, and
more particularly as to the negotiations now going on between
the Pope and the Venetians. He confided to me that the am-
bassador of his Majesty of France at present at Venice, sub-
orned by the Pope’s ambassador, had stated in the Venetian
Senate that he had learned from various sources, all worthy of
faith, that the Florentines, the Bolognese, the Duke of Ferrara,
and the Marquis of Mantua had formed a close league amongst
themselves, under the pretext of mutual defence of their states,
but in reality for the purpose of turning their combined arms
against his Majesty of France, whenever the Emperor of Ger-
many should make an attack upon Lombardy. And that your
illustrious Signoria ought to be very careful to inform his Ma-
jesty of this, from a feeling of obligation to him for all the ben-
efits received, etc., etc. My friend told me furthermore, that,
when the French ambassador made this statement to the Sen-
ate, they replied, that this was very probable, for the parties
named were all armed, and pretended to be dissatisfied with the
conduct of the French; that the Senate would write to their am-
bassador, and that he also ought to write to the king about it.

This friend of mine told me, moreover, that the Pope’s am-
bassador here had express instructions to persuade the king of
the truth of this statement, and to suggest that he could easily
avert this trouble by putting Piero de’ Medici in power again in
Florence, and in that way establish a government there that
would be entirely devoted to his Majesty. That by doing this

18 MISSION TO THE

he would deprive Ferrara, Mantua, and Bologna of their head,
and thus prevent them from carrying on their machinations
against the king. Adding to all this, that inasmuch as the
Cardinal de’ Medici was a churchman, it was the duty of his
Holiness to act thus, particularly as this Cardinal had sup-
plicated the Pope to aid him in his efforts to re-enter his own
country and home; and that his Holiness, moved by just such
prayers, had been compelled to consent to grant him such aid.
But that his Holiness asked no other help from his Majesty the
king than to preserve a strict neutrality; and that by consent-
ing to this, and showing that he had abandoned your friend-
ship, and withdrawn the protection hitherto extended to the
other princes, he would add to the Pope’s credit and reputation
to that degree, that in a short time he should feel encouraged
with his own forces, and such as the Venetians would furnish
him, to deprive Giovanni Bentivogli of his state, and to com-
pel your Lordships to re-establish Piero de’ Medici in Florence ;
and that thus he would make Ferrara and Mantua come to him
with the halter around their necks. And by way of giving still
more credit to this enterprise and to his desire, the Pope begged
his Majesty, besides granting his consent, also to send a few
hundred lances to the borders of the Bolognese territory, whilst
the Venetians would send theirs where they would be of most use.

My friend tells me, furthermore, that all these things are
already done, and that they urge, beg, and importune his Ma-
jesty the king to give his sanction to it all; and that it was for
no other purpose that they had brought Piero de’ Medici from
France to Pisa, but to have him near at hand for the execution
of their designs.

Upon hearing all this, which seemed to me a plot worthy of
our Most Holy Father the Pope, I resolved to say something to
his Eminence of Amboise on the subject; and seizing the first
suitable moment, I complained to his Eminence of the malignity
of your Lordships’ enemies, but spoke only in general terms,
without mentioning either the Pope or the Venetians; saying
that they persuaded themselves they could make his Majesty
the king believe that your Lordships wanted to alienate them-
selves from him; that I did not want, for the purpose of op-
posing these rash and infamous calumnies, to allege either our
good faith in the past, nor the present proofs of it, but wished
merely to show how unreasonable it was that your Lordships

COURT OF FRANCE. 133

should hope for help from the Emperor, who had not even been
able to help or defend Milan, which was regarded as belonging
to him; and that knowing this you should be willing to make
an enemy of a king whom your Lordships imagined they had
laid under obligations to them, by so many perils and expendi-
tures which they had borne and incurred for his sake. Nor
could I comprehend how the Bolognese or the Ferrarese could
place their hopes on any one else but his Majesty of France,
being by the very position of their states obliged, under all
circumstances, to follow the fortunes of whoever possessed
Milan ; the one from fear of the Pope, and the other from dread
of the Venetians. But that his Majesty ought to be well on his
guard against those who sought the destruction of his friends,
for no other purpose than their own aggrandizement, and to
enable them the more easily to wrench Italy from his hands.
That his Majesty ought to prevent all this by adopting the prac-
tice of sovereigns who wish to establish their power in a foreign
province; namely, to weaken the powerful, conciliate the sub-
jected, sustain their friends, and to beware of associates, that is
to say, of such as want to exercise an equal share of power with
them in that province. And if his Majesty would look around
and see who were the parties that desired to be his associates
and share his power in Italy, he would find that it was not your
Lordships, nor Ferrara, nor Bologna, but those who in the past
had always sought to dominate the country.

His Eminence heard me patiently, and then replied, that the
king was in the highest degree prudent; that his ears were long,
but his belief short; that he listened to everything, but put faith
only in what he could touch with his hands and prove true.
And that besides having written to Rome and Milan some time
ago, when IJ had first spoken to him on the subject, he had only
three days since written again, of his own motion, and in the
most earnest manner, in commendation of your interests. And
that although Monseigneur d’Allegri had been allowed to go
with a hundred lances into the Romagna to aid the Duke Val-
entino, yet it was with the express injunction in every way to
favor your interests; and that your Lordships would see, when
your ambassador arrived, that his Majesty would not be want-
ing in his duty, if you did not fail on your part, and offered
more acceptable terms as to the payment of the money due
him. Since then Robertet has spoken to me in the same

ot MISSION TO THE

spirit, assuring me that his Majesty would not himself do any-
thing wrong towards you, nor would he permit others to do so,
if only the Florentines would not harm themselves by their dis-
union and by harboring within their walls persons who had
little love for the liberties of the republic; to which, he said,
your Lordships ought to look carefully. In replying to his
Eminence I had no difficulty in justifying your Lordships upon
this matter of disunion, the idea of which it is above all things
important to remove from their minds, for the mere belief of it
would produce as bad consequences here as the reality would
with you in Florence.

I have nothing further of interest to communicate, for no one
speaks of the propositions which the German ambassadors have
brought. Those who visit them are observed and noted, as well
as those who talk about them with too much curiosity.

Whilst writing I received a letter from Pier Francesco To-
singhi, in answer to-several of mine, which I addressed to him
at a venture. I learn from this letter that his Magnificence
arrived at Lyons on the 2d instant, and was to have left there
on the 15th on his way here. I expect him with impatience,
and may God grant him better fortune than what those have
had who have hitherto been charged with this mission.

I recommend myself to the good graces of your Lordships,
que bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI,
Tours, 21 November, 1500. Secretary.

LETTER XXVII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

On the 21st instant I replied to your Lordships’ letter, and
informed you fully of what his Majesty and the Cardinal d’Am-
boise had told me about the answer given by the Illustrious
Signoria of Florence to Odoardo. I also wrote you about the
intrigues set on foot by the Pope and the Venetians for the
purpose of making your Lordships suspected to his Majesty,
and what D’Amboise had said to me on the subject. Although
I have nothing of special interest to say, yet I will not lose the

COURT OF FRANCE. 135

opportunity of some one’s going to Italy to inform your Lord-
ships of what has occurred here since my last.

Not being altogether satisfied with the answer made me by
the resolution which your Lordships have recently taken with
regard to the sum claimed by his Majesty; and news having
reached here that the Duke Valentino had seized the Val di
Lamona, and that he counted upon obtaining possession of
Faenza erelong, and then hearing that Piero de’ Medici was at
Pisa, and moreover that a new ambassador had arrived from
Lucca, with instructions, it is said, to pay at once ten thousand
ducats to his Majesty on condition that Pietrasanta should be
given up to them; and in addition to all this that Messrs. de la
Palisse and de Chatillon had been sent by the queen to Pisa as
governors ;—in view of all this, I say, I determined to present
myself once more before his Majesty. I pointed out to him
again, that if the answer given by our illustrious Signoria to
Odoardo was not exactly according to his Majesty’s wishes, it
was owing to the absolute impossibility of doing better, in con-
sequence of the heavy expenses to which you had been and
continued to be subjected, having the victorious army of the
Duke Valentino on your borders, who constantly threatened
to assail your Lordships, not so much with his own forces as
with those of his Majesty, and who constantly boasts of being
thus supported, which is calculated to produce very bad ef-
fects unless his Majesty promptly put a stop to it. To all
this his Majesty replied at once: “Why, we have written in
“duplicate to our lieutenants in Italy, that, if the Duke Val-
“entino should attempt anything against the Florentines or
“the Bolognese, they should instantly march against the Duke
“ Valentino, so that upon this point you may rest in perfect
“ security.”

And then his Majesty began his usual complaints; and as to
the other matters that I had touched upon, namely, the queen’s
having sent governors to Pisa, and the proposition of the Luc-
chese with regard to Pietrasanta, his Majesty replied, in general
terms, that we had broken our agreements with him in not
having at the very first made payment of the money due him,
and that even now we were not willing to do so in a way that
he might avail himself of. And to all I could say or allege,
(and I talked to him so long that I feared to abuse his pa-
tience,) I could obtain no further reply. And when I finally

136 MISSION TO THE

said to him that your ambassador would be here within two
days, he answered, ‘ Perhaps he may come too late.”

Thereupon I left his Majesty and went to seek Robertct, and
in discussing with him all I have written above, he told me
there was no truth in the story of Monseigneur de la Palisse
having been sent to Pisa; and that if Piero de’ Medici was
really at Pisa, he was not there by order of the king, but be-
cause he had been called there by the Duke Valentino, to see
whether his presence there could in any way advance the Duke’s
projects. And that it was perfectly true that his Majesty had
written three times, or even oftener, to his lieutenants in favor
of your Lordships and of the Bolognese ; adding, under a pledge
of secrecy, “That the success of the Duke Valentino had be-
“come very distasteful to his Majesty.” And as to the Luc-
chese, he told me that they were making every possible effort
to get Pietrasanta back again, offering ten thousand ducats,
and even more, for it, and that there was danger of their suc-
cess owing to the kineg’s dissatisfaction with your tardiness in
paying his claims. And when I had replied to all this in a
becoming manner, he stated as. his general conclusion, that
according to his own judgment, as well as what he had heard
others say to his Majesty the king and to the Cardinal d’Am-
boise respecting your Lordships’ interests, it seemed to him
certain that, if your Lordships would endeavor not to injure
yourselves, when it came to the proof, you need never appre-
hend anything that was not for your advantage. And with
this assurance I took my leave of his Lordship. I now await
the arrival of the ambassador with the greatest impatience, so
as to see what turn your affairs will take, and to be able to
judge of them more correctly.

I will only now remind your Lordships, with the utmost re-
spect, of a matter that we wrote about very fully on our first
coming here, but which we have not touched upon since, partly
because we did not wish to appear presumptuous, and also
because you have in Florence some extremely prudent citizens,
who are much more experienced than ourselves in the ways
of this court; namely, that your Lordships should arrange
to have some one here who will act as your friend, and who
will defend and protect your interests, the same as is done by
all others who have any business with this court; and indeed
T cannot but think that the ambassador who is coming here is

COURT OF FRANCE. aye

fully prepared upon this point. And I can assure your Lord-
ships that, if your ambassador cannot at least give some proofs
of gratitude to Robertet, he will find himself completely at a
loss here, to such an extent and degree that he will hardly be
able to expedite an ordinary letter.

The embassy from Germany, which consists of a M. Philip
de Nanso (Nassau) and two other gentlemen, had yesterday its
first audience of his Majesty the king. There were present the
Cardinal d’Amboise, Monseigneurs de la Tremouille and d’Au-
bigny, the Grand Chancellor, the Maréchal de Gié, the Prince
of Orange, the Marquis de Rothelin, and Monseigneur de Cla-
ry, together with the ambassadors of the Pope, of Spain, and
of Venice, and three or four Italian gentlemen. The address
of the ambassadors was in ordinary and general terms, to the
effect that the Empire deemed it necessary that all Christen-
dom should arm for the purpose of putting a stop to the vio-
lence of the infidels; and that, unless this were done, the
Christian republic would with difficulty be able to maintain
itself against the daily spoliations of the Turk. And as it
was impossible for all Christendom to arm, unless peace pre-
vailed between the Empire and his most Christian Majesty, as
chiefs of Christendom, they had been sent here for no other
purpose than to promote such a peace. The ambassador
touched upon no other point in his address, and employed
only such words and phrases as are customary on similar
ceremonious occasions. After the audience his Majesty ap-
pointed four commissioners to negotiate this treaty of peace.
This commission consists of his Eminence the Cardinal, the
Grand Chancellor, Monseigneur de Bourbon, and the Maréchal
de Gié; and the whole is to be completed this week, after
which, it is said, his Majesty will leave for Blois; and nothing
more is said about Lyons.

I recommend myself to the good graces of your Lordships,
que bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Tours, 24 November, 1500, Secretary,

138 MISSION: TO THE

LETTER XXVIII.

MaenirFIcent SIGNORI : —

Having received several letters from the Magistracy of the
Ten, in reply to several of my despatches addressed to your
Lordships, and having in turn informed the said Magistracy
of all that relates to the interests of our republic, I deem it
superfluous to repeat the same things to your most excellent
Lordships. The only thing that induces me to write now is to
present my homage to your Lordships, and to recommend
myself most humbly to your good graces. I am furthermore
moved to write by the affection I bear to Messer Giulio Scur-
cigliati of Naples; not for any particular service that he has
rendered to me personally, but because of his warm, fruitful,
constant, and affectionate labors in favor of the liberties of
our republic. And therefore I beg most earnestly to recom-
mend this gentleman to your Lordships; and humbly to ask
that, if you desire to have him continue your friend and de-
fender here, and if your Lordships do not wish to be charged
with ingratitude by the whole court here at seeing all Messer
Giulio’s services unrecognized, you will be pleased to ‘aid him
with your sovereign hand, and to favor him by looking into
the litigation in which he is involved with the heirs of Pier-
antonio Bandini. For I assure your Lordships that when he
received the news, some three days ago, that a decision in
the matter had not been rendered because of the inhibition,
etc., etc., he became so furious at the wrong which he con-
ceived had been done him, that, if I had not been present, he
would have rushed to the court to cry out and complain of the
injury, etc.

He complains of several things: firstly, that your Lordships
had remitted his case to the ordinary tribunal, whilst it ought
to have been summarily adjudged by your Lordships your-
selves; secondly, that this ordinary tribunal had so protracted
the matter that it afforded time to his adversaries to obtain
an order of inhibition; thirdly, that the woman has been re-
lieved from banishment; and fourthly, that the person who
is charged with watching his interests at Florence has de-
prived him of all hope of being able to obtain his rights by
these proceedings ; and finally, that in the inhibition his ad-

COURT OF FRANCE. 139

versaries had called him “ merchant and usurer.” He claims
that he asks no more than his own capital, and is willing to
forego all accrued interest.

So far as I am concerned, Magnificent Signori, I know
nothing of Scurcigliati’s case, but I do know that so long as
your relations with his Majesty are so uncertain, and as it
were in the air, few persons can be of service to you, whilst it
is in every one’s power to injure you; and therefore I have
thought it not amiss, but rather necessary on the whole, to
manage this man and temporize with him. And if you do not, |
he will, at the receipt of the first letter from Florence, rush
like lightning through the court, and the evil he will say of
you will be more readily believed than all the good he has said
before. For he is a man of some influence and credit here,
—a fluent talker, most audacious, importunate, and terrible,
and of uncontrollable passions,—and therefore apt to carry
through whatever he undertakes. I have enlarged upon this
matter solely from my devotion to my country; and my belief
that it was for her good has made me write as I have done.
Your most excellent Lordships will, I trust, hold me excused,
and will act in the whole matter with your wonted goodness
and wisdom.

I recommend myself most humbly to your Lordships.

Servitor

Niccoto MACHIAVELLI.
Tours, 24 November, 1500.

THE MAGISTRACY OF THE TEN TO FRANCESCO DELLA
CASA AND NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

SPECTABILES VIRI, ETC. :—

As we have promised you several times that upon the ar-
rival of our ambassador at court we would give you leave
to return here, we have this day passed a resolution to that
effect, inasmuch as two days since we had letters from our
said ambassador, dated the last day of November, announcing
his arrival. And having replied to him and instructed him

140 MIESSTON- TO THE COUR). OF anv i,

upon all points that occurred to us, we have nothing to com-
municate to you except to instruct you to return here as soon
as you can, which we do herewith. Before leaving, you will
give full information to the ambassador of all that you have
done during your stay at court.

Bene valete !

Ex Pazatio FLorEntTINO, 12 December, 1500.

MISSION TO THE DUKE OF VALENTINOIS.

OctToBER 5, 1502.

CESARE BoraiA, second son of Pope Alexander VI., was originally in-
tended for the Church, and had been made Cardinal of Valence by his father.
But after the assassination of his elder brother, the Duke of Gandia, charged
by all the writers of the day upon Cesare, he doffed the cardinal’s hat and
eagerly seized the sword as more congenial to him. His father, the Pope,
granted him a bull of secularization, and sent him with letters of credence
and strong recommendations to King Louis XII. of France, as bearer of the
Pope’s bull dissolving the marriage of the King with the Queen Jeanne,
thus enabling Louis XII. to marry Anne of Brittany, widow of King
Charles VIII., of whom he had been enamored whilst yet Duke of Orleans.
At the same time Cesare Borgia was bearer of the cardinal’s hat for Georges
d@’Aimboise, Archbishop of Rouen and prime minister of Louis XII. In ree-
ognition of these services the king, who had already made Cesare Duke of
Valentinois, gave him for wife Carlotta d’Albret, daughter of the Sieur d’Al-
bret; and from Cardinal d’Amboise he obtained the promise of aid and sup-
port in the establishment of a state for himself in the Romagna, which had
been given him by his father, Pope Alexander VI., together with the com-
mand of the papal forces. The Romagna, however, was at that time occu-
pied by a number of petty lords and despots, some of whom were employed
by the Duke of Valentinois as captains of his troops. These fearing lest the
Duke would dispossess them, met in secret at Magione, in the Perugian
territory, to devise measures for thwarting the Duke’s projects. Immediately
after his return from France, however, the Duke pushed his military move-
ments with extraordinary energy and skill, and very quickly made himself
master of Faenza, Urbino, ete. Feeling the importance of having the sup-
port and alliance of the Florentine republic, whose territory adjoined the
Romagna, Cesare requested the Signoria of Florence to send an ambassador
to him with whom he could treat of these matters. The Signoria accord-
ingly sent Francesco Soderini, Cardinal of Volterra, and Niccolo Machiavelli
to him at Urbino; but the demands of the Duke for an alliance and a change
in the government of Florence, by which he hoped to facilitate his future
plans of conquest in Tuscany, were such as the envoys could not accede to.
The Duke gave them four days for a final reply, during which Machiavelli
returned to Florence for the purpose of consulting the government; the result

142 MISSION TO THE

of which was that the Signoria wrote to Soderini to inform the Duke of the
impossibility of their complying with his demands.

Meantime, however, the Florentine government became still more alarmed
by the disturbances in the Val di Chiano and Arezzo, which had been stirred
up by some of the Duke’s captains, especially Vitellozzo Vitelli. Although
these disturbances were quieted and Arezzo restored to the Florentines by the
intervention of the French, yet they had produced such an impression upon
the Florentine government that they resolved on the 5th of October, 1502, to
despatch Machiavelli on a special mission to the Duke of Valentinois and to
remain near him and watch his movements. This is the mission that gave
rise to the following despatches from Machiavelli to the Signoria, which are
of the highest interest, especially as they contain an authentic account of the
proceedings of the Duke of Valentinois at Sinigaglia in killing Vitellozzo
Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo, and the Signor Paolo and the Duke Gravina
Orsini.

COMMISSION
GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, 5™ OCTOBER, 1502.

NiccoLo, — We send you to his Excellency the Duke Valen-
tino at Imola, with Ietters of credence, and you will proceed
thither as speedily as possible. At your first interview you
will explain to his Excellency that we have learnt within the
last few days that, after his return to Romagna, the Orsini have
become alienated and detached from his Excellency ; that they
have appointed a meeting with their adherents at Magione, in
the Perugian territory, and that according to current report
the Duke of Urbino and the Signor Bartolommeo del Viano are
also to be there for the purpose of negotiating and adopting
some project against his Excellency, which we regard as equally
directed against his’ Most Christian Majesty the king of France.
Also, that we have been cunningly invited to send a deputy
there, with the view to coming to some understanding with
them. But that we continue the same as ever disposed and
resolved to remain good friends with the Sovereign Pontiff and
his Excellency, and firmly resolved not to separate ourselves
from them, nor from our devotion to the king of France, on
whose friendship and protection our republic depends. And
that therefore, when his interests are in question, or those of
his allies or their adherents, we cannot do otherwise than to
make known to him what is going on and what we hear, and

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 143

to do our duty towards him as good friends. And that for
these reasons we have sent you promptly to his Excellency, as
the importance of the matter seemed to demand it, to assure
him anew that, in the midst of these movements of our neigh-
bors, we are resolved to have due regard for what concerns
him, and to continue our good will towards him the same as
ever. For we regard all the friends of France as our friends,
and whenever their interests are concerned ours are equally
involved. This seems to us sufficient for your first audience,
in which you will in every way show his Excellency that we
place every degree of hope and confidence in him. You may
enlarge upon all this as the occasion may prompt you, ampli-
fying your remarks with all the circumstances that bear upon
the subject, and which we need not specify as you are fully
informed upon this whole matter. But we desire you not to go
outside of it, nor to touch upon any other subject. And should
his Excellency question you beyond this, you will reserve to
yourself to communicate with us and await our reply. After
this first exposé, either at the same audience or at a subsequent
one, you will state to his Excellency that you have been par-
ticularly instructed to thank him most cordially for the service
which he has rendered to our merchants in ordering the resto-
ration of those cloths that had been retained at Urbino for
several months, and which, according to the news in our mar-
kets to-day, have been restored to the agents of those mer-
chants in a most friendly and courteous manner; and you will
say to his Excellency that we regard this service as having
been done to ourselves personally, as well as to our republic.
And after that, when a favorable opportunity presents itself,
you will ask his Excellency in our name to grant security and
safe conduct to the goods of our merchants on their passage
through his states and territories on their way to and from the
Levant. As this is an object of the greatest importance to us,
commerce being as it were the vital part of our republic, you
will use your best efforts to achieve the success we so much
desire.

144 MISSION TO TUE

LETTER I.

Macyiricent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

Finding myself not well on horseback at my departure from
Florence, and believing that my commission required all speed,
I took the post at Scarperia and came here without loss of time,
arriving to-day at about the eighteenth hour. Having left my
horses and servants behind, I presented myself at once, in my
travelling costume, to his Excellency, who received me most
graciously. After presenting my credentials, 1 explained to
his Excellency the object of my coming, beginning by thanking
him for the restitution of the cloths. I then spoke of the de-
fection of the Orsini, of their meeting with their adherents,
how they had cunningly endeavored to induce your Lordships
to unite with them, and of your disposition in regard to your
friendship with the king of France and your devotion to the
Church, amplifying in the best manner I could the reasons that
bind you in friendship to these two powers, and caused you to
avoid any alliance with their adversaries. I assured him that
under all circumstances your Lordships would have every con-
sideration for the interests of his Excellency consistent with
your friendship for the king of France and your ancient devo-
tion to the Church, as well as the affection which you had ever
borne to his Excellency, regarding as you do all the friends of
France as your allies and particular friends.

His Excellency made no reply to what I said respecting the
restitution of the merchandise, but, passing to the other matters,
he thanked your Lordships for your offers and obliging demon-
strations. After that he said that he had always desired your
friendship, and that, if he had failed to obtain it, it was owing
more to the malice of others than to any fault of his own, —
adding that he wished to relate to me what he had never before
told any one respecting his coming to Florence with his army.
And then he told me that ever since the taking of Faenza, and
his attempt upon Bologna, the Orsini and the Vitelli had been
after him trying to persuade him to return to Rome by way of
Florence, which he had refused, because the Pope, by a special
brief, had instructed him differently. That thereupon Vitel-
lozzo had thrown hinself at his feet, weeping, and begging him
to come that way, and promising him that no harm of any

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 145

kind should be done either to the country or the city. But
that, still refusing to consent, they had so beset him with
prayers to that effect, that he finally yielded, but under a
pledge on their part that no damage should be done to the
country, and that the subject of the Medici should not be
mentioned. |

Wishing, however, to derive some benefit from his coming
to Florence, he had thought of availing of the opportunity to
form a friendship with your Lordships, which is proved by the
fact that he had engaged in no negotiations, or had hardly
said one word respecting the Medici, a fact well known by the
commissioner who had treated with him, and that he never al-
lowed Piero de’ Medici to come to his camp. And that whilst
they were at Campi the Orsini and the Vitelli had repeatedly
asked permission of him to present themselves at Florence or
at Pistoja, showing him how they could strike some successful
blows; but that so far from consenting, he had made them
understand by a thousand protests that he would rather fight
them himself. That afterwards, when the treaty was con-
cluded, the Orsini and the Vitelli, on pretence that he had con-
sulted only his own interests and not theirs, and that his
coming to Florence had been solely for his benefit and to their
injury, had tried by dishonest means to break the treaty; and
had committed all sorts of outrages for the purpose of giving
offence to your Lordships, and to disturb the good understand-
ing between yourselves and him. Nor had it been possible for
him to remedy these outrages, because he could not be in all
places at once ; and also because your Lordships had not paid
him the subsidies stipulated and provided for. Thus matters
had remained until the month of June past, when the revolt of
Arezzo occurred, respecting which he told me, the same as he
had previously told the Bishop of Volterra, that he had not
heard anything until then. Still he was pleased that it had
occurred, for he thought the occasion might be used to render
your Lordships a service that would merit your acknowledg-
ments. But that even then nothing was done, either because
of the ill-luck of both parties, or because our republic was not
‘disposed to treat and conclude an arrangement that would
have been mutually advantageous, which, however, had not
caused him much uneasiness. But being disposed to render
you a service, and knowing the wishes of the king, he had

VOL, III. 10

146 MISSION TO THE

written and at once had sent messengers to Vitellozzo to with-
draw from Arezzo. And not content with this, he had himself
gone with his troops to Citta di Castello, and could easily have
deprived Vitellozzo of his state, for the principal inhabitants
had come to offer themselves to him; and this, he said, was
the cause of Vitellozzo’s ill-will and dissatisfaction. As to the
Orsini, he said that he really knew not what had given rise to
their indignation and their departure from the court of Rome
without leave of the Pope. Subsequently, when they saw that
his Majesty the king had treated him better than the Cardinal
of their name, and had bestowed great honors upon him, to
which came furthermore certain reports that had been spread
that he intended to deprive them of their possessions, then the
Orsini abandoned him, and joined that gathering of bankrupts
at Magione. And although he had received several messages
from Signor Giulio Orsino, protesting that they had no inten-
tion of opposing him, etc., etc., yet he knew full well that the
reason why they did not wish to declare themselves openly
against him was that they had received his money. But if
ever they did so declare themselves, he would look upon them
as greater fools than he had ever supposed them to be, for not
knowing how to choose a better moment for injuring him than
the present, when the king of France was in Italy, and his
Holiness the Pope still alive; two circumstances that had kin-
dled such a fire in his favor as all the water the Orsini could
command would not quench. Nor did he care much about
their stirring up the duchy of Urbino, for he had not yet for-
gotten the way to reconquer it, in case he should lose it.

His Excellency then added, that now was the moment to
oblige him, if your Lordships really wished to be his friends, for
he could now form an alliance with you regardless of the Orsini,
which he had never before been able to do. But if your Lord-
ships were to defer it, and he in the mean time should make up
with the Orsini, which they sought by all means to bring about,
then he would be bound again by the same considerations as
before. And as no arrangement would satisfy the Orsini that
did not re-establish the Medici, your Lordships would be ex-
posed to the same difficulties and jealousies as before. He
therefore thought that your Lordships should anyhow declare
yourselves at once either his friends or theirs, as delay might
bring about an agreement between him and the Orsini, that

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 147

would be prejudicial to you. For in the case of victory of
either party, the successful one would either remain your en-
emy, or would anyhow be under no obligations to your Lord-
ships. And his Excellency says that when you come to decide
upon this matter, which of necessity you will have to do, he
does not see how you can take a different course from that in
which his Majesty the king of France and his Holiness the
Pope concur; adding, at the same time, that it would be most —
agreeable to him, in case that Vitellozzo or any other should
make an attempt upon any of his states, that you should cause
whatever troops you have to advance either towards the Borgo
or to the frontiers of his states, for the purpose of sustaining
his cause.

I listened with the utmost attention to the above remarks
of his Excellency, and have given you in full, not only their
substance, but his very words, so that your Lordships may be
able to form a better judgment of it all. Not deeming it im-
portant, I shall not relate what I answered, but I was careful
not to go outside of my instructions. In relation to the sub-
ject of the troops I made no reply at all, but merely said that
I would report to your Lordships his excellent disposition,
which I had no doubt would give you signal pleasure. And
although, as you will perceive, his Excellency manifested 4
great desire that a treaty between yourselves and him should
be promptly concluded, yet notwithstanding my efforts to get
at his real thoughts, he always avoided the subject, so that I
did not succeed in getting more from him than what I have
written.

But having heard on my arrival here that there had been
some disturbances in the duchy of Urbino, and his Excellency
having said in the course of his remarks that he did not attach
any importance to the troubles in that duchy, it seemed to
me not amiss, in the course of my reply, to ask him how this
matter had occurred. To this his Excellency made answer : —
“My clemency and disregard of these things have done me
“harm. You are aware that I took that duchy in three days
“without hurting a hair of any one’s head, with the exception
“of Messer Dolce and two others, who had made open opposi-
“tion to his Holiness the Pope. And what is more, I had even
“confided the public offices of that state to many of its princi-
“pal citizens, and had placed one of them in charge of a certain

148 MISSION TO THE

“wall which I had ordered to be built in the citadel of San Leo.
“A couple of days ago, under pretence of raising a beam, this
“individual concerted a plot with certain peasants, that enabled
“him to obtain possession of that citadel by force, and thus I
“lost it. Some say that they raised the cry of St. Mark, others
“say that of the Vitelli or the Orsini; but up to the present,
“neither one nor the other have openly declared themselves.
“Now, although I give up that duchy for lost, it being a weak
‘and feeble state, and its inhabitants dissatisfied in conse-
“quence of my having burdened them heavily with my troops,
“yet I hope to put all this matter right again. And you must
“write to your Signori to look well to their own affairs, and to
“let us hear from them promptly; for if the Duke of Urbino
“returns to his duchy from Venice, it will not be for their ad-
“vantage, and still less for ours; and this should cause us to
‘have more confidence in each other.”

This is all I am at present able to communicate to your
Lordships ; and although my duty would require me to write
you how many troops the Duke has, and where they are sta-
tioned, as well as many other particulars respecting the state
of things here, yet, having arrived only to-day, it is impossi-
ble for me to ascertain the exact truth, and I therefore reserve
all that for another time, and recommend myself to your
Lordships.

NiccoLo MAacHIAVELLI.
7th October, 1502.

P.S.—I have kept this letter until the sixteenth hour of
this morning, because my courier had no horse and was not
able to find one until now. I have to add, that, in the course of
conversation ‘last evening, his Excellency told me that Pandolfo
Petrucci had sent a disguised messenger to him on the previ-
ous evening to assure him that he would not countenance any
one that opposed his Excellency, and that he had given him
the most positive assurances to that effect. On my way here
yesterday, I met Messer Agapito * about two miles from here
with some seven or eight cavaliers; and, recognizing me, he
asked where [ was going, and who it was that sent me. He
gave me a cordial welcome, but after having gone on his way

* Messer Agapito de’ Gherardi da Amelia, several times mentioned in these
despatches, was one of the principal secretaries of the Duke Valentino.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 149

a short distance he turned back. This morning I have learnt
that said Messer Agapito was on his way to Florence, being
sent on a mission to your Lordships by his Excellency the
Duke, and that my coming caused him to return.

Iterum valete /

8th October, 1502.—I have given the bearer of this two
ducats, so that he might be at Florence by to-morrow, the 9th,
before daylight. I beg you will have that sum reimbursed to
Ser Agostini Vespucci.

LETTER II.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and sent my letter
by Campriano, who was to reach Florence this morning before
day, for which I paid him two ducats, which I beg you will re-
imburse to Messer Agostino Vespucci. The courier Ardingo
arrived here this morning with letters for several private per-
sons; and as he brought none for me from your Lordships, I
fear they were either left at Florence or lost on the road, and
I remain in doubt as to how this has occurred.

As this courier is to return to Florence, I have concluded to
write you by him what has taken place here since my first de-
spatch. Being at court to day at about the twentieth hour, the
Duke sent for me and told me that he wished to communicate
some news he had received, so that I might give the information
to your Lordships. He showed me a letter from Monseigneur
d’ Arles, the Pope’s ambassador in France, dated the 4th instant,
in which he writes that the king and the Cardinal d’Amboise
were well disposed to do what might be agreeable to him; and
that so soon as they heard of his desire to have troops for his
attempt upon Bologna, they had sent word to M. de Chaumont
at Milan to send without delay M. de Lanques with three hun-
dred lances to the Duke; and that if his Excellency should re-
quire it, he was to go ‘with three hundred more lances towards
Parma. He had sent to his Excellency a copy of the letter
which the king had written to the said Chaumont, which the
Duke read to me aloud, and wanted me to see the signature of

150 MISSION TO THE

M. d’Arles, as well as the letter written to him. I recognized
the handwriting, having seen it often in France and at Florence.
In fact, according to that copy, it would be impossible to give
more explicit orders for the moving of these troops.

After having read these letters his Excellency said to me:
‘¢- You see now, Secretary, that letter was written in reply to my
“request for an attack upon Bologna, and you will note how
“very positive itis. You may imagine, then, what I could ob-
“tain for the purpose of defending myself against those, the
“oreater part of whom his Majesty looks upon as his worst
“enemies; for they have always sought to cause him some
“check in Italy. Believe me that this is a great thing for me,
“and the Vitelli and Orsini could not have declared against me
‘at atime when they could have harmed me less. Nor could
“‘T have desired anything more advantageous for the consolida-
“tion of my states, for I shall know now against whom I shall
“have to be on my guard, and who are my real friends. And
“even if under these circumstances the Venetians were to de-
“clare against me, which I do not believe they will do, neither
“myself nor the king of France could desire anything better.
“T give you this information, and will make known to you from
“time to time what takes place, so that you may communicate
“it to your Signori, and so that they may see that I am far from
“ abandoning my own case, and that I am not lacking in friends,
“amongst whom I should be glad to count your Signori, pro-
“vided they promptly give me so to understand. And if they
“do not do so now, I shall leave them aside, and though I had
“the water up to my throat I should nevermore talk about
“friendship with them; though I should always regret having
“a neighbor to whom I could not render friendly service nor
“receive any from him.”

Thereupon the Duke asked me when I thought an answer
would come to the letter I wrote yesterday to your Lordships ;
to which I replied, that I thought it ought not to be later than
Wednesday. I then thanked his Excellency for having com-
municated to me those letters, and for his desire to entertain
relations of friendship with our republic, expressing myself in
such terms as I knew would be satisfactory to his Excellency,
whilst at the same time I kept strictly within your Lordships’
instructions. His Excellency said also that he had forgotten,
when I had spoken to him on a previous occasion, to reply to

*

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 151

that part of my remarks in which I expressed your Lordships’
thanks for the restitution of the cloths, saying that he had done
it most cheerfully and would always act in the same way when-
ever an opportunity occurred to render you a service; and that
he had had more trouble to defend these cloths against the
Orsini than any other business had ever caused him; that it
had been from the first his intention to restore these cloths of
his own accord, and without the intercession of any one, as that
was his way of rendering a service. I thereupon asked the Duke
for a general safe-conduct for all our citizens, which he promptly
agreed to give, saying, however, that he did not understand such
matters, and that I must speak with Messer Alessandro Span-
nochi about it, and prepare it with him, which I shall not fail to
do. His Excellency having thus referred me in this matter to
Messer Alessandro, I shall have to shape my course to suit his
views; and although I have reason to believe, from the expe-
rience of the past, that he is well disposed towards us, yet
I think it would be well if some of our merchants who stand
well with him were to write to him and dispose him still more
favorably ; although I deem it well to caution those merchants
not to venture too far in this matter, for in these days of change
a country often belongs one day to one master and the next day
to another.

His Excellency has talked to me again about the affair of
San Leo, much to the same effect as I wrote you in my last;
but says that only two small castles in the neighborhood of San
Leo have revolted, whilst all the other places are still unde-
cided, and that neither the Orsini nor the Vitelli have as yet
made any open demonstrations against him. He told me also
that three days since a certain Chevalier Orsino, one of the
gentlemen of his suite, had gone to see the Orsini and the
Vitelli, and that he looked momentarily for his return; and
that Pandolfo continued to write him frequently and to send
him messages to the effect that he had no intention of doing
anything adverse to him.

On taking my leave of his Excellency he reminded me again
to recall to your Lordships that if you remained undecided you
would certainly lose, whilst by uniting with him you might be
victorious.

I cannot express in writing with what demonstrations of
affection the Duke spoke, and what efforts he made to justify

152 MISSION TO THE

the past, in all of which the chief persons of his court concur.
Although I tell your Lordships all this, yet it is not likely that
the Duke will long remain in this mood; his object is to know
clearly your intentions, if not by your first, then by your second
answer. J wish to make this known to your Lordships, for
if you judge that the course which I have suggested is a good
one, you must not persuade yourselves that you will always be
in time to adopt it; for the Duke told me at the first interview
that, although for the moment he was not obliged to have any
considerations for the Orsini, yet such would be the case if he
should become reconciled with them. This manifests itself in
many ways that are easier to understand than to explain in
writing. I beg your Lordships, therefore, to come to some de-
cision, and to write me how I am to bear myself in this mat-
ter; also not to fail to instruct me what answer I am to make
to the Duke’s request, that in case of any movement on the
part of the Vitelli you should direct your troops towards the
Borgo. Whatever instructions your Lordships may have to
give me, I beg you will be pleased to write them, so that I may
the more readily obtain an audience and more easily gain time.
And should you really wish to conclude anything essential,
then the more importance you give yourselves in the negotia-
tion, the better and the more advantageously will you be able
to carry it through. Thus it would be very much to the pur-
pose if you were to reinforce me by sending some one here in
the capacity of ambassador or otherwise.

I must now give your Lordships some particulars of the
situation of things here. So soon as the Duke heard of the
loss of San Leo, he caused the duchy of Urbino to be evacuated,
and resolved to concentrate all his efforts on maintaining his
power in Romagna with what troops he had, until he should
have strengthened himself sufficiently to be able to attack those
who had molested him. For this purpose he sent at once Mes-
ser Ramiro to scour the whole country, and to visit all the for-
tresses and put them in condition for defence. He wrote to
Don Hugo di Cardona, one of his Spanish captains, who was
with his troops on the borders of Urbino, to withdraw towards
Rimini; and sent Don Michele Coreglia with money to collect
some thousand of infantry, with which to join the other troops ;
and to-day he has distributed money to some eight hundred
infantry from the Val di Lamona and sent them forward in the

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 153

same direction. At the present the Duke has altogether not
over twenty-five hundred paid infantry, and out of all his men-
_ at-arms he has only about one hundred lances left to him, and
these are composed mainly of his own gentlemen, who can put
about four hundred horses into the field for service. Besides
these he has three companies of fifty lances each under three
Spanish captains; these, however, have been considerably di-
minished in number, from having been a long time without
pay. The infantry and mounted men which he is now trying to
raise, and the auxiliaries upon which he counts, are as follows.
He has sent Rafaello dei Pazzi to Milan to form a company of
five hundred Gascons out of the adventurers that are in Lom-
bardy ; a man of experience has been sent to the Swiss to en-
gage fifteen hundred of them; and five days ago he mustered
six thousand infantry into his service from his own states, and
which he can have together in two days. As to men-at-arms
and light cavalry, he has caused it to be published that he will
take into his pay all such as are within his own states,. and
they are at once to report themselves to him. He has as much
artillery, and in good condition, as almost all the rest of Italy
together. He despatches frequent letters and special messen-
gers to Rome, to France, and to Ferrara, and is hopeful of re-
ceiving from everywhere whatever he asks for. With regard
to Rome there can be no doubt; as to France your Lordships
know what I have above written on that subject; but what he
asks from Ferrara I know not.

As regards your Lordships his Excellency counts upon hay-
ing you as friends, on account of France and the character of
his enemies, or that you will remain neutral. On the other
hand, we see all his enemies armed and ready at any moment
to light a general conflagration; and yet the people are at
heart all for Romagna, but they have been badly treated by
the Duke, who has always favored his soldiers more than the
inhabitants.

It is feared that the Venetians have a hand in all these
movements, and that according as the affair succeeds it may
also have the support of Spain and Germany, and of all those
who are jealous of the power of France. But if all be true
that his Excellency has told me, none of the Vitelli or the Or-
sini have as yet stirred since the events of Urbino, except
Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, who has sent three of them to

154 MISSION TO THE

Castel San Piero, a few miles from here, and four detachments
of infantry under the command of Ramazotto and Del Man-
cino; but has caused them to return home again, according to
what his Excellency told me to-day. From the side of the
Venetians we hear nothing, except that they have some troops
at Ravenna, who have been there for some time; but this also
comes to me from a source that is not authentic.

I have thought that my duty required me to inform your
Lordships fully of the condition in which matters are here, and
how I regard them; and I have done so with the same fidelity
which is at once my duty and my habit. I leave it now to
your Lordships to judge of them according to your wisdom,
and recommend myself to you.

NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI.
Imoua, 9 October, 1502.

P. S.— Messer Alessandro Spannochi told me yesterday
evening, just as I was about to despatch Ardingo, that the
Duke wanted to send some one this morning to Rome by way
of Florence, and desired me to delay the departure of my cou-
rier. I could not, therefore, send him off until now at the
twenty-second hour, and on the 10th of the month. Having
spoken with Messer Alessandro about a general safe-conduct
for all our people, he told me to wait a couple of days, and
that then he would try and do what would be agreeable to
me. I shall not fail to do my best in this matter.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Iterum valete !

LETTER III. .

MaeGniFicent SIGNORI : —

Yesterday I wrote to your Lordships by the courier Ardingo,
giving an account of all that had occurred here; and not wish-
ing to omit informing your Lordships each day of what I hear,
I must now tell you as the news of to-day that the Signoria of
Venice, so soon as they heard of the revolt of the citadel of
San Leo, sent for the Bishop of Tivoli, the Pope’s ambassador,
and informed him of the revolt, manifesting great displeasure,

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 155

and complaining that the cry of St. Mark had been raised in
that citadel; and assuring him that they had no intention of
abandoning either the cause of France or that of the Holy
Father, nor the protection which they enjoyed at the hands of
his Excellency the Duke, and that they had no idea of support-
ing the Duke of Urbino in any way. And having sent for the
latter, they declared their intentions to him in presence of the
said Bishop.

This news has greatly encouraged the whole court, satisfying
them that the origin of these troubles is not as has been pre-
sumed. His Excellency the Duke, by way of manifesting his
satisfaction, immediately sent his secretary, Messer Romolino
to the Venetian Signoria, to thank them for their good disposi-
tion and for their offers. It is reported here, moreover, that a
certain Don Hugo, a Spaniard, and captain of the Duke’s men-
at-arms, and Don Michele, captain of his infantry, whom the
Duke in consequence of these troubles had ordered to fall
back in the direction of Rimini, have altogether transgressed
their orders and gone to the assistance of the governors of La
Pergola and Fossombrone ; that they have taken both these
places and given them up to pillage, killing nearly all the in-
habitants. Thus we see that events are taking a favorable
turn for the Duke rather than otherwise.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoza, 11 October, 1502.

LETTER IV.

MaGniFicent SIGNORI: —

Your Lordships will learn from the enclosed the news which
I heard yesterday at court. Since then, at about the fifth
hour of the night, your courier Baccino arrived with your Lord-
ships’ letters of the 10th, in reply to mine of the 8th. Hav-
ing thoroughly examined them and informed myself of their
contents, I went at the Duke’s audience time, which is about
the twenty-second hour, and presented myself before his Excel-
lency, who said to me, “ We have good news from all quarters.”
And then he related to me the offers made to him by the Vene-

uate, MISSION TO THE

tians, precisely as I have written to your Lordships, and also
what Don Hugo and Don Michele have done in Pergola and
Fossombrone, saying gayly, ‘An evil star reigns this year for
those who rebel.” After that he told me that he had news
from Perugia through the Pope’s envoy, who on his arrival
there found Vitellozzo ill with fever, and the Signor Paolo
Orsino covered with scurvy ; and that no sooner had he arrived
than the Orsini threw themselves into his arms, saying they
were soldiers of the Church and did not wish to deviate in the
least from the will of the Sovereign Pontiff; and that their
leaving Rome was caused solely by their being short of pro-
visions; and that they had implored his Holiness to be pleased
to receive them again and afford them quarters as he had
formerly done, as they could no longer exist where they were.
Of Vitellozzo his Excellency did not tell me anything more;
but I have learnt from another source that he had sent word
to the Duke that, if he could be assured of his safety, he would
come to his Excellency; but if not, then he would go away to
a distance, and would thus show him that he was still devoted
to him.

After some conversation about the professions of the Orsini,
I communicated to his Excellency what your Lordships reply
in your letter of the 10th, which I explained to him paragraph
by paragraph, as also the reasons that would have caused you
to withhold the assistance in case his Excellency should at this
time have need of it; and also those considerations that pre-
vented you from being able at the present moment to declare
yourselves his friends; making him understand that, as you
had written to France on the subject, you would necessarily
have to await an answer from there. After that I informed
him of the engagement of the Marquis of Mantua, adding, as a
suggestion of my own, that I was persuaded his Majesty the
king of France had caused your Lordships to do it; for having
given a prominent position to one of his friends, for such the
Marquis had now become, and wishing at the same time to fur-
nish our republic, which had ever been his most faithful ally,
with a reliable armed force, of which both they and their
friends might avail themselves, and as it was at the same
time the interest of Florence to keep an instrument of such
importance from those who were jealous of his Excellency’s
power, his Majesty had thought that he could not make your

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 15T

Lordships do a wiser and more advantageous thing than to
engage the Marquis of Mantua, at which his Excellency the
Duke would also have reason to rejoice. I did not fail on this
point, as well as upon many others, to impress his Excellency
with your friendly disposition, as requested in your letter. He
answered me most graciously as to the first part, showing
that he believed in reality what your Lordships say with re-
gard to the troops and the alliance; nor did he insist much
upon these points, or solicit them as he had formerly done.
He spoke of the Marquis of Mantua in an honorable manner,
saying that he was an honest man and his friend, and that
he would show me letters from him in which he had quite
recently offered to come to him with troops to aid him in
any of his undertakings; and that he was very glad to have
him in his neighborhood; to all which I replied in a suit-
able manner. Afterwards, in fulfilment of your instructions,
I brought the conversation back to the subject of the Vitelli
and the Orsini, of whom the Duke showed that he had a bad
opinion, confessing freely that he could not trust them, but
would bide his time, etc., etc.

I suggested that in their despair they might perhaps mee
incursions into our territory, and, although we had no fear as
to any of our towns, yet it would tend to disturb the country.
I asked what his Excellency would do if such a thing were to
occur before the troops which your Lordship had organized
could be on the spot. His Excellency replied, that he could
not for the world believe that they would attempt anything of
the kind, and gave some reasons for it; but if they should,
nevertheless, make any movement, and he should know in
what direction they were and what troops they had, he cer-
tainly would not fail in his duty as a good friend to do all he
could in case you should need help. More than that I could
not get from his Excellency in this conversation. On taking
my leave I asked him again for a general safe-conduct for all
our people, which he again promised most freely, telling me to
speak with Messer Alessandro about it. I told him that I had
done so, but that Messer Alessandro had put me off for two or
three days. To this the Duke replied that this delay was
caused by Messer Alessandro’s manifold occupations just at
this moment; but that I must speak to him again on the sub-
ject. This I have done since, and he has again given me fair

158 MISSION TO THE

words, but as yet without any result; the reason of which I
do not know.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoxa, 12 October, 1502.

LETTER V.

MaGnIFIcEentT SIGNORI : —

I have deferred until this evening to send Baccino back with
the two enclosed letters, so as to be able to give your Lordships
fuller information about matters here; and more particularly
to satisfy the desire you express to know the Duke’s disposi-
tion, and what he designs doing in regard to yourselves. But
not having been able to get anything more out of his Excel-
lency than what I have written, and there being at this moment
a secretary of the Duke of Ferrara here, recently sent to his
Excellency in relation to late events, I took occasion to talk
with him. And going from one subject to another, he told me
of his own accord that he had a special commission from his
master to advise the Duke to form the talked of alliance with
your Lordships; adding, as a suggestion of his own, that it
seemed as though such an alliance had been too long thought
about ever to be really concluded; and that he was resolved
the first time that he should talk with the Duke to see whether
he could not bring him to some definite conclusion which might
afterwards be proposed to you by the Duke of Ferrara, and that
he would talk further to me on the subject before his departure.
I showed myself neither anxious to avoid nor to accept this
offer, but rather thanked the secretary in a general way. He
has since then had an interview with the Duke, and, meeting
me again, he entered upon that subject, and told me that he had
found his Excellency most favorably disposed ; and that having
finally told him that if he wished to conclude anything definite
it would be necessary to specify particulars, and if he desired
that the Duke of Ferrara should take some steps in the mat-
ter, etc., etc., his Excellency replied, “ Not yet, but that he
“would let him know in time.” But as this did not satisfy
me, I took occasion to have a long conversation to-day with

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 159

Messer Agapito, the Duke’s first secretary; and having dis-
cussed this matter as between two secretaries who say to each
other frankly what each thinks best for the common interest,
he spoke to me in the following lengthy argument : —

“‘ See now how well it would be if our two governments could
“form an alliance together. The friends of your Signoria are
“equally the best friends of my Duke, and those who are hos-
“tile to my Duke are likewise the bitterest enemies of your
“Signoria. The Venetians are regarded with suspicion by both
“of us since the Duke has wrested Romagna from their hands.
“There was no occasion for your Signoria to take the Marquis
“of Mantua into their pay at this time; they could not be at-
“tacked, for the Duke can never more trust the Orsini and the
“ Vitelli, for they have deceived him ever so often. But he
“thinks that your Signoria have lost a fine opportunity, par-
“ticularly in giving the position that would have suited the
“Duke so well to some one else; and he does not know what
“arguments could now be presented to your Signoria, the Duke
“being covered with glory, most fortunate, and accustomed to
“conquer, and his power having increased whilst yours has
‘diminished since the engagement of the Marquis of Mantua.
“ And that it was reasonable that in any arrangement with you
“the Duke’s rank and honor should be augmented rather than
“diminished.”

After having spoken of the Duke’s good fortune apart from
his successful enterprises, Messer Agapito spoke of recent
events, and said that his Excellency could not ask for anything
that suited his purpose better; for their result had been, that
where the Orsini hoped to stir up all the world against his
Excellency, everybody, on the contrary, had declared in his
favor; that your Lordships had sent an embassy to him, that
the Venetians had written him congratulatory letters, and that
his Majesty the king of France had sent him troops; adding,
that some account ought to be made of such signal good for-
tune.

_In the course of his conversation, which was by no means
a short one, Messer Agapito touched twice upon the subject of
the engagement of the Duke as commander of your troops, say-
ing that, unless the past could be undone, there was no chance
of doing anything in that way for the future. I will not weary
your Lordships by telling you what I replied, but can assure

160 MISSION TO THE

you that I omitted little that can be said to the purpose. But
in the end I could not get anything more out of Messer Aga-
pito, except that the Duke still had his eyes upon such an
appointment.

I must not omit mentioning to your Lordships that the sec-
retary from Ferrara, in talking with me as to the causes that
could make the Duke so reluctant to move, said that he believed
his Exeellency had written to the Pope on the subject, and that
he desired to proceed in the matter according to the Pope’s
wishes. I believe, however, that there may be two other rea-
sons; namely, cither he does not want to forego the chance of
that appointment now, since his affairs here wear a brighter
aspect, and therefore he temporizes, etc., etc.; or he wants to
wait, before the matter goes any further, until the next Gon-
falonier shall have been installed in his palace; for this new
order of things has raised the credit of the city of Florence to
a degree that no one could have believed.*

I cannot and must not, Magnificent Signori, judge of these
matters differently, but will continue from time to time to give
you simply information as to the condition in which they are;
up to the present hour, you are informed of the changes that
have occurred. The more favorable the weather, the more
diffeult will it be to work the soil here; that is to say, the
more favorable the condition of the Duke’s affairs, the more
difficulty will you have in dealing with him.

Only one thing more I wish to say to your Lordships, and I
do so with the utmost respect; namely, if you make the Mar-
quis of Mantua march promptly, you will at once bring back
to reason all those who have strayed from it.

Bene valete !

Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.
Imora, at the 4th hour of night,
13 October, 1502.

* This refers to the election of Pietro Soderini as perpetual Gonfalonier,
which took place on the 20th of September, 1502.

EE

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. . 161

LETTER. VI.

MaentFicent SIGNORI : —

Your Lordships will have learnt from my letters of the 11th,
12th, and 13th, which I sent by the courier Baccino, all that
has taken place here until now. I have therefore but little to
communicate by the present; still, having the opportunity of
sending by Spinelli, who arrived here to-day from Bologna, and
will return by post to Florence, | will write to your Lordships
what little has occurred here since my last.

In my previous letter I informed your Lordships that the
Duke had sent a certain Chevalier Orsino to the other Orsini
at their meeting with their adherents at Magione, to ascertain
their real intentions, and to see whether there be any way of
bringing them back. The said Chevalier returned yesterday,
but I have not been able to learn precisely the result of his
mission. All I have heard is that Paolo Orsino has offered to
come here, and that the Chevalier has returned to obtain the
consent of the Duke, and that he was sent back yesterday
afternoon with instructions that the said Paolo may come
here in all safety, and that accordingly he is expected here
within two or three days.

The above-named Spinelli has told me many things which
your Lordships can learn from him direct. I will only men-
tion specially what he says he has heard at Bologna; namely,
that at the Magione meeting it was decided that the said Paolo
Orsino might come here and make terms with his Excellency
the Duke, provided that whatever arrangement might be made,
all attempts against Bologna should be excluded therefrom.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Imota, 14 October, 1502.

LETTER VII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

To-day at about the twentieth hour, whilst I was at court,
your Lordships’ courier arrived with your letters of the 13th.
As they contain much the same with regard to the negotiations,

VOL. III. 11

162 MISSION 10. THE

etc., as your previous one of the 10th, to which I have replied
at length by mine of the 11th, 12th, and 18th, and as their
general tenor was of no special importance, I should not have
eared to bring them to the notice of his Excellency the Duke
but for the information they contain from Borgo about the
movement of the artillery and infantry. That seemed to me
of importance, and, knowing that it would be greatly appre-
ciated by the Duke, I sought to obtain an audience from him.
But his Excellency was extremely occupied in reviewing some
detachments of infantry, which defiled in succession before his
palace to be mustered into service. I gave a copy of the arti-
cle of Giovanni Ridolfi to one of the Duke’s secretaries, so that
he might present it to him as a matter of importance. So soon
as the Duke had read it, he had me called in, and said to me,
“What think you of the news?” After having read it, I re-
plied, that if I had to judge of it by the place whence it was
written, and by the character of the man who had written it,
I could not but affirm that it was true. For the Borgo was
only five miles from Castello, and Giovanni is a most prudent
man, and as highly esteemed as any one in that city. Where-
upon the Duke said: “I can guess how this matter is. You
“see that Vitellozzo has only started the infantry and the de-
“tached lances, but not the men-at-arms, so that he may be
“able to excuse himself from the charge of treason against me,
“which would probably be brought against him if he had con-
“travened me with the troops whom I have paid. This move-
“ment of the artillery may also be merely a feint on the part
“of Vitellozzo, for he has certain pieces of artillery belonging
“to me, which I sent to demand of him only a few days ago.
“He may therefore make my troops believe that he is sending
“those pieces back to me under escort, so that they may not
“be seized by the people of Agobbio; and to the people of
“Agobbio he may pretend that he is coming to their assist-
“ance. But we shall soon see the upshot of all this, and I
“wait with the utmost impatience for them to declare them-
“selves openly ; although I do not believe that the Orsini will
“do so because of certain negotiations that are going on; and
“besides, my troops ought to present themselves before Urbino
“this day.”

After conversing for some time with the Duke upon this
subject, I availed of the occasion to let him know how openly

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 163

your Lordships had favored Grechetto and Bianchino, and how
cheerfully you had given leave of absence to Maglianes; and
that although these were but small things, yet that out of
small things great ones grow; and that the intentions of men
could be judged of even in the smallest things. I then told
him in a few words, according to your Lordships’ instructions,
of your favorable disposition in all other matters, looking al-
ways to what was reasonable and possible, and provided that
he showed your Lordships all due and suitable respect. At
the same time I thanked him for the favorable answers he had
given me about the safe-conducts, and that your Lordships
would be pleased to have them soon forthcoming in fact. His
Excellency thanked your Lordships upon the first point, saying
that he regarded the smallest service rendered him by your
Lordships as of the greatest magnitude to him; and closed his
remarks with general expressions, but in most obliging and
friendly language. As to the safe-conducts, he called Messer
Alessandro Spannochi, and said to him, “Arrange yourself
“here with the secretary, and try to put this safe-conduct into
“shape.” And thus I left his Excellency after some further
conversation, in which he told me particularly of the disposi-
tion of the king of France to be agreeable to him, and that
the day before Odoardo Baglio had been here to confirm to
him orally what the king of France had several times written
to him, and that he would soon see the practical evidences of
his Majesty’s friendly disposition.
In my letter of the 9th, which I retained here until the 10th,
I wrote so fully to your Lordships respecting the forces which
the Duke has, and the assistance which he expects, that it
seems superfluous to write more. The condition of his affairs
is greatly improved since it is understood that the Venetians
are resolved not to attack him, and since it is seen that he has
the upper hand again in the duchy of Urbino, which he had
looked upon as lost. To this must be added the fact, if indeed
it be true, that the Orsini have submitted or are about to sub-
mit themselves to him. But of this we have not heard anything
more, notwithstanding that the Signor Paolo Orsino is about to
come here, as I have stated in one of my letters of yesterday.
His Excellency has, moreover, taken the Signor Lodovico
della Mirandola into his pay, with sixty men-at-arms and sixty
light-horse. Besides this, he has ordered the son of the gen-

164 MISSION TO THE

eral of Milan, who was formerly the general of Savoy, and
who had been sent to enlist those fifteen hundred Swiss infan-
try, to collect one hundred and fifty men-at-arms in Lombardy,
of which the Duke is going to give him the command. Thus
the men-at-arms which he expects to have together here in
the course of a month are as follows. First, those of his own
gentlemen and the three companies under the Spanish cap-
tains, which I have mentioned in one of my letters, and those
which he is collecting in his possessions in Romagna ;— all
these taken together will make about 500 men-at-arms. Then
there is the Signor Lodovico, and the son of the general of
Milan, who will bring about 210; and he counts upon having
as many light-horse as he has men-at-arms. As to infantry,
I estimate that he will find in Sienna and in the duchy of
Urbino about 2,500; and he will have just as many more as
he has money wherewith to pay them. Thus you see that he
is collecting them from all quarters.

As to what your Lordships say in your postscript, that I
should temporize and make no definite engagements, and en-
deavor to find out the Duke’s real intentions, I think I have
thus far done the first two, and have tried my best to do the
third, of which my letter of the 15th gives ample evidence ;
and therefore it would be superfluous to repeat it again now.
I believe truly that, besides the other reasons which I have
mentioned why the Duke remains undecided, there may be
another, and that is that he wishes you to be governed in
these matters by the king of France, since you show that you
are waiting for his consent.

As I have already mentioned above, Odoardo Baglio was
here yesterday; I called upon him, but had no opportunity to
learn anything from him, which matters little, as he tells me
that he has instructions to go to Florence to your Lordships.
Having returned to the palace, Messer Alessandro Spannochi
told me that he had again spoken to the Duke about the safe-
conduct, but that to make it general would rather be a dis-
advantage for the Duke than otherwise. And when I wanted
to reply to this objection, he said, “I shall have occasion to-
“morrow to be with Messer Agapito, and we will then sce what
“can be done.” I can say nothing more on this subject except
that it would be very much to the purpose if some friend of
Messer Agapito were to write to him on the subject. We hear

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 165

nothing whatever either from Bologna or from the direction of
Urbino.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoxa, 15 October, 1502.

LETTER VIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI:—

Your Lordships will see from the enclosed, that since the
receipt of yours of the 13th I have had an interview with his
Excellency the Duke; also what I have to say respecting the
state of things here, which I have deemed proper to communi-
cate to your Lordships in a confidential letter.

Upon receiving the information from Giovanni Ridolfi as to
the movement of the artillery and of the troops of Vitellozzo,
his Excellency the Duke used, if I remember well, the follow-
ing words: “'T'wo considerations have prevented your Signoria
“from sending some troops to the confines of Vitellozzo’s pos-
“sessions. The one was the desire to await the orders of the
“king of France, and to know what course to take in regard to
“the disturbances here; and the other is the small number
“of troops they have, and the many places they have to guard.
“And as I could have desired much to gain time, and that
“your Signoria should show me some favor, I explain these
“two considerations in the following manner. As to the first,
“touching the king, you may assure your Signoria that I
“am more sure than of death itself, that his Majesty would
“like to have the whole Florentine people come in person to
“support my interests, and upon this point you will shortly
“receive a definite reply. As to the other consideration,
“namely, the having but a small number of troops, you must
“write to your Signoria, that, by way of preventing any incon-
“venience arising from the sending of some of their troops
“from the places where they are, 1 am ready to go in person
“to their assistance, and to bear myself the entire burden of
“the war. In truth, I do not want them to do anything more
“than send to those places near Castello some fifty or sixty
“horse and some three hundred to four hundred regular troops,

166 MISSION TO. Pag

“to have two pieces of artillery taken there, and to levy there
“one man for each house; to order reviews to be held there,
“and to make other demonstrations of that kind. And I
“charge you to urge these things upon your Signoria with all
“possible energy.” |

Such were almost his very words. I did not fail to point
out to his Excellency our lack of troops, and the apprehensions
which their being sent away would naturally excite. He in-
sisted, nevertheless, that I should write to you anyhow and
make the request. I deemed it proper to promise it, but I do
so in a separate and confidential letter, so that your Lordships
may, if you judge it advisable to comply with the Duke’s re-
quest, do it without making it publicly known, and without
compromising yourselves. In that case you ought to send
some regular troops towards the Borgo and Anghiari, hold
reviews, and do what else the Duke asks, either in whole or in
part, pretending that you fear an attack from that direction.
And, on the other hand, you could raise yourselves still more
in the Duke’s estimation by representing the number double
what they really are; for the Duke will not be able to get re-
liable information.

I beg your Lordships will not ascribe these suggestions
either to presumption on my part, or to a desire to obtrude my
advice; but rather to that natural affection which every man
ought to feel for his country. Awaiting your prompt reply
to all this, I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene
valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
16 October, 1502.

LETTER IX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

By my last, which I sent yesterday with the courier, your
Lordships will have been informed of the state of things here,
and of what I had to say in reply to yours of the 18th, to which I
expect your answer. By the present I have to inform you that
to-day at about the eighteenth hour his Excellency the Duke
sent for me, and on my arrival said: “I desire to carry out my

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 167

“intention of communicating to you whatever I hear concern-
“ing the interests of your Signori, or our common interests.
“To-day I have received this letter from Sienna from an agent
“of mine whom I have sent there.’ And then he read me a
passage from that letter, saying, “that the Orsini had marched
“their troops in the direction of Cagli; not as enemies, but
“under pretence that the Chevalier Orsino had told them on
“the part of the Duke that, if they would withdraw with their
“troops towards the duchy of Urbino, the Duke would look
“upon them as his friends. Moreover, that the Florentines
“had sought their alliance, and had offered them honorable
“conditions.” After that the writer of the letter added, “ that
‘‘the Orsini would really be good friends of his Excellency pro-
“vided he would give up his attempt upon Bologna, and enter
“either into the states of Florence or of Venice.” After read-
ing to me that passage from the letter, his Excellency said:
“You see that I act in good faith towards you, believing that
“your Signoria will cheerfully come to be my friends, and will
“not deceive me. And really they ought to have more confi-
‘dence in me now than ever; nor shall I for my part fail to
“do my duty.”

I thanked the Duke first on behalf of your Lordships, for his
frankness in communicating to me that letter, and then said
to him that, if I had to speak to him according to the instruc-
tions given me by your Lordships on leaving Florence, and
according to the letters received since, I could not but bear
witness to the excellent disposition of your Lordships towards
him. And I enlarged upon this subject as far as I thought
proper in accordance with your Lordships’ instructions. After
that, whilst conversing together about the Orsini, as to their —
whereabouts with their troops, and as to their intentions, the
Duke told me that he had information from another source
that they were at Cagli, and that upon their arrival there the
people of Cagli wanted to attack the citadel, but that the Orsini
would not agree to it. And when the people of Cagli had
asked the Orsini whether they intended to injure them, they re-
plied, “No, but that they had not come to defend them either.”
And thus they go on temporizing in the matter.

Such was my interview with the Duke, and to judge by what
he said, and the general tenor of his remarks, which it would
be too long to write, I found him to-day even more desirous

168 MISSION TO THE

of closing an alliance with your Lordships than he was the
last time that I spoke to him.

I must not omit communicating to your Lordships what one
of the Duke’s principal officers told me, whose name I will not
mention, having been specially requested by him to that effect.
Having conversed with him about the affairs of the day, he
began to censure the tardiness of both your Lordships and the
Duke in coming to an understanding; and whilst upon this
point he said to me: “Only two days ago I told the Duke the
“same thing that I tell you now, that it is high time to finish
“the matter, which seems to me easy enough, for both the
“Florentines and his Excellency the Duke are equally well dis-
“posed for it. Both one and the other have enemies, and each
“has to maintain an armed force to defend themselves, and
“therefore it is the easiest thing in the world to agree upon all
“points.” To which the Duke had replied: “Why then do
“these Signori put off so long making me some proposition ?
“Nothing else makes me doubtful of them except the fact that
“they do not declare or explain themselves. The only reason
“why I desire that the first proposition should come from
“them is to give greater stability to whatever may be con-
“cluded between us.” It is not worth while to tell you what
I said in reply; I merely wanted to give your Lordships this
infarmation, so that you may the better understand the Duke’s
intentions, or rather be better able to conjecture them.

I have forgotten to write to your Lordships that in my con-
versation with his Excellency this morning he said to me:
“That agent of mine who writes me from Sienna says that
“your Signori have sent an envoy there to negotiate the con-
“clusion of some sort of truce.” I replied that it was alto-
gether news to me that there were any negotiations pending
between your Lordships and the people of Sienna; nor did I
know what truce there could be in question, unless it be the
one which was made in 1498 for five years, and which would
expire in six or eight months; and that they possibly might
wish to renew it. He then asked me what the conditions of
that truce were, to which I replied, they were simply that the
parties should not injure one another, nor give support to any
hostile force that might attempt to assail the territory of either;
which the Duke seemed to believe.

We have news from the direction of Urbino, that the Duke’s

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 169

army which had orders to approach that town have not passed
Fossombrone ; some say on account of the weather, and others
say that it was because a company of Vitellozzo’s infantry had
entered into Urbino; or perhaps because of the arrival of the
Orsini at Cagli, which I have mentioned above.

There are one thousand infantry here, who are in the Duke’s
pay; and I believe this has prevented him from raising more.
However, a large sum of money is expected from Rome by
way of Florence. The execution of the orders which I have
mentioned to you for the French troops, and for the raising
of both mounted men and infantry, are urgently pressed for-
ward, and all day messengers are arriving and departing for
Lombardy.

The Chevalier Orsino, whom I have mentioned before, re-
turned yesterday evening from Perugia. What news he brings
I know not; I conjecture, the same as what the Duke’s agent
has written from Sienna, of which I informed you above. I
have nothing more to write to your Lordships, unless it be
that, if I were asked for my opinion of all these movements, I
should answer, with your permission, that so long as the pres-
ent Pope lives, and so long as the Duke preserves the friend-
ship of the king of France, he will not be abandoned by that
good fortune which until now has steadily increased. For
those who have given indications of being hostile to him are
too late to do him much harm, and will be still more unable
to-morrow than they are to-day. :

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Intota, 17 October, 1502.

LETTER X.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

Yesterday about the twentieth hour I received by the courier
Baccino your Lordships’ letter of the 17th, with copies of the
letters sent from Perugia. Immediately after their receipt I
presented myself before his Excellency the Duke, and after
communicating to him what your Lordships write touching the
advices you expect from France, and your expressions of good
feeling towards him, as also the object of your sending a special

170) MISSION TO THE

courier to me, I read to him the copies of those letters from Pe-
rugia. Having listened to them, his Excellency thanked your
Lordships very much for the marks of friendship you give him
on every occasion, enlarging upon that point in the most amia-
ble manner, and promising you proof of his gratitude whenever
oceasion should present itself. After that he said that those six
hundred men-at-arms of which his adversaries boasted might on
review turn out less in number, and added laughingly: “They do
‘Swell to write men-at-arms in blank, which means to say none.
“T do not mean to boast, but I intend the results shall prove
“ what they are, and what we are. The more I know them, the
“less account I make of them and their troops. And as to this
“ Vitellozzo, to whom they have given so great a reputation, I
“cannot say that I have ever seen him do a single thing that
“ showed him to be a man of courage. His constant excuse was
“the French disease. All he is fit for is to devastate a defence-
“less country, to rob those who dare not face him, and to prac-
“tise treason. And he has shown this very clearly now in this
“affair of Pisa, so that no one can any longer doubt it; for he has
“betrayed me, being in my pay and having accepted my money.”
He enlarged very much upon this matter, speaking, however,
very calmly and without manifesting any anger. I replied to
his Excellency in the way I thought proper, and did not omit
in this interview, which did not terminate very speedily, to do
my best to confirm him in the opinion that he could not and
ought not to trust them any longer; bringing clearly to his at-
tention many instances of the past, when, whilst making show
of friendship, they were to the extent of their ability scheming
and plotting treason against him. I continue to do my utmost
to win his Excellency’s confidence, and to be allowed to talk
familiarly with him, in which I am aided by circumstances as
well as by the friendly demonstrations which your Lordships
have until now made towards him. But up to the present time
I have not been able to learn anything more from him.

As his Excellency did not himself broach the subject of the
affairs of Urbino, I did not touch upon it lest it might offend
him ; and besides, I can learn about it in great part by other
means.

There is an admirable secrecy observed at this court, and no
one speaks of things respecting which silence is to be observed ;
it is quite possible, therefore, that your Lordships may have

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. bt

heard more accurately at Florence than I have here, that the
Orsini, the Vitelli, and their other confederates, have all de-
clared themselves openly, and no longer dissimulate their
intentions. His Excellency had already told me of it, and
accordingly I mentioned it in my letter of the 17th. Three
days ago they routed after a fashion Don Michele, Don Hugo,
and Messer Ramiro, and drove them into Fossombrone. Some
say that Don Hugo has been taken, Don Michele wounded, and
that Messer Ramiro has retreated to Fano with the greater part
of the troops. Others say that they have abandoned Fossom-
brone entirely, and others again assert that they left there
some three hundred infantry. Be that as it may, the details
are of little importance ; enough to know that the Duke’s forces
have retreated, after receiving some hard knocks. Since then
we hear of no further encounters.

As to the Duke Guido, we got an inkling here a few days ago
that he had left Venice to enter into the duchy of Urbino; and
for that reason his Excellency has promptly sent a large force
to try and bar him the way; it is not known yet at what place
he has arrived. Some say he is at Urbino, others in San Leo,
and others again maintain that he has not yet passed the fron-
tier. I can only write you what I learn, and can only learn
what I hear. No one stirs from the direction of Bologna, and
there seems to be no apprehension from that quarter. The
measures taken by his Excellency are being urged from all
sides, as I have several times mentioned in my letters; and he
has spent since I have been here as much money for couriers
and special messengers as any one else would have spent in two
years. He does not cease day or night to send off messengers,
and yesterday evening he sent off two of his gentlemen, and
with them Guglielmo di P. di Buonaccorso, who had been in his
service at one time, and who speaks French well, to meet the
French lances that are on the way, and which, according to
what his Excellency tells me, might at this moment be on this
side of Modena.

I hope to be able to send you to-day the general safe-conduct
for our people. In speaking yesterday with his Excellency on
the subject, he was very angry that it had not yet been sent; and
in speaking of the matter he said, “ Would it not be proper
“that I should have some security for my people in your terri-
“tory?” To which I replied, that he might see from the facts

lees MISSION 10 THE

that there was no need of it; still, if his Excellency desired to
have a safe-conduct for those in his service and for his subjects,
it would most assuredly not be refused.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.
NiccoLo MacHIAVELLI.
Imoua, 20 October, 1502.

LETTER XI.

MacniFicent SIGNORI: —

Yesterday, before receiving your Lordships’ letter of the
17th, to which this is a reply, his Excellency the Duke sent
for me, and told me that he had letters from France from Mon-
seigneur d’Arles, containing the information that your Lord-
ships’ ambassador had presented himself on your part to his
Majesty the king, and had related to him the doings of the
Orsini, the meetings held by them, as well as the other move-
ments against his Holiness the Pope; that he had pointed
out to his Majesty the consequences that might result there-
from, and had advised him to take the matter in hand himself;
and that, in conclusion, he had told him that your Lordships
were ready to do whatever you could in support of the Pope
and the Duke whenever his Majesty should deem proper. That
his Majesty had expressed himself in reply very warmly in
favor of the Duke, and extremely pleased at the assurances of
the ambassador, saying that the more vigorous the support,
the more agreeable would it be to him, and that the Florentine
Signoria ought to render such aid by their armed forces and
by all other means. When our ambassador replied that vour
Lordships were short of troops, the king said that he would
grant you permission to raise troops in all his states for the
benefit of the Church. After having communicated to me this
information, his Excellency added: “ You must write to your
“Signoria to send ten squadrons of cavalry to my assistance ;
“and tell them that I am ready to conclude a firm and indis-
“soluble alliance with them, from which they will derive all
“the advantages that can be hoped for from my support and
“my fortune.” Adding that, “since his Majesty the king has
“manifested that disposition, of which your Lordships must

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 178

“ now be fully informed, he would wish that that matter should
‘be carried into effect” about which I wrote you on the 16th,
which letter was sent by our courier Giovanni de Domenico,
and which I will not repeat here. Moreover, the Duke would
wish that your Lordships, under color of some excuse, should
give the Orsini and their partisan chiefs to understand, either
verbally or by letter as you may deem best, that you are
obliged to obey the commands or suggestions of his Majesty
the king; and that if his Majesty should require you to give
your support to his Holiness the Pope, no matter against
whom, you would be obliged to give it. And here the Duke
protested to me that your Lordships would thus render him a
very great service, and desired me to write you immediately.

After that he touched upon various other subjects, to all of
which I replied as I thought my duty demanded, but being of
no particular importance, I deem it superfluous to give you
an account of them; and will only mention this, that in speak-
ing of Pandolfo Petrucci he said, “This man sends me every
“day letters or special messengers to assure me of his great
“friendship for me, but I know him.” He then told me that
he had been written to from various places that your Lordships
counselled the Bolognese to declare war against him, and that
those who had so written him said that you had done so either
because you desired his ruin, or for the purpose of making a
more advantageous treaty with him. But the Duke said that
he did not believe it, from all the evidence he had, and espe-
cially from the information he had received from France.

Valete !
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoza, 20 October, 1502.

LETTER XII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday by the courier Baccino,
in reply to yours of the 17th. In the beginning of my letter I
told you that I expected at last to obtain the safe-conduct ;
and for that purpose I went to see Messer Agapito, who told
me it was ready, but that he wanted from your Lordships a

174 MISSION TO THE

corresponding safe-conduct for all the subjects of the Duke.
IIe gave me a copy of the one he had prepared, which I send
you herewith, so that if you think fit you may have a similar
one prepared and send it to me; and I will then immediately
ect the one from here, and will try to effect the exchange
without any expense, provided your Lordships approve of this
arrangement.

Nothing new has occurred here since my last, unless it be
that Messer Antonio da Venafro, one of Pandolfo Petrucci’s
men, arrived here yesterday evening, being sent by the Orsini;
he left again to-day, but I do not know the object of his mis-
sion. I shall make every effort, however, to find it out, and
will then communicate it to your Lordships, to whom I recom-

mend myself.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

21 October, 1502.

Copy of the Safe-conduct.

Cesare Borgia of France, by the grace of God Duke of Ro-
magna and of Valentino, Prince of Adria and Venafro, Lord
of Piombino, ete., etc., Gonfalonier and Captain-General of the
Holy Church of Rome: —

To all the captains, condottieri, chiefs of squadrons, con-
stables, soldiers, and others in our pay, composing our army ;
and to the respected President and Auditors of our Council,
lieutenants, commissaries, podestas, officers ordinary and special,
directly or indirectly subject to our authority, to whom these
presents may come:— Be it known and made manifest that
we, being desirous that the illustrious Signoria, community, and
people of Florence experience, for the convenience of their citi-
zens and subjects, the proofs and demonstrations of our good
will, in conformity with the close and fraternal affection which
we bear to the said Signoria,—therefore we have ordered that
the aforesaid citizens and subjects may with entire liberty and
security contract and maintain friendly intercourse with all our
subjects, and may travel unmolested in person and with their
goods throughout our states and dominions.

And we command and enjoin all the aforementioned officers
and persons, generally and individually, not to permit any im-
pediment, real or personal, to any citizen or subject of the

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. WG)

aforementioned republic anywhere, and most particularly in
the cities, towns, castles, or other places in our dominion of
Romagna, or other states; but to let them pass freely with
their merchandise or goods of any kind belonging to them,
for the purpose of trade or traffic, giving them safe passage,
friendly reception, and good treatment everywhere; and to
afford them friendly assistance, and whatever protection they
may call for. |

And let no one act contrary to these presents, on pain of
incurring the full weight of our resentment and indignation.

Given at Imola, on the 19th of October, 1502, the second
year of our Duchy of Romagna.

LETTER XIII.

Maeniricent S1GNoRI: —

To-day, at about the twenty-fourth hour, I received through
Francesco del Magno three letters from your Lordships, one
of the 19th and two of the 21st; and after having read and
examined them carefully, I went to his Excellency the Duke
to communicate to him your reply to his demands respect-
ing which I wrote in my letter of the 16th. I told him of
the arrival at Florence of Messer Guasparre by order of the
Pope, and of his demands. To the first two, respecting the
hundred lances and the Marquis of Mantua, he replied by de-
claring the one impossible, and that he had nothing to do with
the Marquis, not wishing to begin his engagement before the
month of March. As to the third, touching the alliance, etc.,
I related to him the determination you had come to, promptly
to send an ambassador to the Pope, so as to learn his wishes
more fully, and to treat of all matters of common interest. I
did not in any way make known to the Duke your particular
instructions, as suggested to me by you at the end of your last
letter; and did not fail to try earnestly to convince him of
your desire to be of service to him, and how far you were from
having an understanding with any of his adversaries. And as
it seemed to me to the purpose, I communicated to him that
portion of your letter which refers to that matter.

176 MISSION. 1.0 (Rais,

His Excellency listened to me most graciously, as he always
does; and then, having gone to a table upon which lay some let-
ters, he said to me: ‘“ Before otherwise replying to you, I wish
“to show you a letter which his Majesty King Louis XII. has
“written to the Venetians, and of which Monseigneur d’Arles
“has sent me a copy in French. And for the better under-
“ standing of it, you must know that these Venetians, under pre-
“text of friendship, have sent word to the king by their envoys,
“that their love for his Majesty made them apprchensive lest he
“ should meet with some damage to his renown in Italy ; that as
“his most devoted friends they felt themselves obliged to ap-
“rise him of the current rumors, and of the harm resulting to
“him from the protection which he had accorded and continued
“to accord to the Pope and the Duke of Valentinois, who with-
“out provocation usurped the possessions of others, wasted the
“provinces by war, and committed endless damage and dis-
“orders, discreditable to his Majesty who permitted it. That
“the wrongs of the past were as nothing compared to those
“lately done at Bologna, which his Majesty had undertaken to
“protect. The king, after hearing these things, replied to them
“by letter, so that the Venetians might keep it before their
“eyes, and thus more clearly understand his intentions.” After
that the Duke read me that letter at length, which in effect
justified all these calumnies, and concluded by an expression
of ‘his determination to reduce all the States of the Church
to obedience, and that, if the Venctians were to oppose the
attempts of the Pope, his Majesty would treat them as en-
emies.

Having finished reading that letter, his Exeellency added:
“T have told you several times, and repeat it to you again now,
“that I shall not lack support. The French lances will be
“here shortly ; and thus the Pope will not permit me to want
“for money, nor the king of France to want for troops. Nor
“will [ boast either by act or word, but I think my enemies
“are likely to have occasion to regret their treachery to me.”
And then, turning the conversation upon the Orsini, he said:
“That they had lately been guilty of the greatest treachery
“against him that had ever been committed. You know,” he
said, “that I told you within the last few days that they were
“about to enter the duchy of Urbino in my stead, and accord-
“jing to my orders, which had been communicated to them by

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. y ber

“the Chevalier Orsino. Believing this, as they had raised the
“siege of the castle of Cagli, as I have told you, I wrote to Don
“Hugo di Cardona to march with his troops to Urbino, as the
“Orsini were coming to my support from the other side. He
“did so; but had it not been that he stopped on his way to de-
‘“molish two small castles, my troops would have been all cut
“to pieces. For when they were about to advance, they were
“assailed by a great number of the people of the country, and
‘were on the point of being surrounded by the Orsini, who
“ought to have been my friends. They have now made a
“descent into the territory of Fano, where, however, they take
“only what is necessary for their subsistence, pretending all
“the while to be my friends. Giampaolo Baglioni, another
“friend of the same sort, wanted to enter Fano, but did not
“succeed. You see now how they conduct themselves; they
“keep up friendly negotiations with me, and write me fine
“letters. To-day Signor Pagolo is to come here to see me,
“and to-morrow the Cardinal Orsino is to come, and thus they
‘mock me in their fashion; but I temporize, listen to all I hear,
‘and bide my time. By way of answer to what you told me on
“behalf of your Signoria, I readily accept their excuses, know-
“ing that they are founded in truth. Nor could I be better
“satisfied with them than what I am, and with what they write
“me of having gone purposely to Sienna; and therefore I wish
“you to offer them, on my part, all the service I have it in my
“power to render them. I did not upon your arrival open my-
“self so entirely to you, because my states were at that time ina
“very critical condition. Urbino had rebelled, and I knew not
“whom to rely upon. I found everything in disorder in these
“new states, and did not want your Signoria to believe that
“oreat fears had made me prodigal of promises. But now
“that my fears are less, I promise you more, and if necessary
“shall add thereto my deeds, when my apprehensions shall
“have been entirely dissipated.”

Having made a suitable reply to his Excellency’s remarks,
and having returned to the subject of the Orsini and the nego-
tiations, I thought it proper to say to him as coming from my-
self: “ Your Excellency sees how frankly my noble Signoria
“is in accord with you; for at the very height of your peril
“they have sent me to assure you of their friendly disposition
“and their devotion. Regardless of reproaches for increasing

VOL. III. 12

178 MISSION TO THE

“your reputation and lowering that of your enemies, they have
“broken off all negotiations with them, and have opened to your
“Excellency a free passage through their territories, which acts
“merit recognition and should not be forgotten. I beg, there-
“fore, to remind and urge upon your Excellency, that, if you
“should come to treat with the Orsini or any of the others,
“you will remember our devotion to you, and will therefore not
“conclude any arrangement contrary to the constant profes-
“sions of friendship on the part of your Excellency for my
“Signoria.”

To this the Duke answered that he entertained no such
thought, adding: “ You know that Antonio da Venafro has
“been to see me in the name of the Orsini, and, amonest much
“other news which he has given me, he brought forward a
“proposition to change the government of Florence. I replied,
“that the Florentine government was the friend of the king of
“ France, to whom I am devoted, and that it had never offended
‘me; and what was still more, I was on the point of forming an
“alliance with it. To this Antonio replied by urging me on no
“account to conclude such an alliance, but to let him return
“and effect a good arrangement between us. Whereupon I said
“to him, with the view of not giving him any encouragement in
“that direction: ‘We have gone so far that 1 cannot now go
“back ; nevertheless, I repeat to you that I am willing to listen
“to you and to continue negotiations with you, but will never
“conclude any arrangement adverse to the interests of Flor-
“ence, unless that republic should give me special occasion for
“so doing. And in case Messer Antonio should return, rest
“assured,” continued the Duke to me, “that I will tell you all
“he may say to me concerning your affairs; this I shall do any-
“how.” And thus terminated this conversation with the Duke
on this and many other subjects, which it is not worth while
to report; whereupon I took my leave of his Excellency.

Your Lordships are informed now of the language held by
the Duke, of which I have not written the half; and you will
now weigh the matter with your usual sagacity, having due
regard to the individual who uttered it. As to the situation of
things here I would observe that ever since my being here the
government of the Duke has been maintained exclusively by
his good fortune, which is founded upon the confident opinion
that the king of France will furnish him troops, and that the

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 179

Pope will supply him with money. Another matter which has
operated no less in his favor is the tardiness of his enemies in
pressing him; and in my judgment they are no longer able to
do him any harm, for he has provided all the important places
with garrisons, and the fortresses with ample means of defence.
These precautions have so cooled the spirits of his enemies that
the Duke can now securely await the arrival of fresh forces.
As all these places are commanded by citadels within, they
know that, if they were to commit any folly, the Duke on his
arrival would let the French troops upon them; and thus the
mere apprehension has kept them quiet, if not all, at least the
greater part of them.

The city of Pesaro being most suspected by the Duke, he has
sent Don Michele Coraglia there with such troops as were left
to him; and feeling more sure of Fano, he has left that city to
the care of its own inhabitants. But as Rimini has and con-
tinues to cause him anxiety, he has thrown a strong garrison
into that city. Of Cesena, Faenza, and Furli he has no appre-
hensions, the inhabitants of the latter city being hostile to the
Lady Catharine Sforza, and the other two having no lords. The
Duke himself is here at Imola, and can repress any movement
on the part of the Bolognese. Having organized things in this
wise, he only awaits the arrival of the French to take the field ;
and according to the report of Rafaello de’ Pazzi they must any-
how be by this time in the duchy of Ferrara. He also reports
having left eight hundred Gascons at...... some thirty miles
from here. The six hundred Ferrarese infantry which the Duke
had ordered to be raised there have just arrived here. To-day
he has expedited the Chancellor of the Signor of Mirandola
with money and instructions to have him raise troops; and
this captain promises to be here with his troops within ten days.
On the other hand, the enemy have partly surrounded Fano,
and it is reported to-day that they have opened the siege in
regular form. Moreover the Bolognese are in force at Castel
San Piero, and for two days have scoured and wasted the coun-
try, and are reported this evening to be in the neighborhood of
Doccia, three miles from here.

Your Lordships will judge of these matters as may seem
fit in your wisdom. As you have sent an ambassador to Rome,
my longer stay here will be superfluous. I beg therefore that
your Lordships will consent to my recall; for my private inter-

180 MISSION TO THE

ests at home are going to ruin, and I have expended all the
money you have given me, as is well known to those who serve
me here.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imota, 23 October, 1502.

P. S.—To day is the 24th, and it is announced that the Sig-
nor Paolo Orsino will be at Cesena to-night, and that he will be
here to-morrow to confer with the Duke.

LETTER XIV.

MacnyiFicent SIGNORI : —

By mine of the 23d, which I retained until the 24th, I have
replied to yours of the 21st. Yesterday, the 25th, Signor Paolo
Orsino arrived here and presented himself to the Duke, dressed
like a courier, and stated that the Cardinal Borgia had placed
himself as a hostage for his security in the hands of the Orsini.
The coming of Signor Paolo is in great part due to that gentle-
man, at whose request he has come here to excuse and _ justify
what has occurred, and to learn more nearly the intentions of
‘his Excellency ; and to communicate them to the others. He
has to-day despatched a courier to them in the neighborhood
of Fano to learn their final resolution. I have not been able to
learn any particulars of the interview between Signor Paolo and
the Duke, nor do I believe that I shall be able to obtain any, as
that gentleman is very reticent, and talks with but few persons.
At one time an arrangement was under consideration, and
Messer Giovanni Bentivogli has sent several messengers to the
Bishop of Euna; but now, since the arrival of Messer Paolo,
he often receives a chancellor sent by Messer Annibale Benti-
vogli, who is at Castel San Piero. All the booty taken by the
Bolognese three days ago is being restored. The Orsini have
not laid siege to Fano, as had been reported, nor are the Benti-
vogli before Doccia, which I wrote you yesterday had been cur-
rently reported here. And thus nobody stirs; and we now see
that the negotiations for an arrangement are favorable to the
Duke, and that he entertains them willingly ; but I will not
pretend to judge what his real intentions are.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 181

To-day is the 27th, and yesterday evening at the fourth hour
I received your Lordships’ letter of the 25th. So soon as his
Excellency the Duke had arisen this morning I went to see
him, and as it seemed to me proper to communicate your de-
spatch to him, I read him the greater part of it. He thanked
your Lordships according to his wont for your firm disposition,
and for the communication made to him through the mission
of Messer Gino di Rossi. He assured me that he could not but
believe you, as your words and your letters agreed so entirely.
Then, referring to the arrival of Signor Paolo and the proposed
treaty, he said: “These men merely want that I should secure
‘‘them, and it only remains to find the way of doing it, which
“must be according to fixed stipulations, for which they look
“to the Cardinal Orsino.” And without giving me a chance
to say a word, he added: “It is enough for you to know in
“oeneral that I shall never conclude anything contrary to
“the interests of your Signoria; I will not permit them to
“be wronged to the extent of a single hair.’ He seemed
pleased that an envoy had been sent to Rome, and yet he did
not refer to that matter, but passed it over. I did not fail to
recommend to him Salvestro di Buosi in the terms suggested
to me by your Lordships. His Excellency replied: “ Your
“Signoria desires that I should set Salvestro at liberty, he
“being their-friend. To which I reply, that all my subjects are
“their friends and servants; and your Signoria should rather
“interest itself for the great number of my subjects, who
“would suffer by the liberation of Salvestro, than for him
“alone. Suffice it for the present that no harm shall come
“to him, and so soon as I can set him free without irritating
“my people, I will comply most cheerfully with the request of
“your Signoria.”

Your Lordships desire me to give them a fresh account of
the condition of things as I find them here, having already
done so in my last, which I presume was received by you on
the 24th; I therefore do not repeat it. Matters are very much
as when I wrote you, excepting that the booty taken by the
Bolognese is being restored, and neither Fano nor Doccia is
besieged, as had been reported. It is true, we have the news
to-day that the Vittelleschi have taken the castle of Fossom-
brone, which held to the Duke. Paolo Orsino expressed his
dissatisfaction at it, and spoke very severely of those who

182 MISSION TO THE

caused it to be done. As to the terms of any arrangement
that may be concluded between them, they are not sufficiently
known ; but one may augur favorably regarding it. If we ex-
amine the characters of both the one and the other party, we
shall find in the Duke a daring and fortunate man, full of
hope, favored by a Pope and a king, and who finds himself
assailed by the others, not only in a state that he wishes to
acquire, but also in one that he has already acquired. The
other party will be seen to fear for their own states, and to
have been afraid of the Duke before they provoked him. Hay-
ing done so now, their fears are increased, and it is impossible
to see how the latter can pardon the offence, or how the former
can dismiss their apprehensions ; and consequently how either
the one can yield in his attempt against Bologna, or the others
in theirs upon the duchy of Urbino. It is argued that an ami-
cable arrangement between them would be possible only if they.
could unite their joint forces against some third party, in which
case neither the Duke nor the confederates need reduce their
forces, and both would rather gain in renown and in real ad-
vantages.

However, if such an arrangement could be brought about,
there would be no other power for them to turn against ex-
cept Florence or Venice. An attack upon Florence is judged
to be the easier of the two, so far as Florence itself is con-
cerned, but more difficult on account of the king of France;
whilst an attempt upon Venice would be easier so far as the
king of France is concerned, but more difficult as regards Ven-
ice itself. The latter would be the most agreeable to the Duke,
and the former more acceptable to the confederates. Still it
is not believed that cither one or the other will be undertaken,
although spoken of as a possible thing. And thus I ean find
no one who can definitely suggest a way for an agreement
between the two. But such as nevertheless form some defi-
nite idea to themselves on the subject believe that the Duke
will succeed in causing a division amongst the confederates,
and having thus broken up their alliance he will have nothing
more to fear from them, and may then pursue his own enter-
prises. I am rather disposed to believe this from some mut-
terings that have fallen from the lips of his ministers; and
moreover I have evidence that the Bentivogli are quite uneasy
on account of the coming here of Paolo Orsino. The league,

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 183

however, is so recent, that it is difficult to believe in its being
broken up.

Your Lordships, having now been apprised of the various
reports current here, will, with your greater wisdom and expe-
rience, form a better judgment of the state of things here,
respecting which | have thought it my duty to write all I have
heard.

A considerable part of the Gascons have arrived at Cas-
tello in the Bolognese territory, and the quartermasters of the
French troops are expected here from day to day.

1 entreat your Lordships again to accord me my recall, for
the public weal requires no further temporizing; and if any-
thing definite is to be concluded, then it will be necessary to
send some one of greater authority. My own affairs at home
are falling into the greatest disorder, and moreover I cannot
remain here any longer without money, which it is necessary
to spend here.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoxa, 27 October, 1502.

LETTER XV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

In my last of the 27th, I communicated to you what I had
learned of the state of things here. Since then Signor Paolo
Orsino has been to Bologna, whence he returned this evening.
It is openly said that a treaty has been concluded between
the confederates and the Duke Valentino, and that they are
only waiting for the consent of the Cardinal Orsino before
ratifying it.

I have not been able to learn anything satisfactory as to
the particular conditions of that treaty ; but it is said that all
the old compacts that existed between the Duke and Messer
Giovanni and the Vitelli and the Orsini are renewed by this
treaty ; that the Duke is to be reinstated in the duchy of Ur-
bino, and that the Duke of Ferrara becomes surety for both
parties. Other things are talked about, but I do not mention
them, as they seem less credible than the above. Whether

184 MISSION TO THE

such a treaty has really been concluded, and whether its condi-
tions are such as I have mentioned above, I dare not affirm.
But besides all these negotiations about the treaty, I see the
Duke expending large sums in warlike preparations; it was
only yesterday that he despatched a Messer Arcolano into
Lombardy with several thousand ducats, to hasten the de-
parture of the remainder of the French troops that are ex-
pected, and the other mounted men, whom he caused to be
collected under the command of the son of the General of
Milan, which I mentioned in one of my letters a few days ago.
1 hear, moreover, the Duke’s principal officers speak in secret
very ill of the Orsini, and call them traitors; and in convers-
ing this morning with Messer Agapito about this treaty, he
laughed at it, saying that it was a mere trick to gain time.
The Duke’s own remarks have always made me conclude that
he was anxious thus to temporize, until he should have com-
pleted all his preparations. Nor can I believe that the others
should not be aware of this, so that I am really perplexed; and
being unable to learn anything from his ministers, I would ere
this have addressed myself to the Duke himself, but have not
had an opportunity since then. © To-morrow, however, unless I
should receive letters from you, I shall endeavor to speak to
him, and see how he expresses himself with regard to this
treaty. For when I think whether they may not have con-
cluded some arrangement prejudicial to our republic, I become
uneasy at the secrecy in which this matter is involved; for the
Duke’s secretaries have become almost rude to me, rather than
otherwise, and even the Duke of Ferrara’s envoy, who used to
take pleasure in conversing with me actually avoids me now.
This evening, after supper, Messer Alessandro Spannochi made
use of certain expressions that did not please me, hinting that
your Lordships had had the opportunity of treating with his
Kxcellency the Duke, but that the chance was now lost. I
have thought proper to mention all these indications and
goings on to your Lordships, as they came under my obser-
vation, so that you may yourselves judge of their meaning, and
take such measures as may prevent any one from successfully
plotting against you.

It is now the sixth hour of the night, and some one has just
come in to tell me that the Duke had at that moment received
the news of the revolt of Camerino. We shall know better to-

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 185

morrow morning whether this be true, and if so, it may render
the conclusion of the treaty more difficult, unless the Duke of |
his own accord makes greater concessions to the confederates,
for fear of worse.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imota, 29 October, 1502.

P. S.— To-day is the 30th, and Zerino has just arrived with
your letters of the 28th, respecting which I shall speak with
the Duke, and will then write you fully this evening concern-
ing matters here. I send this letter by Branchino, who is just
about to leave, it being now the twentieth hour; he goes to
Florence to buy horses, etc., etc. Respecting affairs at Came-
rino, which I mentioned above, nothing is openly said at court
this morning, but the individual who told me of it yesterday
evening confirms the news, and says he has seen letters on the
subject directed to Signor Paolo Orsino; but that the Duke
has requested him not to make the information public. I men-
tion this just as I have heard it, and recommend myself again
to your Lordships.

Memorandum of the Troops of the Duke Valentino.

Infantry.

Done Michele. 60 ee ee OU
One ar NOMO ee ee Oe
Comandatore (ee ee a ee ee OD
Wacntro;diseala ye ee
Pou omolnae oe a es et ee
io Seallonda Sienna 02 a et
Gr acheito a Ba ies ie ote eee)
Salzato, the Shontcr| a ee te ee eis 008
Won Ole a
aainbattista NaltIG <0 ee ee 200
Mare cA mtoniG Gl CANO. et = ee On)
Gianniet(o. Gi OtyiCHA se tee ee LOU
Mangiares . . SC ee co ee re ne 4LY)
Gascons and Germans ee ee ee ee UU

These Gascons and Germans are here; all the others are
scattered throughout the neighboring places, as far as Fano,
and the greater part of them have already consumed their pay
for four or six days. The Swiss that are expected are said to
number three thousand lances.

186 MISSION TO THE

Men-at-arms.
Don igo, thespaniards: 5s ee OU
Monsignore d’ Allegri, aSpaniard . . . . .... SO
Don Giovannl ay @ardond 0. ee ee OU)

These three companies had already been reduced in num-
bers before the rout of Fossombrone, and, having since then
received another check, must be still less in number.

Gathered from the Duke’s own states... 30
Conte Lodovieo della Mirandola is said to eee 60, but
I have heard since that he has only about . . . . 40

The latter is with his company at present about six miles
from here. The son of the General of Milan is reported to
have orders to raise one hundred men-at-arms; he is still in
Lombardy, and I know positively that twelve days ago a large
sum of money was sent to him. Messer Galeazzo Pallavicini
is said to have orders to raise fifty men-at-arms; he too is still
in Lombardy.

One hundred men-at-arms, composed of the Duke’s house-
hold, are here. Fifty French lances are in the territory of
Faenza. Others are said to be on the way, and are expected
here from day to day.

Cavalry.
Don Michele Ns Goes ere i
Maestro Francesco da ene Pee i)
Messer Rinieri della Sassetta and ae. Pade ad Toppa
crossbowmen. . . oe cae 200

Conte Lodovico della iced ~ cae ae ee

Besides the other men-at-arms there are: —

Prdoeaein os
PetacuerJanees is 5, 4, 6 ee
Govan Ga Sagsatenlo 735 2, ae i

Messer Baldassara da Sienna has been sent to Florence to
enlist others.

Deserters from the Bentivogli, crossbowmen . . . . 40

The Fracassa is here, having been taken into the Duke’s pay,
as also his men-at-arms.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 187

LETTER XVI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

In my preceding letter I wrote you all that I had been able
to learn up to that morning of the state of things here. Since
then I have been obliged to wait until the twenty-fourth hour
before I could have an audience of the Duke, which has never
happened to me before, even if his Excellency was prevented
by some good reason. Having presented myself before him,
I told him, in accordance with your Lordships’ instructions, of
your continued friendly disposition towards him, and that you
were awaiting the return of the envoys sent to Rome, etc., etc.
I then spoke of the treaty reported to have been concluded, and
his Excellency told me that the terms had been fully agreed
upon. When I asked him the particulars, he replied: “In the
“first instance, the Pope generously grants them a free pardon.
“ Next, I renew to the Orsini and the Vitelli their military en-
“ oavements, but neither his Holiness nor myself give them any
“security. On the contrary, they are to place their children
“and nephews or others as hostages in my hands, according to
“the choice of the Pope. They further obligate themselves to
“aid me in the recovery of the duchy of Urbino, and of any
“ other state that has revolted, or that may hereafter revolt.”

To my question whether there was anything in the treaty
touching Florence, he replied, “ No.” And then he said in re-
lation to the affairs of Bologna, that “these would be left to
“the arbitration of himself and the Cardinal Orsino and Pan-
“ dolfo Petrucci.” He reiterated to me that there was no men-
tion of Florence in the treaty, and promised to give me a copy
of it; which I shall endeavor to obtain anyhow by to-morrow,
provided he keeps his word. To the assurances of friendship
and good will on your part, with which your Lordships have
charged me, his Excellency replied in few but kindly words,
and passed it over lightly.

Before seeing the Duke I had a conversation with an indi-
vidual who habitually professes an affectionate regard for your
Lordships, and who is in a position to be well informed. As
I pressed him upon every point, he gave me the same statement
that the Duke had done. Another person, who is also to a con-
siderable extent in the Duke’s secrets, confirmed these state-

188 MISSION TO THE

ments. And without my having manifested any doubt upon
the subject, all have attested to me that the Duke had always
taken the part of your Lordships whenever there was a question
relating to our republic. Your Lordships will now in your
wisdom judge of the offences and of the agreement, respecting
which I could learn no more. I shall do my utmost promptly
to send you the articles of the agreement, if I obtain the prom-
ised copy. Your Lordships will understand that, if there be
anything in the treaty adverse to you, I could not be informed
of it, as it is not reasonable to suppose that it would come to
light so quickly; your own good judgment must determine
whether there be any such thing or not.

This evening the quartermasters of the French lances ar-
rived, and they will be here themselves by to-morrow. The
Duke does not cease to press the starting of all the other forces
which he expects from Lombardy; namely, the Signor della
Mirandola, and the son or nephew of the Milanese General, who
have been joined by the Signor Fracassa and one of the Palla-
vicini whom he has enlisted in his pay; and it is said here
that the Duke has sent them money so as to enable them to
arm and mount every one of their men. Large sums of money
have been received here by way of Venice, the greater part of
which has been sent into Lombardy. Moreover, all the mal-
contents of Perugia, Castello, and Sienna are here, together
with one of the Savelli. Yesterday one of them told me that
they had asked to be allowed to depart when they heard of the
treaty, but that the Duke had refused to release them, and will
not permit any of their leaders to leave the place; but Signor
Paolo Orsino left this evening, and has gone in the direction
of Urbino.

Apart from the negotiations with the whole body of the con-
federates, Messer Giovanni Bentivogli has carried on one in
particular with the Duke through the intervention of Tommaso
Spinelli, who has repeatedly gone to and fro between them.
According to what the latter has told me, Messer Giovanni
would be willing to abandon the Orsini entirely, should oppor-
tunity present itself, if he could be assured by the Duke of his
safety ; but he wants also the guaranty of his Majesty the king
of France. Amongst other points of the negotiations it is
said that the Protonotario Bentivogli would readily leave the
Church, and marry a sister of the Cardinal Borgia. For the

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 189

purpose of facilitating these negotiations the said Spinelli came
here eight days ago to obtain a safe-conduct for the Protono-
tario Bentivogli; but as it had expired, he returned here yes-
terday morning for another, with which he departed this even-
ing. If these things are really so, we may judge of the good
faith between them, and of their former differences, and their
subsequent agreement.

I have no further news at present, unless it be the confirma-
tion of the revolt of Camerino, of which I have already advised
your Lordships by your own courier, who will anyhow be at
Florence to-morrow. I understand that you complain that my
letters are not frequent enough, which I regret, and the more
as I do not think I can do better, having written you on the
Tth, 9th, 11th, 12th, 138th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 20th, 23d,
27th, and the present, which is of the 29th and 30th.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
October 30, 1502.

P. 8.—I have forgotten to tell your Lordships that, whilst
conversing with Messer Alessandro, I sought to obtain from
him the words he had made use of, and which I mentioned in
my last. He replied that he did not intend to say anything
more than that you had missed the opportunity of settling
matters in your own way with his Excellency the Duke; be-
cause, the Orsini having by this treaty become his friends again,
he is now obliged to have some regard to them, which before
then he would not have had to do; and that further delay only
made matters worse. More than this I was not able to obtain
from him. I beg your Lordships most respectfully to have
some consideration for the party who made these communica-
tions to me, so that it may not come to their ears that I have
written them to you.

7 Iterum valete !

190 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XVII.

MaGniFricEnt SIGNORI : —

By my last of the 29th and 380th, which I sent by Zerino,
your courier, you will have learned what I had to say in reply
to yours of the 28th, and what I have learned from the Duke
as well as from others respecting the movements of Paolo
Orsino, and of the terms of the agreement concluded between
his Exeecllency the Duke and the confederates. And as the
Duke had promised to have me furnished with a copy of the
same, I went to-day to ask his secretary, Messer Agapito, for it,
who finally said to me: “I will tell you the truth, this treaty
“has not yet been definitely settled. A draft of it has been
“»repared, which has been approved by the Duke and Signor
‘Paolo, who has taken it away with him to submit it to the
“confederates; and if they approve of it also, then he is au-
“thorized by the Duke to ratify it on his behalf. But no
“sooner had Signor Paolo gone than the Duke, on more care-
“fully examining the articles of agreement, thought that a
“clause was wanting in it referring to the crown and honor
“of France. An additional article to that effect was immedi-
“ately drawn up, and the Duke sent me in all haste with it
“after Signor Paolo, with instructions to explain to him that
“without that additional article nothing would be concluded.
“When I had overtaken Signor Paolo, he refused to accept it,
“but after a while said that he would submit it to the confed-
“erates, but did not believe that they would agree to it. In
“consequence of this the Duke does not wish any copies of
“the treaty to be given, and neither the Chancellor of Ferrara
“nor any one else has received one.” Messer Agapito after-
wards added: “This supplementary clause will either be ac-
“cepted or rejected; if it is accepted, a window will be opened
“for the Duke to get out of the obligations of this treaty at
“his pleasure. If it be rejected, then it will open the door wide
“for him. But even the children must laugh at such a treaty,
“which is so injurious and dangerous for the Duke, and wholly
“the result of violence.” Messer Agapito spoke with much
warmth upon the matter. All this has been confided to me
in secret. I have nevertheless deemed it my duty to communi-
cate it to your Lordships; and putting this together with what

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 191

I wrote yesterday, you will in your wisdom draw a suitable
conclusion from it. I will only add that Messer Agapito is a
Colonnese, and much devoted to that party.

Your Lordships point out to me in your postscript to your
letter of the 28th, that the succor which the Duke expects is
small in numbers, and slow in coming; and therefore you ap-
prehend that his Excellency, finding himself weak and closely
pressed by his enemies, may conclude some arrangement with
them disadvantageous to himself and prejudicial to his neigh-
bors. I believe your Lordships have reliable advices from
Milan, and from France, respecting the men of the other side;
nevertheless I will tell you what I hear here, so that your
Lordships may be able the better to weigh and judge the mat-
ter. Yesterday evening there returned here Guglielmo di
Buonaccorso, a citizen of Florence, whom I have mentioned to
you as having gone to accompany the French lances that have
come into Italy, and all of which the Duke has ordered into
the territory of Faenza. Guglielmo tells me that these lances
consist of five companies, namely those of Montison, Miolens,
Foix, Dunois, and the Marquis of Saluces; and that when
he saw them all together, only seven were missing out of
the whole complement. But he believes that by this time
these will have been more than made up by the accession of
volunteers; so, as I have already said, these lances are here
in reality. Yesterday, also, there returned here a Spaniard
named Piero Guardarbo, who had been sent by the Duke into
France. Guglielmo told me that he had a long conversation
with this Piero on the road, who had told him that it had been
arranged with his Majesty the king of France that he is to
send three additional companies; and that when he left Milan,
one under command of Monseigneur de Ligny had already
started, but that Monseigneur de Chaumont had not yet de-
cided as to the other two that are to come.

In one of my letters of the 9th to your Lordships, you will
remember my having mentioned that amongst other prepara-
tions which the Duke had made, in consequence of the defec-
tion of the Orsini, he had sent the son of the General of Milan
into Lombardy, with orders to raise fifteen hundred Swiss, and,
moreover, to re-enlist fifty or one hundred mounted men, the
pick of those that had already been in the service of the Duke
of Milan, and to bring them here under his own command.

192 MISSION TO THE

And it is said that the expense of raising them will be borne
by the General of Milan himself, in the hope of thereby having
one of his sons made a cardinal. This same Guglielmo also
told me that he had heard that the Swiss were already at Pa-
via, and that the mounted men were merely waiting orders to
march. It is said, moreover, that the son of Monseigneur
d’Albret has come again into Italy with one hundred lances,
in support of his brother-in-law ; which, if true, although rather
late, yet is of some importance. This Guglielmo, from whom
I have this information, seems to me, from what I have seen
of him, a sensible and reliable man. As regards the Italian
troops, the engagement of the Conte della Mirandola is true,
and he received his pay some days ago. It is also said that he
has received money to furnish men-at-arms to Fracassa and
to one of the Pallavicini, a gentleman in his service; in fact,
he enlists all the scattered men that present themselves. Two
days ago there came a certain Piero Balzano, a deserter from
Giovanni Bentivogli, with forty mounted crossbowmen, and
naoney was paid to him immediately on his arrival.

I cannot at this moment give your Lordships any more in-
formation, for since the revolt of Camerino we have no news
either from there or from the neighborhood of Bologna. The
Protonotario Bentivogli has not come back either, as was ex-
pected, and as [ had written to your Lordships.

Two words will explain the state of things here: on the one
hand they talk of a treaty of amity, and on the other hand
they make preparations for war. Your Lordships, having in-
formation from all parts, will be able to form a better judg-
ment as to what the Duke will or can do, and whether he will
have to yield to the confederates or not, than he who sces only
the one side. I have kept your Lordships fully advised up to
the 31st. To-day is the Ist of November, and being very de-
sirous of sending you the articles of agreement, and to verify
the accounts given me by that friend of mine, I have since
writing to you conferred with another individual who is also
in the Duke’s secrets; and what he tells me fully confirms
what my fricnd had reported to me. But I have not been
able to learn anything from him respecting the supplementary
clause, except that it relates to the honor of France; but this
person assured me again that no reference is made in it to
Florence. It is true, he told me, that there is one clause in

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 193

the agreement that the Orsini and Vitellozzo were not obliged
to serve the Duke simultaneously, but only one at a time.
“You see,” said he, laughing, “what sort of an agreement
this is.” I shall not leave this matter without trying to learn
something more on the subject; and so as not to keep your
Lordships in suspense, I send this by a courier named Giovanni
Antonio da Milano, who has promised me to deliver it by to-
morrow; and your Lordships will please have him paid the sum
of one florin gold.

P. S.—At the moment of closing this letter, Tommaso
Spinelli arrives and tells me that he left the Protonotario
Bentivogli at Castel San Piero, and that he will be here to-
morrow.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Imota, November 1, 1502.

LETTER XVIII.

Maentricent Srenort: —

In my last letters of the 30th ultimo and the 1st instant, I
informed you of what I had been able to learn respecting the
terms of the treaty, and of the reasons why I had not been
able to obtain a copy of it. To-day I had a long conversation
with one of the Duke’s first secretaries, who confirmed all I
had written you. “The return of the Chevalier Orsino is ex-
“nected,” said he to me, “and according to his report they will
“either give the treaty to the public or not.” And he has
promised me that no one shall have a copy of it without my
having one also. In this matter I am obliged to depend upon
others; and yet I have heard nothing that makes me sus-
pect that it contains anything contrary to the interests of your
Lordships ; I have only heard you blamed for having missed the
opportunity of concluding an alliance with the Duke. I have
written you at length, and without reserve, all I have learned
in relation to matters here; and as nothing new has occurred,
I have nothing to write except to repeat that, if words and
negotiations indicate an agreement, the orders given and the
preparations are manifest indications of war. In accordance

VOL. III. 13

194 MISSION LO ToL

with what I have already written, five companies of French
lances were quartered four days ago in the territory of Faenza,
and their captains came here yesterday to visit the Duke and
remained quite a while conferring with him. After they had
gone I called in your Lordships’ name on Monseigneur de Mon-
tison, the commander-in-chief of the whole. He was pleased to
sce me, and seemed favorably disposed towards your Lordships ;
and desired me to remind him, when occasion should offer, of
whatever he could do in favor of our republic. I also called
upon the Baron di Biera, Monscigneur Le Grafis, and Mon-
seigneur de Borsu, lieutenants of Messieurs de Foix, Miolens,
and Dunois. I made mysclf known to them, and they recog-
nized me as having on a former occasion had some negotiations
with them. All seemed pleased to see me, and all offered me
their services ; and so far as I have been able to judge, they are
all your friends, and praised your Lordships highly, which is
no trifle. If there be anything special that I can do with these
gentlemen, I beg your Lordships to instruct me. About three
hundred Gascons arrived here to-day; the Swiss are expected
within the next few days, and on their arrival it is believed
that active operations will be begun.

I told your Lordships in my last, of the Ist instant, that the
Protonotario Bentivogli was to arrive here with a safe-conduct,
and in fact he did come at the nineteenth hour. He break-
fasted with the Duke, and remained afterwards about half an
hour with his Excellency, and then left in the direction of Bo-
logna. Ihave not been able to learn anything of their conver-
sation, because the person that is in the habit of informing me
on these sort of intrigues has gone off with him. True, I have
learned from one who is familiar with the affairs of the Duke,
that the Protonotario is to return here very soon; and that the
Duke is willing to make peace with Giovanni Bentivogli and
give him ample security, provided he will obligate himself to
sustain the Duke against the Orsini and the Vitelli. And
when I remarked to him how the Duke could do so with regard
to the other confederates, he replied, that his Excellency would .
arrange it so that he should be ordered to do it by the king of
France. And speaking of the advantages that would result
from such an arrangement to the Duke, to the republic of
Florence, and to Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, supposing that
it could be accomplished, he added, that the Duke desired it

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 195

very much, as it had been demonstrated to him that it would
give more stability to his state to sustain Messer Giovanni, and
to have him for a friend, than to drive him out of Bologna and
take possession of a place which he could not hold, and which
in the end would prove the chief cause of his ruin. And then
he went on to say that the Duke of Ferrara had always refused
to promise any assistance to his Excellency, and would not do
so now unless the Duke first made peace with Bologna.

I endeavored to confirm this individual in that opinion by all
the arguments that presented themselves to me. It seems to
me certain that such a negotiation is going on, and that both his
Excellency and the Duke of Ferrara are desirous of concluding
it, of which I deem it proper to advise your Lordships, because
it would be so desirable. Although this ought to be communi-
cated to you in cipher, yet as I send it by your own courier I
thought I would save myself as well as your Lordships that
trouble, and hope yon will be satisfied and give me credit
therefor.

A person who was formerly master of the horse in your
Lordships’ service, and who is now one of the Duke’s body-
guard, told me that, happening to be yesterday evening at the
fifth hour at the quarters of the Count Alessandro da Mar-
ciano, brother to the Count Rinuccio, the Duke, who was pass-
ing by there at the time, had the Count Alessandro called out,
and kept him for an hour in conversation. After the Count
returned he told this person that the Duke had talked with him
about many things, all of which, taken together, indicated on
the part of the Duke a desire of revenge rather against those
who had imperilled his state than a desire or disposition for
peace.

Nothing beyond what I have written above occurs to me in
reply to your Lordships’ letter of the Ist; nor have I tried to
see the Duke, having nothing new to communicate to him, it
being tiresome for him always to hear the same things. I
should moreover observe to your Lordships that his Excel-
lency is not accessible except to two or three of his ministers,
and to such strangers as may have important business to trans-
act with him. And he never passes out of his antechamber
until about the fifth or sixth hour in the evening, and for that
reason there is no chance to speak to him except at a specially
appointed audience, which he does not grant to any one whom

1°96 MISSION TO. TRE

he knows to have nothing but words to offer. I mention this
to your Lordships so that you may not be surprised by my re-
solve not to speak to the Duke, so as not to be obliged hereafter
to communicate to you that I have not been able to obtain an
audience.

Bene valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imota, 3 November, 1502.

LETTER XIX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

Messer Baldassare Scipione, a gentleman from Sicnna, al-
ready favorably known to your Lordships by his merits, has
recently entered the service of his Excellency the Duke, as
captain of a corps of lances formed by him. He is sent by his
Excellency to Florence on some business of special interest to
the Duke. His Excellency’s treasurer, Messer Alessandro, has
begged me to recommend Messer Baldassare to your Lordships,
and to solicit, in the name of his Excellency and in his own,
your aid and good offices for Messer Baldassare, for which the
Duke and himself will ever remain under obligations to you.
I beg to add my own humble prayer to that effect, and com-
mend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imota, 3 November, 1502.

LETTER XX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Your Lordships will have learned from my letter of the 5th
that the Duke had gone to Salarolo to confer with those French
gentlemen. During his absence I received yours of the 5th.
His Excellency returned late yesterday evening, and to-day,
after having reviewed the Swiss, who begin to arrive, he could
not give me an audience until the first hour of the night. I
informed him of the mission of Monsignore Volterra to France,

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS, LOT,

and enlarged as far as was suitable upon the favorable character
of the instructions given him as regards his Excellency and his
states. And then I added that your Lordships had written me
that you had been informed by your envoy at Rome that his
Holiness the Pope manifested the same favorable disposition
towards the Florentine republic as his Excellency; but that
your Lordships nevertheless desired his influence with his Ho-
liness whenever there might be occasion for it. Thereupon his
Excellency asked me “what possible occasion could occur.”
To which I answered, that ‘it might be in reference to the re-
“mission of some tithes.” He replied that he would do what
was necessary, and desired me to thank your Lordships for the
instructions given to your envoy to France, the Bishop of Vol-
terra. He also asked me whether the Marquis of Mantua had
accepted his military engagement, to which I answered that
your Lordships had written me a few days ago that the matter
was still in doubt. Thereupon his Excellency asked me, “ And
“what military engagement does your government propose to
“offer me?” My reply was, that “I did not know your Lord-
“‘ ships’ intentions, but that up to that moment I had been under
“the impression that his Excellency intended rather to take
“others into his service and pay.” To which the Duke an-
swered, “ Being by profession a soldier, and being a friend of
“your Signoria, would it be honorable for me not to be engaged
“by them? Nor do I believe that I deceive myself in thinking
“that I would serve them as well as any other captain.”

He then asked me how many men-at-arms your Lordships
intended to keep on foot? To which I made answer, that I did
not know your Lordships’ views upon that point, but I believed
that you intended to keep at least four hundred. Thereupon he
asked me how many the Marquis of Mantua had actually of his
own, and how many our republic; and when I told him, he
arose, saying, “That is no place for me then,” and withdrew
to speak to a French gentleman, whereupon I took my leave.
Before entering upon this discussion respecting his being en-
gaged by your Lordships, and the number of men-at-arms, etc.,
etc., his Excellency said to me, speaking of the Orsini, that the
ratification of the treaty had not yet been received, either be-
cause those who had to sign it were at some distance from each.
other, or because some of them were reluctant to sign, in con-
sequence of Giovanni Bentivogli being vexed at being made of

198 MISSION TO; TALE

so little account as to have his interests referred to arbitration.
But the Duke added that these difficulties caused him less em-
barrassment than they would have done at a former period, as
he was better prepared now. He further observed to me, that it
would be well in the mean time if your Lordships were to make
some special arrangement with him, so that he might not be
entirely dependent upon the other parties; assuring me at the
same time that, if he should finally conclude the treaty with the
Orsini, it would be done in good faith. And then he added,
“ Secretary, I beg you to tell me whether your Signoria will go
“further in sustaining me than by a mere general friendship ?”
And when I replied to him in accordance with your letters, he
said, “I asked you this because, if such a general friendship
“ suffices them, I shall be content with it also, and would not
“like to indulge the hope of any special engagement, which, if it
“be afterwards not concluded, would give rise to irritation be-
“tween us. I desire to be dealt with in entire frankness, etc.,
“ete.” It was after this that he entered upon the discussion
which I have related above.

About two hours after this conversation with the Duke an
agent of the Bentivogli came to me and told me that he had
just had an audience from the Duke, and that shortly after my
leaving the court the ratification of the treaty arrived; but that
the Duke was nevertheless anxious to conclude a separate treaty
with Bologna, and that he had commissioned him at once to
send a messenger to the Protonotario to have him come here
immediately. He has not yet arrived, having injured one of his
toes. Moreover it is reported to-day that the castle of Pergola
had surrendered to the troops of the Orsini, which things agitate
the minds of a good many persons, but I cannot write differ-
ently to your Lordships from what I hear. It is said that the
Swiss and the remainder of the French lances will reach here in
the course of this week. Conversing with one of the Duke’s
secretaries about the coming of these French, he told me that
his Excellency had given orders for a part of them to stop at
Parma, and not to approach any nearer here. Whereupon I
said to him, “The Duke then does not wish to protect himself
‘“‘aoainst his enemies?” He answered, “ You are the cause of
“this, because your Signoria did not seize the opportunity to
“secure the Duke and themselves.” To which I observed,
“that the means of so doing had not been indicated to us;

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 199

“but that your Lordships had never failed to do your utmost
in behalf of your friends.”

I have spoken to the Duke about the Gaddi affair, and he told
me to make his secretary remind him of it. For the present I
think of nothing more, but shall go to court to-morrow to sce
whether I can learn anything respecting the articles of the
treaty, and will advise your Lordships of whatever I may
hear.

Niccolo MAc#IAVELLI.

Imoxa, 8 November, 1502.

LETTER XXI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

Apart from what I have written in the enclosed, I must
communicate to your Lordships a conversation I had with that
friend of mine, who, as I have mentioned to you, told me
within the past few days that it was not well for you to re-
main on general good terms with the Duke; and that it would
be an easy matter for you to form a close alliance with him,
each desiring it and having both the same enemies. That
individual, having appointed an interview with me yesterday
evening, said to me: “Secretary, I have on a former occasion
“intimated to you that for your Signoria to remain on mere
“oeneral good terms with the Duke was of little advantage to
“him, and still less to you; for this reason, that the Duke,
“seeing that all remains in uncertainty with regard to your
“Signoria, will form an alliance with others. I wish to talk
“this over with you at length this evening, and although I
“speak only for myself, yet I have good grounds for what I
“am about to say to you. The Duke knows very well that the
“Pope may die any day, and that, if he desires to preserve the
“states which he has, it behooves him to think of basing his
“power upon some other foundation before the death of the
“Pope. His first reliance will be upon the king of France, the
“next upon his own armed forces; and we see that he has
“already brought together nearly five hundred men-at-arms,
“and as many light cavalry, which will be in effective condi-
“tion within a few days. But as he foresees that in time these

200 MISSION TO THE

“two reliances might not suffice him, he thinks of making his
“neighbors his allies and friends; and those who of necessity
“must defend him, if they wish to defend themselves, are the
‘Florentines, the Bolognese, and Mantua and Ferrara. To
“begin with the last, you see what an alliance he has formed
“with Ferrara; for besides the marriage of his sister with so
“large a dowry, he has already bestowed and continues to
“shower favors upon the Ferrarese Cardinal.* With Mantua
“the Duke is negotiating two matters; the one is a cardinal’s
“hat for the brother of the Marquis, and the other a marriage
“between the Duke’s daughter and the son of the Marquis.
“As compensation for the hat, the Marquis and his brother
“are to deposit forty thousand ducats, which sum is after-
“wards to constitute the dowry of the Duke’s daughter. These
“things are to be carried into effect anyhow, and are obliga-
“tions calculated to preserve friendships. With Bologna he
“is also negotiating some arrangement separate from the other
“confederates; and so far as I see, it is in a fair way of accom-
‘“plishment, for the Duke of Ferrara desires it very much. His
“Excellency Duke Valentino is well disposed for it and the
‘terms are favorable for the Bentivogli. And in fact the
“Duke was never as anxious for the possession of Bologna as
“he has been to assure himself of Romagna, and whenever he
“succeeds in that he will be satisfied. Thus, if those four
“states which adjoin each other become united and well
“armed, they are not to be disregarded. And the king of
“France, knowing that he can rely upon them, is disposed
“even to increase their power. As to your Florentine Sig-
“noria, it is less than three days since that I heard the Duke
“areue that he wished they would make free use of his terri-
“tory, as he would of theirs, they being both friends of the

* This refers to the Cardinal Hippolite d’ Este. The following trait is related
of him by Guicciardini in his History of Italy, and illustrates the manners of the
times: “This Prelate passionately loved one of his female relatives, who with
“an equal passion loved Don Giulio, the Cardinal’s natural brother. The lady,
“by way of ridding herself of the Cardinal’s importunities, avowed to him her
“love for Giulio, and that it was his beautiful eyes that had fascinated her.
“Hippolite, infuriated by this confession, availed himself of the opportunity
“whilst his brother was hunting to have him surrounded by his followers ; and
“forcing him to dismount from his horse, he had his eyes torn out of his head,
“as being the cause of the love he had inspired ”

This is the same Cardinal Hippolite d’ Este to whom Ariosto dedicated his
“ Orlando Furioso.”

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 201

“king of France and himself; and that he had no intention
“of acting adversely to them in any way, even if no definite
“treaty were concluded between them; but should it really
‘¢come to such a treaty, then they would find out the difference
“between his friendship and that of others. But to come back
“to the main point, I tell you that to remain on mere general
“ood terms would be a greater disadvantage for your Signoria
“than for the Duke; for his Excellency having the good will
“of the king and of the aforementioned princes, whilst your
“Signoria have no other support than that of the king, they
“will find that they have more need of the Duke than the
“Duke of them. However, I do not by any means wish to say
“that the Duke is not disposed to render them any service;
“but should it happen that they really have need of him, and
“he being under no obligations to them, he would be free to
“aid them or not, as might seem good to him. Now were you
“to ask me what they ought to do, and that I should specify
“some particulars, I would reply, that you for your part have
“two sores, which, if you do not heal them, will enfeeble you
‘and perhaps cause your death. The one is Pisa, and the
“other is Vitellozzo. If now you were to recover the former,
‘and if the latter were crushed, would not that be a great ad-
“vantage for your republic? And so far as the Duke is con-
“cerned, I tell you that his Excellency would be satisfied with
“the honor of having his former engagement renewed by your
‘Signoria, which he would value more than money or anything
“else; so that if you were to find means for bringing this
“about, everything would be satisfactorily settled. And if you
“were to tell me with regard to Vitellozzo, that the Duke has
“made a compact with him and the Orsini, I should reply that
“the ratification of it has not yet been received, and that the
“ Duke would give the best town he possesses that that ratifica-
“tion should not come; or that such a compact had never been
“talked about. Still, if the ratification should come, I would
“say, ‘Where there are men there are means’; and it is better
“to come to an understanding, and that orally rather than by
“writing. You must understand, furthermore, that it is neces- .
“sary for the Duke to save a portion of the Orsini; for in case
“of the Pope’s death it is important for the Duke to have some
“friends in Rome. But he cannot bear to hear the name of
“Vitellozzo as much as mentioned; for he regards him as a

202 MiSSTON LO, Die

“venomous serpent, and as a firebrand for Tuscany and for all
“Ttaly, who has done and continues to do all he can to prevent
“the Orsini from ratifying the treaty, as they ought to do. I
“desire, therefore, that you should write to the Gonfalonier,
“or to the Ten, what I have said to you, although it comes
“altogether from me. Remind them also of another thing,
‘namely, that it might easily happen that the king of France
“should direct your Signoria to maintain the engagement of
“the Duke, and to place their troops at his service, which they
“would in that case be obliged to do without receiving any
“eredit for it. And therefore you should remind your Signoria
“that, when a service has to be rendered, it is better to perform
“it of one’s own free will, and so as to have it appreciated
“rather than otherwise.”

And finally he begged me to treat with the utmost discre-
tion what he had said against Vitellozzo, as well as other im-
portant matters. The argument of this friend of mine was
quite lengthy, and of a character that will be appreciated by
your Lordships. I replied briefly, and only to those points
that seemed specially to require it. In the first instance, |
told him that his Excellency the Duke had acted wisely in
arming himself and in securing allies; and secondly, I con-
fessed to him that it was our earnest desire to recover Pisa,
and to secure ourselves against Vitellozzo, aithough we did
not regard him as of much account. Thirdly, with regard to
the engagement of the Duke I told him, speaking all the while,
however, only for myself, that the power of his Excellency the
Duke was not to be measured in the same way as that of the
other lords, who so far as their states were concerned had
nothing to show but simply their carriages, whilst the Duke
must be looked upon as a new power in Italy, with which it
was better to conclude a friendship and alliance rather than a
military engagement. And I added, that, as alliances between
princes are maintained only by arms, inasmuch as the power
of arms alone could enforce their observance, your Lordships
would not be able to see what security they could have for
their part when three fourths or three fifths of their troops
were under the control of the Duke. But I wanted him to
know that I did not say this because I doubted the good faith
of the Duke, but because I knew your Lordships to be prudent
men; that it was the duty of governments to be circumspect,

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 2038

and never to expose themselves by their acts to be deceived.
As to what he had said with regard to the possibility of the
king of France’s commanding your Lordships to do certain
things, I said that there was not a doubt but what his Majesty
might dispose of the.Florentine republic as of his own property ;
but neither the king nor any one else could make your Lord-
ships do what was not possible. My friend replied only to
that part of my remarks which related to the Duke’s engage-
ment, saying that 1 had spoken frankly and loyally, which was
very gratifying to him; suggesting at the same time that the
three hundred men might really be reduced to two hundred,
whilst nominally the number of three hundred might be main-
tained ; and to facilitate this, one tenth of the difference might
be conceded to your Lordships, or two thirds to the priests.
As my friend could not continue the conversation any longer,
owing to his other important occupations, he left me, urging
me, however, to make the substance of his argument known in
the proper place; but with an injunction of secrecy. This 1
have done herewith, as your Lordships will observe.

I cannot say whether these suggestions were inspired by the
Duke, or whether they originate with my friend; all I can tell
you is, that the latter is one of the Duke’s chief ministers; and
if all this is merely the result of his own imagination, it is
quite possible that he deceives himself, for he is a man of the
best and most benevolent disposition. I beg your Lordships
will examine the whole subject, and let me have your reply.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Imoua, 8 November, 1502.

LETTER XXII.

Maeniricent Sicnort: —

I replied to your Lordships’ letters of the 3d and 5th by
mine of the 8th, which I sent by the son of Francesco Totti,
aud hope it has reached you safely, for I deem it of some im-
portance, and await your reply. By this I desire to inform
your Lordships that the Protonotario Bentivogli arrived here
to-day. I had a conversation with him before he saw the Duke,
and found him entirely devoted to your Lordships. The object

204 MISSION LOLA E,

of his coming here is, as I have stated in a former letter, to
conclude a treaty of amity between Bologna and his Excel-
lency the Duke, and to avoid the arbitration provided for in
the articles of agreement with the confederates.

It is believed that matters will be arranged between them in
some way, for the Duke desires it, and it would be advanta-
gcous for the Bentivogli. Those who doubt it on account of
the league between the Bentivogli and the Orsini must bear in
mind that the former consider themselves unfairly treated in
the agreement concluded with the Signor Paolo, because their
differences are referred to an arbitration.

To enable your Lordships the better to understand these in-
trigues, I stated in my last communication that after my last
conversation with the Duke the ratification of the treaty had
arrived. It has indeed been ratified by all the confederates
except Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, who did not feel himself
secure whilst his affairs were subject to an arbitration, and
therefore protested from the first against the terms of the
treaty. There is another matter which your Lordships must
know, namely, that the validity of this treaty also requires the
ratification of it by the Sovercigh Pontiff, who, as will be seen
from a brief address to Signor Trocces, of which I send a copy,
consents that Trocces should ratify it in his name, provided
the. same shall have first been ratified by the Cardinal Orsino,
Pandolfo Petrucci, and Messer Giovanni Bentivogli. Two
things are therefore wanting to give effect to this treaty ; one,
the ratification by the Pope, and the other, that of Messer Gio-
vanni. The refusal of the latter necessarily involves that of
the Pontiff, and it is believed that Alexander VI. has given
his power to ratify the treaty in his name with the above
condition, knowing that Messer Giovanni will save himself by
forming a close alliance with the Duke, and that his Excel-
lency the Duke will afterwards make sure of a good part of
his adversaries. In reading attentively the articles of this
treaty, of which I enclose copy herewith, your Lordships will
see that they are full of mistrusts and suspicions; and if you
will at the same time bear in mind what is thought of it here,
your habitual wisdom will enable you to judge what may be
expected from it. I have not obtained the copy of said treaty
and brief of the Pope from the Duke’s chancelry, as had been
promised me, but have it from another source.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 205

I have nothing further to communicate to your Lordships
at present, except that two things only are wanting before
marching the army towards Pesaro; namely, the arrival of
the remainder of the French lances and of the Swiss, and the
conclusion of this treaty with Messer Giovanni; and both are
expected very shortly.

I commend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoua, 10 November, 1502.

Copy of the Treaty between the Duke of Valentinois of the one
part, and the Orsini and their adherents of the other, sent
by Niccolo Machiavelli to the Decemvirs of Liberty of the
Republic of Florence.

Be it made known and manifest to the parties hereto sub-
scribing, and to all others to whom these presents shall come,
that inasmuch as there have arisen between the most illus-
trious Duke of Romagna and the Orsini and their confeder-
ates certain controversies, enmities, misunderstandings, and
suspicions, and both parties being desirous to allay these sus-
picions and animosities, and to terminate all their differences,
they hereby conclude :—

1. A true and perpetual peace, concord, and union, with a
complete remission of all claims for damages or injuries mu-
tually done up to the present day, and on account of which
they promise each other to bear no resentment. And in con-
formity with such peace and union, the aforesaid most illustri-
ous Duke of Romagna receives into his confederation, league,
and perpetual alliance all the aforementioned Signori, and
each one of them, and promises to defend their states col-
lectively and separately against whatever power attempts to
molest or attack them, for any cause whatever. Excepting,
nevertheless, always his Holiness Pope Alexander VI. and
his Most Christian Majesty King Louis XII. of France. And
on the other hand the aforementioned Signori promise in the
same manner to aid in the defence of the person and of the
states of his Excellency, as well as of the illustrious Signori
Don Zofre Borgia, Prince of Squillaci, Don Roderigo Borgia,
Duke of Sermoneta and Biselli, and Don Giovanni Borgia,

2°06 MISSION TO THE

Duke of Camerino and Neppe, brothers and nephews of the
most illustrious Duke of Romagna; and each and all of the
aforementioned Signori will aid and contribute to that effect.

Item. Inasmuch as during the existence of the aforemen-
tioned differences, controversies, and dissensions, the rebellion
and occupation of the states of Urbino and Camerino have
occurred, therefore the aforementioned confederates jointly
and each one separately obligate themselves to assist with all
their forces in the recovery of the above-named states, cities,
and other places that may have rebelled or may have been
occupied.

Item. The aforementioned most illustrious Duke of Romagna
agrees to continue to the Orsini and the Vitelli their former
military engagements and compensation.

Item. His Excellency aforesaid wills and promises that the
aforementioned Condottieri shall not be obliged to render per-
sonal service to his Excellency in camp, except one at a time,
and that according to their own pleasure.

Item. The aforesaid illustrious Duke promises also to have
the present articles of agreement ratified and confirmed by the
Sovereign Pontiff, who will not oblige his Eminence the Signor
Cardinal Orsino to go and remain in Rome, excepting so far as
it may be the pleasure of his Eminence.

Item. Inasmuch as certain differences exist between his
Holiness the Pope and Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, the afore-
mentioned confederate Signori agree that all these differences
shall be referred to his Eminence the Cardinal Orsino, his Ex-
ecllency the Duke of Romagna, and the Magnificent Pandolfo
Petrucci, from whose judgment there shall be no recourse or
appeal.

Item. The aforementioned Signori collectively, and each of
them separately, obligate themselves and promise, whenever
required by his Excellency the Duke of Romagna, to place in
his hands as hostages one of the legitimate sons of each of
them, at such time and in such place as it may please his
Excellency the Duke to indicate.

Item. The aforementioned confederate Signori obligate them-
selves collectively and separately, whenever any plot or machi-
nation against any one of them shall come to their knowledge,
immediately to inform the one against whom it is intended of
the same, as well as all the others reciprocally.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 207

Item. It is agreed between the aforesaid Duke of Romagna
and the above-mentioned Signori to regard and treat as a com-
mon enemy whoever fails to observe the stipulations of this
agreement; and all to unite in the destruction of the state of
the party that fails to conform to these presents. |

Given at Imola, 28 October, 1502.

CESARE. I, PaoLo Orstno, have subscribed.
AGAPITO.

Copy of a Brief from the Pope to Messer Troccvo.

To our beloved son, Francesco Troccio, our Protonatorio and
Camerino, greeting and Apostolic benediction !

We have taken cognizance of the treaty concluded and con-
firmed between our beloved son, Don Cesare Borgia, Duke of
Romagna, and our beloved son, Paolo Orsino, of the house and
family of the Orsini and their confederates, whereof thou hast
sent me a copy with thy letters. And considering that the
articles of agreement made and concluded have been made
regularly, and believing them to have been made with good
intentions, and that the parties thereto will observe them reso-
lutely and honestly : —

Therefore, having particular confidence in thy fidelity and
prudence, we order and enjoin thee, by the tenor of these
presents, that after the said treaty shall have been accepted
and ratified by our beloved son, the Cardinal Orsino, and Pan-
dolfo Petrucci of Sienna, and Giovanni Bentivogli of Bologna
in the name of the other confederates, thou approve and con-
firm the same in our name; to which end we give thee full
and entire authority.

Given in Rome, at St. Peter’s, under the seal of the fish-
erman, 4 November, 1502, and in the eleventh year of our
-Pontificate.

208 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XXIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

Humbly commending myself to your Lordships, I beg to say
that, if you are surprised at not having received any letters
from me, I regret it exceedingly for my part, but it has been
from no fault of mine. Instead of Tommaso Totti, there came
here a man on foot, who with very little practical knowledge
of the country was but little accustomed to walking. On the
8th I gave him my letters in reply to yours, which were of as
much importance as any that I have written since my being
here. I would send your Lordships a duplicate of them if
your courier had not told me that before leaving Florence he
had met the bearer of my first despatches of the 5th. Al-
though I happened to write privately to the Gonfaloniere upon
public events, which was not much, I wrote nevertheless to
your Lordships first on the 3d instant; and my last was of
the 10th, which I sent you by the hands of Jacopo, a carrier of
Monticelli, together with a copy of the treaty, and all the news
from here, which letter ought to reach you to-day. I therefore
beg your Lordships to hold me excused, and to bear in mind
that matters here cannot be guessed at. And you must under-
stand that we have to do here with a prince who governs by
himself. To avoid writing mere fancies and reveries, one
must study matters well, and in so doing time passes, and I
endeavor to spend mine advantageously, and not to throw it
away.

I shall not repeat what I have written in mine of the 8th
and 10th, hoping that they are safely in your hands, although
somewhat late. Your Lordships will have seen from those
letters the turn that matters are taking here; and you will
also have learned from them, at least in part, the disposition
of the Duke, as well as what he told me in the conversa-
tions I had with him and with that friend of mine, who insists
every day that he who temporizes seeks for better bread than
can be made of wheat, and misses the opportunity when it pre-
sents itself. To which I reply that the delay is owing, first,
to the desire of learning the wishes of the king of France; and
next, by that of sending to Rome to ascertain the views of the
Pope, which now depends on the going of the Bishop of Vol-

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 209

terra to France, and upon the coming of the Archdeacon of
Celon here, all which is construed into intentional delay.
People are not wanting here who say that it is the custom
of your Lordships to act thus, and I am reproached every day
that ever since 1499 your Lordships, from not having taken
sides with the French or the Duke, were first badly served by
the Duke, and afterwards crushed by the king of France. I
defend and maintain the honor of the republic as best I can,
adducing all the arguments in my power, and they are plenty,
but they are not admitted. I did not wish to write all this to
your Lordships until to-day, lest I should be accused of pre-
sumption. However, seeing things go as I had anticipated,
I prefer to complain of misrepresentations, rather than repent
later of not having informed you of what is passing here.
Your Lordships ask many explanations of me, and I believe
that up to the present you will find that I have complied with
your requirements, provided that all my letters have been read.
In the first instance, your Lordships desire to hear whether
people here believe in peace rather than in war. To this I
have replied that they talk of peace and make preparations for
war. And as regards peace I have written what has been done
here by the Signor Paolo Orsino, and since then I have sent
you a copy of the articles of agreement with my letter of the
10th, and pointed out the difficulties that have arisen because
Messer Giovanni Bentivogli had refused to ratify that agree-
ment, and because of the instructions from the Pope to Trocces.
So that pending the ratification of Messer Giovanni and of the
Pope, the treaty itself remains in suspense. On the 80th of
the last month, I informed you of the conjectures made here
as to the manner in which this peace might be effected, and of
the difficulties that stand in the way. In view of the character
of the Duke and that of the others, it was deemed impossible
that any agreement could be brought about between them ;
but that most likely the Duke would be able to detach some
of the confederates from their league. We now see things
going that way because, as I have written before, the Protono-
tario Bentivogli is here, and is negotiating a separate conven-
tion with the Duke, which is as good as concluded. The
Bentivogli may be able to justify this course to the other
confederates, because in the general treaty the affairs of Bo-
logna have been left to arbitration, whilst their security is the
VOL. III. 14

210 MISSION TO THE

guaranty of the king of France of the observance of that
treaty. And this evening whilst conversing with the Proto-
notario, he asked me whether your Lordships would also guar-
antee this treaty to both parties, the same as the king of
France? To which I replied that your Lordships would not
hesitate to unite in any engagement with his Majesty the king
of France. Of the conditions of this treaty I can say nothing,
not having heard anything on the subject satisfactory to my-
self. Should it be argued that it may be difficult for the Duke
to give up the idea of not taking Bologna, then I reply the
same as I have written before, that it has been demonstrated
to him that it will be better to establish a durable friendship
than to take a city which he would not be able to hold. How-
ever, the Orsini and the Vitelli have given him cause for acting
with prudence, and have shown him that it behooves him to
think more of what he has acquired than to strive to acquire
more. And the means of so preferring his state is to be
armed with troops of his own, to treat his subjects kindly, and
to make his neighbors his friends. This it seems it is his in-
tention to do, according to what my friend tells me, and as I
have stated to your Lordships in my letter of the 8th.

As to the treaty with the confederates, the ratification of
which came as I have written you, his Excellency has sent
some one to the Orsini to try and settle the difficulty made by
Messer Giovanni, and thus he gains time. The Orsini, mean-
while, remain in the territory of Fano, without moving a step
forwards or backwards ; and thus this part of the general peace
remains in uncertainty. The party that knows best how to
impose upon the others will carry the day ; and he will best im-
pose upon the others who is strongest in troops and in allies.
So much for the question of peace or of war.

I have already advised your Lordships of the preparations
making here; these are steadily continued and urged, although
they are later than what it was thought they should have been
made. For the better information of your Lordships as to the
troops and mounted men here now, and what are expected, I en-
close a list of the same, made up from what I have gathered
from several persons; not having actually seen them myself, I
am obliged to depend for my information upon others. The
Duke is here, and will not leave until after the arrival of the
Swiss, who are looked for this week; and the remainder of

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 211

the French lances are expected daily. The Duke, as I have
mentioned several times, receives all the enemies of Pandolfo,
Gianpaolo, Vitellozzo, and of the Orsini.

I have nothing else of interest to communicate at this time,
but beg your Lordships to excuse me if my communications
are not satisfactory ; and commend myself most humbly.

NiIccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imota, 138 November, 1502.

LETTER XXIV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

After writing you on the 13th by the courier Carlo, in reply
to yours of the 11th, there arrived here on the same day the
Conte Lodovico della Mirandola with his troops. I can now
give you an exact account of these forces, having myself counted
thirty-four men-at-arms and seventy light-horse ; they are quar-
tered at Doccia, three miles from here, in the direction of Bo-
logna. I also wrote to your Lordships in my last as well as in
previous letters, that the negotiations with the Bentivogli were
being much pressed; and that the Protonotario was here, and
was receiving the most friendly attentions at the hands of the
Duke. Yesterday morning I conversed quite a while with his
Reverence ; he spoke of the great advantage which the Duke’s
friendship would be for them, if they could rely upon it, and
how much the Duke, if well advised, ought to desire their good
will. In short, I gathered from what the Protonotario said,
that the treaty between them would have been already con-
cluded, but for the fact that the Duke wanted the Pope to be a
principal party to the agreement; it having always been the
ambition of the Pope to bring Bologna back to her obedience
to the Church, which other pontiffs had not succeeded in doing.
And therefore the Duke wanted the Pope to make this treaty,
for which purpose Messer Romolino, his Excellency’s secretary,
has been sent on horseback to Rome. I learn that the con-
vention between them contains two principal items. First, an
alliance between the Bishop of Euna or the Cardinal Borgia
and these Bentivogli, which is to be effected in one of two
ways: either the Protonotario quits the Church, and marries

212 MISSION TO THE

the sister of the Cardinal, or Messer Hermes Bentivogli mar-
ries her, after having first broken off his engagement with one
of the ladies of the Orsino family. The other is, that the Ben-
tivogli are bound to sustain the Duke with a certain number of
men-at-arms against whoever may attack him. It is said that
some differences have arisen in consequence of the Duke’s
claiming to have that service performed by the Bentivogli with-
out any compensation to them, whilst they demand to be paid
for it in full, or at least in part. There are also some old ac-
counts to be settled by this treaty ; and something is said about
a Cardinal’s hat for the Protonotario, in case he does not leave
the Church. Of all this I have no particulars, nor can I vouch
for all I have written above.

Messer Romolino started this morning, and went in company
with the Protonotario in the direction of Bologna, for the pur-
pose of conferring with Messer Giovanni about the treaty.
Messer Romolino will continue on from there towards Rome.
I therefore write you this so that, inasmuch as he does not
travel by post, your Lordships may show him some honor
when he reaches Florence, and learn something from him con-
cerning these matters. It is said at court that the Duke will
leave here on Tuesday, and will go to Cesena, where he will
halt with his troops. As the messenger that was sent a few
days ago by his Excellency to the Orsini has not yet returned,
we are without news from Fano; but I was told to-day that a
difference had arisen between Vitellozzo and Gianpaolo in rela-
tion to the conditions of the treaty, with which the former is
exceedingly dissatisfied.

Of the Swiss and the men-at-arms that are yet to arrive here,
I know nothing more than what I have written in my last.
Money is expected from Florence to enable the troops here to
take the field; and eight days ago the same Guglielmo Buonac-
corsi whom I have mentioned in former letters was sent there.
To return to the treaty with the confederates, the opinion here
is that they will never be able to make it general, so as to em-
brace every one, unless they should agree amongst themselves
to attack some third party; and therefore let those who fear
this think of it betimes, and take the necessary steps to prevent
such an arrangement.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoua, 14 November, 1502.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 213

P.S. The messenger that brings this is to leave here to-
morrow at noon; I was obliged to employ one of my own
servants for this purpose, as there was no other opportunity
of sending it. Your Lordships will please pay him six lire.

N. M.

LETTER XXV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Yesterday morning I sent to your Lordships, by my servant
Antonio, my letter of the 14th, which must have been received
by this time. I write now to communicate what I have learned
since then respecting the condition of the treaty that has been
so long in course of negotiation between the confederates and
the Duke; which amounts in fact to this, that the Signor Paolo
left here with a draft of the treaty, which was afterwards re-
touched in some particulars by the other parties, and reduced
to what I sent a copy of to your Lordships. They then sent it
back to the Duke signed and ratified by them. But having
been retouched, as I said, his Excellency thought proper also
to add some things and strike out others, according to his own
views; and then he sent it by one of his men to the other par-
ties, with instructions to let them understand that, if they would
accept it thus, it was well; if not, he would go no further in
the matter. His messenger left here on the 8th or 9th, and
yesterday evening one of the Duke’s secretaries showed me a
letter which that messenger had written to his Excellency,
dated the 13th instant, from Sienna. It ran thus:—“I found
“Signor Paolo Orsino here; he expresses surprise that your
- “Excellency has sent him neither answer nor instructions in
“relation to the matter submitted to you by him in the name
“of the other confederates. And in fact, after explaining to
“him and to Pandolfo Petrucci the instructions of your illus-
“trious Lordship, after some discussion, everything was con-
“cluded in good shape and settled in accordance with your
“Excellency’s orders. Signor Paolo and Pandolfo have duly
“ratified the agreement. Messer Antonio Venafro has ratified
“it for the Cardinal Orsino, who had given him full powers to
“that effect. There being no one here who had power to sign

214 MISSION TO THE

“for Vitellozzo nor for Gianpaolo and Messer Liverotto, Pan-
“dolfo and Signor Paolo have pledged themselves that they
“shall ratify it, as you will learn more particularly from said
“ Signor Paolo, who is coming to see your Excellency.” These
are in substance the words of that letter. Signor Paolo is ex-
pected here this evening, and should I learn any further par-
ticulars in relation to this matter, you shall be duly advised.

The Duke of Urbino sent here two days ago to request a
safe-conduct from his Excellency for a citizen of Urbino,
through whom he desired to communicate some matters to
his Excellency. The safe-conduct was sent in blank; and
when this individual arrives, I will endeavor to find out the
object of his coming, and advise your Lordships of it.

Yesterday, according to report, orders were given to provide
quarters for one hundred and fifty French lances; these come
from Tosignano, Fontana, and Condriono, which places are at
the foot of the mountains on the Bolognese borders. Of the
Swiss I have heard nothing more; nor have we any intelligence
from the direction of Fano, except that a certain Giovan Bat-
tista Mancino, captain of four hundred infantry who are in
cantonments near Montefeltro, some eight miles from Rimini,
was robbed by some citizens of Montefeltro, and arrived here
to-day with nothing but his doublet on. In relation to Bo-
lognese matters we are waiting to hear what will be done at
Rome by Messer Romolino, who left Bologna yesterday morn-
ing. The Duke’s departure from here seems postponed until
probably Sunday, and other matters remain as I wrote you last.

The price of grain here is forty soldi a bushel of our meas-
ure; and a certain Messer Jacopo of Borgo, governor of the
place, told me that it was found that every city is short of
grain, some one and some two months’ supply. The presence
of the foreign troops will increase this deficiency, and evidently
this country cannot offer very comfortable quarters for them,
notwithstanding that the Duke draws supplies from elsewhere.
1 bring this to your Lordships’ notice, so that none may be
drawn from the Florentine territory.

There is a Messer Gabriello of Bergamo here, who brings
money from Venice, and does much business here. He showed
me a letter yesterday that came from Venice, and gives the
news that four caravels had returned from Calcutta to Portu-
gal laden with spices; which has caused a great decline in

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 215

the price of spices at Venice, and does great injury to that
city.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.
NiccoLo MacHIAVELLI.
Imoxa, 16 November, 1502.

The bearer of this leaves at the twenty-second hour, and has
promised to be at Florence to-morrow evening, for which 1
have promised him a gold florin; which your Lordships will
kindly have paid to him.

LETTER XXVI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Your Lordships have seen from my letters of the 8th, 10th,
and 13th, how I have gathered from different persons the inten-
tions of his Excellency the Duke; and although all point very
much in the same direction, yet his Excellency has not fully ex-
plained himself, nor has he entered into the many particulars
given me by my friend. But neither my friend nor the Duke
has furnished me those rather questionable examples which an-
other person has given me, with whom I have had occasion to
talk upon this subject. Although in your letter of the 15th your
Lordships reply only in a general manner to what I have writ-
ten, nevertheless I know that I have done my duty in replying
to each according to his communications. I did this the more
readily as your Lordships had recommended to me to conduct
myself in this matter with as much reserve as I might deem
suitable. Yesterday evening I had a long interview with the
Duke, and began my remarks by referring to the mistrust which
his Excellency had manifested with regard to your Lordships
in asking me, at our last interview, whether I really believed
that your Lordships intended to contract a close alliance with
him, or not. I told his Excellency that I had informed your
Lordships of this mistrust, and that it had caused you much
regret and displeasure. And then, in conformity with the sug-
gestions made by you at the beginning of your letter, I enlarged
upon the many proofs which you had given, without reserve
or fear, of your good will towards him. Having touched upon

216 MISSION TO THE

this sufficiently, I came to the question of his engagement,
and observed to him that this matter had caused you much
pain, partly because it was an impossible thing for you to do,
and partly also because it had scemed to me that, in his first
conversation upon this point, he had manifested more regard
for his private interests than for the common benefit; and that
your Lordships could not see any way in which they could with
propriety meet his wishes; for an engagement of importance
they could not contract with him, and an inconsiderable one
they dared not offer him. And finally I made him understand
that provided these difficulties could be removed, and if his Ex-
cellency would limit himself to what was possible and safe for
your Lordships, having, however, always due regard to the king
of France, you were disposed from the present moment to
form the closest alliance with him. I enlarged very much upon
this point, keeping, however, always two important considera-
tions in view: the one, not to deviate from your Lordships’
instructions, and the other, not to make use of any words or ex-
pressions that could wound his Excellency. The Duke seemed
to listen to me with pleasure, and gave no sign of dissatisfaction,
and on closing my remarks he said to me: “ See now, all this
‘amounts to nothing, and, as I told you the last time, the ques-
“tion between us is either of a general friendship or a special
“alliance. If we are to remain on terms of a mere general
“friendship, then there is nothing more to be said on the sub-
“ject; for I have always told you, and shall be as good as my
“ word, that I shall not permit a single hair of your Signoria to
“be touched, that I shall ever be ready to render them any
“service in my power, and that the citizens of your republic
“ shall enjoy every convenience within my dominions. But if
“the question be as to a special alliance, and your Signoria re-
‘fuse me the engagement, then there is nothing more for me to
“do, because they reject the very foundation of such a special
“ alliance.”

I did not fail to reply to all this, saying that mere general
friendships impose no obligations, and are readily changed by
time, that good and ill fortune do not remain always on the
same side, that every day alliances are contracted where there
is no question of an engagement, and that the most durable
friendships are those in which each party finds its advantage.
I added many other reflections, which at the time seemed to me

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. Q17

to the purpose, but which it would be superfluous to repeat here.
It will suffice for your Lordships’ intelligence to know that the
Duke remarked, in conclusion, that if your Lordships were con-
tent with a general friendship, so was he; adding, with many
obliging words, that if at any time you wished to draw the
friendship closer, you were now in possession of his views and
intentions in the matter.

More than this I could not by any further remarks of mine
obtain from him. After this discussion the Duke spoke to me
of the events taking place here; that he looked upon the Bo-
logna matter as settled; and respecting the Orsini and the Vi-
telli he said that he was expecting the Signor Paolo here. I
on my part spoke of the safe-conduct which we had obtained,
and of the circumstances that had given rise to it. Of Vitel-
lozzo and Gianpaolo he spoke in the most sinister manner ;
whereupon I said to him that I had always felt convinced that
he would be victorious, and that if on the first day of my arrival
I had written down my view of these matters, and he were to
read it now, it would seem to him like prophecy; and that one
of the reasons that had made me think thus was that he was
alone, and had to deal with a combination of several adversa-
ries; but that it was easy for him to break the ties that united
them. To which the Duke replied, that virtually he had already
broken them, and that he had already disembarrassed himself
of more than four of them. In speaking of Gianpaolo he said
that he had boasted of being on such good terms with your
Lordships; in answer to which I said that Gianpaolo had for-
merly been our friend, having been in our pay, and that he was
a man of courage; but that in his late transactions he had
rendered us a very bad service. Thereupon the Duke said: “I
“ want to tell you this, which your Signoria do not know as yet.
“ Before Gianpaolo left Perugia to join Vitellozzo he wrote me a
“letter, saying, ‘ You know how thoroughly I detest Vitellozzo,
“and yet I want to unite with him for the purpose of re-estab-
“lishing the Medici in Florence; but I do not wish to have it
“appear as though I was doing it for the love of Vitellozzo,
“and therefore I beg you will write me a letter ordering me to
“ undertake this enterprise.’ And I did write him such a letter,
“but do not know now whether he has not made use of it to
“do me an injury.” To which I replied that I had never heard
of this.

218 MISSION TO THE

Afterwards coming back again to the case of Vitellozzo, the
Duke said to me, among other things: “I will tell you of
“another act of perfidy on his part, which he attempted to
“practise against me, and which has come to my knowledge
“within the last few days. You will remember when we first
“entered upon the Florentine territory with our troops; well,
“‘ Vitellozzo, seeing that he did not succeed in what he aimed at,
“and supposing that I would never suspect him, thought, with-
“out my knowing anything about it, to make terms with the
“ Orsini, to take Prato by surprise during the night, and to
“leave me defenceless in the midst of your country. He com-
“ municated his project to some one, who told me of it only two
“days ago; and when this individual asked Vitellozzo upon
‘what basis he had founded his scheme, and how he would
“maintain himself in Prato, he answered, that all things re-
“quired at the beginning an impulse to be given them, but that
“then the middle and the end would follow of necessity. This,
“however, did not happen in his case; for having gone to re-
“ connoitre Prato, he found the walls higher and better guarded
“than he had supposed.” The Duke added, “ And now his
“ only talent is to plot treason; and every day proves that the
‘‘ Florentines proceeded justly against his brother.” * I made
a suitable reply, but from all the Duke’s conversation I have
only gained the conviction of his deep hatred of Vitellozzo,
without being able to gather how he is going to proceed against
hin.

Since then I have had a conversation with my friend, and
according to your Lordships’ instructions I put the Duke’s
engagement entirely aside, and with regard to Pisa and Vitel-
lozzo I employed almost the very words which your Lordships
have written; adding such other observations as would bear
upon the proposed alliance. Respecting Vitellozzo I could
learn nothing except that the Duke is animated by a most
bitter hatred against him. As to Pisa he said: “ At first the
“Puke’s forces will move towards Urbino; after that they may
“oo further, towards Perugia, Castello, and Sienna; and once
“in that neighborhood it will be easy suddenly to throw them
“upon Pisa; and if they find that city unprepared, it would be

* This refers to Paolo Vitelli, Captain-General of the Florentines, who at the
siege of Pisa became suspected of treason, and was taken to Florence and be-
headed. Buonaccorsi, p. 25.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 219

“an easy matter to take it. But it will be necessary to manage
“it with great secrecy; I do not know whether this can be done
‘at present, since the creation of this perpetual Gonfalonier, and
“whether your Signoria will be able to dispose of some twenty-
“five or thirty thousand ducats which will be needed, without
“being obliged to render an account of them to any one.”

I shall not repeat what I answered, as I do not wish to
weary your Lordships; all I will say is, that I have endeavored
to do my duty. Respecting the engagement of the Duke, this
friend said that the honor of the Duke did not require that
this matter should not be spoken of. And after a little re-
flection he added, that the engagement might be changed into
a subsidy, and that your Lordships ought to give it to him.
I replied, that that would be changing the name, but not the
thing itself; and that if it was desired that I should enter into
communication with your Lordships in reference to such a
subsidy, it would be necessary that I should be able to point
out to you the reciprocal advantages of it, and that such ad-
vantage must be clear and immediate. All this I said as com-
ing only from myself. My friend said that he would think of
the matter, and thus the conversation ended. I have nothing
else to write to your Lordships in answer to your letter of the
15th. As for those others who talk to me every day of these
matters, I always have answered and shall continue to answer
them as seems to me proper.

The remainder of the French that were expected here have
arrived; they are lodged where I have before mentioned to
your Lordships that quarters had been ordered for them; and
according to what I was told by a certain Messer Federigo, a
confidential person of the Cardinal San Giorgio, who came
here two days ago, all the French that left Parma to come here
to the support of the Duke, counting in those who came first
as well as those last arrived, amount to four hundred and fifty
lances. I do not know whether this is the exact truth, but
it accords with what they say themselves; and this Messer
Federigo comes direct from Parma, where he has been for
many days.

The Swiss have not yet come, nor have I heard where they
are; but their arrival here will not be long delayed.

The conclusion of the agreement on the part of the Orsini
awaits the arrival of Signor Paolo, who has not yet made his

220 MISSTON =1O-1HE

appearance; and on the part of the Bentivogli it depends on
Messer Romolino, who, as I have already written, has gone to
Rome; but we hear of no movement on his part.

His Excellency the Duke is still here, and when I asked
Messer Alessandro the treasurer, yesterday, when he would
leave, he said that they were waiting for a reply from a certain
Messer Ercolano, who had been sent to Milan several days ago.
No one knows what to think of the warlike preparations of the
Duke in the midst of all these peace negotiations, particularly
in view of his good faith, which may be relied upon. Messer
Giovanni is full of apprehensions, notwithstanding all the hon-
ors shown to his Protonotario, and the earnestness with which
the agreements are being urged forward. For he sees the
Duke’s forces constantly increasing; and that so far from
leaving, the Duke remains here to the great discomfort of the
inhabitants of the place, as well as his own. Morcover, he
sees the Conte Lodovico della Mirandola arrive and go into
quarters at Doccia; and the French that have lately come here
by way of Ferrara, and who were to go from here to Rimini by
way of Faenza, have been made to retrace their steps by the
Duke’s orders, and are quartered in three small castles, which,
as I have lately written to your Lordships, are situated on the
confines of the Bolognese territory in the direction of Pian-
caldoli, where they are not only uncomfortable, but entirely
away from their route. Some companies of infantry are also
returning here, being a portion of those who have lately been
sent in the direction of this city ; which has given rise to vari-
ous conjectures. Nevertheless, it is not believed that he will
fail of his word where he has once given it.

The Venetians secing the clouds gathering here, have sent
the Conte di Pitigliano with one thousand horse to Ravenna,
so as not to be taken unawares. They feel no apprehensions
for your Lordships, as the main forces of the Duke consist of
French troops, who it is supposed will not be inclined to attack
or injure you; were it otherwise, then nobody would answer
for your safety. As to what the Vitelli and the Orsini have to
fear, your Lordships are better able to discern it than can be
done from here; in fact, there is no head sufficiently secure to
dare to form any definite idea upon that point.

About twenty Pisan cavaliers have come here in search of
an engagement for pay; I do not know whether they will be

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. PA t

accepted, and have taken no steps either in their favor or
against them, for I really know not which would be best.

There was a report here this morning that Bologna had risen
in revolt, under the apprehension that had gained ground there
that Messer Giovanni was about to sell the city to the Duke.
It is believed that these are mere popular lies, for they lack all
confirmation.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
20 November, 1502, 20th hour.

P. S.— At last I have obtained the safe-conduct conformable
to that of your Lordships, and send it herewith enclosed. I
have had much difficulty in obtaining it without paying the
chancelry, for they are not all like that of your Lordships. It
is pretended that yours has been obtained gratis. Nevertheless
it has been agreed...... Messer Alessandro Spannochi. If
he decides that we ought to pay something, then the merchants
of Florence must provide the means.

Lterum valete !
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

LETTER XXVII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote at length to your Lordships on the 20th, by the
courier Carlo, in reply to yours of the 15th; and as matters
here continue very much the same as when I last wrote, I
shall be very brief in my present. The sum and substance
of it is that the Duke is still here, and no one knows precisely
when he is to leave. The troops are not marching towards
Faenza, but there is no lack of the usual warlike preparations.
The Swiss troops have not yet arrived, nor has the Signor
Paolo Orsino made his appearance, and it is said that he is not
coming by way of Florence, because he has not received the
safe-conduct which he has asked for twenty-five crossbowmen.
The treaty with Bologna has also not yet been definitely con-
cluded, although Messer Giovanni here thought that it was.
There always remains the difference of the old treaty, accord-

Dagihge MISSION TO THE

ing to which the said Messer Giovanni is obliged to pay annu-
ally the sum of nine thousand ducats to the Duke. Messer
Giovanni believed that this obligation had been cancelled by
the new treaty, but the Duke claims to understand that the
clause remains in force; and thus the matter has been in sus-
pense for three days past. Messer Giovanni Mino di Rossi
arrived here this evening for the purpose of concluding the
treaty according to the views of the Duke, if he cannot do so
according to his own; how it will end I know not.

To-day I received your Lordships’ letter of the 19th in reply
to mine of the 14th and 16th; 1 understand all you say respect-
ing the obligation, ete., ete. I shall wait until Iam spoken to
on the subject, and will then advise you fully; nor have I
sought another audience of the Duke, to explain to him again
the reasons why your Lordships cannot entertain the idea of
engaging him. For as I think that I know his character pretty
well, I do not wish to weary him with a subject which he seems
to understand, and which is calculated to exasperate rather
than soothe him. And therefore I shall wait until I am spoken
to in relation to these matters, which will be according as time
may shape events, which are judged of here from day to day
as they occur, rather than in any other way. I do not know
yet whether it will be easy for me to obtain audience of the
Duke, for he lives only to advance his own interests, or what
seem to him such, and without placing confidence in any one
else. I shall not therefore attempt to force matters unless I
~am obliged to do so; and after trying once or twice, I shall
not try again. And although up to the present I have had no
cause to complain, yet I do not wish to have occasion for doing
so. Thus, taking all things into account, I desire much that
your Lordships would recall me; for apart from my seeing
that I can be of no use to our republic here, my bodily health
has suffered very much. For two days I had a violent fever,
and feel altogether very unwell. Moreover I have no one to
look after my affairs at home, so that I lose on all sides. Thus
taking everything into consideration I trust your Lordships
will not refuse my request. A messenger from the Duke of
Urbino has arrived here; it is said that he has come to ask for
terms, but no one knows particulars.

Bene valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imona, 22 November, 1502.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 228

LETTER XXVIII.

MaGniricent SIGNORI: —

My last of the 22d was sent by Ugolino Martelli, having
previously written you on the 20th in reply to your Lordships’
letter of the 15th. Since then I have nothing of interest to
communicate, matters here remaining very much in the same
condition as when I last wrote. For the Duke is still here, the
Signor Paolo has not yet arrived, and various opinions prevail
as to his coming. The treaty with Messer Giovanni Bentivogli
is not yet concluded, owing to the difficulty about the old ac-
count of nine thousand ducats which Messer Giovanni was to
pay the Duke within a given time. His Excellency wanted to
convert this into a perpetual obligation, or into one single pay-
ment of forty thousand ducats, to be made within a few months.
But Messer Giovanni will not listen to such a proposition, and
wishes to terminate the annual payments in six or eight years.
This dispute has been going on for four days, Messer Mino de
Rossi being here as representative of Messer Giovanni, and I
think from what I have heard this evening the Protonotario is
expected here to-morrow. Some say that all this delay is
caused by the Duke, who wishes to await the reply of Messer
- Romolino, whom he had sent to Rome with instructions to act
in this matter only in accordance with the will of the Pope.
Others give a much more sinister interpretation to the matter,
notwithstanding that the most amicable relations seem to pre-
vail between his Excellency the Duke and the Bolognese, and
that there is a constant interchange of presents between them.

Many reasons are assigned for the delay in the Duke’s de-
parture ; some say that he does not wish to leave until he has
concluded the agreement with the Bentivogli; others say that
he is utterly without means, and is waiting for money from
Rome. Others again say that it is because the Swiss have not
yet arrived; although three days ago it was reported that they
had passed Ferrara. But nothing certain is publicly known,
though there are persons who claim to be well informed and
who maintain that the Duke wants to be perfectly clear
whether in going forward it will be either as the friend or the
enemy of the Orsini, which, however, cannot be known until
after the arrival of the Signor Paolo. Nor are there wanting

aya MISSION TO THE

persons who say that the Duke leaves for the reasons which
IT have indicated to your Lordships in one of my previous
letters.

I have informed your Lordships that an application has been
made to the Duke for a safe-conduct for one of the Duke of
Urbino’s confidential persons to come here. This personage —
arrived here four days ago, and has suddenly left again. It
is publicly reported that the object of his coming was to nego-
tiate the exchange of certain prisoners, which is all I have
heard on the subject. A couple of days since an individual
returned here from Urbino, who had been made prisoner at
the time when that city was in revolt, and who left there on
the 19th.instant. This person reports that there is a good
deal of alarm felt by the people of Urbino, notwithstanding
their obstiuacy ; and that the cause of their alarm is the treaty
now being negotiated between the Duke and the Orsini. He
relates, that, two days prior to his leaving Urbino, the Duke
Guidobaldi called together first the citizens and afterwards the
troops, of which there were not more than some four hundred
infantry under the command of Giovanni di Rossetto and two
other constables; that the Duke Guidobaldi had spoken to
each of them in a different manner, although the same in sub-
stance, telling them that the treaty between the Orsini and
the Duke Valentino was a sure thing, and that the negotiations
between that Duke and Vitellozzo were also being urged for-
ward, and that he feared a treaty would be concluded between
them, upon which matters he wanted their advice. The citi-
zens replied that they would die with him; the soldiers, after
having examined what forces the Duke of Urbino could muster,
assured him that they would hold Urbino and San Leo for him
during the entire winter, even though the whole world should
be against them. An order was accordingly published for the
evacuation of all the castles and places in the duchy; and for
all the garrisons to withdraw into the cities of Urbino and San
Leo. Giovanni di Rossetto had sent one of his brothers with
his wife and children to San Leo. The same person from Ur-
bino spoke also of the readiness with which the Vitelleschi had
declared themselves at first against the Duke Valentino, and
how much harm they would have done him if the Signor Paolo
Orsino had not held them back; and how six hundred of Vitel-
lozzo’s infantry had routed the Duke’s forces at Fossombrone,

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 995

which forces consisted of one hundred men-at-arms and two hun-
dred light cavalry, who all took to flight without having as much
as put a lance in rest;—and that during the many days that
they were in camp they had never seen a single penny in cir-
culation. His Excellency the Duke has spent since the calends
of October until now more than sixty thousand ducats, accord-
ing to what his treasurer Alessandro has assured me not more
than two days since. I take pleasure in writing this to your
Lordships, so that you may see that, when others are in trouble,
they spend no less than you do, nor are they any better served
by their soldiers than what your Lordships are; whilst, on the
contrary, he who is well armed with troops of his own will always
have the same advantages whichever way things may turn.

That friend of mine whom I have mentioned before has
said nothing to me touching the treaty that is about to be con-
cluded between your Lordships and the Duke. I believe they
are waiting to know the character of the instructions with
which Messer Giovanni Vittorio proceeds to Rome; or rather
they are awaiting the time when you shall have more need of
them than at present; which I am sure your Lordships will
make every effort to avoid.

I continue to pretend not to see anything, both because I
have fulfilled your commission in opening the road you desired
to follow, and because, not having any new propositions to
make to them on your part, without which it would be difficult
to accomplish anything here or at Rome. For having once
made known their intentions, to which your Lordships did not
agree, there is no way of making these people recede from
them, except by presenting some new proposition to them;
for to decline and then to remain silent would not suit men of
this kind.

Your Lordships, I trust, will not charge me with presump-
tion for having given you my opinion, seeing that in your letter
of the 15th you inform me of your intention to contract an alli-
ance with the Duke without delay. For had I not given you
my views of matters as I understand them, particularly with
my knowledge of the Duke’s character, I should feel that I had
not done my duty.

Bene valete !
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Imota, 26 November, 1502.
VOL. ITl. 15

226 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XXIX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI :—

My last of the 26th was sent by a messenger whom the
Guglianos despatched for their private account. I had pre-
viously written on the 22d, and sent the letter by Ugolino
Martelli, who was returning to Florence. Supposing that both
these letters reached you safely, I shall not repeat their con-
tents. By the present I desire to inform you that the Signor
Paolo Orsino arrived here yesterday; and from what I hear
he brought the treaty ratified and signed by Vitellozzo and
the other confederates. He endeavors all he can to persuade
the Duke that they are greatly indebted and entirely faithful
to him, and willing to serve him in any enterprise on the same
footing as any one else. His Excellency in return shows him-
self satisfied with it. Vitellozzo particularly has addressed
most submissive letters to him, full of thanks and excuses
and offers of service, saying that, if ever he has the chance of
speaking to him face to face, he feels confident of being able to
justify himself entirely, and to prove to him that what had
occurred had never been done for the purpose of offending
him, etc., ete.

. His Excellency seems to accept it all, but no one knows
what course he is going to take, for it is difficult to penetrate
his designs and to know him. If we are to judge by the facts
themselves, and by what the Duke himself or his first minister
says, we cannot but augur ill for his adversaries; for the
wrong done him has been great, and his language as well as
that of others is full of indignation against the said Vitellozzo.
It was only yesterday, whilst conversing on this subject with
the first personage of the Duke’s court, this person said to me,
“This traitor has given us a stab, and now thinks to heal the
“wound with words.” Andas Iwas going on trying to find
out which way the Duke inclined in this matter, and question-
ing this individual about it, who, as I have said, is one of
the first personages of the court, he said to me: “We shall
“first march with this army towards Urbino, where we shall,
“however, not remain long, for we are fully persuaded that
“that city will put itself into our hands. Nor shall we go to
“Rimini, but shall move either to Perugia or Castello, accord-

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 227

“ing as may seem best. We shall demand quarters for our
“troops in that city, the Duke being Gonfalonier of the Holy
“Church, and the city belonging to the Church; for the treaty
“does not specify that we are not to lodge with the army of
“the Pope wherever the Duke may choose. We shall then see
‘what answer they will make to our demand, and govern our-
“selves accordingly.” Giving me to understand that upon this
point an opportunity will not be wanting to judge that neither
Vitellozzo nor Gianpaolo is to be trusted, these being the per-
sons against whom the Duke is more incensed than against all
the others.

Two days ago there came here the President of the chief
court of judicature which the Duke has established in this
state. His name is Messer Antonio del Monte a San Savino,
and he is a most learned and virtuous man ; his residence is at
Cesena. On his arrival it was said that the Duke had caused
him to come here for the purpose of sending him to Urbino as
representative of the Holy Father to offer a pardon to the in-
habitants of that city, and of all the other places, which is
quite likely; for to-day his Excellency the Duke, the Signor
Paolo, the said Messer Antonio, and Messer Agapito have been
in conference together during the greater part of the day, for
the purpose, it is said, of preparing the patents and the instruc-
tions according to which Messer Antonio is to proceed.

The Signor Paolo is to accompany him, for the purpose of
withdrawing the men-at-arms that are in the territory of Fano,
and to direct them towards Urbino. It is confidently expected
that this reoccupation will be effected without the necessity of
drawing a sword; it is moreover believed that Jacopo di Ros-
setto, who commands in San Leo, as I have mentioned in a for- ,
mer letter to your Lordships, and who, as everybody knows, is
wholly devoted to Vitellozzo, has been placed there by the latter
for no other purpose than to reconcile the Duke to him by the
surrender of the place to his Excellency. It is furthermore
said, that separate negotiations are being carried on with the
Duke Guidobaldi to induce him to accept a cardinal’s hat, or
some other equivalent compensation. The Signor Paolo de-
mands money for himself, and for the other confederates, in
consideration of the removal of the troops from Fano, and
has been promised five thousand ducats within eight days
from now.

228 MISSION TO THE

The recovery of Camerino during the winter is considered,
not as difficult, but as impossible. Nor is it believed that any
time will be wasted in attempting it, if it cannot be effected by
negotiation. And as with all these agreements and hopes, or
rather certainties, of recovering these states without recourse
to arms, none of the French troops are seen to return whence
they came, but as it seems to be rather the Duke’s intention to
go forward with the entire body of his troops as far as Rome,
it is believed that the Duke’s object is either to settle a good
many matters on the way, of which I have some corroborative
proof, or perhaps that these French troops intend to pass into
the kingdom of Naples to support their countrymen there. And
although this idea has prevailed ever since the French have
come here, yet it is regarded much more probable now, since
it has become known that the Spaniards have received con-
siderable reinforcements by way of Sicily. Upon this point,
however, your Lordships will be able to have more certain in-
formation from Rome.

Yesterday the Duke concluded an arrangement with Bologna;
the annual payment of nine thousand ducats, which was the
cause of difference, has been reduced to five years; and the
agreement would have been signed at once, but that the Bo-
lognese had not the authority to do it. This authorization,
however, has come this morning; but nothing has been done
owing to the Duke’s being occupied with Signor Paolo and
Messer Antonio del Monte in the matter mentioned above. I
have been told that, after the arrival of Messer Romolino at
Rome, the Pope had written to the Duke urging him to con-
clude the treaty with Bologna, with which he professed to be
well pleased and satisfied. I will endeavor, so soon as it shall
have been perfected, to have a copy of it, which I will send to
your Lordships.

Those blessed Swiss that were to have been here have not
yet made their appearance, which is all I have to tell your
Lordships; though I must not omit mentioning that it is un-
derstood here, that if the Duke marches to Rome with his
army, as it is supposed he will do, in such case he will fol-
low his old practice of making the towns belonging to the
Church that fall into his hands pay all his expenses; and that,
amongst others, Ancona is particularly aimed at. It is said
that the Florentine merchants have a large amount of goods

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 229

there ; and as I do not know at what moment this army may
appear before that city, which it is feared may be given up
to pillage when the army does come, and be exposed to all
sorts of other ills, I deem it my duty to bring this at once
to your Lordships’ notice. I had a long conversation this
morning on that subject with Messer Alessandro; and on ask-
ing him how we might secure any goods that our merchants
may have in Ancona, he replied, that the only way would be
to embark them at once and send them to Cesena or Rimini,
and that when once the goods were in either of those places he
would himself be responsible for their safety.

I have nothing more to say except to recommend myself
ever so often to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoua, 28 November, 1502.

Morning of the 29th. — A servant of the courier Carlo has
just arrived, with your Lordships’ letter of the 26th. I note
what you say respecting the ambassador who is to leave for
Rome, and that 1 am to remain here; and the hopes which

your Lordships entertain that the Duke will abandon his fixed
views respecting his engagement. In relation to all these
matters I shall conform strictly to your Lordships’ views; still
it seems to me that, as I have nothing new to communicate to
his Excellency, it would be better not to seek another audience
of him, but to try and mature the matter with some of the in-
fluential persons around him, and to persuade and make them
understand that they may in all respects rely upon your Lord-
ships, provided they do not go beyond what is possible and
reasonable. I shall wait, therefore, until some new proposition
is made to me by them, and am firmly resolved not to act
otherwise in this matter, unless your Lordships should give me
special orders on this point. I note, moreover, what your
Lordships tell me that you hear from Rome relative to the
passage of the Duke into the kingdom of Naples. To this I
reply, that I never heard that the Duke was to go in person,
although a good deal has been said about the French going
there, as I have stated in my preceding letter. For I endeavor
as far as possible to learn the truth, and to inform your Lord-
ships accordingly. I will detain your messenger no longer, so
as not to keep your Lordships in suspense as to information

230 MISSION TO THE

from here. But in my next you shall know all; in fact, I
would write you every day, were it not for the difficulty of
passing the mountains in consequence of the bad weather.
On the other hand, unless some change takes place in the state
of things, it would seem to me superfluous to incur an expense
merely for the purpose of repeating the same thing to your
Lordships.

It is now the eighteenth hour, and the Signor Paolo Orsini
has just left with Messer Antonio del Monte, for the purpose
which I have mentioned above. The Signor Paolo has received
thirty-six hundred ducats.

Valete iterum, ete.

Respecting the Duke’s departure from here, it is said that he
will leave some time this week, as I have before stated, and that
he will go to Furl.

LETTER XXX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote you yesterday by a son of your courier Carlo, and
although I have not much to say now, yet having the opportu-
nity of sending by a son of Messer Alessandro, treasurer, I
would not miss this chance of giving you information of what
is occurring here. Your Lordships will have learned from my
letter of yesterday that Signor Paolo Orsino and Messer An-
tonio del Monte went yesterday to Urbino; but as yet we have
no news of them, and are awaiting the results of their efforts.
Those nearest the Duke say that he will not move from here
until he shall know how to act with regard to Urbino; that is
to say, whether he shall be obliged to employ force or not.
All I know on this subject is that the Bishop of Cagli some
days ago applied for a safe-conduct to come here. It was
refused at first; but two days later it was granted, and he is
expected here shortly.

I told your Lordships in my last that the treaty between
Bologna and the Duke had been concluded, and that his Ex-
cellency was to receive a subsidy of nine thousand ducats for
five years; and that nothing now was wanting but an order to
the Bolognese. But since then letters have come from Rome,

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 931

brought by some one in the service of the Bentivogli, inform-
ing the Duke that it had been agreed between the Pope and
the representative of Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, that the sub-
vention was to continue for eight years, and was to be ten
thousand ducats per annum.

It is said now that the Duke, seeing that the Pope had made
a more advantageous arrangement both as to time and money,
insists upon the terms made by the Pope, whilst Messer Gio-
vanni claims to adhere to the terms made directly between him
and the Duke. And thus matters become embroiled and de-
layed. No one knows whether this is accidental or intentional ;
all we can do is to wait and judge by the result; although the
Bentivogli seem to think that matters are taking their natural
course, and they are satisfied. JI have in various ways en-
deavored to find out whether the Duke has any intention of
going with his troops into the kingdom of Naples; but have
not been able to learn anything certain on the subject. The
opinion at court, however, has been, ever since the arrival of
the French, that they would go to Naples after having finished
matters here. I shall continue my efforts to ascertain the
truth, and will keep you advised. All other matters here re-
main the same as when I last wrote; I have therefore nothing
more to say, but recommend myself to your Lordships, que
bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imota, 30 November, 1502.

LETTER XXXI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

My last was of the 30th ultimo, and before that I had written
on the 28th and 29th. I have now to communicate to your
Lordships that the articles of agreement between his Excel-
lency the Duke and Messer Giovanni Bentivogli were, with
the help of God, finally settled and concluded. I send this
intelligence by an express messenger, believing it to be of
great interest to your Lordships. For besides the other ad-
vantages which our republic will derive from it, there is one
that is not to be esteemed lightly; namely, that the Duke be-

Mes) MISSION TO THE

gins to show himself less disposed to follow his own caprices,
and recognizes that everything will not yield to his good for-
tune. This will dispose him to listen more readily to any pro-
posals your Lordships may choose to make to him. Although
it was my duty to have sent you a copy of this treaty, yet it
was impossible to obtain it this evening; and I therefore pre-
ferred to send you this information at once, rather than delay
by waiting for a copy of the treaty. Various opinions prevail
here as to the course which the Duke will now pursue in his
affairs. For the matter with Bologna as well as that with the
Orsini being settled, and there being hope also of terminating
the Urbino business favorably, as we shall know by to-morrow
what the Signor Paolo has effected by his visit there, nothing
now remains in uncertainty except what the Duke is going
to do with all the troops he has collected here ; and whether
the French in whole or in part will have to return to Lom-
bardy or go to Naples; or indeed whether his Excellency,
despite of all treaties, will have to keep them here for his se-
curity, especially against the Vitelli and the Baglioni. Upon
this latter point I have never learned anything more than what
I have several times written to: your Lordships; namely, that
on the one hand the Duke manifests an evil disposition towards
them, and on the other hand I have heard from that same
friend of mine, that, if the Duke were to go to Rome and re-
main there, he would find out the difference between the Jews
and the Samaritans, as I have written you more in detail in
my last.

As to the other point, whether the French are to go to
Naples either with or without the Duke, I have done my ut-
most to find out something, but can learn nothing positive.
From what I have heard, however, I am more inclined to say
not than otherwise; for on my speaking to-day on that sub-
ject with the friend to whom I have several times referred, he
told me that one of these Frenchmen had shown him a letter
from Naples, from which it appears that the French have the
upper hand there, and that consequently the presence of these
troops was not needed there. Drawing that letter from his
pocket, he gave it to me, and your Lordships will find a copy
of it herewith enclosed. I can say nothing further on this
subject; but by Tuesday we shall see which way this water
will run, and which conjecture may prove to be the most cor-

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 233

rect; for I judge from many indications that the Duke will
leave here with all his troops within three or four days.

It is said that the first halt will be at Furli, and that then
they will advance promptly from there. You will be better able
to judge of this than from the reports that are now circulating
here. And by way of giving your Lordships a better idea of
the spirit that animates the Duke towards his late enemies,
you must know that for the last eight days there has been
a messenger here from Pandolfo Petrucci, and one from Gian-
paolo Baglione, but neither of them has been able to obtain
an audience from his Excellency, or has really any hope of it.
A friend of mine told me that he had heard one of these gen-
tlemen allege in justification of their case against the Duke,
that they had wanted to make him king of Tuscany, but that
he had not only declined the offer, but went and denounced
it to his Majesty the king of France; and that this is the
only thing that Vitellozzo complains of on the part of his Ex-
cellency.

I have again to inform your Lordships that there is no news
from Urbino since the departure of the Signor Paolo Orsino
and Messer Antonio del Monte; but by to-morrow something
is expected from there, as I have already advised you. To-day
it is reported at court that the people of Camerino have de-
stroyed a castle in their neighborhood, belonging to the Church,
and called San Severino.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI.
Imoua, 2 December, 1502.

Please pay the bearer of this six lire. This letter should
reach you at least by the 4th instant.

Copy of a letter from the Duc de Nemours to M. de Chau-
mont, dated 19 November, 1502, from the Kingdom of Naples,
siz leagues from Barletta.

My Lorp Granp Master : —

I desire to inform you hereby that we are here within six
leagues from Barletta, and that our friends have withdrawn
compactly into the city, where they are fortifying themselves

234 MISSION TO THE

without any seeming intention of leaving it. Know further
that Alfonso da San Severo with one hundred men-at-arms
which he had in the city in the service of Monsignore Gon-
salvo Ferrante, has come and surrendered to us with his whole
troop. It is true that the army of the king of Spain has ef-
fected a landing in Calabria, and has joined the other Spanish
forces.

With all this our friends have not yet lost a single place or
town that they had once taken. 1 have sent them fifty lances
and six hundred infantry, and doubt not that when these rein-
forcements shall have joined them the enemy will retreat. I
hope our king will appreciate how well his rights here have
been guarded and defended by us, and that he will shortly see
things go from good to better. You may communicate this
good news to all subjects and servants of the king, and may
God guard you, my Lord Grand Master, etc., etc.

LETTER XXXII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Since the information given in my accompanying letter, I
have learned some particulars of the treaty concluded between
the Bentivogli and his Excellency, which I think proper to
communicate to you privately, having been so requested. The
individual from whom I have them was willing that I should
read the treaty, but would not allow me to take a copy. I can
therefore give your Lordships only what I have been able to
retain in my memory. Your Lordships know from my previ-
ous letters that one agreement was concluded here and another
at Rome, which latter was more advantageous for the Duke
than the other. The Roman agreement contains the following
clauses, viz. : —

Between his Excellency the Duke of Romagna, Prince of
Squillacci and Biselli, of the one part, and the magnificent
Regency of Bologna and Messer Giovanni Bentivogli and his
sons of the other part, there has been concluded a true and
perpetual peace. The contracting parties to have the same
friends and the same enemies; and both parties obligate them-
selves mutually to sustain each other with arms and with all

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 235

the powers of their respective states, against all other powers,
excepting the Pope Alexander VI. and the king of France.

Item. Messer Giovanni Bentivogli obligates himself to serve
his Excellency the Duke of Romagna with one hundred men-
at-arms and one hundred mounted bowmen for a term of six
months within the year, to commence from the date of the
final conclusion of this agreement, in such enterprises as the
Duke may choose to engage in.

Item. The oldest son of Messer Annibale Bentivogli shall
take for his wife the sister of the Bishop of Euna.

Item. The Pope promises to confirm to the city of Bologna
and to Messer Giovanni Bentivogli all the conditions and _privi-
leges that have heretofore been granted to them by any of his
predecessors.

Item. The Pope and the Duke promise that his Majesty the
king of France, the Magnificent Signoria of Florence, and his
Excellency the Duke of Ferrara, will guarantee the execution
of this agreement on the part of the Duke of Romagna.

Item. The aforesaid Duke of Romagna engages to serve the
city of Bologna with one hundred men-at-arms for a period of
eight years consecutively, for which he is to be paid annually
the sum of twelve thousand gold florins.

Such are in substance the conditions of this treaty, so far as
I have been able to remember them from a single reading.

The terms agreed upon this evening conform in all respects
to these, except that the pay for the one hundred men-at-arms
for the period of eight years has been reduced by them to five
years. The amount of pay for the other three years is to con-
stitute the dowry of the Bishop of Euna’s sister; and Messer
Giovanni hypothecates as security for this dowry all his pos-
sessions, in which the Duke insisted that his possessions in
the Florentine states should be comprised. There is one arti-
cle in that treaty which I had forgotten, namely, that the treaty
itself should be kept entirely secret during the next three
months, on account of the affairs of Urbino and Camerino.
This is the reason why I could not have a copy of it, and why
I write you this privately, in accordance with the request of
him who showed it to me.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imota, 2 December, 1502.

236 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XXXIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

Day before yesterday I received a letter from your Lordships
in reply to several of mine. Having in my last, of the 2d, given
your Lordships full account of the state of things here, and
nothing new having occurred here since then, I have really
nothing to write about. Nevertheless, so as not to keep your
Lordships in suspense for want of letters, I deem it well to
write the present. Having been ten days without attempting
to speak with his Excellency the Duke, and the treaty between
him and the Bentivogli having been concluded, I thought it
well yesterday to seek an occasion to see the Duke, who
promptly granted me an audience. Before I could say a word
to his Excellency, he said to me: “I had the desire to speak to
“you some five or six days ago, for during his last visit here
“the Signor Paolo Orsino told me that your Signoria had sent
“two envoys to him at Urbino, to propose to him that, if he or
“his son would engage to serve the republic of Florence, they
“would make terms with him, provided he should accomplish
“some results to their advantage in the affair of Pisa. But
“that he had declined the proposition, although there was
“nothing to hinder him from accepting your Lordships’ offer
“of an engagement even to acting against his Excellency.”

I asked him whether the Signor Paolo had given him the
names of the two envoys, and whether he had not shown him
their letters of credence; or whether the said Signor Paolo
had never in the past told him any hes. His Excellency replied
that the letters had not been shown him, nor had the Signor
Paolo told him who the two were; but as to lies, Signor Paolo
had told him plenty. And thus the matter ended in a laugh,
although at first the Duke spoke in an angry manner, showing
that he believed what Signor Paolo had told him, and regretted
it. It seems to me that it would not be amiss if your Lordships
were to write me something on the subject, so that I might
show it to his Excellency. We conversed afterwards for a full
hour on various matters, which it would be superfluous to re-
port to you, as they were of no importance. I will only mention
that I infer in substance from what his Excellency said, that he
is still of the same mind as to contracting an alliance with your

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. OSF

Lordships and maintaining it; and that he would never himself
do anything adverse to you, nor permit others to do so. For
he regarded any weakness or diminution of your power the
same as a diminution of his own. At the same time, he inti-
mated to me that he was disposed to a certain extent to accept
your propositions, if you declined to agree to his. He did not
say this clearly in so many words, but I thought I could gather
as much from his remarks. And although I tried to find out
his real sentiments, yet I did not succeed, as I could not answer
him except in general terms. We then spoke of the conduct
of the Venetians, and how they had kept up intelligence with
Rimini through a citizen of Venice, who lived there, and whom
he had caused to be hanged to save their honor. He told me
of the fears they had conceived on seeing his army collected |
there, and of the honors they had shown to an agent of his
whom he had sent to Venice to buy some guns, honors such as
were entirely unusual on their part, and undeserved on the part
of the agent. He then spoke of the affairs of Pisa, and of the
vigorous attack which your Lordships had made upon that
city, and he expressed the opinion that its capture would be
the most glorious achievement that any captain could accom-
plish. From that the Duke suddenly turned the conversation
upon Lucca, saying that it was a rich city, and a fine morsel for
a gormand ; and thus we passed considerable time with similar
conversation.

His Excellency said, furthermore, that he had been very glad
to conclude the treaty with the Bentivogli; that he wanted
to act towards them as a brother, and that God himself had
had a hand in bringing about that treaty; for at the begin-
ning he had entered upon that negotiation not at all as a
serious matter, but that afterwards all at once the Pope had
disposed him favorably to it, and that he then consented to it
with as much satisfaction as possible. He added, that if your
Lordships, Ferrara, and Bologna, and himself, were to go to-
gether, then he would have nothing to fear from anybody:
first, because the king of France is the common friend of all
the parties, and so long as he remained in Italy he would pro-
tect them or increase their power; and secondly, because even
if the king should experience some reverses, his alliance with
them would afford him such support at all times that no one
would presume to raise a hand against it.

238 MISSION? FO THE

The Duke told me that the stipulations of the treaty pro-
vided that his Majesty the king, your Lordships, and the Duke
of Ferrara guaranteed the faithful observance of the treaty by
each of the contracting parties; and that he believed your
Lordships would not refuse. I replied, that I could not speak
positively, but I believed that, whenever it was a question of
peace and tranquillity, your Lordships would always lend your
ready concurrence; and more especially when associated in the
matter with the king of France.

I asked his Excellency whether there was anything new
from Urbino, and what he intended to do with his army, and
whether it was his purpose to dismiss the French lances. He
replied, that he had letters yesterday informing him that the
Signor Paolo and Messer Antonio del Monte were at a castle
about five miles from Urbino, and had requested the Duke
Guido to join them there; which, however, he had not done
as yet, having been prevented by an attack of gout, and that
they had therefore resolved to go to him; also, that the in-
habitants of Penna a San Marino had sent a deputation to the
said Signor Paolo to make terms with him; and that as regards
himself he contemplated withdrawing within three days from
here, and moving as far as Cesena with all his army, and ‘he
would then act as circumstances might require. He said fur-
ther, that for the present he would not dismiss a single French-
man; but that when once he had settled his affairs he would
retain no more than two hundred to two hundred and fifty
lances, for these troops were really insupportable and destruct-
ive to the country; adding, that where he had intended to
have only about four hundred and fifty French lances, he had
more than six hundred, because all those that Monseigneur de
Chaumont had with him at Parma had come to him in small
detachments, having understood, as they said, that here “we
lived by the grace of God.” After some further conversation
of this sort I took my leave of his Excellency, and have really
nothing further to write to your Lordships about the state of
things here; for, as I said at the beginning of my letter, mat-
ters remain here much as when I last wrote you. We have
the same troops here, and still expect to start from one day to
another; and your Lordships see what the Duke himself has
told me as to the course he intends to pursue. I hear nothing
different from private sources, and to guess is difficult.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 239

Not knowing when the goods of our merchants are to leave
Ancona, or where they are to go, I can think of no way of
facilitating the matter. I recommend myself to your Lord-
ships, and beg you will grant my recall, and thus at the same
time save the public treasury the expense, and myself the dis-
comforts which I experience. For since the last twelve days
I find myself really sick; and if I go on thus, I fear I shall be
brought home in my coffin.

Have the goodness to direct the bearer of this to be paid one
gold scudo, for he has promised to be in Florence to-morrow
before three o’clock. |

NiccoLO MACHIAVELLI.

Imota, 6 December, 1502.

LETTER XXXIV.

MaeniFicent SIGNORI: —

Since writing you at length, the Duke’s master of horse came
to me and complained very much that a number of horses be-
longing to the Duke had been stolen in the mountains of San
Benedetto. I cannot tell you how much, he said, the Duke felt
agerieved at this, which has incensed him more than if he had
lost one of his towns. He has requested me to write to your
Lordships to take measures to have these horses restored to him,
and to ask you to send some one into these mountains to make
a demonstration against those who committed this wrong. I
have done my best to excuse this affair, but cannot placate the
Duke, it being a matter to which he attaches much importance.
I therefore beg your Lordships again to take measures for the
prompt restitution of these horses, and to endeavor to justify
the whole, so that your merchants may not have to suffer in
consequence, even if no other damage should result from it.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, etc., etc.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Imoza, 6 December, 1502.

240 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XXXV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

My last letters were of the 2d and 6th, sent per post at a
charge of one florin for each; and although I have as yet no
reply, still I cannot doubt but they have safely reached you.
By the present I am enabled to inform your Lordships that we
had the news yesterday evening that Paolo Orsino had settled
the Urbino business, and that the entire duchy had placed itself
voluntarily in the hands of his Excellency the Duke. Also that
the Duke Guido had gone to Castello, and was trying to have
some allowance made to him by his Excellency. For this reason
San Leo has not yet come to terms, but remains waiting at the
instance of the said Duke Guido. I understand that they want
him to renounce the marriage and accept a cardinal’s hat in-
stead, which he declines, saying that he will be satisfied with a
pension that will enable him to live. A number of troops have
left this morning and have gone in the direction of Furli, and
to-morrow, it is said, the Duke will set out, taking with him
all the French and his other troops. We shall see what will
happen.

The same friend to whom I have several times referred in my
letters has repeatedly expressed his surprise to me, within the
past few days, that your Lordships do not come to some arrange-
ment with the Duke, the present being as favorable a moment
for it perhaps as you could possibly desire. I told him in reply
that I was myself better disposed to do so now than I had been,
for it had seemed to me that at the last conversation I had with
the Duke he was less determined with regard to a military en-
gagement by our republic; and that if this be really so and he
was disposed to have as much regard for the interests of Flor-
ence as for his own, he would always be met half-way by your
Lordships, as I had already told his Excellency ever so often.
To this my friend answered, “I have told you on former occa-
“sions that in such an engagement there was both honor and
“profit for the Duke; yet that he cared nothing for the profit,
“but attached much importance to the honor of it; and that,
“if you could gratify him on that point, an arrangement could
“very readily be concluded.” He told me furthermore that an
envoy had arrived from Pisa and had sought to have an audi-

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. AY

ence of the Duke, who at first determined not to grant it, but
that, upon reflection, he had concluded that there could be no
harm in hearing this envoy, and that he would inform me of the
result. It is three days now since my friend told me this, and
although I have asked him several times on the subject, he has
always answered that he had not yet spoken to the Duke, and
that his occupations had prevented him from finding out what
this envoy wanted of the Duke. I asked him again this evening,
and he said that the envoy had been sent back without having
spoken to the Duke. From another source, however, I learn
that this envoy was Lorenzo d’ Acconcio, that he has had two
interviews with his Excellency, and that the object of his mis-
sion was to inform the Duke that the king of Spain had sent a
messenger to offer his assistance to the Pisans, and that these
were disposed to accept the offer unless they could find a de-
fender nearer by, as they could no longer remain in the po-
sition in which they were, and that therefore they had offered
themselves to the Duke; that his Excellency replied to this
proposition in general terms, and told the Pisan envoy to follow
him to Cesena, etc., etc.

Now I do not know which of these two stories to believe, and
submit the matter to your Lordships’ own good judgment. This
much I do know, that both one and the other of the persons
from whom I have this information are in a position most
easily to know the truth. It is reported here that Cascina has
been taken from you by surprise some ten days ago; and yes-
terday I was told by one of my friends that when this news was
received at the house of Bianchino of Pisa, where the Pisans
generally congregate, one of them immediately said that he be-
lieved it to be true, because orders had been given one day to
the Pisan horse to show themselves near Cascina. And when
the garrison of the place made a sortie to encounter the Pisan
horse, there being but a feeble guard left within, the peasants
and their women had risen and taken the place. I mention this
to your Lordships, so that even if it were true you might ad-
vise the commissary of it.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI.
December 9, 1502.

VOL. IIL. 16

242 MISSTON -1O7 THE

LETTER XXXVI.

Macyiricent S1GNorI: —

I wrote the accompanying yesterday, and being anxious to
send it off to your Lordships I offered a reward of two ducats,
but could find no one to take it owing to the extremely bad
weather. For the last four days it has snowed incessantly, and
for that reason no one can be found willing to attempt to cross
the Apennines. I beg your Lordships therefore to hold me ex-
cused, for despite of my unremitting efforts I cannot find any
one to carry these Ietters. It remains for me to inform your
Lordships that the Duke set out this morning with all his forces,
and has taken the direction of Furli. He will stop this even-
ing at Oriolo Secco, and to-morrow night at Cesena. What the
Duke will do after that is not known, nor does any one here
venture to guess at it; for the Urbino business is settled, and
the agreement between the Orsini and the Bentivogli concluded.
And yet the Duke does not dismiss a single French lance, but
they all march with him in the direction I have indicated to
your Lordships.

Large sums of money arrived here yesterday from Milan,
having been sent by the king to pay the French lances. I do
not know the amount, but they say there are six loads of silver
coin. Francesco della Casa will be able to give your Lordships
more correct accounts. Besides this, his Excellency expects
twelve thousand ducats from Florence, ten thousand from Bo-
logna, and three thousand from Venice. And a certain Messer
Gabriello of Bergamo, who is here, tells me that he has orders
to pay the Duke in addition ten thousand ducats within ten
days. I leave these matters for the interpretation of your
Lordships, who, having information from all parts, will be able
to form the best judgment.

I purpose leaving here to-morrow to follow his Excellency’s
court, but I do not go with a good will, for I am by no means
well, and, apart from my indisposition, I have but seven ducats
left in my purse; and when I shall have expended these, then I
shall be reduced to necessity. I have received in all from your
Lordships fifty-five ducats, and have already expended sixty-
two; I therefore beg your Lordships to supply me with funds.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Imota, 10 December, 1502.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 243

LETTER XXXVII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I left Imola on the morning of the 11th, and passed the
night at Castrocaro, where I remained the whole of the 12th.
The next morning I left there, and arrived here at Cesena the
same evening, thinking it best to delay one day joining the
court, so as to have a better chance for lodgings. Although
I have nothing new to communicate by the present letter, hav-
ing written on the 9th and 10th, yet I thought it best to write,
so as not to keep your Lordships in suspense as to matters
here. In my last I informed you that the entire duchy of Ur-
bino, with the exception of San Leo, had placed itself volunta-
rily in the hands of the Duke. The Duke Guido, who retains
San Leo, has gone to Citta di Castello, in the expectation
of being able in this way to obtain better terms for himself
from his Excellency. I have heard nothing further on the
subject, but negotiations are going on in relation to it; but
how and on what terms matters will be settled, I know not,
but shall endeavor to find out, and will then fully advise your
Lordships. Negotiations for an arrangement with the people
of Camerino are also being carried on, and I hear from a good
source that an understanding has been arrived at.

His Excellency the Duke, as I have said, is here with all the
French troops and his own, excepting those who have been the
whole year at Pesaro, and who have not moved from there.
The Duke and the troops are lodged in the city and its vicin-
ity, and live at discretion; that is to say, according to their
own pleasure, and not according to that of the persons who
lodge them. Your Lordships may imagine how things go on
here, and how they went on at Imola, where the court remained
three months, and the whole army two months, and where they
consumed everything to the very stones. Certainly that city
and the whole country have given proof of their patience, and
of how much they are able to bear. I mention this to your
Lordships, so that you may know that the French as well as
the other troops do not act any differently in Romagna from
what they did in Tuscany; and that there is neither more
order nor less confusion here than there has been wherever
these troops have been, etc.

244 MISSION TO THE

As I have written before to your Lordships, all those who
reason on the subject know not what to think of the Duke’s
intentions, he having come here with his troops, and, notwith-
standing all the treaties of peace and the recovery of his pos-
sessions, not having dismissed a single one of the French
troops. After looking at the matter from all sides, they come
to the conclusion that the Duke can have no other object than
to make sure of those who have subjected him to these wrongs,
and who have come within a hair of depriving him of his states.
And although the treaties of peace would seem to oppose this
conclusion, yet the example of the past would make those of
less consequence. I am myself much inclined to this opin-
ion, from the evidence which I have constantly had, and which
your Lordships will remember in my letters. And this is still
further corroborated by what I wrote you in my letter of the
10th respecting the Savelli.

Nevertheless, there are some who say the Duke is going to
Ravenna or Cervia. The Venetians are in great apprehension
on that account, and those who come from there say that the
Rectors personally visit the guards at night, which are posted
the same as if an enemy were at the very gates. With all
this, no one believes it, judging that the Duke would not at-
tempt anything against the Venetians unless the king of France
were at the same time to attack them in Lombardy ; and as no
orders of that kind have been heard of there, the other is not
believed. And thus, after indulging in a variety of specula-
tions, people here have generally concluded to leave the de-
velopment of the matter to time, rather than weary themselves
with idle conjectures.

I have written to your Lordships what is said on the subject
of the Duke’s taking his troops to the kingdom of Naples or
otherwise, and I repeat now that the matter is no longer much
talked about here. It is true the Duke’s courtiers say that,
when he shall have re-established order in Urbino and in
Camerino, he intends going to Rome; and that he will start
from here after Christmas. But those who are of the opinion
that he means anyhow to assure himself of his enemies say
that it is very likely that he will start for Rome, but stop on
the way to settle matters in his own fashion. We shall see
what will come of it. Meantime I shall do my duty in keeping
your Lordships advised whilst I remain here, which, however,

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 245

I do not believe will be much longer; first, because I have
only four ducats left in my purse, as my steward knows, who
is bearer of this letter, and will give your Lordships full ac-
count of my condition and my expenditures; and secondly,
because my remaining here is of no further use. And I beg
to tell your Lordships, in the same spirit of loyalty with which
I have ever served you, that it will be much more advanta-
geous for the conclusion of whatever arrangement you may
have to make with the Duke, to send some one of distin-
guished reputation here rather than to Rome. The reason is
this. In the proposed alliance you have to satisfy the Duke,
and not the Pope; for whatever terms might be concluded
with the latter may be rejected by the former. But whatever
may be concluded with the Duke will never be refused by the
Pope, unless the Duke himself should see that some advantage
could be gained by it; as in the case of the Bolognese treaty.
And as it is hazardous to negotiate on the same subject in two
places at once, it will be better to have this matter negotiated
here rather anon at Rome.

I have neither been charged with that mission, nor am I well
qualified for it. It should be a man of more eloquence and
greater reputation, and one who understands the world better
than Ido. And therefore I have always been of the opinion
that it would be well to send an ambassador here, which would
have more influence with the Duke in all matters that have
to be negotiated with him than any other means that could be
employed. Everybody here is of the same opinion. It is true
he should not come here with incomplete notions, but rather
with resolute views upon certain points; and thus matters
would doubtless be arranged, and that promptly. I have until
now ever done my duty to the utmost of my ability, and shall
not fail to continue to do so; for even if much time has been
wasted in the past, yet all is not lost.

Your Lordships, I trust, will receive this in the spirit in
which I write it, and I beg most humbly that you will provide
me with funds, and grant my recall.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
CrsEna, 14 December, 1502.

P. S.—One of the first gentlemen of the Duke’s court has
requested me, on behalf of his Excellency, to recommend to

246 MISSION TO THE

your Lordships Messer Bartolommeo Marcelli of the Borgo San
Sepolero, who is one of those who, by summons of the Five
Deputies, were to appear before them from the Ist to the 10th
instant. He says.that he received the notification only on the
8th. He is a man of seventy-two years of age, and being here
would have had to make seventy miles in two days, which it
was impossible for him to do, the mountains being covered with
snow, and with daylight only during seven hours; and therefore
he claims indulgence. He is ready to obey the summons and
prove his innocence if time be allowed him. I have been re-
quested, therefore, to solicit your Lordships to grant him a
delay, and to give him at least five or six days’ notice to ap-
pear, and he will promptly obey. I add my prayers to your
Lordships, who are most urgently requested to that effect by
his Excellency the Duke; and believing it proper to bring this
matter to your notice, I hope for a favorable reply.

Your Lordships will please have the bearer of this paid one
gold florin for his trouble.

LETTER XXXVIII.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I write to acknowledge your three letters of the 8th, 10th,
and 13th instant, although I have not much to say in reply,
your Lordships’ letters having been mainly replies to several of
mine. But as your letters contain an explanation of what I
had written you that Paolo Orsino had said to his Excellency
the Duke, and as you manifest therein your good intentions of
forming a closer alliance with his Excellency, and tell at the
same time how much the Pope was pleased at your having
sent an embassy to him; and as you moreover enter into some
particulars, etc., etc.; it seemed to me well to ask for an audi-
ence of his Excellency, which, however, I could not obtain until
yesterday evening at the fourth hour.

Deeming it advisable to communicate to his Excellency a
portion of your letters, I read to him all those parts that relate
to the above-named subjects. His Excellency listened very
cheerfully to it all, and then expressed himself in the highest
degree satisfied with what your Lordships write respecting

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. Q47

Paolo Orsino. And upon the other points he repeated what
he had already told me several times; namely, that he was
anxious for an alliance with your Lordships, and that the
closer it was, the more importance he attached to it, and the
more agreeable would it be to him; and that he was the more
ready to treat with you as he saw that his Holiness the Pope
was most favorably disposed towards your Lordships; saying
that he had lately had letters from his Holiness, in which he
manifested not only a great desire to have the matter closed,
but also such an affection for your Lordships that you could
not wish it greater yourselves. His Excellency added, that he
was more than ever pleased at this, for he saw in it the means
for giving the strongest possible foundation to his power; and
that with such a union between your Lordships, himself, and
Ferrara, Mantua, and Bologna, neither himself nor any of the
others would or could have anything to fear. That he entered
into such a union with the more readiness, as it seemed to him
to be his own act; and that he did it with all the frankness
and sincerity that could be asked of a royal prince. That he
remembered having told me that, when he was able to do but
little, he had neither boasted nor promised anything, but had
reserved his action until his state should be securely estab-
lished ; and that then he had made large offers to your Lord-
ships. And that now since he had recovered Urbino, and that
Camerino was at his disposal, and that without the Vitelli and
the Orsini he found himself with ten thousand horse at his
orders, he thought he could afford to promise largely; that
therefore he placed all his forces at your service in case it
should happen that you were assailed, and that he should not
wait to be called, but would then prove by his acts what he
to-day promised in words.

I fear, O Magnificent Signori, lest your Lordships may think
that I put these words into the mouth of the Duke; for I my-
self, who heard him, and noted his very words and the terms
which his Excellency employed in saying these things, and
observed the gesticulations with which he accompanied them,
can scarcely believe it. But I deem it my duty to write these
things to your Lordships, as it is yours to judge of them and to
think it well that I should tell you of it, but that it will be still
better not to have occasion to put him to the proof. I thanked
his Excellency on behalf of your Lordships in such terms as

248 MISSION TO THE

seemed to me proper, telling him how much importance your
Lordships attached to his friendship and to his offers, etc., ete.

Turning suddenly to another subject, the Duke said to me:
“You are not aware that a citizen of Pisa has arrived here,
‘ond has for several days past solicited an audience of me,
“which I have not yet granted him. In my endeavors to find
“out what he wants, I learn that he has come to inform me that
“the king of Spain had offered them his assistance, and that
“they were for accepting it, unless others were willing to aid
“them. I purpose giving this emissary an audience now, and
“he is for that purpose in the adjoining room. I do not want
“vou to leave, for so soon as I shall have heard what he has to
“say, I will report it all to you.” After thanking his Excel-
lency I withdrew, and thereupon the Pisan entered, and re-
mained with the Duke about a quarter of an hour. When the
Duke had dismissed him, he called me back and told me that
“the Pisan had informed him that he had come on behalf of
“<The Ancients’ of Pisa; that the king of Spain had sent
“them word that he was ready to supply them whatever quan-
“tity of grain they might want, and as much infantry and
“cavalry as they might need for their defence, on condition
“that they would promise to place themselves at his disposal
“and be his friends; that they would be obliged to accept
“these conditions unless they could be assured that help would
“come to them from some other quarter. And therefore they
“had sent him to his Excellency to make their excuse to him
“for whatever course they might take.’ The Duke told me
that he had replied by advising them to consider well what
they did, and upon what course they entered. For they must
see that the Italians were all French in sentiment; that the
king of France was all powerful in Italy, and an enemy of the
king of Spain; so that, if they were to ally themselves with
Spain, they would find that they made enemies of all those who
until now had sustained them. That all at once they would
have the knife at their throat; for one of these fine mornings
the king of France and his adherents would be under their
walls, and that he himself would fly to besiege them, at the
slightest word from the king. And therefore he advised them
as a fricnd to remain as they were, and to preserve the friend-
ship of the king of France, and to conform to his will, as he
was the only one from whom they had anything to hope.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 249

The Duke said that the Pisan envoy remained confounded, and
could make no answer, except that they could exist no longer in
the condition in which they were. His Excellency told me fur-
ther, that he had replied to the Pisan envoy in the manner he
did because he thought it would be believed by the Pisans, and
would be of advantage to your Lordships. For in advising
them to rely upon France, which was your friend, it was the
same thing as advising them to rely upon you, without naming
you, so as not to exasperate them still more. Moreover, he
thought it would be beneficial to you to remove from your
vicinity a war such as this might become. And in fact he
thought that he ought to do anything to prevent the Pisans
from committing such a folly, although he had some doubts
whether he should succeed, seeing the state of desperation the
Pisans were in. To all this the Duke added, that for the present
he had answered them in this wise, but that in future he would
shape his replies according to your Lordships’ instructions.
I thanked his Excellency for this communication, saying that
his reply to the Pisans seemed to me in all respects most pru-
dent and well considered ; that it was not for me to tell his
Excellency how to act in this matter, for he well knew how
much your Lordships had Pisa at heart; and that he knew ©
also the condition of the other Italian affairs, which he would
have to weigh in all his replies and in the negotiations which
his Excellency might have occasion to have with the Pisans.
I also told the Duke that I would write to your Lordships, and
in case of my receiving any instructions on the subject I would
at once communicate them to him.

Your Lordships will remember my having told you in a
former letter that I had received different accounts of this
negotiation, and how according to the one version the Pisan
envoy had not yet spoken to the Duke, whilst according to the
other he had had two interviews with him. For this reason
I wished, before closing this letter, to speak again with both
the parties who had made these statements to me, so as to see
what I could learn from one and the other. I have, however,
not yet been able to do so, but will endeavor to supply this
deficiency in my next.

The affairs of Urbino remain in the same condition as when
I last wrote; and of Camerino I know nothing but what the
Duke told me, and which I have already mentioned to you; and

250 MISSION LO-THE

which amounts to this, that the city is at the Duke’s disposal.
His Excellency has sent orders for the artillery, which is at
Furl, to be brought here. He gives money freely to the in-
fantry and to the men-at-arms; and it is said that within a
week he will break up his camp here and move by slow marches
to Sinigaglia. Four days ago it was reported here that the
French had experienced a complete rout in the kingdom of
Naples; but the Duke told me yesterday that it had been
merely an unimportant affair. Your Lordships are in a posi-
tion to have more reliable intelligence.

I have endeavored to ascertain how the obligation should be
drawn which your Lordships have to execute to the king of
France and the Duke of Ferrara with regard to the treaty con-
cluded with Bologna. A certain Messer Giovanpaolo, secre-
tary of the Bentivogli, has told me that the treaty provided
that his Excellency the Duke obligates himself, within two
months after the ratification of the treaty, to bring about that
his Majesty the king of France, the Duke of Ferrara, and the
Illustrious Signoria of Florence shall guarantee the strict ob-
servance of the peace. And it scems that, as the Duke has to
ask for this guaranty, the obligation has to be given for the
Duke only. The above-named secretary seems to be of the
same opinion; still, if the words of the treaty are as above
stated, then they are liable to a different interpretation. But
as yet the demand has not been made upon your Lordships ;
for since the ratification of the treaty, the question as to the
dowry which the sister of Monseigneur d’Euna is to have has
not yet been settled; this matter, however, is to be taken in
hand to-day.

By your letter of the 8th your Lordships recommend to me
again the case of Salvetto di Buosi, and I mentioned it to the
Duke yesterday evening. After a good deal of discussion
he came to the conclusion that he would save Salvetto’s life,
contrary to the will of the Naldi family; but that he will not
liberate him in opposition to them, for it did not seem to him
wise for the benefit of one person to offend four; and that
it would be a great satisfaction to him if Dionisio would con-
tent himself with that, as he could not do any more.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, and beg again that
you will furnish me the means of support; I have here at my
charge three servants and three horses, and cannot live upon

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. pasa

promises. I began yesterday to run into debt; having spent
seventy ducats up to the present time. You may ask the bailiff
Niccolo Grillo about it, as he has been here with me. I might
have my expenses paid by the court here, and may still have
it done, but I do not wish that; and have not availed myself
of that privilege hitherto, for it seemed to me for your Lord-
ships’ honor and my own not to do it. But your Lordships
must know whether I can with a good will go about asking for
three ducats here, and for four of some one else.
Bene valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Crsena, 18 December, 1502.

P. S.— Your Lordships know that when I obtained the safe-
conduct from his Excellency, a few weeks ago, I had to promise
to give to the Chancelry whatever Messer Alessandro Spanno-
chi might deem proper; and it is certainly no pleasure for me
to allege anything against the fulfilment of that promise. Now
the clerks of the Chancelry are every day at my heels, and I
owe them yet sixteen yards of damask. I beg your Lordships
will have this provided for me through the merchants ; for if
I do not satisfy these clerks of the Chancelry, I shall never-
more be able to expedite anything through them, and especially
confidential matters; for they manage all these things with-
out any reference to the Duke. And, moreover, by sending
this damask, your Lordships will relieve me of an obligation
which I have contracted here. And thus I recommend myself
specially in this matter to your Lordships.

Iterum valete !

LETTER XXXIX.

Maeniricent SieNnori : —

Yesterday, whilst conversing with his Excellency the Duke,
Messer Agapito, his first secretary, came up to me and begged
me to write to your Lordships, and ask you to be pleased to
bring it about that Messer Lodovico Archilegio da Amelia
should be chosen as judge of the wool guild. His Excellency
the Duke added that your doing so would give him particular

252 MISSION TO THE

pleasure ; that, however, he did not wish to write you specially
about it, but relied entirely upon me; and that if the election
had already been made, then he could wish that at the next
election the choice might fall upon Messer Lodovico. I could
not tell your Lordships with what warmth I have been urged °
in this matter both by the Duke and his secretary. I await
your reply.

The Baron de Bierra, at his departure from here, has rec-
ommended to me the father of Camillo del Borgo, who is one
of the number that have been summoned to appear before the
five magistrates, saying that he will appear, provided they
will allow him the time necessary to come, seeing that he is
seventy-two years old and is here at Cesena. The said Baron
has written the enclosed to your Lordships in relation to this
matter, and I recommend him on his behalf to your Lordships,
and myself likewise.

~Niccoto MacHIAVELLI.
CrsEena, 19 December, 1502.

LETTER XL.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote to your Lordships day before yesterday, and sent it
by a servant of Antonio da Sesto. By the present I desire to
inform you that, whilst at court this evening, I saw all the
French captains come in a body to his Excellency the Duke.
Before entering, they held a council amongst themselves; and
in observing their movements and gesticulations, they seemed
to me to be much excited. And thinking that there might pos-
sibly be some news of importance, I went, so soon as they had
left, to the Baron de Bierra for the purpose of learning the
facts; pretending that I came to see him on behalf of your
Lordships, and saying that I had received particular instruc-
tions to do so. After thanking me, the Baron drew me aside
and said: “We are to leave here in two or three days to re-
“turn to the duchy of Milan, having received orders to that
“effect to-day.” And when I asked him for what object, he
said, “That he did not know, but that all the French had to
“leave, and had to retrace their steps; and that they would

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 2538

“certainly start on the day after to-morrow.” I then asked
him whether Monseigneur de Vanne, son of Monseigneur de
Lebret,* would also leave with his troops. To which he re-
plied, “That he did not know what this gentleman would do,
““but that all the others with all their companies would leave
“without fail.’ He told me that I might communicate this to
your Lordships as positive, and also that sufficient money had
been received at Milan to pay the fifteen thousand infantry that
would be collected there within a month’s time. This unex-
pected order, so far as I could judge by their gesticulations,
has turned the heads of all the court. When it shall become
publicly known, I shall be able to write you more in detail as
to what is going on here; but. at present, knowing neither the
cause nor the origin of the movement, I am not able to form
a correct judgment of it. Your Lordships, however, will have
obtained information from other sources, and will therefore
be better able to appreciate it. And although I believe that
your Lordships will have heard from Lombardy, yet I deem
it well to send you this by an express, who will, however, not
start until to-morrow morning, owing to the insecurity of the
country, but has promised to be at Florence by day after
to-morrow.

Monseigneur de Bierra told me in a conversation I had with
him, that he and the other captains of the French mounted
forces had resolved not to march anywhere unless they have
the infantry with them, as otherwise it would not be safe for
them to go. The reason for this, I think, is that they have re-
ceived some offence from the people of the country, which they
have not been able to resent as they could have wished. I
would not omit mentioning this to your Lordships, as Mon-
seigneur de Bierra’s remark seemed to me worthy of notice.

The artillery, which previous to this news had been ordered
to Fano, has all been brought here. I know not what may
happen next, for this new move will necessarily give rise to
new plans. Since these troops have come here certain castles
of the Bishop of Ravenna have been sacked; in all temporal
matters, however, these castles are subject to Cesena. This
act has been attributed to the fact that the Bishop had encour-
aged the revolt of Urbino.

* Or rather d’Alibret (d’Abret). This Monseigneur de Vanne was brother-
in-law to the Duke Valentino, who had married one of his sisters. ;

254 MISSION TO THE

I have nothing else to write, except to reeommend myself to
your Lordships.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Crsena, 20 December, 1502, at the
4th hour of night.

Please have the bearer of this paid one gold florin.

LETTER XLII.

Maentricent SIGNoRI : —

Yesterday morning I received your last letter of the 17th by
way of Bagno, and fully comprehend your instructions. There
seems to me to be no reason for apprehending injury to either
one or the other place belonging to Florence on account of
those who have taken refuge there; for in my opinion it would
require causes of greater gravity to warrant an attack on our
territory. I should regard it, nevertheless, as an act of pru-
dence that these people should withdraw further into the in-
terior of our dominions, and have written to that effect to the
captain. Should anything come to my knowledge that would
cause me any doubts upon that point, I shall advise your Lord-
ships, but more than that I do not believe I can do.

I presume your Lordships to have received all the letters I
have written since coming to Cesena; the first was of the 14th,
sent by the courier Grillo; the other, of the 18th, I sent by a son
of Antonio @ Assetto, who was returning to Florence; and the
last, of the 20th, was sent express by one of the shoemakers’
guild. By the first two I wrote to your Lordships what I had
learned of the condition of things here; also, the conversation
I had with the Duke, chiefly in relation to Pisan affairs. In
mine of the 20th, I informed you of the unexpected departure
of the French. They left yesterday in the direction of Bo-
logna, halting about three miles from here, and passing the
night at Castello Bolognese, so as to reach the Bolognese ter-
ritory the next evening. There are in all about 450 lances.
This sudden and unexpected departure has been the subject of
general conversation, and every one forms his own conjectures
about it. I have done my best to find out the truth of the

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 255

matter, but it is impossible to obtain any correct information.
I have written you what the Baron de Bierra told me; and
since then have conversed with M. de Montison, who told me
that the French troops had left out of regard for the country
and the Duke, who had no further occasion for them; and that
the country was becoming hostile to him on account of being
overburdened by so many troops. The principal personages of
the court tell me that the Duke could no longer support these
troops, and that the further retaining them would cause him
more annoyance from his friends than from his enemies; and
that even without them the Duke would still have troops
enough to enable him to undertake anything he might be dis-
posed to.

Not wishing to leave anything undone to obtain correct in-
formation, I went to see that friend of mine, whom I have
several times mentioned to your Lordships, so soon as the
news of the departure of the French became known. I told
him that, having heard of that departure, which seemed to me
very sudden, and not knowing whether it was by order of the
Duke or contrary to his wishes, I deemed it my duty to let his
Excellency understand that I was ready to conform to his de-
sires as to the manner in which he might wish me to present
this matter to your Lordships. He replied that he would very
cheerfully undertake that commission. When I saw him again,
he told me that he had spoken to the Duke about the matter,
and that he was much pleased at my having suggested this to
him, and that, after a few moments of reflection, his Excellency
had said to him: “Tell the secretary we thank him, but that
“for the present there is no occasion for his doing anything
“in the matter; but whenever there is, we will send for him.”
And thus I lost the desired opportunity of speaking with his
Excellency, and learning from him something more positive in
relation to this matter. And this is all I am able to tell you.
Iam sure your Lordships’ wisdom, and the advices you have
from other sources of which I am ignorant, will enable you to
form a correct judgment of this affair. Those who speak of it
here say, that the departure of the French troops is due to one
of two causes; namely, either because the king of France has
need of them himself in Lombardy, or because his Majesty is
dissatisfied with the Pope, as some cloud has arisen between
them. Be this as it may, the French troops have gone from

YARIS) MISSION TO THE

here, neither well satisfied nor well disposed towards the Duke ;
but in view of their character, this is of little consequence.

What the Duke may now intend or be able to do, no one
knows; but thus far there is no change in his plans. The
artillery has gone in advance, and yesterday there arrived here
six hundred infantry from the Val di Lamona, and one thou-
sand Swiss, part of those that have been so long expected, are
at Faenza. Previous to this the Duke had already fifteen hun-
dred Swiss, Germans, and Gascons in all.

It is still said that after the holidays he will start for Pisa.
On the other hand, he has lost more than half of his forces and
two thirds of his reputation ; and the opinion prevails that he
will not be able to do much of what he at first boasted he
would do, and which it was believed he could accomplish.
San Leo is in the hands of the Duke Guido, and the other for-
tresses in the duchy of Urbino are razed to the ground. Came-
rino, which the Duke said was at his disposal, will change its
purpose when it hears this news. <A secretary of the Cardinal
Farnese, who is Legate of La Marca, and who arrived here yes-
terday, assured me that Camerino was very obstinate in its
opposition to the Duke. Your Lordships will judge now what
course matters may take, and will not fail to bear in mind that
the straits in which the Duke may be placed may cause him
to throw himself into the arms of your natural enemies, against
which your Lordships will know how to provide, with your
habitual wisdom.

I have not heard since of the Pisan negotiations, which I
have mentioned to your Lordships as a matter of great mo-
ment. In speaking on the subject with such persons as I have
referred to in former letters, one of them evaded my questions
and referred me to what the Duke had told me; and the other
told me that Lorenzo @? Acconcio had left for the purpose of
arranging the sending here of three Pisan deputies, two from
the city and one from the country; and that the Duke is dis-
posed to see whether by way of agreement he might accom-
plish something particularly agreeable to your Lordships, and
that his first effort will be to get Tarlatino out of the hands of
the Pisans, and to induce them to break off their friendly rela-
tions with Vitellozzo. Next, he hopes to win the confidence of
the Pisans by giving money to their soldiers, and by taking
them into his pay. And having thus gained their friendship,

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. yas yf

he will endeavor, through the intervention of the king of
France, to bring about some arrangement between them and
your Lordships which he will offer to guarantee. He pretends
to be able to succeed easily in this; but if he fails, it will be
because the Pisans are obstinate, and simply because they have
no confidence that the promises made to them will be fulfilled.
Now whether all this is true or not, 1 do not know; I give it
to you as I have it from an individual who is in the way of
knowing the truth of the matter. I beg your Lordships will
on all accounts make careful use of it, which I suggest with
all due deference.

Messer Ramiro, one of the Duke’s first officers, returned
yesterday from Pesaro, and was immediately confined at the
bottom of the tower by order of his Excellency. It is feared
that he will be sacrificed to the populace, who are very de-
sirous that he should be.

I beg your Lordships with all my heart to be pleased to send
me wherewith to live; for if I have to follow the Duke, I shall
not know how to do it without money. I shall remain here or
return to Castrocaro until your Lordships shall have decided
with regard to myself.

NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI.
23 December, 1502.

P. S.— It is said for certain that the Duke will leave here on
Monday, and will go to Rimini. I shall await your Lordships’
reply, and shall not leave without orders; and beg your Lord-
ships to excuse me, for I can go no further.

LETTER XLII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote your Lordships last on the 23d by way of Bagno, and
as I then gave you full account of the departure of the French
troops, and what is said here about it, I have nothing else of
importance to report on that subject.

The son of the courier Ardingo arrived here yesterday, and
brought me two of your Lordships’ letters, of the 20th and 22d ;

and although I have made every effort since their receipt to
VOL. III. A7

258 MISSION TO THE

have an audience of the Duke, yet I have not succeeded. Yes-
terday, when I expected to have seen his Excellency, he was oc-
cupied in reviewing his infantry, and in his Christmas pleasures,
so that it was impossible for me to see him; and this morning
he left at an early hour with his whole army for San Arcangelo,
fifteen miles from here, and five miles from Rimini. 'To-mor-
row I shall start for the latter place, for I cannot go nearer
to the court on account of the difficulty of finding lodgings ;
although they say that the Duke is not going to stay here, but
will move by long marches towards Pesaro. No one knows
what he is going to do; some think that he will make an attack
upon Sinigaglia, others say Ancona. As regards his forces, he
has, besides the troops of which I sent you a list not long since,
about thirty newly enlisted Albanese Stradiotes; then he has
some twenty-five hundred infantry from the other side of the
mountains, and about as many other Italians whom he passed
in review yesterday and the day before. And you may count
for every thousand infantry about fifty mounted men. The
artillery, with a full supply of ammunition, has taken the same
route. Upon how many troops the Orsini and the Vitelli may
count is not known; but we shall be better informed upon that
point when they shall be nearer to each other. As I have men-
tioned to you before, the Duke is so secret in all he does that he
never communicates his designs to any one. His first seereta-
ries have repeatedly assured me that he never makes his plans
until the moment of his giving orders for their execution, and
he gives these orders only when forced by necessity, and on the
spur of the moment, and never otherwise.

I beg your Lordships therefore to excuse me, and not to im-
pute it to negligence on my part, if my information is not satis-
factory to you, for I am not satisfied with it myself. We hear
nothing more of San Leo and the negotiations with the Duke
Guido.

On a former occasion I wrote to your Lordships what the
Duke had told me of Camerino, which remained at his dis-
posal; and I wrote you subsequently what I had learned from
the secretary of the Cardinal Farnese, who told me that he had
but little hope, especially in consequence of the departure of
the French troops. The Bishop of Euna told me yesterday that
the affair was as good as arranged. Meanwhile we must wait
events, so as not to be led into more errors.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 259

Messer Ramiro was found to-day cut into two pieces in the
public square, and his body still remains there, so that the
whole population has been able to see it. The cause of his death
is not precisely known, other than that it was the pleasure of
his Excellency thus to show that he has the power to make
and unmake men at his will, and according to their merits.

Your above-named courier brought me twenty-five gold ducats
and sixteen yards of black damask, for both of which I thank
your Lordships very much. As the court is about to break up,
they have not yet sent for the three mares which your Lordships
inform me are at Poppi. I have only been told to request you
to direct them to be well cared for until orders shall have been
given to bring them here.

Messer Bartolommeo Marcelli of Borgo, on whose account the
Baron de Bierra wrote lately to your Lordships, asks merely
that time may be allowed for him to appear until he shall be
able to come to Florence. He has himself written to Piero di
Braccio, who manages his case; and I beg now to recommend
him to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Cxsena, 26 December, 1502, 22d hour.

LETTER XLIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORT: —

Day before yesterday I wrote to your Lordships from Pesaro *
what I had heard from Sinigaglia. Yesterday I went to Fano,
and at an early hour this morning his Excellency the Duke
started with his entire army and came here to Sinigaglia, where
all the Orsini and Vitellozzo are, who, as I have already informed
you, had won this city for him. They met his Excellency on his
arrival, and escorted him; but so soon as he had entered the
place with them at his side, he suddenly turned to his guard
and ordered them to seize these men; and having thus made
them all prisoners, the place was given up to pillage.

It is now the 23d hour, and the greatest turmoil prevails, so
that I really do not know whether I shall be able to despatch

* This letter, here referred to as having been written from Pesaro on the 29th
of December, is missing, the original probably being lost.

260 MISSION TO THE

this letter, having no one whom I can send. I shall write more
fully in my next, but according to my Judgment the prisoners
will not be alive to-morrow.

SmniGaGuia, this last day of December.

P. S.— All the troops of the Orsini and Vitellozzo are also
taken, and the manifestoes that are published everywhere say
that “The traitors are captured,” etc., ete. I have paid the
bearer of this three ducats, and your Lordships will please pay
him three more, and reimburse those which I have paid to
Biagio. |
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

LETTER XLIV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote you two letters yesterday in relation to the events
that have taken place here since the Duke’s arrival in Sini-
gaglia; how he had Signor Paolo and the Duke di Gravina
Orsini, and Vitellozzo, and Oliverotto, arrested. In my first
I simply announced the event, but in the second I gave you
all the particular details, and moreover what the Duke had
said to me, and the opinion expressed here as to the Duke’s
proceedings. I should repeat all this at length, if I did not
suppose that these letters have reached you safely. Having
sent these two despatches by express messengers, the first by
a Florentine at an expense of six ducats, and the other by a
man from Urbino at a cost of three ducats, I feel confident of
their arrival. Yet by way of extra care I will summarily re-
peat the whole. His Excellency left Fano yesterday morning
with his entire army for Sinigaglia, which town with the ex-
ception of the citadel had been occupied by the Orsini and
Messer Oliverotto da Fermo. Vitellozzo had arrived there the
evening before from Castello. One after the other these per-
sons came out to meet the Duke, and then accompanied him
into the town and into his house. As they entered his apart-
ment, the Duke had them seized as prisoners; he then had
their infantry disarmed, which was in the suburbs outside of
the city ; and the Duke sent half of his forces to disarm also

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 261

the men-at-arms who were quartered in certain castles some
six or seven miles from Sinigaglia. At two o’clock in the
night the Duke had me called, and with the most serene air
in the world expressed to me his delight at his success; saying
that he had spoken to me of this matter the day before, but
had not then told me the whole. He then spoke in a most
suitable and affectionate manner as to his conduct towards our
republic, adducing all the motives that made him desire your
friendship, provided these feelings were reciprocated by your
Lordships, so that I was quite astonished. I do not repeat all
he said, having already written it in my letter of yesterday
evening.

Finally he concluded by requesting me to write to your
Lordships upon three points. The first, that you rejoice with
him at his having destroyed the chief enemies of the king
of France, of himself, and of the republic of Florence; and
at his having thus removed all seeds of trouble and dissen-
sion calculated to ruin Italy, for which your Lordships ought
to be under great obligations to him. The next is, that I
should request and beg your Lordships on his behalf to be
pleased to give to the whole world a proof of your friendship
for him, by ordering your cavalry towards Borgo, and to collect
infantry there, so that they might march together with his
forces upon Castello or Perugia, as might be required; saying
that he intended at once to take that route, and that he would
have started the evening before, if he had not feared that his
departure would have exposed Sinigaglia to being sacked. His
Excellency then reiterated to me his request that I should
write and ask you to make every demonstration of friendship
for him, saying that at present there was no occasion for your
being restrained by any fear or mistrust of him, seeing that
he was well provided with troops, and that your enemies were
prisoners. And, lastly, he begged me to write to your Lord-
ships that it was his particular desire that you should have the
Duke Guido, who is at Castello, arrested, in case he should
take refuge on Florentine territory upon learning that Vitel-
lozzo was prisoner. Upon my replying to him that it would
not comport with the dignity of our republic to deliver the
Duke Guido to him, and that you would never do it, he an-
swered, that “he approved of my remarks, and that it would
“suffice that you should detain the Duke Guido, and not set

262 MISSION TO THE

“him at liberty without his consent.” I promised to write you
all this, and his Excellency awaits your reply.

In my letter of yesterday I wrote you also that a certain
number of well-informed persons and friends of our republic
have suggested to me that the present is a most favorable op-
portunity for your Lordships to do something for the readjust-
ment of the affairs of Florence. They all think that you can
rely upon France, and that it would be most opportune to send
here one of your most distinguished citizens as an ambassador
on the occasion of this event, and that you should not delay in
doing so. For if a personage of high position were to come
here with orders to establish friendly relations with the Duke,
he would he met half-way. This has been suggested to me
again and again by those who are well-wishers to our republic ;
and I communicate it to your Lordships in the same spirit of
devotion with which I have ever served you. This is in brief
what I wrote you more fully in my despatch of yesterday.
Since then the Duke has had Vitellozzo and Oliverotto da
Fermo put to death at the tenth hour of the night. The others
are still alive; and it is supposed that the Duke is only wait-
ing to know whether the Pope has the Cardinal Orsino, and
the others who were in Rome, safely in his hands, and that, if
so, he will dispose of the whole band at the same time.*

The citadel of Sinigaglia surrendered to the Duke at an

* The capture and death of these corresponds with what Machiavelli himself
states in his description of the proceedings adopted by the Duke Valentino in
putting to death of Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo, the Signor Paolo and
the Duca di Gravina Orsini. Burchard in his well-known Diary says: “The
Duke Valentino had written to the Pope to hold the Cardinal Orsino. When
Adriano Castellense da Corneto, the Pope’s secretary and treasurer, had read this
letter of the Duke Valentino to the Pope, he would not leave the Pope’s chamber
that night, lest he should be inculpated if ever the Cardinal Orsino should get a
hint of it. The Pope thereupon had the Cardinal Orsino and Jacopo da S. Croce
informed that the Duke had taken the castle of Sinigaglia. That Cardinal there-
upon rode, on the 3d of January, 1503, to the pontifical palace to congratulate
the Pope. With him was the Governor, who feigned to accompany him by chance.
When the Cardinal had dismounted and had entered the palace, his horses and
mules were taken to the Papal stables. The Cardinal had scarcely entered the
chamber of the Parrot, when he found himself surrounded by armed men and
became alarmed. He was conducted to prison, and after him the Protonotario
Orsino, Jacopo da 8. Croce, and Bernardino, Abbot of Alviano, where they were
all confined.”

At the same time the Duke Valentino had Vitellozzo Vitelli, Paolo and the
Duca di Gravina Orsini, and Oliverotto da Fermo made prisoners; and after-
wards he had Vitellozzo and Liverotto strangled, and the others were kept in
custody.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 263

early hour this morning, and is now in his possession. His
Excellency left there this same morning, and has come here
with his army. It is certain that they will go in the direction
of Perugia and Castello, and possibly to Sienna. The Duke
will then move to Rome, and according to popular opinion will
settle the Orsini castles there. He also intends taking Brac-
ciano by force, and then all the rest will be as easy as to burn
straw. We shall remain here all to-morrow and next day, and
then go into quarters at Sassoferrato, the season being as un-
favorable for war as can possibly be imagined. You would not
believe it were I to describe the condition of the army and its
followers; for a man who has the chance of sleeping under
cover is deemed fortunate. |

Messer Goro da Pistoja, a rebel and enemy of our republic,
was with Vitellozzo, and is now prisoner here in the hands of
certain Spaniards. I believe that, with a couple of hundred
ducats, should your Lordships feel disposed to spend that much,
it could be managed that he should be delivered to one of your
Rectors. Be pleased to think of this matter, and advise me
whether you think it worth while to do anything in the matter.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
ConRinaLpo, 1 January, 1503.

———_—_—

LETTER XLV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote the enclosed to your Lordships yesterday and re-
peated what I had communicated in my two letters of the day
before, and dated at Sinigaglia, and which I sent by express,
hoping that they have come safely and in time to your hands.
J am sure that, if your Lordships consider the place in which
I am, and the confusion existing here, you will excuse the
delay if my letters are behind time. For the peasants conceal
themselves; no soldier is willing to absent himself, not wish-
ing to forego his chances of plunder; and my own domestics
are unwilling to separate themselves from me for fear of being
robbed. All these things cause such difficulties that since my
first two despatches, which I sent through the influence of

264 MISSION TO THE

friends and by the promise of large rewards, deeming the
news of great importance, I cannot find any one willing to go.
And thus it comes that the letter which I wrote yesterday
evening is still in my hands, and I know not what day I may
be able to send it. But I have not much news to communicate
to-day. His Excellency the Duke is still here in Conrinaldo ;
he attended to-day to paying his infantry, which is about three
miles from here, and organizing his artillery, which he has
directed to move towards Agobbio by way of Fossombrone,
and from there it is to go towards Castello or Perugia, as
may seem best to him.

I had a long conversation to-day with one of the Duke’s first
officers, and he tells me much the same as what the Duke had
told me of his good disposition towards your Lordships. And
in conversing with him as to the course which his Excellency
intended to pursue, he said that having caused Vitellozzo and
Oliverotto to be put to death as tyrants, assassins, and traitors,
the Duke intended to carry Signor Paolo and the Duca di Gra-
vina to Rome, confidently hoping that by this time the Cardinal
Orsino and Signor Julio were in the hands of the Pope; and
that he would then commence legal proceedings against them,
and have them condemned by process of law. He told me
furthermore that his Excellency intended to free all the states
of the Church from factions and tyrants, and restore them to
the Pope, keeping for himself only Romagna; and that he
expected thereby to place the new Pope under obligations, who
would no longer be the slave of the Orsini or the Colonna, as
all his predecessors hitherto had been. And this same gentle-
man assured me anew that the Duke had never had any other
thought but to tranquillize Romagna and Tuscany ; and that
he believed he had now accomplished it by the capture and
death of those who had been the chief cause of all the trou-
bles; and that he regarded the rest but as a spark of fire that
could be quenched by a single drop of water. And, finally, he
told me that your Lordships could now settle their own mat-
ters by sending an ambassador to the Duke, with some propo-
sition that would be alike honorable and advantageous for both
sides ; and who should also give his Excellency every assur-
ance of friendship on your part, leaving aside all formalities
and temporizing.

I have deemed it proper to communicate this conversation

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 265

just as it occurred, and your Lordships will draw your own
conclusions from it.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
ConRiInaLpo, 2 January, 1503.

———_—————

LETTER XLVI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI:— |

It was with difficulty that I found the bearer of this, whose
name is Tornese da Santa Maria Imprunta; and to whom I
have paid a gold ducat, and promised him that your Lordships
will pay him two more ducats.

The ducat which I have paid him you will please reimburse
to Biagio, as also the other four which I have paid for my two

previous despatches.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
ConRInaLpo, 2 January, 1503.

When paid, please give the Captain a certificate of it.

LETTER XLVIL

MaGniFicent SiGNnorI : —

Day before yesterday I wrote my last to your Lordships,
which was, as it were, a repetition of what I had written in
my two other letters of the last day of the past month, which
should have been received by this time; so that your Lordships
will have been informed of the taking of Paolo and the Duca
di Gravina Orsini, and of the death of Vitellozzo and Messer
Oliverotto ; as also of what his Excellency told me, and com-
missioned me to write to your Lordships, and to which | await
your reply. Since then there is nothing new, for we left
Conrinaldo yesterday morning and came here to Sassoferrato,
where we are still at this time. But to-morrow the Duke will
go to Gualdo, to take such measures against his enemies as
the occasion will permit. That portion of his forces which he
sent in pursuit of the cavalry of the Orsini and the Vitelli

266 WMESSTON 0 1

returned to-day, having failed to overtake them, as they had
all fled in the direction of Perugia. They lost, however, a
good many horses, owing to the bad condition of the reads,
and because they travelled in great haste. I have nothing
more of interest to communicate at present; besides, your
Lordships can judge best of the state of things here, being
better informed as to the present condition of Perugia and
Castello, upon which all matters here depend. This evening I
received yours of the 28th ultimo, and understand your instruc-
tions as to the course which I am to follow in the matter of
Pisa, as also what your Lordships say in relation to the Duke’s
mares ; and what you learn from France; and how I am to
thank his Excellency therefor, which I shall do on the first
occasion. ‘

I thank your Lordships especially for the advices from
France, and recommend myself most humbly. Valete /

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
SASSOFERRATO, 4 January, 1503.

LETTER XLVIII.

Maeniricent SicNori: —

I wrote you on the 4th from Sassoferrato, and by a post-
script * informed your Lordships of the news from Castello, of
the arrival of the ambassador, and of the flight of the Bishop
of the place, and of all the Vitelli. On our subsequent arrival
here in Gualdo yesterday, and where we still are for the pur-
pose of giving the army some rest, we found deputies from
Castello who have come to offer the place to the Duke, and to
express their satisfaction, etc., ete.

The Duke accepted the place as Gonfalonier of the Church,
and not otherwise, and immediately directed the deputies to
despatch some one to Castello to have the artillery of the
place put in order. At the same time he ordered his own
artillery, which he had directed to advance towards Agobbio,
to halt and proceed no further, deeming the guns that are in
Castello sufficient for his further enterprises. Some one ar-
rived yesterday evening at the fourth hour to inform the Duke

* This postscript has never been found.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 267

that Gianpaolo Baglioni, with the Orsini and the Vitelli, and
all their men-at-arms, and such as had taken refuge with them,
had left Perugia and gone towards Sienna; and that imme-
diately after their departure the population had arisen and
shouted for the Duke. Two deputies from Perugia have also
arrived this morning, and have confirmed this news; but up
to the present moment these deputies have not had an inter-
view with the Duke. The principal officers of the Duke say
that he neither wants Perugia nor Castello for himself, but
that he merely wishes to deliver them from their tyrants, and
to restore them to the possession of the Church; the same as
I have already written your Lordships from Conrinaldo. His
Excellency will leave here to-morrow with his army for the
purpose of establishing a government there according to his
own views. Upon the point whether Pandolfo Petrucci, to-
gether with the troops that have taken refuge there, will await
the Duke’s coming or not, opinions differ. Messer Baldas-
sare Scipione of Sienna, who commands the detached lances
here, and whose sagacity is well known to your Lordships, is
of opinion that they will wait for the Duke’s arrival; many
others think differently, and each give their reasons for their
belief. We shall soon know. I have not spoken with his Ex-
cellency once since he asked me to request your Lordships to
send your troops towards the Borgo. But there is no longer
any occasion for your doing so, as both Perugia and Castello
have surrendered. I believe you will now be requested to send
them to Sienna. It will be well for your Lordships to think of
this, so that either your support shall be welcome to the Duke,
or that your excuse may be a good one. I have nothing else
to write to your Lordships, for your own wisdom will best en-
able you to appreciate the circumstances and the course which
it will be best for you to adopt.
Bene valete!
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Guapo, 6 January, 1503.

268 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XLIX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote last from Gualdo on the 6th, having previously
written from Sassoferrato on the 4th, and on the 2d from Con-
rinaldo, besides two letters from Sinigaglia on the last of De-
cember, and one from Pesaro on the 28th; and I look anxiously
for your acknowledgment of them all. People here wonder
that you have not written, or in some way sent your congratu-
lations to the Duke upon what he has lately done for your
advantage; for he is persuaded that our whole republic should
feel under great obligations to him. He says that the killing
of Vitellozzo and the destruction of the power of the Orsini
would have cost you two hundred thousand ducats, and, more-
over, that you would never have done it so effectually your-
selves as it was done by him.

Since my last letter little of importance has taken place, but
what you will have heard of much sooner from another quarter.
Now that Castello and Perugia have made their submission,
there remains nothing for the’ Duke except his enterprise
against Sienna. The Duke did not accept those places for
himself, nor will he make terms with them, but has referred
them to Rome, saying that all he aimed at was to have them
return to their obedience to the Church, and to suppress the
factions in those places, and to deliver them from their tyrants.
And to give more color to these professions, he has refused
until now permission to the banished to return to Perugia.
It seems even that he has promised to the deputies who came
to him from Perugia that the banished shall not return there,
telling them that his intention had not been to deliver them
from one tyrant for the purpose of replacing him by ten
others.

Yesterday evening we reached Ascesi, and remain here to-
day; and to-morrow morning the army, without baggage trains,
for so it is ordered, is to march to Torsiano, seven miles from
here, This being but a small place, those who cannot be
lodged within will be quartered in the vicinity. After that,
it is said, the next halt will be at Chiusi in the Siennese terri-
tory, provided he can first cross the Chiana, and then enter the
town, which it seems he intends doing either by consent or by

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 269

force. Yesterday evening the city of Sienna sent deputies
here, who had a long interview with the Duke. I understand
the object of their mission is to learn the reasons that have
induced his Excellency to threaten that city with war, as it is
publicly said that he has the intention of doing. The deputies
say they are prepared to justify the conduct of the city of
Sienna, etc.

The Duke is reported to have replied to them, that he has
ever regarded the city of Sienna as his good friend, and does
so still; that it never was his intention to make war upon her,
but that he has an intense hatred against Pandolfo Petrucci,
who is his mortal enemy since he conspired to drive him from
his states. That whenever the city of Sienna shall take ways
and means to expel Pandolfo, peace would instantly be made ;
but in the contrary case, he had come with his army for the
purpose of doing it. The Duke added, that he should be sorry
to be obliged to injure others, but he felt that he would be ex-
cused by God and by men, and even by the Siennese them-
selves, as being forced to it by necessity and a just anger
against a man who, not content to tyrannize over one of the
finest cities of Italy, wanted to ruin others, for the sake of
dictating laws to all his neighbors. And without any other
conclusion, as I understand, the interview was broken off; the
ambassadors agreeing to write to their government.

Thus matters remain undecided, and no one can venture to
foretell the result. For on the one hand there is the Duke with
his unheard of good fortune, with a courage and confidence al-
most superhuman, and believing himself capable of accomplish-
ing whatever he undertakes; and on the other hand there is a
man at the head of a state of great reputation, which he gov-
erns with great sagacity, and without an enemy either foreign
or domestic, having either conciliated or put them to death, and
having plenty of good troops,—if it is true, as reported, that
Gianpaolo Baglioni has withdrawn and joined him in Sienna.
And even if for the moment they are without any hope of help,
yet time is apt to bring it. There is nothing else to be done but
to wait and see the end, which cannot be delayed many days.
Should this matter lead to open hostilities, then your Lordships
will assuredly be called on by the Duke for assistance, and he
will demand that you attack from your side. Indeed, I won-
der that he has not already done so, but I believe the reason is

270 MISSION TO THE

that the Duke hopes that this affair of Sienna will take the
same course as those of Castello and Perugia, and therefore
he is not disposed to place himself under obligations to your
Lordships.

I have nothing more to write respecting matters here, and
must refer your Lordships to my former letters, both as re-
gards the Duke’s forces and his disposition. But to sum up
the whole in two words, as to his forces he has some five
hundred men-at-arms, eight hundred light cavalry, and about
six thousand infantry. <As to his disposition and intentions
towards your Lordships, his language always has been and con-
tinnes to be full of affection, as I have written you several
times; and he spoke on the subject so reasonably, and with so
much animation, that, if one could believe him to be sincere,
we might rest assured without any uneasiness. But the ex-
perience of others makes one fear for one’s self; and the man-
ner in which he acted towards your Lordships when there was
a question of an arrangement with you deserves serious con-
sideration. For it is evident that his Excellency had the de-
sire to renew his former engagement with our republic; and
when he found there was no chance for that, he avoided the
subject, and passed it over lightly, saying that a general alli-
ance was sufficient for him, as though he saw clearly that he
could not force you to it now, and wanted to bide his time, when
he should be able to do so. He seemed to think that he could
temporize with perfect convenience, it being quite clear to him
that your Lordships would do nothing against him out of re-
gard for France, and in view of the character of his enemies,
as well as of your own weakness; and thus he sees only ad-
vantage in delay. What [infer from all this, and wish to call
specially to your Lordships’ attention, is that when the Duke
shall have carried his enterprise against Sienna to a successful
conclusion, the time for which is drawing near, he will think
that the opportunity which he has planned and expected has
at last come. And I submit humbly to your Lordships, that, if
I judge this matter wrongly, it is owing partly to my want of
experience and partly to the fact that I see only the things
that are passing here, and from these I can form no other
conclusions than those given above. And now I leave the
whole to the wisdom of your Lordships, to whom ] recommend
myself.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. AG |

I have learned this evening that certain plenipotentiaries
have come here secretly; I shall try to find out further par-
ticulars, which I will communicate to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Ascrsi, 8 January, 1503.

P. S.—I have already mentioned to your Lordships that
Messer Goro of Pistoja is prisoner here, and that he might be
redeemed for two hundred ducats, or even less, and delivered
into your hands. I await your Lordships’ reply in relation to
this matter.

LETTER L.

MaGniFicEnt SIGNORI : —

My last was of the 8th, from Ascesi. Yesterday we came
here to Torsiano, a place about four miles from Perugia, but
shall leave to-morrow and go to Spedaletto, twelve miles from
here, on the road to Sienna. Having written you in my last all
I had of interest to communicate, and having received no reply
to my many letters since the 28th ultimo, I should not have
written you now but that the Duke sent for me to-day and
asked me whether I had received any letters from your Lord-
ships. When I told him that I had not, he expressed great
surprise, whereupon, of course, I made all reasonable excuses
for this delay. Then, leaving this subject, the Duke said to me:
“ You know, secretary, how well I am disposed towards your
“government, which I look upon as one of the principal sup-
“ports of my power in Italy; and for that reason my acts and
“ proceedings with regard to internal as well as external affairs
“must not be concealed from your Signoria. You see how I
“stand with those who were the common enemies of your gov-
“ernment and of mine: some of them are dead, some prisoncrs,
“and some are fugitives, or are besieged in their homes; such
‘as Pandolfo Petrucci, to destroy whom will be the last effort I
“shall have to make for our mutual security. It is absolutely
“necessary to drive him from Sienna; for his well-known
“ability, the amount ot money he has at his command, and the
“strength of the place where he is, would, if he were allowed
“to remain there, have to be feared like a spark that may

272 MISSION: LO) Tie.

“cause a great conflagration. So far from going to sleep over
“this matter, we shall have to attack him with all our power.
“T should not find it difficult to drive him out of Sienna, but I
“want to have him in my hands. For this reason the Pope
“tries to lull him into security with briefs, persuading him that
“it will be enough for him to show himself the enemy of the
“ Pope’s enemies; and meantime I advance upon him with my
“army. But it is well to deceive those who themselves have
‘been masters in treachery. The deputies from Sienna who
“came to me in the name of their government have promised
“me well, and I have made it clear to them that I have no de-
“sire of depriving the people of Sienna of their liberties, but
“that all I ask of them is that they shall expel Pandolfo. I
‘have written a letter to the municipality of Sienna, explaining
“to them my intentions, of the honesty of which they have am-
“ple proof in the case of Perugia and Castello, which I handed
“over to the Church, not wishing to keep them for myself.
“ Moreover, our common master, the king of France, would not
“be satisfied were I to take Sienna for myself; and I am not
“sufficiently reckless to attempt anything of the kind. The
“people of Sienna therefore should believe my assurances that
“JT want nothing more of them than the expulsion of Pandolfo.
“ And I desire that your masters should publish and testify that
“J have no other intentions than to make sure of this tyrant
“ Petruccio; and I trust that the government of Sienna will be-
“lieve me. But if not, then Iam resolved to advance upon their
“city and plant my artillery before its gates, and shall do my
“utmost to drive Petruccio from there. I wished to communi-
“cate this to you so that your masters may be fully informed
“of my intentions; and so that, if they should hear that the
“ Pope has written a brief to Pandolfo, they may know for
“what purpose he has done so. For after having taken their
“arms from my enemies I am resolved also to deprive them of
“their brains, which consist in Pandolfo and his intrigues. I
“would moreover entreat that in case I should require any as-
“sistance in this matter, you should ask your masters to furnish
“it to me in my efforts against the said Pandolfo. And I truly
“believe that, if any one had promised to your Signoria a year
“ago to kill Vitellozzo and Oliverotto, to destroy the Orsini, and
“to expel Gianpaolo and Pandolfo, and had asked them one
“hundred thousand ducats for doing it, they would have rushed

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. pads:

“to give it to him. But now, since all this has been so thor-
“oughly done without any expense, or effort, or care, on the
“part of your government, it seems to me that, although there
‘was no written obligation, yet there is a tacit one. And there-
“fore it is well that they should begin to pay it, so that it may
“not seem to me, nor to others, that the republic of Florence is
“ beyond her custom and character ungrateful. And should the
“Signoria object on account of the protection of France, you
“must write to them that the king gives his protection to Si-
“enna, and not to Pandolfo Petrucci. And even if Pandolfo did
“enjoy that protection, which he does not, he has forfeited it
“by leaguing himself with others against myself and against
“his Majesty. Your government therefore will have no excuse,
“if it fails to come with alacrity to share in this enterprise. And
“your Signoria ought to come the more gladly, as it will be an
“advantage to them, as well as a satisfaction to their revenge,
“and a benefit to the king of France. The advantage will be
“the destruction of the eternal enemy of their republic, the
“ prompter of all their enemies, and the resort of all those who
“desire to injure you. And their revenge will be gratified, be-
“cause Pandolfo has been the head and front of all the ills
“which their republic has had to bear for the past year; for it
“was he who furnished the money and the assistance, as well
“as the plans for assailing them. And in what? In their en-
“tire dominions as well as in their own liberty. And whoever
“does not desire to revenge such things, and does not avail
“himself of an occasion like the present one, shows himself
“insensible to everything, and deserves the insults of everybody.
“Wherein it would be an advantage to the king of France is
“manifest to every one; for Pandolfo once crushed, I and your
“ Signoria are freed from all apprehensions for our states, and
“can go with our troops into the kingdom of Naples, or into
“Lombardy, or wherever the king of France may have need of
“us. But so long as Pandolfo remains in Sienna, we can never
“feel secure of our states. All these things are well known
“and understood by the king of France, and therefore will the
“destruction of Pandolfo give him great pleasure, and he will
“feel under obligations to whoever has been instrumental in it.
“And if I knew that my own interests only were to be ad-
“vanced by it, I would make greater efforts to persuade your
“Signoria, but as it is for our mutual interest, let what I have
VOL. III. 18

274 MISSION TO THE

“said suffice. Neither have I said all this because I doubt my
“ ability to accomplish it alone, but because I desire that all Italy
“ shall be assured of our alliance, which will add to the reputa-
“tion of each of us.”

Thereupon the Duke charged me to write to your Lordships
on the subject, and to request a prompt reply, and for that rea-
son have I communicated to you as it were his own words.

In speaking of the affairs of the kingdom of Naples the Duke
told me that the Spaniards had killed some thirty French men-
at-arms in an ambuscade, which was however a matter of lit-
tle importance; and that there was no sign of any movement
from the direction of Germany. Also, that the king had been
much dissatisfied with M. de Chaumont for having recalled his
troops; and he repeated that it had been the result of a private
resentment on the part of M. de Chaumont against his Excel-
lency.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Torstano, 10 January, 1503.

P. 8. — Your Lordships will please pay the bearer of this
ten lire; also, to reimburse Biagio the five ducats which I
have paid for my three despatches of last month, provided it
has not already been done.

Don Michele, a Spanish captain in the Duke’s service, was as
angry as a devil with me to-day, saying that the letter which he
had written at Piombino, as well as those that had been directed
to him, had been opened; and that the customs officials at the
gates of Florence had taken some small change from certain
of his foot-soldiers who were going to Piombino. I beg your —
Lordships to relieve me of these reclamations by remedying the
one and justifying the other.

P. S.—I had forgotten to mention to your Lordships that with
my second letter of the 31st of December I sent you a letter
written by his Excellency announcing, and at the same time
justifying, the event that had taken place. I think it would be
well for your Lordships to reply to that letter, whether it has
made its appearance or not.

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 975

LETTER LI.

MaeniFicent SIGNORI: —

Having lodged last night at Spedale, I was joined on the
road this morning by one of the bowmen of Antonio Gia-
comino, who handed me a letter from your Lordships of the
Sth, from which I learned with much regret that you have not
received any of my reports upon the events that have taken
place. After arriving at this place, Labbro Tesso brought
letters from your Lordships that filled me with equal regret,
for they inform me that you have received but two of my
letters of the Ist and 2d instant. It would really seem as
though my efforts failed at the very moment when they were
most needed, and when they ought to have procured me your
greater esteem. And yet wise men like yourselves know that
it is not enough for a man to do his duty, but that he must
also have good luck. I would gladly send your Lordships
copies of all the letters I have written, if I had them near me;
but not having them, owing to the circumstances and places in
which I have been, I will briefly recapitulate their contents.

On the Ist of December I wrote you two letters; one a short
one, at the twenty-third hour of the night, containing an ac-
count of the arrest of the Vitelli and the Orsini; the other a
long one, giving full details of the event, and the conversations
I had with the Duke, in which he manifested such an affection
for our republic, and expressed himself with so much kindness
and discretion that I could not have wished for anything more.
He showed that he well knew how necessary it was that our
republic should be free and powerful, to enable the surrounding
states to preserve their power; and that he was ready to under-
take anything for that purpose, provided he could count upon
your support. He then wanted me to urge your Lordships to
aid him with your troops in his attempt against Castello and
Perugia, and to take and keep the Duke of Urbino prisoner,
in case he should take refuge on Florentine soil; but he said
he should be satisfied to have the Duke of Urbino remain in
your hands. I wrote you next on the 2d instant from Conri-
naldo, reiterating the same details, and adding an account of
what had subsequently occurred, as your Lordships will have
seen, for that letter was received by you, according to what

276 MISSION TO THE

you write. After that I wrote you from Sassoferrato on the
4th, and from Gualdo on the 6th, giving an account of the
surrender of Castello and Perugia; also about the deputation
that had come to the Duke from Sienna. On the 8th I wrote
you from Ascesi respecting that deputation, and what I had
heard in relation to it. And my last was from Torsiano, on
the 10th, in which I reported what the Duke has said to me
respecting his intentions with regard to Sienna; namely, that
he counted chiefly upon our republic as the principal support
of his power, and that for that reason he wished to communi-
cate to me all his intentions, both with regard to internal and
external affairs. That after having had Oliverotto and Vitel-
lozzo put to death, crushed the Orsini and driven out Gianpaolo,
there remained but one more obstacle in the way of insuring
his own and your Lordships’ tranquillity, and that was Pan-
dolfo Petrucci, whom he intended to expel from Sienna. And
as he thought that this would be for your advantage as well as
for his own, he deemed it necessary that your Lordships should
lend a hand in doing it; for if Pandolfo remained there, it
was to be feared from the character of the man and from the
amount of money he had at command, and from the nature
of the place in which he was, lest he should erelong light a
conflagration that might destroy more than one place; and
that he would ever serve as a refuge for all those violent lords
who know no restraints. And as such a state of things would
prove more injurious to you than to others, he judged that you
ought to feel more interested in it. That there were also vari-
ous other reasons that should influence you to move in the
matter; namely, first, to recognize the advantages derived by
your Lordships from the death of Vitellozzo, etc., ete.; secondly,
your own special interests: and thirdly, the wishes of the king
of France. And as regards the recognition of your obligations
to him, if a year ago any one had proposed to your Lordships
to kill Vitellozzo and overthrow the Orsini and their adherents,
you would readily have obligated yourselves to pay one hundred
thousand ducats. But that inasmuch as all this had been done
without any expense, labor, or charge to you, your Lordships
were under a tacit obligation to him, even if there was no
written one; and that it would be well, therefore, if your Lord-
ships would begin to acquit yourselves of that obligation, and
not to manifest an ingratitude so contrary to your habits. As

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 2G

to the advantage which you would derive from it, that was
great; for if Pandolfo remained in Sienna he would prove a
refuge and a support for all your enemies. As for the pleas-
ure of revenge, he said that Pandolfo had instigated the war
against your Lordships during the past summer in the affair
of Arezzo, both by his talents and with his money, and that it
was in the nature of things that you should seek an opportu-
nity to revenge yourselves upon him on that account; and
that if you allowed the occasion to pass without resenting it,
you would deserve similar injuries at all times. And as to
the advantage that would result from it to his Majesty the
king of France, it consisted in this: that Pandolfo once ex-
pelled from Sienna, he, the Duke, would be relieved from all
apprehensions, and could then hasten freely with all his troops
to the support of the king, either in Lombardy or in the king-
dom of Naples. His Excellency said, furthermore, that your
Lordships ought not to hesitate on account of the protection
which France had promised to Sienna, because that was to the
city, and not to Pandolfo; and that he was making war upon
Pandolfo, and not upon the city of Sienna. That he had so
given the people of Sienna to understand, and had requested
me to write to the same effect to your Lordships, so that you
might publish it and testify to all the world that, if the city
of Sienna expelled Pandolfo, he, the Duke, would not set foot
upon Siennese territory; but that if they refused to do so,
then he would direct his artillery against their walls; and he
requested me anew to write to your Lordships, and to beg you
to assist him with your troops in this undertaking. The sub-
stance of all this was contained in my letter of the 10th, from
Torsiano, which I have now repeated, fearing that letter may
not have reached your Lordships’ hands, as well as my others.
I hope your Lordships will decide this matter soon, by a reply
to this.

After receipt of yours of the 9th, I called upon the Duke and
made known to him that your Lordships were ready to send
your troops towards Castello whenever it should be necessary.
I also told him of the satisfaction which your Lordships felt at
this late event, and of the appointment of Jacopo Salviati as a
special ambassador to him, who would shortly be here. The
Duke was greatly pleased at all this, saying that he felt con-
vinced that your Lordships would not fail in their duty to aid

278 MISSION. LO. Lar

him in his attempt against Pandolfo ; and begged me anew to
urge your Lordships to that effect. He expressed pleasure at
the selection of Salviati, whose arrival he looked forward to
with impatience. We then conversed upon many points touch-
ing this undertaking against Pandolfo, which he declared him-
self resolved to prosecute anyhow, and in relation to which he
manifests the utmost earnestness, saying that he will not want
for either money or support. On the other hand Messer Romo-
lino left vesterday per post for Rome, and I learn from good
authority that the object of this mission is to consult the Pope
upon this enterprise, and to ask him whether, in case it were
possible to treat with Pandolfo on advantageous terms, it might
not be well to do so. For the Duke seems to think that it
might be too much for him if he had at the same time to take
care of Sienna and the Orsini business; whilst by disposing of
the one first, the other would be much easier, and he might
afterwards take up the first again at a suitable moment. It is
possible that my information may not be correct; nevertheless
the thing is not unreasonable, although it is quite contrary to
the Duke’s own words; for he protested to me that he would
carry out his enterprise against Pandolfo at all hazards, and
that if the Pope negotiated with Pandolfo, it was for the pur-
pose of getting him into his own hands, and that the hopes
which such negotiations held out to Pandolfo would prevent
his taking to flight. I think it well to hear all things, and
then to await the result.

The whole of this day has been devoted to making scaling-
ladders, for the first siege works will be thrown up on the
other side of the Chiana on Siennese territory, but the precise
spot is not known.

The Duke has given a most gracious reception to a secretary
of the Bentivogli who has arrived here, and has assured him of
his friendly disposition towards his master. He has ordered
that the treaty of peace concluded between himself and the said
Bentivogh shall be published in all his dominions, as well as
in his camp here, so that it may be known to everybody. His
Excellency has demanded from the Bentivogli one hundred
men-at-arms, and two hundred light cavalry, which they are
bound to furnish him. And he has this day requested me to
write to your Lordships, and to beg you in his name to accord
free passage and provisions, at their own expense, to these

DUKE OF VALENTINOIS. 279

troops of Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, who are coming to his
support.

Of the Duke of Urbino not a word has been said either by
his Excellency or myself, for it did not seem proper for me to
open that subject. The Duke being here in Castello della
Pieve it seemed to me opportune to recommend to him Messer
Bandino, who is in your Lordships’ pay, having heard that cer-
tain of his enemies had returned here. His Excellency replied
to me that he held Messer Bandino in great esteem, and felt a
great interest in his affair, especially as he was in your service ;
and he assured me that no harm shall be done either to his
person or his property.

With this there will be a letter for Piombino, which has been
recommended to me by Messer Alessandro Spannochi. I have
promised him that your Lordships will have it forwarded by
express, and I beg that it may be done.

I have expended five ducats for the sending of my first three
despatches after the events at Sinigaglia, and I beg your Lord-
ships to have them reimbursed to me, and that they may be
paid for my account to Biagio Buonaccorsi, provided it seems
fit to your Lordships that I shall not suffer where I have not
been at fault.

I recommend myself most humbly.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
CaSTELLO DELLA Piven, 12 January, 1503.

LETTER LII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI:—

Yesterday I left the ambassador Jacopo Salviati to return
to Florence, for the reasons which your Lordships will learn
from the ambassador’s letter herewith enclosed. Before my
departure it was said at court that an arrangement had been
concluded between the Duke and the Siennese. Having been
obliged by the state of the river Chiana to return to Castello
della Pieve for the night, I found here Don Hugo, one of the
Duke’s Spanish captains, who is here with his troops. He had
received a letter this evening ordering him to break up in the
morning and march towards Orvieto, as the Duke was also

280 MISSION TO THE DUKE OF VALENTINOIS.

going to take that direction with all his forces. And as I was
about mounting my horse this morning, the said Don Hugo and
his troops were also just about to start;* and he told me that
the treaty with Sienna was really concluded, and that Pandolfo
was to have left Sienna with a safe-conduct from the Duke; ft
but further particulars I did not get. Having brought this
news here with me, I thought it well to anticipate my return
and to send it to you by an express. For further details |
must refer you to what the ambassador will write you; but
knowing that his letter will reach you with difficulty, I would ©
not miss giving your Lordships this brief notice, and recom-

mend myself most humbly.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

21 January, 1503, at the 3d hour of the night.
CASTIGLIONE ARETINO.

I have promised the bearer of this three lire.

* “On the 23d of January it was said that within the past few days the Duke
“had taken the cities of Chiusi and Pienza; also Sarteano, Castel della Pieve,
“and San Quirico, where he found only two old men and nine old women.
“These were hung up by their arms with’ fire under their feet, so as to force
“them to confess where the treasure was concealed. These people, either un-
“ willing to confess, or really not knowing where the money could be found, all
“died under this torture. The Duke’s troops also sacked Acquapendente, Monte-
“ fiascone, and other places.” — Memoirs of Burchard.

+ “On the last day of January it was said that Pandolfo Petrucci was to
“have left Sienna on Friday night, the 23d, to go to Lucca, or wherever he
“might choose to go; and that the Duke was to return to Rome.” — Memoirs of
Burchard.

Pandolfo in fact left Sienna and went to take refuge in Lucca, having spe-
cial letters of recommendation from the Duke Valentino, who however, a few
days afterwards, sent fifty horsemen after Pandolfo to kill him. This attempt
failed because these men were detained some days by the Florentine commissioner
at Cascina. Pandolfo Petrucci, having escaped this danger, arranged his affairs,
and through the intervention of the king of France, as also with the consent of
the Florentines, re-entered Sienna on the 29th of March, 15038, having obligated
himself to restore Montepulciano to the Florentine republic. All this will serve
to explain the several missions of Machiavelli to Sienna.

MISSION TO SIENNA.

COMMISSION AND INSTRUCTIONS

TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, SENT TO SIENNA BY THE TEN OF
LIBERTY AND PEACE.

REsotveD 26 Aprit, 1503.

NiccoLo, — You will proceed by post to Sienna with all pos-
sible speed, and before anything else you will present yourself
to the Magnificent Pandolfo, for whom you will have letters of
credence. And after the customary and necessary formalities
due to the friendship existing between us, and respecting which
we need not give you any special instructions, you will make
known to his Magnificence that the object of your mission is to
inform him of what is taking place, and mainly of those mat-
ters that are of importance to him; and that it is proper at
present to let him know that for some time past we have
been urged by his Holiness the Pope and the Duke Valentino to
conclude an alliance with them, and to form a league with all
the other members of the house of Borgia; and that they are
pressing it at this moment with more warmth and urgency than
ever. As it may happen therefore that such an alliance is con-
cluded, inasmuch as his Majesty the king of France has some
interest in the matter, it seems necessary to us that his Magnifi-
cence should be informed of it, so that he may in return com-
municate to us his views with regard to it; and that it is for
that purpose that we have sent you to perform this office of
good friends.

You will also have letters of credence to the Balia of the city
of Sienna, which you will present or not according as may seem
fit to the Magnificent Pandolfo; and in all matters connected
with this mission you will act in such manner as he may deem
best. You will likewise have a letter for Messer Francesco da
Narni, to whom you will explain the object of your mission.

282 MISSION TO SIENNA.

You will tell him of the confidence which we have in his Lord-
ship, and of our hopes of obtaining through him the object re-
specting which we have spoken with him. You will urge him
to do all he can, and to lose no opportunity of doing it; and you
will communicate to him all the preparations and provisions we
have made, and you will tell him of our relations with France
and with Rome, so far as may seem to you to be advisable. The
conditions of the league which it has been proposed to form with
the above-named parties for the common defence of the states
which they have in Italy, are the following, viz.:— That we are
to keep five hundred men-at-arms, and they six hundred men ;
but until we shall have recovered the places which we have lost
we shall not have to furnish more than three hundred men-at-
arms, and they likewise, so that the obligation shall be equal on
both sides. But after recovering what we have lost, both par-
ties will have to furnish their full quota. The friends and ene-
mies of both shall be common friends and enemies, without in
any way derogating from any other special treaties which any
of the parties may have with his Majesty the king of France.
And if any of the contracting parties acts adversely to his Ma-
jesty, then the league becomes thereby null and void. Within
the period of one month, the parties must make known their
adherents and clients; but neither party can protect rebels or
banish persons. And any difficulties that may arise shall be
subject to the decision of the king, whose consent to the treaty
is an indispensable condition.

And so soon as you shall have executed and carried into ef-
fect the above instructions, you will immediately return, unless
there should be some special reason why you should write to us
and await our answer.*

From the Florentine Palace on the day and date above written.

Decem Viri Lisertatis ET BALL#
Repusu. FLORENT.

MARCELLUS.

” Seal of the Magistrates of the
Ten of Liberty and Peace.

* Machiavelli returned immediately to Florence, without writing any letters
from Sienna.

MISSION TO THE COURT OF ROME.

OctToBER 24, 1503.

THE object of this mission of Machiavelli to Rome was nominally to pre-
sent to the Florentine Ambassador at Rome, Francesco Soderini, Cardinale di
Volterra, certain modifications in the engagement of Gianpaolo Baglioni to
serve the king of France in his contest with the Spaniards under the famous
Captain Gonsalvo de Cordova in the kingdom of Naples. This engagement of
Baglioni had been negotiated by the Cardinal Volterra, and was to be paid
for by the Florentine government, and was to be credited to the Florentines on
their indebtedness to the king of France, and at the saine time was to secure
to the Florentines the aid and support of King Louis XII. against the aggres-
sions of the Venetians. If the proposed modifications were accepted, then
Machiavelli was to ratify the agreement; but if not, then he was to leave the
agreement unratified, ete.; in all of which, however, he was to be governed
by the advice of the Cardinal Volterra. At the same time Machiavelli was
specially instructed to keep the Signoria of Florence diligently informed from
day to day of all that occurred worthy of note. The events then transpiring
at Rome were of the utmost interest and importance. After the death of
Pius III., who had occupied the Papal chair but twenty-six days, Giuliano
della Rovere, Cardinal of San Pietro in Vincola, was elected Pope. Cesare
Borgia had supported the candidacy of Giuliano della Rovere, and induced
his friends the Spanish cardinals to vote for him in the conclave, expecting
that in return the new Pope would not only support his claims to the Ro-
magna, but would also give him the appointment of Captain-General of the
Papal forces, which he claimed to have been promised to him by Giuliano
prior to his election. As we have seen in Machiavelli’s despatches during
his mission to the Duke of Valentinvis, the military successes and the rapid
rise of Cesare Borgia, so we see in his despatches during this mission to
Rome the equally rapid decline of the Borgia’s fortune. He had come to
Rome to aid in the election of Julius II., not thinking that he thereby
placed himself in the power of a man of greater duplicity and craftiness than
himself. For besides his implacable enmity and personal hatred of Cesare
Borgia, Julius II. considered the Romagna as the legitimate property of the
Church, which he was resolved to recover for the Church at any cost; and
therefore he not only disregarded the promises made to Cesare Borgia before
his elevation to the pontificate, but actually had him arrested and imprisoned
in the Castel San Angelo because Cesare Borgia refused to give up the

284 MISSTON LO THE

passwords for entering into the several strongholds which he still held in the
Romagna, and which the Pope had demanded of him. Meantime the Vene-
tians, ever eager to extend their dominion over the Romagna, took advantage
of the absence of the Duke of Valentinois to seize Faenza and some other
smaller towns in the Romagna, and at the same time threatened the adjoin-
ing possessions of the Florentine republic. It was one of the objects of
Machiavelli’s mission to endeavor through the Cardinal d’Amboise, then at
Rome, to obtain the aid and support of the king of France in their efforts to
resist the aggressions of the Venetians; and at the same time, in conjunction
with the Florentine Ambassador, the Cardinal Volterra, to urge the Pope to
active measures against the Venetians.

COMMISSION AND INSTRUCTIONS

GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, SENT TO ROME BY THE TEN OF
LIBERTY, ETC., 24 OCTOBER, 1503.*

NiccoLo, — You will proceed with all diligence to Rome,
bearing with you our several letters of credence to those most
reverend Cardinals whose good will it is most important to
conciliate, such as Rouen, San Giorgio, Santo Severino, Asca-
nio, San Pietro in Vincola, and Santa Prassede.t You will

* Pope Alexander VI. died August 18th, 1505, and on the 22d of Septem-
ber of the same year Francesco Piccolomini was chosen his successor, who took
the name of Pius III. He died on the 18th of October, after having held the
Pontificate only twenty-six days. On the lst of November of the same year
Giuliano della Rovere, Cardinal of San Pietro in Vincola, was elected Pope,
taking the name of Julius I. In the interval whilst the Papal chair was va-
cant in consequence of the death of Pius III., Machiavelli was sent to Rome,
chiefly to the Cardinal Francesco Soderini, to whom he presented the following
credentials, in the original on parchment :—

“ Reverendissime in Christo Pater, ete. Reddet Reverendiss: D. V. literas has
“nostras, Nicolaus Machiavellus, civis et secretarius noster: sub fide quarum
“nonnulla explicabit que nos illi mandavimus. Precamur ob id Reverendissi-
“mam D. V. fidem illi habere certissimam in omnibus que nostro nomine referet.
“Que felicissime valeat.

‘“Ex PALATIO NOSsTRO die 23 Octobris MDIII.

‘*PRIORES LIBERTATIS
“ET VEXILLIFER IUSTITIZ POPULI FLORENTINI.
“ MARCELLUS.”

+ The Cardinal Rouen was Georges d’Amboise, Archbishop of Rouen; the
Cardinal San Giorgio was Raffaello Riario di Savona; San Severino was
the Cardinal Federigo San Severino of Milan, with the title of San Teodoro;
the Cardinal Ascanio was Maria Sforza, son of the Duke of Milan, with the

COURT OF ROME. 285

present yourself to these Cardinals in our name, and make
known to each of them, that we had within the last few days
appointed ambassadors,* who were all ready to start when we
heard of the death of Pope Pius III., which greatly afflicted
our whole city. And that although these ambassadors will not
go now, yet we did not wish to fail in our duty, and have sent
you to express to them our deep grief at this event, and our
desire that they may give to the late Pontiff a successor such
as the needs of Christendom and of Italy require; and that,
knowing such to be also their desire, we offer them all the
assistance in our power to that end.

You will regulate your language as you may deem best to
suit each of these Cardinals, and according to the information
which you will receive from our most reverend Cardinal,t
with whom you will confer before anything else, and accord-
ing to whose suggestions you will regulate your conduct. You
will take with you also a copy of the military engagement of
the Baglioni, concluded within the past few days in our name
by his Eminence; and a minute of our declaration, which we
desire to be added to it. In all this you will observe the fol-
lowing order; namely, you will first confer on the subject
with our said most reverend Cardinal, and you will make him
understand our wishes that he should explain, in accordance
with that minute, that clause of the engagement relative to
our being relieved of the expenses and the damages, etc., etc.,
and that we shall have the right, whenever we may have need
of them, to claim the services of the four hundred lances pro-
vided for in the engagement. And that his Eminence will
speak of it to the Cardinal d’Amboise, either in your presence
or in private, and in such manner as he may deem best, so
that the latter may understand it the same as we do; which
should present no difficulty, as it appears plainly in the written
instrument. And if our declaration is agreed to according to
the said minute, then you will ratify the same, for which pur-

title of Cardinale dei SS. Tito e Modesto Martiri; Cardinale Giuliano della
Rovere had the title of San Pietro in Vincola; Antonio Pallavicini of Genoa
was Cardinale di Santa Prassede.

* The ambassadors appointed on the election of Pius III. were Messer Cosi-
mo de’ Pazzi, Bishop of Arezzo; Messer Antonio Maligonella, Messer Francesco
Pepi, Matteo di Lorenzo Strozzi, and Tommaso Paolo Antonio Soderini.

+ This wes the Cardinal Francesco Soderini of Florence, Bishop of Volterra,
with the title of Santa Susanna.

286 MISSION TO THE

pose we have given you our power; and you will bring back
with you an authenticated copy of that ratification.

Should his Eminence Cardinal d’Amboise, however, make
any difficulty on the subject, then you will not ratify the en-
gagement, but will write to us immediately and await our
further instructions. And in case difficulty is made, then it
will be your business to terminate this affair in accordance
with the terms of our declaration. Should it be objected that
perhaps we will not pay, and that thus the king would not be
served, you will reply that, if the agreement is not concluded
within a certain number of days, we would be willing, Gian-
paolo also consenting, to fall back upon the old agreement,
in so far as we may have failed to fulfil our obligations. It
being understood, nevertheless, that one payment to the king
or to Gianpaolo shall be deemed sufficient.

In the same way, should either the Cardinal d@’Amboise or
Gianpaolo make any difficulty, and object to a mere oral ratifi-
cation in that form, you may offer and promise them a ratifica-
tion by your government in due form, which would be sent as
required, after our first having received notice from you to
that effect.

Beyond this we have no further particular instructions to
give you, save that during your stay in Rome you will keep
us diligently informed from day to day of all that may occur
worthy of notice.

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote yesterday to inform your Lordships of my arrival
here.* By the present I desire to communicate to you what
has been done in relation to the first part of your instructions,
and what I have since learned of the state of things here.
Your Lordships will bear in mind that, after having decided
that the engagement of Gianpaolo Baglioni should be ratified
with suitable reserves, you so notified the Cardinal Volterra.
His Eminence fully comprehended your intentions as commu-
nicated to him by your letter; but as the time for ratifying

* This first despatch is missing.

COURT OF ROME. 287

the convention was passing, and the Cardinal being ignorant
of the fact that I was about to be sent here for that purpose,
he prepared a letter which he intended the Cardinal d’Amboise
should send you signed with his own hand. This letter in sub-
stance contained no more than the form of the declaration
which your Lordships had given me, and to which I was to
conform in my proceedings.

His Eminence was occupied with this matter when I arrived
and submitted to him my commission. He was pleased to
find that your views corresponded with his own, and, ceasing
further efforts to have the aforesaid letter signed by the Car-
dinal d’Amboise, he informed him and the President, who was
charged with this matter, that an envoy had been sent by
your Lordships for the express purpose of ratifying the agree-
ment. His Eminence afterwards directed me to confer with
the Cardinal d’Amboise, but owing to his many occupations
I could not see him until this evening at the fourth hour. In
view of the’ times and circumstances, our Cardinal had directed
me to say to the Cardinal d’Amboise, in substance, that your
Lordships felt no less solicitude for the interests of the king
than for your own; and as, much to their regret, they had
heard many things unfavorable to his Majesty, they felt it to
be their duty as faithful friends to mention them to him with
all respect, so that he might give them such attention as they
deserved. I thereupon told the Cardinal d’Amboise that it
was reported in Florence that the French army had turned
back, that the troops that were in Lombardy had in great part
returned to France, and that the Venetians were in force in
Romagna, and intended to make themselves masters of that
province. Also that it was feared the Germans, either of their
own accord or at the instigation of others, were about to make
an incursion into Lombardy ; and that all these things caused
the greatest uneasiness to your Lordships, who desired to sug-
gest to his Eminence that it was time to increase the French
forces in Italy, and rather to abandon other enterprises, etc., etc.
I told him, furthermore, that I had been sent to ratify the en-
gagement of Gianpaolo Baglioni, with full authority for that
purpose, whenever the agreement was so drawn that the re-
public of Florence should be at no greater charges and should
have no less advantages than under the convention made with
his Majesty. To all of which the Cardinal d’Amboise replied,

288 MISSION. TO. THE

that he thanked your Lordships for the suggestions; that he
had seriously thought of it all, and was here for no other pur-
pose, ete., etc.; and that as to the engagement of Gianpaolo
Baglioni, he would co-operate with the Cardinal Volterra, and
that everything should be settled in due form.

I then reported to our Cardinal all that D’Amboise had said
in reply to the one and the other point; and in relation to the
engagement of Baglioni we came to the conclusion that, hav-
ing done our duty on our part, we would wait for the others to
do theirs, and thus we shall act.

I think this letter will be brought to you by M. de Mellon,
who is sent by the Cardinal d’Amboise to your Lordships at
Florence, and then to Bologna and Ferrara; and afterwards to
Urbino, to complain of the damage done to the Duke Valen-
tino in his state of Romagna. The entrance of Ordelaffo into
Furli, which everybody here lays to your charge, has filled the
Cardinal San Giorgio with indignation on account of his neph-
ews, and has also to some extent angered the Cardinal d’Am-
boise on account of the Duke Valentino. This morning M. de
Trans and the President expressed their displeasure about this
affair to his Eminence of Volterra. The latter had me called
to him, and I justified your Lordships in regard to all these
proceedings in Romagna, of which, as your Lordships know,
Iam thoroughly informed. And then, by way of pacifying the
Duke and making him some reparation, it was decided to send
M. Mellon or some one else to him. His Excellency is at
this moment at Castello, and is more confident than ever of
accomplishing his great projects, in the expectation that the
election of the new Pope will be in accordance with the desires
of his partisans. As the obsequies of Pius III. will terminate
to-day, the Cardinals should go into conclave to-morrow ; but
it is said that they will not do so until Bartolommeo d’ Alviano
and the Orsini shall have withdrawn from Rome; they being
here, the one, as some say, with three hundred men-at-arms,
and the other with two hundred, or a less number as is said
by some. They have had money wherewith to raise one thou-
sand infantry, but we have no evidence of their having put
many on foot.

Gianpaolo is in quarters in the suburbs; his friends say that
he has one hundred men-at-arms, and he has already received
five thousand ducats on account of his engagement, and three

COURT OF ROME. 289

thousand ducats for every one thousand infantry, but which no
one has as yet seen. I have not yet been able to speak with
him, and in truth I have spoken with but few others, excepting
our Cardinal, so that Iam not able to give you such informa-
tion about matters here as I would like. But I shall use all
diligence and make every effort to do my duty.

All I have learned respecting the French army is that they
presented themselves before San Germano, and offered battle
to the Spanish commander Gonsalvo de Cordova, who declined
it. And as the French doubted their ability to take the place,
they concluded to return and to attempt a passage somewhere
else. It is said that they are at Ponte Coneo, and that they
are marching in the direction of Gaeta for the purpose of pass-
ing the Garigliano.

Opinions differ as to the election of the new Pope, and yet I
can only say to your Lordships that it is supposed that San
Pietro in Vincola will not have more than thirty-two votes,
and Santa Prassede twenty-two.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 28 October, 1503.

LETTER II.

Maeniricent SIGNoRI: —

Yesterday I had a discussion with the President, to whom the
Cardinal d’Amboise has committed the negotiations respecting
the matter of Gianpaolo Baglioni. Taking all the arguments
together, I do not see that we shall be able to obtain from the
Cardinal d’Amboise any declaration in accordance with the in-
structions which you have given me, until he shall have come
out of the conclave; for the election of the Pope keeps him so
much occupied that he has real grounds for being excused.
And as the Cardinals insist that the foreign troops shall leave
Rome upon their going into conclave, and as on the other
hand Gianpaolo will not leave until he has the remainder of
his pay, I believe it will have to come to this, that the Cardinal
d’Amboise will give to your Lordships an acquittance for six
thousand ducats, which sum you will pay to Gianpaolo for the

VOL. III. 19

290 MISSION, [CO 1 r

remainder of his pay, and which will be credited to you on ac-
count of the ten thousand ducats which you have to pay to his
Majesty on All Saints’ Day. And according to what Domenico
Martello tells me, you will have all the month of November to
settle it in. Thus I believe that the affair of Gianpaolo can
best be arranged for the present, and in truth, seeing how over-
whelmed the Cardinal d’Amboise is with his many occupations,
we cannot expect anything more.

According to report, Bartolommeo Alviano leaves to-morrow
to rejoin the Spaniards. Gianpaolo tells me that he has not
more than two hundred men-at-arms and three hundred in-
fantry. In examining well the object of these new engage-
ments made by the Spaniards as well as the French, it is evident
that the object is more to increase their reputation than the
number of their troops; for in consequence of the great enmi-
ties which these Condottieri have stirred up in the different
Roman towns, they are looked upon more as brigands than as
soldiers. And being entirely controlled by their own passions,
they cannot well serve a third party ; and the treaties of peace
which they conclude amongst themselves only last until a fresh
occasion presents itself for injuring each other. Whoever is
here on the spot has the daily experience of this; and those
who know them only temporize with them until they can do
without them.

Gianpaolo is to take the route through Tuscany; for he
wanted to do so, saying that he must form his company at
home; and altogether the Cardinal d’Amboise cares little
about it. I believe, as I have mentioned above, that he will
come with an order upon your Lordships for his pay, which
payment will go on account of what we owe the king, according
to the authentic acquittances.

To-day whilst in the apartment of the Cardinal Volterra, the
President and M. de Trans called there, and showed the Car-
dinal a letter which M. d’Allegri had written to the Marquis
of Mantua, dated at Trani on the 24th instant; saying that he
was there with three hundred men-at-arms and two thousand
infantry, and that he had sent for the Viceroy to come and
join him with three thousand infantry and with the artillery ;
and that so soon as the Viceroy should have arrived he would
promptly cross the Gariglano, which presented no difficulty ;
and therefore he urged the Marquis to join him with all the

COURT OF ROME. 991

remainder of his army. He informed him also that he had
just received news of the fleet; that it had gone to Naples,
which city had revolted against the Spaniards, and had opened
its gates to the king’s troops. This letter, as I have said, was
written by M. d’Allegri to the Marquis of Mantua, who sent
the original to the Cardinal d’Amboise, and wrote him on the
25th that he would start the following day with the army to
join M. d’Allegri. I communicate this news to your Lordships
as I have heard it read, and you will judge of it as it deserves,
and wait for its confirmation.

Having received this morning your Lordships’ letter of the
24th, containing the excuses which I am to make to the Cardi-
nal San Giorgio on account of the entrance of Ordelaffo into
Furl, I called at once upon his Eminence, and after some pre-

liminary remarks I read him your Lordships’ letter, which
~ seemed to cover the ground and calculated to produce a good
effect. His Eminence observed to me that in all matters men
looked more to the result than to the means; and that the re-
sult of this affair was that Ordelaffo had entered Furli, and
that his own nephews found themselves driven out of it; that
he readily believed that your Lordships could not have acted
otherwise in this matter, for the reasons which you alleged,
and which he was willing to admit. Still he assured your
Lordships that, since you had been constrained by force not
to sustain his nephews, they had been obliged in their turn to
throw themselves into the arms of the Venetians, and seek
support wherever they could find it for the protection of their
interests. But with all this, he makes the most liberal offers
of service to your Lordships.

The Cardinal San Pietro in Vincola seems to be so gener-
ally supported for the Papacy, that according to the opinion of
every one that speaks on the subject, assuming that we may
accept this universal opinion, one is bound to believe that he
will be chosen. But as most frequently the Cardinals are of
an entirely different opinion when they are outside of the con-
clave than when they are shut up, it is said by those who best
understand matters here, that it is quite impossible to form
any reliable judgment, and therefore we must patiently abide
the result.

Having written to your Lordships yesterday evening a full
account of the conversation which I had with the Cardinal

292 MISSION TO THE

d@’Amboise, I can think at present of nothing else of interest to
communicate. I recommend myself to your Lordships, que
feliciter valeant.
Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 29 October, 1503.

LETTER III.

Maeniricent SIGNORI : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 28th, by M. de Mellon, and
yesterday again I wrote at length and gave the letter to Gio-
vanni Pandolfini, so that he might send it by the first opportu-
nity. It remains for me now to inform your Lordships by the
present that the Cardinals, having determined to go into con-
clave to-morrow, have compelled the troops that are here for
account of Spain and France to leave Rome. SBartolommeo
d’ Alviano left this morning, and will halt this evening about
twelve miles from here on the road to Naples. It is not posi-
tively known whether he will go any farther; his whole force,
including that of the other Orsini, does not exceed two hundred
men-at-arms. The Savelli have withdrawn into their own places,
and Giovanpaolo will lodge to-night at Ruosi, a place about fif-
teen miles from here on the road to Tuscany ; his entire force,
not counting the company of Messer Brandino, does not amount
to more than sixty men-at-arms. True he says that he intends
completing his company when he shall have received his pay.
I believe that he will go into cantonments in the Perugian ter-
ritory ; for he has expressed that intention, and the authorities
of Perugia will permit him to do so, unless something unfore-
seen should occur. As to the ratification of the engagement I
can tell you nothing more than what I wrote yesterday, for the
Cardinal d’Amboise is so exceedingly occupied with going into
the conclave that he cannot give that matter any attention
now. But I believe that to-morrow, before entering into the
conclave, those who are acting here for Giovanpaolo will en-
deavor to obtain a letter from the Cardinal drawn up in the
way which I mentioned in my despatch of yesterday, according
to which your Lordships will be authorized, out of the ten thou-
sand ducats which we owe to the king of France, to pay six thou-

COURT OF ROME. 293

sand to Giovanpaolo for his compensation in full; the Cardi-
nal d’Amboise guaranteeing by his letter that such payment
shall be accounted the same as though made by you to the king
direct. When Giovanpaolo shall have received this sum of six
thousand ducats, he will have been paid somewhat in advance
of what is due him; and if he goes to Tuscany, as it seems
likely he will, your Lordships may perhaps have occasion to
avail of his services there. IJ have talked at length with him
upon this point, and found him so well disposed, and even eager
to render you any service, that it is more than could have been
expected of him, even had he been a native Florentine. Your
Lordships will bear this in mind, so that in case of need you
may claim his services, if you see that it will be of advantage
for the internal affairs of Florence.

The Cardinals, as I have said before, will go into conclave
to-morrow, unless something unexpected should occur; and the
opinion that the Cardinal San Pietro in Vincola will be elected
has gained ground to that extent that there are persons here
who admit that he will have sixty per cent of the votes. And
in truth he is largely supported, and knows how to win the
Cardinals by all the means that can be employed for that pur-
pose. The Duke Valentino is made much of by those who are
anxious to be elected to the Papacy, on account of the Spanish
Cardinals, who are in his interest, and many Cardinals call
upon him daily at the castle, so that it is generally thought
that whoever may be elected Pope will be under great obliga-
tions to the Duke ; whilst he lives in the hope of being in turn
supported by the new Pope.

The Cardinal d’Amboise is very active in the matter, and
the greater part of the Cardinals that come to the palace con-
fer much with him. But it is not known whether he favors
the election of the Cardinal San Pietro in Vincola; if he does,
then there can be no question as to his success; but we must
patiently await the result. The news I wrote you yesterday
respecting Naples, and that the French were about to cross
the Garigliano, has not been confirmed since then. It is true
we have no accounts to the contrary, and, as the roads between
the camp and here are destroyed, letters reach here only with
the greatest difficulty. By way of not omitting anything to
obtain information, I have written in duplicate to Luca Savello,
requesting him to keep me informed from time to time as to

294 MISSION TO THE

the state of things there. It is reported that the Italian men-
at-arms that were with the French have in great part deserted.
Some ascribe it to the dangers to which they were exposed ;
others, to the treatment they had experienced; others again
attribute it to their natural cowardice. I have myself seen
some twenty men-at-arms arrive here who had been with the
Duke Valentino, and whom he had sent into the kingdom of
Naples to serve the king of France. They have taken quarters
here in Rome, some say at the instance of the Sacred College ;
others maintain that they have stopped by order of the Duke
himself, in the hope of availing of their services after the elec-
tion of the Pope.

I have written and shall continue to write daily, and shall
send my letters to Giovanni Pandolfini to forward them to
your Lordships; for having no instructions from you on this
point I have no other means of sending my letters. If your
Lordships desire immediate news of the result of the election
of the new Pope, you must advise me, and give me authority
to incur the necessary expenses; and if not, then I must en-
deavor to send my letters by other opportunities, which, how-
ever, are not to be relied upon. - And so I recommend myself
to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

.

Rome, 30 October, 1503.

P.S.—It is now the third hour of the night, and after
having written all the above I receive your letter of the 26th,
informing me of the loss of Faenza to the Duke. Having re-
turned to my lodgings, and it not being safe for me to be out
at night, I have sent the information to the Cardinal Volterra
by a simple note, and shall talk the matter over with him to-
morrow in person. I can really say nothing on this subject
unless that, with regard to the dangers which your Lordships
indicate, I see no remedy here ; for the French, at whose hands
help was expected, have quite enough to occupy them. The
only hope that remains is that the Duke may succeed in ob-
taining the support of the new Pope, as it is generally believed
that he will; and that the governor of the citadel may hold
out until the Duke can come to his assistance.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NIccoLO MACHIAVELLI.

COURT OF ROME. 295

LETTER IV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

My last was of the 30th of October, and was sent through
the Del Bene; amongst other things, I wrote you what the
general opinion here is respecting the new Pope, and that the
Cardinals were to go into conclave on the following day. The
belief that San Pietro in Vincola will be chosen has grown to
that degree, that before the closing of the conclave they con-
ceded to him ninety per cent of the votes; for it had become
known that his two most influential opponents, who were likely
to prevent his election, had become reconciled to him. These
were the Cardinal d’Amboise and the Spanish Cardinals, friends
of the Duke, who have all changed in his favor. The reason
why the Cardinal d’Amboise has thus changed is said to be
that his suspicions were excited against the Cardinal Ascanio,
and because it had been demonstrated to him that they could
not make a Pope who would more effectually deprive Ascanio
of all influence than San Pietro in Vincola, who had always
looked upon Ascanio as an enemy. But as to the Spanish Car-
dinals and the Duke Valentino, it is easy to conjecture the in-
fluences to which they have yielded; which are that the latter
needs to be re-established, and the former want to be enriched.
If this has really been the way, then we shall know it better
in the course of the day. In short, San Pietro in Vincola will
have known how to employ the means of persuasion better than
the others, if he should be made Pope, which may now be looked
upon as certain. For at this very moment, it being the eighth
hour of the night, at the very turn of the Ist of November, a
servant of the Cardinal San Pietro in Vincola comes into my
chamber, just from the palace, and tells me that the conclavist
of that Cardinal had received five notes, one after the other,
from the Cardinal San Pietro, informing him of the unanimity
of the Cardinals to make him Pope; notwithstanding that at
the beginning it was understood that there were seven Cardinals
in favor of Santa Prassede, and that foremost amongst these
was Ascanio. He told me further that the last of these notes
directed him to despatch this news to Savona and to Sinigaglia,
and that the new Pope had taken the name of Julius II., and
that couriers had been despatched with the news. These events,

296 | MISSION TO THE

and many others that succeed each other from one moment to
another, well merit being communicated to you by express ; but
I have no orders to that effect from your Lordships, nor am I
authorized to incur such an expense; and during the night I
can neither send nor go myself to inquire whether any one else
is despatching a courier to Florence, for it is not safe to ven-
ture out at night here. The individual that came here from
the palace was escorted by twenty armed men. I shall there-
fore wait for daylight, and if I then find any one who will take
my letter I shall send it, and shall then also be able to give you
more certain information. And by way of excusing myself
once for all, I would say that your Lordships will observe that
I write daily; but as to sending off my letters, I must avail
myself of such opportunities as others afford me.
Bene valete !
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Rome, at the 8th hour of night, between the last day of October
and the first day of November.

LETTER V.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

Under favor of God, I inform your Lordships that the Car-
dinal San Pietro in Vincola was this morning proclaimed Pope.
May Heaven make him a useful pastor for all Christendom !

Valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 1 November, 1503,

LETTER VI.

MaGNnIFIcENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote to your Lordships last night, and repeated this
morning, the news of the election of the new Pope in the per-
son of the Cardinal San Pietro in Vineola, who has taken the
name of Julius Il. I write the present with the view of send-
ing it by another opportunity, as I was not in time to send

COURT OF ROME. ya se

it with the courier whom the Del Bene despatched this morn-
ing at one o’clock. The creation and proclamation of this new
Pope has really been quite extraordinary, for the election took
place in open conclave. So soon as the Cardinals came to-
gether, which was about midnight, they caused it to be pub-
lished abroad; and it was upon this publication that the letters
were written; and although we are now at the fifteenth hour,
yet the customary formalities for the publication of the elec-
tion have not yet been complied with. When we reflect well
upon the support which the new Pope received in his election,
we cannot but look upon it as almost miraculous; for the
many parties into which the Sacred College is divided have all
given him their support. The king of France as well as the
king of Spain had written to the College in his favor, and
even the barons of the opposite faction had given him their
_ support. San Giorgio favored him, and so did the Duke Valen-
tino, to that extent that he was enabled to attain this exalted
post. Our countrymen were greatly delighted at it, and found
great hopes upon his election, both on their own account as
well as on account of the public. And yesterday morning a
person in high position told me that if Pietro in Vincola suc-
ceeded in being chosen Pope, we might hope great advantages
from it for our republic, for he has already made greater prom-
ises than customary.

This is all I have at present to communicate, excepting to
recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 1 November, 1503.

LETTER VII.

Maentricent Sienort: —

This is the fourth letter I have written to your Lordships on
the election of the Cardinal ‘San Pietro in Vincola to the new
Pontificate under the name of Julius II. I should not have
written the present one were it not that in conversing to-day,
after the conclusion of the ceremonies, with his Eminence the
Cardinal Volterra, he told me that “they had to-night, after
“the election of the new Pope, distributed by lot the charge of

oS MISSION TO THE

“the different fortresses belonging to the Church. That San
“Giorgio had drawn Citerna, and that he, Volterra, had drawn
“certain others; and that in his opinion, unless some measures
“were taken, you would not be able to retain Citerna. And
“therefore he advised your Lordships that with your approval
“he would endeavor to effect an exchange with San Giorgio ;
“so that he would keep Citerna and give to San Giorgio one
“of the fortresses that had fallen to his lot. That in this way
“the matter would be facilitated, as in fact it would not then
“be looked at so closely.” His Eminence charged me to write
to you on the subject, and to solicit a prompt reply.

I have nothing further to communicate to your Lordships re-
specting matters here, having sent you a long letter this morn-
ing about the election of Giuliano della Rovere to the Pontificate.
He will have enough to do to fulfil all the promises he has made,
for many of them are contradictory ; but he is Pope now, and
we shall soon see what course he is going to take, and which
are the parties to whom he has promised in good earnest. At
any rate it is evident that he has had very zealous friends in
the College, which is attributed to the fact that he himself has
always been a true and devoted: friend, and that therefore he
found good friends when he needed them. Our countrymen
are all rejoiced at his election, for there are many Florentines
here who are very intimate with him; and his Eminence of
Volterra told me to-day that there had not been a Pope for
many years from whom our republic had reason to hope so
much as from Julius II., provided they knew how to accommo-
date themselves to the times. A number of Florentines have
begged me to write to you that the appointing of only five
deputies to congratulate Pius III. on his election had caused
everybody to believe that Florence was not well pleased at his
election to the Pontificate; and therefore they suggested most
humbly to your Lordships to revise the appointment and to
send six, as in the case of Alexander VI. and Sixtus IV.

From the French camp and from the Spaniards nothing
more has been heard than what I have written to your Lord-
ships; and as the camp is broken up, we shall have no further
advices from there. Giovanpaolo and Bartolommeo @’ Alviano
must be a little beyond where they were to have passed the
first night after leaving Rome. Nothing further has been done
with regard to the engagement of Giovanpaolo; nor was that

COURT OF ROME. 299

letter of exchange ever drawn upon your Lordships which his
friends wanted for his payment. From which I draw the
favorable inference that the Cardinal d’Amboise no longer
fears Giovanpaolo as much as when he engaged him.

It is thought that the Orsini will cause your Archbishop to
be made Cardinal, and that his archbishopric will fall into the
hands of some Florentine prelate. I have heard more than one
name suggested, and therefore do not mention any. I recom-
mend myself to your Lordships, and think it would be apropos
that you should with the utmost promptitude cause a letter to
be sent to the newly elected Pontiff, so that I may present my-
self to him with due ceremony; and that, if such a letter is
sent, I may be furnished with a copy, so that my address to
him may correspond with your letter.

Valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 1 November, 1503.

———— en

LETTER VIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

My last letters were of the 1st, on which day I wrote four
letters to your Lordships and sent them by the Martelli and
the Del Bene, and therefore assume their safe arrival. Since
then nothing new of any moment has occurred; and yet, as
Carlo Martelli is going by post to Florence, I would not have
him go without sending you this letter by him. Since the
creation of the new Pope everything has been very quiet in
this city ; the troops of the Orsini have left, although we have
not yet heard of their having passed Monte Ritondo, where
they were to make their first halt; nor are they very numer-
ous. In the same way, Gianpaolo Baglioni had also gone; it
was in fact these troops who it was feared might sack the
city. As I have already stated in my previous letters to your
Lordships, the election of this Pope was almost unanimous;
for with the exception of three or four Cardinals who them-
selves aspired to the Papacy, all the others supported him,
and D’Amboise favored him without stint. It is said that the
reason of this general support was that he had promised to
each whatever they asked, and consequently it is thought that

300 MISSION TO THE

the difficulty will be in the fulfilling of these promises. To
the Duke Valentino, who has been of more service than any
one else, it is said, he has promised to reinstate him in all his
possessions in Romagna, and that he has given him Ostia as
security, where the Duke keeps Mottino with two vessels of
war. The Duke is lodged in that part of the papal palace
called “the new rooms,” where he has some fifty of his re-
-tainers with him; it is not known whether he will depart or
remain. Some say that he will go to Genoa, where he has
most friends, and that from there he will go into Lombardy
to raise troops, and that then he will move to Romagna. And
this is very probable, for he has some two hundred thousand
ducats or more in the hands of the Genoese merchants. Others
say that he has no intentions of leaving Rome, and will await
the coronation of the Pope, so as to be made Gonfalonier of
the Church, in accordance with the promises made to him by
Julius II.; and that by means of the reputation which this
will give him he hopes to recover his states. Others again,
who are no less sagacious, think that, inasmuch as the Pontiff
had need of the Duke in his election, and having made him
ereat promises therefor, he finds it advisable now to feed the
Duke on hope; and they fear that, if the latter should not de-
cide upon any other course than to remain in Rome, he may be
kept there longer than may be agreeable to him; for the Pope’s
innate hatred of him is notorious. And it is not to be sup-
posed that Julius II. will so quickly have forgotten the ten
years of exile which he had to endure under Pope Alex-
ander VI. The Duke meantime allows himself to be carried
away by his sanguine confidence, believing that the word of
others is more to be relied upon than his own; and that the
promise of a family alliance ought to be of some avail, for it is
said that the marriage of Fabio Orsino with the sister of Borgia
is definitely agreed upon; and also that the Duke’s daughter is
to be married to the Little Prefect.*

* This “ Little Prefect” (Prefettino) was Maria della Rovere, son of Giovanni,
Duke of Urbino, and Joanna Montefeltro. Immediately on his father’s death at
Sinigaglia, in 1501, he succeeded at the age of eleven years, under the guardian-
ship of his mother and his uncles, the then Cardinal Giuliano (now Pope Julius IT.)
and the Duke Guido, not only to the lordship of Sinigaglia and to that of other
states, but also to the Prefecture of Rome. He married Eleanor, the daughter
of the Marquis Francesco Gonzaga; he was general in the service of the Church,
of the Florentines, and of the Venetians, and died in the year 1558.

COURT OF ROME. 301

I cannot tell your Lordships anything more of the Duke’s
affairs, nor can I make up my mind to any definite conclusions
in relation to them; we must bide the time, which is the
father of truth. I shall not attempt to tell your Lordships of
all the engagements and promises made to the barons and
cardinals, for they are just what each one asked for. Romo-
lino is to have the Chancellorship of Justice, and Borgia that
of Prisons; but it is not yet known whether they will really
take possession of these offices. And as I have said above,
it seems as though the Pope would be obliged to temporize
with them all; but he cannot delay much longer to declare and
make known whose friend he really means to be. Gianpaolo,
as I anticipated from the first, is taking the route to Perugia
with the consent of the Cardinal d’Amboise, and will ask per-
mission of your Lordships to quarter a portion of his forces
at Cortona; and the Cardinal d’Amboise has requested me to
write to your Lordships to be pleased to grant the request.
Up to the present moment the agreement with Gianpaolo is not
ratified, as it has been impossible to transact any business with
the Cardinal d’Amboise. By way of enabling him to pay the
remainder of his obligation to Gianpaolo, that Cardinal has
written a letter to your Lordships, asking you to pay him, and
promising that the amount shall be credited you on your in-
debtedness to the king of France. D’Amboise justifies his
course at length in that letter, which is signed and sealed by
his own hand. Should your Lordships deem it prudent to
make this payment to Baglioni, then you will be able to avail
of his services, even if his engagement should not be con-
cluded, which is quite possible, as he will have received six
months’ pay at the expense of others; but we do not by any
means despair of concluding his engagement.

The French troops are all encamped on the upper side of the
Garigliano, and although they have captured certain towers
in that direction held for the Spaniards, they are now occu-
pied in constructing a bridge over the river. And although
the enemy is on the opposite side of the river, yet they say
that with the aid of their fleet they cannot be prevented from
crossing the river. The letter that brings this news is of the
80th ultimo, and says that the French talk very confidently.
Certain Pisan envoys have arrived here for the purpose of
felicitating the new Pope upon his election; and his Eminence

Bog MISSION TO THE

of Volterra has arranged with the Pope that, when these en-
voys present themselves to address him, his Holiness is to say
to them that it is his office to pacify Italy, and that inasmuch
as Pisa by its revolt was the cause of the war, so he intends
now to make her the means of peace by uniting her with Flor-
ence; and the Pope has promised to say this.

In my previous letter I wrote to your Lordships in relation
to Citerna, and that the Cardinal Volterra had proposed that
you should allow him to arrange with the Cardinal San Giorgio
to obtain Citerna from him, so as to conceal in some way your
possession of that fortress. I await your reply to that propo-
sition. I think I shall present myself to his Holiness either
to-day, or at the latest by to-morrow, and will inform your
Lordships of the result.

NiccoLO MACHIAVELLI.

Rome, 4 November, 1503.

LETTER IX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I sent my last of the 4th to your Lorain. by Carlo Mar-
telli, and, believing that it must have reached you safely, I did
not ae again by the courier. Having informed you in that
letter of all that has been done with regard to the engagement
of Gianpaolo, and that the Cardinal d’Amboise had written a
letter to your Lordships requesting you to pay the remainder
of his obligation to Baglioni, I shall say no more on that sub-
ject, as nothing new has occurred since; and I shall wait here
until called upon, when I shall reply in accordance with your
instructions. I have now to inform your Lordships that I pre-
sented myself yesterday at the fect of the Pontiff and expressed
to him in your name the pleasure which his promotion to the
Pontificate had given you; and having explained the reasons
of this satisfaction on your part, I offered to his Holiness all
that the power of your republic could do for the glory and
oy of his Pontificate. His Holiness seemed pleased at

his otfer, and showed himself most grateful for all that I had
said to in ; Saying in reply, that he had always counted upon
our republic, but now that his power and authority had been

COURT OF ROME. — 3038

so much increased, he desired to show his affection for her in
every possible way, especially as being under the greatest obli-
gations to his Eminence of Volterra, who had been in great
measure instrumental in his election to the exalted dignity of
the Pontificate. And thus after these customary ceremonies
I took my leave. After that I received your Lordships’ letter
of the 2d instant, in which you state that you have received
the news of the election of the new Pope, and express surprise
at not having had any letters from me. I think that you must
have received immediately after writing to me four of my let-
ters. It is not my fault that they have not reached you sooner,
for the Del Bene gave me no notice of their despatching a
courier on the night of the election. And I do not blame them,
for they told me the next morning that they were under the
impression that the letters which I had previously given them
to forward contained the result of the election. Be that as it
may, I think that your Lordships will be satisfied with my
subsequent letters.

As yours of the 2d gave an account of the ruin of Romagna
and of the disposition of the Venetians, as well as of the con-
dition of things generally in that direction, his Eminence of
Volterra was of the opinion that I ought immediately to com-
municate this information to the Pope, and the Cardinal d’Am-
boise was of the same opinion when he heard it. I therefore
went to his Holiness and read him your letter. He said that
Dionisio di Naldo, chief of the Valle di Lamona, rather sup-
ported the cause of the Duke Valentino than that of the Vene-
tians, and that these matters would take a different shape when
once his election to the Papacy was known; and that they had
gone on thus because they had been ignorant of his election ;
but that he would speak to D’Amboise on the subject. After
leaving his Holiness I spoke to their Eminences Ascanio, San
Giorgio, and San Severino about it, and reminded them that it
was not a question of the liberty of Tuscany, but of that of the
Church; and that, if the Venetians were permitted to increase
their power beyond what it was already, the Pope would end by
being nothing more than the chaplain of the Venetians; and
that it was their business to look to this matter, inasmuch as
they might become heirs to the papal dignity ; that we on our
part had called their attention to it in time, and offered them
what little assistance it was in our power to render.

304 MISSION TO THE

These Cardinals showed that they felt the importance of the
matter, and promised to do all that was possible. I also spoke
to the Duke, and communicated the news to him, which seemed
to me proper for the purpose of finding out how he felt on the
subject, and whether there was anything to fear or to hope
from him. When he heard of the affair of the Castellan of
Imola and the attack of the Venetians upon Faenza, he became
ereatly excited and began to complain bitterly of your Lord-
ships, saying that you had always been his enemies, and that
it was of you and not of the Venetians that he had cause to
complain. For with a hundred men you might have secured
those states, but that you did not want to do it; but that he
would manage so that you should be the first to repent of it.
And now that Imola was lost to him, he would raise no more
troops, nor risk losing what he had left for the sake of trying
to recover what he had lost. That he would no longer be de-
luded by you, but would with his own hands turn over all that
was left to him to the Venetians; and he believed that he
would very soon see our republic ruined, and that then it
would be his turn to laugh. As to the French, they would
either lose the kingdom of Naples, or they would have their
hands so full that they would not be able to render you any as-
sistance. And then he went on speaking with great animosity
and vehemence. I lacked neither matter nor words to answer
him, and yet I thought it best to soothe him, and managed as
adroitly as I could to break off the interview, which seemed to
me to have lasted a thousand years.

I went again to see the Cardinals Volterra and Amboise,
who were at table, and as they had been expecting me with the
answer, I related to them precisely everything as it had oc-
curred. D’Amboise was incensed at the language used by the
Duke, and said: “God has never yet allowed any sin to go
“unpunished, and he certainly will not allow those of Cesar
“ Borgia to pass.” In my letter of the 4th I mentioned to
your Lordships the whereabouts of the Duke at the time, and
the conjectures that were being made with regard to him.
Since then we have seen that he has been gathering troops;
and such of his ministers as I am acquainted with tell me that
he intends going to Romagna at any rate, with all the troops
he can collect. Now that the fortress of Imola is lost, and
having seen the consequent anger of the Duke, I cannot say

COURT OF. ROME. 305

whether he may not change his purpose; at any rate, I can
give your Lordships no further information respecting him.
His Eminence of Amboise and the other Cardinals who watch
the affairs of Italy think that with regard to Romagna one of
two things will have to be done; namely, either to restore that
province to the Church, or to hand it over to the king of
France. Whether or not they will succeed in this I cannot
tell, but I believe they will leave nothing undone to bring it
about; and I really see no other remedy myself.

Of the French and Spanish troops I have at this moment
nothing else to tell you but what I have already said in my
letter of the 4th, no further news having been received here
in relation to them. The French here are very hopeful that
their army has passed the Garigliano, for the river being nar-
row their artillery is able to damage the enemy on the oppo-
site shore, and having command of the sea they would be able
to send some armed vessels up the river, so that the Spaniards
will not be able to show themselves and prevent the French
from crossing to the other side; and once having accom-
plished the passage of the river, they think that all else will be
easy for them. This seems to me quite probable, for Gonsalvo
has always kept himself behind his intrenchments, and has
never shown himself in the open field. More than this I can-
not write to your Lordships, but the end will show all. For
once the French are not in want of money, for the Del Bene
tell me that they have still fifty thousand ducats in sacks in
their house, and there is no other money in circulation here
but ducats.

The Pope will assume the tiara on Sunday, the 8th; that is,
two weeks from to-day.

Valete !
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

—_—_@—_—__—.

LETTER X.

MaeniFicent SIGNoRI : —

I wrote the enclosed to your Lordships yesterday, but the
post to Ferrara was despatched this morning without any
notice to me, which I could not foresee. I shall remind these

VOL, III. 20

306 MISSION: LO Tab

merchants again that they must perform their duty; I shall
certainly not fail in mine. After my interview with the Duke
yesterday, when I left him in the state of excitement of which
I have given an account to your Lordships, he sent for his Emi-
nence of Volterra; and to-day he sent for him again, and in
both interviews, and more particularly in the last, the Duke
told him, after the usual complaints, that he had letters of the
4th according to which the Castellan of Imola had not been
killed, but was prisoner, and that the citadel and the place still
held out for him ; that the Signor Ottaviano (da Campo Fregoso)
had appeared before Imola with a large force, but had been re-
pulsed. He said further that Dionisio di Naldo sustained his
party, and that the Venetians had no troops of any account.
His Eminence seemed to think that this news had somewhat
revived the hopes of the Duke that he might yet be able to
recover his states. He complains of the French and of every-
body else, and yet he expects to be made General of the forces
of the Church, and believes that he will be so nominated by the
consistory that is to be held to-morrow. His Eminence told
him that despair was idle, as it most frequently turns to the
disadvantage of him who yields to it; and on the other hand
he encouraged him and made him fair promises on the part of
your Lordships. We must wait now and see what the con-
sistory will do to-morrow, and whether the Duke will succeed
in getting that command, and if not, what his next plans will
be; of all which your Lordships shall be duly informed. I
should be glad to be instructed how I am to bear myself towards
the Duke in any event, and whether I am to keep him in hopes,
and how. ‘There is no other news stirring here.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Romer, 7 November, 1503.

LETTER XI.

Maentrtcent Stexort : —

_ My last, under cover to Ruccilai, were of the 6th and 7th,
and were forwarded by a courier despatched by the Bolognese.
I gave you therein full account of the condition of the Duke’s

COURT OF ROME. 307

affairs, and of his expectations to be named General of the Holy
Church at the first meeting of the consistory. This meeting
took place yesterday, but according to what I hear, the subject
of the Duke’s affairs was not touched, and the consistory con-
fined itself exclusively to ecclesiastical affairs, and to the regu-
lations that are usually made at the beginning of every new
Pontificate. The war between France and Spain was also dis-
eussed, and the advantage which it would be for all Christen-
dom if they could settle their differences; and it appears that
the new Pope is disposed to aid in bringing about such a settle-
ment, if he has it in his power. The Duke’s concerns therefore
remain in the same uncertainty, and wise persons augur most
unfavorably lest he should come to a bad end, although the
new Pope has always been regarded as a man of entire good
faith. The Duke has been raising men-at-arms here, and ac-
cording to what some people have told me he has also sent into
Lombardy to raise infantry, hoping to recover his states by
means of these troops, and by the help of the reputation which
he would derive from being Gonfalonier and General of the
Holy Church. But having been disappointed in his hopes of
being made Gonfalonier at the first consistory, I do not know
whether he will change his plans, or whether he will persist in
his efforts to obtain that appointment anyhow. I desire much
to receive instructions from your Lordships as to what course
I shall pursue with regard to the Duke. Here it is thought
advisable to induce him to go to Florence, and to give him
some guaranties for that purpose; but I know not whether
your Lordships are of the same opinion.

His Eminence of Volterra and several other Cardinals have
spoken to his Holiness in relation to the affairs of Romagna,
and they think the Pope well disposed to prevent that province
from falling into the hands of the Venetians; for after a good
deal of discussion he said to them: “I have ever been the
“friend of the Venetians, and am so still, provided they make
“no unjust pretensions. But if they attempt to take what
“belongs to the Church I shall do the utmost in my power to
‘prevent them, and will stir up all the princes of Christendom
“against them.” Our Cardinal thus feels assured that, so far
as it depends on his Holiness, matters will go no further.

Letters from the French army inform the Cardinal d’Amboise
that, having thrown a bridge over the Garigliano, a portion of

308 MISSION TO THE

their forces crossed the river under protection of the artillery
which they had on the bank of the river and on board of their
vessels, and that the enemy had retreated with a portion of his
artillery. The French intend now throwing two more bridges
over the river, so as to secure their communications more
effectually, by having both sides of the river occupied by the
French. Sandricourt was the first to pass, and the Bailli
d’Occan followed in the evening. Gonsalvo is about a mile
distant, where he has thrown up some intrenchments. The
French are resolved to fight and conquer, or to pursue him in
case he should attempt to retreat. There is great rejoicing
here amongst the French at this news; they seem to think
that victory is theirs already. May God so direct things that
all will be for the best !

Messer Bartolommeo @ Alviano and the Orsini are at Alagna,
and it is said that they are busy completing their companies
there. The Cardinal d’Amboise, on receiving the news of the
passage of the Garigliano, has requested his Eminence of Vol-
terra to write to Gianpaolo Baglioni to start immediately with
what forces he may have, and to proceed in the direction of
the Abruzzi. He has ordered the Savelli to do the same; and
has begged our Cardinal to write to your Lordships to have
the remainder of the sum due to Baglioni ready, so that he
may not be delayed on that account.

A messenger has arrived here from Messer Ambrogio di
Landriano, saying that the great expenses of the camp have
entirely exhausted his means, and although the time for fur-
ther payments has not yet arrived, yet he demands money.
We have given him fair words, but await your instructions
as to what course we are to follow with regard to him. He
represents the army to be thoroughly united and in the best
spirits, and that they have twice offered battle to the Span-
iards, who each time declined it. In addition to the other
measures which the Cardinal d’Amboise has taken on the re-
ceipt of the above news, he has written to the commanders
to make publicly known to those Sicilian lords who adhere to
the Spanish side, that they will be pardoned if even now they
will join the French.

D’Amboise has news this morning that several places in the
Abruzzi have revolted, which makes him the more anxious
that’ the Savelli and Baglioni should go there; and he renews

COURT OF ROME. 309

his request that I should write to your Lordships to take such
measures that there shall be no delay on account of the non-
payment of the remainder of what is due to Gianpaolo. I
believe that the ratification of his engagement, which should
have been concluded ere this, will be promptly attended to.
Nothing else of any interest.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.
Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.
Roms, 10 November, 1503.

LETTER XI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote to your Lordships this morning, and sent the letter
under cover of his Eminence of Volterra; and it is quite possi-
ble that the bearer of this may also bring my previous one. I
shall not repeat what I have written respecting the news from
the Garigliano, nor shall I say anything touching the Duke, un-
less it be that I have understood from his people that he is much
in earnest with his preparations to go to Romagna. It is quite
possible he may take the route through Florence; and whilst I
was making a visit to our Cardinal this evening, one of the
Duke’s men came to ask his Eminence for a letter in his favor
to your Lordships, so as to permit him to pass securely through
Florence. We shall be on the lookout, and you shall be ad-
vised of his movements. To-day, at noon, | received your Lord-
ships’ letters of the 3d, 4th, and 6th, the latter being the most
important, as it contains the latest news respecting the condi-
tion of things in Romagna. I went immediately to the palace
and found that his Eminence of Volterra was with the Pope;
but as that letter seemed to me altogether such as might be
communicated, and calculated to produce an impression, I sent
it to the Cardinal by the hands of Messer Francesco del Castel
del Rio, one of the Pope’s chief officers. After a little while the
Cardinal came out and told me that the news had greatly moved
the Pope, who would anyhow send a deputy to the Venetians ;
and desired me to speak with his Holiness to-morrow morning
to the same effect. Having returned to my lodgings about the
twenty-fourth hour, I received your letter per express of the

310 PES IECINE MME) ellie 6}

8th, which contained the particulars respecting Faenza. It was
too late to go to the Pope, and the Cardinal did not deem it well
to speak to his Holiness so many times on the same day of the
same thing. But we shall present ourselves early to-morrow
morning before his Holiness to execute the commission with
which your letter charges me, and to find out as far as possible
his intentions ; which, so far as we can judge, make us believe
that he is so far from favoring the Venetians that they wil
have to desist from their attempt if the authority of the Pope
or of those who represent him can suffice for the purpose. But
which of the lords who have possessions in that province he
will favor, it is believed, he has not yet determined upon; and
that he is somewhat undecided in his own mind upon this point,
for the reasons which I have on a former occasion explained to
your Lordships; particularly as the Pope is said to be a man
who at the beginning of his Pontificate would think more of
making a great display at his coronation than of taking any ex-
traordinary trouble about other matters. Nevertheless, we shall
not fail to sound him in every possible way; both for the pur-
pose of arousing him against the usurpers of other people’s pos-
sessions, and also for the purpose of more fully understanding
his designs, so that your Lordships may the better know what
course to adopt in the events that may occur.
.I commend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 10 November, 1530.

LETTER XUL

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

By my two letters of to-day I have informed your Lordships
that the Duke is putting his troops in order for his departure to
Romagna; and how he has obtained letters from his Eminence
the Cardinal Volterra, from the Cardinal d’Amboise, and from
the Pope, in his favor, and directed to your Lordships. I
write the present at the suggestion of the Duke, to let your
Lordships know that he has sent one of his own officers to you
for the purpose of obtaining a safe-conduct from your Lordships,
in accordance with the form herewith enclosed. I have been

COURT OF ROME. 511

requested to recommend this matter to your Lordships, and to

beg you to expedite it promptly. The person who has spoken

in the Duke’s name says that his Excellency is in good spirits,

and hopes, provided your Lordships do not become discouraged,

very soon to recover his places from the hands of the Venetians,

and to prevent them from executing their designs; as he has
still a considerable amount of money left.
Bene valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Rome, 10 November, 1503. Secretary.

LETTER XIV.

Maentricent SigNnori : —

By my last of yesterday I notified your Lordships of the
receipt of your letter of the 8th, per express, and stated the
reasons why I had delayed until this morning to communicate
it to the Pope. His Holiness being indisposed, it was with
difficulty that I could explain everything to him; nevertheless,
he manifested great displeasure at the conduct of the Vene-
tians, and if he had at this moment a strong force at his com-
mand, he would perhaps take things differently; for the pres-
ent, he intends sending a deputy to Venice. His Holiness will
not decide upon the matter by himself, nor will he consult the
whole College, but only a few of the Cardinals of each order ;
for he considers such a decision as a grave matter, because of
the consequences that may result from it. He says he will
have to deliberate upon this through to-morrow. But so far as
seemed to him well, he would now make show to believe that
the Venetians in their conduct have been actuated by hatred
of the Duke, or by some other special reason, and not by a
desire to seize upon the states of the Church, of which his
Holiness, as their immediate lord, intends always to keep the
control in his own hands, so that he may dispose of them ac-
cording to his judgment and the dictates of justice. And if
such be the case, then it will be well indeed; but if not, then
his Holiness will resort to the strongest measures, and will
call upon all the other princes for aid against them, for he is
determined not to let this matter pass lightly. His Holiness

d12 MISSION .TO THE

says that he intends also to write to Ferrara and Bologna, and
will here speak with the Cardinal of Este and the Protonotario
Bentivogli on the subject. And by way of an immediate
remedy tor the state of things made known to him by your
letter of the 6th, he has despatched a brother of Messer Fran-
cesco da Castel del Rio, and a Messer Baldassare Biascia, who
are to seek Dionisio di Naldo, and are to endeavor, by even the
largest promises, to bring him back to his allegiance to the
Church. They are also to try and influence the other popula-
tions of that province to place themselves in the hands of the
Pope, if they wish to escape from imminent perils, and put an
end to all factions. And having been informed that the mere
credit of his election had saved Fano, it seemed to him that he
had already done not a little, and was therefore the more hope-
ful as to the rest. He told me also that the Venetians had
already sent troops and banners into Fano, although they pre-
tended that their object was to preserve it for the Church.

The Pope, moreover, urges your Lordships to do your utmost
to save these states from falling into any other hands, no
matter whose; and to advise and to labor to induce them to
submit themselves to the Sovereign Pontiff, so that he may
dispose of them according to the will of God and justice. It
has been represented to his Holiness what you have already
done up to the present time, and how honestly and frankly you
have acted; but that the condition of your republic would not
permit you to do more, and that it was necessary for his Holi-
ness himself to oppose the attempts of the Venetians, etc., ete.
This was the only conclusion we could arrive at.

I shall endeavor to urge the sending of this deputy to Venice,
and we shall then see what results have been achieved by the
mission to Dionisio di Naldo. No efforts are spared here to
try and stir up his Holiness against the Venetians, in accord-
ance with your Lordships’ views, “and his Eminence of Vol-
“terra does his duty to his country without reserve,” * and does
not cease to press D’Amboise and all the other Cardinals who
have any influence with his Holiness; they all yield readily
to his requests, both with an eye to their own interests and to
those of the Church. The Cardinal d’Amboise particularly is
most zealous, but promises for the present neither men nor

* This passage, and others in the subsequent letters included within quotation
marks, are supposed to have been written in cipher.

COURT OF ROME. 313

any other assistance except letters. He hopes for the success
of the French, or that possibly some arrangement may be
effected with the Emperor and the Archduke, that may shape
matters according to his views, and more especially this affair
of Venice.

Your Lordships will see from the above what effect has been
produced by the information given in your letters of the 6th
and 8th, and repeated afterwards on the 9th, of which I re-
ceived the copy to-day. And to enable your Lordships the
better to understand what course the Pope is likely to take,
or what assistance you may count upon receiving from him
against the projects of the Venetians, I will repeat what I
have already written in several previous despatches to your
Lordships. Whoever examines the present state of things at
Rome will find that all the important affairs of the day centre
here. The first and most important of these is the difference
between France and Spain; the second is the affair of. Ro-
magna; after that come those of the factions of the Roman
barons, and of the Duke Valentino. The Pope finds himself
in the midst of these broils, and although he was elected to
this dignity by great favor and by his reputation, yet as he has
occupied the papal chair but for a short time, and having as
yet neither troops nor money, and being under obligations to
everybody for his election and for the general support he has
received, he cannot as yet take a decided part in anything;
and therefore he is obliged rather to pretend neutrality until
the changes of time and things oblige him to declare himself,
or until he is so firm in his seat that he may favor one or the
other party, and engage in any enterprise he may please.

The facts prove the truth of this; for to begin with the most
important affair, his Holiness passes for being French by natu-
ral affection, yet in his dealings with Spain he bears himself in
such wise that they have no reason to complain of him. Still
he does not go so far in this that France could take umbrage
at it, and circumstances cause both parties to excuse him. In
the affair of Romagna, the Venetians on the one hand aggra-
vate him, and on the other hand you cry out; so that it is
natural that his Holiness should be harassed by it, for he is a
man of spirit, who desires that the Church shall increase and
not diminish under his Pontificate. And yet your Lordships
have seen above how he controls himself, and how on the one

314 MISSION TO THE

hand he accepts the excuses of the Venetians, feigning to
believe that they are influenced in their conduct by their
hatred of the Duke, and not by any desire to injure the Church,
whilst on the other hand he manifests to your Lordships his
dissatisfaction with the conduct of the Venetians, and takes
all the precautions and measures which in reality he is able to
do at present. As to the barons, it is easy for the Pope to
manage them, as the chiefs of the factions are not here; the
Orsini being represented here by the Archbishop of Florence
and by the Signor Giulio, and the Colonnese by their own
Cardinal and certain individuals of no importance. There
only remains then the Duke Valentino, for whom it is believed
that his Holiness has a natural aversion; and yet he manages
him for two reasons. The first, because he wishes to keep his
word with him, of which it is claimed that the Pope is the
most tenacious observer; and because of his obligations to
him on account of his election, which he owes in great part
to the Duke. The other is because, the Pope being still with-
out troops, the Duke is better able than any one else to offer
resistance to the Venetians; and for that reason the Pope
urges his departure, and has addressed briefs to your Lord-
ships, soliciting free passage and safe-conduct for the Duke,
and also favors his cause in other ways. Although I have
indicated all this in my previous despatches, yet it seems to
me necessary to explain it more fully at this time, for I feel
the importance that you should know the Pope’s intentions,
and what he would and could do, and what he desires that you
should do; so that your Lordships may fully understand him,
and not hope for anything more from here. And that it be-
hooves your Lordships to bethink yourselves of other means,
either by supporting the Duke, or by such measures as you
may have in your power. You may assume that the Pope will
have to be satisfied with things as they are, and with whatever
course the affairs of Romagna may take, provided that that
promise does not ship from the hands of the Church or its
vicars.

The Duke sent for me to-day, and I found him in a very
different mood from what he was the last time, as I wrote you
in my letters of the 6th and Tth. He said many things to me,
which being reduced to one amount to this: that we must
think no more of the past, but only of the common good, and

COURT OF ROME. 815

strive to prevent the Venetians from making themselves mas-
ters of Romagna. He told me that the Pope had promised to
aid him, and had written briefs for that purpose; and that
your Lordships should also think of giving him your support,
and that you might in return count upon him for anything.
I answered in a general way, and assured him that he might
rely upon your Lordships.

After that I had a long conversation with Messer Alessandro
di Francia, who told me that they would probably despatch a
courier to-night, with the Pope’s brief and other letters that
have been written by the Cardinal Volterra and myself to your
Lordships in relation to the safe-conduct, which they were
confident of obtaining. He told me further that the Duke
hesitated as to the course he should take, and did not know
whether he should go by land with his troops, which number
about four hundred horse and about as many infantry, or
whether he should let his troops go by land whilst he would
go by sea to Livorno, and then join his troops on Florentine
territory, where he could meet some of your citizens and con-
clude his arrangements with you; but that he did not want
to be delayed, and therefore desired to find the articles of
agreement all duly prepared, so that he might have nothing
to do but merely to sign them. He desired that you should
write to Livorno, so as to insure him a proper reception in case
he should take that route. I replied that I would write to
your Lordships, and gave him good hope. Your Lordships
can now think of all this, and consult and resolve and prepare
yourselves as to the manner in which you will act with regard
to the Duke. Messer Alessandro told me that the Duke would
send some one to Florence to digest and draw up the agree-
ment with you, and that he would not like to send any one of
little authority ; at the same time he could not with safety
send a personage of great authority, but so soon as he should
be in position to do so, he would send such a person.

The letters which your Lordships have sent for the Pope
have been presented to him, and he offers his thanks, etc., ete.
I again beg to refer to my despatch of yesterday.

Valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 11 November, 1503.

316 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

The enclosed was written yesterday, but not having up to the
present moment found an opportunity of sending it by the ex-
tra courier, I deem it proper, by way of not keeping your Lord-
ships waiting any longer for a reply to yours of the 8th, and
because it contains many things of importance respecting the
Duke, to send this express by the hands of Giovanni Pandolfini.
Your Lordships will please pay him the usual price, as I have
so promised him.

Valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 12 November, 1508.

LETTER XVI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Yesterday I wrote to your Lordships per express, and de-
spatched it with my letter of the 11th through the hands of the
Pandolfini, in reply to yours of the 8th, which came also per
express. You will have seen from mine the determination of
the Pope on the subject of the affairs of Romagna, and all that
can be said of his Holiness at this moment. You will also have
learned from it the projects of the Duke, who is occupied mean-
while in raising both infantry and cavalry with which to pursue
his march into Romagna; and I believe that he delays in great
part for the purpose of knowing your decision. For here we
can neither treat with him nor do anything else, because we do
not know what your Lordships’ disposition or determination in
the matter may be. I have several times asked you for your
views, but being still without any reply we are completely at a
loss what to do.

As I have explained in former letters to your Lordships, the
Pope for the moment favors the Duke, for he feels himself
bound by the promises which he has made to him, and also
from his desire not to let those places fall into the hands of
the Venetians. His Holiness seems resolved to do everything
in his power to prevent them from being swallowed up by the

COURT OF ROME. 8317

Venetians. I believe he is conferring to-day with some eight
or ten of those Cardinals who have the honor of the Church
most at heart, to determine about sending an envoy to Venice,
to which I have referred in my letter of the 11th. It seems
that his Holiness has no doubts as to getting those places back
that have been taken by the Venetians, who, he thinks, will
consent to anything. His advisers urge him by all means
to try and get possession of them, demonstrating to him that
he can afterwards dispose of them according to the demands
of honesty and justice, etc., etc.

I have conferred to-day with his Eminence of Volterra re-
specting your Lordships’ reply on the subject of Citerna. He
is constantly after San Giorgio, trying to bring the matter to a
conclusion ; our Cardinal thought that he would be able to effect
an even exchange with San Giorgio, by giving him one of his
fortresses for Citerna, but San Giorgio declines such an ex-
change, and demands two hundred ducats, saying that he has
such an offer from some one else. Our Cardinal would not like
that such an expense should be incurred, and yet he does not
know how it can be avoided, if it is really desired by your
Lordships to have Citerna, for we may lose the chance alto-
gether. San Giorgio has given him to understand that, unless
we decide to-day or to-morrow to take it on those terms, he will
go to the feet of his Holiness, and make known to him that
Citerna, which fell to him by lot, has been occupied by the
Florentines, and make this a subject of complaint. The nego-
tiations are therefore continued, and we shall take such a course
as his Eminence may deem best so as to quiet the matter. For,
having to reprove others for attempting to take what does not
belong to them, it behooves us to avoid all occasions for incur-
ring reproof for the same thing in our turn.

Yesterday evening, Pope Julius II. took formal possession
of the Castel San Angelo with all due solemnity, and has ap-
pointed the Bishop of Sinigaglia as his Castellan. The former
Castellan has left according to report, with the promise of be-
ing made Cardinal. |

By my letter of the 10th, I informed your Lordships of the
report of the passage of the Garigliano by the French; but
since then we have no particulars. True, letters were received
last night by some of the Colonnese here, that some four thou-
sand French had crossed the river, and that Gonsalvo, who

318 MISSION TO. THE

was about a mile distant with his army, could not prevent
them, owing to the swollen state of certain water-courses be-
tween himself and the French. But that, the waters having
subsided, Gonsalvo charged upon the French, who, having no
cavalry, were dislodged from a bastion which they had con-
structed, and were completely routed. A portion of them were
killed, and a portion driven into the river and drowned. This
news was spread by the Colonnese, and although it is now the
twenty-third hour, yet up to the present it is not confirmed.
The French here do not believe it, and say that their infantry
which had crossed the Gariglano was protected by their artil-
lery, which they had placed on the river-bank and on board of
vessels, so that the Spaniards could not attack them. We must
wait for time to clear up this matter, and when the truth is
known your Lordships shall be advised.

It is now one o’clock at night, and up to this moment the
above news has neither been confirmed nor contradicted. The
Cardinals did not meet with the Pope to-day to discuss the
affairs of Romagna, but I believe they will do so to-morrow.
I send this through the hands of P. del Bene, who tells me
that he may possibly despatch. a courier to night.

Valete !
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Roun, 13 November, 1503.

LETTER XVII.

MaGniricEnT S1gNori: —

I reported to you yesterday all that had taken place here up
to that time, and sent my letter this morning through the hands
of P. del Bene. I must now inform your Lordships “ that yes-
“terday and to-day the Pope has conferred with the Cardinals
“¢ Amboise and Volterra, the Spanish Cardinals, the Cardinal of
“Ferrara, and the Duke Valentino, in relation to the depart-
“ure of the last. It was definitely concluded that he is to go
“in two or three days by water to Porto Venere or to Spezzia,
“and from there by the Garfagnana to Ferrara; and that his
“troops, which are said to amount to three hundred light cav-
“alry, one hundred men-at-arms, and four hundred infantry,

COURT OF ROME. 319

“are to go by land to Romagna through Tuscany. They are to
“unite at Imola, which place, it is said, still holds for the Duke,
‘and where he will join them; and then the Duke will attempt
“from there to recover his states by means of his own troops,
‘and those which he counts upon receiving from your Lord-
“ships, from the Cardinal d’Amboise, from Ferrara, and from
“the Pope. And speaking of these auxiliaries, the Cardinal
“Volterra told me that the Pope supplied the Duke with briefs
“and patents at discretion, but with nothing more. The Car-
“‘dinal d’Amboise has promised that Montison shall come to
“him with at least fifty lances; it is, however, not yet known
“ whether they are of those who have already been in the Duke’s
“service. The Cardinal of Este says that he believes that the
“ Duke’s father will uot fail him.” Volterra says that he would
have been glad to have been informed of your views and in-
tentions as regards this matter, and wonders that you have
never written to him how he is to bear himself towards the
Duke.

Being obliged to say something in the name of your Lord-
ships, he represented that you were ready to do anything in your
power to prevent those cities from falling into the hands of
the Venetians, and that, if you were of opinion that the way
to do so would be to help the Duke, he had not the least doubt
that you would lend him every assistance. But that, before
coming to that point, it was necessary for them to see whether
the aid of your Lordships added to the Duke’s forces would
suffice for the desired object; and that therefore it would be
well for the Duke to send some one to Florence for the purpose
of explaining these things, and to have a full understanding.
“ What causes the Cardinal Volterra to be in doubt as to the
“affairs of the Duke, besides not knowing the views of your
“ Lordships, is, that he is not clear himself whether it would be
“desirable for our republic to have the Duke for a neighbor,
“and master of those three or four cities. For if we could
“always be sure of him as a friend, and not have reason to
* doubt and mistrust him, it might be of the greatest advantage
“to reinstate him in his possessions. But knowing the Duke’s
“dangerous character, he doubted much whether you would be
“able to keep him your friend, which would expose us to the
“‘same risk of having the Venetians become masters of those
-“ cities. His Eminence, moreover, sees that your Lordships are

320 MISSION TO THE

“under some obligations to those who hold those places, and
“that their populations have declared themselves the enemies
“of the Duke, so that there is reason to fear lest by supporting
“the Duke the Venetians may be enabled the sooner to attain
“the object of their desires. All these things keep the Cardinal
‘Volterra in a state of indecision.” It has seemed to me proper
to report the substance of this conversation to your Lordships,
so that you may appreciate the merits of the case with your
habitual sagacity. “At the conference between the Pope and
“the Cardinals there was no one to represent the Bentivogli of
“Bologna; but the Duke confidently expects every assistance
“from them. The conference separated with the understand-
“ing that the Duke should take the route indicated, that the
“Cardinal Este should write to Ferrara to solicit aid, that
“the Cardinal d’Amboise should write to Montison in accord-
“ance with the above decision, and that the Cardinal Volterra
“ should explain everything to your Lordships. Thus the mat-
“ter rests, and according to the above understanding the Duke
“is to leave immediately. But already Volterra begins to doubt
“whether the Duke will start, for he seems to have perceived a
“ change in him, and seems to think him irresolute, suspicious,
“and unstable in all his conclusions.” This may be the result
of his natural character, or because the blows of fortune, which
he is not accustomed to bear, have stunned and confounded him.
Two evenings ago, whilst in that part of the palace where the
Duke Valentino is lodged, the deputies from Bologna arrived,
and with them the Protonotario Bentivogli. They all went
into the Duke’s apartment, where they remained more than
an hour.

Thinking that they might possibly have formed some agree-
ment together, I went to-day to sce the Protonotario Bentivogli
under pretence of making him a visit; and having, after some »
general conversation, broached the subject of the Duke’s affairs,
he said to me that they had come to see the Duke at his special
request, who had told them that he would relieve them of the
obligations they had entered into with him the year before.
Having come to that point, and having called a notary to draw
up the agreement, the Duke asked in return for the cancelling
of these obligations certain specified assistance in his affairs of
Romagna. The Bolognese deputies would not agree to this,
having no authority to that effect, whereupon the Duke also

COURT OF ROME. 821

declined to annul their obligations, and thus the matter re-
mained in suspense.

The Protonotario added, that the Duke had not acted fairly
in the matter, and that, instead of standing upon his rights, he
should have shown himself liberal in cancelling these obliga-
tions, on account of which he would anyhow never receive a
single penny from them. He told me furthermore that, having
conversed with the Cardinal Herina on the subject, the latter
had said to him that the Duke seemed to him to have lost his
wits, for he appeared not to know himself what he wanted, and
that he was confused and irresolute. To my question whether
he would sustain the Duke in any way, the Protonotario an-
swered, that the entrance of the Venetians into Romagna was
of such importance, that, if the only way of preventing it was
to support the Duke, he believed that his father and his gov-
ernment would give him their support, and do whatever else
they could in the matter. More than this I did not learn from
him, but I have deemed it not amiss to communicate this con-
versation to your Lordships.

From the armies we hear that the Spaniards in full force
attacked such of the French as had crossed the river, but that
the latter under protection of their artillery defended them-
selves bravely, and that although both sides had lost a good
many men, yet the French remained masters of their position
and of the entire river; that they were busy constructing two
more bridges, so as to pass the river with the bulk of their
forces, under God’s favor.

There is nothing else of interest to communicate from here,
unless it be that the Pope will assume the tiara next Sunday
in St. Peter’s, and on the following Sunday in St. John Lateran,
and that it will be a triumphant solemnity.

With all this the plague is on the increase, for the weather
and the neglect of all precautions favor its development, so that
Rome has become a most melancholy residence.

I recommend myself to God and to your Lordships, que
bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Rome, 14 November, 1503.

VOL. III. 91

322 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XVIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

The enclosed was written yesterday, but as no couricr has
been despatched since then, I could not send it, nor do I know
now when it will go, as there is no regular postal service. I
have to inform your Lordships that it was not until to-day that
the Pope assembled the Cardinals of Naples, Amboise, Capac-
cio, Lisbon, Aragon, San Giorgio, Volterra, and three or four
others of the oldest Cardinals, who have the honor of the
Church and ecclesiastical liberty most at heart. They delib-
erated a long while on the affairs of Romagna, and resolved
to depute some one to Venice. Their choice fell upon Angelo
Leonino, Bishop of Tivoli, who will leave immediately with in-
structions to induce the government of Venice to disarm, and
to restore to the hands of the Pope what they have wrongfully
taken from him. They have decided also to send another
deputy into Romagna, who should be some person of distinc-
tion. They wanted to appoint the Bishop of Ragusa to this
mission, but, as they could not agree about it, the appointment
was conferred on the Cardinal Volterra. He has gone this
evening to have another conference with his Holiness; but it
is too late for me to wait and learn the result. His instruc-
tions will be to do all he can to quiet these disturbances, to
try to restore tranquillity, and to re-establish things as far as
possible for the advantage of the Church. Everything tends
to show that Julius II. is most anxious to save these states for
the Church, and there is no lack of persons here who encour-
age him incessantly in this desire. His Eminence of Volterra
is wide awake on this subject, as well as on all other matters
that concern the general welfare of our republic. He does not
ecase being at the feet of his Holiness to maintain and dispose
him still more favorably to Florence, to which he is already
well inclined. He also solicits the other Cardinals, pointing
out to them the ambition of the Venetians, the dangers to
which their own liberties are exposed, and in fact he does all
that your Lordships could suggest or ask of him. I deem it
but right to bear witness to this, so that your Lordships may
know how zealous and distinguished an advocate you have at
this court, and that you may appreciate deservingly the great

COURT OF ROME. 323

virtues of his Eminence, and his love and entire devotion to his
country.

I must not omit to inform your Lordships that I have un-
derstood that the Pope complained bitterly to the Venetian
ambassador of the proceedings of his government, telling him
that he never could have believed that they had so little re-
gard for the affection which he had always shown their coun-
try as to seek to dishonor and dismember the Church under
his Pontificate ; and that, if they persevered in that conduct,
he would break all bonds of friendship, and submit to general
ruin rather than suffer the Church to be dishonored and dis-
membered, and that he would arouse the whole world against
them. To all which, it is said, the Venetian ambassador re-
plied in the mildest manner, etc., etc.

I learn from Monsignor di Bentivogli, who says that he has
it direct from the Venetian envoy, that the Senate had ap-
pointed eight ambassadors who were to come here and make
their submission to his Holiness. He thinks the Venetian
Senate did this, knowing that such incense and demonstrations
of honor are an article greatly prized by Julius II., which they
ought not to omit to employ. I have deemed it well to men-
tion this to your Lordships, so that, if true, you may not allow
yourselves to be outdone in these sort of demonstrations. And
the sooner you send such ambassadors the more welcome will
they be, and the more advantages you will derive from it; for
his Eminence of Volterra cannot play two parts at once, except
at the cost of one or the other, and therefore it will be well to
anticipate the others.

The news from the French camp is that they are entirely
masters of the Garigliano, and have no fears of being driven
from their positions ; but they have not advanced beyond that,
owing to the inundations that extend over many miles of coun-
try. Gonsalvo is said to have retreated to a position between
Sessa and Capua.

Gianpaolo Baglioni writes that he cannot start with his
troops because he has not yet received the money from Flor-
ence, and says that he has sent some one to you on that
account. It is said that the Cardinal d’Amboise is a little
vexed at this, and that it has caused him to change the desti-
nation of Baglioni, whom he intends now to send into camp,
and not to the Abruzzi, as had been decided the other day. It

324 MISSION TO THE

is also said that, inasmuch as Bartolommeo di Alviano was to
have joined the Spaniards, the French also desire to have the
credit of receiving fresh troops; although according to report
Bartolommeo and the Orsini have taken but few troops there,
and are enlisting men all the time. I learn that the said Bar-
tolommeo has twenty-five men-at-arms at Viterbo, who are
waiting for money before moving forward. And thus on both
sides the attack and the defence proceed but slowly.

Of the Duke Valentino I have nothing more to report, except
that his troops are still here, nor has he started himself, and
thus the matter remains just as it was two days ago; but they
still give out that they will start in two or three days. The
report has been spread throughout all Rome that the Duke is
going to Florence to be your general. Similar stories are con-
stantly put in circulation here.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 16 November, 1503.

P. S.—I have forgotten to say that the last letters I have
from your Lordships are of the 8th. The plague is doing its
duty well, and spares neither the houses of the Cardinals nor
any others where it can find victims, and yet no one here
makes any account of it. Jterwm valete /

LETTER XIX.

Macniricent SIGNORI : —

Not having been able to send the two enclosures of the 14th
and 16th sooner, they will now go at same time with this. I
cannot oblige the merchants to do other than what they please,
and cannot therefore promise you more regular advices from
here; but whenever there is any danger of my letters being
delayed too long, 1 shall do as in the present case, and send
them in some other way by paying for them. Yesterday at an
early hour came your Lordships’ letters of the 13th and 14th;
those of the 10th and 11th having reached me some four hours
sooner. The last two require no reply, having been written
when your Lordships were still uncertain as to an answer to

COURT OF ROME. 325.

yours of the 8th; and in response to the other two, I have
also but little to say, as you have received mine of the 12th,
per express, which fully informs you of the state of things
here, and what you may hope for in the way of assistance. I
refer again to that letter, and more especially to what I have
written in tlie enclosed. His Eminence of Volterra is never-
theless of opinion that I should present myself again at the feet
of the Pope, and read to him your instructions, so as to learn
what his Holiness may now have to say; and also to commu-
nicate to him your views in relation to the Duke’s affairs, and
to sound him as regards his opinion of the whole business.
Efforts were made to procure me an audience, which, how-
ever, I did not get until three o’clock yesterday evening, when I
read to the Holy Father those parts of your letters which it was
proper he should know. When I came to that part where you
say that Messer Ottaviano da Campo Fregoso had taken the
field with cavalry and infantry sent by the Duke of Urbino, his
Holiness became very angry, and said, “ The Duke will be here
“in a couple of days, when I will shut him up in the Castel
“San Angelo.” He then listened with great attention to the
remainder of your letter; and after having heard it all he said
that he felt obliged to your Lordships for reminding him of
what was for the honor of the Church, and for your efforts,
etc., etc.; and that for his part he had done and would con-
tinue to do his utmost, as was well known to his Eminence of
Volterra; that he had sent some one to Venice to let them
know his intentions, and that he would also send some one of
distinction to Romagna to reanimate the lords and the people
of that province, and to induce those who had strayed from
their allegiance to him to return. I replied to his Holiness in
what I thought suitable terms, but obtained no further infor-
mation from him; it is evident, however, that he does all he
can, as I have mentioned in my previous letters. I then
touched upon the affairs of the Duke Valentino, “ and explained
“to his Holiness why your Lordships had not granted the de-
“sired safe-conduct to the Duke; to which he replied that it
“was well, and that he agreed with you entirely,’ and lifted
up his head in a very significant manner. From this it will be
seen what before may have been doubted, that his Holiness
thought it an eternity before he could get rid of the Duke;
and yet he wanted him to go away satisfied, and so as not to

326 MTSSION TO 2H

afford him grounds for complaining of the non-observance of
the pledges on the part of the Pope; as it might still happen
that he might wish to avail himself of the Duke for his own
purposes in the affairs of Romagna; and thus he would not
close the door to his being able to make use of the Duke. But
that he cared nothing about what you or any third party might
do against the Duke.

‘Looking now at all the Pope’s actions as I have explained
“to your Lordships in previous letters, we see that he intends
“oetting those cities into his hands, and that by sending an
“envoy to the Venetians he hopes to obtain their consent,
“etc., etc. And if that plan does not succeed, he will try and
“vet possession of them through some one else, who will hold
“them for the time. And perhaps he thinks that the Duke,
“upon finding himself abandoned by you, will cede to him that
“part of Romagna which he still retains; and that, once hay-
“ine possession of those towns, the others will easily follow.”
Such I believe to be the Pontiff’s conduct and intentions, as
your Lordships will see ; and whatever resistance you make to
the Venetians will naturally be most welcome to his Holiness.

Your Lordships will learn from the enclosed of the 14th
what has been decided upon by the Pope and the Duke, and
those other Cardinals; all of which was agreed upon and ar-
ranged, as the result has shown since then, “to feed the Duke
“with hopes and to urge his departure, which the Pope evi-
“dently desires.”

When the Duke learned through letters from Florence that
your Lordships had not granted the desired safe-conduct for
him, he sent for me; and after my audience with the Pope I
went to him. His Excellency complained of your refusing him
the safe-conduct, and said that he had already sent his cavalry,
supposing that they would be admitted on Florentine territory,
and that he intended to start himself in the expectation that
the safe-conduct would be sent to him anyhow, as he could not
have anticipated a refusal, and could not understand your fear-
ing on the one hand lest those towns should fall into the hands
of the Venetians, and on the other hand your closing the way
to all succor; that perchance he might take a different course,
which might be injurious to your Lordships; and that although
he was aware of the danger of his coming to an arrangement
with the Venetians, yet the force of circumstances might cause

< COURT OF ROME. SA

him to do so; for he would obtain great advantages from them,
which he was disposed to accept to some extent, and which
would be a mortal injury to you. I replied to the Duke, that
the safe-conduct was not absolutely refused, and that he had
been given to understand that your Lordships wanted to know
on what footing you really were with him, and to scttle that
point first, and then to establish such relations of friendship
as should properly exist between two states that desire to be
on good terms and to act in good faith towards each other;
that your Lordships were not in the habit of rashly or hastily
entering into anything, and did not intend to begin doing so
now, and therefore it would be well for him to send some expe-
rienced person, who was fully informed as to his intentions, to
Florence, and I doubted not that your Lordships would do what
was for the advantage of our republic and her friends. The
Duke replied that he had sent his troops forward, and was him-
self on the point of going by water, and that he had wished
before his departure to have a clear understanding of what he
might hope for from your Lordships. To which I answered, that
I would at once write to your Lordships this morning and give
you notice of his Excellency’s having started his troops, and of
his having sent an envoy to you to ask you to admit his troops
on Florentine territory; that this envoy would meantime ar-
rive in Florence, and would negotiate direct with your Lord-
ships; and that I had not a doubt but that some satisfactory
arrangement would be effected, of which his envoy might ad-
vise his Excellency wherever he might be. The Duke seemed
in a measure satisfied, but answered that if your Lordships
hesitated or dealt unfairly with him, which would become
manifest within four or five days, the time necessary for his
envoy to come to Florence and write, he would make terms
with the Venetians and with the Devil himself; or he would go
and join the Pisans, and would devote all his money, his power,
and what allies remained to him to injure our republic. The
person whom the Duke has selected for the mission to your
Lordships is a certain Messer Vanno, the Duke’s foster-
brother, who was to have started this morning; but it is now.
the eighteenth hour, and I have not yet heard of his departure ;
it is possible that the Duke may have changed his purpose.
His Excellency agreed also with the Cardinal d’Amboise to
leave this morning for Spezzia, according to the original plan.

Bye) MISSION: LO GHEE

He intended to take with him on board, and in vessels of his
own, some five hundred men selected from amongst his gentle-
men followers and his infantry ; but up to the present moment
nothing has been heard of his departure. Possibly he may
wish to wait until he is in some measure assured of your Lord-
ships’ intentions.

‘Your Lordships will observe that my answers to the Duke
“were only intended to give some little encouragement to his
“hopes, so that he might have no excuse for remaining here
“any longer, and so that the Pope, in his desire to get rid of
“him, might not oblige you to give the Duke the asked for
‘“‘safe-conduct. When the Duke’s envoy arrives in Florence,
“vour Lordships need not pay much attention to him, and may
“act in the matter as may seem best to you; reflecting whether
“it be more important to break off or to conclude the negotia-
“tion. The Duke’s cavalry that have gone towards Florence,
‘under command of Carlo Baglioni, number one hundred men-
‘“at-arms and two hundred and fifty Hght-horse. Your Lord-
“ships will take measures to find out their whereabouts, and
“should you deem it well that they should in a measure be
“disarmed, you can do so whenever you think proper; and
“when informed of your Lordships’ intentions, I shall act to-
“wards the Duke accordingly. I beg your Lordships will not
“fail to write me in case anything else should occur.”

Your letters are communicated to the Cardinal d’Amboise
and the other Cardinals; and his Eminence of Volterra does
all that is possible to stir up everybody, and to keep them on
the lookout, as I have already mentioned in my enclosure of
the 16th. And if everything here does not go on as you could
wish, it will be the fault of circumstances, and not because the
thing is not thought of or not urged.

“Respecting the security demanded by the Duke, D’Amboise
“says that you must act as best suits yourselves”; in relation
to other matters, he complains much and shrugs his shoulders.
Your Lordships’ letter of the 15th was received this morning,
in reply to which nothing else occurs to me. The Citerna
business is still delayed, for the reasons given in my letter of
the 18th. I will endeavor to bring it to a speedy termination,
and with the greatest possible advantage. Of the French army:
we have no further news, nor can we expect any so long as this
weather continues. In consequence of the inundations around

COURT OF ROME. 829

the Garigliano, the Spaniards cannot attack the French, and
the latter cannot advance.

The assumption of the tiara by the Pope is postponed until
Sunday week. Pagolo Rucellai has given me to understand
that the privilege of extracting saltpetre is within his control,
and that if your Lordships desire any particular conditions in
this matter, which he will be able to manage, he desires to be
informed.

We are now at the twenty-first hour, and an hour and a half
since I received your letter of the 15th, in which your Lord-
ships point out to me the extremely difficult condition of the
affairs of Romagna. But as I had a long interview with his
Holiness on that subject yesterday, and as his Eminence of
Volterra saw him also to-day, it has seemed to me best to
defer until to-morrow to communicate to him the contents
of your letter, so as not to weary his Holiness with that sub-
ject; the more so, as we do not believe that we shall obtain
anything more from him. The Pope can do no more than to
write and send agents, and all this he has done. I believe the
Bishop of Ragusa will be sent to Romagna, and that he will
start immediately.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 18 November, 1503.

P. S.—I send this by the hands of Giovanni Pandolfini,
who leaves at the twenty-second hour. Your Lordships will
please pay him the customary compensation.

nn

LETTER XX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote yesterday and sent my letter per express, together
with my others of the 14th and 16th, which will have informed
your Lordships of all that has occurred here in connection with
the Duke, who left here this evening. He has gone to Ostia to
embark if the weather permits. It promises fair this morning,
and may serve him as well as the French, who have been kept
on the Garigliano only by the high water. These inundations

330 MISSEON: TO. THe |

have obliged their army, as well as that of the Spaniards, to dis-
perse and seek shelter in the neighboring hamlets and villages,
leaving only guards in certain bastions which they have on the
boundary of the territory occupied by them respectively. And
if the weather clears, as it promises this morning, both sides
will be able to take the field and pursue their object, — the one
to try to advance, and the other to resist; of all of which your
Lordships will be duly advised when we receive the news.

But to return to the Duke Valentino. He is really gone, by the
help of God, and to the great satisfaction of the whole country.
He has gone to Ostia, as I have said above, having started his
troops by land towards Florence, some two or three days ago.
According to the Duke’s own account, these forces consist of
about seven hundred horse; and when the weather suits he will
embark with four hundred or five hundred more for Spezzia,
as was agreed upon here, intending from there to follow the
route indicated in my letter of the 14th. It is to be feared lest,
being offended with your Lordships, the Duke may throw him-
self with his troops into Pisa, as he threatened to do at our
last interview, of which I gave an account in my letter of yes-
terday. And what makes me apprehensive of this is, that the
individual whom it was understood he was to send to Florence
has never said one word to me about his passport for his safety,
which I was to give him according to our understanding. And
thence I fear that the Duke contemplates not to co-operate with
your Lordships any longer. I shall try and find out the truth
of the matter, and will then advise you.

T informed your Lordships yesterday of the receipt of yours of
the 15th, per express ; and to-day I have received the copies for-
warded on the 16th. With all my best efforts, however, it was
~ not possible for me to see the Pope to-day ; to-morrow, however,
shall not pass without my seeing him anyhow; and I shall do
what I can for the advantage of our republic, as well as for that
of the Church, which is equally interested in the matter. Your
Lordships’ letter was read to the Cardinal d’Amboise, and I no-
ticed that these things afflict him very much. Nevertheless, he
shrugs his shoulders and excuses himself, saying that there
is no help for it at present. He promises, however, whether
the result be peace or victory, and he counts confidently upon
one or the other, to restore things to their former condition,
and that your interests shall under all circumstances be se-

COURT OF ROME. Beal

cured; more than this we cannot hope for from him. He
understands the affairs of Romagna so well himself, that it
offends him if any one attempts to recall them to his mind.
And yet two days ago M. de Chaumont, Governor of Lom-
bardy, sent him a letter which the French envoy at Venice had
written to inform him of the disposition of the Venetians, and
of their preparations against Romagna, and of their plans,
which aimed at nothing less than, after having seized Ro-
magna, to attack Florence, under pretence of recovering the
one hundred and eighty thousand florins which they claim to
be due them. By this aggression they hope to weaken and
‘diminish the reputation of the king of France, by depriving
him of the men and money which you supply him, and at the
same time to humble Tuscany and increase their own territory.
The Cardinal d’Amboise sent this letter to his Eminence of
Volterra, who seemed pleased to have it, and appeared to take
the matter seriously ; but the only conclusion arrived at was,
that we must wait to see what their fleet will do, upon which
they count so largely, if the weather and the state of the sea
do not hinder its advance.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 19 November, 1503.

LETTER XXI.

MaeniFicent Signor: —

I shall write briefly to-day what has occurred since my
despatch of the 18th, reserving further details for my next.
And I do this so that your Lordships may, on the arrival of
Messer Ennio, the Duke’s envoy and bearer of this, be more
immediately informed of the state of things here. The Duke,
as | have already informed you, left here yesterday morning for
Ostia, and will embark there with some four or five hundred
men for Spezzia. As the weather has improved, I believe he
will sail to-night. His cavalry, consisting, according to his own
account, of about seven hundred horse, he sent forward three
days ago on the road to Tuscany. Now having done all this
without any definite reply from your Lordships for our instruc-

Son MISSION TO THE

tion, on account of which I wrote you on the 18th, the Duke
has sent the bearer of this, Messer Ennio, to your Lordships,
who also brings a letter to you from the Cardinal Volterra
“merely for the purpose of satisfying the Duke; for both the
“Pope and the Cardinal @ Amboise would take it ill if you
“were really to concede a safe-conduct to the Duke.” Accord-
ing to what they say, and the hints which they have thrown
out, your Lordships may, if it suits you, act in accordance
with their intentions and spirit, and may do so without any
hesitation. And if circumstances have caused you to change
your decision “the coming of the Duke’s envoy will afford you
“an excellent opportunity, of which your Lordships will avail
“with your habitual sagacity.” Your letter of the 15th and a
similar one to the Pope of the 16th were submitted to his Holi-
ness this morning. He was greatly affected by them, and said
in a few words that, inasmuch as he had occupied the papal
chair but a short time, he could not regulate this matter as he
would desire; that for the present he would do what he could,
but that hereafter he hoped to do a great deal more; that he
would start the Bishop of Tivoli for Venice to-morrow, and
within a couple of days he would send the Bishop of Ragusa
to Romagna, who should take the route through Florence, with
instructions to confer with your Lordships. Although his
Holiness had resolved to await the answer of the Bishop, yet
he intended to send an envoy to Venice before taking any
other steps against them; but secing their insolence now, he
had resolved to convoke the ambassadors of all the nations,
and to arouse them to the facts, and make his sentiments
known to them, and lay before them his complaints of the
outrages of the Venetians. And, in short, that he would
leave nothing undone, and therefore he hoped your Lordships
would continue your preparations for defence, and meantime he
thanked you for what you had done thus far. His Eminence of
Volterra replied with his habitual prudence, and I added such
remarks as seemed to me proper; but more than the above we
did not get from him. We shall not fail, as we have done
hitherto, to remind his Holiness and the Cardinals of this busi-
ness, as our duty demands, and shall continue to keep your
Lordships fully advised of whatever takes place.

The Duke of Urbino came to Rome to-day. From the French
army we have no further news; it is to be hoped that the

COURT OF ROME. 333

weather may continue clear, as it has begun yesterday and to-
day, so that the army may continue its operations with greater
ease.
Valete !
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 20 November, 1503.

LETTER XXII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI :—

By the enclosed of yesterday I informed your Lordships of
what had taken place here since my last of the 18th, and that
I could not possibly present myself at the feet of his Holiness
yesterday to communicate to him your confidential letter of the
15th, received on the 16th. I did so, however, this morning, in
the presence of his Eminence of Volterra, and read your letter
to his Holiness. After that the Cardinal added what he deemed
proper, and by order of his Eminence I also said what the occa-
sion required. His Holiness manifested great displeasure at
the state of things, saying that he would leave nothing undone
for the honor of the Church; that he had already sent a deputy
to Romagna, but that he would send another of still higher au-
thority, and had designated the Bishop of Ragusa to go there,
and the Bishop of Tivoli to Venice, and that he would urge
their prompt departure ; and that although he had determined
before going further to await the reply of the Venetians, so as
to be more fully justified in his proceedings and more clearly
informed as to their intentions, yet with the information which
your Lordships’ letter gave him he felt justified in going some-
what further, and would address a circular to the princes and
protest to their ambassadors here, and would no longer stand
upon ceremonies with the Venetians. He then called his Emi-
nence of Volterra, who was present, to witness as to his inten-
tions, and charged me to encourage your Lordships by telling
you that his Holiness would leave nothing undone for the lib-
erty of the Church and the security of her friends, and of such
as desired to live righteously; and that he ought to be ex-
cused if, in the beginning of his Pontificate, he did not show
himself more active, but that it was because he was constrained

334 MISSION TO THE

by necessity to act contrary to his nature, having neither troops
nor money. He said further, that the Duke of Urbino would
arrive in Rome this evening, and that he would take measures
that the Venetians should not avail themselves of either his
person or his name, nor of his territory or his troops.

We replied to his Holiness in a becoming manner, but ob-
tained nothing more from him; nor can we hope for anything
else at present, no mattcr what may occur. There is but one
thing upon which any hopes can be founded, and that is the
Pope’s choleric temper and his honorable character ; for whilst
the one will inflame him, the other will impel him to act against
whoever attempts anything adverse to the honor of the Church
under his Pontificate. Thus we see that the Venetians, know-
ing him, think to deceive him with fine promises, and_ to
satisfy his natural character by pretending to desire to be
faithful children to the Church; and that they want not only
Romagna, but all their own dominions, to show obedience to
the Holy Father. For we see that they have appointed eight
ambassadors to present their submission to the Pontiff, which
is a new thing for the Venetians to do, and which they have
done from no other motive than the above. We see also that
they were delighted at the election of Julius I]., and that the
embassy had been appointed to do him honor, and that they
desire to have him for their father, protector, and defender.
In this way the Venctians endeavor to soothe him and to in-
cline him favorably to their purpose; and are not ashamed to
make demonstrations as though they were really the very slaves
of the Pope, so as to be able afterwards to command all the
others. It is thus these things are judged of here; and I de-
sire to acquaint your Lordships with it, so that you may pro-
vide what remedics you can against all eventualities; and that
you may consider whether it might not be well for you not to
allow yourselves to be outdone in humility and politeness, since
in material force you cannot keep pace with these Venetians.

Messer Agapito and Messer Romolino, formerly officers of
the Duke Valentino, but who have remained here, being un-
willing to share the Duke’s ill fortune, have informed me that
on his departure from Rome for Ostia the Duke directed Mes-
ser Ennio, Bishop of Veroli, and entirely devoted to the Duke,
to proceed to Florence and to negotiate and conclude some
favorable arrangement with your Lordships, in accordance with

COURT OF ROME. 835

the conversation which he had lately with me; and that for the
security of Messer Ennio he wanted letters from me and a pass-
port from the Cardinal Volterra. Having failed to find me
yesterday, they wanted me now to see his Eminence, and to
prepare such letters and passport as, when received, would
permit Messer Ennio to start.

I called upon our Cardinal accordingly, and as it seemed
desirable to us that this envoy should go to Florence, for the
reasons given in my letter of the 18th, his Eminence wrote a
letter to your Lordships,* and gave a passport to Messer Ennio
addressed to all the subjects and allies of. your Lordships.
And I also gave him a letter for you, containing in brief the
same that I had said in my former letter and in this one, so
that in case Messer Ennio should arrive before this reaches
you, your Lordships may know how things are here; and may
deliberate on the matter fully informed by what I have said in
this as well as in my letter of the 18th. “All the favors that
“have been shown to the Duke by the Pope, the Cardinal
“q’Amboise, and by others here, had no other object than
“to have him go from here with God, and the sooner the
“ better.”

Thus your Lordships are entirely free to decide, without
regard, whatever may suit you best. And I repeat again, that
if your Lordships should judge from some fresh reasons that it
would be well to favor the Duke, etc., you may take that course,
although the Pope would rather that you should give him a

* The following is the letter of recommendation addressed by the Cardinal
Soderini in favor of Messer Ennio to the Illustrious Signoria of the Republic of
Florence : —

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

The bearer of this is Messer Ennio, Bishop of Veroli, and ambassador of his
Excellency the Duke Valentino, who sends him to you to negotiate and conclude
an arrangement with your Lordships, for which purpose he has been furnished
with the most ample powers. I have deemed it my duty to give him this letter,
not only because of his own personal qualities, but also because his Excellency
the Duke has again requested me to beg you to concede free passage through
your territory for his men-at-arms, who have started three days ago on the
road to Florence; and that your Lordships will also send a safe-conduct for
his Excellency’s own person. The Duke is at this moment at Ostia, but as the
weather is favorable this morning, it is possible that he may have sailed for
Spezzia; but Messer Ennio will be able to give you more particular information
upon this point.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

F. pE SopeERINT,
RoME, 20 November, 1508. Cardinal of Volterra.

296 MISSION TO THE

kick. In short, the Duke’s situation is this. The disposition
of the people here towards him is as I have just explained; he
is himself at Ostia, waiting for suitable wind and weather to sail
for Spezzia ; he will have five vessels, and take some five hun-
dred persons with him; and if he has not already left, he will
probably leave to-night, wind and weather permitting. He has
sent his troops by land towards Florence, but from the Sien-
nese and Gianpaolo Baglioni he has no more pledges than he
has from your Lordships, so that everybody here laughs at
him. We shall see whither the winds will carry him, and
where his troops will bring up, and then we shall also know
what your Lordships will decide upon. The Duke of Urbino
entered Rome this evening in great state; the Pope’s house-
hold and all the Cardinals went out to meet him; some persons
here say that he will be made General of the forces of the Holy
Church.

Of the French army I have nothing to report, but refer your
Lordships to the enclosed letters; and as the weather still con-
tinues fair, it is believed that they will advance, and that they
will not be checked in their progress.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 20 November, 1503.

LETTER XXIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

The accompanying letters of yesterday and the day before
will inform your Lordships of all that has occurred here since
my last of the 18th, sent to you per express through the Pan-
dolfini. I repeated the whole briefly in a letter which I have
given to Messer Ennio, envoy of the Duke Valentino, who has
sent him to your Lordships for the reasons given in mine of
the 18th. I sent that letter by Messer Ennio, so that, in case
he should arrive in Florence before the present letter, your
Lordships may fully understand how matters are here, and
may be able the better to decide the questions in relation to
which he comes. Yesterday, at the twenty-second hour, I re-
ceived your letter of the 17th, from which we learn that Faenza

COURT OF ROME. 337

is at the last extremity. And not to fail of his duty, his Emi-
nence of Volterra sent your letters to the Pope, who was greatly
agitated by the intelligence, according to what the Secretary of
his Holiness reports. So soon as day dawned this morning,
the Pope sent for his Eminence; and, complaining to him of
the conduct of the Venetians, asked what remedies he could
suggest. His Eminence replied, that, seeing these evils steadily
progressing, it seemed to him that the remedies contemplated
by his Holiness were insufficient, and that it was necessary to
resort to stronger measures; that he ought immediately to
make the Legato della Marca move forward with his cavalry,
and that he must appoint another Legate in Romagna, who
ought to be a cardinal, and a man of good character and repu-
tation, who has the honor of the Church at heart, and whose
duty it should be to keep those in obedience who are faithful
to the Church, and bring back to their obedience, by force
if necessary, those who have strayed from it; and that then
he ought to call together the ambassadors of all the nations,
amongst whom there should be the Venetian envoy, and that
in his presence he ought to complain of the wrongs done to
the Church, and ask for counsel and assistance; and that,
moreover, he ought to send briefs everywhere, conforming to
the language he had held to the assembled ambassadors. His
Eminence reminded his Holiness that Pope Clement V. had
rescued Ferrara from the hands of the Venetians, who had
seized that town; and that Pope Sixtus IV., his predecessor
and father, had stirred up all Italy against them. He added,
that, notwithstanding these new measures, he thought his Ho-
liness should not neglect the old ones, and should start the
Bishops of Tivoli and of Ragusa to hold and maintain the
other towns, supposing that Faenza was lost.

The Pope approved the suggestions of his Eminence as good
and true; nevertheless he would not decide to avail of them as
yet, saying that the circumstances seemed to him not to war-
rant the employment of measures that would at once irritate
the Venetians; and that he preferred to carry out his first idea
of sending the Bishops of Tivoli and of Ragusa, to see whether
the Venetians would not by agreement restore to his hands what
they had taken from him by violence. His Holiness seemed
not altogether far from believing that the Venetians would do
so, and that there was good reason to hope for it; although it

VOL. III, 92

338 MISSION TO THE

was only yesterday that he declared that he would call all the
ambassadors together, and protest to them against the acts of
the Venetians. Now his Holiness wants to wait for an answer
from the deputies whom he has sent to Dionisio di Naldo, from
whom as yet nothing has been heard. His Eminence could
not induce the Pope to any other course; and whilst his Hol-
ness seems to him, on the one hand, dissatisfied and disposed
to remedy the evil when, in his opinion, the proper time shall
have come, he finds him on the other hand more cireumspect
and lukewarm in the measures he proposes than what he ought
to be; and therefore he could not induce him to come to any
other conclusion.

Later, at the seventeenth hour, the Pope sent again for his
Eminence, and told him that he had not been able to sleep
on account of the state of things at Faenza and in Romagna,
and that he had thought it might be well to sound the Duke
Valentino again in regard to placing in the hands of his Holi-
ness the castle of Furl and the other fortresses or places
which he still held in Romagna, with the promise to restore
them again to the Duke at a later moment, deeming it prefer-
able that the Duke should occupy them rather than the Vene-
tians. He therefore begged his Eminence of Volterra to take
the trouble of going as far as Ostia to see the Duke, and try
to conclude such an arrangement with him. His Eminence
agreed to do whatever might be agreeable to his Holiness,
who in return promised to let him know if he should finally
decide upon this course; charging him, meanwhile, to confer
with the Cardinal d’Amboise, and to find out how he was
disposed in this matter. This plan, that the Duke Valentino
should hand these places over to the Pope, with the under-
standing that they shall be restored to him later, was proposed
some days ago. The Duke consented to it, but then the Pope
objected, saying that he did not want to break faith with any
one; and being unwilling that any one should be master there,
he refused to entertain the proposition. Now, however, he is
willing to adopt this plan, unless he changes his mind again,
being constrained by that necessity of which you are aware.
He thinks that this is the most efficacious and excusable pro-
ceeding that he can adopt towards the Venetians, decming it
well not as yet to declare himself openly their enemy.

At dinner-time his Eminence was again sent for by the Pope,

COURT OF ROME. 339

who made him stay to dinner and detained him until near the
twenty-fourth hour. His Eminence informed me that the Pope
had sent to Ostia to ascertain whether the Duke had left, and
if not, to make him delay his departure; as in that case the
Cardinal will go early to-morrow to see him, and on the
Cardinal’s return we shall know what conclusion has been ar-
rived at. But if the Duke has left, then it would be useless to
entertain the project any further. His Eminence told me also
that they had talked of the mission of the Bishop of Ragusa,
who has been named Governor of Bologna and of the entire
Romagna, with instructions to do all he possibly can to rescue
those places from the hands of the Venetians, and bring them
back to their obedience to the Holy Church. This Bishop has
orders to stop at Florence and thank your Lordships on behalf
of the Pope for the efforts you have made thus far, and to
confer with you as to whether it be best to go to Faenza or
Furli, or to enter Romagna from some other direction. He is
to act according to your suggestions, and to avail himself in
all other respects of your Lordships’ good offices. He will
leave to-morrow or next day. |

“As to Citerna and the two hundred ducats, etc., about
“which I have written, your Lordships wish to know the
“orounds for such a payment, and the advantages that would
“result from it. In explanation of this I reply that these
“fortresses are distributed amongst the Cardinals by lot, and
““whoever receives one of them has to keep twenty men there
“as a garrison, for which he is paid by the treasury. But in-
“stead of twenty men they keep only ten, and the difference is
“their profit. These gains enable the Cardinals to find per-
“sons who purchase these fortresses from them; and as San
“Giorgio has found some one who offers him two hundred
“ducats for Citerna, he will not part with it for less to any one
“else, and I believe we shall have to pay him that sum if we
“wish to effect the proposed exchange. As to the advantages
“to be gained thereby, it seems to me necessary that, inasmuch
‘“‘as we claim to be the defenders of the Church, we should not
“prove ourselves her despoilers. Nor is there any other more
“suitable way; for if San Giorgio is content, the matter will
“remain quiet for at least one year, and within that period we
“shall find some other expedient. This is the plan proposed
“here, and we shall endeavor to carry it through, although San

340 MTS SONG OO 2a

“Giorgio has drawn back and will not explain himself. But
“T shall not cease to keep an eye on him, and beg your Lord-
“ships meantime to reply upon this point.”

Your Lordships desire further information as to how matters
are going on here, and what the opinions and conjectures in re-
lation to them are. J imagined that up to the present time I
had written in such manner that, if your Lordships take my
letters in hand, you will find in them a complete history of all
that has taken place here. To recapitulate them briefly I
must, as regards the Pope, refer again to what I have written
about him in my letter of the 11th; for his Holiness seems to
me still bound by the same obligations and considerations
which I then communicated. As to the Duke Valentino, you
will have seen what I wrote subsequently, and more especially
what I said in my three letters on the subject of his affairs;
from which your Lordships, with your habitual sagacity, will
be able to judge how his affairs will probably terminate, and
what his own end is likely to be. Respecting Romagna I can-
not yet tell: your Lordships more than I have already done in
my previous letters as to what is generally said here on the
subject. From these your Lordships will also have learnt
the attitude of the Pope and of the Cardinal d’Amboise, and
the doings of the Venetians, real as well as pretended; how
faté prevents the French from being able to resent them, and
how the Pope finds it convenient to feign to believe them.
Thus your Lordships cannot in this state of things hope that
either the French or the Pope will aid you against the Vene-
tians with either men or money; and that you will have to
rely upon anything else rather than upon the men and money
of others.

As regards the Spanish and French armies, the latter have
so entirely obtained the control of the Garigliano, that the
Spaniards could not prevent their crossing the river, nor
afterwards drive them from the positions which they hold
there. As to their respective forces, I can but repeat what I
have said before on that point, and what is generally admitted ;
namely, that the Spaniards, being inferior in numbers, cannot
venture to give battle, and therefore withdraw behind difficult
passes and strong places; as was seen first at San Germano
and now on the Garigliano, where, having been driven from the
river-bank, they have retreated about a mile, and by means of

COURT OF ROME. 841

intrenchments and redoubts present fresh obstacles to the ad-
vance of the French. The bad weather also hinders the French
from moving forward; for the country being low and swampy
and the rain incessant, both French and Spaniards are obliged
to confine their operations to guarding the redoubts which they
have thrown up in front of each other, leaving the rest of their
armies to disperse and seek shelter in the neighboring hamlets
and places, being mutually protected against each other by the
water and the weather. Yesterday the sky cleared a little,
but to-day it rains again, and it is feared that the wet weather
may continue for some time yet. Both armies suffer from
want of forage and provisions; but the French suffer most, as
the country around their camp is wasted to a greater degree.
This exposes them to some disaster unless they can advance ;
on the other hand, the power of money, of which the French
have abundance, may give them the best of the game, and may
cause the Spaniards, who are short of money, to lose. It is
believed that Bartolommeo d’ Alviano has joined the Spaniards,
but only with a small force. The Cardinal d’Amboise, on the
other hand, sent the Savelli and the troops of Giovan Giordano
to the French army, who consider themselves as having been
badly served by Gianpaolo Baglioni in not having moved with
his cavalry when he was ordered, and when they urged him to
march. Taking all things together, I am really at a loss what
conclusion to come to as to the possible issue. Your Lordships
can form your own conclusions better than any one else. I will
only say this, that the general opinion is that, considering all
things, the French have more money and better troops, but the
Spaniards have more good fortune and a better commander.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 21 November, 1503.

LETTER XXIV.

Maeniricent Signor : —

This morning, at the twentieth hour, his Eminence of Vol-
terra left for Ostia for the purpose explained in the accom-
panying letter. The Cardinal Romolino has gone with him,

342 MISSION TO THE

and they will not return until to-morrow evening. Your Lord-
ships will be promptly informed of the result of their mission.
I shall endeavor to send this by an express that is to leave ;
but should I not be able to do so, I will send it anyhow by a
special messenger.

Bene valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 22 November, 1503.

LETTER XXvV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I write these few lines for the purpose of recommending
myself especially to your Lordships, knowing that I may do so
with entire confidence. On leaving Florence I received thirty-
three ducats, of which I have expended about thirteen for post-
age as per account sent to your colleague Niccolo d’Alessandro
Machiavelli. Eighteen ducats I.had to pay for a mule, and for
a velvet suit eighteen more. For a Spanish cloak I paid eleven
ducats, and for an overcoat ten, making in all seventy ducats.
T am living at an hostelry which costs daily for myself and two
servants and the mule ten carlini. True, your Lordships have
given me the salary I asked for; and I asked for what I sup-
posed would be sufficient, not knowing how dear everything is
here. I have therefore to thank your Lordships, and to com-
plain only of myself. But having learned to know the cost of
living here better, | would now beg your Lordships to remedy
the matter, if it can be done. If my salary cannot be increased,
at least have me reimbursed for the postage expenses, as has
always been done to every envoy. Niccolo d’Alessandro Machia-
velli knows my circumstances, and can tell you whether I am
able to bear such a loss; and even if I could, your Lordships
know that in this age men labor to get ahead, and not to go
behindhand.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue feliciter valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 22 November, 1503.

COURT OF ROME. 843

LETTER XXVL.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Yesterday I sent to your Lordships through Giovanni Pan-
dolfini, and free of charge, four letters of the 19th, 20th, 21st,
and 22d. The last informs you of the departure of the Car-
dinal Volterra for Ostia, for the purpose explained to your
Lordships in mine of the 21st. Since then I received last
night yours of the 20th, giving the news of the loss of Faenza.
So soon as it was light this morning I went to the chamber of
Messer Francesco di Castel del Rio, the person nearest to the
Pope, and read him your Lordships’ letter. He told me that his
Holiness had nothing so much at heart as the affairs of Ro-
magna, and for that reason the news would be most painful to
him. Still, as it was necessary that his Holiness should know
it, he thought it best to avail of some favorable occasion to com-
municate it to him, and made me leave the letter, which I did
most willingly, for it seemed to me in all respects proper that the
Pope should know the facts. Deeming it well also to give the
news to those Cardinals who have shown themselves most de-
voted to the Church in this matter, I spoke to Ascanio and
Capaccio. Ascanio told me that he had also received the news,
and that he was for doing everything possible for the good of
the Church, etc., etc. Capaccio expressed himself in the most
acceptable manner towards your Lordships, but added that he
thought you had made a mistake in this Romagna business, in
having supported those lords who have taken possession of
these places again; that you ought to have abstained from
interfering, or, if you wanted to do it, you should have done so
in the name and under cover of the Church, and not in the,
name of any one else. Thus you would not have afforded the
Venetians an occasion to oppose you, and to take to arms.
These Venetians excuse themselves to the Pope on no other
ground than this, and pretend to have taken arms against the
cities of the Church, not for the purpose of holding them, but
merely to prevent the Florentines from taking possession of
them under cover of the Church.

Your Lordships know that I have ample ground for justify-
ing your conduct in this matter, having been personally present
at all the discussions and decisions come to by your Lordships

344 MISSION TO THE

on the subject, all of which I explained very fully to his Emi-
nence the Cardinal Capaccio. He seemcd satisfied, but re-
marked nevertheless that it would have been well not to have
afforded the Venetians such a pretext. Under the circum-
stances, however, he said it was necessary to think of the
remedies; and so far as he was concerned, he was for leaving
nothing undone, and he thought that his Holiness was ani-
mated by the same feelings; and then he told me of the steps
taken in sending the Bishops of Tivoli and Ragusa, etc., etc.
After that I had a conversation with the Cardinal d’Amboise,
who told me that I ought to communicate the news to the
Pope ; and that as for himself he would do all that was possi-
ble for the security of your Lordships and for the liberty and
honor of the Church. At that moment Castel del Rio sent
for me and informed me that he had shown your letter to the
Pope, who was as much grieved at the events as could be
imagined, and was resolved to leave nothing undone, as was
well known to his Eminence of Volterra, who had gone on
horseback to Ostia for no other purpose, and that on his return
he would decide whether some more effective measures could
not be taken, and that then all would be done. I did what I
thought my duty with Castel del Rio, as well as with the other
Cardinals; still I judge that my offices are the less needed in
this matter, as the Cardinal Volterra neglects nothing that ought
to be said or done by any one who has the welfare of his coun-
try and the general good at heart, as I have already written
several times to your Lordships. And if the measures and
remedies do not conform to his suggestions, and are not such
as the necessities of the occasion demand, or as your Lordships
might desire, you must only blame the malignity of the times
and the ill fortune of the feeble. We must then await the
return of our Cardinal from Ostia, and see what arrangements
he may have concluded, and whether thereupon the Pope or the
Cardinal d’Amboise will decide upon moving more promptly.
it is now the twenty-fourth hour, and, as his Eminence has
not yet returned, | judge that he will not come back until to-
morrow. I must not omit to tell your Lordships that it is
publicly said here, (and I write it because I have heard it from
aman of serious character, and who is in a position readily to
know the truth,) that early this morning a messenger came to
his Holiness from those Cardinals who went to Ostia to see

COURT OF ROME. 345

the Duke Valentino, signifying that the Duke refused to place
the fortresses of Romagna in the hands of the Pope; and
that his Holiness, enraged at this news, has sent orders to
have the Duke arrested, and that he is now held as prisoner.
And further, that the Pope has immediately written to Sienna
and Perugia, ordering such of the Duke’s troops as might come
there to be immediately disarmed.

I do not know whether all this be true, but shall inform
myself on the subject the moment our Cardinal returns, and
will then at once write to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.

Rome, 23 November, 1503.

LETTER XXVII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

By my enclosed of yesterday, in reply to your Lordships’
letter of the 20th, you will be informed of the events of that
day. Since then I have received yours of the 21st, with a copy
of the convention concluded between the people of Faenza and
the Venetians. Having at the same time heard of the return
of his Eminence of Volterra, I called upon him immediately
and read him the letters and the articles of the convention.
After carefully noting their contents, and particularly the post-
script where your Lordships show that you had foreseen that
the attack of the Venetians upon Romagna was made “ with
“the consent of the Pope, he told me that he had conferred
“several times with the Cardinal d’Amboise about it, and that
“he had also had his suspicions on the subject, seeing the tar-
“‘diness of the Pope’s measures,” but that having afterwards
talked with his Holiness, and seeing how keenly he felt the
conduct of the Venetians, he could no longer believe it. And
thus with regard to the information which you give respecting
those who had gone to Imola, our Cardinal said that your Lord-
ships were either misinformed, or that the Pope had been de-
ceived by his envoys, as they had no authority to speak for any
one but for the Church. We shall nevertheless watch these
things closely, and if we learn anything of moment your Lord-
ships shall be promptly advised. Your letter was subsequently

346 MISSION TO THE

read to the Cardinal d’Amboise, and the articles of the con-
vention were also shown him; and as the ambassador of the
Emperor of Germany, who has repeatedly visited the Cardinal
within the past few days, happened to be in his chamber at the
time, the Cardinal called him to lsten to the letter and the
articles of the convention. Both the Cardinal and the ambas-
sador manifested much resentment, and expressed themselves
in the gravest and bitterest manner against the Venetians, in-
timating that this act of theirs might easily prove their ruin.
In truth, there is such a general hatred manifested here against
the Venetians, that we may hope that, if an occasion were to
present itself, some harm would be done to them; for every-
body cries out against them, not only those who hold their
states from them, but all those lords and gentlemen of Lom-
bardy who are subjects to the king of France (and these are
not a few) cry into the ears of the Cardinal d’Amboise. And
if he has not yet taken any action against them in the matter,
it arises from the considerations which your Lordships under-
stand, and which may cease either in consequence of a peace
or a truce, or some other means, by which their condition
would be improved. In short, the general opinion is that this
attack of the Venetians upon Faenza will serve them as a door
that will either open all Italy to them, or that will lead to their
own ruin.

His Eminence of Volterra, with that prudence which he
manifests on all occasions, enlarged upon the dangers to which
our republic is exposed, and the inconvenience which she suf-
fered from not having her troops within reach; and that the
well-known ambition of the Venetians might easily give rise
to a state of things that would not only make our own troops
necessary, but also those of the king, to defend us against
that inordinate desire for conquest of the Venetians, which,
whilst it made them usurp the possessions of the Church, at
the same time threatened those of Florence. D’Amboise be-
came terribly excited at these words, and swore by God and
on his soul, that if the Venetians committed such an outrage
the king of France would leave all his other occupations, no
matter how important, to come to our defence, and that upon
that point your Lordships might be of good cheer, etc., ete.
His Eminence of Volterra did not deem it proper to say any-
thing more, Judging that it was enough for the present to have

COURT OF ROME. 347

warned D’Amboise of what might happen. I went afterwards
to present myself at the feet of the Holy Father, where | found
his Eminence of Volterra, and read your Lordships’ letter to
him, as also the articles of the convention, his Eminence adding
what he thought to the purpose. His Holiness repeated what .
he had already said to me on another occasion, that he was
fully resolved not to suffer such a wrong done to the Church;
and that, besides having sent the Bishop of Tivoli, he would
also send the Bishop of Ragusa to make his intentions known
in Romagna and to the Venetians; that he had caused the
Duke of Urbino to withdraw his troops, and had written to
order Vitelli to do the same. He said further, that, for the
purpose of depriving the Venetians of every excuse for this at-
tempt, which they pretended to be against the Duke Valentino
and the Florentines, he had written to your Lordships, request-
ing you to withdraw your troops, and had ordered the Vene-
tians to do the same; “and that with regard to the Duke
“ Valentino he had taken measures that were known to Vol-
“terra ;”’ that he would wait now to see what the Venetians
would do after all this, and if they did not desist from their
attempt, and did not make restitution of what they had taken,
he would unite with France and the Emperor for no other pur-
pose than the destruction of the Venetians, for which these
sovereigns were well disposed. When his Eminence of Vol-
terra replied that the Venetians said that they intended to
hold those places and pay the same dues as the other lords,
which they thought his Holiness would readily agree to, the
Pope replied that he had no such intentions, for he wanted
those cities in the hands of men of whom he could dispose at
his pleasure.

Your Lordships will judge of the intentions of the Pope by
what he says, and by the measures he has taken, and what is
likely to be the result of this affair. You will also have re-
ceived the Pope’s brief directing you to withdraw your troops
from these places; for he has written to the Venetians to the
same effect, for the reasons above explained. What the Vene-
tians will do on receipt of this brief is not known; but your
Lordships can watch them, and govern your actions according
to your habitual prudence. And to conclude, as regards the
intentions of his Holiness, your Lordships will see, as I have
several times said, that he wants to keep all those places in his

348 MISSION TO THE

own hands and under his own control, and it is for this pur-
pose that he has sent those Cardinals to Ostia, “the result of
‘which was that, as the Duke refused to give up those places
“which he still held, the Pope had him arrested, as I have
“related in the enclosed. It seems to be the Pope’s determi-
‘nation to have those places, and to assure himself of the
“Duke’s person, who is actually now in the Pope’s power,
“being on board of one of the king’s galleys, under command
“of Mottino. It is not supposed that he will do him any other
“harm for the moment; nor is it known for certain that the
“Pope has ordered such of the Duke’s troops to be disarmed
“as have gone by land. But it is believed that this will natu-
“rally be done, as they come without a safe-conduct from any
*¢ one.”

His Holiness will assume the tiara on Sunday next. Your
Lordships can therefore start the ambassadors at your entire
convenience; but his Eminence of Volterra suggests that the
sooner the better, considering the Pope’s character, for he says
that his Holiness seems to desire their coming, and would not
be displeased at their arrival before the Genoese ambassadors,
and that the first come will be the first despatched. His Emi-
nence has charged me to advise your Lordships to urge their
departure, for by doing so you will greatly advance yourselves
in:the Pope’s good graces without any inconvenience to your-
selves.

From the camp I have nothing else to tell you but what I
have already said in my letter of the 21st, for the weather
continues most unfavorable, and, if this goes on so, the troops
will be obliged to retire into quarters somewhere. Perhaps they
may be able by means of some agreement to withdraw from
each other’s front, for which the six months’ truce concluded
at Perpignan gives some hopes. Your Lordships will be kept
fully advised in relation to all this.

Valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Romeg, 24 November, 15038.

COURT OF ROME. 349

LETTER XXVIII.

Maenrricent SIGNORI: —

To prevent your Lordships from having to wait for my
letters, and at the same time to keep you informed of the vari-
ous phases through which the Duke Valentino’s affairs have
passed, and of their present condition, I hasten to send you
the enclosed through the agency of Giovanni Pandolfini, who,
seeing how irregularly the service of the couriers is performed,
has resolved to send a messenger of his own. He is to leave
at the twenty-second hour, and your Lordships will please pay
him according to the advice of Giovanni.

Having written every day, or at least once every two days,
_I regret that, despite of many discomforts and dangers and my
utmost diligence, as well as heavy expense, which neither the
salary allowed me by your Lordships nor my own means can
afford, I should be blamed for negligence. Henceforth, there-
fore, no three days shall pass, unless something extraordinary
occurs, without my despatching a special courier to your Lord-
ships; although the wretched roads and the fatigues of the
couriers cause others to be served quite as badly as your Lord-
ships. There is nothing new here but what I have already
written. The Pope assumes the tiara to-morrow morning, as
I have already mentioned.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 25 November, 1503.

LETTER XXIX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: ~

Through the agency of Giovanni Pandolfini, who despatched
an express, I sent yesterday three letters to your Lordships of
the 23d, 24th, and 25th, which contained full report of all that
had occurred here during those three days, and of what we
learn here in relation to matters at present in preparation here.
T have told you “that the Duke has finished his réle here for-
“ever, that he is at the Pope’s mercy, who wants by all means

300 MISSION: LO Tit

“to obtain possession of those fortresses that are still held by
“the Duke, and at the same time wants to assure himself
“of the Duke’s person. It is not exactly known whether the
“Duke is still on board of a vessel at Ostia, or whether he
“has been brought here. Different rumors are current here
“on the subject to-day; in truth, some one has told me that
“vesterday at the second hour, whilst in the Pope’s chamber,
“two persons arrived from Ostia, whereupon every one was im-
‘mediately requested to leave the chamber. But having re-
“mained in the adjoining room this individual overheard that
“these persons brought the news that the Duke had been
“thrown into the Tiber by order of the Pope. I can neither
“confirm nor deny this statement, but I believe that, even if it
“be not true now, it certainly will be erelong. And we now
“see how honorably this Pope begins to pay his debts, and
“how he wipes them outas with a sponge. Nevertheless every-
“body blesses his hands, and will do so still more the more de-
‘“‘cidedly he goes ahead. But since the Duke is taken, whether
“dead or alive, we can now act regardless of him. So soon as
“JT learn anything positive about it, your Lordships shall be
“informed.”

To-day, with the help of God, our Holy Father, Pope Julius IT.,
assumed the tiara, and gave his benediction to the people in the
most edifying manner, and great festivity prevailed throughout
all Rome. On Thursday, God willing, he will go to St. John
Lateran; but should the weather not be favorable, then he
will postpone it until the first fair day. The Bishop of Ragusa,
who was to have gone to Romagna, wanted to witness the coro-
nation; but it is not known whether he will delay his depart-
ure so as to enable him also to assist at this other solemnity.
Ac to urging his departure, your Lordships may be assured, as
I have before written, that nothing will be left undone upon
that point, and that, as you are aware, by a personage of higher
authority than myself.

The French and the Spaniards remain in the same condition
as stated in my letter to your Lordships of the 21st, and we
have the same hopes now as then; for the bad weather having
continued, they could do nothing. True, yesterday a man ar-
rived here from the camp who had left there two days before,
having been sent by the French commander to inform the
Cardinal d’Amboise that they intended anyhow to advance

COURT OF ROME. 351

within eight days, and to have a battle or ravage the country,
even if they had to wade through mud and water up to their
throats. They are very hopeful of victory, and I understand
that Cardinal d’Amboise has given them free rein and com-
mended them to God. We shall see what will come of it, and
will pray God to grant victory to those who shall bring peace
and welfare to Christendom and to our republic. The opin-
ion prevails that this attempt will result unfavorably for the
French; for they are weak in infantry, and if the mud is not
dried by the north wind, or any other winds that may blow,
‘their cavalry, in which they are strongest, will not be able to
manceuvre, and thus the best part of their forces will be em-
barrassed, whilst the infantry of the Spaniards, in which they
are strongest, will be able to act freely. Still we must suppose
that so many men of ability as are on the side of the French
value their lives and know what they are about.

This morning the duplicates of your letters of the 20th and
21st came to hand, and this evening I received those of the 22d
and 24th. D’Amboise shall be informed of the payment made
to Gianpaolo Baglioni; I will also communicate to him your let-
ters touching the affairs of Romagna. But this cannot be done
until to-morrow; to-day being a holiday, it would seem to me
not proper to trouble him with business matters. I am really
astonished that on the 24th your Lordships had not yet re-
ceived my letters of the 19th, 20th, 21st, and 22d, which I sent
on the 22d by a courier who was despatched to France; but I
think that by this time he must have arrived at Florence any-
how. By the series of letters which I have written from the
16th until to-day, your Lordships will understand what steps
the Pope and the Cardinal d’Amboise are taking with regard
to the proceedings of the Venetians. And in fact the Pope
believes that he will be able to recover those places from them
in an amicable way; and D’Amboise hopes to be able to check
their insolence with briefs. But up to the present we do not
see that either of them is for expending anything but admoni-
tions and menaces, either by letter or by word of mouth, and
your Lordships know with what energy they dispense these.
I have told. your Lordships, in my letter of the 24th, what his
Eminence of Volterra said to me about the suggestion of your |
Lordships, “ whether the Pope might not have consented to
“the acts of the Venetians; that he had several times talked

San MISSION TO THE

“with the Cardinal d’Amboise about it, and had concluded
“that it could not be; and that this conclusion was based upon
“the language held by the Pope whenever he had spoken to
“him on the subject. And not believing the Pope to be a man
“of double dealing, but rather abrupt and impetuous, they had
“no misgivings upon that point. His Eminence of Volterra has
“since then told me again, that one day, the same as on other
“occasions, the Cardinal d’Amboise had pressed the Pope upon
“this point, showing him that he desired to understand his in-
“tentions, so as to know what course the king of France would
“have to take, and that thereupon the Pope became greatly ex-
“cited, and affirmed with the gravest oaths that the acts of the
“Venetians were entirely contrary to his will; that everybody
“understood this fully, and that he wanted to remedy the mat-
“ter, etc., etc.; and that the Pope’s language was such that he
“could not have shown himself more dissatisfied. These two
“cardinals seem to believe him in part, and feel themselves in
“oreat measure secure, notwithstanding that there are others
“of equally high position who doubt whether amongst other
“promises for the purpose of* gaining the Papacy, Julius I.
“may not have promised this to the Venetians,” etc., ete.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 26 November, 1503.

LETTER XXX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote the enclosed yesterday, giving an account of what
had occurred here during the day. It remains for me to in-
form your Lordships that your letters of the 24th were com-
municated to his Holiness through Castel del Rio; but that on
the whole nothing can be drawn from the Pope except that he
is firmly resolved to have things restored to their places, and
that he is busily oceupied trying to get the fortresses which
the Duke still holds out of his hands. Respecting the Duke
I cannot confirm altogether what I had written in the accom-
panying; the only thing positive is that he is at Ostia in the
power of the Pope. But I was told yesterday that Messer

COURT OF ROME. 303 ©

Gabriello had returned from Fano, and Messer Romolino from
Ostia, and that they had arranged matters with the Duke; that
is to say, he places the fortresses by agreement in the hands
of the Pope, for which his Holiness gives him certain compen-
sation ; also that Romolino had prostrated himself at the feet
of his Holiness, and with tears in his eyes had recommended
the Duke to his consideration. We shall know erelong what
will come of all this. The Pope thinks that, once in possession
of those fortresses, he will be better able to face the Venetians,
and that the population of Romagna will be more disposed to
adhere to him when once they see the standard of the Church
floating from those fortresses. Of the French army I can re-
port only what I have said in the enclosed; the weather seems
settled, but we cannot know whether it will last.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 27 November, 1503.

LETTER XXXI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday and the day previous,
and both letters were sent through Giovanni Pandolfini free of
charge. It remains for me now to inform your Lordships that
last night the whole of the Pope’s guard went to Ostia to bring
the Duke Valentino here, according to the report of some,
whilst others say that it is not only to bring him here, but also
to make more sure of his person. For yesterday evening the
Pope received information that the Duke had withdrawn with his
followers on board of one of his own galleys, and that he would
escape unless sufficient force were sent down at once to pre-
vent it. The guard was consequently ordered down, and early
this morning Castel del Rio also went down to Ostia; but up
to the present twenty-fourth hour they have not returned. It
was rumored this morning that the Duke had fled; but this
evening it is stated that they have him in hand. However this
may be, we shall know better by to-morrow; and we see now
that the Pope is going to make a clean business of it with the
Duke, and perhaps all I wrote in my letter of the 26th may in

VOL, III. 23

354 MISSION TO THE

every respect be verified. We see now that the Duke’s sins
have little by little brought him to expiation. May God guide
things for the best!

The Cardinal Ragusa left here yesterday and will pass
through Florence, as I have already informed you, “and in fact
“he will govern his conduct according as you may direct him;
“his instructions were drawn up by the Cardinal Volterra.
“The Pope particularly recommended him to conduct himself
“in Florence with such prudence that he may not give cause to
“the Venetians to suspect him of being in your interest.” I
have deemed it well to mention this to your Lordships, so that
you may use due caution and prudence in dealing with him.
One of the persons whom the Pope in the beginning sent into
Romagna returned here yesterday, and reports that the Church
has but few adherents amongst the inhabitants of Imola and
Furli; because the latter fear that they may not again be
placed under the government of the Countess of Furli, whilst
those of Imola desire the return of the Duke. He also states
that the Castellan of Furli is resolved upon making a vigorous
resistance, and to remain faithful to the Duke so long as he
knows him to be alive. This report displeases the Pope very
much ; still he relies upon the mission of the Bishop of Ragusa,
and will await the result.

Nothing more from the camp than what I have lately written.
Gianpaolo Baglioni is expected here within a week.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 28 November, 1503.

LETTER XXXII.

_ Maentricent SIGNoRI : —

“Volterra communicated to me to-day, that yesterday, whilst
“conversing with D’Amboise about the things that are going on
“here, he touched upon the treaty that is on foot between the
“three sovereigns of France, Germany, and Spain. D’Amboise
“seemed very anxious that it should be carried into effect,
“because France has been much exhausted during the past
“vear; and he hoped that with a little repose she would soon

COURT OF ROME. 300

“be in condition to engage in any important enterprise. He
“spoke so earnestly on the subject, as to make one believe that
‘che would be in favor of accepting such a peace, even if it were
“disadvantageous for France. His Eminence told me further,
“that D’Amboise had given him to understand that in the
“event of such a peace the Emperor would come any way into
“Italy. Volterra having observed, in reply to him, that, as on
‘the occasion of similar treaties and descents of the Emperor
“into Italy, it would be necessary for France to remember her
“allies and to protect them, D’Amboise answered that this
‘would under any circumstances be the first thing to be
“done, as they would on no account allow Tuscany to be dis-
“membered. True, the Emperor being poor, and wishing to
“travel in a becoming manner, it would be necessary for Flor-
“ence to contribute and serve him with a sum of money, which
“however need not be considerable; but that it was important
‘“‘for your Lordships not to fail in doing this. In the course of
“the conversation D’Amboise allowed it to escape from his
“lips that the aforesaid three sovereigns intended under the
“treaty to divide Italy amongst themselves; but he affirmed at
“the same time that under the protection of France Florence
“would be saved and her situation even improved. During
“this conversation Volterra never lost sight of the duties of
“his office; in short, he obtained from D’Amboise all the above
‘information, and if this treaty is concluded, it will not be
“until after D’Amboise shall have conferred with the Emperor
“on his way back to France. It has seemed to me proper to
“communicate to your Lordships all the information I have
“had on the subject, so that when D’Amboise passes through
“Florence, as he will, you may place some citizen near him
“who will advocate your interests and will know on what sub-
“jects to sound him.

“You must also know that the Emperor’s ambassador was
“ this morning with Volterra, and told him that the Vene-
“tian ambassador had been to see him the day before, and
“had endeavored to persuade him on the part of his govern-
“ment of their devotion to the Emperor, and how anxious they
“were that he should come into Italy, so that they might to-
“gether with him settle the affairs of Italy, which were in
“such a bad condition; that the Venetian ambassador touched
“several times upon the affairs of Romagna, in the hope that

306 MISSION TO THE

“the Emperor’s ambassador would enter upon a discussion of
“that subject; but as he did not, the Venetian himself opened
“the matter, and began about the disorders in Italy, showing
“that Romagna had been devastated for two centuries on ac-
“count of the Popes, who wanted to establish first one and
“then another as master of that province; so that its popula-
“tion was wearied, and in their desire for repose had thrown
“itself into the arms of the Venetians, who had received them,
“but that henceforth they wished to pay to the Church the
“revenues due to her. And as to the other lords, they were
“ready to submit themselves to their sense of justice. The
“German ambassador said that he had replied in a suitable
“manner, and, without noticing the arguments of the Venetian,
“he began again to say that the Emperor would without fail
“come into Italy very soon, and that his intentions with regard
“to Pisa were twofold; first, to give possession of that city
“to whoever gave him the most money for it; and secondly,
“that under all circumstances he wanted an annual revenue
“from it, as though it were his own property bestowed upon
“some one as his feudatory. To all this Volterra replied
“in a suitable: manner, whereupon the German ambassador
“left. I write all this to your Lordships for the reason above
“stated, and confidently, so that this information may not
“reach any party where it might give rise to unfavorable re-
“‘flections, etc., etc.”

Idem Niccoto MACHIAVELLI.
Rome.

“ By your letter of the 25th I have your instructions respect-
“ing Citerna, and shall follow the matter up with all possible
“economy ; but the Cardinal San Giorgio says that he has a
“secret offer. Still the negotiation will not be given up, and
“your Lordships shall be advised of the result.

“ Die quo in literis.”

Idem Niccouo.

COURT OF ROME. 357

LETTER XXXIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

The enclosed will inform your Lordships of what occurred
here yesterday. Since then your letter of the 25th has arrived,
and although there was a consistory to-day, nevertheless meas-
ures were taken early this morning to communicate the news
contained in your letter to the Pope. Yours of the 24th was
communicated to him at the same time, giving an account of
the preparations of the Venetians for the purpose of making
themselves masters of the remainder of Romagna. In short,
his Holiness was reassured by the course of French affairs, and
takes hope from the treaty between the two kings referred to
in my letter of the 25th. But he was greatly irritated against
the Venetians, so that, if any reliance can be placed upon words,
gesticulations, and other indications, we must believe that these
things really vex him, and that they have been done without
his consent. Nevertheless, we do not see that he contemplates
taking any other measures than such as he has ordered up to
the present; but he seems altogether resolved to wait and see
the result of the missions he has sent into Romagna and to
Venice. Nothing is left undone to stir up the zeal of his Holi-
ness, for in truth, besides his Eminence of Volterra, who acts
in the matter with courage and and earnestness, and regardless
of all other considerations, there are other Cardinals who give
his Holiness no rest, and D’Amboise is one of those who prom-
ise him troops and all other aid, in case he should take fresh
measures for resenting the acts of the Venetians. And that
things are tending that way is proved by the language which
his Holiness held this morning at the consistory before all the
Cardinals. For when he came to declare the four Cardinals
whom he created to-day, his Holiness said that one of the rea-
sons that influenced him in the creation of those Cardinals was
to give the Church more supporters for her defence against
those who sought to usurp what belonged to her, and so as to
be able the easier to recover from the hands of the Venetians
the places which they had wrongfully seized; notwithstanding
which he believed that they wished to act like faithful children
of the Church, and were willing to restore those places to her,
as he had been repeatedly assured by their ambassadors. In

358 MISSION TO THE

saying this his Holiness softened his language; although the
first part of his address was such as I have stated above.

The guard returned from Ostia to-day at the twenty-second
-hour, and the Duke Valentino was brought at the same time on
a galley to San Paolo (fuori le Mura), about two miles from
here; and it is believed that he will be brought up to Rome
to-night. What will be done with him after that will be known
erclong. For the present your Lordships need not trouble
yourselves as to where the Duke may possibly disembark. The
infantry which he had taken into his pay come straggling back,
and the gentlemen whom he had taken with him will have to
return to their homes; and Don Michele with the other troops
who are coming to Florence will not get much good by it. For
the present I know nothing more of them; but your Lordships
will have better information on the subject from Perugia or the
neighboring places. Of the French and the Spaniards we hear
nothing new; they retain their former positions, where they
are kept by the same causes that I have mentioned in previous
letters. Nor is it known what determination the French have
come to with regard to their mtended advance under any cir-
cumstances, as they had given us to understand. Perhaps they
have been stopped by the same considerations which I have
mentioned in a former letter. Anyhow it is said that both the
armies cannot well be in worse positions, nor in greater want.
The weather does not improve; although it was fair for two
days, yet to-day it has begun to rain again without cessation,
and thus the poor soldiers have to contend against the waters
of the earth and of the heavens.

The newly created Cardinals are the following : —

1. The Archbishop of Narbonne, nephew of D’Amboise.

2. The Bishop of Lucca.

8. The Bishop of Mende, in France.

4. The Bishop of Sibilia.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Rome, 29 November, 1503.

P. 8.—I had omitted to tell your Lordships that the Pope
does not go to St. John Lateran to-morrow, for fear of the
weather. The solemnity has been postponed until Sunday.

NiccoLo MacHIAVELLI.

COURT OF ROME. 309

LETTER XXXIV.

MaeniFicent SIGNORI : —

The enclosed letters of yesterday and the day before will
inform your Lordships of what has taken place here since my
letters of the 26th and 27th. This morning his Eminence of
Volterra told me that he had again been with the Pope, and
that, in speaking of the affairs of Romagna, his Holiness said:
“This Venetian ambassador makes a great outcry about what
“T said in the consistory, and goes about complaining to the
“whole world on the subject.” His Eminence replied that his
Holiness ought to learn from this how much noise these Vene-
tians made about his words, whilst they themselves were un-
willing to be reproached for their acts. And that his Holiness
ought to be the more incensed by their acts, as they were com-
mitted against the Church, etc., etc. The Pope having there-
upon asked him whether he had any new measures to suggest,
his Eminence replied, that it seemed to him that his Holiness
ought to request the Cardinal d’Amboise, before leaving Rome,
to order some lances into the province of Parma; and moreover
he ought to leave Gianpaolo in Tuscany, so that he could read-
ily be sent to the frontiers of Romagna, and could be made use
of either in reality or by way of demonstration, according to
circumstances. These two things he thought would not be
difficult for D’Amboise to do, for the troops would anyhow
have to go into winter quarters, and therefore it ought to be
immaterial to him whether they were at Parma or elsewhere.
That Gianpaolo was not needed in camp, as there was already
too much cavalry there, and that perchance, if a truce were
concluded, as was hoped for, he would also have to go into
winter quarters. His Eminence of Volterra furthermore re-
minded his Holiness that he ought promptly to engage those
Condottieri whom he intended to take into his pay, in addition
to the Duke of Urbino, who seemed disposed to take some of
the Colonnese into his own pay. He related to him also, that
there had been some negotiations during the past year, through
the intervention of the king of France, to effect a union between
your Lordships and the cities of Sienna, Bologna, and Ferrara,
but that Pope Alexander VI. in his unlimited desire for domi-
nation had always opposed it, lest such an alliance might be

360 MISSION TO THE

directed against him; that it would be well, however, for his
Holiness to resume these negotiations, and that, if he were to
take them in hand, he would doubtless succeed, and that very
soon. His Eminence pointed out to the Pope what good would
result from it, and how such an alliance would insure peace
and quiet to all those states as well as to the Church, and add
greatly to the consideration of his Holiness. His Eminence
told me that the Pope listened quietly, and with sceming pleas-
ure, to all his arguments, and said that he would endeavor to
have D’Amboise do what his Eminence had suggested, and that
he would engage the Condottieri as soon as possible. His
Holiness said, moreover, that the proposed alliance pleased him
much, and that he would promote it to the extent of his power ;
in fact, that, so far as he was concerned, he was ready to do
anything to bring it about. After that they talked of the Duke
Valentino, from which it appeared that the Pope does not yet
treat the Duke as a prisoner for life. He has sent him to Mag-
liana, seven miles from here, where he is guarded ; and in this
way the Pope is trying to make him plhable, and to get his
countersign from him by agreement, so that it may not be said
of him that he had obtained it by force, lest the governors of
those fortresses, under such an impression, should undo the
whole by giving those places into the hands of some one else
instead of the Pope; and therefore he wanted the Duke’s coun-
tersign by agreement, as I have said. The agreement will cer-
tainly contain the conditions that the Pope is to have those
fortresses, and that then the Duke will be allowed to go free.
Perhaps there may be a question as to some compensation, or
it may even contain a promise of their being restored after a
while to the Duke. What the result of all this will be, I can-
not say; nor is it easy to form a judgment in the matter, for
the Duke’s affairs have undergone a thousand mutations since
I have been here, though in truth these changes have always
been downward.

To-day at dinner-time I received your letter of the 27th, in
reply to mine of the 25th, and announcing the arrival of Messer
Ennio, together with the news of Imola, etc., etc. I applied
immediately for an audience of his Holiness, and, presenting
myself at his feet, | communicated to him the contents of your
letters. In reply his Holiness referred, the same as on former
occasions, to his intentions against the Venetians; and as to

COURT OF ROME. 361

Messer Ennio, the Pope expressed himself pleased to have the
information and the particulars of the way in which the affair
had passed off; adding. merely that your Lordships should
take care to withdraw your troops. To which I replied, that
your Lordships had thought of all this, and would act in such
manner as not to set a bad example to the Venetians; and
that, on the other hand, you would do your’ utmost to prevent
any inconvenience arising from it. His Holiness told me that
he had heard of the news from Tosignano, which he regretted
greatly, and thanked your Lordships for your offer.

For information respecting the French and Spanish armies
I must refer you to what I have said in my previous letters on
the subject. The Cardinal d’Amboise will leave here without
fail next week. In conversing three or four days since with
the most Reverend Monsignore Capaccio, he told me that he
had received a benefice in Mugello, and was about to send the
Bull and his executive letters; and he requested me to write
to your Lordships to be pleased promptly to expedite them ;
reminding me that he had never asked for anything of you,
but had on every occasion served you like a good Florentine.
I replied to him in a suitable way.

His Eminence of Volterra, as I have repeatedly observed in
my letters, never fails to do his duty to his country; but he
would wish to avoid committing any error, and would not like
that his too great desire to do what is right and good should
mislead him. It would be very agreeable to him, therefore,
if, besides your instructions with regard to Romagna, you
would indicate to him what, in your Lordships’ judgment,
would be the best thing for the Pope to do, so that his Emi-
nence may act with less hesitation and more wisdom.

i recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

3 NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 30 November, 1503.

The present letters are sent by a confidential express, for
which your Lordships will pay to Giovanni Pandolfini the usual
price. This express will leave at the fourth hour of the night.

362 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XXXV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

After having despatched per confidential express my letters
of the 28th, 29th, and 30th, I received your Lordships’ letter
of the 28th per express. I presented myself this morning at
the feet of the Holy Father, and read to him your Lordships’
letters in the presence of his Eminence of Volterra. His Holi-
ness listened as usual, and manifested the greatest displeasure
at the news; he repeated to me that he would not rest nor
leave anything undone that was in his power to do for the
honor of the Church and the security of her friends; that
until now he had done the greater part of what your Lordships
had required him to do, that the briefs to the Venctians had
been written and sent, and that the Bishop of Ragusa ought by
this time to be at Sienna. Moreover, that as he had no troops
he would ask the Cardinal d’Amboise to consent to his employ-
ing Gianpaolo Baglioni himself, and that he would to some
extent endeavor to raise troops, and that thus he would do as
much as he possibly could, and with such good will that no-
body in reason could ask more of him. I replied to all this
as seemed to me proper, and Cardinal Volterra did his duty,
as ever is his wont, for he remained to-day, as on many
previous occasions, to dine with his Holiness; and made it a
point to remind and urge him to take the necessary steps for
our security and for the honor of the Church. The Pope
seemed to his Eminence in great agitation, for whilst on the
one hand he is anxious to act, he feels on the other hand that
he lacks the power. There is no doubt that, if the Pope can
be kept in this mood, he will in course of time put those who
now attempt to dishonor the Church in great peril. His Emi-
nence also seems to think that your Lordships should urge the
departure of the ambassadors, and that you should be liberal
in those things that cost nothing, and bestow and distribute
them according to circumstances.

When his Holiness was informed, according to what you
write, that Ramazotto had entered the castle of Imola, he said
that this captain was devoted to him, but that, if the report
was true, it must have been done by order of the Cardinal San
Giorgio, and that we could learn from him whether he knew

COURT OF ROME. 863

anything about it. More than this I have not been able to get
from his Holiness; but your Lordships will be able to judge
and decide from these conclusions and resolutions what ought
to be done. For, as has been said a thousand times, for the
present there is nothing to be hoped for from here in the way
of aid either of troops or of money, unless D’Amboise should
consent that the Pope should engage the services of Gianpaolo,
and every effort will be made to induce him to do so. There
is no indication that those who influence his Holiness have had
the least idea that the acts of aggression of the Venetians have
been done with his consent, for they do not believe him capable
of such duplicity, having never before known him such, and
looking upon him rather as an impulsive man who acts regard-
less of all considerations. His Holiness says that his briefs
have been sent off in duplicate to the Venetians; and as none
have been presented to your Lordships, it is natural to conclude
that he has abstained from sending you any, for the reason
which he himself intimated to me yesterday evening when I
spoke to him on the subject, as | wrote your Lordships in my
letter of yesterday.

Whilst at the feet of his Holiness news came that Don
Michele was taken prisoner, and that his company had been
stripped by Gianpaolo Baglioni on the frontier between Tus-
cany and Perugia. His Holiness manifested great satisfaction
at this, as the affair seemed to have succeeded entirely accord.
ing to his wishes. His Eminence of Volterra remained with
his Holiness, and went with him to dine in the Belvedere ;
whence he returned in the evening at about the twenty-fourth
hour, and related to me that after my having left the Pope the
Duke of Urbino sent him a letter, which Gianpaolo Baglioni
had written to some one in his confidence, to the effect that
the inhabitants of Castiglione and Cortona, aided by his troops,
had stripped the men under Don Michele, and that he himself
and Carlo Baglioni were prisoners at Castiglione Aretino, in
the hands of your Lordships’ rectors. This news delighted the
Pope in the highest degree, for it seemed to him as if the cap-
ture of this individual would afford the opportunity for dis-
covering all the cruel robberies, murders, sacrilege, and endless
other crimes that had been committed during the past eleven
years in Rome, against God and mankind. And his Holiness
said to Cardinal Volterra that he hoped that, since your Lord-

364 MISSION TO THE

ships had done so well in allowing your subjects to assist in
stripping Don Michele and his troops, you would also render
him the further service of delivering Don Michele into his
hands. He immediately directed a brief to be written to your
Lordships, demanding the said Don Michele, which brief will
be forwarded at same time with this letter. His Eminence
encouraged the Pope to hope that it would be done, and he
counsels your Lordships most earnestly to surrender this in-
dividual, as being an enemy and despoiler of the Church. You
will thus give his Holiness a proof of your devotion, which will
be greatly prized by him, and will cost you nothing. His Emi-
nence also told me that the condition of Romagna had formed
the principal topic of their conversation all day, and that he
had recognized in the Pope an earnest desire and great cager-
ness to remedy that state of things; that he intended to take
troops into his pay, and to do all other things to enable him
to show his teeth to everybody. And if these things are not
immediately carried into effect it will be owing to the causes
which I have explained in my letter of the 11th of last month,
which keep him embarrassed; besides these he naturally per-
plexes himself a httle, which another, who had more resources,
would not do. But his great mind and the love of honor which
his Holiness has always manifested will overcome all this.

The Bishop of Ragusa ought by this time to have arrived in
Florence, and according to what the Cardinal Volterra tells me
the Pope’s brief will be presented by him to your Lordships,
unless it should have been previously sent to you; he also tells
me that the Pope has written twice to Venice. So far as I am
aware, there is nothing new from the French camp.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 1 December, 1503.

P. S.—I had forgotten to tell your Lordships that the Duke
Valentino is at the palace, where he was brought this morning,
and is lodged in the chamber of the treasurer. I must also
inform you that the Pope wishes your Lordships to send Don
Michele under a strong guard as far as Acquapendente, where
his Holiness will have ordered that he shall be received. His
Eminence of Volterra seems to think that, if your Lordships
wish to avoid the expense of sending him so far, you might

COURT OF ROME. 365

have him taken to Perugia, and send immediate information
of it here, so that the Pope may mane arrangements to have
him sent for there.

LETTER XXXVI.

Maentricent SigNorI —

I wrote you yesterday all that had occurred here; perchance
that letter may reach you at the same time with this one. I
must now inform your Lordships that one of Signor Luca Sa-
vello’s men-at-arms called this morning upon his Eminence of
Volterra and myself, having been sent expressly to the Cardi-
nal to tell him that it was impossible for Signor Luca to subsist
any longer without money, and that he desired a small payment
on account, and that if this were not promptly made he would
be constrained to disband his company and return home, which
for the honor of your Lordships and his own he would not
wish to be obliged to do. His Eminence gave him fair words,
and promised him that your Lordships should be written to on
‘the subject; and he directed me to write and reassure Signor
Luca, and also to bring the matter to your notice, so that you
may reply and provide the means. This messenger left the
camp four days ago; he reported also that the greater part of
the army was on the Garigliano, where the bridge had been
thrown over the river, and that the rest were dispersed in the
vicinity within ten miles. He reported many disorders and
much difficulty in crossing the river; he also stated that it was
reported in camp that Gonsalvo had a number of boats brought
by land, which he intended to place upon the river for the pur-
pose of crossing to the other side, for the arrival of the Orsini
made him suppose himself superior in number to the French.
We asked the messenger what the French intended to do under
the circumstances ; but he could not tell, nor was he able to give
any explanations upon many other points. I can say nothing
more on this subject; we must await the issue, and pray God
that it may be favorable.

“San Giorgio does not wish that any one should receive the
“appointment of constable who is a Florentine, or a subject of
“that republic; and therefore you might name any one to that

366 MISSION TO THE

“office whom you thought suitable, and the sooner the better,
“so that we may get this matter off our hands. But it will
“not cost you less than two hundred ducats, for it is the money
“he wants, and not the exchange.”
I recommend myself to your Lordships.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 2 December, 1503.

LETTER XXXVII.

Maeniricent S1GNORI : —

After having written you the enclosed I left the palace with
the intention of seeing San Giorgio, for the object known to
your Lordships. Having waited a long while without being
able to see him, because of his occupations, I returned to the
palace where I found his Eminence of Volterra, who had been
with the Pope in relation to the affairs of the Duke Valentino.
His Holiness had obtained the countersign for the fortresses
from the Duke, and had ordered that Messer Pietro d’ Oviedo,
as the Duke’s representative, and some other person as repre-
senting his Holiness, should leave this evening or early to-
morrow for Florence on their way to Romagna. And as his_
Eminence had written a letter to your Lordships in my ab-
sence, which these commissioners should present to you, I must
refer to that letter for all that has been agreed upon with the
Pope, and for all that his Eminence thinks your Lordships
ought to do in this matter. I will only say, by direction of his
Eminence, that nothing should be left undone by your Lord-
ships to enable the Pope to succeed in obtaining possession of
these fortresses; and to reassure their castellans by becoming
surety for the Pope’s promises, and even to expend some of
your own money for that purpose; and altogether to act in
such manner as to assure and dispose their inhabitants favor-
ably, and to inspire them with the hope that the Pope will deal
with those lords that have returned to him in the way they
could wish; and in fact to employ all your skill to carry the
matter through. For if the Pope succeeds in getting posses-
sion of the castles of Furli and Cesena, apart from the advan-
tage that would result to Florence from such an impediment

COURT OF ROME. 367

being placed in the way of the Venetians, his Holiness would
also acknowledge himself under the greatest obligations to your
Lordships. :

The Duke Valentino has been removed from the apartment
of the treasurer, and is now lodged in that of the Cardinal
d’Amboise; he is trying to accompany that Cardinal to Flor-
ence, where he will go immediately after the coronation in
St. John Lateran.

“‘TD’Amboise received the Duke most unwillingly in his
‘apartment, and is still more reluctant to take him with him.
“In the matter of receiving the Duke in his apartment, the
‘Cardinal submitted for the sake of gratifying the Pope; but
“as to taking him with him to Florence, the Cardinal may per-
‘haps not agree to that. And then if the Pope wants posses-
“sion of those fortresses before the Duke leaves Rome, they
“could not be turned over to him in time, inasmuch as D’Am-
“boise is on the point of starting. It is not easy therefore to
‘form an opinion as to what the end of the Duke may be; but
“many conjecture that it will be a bad one.”

The Cardinal d’Amboise will leave immediately after the
Pope shall have gone to St. John Lateran, which is to be on
Monday or Tuesday next. The Emperor of Germany’s am-
bassador will accompany D’Amboise, who will endeavor to
have an interview with the Emperor before proceeding on to
France, in the hope of bringing about an agreement between
those two sovereigns. His Eminence of Volterra thinks it
would be well that your Lordships should at once send some
one of experience and position as your representative to go
with the Cardinal d’Amboise, who should meet him this side
of Sienna, so that in passing through that city he might see
whether some good arrangement might not be effected with
Pandolfo. Our Cardinal seems to think it desirable that your
Lordships should send some one with the Cardinal d’ Amboise,
who should be present at the interview with the Emperor, so
as to remind him of the interests of our republic, and to find
out whether anything is proposed to its detriment, and if so,
to counteract it as far as possible, and promptly to advise your
Lordships of it. Such a person should be a man of experience,
and agreeable to the Cardinal d’Amboise, as well as devoted to
our republic. When his Eminence of Volterra related to the
Cardinal d’Amboise the message he had received that morning

368 MISSION: LO. THE.

from Messer Luca Savello, which I have mentioned in the en:
closed, D’Amboise shook his head and said that the fellow
must be a fool; assuring his Eminence of Volterra, at the
same time, that he had letters of the 29th of November, saying
that the enemy was much worse off than the French, for they
were up to their middle in water, and were less sheltered and
suffered more from want, having less money to spend. And
that the French were still of the same mind as heretofore
with regard to an advance, if only the waters of heaven and
earth would let them. Since then I have conversed this even-
ing with a citizen of Florence who had talked with Salvalago
of Pistoja, who came a couple of days ago from the camp, and
relates that he has been several times within the past three
weeks in the French and Spanish camps for the purpose of
receiving certain prisoners, and that the statements of this
Salvalago correspond more with what the Cardinal d’Amboise
says than with the reports brought by the messenger from
Savello. The end will explain all, and we must abide it in
patience.

The Marquis of Mantua left*here yesterday for Florence; he
is ill of a quartan ague.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 2 December, 1503.

P. 8.— After having written the above, and whilst in the
act of sealing it, your letter per express arrived, informing me
of the capture of Don Michele. We had this news already
yesterday morning, and I wrote you yesterday evening at length
what the Pope wanted done in the matter, as you will also learn
from the brief of his Holiness, which was sent with our letters.
And as Giovanni Pandolfini has told me that they were safely
sent last night, 1 do not repeat it now. And although your
Lordships’ instructions had been fulfilled, I nevertheless sent
the letters to his Eminence of Volterra at the palace; for it
being now the third hour of night, persons in my position can-
not with safety pass through the streets of Rome.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

COURT OF ROME. 369

LETTER XXXVIII.

Maeniricent SIGNORI: —

I wrote two letters to your Lordships yesterday, which will
be brought to you by the same courier, whose departure has
been delayed until this evening, and who, according to what
I hear, will not start for Florence until the third hour of night.
I acknowledged in my last the receipt of your private despatch
per express, containing the news of the capture of Don Michele.
But as this news had already reached the Pope, as mentioned
in my letter, and as his Holiness had already written to you,
there was no occasion to do anything more in the matter.
Nevertheless your Lordships’ letter was communicated to the
Pope, and produced the same effect as mentioned in my letter
of the Ist; that is to say, his Holiness manifested much pleas-
ure, and then demanded with great earnestness to have Don
Michele delivered to him. And he seemed confident that this
request would not be refused, and to-day he said, smiling, that
he wanted to talk with Don Michele and to learn some tricks
from him, so as to enable him the better to govern the Church.

I have told your Lordships in my last of yesterday, that
Pietro d’ Oviedo, together with an envoy of the Pope, was to
have left this morning for Florence with the countersigns of the
fortresses. Your Lordships must know that they have not yet
started, for the reason that, as the Pope was negotiating for the
amicable transfer of these fortresses, the Duke held back and
wanted guarantees, and stood upon other trifles, and at the
same time the Pope did not yet want to force him. The guar-
antees demanded by the Duke are that the Cardinal d’Amboise
shall pledge himself in his own handwriting that all the Pope’s
promises shall be carried out; in other words, that D’Amboise
shall become surety for the good faith of the Pope. The Car-
dinal d’Amboise has until now refused to do this, and no one
believes that he will be induced to consent to it in any way or
at any price. And thus this matter has been discussed all day,
and the final impression is that without any other pledges on
the part of the Cardinal d’Amboise, Messer Pietro d’ Oviedo
will start to-morrow morning with the countersigns, “and thus
“the Duke is little by little slipping into his grave.”

Certain young Roman gentlemen, followers of the Duke,

VOL, III. 24

SA) MISSION TO THE

came to-day to his Eminence of Volterra and complained that,
whilst the Florentine merchants were well received at Rome,
their own men and their effects that were with Don Michele
had been seized and taken from them, in consequence of which
they made these complaints, and even threats. His Eminence
answered them sharply, saying that the Florentine merchants
came to Rome unarmed and for a useful purpose, and not with
the intent to do harm to any one; and that, if their men and
things had been seized and spoliated, it was because of the in-
juries which they had in the past inflicted upon the inhabitants
of the country, and because they had now come amongst them
again without any guaranty or assurance not to do them fresh
harm. These young men finally went away as they had come.
His Eminence thinks, nevertheless, it would be well for you to
gather all the facts and proofs of the case, and proceed the
same as others who have been despoiled by the Duke. These
have made public declaration of their grievances, and have pro-
ceeded against the Duke in the regular legal way, and their
petitions have already been filed. Amongst these figure the
Duke of Urbino, who claims two hundred thousand ducats, and
the Cardinal San Giorgio, who claims fifty thousand ducats for
account of his nephews. By adopting the same course your-
selves, you would always be able to justify this late incident
by proving the damages which you have suffered at the hands
of the Duke.

The engagement of Gianpaolo Baglioni remains suspended,
so far as your Lordships are concerned, for the reasons men-
tioned before, that the Cardinal d’Amboise is dissatisfied with
him; for after having given Gianpaolo permission to go to
Perugia, he ordered him to do several things, none of which he
has done; and also because, despite of all the letters written
and all the money paid him, he has never yet come here. His
Eminence fears that, unless measures be taken to remedy this
in some way, all the money paid by the king of France and
D’Amboise to enable Baglioni to mount his troops may after
all have been expended only for the benefit of some one
else. And his Eminence of Volterra sees no other remedy
than to have this business ratified by your guaranty, — which
he thinks can be concluded here if Gianpaolo arrives here with
his company before the departure of the Cardinal d’Amboise,
so that he may talk and demonstrate to him that everything is

COURT OF ROME. 871

in order. His Eminence furthermore is of the opinion, that, if
D’Amboise should have left before Gianpaolo arrives here, you
should do your utmost to bring this matter to a conclusion
before the Cardinal shall have left Tuscany ; otherwise he fears
the result may be such as has been indicated above.
Valete ! :
Roms, 3 December, 1503. NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

——_—

LETTER XXXIX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I write to-day more for the sake of keeping up my habit of
writing to your Lordships daily, than from necessity ; and for
news I must refer you to my letters of yesterday and the day
before, which were sent by a courier from Lyons, who was
despatched this evening. The only thing of interest here is
that a public consistory was held yesterday, and the names of
those Cardinals were published whose nominations had been
contemplated, as I had communicated to your Lordships in a
previous letter. I must also inform you that the French have
received intelligence through a man sent here on purpose, and
who arrived two hours since, that the Spaniards had some boats
that had been brought by land, and which they placed upon the
Garigliano, intending to run them against the bridge constructed
by the French, and some of these barges were filled with com-
bustibles and lighted, so as to try and burn the bridge. At a
given signal these barges were launched upon the river, and at
the same moment a land attack was made upon the redoubt
which is held by the French on the other side of the river.
Both these assaults were gallantly repulsed by the French,
some three hundred Spaniards were killed, and the barges were
captured and sunk. Thus the story is related by a Frenchman.

His Holiness goes to-morrow to St. John Lateran ; a splendid
solemnity has been arranged for the occasion, and unless the
weather interferes it will be a brilliant festivity.

It is now the eighteenth hour, and should anything else
occur to-day, it will be communicated to you to-morrow.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 14 December, 1503.

BY MISSION TO THE

LETTER XL.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI : —

My last to your Lordships was of day before yesterday, in
which I gave you the news up to that time. But I had scarcely
written it when Pietro d’ Oviedo left, together with the Pope’s
representatives, and having the countersigns, etc., etc. <As
they were to travel by post, they ought to be in Florence by
this time, and your Lordships will have seen them in person.
The Bishop of Ragusa must also have arrived, and you will
likewise have spoken with him, and agreed with him as to the
nature of the assistance which he is to furnish you, according
as circumstances shall require. Since then nothing is thought
of here but festivities.

The Pope went yesterday with great solemnity to St. John
Lateran, whence he did not return until the fourth hour of
night. On Sunday he goes to San Paolo, and he has ordered
that the tabernacles, the triumphal arches, and the temples
that have been erected in the streets shall remain, for he wants
to show himself on Sunday with the same pomp. I have re-
ceived a letter from your Lordships of the 2d, and although
the news of the arrival of the Count Pittigliano in Romagna
would have been of interest, yet all the above circumstances
have prevented me from doing anything in the matter. The
Pope and all Rome look forward to the arrival of Don Michele
as a great occasion, and would like to have it happen on Sun-
day, so that they might make use of him in the triumphal pro-
cession; but the Pope will be glad to have him whenever he
may come.

We have no further news from the French and the Spaniards.
The Cardinal d’Amboise and the Spanish ambassador have
commenced their conferences. It is said that the Pope has
sent a commissioner to Gonsalvo to try and bring about a truce
between them, and there is fair prospect of success unless some
mishap occurs meantime.

In a previous letter I informed your Lordships that his Emi-
nence of Amboise was dissatisfied with Gianpaolo, and that it
was to be feared that, after having mounted his company by
means of French money, some one else might have the benefit
of it. There seems to be no way of preventing this except to

COURT OF ROME. 8373

induce Gianpaolo to have an interview with the Cardinal d’Am-
boise, either here in Rome or somewhere on the road, and to
make him protest to the Cardinal that he wished to serve him,
and declare himself ready to obey his orders; and that then
you should endeavor to complete his engagement, from which
you would derive great advantages. But if Gianpaolo should
not have such an interview with D’Amboise, the difficulty could
not be remedied, for the Cardinal has become terribly embit-
tered against Gianpaolo, and has repeatedly sworn as a soldier,
that, if Gianpaolo does not return him his money, he would,
if he could not injure him in any other way, hand him over
as a prey to any one with whom he could come to an under-
standing about it, no matter whether Italian or Ultramon-
tane. The Cardinal d’Amboise says that he has heard that
Baglioni has pledged himself to Bartolommeo d’ Alviano never
to enter the kingdom of Naples against the Spaniards; and
certain indications which he has noted since make the Cardi-
nal believe that this is undoubtedly true. To prevent such an
evil, his Eminence of Volterra and myself have written this
evening to Gianpaolo, each one separately, in plain language,
enjoining him to endeavor to have an interview with the Car-
dinal d’Amboise on the road, if he desired to avoid being
blamed as an enemy of France, and no friend of your Lord-
ships. I have given you this information so that you may
know how the matter stands, and that you may reflect upon
it and take such steps as you may judge to be most conducive
to the common interest. The Cardinal d’Amboise leaves, as
I have said, either on Friday or Saturday next, and the Impe-
rial ambassador will accompany him. D’Amboise has been
‘confirmed Legate of France.

His Eminence of Volterra desires to remind your Lordships
to send two or three deputies to meet him at least one day’s
journey this side of Sienna, so as to be able to confer with him
in relation to the interests of our republic, and especially about
Montepulciano and Pisa. He also suggests that you should
send some one to accompany him, and who should be present
at his interview with the Emperor. His Eminence thinks that
this would in every respect be most useful.

The Duke Valentino remains in the apartment of the Cardi-
nal d’Amboise, but is treated very ceremoniously. Yesterday,
on account of the festivities, he was placed under the guard

374 MISSION TO THE

and surveillance of Castel del Rio, who took him to dine at the
Belvedere, and treated him with great respect all day. It is
believed that after the departure of D’Amboise the Duke will
be confined for good in the Castel San Angelo.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que felices valeant.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 6 December, 1503.

LETTER XLI.

MaGnIFICENT SIGNORI : —

Your Lordships will bear in mind what I wrote you on the
28th ultimo. The Impcrial ambassador has again been with
the Cardinal Volterra, and said to him: “ Your Eminence does
“not seem to think of what I have told you several times, nor
“have you ever given me an answer. And yet it would be
“well to think of it and answer me. And I tell you again now
“that the Emperor will come into Italy, and intends to ob-
“tain two advantages from Pisa; namely, a certain amount of
“money at once, and a regular revenue for the future; and that
“he will give the possession of that city to whoever makes him
“the highest offer for it.’ Our Cardinal replied that he could
not give him an answer upon these points; but as he was go-
ing himself with the Cardinal d’Amboise to Florence, he could
there confer with your Lordships and get an answer from you
direct. The ambassador agreed to wait until then; and in
speaking afterwards of the proposed treaty between the Em-
peror and the king of France, he said that treaty would cer-
tainly be concluded in the course of a month, and that amongst
other conditions it would contain one to the effect that the par-
ties would protect the interests of each other’s allies, except in
cases where either of the sovereigns had special claims, even
though adverse to the ally of the other. The ambassador add-
ed, that the Venetians sought to make such a treaty a ground
for claiming to be allowed to keep what they had taken. Car-
dinal Volterra replied, that such a proceeding would deprive
the Emperor Maximilian and King Louis XII. of a most favor-
able opportunity for increasing their power in Italy, and to
hold their own states securely, as it would make a formidable

COURT OF ROME. 875

state like Venice still more powerful, and would make a feeble
state like Florence weaker than before. And therefore he
could not help saying, even though his words were insufficient
to prove it, that it was evident to him that your Lordships
were disposed to come to an arrangement with the Venetians
before any one else had thought of it. And that you would
only look to the interests of Florence at the least suspicion
that your republic was to be dismembered and left to the
mercy of others.

His Eminence of Volterra seemed to think that these words
checked the ambassador in some measure, and caused him to
reflect, and that he went away in a less arrogant mood.

The ambassador will pass through Florence with D’Amboise,
and meanwhile your Lordships will have reflected as to how to
treat him in relation to the interests of our republic, etc., etc.*

LETTER XLII.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNOR: —

I have received your letter of the 21st, and although I could
not make out the signature I thought I recognized the hand-
writing and the style. But even if I were mistaken, the reply
which | address to you will neither be out of place nor from
the purpose. You point out the danger to which the rest of
Romagna is exposed by the loss of Faenza, and you intimate
that the Florentines have need to think of their own interests,
because others who could and should do so pay no attention to
them. You fear lest the Pope had given his consent to the
proceedings of the Venetians, and you make yourself illusions
as to the final result of French affairs, and urge me to renew
my instances and solicitations. Although all this had already
been officially written to me, and although I have replied to it
as fully as you could possibly desire, and so that you could
have formed a definite opinion on reading my letters, yet I will
not fail in my duty to you; and in accordance with your re-

* The above letter and the following one were taken from a manuscript of
Giuliano de’ Ricci, who says that he copied them thus imperfectly because they
were written on a piece of paper that was all torn and spoiled. The next letter,
No. XLII, was directed to one of the principal citizens of Florence, probably the
Gonfaloniere Pietro Soderini.

376 MISSION TO THE

quest I will answer your questions in very plain language, if
my communications to the government have been too diplo-
matic, which, however, I do not believe to be the case.

You express the wish that for once the Pope and the Cardi-
nal d@ Amboise should, in the Romagna business, employ other
means than mere words, which you deem insufficient remedies
for what the Venetians have done and continue to do; and you
have caused both Pope and Cardinal to be solicited upon that
point in a way that you know. The results of this have been
those resolutions which have been communicated to you; for
the Pope hopes that the Venetians will have to act in a manner
. that will be satisfactory to him; and the Cardinal d’Amboise
believes that he will still be in time to remedy matters, cither
by a peace, a truce, or a victory. And both Pope and Cardinal
are so fixed in their opinions, that they will not listen to any
one who suggests anything different from their own views.
We may conclude, therefore, that you need not expect either
troops or money from here, but only briefs, letters, or monitory
embassies, which may be more or less vigorous according to
the considerations which the Pope and the king of France may
have to observe. And what these may or should be you will
be best able to judge yourselves, keeping in view the condition
of Italy, and then in thinking of your own interests after having
seen and examined what may be done by others for your secu-
rity, and after having seen and examined what you may ex-
pect from here. As to what may be hoped for from this latter
point, I cannot write more fully than what I have done already.
I will add merely, that if the Cardinal d’Amboise asks for any-
thing else, such as the services of Gianpaolo, or for your troops,
you must let him know that you cannot spare either, as you
want them yourselves for the defence of your republic.....
But you cannot reason with him on this subject without his
getting as mad as the devil, and calling God and men to wit-
ness that he would take up arms himself if any one but touched
a hair of your head, or that he would lend his help, so that
Romagna should not be exposed to greater dangers; and for
this he thinks he will always be in time, as has been said.
This is the substance of what I am able to write respecting the
state of things here; and I do not believe that any one could
write you anything else, if he wished to tell you the truth.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

COURT OF ROME. 377

LETTER XLIII.

MaenIFICENT SIGNORI : —

I wrote the enclosed yesterday, and by the present I desire
to inform your Lordships that the Cardinal d’Amboise leaves
to-morrow without fail, and will pass to-morrow night at Brac-
ciano. All the other Cardinals of this court have called upon
him to-day, and he is really in great favor with everybody ; for
he has always been found easy of access and more affable than
what was anticipated, he being a grand seigneur and a French-
man. According to what I have been told confidentially, the
Duke Valentino will remain here, although it is publicly said
that he will accompany the Cardinal. I would remind your
Lordships once more to send some one to meet him, for the
reasons given in a previous letter.

I have spoken with Antonio Segni about the case of Mottino,
and he said to me this evening that by to-morrow he would
have something to tell me. I beg to remind your Lordships
‘about the plundering of Don Michele, so that those Roman
gentlemen may not act as Paolo Orsino has done. In a former
letter I have written to your Lordships as to what should be
done in this matter, and I refer to it again now.

Valete !
Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.

Rome, 7 December, 1503.

LETTER XLIV.

Maentiricent S1eNori : —

Yesterday I received your letters of the 4th and 7th; as they
contain nothing but the acknowledgment of my many letters
up to that day, and the arrival of Messer Pietro d’ Oviedo and
the Bishop of Ragusa, and a reference to what you intend to
write in other letters, I have nothing to say in reply. I write
the present for the sake of keeping up the habit of writing, and,
as it will contain nothing of special importance, I shall send it
by the regular courier. I have already written, on the 6th and
7th, respecting the departure of the Cardinal d’Amboise; and

378 MISSION TO THE

as those letters were sent by a courier from Lyons, despatched
in haste by the Del Bene, I doubt not but what they have
reached you by this time.

The Cardinal d’Amboise did leave yesterday, but did not go
as far as Bracciano; in point of fact, he went no farther than
about two miles from here. He will lodge at Bracciano to-
night, and will then go on to Florence to proceed from there
into Lombardy. I do not repeat what I have several times
written, about sending some one with him into Germany, assuni-
ing that your Lordships have already decided these matters.

The Duke Valentino continues to occupy a portion of the
apartment which the Cardinal d’Amboise had in the palace,
and was guarded to-night by some of the Pope’s men. It is
believed that, for the purpose of avoiding this inconvenience,
the Pope will have him shut up in the castle, although many
things are rumored amongst the people, such as that the Pope
has promised the Cardinal d’Amboise to release the Duke so
soon as he shall have obtained those fortresses from him; and
that the Duke’s daughter is to marry the Little Prefect, and
that she is to have Romagna for her dower, etc., ete.

Your Lordships charge me to write you what the French and
the Spaniards are doing, and what their condition, where they
are, and what is said and believed about them. In reply, I say
that I wrote fully on this subject on the 21st ultimo, and that
both armies are in the same condition as then, only worse in
proportion, as they have been suffering from want so much
longer. To sum up the whole, I say, that several weeks ago
the French threw a bridge over the Garigliano which enabled
them to make themselves masters of the opposite side of the
river, where they threw up a redoubt, which they still hold. But
there are no more French on that side of the river than those
who guard the redoubt, which amount to about two hundred
men. All the rest of the French army is on this side of the
Garigliano ; about one fourth is near the bridge, the other three
fourths are scattered in quarters, some five, six, and ten miles
off. The Spaniards are on the other side of the Garigliano,
where they have cut a trench about a mile’s distance from the
French redoubt, and above this trench they have thrown up two
bastions, which are provided with a guard. <A good part of their
army 1s near by, the rest is dispersed in quarters. Such is the
relative position of the two armies; they can neither attack

COURT OF ROME. 379

nor force each other, being prevented by the river, and the rain
that has fallen and continues to fall. Both are suffering the
greatest discomforts, and it is believed that the one that can
endure it longest will be victorious; but which of the two is
likely to endure it longest is impossible to say at this moment,
for here, as well as elsewhere, people are influenced in what
they say by their passions only. And even those who come
from the camp vary in their opinions, so that we can do
nothing but quietly await the result. It is true that within
the past few days the Spanish have made several attempts to
destroy the bridge and drive the French out of their redoubt,
but thus far they have not succeeded. Such is the state of
things with regard to the armies; and so I wrote you on the
21st, since which the aspect of matters has not changed, and
I should not know how to describe it differently to your Lord-
ships. Should any change occur I will advise you of it, but if
there is no change I should not know what to write you, wish-
ing to tell you the truth about the matter.

In one of my previous letters I informed your Lordships that,
in accordance with your instructions, I had spoken with Anto-
nio Segni. To-day the said Antonio called to see me, and told
me that he had spoken with Mottino, and learned from him, in
substance, that his engagement with the French had expired on
the last day of San Andrea, and that he would not renew it at
any price. True, he says that he is not able to get his dis-
charge from them, although he has been constantly after San
Severino to obtain it. He expresses himself well disposed to
serve your Lordships, but says that he is in no hurry. He has
two galleys, but will not serve with only one, wishing to have
both engaged, for which he would be satisfied to receive nine
hundred ducats per month, and would give any security that
your Lordships might require. He says furthermore, that,
besides his own galleys, a brother of his has three brigantines,
and that for three hundred florins per month he would immedi-
ately enter your Lordships’ service with all three. Your Lord-
ships will now consider what is best to be done in the maiter,
and send a reply. }

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 9 December, 1503.

380 MISSION TO THE

LEER XY.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

My last of the 9th, which I sent by the regular courier, will
reach you probably at the same time with this one, which will
go by an extra courier that is to be despatched this evening.
I informed you in my last of the departure of the Cardinal
d’Amboise, and of what I had learnt from Antonio Segni with
regard to Mottino’s disposition. Since then I have received
your last of the 8th, and have conferred with Castel del Rio
respecting what you write about the Bishop of Ragusa and the
two envoys with the countersigns. He showed himself fully
informed on these subjects, and said that the Pope could not
be better satisfied with your Lordships than he was. San
Giorgio, to whom I also communicated your advices, assured
me of the same thing. It is evident therefore that the Bishop
of Ragusa has written favorably to the Pope, and given him an
account of what your Lordships have done. Both Castel del
Rio and San Giorgio showed that they knew the coming of the
deputies from Furli; and when they arrive, his Eminence of
Volterra or myself will carry out your Lordships’ instructions.
Not having heard anything further of Don Michele, I have
nothing to tell your Lordships respecting him; but should any-
thing come to my knowledge, I will at once advise you of it.
I would most respectfully remind your Lordships to reply to
the Pope’s brief, and in such manner as will tend to confirm
his Holiness still more in his benevolent disposition towards
our republic.

I note what you write touching Citerna, and his Eminence
tells me that in places of that kind it is usual to send only a
Castellan to guard and take care of them. Your Lordships
should therefore decide upon this matter, and send the name
of the Castellan, provided you conclude to take that course;
and let us know at the same time where we are to obtain the
money for the expenses.

As to your grievances against the Duke Valentino, it is
necessary that whoever may be charged by your Lordships to
attend to this matter should have a power of attorney from you
for that purpose. You should therefore appoint some one here
to attend to the matter, or perhaps it would be still better if

COURT OF ROME. 881

yon were to place it in the hands of one of the ambassadors
whom you are going to send here.

The Duke Valentino remains in the same place where he was
when I wrote you on the 9th, and we are waiting to see what
the states of Romagna will do with regard to him. We have
no further news from the French than what I have given you in
my former letters; it is believed that, if the weather continues
as at present, the two armies may be able one way or another
to attempt some movement against each other.

Your Lordships direct me to leave with the Cardinal d’Am-
boise for Florence, and in case he should have left already,
that I should come per post so as to arrive before him. Your
letter came only yesterday, and D’Amboise left on Saturday,
so that I should have to come by post, which would be painful
and difficult for me, being afflicted with a malady that is very
prevalent here at Rome, namely, cough and catarrh, which af-
fect the head and the chest, so that the violent jolting of the
diligence would do me serious injury. Anxious always to obey
your Lordships’ orders, I should nevertheless have taken the
risk, but his Eminence of Volterra would not consent to my
leaving; for it seemed to him that, inasmuch as your ambassa-
dors will not be here before twenty days, according to what
you write, it would be very onerous for his Eminence, and in-
jurious to the interests of Florence, if he had to remain here
without some one of whose services he might avail in public
matters. His Eminence was so decided upon this point, that,
in the hope that your Lordships may not disapprove of it, I
yielded readily to the authority of his Eminence, and influenced
by his devotion to our republic, and by the confidence which all
Florence reposes in him, and which he so deservedly enjoys.
Nevertheless I shall conform strictly to your Lordships’ further
orders.

Bene valete !

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 12 December, 1503.

P. S.—I have forgotten to tell you that certain Roman
gentlemen have handed the enclosed list of things which they
have lost to the Cardinal Volterra, who promised them that
this list shall be forwarded to your Lordships, and their case
commended to you. Your Lordships will please send us what
reply you may think proper.

382 MISSION TO THE

LETTER XLVI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

As this courier leaves unexpectedly I write in all haste to
inform you of the latest events here. Yesterday evening news
came to the French that the infantry of Gonsalvo, unable any
longer to endure the privations they are suffering, mainly in
consequence of want of money, have suddenly broken up their
camp; so that Gonsalvo with his cavalry was obliged to with-
draw to Sessa, where there is much sickness. This retreat
was effected with so much noise and confusion that the French
heard it, and sent a body of some twenty horse across the
river to reconnoitre. These found that the Spaniards had
broken up their camp, and had abandoned all their heavy bag-
gage and things of little value. This detachment of French
cavalry attacked the Spanish rear, and captured the baggage
of Signor Prospero Colonna. This is the account which the
French give of this affair, and they have exhibited letters to
that effect. It is supposed that if this be true, and the weather
permits, the French will be able to advance. Your Lordships
shall be advised of whatever happens. I have some few other
matters to mention, which I will do in my next, as this courier
can wait no longer.

Valete !

NiccoLto MACHIAVELLI.
14 December, 1503.

LETTER XLVII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

I wrote your Lordships briefly to-day, and sent the letter by
a courier despatched by the French here, which did not afford
me the time to write more fully. Still I informed you of the
news which the French here had from their army on the Gari-
gliano; namely, that the Spaniards’ infantry, from want of
necessaries, and not being regularly paid, broke up their camp
contrary to the will of Gonsalvo, who was in consequence
obliged also to retreat with his cavalry to Sessa, where a great

COURT OF ROME. 383

many of his troops are reported to be dying. It is also stated
that the French, on hearing the noise of this retreat, sent some
twenty horse to reconnoitre, who found the Spanish camp
broken up as though in flight, and much of their heavy bag-
gage, especially their cooking utensils, abandoned; and that
these twenty horsemen had captured a portion of Signor Pros-
pero Colonna’s baggage. This is all I have heard; should I
learn anything more, I will report it to your Lordships. I have
heard from Paolo Rucellai, who is on very friendly terms with
the Orsini, that they have not yet received their quarter’s pay,
according to promise, and that they had announced to Gon-
salvo their intention to withdraw. We hear from all sides
that there is great scarcity of money amongst the Spanish
forces.

In a former letter I made known to your Lordships that the
Signor Luca Savello had sent one of his men here to recom-
mend himself, and to declare that he could no longer submit
to the privations he was experiencing for want of money.
Your Lordships have not yet replied to this, and Signor Luca’s
messenger is in despair, and I know not what to say to him.
Besides this Messer Ambrogio da Landriano came here yes-
terday in person with a letter of credit from the Bailli to the
Cardinal, and complained bitterly to his Eminence and myself
of the privations and misery which himself and his company
are suffering; and he protests that, if the French had not sup-
plied him with money, they would have died of hunger; and as
he could not ask them for any more, he would be obliged to
leave with his company, to the great discredit of your Lord-
ships. That he was most unwilling to do this, having until
now maintained his company as well as any other captain; and
that out of his five hundred men, there were forty mounted and
ten crossbowmen. He wants pay for at least one quarter and a
half, besides the one hundred ducats due him on his former
engagement.

I have promised him to write and recommend his case to
your Lordships, which I do herewith, and beg you will send an
answer which is so eagerly looked for. Messer Ambrogio left
the camp eight days ago, and reports great scarcity of forage,
bread, and shelter, and that there are not nine hundred good
men-at-arms and only six thousand infantry left in camp, whilst
the Spanish have received reinforcements of infantry. Never-

384. MISSION TO THE

theless he thinks that the news of the retreat of the Spanish
forces, which he learned here, is most likely to be true; for he
affirms that they were not able to pay for provisions, and that
for several weeks they had forced the people of the country to
bring them supplies. But as they probably cannot force them
any more, they have themselves been compelled to go and seek
supplies wherever they can be had. He reports three causes
that until now have prevented the French from being victori-
ous. The first and most important is, that they have lost so
much time under the walls of Rome, —the very time that would
have been most suitable for advancing without being impeded
either by the river or by rain, for Gonsalvo was not then pre-
pared to encounter them. The second cause was, that they had
not sufficient horses for their artillery, which prevented them
from making more than two miles per day. And the third was
the severe winter, which still continues; and Messer Ambrogio
affirms that whenever they had attempted any movement the
weather had become twice as bad as before.

With all this he avers that, even if Gonsalvo had not beaten
a retreat, he would not have ventured to attack the French, on
account of their being in a very strong position and ready to
give battle to whoever might attack them. When asked as to
the chances of an advance, he said, that although Gonsalvo had
retreated, yet if the ground did not dry up, and when dry, if
they were not provided with more oxen, buffaloes, or cart-
horses, it would be impossible for them to move their artillery.
He reports that the Bailli d’Occan is greatly dissatisfied at
not being paid; and his Eminence of Volterra suggests that, if
your Lordships think that you can relieve yourselves of that
expense, you should lose no time in doing it.

Your Lordships’ letters of the 10th ie 11th, directed to his
Eminence of Volterra, under the supposition that I was on the
road to Florence, were received to-day. The reason of my not
having left was explained in my previous letter; it was that
the Cardinal deemed my presence here necessary, and objected
to my departure. We learn from your letters the reason why
we have no news from Pietro, or Messer Carlo, or from the
Bishop of Perugia. It will all be explained in the quarter
where it is required; and the same with regard to what you
say respecting Don Michele and the news from France. All
this will be most gratifying to his Holiness, and particularly

COURT OF ROME. 385

the news of Don Michele; and we shall see to it that he is sent
for at such place as your Lordships may indicate as most con-
venient to yourselves.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 14 December, 1503.

P. S.—I must not omit to tell your Lordships that some
days ago a former secretary of the Cardinal San Angelo has
been arrested for the purpose of learning the particulars of the
death of that Cardinal.* And it is reported that he confessed
two days since that he had poisoned him by order of Pope
Alexander VI., and that he will be publicly burnt, and that the
Cardinal’s cook and one of his butlers have fled. They are
beginning here to take these matters up again. The Duke
Valentino remains in the same situation which I have ex-
plained several times before. I beg to remind your Lordships
that if you intend to proceed against him you must send a
mandate to whomever you think proper, with power to substi-
tute a procurator, etc., etc.

LETTER XLVIII.

Maentricent Sienori : —

My last despatches were of the 14th; the first, together with
a short letter, was sent by a courier despatched by the French
here; and the second I intrusted to Giovanni Pandolfini, who
told me he had sent it by the Ferrara post. This Giovanni
complains that he has not been reimbursed for the expense of
sending it, and has begged me to remind your Lordships of the
fact. I do so now constrained by necessity, for if anything
were to occur of which it would be important to give you im-
mediate information, I should be without the means of doing
so unless the claims of Giovanni had been satisfied. He also
tells me that some one has written him, that, apart from the

* This Cardinal was Giovanni Michele, from Venice, nephew of Paul II. It
was said that Pope Alexander VI. had him poisoned by his cook, Ezzelino da
Furli.

VOL, III. 25

386 MISSION TO THE

other matter, his services in forwarding despatches are not
appreciated, which has increased his dissatisfaction.

In my last letter I wrote you what I had learned about the
Spaniards, and what had been told me by Messer Ambrogio da
Landriano, who sends one of his men to Florence with letters
from the Cardinal Volterra and myself, recommending him to
your Lordships. I have nothing else to say of Messer Ambrogio,
except that I await your reply with impatience, so that I may
know what to say to him. The news respecting the Spaniards
is confirmed, as you will sce from the tenor of an extract from
a letter written at Gaeta which I enclose.* We are waiting to
see what will come next; there are many who think that this
affair will facilitate the conclusion of peace, unless some greater
disaster should follow. Your Lordships will be promptly ad-
vised of whatever happens. Your last letters of the 11th,
directed to Cardinal Volterra, have been communicated by him
to the Pope, who was in the highest degree pleased at the sur-
render to him of Don Michele. It has not yet been decided when
and how he is to be brought here. Our Cardinal thinks it will
all be settled to-morrow. His Holiness was also much pleased
with the news from France, but regretted that his envoys had
been delayed by the snow; he bears it patiently, however, as
the cause of it is a power higher than himself, and thus he
remains in suspense as to the results of the mission of his

* The following is the letter referred to: —

Copy of an extract from a letter dated at Gaeta, 10 December, 1508, and written by
Vincenzo di Laudato to Piero Cavalcanti at Rome.

The nature of things has produced its effects. You must know that the Span-
ish camp which was established on the Garigliano has been broken up; the
troops being unable any longer to endure the privations they were suffering, and
because their number had been greatly reduced by want. It is said that the
troops have gone into quarters at Trani, Sessa, Carinola, and Capua. This has
induced our forces to advance to Sessa. I trust they may meet with no diffi-
culties, for those who were on the other side have entirely disappeared, and it
would be a mere chance if they could bring more than eight Zarli together. This
province will now be able to breathe freely, and it really seems as though we
were released from prison. You must know that Louis d’Ars has behaved like
a valiant captain ; with his army, composed of about three thousand infantry and
six hundred Stradiote cavalry and two hundred men-at-arms, he has reduced all
the towns of Puglia to submission, and finaily, has taken Troja and Sansovero,
and may now, if he chooses, go as far as Tripalda. I think the enemy in finding
himself thus between two armies, must suffer much anxiety, and what is worse
for him, he has not one cursed carline, whilst here gold is flung about in abun-
dance. May God put an end to so many afflictions !

COURT OF ROME. 587

envoys. The Venetian ambassador is trying to placate his
Holiness, but as yet he has not found the way of doing it.
He is most assiduous in paying court to San Giorgio. Some
persons here fear that he is endeavoring by his intervention to
induce the Pope to acquiesce in the Venetians retaining Faenza
and Rimini, and that in return they will favor the restoration
of Furli and Imola to the nephews of San Giorgio. It is be-
lieved, however, that the Pope will not consent to this, nor are
there wanting persons who are endeavoring to find out and
thwart this intrigue. We are awaiting your final decision
respecting Citerna, and your mandate in the NU: of the
Duke Valentino.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.
Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.
Rome, 16 December, 1503.

LETTER XLIX.

Maeniricent SiGNoRI : —

The bearer of this is one of the men of Messer Ambrogio da
Landriano, who sends him to Florence to remind your Lord-
ships of his necessities ; and as I wrote you at length on the
14th upon this subject, I shall not enlarge upon it any further
now; but refer to what I then said, and which will be fully
explained by the present messenger to your Lordships, to
whom I recommend him and Messer Ambrogio, as well as
myself.

Bene valete !
NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.*
Rome, 16 December, 1503.

* After this letter, Machiavelli returned to Florence, as appears from the
following letter from the Cardinal of Volterra, Soderini : —

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

My last was of the 15th, and to-day I have yours of the 14th, which demands
but a brief reply, seeing that I have attended to all that your Lordships have
directed me to do.

You will also have the verbal report of Niccolo Machiavelli, who goes to
Florence per post, in obedience to your orders, anxious to do his utmost, notwith-
standing his indisposition, and contrary to my wishes. For, as I have several

388 MISSION 10 THE COURT OF ROME:

times written to your Lordships, I was desirous that there should be some ac-
credited agent here, there being many matters here which it is not suitable for
me to attend to or to speak about; nor can I go to many places where a minister
can go with entire propriety. I beg your Lordships therefore to provide for this,
as it is greatly needed in this place.

Niccolo will report particularly upon all other matters; and your Lordships
ought to hold him very dear, for his fidelity, zeal, and prudence leave nothing to
wish for in him. You will hear fully about Citerna matters, and about the busi-
ness of those Roman gentlemen, which ought to be attended to and provided for.
They are of importance now, and may be much more so hereafter, as similar
instances have proved. Et bene valete DD. VV. quibus me commendo.

V. tanquam F. F. pe Soperinis
Cardinalis Vulterranus.

SECOND MISSION TO THE COURT OF
FRANCE.

COMMISSION

GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, ENVOY TO HIS MOST CHRISTIAN
MAJESTY THE KING OF FRANCE (LOUIS XII.)

RESOLVED UPON, 14 January, 1504.*

NiccoLo,— You will proceed per post, via Milan, to Lyons,
or wherever you may learn that his most Christian Majesty is
to be found, and you will take with you two letters of credence,
one to his Majesty, and the other to the Cardinal d’Amboise;
also two letters without any address, which you will make use
of where it may be most necessary ; and another for our am-
bassador there, Niccolo Valori, to whom you will explain on
your arrival all the instructions we have given you. You will
communicate everything to him, so that he may fully under-
stand the object of your mission, and that he may in turn
inform you of all that has taken place, and what he may have
learned of the affairs of France since your departure from here.
After that you will present yourselves together before his Ma-
jesty, and make known to him all the points herein specified,
which we desire particularly that his Majesty should fully

* Niccolo Machiavelli was sent to France, where Niccolo Valori was the
ambassador of the Florentine republic, in consequence of the apprehensions
conceived by the Florentine government lest Gonsalvo de Cordova, after having
defeated the French on the Garigliano, and captured Gaeta, and after hav-
ing assured to his Catholic Majesty of Spain the possession of the kingdom
of Naples, should move upon Florence for the purpose of changing its govern-
ment, re-establish the Sforzas in Milan, and thus utterly destroy the power of
the French in Italy. The result of this mission was the assurance that Florence
should be withdrawn from the treaty existing between France and Spain, in
which the Florentines were specially named and comprised by the king of
France as his allies and adherents. See the Diary of Buonaccorsi, p. 35, and
Guicciardini, Lib. VI.

8390 SECOND MISSION TO THE

understand, together with all the circumstances connected
therewith; taking care not to omit any part, so as to make
him see clearly to what condition our affairs here have been
brought, and how they may yet be recovered; and that to
save ourselves from destruction it has become necessary for
us to see and understand clearly all his Majesty’s thoughts
and designs.

One of the objects of your mission is that you may see with
your own eyes what preparations they are making, and report
to us immediately ; giving us at the same time your own judg-
ment and conjectures respecting them. And if these prepara-
tions are of such a character that we cannot depend upon them,
either from their being too insignificant, uncertain, or too slow,
then you must make his Majesty fully understand that it is
quite impossible for us to provide forces enough to suffice for
our safety; and that it would not be prudent for us to wait
and place our reliance upon assistance that is not considerable,
prompt, and real. Nor must you confine yourself to this only,
but you must demonstrate to them the urgent necessity for us
to seck our safety wherever we can find it; for the preserva-
tion of our state is before every other consideration, as that is
the only small remnant of our liberties left to us, and which it
behooves us to save by every effort in our power. And to arrive
at this conclusion, it will be necessary for you to explain to his
Majesty, as time and place may suit, the dangers with which
we are threatened, on the one hand from the Venctians, and
on the other hand from the Spaniards, who are acting in con-
cert with each other. And you must make his Majesty com-
prehend the condition of our affairs; how on the one hand we
are involved in war with Pisa, and how on the other the Vene-
tians with an army are threatening our very borders; and how
all our other neighbors, who ordinarily are badly disposed
towards us, and more particularly so since the late defeat of
the French, have already made terms with the Spaniards, or
are upon the point of doing so; that we have but few troops,
and these in great part scattered in different places, and the
other part defeated in the kingdom of Naples whilst in his
Majesty’s service; upon which points it is not necessary to
give you any particular instructions, because during your stay
here you had the opportunity of knowing it all yourself. The
same with regard to the events in the Romagna, and what has

COURT OF FRANCE. 391

been learned from Rome respecting the determination of the
Spaniards, and what little we may hope for from the Pope.
And should you lack information upon any of these points, you
will be able to get it from Niccolo Valori, to whom everything
has been written, and to whom copies of all documents and
despatches have been sent, which he has most probably all
with him. In stating the dangers to which we are exposed,
and the evil intentions of our enemies, you may also mention
the coming of our banished to Castello and to Sienna. After
having related all these things, together with the circumstances
connected therewith, which you must do in the most effective
manner, you will conclude by telling his Majesty that in con-
sequence of these things we have sent you to him to learn his
intentions, and to know what provisions he is making to main-
tain what remains to him yet of possessions and friends here.
You will also show to his Majesty that Lombardy is in no small
danger, unless he remedies it actively, and shows to the whole
world that he will and can save both states; and finally, that we
desire his Majesty’s counsel and help to save us and our state.

We believe that the answer will be vigorous, and that a
variety of projects will be proposed; but our intention is that
you should say, and we charge you particularly to reply, that
such plans and resolutions will not suffice us, but that it is
essential that they should send help at once, and of such a
character that his Majesty’s enemies, and those of his friends,
will have to desist from molesting his and their states; and
that unless the assistance rendered us be of that character, we
shall risk being attacked, which we desire to avoid; and that
we do not wish to be compelled to seek our safety by other
means; the same as in the contrary case we are resolved never
to abandon his Majesty’s friendship, but to share his fortunes,
whatever they may be, provided we see the way clear for our
preservation.

You will explain to Valori that the principal cause that
has induced us to send you on this mission has been a letter
received yesterday from Alessandro, informing us that the
engagement of Bagloni had been broken,* and that we are
consequently to provide for the payment of ten thousand scudi

* This was the military engagement (condotta) of Giovanpaolo Baglioni, made
by the Florentines in their name, but for account of King Louis XII. of France,
of which mention is made in the preceding Mission to Rome.

392 SECOND MISSION TO THE

at the period of every fair; and that our letters have been re-
tained. All this seems to us an indication that they have cut
loose entirely from our interests, and think only of their own;
and that they abandon their friends, who have suffered so much
for their sake, and leave them a prey to their enemies; and
that they have no memory either for our fidelity or for the ser-
vices we have rendered them. And as these are matters of
much importance, it seems to us that, having to speak of them,
it will be proper to make them understand that we deem it
necessary to conclude Baglioni’s engagement, for the reasons
of which you are fully cognizant yourself, and in accordance
with which we have several times written to Valori. And as
to the payment of the ten thousand scudi, you can say that we
have no wish to fail either in our good faith or in our obliga-
tions, but that it is quite impossible for us to burden ourselves
with any new expenditures ; and as Baglioni’s engagement was
for the benefit of their cause, and was made at their request,
we cannot assume either the one or the other responsibility,
and that they must acquit us of the obligation.

And should it be said in reply that we had never ratified
the engagement, you may answer, that it was nevertheless con-
cluded, and that we had the Cardinal’s pledge for it, which
we do not hold in so little respect but what we deem it neces-
sary for our honor to have that engagement definitely con-
cluded. And moreover, we think matters ought to be so
arranged that we may be able to keep our faith and comply
with our engagements; for to be obliged to suffer, and to be
assailed at the same time without secing any refuge, would be
more than we are able to bear. You will furthermore demon-
strate to his Majesty, that neither the conclusion of an engage-
ment with Baglioni, nor the release from all other obligations,
will suffice in all the dangers that surround us; but that it is
necessary for his Majesty to rouse himself and provide such
help as we have indicated above. Upon all these points you
will confer also with the most reverend Legate, with Nemours,
and with all such others as may be able to aid in this matter
with his Majesty the king. We desire you to use the utmost
diligence in all this, and write us the result as soon as possible.
And when you have executed our commission, and obtained all
the information possible, you will return to your post here,
unless the ambassador should think otherwise.

COURT OF FRANCE. 393

In passing through Milan you will call upon the most illus-
trious lieutenant, and explain to him also all the same matters,
in such manner as may be most suitable; and above all you
will endeavor to make him sensible of the dangers to which
that state is exposed from the neighboring Venetians, and
from the spirit that animates them; as also from the Span-
iards, who, it is understood, are gathering their troops for the
purpose of an advance; and that one of the most effective
remedies against all this would be to sustain Tuscany, and to
preserve her life until she shall have recovered her former
strength. You will urge him to write to his Majesty upon
all the points upon which you will have spoken to him; for
experience has shown that few counsels have greater effect
in moving his Majesty than those of his own officers.

We have explained to you, Niccolo, our necessities in a
general way, and have commissioned you to ask of his Majesty
of France aid and counsel as to what to do in the midst of so
many dangers; and we judge it unnecessary to say anything
more, unless it should be specially asked for. In case it be
said to you that his Majesty is willing to make provision in
our favor, but that we must say what remedies we think neces-
sary, you may reply, that in our judgment the first thing to
do would be for his Majesty to pass the Alps and to come to
Milan, and to send fresh troops there; and that these, as well
as those already there, should be so organized, and quartered
in such places, as not to be exposed to any danger; that his
Majesty, by virtue of his authority, should reunite all the states
of Tuscany, take into his pay either the Colonna or the Or-
sini and add to their strength, and if not all, then at least a
part of them, such for instance as the Baglioni, by means of
whom he could make sure of Sienna, a matter very necessary
to be thought of; that he ought to keep his fleet in our
waters; and that he should endeavor to have the Pope openly
declare himself for him; and in addition, as we have already
written on a former occasion, to assure himself of the Swiss
and of others, upon which point the Ambassador will be able
to inform you, to whom we have written every day, keeping
him fully advised of all that has occurred, and of all our
views. |

I, MARCELLUS VIRGILIUS.

From our Patacz, on the day above written.

394 SECOND MISSION TO THE

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUstTRIoUS SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here this morning at about the twenty-second hour,
and have had an interview with Monscigneur de Chaumont.
I explained to him the object of my mission to the king, and
that I had come by way of Milan, so that his Lordship might
hear from me direct what I had to communicate to the king,
and that he might write to his Majesty, and recommend to him
the interests of his friends and of his own states, and point
out to him the dangers with which they are threatened, and the
remedies that should be employed. After that I communicated
to him all I was instructed to say, and endeavored to make
him sensible of the necessity that we should have assistance ;
but that such assistance should be real, as indeed the dangers
were that threatened us. For if your Lordships should be
abandoned, you would inevitably expect to see your city pil-
laged, and witness her total ruin; or you would have to make
terms with those who aim to force you to do so, even if the
conditions were anything but good. I spoke of the Venetians
according to my instructions, as also of your Lordships’ neigh-
bors, and of the confusion into which they had been thrown,
and how necessary it was for the king to preserve them as
friends, as well as to win back again those whom he had lost.
In fact, I did my best not to omit saying anything that was
essential for him to know in relation to this matter, without
transgressing your Lordships’ instructions.

Respecting the dangers with which you are threatened,
and the remedies to be applied, his Lordship answered in
a general way, first, that he did not believe that Gonsalvo
intended to advance, and then that, even if he should, the
king would take good care of his friends, as well as of his
own states; and that you need have no apprehensions on that
score, as his Majesty would not fail in his promises. And
when I observed that these assurances did not suffice for those
who had the enemy, so to say, on their backs, and related to
him the evidence which we had of Gonsalvo’s intention to
follow up his enterprise, his Lordship said, “ When Gonsalvo
“sees his Majesty’s fleet increased to double its strength, and
“learns that there is a large force in Lombardy, he certainly

COURT OF FRANCE. 395

“will not advance.” I replied, that neither the fleet nor the
troops in Lombardy could defend Tuscany. To which he re-
joined that the Pope would be a good Frenchman, and that
Giovanpaolo was in their pay, and that the Siennese would be
able to make a stout resistance. I answered him by saying
that both the Pope and the Siennese would want to see with
their own eyes the assistance promised by the king, as neither
of them had any forces of their own; that it was a good thing to
have Gianpaolo Baglioni in one’s pay, but that his engagement
ought to be definitely concluded. And I demonstrated to him
how necessary it was to close this engagement, and not only to
have Baglioni in their pay, but to bind him to serve the state.

I did my best to convince Monseigneur de Chaumont that
there was no city in that part of Italy more suitable for be-
ing made a point of resistance than Perugia, by quartering
there some four or five thousand infantry and four or five hun-
dred men-at-arms; that its situation was one of the strongest,
and that with such a number of troops it would be truly im-
pregnable, and could not with safety be left in the rear. I
persuaded him, so far as I was able, of the importance for
them to preserve that city, and thus to acquire other Italian
troops. After that we touched upon the subject of the alli-
ances that should be concluded between your Lordships and
the scattered little states of Italy, but to effect which would
require the interposition of the king’s authority. His Lordship
concluded to write to the king on that subject, as well as about
the other matters which we had discussed. I begged him to
send one of his own men to come with me, to which he re-
plied that he would cause the post to run, and advised me to
lose no time in finding the king, who, he believed, would give
me a reply that would reassure your Lordships. And as I
took my leave, he said in a voice loud enough for all around to
hear, “Ne doutez de rien.” I have forgotten to tell your
Lordships that the Lieutenant said nothing respecting the
Venetians, except that he would make them attend to their
fishing, and that they were sure of the Swiss.

This is all I have been able to get out of Monseigneur de
Chaumont, and I have endeavored to give you his very words.
Since then I have talked with one who is a friend of our city,
and who recognized me, having been at court when I was there
before; and having drawn me aside, he said to me, with great

396 SECOND MISSION TO THE

show of regret, that he augured ill of the king’s affairs, for he
knew that he could not raise any more money ; that he had but
few men-at-arms here, who were dispersed in different places,
that he had no infantry, and that it would require a long time
to provide both, but that there were no indications of their
taking any steps about it; that on the other hand the enemy
were ready in their saddles, fresh, and with all the prestige of
victory and good fortune; so that he really knew not what
help there was, not alone for his Majesty’s friends, but for his
own states even. All this my friend said to me lamentingly,
like one who feared these things, but not desired them. At
another time I will give you the name of this individual, when
I can do so without danger to him in case my letter should
miscarry. Beyond the above, I can say nothing to your Lord-
ships about matters here, not having been able in so short a
time to learn more. I leave to-morrow about noon for Lyons;
and recommend myself to your Lordships.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Mian, 22 January, 1504. Secretary.

LETTER If.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : * —

Yesterday at about the twenty-second hour, Niccolo Machia-
velli arrived here, and having heard from his own lips the
reason of his coming, and having read his commission, and it
being already late, we thought it well to defer until this morn-
ing all attempts to present him to the king. Accordingly we
went to court this morning for that purpose, and, having en-
deavored to obtain an audience, I was told that it would be
impossible to see his Majesty that day, as he was suffering
somewhat from dysentery ; but that, if the matter was pressing,

* Nearly all the letters of this Legation were written by Niccolo Valori, who
was Florentine Ambassador at the Court of France. It has been supposed, never-
theless, that it would be acceptable to the reader to have them printed, partly
because they throw much light upon the state of things at the Court of France at
that time, and partly because they were in substance concerted with Machiavelli
and written (perhaps?) jointly with him; although in point of style they lack
the terseness and lucid compactness of Maclifavelli’s despatches.

COURT. OF FRANCE. 397

we should speak to the Cardinal d’Amboise. I believe the
excuse was true, for the king had refused to see some men
sent by the Marquis of Mantua to present him some birds, for
which he had asked the Marquis, and which he was very anx-
ious to possess. Being thus precluded from seeing the king,
we decided it would be well to see D’Amboise, and accordingly
went to his lodgings. When I made known to him the arrival
of the Secretary, he withdrew apart, where, after a few custom-
ary and suitable words on my part, Machiavelli presented his
letters of credence to the Cardinal, and stated to him, so far as
the time and the nature of the audience permitted, the object
of his mission, which was in fact to point out the dangers by
which our republic is threatened on the part of Gonsalvo and
on that of the Venetians; as also from your being surrounded
by a number of other enemies, some of whom have already
declared themselves either for the Spaniards or the Venetians,
and others were ready at any moment to do the same; and
also because you have lost your troops in the kingdom of Na-
ples, and find yourselves at the same time with the Pisans on
your back, who were resorting to all the tricks of the infer-
nal regions to injure you. He then showed that in all these
threatening dangers you had but one confident hope, and that
was in the assistance and arms of the king; but that inas-
much as the injuries were real, it was necessary that the help
should also be real, and that he had been sent expressly to
learn what assistance his Majesty intended to render us; and
that it was earnestly desired that it should be of such character
that our city might confidently rest her hopes upon them. All
this Machiavelli said, with that animation which the subject
demanded. Afterwards he added, that if his Majesty declined
to grant us assistance, and such as the circumstances required,
there would be nothing left for you but to make terms with
those who were trying in every way to subjugate you.

His Eminence remained to listen to Machiavelli with evident
displeasure, and showing himself to be much irritated ; in his
reply he complained much of these constant lamentations of
your Lordships, who, being wise, should not in these times,
and in the difficulties in which they are, use such language.
He referred again to those points which I have already men-
tioned to your Lordships; saying that it was expected that the
truce between Spain and themselves would be ratified, and that

398 SECOND MISSION TO THE

in less than a weck they would be fully informed upon that
point; and that his Majesty would not fail, in any way or
point, to protect his allies or his own states; and that if your
Lordships wished to take another course, they could not pre-
vent you, but that you ought to think well before acting. To
this I promptly replied, that there was not a man in all Flor-
ence who thought that you would have to take such a step,
for every one confidently believed that the king would not let
us want for help; and that what had been said on the subject
was merely to show to what point our city might be driven, in
case the support of his Majesty should fail us. Thereupon
Machiavelli, with his wonted sagacity and adroitness, added,
with the view of soothing his Eminence and to come to some-
thing definite, and also to have occasion to speak of Giovan-
paolo, that it should be borne in mind, that the way to save
Tuscany would be to save her walls; and that these walls on
the side towards Gonsalvo were the Pope, Sienna, and Perugia.
His Eminence did not Ict Machiavelli say anything more, but
quickly answered that they were sure of the Pope and of Si-
enna, and that, as Perugia was a city belonging to the Church,
she would do whatever the Pope wanted; and thereupon he
rose and left us abruptly. I must not omit to tell your Lord-
ships that, in complaining of your lamentations, and in at-
tempting to show us that the king was doing all he could,
his Eminence said that those troops that had come from Gaeta
into Lombardy, as it were in nothing but their shirts, were not
willing to stop south of the Alps, and that a great part of
them were no longer there, notwithstanding the orders given
to stop them, and the sending of Monscigneur de Guiche to
reorganize them, as I have already reported in previous de-
spatches. And when I expressed to the Cardinal my desire
that the king should hear from the Secretary himsclf the same
that he had heard, he said that it would have no other result
than to cause fresh troubles to his Majesty, if to the difficulties
with his troops there were added complaints from his friends.
After this, we could not induce his Eminence to remain or to
enter upon any other subject.

When the Cardinal had left us, Machiavelli and myself con-
cluded that it would be well to have this matter made known
in every possible way ; and therefore Machiavelli together with
Ugolino went to see Robertet, whom until now I had not

COURT OF FRANCE. 399

visited, nor had he called upon me, as I had understood that
he preferred that neither your Lordships’ ambassadors nor
those from other states should be on such intimate terms with
him, although in public they show him every mark of esteem
and affection. When Machiavelli returned, he reported to me
that Robertet, so soon as he saw him, said: “Do not talk to
‘me now on any subject, for the Cardinal Legate has told me
“everything that you could possibly wish to say; and I repeat
“to you on his behalf that the truce with the Spaniard will,
“without fail, be ratified; and that whatever the terms may
“be, your safety will be provided for; and in case the truce
“should not be ratified, it will be known within a very few
“days. And I assure you that the king will defend Tuscany
“the same as Lombardy, for he has the safety of both equally
“at heart; and we must wait and see what issue the ratifica-
“tion of the truce will have.” The above is the substance of
what we have been able to learn from these two personages,
and your Lordships can now conjecture what you may have
to hope for. Despite of Machiavelli’s tact, we did not succeed
in touching upon the subject of Giovanpaolo, and we did not
regret to defer it until another day, so as to avoid the ap-
pearance that Machiavelli had come here mainly on that
account, which seemed to us the received impression here;
for the abrupt breaking off of the interview by the Cardinal
d’Amboise had apparently no other motive than to avoid a
discussion of that matter. For after having told us that they
had the best expectations for their cause from Pandolfo, and
having briefly said of Perugia what we have above reported, he
left us to go over to join Nemours and the other persons who
were waiting for him. And notwithstanding that your Lord-
ships had written to me to obtain the consent of the Cardinal
to conclude the engagement of Giovanpaolo, the matter was in
a measure left in suspense. But we shall do our utmost to
bring it to a conclusion satisfactory to your Lordships; and if
we fail, it will not be for want of efforts and diligence on our
part.

I had written thus far on the 27th; it is now the 28th, and
although both yesterday and to-day we endeavored to obtain an
audience of the king, yet we did not succeed, owing to his
Majesty’s indisposition both of mind and body, of which I have
made mention in a previous despatch; for those who have

400 SECOND MISSION TO THE

charge of his health strive to keep him from seeing or hearing
anything that might cause him displeasure. To-day, almost
immediately after dinner, I received a message from his Emi-
nence the Cardinal Legate to come to him; I therefore went at
once to his house accompanied by Machiavelli. Being admitted
to where he was, we found him in council, where there were
present the Grandmaster of Rhodes, Nemours, Robertet, and
eight or ten other personages of the long robe. His Eminence
then said to me, within hearing of all present, that he had me
call because he could not, on the arrival of your secretary two
days since, tell me his whole mind, partly because he had not
had the opportunity of communicating with the gentlemen of
the Council on the subject, and partly for want of time; but he
wished now to do his duty, so that I might write to your Lord-
ships, and keep you in good heart. He then added, almost in
the same words, what he had said to me on a previous occasion ;
namely, that there would have to be either peace or war; and
whether it would be the one or the other would be definitely
known anyhow within the present week. If it be peace, as they
believed it would be, then your Lordships, being the king’s
allies and confederates, might rest in security ; and if it be war,
then you would find that your interests and those of his Majesty
would be regarded as identical, and that nothing would be left
undone to secure your safety. That orders had been given
to assemble twelve hundred lances in the duchy of Milan, and
that your Lordships ought also to do what you could, and take
care, if possible, to prevent any troops from entering into Pisa.
Also that they intended, so soon as they received the answer
from Spain, to despatch an envoy to your Lordships to reassure
you, and to apprise you fully of their plans and intentions.
And in the course of his remarks the Cardinal said, that the
king well knew that he had not in all Italy more faithful friends
than your Lordships and the Duke of Ferrara, and that his
Majesty meant to keep you such. His Eminence was so much
more cheerful than I had yet seen him, that this very cheerful-
ness, and the fact of his having sent to have me called for no
other purpose than to repeat to me what he had already told
me, left me in doubt as to what all this could signify. I replied
for the moment, that, seeing his Eminence and the Council in
such good spirits, | could but rejoice and augur favorably from
it; and that I was quite sure that, in the event of peace or of a

COURT OF FRANCE. 401

truce, your Lordships would have that position and that security
which was due to your fidelity; but that in the event of war,
your Lordships could do but little or nothing by yourselves ;
and that the twelve hundred lances would be a partial remedy
if they were actually now in Lombardy, or would not have to
lose time in getting there. And then I added such further re-
marks as seemed to me calculated to stimulate them to furnish
you the needed help in case peace should not be had. I recalled
to them the conduct of the Venetians, and the means and efforts
employed by them to disturb and disorganize the duchy of Mi-
lan, and the states of the king. All I said was listened to with
great attention; and Machiavelli, who was present as I have
said, added that he would delay his departure until the decision
of Spain should be received, so as to enable him to carry with
him the good news of the agreement, or such resolve on the
part of his Majesty respecting aid as would permit your Lord-
ships to rely upon it with confidence ; — to which D’Amboise re-
plied that this was well. As the Council was more than usually
numerous, I drew Machiavelli and Ugolino aside with me, and
then reminded the Council, in any composition or agreement that
might be arrived at, on no account to disparage our authority
over Pisa; for if the Pisans were named by the Spaniards in any
treaty of peace or truce, it would be looked upon as an evidence
of their independence. Whereupon D’Amboise replied that such
a thing would not be thought of, as they had the matter of Pisa
much at heart. And referring again to our good faith, he spoke
df the Venetians in a detrimental manner rather than other-
wise, and spoke of Pandolfo in such terms as made me judge
that they were not very sure of him, notwithstanding what
he had previously said of Sienna, and which I have mentioned
above; of Giovanni Bentivogli he said that he was an adherent
of the Sforzas.

Your Lordships will see from all I have written what we have
been able to learn, since the arrival of Machiavelli, of the situation
of things here ; and although his commission comprises, besides
pointing out to the king and the Cardinal the dangers, the duty
of seeing with his own eyes what assistance they are preparing
to render us, and to learn their thoughts and designs, and then
to report to you his own conclusions and conjectures as to the
state of things here, nevertheless I do not deem it superfluous,
or out of place, for my own satisfaction, to repeat to your Lord-

VOL, III. 26

402 SECOND MISSION TO THE

ships what I have already written you on a former occasion.
Tlis Majesty the king, and Cardinal d’Amboise, as well as all the
gentlemen and nobles here, are, in consequence of the events
until now, more disposed for peace than for war. They are
carrying on negotiations for such a peace both with Spain and
with the Emperor of Germany; the negotiations with Spain
are at the same point which I mentioned in a former despatch,
and the ratification of the truce is expected to arrive here during
this week. Everybody here at court speaks of it and confi-
dently believes it, and the Spanish ambassadors themselves ex-
press that opinion, and regard its arrival as certain. As for
myself, I cannot judge of this matter differently from what
others do; although I think, according to the experience of the
past, it may or may not be, and that the earnest affirmations
of the ambassadors may merely be intended to lull the king
asleep as to measures necessary to be taken. All this we shall
know very soon, as the time is fixed for the answer to arrive;
and then we shall see the result.

As to the peace which they are trying to bring about with
the Emperor of Germany, nothing definite has as yet been done ;
true, day before yesterday an ambassador of the Empcror’s
arrived here, who is the secretary of that sovereign and greatly
esteemed by him. They went to mect him outside of the city,
and received him with great honors; but it is said that he has
no commission other than to establish relations with his Ma-
jesty the king, until the arrival of his colleague, who has gone
to the Archduke for the purpose of conferring with him before
coming here; but no opinion can be formed as yet whether
a peace will be concluded or not. We must wait for time to
form a judgment upon this matter; but after the arrival of the
other ambassador I shall not fail to watch their movements, and
to advise you fully; and so for the present I shall say no more
about it, as it is not yet of as much importance for your Lord-
ships as the matter of Spain; which, if concluded and the truce
ratified, as is hoped here, will render your Lordships safe from
Gonsalvo and his troops. The Venetians will then also take
care not to wrong or injure you. But if the truce should not be
ratified, to which all the French hold so much, then I should not
know what to say of their thoughts and intentions, and what
provisions will then have to be made other than what I had
written to your Lordships before, and what I write now, and of

COURT OF FRANCE. 403

which you will form such judgment as your wisdom will sug-
gest. And if it so turns out that we shall have war, you can
more immediately demand assistance through us, and they will
no longer be able to take refuge in their hopes of peace, as they
do now; for they must then show their hands, or satisfy your
Lordships. As yet nothing has been said to me respecting the
money due by your Lordships to the king at the time of the
next fair; should they say anything to me about it, I shall re-
ply in accordance with the instructions wus Niccolo Machi-
avelli has brought with him.

I have omitted to tell your Lordships that, before leaving the
Cardinal d’Amboise to-day, I asked him whether he thought
that I ought to call upon the newly arrived ambassador of the
Emperor of Germany, since it was at his suggestion that I
called, on my arrival, upon Monseigneur Philibert; I also asked
him whether in his opinion I ought to call upon the Spanish
ambassadors. He replied that I ought certainly to call upon
both the one and the other, and spoke of them in the most
amiable and honorable manner on the part of his Majesty of
France. And accordingly I shall call upon both of them to-
morrow, and should I learn anything of moment I will promptly
advise your Lordships, que feliciter valeant.

Servitor
NIccoLo VALOoRI,
Lyons, 29 January, 1504. Ambassador.

LETTER III.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here last Friday about the twenty-second hour, and
thus fulfilled the promise made to your Lordships to be here
within six days or sooner, deducting the time occupied in going
to Milan. I have nothing to report as to my proceedings here,
but confirm fully all that the Ambassador has written you at
length. Iam waiting for the expected ratification of the truce
with Spain, after which I shall return, and bring with me either
perfect security for our republic by means of the peace, or I
shall bring instructions to prepare for war. And whether this
will or will not result in safety for your Lordships I am not able

404 SECOND MISSION TO THE

to say; but I know well that it would be impossible to change
the minds of the people here.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.
Servitor
NiccoLo MacHIAVELLI.
Lyons, 30 January, 1504.

N. B.—The individual whom I mentioned in my letter from
Milan as having expressed to me so gloomy a judgment of the
condition of the French there, is the Count Piccino da Novara.
I write this so that your Lordships may attach more impor-
tance to his opinion, for he is well known by all who have been
ambassadors to France.

LETTER IV.

Maentricent SIGNort, ETC. : —

By the enclosed of the 27th, which has been retained until
the 29th, your Lordships will have been informed of all that
has taken place since the arrival of Machiavelli. ‘That letter
was not sent for want of the convenience of a courier, and
from my desire to forward it free of expense. But as some
one leaves this evening for Florence, I will not miss the oppor-
tunity of writing to your Lordships what I heard from the
king, before whom I presented myself to-day immediately after
dinner, accompanied by Machiavelli and Ugolino Martelli. We
spoke to his Majesty conformably to what we had already twice
said to the Cardinal d’Amboise, as reported in the enclosed.
Nor did the king’s replies vary in general from what the Car-
dinal had said; but he added specially that he was organizing
a new corps of fourteen hundred lances and twenty thousand
infantry, and had given orders that very day that a cousin of
D’Aubigny’s should be placed in charge of the citadel of Mi-
lan with one hundred Scottish lances, which he has collected
for the purpose of reducing that stronghold to subjection ; and
that besides these he would send there some two or three hun-
dred lances, of certain detached bands, which he would unite
and send into that duchy. We did not fail to encourage him
to this, and even to greater preparations, and to point out to

COURT OF FRANCE. 405

him that it would be highly advantageous for him to re-engage
as many Italian troops as possible, showing him the course
pursued in that respect by his adversaries. His Majesty re-
plied that he would do so, but that it was necessary that your
Lordships should take into your pay as many as you possibly
could; adding, that the Pope had written him that he was form-
ing a corps of four hundred men-at-arms, and that although he
had given the captaincy to the Duke of Urbino, wishing thus to
honor the Prefect, yet that this was merely a matter of cour-
tesy ; and that he should give orders that these troops should
be commanded by able men, and such as were experienced in
the profession of arms. His Majesty affirmed most energeti-
cally, and showed by his manner, that he felt sure of the Pope;
respecting Spanish affairs and the ratification of the truce, he
expressed the same opinion as the Cardinal Legate, which I
have communicated to you in the enclosed, and he said that
by Friday the answer ought to be here, and that then your
secretary could return to Florence, either with the news of the
definite conclusion of the truce and peace, or of war. Here
we did not fail to remind his Majesty, in the event of war being
the result, of the measures necessary to be taken for the pro-
tection of his own interests as. well as those of his allies; the
most important of which measures were to have a large fleet
at sea, and to strengthen Tuscany with good troops.

It remains for me to inform your Lordships that, before our
interview with his Majesty, the envoy of the Marquis of Man-
tua, and another individual who came here by post, sent by
that prince, had an audience of the king. I could learn noth-
ing of the object of their coming, except what his Majesty told
me so soon as I presented myself; namely, that these gentle-
men had been sent by the Marquis of Mantua for no other pur-
pose than to urge him to attack the Venetians; and that he,
on his part, would not fail to furnish what troops and men-at-
arms he could possibly raise for that purpose. His Majesty
added, that the envoy from Ferrara had made him similar
offers; to all which I replied in a becoming manner, urging
his Majesty to take that course.

To-day the ambassadors of the Emperor of Germany dined
with the Cardinal Legate; they have as yet not had an audi-
ence of the king, and it is believed that the reason is that
his Majesty wishes first to know what propositions they bring,

406 SECOND 2SSION. JO Tie

so as to prepare himself to manage the business with the more
credit to himself. The ambassador from Genoa gave us to
understand, this morning, that by order of his Majesty and his
own government all their vessels that were in port were to be
stopped, as he wished to arm them for his service; from the
same source we learn the death of the Marquis of Saluzzo.
We hear furthermore, from various quarters, that the king
has sequestered all the revenues of Monsignor Ascanio; and
that he has sent for a number of Milanese gentlemen, noted
as being of the Sforza party, and has banished them to differ-
ent places, fixing the time when they must report themselves
there.

After writing thus far, I went to make my visit to the Span-
ish ambassador, as agreed with the Cardinal Legate yesterday.
I conversed with him on general matters, having due regard
to the honor of both sovereigns, as well as that of your Lord-
ships. He replied to me most graciously, and in the course
of his remarks assured me that the ratification of the truce
would unquestionably come, and would not be delayed beyond
this week, and might even reach here this very night.

I mention this to your Lordships, so that you may know
what I have learned from that ambassador; beyond which I
have nothing to report.

I recommend myself humbly to your Lordships, que bene
valeant.

Servitor
NIccoLo VALORI,
Lyons, 30 January, 1504. Ambassador,
—_——_—_@——_——
LETTER Y.

Maceniricent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

We wrote to your Lordships yesterday, since which it hap-
pened that, whilst the Cardinal d’Amboise was at chapel this
morning, we approached his Eminence, who had been con-
versing for a considerable time with Monsecigneur Philibert,
and not without some discussion between them. After some
general remarks and other observations, such as we have men-
tioned before, the. Cardinal said that it seemed to him note-

COURT OF FRANCE. 407

worthy that Gonsalvo was doing all he could to interrupt the
peace negotiations, although he hoped that Gonsalvo would be
constrained to obey; and even if he were not, that your Lord-
ships, with the aid and favor of his Majesty of France, would
not only be able to defend yourselves, but even to keep Gonsalvo
in check. To all this we replied in such manner as we thought
to the point, and which we will not weary your Lordships with
repeating, having written the same thing before. A friend of
your Lordships reported to me the same thing, with the fur-
ther statement that there was an indication that, in the ex-
pected ratification of the agreement, there might be something
that would delay its final conclusion until their Catholic Ma-
jesties should first be informed of Gonsalvo’s opinion upon it ;
but that nevertheless the ratification was regarded as certain.
I should, however, feel that I had failed in my duty and my
office, were I not to report to you daily what we hear.

Nothing else has occurred here worthy of your Lordships’
notice. To-day or to-morrow the other Imperial ambassador
is expected here; he is called the Count Gaspar de Verespony,
and comes accompanied by one of the Archduke’s confidential
men. It was by the Emperor’s orders that these ambassadors
went to the Archduke, so that their mission here might be
conformable to the views of both father and son. According
to what we hear, the ambassador who is already here is a man
of high consideration, and bears the title of Chancellor of the
Province, but he is not to have an audience of the king until
after the arrival of his colleague. We have an excellent op-
portunity of finding out the designs of these ambassadors
through one of their countrymen, who is in our interest. So
far as we have been able to learn, they are greatly incensed
against the Venetians, and inclined to make terms with the
king here, intimating, however, that the Archduke will not
yield any of the conditions for the protection of his property
-that had been subjects of discussion under the former treaty ;
and he particularly claims the kingdom of Naples as a dowry,
as had already been a subject of negotiation. I write these
statements such as they are to your Lordships, inasmuch as
they are secrets reserved for but a few. Some of the suspected
Milanese who have been recalled are beginning to make their
appearance here.

I have nothing further of interest to communicate at present,

408 SECOND MISSION TO THE

having written you yesterday at length; and nothing has oc-
curred here but what I have stated above. I will only observe
that we neither see nor hear anything as to preparations for
war beyond the fact that everybody’s thoughts are directed to
the providing of money. A good deal is said about laying a
tax of ten per cent upon the priests, and about resorting to all
possible measures for collecting this revenue, which, according
to their opinion, will produce large sums. Beyond this I think
of nothing else to mention. Bene valeant DD. VV., to whom
I humbly recommend myself.

Servitor
NiccoLo VALORI,
Lyons, this last day of January, 1504. Ambassador.
ee es

LETTER VI.

Macniricent SIGNoRI, ETC. :—

Should it seem to your Lordships that I have deferred too
long since my arrival to write, it is owing solely to the want
of facilities for sending my letters without involving you in
expense. But we have not and shall not neglect to make every
effort, by all the means at our command, to move and favora-
bly dispose the king and the Cardinal Legate towards our
republic; nor do we omit to do everything in our power to in-
fluence those who surround his Majesty to induce him to think
of the security of your Lordships. It is this probably that has
caused my receiving a visit at my lodgings to-day from Messer
Claudio, who is much employed nowadays by the Cardinal
Legate, and is the Datary* in place of Narbonne. He told
me, on behalf of his Eminence, how well they were disposed,
and how they gave their continuous thoughts to the means
for relieving their own condition, and for the security of their
friends, and that he had come again to ask me what I could
suggest upon that point; adding, that it seemed to them that
Pisa was in the greatest danger, and most exposed to the
power and will of the enemy, who would, if they came there,
cause more ruinous effects than anything else that could at

* Datary, an officer of the Chancery at Rome, who affixes the “datum Roma,”
etc. to the Pope’s Bulls. -

COURT OF FRANCE. 409

present be thought of; and that, if it were possible to open
some communication with the authorities of that city to en-
courage them not to despair and throw themselves into the
arms of the Spaniards or the Venetians, it was believed that
it would be most opportune, and for the common security and
benefit ; but that they would do nothing without the consent
and participation of your Lordships; adding that, whenever it
was in the power of his Majesty, there would not be wanting
ways and means within a few years to satisfy your Lordships.
I replied that your Lordships had brought the necessary reme-
dies most urgently to the notice of his Majesty and of the
Cardinal Legate, as well as to that of the Council when his Ma-
jesty himself was present; and that they must have seen from
your letters, as also from your having so recently sent your
secretary here by post, that your Lordships have not failed in
your duty. But that I believed that it was our ill fortune that
the consideration shown to us should have been so unequal to
that which another potentate of Italy had received, who, through
their coming into Italy, and by his having so often deceived
them, had acquired so great a state in Lombardy and in the
Romagna; whilst we, after such strict observance of our en-
gagements, our constant fidelity, and the loss of one third of
our state, had to make such efforts to persuade them, with so
little satisfaction to ourselves as well as to them, to what was
no less for the advantage of his Majesty the king, than for that
of your Lordships. And if ours was but “a mere song,” as
his Eminence the Cardinal Legate had been several times
pleased to call it, we should leave it to others to sing it, were
it not that we should be the first to suffer. But that if his
Majesty wished to maintain his states in Italy, as well as his
friends, then he ought to put faith in the Italians; and that
it was of the first necessity for your Lordships, as the most
effective remedy for your difficulties, that his Majesty should
place at least eight hundred to one thousand men-at-arms in
Lombardy, secure the Swiss by all means, and carefully watch
matters in Genoa by keeping his fleet there; as also to draw
towards himself as many friends in Italy as possible, and that
mainly from amongst the military men. That his Majesty
should bear in mind that neither the Pope nor your Lordships
could or should be constrained by force, and that he ought to
have confidence in us, whom, after so much experience, he

410 SECOND MISSION. TO THE

ought to trust as he would his own subjects. And that if
Gonsalvo, through the Cardinal Santa Croce or others, in-
fluenced the Pope adversely, no means should be left unem-
ployed to show his Holiness that his Majesty, so far from
abandoning his interests in Italy, has these as well as those
of his friends constantly in his thoughts. That as to what
preparations ought to be made in France, in view either of
peace or of a mere truce, I could not venture to give any
advice, although I would repeat the words of King Louis,
who used to say that “it was always during the negotiations
“that he made greater and better preparations than during
“peace.” <As regards Pisan affairs, I said that his Majesty
knew well that it was the duty of an ambassador to hear all
that was proposed, and then to communicate it to his govern-
ment, and that I intended so to act. That I was well aware
of the importance for Italy to be well armed, so that she might
employ her force whenever necessary ; for if powerful princes
used words without arms to enforce them, it only served to
compromise their dignity. I was answered, that this matter
would present no difficulties, for they knew that the company
of the Venctians was far from agreeable to the Pisans, and
that they were more inclined to trust the French than the
Spaniards; that if these negotiations with the Pisans  suc-
eceded, then both themselves and your Lordships would be
relieved of great dangers; and if they did not succeed, your
Lordships as well as his Majesty the king would better under-
stand the Pisans, and that then by common accord better
remedies could be devised; and that even if these negotiations
with the Pisans were protracted for some length of time, your
Lordships should not at once be discouraged.

I made my usual reply, that I would write to your Lordships,
as you required me to do, for without special orders or instruc-
tions I could not venture to say anything on the subject. Your
Lordships must know that all these arguments have been re-
peated by them several times, and that they evidently have
this matter much at heart; for yesterday morning, at the Ce-
lestines, the Pope’s ambassador spoke to me about it, adding
however that Pisa might be placed in the hands of the Pope,
to which the French would perhaps consent. Nemours said
the same thing afterwards to the ambassador from Ferrara,
and urged him to persuade me to write at once to your Lord-

COURT OF FRANCE. 411

ships about it. Your Lordships must now instruct me pre-
cisely what I am to answer, and how I shall conduct myself,
and I shall keep strictly within your mandate and instructions.

The Imperial ambassadors together with the Archduke’s
agent had an audience of his Majesty to-day ; the impression is,
that at this first interview only general matters were discussed.
I have not yet called upon these ambassadors, for I was waiting
until after they should have had their first audience. I shall
speak again to the Cardinal Legate about it, and follow his
suggestions, as I have had no instructions from your Lordships
upon this point; his Eminence had approved my manner, as
well as the remarks which I made to the Spaniards, which
seemed to have been very agreeable to him. ‘Through our
German friend we learn, from what he has found out by
pretty sure means from the Kmperor’s ambassadors, and es-
pecially the younger one, that his Imperial Majesty is resolved,
come what may, to make a descent into Italy this summer,
with a large force of his own troops; but that his coming will
not be very agreeable to King Frederic, for he knows that
the Archduke wants the kingdom of Naples as a portion for
his son. In the same way I learn that the ambassador who
is called the Chancellor of the Province has frequent confer-
ences with the Spanish ambassadors, and shows them marks
of esteem and confidence, and that that ambassador bears the
same relations to the Emperor as the Cardinal Legate does to
the king of France. On the other hand, these Spaniards aver
that their Catholic Majesties, by way of easing their minds and
conscience, desire to re-establish the son of King Frederic
upon the throne of Naples, by giving him their niece for wife.
These diverse accounts would seem to indicate some difficulty
in the peace negotiations. And although it would appear
reasonable that the Emperor will not make a descent into
Italy without the good pleasure of these two sovereigns, and
without having concluded a peace with his Most Christian
Majesty, yet it is said that he is collecting troops, and has
asked the Swiss for five thousand Vj.2°(?). These people
are reported to be well inclined for such a descent, and par-
ticularly those of the three Cantons nearest to the confines of
the duchy of Milan.

About four days ago a man from that country was brought
before his Majesty and reported to him the above-mentioned

412 SECOND MISSION TO THE

order from the Emperor, and the favorable disposition of the
Swiss for such an enterprise, together with some particulars
as to their demand for a cession of Como and other places;
but his Majesty showed that he did not attach much importance
to this report, feeling quite sure of the Swiss.

Now I wished to inform your Lordships of all I could find
out in relation to these matters, so that, in your wisdom, you
may form your own judgment upon them; particularly seeing
the delay in the arrival of the ratification of the agreement,
and that the truce with Spain will soon expire, and that they
are not doing much here in the way of preparations, but con-
tinue to affirm that they regard the ratification as certain. We
must form our judgement therefore from one day to another,
as events may occur; but we shall continue to be watchful,
so as to keep your Lordships better informed if possible, and
to be able the more promptly to solicit assistance, in case the
ratification should after all not come. Niccolo Machiavelli
will remain here a few days longer.

Yesterday a cousin of the Bailli d’Occan came to me, and
told me he had not yet had his pay for six months’ service,
and wanted us to provide for it. I answered him that I be-
lieved they did not keep their accounts well, but that I would
write to your Lordships for instructions upon the matter ;
although things had come to that pass that it was necessary
for you to think of spending no money except in defence of
your own interests, which were closely united and bound up
with the defence of the states of his Majesty. It was with
some difficulty that I got rid of this man, who kept saying to me
that he intended anyhow to speak to his Majesty and the Cardi-
nal Legate about it. I beg your Lordships will instruct me in
relation to this matter, for this man is a perfect wasp; they
are all starved and ruined, and I wish very much you would
write me whether I shall do anything to make it known that
the engagement of Baglioni is terminated, for this cousin of
his demands it. And although I told him in so many words
that death settled everything, and that such was your Lordships’
understanding of the matter, yet I wish you would instruct me
whether you think that I ought to go any further.

The generals have sent to claim from Ugolino the pay-
ment of ten thousand ducats due at the last fair, as had been
agreed, and to ask at the same time whether the ten thousand

COURT OF FRANCE. 413

ducats due at the present fair were ready, together with what
was due on the past. Ugolino told me that he had replied
that he would speak to me about it; but that this did not
satisfy them, and that they wanted to speak to me themselves,
as also to the king and the Cardinal Legate, inasmuch as this
money had been assigned to them. When they come to talk
to me about it, I shall reply in accordance with your Lordships’
instructions. I have nothing else of interest to communicate
to your Lordships, to whom I recommend myself, que feliciter

valeant,
Servitor
NiccoLo VALoRI,

Lyons, 2 February, 1504. Ambassador.

a Sa

LETTER VII.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I have to-day received your Lordships’ letters of the 26th,
28th, 29th, and 31st ultimo, and of the 1st instant, for which
I had been truly anxious, for it had seemed to me a very long
time to be without news from Florence. Your Lordships must
have received my several letters which I have sent since the
arrival of Machiavelli, written on the 27th, 29th, 30th, and 31st
ultimo, and from which you will have learned all that we have
been able to do since then, and what hopes and conjectures we
have formed as to help from here for ourselves and the other
allies and states which his Majesty has in Italy. Your Lord-
ships will also have noticed what I wrote more especially in
regard to Pisan affairs in my enclosed despatch of the 2d in-
stant, which was not sent sooner because no couriers have
been sent to Italy since then. And so as not to fail in any-
thing that could possibly be done to promote your interests,
and to arouse their feelings in our favor, we went immediately
on receipt of your letters to his Majesty the king, whom I
found still in bed, where he has been confined for more than
a week. He seemed to me to look better than usual, and,
according to what his Majesty himself said, he was in the
best way of getting over his ailment. I communicated to
him the advices I had from your Lordships, also those from
the Romagna, as well as those from Rome which I had re-

414 SECOND MISSION TO. THE

ceived from his Eminence of Volterra, who never fails to keep
me fully posted by every courier upon every point which the
interests of our republic make it necessary for me to know.
I spoke again to his Majesty of the dangers that threaten, first
his friends, and then his own states in Italy, and what meas-
ures were necessary to avert them. Although our conversa-
tion was fragmentary, as seems to be the way in which all
business matters are treated here, yet I was careful to touch
again upon all the points embraced in your Lordships’ instruc-
tions for the advantage of Italy. And as I surmised that the
Venetians are carrying on some secret negotiations with his
Majesty, | advised him well to watch their proceedings, as they
would certainly deceive him underhandedly; and I demon-
strated to him that they had no real intention of making terms
with him, but that it was a mere pretext for obtaining better
terms in the arrangements they were negotiating with the
Emperor of Germany and with Spain. Upon this point his
Majesty replied to me to be of good cheer, that he would never
make terms with the Venctians, and that the Milanese had
offered him one hundred thousand ducats if he would make
war upon Venice; and that he would in any event enter into
an arrangement with the princes of the Empire and with the
Emperor himself, and that conjointly with the Emperor they
would beat Venice and Spain together, in case Spain did not
consent to peace or to a truce. On the one hand his Majesty
seemed to apprehend lest Gonsalvo should disturb the proposed
peace, and on the other hand he spoke confidently of conclud-
ing an arrangement, unless the king of Spain should demand
conditions that were not acceptable to him.

The hostile disposition of the king towards the Venetians
manifests itself in many other ways besides his own words;
for this very day, after the audience, I met the ambassador
from Ferrara, who told me that he had also spoken with the
king this morning, and that his Majesty had said to him that
he wished that his Duke would, for the love of him, once
more put on his armor against the Venetians, and that before
dying he wanted anyhow to recover the states which they
had taken from him. His Majesty entered fully into the rea-
sons which I suggested to him relative to the affairs of Pisa,
showing that he believed that it was from that quarter that
your Lordships were more exposed to attack than from any

COURT OF FRANCE. 415

other; and for that reason, he said, he had caused M. de Ra-
venstein to open certain secret negotiations with the Pisans,
so that they might not throw themselves into the arms of
Gonsalvo, or of any one else; adding, “that if two or three
“thousand infantry entered Pisa, they could disturb your Lord-
“ships’ state very much, and that in such case it would be
“very difficult to take the town by force.” His Majesty came
back several times to this argument, so that it is evident that
he had the matter much at heart, as I have explained to your
Lordships at length in the enclosed despatch. And yet it is
affirmed here that there is no intention to make any arrange-
ment with Pisa without your consent and participation; it is
necessary, therefore, that your Lordships should write me your
views upon this point, and how I am to manage this matter if
pressed to something definite. Respecting the provisions to
be made for his own safety, and for that of his allies, his Ma-
jesty held the same views which I have before communicated
to your Lordships; and although we have reminded him of the
importance of taking Italian troops into his pay, yet it does
not appear that he responds in a manner to give any hope for
it; and what makes me believe that he is in no way disposed
to do it is that the envoy of the Marquis of Mantua told me,
that the said Marquis had sent a man expressly to ask the
king’s permission to raise fifty Italian men-at-arms in place
of the fifty French lances which he has engaged from his
Majesty, but his request was not granted, which fact, in every
respect, deserves your consideration. We did not omit to urge
upon the king again to remember his friends in the agreement
which is being negotiated, and to save them, which he has
promised to do. After taking my leave of his Majesty, I
thought it proper to call with Machiavelli upon the Grand
Chancellor, whom, for good reasons, I had not seen since the
arrival of Machiavelli. I was more particularly induced to do
this, as I had not been able to speak to the Cardinal Legate ;
and accordingly we went to see the Chancellor, and said to
him all we could under the circumstances respecting his
Majesty’s affairs, as well as our own and those of the rest of
Italy. His Lordship received us very cheerfully, and seemed to
listen to my remarks with great interest; he spoke himself of
passing events, and what he thought of them, and of his hopes
for a favorable issue; and said, in substance, that the king, for

416 SECOND MISSION TO THE

his part, had not the least fear, for that whoever should at-
tempt to assail the king in his proper states of France would
find out their mistake. And here he gave us an account of the
king’s forces, and referred to the example of the past, ete., etc.
And as regards the duchy of Milan, they would anyhow within
two months have a thousand French lances there, and could
send there at any moment six thousand infantry; but that
his Majesty did have some fears for his friends who were more
open to attack. But looking at it on the other hand, that he
held the duchy of Milan, which forms a considerable part of
Italy, and that the Pope and all Tuscany were his friends, it
seemed to him that he had more than a mere party in Italy,
and that if they did their duty, sustained by the power and
good will of the king, they would be well able to defend them-
selves. He came back several times to this point, saying that
your Lordships ought to show some vigor and take good care
of Livorno, pointing out its importance and its convenience
for the French fleet, as well as for your defence.

I remained a long time with the Chancellor, and did not fail
to reply to that part of his remarks which seemed most suita-
ble; telling him that it was well for him to say that we ought
to take vigorous measures, but that the difficulty was the lack
of power to do so, giving him the reasons; and that therefore
it was necessary that the king should make such display of
vigor, and pointed out to him that there were two ways of his
doing so. The one was to bring about a union between the
Pope and all Tuscany, Bologna, Ferrara, and Mantua, so that
these different members should become one body, and that
their united power might act with greater effect ; and to bring
this about, it was necessary to send some sagacious man,
charged with this object, to the several parties. The other
way was for the king to take into his pay as many Italian
captains as he possibly could, adding that there were not so
many military men in Italy but what he could in a very short
time engage the greater part of them, provided he was willing
to spend his money for that purpose. And as an example we
cited our own republic, which in former times, when she was
not torn to pieces as now, had many times, with nothing but
her money, taken their arms from her enemies. We also cited
the example of Gonsalvo, who achieved victory with Italian
troops. These arguments satisfied him, and he promised his

COURT OF FRANCE. 417

efforts to bring about either one or the other. Upon the point
of employing Italian troops, however, he stated that out of the
one thousand lances which they were going to send into Lom-
bardy, as stated above, there would be more than four hundred
Italians; and he seemed to wish to infer that, so far as to the
taking of Italians into their pay, they had done their part, and
that it was for their friends now to do the rest.

Thus, not having been able to see the Cardinal Legate to-day,
we have not gathered any further information than what we
have above written. Your Lordships will now form such judg-
ment of it as your wisdom will suggest, and see what hopes it
will be safe to build upon it. And as there is as yet no solu-
tion of the Spanish business, no answer having been received
from there, although there is some talk at court that it has
come, I have not permitted Machiavelli to leave here, because
our intention is to make his departure the occasion for press-
ing them here a little more, and to see whether we cannot get
something more out of them, although I doubt it; and many
persons begin to doubt whether this Spanish business has not
been protracted on purpose, and that the French have been
deceived. It is said that an agreement has been concluded
with the Swiss, who promise to serve the king within the duchy
of Milan and in France, but nowhere else. If this be true, then
it is very opportune. The German ambassadors have to-day
received an express from his Imperial Majesty, who is at Olem-
berg; this messenger made the trip in five days, and after his
arrival Robertet passed full two hours or more with the am-
bassadors, and has written much. It is believed that they are
drawing up the articles of agreement. Another envoy of the
Archduke is expected here, who is said to hold a high position
near that prince. It is evident now that the king mistrusts
the treaty with Spain, and has entirely turned towards the
Germans; and it is suspected that he is disposed to dissuade
the Emperor from his purpose of coming into Italy, and thus
save the Italians from seeing every day new faces. There is
one indication that I have noticed which makes me believe
that these things may well be so, for the Germans no longer
exert themselves as much as they did, nor do they see the
Spanish ambassadors as often as they used to do, and as I
have mentioned in one of my letters. From all these facts
your Lordships will form such conjectures as your wisdom will

VOL. Ill. 27

418 SECOND MISSION TO THE

suggest; and if I have the opportunity of speaking with the
Cardinal Legate to-morrow, as I think I shall, I will write to
your Lordships what I learn from him, and will send it by the
first messenger that is despatched for Italy. I have nothing
further to say, except to recommend myself humbly to your
Lordships, que felicissime valeant.
Servitor
NiccoLo VALorRI,
Lyons, 7 February, 1504. Ambassador.

LETTER VIII.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Your Lordships will have seen from the enclosed of the 7th
what has been done since the receipt of your last letters. De-
spite of all my efforts yesterday to speak to the Cardinal Legate
I did not succeed, for he is suffering, it is said, from a violent
catarrh, and neither dines nor sups in public, as is his wont.
Being thus unable to do anything else, and feeling that we
ought not to neglect anything we could possibly do, we went to
see Robertet and pointed out to him very fully where the diffi-
culty and complication of the matter really lies; and as he has
better opportunities for communicating with the Legate, we
left him certain extracts from the letters received, which briefly
give the substance of all we have heard from Florence; and by
way of spurring them up, we said to Robertet that Machiavelli
was determined to return even without concluding anything.
Robertet, showing that he was startled by this, said that Machi-
avelli ought to stay a few days longer, at least until the Span-
ish business was either closed or broken off, so that he might
return with something definite. As mentioned in a former
despatch, Robertet had from the first approved of your having
sent Machiavelli here. I have seen the Pope’s ambassador,
and, in talking over with him the events of the day, we agreed
to call together this morning on the Cardinal Legate, to see
whether we two could not bring matters to a better conclu-
sion than what until now I had been able to do, having due
regard to the information respecting the state of things in the
Romagna contained in your Lordships’ letters; and to see

COURT OF FRANCE. 419

whether we could not induce the Legate to take steps for
bringing about that league of the Italian states which we had
suggested. Also to know clearly whether they intended to en-
gage Italian troops for the defence of the Church and their
other friends, although I have great doubts upon this point, for
the reasons which your Lordships will have noted in my en-
closed despatch. We went accordingly this morning to call
upon D’Amboise, but did not succeed in obtaining an interview,
and have appointed another hour of the day for that purpose.
As, however, this courier leaves, I would not miss the opportu-
nity of writing to your Lordships what has been done up to the
present. It is true that Robertet and the Chancellor have been
with D’Amboise this morning, and, as they remained a long
while with him, I believe they must have talked over among
them the subject on which we have said so much to them.
We have done all that can be done, and have not neglected
trying to know all and do all in our power. I will not omit
to inform your Lordships what I have learned from a friend
who had a conversation with the Spanish ambassadors, who,
upon his remarking as to the delay in the answer from Spain,
said to him, that he must not be much surprised at that, for
they doubted whether the king of Spain would settle anything
until after having first freed the entire kingdom of Naples
of the French; and that the king of Spain well knew what
it meant to make a truce whilst Louis d’Ars was in Venosa, or
in any other place within the kingdom of Naples. Every day
some of the French, who come back from there, die; quite re-
cently Sandricourt and the Bailli de la Montagne died. This
is all that occurs to me to say. Bene valeant DD. VV., quibus
me commendo.

Servitor
NiccoLo VALORI,
Lyons, 9 February, 1504. Ambassador.
—_——_¢@—_—_—.
LETTER IX.

Macniricent SIGNoRI, ETC. : —

My last letters were of the 2d, 7th, and 9th instant, and were
sent by a courier despatched by Neri Masi; they will have in-
formed your Lordships of the state of things here, and what we

420 SECOND MISSION TO THE

have been able to do here since receiving your last letters.
Although I endeavored to see the Cardinal Legate yesterday, as
already stated in my last, yet I failed to obtain an interview, as
he is still confined to his chamber, and no one has been admitted
except the Chancellor, Nemours, and Robertet; and so far as I
can learn, they have been occupied with orders and despatches
for the regulation of matters in the kingdom of Naples and the
duchy of Milan. Being however at the Legate’s lodgings this
morning, | succeeded, after some little effort, in obtaining an in-
terview with him. In reminding him of our affairs, ] mentioned
to him what the Spanish ambassadors were reported to have
said about the delay of the ratification of the truce, of which I
informed your Lordships in my last of the 9th; to which he
immediately replied, although having listened attentively to all
that had been said, that the Spanish ambassadors had notified
him that the ratification had been received,* and that they in-
tended to call upon him that evening in relation to that matter,
and that he would then inform me of the result. I expressed
my pleasure at this on account of the general good; and without
any further remarks, seeing that he was very much occupied,
I took my leave. Anxious to learn something more upon this
important subject, I called at the king’s lodgings, thinking that
ftom his frank way of speaking I might get a little more at the
bottom of this matter. I was finally admitted to his Majesty,
who was still at table, and at a convenient moment I broached
in a suitable manner the subject of the news which I had heard
from D’Amboise. His Majesty promptly replied that the ratifi-
cation had come, but that he was not satisfied with it, and could
have wished rather that it had not come; affirming, with an
oath, that he would give a great deal not to have promised the
Spaniards what he had done; but having given his word, he
would keep it, for he would sooner die than break his pledge,
affirming again that, if he were now called upon to make such a
promise, he would certainly not do it; for that he had made en-
tirely sure of the Swiss, and was upon the point of making terms
with the Germans, from which he hoped great good; so that he
was now in condition to chastise those who had offended him.

* The truce between the Spanish and the French was concluded for three
years, with the agreement that each party was to name their friends and adhe-
rents within the space of three months. The Florentines were named by the
French.

COURT OF FRANCE. 421

And here he mentioned the Venetians by name, adding that,
cost what it may, they must be destroyed; and that he felt sure
that for such a purpose you would give your men-at-arms, and
do all that was in your power. He said, furthermore, that he
would very soon have one thousand men-at-arms in Lombardy,
and that there was money enough ready to pay at once eight
thousand Swiss, and make them descend into Italy whenever
it might be necessary, either for his defence, or for that of his
friends, or for attacking his enemies; and that he should not
want for either men or money. Also, that he had issued a new
order in France, besides the regular troops of the line, to organ-
ize and keep ready for service a corps of eighteen hundred no-
bles, each of whom was to have three horses for service. And
he spoke again of the twenty thousand infantry which he kept
ready, and said, with much animation, that he intended neither
to abandon his own interests nor those of his friends, that he
was in better health than he had been for ten years, and that
his illness had been caused by nothing but his displeasure at
the base conduct and wickedness of his troops; but that it was
necessary for him to have patience, and to reorganize his forces,
which he should not fail to do, leaving nothing undone in that
respect. He also said, that we might consider the peace with
the Emperor of Germany as assured, and that we ought to be of
good cheer, as he should not fail in anything that was due to our
republic, and would allow no one to touch a hair of your head ;
and that to be wanting to you now would in fact be wanting to
himself; that he esteemed Florence as much as he did Milan
or any other of his own states. And that if the Emperor passed
through Italy to go to Rome, by whatever route he went, he
would hold him in check by having him accompanied by a good
portion of his own, and by some of your Lordships’ troops, so
that the Emperor should not be able to do anything without the
will and consent of others. That possibly it might happen that
he would himself come into Italy; but that under any circum-
stances it would be proper to treat the Emperor well, to be lib-
eral towards him in all outward ceremonies, and to show him all
the customary honors due to so great a prince; and in case of
any disaster befalling him on the road, we might aid him with
some men and some money. And then his Majesty said: “T
‘assure you that the Emperor is ill disposed towards those
“Venetians, and I know that you feel even worse towards them;

492 SECOND MISSION TO THE

“and as for myself, I feel worse towards them than either of
“you.” After that his Majesty suddenly turned to Pisan affairs,
and charged me to advise your Lordships to think of them, and
that it would be well anyhow to have some stores and _ provis-
ions sent into the town, saying that he had letters from there
to the effect that they would gladly place themselves in his
hands, but that he would not accept the proposition unless it
was your Lordships’ wish that he should; and that he said this
so that if any difficulty resulted from it that caused you dissat-
isfaction, he wished to be in a position of having done his duty
towards you; and that he would not fail to remember your
Lordships’ interests and necessities.

Your Lordships will observe that I have placed all his
Majesty’s remarks together, without interrupting them by the
replies which I made in the course of this interview, in which I
did not fail to remind his Majesty in proper terms of those
things that are essential for our republic. I have done this so
that your Lordships, having all the remarks of his Majesty
together before your eyes, may be the better able to weigh
them, and to form such judgment of them as your wisdom may
suggest, and then to instruct me how I am to conduct myself in
relation to the events that may occur from day to day. I again |
venture, with all due respect, to call your Lordships’ attention
to this Pisan business, and to ask you to instruct me whether I
am to cut short their arguments or to continue to listen to them.
Your Lordships moreover have heard that the ratification of the
truce has really come, but with all my efforts to learn some of
the particulars of it I have not succeeded. All I have learned,
and that is neither from the king nor from the Cardinal Legate,
but from some one who says that he has heard it from both, is
that both parties are to have three mouths’ time within which
they are to name their allies and adherents, that the truce is to
last three years both on land and on the sea, and that the
French and the Spaniards are both free to transport their mer-
chandise from any one place to another. More than this I have
not learned, and it is very possible that it contains but few other
articles; for in the opinion of many with whom I have con-
versed, this truce is to serve merely as a suspension of arms;
and it is believed that one of the advantages from it will be that
the friends of the king in Italy will remain more secure. So
far as I can learn, nothing is said of Don Federigo, or of any of

COURT OF FRANCE. 423

the barons of the kingdom of Naples. There remains still this
German matter, which deserves to be watched and carefully
considered by every Italian, particularly if the Emperor comes
into Italy, as seems to be decided, so soon as the treaty shall |
have been definitely concluded. And you will observe from the
remarks of the king that the Emperor will not be able to at-
tempt this passage by himself, but will have to be aided in it by
others. It seems reasonable that the king will endeavor to re-
lieve himself of as much expense as he can, and that he will aid
the Emperor to procure for himself subventions of men and
money from others. All this your Lordships will take into
consideration with your habitual prudence.

In compliance with his Majesty’s suggestion I have called
upon the German ambassadors. Certainly the Chancellor must
be a man of great ability ; he spoke of our republic in the name
of his sovereign in the most honorable manner, and has prom-
ised also to do, both here and at home, all he can to serve the
interests of your Lordships.

The arrival of this ratification from Spain has made these
people here very anxious to collect the money which they claim
that we have to pay them at the time of the present fair for their
pretended protection; and their generals have already spoken
three times to-day to Ugolino on the subject. And Monsignore
di Ravel has a man here for the express purpose of soliciting
for him, and he acts like all men who have but one thing to
attend to, so that I have him all day at my ears. This illustri-
ous Signore has written me a letter on the subject, which is
herewith enclosed ; and I beg your Lordships will be pleased to
write me what I am to reply upon both the one and the other of
these subjects; for the Cardinal Legate is so dissatisfied and
displeased with Giovanpaolo Baglioni, that you cannot speak
to him about it.

His Majesty will leave here on Sunday or Monday, unless
something special should occur to prevent him; and I shall
follow him in two or three days after; and Machiavelli will re-
turn by short stages to Italy, if nothing occurs meantime that
will require him to make greater speed. I can think of nothing
else to write except to recommend myself most humbly to your
Lordships, que felicissime valeant.

Servitor
NIccoLo VALORI,

Lyons, 11 February, 1504. Ambassador.

424 SECOND MISSION TO THE

LETTER X.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

By the enclosed of the 11th instant, your Lordships will have
been informed of all that has occurred up to that day. I have
since then been with the Legate this morning, who, so soon as
he perceived me enter his room, called me to him and said to me
that things were going on well, and that he hoped they would
be going on still better; and that the Venetian ambassador had
been with him, and had made numerous offers on the part of
his Signoria, showing how anxious they were to please his
Most Christian Majesty. Whereupon the Legate told me that
he said to hin, that, if the Venetians wished to be friends of
the king, they ought to show proper regard for his friends in
Italy, and especially mentioned your Lordships to him; for
that if you were wronged, it was the same as if his Majesty
himself had been injured directly. To which, he said, the
ambassador replied, with an oath, that his Signoria had never
so much as thought of wronging anybody, and that he might
make himself easy on that score, for they had no intention of
injuring any one, neither the Florentines nor any other friends
of his Majesty.

I thanked his Eminence for what he had done, but showed
him that that did not suffice, as it was only a temporary relief ;
and that it was necessary to think of means of placing the
Venetians in such a position that they should not be able at
their pleasure to assail any one, so that at no time either the
king or his friends should be at their discretion. I think that
the Legate told me the above of the Venetians for the purpose
of allaying all suspicions which have been manifested here of
late; for they have always had two great fears, the one of
Gonsalvo, and the other of the Venetians. And as they seem
to think that by means of this truce they have secured you
against the Spaniards, so they wished to show that you had
equally nothing to fear from the Venetians. His Eminence
continued his remarks, and urged earnestly that you should
look to the matter of Pisa, and that you ought to give it your
attention now, whilst there is still time, so as to prevent the
occurrence of anything that would be unsatisfactory to the
king and your Lordships. And here he added, that his cousin

COURT OF FRANCE. 425

Monseigneur de Bayeux, who had some influence in Pisa, had
initiated certain negotiations, and drawn up certain articles to
which the Pisans would consent, and which he would send to
me, charging me to forward them to your Lordships, so that
you might carefully consider them; and if these articles met
your approval, then they would serve to put an end to those
evils which for so long a time had kept Tuscany and all Italy
feeble. I replied to all this the same as I had done before;
namely, that I would communicate it all to your Lordships,
and then await your instructions, without which I could not
discuss the matter. I shall wait and see what these proposed
articles amount to, and so soon as received I will forward them
to your Lordships, and you will judge of them with your habit-
ual wisdom. I have no further particulars of the truce to com-
municate to your Lordships, but am waiting to get a copy of
it, which I certainly shall have so soon as it is published and
proclaimed, and will then send it at once to your Lordships.
After leaving the Cardinal Legate, and knowing that Mon-
seigneur de Trans had returned here from his embassy to
Rome, and was confined at home by a slight indisposition, I
went to call upon him, so as to learn something from him about
the Pope and the affairs of Italy, as also to show him a cour-
tesy which I did not think ought to be omitted. He seemed de-
lighted at my visit, and talked to me much and for a long time
of the affairs of Italy; and his remarks were in my opinion
very judicious. He observed that things were at this moment
in such condition that every one could revenge himself on the
Venetians, and assure himself of them; but if the present
opportunity were allowed to pass, and some prince should
happen to die, there would be danger of being obliged to sub-
mit to their domination. After that he observed how reason-
able it was, and how easily it could be done. And first he
said, that Spain, having declined to have the king of France as
copartner in the possession of the kingdom of Naples, would
still less want the Venetians there; and that the Pope would
naturally wish to recover his own, and to avenge the Church
of the old wrongs done to her, as well as of the recent ones.
And in the same way the Emperor ought to desire to put his
foot into Italy on their territory, and to recover the posses-
sions which the Venetians had taken from the empire. And
that the king of France ought also gladly to concur in all this,

426 SECOND MiSSLON GO. Lids

not so much for the sake of restoring to the duchy of Milan what
the Venetians had taken possession of, as for the purpose of
securing himself against their power and malevolence. And if
he were not stirred by these two motives, he ought to be moved
by the satisfaction which it would give to his entire realm, and
by the desire of every lord and every subject to make war upon
the Venetians. But for the accomphshment of all this it was
necessary to do everything that possibly could be done to pre-
vent the Venetians from being named in the truce by either of
the kings as allies or adherents.* And believing it certain
that they would not be named under any circumstances by the
king of France, all efforts should be made to prevent their
being named by the king of Spain; and that for this purpose
he saw no surer means than the intervention of the Pope. He
told me that he purposed writing very fully on the subject, and
that he had held the same language to the Cardinal Legate
D’Amboise, who had seemed pleased at it; and that he in-
tended also to speak to the king about it so soon as he should
be able to go out. He spoke on this subject with a degree of
vivacity and earnestness which I cannot possibly describe to
your Lordships. And as the mode of proceeding urged by him
seemed to me quite in your interest, | encouraged him with all
the arguments of which I was master. He told me further-
more, that he should also write to his Eminence the Cardinal
Volterra about it, so that he might remind his Holiness of what
ought to be done, and to urge him to do it; and requested me
to write also in the same sense to his Eminence. I did not
think it amiss to do so, but in my letter I have been careful
to speak as it were by the mouth of Monscigneur de Trans.

I write all these particulars to your Lordships so that, should
you deem it advisable to urge this matter, you can instruct
your ambassador at Rome accordingly, for his Eminence of
Volterra can do a great deal towards it; and the consequence
will be that either the king of Spain will abstain from naming
the Venetians in the truce from fear of offending the Pope, or,
if he persists in doing it, the French here will make greater
efforts to win his Holiness over to their side, and perhaps,
seeing the king of Spain’s disposition in the matter, they may

* The Venetians were proposed by the king of Spain, but the French refused
to accept them, because of their hostility to the Church; and thus they were not
named.

COURT OF FRANCE. 427

resort to measures other than the truce. For his Majesty of
France has said, with his own mouth, that if the king of Spain
were not satisfied with what was reasonable, the Emperor and
the Archduke would in less than three months be more hostile
to him than he was himself; intimating thereby that to com-
prise the Venetians within the terms of the truce, or in any
way to tie the hands of the Emperor, would be food for fresh
quarrels, inasmuch as the Empire could not otherwise be sat-
isfied.

This morning, whilst at church, I was assailed by those
generals on account of the money of which your Lordships
know; they told me that it must be provided anyhow. Since
then the Cardinal Legate has twice sent to me for the same
purpose, and was with difficulty put off, although I replied
sharply, and alleged all the reasons and justifications that
occurred to me at the moment. They say that this does not
satisfy them; and that, as they are preparing for the defence
of the duchy of Milan, we may rest perfectly secure on all
sides; and therefore they press me for the money in such man-
ner that it becomes necessary for me to have instructions as
to what I am to do in the matter. I have omitted to tell your
Lordships that the Cardinal Legate and Robertet request that
the negotiations with Pisa may be kept secret, and the king
desires the same of me as regards his frank remarks touching
the Venetians.

It is said that at the farthest within a couple of days the
other envoy of the Archduke, Monseigneur de Veri by name,
will be here; and that on his arrival the treaty between his
Majesty the king and the Emperor and the Archduke will be
concluded, the conditions having been all agreed upon. This
is all I have to communicate, except humbly to recommend
myself to your Lordships, que felicissime valeant.

Servitor
| NiccoLo VALOoRI,
Lyons, 13 February, 1504. Ambassador.

428 : SECOND MISSION TO THE

e

LETTER XI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

On the 11th and 18th instant I wrote to your Lordships through
the agency of Neri Masi, and another letter, also of the 13th,
I sent under cover of Tommaso del Bene, by one of the Duke
Valentino’s men. In these | wrote particularly, and as nearly
as possible in their very words, what the king and D’Amboise
had told me, leaving it to your Lordships to form your own
judgment therefrom, as regards your own as well as his Ma-
jesty’s interests. As Turpin, the treasurer, never fails when
he meets me to remind me of the money which he claims to
have been assigned to him, and the want of which impedes all
other affairs, 1 did not wish to afford him the opportunity to
speak to me on the subject in presence of either the king or
the Cardinal Legate, lest I should answer him impatiently ;
and therefore I have been but rarely to call upon either one or
the other. And not having consequently anything to commu-
nicate to your Lordships that I had heard directly from them,
nor having been charged by them with any special commission,
it seems to me not amiss to give you such information as I
have been able to gather from persons who have good facilities
for knowing all that goes on here. This may appear to your
Lordships to differ from what I have written in several of my
letters, but experience has shown that matters are often con-
ducted here very differently from what men generally presume,
and from what would seem reasonable.

I have been told that the king of Spain will name the Vene-
tians as his friends and confederates. The French are said to
be disposed to do the same, without reflecting what a reputa-
tion it would give to these Venetians, by letting the world see
that each of these kings is anxious to have them with him. I
made a friend of your Lordships ask the Cardinal Legate about
it, as a matter that was of no less importance to his master
than to others, and he replied, “ We certainly have no intention
“of doing so; but as I see that you have been talking with
“the Spanish ambassadors, I would like to know what their
“king is going to do.” This reply does not seem to me to
differ much from what has been told me by another friend, who
is constantly near the king from pure loyalty, and who hears

COURT OF FRANCE. 429

much, and who, speaking to me on the subject, remarked:
_ “His Majesty of France is tired of war, and evidently anxious
‘for peace; and he would not like to have it appear, in case
“of new complications, that he would have to avail himself of
“the reputation and credit of the Venetians, who, more easily
“than any one else, could molest the duchy of Milan. Anda
“proof that the king is afraid of this is, that, so soon as he
‘found himself obliged to fall back, he wanted to secure him-
“self on that side, and sent an envoy exclusively for that pur-
“pose to Venice.” He added: “The possessions which the
“Venetians have at the foot of the mountains on the side of
“Germany are a barrier and a palisade that protects Lombardy
“against the Swiss as well as the Germans, which he would
“not like to have thrown down; although at present he is on
“goood terms with the Emperor, and although in words that
“sovereign would be permitted to pass into Italy, yet in fact
“and reality he would never be allowed to do so.” My friend
assured me, at the same time, that it was positively certain that
by an arrangement of the king of France the offer would be
made to the Emperor to send him the imperial crown on the
part of his Holiness by a Legate.

I believe that this may well happen, for my authority is very
reliable. It may also be that they may wish to stand upon
both feet, and first to try: and bring about that which they
desire most, which may easily be gathered from many indi-
cations and from various conversations, although somewhat
general, with the king and the Cardinal Legate; namely, that
by means of this agreement made with the Emperor and the
Archduke they can in some way make Spain understand that
there is mistrust between them, because they will not allow
the father to retrieve the affairs of the Empire, nor the son to
refuse to keep the agreement which he has made, or to take
the kingdom of Naples from them. And on the other hand,
if a way be found to make them come to a good understand-
ing, and to have it well confirmed between them, and if his
Holiness (who plays the principal part in this game) takes it
well to heart, it might easily be that the result would tend to
insure the security of Italy and their own for a long time. The
Cardinal Legate has recently written to the Pope with his own
hand; and I have been told that if they see that he goes reso-
lutely with them, and looks to the security of Italy, they will not

430 SECOND MISSION TO THE

fail to support him. But if otherwise, and they do not find
that support in the Emperor and the Archduke which they had
wished and hoped for, they will assuredly take the second part.
And therefore to support the affair as much as possible at
Rome would be to insure success rather more effectually than in
any other way. And here we shall not fail to act in such man-
ner as we shall think best calculated to satisfy your Lordships ;
and if I overstep the bounds of my duty, or write too freely, I
beg your Lordships to believe that it arises simply from my
devotion and zeal.

In a conversation which Ugolino had with Robertet, the
latter told him that it was not necessary at present to think of
uniting Italy, and that it was advisable rather not to let the
intention become known. Although he went no further, yet I
think it may be that they do not wish to give Spain the occa-
sion of having to name the Venetians, cte., and that they want
first clearly to know the Pope’s intentions. Certain it is, that
if the Cardinal Legate docs not take them under his protection,
either because he believes that it would be of advantage to
France, or for any other reason, they could not be in worse
estimation, either with the king or with the general mass of the
French. This matter sometimes disturbs the judgment of the
Cardinal Legate, for, notwithstanding what he has said as to
what the Venetians intend to do, and how he has spoken of
them, the words which his Eminence used when he spoke of
them the last time to us were not without some symptoms
of justification, and were somewhat more friendly than usual.
I must also mention to your Lordships, in connection with this
subject, that when the king told the ambassador from Ferrara
to write to his Duke that a month should not pass before he
would have the Polesine restored to him, he charged the am-
bassador expressly not to have the matter talked about.

I place all these things before your Lordships just as I hear
them, so that you may in your wisdom form a proper judgment
of them. The treaty negotiations with Germany are being fol-
lowed up; and although the French say that they are as good
as concluded, yet I hear from a very reliable source that there is
a great dispute about the investiture, and that the ambassadors
of his Imperial Majesty say that they have no instructions upon
that point; and I believe that the last messenger, whom they
have despatched only a few days since, has been sent for no

COURT OF FRANCE. 431

other purpose. I understand, and from different quarters, that
it is the intention to put a part of these barons from the king-
dom of Naples upon the Pope and upon your Lordships; and that
they have also made some promises to the Marquis of Mantua
in connection with this matter. They may perhaps have done
this, because, not wishing to comply with the demands which
he had made, they yet wished to show him that they had not
lost sight of his case ; or perhaps they think of satisfying him
at the expense of others. Whatever they may do with regard
to the Marquis, their intentions touching these barons are posi-
tively fixed; so that if anything is said to me on the subject,
I know that I could only say in reply that I would write to
your Lordships about it; yet if you would give me some in-
structions, I might shape my answer so as to meet their views
to some little extent. Nothing further occurs to me to write,
except to recommend myself to your Lordships, que felicissime
valeant.
Servitor
NICCOLO VALORI,
Lyons, 17 February, 1504. Ambassador.

LETTER XII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORT, nop MOR S —

Not having had an opportunity of sending mine of the 17th
sooner, it will be enclosed with this; at the same time I send
your Lordships a copy of the articles of the truce, which were
published here yesterday. I believe this publication has been
hastened by the very great desire which the king has to get
away from here; for it is said that he is so disgusted with this
place that it will be a long time before he returns to it. On
the occasion of this publication it seemed to me proper to call
upon the Spanish ambassadors, and I learned from them, what
seemed to me to be said for some special purpose, that it had
been well considered to have the truce published on a fixed day,
and that they had taken so much time for it, in order that
during the interval Gonsalvo might make himself master of all
that remained of the kingdom of Naples; so that there should
not be the smallest place left, nor the least spark that could

432 SECOND MISSION 20" THE

rekindle a great conflagration, which would never take place
with the consent of their Catholic Majesties, who were both
most anxious for peace. And that matters here would not be
impeded by them, as they should remain content with Span-
ish and Sicilian affairs, leaving those of Italy to whom they
belonged, namely, Don Federigo. It may be that such is re-
ally their intention, but (to continue, with all due respect,
my habit of writing to your Lordships without any reserve)
I know not whether they may not have spoken to me thus
because they knew that certain charges were made against
them here; or they may have heard some remarks by the
Archduke, and wished to justify themselves in anticipation,
and at the same time delay and protract some other business.
Although I had resolved on account of those unfortunate men
of the Bailli, who are really starving and constantly after me,
not to frequent the court, yet on the publication of the truce,
and because of certain rumors that had come to my ears re-
specting Piombino, I was unwilling to miss presenting myself
before his Most Christian Majesty; and being promptly ad-
mitted, I again expressed my pleasure at this publication of the
truce, and asked whether I should have to write to your Lord-
ships anything but good news on the part of his Majesty ; after
which I endeavored adroitly to learn from him whether he had
heard anything of those rumors that were being circulated
about Piombino, and about the treaty with the Emperor, al-
ways recommending to his Majesty the interests of our re-
public.

In answer to my first remarks about the truce, the king
came back to what he had told me before, —that, were it not
for his determination to keep his faith, etc., he did not know
how things would go on, and that we should soon sce or hear
of something,— showing both by his language and gestures
that he was not much pleased with the business. If I am not
mistaken, they are following the same track that I mentioned
to your Lordships in my enclosed despatch. You will be better
able to judge than myself whether matters will go on well or
otherwise. One thing is very clear, and I have it from very
good authority, namely, that the Pope’s support is of great im-
portance to both parties, whether it be to make them observe
the truce, or whether it be to make the Spaniards disclose their
purpose, and to alienate them from the Venetians. Respecting

COURT OF FRANCE. 433

Piombino, his Majesty said, “The Genoese ambassador has
“been to confer with me on the subject, but from my own
“people I have heard nothing.” And as that ambassador had
told him that the people of Piombino had cried, “* Marzocco and
“St. George!” I asked his Majesty whether he would have been
pleased if the movement had succeeded; to which he replied,
“Yes,” that it would have given him pleasure. Beyond all
doubt it is well with these people to be of the country that is
spoken of. His Majesty then touched upon Pisan matters, with
which I have already wearied your Lordships; and although
I tried twice to interrupt him, yet he invariably returned to
the same subject, but dealt always in generalities, referring
us first to the Cardinal Legate and then to Robertet. There
are evidently points in the negotiations that do not suit his
Majesty very well, for he said that they were engaged in try-
ing to modify them with Monseigneur de Bayeux, the protector
of the Pisans;. after which he would give me a copy for your
Lordships.

As to the treaty with the Emperor, his Majesty said that
the negotiations were not yet concluded, although they had
reached a point that left him no doubt but what it would
be concluded anyhow; and then he made me such large prom-
ises that your Lordships’ interests should be treated exactly
as his own, that, if ever faith can be put in the promises of
a king, we must believe in these. Upon this subject I have
also caused the Chancellor of the Province and Monseigneur
Philibert adroitly to be sounded, but found nothing but what
was satisfactory. This Chancellor is evidently a man of im-
portance ; he speaks of our republic with great affection, and
from his familiar conversation, which at times reveals his real
thoughts, it appears that his sovereign is resolved anyhow to
make this voyage into Italy ; and several times has asked some
of our Florentines how his master would be received and
honored in Florence, adding, that unless such preparations are
made as are suitable for such an occasion, (which is very
doubtful for the reasons before written you,) it will be another
generation before Italy will see an Emperor face to face.

The Archduke has sent M. de Veri here, and, from what
I hear, he was not much pleased to find that the ratification
had arrived. He is daily with the Imperial ambassadors, and
they have long conferences with the people of the government

VOL. III. 28

434 SECOND MISSION, TOVTHE

here, the particulars of which it is difficult to ascertain. They
have positively declared that they do not intend to follow the
court; but I hear that they have since then changed their
minds, and if the king leaves to-morrow, as it is said he will,
they will follow him, for it is believed that they have not yet
concluded their treaty.

It is necessary that your Lordships should instruct me what
to do about this money of Ravel’s and of the Bailli’s men, for
the manner in which they go on about us is not very creditable
to our republic. The Cardinal Legate has offered to lend me
some money wherewith to satisfy them, and this might perhaps
be done now more easily than at some other time. I appre-
hend that I shall have to give something to each man, so as to
relieve myself of their importunities; for it is most unpleasant
to have to do with such people. Machiavelli will be able to
tell you whether I have resisted their claims or not. Never-
theless there are things that are more difficult to carry through
than one thinks at first; I therefore beg your Lordships to
favor me with a prompt reply. JI must not omit to tell your
Lordships that I am informed that Monseigneur de Raven-
stein has designs of his own in connection with the affairs of
Piombino.

. Monseigneur d’Aubigny * has arrived, and of all who have
returned from the kingdom of Naples, none have been received
by his Majesty with more pleasure than he. I made it a point
to call upon him in your name, and found him most friendlily
disposed towards our republic, and thoroughly versed in Italian
affairs. But every one holds his judgment in suspense, fearing
to run counter to the designs of the Cardinal Legate. I also
called on Madame de Bourbon, whom the queen had called here
at the time of the king’s indisposition; this lady showed her-
self well disposed to your Lordships, to whom I recommend
myself.
Servitor
NIccoLo VALORI,
Lyons, 18 February, 1504. Ambassador.

* Monseigneur d’Aubigny had been taken prisoner by the Spaniards in Cala-
bria, but was released on the surrender of Gaeta.

COURT OF FRANCE. 435

LETTER XIII.

MaGniriIcEent SIGNOR1, ETC. : —

The want of couriers is the cause of the delay in the arrival
of my despatches, and compels me to allow my letters to your
Lordships to accumulate here, which would be much more dis-
agreeable to me still, were it not that I see that you are con-
strained to do the same; for it is only to-day that I have
received yours of the 2d, 8d, oth, 8th, 10th, and 12th instant,
with copies of advices from Rome and the Romagna, which
are very full and to the point. We called immediately with
your letters upon his Majesty, informing him of the conduct
of the Venetians, which is so contrary to their pledges; men-
tioning at the same time all such other matters as seemed to
us proper; and we begged his Majesty that, inasmuch as the
Secretary has to return to Florence, to be pleased to enable
him to carry some good resolution back with him to your Lord-
ships. I also availed myself of the occasion to tell and repeat
to his Majesty all those matters with which your Lordships
have charged me; which was not a difficult task, as his Ma-
jesty allows every one to speak to him at length. It would be
well if it were so with the Cardinal Legate, where things are
discussed drop by drop, and then decided. His Majesty re-
plied, that, if this treaty with the Emperor should be concluded,
it would surround you with a beautiful garland; and that we
ought to wait, and we should soon hear of a matter that would
please us greatly; and that he intended to send an envoy to
Florence and to Rome, through whom your Lordships would
be informed of certain orders and measures that were intended
to be beneficial to your Lordships and to all Italy, referring us
at the same time for particulars to the Cardinal Legate.

In relation to the treaty with the Emperor, his Majesty said
that it was near its conclusion; but what gave him par-
ticular pleasure was that he had the signature of the Swiss
in his hands, by which they bound themselves to furnish him
upon his requisition twelve to sixteen thousand men, and
that he felt perfectly sure of them. And here he enlarged
considerably upon your Lordships’ matters, not omitting the
orders given and provisions made for his kingdom and for the
duchy of Milan, which are the same that I have communicated

436 SECOND MISSION TO THE

to your Lordships in former despatches. We did not omit to
urge him again to take into his pay also some Italian captain,
pointing out to him the good effects that would result from it,
asking him at the same time, with proper tact, which one he
judged to be the best. Upon this point his Majesty replied
that he certainly intended to take some one of the Italian cap-
tains into his pay, but that it was necessary that the Pope and
your Lordships should first make the beginning. And as he
said nothing as to any preference, I resumed the subject, say-
ing that your Lordships purposed doing so, for seeing what
turn matters were taking you could not remain unarmed; and
that it seemed to you of advantage, both for the sake of secur-
ing their good will, as well as for the purpose of taking them
from others, to try and secure some of the best captains, either
of the house of Colonna, or of the Orsini, or even Gianpaolo
Baglioni. His Majesty urged us by all means to speak to the
Cardinal Legate about it. For the purpose, therefore, of seeing
whether I could learn anything special from him, I called upon
the Cardinal Legate, and having first informed him of the news
I had from your Lordships, and of the recent doings of the
Venetians, and of the present state of things in the Romagna,
which until now was safe rather by the providence of God,
seeing the death of the Signor..... etc., than by the help of
man, I told his Eminence that the king had referred us to
him. He replied that there were at this moment too many
witnesses present to enter upon a discussion of these mat-
ters, but that he would at another time give me a long audi-
ence, on which occasion he would like to have the Marquis de
Final present; and then he called Monseigneur de Trans and
the aforesaid Marquis, and in presence of all the government
officials who were there, he said: ‘ You see that Imola and
Furli are not lost, as Monseigneur de Trans has stated.” And
when I repeated to him that, in view of these events, your
Lordships felt constrained to arm yourselves; and that there
was no more effective way of depriving the enemy of his arms
than to try and engage one of the best captains, either of the
house of Orsini or Colonna, or Gianpaolo, and that his Ma-
jesty the king ought to do the same; his Eminence replied
that these men were all impostors, but that if we would be
governed by his advice all would go well; and thereupon, see-
ing the number of persons present, our interview terminated.

COURT OF FRANCE. 437

Before seeing the Cardinal Legate again it seemed to me ad-
visable to see the Pope’s ambassador; and having called at his
house, I informed him of the arrival of Messer Pietro Paolo at
Florence, and of your Lordships’ instructions, using such terms
as I judged best for facilitating my object, which was to learn
from him as far as possible the intentions of the court of
Rome, before seeing the Cardinal Legate again. His Lordship
made me read a number of letters which he had received from
Rome, amongst others one from Capaccio, full of wisdom, and
really very much to the point as regards Italian affairs. He
suggests to him many things in the name of the Sovereign
Pontiff, and advises the ambassador to urge the French to take
such measures against the Venetians that the Church may not
fall a prey to them, as all that has been done hitherto has been
ineffectual; adding that his Majesty’s ambassador at Venice
goes so far as to inform the Venetians by simulated letters of
all that is to happen, so that, under a dissembled ignorance,
they may openly engage in their various enterprises. Thus
your Lordships see how these French people act; for although
they know that the Venetians have won over their ambassador,
as I have before written to your Lordships, yet they do not
attempt to remedy it. Afterwards he communicated to me
that he hoped to induce his Majesty to write to the Venetian
Senate that, if they did not desist from troubling the posses-
sions of the Church, he would have to give them proofs of his
displeasure; and that, in consequence of the conduct of the
present French ambassador at Venice, another would probably
be sent, and who would be furnished with special letters from
his Majesty. Two or three persons are spoken of for that post,
but I cannot tell your Lordships anything positive about this.
The individual likely to be sent to urge the union of all Tus-
cany will, | think, be Messer Francesco da Narni, with whom,
seeing the disposition of the people here, I have done my best
to place myself on a friendly footing; but according to what
Robertet tells me, it is uncertain whether he will leave here
soon; the envoy to Venice, however, will start within a day or
two.

I learn that the Spanish ambassadors have told the ambas-
sador of the Pope that if the aforesaid Venetians are named
by their most Catholic king, it will be with the condition that
they shall give satisfaction to his Holiness the Pope; and in

438 SECOND MISSION TO THE

that case they would also be named by the French. This
matter depends now entirely upon the agreement with the
Kmperor ; for if these people here do not arrange this differ-
ence after their experience with the Spaniards, it is not likely
that they would want also to embroil themselves with the
Venetians. When this treaty is concluded, in the way they
desire here, I shall certainly hope for some good results from
it; and as all this has to be judged of by the actions of the
Legate, I have his movements as carefully watched as I can/
with the means at my disposal. The late news from Furli has
disconcerted him very much, and your Lordships may believe
me if I tell you that, if the Pope does what he can, there is
still some hope that we may get well out of the affair.

I have arranged with the Pope’s ambassador that he shall
remain present at my appointed audience with the Cardinal
Legate, which I would gladly have deferred longer, for I
believe I shall not be able to learn anything more from him,
unless it be that he would press me again in relation to his
wish that your Lordships should engage some of those Nea-
politan barons, in reference to which I would like to have
some light and instructions from your Lordships. As already
stated in one of my previous letters, Turpin has undertaken
to send to your Lordships for the money due to the king. I
neither advised him to take this course nor did I dissuade him;
as to myself personally they cannot cause me the least annoy-
ance, no matter what sinister measures they may employ; but
I would not have them make the slightest demonstration that
might be discreditable to our city, which I believe these men
of the Bailli’s capable of, for they are desperate and utterly
ruined; and it is a bad thing. to have to do with men of that
sort. One of the first men of the government has complained
that the king speaks so freely of the Venetians, which has pro-
duced a bad effect, and we come in for a share of the blame.
~The Venetian ambassador attends to nothing else but trying
_ to justify himself, and to think of means for giving effect to
his protestations. I continue under all circumstances to write
you freely all I hear, and for which you will make such allow-
ance as your Lordships’ wisdom may suggest.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo VALORI,
Lyons, 19 February, 1504. Ambassador.

COURT OF FRANCE. 439

P. S.— Monseigneur de Nemours* was also much pleased
at the good news of the truce, and begs to remind you of his
David, which he is very desirous to have, and wishes it could
be. sent to Livorno. Your Lordships will I hope deign to in-
struct me what I am to say to him on the subject.

———_@———

LETTER XIV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I informed your Lordships by my preceding letter, which,
for want of a courier, I send at the same time with this one,
that I had arranged an audience with the Cardinal Legate ;
but the affairs of Germany and the departure of his Majesty
unavoidably delayed it until yesterday morning. I repeated to
his Eminence the advices received from your Lordships, and
the measures suggested by you, begging him constantly that
in their treaties they might for once recognize such signal
fidelity and loyalty as yours. He replied that we should pres-
ently have occasion to be better satisfied than we had been for
along time past; and that I should write to your Lordships
and to the Gonfaloniere, to be patient and of good cheer, and
that you would very soon see that the results would correspond
with the promises. And as his Eminence seemed to be ina
favorable mood, I added that for once I would like to leave
vague generalities, and participate in the good spirits which
his countenance indicated. He said to me: “ We send Messer
“Francesco da Narni to Florence and to Rome, and he will
“carry news that will be most welcome to you, and the union
“of all Tuscany, which you have desired so much, will be car-
“ried into effect. The convention with the Emperor was con-
“cluded yesterday, and the German ambassadors carry it with
“them, to return here with the ratification before Easter, and
‘your interests are as well protected by it as our own.” Wish-
ing to press him still further, especially as to the position in

* This was Pierre de Rohan, Maréchal di Gié, to whom the Florentine Sig-
noria had promised a bronze statue of David, which had been ordered of Michel
Angelo, 12th August, 1502. The Maréchal, however, having fallen into dis-
grace with the king, the David was sent as a present to the treasurer, Florimonde

de Robertet, who placed it in the court-yard of his palace at Blois. The palace
still exists, but the bronze David is no longer there.

440 SECOND MISSION TO THE

which Pisa would remain, and whether we ought to do any-
thing in the matter, he replied that he would say no more
about it until after the arrival of the ratification, lest it might
do harm. His Eminence, nevertheless, let fall the following
words, which seemed to me worth noting: “Keep yourselves
“well prepared and provided, and leave us to think and do the
“rest.” I did not want to enter upon the subject of the en-
gagement of any Italian captain, for besides the intention which
I knew him to have of giving you some of these Neapolitan
. barons, that cousin of the Bailli’s had told me that he would
demand the confirmation of the engagement of fifty lances;
and therefore I took my leave of his Eminence, who leaves here
this forenoon. Your Lordships will doubtless have concluded
an engagement with some one whom you consider suitable; for
when the thing is once done, there will be much less difficulty
in defending it here. Machiavelli has taken leave of his Emi-
nence, and departs from him in a day or two. Robertet, in
company with whom I walked on returning from the Cardinal
Legate’s house as far as the church, confirmed the assurances
of the Cardinal Legate; so that if this time your Lordships’
interests are not properly cared for, we may forever despair of
their promises, seeing the manner in which they have spoken
to us as well as to others. Upon asking the aforesaid Robertet
as to the position in which the convention left the matter of
Pisa, I could get nothing out of him, but he said: “ Messer
“ Francesco, as you know, goes to Florence, and by order of the
“Cardinal Legate I am to prepare special instructions for him ;
“for the person who is here in the interest of Pisa is a man of
“extravagant views, and Messer Francesco is much better suited
“to the task.” Although Robertet did not answer my question,
yet it seems to me proper to let you know what I did gather
from him; for they either want to lull us into security, or they
have not conceded Pisa to the Emperor, as some have sup-
posed.

As it seemed to me that the sending of an envoy to Venice,
which has been as good as decided upon, was a matter that
concerned the Pope’s ambassador more than myself, I resolved
to seek an interview with him before Robertet or the Cardinal
Legate should see him on the subject. After having communi-
cated to him the substance of the conversations I had had with
them, I expressed my surprise that they had not said one word

COURT OF FRANCE. 441

in relation to that decision ; for I really thought it more to the
purpose and more important than anything else, that the Vene-
tians should for once understand the king’s intentions with
regard to the affairs of his master. He replied: “ Everything
“ooes well, and it has been deemed best to defer saying any-
“thing because I have letters from the Bishop of Ragusa, to
“the effect that Messer Pietro Paolo will be in time at the
‘castle of Furli. Rely upon it, your interests are more thought
“of than you believe. It would not be well further to disclose
“our purposes with regard to the Venetians, in case the ratifi-
“cation by his Imperial Majesty of the convention concluded
“by those ambassadors should not arrive; for such premature
“disclosures would only increase their pretensions. But be of
“ood cheer, for his Holiness has no intention of remaining
“quiet. This union with and the support of the king will add
“to our credit and reputation, and will give others something
“to think about. His Holiness is anyhow resolved to arm,
‘and if he, jointly with your Signoria, could raise one thousand
“men-at-arms, what with the other allies and the credit of the
“duchy of Milan, provided she remains as she is, the Venetians
“will have to think well of what they venture to undertake.”
I did not delay in replying, “that we were fed with words, and
“they with facts.” As he wanted either to close the conversa-
tion, or give himself some importance, he said to me: “I have
“under the secret of a confession, and 7m articulo conscten-
“ tie, what, if I could reveal it to you, would convince you that
~“T am not speaking at hazard.” It is difficult to draw from
the lips of men what they are not willing to tell; and I must
leave it to your Lordships to form your own conclusion from
such information as I have been able to gather.

Afterwards I called upon the Chancellor of the Province, who
leaves to-morrow, well pleased with the attentions shown him,
and with the results achieved; they have presented him with
money and shown him all honor. I have again expressed to
him the good will and devotion of your Lordships to his sove-
reign, and the hopes which you build upon him in all your
necessities, of which he would always have proof whenever
occasion should present itself. The Chancellor showed himself
much pleased at all this, and assured me that his sovereign
would undoubtedly come into Italy; and he promised me to
make known to the Emperor these demonstrations of good will

449 SECOND MISSION TO THE

which I had made in your Lordships’ name. And he affirmed
this intended voyage of the Emperors so positively, that it will
either take place, or he will be completely dishonored ; for it is
said that he has the entire confidence of his sovereign, and that
whatever he decides is invariably done. I am resolved to see
him again, for Robertet told Ugolino, within the last few days,
that, if their negotiations with Pisa did not ‘succeed, this
Chancellor would be apt to have that city restored to your Lord-
ships; for that he was a man who gladly took a part in affairs
where he saw a profit. If this seems different from what they
told me on other occasions, it is because of their nature and
habits always to have more than one plan; thus your Lord-
ships will not blame me, but rather hold me excused for writ-
ing all I hear.

I shall see the Grand Chancellor again before his departure,
which will not be until next Monday. Since the return of the
Legate he has almost invariably intervened in all the negotia-
tions that have been going on; should I not learn anything
more from him I will so inform your Lordships. But if mat-
ters are treated more openly, as some think will be the case,
then it may perhaps be easier to learn something more. Every-
thing, however, has its counterpoise, for if that should be the
case, then the Admiral will have to take a more active part in
them ; and so far as I hear, he has never been well inclined to
the interests of Italy. But I will write more fully to your
Lordships respecting this movement, if I find that there is any
foundation for it. Your Lordships will hold me excused if, as
I think, you will receive no letters from me for a month to
come; for the king, tired of being confined so long to one
place, wishes to stop in every town, and it will be very difficult
to follow him there. And when the court is not fixed in any
one place, nothing can be done, nor can any information be
obtained. Added to this comes another inconvenience: Ugo-
lino is sick, and it is the beginning of a long illness, although
there is no danger ; but, in truth, his knowledge of the language
and the usages of the country make him most useful to me.
God willing, I shall follow the court on Monday or Tuesday.

The Cardinal Legate has caused one hundred ducats to be
paid to the Bailli’s men, and tells me that he has done it to
save me from some insult, for which there would be no remedy
because of the agreement which the Bailli holds. The Legate

COURT OF “FRANCE. 443

says that your Lordships may expect to receive this account,
and hopes you will pay it, for the men-at-arms insisted on being
paid; and truly, if the Legate had not taken this course, I should
have had these men around me by dozens wherever I went.
Very little is heard of the terms of the treaty that is being
negotiated, but it is said that both parties bind each other by
many oaths; and that the Emperor concedes the duchy of Mi-
lan to the king of France, who is to pay him a sum of money
and to furnish him men for the passage into Italy. As to the
Signor Lodovico (Il Moro) it is said that the German ambas-
sadors wanted to relieve themselves of that responsibility, but
that nevertheless at the meeting of the two sovereigns they
will decide about him; and that his Most Christian Majesty
has pledged himself to liberate him, and to give him the means
of living in France. Of Don Federigo both Spaniards and
French speak most honorably ; in a former letter I told your
Lordships all I had heard on the subject, and of the intentions
of the Spaniards, who affirm most positively that their Catholic
Majesties intend to restore him to the throne, and to make his
son marry the dowager queen of Naples, that is to say, the one
who was the wife of King Ferdinand. The secretary of King
Federigo tells me that the French wanted to give to the Prince
Germaine de Foix, niece of the king and queen of France; and
that he has lately pressed both the king and the Cardinal
Legate very hard to make the Spaniards declare whether they
really mean what they say, or whether, for some selfish pur-
pose, they merely feign this promise to reinstate Don Fede-
rigo, etc. But, as he says, they declined to do so, although it
would have been much more to their honor than the truce
which they have just concluded; and that it must be either
that they intend to blind these Catholic kings, or that they
fear that, if their plans were to become known to the Arch-
duke, it might lead to results directly contrary to what these
French aim at.

Your Lordships will judge of this as well as of the other mat-
ters with your habitual wisdom. I recommend myself and beg
you will excuse me, for I must follow the court, and so long as
it keeps moving I shall not be able to do anything; and so I
will say no more at present. Bene valeant DD. VV.

Servitor
NiccoLo VALORI, |
Lyons, 22 February, 1504. Ambassador.

444. SECOND MISSION TO THE COURT OF FRANCE.

LETTER XV.

MaGniricent SIGNORI: —

Since the arrival of the ratification of the truce by Spain I
have been, as it were, constantly with one foot in the stirrup
to return to Florence; but his Magnificence the Ambassador
thought that I ought not to leave here until after the departure
of Messer Francesco da Narni, who has been deputed to Flor-
ence for reasons which your Lordships will have learned from
the Ambassador. It had been at first determined that I should
leave at the same time with Messer Francesco ; but upon more
careful reflection it was deemed best that I should not accom-
pany him, lest it should detract from the importance of his
mission, and make it appear as though it had been solicited
by your Lordships. Thus it is that I find myself still here,
my only business now being to wait for a companion; but I
shall start without fail on Friday next, when the Ambassador
will also leave here to follow the king. JI recommend myself
a thousand times to your Lordships, and refer for all important
matters to what your Ambassador writes and has written, for
he is most sagacious, zealous, and devoted to his country. Bene
valete !

Servitor
NiccoLo MacHIAVELLI.
Lyons, 25 February, 1504.

MISSION TO GIANPAOLO BAGLIONI+*

INSTRUCTIONS TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.
Sent To Perveta, By REsoLuTIoN oF 8TH APRIL, 1504.

NiccoLo, — You will proceed with all despatch to find Gian-
paolo Baglioni, wherever you may learn that heis. The cause of
our sending you to him is the letter which he has written to Mes-
ser Vincenzio, which the latter communicated to us yesterday ;
and as you have already full knowledge of that letter, we deem
it unnecessary to say anything to you of its contents. In your
address to Baglioni, you will first refer to that letter, and then
express to him the astonishment and displeasure which it has
caused us in his own interest, which is ours; having always
thought that whatever affected the state of Perugia, touched us
equally. You will next tell him that our not being able to

* Buonaccorsi, p. 100 of his Journal, gives the following account of the circum-
stances that occasioned this mission: ‘“ It was decided to collect all the men-at-
arms, and to send them to the camp before Pisa. To accomplish this, their pay
was sent to each, and all who were subject to being called uponto fulfil their
annual engagement were required to do so. Amongst these was Gianpaolo Ba-
glioni, who had accepted and ratified his engagement; but when his pay was
sent to him, the same as to the others, he declined to accept it, alleging that he
could not leave his home on account of his enemies, who, he said, were planning
to attack his possessions. And as his engagement, together with that of his son,
was for 155 men-at-arms, which in fact constituted the bulk of the men-at-arms
of the republic, his refusal was regarded as a most important matter, etc. The
Signoria could not believe that Gianpaolo would break his faith in so gross a
‘manner, and therefore sent a confidential agent to him, who however made the
same report; namely, that Gianpaolo refused, being unable to leave home on
account of his enemies, but that in all other respects he professed to be a faithful
servantof therepublic. This agent, however, found out during his brief stay at
Perugia that there was an understanding between Gianpaolo and the house of
Orsini, Pandolpho Petrucci, Gonsalvo Fernando, Bartolommeo d’Alviano, and all
the rest of their faction. He had intended to remain longer, so as to find out a
little more as to Baglioni’s real intentions ; but when his pay was sent him, he was
obliged either to accept it and serve, or openly declare his intention not to do so,
as in fact he did.”

446 MISSION 10 GIANPAOCLO LAGLIONT.

avail ourselves of his engagement causes us as much danger
and trouble as anything that has occurred for a long time; and
that we are no less grieved at his Lordship’s not having made
known to us anything of his apprehensions and dangers, for
knowing our affection for him personally, and the interest we
have in the preservation of his state, it seemed to us most nat-
ural that he should have advised us of all this, and that he
should have looked upon us as such friends that we would
have aided him with our counsels and in every other way.

You will shape your remarks to him in such wise as to make
it appear that this is the only object of your mission, and that
we do not see in his determination not to fulfil his engagement
anything more than what he himself would have us_ believe.
His replies must govern your subsequent proceedings, which
you must manage so as to let him feel that we are much dis-
satisfied with his Lordship, and to stir him up in some way by
pointing out to him the blame that will fall upon him in con-
sequence. As to the ingratitude that may be imputed to him
for all the benefits he has received in the past, and his want
of faith as a soldier, the two essential and fundamental points
that men look to, you must endeavor to remove the appre-
hensions which he pretends to have, and answer him upon
eyery particular, which, with your perfect knowledge of the
state of things, it will be easy for you to do. And you must
try to bring him to the point of revealing to you the real motive
for his determination ; which seems to us to have no other foun-
dation than that he has either very sorrowful support, or that
he seeks thereby to obtain better terms for his engagement.
It is upon this latter point that you must lay most stress, so
as to draw from him all you possibly can, which is the main
object of your mission. During your stay near Gianpaolo you
will diligently endeavor to find out the number of men he has,
and their whereabouts.

In passing through Cortona, which it seems to us desirable
you should do, you must find out from the commandant of the
place whether he has any information in relation to these
matters; and so soon as you have had an interview with the
aforesaid Gianpaolo, you will inform us of all you have learned
from him.

Eco MAarceLuLus VIRGILIUS,

| Decemv. Lib. et Bal. Reip. Flor.
Ex Paxatio Firorentim, 8 April, 1505.

MISSION TO GIANPAOLO BAGLIONI. 447

LETTER.

Macniricent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

Iarrived yesterday evening at the fort of Cortona and learned
that Pietro Bartelino had returned from Gianpaolo and was
above. It being too late to reach Castiglione by daylight, and
having, moreover, instructions from your Lordships to confer
with Antonio, I went up to pass the night with him. I had a
full conversation with him, and learned from Pietro how his busi-
ness had turned out, respecting which he told me that he had just
written to your Lordships. Early this morning, in good time,
I was with Gianpaolo, and both before and after dinner I talked
with him for over three hours, during which time I had ample
opportunity to execute your Lordships’ commission, the three
main points of which were, first, whether he would serve or
not; second, in case of his refusal to serve, then to ascertain
what his real motives are, — whether he merely wants to obtain
better terms, or whether he has more important reasons; and
finally, not to break with him, lest it should give him occa-
sion, etc., etc.

For the purpose of treating all three of these points, I opened
the conversation in accordance with your Lordships’ instruc-
tions, telling Baglioni that your Lordships complained of the ob-
stacles which he alleged, and wondered that you had not heard of
them before ; offering him at the same time every assistance for
the security of his state, for which offers he thanked your Lord-
ships most kindly. He said that the reason of his not having in-
formed you sooner was that he himself had not been aware of his
situation before; but that he knew now the impending dangers
and the machinations of the Colonnas and of his other enemies,
and the intrigues which they had been carrying on, even within
Perugia itself; and that so soon as he discovered these, he saw
that it would be impossible for him to accept any obligations to
others without manifest danger of losing his own state, and
that it was much better for him now to have taken care of
his ewn interests than to have accepted your money, and then
have been obliged to leave perhaps in the midst of his duty.
From this argument he passed abruptly to the manner in which
you had acted towards him last year, and how, whilst he
remained in camp, although written to daily by his people to

448 MISSION TO GIANPAOLO BAGLIONI.

come home, you had refused to give him leave; and that, so as
not to break with you, he had engaged the Signor Bartolommeo
to come to Perugia, which had excited such suspicion in your
minds that he had to send him away again; that he did not
intend to expose himself to the same thing this year, but believed
that he would be able to settle his affairs and secure himself in
such manner this year as to be able to serve your Lordships
next year, adding that he was sure of being then your servant
more than ever. And when I met these doubts of his with
such arguments as I could offer, Justifying your Lordships’ con-
duct of last year, he replied that he could not be satisfied, nor
could he rely upon you, inasmuch as you had always, and even
within the past few days, carried on negotiations with Fabrizio
Colonna to engage him in your service; and that, although
nothing definite had been done, yet you could hammer at this
matter so long that it would be concluded, so that when it was
done he would find himself in the midst of his enemies. And
then he went on enlarging upon this matter, expressing his
detestation of your engagement of the Savelli and the Colonnas,
and blaming you for neglecting the Guelfs; adding that, if you
had leaned upon them, and formed him and Bartolommeo d’ Al-
viano and Vitelli into one body, things would have been better
for them and for you; for then the Colonnas, who are their
enemies, would have been kept down, and Pandolfo and the Luc-
chese, who are also your enemies, would have remained quiet,
and Pisa would have fallen of itself. Ireplied to all this as well
as I could, but he remained firm in maintaining that it would
have been best for Florence to have formed all the above Orsini
into one body; and then it escaped his lips that it was now
too late for you to do this. He complained of the Perugian
rebels who reside in Cortona, adding that, if he were accused of
having broken his faith, and that it became necessary for him
to justify himself, he was ready to do so; that he had submitted
his argument to a number of learned Perugians who all decided
that he was not bound by it. Respecting the Perugian rebels
who are at Cortona, I told him that, knowing the character of
those who had occasionally resided there, his Lordship ought
not as much as mention the matter, and that I should be
ashamed to reply to him upon that point. But as to his being
able to justify his treating his engagement as not binding, L
observed that, inasmuch as he had afforded me ample scope to

ae

MISSION TO GIANPAOLO BAGLIONI. 449

discuss the value and importance of good faith, I was not con-
scious of having omitted anything that could be said under the
circumstances. And then I gave my remarks such a turn as to
show him that your Lordships’ displeasure at his resolution was
more on his than on your own account. For even if you were
at this moment unexpectedly deprived of one hundred and
thirty men-at-arms, there were so many unemployed horses in
Italy just now that there was no danger of your being obliged
‘ to remain on foot, or to be compelled to abandon any of your
plans, and that thus your difficulties would be easily remedicd ;
but that such was not the case with his. For even if you had
never to complain of his want of good faith, assuming that
his apprehensions were well founded and really obliged him
to remain at home, yet every one knew the obligation under
which he was to your Lordships, and was cognizant of his en-
gagement as it stands, of the payments that had been regularly
made, of the conveniences afforded him, of the engagement that
had been made by him, and at his special request, for his son,
and that his entire pay had been brought to him at his own
house, and would therefore never excuse him, but would charge
him with ingratitude and bad faith, and would regard him as
a stumbling horse which nobody would ride for fear of get-
ting his neck broken; that matters of this kind were not to be
judged by learned doctors, but by gentlemen; and that whoever
attached any value to wearing armor, and desired to win honor
by his arms, could lose nothing that was prized so much as the
reputation for good faith, and that it seemed to me that in this
case he staked his very lightly. And as he persisted in saying
that he could justify his conduct, I answered that men ought to
do everything in their power never to be obliged to justify
themselves, for justification presupposes error or the suspicion
of error; that last year he had to justify himself with regard
to the French, and in fact he had to justify himself too often.
And thus I pricked him right and left, speaking to him as a
friend, and as though merely coming from me; and although I
noticed several times that he changed countenance, yet he gave
no indication that could make me hope he would change his
determination.

This is all I can report to your Lordships of our long con-
versation. Our subsequent rather confused and desultory dis-
cussion tended all to the same effect, for he firmly held to his

VOL. III. 29

450 MISSION. 10 GIANPAOLO BAGLIONT.

resolve to remain at home this year and not to serve any one;
telling me also that within a few days he would cause four
persons to be executed in Perugia who were his enemies; and
that we must not take umbrage at him if he should collect
troops, which he should do only to enable him to resist his
enemies, and to dislodge some of them from certain castles
which they occupied. He said that you could do this year
without taking any men-at-arms into your pay, for he did not
see that you were in condition to attack Pisa; but if neverthe-
less you did make an engagement with any one, you ought to
avoid the Colonnas, and take either the Marquis of Mantua or
some others who were not of the Colonna faction. In the
course of his argumentation he let the remark escape him that
he could tide over this year with such resources as he could
procure from elsewhere. I did not fail to reply to these argu-
ments in such manner as seemed to me suitable and to the
point. But to justify himself to your Lordships and relieve
them of all doubt as to his good faith he offered, in case you
should decide upon a movement against Pisa, to come in per-
son with some forty or fifty of his men; but that he should
come merely as a friend, voluntarily, and not as being under
any obligation to do so; and that he would be satisfied even if
your Lordships employed him only as a pioneer.

Your Lordships will see from what I have written thus far
that Gianpaolo is positively determined not to serve you; as
also the reasons which he assigns for it, and which, he avers,
have reference purely to his own interests. But here is what I
learn from others, and I have it from two Florentines who are in
his pay, one of whom is more skilful in intrigue than in action.
Both tell me that this is all a concerted affair between Gianpaolo
and Pandolfo, the Lucchese, and the Orsini faction. They do
not know whether any others are implicated, but they do know
there is a good deal going on; for Gianpaolo receives nightly
some individual who is a courier, or seems like one. Messer
Goro da Pistoja, they tell me, is very busy moving to and fro;
at this moment he is absent, but they know not where. On
Sunday Gianpaolo had a meeting with Pandolfo in the direc-
tion of Chiusi, under pretence of hunting. Their designs un-
questionably are to take Pisa from you, and to do even worse
if they can; their final object being to reduce you to the same
condition as themselves, so that those who are well armed

MISSION TO GIANPAOLO BAGLIONI 451

may fare well, whilst the others may look to their security
as well as they can. They have made Gianpaolo trifle with
you, so that you might have less time for making your prepa-
rations; nor would he as yet have made known his intentions
if you had not sent him his pay; but upon learning that it was
on the way, he wished to anticipate you, and so wrote that
letter to Messer Vincenzio. I learn furthermore from these
men, that in place of that letter Gianpaolo wished to have sent
Ser Valerio to you, but that he did not want to come, saying
that you would hang him for bringing such news to you.
Those who influence Gianpaolo in all this have made him take
this means of saying that he would not serve you, and that he
wanted to remain at home, because they and he knew that you
would be vexed by this wrong and would be apt to do some-
thing adverse to him, either by taking the Colonnas into your
pay, or by some other means to guard yourselves against him,
and thereby afford him the occasion for saying that he was
justified in declaring openly against Florence; and therefore
he advises you in the most friendly manner to remain without
men-at-arms rather than engage the Colonnas. ‘Those who
have given me these particulars tell me that, unless you give
Gianpaolo occasion, he will not declare against you, but will
arrange to place all his troops under Bartolommeo d’ Alviano,
or any one else, as may seem best to him. They also tell me
that he has advised his soldiers to remain quiet and of good
cheer, for that if he receives no money from the Florentines,
he will have it from some one else; and he intimated as much
to me himself in the conversation I had with him, which I
reported above. They say furthermore, that he thinks you
will not be able to raise troops, and that, if nevertheless you
engage the Colonnas, he will cut off their roads for coming
into Tuscany, and will not permit them to pass in any way.
They also report that for the past two months Gianpaolo has
been completely absorbed in his thoughts, as it were, and has
never laughed with right good will. This I have noticed my-
self, for when I told him at our interview to reflect well upon
the course he was going to take, which was of more importance
for him than for Perugia, he replied, “Believe me, I have
“thought of it well, and have crossed myself more than half
‘“‘a dozen times, and have prayed God to direct me wisely.”

I leave your Lordships now to form your own judgment upon
all this. You advised me verbally to be careful not to break

452 MISSION TO GIANPAOLO BAGLIONI.

with Gianpaolo; and therefore, when he argued with me, and
endeavored to show by the most earnest protestations how en-
tirely devoted he was to our republic, as you would find out more
and more every day, and that if you took umbrage at his pres-
ent decision, he would send his son Malatesta Baglioni to you
as a hostage, I asked him why he had not ratified his en-
gagement. He replied at once, and without reflecting, that he
would do so most cheerfully whenever your Lordships wished
it. J answered him, that I had no instructions upon that point,
and that your Lordships had not said anything to me about
it; but that he could let your Lordships know, so as to ascer-
tain your wishes in the matter. Whereupon he promptly sent
a messenger to Perugia to ask Ser Valerio to come to him,
saying that he would immediately despatch him to your Lord-
ships with that commission, and I saw nothing improper in my
approving of this. In conclusion, when I took my leave of
him, he said to me, “that this year he would not serve your
“Lordships on any account nor at any price; but that, if you
“decided upon renewing the siege of Pisa, he would come as a
“friend with forty or fifty men; and that I should assure
“your Lordships that he had no intention of wronging you,
“nor of allying himself with any one who intended to injure
“you, and that it was only the necessity of being obliged to
“remain at home, and nothing else, that had caused him to
“decide as he had done; but that, if you wished, he would
“willingly give you his son.”

I have entered fully upon all the above details, so that your
Lordships may judge of them with your habitual prudence;
nor have I hesitated in writing so much at length, contrary to
my disposition, but the subject seemed to me of such impor-
tance that I thought I could not err in communicating to you
all I had heard and seen here. As to the number of men-at-
arms * which Gianpaolo Baglioni has, and their whereabouts,
I have learned that about twenty of the old are wanting, but
that within the past few days he has taken twenty-eight men-

* Gente d’ Arme. Men-at-arms were gentlemen who fought on horseback. Ev-
ery man-at-arms had with him five persons; namely, three archers, one equerry,
and a page or varlet. When Charles VII. began to organize the French nobility
into a regular body of cavalry, he formed them into fifteen companies, called Com-
pagnies d’Ordonnance ; and as each man-at-arms had five other men in his suite,
each company consisted of six hundred men. There were besides a great number
of volunteers who followed these companies at their own expense, in the hope of
being admitted as a man-at-arms. See Artaud, Machiavel, Tom. I. pp. 127.

MISSION TO GIANPAOLO BAGLIONI. 453

at-arms into his pay from the Prefect and the Duke of Urbino.
These are quartered throughout his entire state, and here in
Cortona he has but three men-at-arms. According to public
report he will have altogether within a month one hundred
men-at-arms and one hundred light-horse.*

I did not stop longer at Castiglione, as it seemed to me that
I had obtained all the information I was instructed to gather
in relation to these matters, and moreover I could not have
written you from that place the half of what I have written.
And had I remained there one day longer, I should have been
taken for a spy and should have been detained there with little
satisfaction or credit to your Lordships; and therefore I con-
cluded to come away, thinking that it would be a greater error
to remain than to be obliged to return there. This evening
I shall stop at Cortona, and to-morrow I shall speak to the
commandant of Arezzo, and the following day, God willing,
I hope to be back in Florence. I recommend myself to your
Lordships.

11 April, 1505.

I have given two ducats to the courier Carlo who leaves
to-day at the twenty-third hour; he has promised to reach
Florence before your Lordships go home, and if he fails in
this he is to return the two ducats.

Servitor,
Niccoto MACHIAVELLI.

* In a collection of original letters addressed to Niccolo Machiavelli and be-
longing to a Florentine patrician family, there is one from Boscherino, captain of
a squadron of Gianpaolo’s, dated April 16, 1505, from which can be inferred what
relations Machiavelli had with this captain in connection with this mission; and
as it throws some light upon this business, the letter is here given.

Nopitts Vir, ET MI OBSERVANDISS., ETC. : —

When you left, it was agreed that, in case the Lord Gianpaolo did not accept
the engagement, your Nobility would inform me, or that you would procure me
a position with some other Condottiere, equal to what I hold here. And as I am
extremely anxious not to remain without employment, I make bold to trouble
you in this matter; but feel assured that your humanity will excuse me, and
that you will try to satisfy my earnest wishes in the manner I desire, and as
agreed between us. And although I am not able in whole or in part to com-
pensate your Nobility, yet the Almighty and your humanity will supply my in-
sufficiency, and to these I cease not to recommend myself, which is all I have to
say excepting ever to recommend myself, etc., etc.

Your servant,
BoscHERINO,
Captain of Squadron of the Lord Giovanpaolo Baglioni.

MISSION TO THE MARQUIS OF MANTUA,
JOHN FRANCIS IL OF GONZAGA.

INSTRUCTIONS

GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, SENT TO MANTUA BY THE
MAGISTRACY OF THE TEN.

RESOLVED ON, THE 4TH OF May, 1505.

NiccoLo, — You will proceed by post, and with all possible
speed, to find the Marquis of Mantua, and definitely conclude
his engagement, in relation to which we have this morning
received an envoy from him. And by way of instructing you
as to what you will have to do, we will tell you briefly that the
articles which his Lordship will have to ratify are the same that
have lately been decided upon in the Council of the Highty,
a copy of which you have herewith, and which are not to be
modified or changed in any particular. The conclusion of this
agreement will have to be effected anew by you for our account
of the one part, and by his Lordship of the other part. And
in case it should be necessary, you will use the powers we have
given you for that purpose; or indeed his Lordship may ratify
and accept it in the manner and form above indicated. The
difficulties which he started were, as you know, that he wanted
five hundred foot-soldiers, which demand has been altogether
rejected, and you will reject it in the same way. His letter
was to the effect that he wanted to give us only one hundred
and fifty men-at-arms, and the remainder in ight horse, which
has also been refused, and you will do so still more emphati-
cally. And the third involved an entire change in the eighth
article, which defines the manner in which he is to serve us;
but as this alteration seemed to us to annul the entire agree-
ment, we have most energetically rejected it cn toto, and wish
you to do the same; for we do not want to be obliged to place

MISSION TO THE MARQUIS OF MANTUA. 455

ourselves in opposition either to the Most Christian King or to
his Imperial Majesty. Nor do we want to contract an engage-
ment at such great cost without being assured that the service
is to be performed. All these demands having been excluded
by us, he now comes back asking restitution of all the places
which he or his people had seized, and which for a time had
been held by him or his ancestors. And moreover he wanted
us to give him leave to return, in his own person only, to his
country, whenever there seemed to him necessity or urgent
cause for it. Not wishing on our part to raise any more diffi-
culties than what this negotiation naturally involves, and on
the other hand being unwilling to change the whole character
of the engagement, we have resolved upon a third course, and
have promised the Marquis in a special letter what you will
see in a copy of the same. Besides this, our illustrious Gon-
faloniere has written him a letter, of which you will be the
bearer, and of which you will make use in case of necessity,
not otherwise. You must know furthermore that, in the ar-
ticle in which he speaks of the consent and good graces of
the king in connection with this engagement, he had added
certain words of the utmost import, to the effect that every
question should at all times be subject to the will and pleasure
of the king; such were the very words. But as this did not
seem to us well, we object altogether to any such conditions,
holding to the engagement already concluded, and to the clauses
which it contains upon that point. Under any circumstances,
to avoid all delay in this negotiation, should his Lordship desire
some respectful reference to his Majesty the king in this agree-
ment, we will cheerfully admit it, provided it signifies nothing
more than what was in the beginning the mutual intention of
both parties, namely, that this engagement was made with the
consent and good pleasure of his Majesty. As the prompt set-
tlement of this matter is of much importance to us, you will
see that it is brought to an immediate conclusion; but should
there be any difficulty that will prevent this, you will return
here without delay. If, on the other hand, you conclude the
affair without any difficulties, then you will urge his Lordship
to start at once with the whole of his troops, or at least with
a part of them, for you know how important time is for us.*

* The refusal of Gianpaolo Baglioni to continue his engagement (Condotta)
with the Florentine republic induced the latter to take the Marquis of Mantua

456 MISSION TO THE MARQUIS OF MANTUA.

into their pay, whom they engaged with three hundred men-at-arms and the title
of Captain-General. Before the final ratification of the agreement difficulties
arose, the principal one of which had its origin in an article demanded by the
Marquis, that the whole should be subject to the decision of the king of France.
The Florentines were unwilling to concede this to its full extent, and Machiavelli
was sent to Mantua to conclude and ratify the agreement on suitable conditions.
This ratification, however, was not effected, owing to new difficulties that were
constantly interposed on account of the above article. Vide Buonaccorsi’s Jour-
nal, p. 103.

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

INSTRUCTIONS

GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, SENT TO PANDOLFO PETRUCCI
AT SIENNA. ;

ReEsoLvED, 16 Juny, 1505.

NiccoLo,— You will proceed on horseback to Sienna, so as
to arrive there to-morrow morning at business hours, and you
will immediately call upon the Magnificent Pandolfo, for whom
you have our letters of credence. You will express to him the
pleasure we have derived from his having sent a confidential
agent to communicate to us the information he had received
of Bartolommeo @’ Alviano’s intention to proceed immediately
to Piombino. You will thank Pandolfo for the offers he has
made to us, and add at once that we have sent you to him for
the purpose of learning from his Lordship what he thinks
ought to be done so as to prevent any further disorders; en-
larging upon the subject as you may judge necessary for the
purpose of more effectually finding out the truth. You will
treat the subject in all its bearings, for which purpose you will
have to take counsel of yourself, and govern your conduct with
your habitual prudence.*

* This mission to Sienna has reference to the attempt made by Bartolommeo
d’ Alviano, a Condottiere in the service of Spain, to assail the Florentine domin-
ions and to furnish help to the Pisans. Pandolfo Petrucci, who was in secret
understanding with D’ Alviano, had advised the Florentine government of this
movement, for the purpose of deceiving them, and with the view of getting some
military engagement from them. No such engagement, however, was made with
him, as his duplicity and hostility to the republic were well known. Bartolom-
meo d’ Alviano was subsequently defeated at Torre di S. Vincenzio in the Ma-
remma, on the 17th of August, by the Florentines, under command of Antonio
Giacomini. Vide Buonaccorsi’s Journal, pp. 107-115, where he gives all the
details of this affair.

458 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

LETTER I.

MaGnirFicent SIGNoRI, ETC.: —

I had an interview this morning with Pandolfo, so soon as
he had risen, for I arrived here before even the city gates were
opened. When I communicated to him the instructions which
I had from your Lordships, he did not allow me to enter into
any explanations, but said: “I will tell you how this matter ©
“stands. The Signor Renzo da Ceri had seized on my terri-
“tory some five hundred head of cattle, whereupon I sent
“Cornelio Galanti to Bartolommeo d@’ Alviano to complain of
“this robbery, with orders, if he did not obtain satisfactory
“redress, to proceed to Rome, there to lodge a complaint with
“his Holiness the Pope. Cornelio went, and I believe some
“arrangement is likely to be effected between Renzo and the
“owners of the cattle. Cornelio wrote me furthermore, that
“ Bartolommeo had given him to understand that he could no
“longer supply provisions for his soldiers, and had decided at
“any rate to break up on the following Thursday, which hap-
“nens to be this very morning, and to move to Campiglia,
“there to take up his quarters, and then to act as fortune
“might dictate. I was surprised and displeased at this, and
“at once sent a mounted messenger to inform your Gonfalo-
“niere of this, writing at the same time again to Cornelio to
“‘see the Signor Bartolommeo again, and to advise him, on my
“part, to desist altogether from such an enterprise, which,
“without adequate support, was downright madness, and that
“T could see no chance of his having any reliable support.
“And to tell him furthermore, that in our territory he could
“have only what he could steal, and nothing more; adding,
“that he would certainly have a reply to that letter to-day,
‘and therefore it would be well for me to await its arrival
“before writing to your Lordships; and that for the moment
“he could tell me nothing but what he had already written to
“vou, namely, that he was ready to do all that he and his city
“were able to do, and that he would send for me so soon as
“the answer came.” And therefore, as I was to see him again,
I did not care to enter into any further particulars with him at
that moment. After dinner, at about the seventeenth hour,
Pandolfo sent for me, and according to what I had heard he

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 459

had invited some five or six of the chief citizens to dinner,
during which he had some little conversation with them about
my mission, and these were still with him when I arrived at
his house. Having seated myself amongst them, Pandolfo told
me that he had received an answer from Cornelio, who in-
formed him that he had tried by a long argument, on behalf
of Pandolfo, to dissuade D’ Alviano from advancing towards
Sienna, but that it had produced no effect, and that D’ Alviano
was to break up that very morning and move his camp to the
mill of Vetrella, and that the next day he was to proceed to
San Giovanni di Selva, between Montefiascone and Viterbo,
where he was to receive some money; but that he did not
know how much nor from whom; and that D’ Alviano said
that he had large resources of money, infantry, and artillery,
but left us to guess from whom. It was clear, however, that it
must be Gonsalvo who supplied him with infantry from Piom-
bino, as well as with artillery which he has there, and also
that it might easily be that such of the Spanish infantry as
were at Gacta, and which it was said were to embark for
Sicily, would go back to Piombino to join D’ Alviano.

This information seemed to make it clear to Pandolfo that he
would have to mount, and for this purpose he has already taken
such measures as are within his means. He has written to
Cornelio not to return, but to follow D’ Alviano’s army, and to
advise him of its movements from point to point. He has
also written to Gianpaolo Baglioni promptly to mount, and
move with all his men across the Chiane into the Maremma ;
and he advises you to send all your forces to Campiglia in the
Maremma. Pandolfo added, that although himself and all
these citizens were disposed to do all they could to prevent this
movement of D’Alviano’s, yet they did not know how they
could, nor how their own security would be thereby insured, as
it would expose them to drawing a war upon themselves, not
having yet concluded any definite engagement with you. And
therefore it seemed to him that an agreement should first be
concluded with you, and that, if his views had not heretofore
been fully understood, he thought the state of Sienna would be
satisfied to agree upon the following basis, viz. :— First, pro-
long the truce of ’98 as it stands for another five years; and
should it contain any article not suited to the present state of
things, or likely to give rise to disputes, it might be struck out;

460 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

and to add merely that the Siennese shall be obliged during the
entire term of five years to keep fifty men-at-arms at the service
of the Florentine republic. That although at first one hundred
had been spoken of, yet he had thought that it would matter
little to you if the number were reduced to only fifty; for
inasmuch as they would have to remain always armed, even at
home, it would involve them in an expense that would become
insupportable ; and that their giving you fifty men-at-arms for
your service was intended more as an evidence of their friend-
ship than for anything else. Second, in the event of Pisa being
recovered by your Lordships within the five years, then Monte-
pulciano is to remain free to the Siennese ; but the Pisan terri-
tory as well as the fifty men-at-arms to be subject to your will
and pleasure. If, however, Pisa is not recovered within the
five years, then they do not give up their claims to Monte-
pulciano, which in that case remain the same as before the
conclusion of the agreement, which however is to hold good
anyhow until it is formally abrogated.

I replied to all this, that I had no instructions to discuss this
subject, but could write to Florence about it; still, if I were to
express my opinion, it was that I did not see how such an agree-
ment would relieve his apprehensions ; and that there was always
much time lost in such negotiations, whilst Bartolommeo was
already in the saddle. To which Pandolfo observed that there
were but two articles to be agreed upon, which could be done
within four days, and that no time need be lost on that account ;
but that you could push your men on to Campiglia, whilst he
would send his into the Maremma; and that other expedients
might also be tried, which would be the most effective way per-
haps of putting down D’ Alviano, namely, to take the Vitelli
away from him, who had sixty men-at-arms. And here he
swore that he would be hanged if D’ Alviano moved forward, if
deprived of the Vitelli; and that other Condottieri besides the
Vitelli might also be detached from him. And if all this
should involve your Lordships in some expense, it would nev-
ertheless be money well laid out, as it would be the means of
securing you against D’ Alviano, not only for the present, but
for all time; for he was a man to be feared by all who had
possessions, whilst he had none, and was always armed. And
being, moreover, of a ferocious and reckless disposition, and
Italy being full of thieves, accustomed to live upon what they

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA, 461

could take from others, these all flocked to him to share in his
plunder. :

I did not fail to say in reply to Pandolfo, that inasmuch as he
knew D’ Alviano best, so it behooved him more than any one
else to oppose his schemes, and that he ought not to wait for
others to do everything ; and that he ought promptly to apply
those measures which he constantly urged upon others to take.
I also reminded him that we lacked neither troops nor favors,
which were always at the service of others when they were
ready to accept and employ them for the common advantage ;
but if not, and if Tuscany had to undergo fresh troubles, we
knew well that these very troubles would cause some to suc-
cumb, whilst others escaped; but that it was the most feeble
who would succumb. Here he resumed his remarks, and at-
tempted by a long argument to justify the past, and concluded
by asking me to write to your Lordships, and saying that it
would be agreeable to him to have me remain until your answer
came as to what you had resolved to do, and so that he might
inform me verbally of the progress of D’ Alviano. But he re-
quested me to ask your Lordships not to mention his name in
case you should publish your intentions ; and he complained
that his name had been mentioned by the individual whom he
had sent to you with the information that had caused your
Lordships to send me here.

I must not omit mentioning to your Lordships that Pandolfo
told me that, by way of anticipating, he had already ordered
letters to be written to the Vitelli to endeavor to detach them
from D’ Alviano. He said also that he believed that he would be
able to keep the said Signor Bartolommeo in suspense for six or
eight days on pretence of intending to send him money; but
that he would not do so unless he had first come to an agree-
ment with your Lordships. And he added, that, if the two
states came to terms, they would not lack means for restrain-
ing D’ Alviano, and that you ought to remember that he had
held him in check in 1489, when he was in the service of the
Venetians.

I have thus far written only what I have from Pandolfo’s own
lips. I might have written you the various replies I made to
his remarks, but omit them, so as not to weary your Lordships.
Nor can I form an opinion whether he is to be believed or not,
for I have seen nothing here that would enable me to form a

462 SECON DaMISSLON bo SIENNA,

better judgment upon this point than what your Lordships can
do yourselves. I will only tell you that you have nothing to
expect from here, for Pandolfo has no fear of D’Alviano for the
moment; and if what he says be the truth, it is not present fear
that will make him act, but that of the future.

I have had a call from a Siennese who professes to be very
friendly to our republic, and he told me that you must not rely
upon anything that Pandolfo promises or says; and that he
knows for certain that the Venetians are spending money here,
and are mixed up in this complication; that a few days since
Guido Orlandi returned from Venice, where he went some
weeks ago with Messer Petruccio, who has remained there ; that
this Guido was brought here in a cart, having injured one of his
legs on the road, whilst carrying despatches ; aud so soon as he
arrived here, Pandolfo visited him, and then immediately de-
spatched Cornelio Galanti to D’Alviano to urge him to move
forward, and to inform him that he had already sent some per-
sons to the Siennese frontier to receive his men, and provide
quarters for them; that Pandolfo’s design is to destroy our
present Gonfalonicre, who seems indisposed to enter into close
relations with him, whilst the others would readily come to
terms with him, each having an interest in doing so. This
Siennese thinks that there are great intrigues going on here,
and promises to inform me of many other things whilst I am
here. This man has quite good manners and seems very intel-
ligent, but shows himself so violent against him who governs
here that it destroys my faith in him. Nevertheless I write
you what he has told me, and shall continue to do so if he
tells me anything more; and your Lordships will make such
use of the information as will prevent all harm.

The present courier leaves at the twenty-second hour.
Your Lordships will please have the expense reimbursed to
Francesco di Luzio. Valete!

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Srewna, 17 July, 1505.

‘SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 463

LETTER II.

MaGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships at length yesterday and sent it
by an express who should have arrived at the second hour of
the night. I look for a reply at latest by to-morrow, so as
to permit my return. This morning at the Duomo I was
addressed by one Ser Paolo di Pietri di Paolo, who lived at
Florence while banished from here. He began by telling me
of his deep obligation to our city for having served him more
than once as a refuge and shield in his adversity, and for the
great kindness and benevolence shown him by our citizens.
Amongst many other matters he mentioned Messer Francesco
Gualterotti; at first he said that he did not wish to speak of
public affairs, as he could not open his heart to me as he
should desire, but he offered me his services for any personal
or private matter. Nevertheless I led him on indirectly, so that
after a good deal of talk we came to discuss the events of the
day ; and he assured me that D’ Alviano had actually started
for Campiglia, and that Gonsalvo was to aid him with infantry,
and perhaps even with the troops that were now at Piombino;
and that the Venetians were to supply him with money, and
that Sienna would permit him to force a passage through her
territory, without, however, furnishing him troops, or giving
him any other open support. But when I asked what D’ Alvi-
ano wanted to do at Campiglia, this Ser Paolo said: “Take that
“place, give the Pisans more room, and then act according to
“his success; but that he ought to remember that on a former
“‘occasion he came to the very gates, and that perhaps he might
“try the same thing now, and leave Campiglia aside.” And
then he added, that he wondered much that our city had not
been willing to make sure of him who governed here, by com-
ing to some arrangement with him respecting Montepulciano,
as had been several times proposed; and that it seemed to
him that by such an arrangement you would be “ selling the sun
in July” * to the Siennese; for that when once masters of Pisa,
not only Pandolfo, but Montepulciano, Sienna, and all the rest
of Tuscany, would be at your discretion. I remarked to him

* An Italian proverb, which means to sell to any one what belongs to
everybody.

464 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

that the fault was theirs if no agreement had been concluded,
for Florence had ever been disposed to do all that was reasona-
ble; but that now it seemed to me that matters had come to
that point that it was useless to talk of any agreement since
Pandolfo had combined with Bartolommeo and his adherents.
Whereupon he answered quickly, that I ought not to say so, for
in his judgment the present moment was most favorable for
you to effect an arrangement; but that no time was to be lost,
as the negotiations between Pandolfo and the others amounted
only to conferences and words, and that it would not cause
Pandolfo much pain to deceive the Venetians, although they
had already spent a good deal of money; and then he intimated
to me that this money was paid through his hands. And in
the same way, he said, Pandolfo would not mind deceiving
Gonsalvo, for that both the Venetians and Gonsalvo were goy-
erned in this matter by the advice of Pandolfo, who had gained
such influence with both that they believed and confided en-
tirely in his intelligence. And that he believed that Pandolfo
would gladly make an arrangement with you so as not to lose
altogether the advantages of these movements, and fearing
lest the whole responsibility should fall upon him as on a for-
mer occasion, and that thus an arrangement with you would
be the safest thing for him.

To all this I replied that it was difficult on the one hand
to believe that all these movements were of so much impor-
tance, and on the other, that Pandolfo could stop them at
his pleasure; and therefore I imagined that Pandolfo would
either not come to any agreement, or that, if he did, all
these preparations had no other object than to alarm, but not
injure us. That we were in condition not to fear even the
most vigorous attacks, and much less any feeble ones; and
then I told him the state of our forces and that of our allies.
He answered, that the more secure you were, the better pleased
was he; that he did not know whether this contemplated move-
ment was great or little, but this much he knew, that whether
great or little it depended altogether upon Pandolfo, whose
brains had originated it all. And here he enlarged upon Pan-
dolfo’s ability, referring again to the great credit which he had
acquired everywhere, and that he had his foot, so to say, in a
thousand stirrups, but so that he could withdraw it from them
at his pleasure. And here he left me, having concluded by

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 465

saying that an arrangement with Pandolfo seemed to him of
the greatest advantage for us.

As I wrote yesterday to your Lordships the substance of the
conversation I had with that other friend, so I have deemed it
proper to give you a full account of this one also. Both showed
themselves in the beginning of their conversation dissatisfied
with Pandolfo, but, as you will have observed, their conclusion
was very different. I did not mention the name of the one
yesterday, so as not to compromise him; but I gave you the
name of the first one, for it seemed to me that his communica-
tions were less likely to expose him to danger, and so that your
Lordships, knowing who it was, might be able to judge better
what confidence to put in his statements. I have nothing else
to write unless it be that I have omitted to inform your Lord-
ships, in my letter of yesterday, that when Pandolfo told me,
in my last conversation with him, that he would do all in his
power to oppose D’Alviano, I replied that I believed it, having
seen that he had sent to Florence to enlist infantry ; in answer
to which he said that the men enlisted at Florence were not for
that purpose, but that one of his lately created captains of
police had engaged thirty men, which statement I have since
found to be true.

Since writing yesterday Pandolfo has sent to inform me that
one Bastiano of Cortona, for a long while his barber, having
gone to Cortona a few days since to assist at the marriage of
his sister, has been detained by the commandant on suspicion
of his being engaged in some conspiracy against the state.
Pandolfo thinks that the truth must have been found out by
this time, and desires that you would make him a present of
this man, and release him. He requests me to ask this of your
Lordships in his name, which I do herewith, and recommend
myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Sienna, 18 July, at the 15th hour. Secretary.

VOL. III. 30

466 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

LETTER III.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

The enclosed I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, so that
you might make such use of the information contained therein
as may be of advantage; I shall continue in the same way
to write what I sec and hear. This morning came your
Lordships’ letter in answer to mine; I went immediately to
Pandolfo, and communicated to him your Lordships’ reply.
Respecting the proposed truce or league he said, that difficult
things should be left alone, and that very often the wisdom of
men did not suffice to oppose the will of Heaven, which chooses
to conceal its designs as it has done hitherto. <As to the Vitelli
and the other Condotticri, he says that that was an idea and
plan of his own, as he thought that there would be no more
effectual way to repress the audacity of D’ Alviano; but he
could not say on what terms and conditions they could be en-
gaged, unless he should hear from them, as he had written
them for the purpose with the view of sounding them; and
that he should have a reply from them to-day, which he would
immediately communicate to me; and that he believed he would
be able to get them, unless they had formed some fresh en-
gagement with D’ Alviano, of which he said he knew nothing.
As to the others, he had not approached them, fearing lest
Bartolommeo should find it out; for he was very reluctant to
offend him, unless he had first closed an arrangement with
you, as he did not want to make an enemy for himself without
at the same time gaining a friend. And having opened himself
freely and told you his mind frankly respecting the truce, and
being willing to agree to everything that was reasonable, it
ought to be an easy matter to come to an agreement, if you
really wished it; but if you did not wish it, then indeed every-
thing became difficult. And if the question was now as to
fifty men, it arose from the fact that Montepulciano was not
conceded to them entirely free, as was the case when they con-
sented to one hundred men-at-arms. And here he enlarged
much upon this point, showing that we must look to such an
agreement as the true means for securing the tranquillity of
Tuscany ; but if your Lordships would frankly declare that
under no circumstances would you make such a treaty, and

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 467

that you regarded it for the common good not to light a new
conflagration, he would be much better satisfied than to keep
matters in uncertain suspense as at present. And as in all my
replies to his arguments I insisted mainly upon the shortness
of the time, as in fact I had done from the beginning, and as
your Lordships advise in your letter, he answered that to con-
clude such an agreement would require only hours, and not days ;
and that possibly Bartolommeo might remain some days in the
place where he now is, as he had written to Gianpaolo to the
effect that he wished to confer with him at Graffignano, and
that the latter must now be on his way there; that perchance
the money with which Bartolommeo intended to pay his men
at Selva might not have arrived ; and therefore, he said, that to
avoid having him unexpectedly upon his back he had sent the
Podestas into their several Podesterias on the confines of the
Maremma, to have the harvest brought into the towns and
places, and to make provision of flour; but that he believed he
would most likely have to wait awhile, and that thus there
would be abundance of time. He added, that he did not know
what Bartolommeo could want from Gianpaolo.

Not wishing to weary your Lordships, I do not repeat the
answers I made to Pandolfo’s arguments, but shall only report
his conclusions, which are as follows. By making an arrange-
ment with him you secure yourselves by such expedients as you
together may employ, one of which is to dismember the forces
of Bartolommeo. But if no agreement is concluded then, he
says, he will not be able to exert himself in a manner that
would be manifestly hostile to Bartolommeo. But nevertheless
he would oppose him, and do all in his power to that effect.

Your Lordships must judge now from all I have written
what Pandolfo’s object really is, for there is little or nothing to
be gained from being face to face with him. He professes not
to know what this enterprise of Bartolommeo’s is founded
upon, but that it may nevertheless have very solid foundations ;
and he swears that Bartolommeo shall have neither the troops
nor the subjects of this state at his disposal. He says that he
does not believe that Gianpaolo will support him with his in-
fantry, nor does he know whether the Vitelli will serve him
with theirs: but that he will know of it if they do; for he keeps
a confidential person near Bartolommeo, who informs him of
all his movements, which he is thus enabled to make known

468 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

to us. He also tells me that he has written to Rome to ascer-
tain what this whole affair is really based upon, and that he
will inform you so soon as he has a reply. I am told that on
hearing of the death of the Cardinal Ascanio, Pandolfo was
quite gloomy for a while, but that he is now quite cheerful
again and full of hope. One sees no great preparations going
on here. In a long conversation which I had yesterday with
Messer Antonio da Venafro, who is as it were the very soul of
Pandolfo, and without equal amongst the other men here, he
talked of nothing else but this agreement, which, he said, ought
to be made for mutual safety, as then it would be easy to
destroy any support that D’ Alviano might have. And one of
the first steps which he suggested was to disarm Bartolommeo,
but that for this the agreement ought first to be concluded.
Your Lordships will now take all I have written into consider-
ation, and will in your high wisdom decide what course will be
the best.

Pandolfo has asked me several times whether the Marquis of
Mantua has received his pay; L have invariably answered, that
at the time of my departure from Florence it was about to be
sent to him. And this morning he told me that he had heard
from Lombardy that this engagement would not be carried out,
betause the Marquis saw that difficulties were being made, and
he had not received any money. I replied the same as before,
but felt inclined to tell him that I had news from your Lord-
ships that you had paid him; but that you had to keep it secret,
so as to enable you to lay a new impost, under the gencral
impression that this money had yet to be paid. I did not say
it, however, not knowing whether it would be proper. It will
be time enough, however, whenever your Lordships wish it to
be known.

Were it not that I am aware of your Lordships’ anxiety to
have my letters, I should have waited until evening to despatch
this, so that I might have given you whatever news Pandolfo
may receive from D’ Alviano’s camp. But not to keep your
Lordships in suspense, I send this now, it being the seventeenth
hour, and you will please have Francesco del ‘Nero reimbursed
fifteen earlini.

That Bastiano of Cortona, Pandolfo’s barber, whom I have
recommended to your Lordships by the enclosed, has returned
here, having most probably made his escape. Pandolfo tells

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 469

me that he fears lest proceedings may be taken against this
man’s property, and begs me to ask your Lordships to prevent
it, offering to have him appear whenever you may require it.
I urge this matter on Pandolfo’s behalf, and beg you will favor
me with a reply that I may show him.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

19 July, 1505, at the 17th hour.

I have forgotten to tell your Lordships that Pandolfo has
begged me a great many times to request you not to mention
him in connection with the information which he gives respect-
ing Bartolommeo d’ Alviano, as he should be obliged to deny
it; and therefore he wishes you to keep all his dealings with

your Lordships secret.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

LETTER IV.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

By my despatches of yesterday your Lordships will have
learned what is passing here. Respecting the plan of detach-
ing the Vitelli from D’ Alviano, which Pandolfo proposes as the
best and really necessary means for getting rid of D’ Alviano, he
says that he has given me only his own opinion without know-
ing what the Vitelli may intend; and therefore he must wait
for a reply to the letter which he wrote them on my arrival
here, in which he sounded them in a general way as to whether
they were disposed to leave D’ Alviano. Since then the Chan-
cellor of the Balia came to me yesterday evening at the second
hour of night, and told me that Pandolfo had received letters
in relation to that matter from Cornelio Galanti and from the
Vitelli; and although they contained nothing that could not be
deferred until to-morrow, nevertheless in compliance with his
promise to let me know immediately what he might hear from
the camp, he informed me that he had been advised that,
according to orders, the troops had reached Selva, and that
Bartolommeo intended going as far as Alviano, and that his
resolve to advance was fixed and absolutely irrevocable; that
he was waiting for the receipt of certain moneys to move, but

470 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

did not know exactly when. He said moreover with regard to
Gianliso and Vitello Vitelli that they were ready to do what-
ever his Magnificence wished, although they would first have to
write to Messer Giulio, their uncle, and to their other brother,
who were at Castello, for they were accustomed to do nothing
without mutual consent. He said also that he had heard from
Rome that the Abate d’ Alviano had gone to Naples, after hav-
ing first conferred with the Pope. After this communication
the Chancellor left me, with the request that I would call in
the morning upon Pandolfo. Accordingly, I was with him this
morning, and he repeated to me the same that he had sent the
Chancellor to tell me yesterday evening; and furthermore, that
the army would move on Tuesday next, and would advance in
this direction by short marches, so that he believed that within
three days they would enter the Siennese territory; and that
Bartolommeo had sent him word that when he should come
within his dominions he would publish an order that no one
should touch anything provided that he could purchase with his
money whatever he on need, and that he ought now to make
up his mind whether he would ae him pass as a friend or as
an enemy.

Respecting the Vitelli he told me that he had received
a general reply from them, as he had written to them in the
same general way to know whether they were disposed to
leave Bartolommeo in case he should want them himself, and
that he had not mentioned the Florentines nor any one else.
And although they placed themselves entirely in his hands,
yet as he did not altogether know their views, he did not know
what to say. Still, to enable me to write something definite,
he would say that he thought the Vitelli would be satisfied
with an engagement for sixty men-at-arms, which is the num-
ber they have with Signor Bartolommeo; and that an engage-
ment for one year, with the usual pay and provisions, would
probably content them; and that he would manage to have the
state of Sienna onto one third of the pay. After that
he started a doubt, saying that he did not know whether the Vi-
telli would be willing to serve within your territory; still he
believed that the difficulty might be solved by stipulating in the
engagement that, if you should require them to serve in any
enterprise specially your own, you should not be able to compel
them to serve you in person, but that in such case it should

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 471

suffice that they should supply only forty men-at-arms under
some other captain; and that this would be the best plan for
you to adopt. Pandolfo added however, afterwards, that such
an engagement could not be made with the Vitelli without first
concluding an arrangement with him, for the reasons which he
had already explained to me; for he did not want to make an
enemy of Bartolommeo without securing at the same time your
friendship. I said that your Lordships were well satisfied with
his having pointed out the evil, but not so with the remedies ;
for if the danger was so near, as he had repeatedly declared,
and likely to injure him as well as yourselves, as he professed
to fear, then it behooved himself as much as you not to stand
upon difficulties in obviating it. And if the best remedy was to
detach the Vitelli from Bartolommeo, then it should be done
in a shorter and more direct way than that he was taking,
and should not be managed like discussing an engagement in
January that was to go into effect the following May. And
that it seemed to me that fortune had now placed before him
an opportunity for recovering your Lordships’ confidence, which
he had lost by his former conduct; and that if he succeeded, by
whatever means he could, in inducing the Vitelli to leave D’ Al-
viano, thus giving you a proof of his friendly disposition, he
would not fail in concluding an agreement with you, either for
a Condotta or anything else he might desire that was consistent
with honor. To which he replied, that by acting thus he would
at once make D’ Alviano his enemy, and that you might after-
wards abandon him, and therefore he would not act differently
from what he proposed. He did not believe, however, that there
would be a lack of time, if you should be willing, because he
did not think Bartolommeo would move as promptly as he had
said, owing to the Abate’s having gone to Naples for the pur-
pose probably of obtaining the money which Bartolommeo
wants to pay out. He added, that he thought the Pope urged
Bartolommeo to this movement, so as to give occasion for the
French to come into Tuscany and thus produce some disturb-
ances; for he feared lest this Pope should some day become
another Alexander VI. I told him that this was an additional
reason for promptly crushing out this spark, and whenever I
have spoken to him I have urged him to think well of the con-
sequences which this movement of D’ Alviano’s might produce,
and that your Lordships were ready to take any course and to

a2 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

employ all your power to save your state, as well as to take
vengeance upon any one who attempted to injure it. But all I
said seemed of no use, and I believe that his resolution is defi-
nitely taken. It would indeed be a good thing if we could get
at the real truth of this affair.

Your Lordships will observe that all the information I have
respecting Bartolommeo comes from Pandolfo, and whenever
he tells me anything he conjures me to request your Lordships
never to quote him; he also desires that the negotiations with
.the Vitelli may be kept secret. He declined to write them
again to-day, or to go any further with them at present, hoping
to have some reply from you upon which to base further nego-
tiations with them.

To come back again to the information I have obtained
respecting D’ Alviano, I would say that your Lordships should
not rely upon it more than necessary, and that it would be well
to try and obtain some information about him from some other -
quarter. Thus you could learn from Borgo and from Cortona
whether any infantry are being raised at Castello or Perugia,
and also whether Gianpaolo has passed the Chiane with his
troops; for although Pandolfo says that he may arrive at anv
moment, yet we do not hear that he has really started. And
this morning Pandolfo informed me that Gianpaolo would not
go to mect Bartolommeo at Graffignani, as he had told me
yesterday, because he had sent Ser Pepo to look for him at
Alviano, where Bartolommeo was reported to have gone.

I must not omit to repeat to your Lordships that Pandolfo
has affirmed to me a thousand times that without the Vitelli
D’Alviano would have to abandon his enterprise, as he could
not move one step forward without them. The reasons which
he alleges for this are, that the force of the Vitelli is large,
and that if they were to leave him they would turn against
him; and such a sudden defection would disconcert the other
troops, so as to produce the results which he predicts. Your
Lordships will now form your own judgment of these matters.

I recommend myself, etc.

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
20 July, at the 15th hour of the day.

Your Lordships will please reimburse Francesco del Nero
fifteen carlini for the present express.

/ SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 473

LETTER V.

Maenrricent SIGNoRI, ETC. —

Immediately on receipt of your Lordships’ letter of yesterday,
dated at the sixteenth hour, I called again on Pandolfo, and
had a long conversation with him, so far as seemed to me proper,
on the subject contained in your Lordships’ letter. His Mag-
nificence found no difficulty in replying, having clearly in his
mind all that he had said to me in answer to your first letter,
and assuring me again that this movement was altogether dis-
pleasing to him, in proof of which he said that he had opposed
it whenever he could, by informing you of it, and at the same
time dissuading D’ Alviano. And moreover, that for the pur-
pose of getting at the truth of the matter, and the better to
understand the condition of this whole business, he said that he
had written to his agent at Rome, directing him to see the
Cardinal Santa Croce, and ascertain whether Bartolommeo had
undertaken this movement by order of Spain; for if he had
done so at the suggestion of that king, he would have to adopt
a different course from that which he would have to follow if
done without such direction; that he had received a reply to
that inquiry this morning, from which it appeared that Santa
Croce had said that he knew nothing about it, but believed that
Bartolommeo did not have the approval of Spain. To make
quite sure, however, he would write to Gonsalvo, and commu-
nicate to him the reply he might receive; but that he believed
that Gonsalvo had ordered D’Alviano to desist altogether from
this attempt. It is thus that Pandolfo pretends to have done
all that was possible for him, both by way of negotiation
and stratagem. But that if it should become necessary to act
openly and employ force, then he would need your Lordships’
concurrence and support, which he could not rely upon without
a full understanding, and therefore he had always told me that
it was necessary to conclude an agreement, and then to pro-
vide more powerful remedies. And that it had never been
true that in this affair he had both the bridle and the spurs;
that as to the spurs he had never had any, but as to the bridle
he drew that as much as he could. But as he doubted his own
ability to do all that was necessary, he asked the co-operation of
your Lordships, but wanted it in such wise as would prove of
advantage to each party, and not to one only.

A4T4 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

T have endeavored to give to your Lordships the exact words
of Pandolfo, so that you may the better judge of his intentions,
and decide what course it will be best to follow for the interests
of our republic. J do not write all the replies I made to Pan-
dolfo, not wishing to consume your Lordships’ time; but I said
all that my experience and judgment suggested; although it
was of but little avail, for Pandolfo is a man who has all his
plans definitely made, and is resolved to carry through whatever
he desires. And therefore I said to him, in one of my answers,
that I did not understand how Gonsalvo could order Bartolom-
meo not to march, as his Condotta expired on the 20th of this
month ; to which he replied, that it was himself who had stated
that Bartolommeo’s engagement with the Spaniards ran only to
July 20, because the last time that he was with Bartolommeo,
and when speaking to him about engaging with the French or
with you in consequence of the negotiations opened by Rucellaio,
Bartolommeo said that he should be free to do so after July 20 ;
whence he had concluded that Bartolommeo’s engagement with
the Spaniards terminated on that day. But that he had under-
stood since then that it continued in force till the end of October,
which was most likely to be true, for it had commenced in Octo-
ber, and such engagements are usually made for an entire year ;
it might possibly, however, contain a clause that permitted
D’Alviano to engage two or three months in advance with some
other party. Pandolfo told me furthermore, that he had heard
from Rome that the Pope was urging Bartolommeo to leave the
territory of the Church, and that, for fear lest he should attack
and plunder his troops who are at Otri, he had sent there such
infantry and horse as he had at Rome. I observed further to
Pandolfo, that inasmuch as Gonsalvo was not in accord with
Bartolommeo, the latter could not avail himself of the infantry
from Piombino, or of such as might come there. He replied to
this that I was correct, but that he believed D’ Alviano would
obtain infantry from elsewhere, and that it was for this reason
that Bartolommeo had sought an interview with Gianpaolo to ask
him for his infantry, and that Gianpaolo had gone to meet him,
as he had previously told me, and had not sent Ser Pepo there,
as he had subsequently stated. But that he did not believe
that Gianpaolo would aid him, and that he would so advise him ;
and that he had given orders to Cornelio to intervene in their
negotiations so as to. know all about it, and that so soon as he
should hear in reply he would inform me.

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 475

After all this long discussion and dispute about this whole
business, I said to Pandolfo, so that he might see that others
understood all these natural or accidental subterfuges and eva-
sions, that all these intrigues confused me to that degree that I
feared it would turn my head before I could return home; for
at one moment I was told that Bartolommeo was advancing with
infantry and money furnished him by Spain, and then again
that he was without either, and that Gonsalvo would order him
to remain quiet; and again I hear that he will move in two or
three days, which would show that he had received all the as-
sistance he needs; and now | am told that he has been begging
for infantry from Gianpaolo. One day I hear that the Pope
depends greatly upon him, and the next that he is afraid of
him. At one moment it is said that there is the best possible
understanding between him and the state of Sienna, and the
next moment that his soldiers are plundering the Siennese ;
and therefore I begged his Magnificence to explain to me all
these contradictions. Pandolfo replied: “I will answer you
‘as King Frederick answered a similar question asked by one
“of my envoys; namely, that to avoid falling into error we
“must shape our course according to events from day to day,
‘and must judge of things from one hour to another, for time
“and circumstances are more powerful than human intelli-
“gence.” He said also that the present times were influ-
enced by the spirit of D’ Alviano, a man who at the same
moment inspired his neighbors with hope and fear whilst he
was thus armed. Thereupon I told him of the measures which
your Lordships have taken with regard to Mantua and Milan,
so that others may the less look to them for support.

Nothing more was said about the Vitelli, as Pandolfo had
not yet received a reply to the letter which he wrote yesterday,
in which he enlarged a little more upon this affair. Nor has
it been possible as yet for me to have a reply from your Lord-
ships to what I wrote you about in my despatch of yesterday.
No further news from the camp of D’ Alviano.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secretary.
Srenna, 21 July, 1505, at the 19th hour.

476 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

Pandolfo has again spoken to me about his man from Cor-
tona, and offers to have him appear before your Lordships if
any unfavorable report is made respecting him.

LETTER VI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Your Lordships’ last letter of the 21st reached me the same
diay at the twenty-second hour. Having noted what your Lord-
ships write respecting the proposition of Messer Michele de’
Ricci, [ called on Pandolfo and executed your Lordships’ com-
mission in such manner as seemed to me proper. Pandolfo
rephed that he had not had any conversation with Messer
Michele on the subject; and that, if the latter had made that
proposition, it was done doubtlessly because he desired that an
agreement should be concluded, and because it probably seemed
to him the best thing to be done. And when I asked him what
he thought of it, he said that he would: have to confer with
some of his citizens on the subject ; but if he had to give his
individual opinion about it, without further reflection, he would
say that he saw no security in it for the people of Sienna.
We discussed this matter for a while, and although I thought
I perceived clearly what his sentiments were, yet it seemed to
me well not to write immediately to your Lordships, for I
imagined that possibly, on further reflection, Pandolfo might
assent in part to the proposition. Nor could I yet write dif-
ferently to your Lordships yesterday, not having had any fur-
ther answer from Pandolfo, who has been occupied with the
citizens of Sienna in a solemn festivity in honor of the return
of the Nine. He excused himself on this ground, and deferred
his reply until this morning.

Having gone therefore at a suitable hour to the Duomo, I
found Pandolfo there with four of his leading citizens; and
having joined them, Pandolfo said to me in few words that he
would leave me with Messer Antonio da Venafro, who would
inform me of their conclusion. Being thus left alone with
Messer Antonio, he said to me that he saw no security for
the Siennese in this proposition of Messer Michele, for he no-

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. ATT

ticed that it exposed them to two dangers; the one, in case the
king for some reason should or could not decide; and the other,
that if he did he might adjudge Montepulciano to your Lord-
ships. And although it was believed here that your Lordships
would cheerfully accede to a relinquishment of it, in case the
king, after having restored Pisa to you, were also to adjudge
Montepulciano to you; yet as but one of two results is possible,
they would be left in doubt, and would therefore never consent,
unless means should first be found to dissipate that uncer-
tainty ; and for this he knew of no better way than to do as
had been proposed in the beginning. For to try and have the
king do some act to reassure the people of Sienna would be
a protracted affair, whilst there is hardly time to make suit-
able preparations for resisting those who desire to destroy
Tuscany.

And thus Messer Antonio talked much more at length than
what I have written. In reply I said all that seemed to me
proper for the justification of your Lordships’ course, whilst
he with his utmost ability neglected nothing to prove how
much Pandolfo desired this agreement with your Lordships,
and as he wished to conclude it with a good will, so he pur-
posed to execute it even with a better will. Antonio added,
that it would be so manifestly for your advantage that, know-
ing your wisdom, he was astonished at the difficulties made in
deciding to conclude it; and that he could not comprehend
whence this reluctance arose. And as he went so far in this
matter I could not help pointing out to him that the difficulty
lay more with others than with your Lordships, and was more
particularly caused by those who wanted to take a greater
share of things than what belonged to them; and that the
impediments in the way of such a treaty were not so much
the separation of Montepulciano, although that involved both
loss of honor and advantage, as the proceedings of certain pri-
vate persons here, which had caused a mistrust in the minds
of many persons, and made them doubt whether even the ces-
sion of Montepulciano would be of any use; for they seem to
think that others wish to subject them to their will both by
insults and violence. The reason for their believing this was,
amongst other things of the past which I will not now repeat,
the rupture of the agreement with Lucca, and the breaking of
the engagement of Giovanpaolo, and the present movement of

478 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

Bartolommeo qd’ Alviano, with which we are threatened at the
same time that we are solicited to favor it. He knew well
that enmities were engendered by injuries, and friendships by
benefits ; and that it was a great error to attempt to make any
one a friend by beginning with injuring him; and that there-
fore I had said several times to Pandolfo, to him, and to many
other citizens, that to conclude this agreement easily it would
be necessary for them to remove this mistrust that had sprung
up, and to do this the greatest efforts must be made by those
who were most to blame for its existence; and that it was the
business of the Siennese to show themselves ready and united,
and with a single purpose to resist Bartolommeo. That such
a proof of good will would promptly produce friendship, and
would assuredly put an end to all mistrust; otherwise, there
being no time to build up such a friendship, I feared we should
see the whole business get into such confusion as to fill every
one with fear, and that within a short time here I had seen
many people who would laugh in the summer but ery in the
winter. That I had said on former occasions, and would now
again remind him, that it was generally the feeble who had
most to fear and least to gain from disorders.

Messer Antonio nevertheless maintained his ease, and lacked
neither words nor reasons to demonstrate to me that, Sicnna
not having any agreement with Florence, you could not rea-
sonably desire nor expect any benefits at their hands; and that
this had been the cause of the rupture of the agreement with
Lucea, and of the breaking of Gianpaolo’s engagement, and of
their doing nothing to remedy the present evil. For unless
you became their shield, they could not draw the sword against
others. But if a treaty were once concluded between you, you
would at once become masters of Tuscany. And then he en-
larged anew upon the great advantages that would result to
you in consequence, saying to me several times, “ Believe me,
“ Niccolo, he who blames Pandolfo may give you many reasons,
“but will not tell you all that he has in his heart.” I com-
bated him the best I could, but could get nothing else out
of him.

Pandolfo tells me that he has no news from D’ Alviano’s
camp, and presumes, from the fact that Cornelio has not written
him, that the army did not move yesterday as he had written.
He promises to let. me know so soon as he hears anything.

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 479

This rests entirely with him, as I have no means of obtaining
information on the subject from any other source.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Srenna, 23 July, 1505.

Your Lordships will please have Francesco del Nero reim-
bursed fifteen carlini for despatching this letter at the seven-
teenth hour.

LETTER VII.

Maeyiricent SIGNoRI, ETC.: —

By my last, dated yesterday at the seventeenth hour, I com-
municated to your Lordships the replies made to me by Pan-
dolfo, and afterwards in his name by Messer Antonio da Vena-
fro, to the proposition made by Messer Michele Ricci, as stated
in your Lordships’ letter of the 21st. You will have seen from
my letter that we have to give up this negotiation for an agree-
ment, or to conclude it in the manner suggested in my first
letter to your Lordships. Yesterday evening at about the
twenty-fourth hour Pandolfo had me called, and informed me
that he had received letters from Rome of the 22d, and from
the camp of the same date. He read me the letter from Rome
written in cipher, which, however, had been deciphered between
the lines as is customary. The agent whom he keeps in that
city informs him that the Cardinal Santa Croce had received a
reply from Naples to the inquiry which he had made of Gon-
salvo, as to whether Bartolommeo had started this movement
with his knowledge or not; and that this reply stated that it
was contrary to the wishes of Gonsalvo; and that he had sent
a special messenger to Bartolommeo ordering him not to inter-
fere in the affairs of either Tuscany or Pisa; and that the
Cardinal de’ Medici had received the same information from
the agent whom he keeps near Gonsalvo. Of the letter from
the camp Pandolfo read me only that portion which referred
to the Vitelli; and which says that an answer had been re-
ceived from Messer Giulio and their brother Giovanni, who are
both entirely satisfied to comply with Pandolfo’s wishes, offer-

480 SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA.

ing at the same time to do whatever may seem best to him, and
expressing in the most ample and earnest terms their anxious
desire to do whatever may be agreeable to him. He told me
furthermore, that this letter informed him that the troops had
not yet started from Selva, as had been lately reported; but
that they were to start this morning for Capo di Monte by the
road of the Maremma, and that Gianpaolo had met Bartolom-
meo, who had asked his support, which the former, however,
had neither promised nor refused.

I thanked Pandolfo for this information, but passed over
that part relating to the Vitelli, not having as yet a reply from
your Lordships to what I had written upon that point; it
seemed to me, moreover, best to do so, as Pandolfo himself said
nothing more about it, except what he had read from the letter.
I told him that I was not pleased with the conduct of Gian-
paolo; that it would have been more proper for him to refuse
Bartolommeo absolutely ; and that he, Pandolfo, ought to do
everything in his power to make Gianpaolo refuse his support
to Bartolommeo, which I believed would be easy for him to do,
inasmuch as Gianpaolo had all confidence in him, and was in
factin his pay. He replied, that he had ordered him on return-
ing towards Perugia to approach as near as he could to this
place, so that he might go to meet him; or to come even as
far as Sienna, as he wished to confer with him in person upon
this business. I asked him what he believed of Bartolommeo,
and whether he thought that he would advance notwithstanding
Gonsalvo’s orders to the contrary, supposing the information
from Rome to be true. He replied, that he could not judge ;
but that reason should counsel D’ Alviano not to advance in
opposition to Gonsalvo’s will, he being in his service until
October, but that he was not yet clear upon this point; al-
though it would seem to him clear enough, if it were true that
the Abate d’ Alviano had gone to Naples for money, as had
been written to him. But that, nevertheless, even if reason
counselled D’ Alviano not to advance, desperation might cause
him to do so; and for that reason he advised your Lordships
not to fail in making suitable preparations. And that although
three out of four who act from desperation generally end badly,
yet it would be well not to allow Bartolommeo to be thus driven
on by desperation, as we cannot move any one thing without
stirring a thousand others, and events are very uncertain. And

SECOND MISSION TO SIENNA. 481

then he enlarged again upon the point that it behooved your
Lordships to put your foot upon this first spark of a conflagra-
tion, and that you could become masters of Tuscany by uniting
it; and that this union would combine such forces that it could
defend itself against whoever might attempt to assail it, and
would be respected by everybody. And that if you suspected
the Orsini, you could detach the Vitelli and the Baglioni from
their faction, which it would be easy to do, inasmuch as they
would feel themselves more secure under the protection of
united Tuscany than under that of the Orsini; that in truth
this matter seemed to him so easy, and offered such security,
that he really believed the only reason why it was not done
was because it was God’s will that this fair province of Italy
should be ruined. In the course of his remarks he said that
there was another means by which Bartolommeo could be
rendered harmless, and that was to make him suspect to the
Pisans, which might be done in a thousand ways. He did not
want to enter into particulars upon this point; but respecting
the other matters he said many things, to which I replied fully ;
but I abstain from writing them all to your Lordships, so as
not to weary you fruitlessly.

I shall send this letter to the post so that it will be forwarded
by the first courier that leaves; I would have sent it by an ex-
press, but that would leave me only one single scudo, and I
am indebted at my hostelry. I beg your Lordships will either
recall me, which would be most agreeable to me, or that you
will provide me with the necessary means.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

—— Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secretary.

VOL. III. 4

SECOND MISSION TO THE ARMY
BEFORE PISA*

I.

TO ANTONIO GIACOMINI, COMMISSIONER AT THE CAMP.
19 Aueust, 1505.

YESTERDAY, on receipt of your letter, and upon the arrival of
Luca Cavalcante, we wrote you what had taken place since we
received the news of the rout of Bartolommeo, and directed
you to move camp, and proceed towards Pisa; so that we pre-
sume that by the time this reaches you the army will have
started and gone in the direction indicated in our instructions.
By the present we desire to inform you that, having heard the
opinion of the governor that it would be well not to lose the
present favorable moment and opportunity to recover posses-
sion of Pisa, and to avenge some of the wrongs we have suffered
at the hands of our neighbors, we have become most desirous
to follow his counsels. And having this morning had the
sum of one hundred thousand ducats accorded to us by the
Council General, we decm it well, at all hazards, to make this
attempt upon Pisa. And to enable us the better to decide
upon this matter we wish you at once to see his Lordship the
Governor, and agree with him respecting all things necessary

* After the defeat of Bartolommeo @’ Alviano, mentioned in the note to the
preceding Mission, the Florentines imagined that they ought to take advantage
of the ardor created by that victory, and attempt the conquest of Pisa. Great
preparations were made for this purpose, and pressing orders were sent to Anto-
nio Giacomini, the Commissioner at the camp, to lead the army immediately before
the walls of that city. Machiavelli was sent to the camp to concert with Giaco-
mini all necessary preparations and provisions for this enterprise, which, however,
proved a failure, in consequence of the cowardice of the troops, as related by
Buonaccorsi, p. 115. We give some of the letters that speak of the measures taken
by the republic of Florence, and of the orders given; as also of the mission of
Machiavelli.

SECOND MISSION TO THE ARMY BEFORE PISA. 488

for such an attack, omitting nothing, and beginning from the
smallest up to the greatest, and to send us at once a full list of
the same. And as the providing of the necessary things will
require some days, we do not wish that time to be lost, but
desire that it may be employed to the utmost possible advan-
tage.

The first thing to do, therefore, is to show yourself with the
army as near as possible before Pisa, at such a point as may
seem best to you, and then to employ such means, be it either
force or stratagem, as you may deem suitable for sounding the
disposition of the Pisans since the news of our late victory,
and see whether you cannot stir up some disturbance within
the city itself; and in this way use every means of trying
whether fortune may not have prepared some advantage for
us without our being obliged to make greater efforts. And if
after that the Pisans remain as obstinate as before, then move
the army at once upon the Pisan territory, but in such a posi-
tion that you may be able suddenly to fall upon the Lucchese ;
for it is under all circumstances our wish that, before attempt-
ing an actual assault upon Pisa, you should attack the domin-
ion of Lucca, and plunder, waste, and ravage it with fire and
sword in the most hostile manner, leaving nothing undone
that can damage them; and above all, level Viareggio with the
ground, as well as every other place of any importance. And
so as to carry this out the more effectually, we desire that at
the same moment of your entering with the army upon their
territory, it shall also be assailed by the men of Pistoja, of
Borghiniani, of Pescia, of Lunigiana, and in fact by all our
other subjects who live upon the territory adjoining that of
Lucca. And inasmuch as secrecy is of the utmost importance
in this business, so that the Lucchese may not be aware of their
being about to be assailed until they hear the sound of our
trumpets, we shall not write to our different subjects what they
have to do until a day or two before the attack is to be begun.
If you think, however, that it would be better for you to write
to them from the camp, then let us know, and we will simply
direct them implicitly to obey your orders. If, on the other
hand, you deem it best that we should write to them from here,
then you will indicate to us the orders which we must give
them ; also the way in which you think this whole affair ought
to be carried out.

484 SECOND MISSION TO THE

To conclude now respecting all we desire to be done, and to
reduce the whole to a few words, we want you to let us know
at once all that you may need for the capture of Pisa, and for
making a demonstration with the army before the town, so as
to sound the disposition of its inhabitants; and in case this
should produce no effect, what you may then need for moving
the camp to a point from which you can suddenly strike the
Lucchese in the above indicated manner. You are to advise us
as to the orders to be sent to the people living near the confines
of the Lucchese territory ; and of whatever may occur to you
as being necessary to give vigor to this attack upon the Luc-
chese; so that, after receiving your reply to this, we may un-
derstand how this affair is to be managed, and the time when it
is to be begun, and how we can make sure that, having carried
this matter through, we may proceed to the assault upon Pisa ;
so that the Lucchese, having to take care of their own wounds,
may not attempt to try and heal those of others, and that they
may know the fruits of war after having rejected those of peace.
And so that our neighbors, secing how, contrary to their ex-
pectations, we avenge bitterly any attempt to injure us, may
themselves be more careful than they have been hitherto before
planning any unjust designs against our state.

But in all this you must act with the utmost promptness, and
before our army shall have forgotten how to conquer, or our
enemies how to be beaten, and before unforeseen circum-
stances can arise from any quarter that could tend to chill
the ardor of our troops.

We do not recommend what changes to make in the post
according to the route you may take, confident that you have
given all necessary orders upon that point.

If amongst the prisoners taken, there should be any sec-
retary or agent of Lucca, or of Pandolfo or D’ Alviano, or of
any other of the Orsini faction, you will send them to us here ;
and the same with any Pisan, or any other person notably our
enemy.

Vale!

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 485

II.

TO ANTONIO TEBALDUCCIO (GIACOMINI TEBALDUCCIO).

21 Aucust, 1505.

Havine seen from your last letter that you desire to have
Niccolo Machiavelli with you, so as to be able to confer with
him about all matters relating to our enterprise, we have sent
him to you early this morning, with full instructions upon all
points that are likely to present themselves. Our illustrious
Signoria, desiring to act in this business with all delibera-
tion and the approval of the mass of our citizens, although the
money already voted for the purpose may be taken as an assur-
ance that it is both approved and desired, have this morning
anew submitted to the General Council the question whether
the enterprise is to be carried out or not. The question was re-
ceived with the greatest favor, and with the greatest unanimity
it was approved, and decided that it should be undertaken at
all hazards. The matter is therefore reduced to that point,
that, God willing, we are bound to attempt it, and so it will
be done. And as amongst the first preparations the raising
of infantry is most important and necessary, and requires the
utmost promptness, therefore it is one of the first matters to
which we have turned our attention. And for this purpose we
send you herewith a list of such constables as are with the
army now, and a statement of the number of infantry that we
have assigned to each. Have them come to you and ask them
how soon they can fill up their number, and supposing that
they will act with all promptness, let them send their agents
here for money, which will be sent them without delay, so
that they may proceed at once to recruit the necessary number
of men. }

We have nothing further to say at present, whilst awaiting
the return of Machiavelli. You will take the same course
with the other constables who are not with you in camp, but
in the neighborhood, such as at Livorno, Rassignano, and such
other places; having a clear understanding with them as to
the time they may deem necessary for getting in order. And
you will arrange with them to send their agents here for money,

486 SECOND. MISSION. LO WHE

and to make their levies with all possible despatch. And if
you think that the pay of the infantry can be reduced to four-
teen lire and seventeen soldi, you must so inform us, as in
that case we may increase the number in proportion.

P. S.— You know perfectly the number of pieces of artillery
we have, but we do not know how many artillerists are neces-
sary for their service, and how many you have now with you.
Consult with the Governor, and remind him of this matter, as
well as of anything else that it may occur to you we should’
provide from here, and inform us of it without delay.

II.
TO ANTONIO TEBALDUCCIO.
24 AuGust, 1505.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI returned here yesterday evening, and
having heard his verbal report, and read the list of articles
which you require for your undertaking, we have decided to
confine the same to Pisa, leaving all else aside for the present.
And from last night until this evening we have attended to
nothing else than to expediting to you as promptly as possi-
ble all the artillery and ammunition that you have called for,
which we hope will reach you anyhow before the end of the
present month. As to the infantry, which is of the most impor-
tance, and which it will require a longer time to bring together,
we have noted the reduction which you have made in the lst,
and which we approve of. We have also noted whence you
propose to obtain the rest of the infantry, and in accordance
with your directions have this day expedited the Bolognese
constables with money for a levy of one thousand infantry,
and have ordered that the Marquis Galeotto Malespina shall
raise. four hundred of these; three hundred under his own
command, and one hundred under that of his son. We leave
it. to you now to solicit the Marquis of Panzano and the Mar-
quis of Massa. We have furnished funds to Gianotto da Carda
and Giannesino da Serrezano for two hundred infantry; the
Count Carpigna we purpose leaving aside, and in his stead

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 487

have taken the Marquis Carlo del Monte, with four hundred
stipendiaries.

We have had here the Governor’s Almoner, and the Chan-
cellor of the Count Niccolo da Bagno, who has raised a doubt
whether that gentleman can serve, owing to certain difficul-
ties that have arisen at Cesena. We have ordered a mes-
senger to be sent to him in all haste, and await his reply.
Guido Vaini has been furnished with money for four hundred
stipendiaries; money has also been sent to Messer Martino
del Borgo and Bernardino da Carrara for three hundred and
fifty men between the two. The twelve hundred ducats you
ask for, for the purpose of forming a corps of two hundred
men in your own way, will be sent to you, and we approve
of your doing so. To Messer Pier Bernardo, brother of Mes-
ser Vittorio da Canale we have sent two hundred ducats for
levying two hundred men: the money has been sent in let-
ters of exchange on Fuligno, in accordance with your request.
To Cecotto Tosinghi and Messer Criaco we have sent money to
add one hundred men to each of their corps, and the same to
the agent of Zitolo for increasing his corps two hundred men.
It is necessary now that you should urge the rest of those who
have to augment their Condotta, but they must not send their
agents here to levy their increase, for Signor Piero has not
yet sent here for his. You must also let us know how you
think we ought to manage about the payment of the companies
that are with you, and when you think that we ought to send
the money for their pay. As Machiavelli has recommended to
us that it would be well to publish in camp, and in the country
around, that whoever wants money need only to come for it,
so as to deprive such as may wish to raise troops in aid of the
Pisans of all chance of doing so, we have concluded to have
such publication made; but it will be proper to delay this
until the money is actually there, or until you are sure that
it will be there within a couple of days.

Machiavelli has also suggested to us that it would be well to
send some one from here to Lucca to ascertain the real dispo-
sition of the inhabitants. After examining this suggestion, we
deem it better that you should send some one from there, with
such instructions as may seem to you proper, to try and see
~ whether he cannot make sure of having their support in this
enterprise.

488 MISSION: 70 THE ARMY BELO. Eis.

We intend that the five hundred pioneers which you have
asked for the siege works, as also the other five hundred for
the camp service, shall be drawn from Cascine, from Lari, and
from the mountains and other places in the neighborhood. We
wish to pay them with our money and settle with them every
evening, and will send you the order to do so. Meantime you
will instruct the Rectors as to what they will have to do to find
a sufficient number of men for this service. The young men
for the service of the pioneers, and for yours, are already
selected, and will be promptly expedited; and you must let
us know if amongst those intended for your service there may
be any that suit you better than the others. This is all we
have to say on this subject. As the sailors of the galleys and
brigantines have to be paid in September, we desire that out
of the moneys you may have in hand you would send four
hundred and fifty ducats gold to the commissary of Livorno,
Zanobi Ridolfi; and you will write him that this sum is sent
expressly for the pay of the equipages of the said galleys and
brigantines; and we wish you to send this sum so that it shall
be received on the 28th instant.

END OF VOL. III.

University Press: John Wilson & Son, Cambridge.

Nb 14-4 ~G/
er :

University of Toronto |

Acme Library Card Pocket
| LOWE-MARTIN CO, LIMITED

°C oA
*pTouyeq aD Aq °14 ***sSUTZTIA

oTZewoTdTp pue ‘TeoTyTTod ‘Teats04sTy eu],
OTOOOTN ‘TT TeasetyoeN

OTZT7S ©

apa"
t467 TH
IH

ROE EO RN

22

-

* ? Os reer > ee Se eh Sea a3 ~
ERTS OR ah cek SSeS hte tn Le ee AR HEN AN Ney AOR aa ENE SRS
AEN x SNA SAS SES SR NT ey
my SONS ~ > \ SR
3 S SS ~
¢ aN oS ¥ SCR SLO Cr a en CLAIR TEES A a ES Sa Stee hee SSSR Se Lge WA ANIONS tt .
SAY . . SS SANSA SAS SSS CC
BON SVAN WENA SNES ~ . SN ~~ . . . . . SS .
SN 2
SS Se S
S x .
‘ S

AG

ty

Ly

is

Z
yeep beeps Yj GL MILE Mee LL ie
Ie iis LEGS ALLE LEY La

‘2 . SN

. Ae —
SEN ~~ SS ~
SEN TSS eS

S SS
S . s S
SSH \ \ ASK KSA MK
AN SS = SS - = SSS sate SS SS SS PEAS : es SV NAAN
i APO TRS ORE a Race Ce ° see eat ae Sacer a ma POAT IT AI ee ROE Re
