The Historical, Political, and Diplomatic Writings of Niccolò Machiavelli, Vol. 1 (Niccolò Machiavelli (Christian E. Detmold, trans.), 1513)
==========================================================
Machiavelli's complete works in Detmold's translation (1882-91, 4 vols.) - Discourses, Florentine Histories, Art of War, the comedies, letters and diplomatic writings; the founder of modern political science entire. Vol. 1 of 4.

HISTORICAL, POLITICAL, AND DIPLOMATIC

WRITINGS

OF

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI

TRANSLATED FROM THE ITALIAN

BY

CHRISTIAN FE. DETMOED

IN FOUR VOLUMES

Vober

BOSTON
JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY
1882

Copyright, 1882,
By CHRISTIAN E. DETMOLD.

All rights reserved.

University Press:
Joun Witson AND Son, CAMBRIDGE.

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

In offering the present translation of Machiavelli’s principal
historical, political, and diplomatic writings, my original object
was simply to afford to the general reader the opportunity of
judging for himself of the character of tha, ‘an, and of those
of his works upon which his reputation for ‘ood or for evil
mainly depends. I had no intention of entei ng the lists of
the detractors and defenders of Machiavelli, or 01 adding to the
number of his commentators. Enough of these have written
in almost every European tongue, making volumes sufficient
nearly to constitute a respectable library by themselves.

Nevertheless, as certain views and conclusions touching the
more prominent of the seeming contradictions in Machiavelli’s
writings suggested themselves to me whilst engaged in this
translation, I venture briefly to present them, although they
may differ materially from those taken by leading critics and
commentators. No writer perhaps has been more variously
judged than Machiavelli; regarded by some as the very em-
bodiment of the spirit of evil, especially by the earlier critics ;
and by others looked upon as a pure, unflinching patriot, mis-
understood and misinterpreted. The manifest contradictions,
real or apparent, in his writings, have naturally given rise to
widely differing commentaries, aiming less to explain and
reconcile these contradictions to each other, than to make the
favorable or unfavorable estimate of the author prevail. None
of Machiavelli’s writings, except his treatise “On the Art of
War,” were printed during his lifetime. A few years after

iv TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

his death, however, the “ Discourses on the First Ten Books of
Titus Livius,” the Florentine History, and “ The Prince,” were
printed at Rome with the authorization of Pope Clement VII.
But disregarding this previous papal permission, Pope Paul IV.
ordered these works to be placed in the Index Expurgatorius,
which order was confirmed by the Council of Trent in 1564.
Eight years later, the commission on the Index proposed to the
descendants of Machiavelli to publish an expurgated edition of
his works, on condition that the author’s name should be sup-
pressed. This offer, however, was indignantly rejected by his
grandsons, Giuliano de’ Ricci, son of the daughter, and Niccolo
Machiavelli, son of one of the sons; and thus for centuries his
writings remained utterly discredited in Italy.

Bayle in his Dictionary observes that “ Machiavellism” and
the art of “ governing tyrannically by violence and fraud are
“terms of the same significance”; thus creating the word

“ Machiavellism,” which has been generally adopted in Euro-
pean languages. Later, no less a personage than Freder-
ick the Great, while Crown Prince of Prussia, published his
“ Anti Machiavelli,’ which, it is said, he somewhat regretted
after having become king; and of which a Frenchman said,
with as much wit perhaps as truth, that “the greatest homage
“which any prince had ever paid to the doctrines of Machia-
“velli was to have refuted him, so that he might follow his
“ precepts with the greater impunity.”

The writings and reputation of Machiavelli became early
known in England. Lord Bacon refers to him several times
in his Essays, but makes no unfavorable reflections upon him.
Shakespeare mentions him three times, and of course takes the
then prevailing popular view of his character. First, in the
Merry Wives of Windsor, Act III. Sc. 1, the host of the Gar-
ter inn exclaims: “ Peace, I say! hear mine host of the Garter.
Am I politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel?” Secondly,
in the First Part of King Henry VI., Act V. Sc. 4, when
the captive Maid of Orleans pleads for her life on the ground
of being with child, and says, “It was Alencon that enjoyed
my love,’ the Duke of York exclaims, “ Alencon! that noto-

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. y

rious Machiavel!” And thirdly, in the Third Part of King
Henry VL, Act HI. Sc. 2, when Richard, Duke of Gloster,
resolves to make himself king of England, he ends his long
soliloquy, in which he recounts his various qualifications for
deceit and murder, by the following climax : —

“T can add colors to the chameleon,

Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,

And set the murderous Machiavel to school.

Can I do this, and cannot get a crown ?
Tut! were it farther off, I’ll pluck it down!”

Upon one point the modern reviewers and commentators of
Machiavelli are pretty much agreed; namely, that his morality
must be judged of by that prevailing at the time of his writing,
and that the principles of conduct laid down by him in “ The
Prince” are more the reflex of the perversity of the period in
which he lived, than that of his own mind. It was the period
of the Renaissance, a time of great interest and great troubles
for Italy, and perhaps the most interesting period that any
people ever passed through; and fruitful of the most important
events, discoveries, and progress in nearly all human achieve-
ments. It was marked at the same time by contradictions
similar to those noted in Machiavelli, — with the developments
of human genius at their highest, and that of the moral sense,
if not at its lowest, yet at a very low point. It was then that
Alexander VI., the father of Cesare and Lucretia Borgia, was
Pope, and shocked the world by his gross sensuality and licen-
tiousness ; and was succeeded in the Pontificate, after a brict
interval of less than a month, by Julius II., who was more sol-
dier than priest, and exceeded even the Borgia in the display
of craft and violence in his efforts to recover and enlarge the
possessions and temporal power of the Church.

In dedicating his little volume of “The Prince” to Lorenzo
de’ Medici, Machiavelli makes no pretence of offering a moral
treatise ; but simply, as the result of his reading and personal
experience, a collection of the actions of great men, by which
they succeeded in acquiring and preserving states. It is by
the example of these that he attempts to instruct the Magnifi-

vi TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

cent Lorenzo as to the qualities and conduct necessary for a
prince to achieve similar success.

Modern English writers have judged Machiavelli differently,
and some of them, perhaps, have gone to the other extreme ;
as may possibly be said of Byron in Childe Harold’s Pilgrim-
age (Canto IV. St. 54, 55): —

“Tn Santa Croce’s holy precincts lie
Ashes which make it holier, dust which is
Even in itself an immortality.
, : : Here repose
Angelo’s, Alfieri’s bones, and his,
The starry Galileo, with his woes ;
Here Machiavelli’s earth returned to whence it rose.

“These are four minds, which, like the elements,
Might furnish forth creation.”

Prominent, however, amongst modern reviews of Machiavelli
stands Macaulay’s masterly, brilliant, though not always just
essay, which appeared in the Edinburgh Review, March, 1827.
This came like a revelation upon the reading public, and cer-
tainly did more than any other literary production to spread
amore correct knowledge and juster views of Machiavelli in
England and America.

I abstain from referring to the many most interesting and
instructive works on Machiavelli, in Italian, French, and Ger-
man, that have appeared within the last thirty years; but
should be unjust were I not to mention specially that very
able and exhaustive work, “ Niccolo Machiavelli and his Times,”
by Professor Pasquale Villari of Florence. Two volumes of
this have appeared simultaneously in Italian and in English
(1877, 1881), and the third is looked for with eager interest.

The great experience in public affairs which Machiavelli had
acquired during his many years’ employment in the service of
the state at home and in his various missions abroad, coupled
with his natural gifts of quick perception and keen penetration,
soon taught him that the constant resort to dissembling and
treachery by the rulers and governments of the different states
of Italy in their dealings with each other, as well as with their

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. Vii

more powerful neighbors north of the Alps, was the conse-
quence of their own weakness and fear. This weakness was
the natural result of the subdivision of Italy into so many
small principalities, forever warring against each other by
means of mercenary soldiers of fortune.

Several of the more important of these principalities had in
turn invoked the aid of their powerful Transalpine neighbors,
France, Germany, and Spain, who in their turn had invaded,
pillaged, and devastated Italy from one end to the other. The
woes inflicted upon Italy by these foreign invasions were the
cause of intense grief and mortification to Machiavelli; who,
enthusiastic admirer of the ancient Romans that he was, could
never forget the power wielded by Rome of old, when, exercis-
ing the concentrated sovereignty of all Italy, and with armies
of her own, she had made herself the mistress of the world.
He witnessed with shame and humiliation the degeneracy and
helplessness of his country, and clearly saw the causes of it.
It was this that made him the unceasing advocate of the union
of all Italy, of the establishment of national armies, instead of
the uncertain employment of the venal Condottieri, and of the
expulsion of the detested foreigners from the soil of Italy.
Machiavelli was a sincere republican and a true lover of lib-
erty; but for the sake of a united Italy, with well-trained
national armies, strong enough to protect her against the peri-
odical inundations of Northern barbarians, he was willing to
give up his cherished republican form of government, and ac-
cept the one man power of a prince, though he was a Medici.
Thence that passionately eloquent appeal to Lorenzo de’ Medici,
to play the part of the long hoped for deliverer, with which
Machiavelli thus closes his much debated treatise of “The
Prince ” : —

“You must not, then, allow this opportunity to pass, so that
“Italy, after waiting so long, may at last see her deliverer ap-
“pear. Nor can I possibly express with what affection he
“would be received in all those provinces that have suffered so
“long from this inundation of foreign foes !— with what thirst
“for vengeance, with what persistent faith, with what devotion,

viii TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

“and with what tears! What door would be closed to him?
“Who would refuse him obedience? What envy would dare
“oppose him? What Italian would refuse him homage? This
“barbarous dominion of the foreigner offends the very nostrils
“of everybody.

‘Let your illustrious house, then, assume this task with that
“courage and hopefulness which every just enterprise inspires ;
“so that under your banner our country may recover its an-
“cient fame, and under your auspices may be verified the
“words of Petrarca: —

*««Virtt contro al furore
Prendera |’ arme, e fia il combatter corto ;

Ché I’ antico valore
Negli Italici cuor non é ancor morto.

299

In fact, Machiavelli felt with regard to the union of Italy
very much as President Lincoln did during the Secession war,
when he said, with reference to the United States, “My para-
“mount object is to save the Union, and not either to save
“or to destroy slavery.”

During his several missions to France Machiavelli had clearly
observed that the power of France was the result of the unity
of territory and of the government. This had been the work
of Louis XI., who was indeed the recognized founder of the
French monarchy. And the means which he had employed
for the attainment of that end were precisely those which
Machiavelli recommends for a similar purpose in his treatise
of “The Prince”; namely, disregard of pledges, dissembling,
perfidy, and violence. In fact, Louis XI. had anticipated these
precepts, even to the extermination of a number of the great
houses of France which, by their claims to sovereignty over
any portion of the soil, could imperil in the slightest degree
the absolute control of the king over the entire kingdom.

None of the states of Italy had at that time any regular
armies of their own; thus their wars against each other were
carried on, as already said, by hired soldiers of fortune, who,
for stipulated sums of money, and for a fixed period of time,
furnished a certain number of men, generally mounted. These

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. ix

captains, by an understanding amongst themselves, avoided
killing or wounding each other’s men, so that the battles of
those days were rarely bloody. Military valor seems to have
died out amongst the Italians, and cunning and perfidy had
taken its place. It was a period of personal government, when
despotism had supplanted the ancient liberties, which the peo-
ple had not the courage to maintain or recover.

Machiavelli had also noticed, during his missions to France,
the organization of the army, due to the efforts of Charles VIL. ;
and made it the subject of especial notice in his despatches to
the Florentine government. He succeeded subsequently in in-
ducing the government of Florence to authorize the establish-
ment of a national militia, and was himself employed to enlist
and enroll the men of the Florentine dominion for that pur-
pose. In this laborious duty he displayed the same zeal and
devotion to his country, that he did in all his other public
employments. Still later in life, after he had tasted the bitter-
ness of degradation from office and the proverbial ingratitude
of governments, he wrote and published his seven books on
“The Art of War,” a highly interesting and admirably written
dissertation in the shape of a dialogue; but not comprised in
this translation.

The famous eighteenth chapter of “ The Prince ” —“ In what
Manner Princes should keep their Faith” —has earned for
Machiavelli the odious reputation of having originated and rec-
ommended a system of fraud and perfidy as one of the essen-
tial arts and practices of princes and governments in all public
affairs. I think the unprejudiced reader will have no difficulty
in coming to the conclusion that, like other wrongs imputed to
Machiavelli, the charge is unjust. The chapter in question
opens as follows: “It must be evident to every one that it is
‘more praiseworthy for a prince always to maintain good faith,
“and practise integrity rather than craft and deceit. And yet
“the experience of our own times has shown that those princes
“have achieved great things who made small account of good
“faith, and who understood by cunning to circumyent the in-
“telligence of others; and that in the end they got the better

x TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

“of those whose actions were dictated by loyalty and good
“faith,” etc.

Proceeding then to indulge in a fanciful and far-fetched —
allegory to sustain his argument, Machiavelli goes on to say:
“A sagacious prince then cannot and should not fulfil his
“pledges when their observance is contrary to his interest,
“and when the causes that induced him to pledge his faith
“no longer exist. If men were all good, then indeed this
“precept would be bad; but as men are naturally bad, and
“will not observe their faith towards you, you must, in the
‘‘same way, not observe yours to them.”

In all this, Machiavelli merely states, with his accustomed
unhesitating honesty, the practices of nearly all the sovereigns
and governments of Europe at that time, — not only in Italy, but
in Spain by Ferdinand the Catholic, by Henry VII. in England,
and above all by Louis XI. in France, who did not hesitate to
teach his son that “a prince who did not know how to dis-
“semble was unfit to govern.” In truth, this was the period
of which it has been well said by one of the historians of
France, “The princes of this century placed success before
“honor.”

To show further that Machiavelli, so far from being the
originator of so vicious and reprehensible a practice, merely
indicated it as one of the means generally employed by princes,
and that it was sanctioned even in advance by the highest au-
thority of the Church, the Popes themselves, I quote the fol-
lowing: “In virtue of the papal bulls of the latter part of the
“fifteenth century,* the sovereigns of France had special im-
“munities in all matters of conscience; for the king’s confessor
“had the power to absolve the king and his wife, his brothers,
“and his children, from the greatest sins, and even crimes,
“without being obliged to resort to pontifical authority. The
“king was free to choose his own confessor, and to change him
“at pleasure, if he found him too strict. The confessor had
“also power to release the king from his vows and oaths; and

* Long prior, therefore, to Machiavelli’s writing “The Prince,” which was
not until 1516, the early part of the sixteenth century.

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. xi

“thus the king was raised by the Holy See above all the obli-
“gations of duty, law, and right.” *

Another circumstance that has brought severe censure upon
Machiavelli is his having held up Cesare Borgia as an example
in “The Prince.” But here he has also been misunderstood
and misinterpreted; for after having pointed out wherein
Cesare Borgia acted judiciously, and wherein he was at fault,
Machiavelli says: “ Whoever, then, in a newly acquired state,
“finds it necessary to secure himself against his enemies, to
“oain friends, to conquer by force or by cunning, to make him-
“self feared or beloved by the people, to be followed and re-
“vered by the soldiery, to destroy all who could or might injure
“him, to substitute a new for the old order of things, to be
“severe and yet gracious, magnanimous, and liberal, to disband
“‘a disloyal army and create a new one, to preserve the friend-
“ship of kings and princes, so that they may bestow benefits
“upon him with grace, and fear to injure him,—such a one,
‘“‘T say, cannot find more recent examples than those presented
“by the conduct of the Duke Valentino.” (Chapter VII.)

Machiavelli thus states most carefully in detail the particular
cases in which the conduct of Cesare Borgia might serve as
an example, but he does not by any means hold him up as a
commendable model of general excellence. In fact, although
Machiavelli cites many precedents in support of his theories,
yet he never justifies crime. On the contrary, he almost in-
variably condemns it. For instance, in speaking of Agathocles
the Sicilian, whom he cites as having achieved the sovereignty
of Syracuse “by a thousand efforts and dangers,” and main-
tained it “with great courage, and even temerity,” he adds:
“Yet we cannot call it valor to massacre one’s fellow-citizens,
“to betray one’s friends, and to be devoid of good faith, mercy,
“and religion; such means may enable a man to achieve em-
“pire, but not glory.”

In the “ Discourses on the First Ten Books of Titus Livius” 7

* See “Priviléges accordés & la Couronne de France par le Saint Siége,”

1852, Imprimerie Impériale.
t Book III. Chap. XL. See Vol. IL. p. 419.

xii TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

Machiavelli speaks of stratagems, and of deceiving the enemy
in time of war, as being laudable and honorable. But he is
very careful to draw a distinction thus: “ But I will say this,
“that I do not confound such deceit with perfidy, which breaks
“pledged faith and treaties; for although states and kingdoms
“may at times be won by perfidy, yet will it ever bring dis-
“honor with it.”

As a further proof of the injustice of the aspersions of
Machiavelli, I have included in these volumes a translation
of a little book bearing the title of “Thoughts of a States-
man”; being a collection of maxims selected from the works
of Machiavelli, and first published at Rome in 1771, and re-
printed in the Jtalia edition of his works (1818).

In conclusion, I think it can with truth be said of Machia-
velli, that he has been more abused than known, and that had
he been better known he would have been less abused. For
the reader of his works would have become satisfied that
Machiavelli was neither devil nor saint, but simply a most
gifted, honest man and patriot, who was not afraid to write,
in the most terse and lucid manner, what he honestly thought
calculated to advance the interests of his country, which he
had so much at heart. If by the present translation I succeed
in causing a more accurate acquaintance with the works of this
remarkable man, I shall feel doubly rewarded, having already
had ample compensation in the work itself, which, during
several years of compulsory inactivity from impaired health,
has afforded me constant, agreeable, and most instructive

occupation.
C. E. DETMOLD.
Paris, March, 1882.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.

Pace

PRA NSUA TORS PREM ACK 16 pet l7 pec oie oc ye ay
Petr ON NICOOLG: MACHTAVALLY 8 es ee ey

HISTORY OF FLORENCE.

EC ATION Fee ete ee een a es ioe eee 3
PG RPACR OS ee ee ee 7
METH E OOK! ou ee ne eee
PEUOND DOORS ere ee a Re Or
Rpts DOOM Se ee en, ee ee

APACS ge

MOP RCH OOK ve ne i ee ee a OO
Firta oe : : ee eh oo pre ed. ecole
Mn Boe 6s
PAREN DOOR ee ee is es lO

SPL IGHTHP BOOK oe ee oe ce OOF

ag ree

wee
*

bh igad

OF

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLL

THE following sketch of the life of Machiavelli is, so far
as the facts are concerned, translated almost verbatim from
Luigi Passerini’s article on Machiavelli, prefatory to the edi-
tion of his works by L. Passerini and G. Milanesi; that being
the most concise and correct of the many biographies of the
Florentine Secretary, and supported throughout by official doc-
uments.

The origin of the Machiavelli family dates from the old
Marquis Hugo of Tuscany, who flourished in the middle of the
ninth century. The family were lords proprietors of Monte
Spertoli, in the Val di Pesa; but desirous of enjoying the
right of citizenship of Florence, they moved into the city and
established themselves in the quarter of Oltr’ Arno. They
became attached to the Guelf party, and a number of the
ancestors of Niccolo were honored with the highest dignities
in the government. Bernardo, the father of Niccolo, was a
respectable jurisconsult, or, as it was then termed, judge, and
treasurer of the Marches of Ancona. He had married Bartolo-
mea Nelli, widow of Niccolo Benozzi, who was of an equally dis-
tinguished family, tracing their origin back to the old Counts
of Borgo Nuovo di Fuecchio, known before the ninth century ;
and a number of the members of this family had also enjoyed
the honors of some of the most important offices in the govern-
ment of Florence. With all this the family were poor, receiv-
ing but a very scanty income from their landed possessions,

xvi LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

and having to depend almost entirely upon the modest com-
pensation which Bernardo derived from his profession.

Niccolo Machiavelli was born on the 3d of May, 1469; little
or nothing is known of his early years, or who directed his
first studies, though there is reason to believe that it was his
mother, who was a great lover of poetry and had herself writ-
ten some religious verses. Being desirous of devoting himself
to the service of the government, he was placed about the year
1494 under the direction of Marcello Virgilio Adriani, in the
Second Chancellery, whose business was mainly with the am-
bassadors and with all matters concerning war. It is probable
that by way of beginning his political career he chose a mo-
ment when, in consequence of the expulsion of Piero de’ Medici,
‘there was an entire reform of the institutions of the republic,
by establishing them upon a wider and more democratic basis.
Fra Girolamo Savonarola had at that time a large share in the
affairs of the government; but it cannot be truly said that
Machiavelli was indebted to him for his admission to the pub-
lic service, as has been asserted by some, misled probably by
another of the family bearing the same name, and who was
amongst the warmest supporters of Savonarola’s faction, whilst
the writings of our Niccolo show clearly that he was neither
friend nor admirer of the terrible Dominican.

Machiavelli very soon gave proof of superior ability in the
career which he had chosen; so that when the post of Secretary
became vacant, in 1498, it was given to him by a decree of the
Major Council on the 19th of June, 1498, although very able
men, and more advanced in years than he, competed for the
place. Amongst these was Francesco Baroni, who had but
_lately rendered valuable service to the state in the trial of Fra
Girolamo Savonarola.

Machiavelli had scarcely held the office a few weeks, when, by
another resolution of the Signoria, he was on the 14th of July
chosen Secretary of the Ten of Liberty; at all times a most
important office, inasmuch as he had to occupy himself with
military matters, which had become much more important at

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI xvii

that time, when Florence was engaged in war with Pisa for the
purpose of bringing that revolted city back to her duty, and
at the same time had to defend herself against the Venetians,
who, at the instigation of the Medici, were moving against the
Florentine republic. Although elected only for the month of
August, Machiavelli remained nevertheless in charge for about
fifteen years, an unquestionable proof that a person more capa-
ble of filling the post than he could not be found. And in fact
the documents that remain to us of those times show the very
large share he had in all the affairs of state, political as well as
military ; and the many records of external relations, as well
as matters of war, written at the dictation of Niccolo Machia-
velli, bear witness that nothing important was done whilst he
was in office without his direction and counsel.

Besides the despatch of the ordinary business of his office, he
was frequently employed by the Signoria, or more correctly
speaking by the “Ten of Liberty and Peace,’ to whom this
business belonged, in missions of the greatest interest. The
series of these missions begins in November, 1498, with that
to the Lord of Piombino, at that time in the military service of
the republic, to request him to join the Florentine forces before
the walls of Pisa. He was sent to him a second time on the
24th of March, 1499, whilst Jacopo d’ Appiano was at Pontedera,
to urge him to do his duty, and not to insist upon an increase
of pay which he demanded. This mission was followed by an-
other to the Lady Catharine Sforza Riario, at Furli, in July of the
same year, in relation to the condotta of her son Ottaviano.

Machiavelli was several times sent as commissary to the army
besieging Pisa, where he was exposed to very great fatigue and
even danger of life. But in July, 1500, he was charged with the
still more important duty of proceeding to the court of France,
together with Francesco della Casa, ambassador to Louis XIL.,
to explain to him the truth respecting the ill conduct of his
troops, which he had sent against the Pisans at the request of
the republic of Florence; and to vindicate the Florentine re-

public from the charges made by these rapacious mercenaries,
VOL, I. B

Xviii LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

for the purpose of exculpating themselves for their shameful
conduct. Machiavelli, having been an eyewitness to the whole
affair, was the soul of this embassy, from which he returned to
Florence, after about six months’ absence, on the 14th of Janu-
ary, 1501, when he immediately resumed his old office in the
Chancellery of the Ten of Liberty; but for a very short time only,
as by the end of the same month he had to proceed to Pistoja,
which was all in confusion in consequence of the feud between
the parties of the Panteatichi and the Cancellieri. After this
he had to proceed in the summer to Cascina and Sienna, on
business relating to the Pisan war. In August he went again
to Pistoja, where he succeeded in making the opposing factions
swear to keep the peace; which, however, was but ephemeral,
for a peace imposed by menaces is not durable. After a little
while the parties resumed their arms, and blood flowed in the
streets; so that it became necessary for Machiavelli to return
there in October, in company with Niccolo Valori.

Between the months of May and October he went several
times to Arezzo; also to Vitellozzo Vitelli, Condottiere of the
Duke Valentino, who had instigated that city to revolt ; and also
to the Florentine commissaries who were with the French army.
On his return he presented to the Signoria a communication
“On the Manner in which the revolted Population of the Val
di Chiana should be treated,” of which, however, only a frag- -
ment remains.

His mission to Cesare Borgia, whom he found at Imola in the
early part of October, and whom he followed through the Ro-
magna and Umbria until the 23d of January, 1508, is so well
known as to make it unnecessary to enlarge upon its object
here ; particularly as it gave rise to Machiavelli’s well-known
“ Description of the Manner in which the Duke Valentino pro-
“ceeded to kill Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo, the
“Signor Paolo and the Duke Gravina Orsini.” The Duke of
Romagna, believing that this act, which he regarded as necessary
for his own defence, did not displease the Florentine republic,
induced his father, Pope Alexander VI., to request the govern-

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI. xix

ment of the republic to contract an alliance with the Borgia
family. This caused Piero Soderini to send Machiavelli to Si-
enna as ambassador to Pandolfo Petrucci on the 26th of April,
1503, to inform him of the fact, and to invite him to make
common cause with the Florentines. But whilst the negotia-
tions were pending, Pope Alexander VI. died, and Machiavelli
was sent to Volterra to concert measures with Cardinal Fran-
cesco Soderini respecting the election of a new Pope. He ac-
companied this prelate as far as Val d’ Arno, whilst on his
way to Rome; and afterwards, on the 24th of October, he left
himself for the Eternal City, where the conclave was assembled
for the election of another new Pope in place of Pius III., who
had died only twenty-six days after his election, and where
Machiavelli remained until the 22d of December.

He was not permitted to enjoy a long repose, for on the
12th of January, 1504, we find him charged with a mission
to Firenzuola; the object of which, however, is not known. A
few days later he received instructions to proceed a second time
to the court of France. He did not leave, however, until the
19th of January, and negotiated with King Louis XII. at Lyons,
respecting the object of his mission; and on his return, which
must have been near. the close of February, he was glad to
bring the Signoria the assurance that in the truce concluded
between France and Spain it was stipulated that the republic
of Florence should be comprised, and that the apprehensions
excited by the success of the Spanish arms were groundless.

In April of the same year Machiavelli was at Piombino, with
the apparent object of informing Jacopo IV. d@ Alviano, lord of
the place, of certain dangers that threatened him, and to coun-
sel him; but with the real purpose of ascertaining exactly his
disposition, and to bring him back to his good faith to the re-
public. Having returned to Florence, he had barely time to lift
his foot from the stirrup, when he had, on the 8th of the same
month, to proceed to Castiglione del Lago, to urge Gianpaolo
Baglioni, then in the pay of the republic, to perform his duty,
and to take the field with his troops against the Pisans, which

XX LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

he refused to do on the ground of his having to guard himself
against enemies whom he had in Perugia, and by whom his
power was menaced. As Baglioni persisted in his refusal,
Machiavelli went to Mantua to conclude a condotta with the
Marquis Giovan Francesco to enter the service of the republic.
But he failed in his efforts, owing to the immoderate demands
of the Gonzaga. After that he was sent in July to Sienna, to
thank Pandolfo Petrucci for the information which he had
secretly given to the Signoria of the hostile intentions of Bar-
tolommeo d’ Alviano, who was preparing to carry help to the
Pisans, and to treat with Pandolfo about a condotta in the pay
of the republic. But as the latter was cunningly playing a
double part and contemplated treason, Machiavelli, who knew
him well, and surpassed him in sagacity, drew from him the
information which he wanted most; and then left him without
concluding any engagement with him. Bartolommeo @’ Alviano
actually started for Pisa; but at Torre San Vincenzo he encoun-
tered Antonio Giacomini, and was completely defeated by him,
so that he had to take to flight.

The Florentines thought that the favorable moment had ar-
rived for capturing the revolted city, and for that purpose the
Ten sent the Secretary to the besieging army to concert meas-
ures for the attempt. He fulfilled his duty, but the enterprise
failed in consequence of the cowardly conduct of the mercenary
soldiers.

This experience completely satisfied Machiavelli how little
reliance could be placed upon hireling troops, and how ne-
cessary it was for every state to have an army of its own.
Having convinced the Ten of the advantage of enrolling the
subjects of the republic, he was intrusted with the charge of
making a beginning of the work, and from the month of De-
cember, 1505, until towards the end of March of the following
year, Machiavelli devoted himself to this business ; and we have
accounts of his presence in the Val di Sieve, in the Mugello,
and in the Casentino.

Interrupting at this point the course of his missions, it seems

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI. x1

opportune here to show how, from the time that he assumed
office, the great mind of the Secretary became convinced that
the military system of the Italians was false; for it had un-
dermined valor and discipline, and had made that beautiful
country the easy prey of every foreign robber.

He perceived, therefore, that it would be necessary to abolish
the system of mercenary troops, and to constitute a national
army. But as it requires time to eradicate inveterate preju-
dices, which can only be done gradually, he began by inducing
the Ten to order the enrolment of one man for every hearth in
the Florentine dominions. The first step was taken in 1500;
meantime, however, it was ordered that all the men capable of
bearing arms, in every family, should be registered ; and when
the opportune moment seemed to him to have come, he suc-
ceeded in having an order passed by the Ten, that there should
always be ten thousand men kept under arms under the banner
of the Lily, and that that number should be made up by select-
ing the most suitable men from amongst those that were already
inscribed, in proportion to the number of the population of the
different places.

As the burden of the business relating to war was increased,
Machiavelli began to influence public opinion upon this point
by pronouncing, in March, 1503, a discourse in the General
Council exhorting the people to arm themselves for their own
defence, rather than resort to mercenary troops, and endeavor-
ing to stir them up to make the necessary sacrifices for sup-
plying the means for this purpose. Afterwards he presented
a written communication to the Ten, the manuscript of which
is amongst the treasures transferred from the Royal to the
National Library, by which he succeeded in inducing them to
intrust the organization of the army to a magistracy of nine
citizens, to be appointed by them, who should be called the
‘Nine of Ordinance and Militia,’ and should occupy them-
selves with the formation of the companies, the training and
discipline of the soldiers, and should see that the prescribed
number of men was always complete, armed, drilled, and

xxii LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

ready to take the field; all other authority over the army,
and the exclusive right to mobilize and send it into the field,
remaining with the Ten. Machiavelli was secretary and the
very soul of the magistracy of the Nine; and to him are due
the celebrated decree of the 6th of December, 1506, by which
this new magistracy was instituted, and the instructions for the
infantry, as well as another decree of the 20th of March, 1512,
which established the regulations for the mounted troops.
With these institutions Machiavelli laid the foundation for the
military system of the present time, and initiated that which
was afterwards taken up by Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy, and
was the glory of Piedmont, and later of Prussia, which imitated
it, — making of the military profession a national institution,
and not a trade. He introduced, moreover, a bold innova-
tion in demonstrating the superiority of infantry over cavalry,
which was highly praised by those contemporaries who were
in position to appreciate its full importance. There exist sev-
eral letters in the archives relating to it, amongst which are
two full of patriotic enthusiasm, written by Cardinal Soderini
in praise of this fact,— the one addressed to his brother Piero,
and the other to Machiavelli.

In the autumn of 1504 Machiavelli wrote the Decennali in
terza rima, and dedicated them to Alamanno Salviati; it is
probable that he had the work printed about the end of that
year, or in the beginning of the next, under the care of his col-
league in the Chancellery, Ser Agostino di Matteo. The title
of this extremely rare little volume is “ Nicolai Malclavelli Flo-
“rentini Compendium Rerum Decennii in Italiam Gestarum ad
“Viros Florentinos, incipit feliciter.’ It bears neither the
printer’s name, nor the place or date.

Resuming now the interrupted series of Machiavelli’s mis-
sions, it appears that, whilst he was occupied with the reorgani-
zation of the militia, he was sent a second time to the court
of Rome, on the 25th of August, 1506. He did not return
until the 1st of November, having accompanied Julius II. as
far as Imola; the Pope’s aim being the recovery of Bologna.

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI. XXlii

The particular object of this mission was to show to the iras-
cible and suspicious Pontiff the good disposition of the Flor-
entines, and their great desire to favor his attempt against
Bologna. On the 14th of March, 1507, Machiavelli went to
enroll and select infantry in the Val di Tevere, in the Val di
Chiana, in Chianti, and in the vales of Elsa and Cecina, and was
gone thirty-four days. In May he was charged again to proceed
to the lord of Piombino; but he had hardly reached Volterra
when he received orders to return, the motive of his mission
having ceased to exist. The object for which the Ten sent
Machiavelli to Sienna in August was not a serious one; for he
was merely to ascertain the extent of the retinue of the Cardi-
nal Legate Bernardino Caravajal, whose arrival was expected
in Florence. But the mission to the Emperor Maximilian was
of greater importance: he was sent to him in December, 1507,
and remained until the 16th of June of the following year, the
object being to arrive at some agreement respecting the pecu-
niary subsidy which the Emperor demanded of the republic on
the occasion of his coming into Italy for the purpose of receiv-
ing the imperial crown from the Supreme Pontiff. Machiavelli,
being a keen observer of the customs and conditions of the dif-
ferent peoples, made Germany a subject of special study ; and
to this period belong the two Reports “On the Affairs of Ger-
many,” and the “ Discourse on the Affairs of Germany and on
the Emperor.”

In August he made an extraordinary levy of infantry and
pioneers, and sent them into the Pisan territory to devastate
the fields and to carry off the crops. The wretched inhabitants
of the Vicariates of San Miniato and Pescia were subjected to
similar injuries in October, because of the suspicion that they
might possibly send supplies of provisions to Pisa. He spent
all the following January and a couple of days of February in
mustering corporals and soldiers in various provinces subject
to the republic. On the 18th of February he went to inspect
the army before Pisa, and had thence to proceed to Piombino
in March, to negotiate an agreement with the Pisans through

Xxiv LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

the mediation of Jacopo d’ Appiano, which, however, was not
concluded. Having afterwards returned to the camp before
Pisa, he remained there until the 8th of June. During this
time he was also occupied with other missions, all which had
for their object the happy termination of this war, which ended
with the surrender of the city.

Thence he went to Mantua, to pay into the hands of the
Emperor’s mandataries the second instalment of forty thou-
sand ducats which the Florentines had agreed to pay him for
the confirmation of the privileges conceded to the republic by
-his predecessors; and to obtain from the Emperor a full and
explicit renunciation of all claims which he could possibly
make upon the city or state of Florence, and particularly upon
Pisa, which they had but so lately reconquered. This was
done by an agreement in the preparation of which our Secre-
tary had a large share. On this occasion he was also charged
to proceed into Lombardy to watch personally the fierce war
which the allies of Cambray were carrying on against Venice,
and to report thereupon to the Signoria. This mission lasted
from the 10th of November, 1509, until the 2d of January of
the following year; and it was at that time that his enemies
tried to ruin him, and presented a protest in December to
the conservators of the laws demanding that he should be
deprived of all office, as being the son of a bastard father;
basing their demand upon an old law, that had fallen into des-
uetude. But if this storm raged for a few days, it had no evil
consequences, mainly owing to the efforts of his friend and
colleague, Biagio de Buonaccorsi. In March, Machiavelli was
appointed arbiter to settle the dispute about the boundary be-
tween the men of the little commune of Gargonza, belonging
to the republic of Florence, and those of Armaiuolo, subject to
Sienna; and at the end of May he was sent into the Vicariates
of San Miniato and of Pescia, to review certain companies of
infantry, and to select other men to add to these companies.

The importance which the Signoria attached to having a
confidential person near the king of France, who was the prin-

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI. XXV

cipal ally of the Florentines, and upon whom they relied more
than upon any other, caused them, when the post of resident
ambassador became vacant, to appoint Machiavelli to the place
until a new one could be named. He therefore went to join
the court of France, at Lyons, on the 24th of June, 1510, and
followed it afterwards to Blois and Tours, returning to his
own country on the 19th of October. To this third journey into
France, it seems, we must refer his “ Description of French
Affairs,” for he made a longer stay there this time than on the
former occasions, so that he had better opportunity to investi-
gate men and things.

From November, 1510, until the end of May, 1511, he was
most active, for existing documents show that he remained
but a few days quiet during that period, being at one moment
ambassador at Sienna, afterwards engaged in enrolling men
for the infantry and cavalry, and subsequently at Pisa, at Arez-
zo, and at Poggibonsi, to examine and put in a state of defence
the fortresses of those places. After this he was at Monaco
from the 11th of May to the 5th of June, to negotiate a treaty
of friendship with Luciano Grimaldi, lord of that place; and
from the 24th of August to the Tth of September he went rap-
idly through the upper Val @’ Arno, the Val di Chiana, and the
Casentino, to enroll one hundred men fit to serve on horseback.

He had hardly been back four days in Florence, when he
was obliged to leave in haste for Lombardy, to have an inter-
view at Milan with the lieutenant of King Louis XIL., and to
proceed immediately afterwards to Blois to treat directly with
that monarch. The object of this mission was to prevent, if
possible, the assembling in council at Pisa of the cardinals who
were hostile to Pope Julius II., the republic having conceded
to those cardinals the hospitality of Pisa, fully aware that by
this act it would draw upon itself the vengeance of that im-
placable Pope. Machiavelli, however, did not succeed in this
mission; so that, having returned to Florence on the 2d of
November, he was ordered the next day to proceed to Pisa
and persuade those prelates to leave that city. For this pur-

XXvi LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

pose a good body of soldiers was worth more than all argu-
ments, and Machiavelli sent them into Pisa under pretext of
protecting the cardinals; but these prelates were frightened
by the troops; and better still, the lack of provisions sub-
jected them to privations to which they were not accustomed.
He rendered an account of this mission on the 11th of No-
vember, and left for the Romagna on the 2d of December, to
register on his roll of ordinance the men suitable to serve in
the infantry, and for the same purpose he went through the
greater portion of the Florentine dominion from May until
August, 1512.

Meantime the vengeance of Julius IT. ripened, and fell terri-
bly upon the Florentine republic. He began by summoning
the Signoria to dissolve the alliance with the king of France,
and to adhere to the league which he had formed against the
French with Spain, England, and Venice, and which he was
pleased to call “the holy league.” After the refusal of Piero
Soderini, the perpetual Gonfalonier, who wanted to remain
faithful to the oaths which he had taken, the Pontiff sent a
Spanish army into Tuscany, which was accompanied by his
Legate, the Cardinal de’ Medici, who sacked Prato so barba-
rously that she laments it to this day; and he encouraged the
partisans of the Medici in Florence to set a conspiracy on foot
to drive the Gonfalonier from the seat of government, and to
replace the country under the yoke of the hated Medici family.
If Soderini had had Machiavelli about him at that time, it is
probable that he would have borne himself with more sagacity,
and would have spared to himself and to Florence the injury
and shame in which he found himself involved; although
Machiavelli would probably not have advised him to detach
himself entirely from France, for the Secretary remained
friendly to that power even in after years, when he lived
entirely removed from all public business, as his familiar let-
ters show most clearly. But even if Machiavelli had been in
Florence on that fatal day, he was nevertheless a stranger to
the facts that afflicted her. The fall of Soderini actually oc-

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI. XXVil

curred on the 30th of August, 1512, and it is proved by public
documents that Machiavelli was on the 27th of August at Firen-
zuola, and that, with but rare and brief interruptions, he had
been absent from Florence ever since the first week in May.
So that it is evident that he could not have influenced the
Gonfalonier in his councils, who was, however, in the habit
of consulting him, but most probably could not do so on that
occasion, because the demands of the Pope and the execution
of his threat were an affair of but a very few days.

Speaking of this fact, it seems interesting to note that Machi-
avelli neither disapproved nor censured Soderini for his con-
duct, and the proof of this is a letter which he wrote shortly
after the event to an unknown lady.* And as he preserved his
esteem and friendship for the deposed Gonfalonier, and kept
up a correspondence with him even during his own exile, we
have the right to reject a biting epigram upon the death of So-
derini attributed to Machiavelli, but which would have been an
evidence of ingratitude and manifest contradiction on his part.t

Nevertheless, if Machiavelli did not influence Soderini in his
determination, he had to experience the painful consequences
of it. For so soon as the government was changed according
to the will of the new masters, Machiavelli was formally dis-
missed, on the 8th of November, from the office of Secretary of
the Second Chancellery of the Signoria, and at the same time
from the secretaryship of the Magistracy of the Ten. By an-
other decree of the 10th of November, he was confined for a
whole year within the limits of the territory of the republic;
and on the 17th, he was notified that for a whole year he was

* This lady is presumed to have been Alphonsina Orsini, the widow of Piero,
and mother of Lorenzo de’ Medici.

+ “La notte che mori Pier Soderini
“T” alma n’ ando dell’ Inferno alla bocca.
“E Pluto la grido: Anima sciocca,
“Che Inferno? Va nel Limbo de Bambini.”

The night when Peter Soderini died,

His soul for entrance into Hell applied.

But Pluto shouted: Hence, thou simple soul!

This is no place for you. Go to the infant’s Limbo, fool!

XXvili LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

not to enter the palace of the Signoria; which prohibition was,
however, several times interrupted for special reasons, but al-
ways by particular authorization of the College of Priors.

But a much greater misfortune befell him in the following
year, when the conspiracy of Pietropaolo Boscoli and Agostino
Capponi against the lives of Giuliano and Lorenzo de’ Medici
was discovered. Being suspected of participation in this con-
spiracy, he was shut up in the prison of the Bargello, and had
there to suffer the torture, the executioner having subjected
him six times to the strappado. He was also kept for some
days shackled, as we must presume from his writing that he
had “ jesses”’ on his legs; it being well known that that word
signifies the leather straps that hold one of the claws of the
falcons. There is no mention of his torture in the public
documents, nor in the resolutions of the Eight, where the con-
demnation of the other conspirators is recorded. But there
can be no doubt about it, as he mentions it himself in a letter
written to his friend Francesco Vettori on the 13th of March.

Machiavelli was doubtless innocent of being a party to this
conspiracy, which originated with Paolo Boscoli, a young man
of one of the old and distinguished families of Florence, who
had drawn Agostino Capponi into the plot. The latter com-
mitted the imprudence of letting fall a list of the conspirators,
in going into the house of the Pucci; this list was picked up,
and immediately communicated to the magistracy. Many of
the most distinguished citizens were implicated, and Machia-
velli amongst the rest. It is quite possible, however, that the
list dropped by Capponi may have been merely a memoran-
dum of those whom the originators of the conspiracy proposed
amongst themselves to draw into the plot. For the firm denial
of Machiavelli under the pangs of torture ought certainly, with
so honest and fearless a mind as his, to be taken for the truth,
and should acquit him, not only of an unpatriotic act, but also
of an act of folly in being one of a numerous body of conspira-—
tors, which folly no writer has ever exposed with greater clear-
ness and more conclusive force of argument than himself.

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI. 0.45. ¢

Whilst this process was going on, Pope Julius IT. died, and
the Cardinal Giovanni de’ Medici was chosen as his successor,
and assumed the title of Leo X. So soon as he heard of Machi-
avelli’s imprisonment, he ordered his fetters to be struck off,
and had him set free, as well as all the others who had been
charged with being implicated in the Boscoli conspiracy. Un-
happily Boscoli and Capponi, having been found guilty, were
executed before the Pope’s pardon arrived. It is very possible
that Giuliano de’ Medici was also active in Machiavelli's favor ;
for it was to him, and not to his namesake of another family,
as some have supposed, that the two sonnets were addressed
which Machiavelli wrote in prison; as is clearly shown by the
title of ‘Magnificent Signore,” and “Your Magnificence,”
which belonged only to the family of the Medici.

Released from prison, but disgusted with the ingratitude of
the city which he had served so long and so well, Machiavelli
withdrew to his little property in the Percussina, near San Cas-
ciano, where he spent the greater part of his time in rustic oc-
cupations and games ; and in the evening he passed four hours
at his desk, occupied with a little work which he intended to
entitle “De Principatibus,” in which he discusses “what a prin-
“cipality is, what kinds there are, how they are acquired, how
“maintained, and why they are lost.” Thus he wrote in a
letter to Francesco Vettori, on the 10th of December, 1513,
that he felt somewhat uncertain whether or not to give it that
title; and intimating his intention of dedicating it to the Mag-
nificent Giuliano de’ Medici. This fact ought to undeceive those
who assert that he had prepared this book for Cesare Borgia ;
and that, having had no opportunity of presenting it to him, he
afterwards used it as a homage to the Medici to gain their
favor. This book is the famous treatise of “The Prince,”
which he presented to Lorenzo, son of Piero de’ Medici, rather
than to Giuliano, the uncle of Lorenzo, as he had at first in-
tended. The reason of this was that Giuliano abandoned the
government of Florence in 1514; having been called by his
brother to Rome. . Most probably Machiavelli did not wish to

XXX LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

delay presenting his book to Lorenzo in 1516, when, after the
death of Giuliano, Lorenzo began to spread his wings, in at-
tempting the conquest of Urbino; which enterprise, according
to Guicciardini, was the first step towards the dominion of all
papal fiefs, and perhaps also of the kingdom of Naples.

Seeing that he was not employed by the new government,
notwithstanding the unceasing efforts made in his behalf by
Francesco Vettori, he lamented that he could not make himself
useful to his country, whilst feeling himself capable of render-
ing the most valuable services, for he had not wasted his time
during the fifteen years that he had studied the arts of states-
manship. Machiavelli, therefore, occupied his rare genius in
benefiting his country by his writings, and by instructing the
Florentine youth, who met together in the Rucellai Gardens,
where the celebrated Platonic Academy, which had been insti-
tuted by the old Cosimo de’ Medici after the disasters of his
family in 1490, had found hospitality. We must also refer
the “ Discourses upon the First Ten Books of Titus Livius ”
to the period between 1516 and 1519; for this work is ded-
icated to Cosimo Rucellai and Zenobio Buondelmonti, both
‘ born in 1495; and it is evident from the character of the
work that it was not written for boys, but for young men
grown up. These “ Discourses” seem like a continuation of
“The Prince” ; for after having shown the Medici by the lat-
ter work how to grasp the sovereignty, and how to expel the
foreigners from Italy, he desired by the former to point out to
them the necessity of new institutions for maintaining them-
selves and making a state happy, after having consolidated
their dominion, by basing it upon three powers; namely, the
prince, the nobles, and the people. He also read at the meet-
ings of the Academy the “ Dialogue upon Language”; and he
undoubtedly prepared also for this Academy the “ Seven Books
of the Art of War.” He did not begin this work before 1519,
for he opens it with the praises of Cosimo Rucellai, who died
in that year; and he certainly had finished it before November,
1520, as is proved by a letter of the 17th of that month, written

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLL XXXxi

by Filippo de’ Nerli, who had just then read the book. In the
following year he had it printed under the title “De Re Mili-
tari,” and the edition, issued by the heirs of Filippo di Giunta,
bears the date of the 16th of August. Unquestionably he was
urged to this work by love of his country, seeing that he in-
tended thereby to teach the Florentine people to defend their
state with arms against whoever should, from within or with-
out, plot against their liberty ; showing at the same time by
examples from antiquity the injury which results to republics
from keeping mercenary armies, and explaining all things that
seemed to him most suitable for instructing an army and
leading it into the field.

If we are to believe two slanderous writers, Cardano and
Bandello, Machiavelli was an able theoretician, but otherwise
inexperienced in the practice of military affairs. And this
was quite natural, for he was not accustomed to direct battal-
ions in war, nor was this a matter that concerned him. The
former of these two writers relates that, when asked by the
Duke of Urbino to give a demonstration of his system, Machia-
velli dared not attempt it; and the other relates that he tried
in vain for two hours to put three thousand infantry in order
of battle, which Giovanni de’ Medici afterwards did with the
greatest ease.

During his stay in Lucca, Machiavelli wrote the Life of
Castruccio Castracani, in 1520; and Zanobi Buondelmonti, to
whom he sent it, acknowledges the receipt of it in a letter
of the 6th of December. At the same time, accurate observer
that he was of what was passing under his eyes, he also wrote
the “Summary of the Affairs of Lucca.” Jacopo Nardi tells
us, in the seventh book of his History, that Machiavelli did
this work for Zanobi Buondelmonti, Luigi Alamanni, and Cosi-
mo Rucellai, who loved him very much, and who, by way of
courtesy, gave him some emolument, being infinitely delighted
with his conversation, and holding all his works in the highest
esteem.

Meanwhile the rulers of Florence, and especially the Cardinal

XXxii LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

Giuliano de’ Medici, began to have some consideration for
Machiavelli, and to make use of him. In fact, he was sent to
Lucca in June, 1520, to protect the interests of the Florentine
merchants who were exposed to loss by the failure of Michele
Guinigi; and whilst in that city he was charged by the Cardi-
nal to ask the Signoria of Lucca to expel from their territory
three Sicilians, formerly students at Pisa, but who had been
banished from that university. It is very probable that the
Medici decided to favor him after the “ Discourse upon the
Reorganization of the State of Florence”; to which he after-
wards added another little treatise, withovt any title, relating
to the same subject, (preserved amongst the manuscripts that
came from the Royal to the National Library,) and which he
had most probably presented to the Cardinal Giuliano de’
Medici. Both of these may be referred to the year 1519, and
were certainly written before December, 1521, Leo X., to whom
the former was without doubt presented, having diced on the
first of that month. It cannot be ascertained whether Machia-
velli’s opinion was given spontaneously, or whether it had been
requested ; but it certainly did not displease the Pontiff. Al-
though holding firmly to republican appearances, Machiavelli
would have wished that, the powers being duly equilibrated,
Leo X. should reserve the supreme arbitrament to himself,
thinking perhaps that after Leo’s death Florence might re-
cover her liberty. Lorenzo de’ Medici was already dead at
that time, and therefore the hopes which Machiavelli had of
making him Prince had vanished. It may also be that he
had, during the lifetime of Lorenzo, tasted the bitterness of
deception in having placed confidence in such a man; and un-
able therefore, for the moment at least, to think of the inde-
pendence of Italy from foreigners, he tried to find a possible
means for arriving at the necessary conciliation between the am-
bitious hopes of the Medici and the liberty of his country. But
that was not what the Cardinal Giuliano de’ Medici desired ; he
ruled over the republic more absolutely than his cousin, the
Pope, and it seemed to him as though he had shown enough

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI. XXXlii

love of country and of liberty in inviting several citizens to
prominent offices, with the hope of satisfying in that way the
clamors of the malcontents. Having extinguished in blood a
conspiracy set on foot amongst the young men of the Oricellari
Gardens, he made that the pretext for casting aside all idea
of reform; and continued to govern absolutely, with the forms
of a republic, but with the magistrates devoted and subject to
him personally.

Another benefit bestowed by the Medici on Machiavelli was
the commission to write the Florentine History, which the Car-
dinal Giuliano gave him, although he did so through the offi-
cials of the University, who charged Machiavelli with it on the
8th of November, 1520. But that the person who really gave
him this commission was the Cardinal, appears clearly from the
author’s dedication of his work to the Pope, in which Machi-
avelli expresses to him his gratitude in the most explicit man-
ner. It must not, however, be passed over in silence, that
public opinion had also designated him for this work; and a
letter still exists from Zanobi Buondelmonti, written to Machi-
avelli on the 6th of September of the same year, in which he
urges him, not only in his own name, but speaking also for
Jacopo Nardi, Luigi Alamanni, and for all the most cultivated
gentlemen of Florence, not to delay taking it in hand.

The friendship of Piero Soderini for Machiavelli continued
uninterruptedly ; and of the many proofs of the zeal with which
he endeavored to relieve Machiavelli’s misfortunes, there re-
mains a letter written by Soderini in 1521, from which it
appears that he was occupied in obtaining for Machiavelli the
office of secretary of the republic of Ragusa, which, however,
he declined to accept; and that in place of it he obtained for
him the post of secretary to Prosper Colonna, with very liberal
pay, which Machiavelli also refused, in the hope probably of a
brighter future.

In May, 1521, he received from the Magistracy of the Eight
of Practice the commission to go to Carpi, where the Chapter

of the Minorite Brothers of San Francesco was assembled, and
VOL. I. c

XXXlv LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVETTLI.

to request them to constitute the Florentine dominion a sepa-
rate chapter; and also to select a good preacher for the church
of Santa Maria del Fiore. He accepted and fulfilled this mis-
sion, but laughing all the while at the friars and the people
of Carpi, as appears from his letters to his friend Francesco
Guicciardini.

Fully four years elapsed before he was again actively em-
ployed; the cause of this was probably the conspiracy against
the Medici, which was set on foot by some of the young men
of the Oricellari Gardens, and which cost the lives of Jacopo
Diacelto and Luigi Alamanni, who were beheaded on the 7th
of June, 1522. According to the testimony of the historian
Nardi, Machiavelli was not altogether free from blame for the
thoughts and actions of the conspirators, although he was not
subjected to any trouble on that account. In August, 1525,
finally, he was sent as Ambassador to Venice, to claim before
the Doge and the Senate the restitution of the money and ob-
jects taken by a certain Giovanbattista Donato from three
young Florentines, who were coming from Ragusa; but the
documents do not tell us what result this mission produced.

To this period must be referred the two very amusing and
witty, but not over moral comedies, “The Mandragola” and
“Clizia.” Although there is evidence that the Mandragola
was written in 1520, and studied to be performed before Pope
Leo X. (as appears from a letter written by Machiavelli from
Rome on the 26th of April of that year), yet it was performed
for the first time in 1525, by the Academicians of the Cazzuola,
in the house of Bernardino di Giordano; the scenery for it
having been prepared by the painter Andrea del Sarto and the
famous architect Bastiano Aristotele da San Gallo. Vasari
relates that the Cardinal Silvio Passerini, with the young ©
Alessandro and Ippolito de’ Medici, was present at the per-
formance. The familiar letters of Machiavelli tell us, more-
over, that at the request of Francesco Guicciardini, governor
of the Romagna, the Mandragola was repeated at Bologna
during the Carnival of 1526; and in March of the same year

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, XXXV

it was performed with the greatest success at Rome. The
Clizia followed soon after, and was also performed by the
Academicians of the Cazzuola in the house of Jacopo, the
furnace-man, near the gate of San Frediano; and Vasari tells
us that the Cardinal of Cortona was so much pleased with the
scenery made by San Gallo, that he took him under his pro-
tection from that day, and employed him in various magnifi-
cent works.

Machiavelli has been blamed for having written these come-
dies; he anticipated this himself, and in his prologue to the
Mandragola, addressed to the public, he says: “ And if this
“play seems unworthy to occupy the leisure of a wise and grave

“man, deign to excuse him, and bear in mind that he tries by
“these distractions to soften the sorrows that pursue him. For
“he can no longer turn his thoughts elsewhere, and has been
“forbidden to show in any other way the qualities he may
“ possess,” etc. These comedies, however, suited the taste of
the period when they were written, as their popularity attests.
They are certainly no worse than the tales of Boccaccio, and
infinitely more spirited and witty.

Pope Clement VII., being free from all suspicion against
Machiavelli, now wished to employ him in a matter for which
he believed him better qualified than any one else ; and therefore
charged him, in March, 1526, to visit the fortifications of Flor-
ence in company with some military architects, for the purpose
of examining their defects and needs; and to prepare a project
for fortifying the whole city, so as to be able to resist the
attacks of a hostile army. Machiavelli made a full report of
this commission, which he sent to the Pope at Rome. It was
probably in consequence of this that he was sent to the camp,
to Francesco Guicciardini, commissary of the Pope, in the
army of the allies against the Emperor Charles V.; and was
sent by Guicciardini in August of the same year as envoy to the
Venetian Proveditore, who was beseiging Cremona, to hasten
the capture of that place, or rather to persuade him to abandon
this siege, and to unite all the forces for the more important

XXXvi LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

acquisition of Genoa. “About this time the Pope had, at the
request of Jacopo Salviati, destined Machiavelli to an honorable
office at court; but as he would not abandon his mission, this
post was given to some one else. Machiavelli was sent, in
November, a second time to the same Guicciardini, the Pope’s
lieutenant, and living at that time in Modena, with instruc-
tions that were most honorable for him, from the Cardinal
Passerini, who governed Florence at that time as tutor of the
young Ippolito and Alessandro de’ Medici. The Cardinal,
always timid, saw supreme danger imminent for Florence ;
for the Pope was almost a prisoner of the Colonnese at Rome,
whilst a numerous German army was descending upon Italy ;
so that he would have preferred that Guicciardini had sent him
substantial aid into the city, or rather that he should have
managed to bring about some agreement with the enemy. The
lieutenant, however, did nothing that was asked of him, for
the simple reason that he could not do it, and therefore it
became necessary to send Machiavelli to him once more, who
went accordingly, in February, 1527. The negotiations of
the ambassador were protracted, he having been charged to
follow Guicciardini wherever the particular duties of his office
might call him. They proved, nevertheless, to have no result ;
as the troops of the lieutenant were insufficient to restrain the
violence of the German hordes that had invaded the Bolognese
territory and were laying it waste.

Machiavelli returned to Florence on the 22d of April, but
nothing is heard of him during the sedition against the Medici
on the 26th of that month, which, however, was quickly put
down; nor on the occasion of the subsequent events that led to
the expulsion of the Cardinal Passerini with his pupils, and to
the claim of the Florentines for the restoration of their liberties.
Perhaps Machiavelli was not in Florence at the time, and had
already returned to Guicciardini, by whom he was certainly
sent to Andrea Doria, who was at Civita Vecchia, to obtain a
brigantine from him. He was in this port on the 22d of May,
as appears from one of his letters, and embarked the next day

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI. XXxvii

on a galley that escorted the Marchioness of Mantua, and a
few days after landed with her at Livorno.

Being thus restored to his country, Machiavelli lived in ob-
scurity the few days that were left him of life, until the 22d of
June, 1527, when he died like a Christian, as is proved by a let-
ter written by his son Piero to his relative Francesco Nelli.

Thus far the facts relating to Machiavelli’s life have been, as
before stated, mainly taken from L. Passerini’s article, referred
to at the beginning of this biography For the subsequent re-
marks the author of these translations is alone responsible.

The story related by Benedetto Varchi, and believed by
many, that Machiavelli died from disappointment because Do-
nato Giannotti was preferred to him in the appointment to the
office of Secretary to the Ten of Liberty and Peace, is mani-
festly incorrect, for Machiavelli died before Giannotti was
elected to that office. His son Piero attests most positively
that he died from pains in his stomach, resulting from a medi-
cine which he had taken on the 20th of June. Equally un-
founded is the story. of his having lived unhappily with his
wife, and that in his novel of “ Belphegor,” the Lady Onesta
was intended to represent her; for although his frequent, nay,
almost constant absences from Florence did not permit him
to be a very devoted husband, which réle was perhaps not
- entirely suited to Machiavelli’s character, yet there is no evi-
dence that he did not always treat his wife with every degree
of respect; and the best proof of the good relations existing
between them is the fact that in both his wills he speaks of
his wife with esteem and affection, and intrusts her with the
sole management of his property and the guardianship of his
children.

Of Machiavelli’s life little more can really be said than that,
until the fall of Soderini and the return of the Medici in 1512,
it was entirely devoted to the service of the state, either as
Secretary of the Magistracy of the Ten, or in missions to for-
eign courts or to different states in Italy, in all of which he
displayed as much zeal as capacity. These missions must

XXXVill LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

often have been very distasteful and irksome to him, especially
when sent as an envoy to the King of France or to the Em-
peror of Germany, to solicit the armed intervention of the one
in the affairs of Italy, or to pay tribute to the other for a guar-
anty of the integrity of the republic. The eight years inter-
vening between the time of his removal from office and the
year 1521, when he was again employed by the government,
were spent at his villa near Casciano in rural pastimes, and
literary occupation, and in a highly interesting correspondence
with various friends, chiefly with Francesco Vettori. He died
poor, as he had lived, a good proof of his strict honesty,
taking into consideration the opportunities he had to enrich
himself in his many years’ services to the state. During his
frequent and important missions his pay never exceeded ten
lire per day, out of which pittance he had to pay for his ser-
vants and horses, and frequently for the postage and express
messengers to carry his despatches to the government of Flor-
ence, which often obliged him to borrow and to draw upon his
own resources. And from this scanty pay of ten lire per day
his salary as Secretary to the Ten was regularly deducted. We
consequently find in his despatches frequent appeals, at times
pathetic, at times humorous, but always urgent, to the govern-
ment of Florence for increase of pay, or pecuniary assistance
of some kind.

He was personally esteemed by the most distinguished men
of Florence of his time, for he was of most cheerful social
temper, and his conversation was full of learning and wit. He
was a good Catholic, but no Papist; on the contrary, he at-
tributed nearly all the miseries of Italy to the efforts of the
Popes to maintain and increase the temporal power and pos-
sessions of the Church.* This brought upon him the enmity
of the Church, the violent criticisms, perversions, and finally
the condemnation of his writings, and their being placed in the
Index Expurgatorius. .

There are many editions of Machiavelli’s works. The most

* See Discourses on Livy, Book I. Chap. XII.

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLL XXXIX

perfect, so far as it goes, is the one printed at Florence in
1875, under the direction of L. Passerini and G. Milanesi, con-
taining a large number of letters from the Florentine govern-
ment and others to Machiavelli, which throw much light upon
the various missions, the whole being carefully revised accord-
ing to the original documents. Unfortunately, the untimely
death of one of the editors put a stop to the completion of this
edition. As early as 1772 an edition was published in London
in three volumes, large quarto, containing all the works of
_ Machiavelli then known, with a Preface by Baretti. Ten years
_ later, however, in 1782, Lord Nassau Clavering, Earl Cowper,
published at his own expense a handsome one in four vol-
umes quarto, truly worthy of the Florentine Secretary. This
edition is still greatly prized to this day, and has served as
the standard for all subsequent to it. It was also due to the
persistent efforts of the same generous Englishman, that the
Grand Duke Leopold of Tuscany had a monument erected
_ over the until then obscure tomb of Machiavelli, by the side
of that of Michael Angelo in the church of Santa Croce at Flor-
ence, where the remains of Machiavelli had been buried in the
family vault, and had remained unnoticed for two and a half
centuries. This monument was designed by the Chevalier
Alberto Rombotti, and executed in marble by the sculptor
Spinazzi in the year 1787; it bears the following Latin in-
scription : —
TANTO NOMINI NULLUM PAR EULOGIUM
Nicotaus MACHIAVELLUS.

Numerous portraits and busts exist, claiming to represent
Niccolo Machiavelli; the greater part of them, however, — if
not all save one,—are not portraits of the great Secretary.
They are either fictitious, or they represent some other per-
sonage ; in several instances they are portraits of Lorenzo, or
some other of the Medici family. The marble bust in the
museum of the Bargello at Florence, which bears the inscrip-
tion “Niccolo Machiavelli,” is certainly not the bust of our

xl LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

Machiavelli. In the Palazzo Boutourlin at Florence there is a
portrait by Andrea del Sarto, which represents an old man
with a very sad expression; it is claimed to be the portrait
of Machiavelli, but is not generally recognized as such, and
certainly has not a single feature that suggests the character
of Machiavelli. Mr. A. F. Artaud, who was for some years
Chargé d’Affaires of France at Florence, and published in 1833
two most valuable and interesting volumes with the title of
“ Machiavel, son Génie et ses Erreurs,’ condemns all the en-
eraved portraits, claims to have discovered the only true like-
ness of Machiavelli by Santi-Titi, and gives a small engray-
ing of it by Rubiére as the frontispiece to his first volume.
The same picture has been admirably engraved on a much
larger scale by P. Toschi and A. Isac; and certainly the face
is most expressive of quick intelligence and penetration, and
such as one might well imagine Machiavelli’s countenance to
have been. But unfortunately the picture is not authentic, for
Santi-Titi was not born until 1538, eleven years after the death
of Machiavelli, in June, 1527. It may have been painted by
Santi-Titi from a sketch by some one else, or from a cast taken
from Machiavelli’s face ; but an original portrait it cannot be
called. It is this portrait that has been mainly consulted by
the sculptor Bartolini in his admirable statue of Machiavelli,
which, amongst the other great men of Florence, adorns the
inner court of the Uffizii at Florence.

The portrait in profile prefixed to this volume of the pres-
ent translation is presumed to be the only well authenticated
portrait of Niccolo Machiavelli known to exist. The original
was painted by Angelo Allori (Bronzino), and hangs in the
Doria Gallery in Rome. It bears a striking resemblance to
the colored plaster bust of Machiavelli belonging to the Mar-
chioness Isabella Piccolellis, born Ricci, which was copied
from a cast of Machiavelli’s face, taken from his body after
death. This bust has always been in possession of the Ricci
family, the lineal descendants of Machiavelli, through his
daughter.

Zz

LIFE OF NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI xli

The recent history of Italy has shown how correctly, and
with almost prophetic vision, Machiavelli foresaw that her
deliverance from all her ills could only be effected through
the fusion of all the different Italian states into one, under
the government of one man of courage, loyalty, and prudence,
and with a national army. How nobly and completely this
task was performed by the late King of Italy, Victor Emman-
uel, aided by his great minister, Cavour, is familiar to all the
world. No longer does any foreign power possess one foot of
Italian soil, and Italy made one has taken her place amongst
the great powers of the earth

The great merits of Machiavelli have been recognized by the
Italian government. His bust in marble has been placed promi-
nently amongst Italy’s other great men in the Pincio Gardens
at Rome; and the modest house in which he lived and died, in
the Via Guicciardini at Florence, has two marble tablets above
the door. The one records the fact of his having lived and died
there ; the other was placed there by order of the government,
on the fourth centenary of his birth, and bears the following
inscription : —

A NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

DeuU’ UntrA NAZIONALE PRECURSORE AUDACE E INDOVINO
ED’ ARMI PROPRIE E NON AVENTIZIE PRIMO ISTITUTORE
E MAESTRO, UL’ ITALIA UNA E ARMATA POSE IL 3 MAGGIO 1869

IL QUARTO DI LUI CENTENNARIO.

TO NICHOLAS MACHIAVELLI.

THE INTREPID AND PROPHETIC PRECURSOR OF NATIONAL Uniry,
THE FIRST INSTITUTOR AND MASTER OF HER OWN
IN PLACE OF ADVENTITIOUS ARMIES,
UNITED AND ARMED ITALY PLACED THIS TABLET,
On HIS FOURTH CENTENARY, 3D May, 1869.

Sc eohae,

Sara
Pay

THE

HISTORY OF FLORENCE.

_ oe
aN ea
ee

a

ae
a fen

Rs
eae
is

—

es
be

ae

SS

abhi ve
eae
eet

DEDICATION.

TO OUR MOST HOLY AND BLESSED FATHER AND LORD,

CLEMENT VIL.

HIS HUMBLE SERVANT,

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

Most Hoty anp BLEssep Fatuer, — Since your Holiness,
before attaining your present exalted position, commissioned
me to write an account of the things done by the Florentine
people, I have used all the diligence and skill given me by
nature and experience to satisfy your command. Having now
in the course of my writing arrived at the period when the
_ death of the Magnificent Lorenzo de’ Medici caused a change
in the government of Italy, and having to describe the events
that followed with a greater and loftier spirit, they being of a
greater and more elevated character, I have deemed it well to
reduce all I have written up to that epoch into one volume,
and to present it to your Holiness, so that you may begin in
some measure to enjoy the fruits of your sowing and of my
labors.

In reading this your Holiness will see first, after the begin-
ning of the decline of the power of the Roman Empire in the
West, how many changes the states of Italy underwent during
several centuries, and how many disasters they experienced
under so many princes. You will see how the Pope, the
Venetians, the Kingdom of Naples, and the Dukedom of Milan
took the first rank and power in that province. You will see
how your country raised itself by its very division from sub-

4 HISTORY OF FLORENCE.

jection to the Emperors, and remained divided until it began
to govern itself under the protecting shadow of your house.

And being particularly charged and commanded by your
Holiness to write the doings of your ancestors in such manner
that it might be seen that I was free from all adulation, (the
true praises of men being agreeable to hear, whilst such as are
feigned and written by favor are displeasing,) I have hesitated
much in describing the goodness of Giovanni, the wisdom of
Cosimo, the humanity of Piero, and the magnificence of Lo-
renzo; so that it might not seem to your Holiness that I had
transgressed your commands. For this I excuse myself to
you, and for any similar descriptions that might displease as
being little faithful; for finding the recollections of those who
have at various time written of them full of praise, it became
me to write of them such as I found them, or to pass them over
with invidious silence. And if under their distinguished acts
there was concealed an ambition common to usefulness, or (as
some say) contrary to it, I, who do not know it, am not bound
to describe it; for in all my narrative I have never attempted
to cover a dishonest act with honest reasons, nor have I ever
dimmed a praiseworthy act by representing it as having been
done for a contrary purpose. But it may be seen in all parts
of my history how far I am from adulation, and especially in
the private discourses and public speeches, direct or indirect,
which I have preserved with the very sentences, order, manner,
and disposition of the person that spoke them, and without any
reserve. I avoid in all instances odious expressions, as being
wholly unnecessary to the dignity and truth of history. No
one, therefore, who considers my writings rightly, can charge
me with being a flatterer, particularly seeing that I have not
said much of the memory of the father of your Holiness, — the
reason of which was the shortness of his life, during which he
could not make himself known; nor could I by my writings
have made him illustrious. Nevertheless the merit of having
been the father of your Holiness is an ample equivalent of all
those of his ancestors, and will insure him more centuries of
fame than his evil fortune took years from his life.

DEDICATION. 5

I have endeavored then, Most Holy Father, in my descrip-
tions, whilst not tarnishing the truth, to satisfy everybody ;
and yet I may have failed to satisfy any. Nor should I won-
der if this were the case, for I judge it to be impossible to
describe the events of one’s own times without offending many.
Nevertheless I enter the field cheerfully, hoping that inasmuch
as I am honored and supported by the benevolence of your
Holiness, so shall I be aided and defended by the armed legions
of your most holy judgment; and with the same courage and
confidence with which I have written till now, I shall continue
my undertaking so long as life is left me, and your Holiness
does not abandon me.

Aj

ty

PREFACE.

Ir was my intention when I first resolved upon writing the
things done by the Florentine people, within and without their
city, to begin my narrative with the year 1434 of the Christian
era, at which time the family of the Medici, by the merits of
Cosimo and his father Giovanni, exercised more authority in
Florence than any one else. For I thought to myself that
Messer Lionardo d’ Arezzo and Messer Poggio, two excellent
historians, had related all the events that had occurred previ-
ous to that time. But having afterwards diligently read their
writings to see in what order and manner they had proceeded,
so that by imitating them our history might be the more ap-
proved by the reader, I found that in their descriptions of the
wars carried on by the Florentines with foreign princes and
peoples they had been most diligent; but of their civil dis-
cords and internal dissensions, and of the effects resulting
therefrom, they had in part been silent, and in part had de-
scribed them very briefly, which to the reader could be neither
useful nor agreeable. I believe they did so because these facts
seemed to them so unimportant that they judged them un-
worthy of being recorded in history, or because they feared to
offend the descendants of those who took part in them, and
who by the narration of these facts might have deemed them-
selves calumniated. These two reasons (be it said with their
leave) seemed to me wholly unworthy of such great men;
because if anything delights or instructs in history, it is that
which is described in detail; and if any lesson is useful to the
citizens who govern republics, it is that which demonstrates

8 HISTORY OF FLORENCE.

the causes of the hatreds and dissensions in the republic, so
that, having learned wisdom from the perils experienced by
others, they may maintain themselves united. And if the di-
visions of any republic were ever noteworthy, those of Florence
certainly are most so, because the greater part of the other
republics of which we have any knowledge were content with
one division, by which, according to chance, they either in-
creased or ruined their city. But Florence, not content with
one division, had many. In Rome, as everybody knows, after
the expulsion of the kings, a division arose between the nobles
and the people, and with that she maintained herself until her
downfall. So did Athens, and so all the republics that flour-
ished in those times. But in Florence, the first division was
amongst the nobles, afterwards between the nobles and the
citizens, and finally between the citizens and the populace; and
many times it happened that one of the parties that remained
in power again divided in two. These divisions caused so
many deaths, so many exiles, so much destruction of so many
families, as never occurred in any other city of which we have
any record. And truly no other circumstance so much illus-
trates the power of our city as that which resulted from these
divisions, which would have been enough to destroy any other
great and powerful republic.

Ours, nevertheless, seems always to have increased in
power; such was the virtue of her citizens and the strength of
their genius and courage to make themselves and their country
great, that the many who remained untouched by so many
evils could by their virtues exalt their city more than the
malignity of those events that diminished her greatness could
have oppressed her. And doubtless if Florence had had so
much good fortune that, after having freed herself from the
Empire, she could have adopted a form of government that
would have kept her united, I know not what republic, modern
or ancient, would have been her superior, such abundance of
power of arms and industry would she in that case have pos-
sessed. For it will be seen that after she had expelled the
Ghibellines in such numbers that Tuscany and Lombardy were

PREFACE. 9

full of them, the Guelfs, together with those who remained in
Florence, drew from the city, and of her own citizens, twelve
hundred mounted men and twelve thousand infantry for the
war against Arezzo, one year before the battle of Campaldino.
Afterwards, in the war against Filippo Visconti, Duke of
Milan, having to make trial of her own resources, but not of
her own troops, (for they had exhausted them at that time,)
it will be seen that she spent during the five years that this
war lasted the sum of three and a half millions of florins; and
after that war was finished they were not satisfied to remain
at peace, but took the field against Lucca. I cannot sce there-
fore what reasons there can be why these divisions should not
be worthy of being particularly described. And if those most
noble writers were withheld from doing so by the fear of offend-
ing the memory of those of whom they would have to speak,
they deceive themselves in that respect, and show that they
little know the ambition of men, and the desire they have to
perpetuate the names of their ancestors and their own. And
they do not remember that many, not having had the opportu-
nity of acquiring fame by any praiseworthy acts, have endeay-
ored to acquire it by disgraceful ones. Nor have they considered
how the actions that have inherent greatness, such as those of
governments and states, however they may have originated, or
whatever their object may have been, always bring more honor
than discredit to the actors. But I, having considered these
things, have been induced thereby to change my purpose, and
have resolved to begin my history from the origin of our city.
And as it is not my intention to occupy the same ground as
others, I shall describe particularly only those things up to the
year 1434 that occurred within the city, and of the foreign rela-
tions I shall say no more than what may be necessary for a
proper understanding of the internal affairs. From and after
the year 1434, however, I shall fully describe both the one and
the other. Beyond that, for the better understanding of each
period, before I treat of Florence I shall relate by what means
Italy came to be under the rule of those potentates who gov-
erned her at that time.

10 HISTORY OF FLORENCE.

All of which things, Italian as well as Florentine, will be
completed in four Books; the first of which will briefly relate
all that befell Italy after the decline of the Roman Empire up
to 1434; the second will go with its narrative from the begin-
ning of the city of Florence up to the war which she carried
on against the Pope after the expulsion of the Duke of Athens.
The third will finish in 1414 with the death of King Ladislaus
of Naples; and with the fourth we shall reach the year 1484,
from which time forward will be described particularly the
events that occurred, within Florence and without, up to our
times.

HISTORY OF FLORENCE.

FIRST BOOK.

SUMMARY.

1. Tue Barbarians occupy the Roman Empire. — 2. The Franks and
Burgundians give their names to France and Burgundy; the Huns, to Hun-
gary; the Angles, to England. —38. The Huns and Vandals overrun Italy.
—4. Theodoric and the Ostrogoths. —5. The modern languages: great
changes in the world. —6. Death of Theodoric. Belisarius combats the
Goths, who are afterwards defeated by Narsetes. —7. Justinus reorganizes
Italy. —8. Kingdom of the Longobards. — 9. How the Popes became power-
ful. —10. The Pope asks help of Pepin against the Longobards. — 11. Char-
lemagne and end of the Longobards. — 12. The Empire passes into Germany.
13. Organization and division of the Italian states. —14. Nicholas II. de-
volves the election of the Popes upon the Cardinals. — 15. Alexander II.
excommunicates Henry II. and releases his subjects from their oath of fidelity.
Guelfs and Ghibellines. — 16. The Normans found the Kingdom of Naples.
—17. Urban II. goes to France and preaches the first Crusade. Orders of
the Knights of Jerusalem, and of the Templars. End of the Crusades. —
18. The Countess Matilda dies, leaving her state to the Church. Frederick
Barbarossa. His dissensions with Alexander III. Lombard League. —
19. Death of Thomas 4 Becket. Amends made by the King of England.
Reconciliation of Frederick with the Pope. His death. — 20. The Kingdom
of Naples passes into the hands of the House of Suabia. Orders of the
Dominicans and Franciscans. —21. Beginning of the greatness of the House
of Este. Division of the cities and of the lordssinto Guelfs and Ghibellines.
Frederick II. —22. Death of Frederick II., who leaves the kingdom to his
son Conrad. The kingdom falls under the tutelage of Manfred, bastard son
of Frederick. Enmity between Manfred and the Church, in consequence of
which the Pope calls Charles d@’Anjou into Italy, and invests him with the
Kingdom of Naples and Sicily. Battles of Benevento and of Tagliacozzo.
— 23. Restless policy of the Popes to make themselves masters of Italy. —
24. Sicilian Vespers. — 25. The Emperor Rudolph sells their independence to
many cities of Italy. —26. Boniface VIII. institutes the Jubilee. Clement V.
transfers the pontifical seat to Avignon. Henry of Luxemburg descends into
Italy with the intention of uniting and pacifying it. He besieges Florence

12 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

in vain, and dies at Buonconvento, in the midst of his enterprise. —27. The
Visconti make themselves masters of Milan and drive out the Torriani.
Gio. Galeazzo first Duke of Milan. — 28. Louis of Bavaria, and John,
King of Bohemia, come into Italy. League of the Italian cities against
John and the Pope. — 29. Origin of Venice ; its growth and decadence. —
30. Discords between Benedict XII. and the Emperor Louis. — 31. Cola
di Rienzo, Tribune of Rome, attempts to restore the old form of republic. —
32. The Jubilee is reduced to fifty years. Queen Joanna gives Avigndn
to the Church. The Cardinal Egidio d’ Alborno restores the power of the
Popes in Italy. — 33. Turbulence in the Church, in Naples, and in Lom-
bardy. — 34. Companies of adventurers. Verona gives herself to Venice. —
35. Dissensions between Pope Innocent VII. and the people of Rome, on
account of the franchise. Council of Pisa. — 36. Council of Constance, and
end of the schism that has existed between the three Antipopes, Gregory XIL.,
Benedict XIII., and John XXIII. — 37. Filippo Visconti recovers his
state. —38. Joanna II., Queen of Naples, and her wickedness. —39. Polit-
ical condition of Italy at about the middle of the fifteenth century.

1. THE nations who inhabit the Northern regions beyond the
rivers Rhine and Danube, being born in a healthful and pro-
lific’ climate, often increase in such numbers that some of them
are obliged to abandon their paternal lands and to seek new
countries for their habitation. The order which they adopt
when any one of these provinces desires to relieve itself of its
. surplus population is to divide themselves into three parts,
apportioning to each an equal number of nobles and commons,
rich and poor; after which that portion whom fate commands
to leave, goes off to seek its fortune; and the two parts who
have thus relieved themselves of the one third of their numbers
remain to enjoy the paternal possessions. It was these nations
that destroyed the Roman Empire, for which the Emperors
afforded them the opportunity, who, having abandoned Rome,
the ancient seat of their empire, went to reside at Constanti-
nople, thereby enfeebling the western part of the Empire,
because it was less watched over by them, and more exposed
- to the rapacity of their ministers and of their enemies. And
truly, to ruin so great an empire, founded upon the blood of
\ so many virtuous men, needed no less than the indolence of its
| princes, the faithlessness of its ministers, and the power and
. persistence of those who assailed it; for it was not only one
people that assailed it, but many who conspired for its ruin.

The first who came from those Northern regions to assail the
Empire, after the Cimbrians,—who were defeated by Marius, a
Roman citizen,—were the Visigoths, which in their language

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 13

signifies Western Goths. These, after some fighting on the
confines of the Empire, were settled for a long time, upon a
concession from the Emperor, above the river Danube; and
although for various reasons and at different times they as-
sailed the Roman provinces, they were nevertheless kept in
check by the Emperors. And the last who gloriously over-
came them was Theodosius, so that, being reduced to subjec-
tion, they did not re-establish any king over themselves, but,
content with the stipend conceded to them, they lived and
fought under his government and banner. But after the death
of Theodosius, when Arcadius and Honorius, his sons, became
heirs to the Empire, but not to their father’s virtues and for-
tunes, the times became changed with the princes.

Theodosius had appointed three governors to the three parts
of the Empire, — Rufinus to the Eastern, Stilicho to the West-
ern, and Gildon to Africa; they all, after his death, thought no
longer of how to govern those provinces, but only how to possess
them as independent princes. Gildon and Rufinus were put
down in their attempts; but Stilicho, knowing better how to con-
ceal his intentions, sought to acquire the confidence of the new
Emperors, and at the same time to disturb them in their state
in such manner that it would be the easier afterwards for him to
occupy it. And by way of making the Visigoths their enemies,
he advised the Emperors not to give them their accustomed
provision; and besides this, deeming that these enemies were
not sufficient to disturb the Empire, he ordered that the Bur-
gundians, Franks, Vandals, and Alans, likewise Northern tribes,
and already on the move in search of new lands, should assail
the Roman provinces. The Visigoths, consequently, deprived
of their provision, for the sake of being better organized for re-
venge of their wrongs, created Alaric their king ;— and having
assailed the Empire, after many accidents, ravaged Italy, and
took and sacked Rome. After this victory Alaric died, and
Ataulf succeeded him, who took for wife Placidia, the sister of
the Emperors; and by reason of this relationship he agreed
with them to go to the assistance of Spain and Gaul, which
provinces were being assailed by the Vandals, Burgundians,
Alans, and Franks, for the reasons above stated. From this
resulted that the Vandals, who had occupied that part of Spain
called Betica, being powerfully assailed by the Visigoths, and
seeing no relief, were called by Bonifacius, who governed Africa

14 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. | [Boox I.

for the Empire, to come and occupy that province, which was
in a state of revolt, hoping in this way to conceal his misgov-
ernment from the Emperor. For the reasons above stated the
Vandals readily undertook that enterprise, and under the lead
of their king, Genseric, made themselves masters of Africa.
In the midst of this Theodosius, son of Arcadius, had succeeded
to the Empire, who, giving little attention to the West, caused
those populations to think of securing to themselves the pos-
session of the lands they had conquered.

2. Thus the Vandals ruled in Africa, the Alans and Visi-
goths in Spain; the Franks and the Burgundians not only
took Gallia, but those parts that were occupied by them were
named after them,— whence one part is called France, and the
other Burgundy. The fortunate successes of these stirred up
new nations to the destruction of the Empire: another people,
called Huns, occupied Pannonia, a province situated on the
other side along the shores of the Danube, which having taken
its name from them was called Hungaria. Added to these
disorders came that the Emperor, seeing himself assailed on so
many sides, by way of reducing the number of his enemies,
began to make treaties, now with the Vandals and now with
the Franks, which caused the power and authority of the Bar-
barians to increase, and that of the Empire to decline. Nor
was the island of Britain, now called England, secure from
similar destruction; for the Britons, fearing the people that
~had occupied France, and not seeing how the Emperor could
protect them, called to their aid the Angles, a people of Ger-
many, who engaged in the enterprise under their king, Volti-
gern; at first they defended the Britons, but afterwards drove
them from the island and remained themselves to inhabit it,
_and which was called after them Anglia. But the original in-
habitants, being despoiled of their country, became from neces-
sity aggressive, and thought that, although unable to defend
their own country, yet they might be able to seize that of others.
- They therefore crossed the sea with their families, and occupied
those places which they found near the ocean, and after their
own name they called that country Brittany.

3. The Huns, who, as we have said above, had occupied Pan-
nonia, united with other tribes called Zepidians, Erulians, Tu-
ringians, and Ostrogoths (which in their language signified
Eastern Goths), and set out to find new lands; and not being

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. st)

able to enter France, which was defended by the Barbarian
forces, they went into Italy under their king, Attila, who shortly
previous had killed his brother Bleda, so as to have the gov-
ernment all to himself; and having in this wise become very
powerful, Andaric, king of the Zepidians, and Velamir, king of
the Ostrogoths, became subject to him. When Attila got to
Italy he besieged Aquileia, where he remained two years with-
out any other hindrance; during this siege he ravaged the
whole surrounding country and dispersed its inhabitants, which,
as we shall see in its place, gave rise to the city of Venice.
After the capture and destruction of Aquileia, and many other
cities, Attila turned towards Rome, from the destruction of
which he abstained in consequence of the entreaties of the
Pope, whose venerableness had so much influence upon him
that he left Italy and returned to Austria, where he died. After
the death of Attila, Velamir, king of the Ostrogoths, and the
chiefs of the other nations, took up arms against his two sons,
Henry and Uric; they killed the one, and constrained the other
to recross the Danube and return with the Huns to their own
country ; and the Ostrogoths and the Zepidians settled in Pan-
nonia, and the Erulians and Turingians remained higher up on
the other side of the Danube.

After the departure of Attila from Italy, Valentinian, the
Western Emperor, thought of restoring the country; and by
way of placing himself in better position to defend Italy against
the Barbarians, he abandoned Rome and established his resi-
dence at Ravenna. The adversities which the Western Empire
had suffered were the cause why the Emperor, who resided at
Constantinople, had several times conceded it to others, on ac-
count of the danger and expense of its defence. And many
times, even without his permission, the Romans, secing them-
selves abandoned, created from their own midst an Emperor ;
or some one assumed the Empire of his own authority, —as
happened at the time when, after the death of Valentinian,
Rome was seized by Maximus, a Roman citizen, who constrained
Eudoxia, widow of the former, to take him for her husband.
But being of imperial blood and unable to bear her marriage
to a private citizen, she resolved to revenge the insult, and for
that purpose secretly agreed with Genseric, king of the Van-
dals and master of Africa, to come into Italy, pointing out to
him the facility and advantage of such an enterprise. Gen-

16 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

seric, attracted by such a prey, came promptly, and, finding
Rome abandoned, sacked the city, where he remained two
weeks. He also captured and sacked other places in Italy,
loaded himself and his army with the plunder, and then re-
turned to Africa. The Romans, having come back to the city
after the death of Maximus, created Avitus Emperor. After
many other events in Italy and elsewhere, and after the death
of other Emperors, the Empire of Constantinople fell to Zeno,
and that of Rome to Orestes, and Augustulus, his son, who ob-
tained possession of the Empire by fraud. And whilst they
attempted to hold it by force, the Erulians and Turingians, who,
as I have said, had established themselves after the death of
Attila beyond the Danube, leagued themselves together under
their chief, Odoacer, and came into Italy. The settlements
which they left vacant were occupied by the Longobards, a
people also from the North, led by Godago, their king; and
these were, as I shall show in its place, the worst plague of
Italy. When Odoacer came into Italy he defeated and killed
Orestes near Pavia, and Augustulus fled. After this victory
(in order that Rome might change its title with its power)
Odoacer abandoned the title of Emperor and had himself pro-
claimed King of Rome, and was the first of the chiefs of the
Barbarian tribes that scoured the world at that time who un-
dertook to reside in Italy. For the others, after having de-
spoiled it, sought other countries where to establish their seats,
influenced either by fear or inability to hold Italy, which could
so easily be succored by the Emperor of the East, or from
some other occult reason.

4. At this time, then, the ancient Roman Empire was reduced
under the following princes: Zeno, ruling in Constantinople,
commanded the whole of the Eastern Empire; the Ostrogoths
were masters of Meesia and Pannonia; the Visigoths, the Franks
and Burgundians, held France; and the Erulians and Turingi-
ans, Italy. The government of the Ostrogoths had come to The-
odoric, who, being on terms of friendship with Zeno, Emperor of
the East, wrote to him that it seemed unjust to his Ostrogoths
that, being superior to all the other tribes in power, they should
be inferior in dominion, and that it was impossible for him to
restrain them any longer within the limits of Pannonia; so that,
seeing the necessity for allowing them to take up arms and go
in search of new lands, he wished first to make it known to him,

Book I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 17

so that he might provide for it by conceding them some country
where, with his good grace, they might live honestly with more
comfort and convenience to themselves. Whereupon, Zeno,
partly from fear and partly from the desire to drive Odoacer
out of Italy, conceded to Theodoric authority to move against
Odoacer and to take possession of Italy. Theodoric promptly
set out from Pannonia, which he left to the Zepidians, who were
his friends, and having come into Italy he slew Odoacer and his
son, and after his example he assumed the title of King of Italy,
and established his seat at Ravenna, influenced by the same
considerations that had induced the Emperor Valentinian to
reside there.

Theodorie excelled both in war and in peace, whence he was
always victorious in the one, and in the other greatly benefited
his people and cities. He distributed the Ostrogoths through
the country under their chiefs, so that in war he might be able
to command, and in peace to supervise them. He increased
Ravenna, restored Rome, and with the exception of military
commands he gave back to her citizens all their former honors.
He restrained within their limits all the Barbarian kings who
were occupants of the Empire, without any warlike disturbance,
but simply by the force of his authority. He built up the coun-
try, established fortresses between the Adriatic and the Alps,
so as to impede more effectually the passage of fresh Barba-
rians, who might wish to assail Italy. And if so much virtue
had not been stained at the end of his life by some cruelties
practised towards certain suspected persons in his kingdom,
such as the deaths of Simmaco and Boezio, two most saintly
men, his memory would have been worthy of all honor; for by
means of his valor and goodness Rome and all the other parts
of the Western Empire, relieved of the constant shocks which
it had borne during so many years from repeated Barbarian
inundations, raised themselves again and brought themselves
back to good order and happiness.

5. And truly, if ever there was a period of utter wretchedness
in Italy and in those provinces that were overrun by the Bar-
barians, it was that from the time of Arcadius and Honorius
to that of Theodoric. For when we consider how injurious a
mere change of ruler or form of government is to any repub-
lic or kingdom, not from any extrinsic force, but merely from
civil discords, — and when it is seen what inconsiderable changes

VOL. I. 2

18 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I..

have caused the ruin of even the most powerful republics and
kingdoms, — then it will be easy to imagine how much Italy and
the other provinces of the Roman Empire must have suffered .
in those times, when they changed, not only their forms of gov-
ernment and their princes, but also their laws and customs,
their mode of living, their religion, their language, dress, and
even their names. Each one of such changes, to say nothing
of all of them taken together, is enough to terrify any firm and
constant mind by merely thinking of it, and without witness-
ing or being himself obliged to undergo it. This state of things
caused the ruin, but also the birth and growth, of many cities.
Amongst those that were ruined were Aquileia, Luni, Chiusi,
Popolonia, Fiesole, and many others; and amongst those that
sprung into existence were Venice, Sienna, Ferrara, Aquila, and
other considerable places and castles, the names of which I
omit for the sake of brevity. Those which from small cities
grew into large ones were Florence, Genoa, Pisa, Milan, Naples,
and Bologna; to all these must be added the destruction and
rebuilding of Rome and other cities that were at various times
destroyed and rebuilt. From these ruins and these new peo-
ples sprang new languages, as appears from those which ob-
tained in France, Spain, and Italy, where the mixture of the
native tongues of these nations with the ancient Roman tongue
produced the new language. Besides this, not only were the
names of the provinces changed, but also those of lakes, rivers,
seas, and of men; for France and Italy are full of new names,
altogether different from the old ones ; for without noting many
others we see that the names of Po, Garda, Archipelago, &c.
are entirely dissimilar from the ancient names of those locali-
ties. Men also changed their names, and from Cesar and Pom-
pey became Pieri, Giovanni, and Mattei. But amongst all these
changes not the least one was that of religion ; for combating
the habit of the ancient faith with the miracles of the new, gave
rise to the gravest tumults and discords amongst men, — and
even if the Christian religion had been a united one, its intro-
duction would nevertheless have been followed by minor dis-
cords; but the Greek Church, opposing those of Rome and
Ravenna together, and the heretical sects being in conflict
with the Catholics, caused infinite misery in the world: of
which Africa furnishes us proof, for she had to endure far
more troubles from the sect of the Arians, to which the Van-

Book I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 19

dals adhered, than she suffered from their cruelty and rapacity.
Men thus living in the midst of so many persecutions bore the
terror of their souls written in their eyes; for, besides the in-
finite evils which they had to endure, they were deprived in
great measure of the ability to seek a refuge in the help of God,
which is the hope of the wretched; for the greater portion of
them, being uncertain as to what God they should fly to for
refuge, died miserably, bereft of all help and all hope.

6. Theodoric therefore merited no mean praise as having
been the first to put an end to so many evils, so that for the
thirty-eight years during which he reigned in Italy he restored
her to such greatness that the former miseries were in great
part forgotten. But when he came to die and the kingdom
fell to Atalaric, son of his daughter Amalasiunta, the measure
of Italy’s ill fortune not being yet exhausted, she relapsed into
her former wretchedness; for Atalaric died shortly after his
grandfather, and, the government remaining in the hands of
his mother, she was betrayed by Teodatus, whom she had called
to her aid in the government of the kingdom. Having killed
the queen and declared himself king, he became very odious
to the Ostrogoths, which encouraged the Emperor Justinian to
believe himself able to drive Teodatus out of Italy. Justinian
appointed Belisarius as captain of this undertaking, who had
already conquered Africa, expelled the Vandals from it, and
brought that province back to subjection to the Empire. There-
upon Belisarius took possession of Sicily, and, passing thence
into Italy, took Naples and Rome. The Goths seeing their
impending ruin, killed King Teodatus as being the cause of it,
and elected in his stead Vitigites, who after some fighting was
besieged by Belisarius in Ravenna, and taken; but before his
victory was completed Belisarius was recalled by Justinian, and
Giovanni and Vitales put in his place, who were in no way his
equals in valor and experience. This caused the Goths to take
courage again, and they created Ildovado their king, who at
that time was governor of Verona. He was killed, and after
him the kingdom fell to Totilas, who routed the troops of the
Emperor and reoccupied Tuscany and Naples, and drove his
captains back almost to the extreme limits of the states which
Belisarius had recovered. Justinian therefore deemed it ad-
visable to send Belisarius back to Italy, who, having returned
there with a small force, rather lost the xeputation which his

20 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

first victories had given him, but which he had to achieve
anew. For whilst Belisarius was at Ostia with his troops, To-
tilas took Rome under his very eyes, and, finding that he could
neither hold nor leave it, he destroyed it in great part, and drove
the people out, who carried their Senators away with them ; and
paying but slight heed to Belisarius, he went with his army
into Calabria to meet the troops that had come from Greece
to aid that general. Belisarius, seeing Rome abandoned, re-
solved upon an undertaking worthy of him; for, having entered
the ruins of Rome, he rebuilt the walls of the city with the ut-
most celerity, and recalled its inhabitants. Fortune, however,
did not favor this praiseworthy attempt, for Justinian, being at
that time attacked by the Parthians, recalled Belisarius, who,
in obedience to his master, abandoned Italy to the mercy of
Totilas, who retook Rome, but did not treat the city with
the same cruelty as at first, because of the entreaties of St.
Benedict, who had a reputation of great sanctity, and induced
Totilas to apply himself rather to the rebuilding of the city.
Justinian meantime made terms with the Parthians, and, at-
tempting to send fresh troops to the succor of Italy, was pre-
vented by the Sclaves, a new Northern people who had passed
the Danube and assailed Illyria and Thracia, so that Totilas
was enabled to occupy almost the whole of Italy.

But after Justinian had defeated the Sclaves he sent the
eunuch Narsetes with an army into Italy, who, being eminent
in the art of war, defeated and killed Totilas immediately upon
reaching Italy. And the rest of the Goths that remained after
this defeat retreated to Pavia, where they made Teja their |
king. Narsetes, on the other hand, after his victory, took
Rome, and finally came to battle with Teja near Nocera, and
killed him and scattered his army. In consequence of this vic-
tory the rfame of the Goths disappeared from Italy entirely,
where they had ruled for seventy years, from the time of their
King Theodoric to that of Teja.

7. But no sooner was Italy liberated from the Goths than
Justinian died, and was succeeded by his son Justinus, who
by the advice of his wife Sophia recalled Narsetes from Italy
and sent Longinus in his place. Following the practice of
others, Longinus established his residence at Ravenna, and
moreover gave a new form of government to Italy; for he did ,
not establish governors of provinces, as the Goths had done,

Book I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 91

a

but created chiefs in all the cities and places of moment, with
the title of Duke. And in this distribution he did not honor
Rome more than the other places, for having abolished the
Consuls and the Senate, which dignities had until that time
been maintained there, he put Rome under a duke, who was
sent there every year from Ravenna, so that it was thence
called the Dukedom of Rome; and to him who remained in
place of the Emperor at Ravenna he gave the title of Exarch.
These divisions made the ruin of Italy still more easy, and
gave more ready opportunity to the Longobards to take pos-
session of it.

8. Narsetes was very indignant against the Emperor for being
deprived of the government of that province, which he had con-
quered by his valor and with his blood; for Sophia, not content
with injuring him by having him recalled, added insulting words,
saying that she wanted him to return to spin with the other
eunuchs; so that Narsctes, full of indignation, persuaded Alboin,
king of the Longobards, who then ruled over Pannonia, to come
and seize Italy. The Longobards, as we have seen above, had
taken possession of the places near the Danube that had been
abandoned by the Erulians and Turingians, when they were led
into Italy by their king, Odoacer. Having remained there some
time, and Alboin, a cruel and daring man, having become their
king, they passed the Danube, and fought with Commundo, king
of the Zepidi, who held Pannonia, and defeated him. Amongst
‘ the booty taken was the daughter of Commundo, named Rosa-
munda, whom Alboin took for his wife, and made himself mas-
ter of Pannonia. Prompted by his cruel nature, he had a cup
made out of the skull of Commundo, from which he drank in
memory of that victory. But when called into Italy by Nar-
setes, with whom he had formed a friendship during his war
with the Goths, he left Pannonia to the Huns, who, as we have
said, had returned to their country after the death of Attila, and
thence came into Italy. Finding that country divided into so
many parts, Alboin occupied in one move Pavia, Milan, Verona,
~ Vicenza, all Tuscany, and the greater part of Flaminia, now
ealled the Romagna. So that it seemed to him that, after so
many and such rapid victories, he had already conquered all
Italy, and celebrated it by a grand banquet at Verona. Having
become excited by much drink, he filled the skull of Commundo
with wine, and had it presented to Rosamunda, his queen, who

22 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

sat opposite to him at table; saying in a loud voice, so that she
might hear it, that on an occasion of so much gladness he
wished her to drink with her father. This speech was like a
sword thrust into the breast of the lady, who resolved upon
revenge; and knowing that Almachilde, a noble and savage
Longobard youth, was in love with one of her maids, arranged
with her that she should secretly cause Almachilde to pass a
night with the queen instead of herself. Almachilde, having
according to appointment met the queen in a dark place, and
believing himself to be with the maid, lay with Rosamunda,
who, after having discovered herself to him, told him that it
was at his option either to kill Alboin, and always to enjoy her
and the kingdom, or to be himself killed by Alboin as the rav-
isher of his wife. Almachilde consented to kill Alboin; but,
after having put him to death, seeing that he could not hold
the kingdom, and fearing to be killed himself by the Longobards,
who were greatly attached to Alboin, he fled, taking with him
the queen and all the royal treasure, to Longinus, in Ravenna,
who received him honorably. During these troubles, the Em-
peror Justinus had died, and Tiberius had been made Emperor
in his place, who, being engaged in a war with the Parthians,
could not go to the assistance of Italy. This seemed, therefore,
a favorable opportunity to Longinus to make himself king of
the Longobards and of all Italy by means of Rosamunda and
her treasures ; and having conferred with her on the subject, he
persuaded her to kill Almachilde, and to take him for her hus-
band. Rosamunda having agreed to this, she ordered a cup of
poisoned wine, which she carried with her own hand to Alma-
childe, who, being thirsty as he came out of his bath, drank the
half of it; and feeling immediately after an internal commotion,
he concluded that he had been poisoned, and forced Rosamunda
to drink the rest, and thus in a few hours they both died, and
Longinus was deprived of the hope of becoming king.
Meantime the Longobards met together at Pavia, which they
had made the principal seat of their kingdom, and made Clefi
their king, who rebuilt Imola, which had been destroyed by
Narsetes, and occupied Rimini, and almost every other place
down to Rome; but in the course of his victories death over-
took him. This Clefi was cruel in his ways, not only to stran-
gers, but also to his Longobards, who, being alarmed by the
royal power, resolved to have no more kings, but created from

Boox I.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 23

amongst themselves thirty dukes, who should govern them.
This was the reason why the Longobards never obtained pos-
session of all Italy, and why their kingdom never extended
beyond Benevento; and also why Rome, Ravenna, Cremona,
Mantua, Padua, Monselice, Parma, Bologna, Faenza, Furli, and
Cesena partly defended themselves for a time, and partly were
never occupied by the Longobards. For the fact of their having
no kings had made them more disposed for war ; but afterwards
having again established royalty, they became, from having for
a time enjoyed freedom from control, less inclined to obedience,
and more ready for discord amongst themselves, which circum-
stance first retarded their success, and in the end caused their
being driven entirely out of Italy. The Longobards then being
established within the above indicated limits, the Romans and
Longinus made a treaty with them that each should retain their
arms, and keep and enjoy what they possessed.

9. About that time the Popes began to acquire greater author-
ity than they had hitherto enjoyed. The first successors of St.
Peter had secured the respect and reverence of men by the
sanctity of their lives and the miracles which they performed.
The example of their virtues extended the Christian religion to
that degree that the princes were obliged to submit to it for
the sake of putting an end to the great confusion that prevailed
in the world. The Emperor then having become a Christian,
and having left Rome and established himself at Constantinople,
it followed, as we have said at the beginning, that the Roman
Empire fell more rapidly into decadence, whilst the Church of
Rome increased in power and influence. Nevertheless, until
the coming of the Longobards, all Italy being subject to the au-
thority of the Emperors or kings, the Popes at that time never
assumed more authority than what the reverence of their char-
acters and their learning gave them. In all other respects they
obeyed either the Emperors or the kings, and on several occa-
sions were put to death by them, or were employed by them as
ministers. But he who caused the pontiffs to become more
influential in the affairs of Italy was Theodoric, king of the
Goths, when he established his residence at Ravenna; because
Rome, having been left without a prince, the Romans had rea-
son for yielding more obedience to the pontiffs, for the sake of
their protection. Their actual authority, however, was not much
increased by this; it only caused the church of Rome to have

24 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

precedence of that of Ravenna. But when the Longobards came
and reduced Italy to many. parts, they afforded the Popes the
opportunity to become more active; for being, as it were, the
chief power in Rome, the Emperor of Constantinople and
the Longobards held them in such respect that the Romans,
through the Pope, not as subjects but as equals, confederated
with the Longobards and with Longinus. And thus the pon-
tiffs, continuing to be at one time the friends of the Longobards
and then again of the Greeks, materially increased their con-
sideration and influence.

It was at this epoch, and under the Emperor Heraclius, that
the ruin of the Eastern Empire began. The Sclaves, of whom
we have made mention above, having again attacked Llyria,
made themselves masters of it, and gave it their own name,
Sclavonia. The other parts of that empire were assailed, first
by the Persians and after that by the Saracens, who came from
Arabia under Mahomet, and finally by the Turks, who, having
taken Syria, Africa, and Egypt, the impotence of that empire
no longer afforded the Pope any refuge there in his oppres-
sions; and, on the other hand, as the power of the Longobards
increased, he thought it necessary for him to seek new friends,
and therefore had recourse to the king of France. So that all
the wars that were made by the barbarians in Italy after that
time were caused by the pontiffs, and all the Barbarians that
overran that country were, in most instances, called there by
them. This course of proceeding is continued even in our times,
and has ever kept, and still keeps, Italy disunited and weak.
And therefore the history of the events from that time until
the present will not show any more the progress of the decline
of the Empire, which was general, but the growth of the power
of the pontiffs, and of those other princes that ruled Italy after
that time until the coming of Charles VIII. And it will be
seen how the Popes, first by means of the Censure, and after-
wards by the Censure and force of arms together and combined
with indulgences, became at the same time both terrible and
venerable, and how, having misused both the one and the other
of those means, the Censure lost its terrors entirely and the
indulgences were no longer valued.

10. But to return to the order of our history, I say that when
Gregory III. had become Pope, and Aistolfo king of the Lon-
gobards, the latter occupied Ravenna, in contravention of the

Boox I.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 25

treaties he had made, and set on foot a war against the Pope.
Gregory thereupon, for the reasons above given, having no con-
fidence in the Emperor of Constantinople on account of his
weakness, and unwilling to trust the Longobards, who had re-
peatedly broken their faith, had recourse to Pepin II., who from
being lord of Austrasia and Brabant, had become king of
France, not so much by his own power and merits as by those
of Charles Martel, his father, and of Pepin, his grandfather.
It was Charles Martel who, when governor of that country,
gained that memorable victory over the Saracens at Torsi, on
the river Loire, where more than two hundred thousand of
them were slain; whereupon Pepin“II., through the influence
of his father’s reputation and his own valor, became king of
that realm. Pope Gregory, as has been said, sent to him for
assistance against the Longobards, which Pepin promised him,
but desired first to see him personally and to honor his pres-
ence. Gregory, therefore, went to France, and, after having
been honored by the king, was sent back to Italy accompanied
by an army, who besieged the Longobards in Pavia. Whereupon
Aistolfo, constrained by necessity, made terms with the French,
who concluded the agreement at the request of the Pope, who
did not wish his enemy killed, but desired that he should live and
be converted to the Christian faith. Aistolfo bound himself by
this treaty to restore to the Church all the lands which he had
occupied; but after the return of Pepin with his troops to
France, Aistolfo disregarded his obligations under the treaty,
and. Gregory had again recourse to Pepin, who once more sent
his troops into Italy, defeated the Longobards, and took Ra-
venna; which, contrary to the will of the Greek Emperor, he
gave to the Pope, together with all the other lands that were
comprised under the Exarchate, adding thereto the lands of Ur-
bino and La Marea. During the transfer of these lands, Aistolfo
died, and Desiderius, a Longobard, who was Duke of Tuscany,
took up arms to seize that kingdom, and demanded assistance
from the Pope, promising him his friendship in return, which
Gregory conceded to him, so that the other princes submitted
to him. At first, Desiderius kept his pledges, and transferred
the lands to the pontiff according to the agreement made
with Pepin; after which no more exarchs came from Con-
stantinople to Ravenna, which remained subject to the rule
of the Pope. After that Pepin died, and was succeeded by

26 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book I,

his son Charles, who, from the greatness of his deeds, was
called the Great.

11. Meantime Theodore I. had been elevated to the papal
chair; he soon became involved in difficulties with Desiderius,
and was besieged by him in Rome; so that he was obliged to
have recourse to Charles, who, having passed the Alps, besieged
Desiderius in Pavia, took him and his sons prisoners and sent
them to France, and then went to visit the Pope at Rome,
where he decided that the Pope, as Vicar of God, could not be
judged by men, and in turn the Pope and the Roman people
declared Charles Emperor. And thus Rome again began to
have Emperors in the West, and whilst formerly the Pope had
to be confirmed by the Emperor, the Emperor now on his elec-
tion had need of the Pope; and thus the Empire began to lose
its dignity, and that of the pontiff was increased; and by these
means the papal authority steadily grew beyond that of the
temporal princes.

The Longobards had now been two hundred and thirty-two
years in Italy, and only remained foreigners in name; and
when King Charles wanted to reorganize Italy during the
papacy of Leo III., he consented to the Longobards inhabiting
the places where they had been born and bred, and that that
country should be called after them Lombardy. And as they
held the name of Rome in great reverence, they desired that
that entire portion of Italy adjacent to their possessions, and
which was subject to the Exarch of Ravenna, should be called
the Romagna. Besides this Charles created his son Pepin
King of Italy, whose jurisdiction extended as far as Benevento,
and all the rest was held by the Greek Emperor, with whom
Charles had concluded a treaty.

At that time Pascal I. was chosen supreme pontiff, and the
parochians of the churches of Rome, from being near the Pope
and present at his election, assumed the name of Cardinals for
the purpose of sustaining their power with a splendid title,
and they arrogated to themselves so much influence, particu-
larly after they had excluded the Roman people from the elec-
tions of the Popes, that the choice of pontiffs rarely passed
outside of their number.

After the death of Pascal, Eugene II. was created Pope under
the title of St. Sabina; and Italy, since being under the con-
trol of the French, changed in part the form and organization

Book I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 27

of its government, by the Pope’s having assumed more author-
ity in temporal matters, and by the introduction into Italy of
the titles of Count and Marquis, in the same way as the title
of Duke was first established by Longinus, the Exarch of
Ravenna. After Eugene II. a Roman priest called Osporco
came to be Pope; the ugliness of his name caused him on his
election to assume that of Sergio, and it was this circumstance
that gave rise to the practice of changing their names which
the Popes adopt on their election.

12. Meanwhile the Emperor Charles had died, and was suc-
ceeded by his son Louis; after whose death there occurred such
dissensions amongst his sons, that at the time of his grandsons
the Empire was taken from France and transferred to Ger-
many; and the first German Emperor was called Arnolfo.
The discords amongst the descendants of Charles lost them
not only the Empire, but also the kingdom of Italy; for the
Longobards, having recovered their strength, attacked the Pope
and the Romans, so that, not knowing where to seek assistance,
the Pope, from necessity, made Berengarius, Duke of Friuli,
king of Italy. These events encouraged the Huns who were
in Pannonia to assail Italy; but having encountered Berenga-
rius in battle, they were forced to return to Pannonia, or rather
to Hungary, as that province was then called. At that period
Romano was Emperor in Greece, having taken the Empire
from Constantine, whose armies he had commanded. This
usurpation had stirred up a rebellion against him in Puglia
and Calabria, which provinces owed obedience to the Empire;
this made Romano so indignant that he permitted the Sara-
cens to enter those provinces, of which they made themselves
masters, and then also attempted to take Rome. But the
Romans, seeing Berengarius occupied in defending himself
against the Huns, put Alberic, Duke of Tuscany, at their head,
and his valor saved Rome from the Saracens ; who, after raising
the siege of Rome, built a fortress on Mount Galgano, whence
they dominated Puglia and Calabria and threatened the rest
of Italy. It was thus that Italy suffered terrible afflictions in
those days, being assailed towards the Alps by the Huns, and
towards Naples by the Saracens.

This unhappy state of things lasted many years in Italy
under the three Berengarii, who succeeded one another. . The
Pope and the Church were constantly disturbed by these trou-

28 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book I.

bles, there being no one to whom they could resort for help,
owing to the dissensions of the Western princes and the impo-
tence of the Eastern. The city of Genoa and its adjacent shores
were ravaged by the Saracens, which gave rise to the greatness
of the city of Pisa, which afforded a refuge to many unfortu-
nate people who had been driven from their own homes. ‘These
events occurred in the year 931 of the Christian era. But now,
when Otho, Duke of Saxony and son of Henry and Mathilda,
aman of great prudence and reputation, had become Emperor,
the Pope Agapites appealed to him to come into Italy and to
deliver her from the tyranny of the Berengarii.

13. The states of Italy were at that time distributed as fol-
lows: Lombardy was under Berengarius III. and his son
Albert; Tuscany was governed by a minister of the stern
Emperor; Puglia and Calabria obeyed in part the Greek E
peror, and in part the Saracens. Rome chose every year two
Consuls from amongst her nobles, who governed it according to
ancient customs ; to these was added a Prefect, who represented
the people. There was also a Council of Twelve, who distributed
every year the rectors for the different places subject to Rome.
The Popes had more or less authority throughout Italy, accord-
ing as they were in favor with the Emperors or with the other
princes that were most powerful in the country. The Emperor
Otho then came into Italy and took the government from the
Berengarii, who had held it for fifty-five years, and restored to
the Pope all his dignities. Otho had a son and a grandson
bearing the same name as himself, who one after the other
succeeded him in the Empire. At the time of Otho III, Pope
Gregory V. was expelled by the Romans, whereupon Otho
came into Italy and restored the Pope in Rome; who, by way
of revenging himself upon the Romans, took from them the
power of creating the Emperors, and bestowed it upon six
princes of Germany, namely, the Bishops of Mayence, Treves,
and Cologne, and the princes of Brandenburg, the Palatinate,
and of Saxony. This occurred in the year 1002.

After the death of Otho III., Henry, Duke of Bavaria, was
created Emperor by the Electors, and was crowned twelve years
afterwards by Pope Stephen VIII. Henry and his wife, Sime-
onda, led a most holy life, as may be seen from the many
churches endowed and built by them; amongst others, the
Church of San Miniato, near the city of Florence. Henry died

Book I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 29

in the year 1024, and was succeeded by Conrad of Suabia ;
and after him came Henry II., who came to Rome, and, there
being a schism in the Church and three Popes, he displaced
them all and had Clement II. elected, by whom he was crowned
Emperor.

14. At this time Italy was governed in part by the people
and in part by princes, and partly by envoys of the Em-
perors, the most prominent of which, and to whom the others
deferred, were called Chancellors. Amongst the most power-
ful princes was Gottfried, and the Countess Mathilda, his wife,
who was the daughter of Beatrice, sister of Henry II. She
and her husband possessed Lucca, Parma, Reggio, and Mantua,
together with all the lands that are now called “ [1 Patrimonio.”
The pontiffs experienced at this time great difficulties from
the ambition of the Roman people, who at first availed of the
authority of the Popes to free themselves from the Emperors ;
and, after having taken the government of the city into their
own hands and remodelled it according to their own seeming,
suddenly became hostile to the Popes, who received more ill-
treatment from the people of Rome than from any other Chris-
tian prince. And in the days when the Popes by means of the
Censure caused all the West to tremble, the Roman people re-
volted, none of them having any other intention than to deprive
each other of influence and authority.

As Gregory V. had taken from the Romans the power to
create the Emperors, so Nicholas II., when he came to the
pontificate, deprived the people of Rome of the privilege of
concurring in the creation of the Popes, and established that
the election of the Popes should belong exclusively to the Car-
dinals. Nor was he content with this, but having come to an
agreement with the princes that governed Calabria and Puglia
(for reasons which we shall presently state), he constrained
all the officials sent there by the Romans for the administra-
tion of justice to render obedience to the Popes, and some of
them he deprived of their offices entirely.

15. After the death of Nicholas II. there was a schism in
the Church, because the clergy of Lombardy would not yield
obedience to Alexander II., who had been elected Pope at
Rome; and they created Cadolo of Parma Antipope. The
Kmperor Henry, who hated the power of the Popes, gave Pope
Alexander to understand that he must resign the pontificate,

30 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book J.

and the Cardinals that they must go into Germany to create a
new Pope. This caused Henry to be the first prince who was
made to feel the power of spiritual weapons; for the Pope
called a council at Rome, and deprived Henry of the Empire
and of his kingdom. Some of the Italian people followed
Henry and some the Pope, which was the seed of the feuds
between the Guelfs and the Ghibellines (Waiblingen) ; so that
Italy, after the invasions of the Barbarians had ceased, became
torn by intestine wars. Henry thereupon, being excommuni-
cated, was constrained by his people to go to Italy and kneel
barefoot to the Pope and ask his forgiveness, which occurred
in the year 1080. Nevertheless, soon after, other differences
arose between the Pope and Henry, so that the Pope excommu-
nicated him anew, whereupon the Emperor sent his son, who was
also called Henry, to Rome; and he, assisted by the Romans,
who hated the Pope, besieged him in his castle; but Robert
Guiscard having come from Puglia to relieve the Pope, Henry
did not wait to encounter him, but returned alone to Germany.
The Romans, however, persisted obstinately in the siege, so
that the city of Rome was again sacked by Robert, and thrown
back into its former ruined condition, from which it had been
restored by several successive Popes. As this Robert Guiscard
was the founder of the kingdom of Naples, it seems to me not
superfluous to give some particular account of his origin and
his deeds.

16. The dissensions amongst the heirs of Charlemagne, of
which we have spoken above, afforded the opportunity to a
new Northern people, called the Normans, to come and assail
France, and to take possession of that portion which is called
Normandy. A part of this people came into Italy at the time
when that country was infested by the Berengarii, the Sara-
cens, and the Huns, and took possession of some lands in the
Romagna, where they maintained themselves bravely during
the subsequent wars. Tancred, who was one of these Nor-
man princes, had numerous sons, amongst whom were William,
called Ferabar, and Robert, called Guiscard. The principality
had now come to William, and the disturbances of Italy had
ceased in that part of the country. Nevertheless, the Saracens
held Sicily, and constantly plundered the shores of Italy. Wil-
liam therefore agreed with the Princes of Capua and Salerno,
and with Melorco, the Greek, who governed Puglia and Calabria

Book I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 31

for the Greek Emperor, to attack the Saracens in Sicily ; and it
was agreed between them that, in case of success, they should
divide the booty and the lands equally, one fourth to each.
The enterprise proved fortunate, and after driving out the
Saracens they took possession of Sicily. But after this victory
Melorco secretly caused troops to be sent over from Greece, by
the aid of whom he seized the whole island in the name of the
Emperor, and only divided the booty with the others. William
was ill content with this, but awaited a more convenient time
to manifest it, and left the island, accompanied by the Princes
of Salerno and Capua. When these had parted from liim to
return to their homes, William, instead of returning to the
Romagna, turned with his troops towards Puglia, and promptly
seized Melfi, and thence in a short time, despite of the resist-
ance of the troops of the Greek Emperor, made himself master
of almost the whole of Puglia and Calabria, which provinces
had been subject to his brother, Robert Guiscard, at the time
of Pope Nicholas II. Having had great differences with his
nephews about the inheritance of these provinces, Robert
availed of the influence of the Pope to compose them, which
the latter did most readily, being desirous of securing the
friendship of Robert, so that he might defend him against the
German Emperor and the insolence of the Roman people.
This indeed happened, as we have related above, when at the
instance of Gregory VII. he drove Henry from Rome, and re-
duced the people of that city to subjection. Robert was suc-
ceeded by his sons Ruggieri and William, who added to their
possessions Naples, and all the country between Naples and
Rome, as also Sicily, of which Ruggieri had made himself
master. But William afterwards, whilst on his way to Con-
stantinople to espouse the daughter of the Emperor, was at-
tacked by Ruggieri, and deprived by him of his state. Ruggi-
eri, elated by this ECR con had himself proclaimed King of
Baie but afterwards contented himself with the title of King
of Puglia and Sicily, and was the first to give a name and or-
ganization to that kingdom, which has maintained itself in its
ancient limits, although it has several times changed not only
its dynasty, but also its nationality. For when the Norman
line became extinct, the kingdom was transferred to the Ger-
mans, and from en to the French; from these it passed to
the Aragonese, and is now possessed by the Flemish.

32 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book I.

17. Urban II. had now come to the supreme Pontificate ;
he was hated by the Romans, and believing that he could not
remain securely in Rome on account of the disturbances in
Italy, he turned his attention to a grand and noble enterprise.
He went to France with all his clergy, and having gathered a
large assemblage of people at Antwerp, he addressed them a
discourse against the infidels, by which he inflamed their minds
to that degree that they resolved to undertake a war against
the Saracens in Asia. This enterprise and similar subse-
quent ones were called the Crusades, because all who joined
in them wore a red cross on their arms or on their clothes.
The chiefs in this enterprise were Godfrey, Eustace, and Bald-
win, Counts of Bouillon, and a certain Peter the Hermit, who
was celebrated for his sanctity and wisdom. Many kings and
nations aided this undertaking with money, and many individ-
uals served as soldiers without any pay: such was the power
and influence of religion upon the minds of men in those days,
stimulated by the example of those who were the leaders in
this enterprise. At first the results were glorious, for all Asia
Minor, Syria, and part of Egypt, fell under the power of the
Christians. It gave rise to the order of the Knights of Jeru-
salem, which exists to this day and holds the island of Rhodes,
and has remained the chief obstacle to the power of the
Mahometans. It also gave birth to the order of the Knight
Templars, which became extinguished, however, soon after, in
consequence of their bad habits. Various events occurred in
connection with this undertaking by which at different times
many individuals and nations became famous. The kings of
England and France lent it their aid and support; and the
people of Pisa, Venice, and Genoa acquired great renown, and
fought with varying fortunes in this expedition, up to the time
of Saladin the Saracen, whose valor, together with the dis-
sensions of the Christians, deprived them in the end of all the
glory they had acquired in the beginning; and after ninety
years they were driven out of the places which they had at
first recovered with so much honor.

18. After the death of Urban, Pascal IT. was made Pope, and
the Empire fell to Henry 1V., who went to Rome feigning friend-
ship for the Pope; but afterwards he imprisoned him, together
with all his clergy, and did not liberate them again until they
conceded to him the power of disposing of the Church in Ger-

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 33

many as seemed to him proper. At this time occurred the
death of the Countess Mathilda, who left all her estates to the
Church. After the death of Pascal and of the Emperor Henry,
more Popes and Emperors succeeded, until the Pontificate came
to Alexander III., and the Empire to Frederick of Suabia, called
Barbarossa. At that period the Popes had had many difficulties
with the Roman people and the Emperors, which increased very
much at the time of Barbarossa. Frederick excelled in war,
but his pride was such that he could not bear to yield to the
Popes ; nevertheless, after his election, he came to Rome to be
crowned, and then returned peacefully to Germany. But he
did not remain long in that frame of mind, for he returned to
Italy to reduce to subjection some towns of Lombardy that had
refused him obedience. At this time the Cardinal St. Cle-
ment, a Roman by birth, separated himself from the Pope, and
was himself made Pope by some of the cardinals. The Emperor
Frederick was at that time encamped before Crema, and when
Pope Alexander complained to him of the Antipope, Clement,
he replied that they should both come before him, and that then
he would decide which of them was the true Pope. This answer
displeased Alexander, and seeing Frederick inclined to favor
the Antipope, he excommunicated him, and fled to Philip, king
of France. Frederick meanwhile continued the war in Lom-
bardy, and took and destroyed Milan; in consequence of which
Verona, Padua, and Vicenza united against him for their com-
mon defence.

In the midst of these occurrences the Antipope died, where-
upon Frederick created Guido of Cremona Antipope in his place.
The Romans at this time, partly in consequence of the absence
of the Pope and partly in consequence of the obstacles which
the Emperor met with in Lombardy, had resumed considerable
authority in Rome, and claimed obedience from those places
that used to be subject to them. And as the Tusculanians
refused to concede any authority to them, they went in mass
to attack them; but the Tusculanians, being supported by Fred-
erick, routed the Roman army with such slaughter that Rome
never afterwards was either populous or rich. Pope Alexander
meantime had returned to Rome, deeming himself safe now in
remaining there because of the enmity between Frederick and
the Romans, as also on account of the enemies which Frederick

had in Lombardy. But, regardless of all such considerations,
VOL. I. 3

34 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

Frederick took the field and marched upon Rome, where Alex-
ander, however, did not await him, but fled to William, king of
Puglia, who had become heir to that kingdom after the death
of Ruggieri. But Frederick gave up the siege of Rome in con-
sequence of the pest, and returned to Germany ; and the towns
of Lombardy that had conspired against him, by way of enabling
them to subdue Pavia and Tortona, which were held by the Im-
perialists, built a city that should serve them as a stronghold,
and which they called Alexandria, in honor of Pope Alexander,
and in derision of Frederick. Guido the Antipope also died, and
his place was filled by Giovanni da Fermo, who, favored by the
Imperial party, remained at Montefiascone.

19. In the midst of these events Alexander had gone to
Tusculum, called there by the people to protect them with his
authority against the Romans. Whilst there, envoys came to
him from the king of England to explain to him that their king
had no share in the guilt of the murder of the blessed Thomas,
Bishop of Canterbury, of which he had been publicly accused.
On account of which the. Pope sent two cardinals to England to
investigate the truth of the matter; who, although they could
discover no manifest proof of the king’s being guilty, yet, on
account of the infamy of the crime and for not having honored
Thomas as he deserved, ordered that the king, by way of pen-
ance, should convene all the barons of his realm, and by a sol-
emn oath should excuse himself in their presence; and that,
furthermore, he should at once send two hundred soldiers to Je-
rusalem, and pay them for one year; and that the king should
also be obliged personally to go to Jerusalem within three years,
with as great an army as he could bring together ; and to an-
nul all the acts passed during his reign that were adverse to
ecclesiastical liberty ; and to consent that every one of his sub-
jects should have the right to appeal to Rome; all which con-
ditions were accepted by King Henry. And so great a king
submitted to such a judgment, to which any private individual
of the present day would disdain to submit. And yet, whilst
the Pope had so much authority with princes at so great a dis-
tance, he could not make himself obeyed by the Romans, whom
he could not induce, even by entreaties, to allow him to stay in
Rome; although he promised them, moreover, that he would not
interfere in any but ecclesiastical matters. So much more are
appearances dreaded at a distance than when seen near by.

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 85

At that time Frederick had returned to Italy, and whilst he
was preparing to renew hostilities against the Pope all the pre-
lates and barons gave him to understand that they would aban-
don him if he did not reconcile himself with the Church; so
that Frederick was obliged to go to Venice to render homage to
the Pope. <A pacification was there effected between them ; and
in the treaty the Pope withdrew from the Emperor all authority
over Rome, and named William, king of Sicily and of Puglia,
his coadjutor. Frederick, unable to live without being engaged
in some war, undertook to go to Asia, there to give vent to his
ambition against Mahomet, which he had not been able to do
against the Vicar of Christ. But having reached the river
Cydnus, and being attracted by the clearness of its waters, he
bathed in it, and died in consequence; and thus the water
rendered greater service to the Mahometans than the excom-
munications had rendered to the Christians; for these only
checked the pride of the Emperor, whilst the former extin-
guished it.

20. After the death of Frederick, it only remained for the
Pope to subdue the contumacy of the Romans; and after much
disputing about the creation of consuls, it was agreed that the
people of Rome should elect them according to custom, but that
they could not enter upon their functions until after having first
sworn fidelity to the Church. This agreement caused the Anti-
pope Giovanni to fly to Monte Albano, where he died soon
after. William, king of Naples, died also about this time, and
the Pope proposed to take possession of that kingdom, as the
king had left no son but Tancred, who was an illegitimate
child. The barons, however, did not concur in the Pope’s inten-
tions, and wanted Tancred for their king. Celestin III. was
Pope at that time, who, being desirous to get the kingdom out
of the hands of Tancred, managed to have Henry, son of Fred-
erick, made Emperor, and promised him the kingdom of Naples
on condition of his restoring to the Church all the lands that
had belonged to her. And, by way of facilitating this matter,
he withdrew from the convent Costanza, a daughter of William’s
and no longer very young, and gave her to Henry for his wife.
And thus did the kingdom of Naples pass from the Normans,
who were the founders of it, to the Germans. After having
settled matters in Germany, Henry came to Italy with his wife,
Costanza, and a son four years of age, called Frederick, and

36 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book I.

took possession of the kingdom of Naples without much diffi-
- culty; for Tanered had already died, leaving only a small boy,
called Ruggiero. After a time Henry died in Sicily, and Fred-
erick succeeded to the kingdom of Naples, and Otho, Duke of
Saxony, to the Empire, through the favorable influence of Pope
Innocent III. But no sooner had Otho taken the crown than,
contrary to all expectation, he turned against the Pope, seized
the Romagna, and ordered an attack upon the kingdom, in con-
sequence of which the Pope excommunicated him, so that he
was abandoned by everybody; whereupon the Electors chose
Frederick, king of Naples, Emperor. Frederick came to Rome
for his coronation, but the Pope would not crown him, for he
feared his power, and therefore sought to get him out of Italy,
the same as he had done with Otho. Frederick became so
indignant at this that he returned to Germany, and, after a
protracted war, defeated Otho.

In the midst of these events Pope Innocent died, who, besides
many other excellent works, built the Hospital of Santo Spirito
at Rome. He was succeeded by Honorius III., during whose
Pontificate the orders of St. Dominic and St. Francis were es-
tablished, in the year 1218. It was this Pope who crowned
Frederick, to whom John, a descendant of Baldwin, king of
Jerusalem, who was with the remnant of the Christians in Asia,
gave one of his daughters for wife, and with her dower he con-
ceded to Frederick the title to that kingdom; and this gave rise
to the custom that whoever is king of Naples also bears the
title of king of Jerusalem.

21. The state of things in Italy at that time was as follows.
The Romans made no more Consuls, and in their stead they
created, by the same authority, first only one Senator, and after-
wards more. The league that had been formed amongst the
cities of Lombardy against Frederick Barbarossa was still in
existence, and was composed of the cities of Milan, Brescia,
Mantua, with the greater part of the cities of the Romagna, and
in addition Verona, Vicenza, Padua, and Trevisi. On the side
of the Emperor were Cremona, Bergamo, Parma, Reggio, Mo-
dena, and Trent. The other cities and castles of Lombardy
and the Trevisian Marches, according to necessity, favored
either the one or the other party.

At the time of Otho HI. there had come into Italy one Ezze-
lino, of whom there remained a son born in Italy, who became

Book I.]} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 387

father to another Ezzelino. The latter, being rich and power-
ful, united with Frederick IJ., who, as we have said, had be-
come hostile to the Pope; and having come into Italy through
the favor and means of Ezzelino, he took Verona and Mantua,
destroyed Vicenza, seized Padua, and routed the army of the
leagued cities, and then marched upon Tuscany. Meantime
Ezzelino had subjugated the entire Trevisian Marches; but
failed to take Ferrara, which was being defended by Azone
d’ Este and by the troops which the Pope had in Lombardy.
When the siege was raised, the Pope gave that city in fief to
Azone d@’ Este, from whom those are descended who rule over
the city at the present day. Frederick, desirous of making
himself master of Tuscany, stopped at Pisa; and in scanning
his friends and his enemies in that province, he sowed so much
discord that it was the ruin of all Italy, because the factions
of the Guelfs and Ghibellines multiplied everywhere, those be-
ing called Guelfs who adhered to the Church, and Ghibellines
those who followed the Emperor. These appellations were
first applied at Pistoja. After departing from Pisa Frederick
attacked and wasted the lands of the Church in every direction,
so that the Pope, seeing no other remedy, proclaimed a crusade
against him, the same as his predecessors had done against
the Saracens. And Frederick, to prevent being suddenly aban-
doned by his troops, as in the case of Frederick Barbarossa,
and others more powerful than himself, took a number of Sara-
cens into his pay; and by way of fixing them as a permanent
obstacle to the Church in Italy, who would not fear the papal
maledictions, he gave them Nocera in the kingdom of Naples,
so that, having a place of refuge of their own, they might serve
him with a greater sense of security.

22. The Pontificate had now come to Innocent IV., who,
fearing lest Frederick should go to Genoa and thence into
France, ordered a council to be held at Lyons; to which Fred-
erick resolved to go, but was prevented by a rebellion of the
city of Parma; and being repulsed in his attack upon that
city, he went into Tuscany, and thence to Sicily, where he died,
leaving his son Conrad in Suabia, and his natural son Manfred
he left in Puglia, having made him Duke of Benevento. Con-
rad came to take possession of the kingdom, but died after
having reached Naples; he left one son, named Conradin, who
was still young, and was at that time in Germany. Meantime

38 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

Manfred seized the government, first as the guardian of Con-
radin; and afterwards, having started a report of Conradin’s
death, he made himself king, contrary to the will of the Pope
and of the Neapolitans, whom he forced to yield their consent.
Whilst these things were going on in the kingdom of Naples,
many disturbances occurred between the factions of the Guelfs
and the Ghibellines. At the head of the Guelf party was a
Legate of the Pope; and the Ghibellines were led by Ezzelino,
who possessed nearly all Lombardy beyond the Po. And as
the city of Padua revolted during the progress of the war,
Ezzelino had twelve thousand Paduans put to death, but died
himself at the age of thirty before the war had been brought to
a close; after his death all his possessions became free. Man-
fred, king of Naples, continued in hostility towards the Church
the same as his ancestors, and kept the then Pope Urban IV.
in continual anxiety ; so that the Pope, by way of reducing him
to subjection, proclaimed a crusade against him, and went him-
self to Perugia there to await the gathering of troops. And as
it seemed to him that but a few came, feebly and tardily, he
bethought himself that, to enable him to conquer Manfred, he
would need to have assistance; and therefore he turned for
aid and favor to France, and created Charles of Anjou, brother
of Louis, king of France, king of Sicily and Naples, and urged
him to come into Italy to take possession of that kingdom.
But the Pope died before Charles came to Rome, and Clement
IV. was elected in his place. During his Pontificate Charles
came with thirty galleys to Ostia, having ordered the other
portion of his troops to come by land. During his stay in
Rome the Romans, by way of gratifying him, made him Sena-
tor; and the Pope invested him with the kingdom, with the
obligation, however, that he should pay every year to the
Church the sum of fifty thousand florins ; and he issued a decree
that in future neither Charles nor any one else that held the
kingdom of Naples should be Emperor. And Charles, having
taken the field against Manfred, routed and killed him near
Benevento, and made himself master of Sicily and of the king-
dom. But Conradin, to whom the state belonged according to
his father’s will, gathered a large force in Germany and came
into Italy against Charles, whom he encountered and fought at
Tagliacozzo, but was routed, and whilst flying in disguise was
taken and put to death.

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 39

23. Italy remained quiet until the accession of Adrian V. to
the Pontificate. Whilst Charles was at Rome governing it
by virtue of his office of Senator, the Pope could not brook his
power, and went to live at Viterbo, and solicited the Emperor
Rudolph to come to his aid against Charles into Italy. And
thus did the Popes, influenced either by the love of their reli-
gion, or by their personal ambition, continue to call into Italy
new people, and to stir up new wars; and after having made
one prince powerful they repented of it and sought his ruin,
and would not permit that that province which they were
themselves too weak to hold should be possessed by any one
else. And the princes feared the Popes, because these always
carried the day, whether fighting or flying, unless they were
overpowered by some fraud, as was Boniface VIII. and some
others, who were taken prisoners by the Emperor under the
pretence of friendship.

Rudolph did not come into Italy, being detained by the war
in which he was engaged against the king of Bohemia. In the
midst of this Adrian died and was succeeded in the Pontificate
by Nicholas III. of the house of Orsini, an ambitious and auda-
cious man. Resolved by every means to diminish the power
of Charles, he directed that Rudolph should complain because
Charles kept a governor in Tuscany on account of the Guelf
party, which had been re-established by him in that province
‘ after the death of Manfred. Charles yielded to the Emperor,
and withdrew his governor, and the Pope sent his cardinal
nephew there as governor of the Empire; so that the Emperor,
in return for the honor shown him, restored the Romagna to
the Church, which had been taken from her by his ancestors,
and the Pope made Bartoldo Orsini Duke of the Romagna.
The Pope, thinking that he had become sufficiently powerful to
be able to contend against Charles, deprived him of the office
of Senator, and issued a decree that henceforth no one of royal
lineage should be able to be a Senator in Rome. He had it in
his mind also to take Sicily from Charles, and for this purpose
set secret negotiations on foot with Pedro, king of Aragon,
which were carried into effect afterwards under his successor.
He contemplated furthermore to create from amongst his family
two kings, one in Lombardy and the other in Tuscany, so that
they might defend the Church against the Germans whenever
they might attempt to come into Italy, and against the French

40 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

who were in the kingdom of Naples. But before putting these
designs into execution he died, having been the first Pope
who openly manifested his selfish ambition, and who designed,
under color of aggrandizing the Church, to bestow honors and
benefits upon his own family. Previous to that time no men-
tion had ever been made of nephews or relatives of any of the
Popes; but henceforth history is full of them, so that even
their children are seen to figure init. And after having at-
tempted to make their children princes, there really seemed to
remain nothing more for the Popes to do than to leave them
the Papacy as an hereditary right. It is very true that the
principalities established by the Popes until then have been
but short-lived, because in many instances the Popes them-
selves did not live long; so that either they could not finish
planting their seeds, or, if they did, they left them whilst their
roots were yet so feeble and few that they were destroyed by
the first storm after the power that sustained them had ceased
to exist.

24. The next Pope was Martin IV., who, being French by
birth, favored the party of Charles; in return for which Charles
sent his troops into the Romagna, which had revolted against
the Holy See; and whilst besieging Furli, Guido Bonatti, an
astrologer, directed the people to assail Charles at a particular
point indicated by him, so that all the French were either
taken or slain.

At that time also was carried into effect the plot that had
been arranged between the Pope Nicholas and Pedro, king of
Aragon, according to which the Sicilians killed all the French
that were found on the island. Pedro made himself master of
Sicily, claiming it as belonging to him by right of his wife, Cos-
tanza, daughter of Manfred. But Charles died whilst organ-
izing the campaign for the recovery of Sicily, leaving a son,
Charles II., who was taken prisoner during the war in Sicily.
For the sake of gaining his liberty he promised to return to
prison provided he should not have succeeded within three
years in inducing the Pope to invest the royal house of Ara-
gon with the crown of Sicily.

25. The Emperor Rudolph, instead of coming into Italy to
restore the influence of the Empire there, sent an ambassador
with authority to concede their freedom to all the cities that
were willing to purchase it; in consequence of which many

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 41

cities purchased their liberties and changed their form of gov-
ernment. Adolf of Saxony succeeded to the Empire, and
Pietro del Murone to the Pontificate; the latter took the
name of Celestin, but being a hermit of great sanctity he re-
nounced the Pontificate, and Boniface VIII. was elected Pope
in his stead. Heaven, knowing that the time was to come
when the French and the Germans should leave Italy, and
that country should remain wholly in the hands of the Italians,
so that the Pope deprived of foreign aid should neither be able
to confirm nor enjoy his power, raised up two powerful families
in Rome, the Colonna and the Orsini, who by their proximity
would keep the Pope impotent. Boniface, aware of this, re-
solved to crush the Colonna; and after having excommuni-
cated them, he proclaimed a crusade against them, which
although it did them some harm yet injured the Church more.
For the same weapon which had been most valiantly and suc-
cessfully employed in defence of the faith, failed of effect when
for purposes of personal ambition it was turned against Chris-
tians. And thus their very lust of power caused the Popes
little by little to be enfeebled. Besides the above extreme
measures, Boniface deprived two of the family of the Colonna
who were cardinals of this dignity. Sciarra, the head of the
house, which before him had been unknown, having fled, was
taken by Catalan corsairs and put to the oars; but being after-
wards recognized at Marseilles he was sent to Philip of France,
who had also been excommunicated and deprived of his king-°
dom by Boniface. Philip considering himself as in open war
against the Pope, in which he might remain either a loser or
be exposed to great risks, had recourse to deceit, and, feigning
a desire to make peace with the pontiff, sent Sciarra secretly
into Italy. Upon arriving at Anagni, where the Pope was, he
gathered his friends in the night and took the Pope prisoner.
And although Boniface was soon after liberated by the people
of Anagni, yet the mortification caused by that insult drove
him mad, and he died.

26. It was this Boniface who organized the Jubilee of the
Church in the year 1300, and ordered that it should be cele-
brated every hundred years. In these days there occurred
many troubles between the Guelfs and the Ghibellines; and
Italy, having been abandoned by the Emperors, many cities
became free, and many fell under the control of despots. Pope

42 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox L

Benedict restored the hat to Cardinal Colonna, and readmitted
King Philip of France to the blessings and privileges of the
Church. Benedict was succeeded by Clement V., who, being a
Frenchman, transferred the pontifical seat to France in the year
1305. In the midst of these events Charles II., king of Naples,
died, and was succeeded by his son, Robert ; and Henry of Lux-
emburg had become Emperor, who came to Rome to be crowned,
although the Pope was not there. His coming caused great
disturbances in Lombardy; for he restored all the banished,
whether Guelfs or Ghibellines, to their country, whence it re-
sulted that, each party endeavoring to drive out the other, the
province was torn by warlike dissensions, which the Emperor
with all his power could not obviate. Having departed from
Lombardy, the Emperor Henry went by way of Genoa to Pisa,
where he attempted to take Tuscany from King Robert; but
failing in this, he went on to Rome, where he remained but a
few days, being driven out by the Orsini, with the help of King
Robert ; whereupon he returned to Pisa, and by way of carrying
on the war more securely against Tuscany, and taking that state
from King Robert, he caused it to be attacked by Frederick,
king of Sicily. But whilst he hoped at the same time to ob-
tain possession of Tuscany and to deprive King Robert of his
state, he died, and was succeeded in the Empire by Louis of
Bavaria. In the midst of these events John XXII. was elected
Pope. Under his Pontificate the Emperor did not cease his
persecutions against the Guelfs and-the Church, which was de-
fended in great part by King Robert and the Florentines. This
gave rise to the many wars in Lombardy on the part of the
Visconti against the Guelfs, and on the part of Castruccio of
Lucca against the Florentines in Tuscany. But as it was the
family of the Visconti that created the Dukedom of Milan, —
one of the five principalities that subsequently governed Italy,
—it seems to me proper here to give some account of their
condition.

27. After the establishment in Lombardy of the league of
the cities, already mentioned, for the purpose of mutual de- *
fence against Frederick Barbarossa, the city of Milan, having
been rebuilt after its destruction, for the purpose of revenging
herself for the wrongs endured, joined the league, which checked
Barbarossa, and kept the Church party alive for some time in
Lombardy. And in the disorders of the wars that followed

Book I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 43

thereupon the family of the Della Torres became most powerful
in that city; so that their influence increased steadily, whilst
the Emperors possessed but little authority in that province.
But when Frederick Il. came into Italy, and the Ghibelline
party had become powerful by the acts of Ezzelino, there oc-
curred in all the cities Ghibelline disturbances, whilst in Milan
the Visconti were amongst the adherents of the Ghibellines,
and drove the Della Torres from Milan. These had been ab-
sent, however, but a little while, before they were restored to
their country by the treaties made between the Pope and the
Emperor.

But the Pope, having gone with his court to France, and
Henry of Luxemburg having come into Italy to be crowned at
Rome, he was received at Milan by Maffeo Visconti and Guido
della Torre, who were the heads of those families. Maffeo con-
ceived the idea to avail of the presence of the Emperor to drive
out Guido, believing the undertaking easy, because Guido be-
longed to the faction opposed to the Emperor. He therefore
profited by the complaints of the people of the oppressive con-
duct of the Germans, and cautiously encouraged and persuaded
the people to take up arms, and to arise and shake off the yoke
of these barbarians. And when he supposed that he had ar-
ranged everything for his purpose, he caused some of his de-
voted adherents to create a tumult, whereupon the people rose
in arms against the Germans. No sooner was this disturbance
begun than Maffeo, with his sons and his partisans all in arms,
rushed to Henry, and represented to him that the tumult had
been created by the Della Torres, who, not content to remain
quiet in Milan, had taken that opportunity to try and plunder
him, for the purpose of ingratiating themselves with the Guelfs
in Italy, and to make themselves masters of that city. But he
bade Henry to be of good cheer; that he would stand by him,
and that he and his party were ready to aid and defend him
with all the means in their power. Henry, believing all that
Maffeo told him to be the truth, united his forces to those of
the Visconti, and attacked the Della Torres, who had run to
all parts of the city for the purpose of staying the tumult; and
those who were not taken prisoners were killed, the others were
deprived of their property and sent into exile. Thus Maffeo
Visconti remained Prince of Milan, and after him came Ga-
leazzo and Azzo, and then Luchino and Giovanni; the latter

44 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book I.

became Archbishop of Milan, and Luchino, who died before
him, left two sons, Bernabo and Galeazzo. But soon after,
Galeazzo also died, leaving a son, Giovanni Galeazzo, called
Conte di Virtu. After the death of the Archbishop, Giovanni
Galeazzo murdered his uncle, Bernabo, in a treacherous man-
ner, and remained sole Prince of Milan, and was the first who
took the title of Duke. He left two sons, Philip and Giovanni
Maria Angelo; the latter was killed by the people of Milan,
and the government remained in the hands of Philip, who left
no male children; whence the state was transferred from the
house of Visconti to that of the Sforzas, in the manner and for
the reasons which we shall relate at the proper time.

28. Returning now to the point from which I digressed, the
Emperor Louis, for the purpose of reviving the power and in-
fluence of the imperial party, and to assume the crown, came
into Italy; and being at Milan, as a pretext for obtaining
money from the Milanese, he made show of leaving them their
liberty and put the Visconti in prison. Afterwards he liber-
ated them by means of Castruccio da Lucca; and having gone’
to Rome for the purpose of more easily disturbing Italy, he
created Piero della Corvara Antipope, intending by his in-
fluence and the power of the Visconti to keep the opposing
parties of Lombardy and Tuscany in a condition of weakness.
But Castruccio died, which was the beginning of the Emperor’s
failure; for Pisa and Lucca revolted against him, and the
Pisans sent the Antipope as prisoner to the Pope in France;
so that Louis, despairing of affairs in Italy, returned to Ger-
many. No sooner had he left than John, king of Bohemia,
came into Italy, called there by the Ghibellines of Brescia, and
made himself master of that city and of Bergamo. And as he
had come into Italy with the consent of the Pope, who how-
ever feigned the contrary, he was supported by the Legate of
Bologna, who judged that that would be a good means of pre-
venting the return of the Emperor into Italy. It was in this
way that the condition of Italy became changed; for the Flor-
entines and King Robert, seeing that the esate supported the
project of the Ghibellines, became hostile to all who were
friends of the Legate and of the king of Bohemia. And many
princes united with them without having any regard to either
Guelf or Ghibelline party ; amongst these were the Visconti,
the Della Scalas, Philip Gonzago of Mantua, and the Princes of

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 45

Carrara and of Este. Whereupon the Pope excommunicated
them all; and the king, fearing this league, returned home to
collect more forces. But having afterwards returned with these
into Italy, he nevertheless found the enterprise so difficult for
him that he returned to Bohemia disheartened, to the great
displeasure of the Legate; leaving only Reggio and Modena
guarded, and recommending Parma to Marsiglio and Piero
de Rossi, who were most powerful in that city. After his
departure, Bologna joined the league, and the confederates
divided the four cities that yet remained to the party of the
Church amongst themselves, and agreed that Parma should
belong to the Della Scalas, Reggio to Gonzaga, Modena to the
D’ Estes, and Lucca to the Florentines. The taking of these
places occasioned many wars, which however were afterwards
composed in great part by the Venetians. Some persons per-
haps may wonder that, in narrating so many events that have
occurred in Italy, we have deferred so long to speak of the
‘Venetians, their state being a republic, which on account of
its organization and power should be noted above every other
principality in Italy. But the wonder will cease when they
understand the reason of it, and therefore I shall resume the
history of Venice so far back that the reader may understand
her origin, and why the Venetians delayed so long taking an
active part in the affairs of Italy.

29. When Attila, king of the Huns, besieged Aquileia, its
inhabitants, after defending themselves a long time, despaired
of their safety, and took refuge as best they could, with their
movables, upon those rocky shoals that lay unoccupied near
the head of the Adriatic Sea. The Paduans, also, seeing the
conflagration approach, and fearing that, after Aquileia should
have been taken, Attila would attack them, carried all their
movables of greatest value to a point on the same sea called
Rivo Alto, where they also sent their women and children and
old men, keeping the young men in Padua for its defence.
Besides these, the people of Monselice, together with the in-
habitants of the hills in the rear, impelled by the same fears,
took refuge also on the same rocky shoals of the Adriatic.
But after Aquileia was taken and after Attila had destroyed
Padua, Monselice, Vicenza, and Verona, the inhabitants of
Padua and the most influential of the other cities remained to
inhabit the swamps around Rivo Alto. And all the people of

46 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boor I.

the vicinity of that province, which was anciently called Vene-
zia, driven from their homes by the same circumstances, in
like manner took refuge in those marshes. Thus constrained
by necessity, they left the most agreeable and fertile places to
dwell in sterile and unsettled ones, deprived of all comforts.
A great many people being thus suddenly brought together
there, they made those places in avery short space of time, not
only fertile, but most delightful; and having established order
and laws amongst themselves, they lived securely whilst there
was so much ruin and distress throughout Italy, and in a little
while they grew in reputation and power. For, besides the
above-mentioned inhabitants, many others took refuge there
from the cities of Lombardy, mostly driven away by the cruel-
ties of Clefi, king of the Longobards; and which caused the
new city to increase so considerably, that at the time when
Pepin, king of France, came at the Pope’s request to drive the
Longobards from Italy, in the conventions that were made
between Pepin and the Emperor of the Greeks, the Duke of
Benevento and the Venetians obeyed neither the one nor the
other, but enjoyed their independence and liberty in the midst
of them. Besides this, as necessity had obliged them to live
as it were in the water, so, unable to avail of the land, they
were forced to see how they could gain an honest living by sea;
and going with their vessels to all parts of the world, they filled
their city with various kinds of merchandise, of which other
people being in need caused them frequently to resort there for
their supplies. Nor did the Venetians for many years think of
any other dominion than that which facilitated the transport
of their merchandise; and therefore they acquired many ports
in Greece and in Syria. And as the French in their voyages to
Asia availed of the vessels of the Venetians, they assigned to
them the island of Candia as a reward. And so long as they
lived in this wise their name became feared on the seas, whilst
in Italy it was venerated, so that in most of the controver-
sies that arose the Venetians for the most part became the
arbiters; as was the case in the differences between the con-
federated princes on account of the places which they divided
amongst themselves, which dispute being referred to the Vene-
tians, the Visconti received Bergamo and Brescia.

But as the Venetians, urged on by the lust of conquest, had
in the course of time obtained possession of Padua, Vicenza,

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 47

and Trevisi, and afterwards of Verona, Bergamo, and Brescia,
and of a number of places in the kingdom and in the Romagna,
they acquired such a reputation for power that they became a
terror not only to the princes of Italy, but also to the Ultra-
montane kings. In consequence of which these combined
against the Venetians, who thereupon lost in one day that state
and power which they had achieved in so many years and at
such infinite expense. And although they subsequently re-
acquired it in part, yet not having recovered their former rep-
utation or power, they exist, like all the other Italian states,
at the discretion of others.

30. Benedict XII. having become Pope, it seemed to him
that he had lost all control of Italy, and, fearing lest the Km-
peror Louis should make himself master of it, he bethought
himself to secure the friendship of all those who had usurped
the places that used to be subject to the Emperor, so that,
haying reason to fear the Empire, they might ally themselves
to him for the defence of Italy. He therefore issued a decree
that all the tyrants of Lombardy should by a just title continue
to hold the places they had usurped. But after having made
this concession Benedict died, and was succeeded in the Pon-
tificate by Clement VI. The Emperor, seeing with what liber-
ality the Pope had donated the possessions of the Empire,
resolved to be not less liberal with the goods of others, and so
he gave to all those who had usurped the lands of the Church
full imperial authority to retain them as their own property.
In consequence of which Galeotto Malatesta and his brother
became lords of Rimini, Pesaro, and Fano; Antonio da Monte-
feltro became lord of Marca and Urbino; Guido da Polenta, of
Ravenna; Sinibaldo Ordelaffi, of Furli and Cesena; Giovanni
Manfredi, of Faenza; and Lodovico Alidosi, of Imola. Besides
these, many others became lords of other cities; so that of the
_many towns that belonged to the Church but a few remained
without princes. This kept the Church weak until Alexander
VI., in our day, restored her to her former authority by the
ruin of those princes.

At the time of granting the above concession the Emperor
was at Trent, and gave out that he intended to pass into Italy,
which occasioned many wars in Lombardy, whereby the Vis-
conti made themselves masters of Parma. Robert, king of
Naples, died about this time, leaving only two granddaughters,

48 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

children of his son Charles, who had died some time before him.
By his will he constituted the elder, Joanna, heiress of the
kingdom, and that she should take for her husband Andreas,
king of Hungary, his nephew. Andreas had not lived long with
Joanna before she had him killed, and married another cousin
the Prince of Taranto, called Lodovico. But Louis, then king
of Hungary and brother to Andreas, for the purpose of aven-
ging the death of his brother, came with troops into Italy and
drove Queen Joanna and her husband from the kingdom.

31. At this time there occurred a memorable affair at Rome;
namely, a certain Niccolo di Lorenzo, Chancellor of the Cam-
pidoglio, expelled the Senators from Rome and proclaimed
himself chief of the Roman republic, with the title of Tribune ;
and re-established that ancient form of government, with so
much reputation of justice and virtue that not only the neigh-
boring states, but all Italy, sent ambassadors to him; so that
the ancient provinces, seeing the regeneration of Rome, also
began to raise their heads; and some from fear, and others
influenced by hope, did him honor. But despite of this great
reputation, Niccolo became discouraged almost at the very
outset ; for borne down by the weight of responsibility he fled
secretly of his own accord, and went to Charles of Bohemia,
who had been elected Emperor by order of the Pope, and in
disregard of Louis of Bavaria. Charles, by way of making
himself acceptable to the Pope, sent him Niccolo as prisoner.
Not long after this, however, it occurred that one Francesco
Baroncelli, in imitation of Niccolo, seized the Tribunate of
Rome and expelled the Senators. The Pope, as the promptest
means for repressing this attempt, had Niccolo liberated and
sent to Rome, and restored him to the office of Tribune; and
when Niccolo had resumed the government he had Francesco
put to death. But the Colonnese having become his enemies,
Niccolo was also killed a short time afterwards, and the Sena-
tors restored to their offices.

32. In the midst of these events the king of Hungary, after
having driven the Queen Joanna from the kingdom of Naples,
returned to his own dominions. But the Pope, who preferred to
have the queen near Rome rather than the king, managed in
such manner as to have the king of Hungary consent to restore
the kingdom to Joanna, provided that her husband, Lodovico,
should content himself with the title of Prince of Taranto, and

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 49

not claim that of king. It was now the year 1350, and it
seeming to the Pope that the Jubilee, which Boniface VIII. had
ordained for every hundred years, might be celebrated every
fifty years, and having proclaimed this by a decree, the Roman
people in return for this benefit agreed that the Pope should
send four cardinals to Rome to reform the government of the
city, and to create Senators according to his pleasure. The
Pope also pronounced Lodovico di Taranto king of Naples ;
whereupon the queen out of gratitude gave her patrimony of
Avignon to the Church. About this time Luchino Visconti
was killed, whereupon the Archbishop Giovanni remained sole
lord of Milan. He frequently engaged in war against Tuscany
and his other neighbors, so that he became very powerful.
After his death there remained his nephews, Bernabo and
Galeazzo; the latter, however, died soon after, leaving a son,
Giovanni Galeazzo, who shared the government with Bernabo.
At this period Charles, king of Bohemia, was Emperor, and
Innocent VI. was Pope; the latter sent the Cardinal Egidius,
a Spaniard, into Italy, who by his ability and valor restored
the reputation of the Church, not only in the Romagna and in
Rome, but in all Italy. He recovered Bologna, which had
been occupied by the Archbishop of Milan; compelled the
Romans to accept a foreign Senator, who should be sent there
every year by the Pope; made honorable treaties with the Vis-
conti; defeated and took prisoner Giovanni Aguto, an English-
man (John Sharpe) who was carrying on a war with four
thousand English in Tuscany in aid of the Ghibellines. Where-
upon Urban V., having become Pope and having heard of all
these victories, resolved to visit Italy and Rome, where the
Emperor Charles also came; after a few months, however, the
Emperor returned home, and the Pope went back to Avignon.
After the death of Urban, Gregory XI. became pontiff; and
the Cardinal Egidius also having died, Italy relapsed into its
former condition of discord, caused by the peoples having
combined against the Visconti. So that the Pope first sent a
Legate into Italy with six thousand Bretons, and afterwards
came in person and re-established his court at Rome in the
year 1376, after its having been seventy-one years in France.
After the death of Gregory, Urban VI. was made Pope, but
shortly afterwards Clement VII. was created Pope by ten cardi-
nals at Fondi, who declared Urban VI. improperly elected.

VOL. I. 4

50 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Boox I.

At this time the Genoese, who had lived many years under the
government of the Visconti, revolted, and an important war
broke out between them and the Venetians, on account of the
island of Tenedos, in which all Italy took sides. It was in
this war that the first cannons were seen, a new instrument of
war invented by the Germans. And although the Genoese
were for a time superior and held Venice besieged for some
months, yet at the end of the war the Venetians remained
victors, and through the intervention of the Pope made peace
in the year 1381.

33. A schism having been created in the Church, as has been
stated, the Queen Joanna of Naples supported the schismatic
Pope, whereupon Urban induced Charles of Durazzo, who was
descended from the royal family of Naples, to attack Joanna in
her kingdom. He deprived her of the government and made
himself master of the kingdom. Joanna fled to France, and
the king of France, irritated by the conduct of Charles, sent
Louis of Anjou into Italy to recover the kingdom for the queen,
and to drive Urban out of Rome and to establish the Antipope
Clement there. But in the midst of this enterprise Louis died ;
and his troops, having been defeated, returned into France.
During these events the Pope went to Naples, where he impris-
oned nine cardinals for having adhered to France and to the
Antipope. Afterwards he became dissatisfied with the king for
having refused to make one of his nephews Prince of Capua;
but feigning not to care about it, he asked the king to grant him
Nocera for his residence, where he afterwards fortified himself
and prepared to deprive the king of his realm. The king
thereupon took the field, and the Pope fled to Genoa, where he
caused the cardinals whom he had imprisoned to be put to
death. Thence he went to Rome, and for the purpose of re-
covering his influence he created twenty-nine cardinals.

Meanwhile, Charles of Durazzo went to Hungary, and was
made king of that country, where he died soon after, having
left his wife and his children, Ladislas and Joanna, at Naples.
At this same time, Giovanni Galeazzo, after having had his
uncle, Bernabo, put to death, seized the entire government of
Milan for himself. Not satisfied, however, with having become
Duke of all Lombardy, he wanted also to possess Tuscany ; but
at the very moment when he thought that he had gained his
object, and that he would now be able to have himself crowned

Boox [.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 51

king of Italy, death carried him off. Boniface IX. had suc-
ceeded to Urban VI.; and the Antipope Clement VII. had also
died at Avignon, and Benedict XIII. was elected in his place.

34. Italy at this time was overrun by soldiers of every nation-
ality, — English, Germans, and Bretons,— brought there in
part by those princes who at various times had come into Italy,
and in part sent there by the Popes whilst at Avignon. It was
with these soldiers that the princes of Italy carried on their
wars, until one Lodovico da Cento, a native of the Romagna,
formed a company of Italian soldiers, called the San Giorgio,
whose bravery and discipline very soon transferred the high
reputation of the foreign soldiers to those of Italy, and of which
the Italian princes afterwards availed themselves in their wars
against each other. The Pope, on account of the difference
which he had had with the Romans, went to Scesi, where he
remained until the year of jubilee, 1400; when the Romans,
to induce him to return, on account of the benefit which it
would be to the city, agreed anew to accept a foreign Senator
to be sent by the Pope, and allowed him to fortify the castle of
San Angelo. Having returned on these conditions, the Pope,
by way of enriching the Church, ordered that during a vacancy
of any benefice, one year’s income of it was to be paid over to
the Apostolic Chamber.

After the death of Giovanni Galeazzo, Duke of Milan, this
state fell a prey to many divisions, notwithstanding his having
left two sons, Giovanni Maria Angelo and Philip. In the troubles
that resulted, the former was killed, and Philip remained for a
time shut up in the castle of Pavia, whence he escaped by the
courage and fidelity of its castellan. Amongst others who
seized the places that had been possessed by their father, was
Guglielmo della Scala, who during his banishment had taken
refuge with Francesco da Carrara, lord of Padua, with whose
assistance he retook the city of Verona, where, however, he
lived but a short time, having been poisoned by order of Fran-
cesco, and the city taken from him; in consequence of which
the people of Vicenza, who had lived securely under the banner
of the Visconti, fearing the power of the lord of Padua, gave
themselves to the Venetians, who, with their aid, made war
against Francesco, and took from him first Verona and after-
wards Padua.

35. In the midst of these events Pope Boniface died, and

52 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

Innocent VII. was elected to succeed him. The people of Rome
besought him to restore to them the fortresses and their liberty,
and upon the Pope’s refusal they called King Ladislas of
Naples to their aid. Afterwards, when harmony had been re-
stored between them, the Pope returned to Rome, whence he
had fled to Viterbo, where he made his nephew, Lodovico, Count
della Marca. After this he died, and Gregory XII. was made
Pope, with the understanding that he should resign the papacy
whenever the Antipope should resign. And by the persuasion
of the cardinals, and as proof that the Church could be united,
Antipope Benedict came to Porto Venere, and Gregory to
Lucca, where they negotiated in relation to many matters, but
concluded nothing; so that the cardinals of the respective
popes left them, and Benedict went to Spain and Gregory to
Rimini. The cardinals, on the other hand, with the aid of
Baldassar Cossa, Cardinal and Legate of Bologna, ordered a
council at Pisa, where they created Alexander V. Pope, who
promptly excommunicated King Ladislas, and invested Louis
of Anjou with the kingdom; and, in conjunction with the Flor-
entines, the Genoese, and the Venetians, they attacked Ladis-
las and took Rome from him. But in the very height of this
war Alexander died, and Baldassar Cossa was created Pope,
who took the name of John XXIII. He left Bologna, where
he had been made Pope,. and went to Rome. There he found
Louis of Anjou, who had come with the army from Provence,
and, having encountered Ladislas, had defeated him. But ow-
ing to the desertion of the Condottieri he could not follow up
his victory, so that the king in a short time recovered his forces
and recaptured Rome; whence the Pope fled to Bologna, and
Louis returned to Provence. The Pope, thinking in what man-
ner he might reduce the power of Ladislas, managed to have
Sigismund, king of Hungary, elected Emperor, and persuaded
him to come into Italy, where he met him at Mantua. They
agreed to convene a general council, at which the Church should
be reunited, so that she might be able to resist the power of
her enemies.

36. At this period there were three Popes, — Gregory, Bene-
dict, and John,—who kept the Church weak and without
authority. The city of Constance, in Germany, was chosen as
the place for the meeting of the general council, which, how-
ever, was not in accordance with the intentions of Pope John.

Boox 1.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 53

And although the death of Ladislas had removed the reason
which had induced the Pope to propose this general council,
yet, having accepted the obligation, he could not now refuse to
be present at its meeting. Having come to Constance a few
months after the opening of the council, he discovered his error
too late, and in attempting to fly he was arrested, imprisoned,
and obliged to resign the papacy. Gregory, one of the Anti-
popes, resigned through an envoy sent by him to the council ;
and the other Antipope, Benedict, who refused to resign, was
condemned as aheretic. Finally, however, being abandoned by
his cardinals, he too was obliged to resign, and the council
created Oddo, of the house of Colonna, Pope, who was there-
after called Martin V.; and thus the Church became united
again under one Pope, after having been divided during forty
years into several Pontificates.

87. At that time, as we have said, Philip Visconti was shut
up in the castle of Pavia. But Fazino Cane who, during the
troubles of Lombardy had made himself master of Vercelli,
Alexandria, Novara, and Tortona, and had amassed great wealth,
died without issue, and leaving his wife, Beatrice, heir to his
estates. He had by his testament engaged his friends to make
his widow marry Philip, who, having become powerful by this
marriage, recovered possession of Milan and of all Lombardy ;
after which, by way of showing his gratitude for the great
benefits received, in the ordinary manner of princes, he accused
Beatrice of infidelity, and had her put to death. Having now
become very powerful, Philip began to meditate war against
Tuscany, in accordance with the designs of his father, Giovanni
Galeozzo. .

38. King Ladislas of Naples, in dying, left to his sister,
Joanna, the kingdom, together with a large army, headed by
the principal Condottieri of Italy. Chief amongst these was
Sforza da Contignuola, who was reputed very valiant, accord-
ing to the mode of fighting then in use. The queen, to escape
the infamous suspicion of keeping one Pandolfo, whom she had
brought up, took for her husband Giacopo della Marcia, a
Frenchman of royal blood, upon condition that he should con-
tent himself with the title of Prince of Taranto, leaving to her
that of queen, and the government of the kingdom. But so
soon as he arrived in Naples the soldiers proclaimed him king,
so that great differences arose between husband and wife, with

54 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

alternate advantages to each ; but in the end the queen retained
control of the government, and soon after manifested her hostil-
ity to the Pope. Thereupon Sforza, for the purpose of placing
her in the necessity of invoking his support, withdrew from
her service. Thus the queen suddenly found herself disarmed,
and, having no other resource, she appealed for aid to Alfonso,
king of Aragon and Sicily, and adopted him as her son, and
took into her pay Braccio da Montone, who was as well reputed
in arms as Sforza, and an enemy of the Pope, from whom he
had taken Perugia and some other places belonging to the
Church. Subsequently, peace was made between them and the
Pope; but King Alfonso, fearing lest the queen should treat
him as she had done her husband, sought cautiously to make
himself master of the fortresses; but Queen Joanna, being as-
tute, prevented him, and fortified herself in the castle of Naples.
This increased their mutual suspicions, so that they came to
arms, and the queen, with the assistance of Sforza, who had
returned to her pay, overcame Alfonso, drove him from Naples,
and cancelled her adoption, and in his stead adopted Louis of
Anjou, which occasioned fresh wars between Braccio, who ad-
hered to the party of Alfonso, and Sforza, who supported the
queen. In the course of this war, Sforza was drowned in cross-
ing the river at Pescara; so that the queen, being again left
without a commander, would have been driven from the king-
dom had not Philip Visconti, Duke of Milan, come to her aid,
in consequence of which Alfonso was obliged to return to
Aragon. But Braccio, undaunted by having been abandoned
by Alfonso, continued to make war against the queen. Having
besieged Aquila, the Pope, deeming the greatness of Braccio
inopportune for the Church, took into his pay Francesco, the
son of Sforza, who went to encounter Braccio at Aquila, where
he defeated and killed him. Braccio left a son, Oddo, from
whom the Pope took Perugia, leaving him in possession of
Montone. But Oddo was killed soon after that, whilst fighting
in the Romagna for the Florentines; so that of those who had
been fighting under Braccio there remained, as the most _re-
nowned, Niccolo Piccinino.

39. Having now brought our narrative down to near that
period which I had designed for this First Book, there remains
but little of consequence to relate except the wars of the Flor-
entines and Venetians with Duke Philip of Milan, which will

Boox I.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 55

be related when we come specially to treat of Florence. I will
therefore proceed no further, and will only briefly recall the con-
dition of Italy at the period at which we have arrived with our
history, and what princes and what armies she then possessed.
Of the principal states, Queen Joanna IJ. held the kingdom
of Naples; La Marca, the Patrimony, and some of the places
in the Romagna, in part obeyed the Church and in part were
possessed by their vicars or usurpers, — Ferrara, Modena, and
' Reggio by the family of Este, Faenza by the Manfredi, Imola by
the Alidosi, Furli by the Ordelaffi, Rimini and Pesaro by the
Malatesti, and Camerino by the Varanos. <A portion of Lom-
bardy obeyed the Duke Philip, and a portion the Venetians;
for all the families that had possessed particular states in that
province were extinguished, except the house of Gonzaga,
which ruled over Mantua. The Florentines were masters of
the greater part of Tuscany; only Lucca and Sienna had laws
of their own, — Lucca under the government of the Guinigi,
whilst Sienna was entirely free. The Genoese, at one time free
and at another time subject to the kings of France, enjoyed no
consideration, and were counted amongst the smaller powers.
All these principal potentates had no troops of their own.
Duke Philip, shut up in his palace, and not allowing himself to
be seen, carried on his wars by commissaries. The Venetians,
when they turned their attention to the land, dispensed with
those forces that had won them so much glory on the seas,
and, following the custom of the other Italian states, intrusted
the control and direction of their armies to others. The Pope,
being a priest and therefore unsuited to the profession of arms,
and Queen Joanna, being a woman, did from necessity what
the others had done from an evil choice. The Florentines also
obeyed the same necessity ; for having by their constant dissen-
sions extinguished the nobility, and the republic being con-
trolled by men brought up in commercial pursuits, followed the
practice and fortunes of the others.

The armies of Italy then were in the hands either of the
smaller princes, or of men who possessed no state; for the
smaller princes adopted the profession of arms, not from any
love of glory, but for the sake of wealth and security. The
others, from having been reared to it from childhood, and hav-
ing no other calling, sought in the profession of arms the means
of achieving wealth, power, and honor. Amongst these the

56 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox I.

most famous were the Carmagnola, Francesco Sforza, Niccolo
Piccinino, pupil of Braccio, Agnolo della Pergola, Lorenzo and
Micheletto Attenduli, the Tartaglia, Giacopaccio, Accolino da
Perugia, Niccolo da Tolentino, Guido Torello, Antonio dal Ponte
ad Hra, and many others of the same kind. Added to these
were those smaller princes or lords of whom we have spoken
aboye, and who were joined by the barons of Rome, the Orsini
and the Colonna, together with other lords and gentlemen of
the kingdom of Naples and of Lombardy. Being constantly in
arms, these men had formed a league, or a sort of understand-
ing amongst themselves, and had reduced the profession of
arms to an art by which they protracted the wars, so that gen-
erally both parties for whom they were carried on were losers.
And at last they reduced it to so low a standard that any cap-
tain of the most ordinary capacity, who had but a spark of the
ancient valor, would have put them to shame, and would have
been admired and honored by all Italy for his courage. Of
such idle and indolent princes, therefore, and of these most
cowardly armies, my history will be full; but before I descend
to these, I shall, in accordance with my promise in the begin-
ning, relate the origin of Florence, to explain fully to the un-
derstanding of every one what the condition of that city was
in those days, and how she arrived at it in the midst of all the
troubles that had befallen Italy for a thousand years.

SECOND BOOK.

SUMMARY.

1. Custom of the ancient republics to plant colonies, and its advantages.
—2. Origin of Florence and of its name. Destroyed by Totilas and rebuilt
by Charlemagne. The Florentines take Fiesole. — 3. First intestine dis-
sensions in Florence, occasioned by Messer Buondelinonte Buondelmonti,
who, having engaged himself to a lady of the family of the Amidei, broke

‘his faith and married one of the Donati (1215); in consequence of which
Buondelmonte is killed, and in consequence of the enmity caused thereby
between his family and that of the Uberti, relatives of the Amidei, great
disturbances and slaughter occur in Florence. —4. Frederick II. of Sua-
bia favors the Uberti, and the Buondelmonti are supported by the Church.
These factions in Florence also take the names of the Ghibelline party
and of that of the Guelfs. Families of the Ghibelline party. Families
of the Guelf party. The Guelfs are driven out of Florence, but after the
death of Frederick they make terms with the Ghibelliues and return to
Florence, and then jointly attempt to reorganize the government of the city
(1250). — 5. Florence is divided into wards, with two Ancients per ward.
Captain of the People and Podesta taken from amongst strangers. Order of
the militia by banners, twenty in the city and seventy-six in the country.
—6. Greatness to which Florence attained under the new government.
Fresh movements of the Ghibellines, on account of which they are driven
out of Florence. The Guelfs are routed at the battle of Arbia by the troops
of Manfred, king of Naples (1260). —7. Council of Ghibellines at Empoli.
Farinata degli Uberti opposes the proposition to level Florence with the
ground. — 8. Pope Clement IV. favors the banished Guelfs, and gives them
his banner. The Guelfs, with the help of Charles d’Anjou, grow in power
(1266), in consequence of which the Ghibellines of Florence attempt by new
enactinents to win the good will of the people. They divide the citizens into
twelve Trades, seven major and five minor ones (the minor ones were after-
wards increased to fourteen) ; and each Trade has a magistrate and banner. —
9. The Count Guido Novello, deputy of King Manfred at Florence, is ex-
pelled in consequence of his attempting to impose a tax upon the Florentines.
—10. The Guelfs return to Florence and reorganize the government. They
create twelve chiefs called Buonomini, a Council of eighty citizens, and a Col-
lege of one hundred and eighty of the people, who together should compose the
General Council. They also create a Council of one hundred and twenty, com-
posed of men of the people and nobles, to supervise the deliberations and the

58 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Boox II.

distribution of the public offices of the Republic. Gregory X. attempts to re-
establish the Ghibellines in Florence. Nicholas III. seeks to lower the power
of Charles d’Anjou.—11. Messer Latino, the Imperial Legate, restores the
Ghibellines in Florence, and gives them a share in the governinent (1280). At
first three Priors are created from the trades or guilds, and afterwards six, for
the government of the city. Battle of Campaldino (1289). — 12. Gonfaloniers
of Justice are created, with one thousand men under twenty banners (1293). —
13. Giano della Bella remodels the government in favor of the people. His
enmity with Corso Donati, and his voluntary exile from Florence. — 14. Dis-
turbances between the people and the nobles. — 15. New reorganization of the
state. Arnolfo di Lasso builds the Palace of the Signoria and the prisons
(1298). —16. Fresh dissensions between the Cerchiand the Donati. Origin
of the factions of the Bianchi (Whites) and the Neri (Blacks) in Pistoja.
Messer Corso Donati places himself at the head of the Neri party in Florence,
and Messer Vieri de’ Cerchi at the head of the Bianchi party. —17. The
Pope’s Legate in Florence increases the fusion by an interdict. — 18. The
Donati and others of the Neri party are exiled by the advice of Dante Ali-
ghieri. — 19. They go to the Pope, who sends Charles de Valois to Florence ;
under his protection the Donati return to Florence, and the Cerchi are
obliged to fly. Matteo d’ Acquasparta, the Papal Legate, tries in vain to com-
pose these discords, and being angered he leaves Florence after having again
placed the city under an interdict. — 20. Dante Alighieri is exiled with the
Bianchi party (1302).—21l. Great pride of Corso Donati. Nicholas de
Prato is sent as Legate of the Pope to Florence. Riots. Conflagration of
Orto San Michele and of the New Market. — 22. Fresh reforms in Florence.
Capture of the Stinche castle. Corso Donati returns from Rome. — 23. He
is accused and condemned. He resists the sentence with arms in hand; but
is taken near San Salvi and is there slain. — 24. Henry of Luxemburg be-
sieges Florence in vain; and afterwards dies at Buonconvento (1313). —
25. Florence gives herself for five years to Robert, king of Naples; he
makes unsuccessful war upon Uguccione della Faggiuola. Florence with-
draws her obedience to the king of Naples, and takes Lando @’ Agobbio for
her Bargello, who is expelled in consequence of his tyranny and dishonest
proceedings. Fresh reforms.-— 26. War between the Florentines and the
Lucchese under the lead of Castruccio Castracani. The Buonomini. —
27. The nobles within Florence, and the exiles, attempt to recover control
of Florence. — 28. New political measures. — 29. The Florentines are routed
by Castruccio at Altopascio. — 30. Gauthier, Duke of Athens, comes to
Florence as deputy of Charles, Duke of Calabria. New reforms in the state.
Two councils are created: one consisting of three hundred of the people, and
the other composed of two hundred and fifty nobles and citizens of the people.
The first is called the ‘‘ Council of the People,” and the other ‘‘ Council of the
Commune.” — 31. Louis of Bavaria. The Germans sell Lueca. Castruccio
dies. Inundation of Florence. —32. A conspiracy of the Bardi and the
Frescobaldi is discovered and crushed. — 33. Lucca is purchased by the
Florentines, but is taken by the Pisans. — 34. Efforts of the Duke of Athens
to gain the lordship of Florence. —35. The Duke of Athens is proclaimed
Prince of Florence by the people, for life (1342). — 36. His misgovernment.
— 37. He is expelled from Florence (1343). — 38. Many cities and towns

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 59

of the Florentine dominion rebel, but the Florentines by their prudent con-
duct preserye their lordship over them. —39. The city is divided into quar-
ters, with three Signori per quarter; and in place of the twelve Buonomini
they create eight Counsellors, four from the people and four from the nobles.
Disturbances between the people and the nobles, in consequence of which
the nobles are driven out of the palace, and the government remains in the
hands of the people. —40. Riot created by Andrea Strozzi in favor of the
nobles. — 41. After great disturbances the nobles are entirely subdued by
the people. Fresh reforms of the government. —42. The people divide
themselves into the rich, the middle, and the lower class. They take two
Signori from the rich, three from the middle, and three from the lower class ;
and the Gonfalonier is taken alternately from the different classes. Dread-
ful pestilence in Florence, described by Boccaccio (1348).

1. Amoncst other great and admirable institutions of the
ancient republics and principalities that are now extinct, we
must note the practice of constantly building new towns and
cities. In fact, nothing is so worthy of a good prince, or of a
well-organized republic, nor more useful to any province, than
to build up new cities, where men may establish themselves
with the conveniences for defence and habitation. It was easy
for the ancients to do this, being accustomed to send new inhab-
itants to occupy conquered territories and vacant lands; such
settlements were called colonies. This practice, besides causing
new towns to be built up, rendered the conquered territory more
secure to the conqueror, filled the vacant lands with inhabitants,
and maintained the population well distributed in the provinces.
Whence it came that, living more securely in a province, the
people multiplied there more rapidly, and were more prompt in
offence, and in defence more secure. The discontinuance of
this practice, because of the vicious administration of republics
and princes, has resulted in the ruin and weakness of the prov-
inces; for it was the only system that insured an abundant
population to the country and rendered empires more secure.
This greater security is due to the fact that a colony which is
established by a prince in a newly acquired country is like a
fortress and garrison, which keeps the other inhabitants in alle-
giance. Moreover, without such a system, a province would not
become fully inhabited, nor keep her population well distributed ;
for all the places in it are not equally fertile and salubrious.
This causes a superabundance of inhabitants in one place, and
an insufficiency in another. And if there be not some means
for remedying this unequal distribution, the province will in a

60 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Boox II.

little while be ruined; for one portion of it will become de-
serted from want of inhabitants, whilst the other portion will be
impoverished from having too many. And as nature cannot
correct this defect, we have to resort to art to do it; for un-
wholesome countries are made salubrious by being settled at
once by a large population, who by cultivation make the land
fertile, and by fires purify the air; which nature unaided could
not do. This is demonstrated by the city of Venice, situated in
a marshy and unwholesome place; nevertheless, the large num-
ber of inhabitants that flocked there at once made it healthy.
Pisa also, in consequence of its insalubrious air, never was fully
inhabited until Genoa and its shores were ravaged by the Sara-
cens, which caused those people who were thus driven from their
homes to move at once in great numbers to Pisa, which thus
became populous and powerful.

Without the system of sending out colonies, conquered terri-
tories are held with greater difficulty ; vacant lands never be-
come inhabited, and such as are overpopulated will not be
relieved. Whence many parts of the world, and more espe-
cially portions of Italy, have become deserted as compared with
ancient times. And all this comes from the fact that her princes
are destitute of the love of true glory, and her republics lack
institutions that are worthy of praise. In ancient times, then,
the system of colonies often caused new cities to spring up, or
such as had already a beginning were largely increased thereby.
Of the latter was the city of Florence, which owed its origin to
Fiesole, and its increase to colonies.

2. It is undoubtedly true, as has been shown by Dante and
Villani, that the city of Fiesole, being situated on the summit of
a mountain, and wishing to make its markets more frequented
and accessible to those who desired to come there with their
merchandise, established a place for this purpose in the plain
between the foot of the mountain and the river Arno. This
market, I judge, caused the first buildings to be erected at that
place, owing to the desire of the merchants to have convenient
places for receiving and delivering their goods, and these build-
ings in the course of time became permanent structures. After-
wards, when the Romans, by the conquest of the Carthaginians,
had rendered Italy secure from foreign attacks, these buildings
were multiplied in great numbers; for men do not select incon-
venient places to dwell in, except from necessity ; so that if the

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 61

fear of attack constrains them to live in rude and inaccessible
places, they will naturally be attracted to inhabit agreeable and
convenient localities whenever that fear of attack ceases. Secu-
rity, then, which sprang from the reputation of the Roman Re-
public, caused the increase of those habitations (which were
already commenced in the manner above stated) in such num-
bers that they assumed the form of a settlement, which at first
was called Villa Arnina. Afterwards civil wars arose in Rome,
first between Marius and Sylla, subsequently between Cesar and
Pompey, and then between the murderers of Cesar and those
who wished to avenge his death. Sylla first, and after him
those other three Roman citizens, who, after having avenged
Cesar, divided the Empire between them, sent colonies to Fie-
sole, and these established their dwellings, in whole or in part,
in the plain, near the settlement which had already been com-
menced. And thus by this increase that place became filled
with habitations and men, which by its civil organization could
soon be counted amongst the cities of Italy. As to the origin
of the name of Florentia, however, there are various opinions.
Some claim that it was so called after Florino, one of the chiefs
of the colony; others maintain that it was at first called, not
Florentia, but Fluentia, from being situated near the river Arno,
and they adduce the testimony of Pliny, who says: “ The Flu-
entines dwell near the river Arno.” This opinion may, how-
ever, be erroneous; for the text quoted from Pliny tells where
the Florentines dwelt, not how they were called. And most
probably the word “ Fluentines ” is a corruption ; for both Fron-
tinus and Cornelius Tacitus, who wrote in the times of Pliny,
call the place Florentia and the people Florentines. At the time
of Tiberius, already (in the year 17 after Christ) the Florentines
governed themselves, according to the custom of the other cities
of Italy. And Cornelius Tacitus refers to the coming of Floren-
tine ambassadors to the Emperor to request that the waters of
the river Chiana might not be discharged into the Arno above
their settlement. It is not reasonable to suppose that that city
should in those days have had two names, and I am inclined to
believe that it was always called Florentia, whatever the reason
may have been why it was so named. And to whatever cause
its origin may be due, it came into existence under the Roman
Empire, and began to be mentioned by writers at the time of
the first Emperors. When that Empire became a prey to the

62 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

incursions of the Barbarians, Florence was also destroyed by
Totilas, king of the Ostrogoths, and was rebuilt two hundred
and fifty years afterwards by Charlemagne, from which time
until the year of Christ 1215 it shared the fortunes of those
who ruled over Italy. At that period, Italy was governed by
the descendants of Charlemagne, afterwards by the Berengaril,
and lastly by the German Emperors, as we have shown in our
general remarks. During this interval, the Florentines, re-
strained by the power of their rulers, could neither increase nor
do anything memorable. Nevertheless, in the year 1010, on the
day of St. Romulus, a day of solemn festival for the Fiesolans,
their city was captured and destroyed, either with the consent
of the Emperor, or in the interval between the death of one
Emperor and the creation of another, during which a general
license prevailed. But afterwards, when the authority of the
Popes increased in Italy, whilst that of the German [Emperors
had diminished, all the cities of that province governed them-
selves with less respect for their princes. Thus, in the year
1053, at the time of the Emperor Henry, Italy was openly
divided between him and the Church; notwithstanding which
the Florentines maintained themselves united until the year
1215, yielding obedience to the victorious party, and having no
other ambition than their own security. But as the infirmities
of our bodies are dangerous in proportion as their progress is
slow, so Florence, being slower in following the factions of
Italy, was also afterwards the more sorely afflicted by them.
The cause of the first division is most noteworthy ; and although
having been mentioned by Dante and many other writers, it
seems to me proper briefly to relate it here.

3. Amongst the other powerful families of Florence were the
Buondelmonti and the Uberti; next to these were the Amidei
and the Donati. In the latter family there was a rich widow
having a most beautiful daughter, whom the mother in her own
mind had designed to marry to Messcr Buondelmonte, a young
cavalier and head of the house of Buondelmonti. But as she
had not made this design known to any one, either from neglect
or perhaps because she thought it would always be time enough,
it happened that Messer Buondelmonte engaged himself to
marry a young lady of the Amidei family, which contravened
the Lady Donati very much. And hoping that she might yet,
ere the nuptials were actually celebrated, interrupt the engage-

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 63

ment by the beauty of her daughter, and seeing Messer Buon-
delmonte coming alone towards her house, she descended to the
lower floor, making her daughter follow her. And as the gentle-
man passed, she said: “I am truly glad that you have chosen
“a wife, although I had kept my daughter for you”; and,
pushing open the door, she enabled him to see her. The gen-
tleman, on beholding the beauty of the young lady, which was
indeed remarkable, and considering that her family and dowry
were not inferior to that of the one he had chosen, became so
inflamed by the desire to have her, that, unmindful of his
plighted faith and of the evils that might result from his break-
ing his engagement, he replied: “ Since you have kept her for
“me, I should be an ingrate to refuse her, it being still time” ;
and without delay he solemnized his marriage with her. When
this became known to the families of the Amidei and the
Uberti, who were nearly related to them, it filled them with
deep indignation ; and having convened a number of the other
relatives of the families they concluded that this insult could
not be tolerated without shame, nor avenged except by the
death of Messer Buondelmonte. And although some spoke of
the evils that might result from this course, yet Mosca Lam-
berti said that “he who thought of too many things never did
“anything,” and quoted the old proverb, “A thing done must
“have a beginning.” The execution of the murder was there-
fore confided to Mosca, Stiatta Uberti, Lambertuccio Amidei,
and Oderigo Fifanti. These met on Kaster morning at the
house of the Amidei, between the Ponte Vecchio and Santo Ste-
fano; and as Messer Buondelmonte was crossing the bridge on
a white horse, thinking it to be as easy to forget an insult as to
renounce an alliance, they attacked and killed him at the foot
of the bridge, by the statue of Mars. This homicide divided
the whole ae of Florence,— the one party supporting the
Buondelmonti, and the other the Uberti. And as these fam-
ilies had strong houses and towers, with plenty of men, they
fought for many years without the one being able to drive out
the other. Their enmity, however, though not terminated by
a formal peace, yet was at different times composed by truces,
and in this way, according to new accidents, it was at one time
quieted and then again rekindled.

4. Florence remained involved in these troubles until the
time of Frederick II. (1246), who, being king of Naples, thought

64 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IT.

of strengthening himself against the Church; and, by way of
establishing his power more firmly in Tuscany, he supported
the Uberti and their followers, who with his aid drove the
Buondelmonti out of the city. And thus Florence, the same
as all Italy had been before, became divided into Guelfs and
Ghibellines. And here it seems to me not superfluous to make
a record of the families who adhered to the one and the other
party. Those, then, who sided with the Guelfs were the
Buondelmonti, Nerli, Rossi, Frescobaldi, Mozzi, Bardi, Pulci,
Gherardini, Foraboschi, Bagnesi, Guidalotti, Sachetti, Manieri,
Luccardesi, Chiaramontesi, Compiobessi, Cavalcanti, Giando-
nati, Gianfigliazzi, Scali, Gualterotti, Importuni, Bostichi, Tor-
naquinci, Vechietti, Tosinghi, Arrigueci, Agli, Sizi, Adimari,
Visdomini, Donati, Pazzi, Della Bella, Ardinghi, Tebaldi, and
Cerchi. To the Ghibelline party belonged the Uberti, Mannelli,
Ubriachi, Fifanti, Amidei, Infangati, Malespini, Scolari, Guidi,
Galli, Cappiardi, Lamberti, Soldanieri, Cipriani, Toschi, Amieri,
Palermini, Migliorelli, Pigli, Barucci, Cattani, Agolanti, Brunel-
leschi, Caponsacchi, Elisei, Abati, Tedaldini, Giuochi, and the
Galigai. Besides this, many of the people attached themselves
to one or the other of these families, so that the whole city, as it
were, was infected with this division. The Guelfs then, expelled
from Florence, established themselves in the country above, in
the Val d’ Arno, where they had most of their strongholds, so
that they might the better defend themselves against their
enemies. But after the death of Frederick the moderate men
of Florence, who had most influence with the people, deemed it
advisable to restore union amongst the inhabitants of the city,
rather than to have it ruined by continued divisions. They
therefore managed that the Guelfs, forgetting their former
griefs, should return; and that the Ghibellines, laying aside
their suspicions, should receive them (1250) ; and being thus
reunited, the time seemed to them favorable for the adoption of
a form of government that should insure them liberty and the
means of defending themselves before the new Emperor should
have acquired too much power.

5. They therefore divided the city into six wards, and elected
twelve citizens, two for each ward, who should govern it:
these were called Ancients, and were changed every year. And
to remove all cause for enmities that might result from their
judicial functions, two foreign judges were appointed, one of

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 65

whom was called Captain of the People, and the other the
Podesta, who were to decide all civil and criminal eases that
should occur amongst the people. And inasmuch as no civil
organization is stable unless its defence is provided for, they
constituted twenty banners in the city and seventy-five in the
country, under which all the young men were enrolled; and it
was ordained that, whenever called by the Captain or the An-
cients, every one was to appear promptly and well armed, under
his banner. And they varied the devices of these banners accord-
ing to the different arms, so that the crossbowmen had different
ensigns from the shield-bearers. And every year, at Pentecost,
they distributed with great pomp their ensigns to the new sol-
diers, and assigned new captains to all the companies. And to
render their army more imposing, and to assign to each a
rallying-point in case of being hard pressed in battle, whence
they might make head anew against the enemy, they had a
great car made, to be drawn by two oxen, all covered with
scarlet, above which floated a white and red flag. And when
they wanted to call the army out, this car was drawn to the
New Market, and consigned with great pomp to the chiefs of
the people. They had also, by way of giving more éclat to
their military enterprises, a bell called Martinella, which was
sounded continually during one month before they moved their
troops out of the city, so as to afford the enemy time to prepare
for defence. Such was the valor of those men, and such their
magnanimity, that they deemed it shameful and wrong to
attack an enemy unawares, whilst nowadays this is considered
a proof of courage and of prudence. This bell was also carried
into the field with their armies, and by means of it they com-
municated their commands to the guards and sentinels.

6. By means of these civil and military institutions the Flor-
entines established their liberty ; and it is not easy to imagine
how much power and influence Florence acquired in a short
time, so that she became not only the chief city of Tuscany,
but was counted amongst the first cities of Italy; and would
have risen to almost any height had she not been afflicted by
frequent new dissensions. The Florentines lived ten years
under this government, during which period they constrained
the Pistojans, the Aretines, and the Siennese to form a league
with them. Returning with their army from Sienna they took
Volterra, destroyed several castles, and carried their inhabit-

VOL, I. 5

66 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

ants to Florence. These enterprises were all conducted under
the direction of the Guelfs, who had much more power with
the people than the Ghibellines; either from the fact that the
latter had made themselves odious by their haughty conduct
when they ruled Florence at the time of Frederick, or because
the former, being the party of the Church, were more beloved
than the party of the Emperor; for with the help of the Church
they hoped to preserve their liberty, which they feared to lose
under the Emperor. The Ghibellines, however, seeing their
authority diminish, could not remain quiet, and only awaited
an opportunity to seize the state again; this they thought had
arrived when Manfred, son of Frederick, had made himself
master of the kingdom of Naples and had materially lowered
the power of the Church (1257). They therefore engaged in
secret intrigues with Manfred for the recovery of their power,
but did not manage them with sufficient prudence to prevent
their being discovered by the Ancients. Whereupon these
cited the Uberti before them, who, however, not only did not
obey the summons, but took to arms and fortified themselves
in their houses. Whereat the people became indignant and
armed themselves, and with the aid of the Guelfs forced them
to leave Florence and go with the Ghibelline party to Sienna
(1258). From there this faction called in the help of Manfred,
king of Naples, whose troops, under the skilful direction of
Messer Farinata of the Uberti, defeated the Guelfs on the
river Arbia with such slaughter (1260) that those who es-
eaped took refuge in Lucca, and not in Florence, fearing that
their city would certainly be lost.

7. Manfred had sent to the Ghibellines the Count Giordano
as commander of his troops, he being a man of high military
reputation in those days. After the above victory Giordano
went with the Ghibellines to Florence, and subjected that city
entirely to Manfred, abolishing the magistrates and all the other
institutions that gave any evidence of their former liberty.
This outrage, committed with great want of prudence, excited
the greatest indignation amongst the people of Florence; so
that, from being regarded as friendly to the Ghibellines, they
became their greatest enemy, which in time caused their total
ruin. Count Giordano, having to return to Naples on account
of the troubles in that kingdom, left the Count Guido Novello,
lord of Casentino, as viceroy in Naples. He called a council

Book II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 67

of Ghibellines at Empoli, where it was unanimously resolved
that to preserve the power of their party in Tuscany it would
be necessary to destroy Florence, which city, from its people
being Guelfs, was alone able to restore the Church party to
power. Not one citizen or friend objected to this cruel sen-
tence against so noble a city, except Messer Farinata degli
Uberti, who openly. opposed it and defended the city regard-
less of consequences, saying, “ that he had exposed himself to
“much fatigue and danger for no other purpose than to be able
“to inhabit his native city, and that he did not intend now to
“forego the object he had so earnestly sought, nor to refuse the
“favors of fortune, and that he would be no less the enemy
“of those who intended differently, than he had been of the
“ Guelfs; and that if any one from fear of his country wished
“to destroy it, he yet hoped to defend it with the same valor with
“which he had driven the Guelfs from it.” Messer Farinata
was a man of great courage, and excelling in the art of war; he
was chief of the Ghibellines, and greatly esteemed by Manfred.
His influence put the proposition to destroy Florence at rest,
and the council thought of other means of preserving the con-
trol of the state to the Ghibellines.

8. The Guelfs who had taken refuge in Lucca, and who had
been sent away from there by the people of that city because
of the threats of the Church, went to Bologna. From there
they were called by the Guelfs of Parma to aid them against
the Ghibellines, and, having succeeded in defeating them, all
their possessions were given to them. Having thus grown
in riches and honor, and knowing that Pope Clement had called
Charles of Anjou to take the kingdom of Naples from Manfred,
they sent envoys to the Pope to offer him their forces (1266).
The Pope not only received them as friends, but gave them his
banner, which was ever after borne by the Guelfs in all their
wars. After this Manfred was despoiled of his kingdom by
Charles, and was killed. The Guelfs of Florence having aided
in this, their party gained strength, whilst that of the Ghibel-
lines became weaker. Whereupon those who governed Flor-
ence, together with the Count Guido Novello, judged that it
would be well by some benefits to try and win over to their
side the same people, whom before they had aggravated by
every kind of wrong. And had they employed these means
of conciliation before necessity forced them to it, they would

68 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. (Boon II.

have been of service to them; but now, being employed reluc-
tantly and too late, they proved of no use, but actually hastened
their ruin. They thought, nevertheless, that they would make
the people their friends and partisans if they restored to them
a share of the honors and authority of the government which
they had taken from them; they therefore selected thirty-six
citizens from the people, who, together with two nobles, whom
they had caused to come from Bologna, should reform the
government of the city. These, according to what had been
previously agreed upon, divided the whole city into trades or
guilds, and placed a magistrate over each guild, who should be
the means of communication between the guilds and them-
selves. They moreover assigned to each guild a banner, under
which to assemble in arms whenever the city might have need
of them. At first there were twelve of such guilds, seven
major and five minor ones; the latter were afterwards increased
to fourteen; so that there were in all twenty-one, the same as
at the present day. The thirty-six reformers introduced also
other measures for the general benefit.

9. For the support of the army, the Count Guido ordered a
tax to be laid upon the citizens, which, however, caused so much
difficulty that he did not venture to have it collected by force.
Seeing that he had lost the control of the government, he held
a council with the chiefs of the Ghibellines, and they resolved
together to take from the people by force what they had con-
ceded to them with such want of prudence. And when the
moment seemed to him to have come for taking to arms, the
Thirty-six being assembled in council, the Count Guido and
the Ghibellines raised a tumult, whereupon the Thirty-six re-
treated to their houses and gave the alarm; and promptly the
banners of the guilds made their appearance, followed by many
armed men. When these heard that the Count Guido and his
party were at San Giovanni, they made a stand at the Santa
Trinita, giving the command to Messer Giovanni Solderani.
The Count, on the other hand, learning where the people were,
started to meet them. Nor did the people shrink from the con-
flict, but, facing the enemy, they encountered him where now
the Loggia of the Tornaquinci stands. The Count Guido was
repulsed, with the loss and death of a number of his men; which
so frightened him that he became afraid the enemy would again
attack him in the night, and, finding his men beaten and dis-

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 69

heartened, would kill him. And this fear obtained such mastery
over him that, without thinking of any other remedy, he con-
cluded to save himself by flight rather than fight; and, contrary
to the advice of the Rectors of the party, he marched off with
all his men to Prato. But so soon as he found himself in safety
he perceived his error, and, wishing to make it good, in the
morning, when day had come, he returned with his men to
Florence, for the purpose of entering by force into the city, which
he had abandoned from cowardice. But he did not succeed in
his design ; for the people, who would not have been able to drive
him out without great difficulty, easily kept him out; so that he
went off to Casentino filled with grief and shame, whilst the
Ghibellines retreated to their villas.

The victorious citizens thereupon resolved, by the advice of
those who had the good of the republic at heart, to reunite the
city, and to recall all its citizens, Ghibellines as well as Guelfs,
who might be in exile. Thereupon the Guelfs, who had been
expelled six years before, returned, and the Ghibellines were
pardoned their recent offences, and were also restored to their
country (1276). They were nevertheless very odious to the
people and to the Guelfs; for the latter could not forget their
banishment, and the former remembered too well the tyranny
they had endured under their government, which prevented both
the one and the other from remaining quiet. Whilst this was
the state of things in Florence, the report spread that Conradin,
nephew of Manfred, was coming with an armed force from Ger-
many to take possession of Naples. This filled the Ghibellines
with hopes of being able to recover their power and authority ;
and the Guelfs began to think of the means to secure them-
selves against their enemies, and applied to King Charles for
aid in defending themselves during the passage of Conradin.
When therefore the troops of Charles came, it made the Guelfs
insolent, and so alarmed the Ghibellines that they fled two days
before their arrival, without being driven away.

10. The Ghibellines having departed, the Florentines reor-
ganized the government of the city, and elected twelve chiefs,
who should hold the magistracies for two months. These were
not called Ancients, but Buonomini (Goodmen). Next to these
came a council of eighty citizens, called the Credenza; after
these there were one hundred and eighty of the people, thirty
for every sixth, who, together with the Credenza and the twelve

4

70 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

Buonomini, were called the Council General. They also estab-
lished another council of one hundred and twenty citizens and
nobles, which should give final force to all the acts resolved
upon in the other councils, and whose duty it should also be to
distribute the public offices. Having established this govern-
ment, the Guelf party strengthened themselves also with magis-
trates and other institutions, so as to be able more effectually
to defend themselves against the Ghibellines, whose possessions
they divided into three parts; one of which they devoted to pub-
lic uses, another was assigned to the magistrates of the party,
called the Captains, and the third part was given to the Guelfs
in compensation for the losses they had suffered. And, by way
of keeping the Guelf faction dominant in Tuscany, the Pope
appointed King Charles Imperial Vicar of Tuscany.

Whilst the Florentines, by virtue of this government, main-
tained their authority at home by laws and abroad by arms, the
Pope died; and after a Jong dispute, which lasted two years,
Gregory X. was chosen pontiff (1271). Gregory had resided a
long time in Syria, and was still there at the time of his elec-
tion, and was consequently a stranger to the intrigues and strife
of the factions, to which he did not attach so much importance
as his predecessor had done. When therefore he came to
Florence for the purpose of going into France, he deemed it the
duty of a good pastor to restore harmony to the city, and labored
so effectually to that end that the Florentines agreed to receive
the syndics of the Ghibellines in Florence to negotiate as to the
mode of their return (1273). And although the negotiations
were concluded, yet the Ghibellines were afraid to return. The
Pope blamed the city of Florence for this, and in his indignation
launched an interdict against her. She remained in this state
of contumacy during the lifetime of the Pope; but after his
death, the interdict was removed by his successor, Pope Inno-
cent V. (1275). The Pontificate had now come to Nicholas II].
of the house of Orsini; and as the Popes always feared any one
who had attained great power in Italy, even though he had ac-
quired it by the support of the Church, so they fought again to
abate that power, which gave rise to frequent disturbances and
consequent changes; for the fear of a powerful state or indi-
vidual made the pontiffs raise up a weak one to keep the other
in check ; and when the one had become powerful in turn, they
again feared him, and sought to put him down. It was this

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. gk

policy that caused the kingdom of Naples to be taken from
Manfred, and to be given to Charles ; and when the latter after-
wards occasioned them apprehension, they sought to ruin him.
Pope Nicholas, influenced by these considerations, labored so
effectually that Charles was deprived of the government of Tus-
cany by means of the Emperor ; and he sent Messer Latino as his
Legate into that province in the name of the Emperor (1279).
11. The condition of Florence was at that time most deplora-
ble; for the Guelf nobility had become insolent, and had lost
all fear of the magistrates; so that almost daily murders and
other acts of violence were committed, without their authors
being punished, as they were protected by some one of the
nobility. The chiefs of the people thought that the recall of the
banished would be a good means for curbing this insolence ; and
this gave the Legate opportunity to restore union to the city.
The Ghibellines returned to Florence (1280), and, instead of
twelve chiefs, it was resolved to have fourteen, — seven for each
party, — who should govern for one year, and should be chosen
by the Pope. Florence continued under this system during two
years, when Martin, a Frenchman, came to the Pontificate, who
restored to Charles all the authority that had been taken from
him by Nicholas. This immediately revived the parties in Tus-
eany. The Florentines armed against the imperial governor,
and, by way of depriving the Ghibellines of the government and
restraining the license of the nobles, they instituted a new form
of government. This was in the year 1282. Since the bodies
of the guilds had received the magistracies and the banners,
they had become so influential that of their own authority they
ordained that, in place of fourteen governors, there should be
chosen three citizens, who should be called Priors, and should
remain two months in the government of the republic, and
might either be taken from amongst the nobles or the people,
provided that they were merchants, or exercised some branch
of industry. They then reduced the number of the first magis-
trates to six, so as to have one for each sixth of the city, which
number was maintained until the year 1382; when the city was
divided into four quarters, and the number of the priors in-
creased to eight, although it happened several times that they
made twelve priors. This organization of the government was
the cause, as will be seen, of the ruin of the nobles; for they
were, from various circumstances, excluded by the people from

72 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

all participation in the government. At first the nobles sub-
mitted to this, owing to their divisions amongst themselves ;
for, being too eager to take the government from each other,
they lost it entirely. To this new magistracy a palace was
assigned for their residence; it having until then been cus-
tomary for the magistrates and councils to hold their meetings
in some of the churches. This palace was supplied with ser-
geants and other necessary officers. And although in the be-
ginning these magistrates only called themselves priors, yet, by
way of greater magnificence, they soon added to it the title of
Signori (Lords). For some time the Florentines remained at
peace amongst themselves, during which period they carried on
the war against the Aretine, because these had expelled the
Guelfs, and they achieved a complete victory over them at
Campaldino (1289). As the city increased in population and
wealth, it became necessary to extend the walls; and the cir-
cumference of Florence was enlarged, as it is seen at the pres-
ent day,—the city having originally occupied only the space
from the Ponte Vecchio to the church of San Lorenzo.

12. The wars abroad and the peace at home had pretty much
extinguished the factions of the Guelfs and the Ghibellines ;
there remained only some jealousies between the nobles and the
people, which is natural in every city; for the people desiring
the observance of the laws, and the nobles wishing to command
the people, it is not possible for a good understanding to exist
between them. This ill feeling did not manifest itself so long
as the Ghibellines inspired them with fear; but so soon as
these were subdued it showed its strength, and every day some
of the people were insulted, and the laws and the magistrates
were insufficient to protect them; for each noble with his
relatives and adherents defended himself against the forces of
the priors and the captains. The chiefs of the guilds, never-
theless, desirous of remedying this state of things, provided
that every Signoria, upon first assuming office, should appoint
a Gonfalonier (Standard-bearer) of Justice, and who should be
of the people, and to whom were given one thousand men, en-
rolled under twenty banners, and who with his standard and
his armed force should promptly enforce justice, whenever he
should be called upon by them or by the captains. The first
one chosen to this office was Ubaldo Ruffoli (1293); he dis-
played his standard and pulled down the houses of the Galletti

Book II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 73

because one of that family had killed one of the Florentine
people in France. It was easy for the guilds to establish such
an institution, owing to the grave dissensions that prevailed
amongst the nobles, who at first gave little heed to the pro-
vision thus made against them, until they saw the harshness
of this execution against the Galletti. This caused them much
consternation ; but they soon resumed their former insolence,
for, as some of the nobility always belonged to the Signoria,
they could easily impede the Gonfalonier in the execution of
his office. Besides, the accuser who had received an injury was
obliged to have a witness, and none could be found willing to
testify against the nobility. Thus Florence soon relapsed into
the same disorders as before, and the people were again sub-
jected to the same insults and injuries from the nobles; for the
judgments were slow, and the sentences failed to be executed.
13. The people did not know what course to pursue in this
state of things, when Giano della Bella, a noble of most ancient
lineage, but at the same time also a true lover of the liberty
of his city, encouraged the chiefs of the guilds to reform the
government of the city. And by his advice it was ordained
that the Gonfalonier should reside in the palace with the Priors,
and should have four thousand men under his command. They
also deprived the nobles of all right to sit in the Signoria, and
subjected the abettors of any crime to the same penalty as the
principal; and ordained that public report should suffice to
warrant judgment. By these laws, which were called the Ordi-
nances of Justice, the people gained much influence and Giano
much odium; for he was in the worst possible odor with the
nobles, who looked upon him as the destroyer of their power ;
and the wealthy citizens were jealous of him, thinking that he
had too much influence. These feelings manifested themselves
on the first occasion that presented itself. It so happened that
one of the people was killed in a fight in which many nobles
had intervened. Amongst these was Messer Corso Donati, who,
being more audacious than the others, was charged with the
murder. He was therefore arrested by the captain of the peo-
ple, but whether it was that Messer Corso was not guilty, or
that the captain was afraid to condemn him, he was entirely ac-
quitted. This decision so displeased the people that they took
to arms and rushed to the house of Giano della Bella to ask
him to see to it that the laws which he had originated should

74 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

be executed. Giano, who desired that Messer Corso should be
punished, did not cause the people to disarm, as many thought
he should have done, but he advised them to go to the Signoria
to lay the case before them, and to ask them to take the matter
in hand. The people thereupon, full of indignation, feeling
themselves wronged by their captain and abandoned by Giano,
went, not to the Signoria, but to the palace of the captain, took
and sacked it. This act gave great offence to all the citizens,
and those who desired Giano’s ruin charged him with being
the cause of it. And some of his enemies being amongst the
Signoria, he was accused by them before the captain as an in-
stigator of the people; and whilst his case was being discussed,
the people took to arms and rushed to his house, offering to de-
fend him against the Signoria and his enemies. Giano wished
neither to put this popular favor to the test, nor to commit his
life to the hands of the magistrates, for he feared the malignity
of the latter, and the instability of the former; and therefore,
by way of depriving his enemies of the opportunity of injuring
him, and his friends of the occasion to offend his country, he
determined to go away to escape envy, and to relieve the citi-
zens of the fear they had of him, and to leave the city which
by his efforts and dangers he had freed from the tyranny of
the nobles; and therefore he chose voluntary exile (1295).

14. After the departure of Giano the nobles hoped again to
recover their power ; and judging that their troubles were the
result of their own discords, they united together and sent two
of their number to the Signoria, whom they judged to be favor-
ably disposed towards them, to request that they would in some
measure temper the harshness of the laws against them. The
people upon learning this demand became greatly excited, fear-
ing lest the Signoria might concede it; and thus, what with the
demands of the nobles and the suspicions of the people, they
came to arms between them. The nobles made head in three
places, at San Giovanni, the Mercato Nuovo, and the Piazza
de’ Mozzi, and under three chiefs, Messer Forese Adimari,
Messer Vanni de’ Mozzi,and Messer Geri Spini; and the people
assembled in great numbers under their banners at the palace
of the Signori, who lived at that time near the church of San
Procolo. And as the people mistrusted this Signoria, they de-
puted six citizens who should govern with them. Whilst both
parties were preparing for a conflict, some of them, both citizens

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 75

and nobles, as also certain priests of good repute, set to work
to pacify them, reminding the nobles “that it was their own
“haughtiness and bad government that had caused them to be
“deprived of certain dignities, and the enactment of the laws
“against them; and that their attempt now to recover by force
“ of arms what they had allowed to be taken from them by their
“dissensions amongst themselves, and by their evil conduct,
“could only lead to the ruin of their country, and to an aggra-
“vation of their own condition; and that the people in regard
“to wealth, numbers, and violence of resentment were greatly
“their superiors; and that that nobility by which they con-
“sidered themselves superior to others was but a vain word
“when it came to a conflict of arms, and would prove of little
“service in defending them against so many enemies.”

On the other hand, they reminded the people “that it was
“not wisdom always to desire the last victory, and that it was
“never prudent to drive men to desperation, for he who had no
“hope of good also had no fear of evil; and that they must
“bear in mind that it was the nobility who had brought honor
“to the city in war, and that therefore it was neither just nor
“well to persecute them with so much rancor; that the nobles
“bore very well their being deprived of a share in the supreme
“ magistracies, but that they could not bear that it should be
“in the power of any one by means of these new ordinances to
“drive them from their country; and therefore it was well to
“ mitigate these, and by such concessions to induce the nobles
“to lay aside their arms, and not to tempt the fortune of a
“fight by confiding too much in their numbers, for it had often
“been seen that the few have overcome the many.” The
people differed in opinion; many wished it to come to a fight,
to which it would have to come anyhow some day, and there-
fore it was better to have it now rather than wait until the
enemy should become more powerful. And, said these, if it
were believed that the nobles would remain content if the laws
against them were mitigated, then it were well that this should
be done; but they thought that the arrogance of the nobles
was such that nothing but force would ever keep them quiet.
Many others, who were more prudent and of less violent dis-
position, thought that a modification of the laws was a matter
of little consequence, whilst it would be a very grave matter to
come to a conflict of arms. And this opinion prevailed, so

76 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IL.

that it was provided that, in all accusations against nobles,
witnesses should be required.

15. Although both parties laid aside their arms, yet they re-
mained very mistrustful of each other, and fortified themselves by
raising towers and providing arms. The people reorganized the
government, and reduced the Signoria in numbers because they
had been favorable to the nobles; and the chicfs of those that
remained were the Mancini, Magalotti, Altoviti, Peruzzi, and
Cerretani. The state being thus constituted, they built a pal-
ace, in 1298, for the purpose of lodging the Signori with greater
magnificence and security; and adjoining to it they formed an
open square or piazza by removing the houses that had formerly
belonged to the Uberti. At the same time they began also to
build the public prisons, and in a few years these edifices were
completed. Our city, abounding in wealth and population and
influence, never enjoyed a state of greater prosperity and con-
tentment than at that time. The citizens capable of bearing
arms numbered thirty thousand, and the country belonging to
Florence was able to furnish seventy thousand more. All Tus-
cany recognized her authority, either as subjects or as allies.
And although some angry feeling still remained between the
nobles and the people, yet no ill effects resulted from it, and
all lived in peace and union. This peace, had it not been dis-
turbed by fresh intestine discords, would never have been
troubled from without; for Florence had attained that con-
dition that she feared neither the Empire nor those whom she
had banished; and with her own forces she could have held her
ground against all the other states of Italy. But the evil which
no foreign power could have caused to the city was produced
by her own inhabitants.

16. (1800.) Amongst the most powerful families of Flor-
ence, by their riches, their nobility, and the number of their
followers, were the Cerchi and the Donati. Being neighbors in
Florence as well as in the country, some differences had arisen
between them, but not sufficiently grave to provoke a resort to
arms, and which would perhaps never have had any serious con-
sequences had not some fresh causes increased the ill feeling
between them. The family of the Cancellieri was one of the
principal families of Pistoja. It happened that Lore, son of
Messer Guglielmo, and Geri, son of Messer Bertaccio, all of
that family, whilst playing together, fell to disputing, and Geri

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. ras

was slightly wounded by Lore. Messer Guglielmo was greatly
pained at this; but in the belief that humility would remove
the offence, he thereby increased it. He ordered his son to go
to the house of the father of the boy whom he had wounded,
and ask his forgiveness. Lore obeyed his father; but this act
of humiliation did not assuage the harsh, vindictive temper of
Messer Bertaccio, who caused Lore to be seized by his servants
by way of aggravating the insult, and had his hand cut off
over a manger, saying to him: “ Return to your father and tell
“him that wounds are cured with iron, and not with words.”
The cruelty of this act so enraged Messer Guglielmo that he
armed his followers for the purpose of avenging it; and Messer
Bertaccio also armed himself for defence. This feud divided
not only the family of the Cancellieri, but all Pistoja. And as
this family were descended from a Messer Cancellicri who had
had two wives, one of whom had borne the name of Bianca,
the party who were descended from her adopted her name of
“Bianchi” ; and the other party, by way of having a name
the very opposite of that of the others, called themselves the
“Neri.” These two factions continued their warfare against
each other for many years, causing the death of many men and
the destruction of many families. Unable to restore peace
amongst themselves, and weary of the evil, and determined
either to put an end to their dissensions or to increase them by
drawing others into their quarrel, they came to Florence. The
Neri, from old relations of friendship with the Donati, were
supported by Messer Corso, head of that family; whereupon
the Bianchi, for the sake of also having a powerful support
that would sustain them against the Donati, had recourse to
Messer Veri de’ Cerchi, a man in all respects not the least
inferior to Messer Corso.

17. This Pistoja quarrel increased the ancient hatred between
the Cerchi and the Donati, and had already become so public
that the Priors and other good citizens thought that they might
at any moment come to an armed conflict, which might involve
the whole city in the difficulty. And therefore they resorted
to the Pope, praying him to employ his authority in putting an
end to this quarrel, which they themselves had been unable to
compose. The Pope sent for Messer Veri, and charged him to
make peace with the Donati; at which Messer Veri professed
to be astonished, saying that he had no enmity against them,

78 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

and as the making of peace presupposed a state of war, which
did not exist, he could not see the necessity of making peace.
When Messer Veri returned from Rome without having accom-
plished anything, the quarrel increased to that degree that the
most trifling accident might at any moment have provoked the
factions to violent excesses, which in fact occurred. It was in
the month of May, at the time when the public festivals are
being celebrated in Florence, that some young gentlemen of
the Donati, being on horseback with some of their friends, had
stopped to see some women dance at the Santa Trinita. Some
of the Cerchi, accompanied by a number of young nobles, came
there also, and wished to see the dancing, and, not knowing
the Donati who were before them, pushed their horses right in
amongst them. Whereupon the Donati considered themselves
insulted, and drew their swords, to which the Cerchi bravely
responded ; and after many on both sides were wounded, the
parties separated. This encounter was the beginning of much
evil; for the whole city became divided, the people as well as
the nobles, and the parties took the names of Bianchi and Neri.
The chiefs of the Bianchi party were the Cerchi, who had been
joined by the Adimari, the Abati, a portion of the Tosinghi,
of the Bardi, of the Rossi, of the Frescobaldi, of the Nerli, and
of the Mannelli, and all the Mozzi, the Scali, the Gherardini,
the Cavalcanti, the Malespini, Bostichi, Giandonati, Vecchietti,
and the Arrigucci. These were joined by many families of the
people, together with all the Ghibellines that were in Florence ;
so that within the great number of their adherents were com-
prised nearly the entire government of the city. On the other
hand, the Donati were chiefs of the party of the Neri. With
these were those portions of the abovenamed families who had
not attached themselves to the Bianchi; and furthermore all
the Pazzi, the Visdomini, the Manieri, the Bagnesi, the Torna-
quinci, Spini, Buondelmonti, Gianfigliazzi, and the Brunelles-
chi. And not only was the whole city affected by this feud,
but the whole country was also divided by it; so’ that the cap-
tains of the parties, and all the adherents of the Guelfs and
lovers of the republic, began to be very apprehensive lest this
new division would cause the ruin of the city and the resuscita-
tion of the Ghibelline party. They therefore sent anew to Pope
Boniface so that he might devise some remedy for this state of
things, unless he desired to see the city of Florence, which had

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 79

ever been the shield of the Church, become either ruined or
Ghibelline. The Pope therefore sent Matteo d’ Acquasparta, a
Portuguese cardinal, as his Legate, to Florence; but he found
such difficulty with the Bianchi party, who, from supposing
themselves to be the most powerful, were the most audacious,
that he became indignant and departed, placing the city, how-
ever, under an interdict, so that she remained in still greater
confusion than before his arrival.

18. It happened in the midst of this general fermentation,
that a number of the Cerchi and the Donati met at a funeral
and began to quarrel. From words they came to blows, al-
though it caused for the moment only a slight disturbance.
But when each had returned home, the Cerchi resolved to attack
the Donati, and started with a number of men to find them.
They were repulsed, however, by the bravery of Messer Corso,
and a number of their men were wounded. All Florence was
quickly in arms; the Signoria and the laws were overpowered
by the nobles, and the best and wisest citizens were filled with
fears and misgivings. The Donati and their party, being the
weaker, were the most apprehensive ; and by way of providing
for their safety Messer Corso met with the other chiefs of the
Neri and the leaders of the party, and agreed to ask the Pope
for some one of royal blood to come to Florence and reorgan-
ize the government, hoping in that way to be able to put down
the Cerchi. This meeting and resolution was made known to
the Priors, and was represented by the opposite faction as a
conspiracy against the liberty of the city. Both factions being
in arms, the Signoria, of which Dante was a member at that
time, encouraged by his advice and prudence, caused the people
to arm; they were joined by many of the people of the coun-
try, and thus they forced the chiefs of the factions to lay down
their arms; whereupon they banished Messer Corso Donati and
many others of the Neri party. And to show that they had
been impartial in that judgment, they banished also several of
the Bianchi party, who, however, soon after were permitted,
under color of good reasons, to return to their homes.

19. Messer Corso and his adherents, believing the Pope to be
favorable to their side, went to Rome, and by their personal
efforts persuaded him to do what they had already asked of
him by letters. There happened to be at that moment at the
papal court Charles de Valois, brother of the king of France,

80 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Boox II.

who had been called to Italy by the king of Naples to go to
Sicily. Being very much urged thereto by the banished Floren-
tines, the Pope concluded to send Charles to Florence so soon
as the weather should be favorable for the voyage. Charles
thereupon went to Florence, and although the Bianchi, who at
that time held the government, mistrusted him, yet, as he was
chief of the Guelfs and sent by the Pope, they did not ven-
ture to impede his coming; and by way of securing his good
will they gave him authority to dispose of the city according to
his pleasure. Having received this authority, Charles caused
all his friends and partisans to arm themselves. This so filled
the minds of the people with mistrust of him, that they all
took up arms and remained in their houses, so as to be ready
in case Charles should attempt any movement.

The Cerchi and the chiefs of the Bianchi party, from having
been for some time at the head of the republic, and having
borne themselves very proudly, had made themselves univer-
sally odious. This encouraged Messer Corso and the other
banished Neri to come to Florence, well knowing that Charles
and the captains of the party were favorably disposed towards
them. And whilst the city, from mistrust of Charles, was in
arms, Messer Corso, with all the banished, and many others
who had followed him, entered Florence without hindrance
from any one. Although Messer Veri de’ Cerchi was urged to
move against them, yet he refused, saying that he wanted the
people of Florence to chastise them, as it was against them
that they had come. But the very contrary happened; for
instead of being chastised by the people, Corso and his followers
were well received by them, and Messer Veri was obliged to
seek safety in flight. Corso, after having forced the gate of
the Pinti, made a stand at the church of San Pictro Maggiore,
a place near his own house; and having been joined by many
of his friends and the people, who, eager for something new,
had collected there, he first of all liberated from prison all who
were confined either for reasons of state or private causes; and
then he compelled the Signori to return to their own houses as
private citizens, and elected others from the people and of the
Neri party ; and continued during five days to pillage the houses
of the foremost of the Bianchi party. The Cerchi and the
other chiefs of the faction, seeing that Charles was adverse to
them and the people hostile, had left the city and withdrawn

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 81

to their strongholds. And whereas formerly they were never
willing to follow the counsels of the Pope, they found them-
selves now obliged to recur to him for help, showing him how
Charles, instead of uniting, had only come to make the divis-
ions of Florence greater. Whereupon the Pope again sent his
Legate, Messer Matteo d’ Acquasparta, to Florence, who suc-
ceeded in bringing about a peace between the Cerchi and the
Donati, and fortified it by fresh intermarriages amongst them.
But wishing that the Bianchi should also participate in the
public offices, the Neri who held the government refused their
consent; so that the Legate departed no better satisfied nor
less angry than he had been the first time, and left the city
under an interdict for her disobedience.

20. Both parties then remained in Florence dissatisfied ; the
Neri, because, seeing the opposite party near them, they feared
that they might ruin them and repossess themselves of the
power they had lost; and the Bianchi, because they felt them-
selves deprived of all power and honors. To these natural aver-
-sions and suspicions new injuries supervened (1302). Messer
Niccolo de’ Cerchi, being on his way to his estates accompanied
by a number of his friends, and having arrived at the bridge
over the Affrico, was assailed by Simone, son of Messer Corso
Donati. The conflict was severe and ended unhappily for both
parties ; for Messer Niccolo was killed, and Simone so seriously
wounded that he died the following night. This affair dis-
turbed the whole city anew, and although the Neri party was
chiefly to blame, yet it was defended by those in the govern-
ment. And before any judgment had been rendered in this
matter, a conspiracy was discovered of the Bianchi and Messer
Piero Ferrante, one of the barons of Charles, with whom they
were negotiating to be reinstated in the government. The dis-
covery of this conspiracy was made from certain letters written
by Cerchi to Ferrante. And although it was generally believed
that these letters were forged, and suggested by the Donati for
the purpose of covering up the infamy they had acquired by the
murder of Messer Niccolo, yet the Cerchi, together with their
adherents of the Bianchi party, amongst whom was the poet
Dante, were banished, their property confiscated, and their
houses pulled down. These, together with a number of Ghib-
ellines who had joined them, scattered in many places, seeking
by fresh labors to gain new fortunes. Charles, having accom-

VOL. I. 6

82 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

plished the object for which he had come to Florence, returned
to the Pope to follow out his enterprise against Sicily, in which
he proved himself neither better nor wiser than he had done in
Florence, so that he returned to France with the loss of reputa-
tion and of many of his men (1304).

21. After the departure of Charles things remained tolerably
quiet in Florence. Only Messer Corso was restless, because he
thought that he did not hold that rank in the city to which
he considered himself entitled. The government being in the
hands of the people, he saw the republic administered by men
much inferior to himself. Influenced therefore by his restless
and ambitious spirit, he sought to cloak his dishonest inten-
tions with an honest pretext, and falsely charged a number of
citizens who had administered the public funds with having
misappropriated them to private purposes, and demanded their
trial and punishment. This demand was supported by many
whose desires were similar to his own; others, who in their
ignorance believed Messer Corso to be actuated by patriotic
feelings, also united with him. The calumniated citizens, on
the other hand, who were supported by the people, defended
themselves against this accusation. This difference increased
to such a degree that, according to the customary fashion, the
parties came to arms. On the one side were Messer Corso and
Messer Lottieri, Bishop of Florence, with many nobles and some
of the people; on the other were the Signori, with the greater
part of the people; and the quarrel grew to that point that in
many parts of the city they actually came to fighting. The
Signori, seeing the great danger in which they were, sent to the
people of Lucca for assistance; these quickly came to Florence,
and by their intervention matters for the time were settled and
the disturbances stopped, and the people of Florence retained
their government and tlieir liberties without otherwise punish-
ing the authors of this trouble. The Pope, having heard of the
disturbances in Florence, sent his Legate, Messer Niccolo da
Prato, to put a stop to them, who, being a man of great repute
by his office, his learning and exemplary mode of life, very
soon obtained such influence with the people of Florence that
they gave him authority to establish a government according to
his own views. Being by birth a Ghibelline, Messer Niccolo
contemplated the recall of the banished; but wished first to
win the people entirely over to him, and for that purpose he

Boox II.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 83

re-established the old companies of the people, whereby the
power of the people was greatly increased, whilst that of the
nobles was diminished. When the Legate, therefore, thought
that he had thoroughly secured the good will of the multi-
tude, he attempted to carry out the recall of the banished. But
he failed in his various efforts, and became thereby so mis-
trusted by those who governed the city that he was obliged to
depart and return to Rome filled with anger, and leaving Flor-
ence in much confusion and under an interdict.

The city was perturbed not only by this, but also by many
other troubles in consequence of the enmities between the peo-
ple and the nobles, the Guelfs and the Ghibellines, and the
Bianchi and the Neri. The whole city was therefore in arms,
and conflicts were of daily occurrence; for many were greatly
discontented at the departure of the Legate, being themselves
desirous for the return of the banished. The first who started
these troubles were the Medici and the Giugni, who had made
themselves known to the Legate as being in favor of the rebels.
There was fighting then in most parts of Florence, and to these
troubles was added a great conflagration, which broke out first
in the Orto San Michele and in the houses of the Abati, whence
it spread to those of the Caponsachi, burning them, together
with the houses of the Macci, the Amieri, Toschi, Cipriani,
Lamberti, and Cavalcanti, and the entire Mercato Nuovo.
Thence the fire passed to the Porta San Maria, burning the
whole of it; then, turning from the Ponte Vecchio, it burned the
houses of the Gherardini, Pulci, Amidei, Lucardesi, and many
others; so that the number of houses destroyed amounted to
over seventeen hundred. According to the opinion of many
the fire originated by accident in the very midst of a fight;
others affirmed that it had been kindled by Neri Abati, Prior
of San Pietro Scheraggio, a dissolute and evil-minded man, who,
seeing the people engaged in fighting, committed this villanous
act, knowing that it could not be checked by the people who
were occupied by the fight; and by way of insuring its success
he set fire to the houses of his associates, where he had a better
opportunity of doing it. It was in the month of July, of the
year 1304, that Florence was thus visited by fire and sword.
Messer Corso Donati was the only one who in the midst of all
these tumults did not arm, for he judged it would be easier for
him to become the arbiter between the two parties when, weary

84 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

of fighting, they should wish to come to terms. The parties
however deposed their arms more from satiety of evil than from
a desire for union; and the only result was that the banished
did not return, and that the party who favored them failed
to gain control of the government.

22. The Legate, having returned to Rome, and hearing of the
fresh disturbances that had taken place in Florence, persuaded
the Pope that the only means of restoring peace and union to
Florence would be for him to cause twelve of the first citizens
of that city to come to him, and that thus by taking away the
food of the evil he would be able to quench it. The Pope
acted upon this advice; and the citizens whom he called obeyed
and came to Rome, and Messer Corso Donati was one of them.
No sooner had these left Florence than the Legate gave the
banished to understand that now was the time for them to
return, as the city was at that moment without any of its chiefs.
The banished therefore made the attempt, and came to Flor-
ence and entered the walls, which had not been prepared for
defence, and advanced as far as San Giovanni. It was a nota-
ble fact that the very men who a short time before had fought
for the return of the banished, when these had begged unarmed
to be allowed to return to their country, took up arms against
them when they saw them come armed, with the intent to seize
the city by force. So much more did these citizens esteem the
public good than their private friendships; and having called
all the people to their assistance, they forced the banished to
return whence they had come. The failure of the banished
in their attempt was caused by their having left a part of their
men at Lastra, and by their not having waited for Messer To-
losetto Uberti, who was to have come with three hundred
mounted men from Pistoja; they had vainly imagined that
celerity of movement would more surely give them the victory
than strength. And thus it often happens in such enterprises
that celerity robs you of strength, whilst tardiness deprives you
of the opportunity. The rebels having withdrawn, Florence
relapsed into its old dissensions. The people, wishing to abate
the power of the family of Cavalcanti, forcibly took from them
the castle of Stinche, situated in the Val di Greve, and which
had from time immemorial been their residence. And as those
who were captured in it were the first to be confined in the
new prisons that had been built in Florence, these were thence-

Boox I1.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 85

forth called after the castle whence the prisoners had been tak-
en, and to this day these prisons are called the Stinche (1307),

Those who were at the head of the government of the
republic re-established the companies of the people, and gave
them the banners under which the guilds had formerly assem-
bled. The captains of these assumed the title of Gonfalonieri
of the companies and colleagues of the Signori, and claimed
the right to aid the Signori with their counsels in all armed
conflicts or other disturbances. To the ancient Rectors they
added an officer called Executor of Justice, whose duty it was to
aid the Gonfalonieri in repressing the insolence of the nobles.
In the midst of all this the Pope died, and Messer Corso and
the other citizens returned from Rome; and all would have
been tranquil if the turbulent spirit of Messer Corso had not
disturbed Florence anew. For the purpose of gaining influence
he opposed the nobles on every occasion, and to whatever side
he saw the people inclined, to that he inclined also; so that he
became the head and front of all differences and innovations,
and all who wished to obtain anything extraordinary had re-
course to him. Thus many of the best reputed citizens came
to hate him, which increased to such a degree that the party of
the Neri broke out into open division. Messer Corso relied
upon his private power and influence, his adversaries upon that
of the government; but such was his personal authority that
everybody feared him. And therefore for the purpose of
depriving him of this popular favor his opponents adopted a
plan by which it was easily destroyed, for they spread the
report that he wanted to seize the government and make him-
self tyrant of Florence. It was easy to make the people be-
lieve this, for his way of life exceeded all civil bounds, and
his marriage with a daughter of Uguccione della Faggiuola,
head of the Ghibellines and of the Bianchi party, and a man
of greatest power in Tuscany, gave still greater consistency to
this report.

23. So soon as this alliance became known, his adversaries
took courage, and armed against him. The same considerations
caused the people not to defend him, but the greater part rather
joined his enemies. The principal of these were Messer Rosso
della Tosa, Messer Pazzino de’ Pazzi, Messer Geri Spini, and
Messer Berto Brunelleschi. These, with their followers and the
greater part of the people, met, armed, at the palace of the Sig-

86 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

noria, by whose order an accusation against Messer Corso had
been placed in the hands of Messer Piero Branca, captain of the
people, charging Messer Corso with an attempt, by the aid of
Messer Uguccione, to make himself tyrant of the city. There-
upon he was cited to appear, and condemned for contumacy as
a rebel (1308), — not more than two hours having been allowed
to elapse between the accusation and the sentence. After this
judgment, the Signori, with the companies of the people under
their banners, went to seek Messer Corso. He, on the other
hand, undaunted at seeing himself abandoned by many of his
adherents, nor by the sentence pronounced against him, nor by
the authority of the Signori or the multitude of his enemies,
fortified himself in his palace, hoping to be able to defend him-
self until Uguccione, for whom he had sent, should come to his
assistance. He barred his palace and the streets around it,
which were occupied by his partisans, who defended them so
well that the people, though very numerous, could not dislodge
them. The combat, however, was very severe, and many were
killed and wounded on both sides; and the people, seeing that
they could not get at Messer Corso from the open streets, occu-
pied the adjoining houses, and, breaking through the walls, they
succeeded in entering his palace. Messer Corso, finding him-
self surrounded by enemies, and relying no longer upon the ex-
pected aid of Uguccione, resolved, after despairing of victory, to
find a means of safety; and, together with Gherardo Bordoni
and a number of his stoutest and stauchest friends, he charged
so impetuously upon his enemies that they opened their ranks,
and allowed him to pass through, fighting, and to escape from
the city through the Porta alla Croce. They were, however,
pursued by a number of their enemies, and Gherardo was killed
on the Affrico by Boccaccio Cavicciuli. Messer Corso was also
overtaken and captured at Rovezzano by some Catalan horsemen
in the service of the Signoria. But on approaching Florence,
he threw himself off his horse, so as to avoid meeting his ene-
mies face to face and being torn in pieces by them ; and, being
down on the ground, one of the men charged with conducting
him to Florence cut his throat. His body was picked up by the
monks of San Salvi, and was buried without any honors. Such
was the end of Messer Corso, who had done both much good
and much evil to his country and to the party of the Neri; and
his memory would have been more glorious if his spirit had

Book II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 87

been less turbulent. Nevertheless, he deserves to be numbered
amongst the great citizens which Florence has produced. It is
true that his turbulence caused his country and his party to
forget the obligations they owed him, and in the end brought
many ills upon both the one and the other, and death upon him-
self. Uguccione, whilst coming to the support of his son-in-law,
heard, at Remole, how Messer Corso had been defeated by the
people; and, seeing that he could be of no possible service to
him, and not wishing uselessly to expose himself to harm, re-
turned to his estates.

24. After the death of Messer Corso, which occurred in the
year 1308, the disturbances ceased in Florence, and the people
lived in peace until it became known that the Emperor Henry
had passed into Italy, together with all the banished Florentines,
whom he had promised to restore to their country. The chiefs
of the government, judging it to be desirable to diminish the num-
ber of their enemies by diminishing that of the banished, resolved
that these should all return, excepting those who had been spe-
cially forbidden by law to come back. The greater part of the
Ghibellines were obliged, therefore, to remain in exile, as also
some of the Bianchi party; amongst these were Dante Alighi-
eri, the sons of Messer Veri de’ Cerchi, and those of Giano della
Bella. They, moreover, sent to implore the assistance of Robert,
king of Naples; and as they could not obtain this aid from him
as an ally, they gave him the control over the city for five years,
so that he might defend them as his subjects. The Emperor, in
coming into Italy, took the road by way of Pisa, and passed
through the low country (Maremme) on to Rome, where he
was crowned in the year 1312. After that, having resolved to
subjugate the Florentines, he went by way of Perugia and Arezzo
to Florence, and encamped with his army at the monastery of
San Salvi, within a mile of the city, where he remained fifty
days without any results. Despairing of being able to disturb
the government of that city, he marched to Pisa, where he
agreed with Frederick, king of Sicily, to undertake the conquest
of the kingdom of Naples. Having started with his army, con-
fident of victory, whilst King Robert was already trembling with
fear of losing his kingdom, death overtook Henry, at Buoncon-
vento, in the year 1313.

25. Shortly after that, Uguccione della Faggiuola became lord
of Pisa, and soon after also of Lucca, where he was placed by the

88 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

Ghibelline party ; and, with the aid of these cities, he did much
serious damage to the neighboring country. To save themselves
from this, the Florentines applied to King Robert for his brother
Piero to take command of their armies. Uguccione, on the other
hand, continued to strengthen himself, and had seized by force
and by fraud a number of castles in the Val d’ Arno and in the
Val di Nievole. He then went to besiege Monte Catini, which the
Florentines deemed it necessary to succor, so as to put a stop to
this conflagration, and prevent it from spreading over the whole
country. Having assembled a large force, the Florentines went
over into the Val di Nievole, where they encountered Uguccione,
but were routed after a bloody battle. Piero, brother of King
Robert, was killed, and his body never found; with him over
two thousand men lost their lives. Nor was this victory a joy-
ous one for Uguccione, for it cost the lives of one of his sons and
of many other captains of his army. After this defeat, the Flor-
entines fortified the places in the vicinity of their city, and King
Robert sent them as captain of their forces Conte d’ Andria,
called the Count Novello. Whether it was the bad conduct of
this general, or whether it was owing to the natural disposition
of the Florentines to get tired of every government, and to differ
amongst themselves on every occasion, the city, notwithstand-
ing the war with Uguccione, divided into two factions, the one
friendly and the other hostile to the king. The leaders of the
hostile faction were Messer Simone della Tosa and the Maga-
lotti, with certain others of the people who had the prepon-
derance in the government. These managed to induce the
government to send to France and to Germany to obtain men
and commanders, with whose aid they might drive out the Count
governor of the king. But fortune would have it that they could
not obtain any. They did not, however, give up the attempt ;
and, seeking for some one to whom they could look up, and
unable to find such either in France or in Germany, they took
one from Agobbio. Having first expelled the Count N ovello,
they made a certain Lando of Agobbio Executor, that is to say,
Bargello, and gave him absolute power over all the citizens.
This Lando was a cruel and rapacious man. He went through
the city, followed by a number of armed men, and took the lives
of this or the other one, according to the dictation of those who
had elected him. And he carried his audacity to that point that
he coined base money with the Florentine dies, without any one’s

Boox II.]} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 89

daring to oppose him (1316). To this condition had Florence
been reduced by her discords! Truly great and wretched city !
whom neither the memory of her past dissensions, nor the fear
of Uguccione, nor the authority of a king, had been able to keep
united and stable; so that she was brought to the most wretched
state, being assailed from without by Uguccione, and plundered
within by Lando d’ Agobbio.

The noble families, and the most considerable amongst the
people, and all the Guelfs, supported the king and opposed
Lando and his followers. But as the king’s adversaries had
control of the government, the former could not openly declare
themselves without great danger. Still, having resolved to rid
themselves of this infamous tyranny, they sent secret letters to
King Robert, requesting him to appoint the Count Guido da
Battifolle his vicar in Florence. The king complied with this
request, and the opposite party, notwithstanding that the Sig-
nori were hostile to the king, dared not oppose the Count, be-
cause of his excellent qualities. With all this, however, his
authority was but limited, as the Signori and the Gonfalonieri
favored Lando and his party. Whilst Florence was in this
troubled condition, the daughter of King Albert of Bohemia
passed through the city, on her way to join her husband,
Charles, son of King Robert of Naples. She was received with
great honors by the friends of the king, who complained to her
of the condition of the city and of the tyranny of Lando and
his followers. Her influence and efforts, together with that
of the representatives of the king, restored union and peace
amongst the citizens before she departed from Florence; and
Lando was deprived of all authority, and sent back to Agobbio,
laden with plunder and stained with blood.

In the reorganization of the government, the king’s lordship
over Florence was extended for three years; and inasmuch as
seven Signori had already been elected by the party of Lando,
six were now chosen by the adherents of the king; so that
there were several Signoria consisting of thirteen in number,
although they were afterwards reduced again to seven, accord-
ing to ancient custom.

26. At this time the lordship of Lucca and Pisa was taken
from Uguecione, and Castruccio Castracani, a citizen of Lucca,
was made lord of these cities in his stead (1322) ; and being an
ardent and courageous youth, and fortunate in his undertakings,

90 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Boox II.

he became in a short time chief of the Ghibellines in Tuscany.
The civil discords of Florence having been quieted for some years,
the Florentines thought at first that they had nothing to fear
from the power of Castruccio ; but when it afterwards increased
beyond their expectations, they began to consider as to the best
means of protecting themselves against it. And to enable the
Signori to deliberate with greater wisdom and execute their re-
solves with greater authority, they chose twelve citizens, whom
they called Buonomini, and whose advice and concurrence
should be required for every important act of the Signori.
In the midst of this the term of King Robert’s lordship
over Florence expired, and the city, having thus regained its
independence, restored the former organization of the govern-
ment, with the customary rectors and magistrates ; and the fear
which Castruccio inspired kept them united. After several
attempts against the lords of Lunigiana, Castruccio assailed
Prato (1323) ; whereupon the Florentines, having resolved to
succor that place, closed their shops and marched there in a
body, being twenty thousand foot and fifteen hundred mounted
men. And by way of diminishing the forces of Castruccio and
increasing their own, the Signoria published a proclamation to
the effect that every banished Guelf who came to the rescue
of Prato should afterwards be reinstated in his country ; which
caused four thousand banished to flock to their standard. The
bringing of so great a force so promptly to Prato alarmed Cas-
truccio, so that he retired to Lucca, unwilling to tempt fortune
in a battle. This occasioned a difference of opinion in the
Florentine camp between the nobles and the people ; the latter
wishing to follow Castruccio and to engage him in battle and
to destroy him, whilst the former wanted to return home, say-
ing that it was enough to have exposed Florence to danger for
the sake of relieving Prato, which was very well when neces-
sity constrained them to it; but that now, such being no longer
the case, and when the risk of loss was great and the chance
of gain small, it would be tempting fortune to pursue Cas-
truccio. And as they could not agree, the question was sub-
mitted to the Signori, who were as much divided in opinion as
the people and the nobles had been. When this became known
in the city, the people collected in great numbers in the Piazza,
and used threatening language against the nobles, so that these
yielded from fear. But the resolve being taken so late, and

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 91

so unwillingly by a large portion, it afforded time to Castruccio
to retreat in safety to Lucca.

27. This disappointment excited great indignation amongst
the people against the nobles; so that the Signori refused to
observe the promise which they had made to the four thousand
banished, by the advice and order of the nobles. These rebels,
anticipating this refusal, resolved to forestall it; and, leaving
the camp in advance of the army, they presented themselves
at the gates of Florence for the purpose of entering the city
first. This movement, however, having been foreseen, did not
succeed, and they were repulsed by those who had remained in
the city. They thereupon attempted to obtain by negotiation
what they had failed to obtain by force, and sent eight envoys
to the Signori to remind them of the pledge given to them, and
of the dangers to which they had exposed themselves in the
hope of the promised reward. And although the nobles made
great efforts in behalf of the banished, regarding the promise
of the Signori as a sacred obligation, for the fulfilment of which
they had made themselves responsible, yet they did not suc-
ceed, owing to the universal indignation against them in con-
sequence of their failure in the attempt against Castruccio, in
which they might have succeeded. This was a dishonor and a
shame for the city, and caused great irritation amongst the
nobles, some of whom in consequence endeavored to obtain by
force what had been denied to their entreaties. They engaged
the banished, therefore, to come armed to the city, whilst they
would take up arms in their behalf within Florence. This plot,
however, was discovered the day before that set for its execu-
tion, so that the banished found the citizens armed and prepared
to repel those outside; whilst they filled the nobles within with
alarm to that degree that they dared not take up arms. And
thus the banished had to desist from their attempt without hav-
ing obtained any result. After the withdrawal of the banished
the Signori wanted to punish those who had invited them to
come; and although every one knew who the guilty parties
were, yet no one dared to name and accuse them. To get at
the truth of the matter, therefore, regardless of any one, it was
provided that in a general council each one should write a list
of the names of the guilty parties, and that these written lists
should be secretly presented to the captain of the people.
Whereupon there appeared as accused Messer Amerigo Donati,

92 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

Messer Thegiao Frescobaldi, and Messer Lotteringo Gherardini.
But the judge was more lenient to them than what their offence
merited, and they were condemned merely to a fine in money.

28. The disturbances created in Florence by the coming of
the banished to the very gates of the city proved that a single
chief did not suffice for the command of the companies of the
people. And therefore it was ordained that in future every
company should have three or four captains; and they gave to
each Gonfalonier two or three adjuncts, who were called Pen-
nonieri; so that in cases of necessity, where the whole company
was not required to be present, a portion of them might act
together under one head. And as it happens in all republics
that after a disturbance of any kind some old laws are annulled
and some new ones enacted, so it happened in this case. In-
stead of, as heretofore, creating a Signoria at stated intervals,
the Signori and such of their colleagues as were then in charge,
relying upon their strength, obtained from the people the au-
thority themselves to choose the Signoria, who should in future
hold this office for a term of forty months. The names of
these were to be put into a bag or purse, whence they were to
be drawn every two months. But before the period of forty
months had expired, they recommenced placing the names in
the purse, because many citizens suspected that their names had
been omitted to be put in. This gave rise to the practice of
placing in a purse, a long time in advance of the drawing, the
names of all the magistrates within as well as without the city ;
whilst according to the former system, at the expiration of the
term of a magistracy, the successors were elected by the coun-
cils. This method of drawing the names of the magistrates
from purses (imborsations) was called the Sguzttini; and as
it occurred only once in every three, or at most five years, the
city was relieved of much trouble and disturbance that had -
previously accompanied the creation of magistrates, owing to
the great number of competitors for the several offices. The
Florentines adopted this system as the best means of correct-
ing the troubles attending the old method; but they did not
perceive the defects that were concealed under these unimpor-
tant advantages.

29. It was now the year 1325. Castruccio, having made
himself master of Pistoja, became so powerful that the Floren-
tines, fearing his greatness, resolved to attack him and to

Boox II.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 93

rescue that city from his rule before he should have fairly es-
tablished his dominion over it. They raised from amongst
their own citizens and allies twenty thousand infantry and
three thousand mounted men, and with this force they took
the field at Altopascio, intending to seize that city, and thus to
prevent assistance being sent from there to Pistoja. They
succeeded in taking the place; and from there they marched
upon Lucca, wasting the country as they went. But owing to
their want of prudence and the bad faith of their captain they
made but little progress. The name of this captain was Rai-
mondo di Cardona. Having seen how readily the Florentines
had disposed of their liberties, yielding them first to the king
of Naples, then to the Pope’s legates, and then again to others
of lesser grade, he thought that, by involving them in some
difficulties, it might easily happen that they would appoint him
their prince. He did not fail repeatedly to suggest this, ask-
ing them to give him the same authority over their city as
they had given him over their army, adding that without this
he could not enforce the obedience essential to a general. And
as the Florentines did not concede to him his demands, he
went on losing time, of which Castruccio promptly took advan-
tage. For the assistance which had been promised him by the
Visconti and the other tyrants of Lombardy arrived, and, hay-
ing been strengthened by this accession, Castruccio attacked
Messer Raimondo, who, having in the first instance lost the
victory from want of good faith, knew not how to save himself
after defeat from want of prudence. For advancing slowly
with his army he was met and attacked by Castruccio near
Altopascio (1325), and after severe fighting was completely
routed. In this battle many citizens were made prisoners, and
many were slain; amongst the latter was Messer Raimondo
himself, who thus received from fortune that punishment for
his bad faith and evil counsels which he had deserved at the
hands of the Florentines. The damage done by Castruccio to
the Florentines after this victory, in the way of plunder, pris-
oners, destruction, and burnings, could not be told; for the
Florentines having no troops to oppose him, he rode and roved
over the country when and where he pleased during several
months ; and the Florentines after such an overwhelming de-
feat deemed themselves fortunate in being able to save their
city.

94 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

30. And yet they were not so much disheartened but what
they raised large sums of money for the payment of troops and
to send to their allies for help. But all this did not suffice to
keep their powerful enemy in check; so that they applied to
Charles, Duke of Calabria, and son of King Robert of Naples,
to come to their defence ; but by way of inducing him to come
they were obliged again to make him lord of the city ; for being
accustomed to rule in Florence, he preferred her subjection
rather than her alliance. But as Charles was at that time oc-
cupied with the war against Sicily, and could not come in person
to assume the sovereignty over Florence, he sent in his stead
Gauthier, a Frenchman by birth and Duke of Athens, who as
vicar of the sovereign took possession of the city and organ-
ized the government according to his own will. Nevertheless
he made himself generally beloved by the modesty of his bear-
ing, by which he concealed in a measure his real nature.

When Charles had terminated the war with Sicily, he came
with one thousand horsemen to Florence, and made his entry
in July, 1826. His arrival put a stop to Castruccio’s further
devastations of the Florentine territory. But the reputation
which Charles gained outside of the city he lost within, and
the injuries which the enemy did not do had to be borne when
done by friends; for the Signoria could do nothing without
the concurrence of the Duke, who within the period of one year
extorted from the city four hundred thousand florins, although
according to the convention made with him he had no right
to go beyond two hundred thousand florins. Such were the
charges with which he or his father burdened the city daily.
Fresh suspicions and enmities were added to these losses; for
the Ghibellines of Lombardy took such umbrage at the coming.
of Charles into Tuscany, that Galeazzo Visconti and the other
Lombard tyrants, by means of money and promises, caused
Louis of Bavaria, who had been elected Emperor contrary to
the will of the Pope, to come into Italy. Louis came into
Lombardy and thence into Tuscany, and with the help of Cas-
truccio made himself master of Pisa (1327), and, having been
supplied with money there, he moved on towards Rome. This
caused Charles to depart from Florence, as he had become ap-
prehensive for the safety of the kingdom of Naples; he left
Messer Filippo da Saginetto as his vicar in Florence. After
the departure of the Emperor, Castruccio made himself master

ft

Book AL} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 95

j “8, ordi? ; but the Florentines took Pistoja from him by means

of f°A-cret intelligence with some of its inhabitants. Castruccio
plereupon homeved it with such valor and obstinacy, that all
jme efforts of the Florentines to relieve Pistoja were fruitless.

{mn vain did they attack his army and his possessions, but nei-
ther force nor perseverance on their part could drive him off,
such was his determination to chastise the inhabitants, and to
triumph over the Florentines. The Pistojans were obliged
therefore to accept him as their lord; and although he achieved
this with so much glory to himself, yet it also cost him such
efforts and fatigue that he died from the effects of it on his
return to Lucca, in 1328. And as fortune rarely fails to accom-
pany any good or evil with another good or evil, so it happened
in this case; for Charles, Duke of Calabria and lord of Flor-
ence, also died at Naples; so that the Florentines, without any
effort of their own, were relieved from the fear of the one and
the lordship of the other. Thus they remained free to remodel
the government of their city ; and they consequently annulled the
organization of the old councils entirely, and created two others,
the one composed of three hundred citizens of the people, and
the other of two hundred and fifty nobles and citizens ; the first
being called the Council of the People, and the other the Council
of the Commons.

31. When the Emperor arrived at Rome he created an Anti-
pope, ordered many things adverse to the Church, and attempted
many other things unsuccessfully ; so that in the end he de-
parted with shame and went to Pisa (1329), where, either from
disgust or from not having received their pay, eight hundred
German cavaliers rebelled against him and fortified themselves
at Montechiaro, above Ceruglio. After the Emperor had left
Pisa to go into Lombardy, these seized Lucca and expelled
Francesco Castracani, who had been left there in command by
the Emperor. And thinking to derive some advantage from
the capture of this city, they offered it to the Florentines for the
sum of eighty thousand florins, which offer, however, was de-
clined, by the advice of Messer Simone della Tosa. This course
would have been most advantageous for the Florentines if they
had remained of the same mind; but very soon after a number
of them changed their views, which proved most injurious to
the city. For whilst they declined it at the time when they
might have had Lucca peaceably for so small a sum, they

96 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. gprs

afterwards wanted it when they could no longer have
though they now would willingly have paid a much larger
times, to the great injury of their city. Lucca, having be: a
refused by the Florentines, was purchased by Messer Gheraa
dino Spinoli, a Genoese, for the sum of thirty thousand florins. '
, And as men are apt to be less eager to take what they can get
| easily than they are in desiring what they cannot get, so the
‘people of Florence, when they became cognizant of the sale of
Lucca and the small price at which Messer Gherardino had ob-
tained it, became seized with an eager desire to possess it, and
blamed themselves and Messer Simone, who had advised them
to decline the purchase. And in the hope of obtaining it by
force, after having refused to purchase it, they sent their troops
to ravage and plunder the Lucchese territory. Meantime the
Emperor had left Italy, and the Pisans had sent the Antipope a
prisoner to France.

From the death of Castruccio, in 1328, until the year 1340,
Florence enjoyed internal tranquillity, and occupied herself
wholly with the foreign relations of the state. She was in-
volved in several wars; in Lombardy in consequence of the
coming of King John of Bohemia, and in Tuscany on account
of Lucca. The city was embellished with many new edifices :
amongst others they built the Campanile (Bell Tower) of the
Santa Reparata under the direction of Messer Giotto, a most
celebrated painter in those days. In 1333 the waters of the
Arno had risen throughout Florence more than twelve braccia,
and by its overflow had destroyed some of the bridges and
many buildings, all of which, however, were restored, with the
greatest care and at much expense. —

32. The year 1340, however, brought with it fresh causes
for discord. The citizens holding power had two means of
increasing and maintaining their control; the one was to re-
strict the number of names put into the purses for the elec-
tion of magistrates, so that only their own names or those of
their friends should be drawn; and the other was always to
keep in their own hands the control of the election of the
Rectors, so as to insure to themselves favorable judgments at
their hands. And so highly did they value this second means,
that on several occasions when the ordinary Rectors did not
suffice them, they brought in a third one. It was in this extra-

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 97

ordinary way that they had introduced Messer Jacopo Gabrielli
of Agobbio, under the title of Captain of the Guard, giving him
plenary authority over the people. He committed daily acts of
_ injustice to oblige and please those who held the government;
and amongst those whom he had thus wronged were Messer
Piero de’ Bardi and Messer Bardo Frescobaldi. These, being
nobles and naturally proud, could not bear that a stranger
should thus wrong them to gratify a few men in power. To
revenge themselves upon him and those who held the govern-
ment, they formed a conspiracy, in which many noble families
became engaged, and also some of the people who were dissatis-
fied with the tyranny of the chiefs of the government. The plan
agreed upon amongst these conspirators was that they should
collect a number of armed men in their houses, and on the morn-
ing of the feast of All Saints, when all the people were in the
churches praying for their dead, they should all take up arms,
kill the captain and the chiefs of the government; and that
then they should reorganize the government by creating new
Signori and by establishing an entirely new order of things.
But the more dangerous enterprises are reflected upon, the |
more reluctantly do men enter upon them; and thus it hap-
pens (almost always) that those conspiracies which fix upon a
certain time in advance for their execution are generally dis-
covered. Amongst the conspirators was Messer Andrea de’
Bardi; in thinking over the matter, the fear of punishment
overcame in him the desire of revenge; and therefore he dis-
closed the whole plot to Jacopo Alberti, his brother-in-law,
who made it known to the Priors, and these communicated it
to the Signori. As the danger was pressing, All Saints’ day
being near at hand, a number of people assembled in the pal-
ace; and deeming delay dangerous, they wanted the Signori
to have the tocsin sounded, and the people called to arms.
Taldo Valori was Gonfalonier at that time, and Francesco. Sal-
viati was one of the Signori; these, being relatives of the Bardi,
objected to having the alarm sounded, alleging that it was not
well to cause the people to arm for every slight cause, as power
given to the multitude, and not controlled by any check, never
resulted in good; that it was easy to start tumults, but diffi-
cult to check them; and therefore it would be better first to
hear the truth of the matter, and then to punish it legally,
rather than to chastise it in a tumultuary manner at the risk
VOL. I. 7

98 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

of the ruin of Florence and upon a simple denunciation. This
advice was not listened to, but, with vile and insulting words
and manner, the people forced the Signori to have the alarm-
bell sounded ; and when this was heard, the whole people of
Florence rushed armed to the Piazza. On the other hand, the
Bardi and Frescobaldi, seeing their plot discovered, took to
arms, resolved either to conquer with glory or to die without
shame; and hoping to be able to defend that part of the city
on the opposite side of the river where they had their palaces, |
they fortified the bridges, trusting in the aid which they ex-
pected from the nobles of the country and from their other
friends. But their plans were thwarted by the people who in-
habited the same side of the city, and who armed in support of
the Signori; so that, finding themselves hemmed in, they aban-
doned the bridges and retreated to the street in which the .
Bardi lived, that being a stronger position than any other, and
there they defended themselves most gallantly. Messer Jacopo,
knowing that this conspiracy was aimed mainly against him,
being afraid of death and stupefied with terror, placed himself
in the midst of his armed men near the palace of the Signori.
But the other Rectors, being less conscious of guilt, were more
courageous, especially the Podesta, Messer Maffeo da Marradi.
He showed himself fearlessly in the thickest of the fight; and
having passed the bridge of Rubaconte, he rushed into the midst
of the Bardi, and made signs to them for a parley. The re-
spect which his conduct inspired, and his other well-known
great qualities, put a stop to the fighting, and caused the con-
spirators quietly to listen to him. In a modest but grave
manner he blamed the conspiracy, and pointed out the dan-
ger in which they were if they did not yield to the popular
impulse, and held out to them the hope that they should after-
wards be heard and judged with leniency, and promised to
exert himself to have their reasonable dissatisfaction treated
with proper consideration. He then returned to the Signori,
and persuaded them not to desire a victory at the expense of
the blood of their fellow-citizens, nor to condemn the conspira-
tors without first giving them a fair hearing. His efforts suc-
ceeded, so that, by consent of the Signori, the Bardi and the
Frescobaldi, with their friends, were permitted to leave the city,
and retire unmolested to their castles. After their departure
the people disarmed, and the Signori proceeded only against

Boox II.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 99

such of the families of the Bardi and Frescobaldi as were taken
with arms in hand. And by way of depriving them of power
they purchased from the Bardi the castles of Mangona and
Vernia; and provided by law that thenceforth no citizen should
be allowed to possess any castle within twenty miles of the city.
A few months afterwards Stiatta Frescobaldi was beheaded, and
many others of the family were exiled. It was not enough for
those who governed to have overcome and subdued the Bardi
and Frescobaldi, but as is always the case with men clothed with
authority, that the more power they have the more they abuse
it, so where previously there was but one captain of the guard
who harassed the city, they appointed another for the country,
giving him very extensive authority, so that those who incurred
the suspicion of these captains could neither live within the
city of Florence nor outside of it. And they irritated the
nobles to that degree against themselves, that these were ready
to sell the city and themselves for the sake of revenge. The
opportunity they had waited for soon presented itself, and they
made good use of it.

83. During all the troubles that had prevailed in Tuscany
and Lombardy the city of Lucca fell under the control of
“Mastino della Scala, lord of Verona (1841). Although accord-
ing to his engagements he should have handed that city over
to the Florentines, yet he did not do so; for as lord of Parma
he thought himself able to hold it regardless of his pledges.
The Florentines therefore, by way of revenging themselves,
united with the Venetians and attacked him so fiercely that he
came near losing his whole state. They however derived no
other advantage from all this than the small gratification to
their pride of having defeated Mastino; for the Venetians,
according to the fashion of all who ally themselves with others
less powerful, after having won Trevisa and Vicenza, made
terms with Mastino, regardless of the Florentines. But the
Visconti, lords of Milan, having soon after taken Parma from
Mastino, he judged that he would in consequence no longer
be able to hold Lucca, and therefore he resolved to sell it.
The Florentines and the Pisans were equally competitors for
it; and the latter, whilst pressing the negotiations for it, per-
ceiving that the Florentines, being the richer, were about to
obtain it, resorted to force, and aided by Visconti they laid
siege to the city. The Florentines, however, did not in conse-

100 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IT.

quence of this withdraw from the purchase, but concluded the
bargain with Mastino, paying part of the money down and
giving hostages for the payment of the other part; and sent
Naddo Rucellai, Giovanni di Bernardino de’ Medici, and Rosso
di Ricciardo de’ Ricci to take possession of Lucca. They en-
tered the city by force, and it was handed over to them by the
troops of Mastino. The Pisans nevertheless pursued their
enterprise, and made every effort to make themselves masters
of Lucca. The Florentines, on the other hand, endeavored to
make the Pisans raise the siege; and after a long war the Flor-
entines were driven off with loss of their money and their
glory, and the Pisans became masters of Lucca. The loss of
that city, as usually happens in such cases, made the people
indignant against those who held the government, and they
openly denounced them in all the public places and piazzas,
charging them with avarice and blaming them for the evil
counsels they had given. At the beginning of this war its
conduct had been confided to twenty citizens, who had chosen
Malatesta da Rimini as captain of the enterprise. He had
conducted it with little courage and still less prudence, and
therefore the Council of Twenty sent to ask the assistance
of Robert, king of Naples, who sent to them Gauthier, Duke of
' Athens ; who, according to the decrees of Heaven, whose hand
always prepares the evils to come, arrived at Florence at the
moment when the attempt upon Lucca had just failed so com-
pletely (1842). Whereupon the Twenty, seeing the people in-
dignant, sought to inspire them with fresh hopes by appointing
a new captain, and thereby either to check them or to deprive
them of all further pretext for denouncing them. And to
constrain them also by fear, aud to enable the Duke of Athens
to defend them with more authority, they appointed him first
as Conservator and afterwards as Commander of their armed
forces.

The nobles — who for the reasons above given were malcon-
tent, and many of them having known Gauthier at the time
when he had on a previous occasion governed Florence in the
name of Charles, Duke of Calabria — thought that the moment
had come when they might, with the ruin of the city, avert
their own destruction. They thought that there was no other
means of subduing the people who had inflicted so many
wrongs upon them than to subject themselves to a prince who,

Book II.]} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 101

knowing the merits of the one party and the insolence of the
other, might reward the one and curb the other. To these con-
siderations was added the hope of advantages which they would
derive from it, if by their efforts he should be made Prince of
the city. They therefore had several secret conferences with
Gauthier, and persuaded him to assume the sovereignty over
all, offering him all the support in their power. Some of the
burgher families united their influence to the authority and
advice of the nobles. These were the Peruzzi, Acciaiuoli, An-
tellesi, and Buonaccorsi, who, being weighed down by debts
which they were unable to pay with their own means, wished
to acquit themselves of them with the property of others, and
counted upon liberating themselves from the servitude to their
creditors by the enslavement of their country. These persua-
sions fired the ambitious spirit of the Duke with the greatest
desire of domination ; and by way of obtaining the reputation
of being severe and just, and thereby to gain the good will
and support of the people, he prosecuted those who had con-
ducted the war against Lucca, and inflicted the penalty of
death upon Messer Giovanni de’ Medici, Naddo Rucellai, and
Guglielmo Altoviti; many others he condemned to exile or to
heavy pecuniary fines.

34. These executions greatly alarmed the middle class of
citizens, and gave satisfaction only to the nobles and the pop-
ulace ; to the latter because it is their nature to rejoice in evil,)
and to the former because they saw themselves avenged of the’
many injuries received at the hands of the citizens. When
the Duke passed through the streets, the people loudly praised
his frankness of spirit, and he was urged on all sides to inquire
into the frauds of the citizens and to punish them. The au-
thority of the Twenty had declined, and the influence of the
Duke had become great, and the fear of him still greater ; and
everybody by way of displaying their devotion to him had his
arms painted over their doors; so that he really lacked noth-
ing of being a prince except the title. Believing that he might
now attempt anything with safety, he gave the Signori to
understand that he deemed it necessary for the good of the
state that they should freely concede to him the sovereignty
over it, and that, inasmuch as the whole city seemingly con-
sented to it, he desired that they also should give their concur-
rence. Although the Signori had for a long time foreseen the

102 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

ruin of their country, yet they were greatly troubled by this
demand ; and though they well knew their danger, still, so as
not to fail of their duty to their country, they refused his
demand in a spirited manner. By way of making greater
show of religion and humanity the Duke had chosen for his
residence the convent of the Minorite Brothers of Santa Croce ;
and desiring to put his evil intentions into execution, he pub-
lished a proclamation commanding all the people to assemble
before him in the Piazza of Santa Croce. This proclamation
frightened the Signori much more than the previous words of
the Duke had done; and they united themselves closely with
such of the citizens as were regarded as true lovers of their
country and of liberty. And knowing the power of the Duke,
they did not think of any other means of resistance than by
petition ; and to try, as their forces were insufficient, whether
prayers and supplications would not make him renounce his
attempt, or alleviate the yoke which he was about to impose
upon them. A portion of the Signori therefore went to see
him, and one of them addressed him as follows : —

“We have been induced, O Signor, to appear before you,
“first by your demand to have the lordship over our city con-
“ferred upon you, and next by your order for an assembly of
“the people; for it appears certain to us that you aim to obtain
“by extraordinary means that to which by ordinary means you
“have been unable to obtain our consent. It is not our inten-
“tion to oppose your designs in any way by force, but only to
“point out to you the weight of the burden which you are
“about to take upon yourself, and the greatness of the danger
“of the course which you are pursuing, so that you may always
“remember our counsels, and those of the persons who advise
“you differently, for the gratification of their revenge, and not
“for your good. You seek to enslave a city that has always
“lived in the enjoyment of liberty; for the authority which
“on a former occasion we accorded to the king of Naples was
“an alliance, and not servitude. Have you considered the im-
“portance of this in a city like ours, and how powerful the
“mere name of Liberty is, which no force can subdue, nor time
“consume, and for which nothing else can compensate? Think,
“O Signor, what power would be requisite to keep such a city
“in subjection! The foreign troops which you may always
“keep there will not suffice, and those of the city you will not

Boox I1.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 103

“be able to trust; for those who are your friends to-day, and
“counsel you to your present attempt, will no sooner have
“ profited by your power to defeat their own enemies, than
“they will seek your overthrow for the purpose of making
“themselves masters. The people, in whom you trust, will
“turn against you at the first mischance, however small; so
“that you may expect in a little while to have the whole city
“hostile to you, which would involve her ruin and your own.
“Nor can you hope to find a remedy for this evil, for those
“princes only can assure their sovereignty who have but few
“enemies, of whom they can easily rid themselves by death or
“by exile. But against a universal hatred there can never be
“any security, for you can never know where the evil has its
“ origin; and he who fears every man can never make sure of
“any one. And if yet you attempt it, you will only aggravate
“your danger, for the hatred of those who remain will become
“more inflamed, and they will be the more ready for revenge.
“ Nothing is more certain than that time will not efface the
“love of liberty; for we often hear of its being reasserted in
“cities by those who have never tasted its sweets, and who
“loved liberty only from the memory of it transmitted to them
“ by their fathers. And once recovered they have defended it
“with the utmost obstinacy and through every danger. And
“even if the fathers left no record of the liberties they enjoyed,
“ yet the public palaces, the dwellings of the magistrates, the
“banners of the free orders, all bear witness to them; and
“the memory of all these things is fondly cherished by the
“citizens. What acts of yours could you offer as an equiva-
“lent for the happiness of living in the enjoyment of liberty,
“ or that could extinguish in men’s minds the desire for their
“present condition? In vain would you add all Tuscany to
“the possessions of the city! In vain would you return daily
“crowned with victory over our enemies, for that would not
“redound to the glory of Florence, but only to yours, and her
“citizens would thereby not gain subjects, but merely fellow-
“slaves, whereby their own servitude would be aggravated.
“ And if your life were that of a saint, your manners benevo-
“lent, and your judgments just, all this would not suffice to
“secure their affection. And if you were to believe that it
“would suffice, you only deceive yourself; for every chain
“is heavy and every fetter irksome to him who has been accus-

104 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

“tomed to live unconstrained. A turbulent state and a benign
“prince are incompatible, for of necessity they must either
“become assimilated, or the one will quickly destroy the other.
“You must expect therefore either to hold this city by vio-
“lence, for which the citadels and their garrisons and foreign
“allies are generally insufficient, or you must be content with
“the authority which we have conferred upon you, and to this
“we would advise you, reminding you that that dominion only
“is desirable which is borne willingly. Do not attempt then,
“under the promptings of your ambition to place yourself
“where you can neither remain nor rise higher, and whence
“you would of necessity fall, with equal injury to yourself and
“ ourselves!”

35. The obdurate soul of the Duke was in no way moved by
this address. He replied, “that it was not his intention to
“deprive Florence of her liberty, but rather to restore it to
“her; that cities were enslaved only by discord, whilst union
“insured them freedom; and if Florence by her factions,
“ambitions, and enmities deprived herself of liberty, and he
“restored her to union, he could not be charged with an
“attempt to enslave her. And as he had been induced to take
“this task upon himself, not from any ambition of his own, but
“at the urgent instance of many citizens, it would be well for
“them to be content with what would satisfy the others. And,
“as for the dangers to which he would expose himself by this
“step, he did not regard them, for it was not the practice of
“a good man to be deterred by fear from doing a good act, and
“only a coward desisted from a glorious enterprise because its
“issue was involved in doubt. And that he believed his con-
“duct would be such that in a short time they would find out
“that they had trusted him too little and feared him too
“ much.”

The Signori, seeing therefore that they could effect no good,
agreed that the people should assemble the following morning,
and with their concurrence to give the Duke the sovereignty
over Florence for one year, with the same conditions as those
given on a former occasion to Charles, Duke of Calabria. It
was on the 8th of September, of the year 1342, that the Duke,
accompanied by Messer Giovanni della Tosa and all his adher-
ents, and many other citizens, came into the Piazza, and to-
gether with the Signoria mounted the Ringhiera, as the people

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 105

of Florence called those steps which were at the foot of the
palace of the Signoria. From there the terms of agreement
were read to the people that had been concluded between the
Signoria and the Duke; and when they came to that passage
by which they accorded to the Duke the lordship over Florence
for one year, there arose cries from the people, “ For life!”
And when Messer Francesco Rustichelli, one of the Signori,
arose to speak for the purpose of allaying the tumult, he was
interrupted by cries; so that the Duke was elected by the peo-
ple sovereign of Florence, not for one year, but in perpetuity ;
and he was taken and carried by the people around the Piazza,
who shouted his name aloud. It was customary for the captain
of the guard of the palace, in the absence of the Signoria, to
keep the gates of the palace locked inside. This office was
held at the time by Rinieri de Giotto, who, having been bribed
by the friends of the Duke, admitted him inside of the palace
without awaiting any attempt at force. The Signori, frightened
and covered with shame, retired to their own houses; the pal-
ace was sacked by the Duke’s adherents, the gonfalon of the
people was torn down, and the Duke’s standard raised instead.
All of which caused immeasurable grief and regret to all the
good citizens, and much joy to those who had consented to it
from malice or ignorance.

36. No sooner had the Duke obtained the sovereignty of
Florence than, for the purpose of depriving those of power who
had been the customary defenders of liberty, he prohibited the
Signori from assembling in the palace, and assigned to them a
private house. He took the standards from the Gonfalonieri of
the companies of the people, suspended the ordinances of justice
against the nobles, liberated the prisoners, recalled the Bardi
and the Frescobaldi from exile, and forbade everybody from
bearing arms. And, by way of being the better able to defend
himself against those within Florence, he formed alliances with
those outside of the city. He favored and bestowed great ad-
vantages upon the people of Arezzo, and upon all others that
were subject to the Florentines, and made peace with the Pisans,
although one of the conditions on which he was placed at the
head of the state was that he should make war upon Pisa. He
withheld the interest from those merchants who had loaned
money to the city during the war with Lucca, increased the old
taxes and laid new ones, and deprived the Signori of all author-

106 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. (Boox II.

ity. His Rectors were Baglione da Perugia and Messer Gugli-
elmo d’ Ascesi; with these, and Messer Cerettieri Bisdomini, he
consulted. The taxes which he imposed upon the citizens were
heavy, and his judgments unjust. He threw off the cloak of
religion and of humanity, which he had assumed, and abandoned
himself to pride and cruelty. Many noble and prominent citi-
zens were condemned to heavy fines or death, or subjected to
all sorts of newly contrived torments. And so that his govern-
ment outside of the city should not be better than that within,
he created six Rectors for the country, who plundered and mal-
treated the inhabitants. Although the nobles had supported
and aided him in obtaining the sovereignty, and he had recalled
many from exile, yet he held them in suspicion; for he could
not believe that the generous spirit that belongs to true nobility
could be content to live under his rule. He therefore turned
to favor and conciliate the common people, thinking that with
their support, and with foreign troops, he would be able to
maintain his tyranny. When, however, the month of May had
come, at which time the people are accustomed to hold their
festivals, he had the common people and the small citizens
formed into several companies, on whom he bestowed splendid
titles, and gave them banners and money; and whilst a part of
these went through the city with festive rejoicings, the others
received them with the greatest pomp.

As the fame of the new sovereignty of the Duke spread, many
Frenchmen flocked to him, and he gave employment to them all
as men worthy of all trust; so that, in a short time, Florence
became subject, not only to Frenchmen, but also to their man-
ners and customs and fashions in dress ; for all men and women
imitated them, regardless of all decencies of life and without
shame. But what gave the greatest offence were the outrages
committed by the Duke and his followers upon the women, re-
gardless of everything. The citizens, therefore, were filled with
indignation at seeing the majesty of their state ruined, all order
disregarded, the laws annulled, all honesty corrupted, and all
modesty extinguished ; for those who were not accustomed to
see royal pomp could not meet the Duke, surrounded by armed
satellites on foot and on horseback, without being deeply pained.
And they were made to feel their shame more keenly by being
obliged to do honor to him whom they hated most. All this
was aggravated still more by the apprehension caused by the

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 107

many deaths and heavy taxes with which he exhausted and im-
poverished the city. The Duke was aware of this general feel-
ing of hatred and apprehension, and he feared it, although he
tried to make it appear that he was beloved by everybody.
Thus it happened that when Matteo di Morozzo, either for the
purpose of ingratiating himself or to save himself from danger,
revealed to the Duke that the family of the Medici and some
others were conspiring against him, he not only caused no inves-
tigation of the matter, but had the informer miserably put to
death. By this course the Duke discouraged those who desired
to advise him for his safety, and encouraged those who sought
his destruction. He also subjected Bettone Cini to the cruel
torture of having his tongue cut out, causing his death thereby,
for having dared to speak against the taxes imposed upon the
citizens (1343). This act incensed the citizens still more, and
increased their hatred of the Duke; for the city, which had been
accustomed in all matters to act and speak with the utmost de-
gree of freedom, could no longer endure to have her hands fet-
tered and her mouth gagged. This indignation and hatred,
therefore, increased to such a point, that it would have stirred
not only the Florentines, who were alike incapable of maintain-
ing their liberty or of supporting their servitude, but any other
enslaved people, to make an effort for the recovery of their
liberty. Accordingly, many citizens of all conditions resolved
either to sacrifice their lives or to recover their liberty. They
formed three separate conspiracies, composed of three different
classes of citizens, — nobles, people, and artificers, — who, be-
sides the general causes of discontent, were influenced thereto
by the opinion that, although the people had lost the control of
the government, yet the nobles had not gained it; and that the
artificers were deprived of their customary gains. Messer Ag-
nolo Acciaiuoli was Archbishop of Florence at that time. In
his preaching he had magnified the doings of the Duke, and had
won for him great favor with the people. But when he after-
wards saw him as lord of Florence, and perceived his tyrannical
conduct, he became convinced that he had misled his country ;
and to make good the error which he had committed, he could
think of no other remedy than that the same hand that had
inflicted the wound should also heal it; and therefore he
placed himself at the head of the first and most powerful con-
spiracy, in which there were also the Bardi, the Rossi, the Fres-

108 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

cobaldi, Scali, Altoviti, Magalotti, Strozzi, and the Mancini. One
of the other conspiracies was headed by Manno and Corso Do-
nati, and with them the Pazzi, Cavicciulli, Cerchi, and the Al-
bizzi. The chiefs of the third conspiracy were Antonio Adimari,
and with him the Medici, Bordoni, Rucellai, and Aldobrandini.
They resolved upon killing the Duke in the house of the Albizzi,
where they supposed he would go on the day of San Giovanni to
see the horses run. But as he did not go there, they could not
carry out that plan. They then thought of attacking him as he
made his promenade through the city; but they saw that that
would be difficult, as he went always accompanied and well
armed, and always varied his promenade, so that they could not
with any certainty lie in wait for him in any particular place.
They also talked about killing him in the council chamber, but
feared that, even if they succeeded, they would be at the mercy
of the Duke’s guard. Whilst the conspirators were discussing
these different plans, Antonio Adimari communicated the matter
to some of his Siennese friends, for the purpose of obtaining
their assistance. He made known to them a part of the con-
spirators, and assured them that the whole city was ready to
strike for liberty. One of these mentioned the subject to Messer
Francesco Brunelleschi, not by way of denouncing it, but merely
to ascertain whether he too was one of the conspirators. Messer
Francesco, either from fear for himself or from hatred of the
other conspirators, revealed the whole to the Duke, who imme-
diately had Pagolo della Mazzacca and Simone de Monterappoli
arrested ; and when the Duke learned from them the character
and extent of the conspiracy, he became frightened, and was
advised to have the conspirators summoned for examination,
rather than arrested as prisoners, because, if they should escape
by flight, he could easily and without any disturbance rid him-
self of them by declaring them exiles. The Duke therefore had
Antonio Adimari summoned, who, confiding in his companions,
promptly appeared. He was kept prisoner, and the Duke was
advised by Messer Francesco Brunelleschi and Messer Uguccione
Buondelmonti to have the country scoured, and to have all the
conspirators that were captured put to death. But the Duke did
not consider himself strong enough to act according to this ad-
vice in the midst of so many enemies; he therefore adopted a
different plan, by which, if it had succeeded, he would have made
sure of his enemies and provided new forces for himself. The

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 109

Duke was in the habit of convoking some of the citizens for the
purpose of consulting with them upon cases that occurred. Hay-
ing thereupon taken the precaution to send outside of the city for
troops, the Duke prepared a list of three hundred citizens, and
had them summoned by his sergeants under pretence that he
wished to consult with them; it being his intention when they
were assembled to have them either killed or imprisoned. The
imprisonment of Antonio Adimari and the sending for troops,
which could not be done secretly, frightened the citizens, and
especially those implicated in the conspiracy, so that the most
daring refused to obey the summons of the Duke. And, as
every one had read the list, they met and encouraged each other
to take up arms, and to resolve rather to die like men than to
be led like calves to the shambles. Thus in a few hours all the
conspirators became known to each other; and resolved on the
following day, which was the 26th of July, 18438, to cause a
tumult in the old market, and then to arm themselves and call
upon the people to arise and assert their liberty.

37. On the following morning, therefore, according to the
order agreed upon, at the hour of nine, the conspirators took
up arms, and at the cry of “ Liberty,” the people armed them-
selves and threw up barricades, and raised the banner that
had been secretly provided by the conspirators. All the heads
of families, nobles as well as citizens, united and swore to
defend themselves and to kill the Duke; the only exceptions
were some of the Buondelmonti and Cavalcanti, and those four
families of the people who had aided the Duke in making him-
self sovereign of the city ; these, together with the butchers and
others of the lowest class of the people, came together armed
in the Piazza, in support of the Duke. At this disturbance the
Duke armed the palace, and his people who were lodged in
various parts of the city mounted their horses to go into the
Piazza; but on the-way they were attacked in several places,
and many of them killed. Nevertheless some three hundred
horsemen reached the Piazza. The Duke was in doubt whether
to go to encounter his enemies, or to defend himself within the
palace. On the other hand, the Medici, Cavicciulli, Rucellai,
and other families who had been most wronged by him,
doubted lest, in case the Duke should come out, many who had
taken up arms against him might not declare in his favor ;
desirous therefore to prevent his coming out of the palace and

110 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

increasing his forees, they made head and assailed the Piazza.
Upon their arrival those families of the people who had de-
clared for the Duke, seeing themselves boldly attacked, changed
their resolve as the Duke’s fortune had changed, and all joined
the citizens, excepting Messer Uguccione Buondelmonte, who
went into the palace, and Messer Gianozzo Cavalcanti, who
retreated with a portion of his companions to the New Market ;
there he mounted upon a bench and entreated the people who
were going armed to the Piazza to go there in support of the
Duke. And for the purpose of alarming them he magnified
the forces of the Duke, and threatened the people that they
would all be killed if they persisted obstinately in their at-
tempt against their lord. Finding not a man to follow him,
nor any one to chastise him for his insolence, and seeing that
he was exerting himself in vain, he resolved to tempt fortune
no more and retired to his own house. Meantime the fight
between the people and the Duke’s forces was hotly contested,
and although the Duke aided them from the palace yet his
men were beaten; a part of them surrendered to the people,
and a part, abandoning their horses, took refuge in the palace.
Whilst the fighting was going on in the Piazza, Corso and
Messer Amerigo Donati with a portion of the people broke
open the prison of the Stinche, burned the papers of the Po-
desta and of the chancelry, sacked the houses of the Rectors,
and killed all the officers of the Duke they could get hold of.
The Duke, on the other hand, seeing that he had lost the Piazza
and that the whole city was against him, and himself with-
out help of any kind, made an attempt to win the people over
to his side by some act of signal humanity; and having the
prisoners brought before him, he liberated them with kind
and condescending words, and made Antonio Adimari a noble
against his own wishes. He removed his own standards from
the palace, and had them replaced by the gonfalons of the
people. But all these things being done too late and out of
season, being evidently done unwillingly and by constraint,
proved of no advantage to him. He remained therefore, ill
content, besieged in the palace, and saw how from having at-
tempted to grasp too much he had lost all; and began to fear
that in afew days he would have to die either from hunger
or the sword. The citizens went to Santa Reparata to reor-
ganize the government, and chose fourteen citizens, half nobles

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 111

and half of the people, who together with the Bishop should
be invested with full powers to remodel the government of
Florence. They also elected six others who should exercise
the powers of the Podesta until one could be chosen for that
post.

A good many strangers had come to Florence to aid the
people in their struggle, amongst others some citizens of Pisa
together with six ambassadors, men who were held in high
honor in their own city. These attempted to negotiate an
arrangement between the Duke and the people; but the people
refused any agreement unless Messer Guglielmo d’ Ascesi and
his son, together with Messer Cerettieri Bisdomini should first
be delivered into their hands. The Duke would not consent to
this, yet, on being threatened by the people who were shut up
with him in the palace, he allowed himself to be forced to it.
Certainly the resentments seem fiercer and the wounds more
deadly when a people struggle to recover their liberty than
when they defend it. Messer Guglielmo and his son were
given up to the thousands of their enemies, although the son
was not yet eighteen years of age. But neither his tender
years nor graceful form, nor his innocence, could save him
from the fury of the multitude; and those who could not
wound him whilst alive, did so after his death. Nor did it
satisfy them to hack him with their swords, but they tore him
with their hands and teeth. And so that all senses should be
satisfied by revenge, having first heard his lamentations, and
seen his wounds, and touched his torn and palpitating flesh,
they wanted also to have their palates taste it; so that after
having satisfied all their outer senses, they might also glut
those within. The more these unhappy victims were subjected
to this rabid frenzy, the better was it for Messer Cerettieri ;
for the multitude, tired by their cruelty upon the two Ascesi,
did not think of Messer Cerettieri, who, not being otherwise
demanded, remained in the palace, whence he was taken and
carried away during the night by some of his friends and rela-
tives. When the multitude had assuaged their fury upon the
blood of the two Ascesi, an agreement was concluded by which
the Duke was to renounce all the claims he had upon Florence,
and be allowed to depart in safety with all his people and his
goods; and according to which he was to ratify this renuncia-
tion at Casentino, outside of the Florentine dominions. After

112 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox II.

signing the agreement the Duke departed from Florence accom-
panied by many citizens; and on arriving at Casentino he rati-
fied his renunciation, though most reluctantly ; nor would he
have kept his faith had he not been threatened by the Count
Simone to carry him back to Florence. The Duke, as is proved
by his conduct, was cruel and avaricious, difficult of access, and
haughty in his demeanor. He wanted the servility of the peo-
ple, and not their good will; and for that reason he desired
more to be feared than to be loved. Nor was his appearance
less odious than his conduct; for he was of low stature and
swarthy, with a long and coarse beard. He was equally hated
by all parties, so that within a period of ten months he lost by
his own bad conduct that sovereignty which the evil counsels
of others had bestowed on him.

38. These events in the city of Florence encouraged all the
other places that were subject to the Florentines also to assert
their liberties; so that Arezzo, Castiglione, Pistoja, Volterra,
Colle, and San Gimignano revolted. Thus Florence at one
blow got rid of her tyrant and lost her dominions; and in re-
covering her own liberty she taught her subject cities how they
could recover their own. After the expulsion of the Duke and
the loss of the subject cities, the fourteen’ citizens and the
Bishop thought it better to placate their subjects by peace
than to make them enemies by war, and to prove to them
that they were willing that they should enjoy their liberties
the same as the Florentines did their own. They therefore
sent ambassadors to Arezzo to renounce the sovereignty which -
they held over that city, and to conclude a treaty with her citi-
zens to the effect that, since they could not hold them as sub-
jects, they would value them as allies. With the other places
they also agreed as best they could to keep them as friends,
so that they might aid them in maintaining the independence
_ of Florence. This course, so wisely taken, had the happiest
results; for a few years after Arezzo returned voluntarily
under the government of Florence; and the other places also
came back within a few months to their former obedience.
And thus the things we desire are often obtained with more
ease and less danger by seemingly renouncing them, than by
pursuing them with the greatest energy and perseverance.

39. Having settled outside matters the Florentines now turned
their attention to those within the city ; and after some disputes

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 113

between the nobles and the people, it was agreed to concede to
the nobles one third of the Signoria, and one half of the other
public offices. The city, as stated above, was divided into
sixths, whence there were always six Signori, that is one for
each sixth; except that on several special occasions twelve
or thirteen Signori were created ; though the number was soon
after again reduced to six. Still some reform seemed neces-
sary in this respect; whether it was that the sixths were badly
distributed, or whether it was that they wished to give a greater
part to the nobles, it was deemed advisable to increase the
number of the Signori. The city was therefore divided into
fourths, and for each fourth they created three Signori. They
left the Gonfalonier of Justice and those of the companies of
the people; and in place of the twelve Buonomini they created
eight Counsellors, four nobles and four citizens. Having es-
tablished the government with this organization, the city would
have been quiet, if the nobles had been content to live with
that degree of modesty which is suitable for a republic. But
their conduct was just the reverse; for in private life they
wanted no equals, and in the magistracies they wanted to be
masters, and every day gave birth to some fresh display of
their insolence and pride. This displeased the people, who com-
plained that in place of one tyrant, whom they had crushed, a
thousand others had sprung up. The insolence on the one
hand, and the dissatisfaction on the other, increased to that
degree that the chiefs of the people complained to the Bishop
of the shameless conduct of the nobles, and of the bad fellow-
ship which they manifested towards them, and persuaded him
to bring it about that the nobles should content themselves
with having a share of only the other offices, and leave the
magistracy of the Signoria exclusively to the people. The
Bishop was naturally good, but easily swayed first in one direc-
tion and then in another. It was this weakness which had
caused him, at the instance of his associates, first to give his
support to the Duke of Athens, and afterwards to conspire
against him by the advice of some of the citizens. In the re-
organization of the state he had favored the nobles, and now
he seemed to favor the people; and for that reason the chiefs
of the people addressed themselves to him with their request.
Believing that he would find in others as little stability of pur-
pose as he himself possessed, he hoped to carry the matter
VOL. I. 8

114 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book II.

through by agreement, and convoked the Fourteen, who still
held their authority ; and with the best words he knew how
to employ, he advised them to consent to yield the office of the
Signoria wholly to the people, promising them that in that case
the city should remain quiet, but otherwise they might expect
disorder and their own destruction. These words greatly ex-
cited the nobles, and Messer Ridolfo dei Bardi replied sharply,
calling the Bishop a man of little faith, and reproving his friend-
ship for the Duke as inconsiderate, and the Duke’s expulsion as
treason; and concluded by telling him that they would defend
at all hazards the honors they had acquired at their own peril.
And having departed with the others indignant at the Bishop,
they communicated the matter to their associates and all the
noble families. The representatives of the people also made
their views known to the people. And as the nobles organized
themselves with such aid as they could get for the defence of
their Signori, the people thought best not to wait until the
nobles should be prepared, but rushed armed to the palace,
crying that they wanted the nobles to resign from the magis-
tracy. The noise and tumult were great. The Signori saw
themselves abandoned ; for the nobles, seeing the people armed,
dared not take to arms themselves, and all remained in their
houses. The Signori of the people, having first endeavored to
quiet the people by assuring them that their associates were
good and modest men, and having failed in that, as the least
objectionable course, sent the Signori of the nobles home to
their houses, whither they were safely conducted with much
difficulty. The nobles having thus left the palace, the four
Counsellors were also deprived of their offices, and instead of
them twelve of the people were appointed ; and to the eight
Signori that remained they gave one Gonfalonier of Justice and
sixteen Gonfaloniers of the companies of the people, and they
reorganized the councils so that the whole government depended
upon the will of the people.

40. At the time when these events occurred there was a
great scarcity in the city, so that the nobles as well as the °
small people were both ill content ; the latter from hunger, and
the former from having lost their offices and dignities. This
encouraged Messer Andrea Strozzi to think that he might make
himself master of the liberties of the city. He therefore sold
his grain at a less price than others, in consequence of which

Boox II.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 115

many people used to collect at his palace. Thereupon he ven-
tured one morning to mount his horse, and with a few follow-
ers to call the people to arms. In a few hours he gathered
more than four thousand men, with whom he proceeded to the
palace of the Signoria, and demanded to have the palace opened
to them. But the Signori drove them from the Piazza by
threats and force of arms, and afterwards frightened them so
much with the ban, that little by little they all returned to
their homes ; so that Messer Andrea, finding himself left alone,
could only save himself with difficulty from the hands of the
magistrates. This attempt, though reckless, and ending as such
attempts are apt to do, yet gave hopes to the nobles that they
might still compel the people to terms, seeing that the lower
class was in discord with the better classes. And so as not to
lose this opportunity they resolved to arm and recover by force
that which by force had been taken from them. And their
confidence of success increased to that point that they provided
themselves openly with arms, fortified their houses, and sent
to their friends and into Lombardy for assistance. The people
and the Signori, on the other hand, provided themselves with
arms, and called upon the people of Sienna and Perugia for
assistance. Help for both parties had already appeared, and
the whole city was in arms. The nobles made head in three
places on this side of the Arno; at the houses of the Cavicciulli
near San Giovanni, at the houses of the Pazzi and the Donati
at San Pier Maggiore, and at those of the Cavalcanti in the
New Market. Those on the other side of the Arno had forti-
fied themselves at the bridges and in the streets near their
houses; the Nerli at the Ponte alla Carraja, the Frescobaldi
at the Santa Trinita, and the Rossi and Bardi defended the
Ponte Vecchio and that of the Rubaconte. The people, on
the other hand, gathered under the Gonfalonier of Justice and
under the banners of the companies of the people.

41. Matters being thus, the people thought best not to defer
the contest. The first that moved were the Medici and the
Rondinelli, who attacked the Cavicciulli from the street that
leads towards their houses by the Piazza di San Giovanni.
Here the fighting was severe, for the people were struck by
stones thrown from the towers, and wounded by crossbows from
below. The battle here had lasted three hours, and the number
of the people steadily increased; so that the Cavicciulli, seeing

116 "HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IL

themselves overpowered by the multitude and receiving no as-
sistance, became frightened and surrendered to the people, who
spared their houses and goods, only taking from them their arms,
and ordering them to distribute themselves and their relations
and friends amongst the houses of the people. The first attack
having been victorious, the Donati and the Pazzi were also easily
overcome, being less powerful than the others. There only re-
mained on this side of the Arno the Cavalcanti, who were strong
in numbers and in position; but on seeing all the banners com-
ing against themselves, whilst only three had sufficed to overcome
the others, they surrendered without making much resistance.
Three parts of the city were already in the hands of the people,
and only one remained in possession of the nobles; but this was
the most difficult, both on account of the strength of its defend-
ers as well as from its position, being protected by the river
Arno, so that it was necessary to take the bridges, which were
guarded in the manner above stated. The Ponte Vecchio was
therefore the first to be attacked. This was gallantly defended,
for the towers were armed, the streets barricaded, and the bar-
ricades were held by the most desperate men, so that the people
were repulsed with great loss. Finding their exertions here to
be in vain, they tried to pass the Rubaconte bridge, and meeting
there the same desperate resistance, they left four companies to
guard these two bridges, and all the others went to assail the
Ponte alla Carraja. And although the Neri defended it most
manfully, yet they could not resist the furious onslaught of the
people, partly because this bridge was less strong, not having
any towers for defence, and partly because the Capponi and
other families of the people also assailed them. Being thus at-
tacked on all sides, they abandoned the barricades, and gave
way to the people, who after this also overcame the Rossi and
the Frescobaldi, for all the people on the other side of the Arno
joined the victors. There were therefore only the Bardi left,
who were neither daunted by the defeat of the others, nor by the
union of all the people against them, nor by the hopelessness of
all succor; preferring rather to die fighting and to see their
houses sacked and burnt, than to yield voluntarily to the power
of their enemies. They defended themselves therefore so well
that the people were unsuccessful in their several attempts to
drive them either from the Ponte Vecchio or the Ponte dal Ru-
baconte, being each time repulsed, with the loss of many killed

Boox II.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. a bye

and wounded. In olden times there had been a road made by
which one could pass from the Via Romana, between the houses
of the Pitti, to the walls above the hill of San Giorgio. The
people sent six companies by this road, with orders to attack
the houses of the Bardi from the rear. This caused the Bardi
to lose courage, and insured the victory to the people; for when
those who guarded the barricades became aware that their houses
were being attacked, they abandoned the fight, and ran to protect
their homes. This enabled the people to take the barricade of
the Ponte Vecchio, whilst the Bardi, who were everywhere put
to flight, were sheltered by the Quaratesi, Panzanesi, and the
Mozzi. The people thereupon, — that is, the lowest and most
ignoble of them,—thirsting for booty, plundered and sacked
all their houses, pulled down their palaces and towers, and
burnt them with such fury that everybody, even the most cruel
enemy of the Florentine name, would have been ashamed at
such wanton destruction.

42. The nobles being vanquished, the people reorganized the
government so as to be composed of three classes of the people,
—the rich, the middle, and the lower class. It was ordained
that the rich should have two Signori, and the middle and lower
classes each three, and that the Gonfalonier should alternately
be taken from each class. Furthermore, all the old ordinances
against the nobles were re-established, and, by way of weakening
them still more, many of them were reduced from their rank and
mixed with the people. The ruin of the nobles was so great, and
so overwhelmed their party, that they never again ventured to
take up arms against the people, and thus they became continu-
ally more humble and abject; and thus Florence deprived her-
self not only of all military valor, but also of all sentiment of
generosity. After this destruction of the nobles, Florence en-
joyed tranquillity until the year 1353; in the course of which
period occurred that memorable pestilence, described by Messer
Giovanni Boccaccio with so much eloquence, and by which Flor-
ence lost ninety-six thousand inhabitants (1348). The Floren-
tines also made war for the first time against the Visconti, in
consequence of the ambition of the Archbishop, then Prince of
Milan. So soon as this war was terminated, the factions within
the city revived; and, although the nobility was destroyed, yet
fortune soon found new ways of causing fresh troubles to arise
from fresh dissensions.

THIRD BOOK.

SUMMARY.

1. Reflections upon the domestic discords of the republic. Parallel be-
tween the discords of Rome and those of Florence. —2. Enmity between the
two families of the Albizzi and Ricci. — 3. Origin of the system of admonish-
ing; scandals resulting from it (1357). — 4. Checks put upon the captains of
the Guelf party. —5. Many citizens, moved by the disorders of the city, meet
in San Pietro Scheraggio, and from there go to the Signori to urge them to
provide for the peace of the city. The Signori commit the welfare of the
republic to fifty-six citizens, who, by showing more favor to the Guelf faction
than to the other, leave the field to be overrun by the evil weeds of discord
with increased exuberance. —7. War of the Florentines against the Legate
of Pope Gregory IX., who attacks them at a time of scarcity, hoping to
subdue them (1375). League of the Florentines against the Pope with
Messer Bernabo and all the cities that were hostile to the Church. —8. Flor-
ence divides into two factions, the captains of the Guelf party against the
Eight of the War (1378).—9. Salvestro de’ Medici is made Gonfaloniere.
His laws against the captains of the parties, and in favor of the Admonished
(1378). The colleges disapprove of them. —10. Afterwards, constrained by
popular tumults, they approve them. — 11. The magistrates and the Gonfalo-
niere Guicciardini strive in vain to allay these tumults. —12. Origin of the
corporations of the trades. —13. The wool trade or guild, being the most
powerful amongst the trades, invites the people to fresh disturbances ; more
ruin, burning, and sacking of houses. —14. The people demand that the
Signoria shall leave the palace. —15. They constrain them by force to come
out of it.—16. Michele di Lando, wool-carder, is made Gonfaloniere by the
clamor of the people. He abolishes the Syndics of the Guilds, the Signoria,
and the Colleges ; also the Eight of the War. The people, thinking that
Michele is too favorable to the rich, rise against him, but he encounters and
compels them to submission. Disposition of Lando. —18. Fresh regula-
tions for the election of Signori, by which the common people are deprived
of any share in the Signoria, but the minor trades or guilds are left more
powerful than the noble citizens, whence after a short time the city is again
thrown into confusion. — 19. Piero degli Albizzi and other citizens, sus-
pected of holding secret relations with Charles of Durazzo, pretender to the
kingdom of Naples, and with the Florentine exiles, are taken and condemned
to death (1379). —20. Insolence of Giorgio Scali and of Tommaso Strozzi

Boox III.) HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 119

against the authority of the magistrates. Scali is decapitated and Strozzi
obliged to fly (1331).—21. Reform of the magistracy unfavorable to the
people (1882). — 22. Michele di Lando and other chiefs of the people are im-
prisoned. The Florentines purchase Arezzo (1384).— 23. Benedetto degli
Alberti becomes suspect to the Signoria by his magnificence and popular-
ity; he is confined, and his fainily admonished. — 24. Many other citizens
are admonished and confined. —25. War of the Florentines with Gio. Ga-
leazzo Visconti, Duke of Milan, called Conte di Virtu (1390). The people,
irritated by the violence of Maso degli Albizzi, intrust themselves to Messer
Veri de’ Medici, who refuses to make himself Prince of the city, and appeases
the people (1393). —26. The Signoria attempt by violent neans to prevent in-
surrections, and Donato Acciaiuoli, who opposes them, is confined. —27. The
banished attempt to return to Florence; they enter by stealth and excite a
riot in the city ; but are taken in the Santa Reparata and put to death (1397).
—28. Supported by the Duke of Milan they conspire anew, but without suc-
cess (1400).—29. The Florentines take Pisa (1406). They make war
against Ladislas, king of Naples, and having defeated him they take Cor-
tona (1414). State of Florence at this time.

1. THE causes of nearly all the evils that afflict republics are
to be found in the great and natural enmities that exist between
the people and the nobles, and which result from the disposition
of the one to command, and the indisposition of the other to
obey. It is this diversity of disposition that supplies nourish-
ment to all the troubles that disturb these states. This was the
cause of the divisions in Rome, and it is this that kept Florence
divided, if I may compare small things with great ones, although
different effects were produced by it in these two republics ;
for the dissensions that arose in the beginning in Rome were
marked by disputes, those of Florence by combats. Those of
Rome were terminated by a law, those of Florence by the death
and exile of many citizens. Those of Rome ever increased mili-
tary valor, whilst those of Florence destroyed it entirely. Those
of Rome led from an equality of citizens to the greatest inequal-
ity, and those of Florence from inequality to the most wonderful
equality. This diversity of, effects must have been caused by
the different character of the aims which these two peoples had
in view. For the people of Rome desired to enjoy the highest
honors of the state equally with the nobles; the people of Flor-
ence fought for the exclusive control of the government, with-
out any participation in it by the nobles. And as the object
of the Roman people was more reasonable, so the nobles bore
the wrongs inflicted upon them more readily, and yielded with-
out coming to arms. And, after some disputes, they agreed to

120 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

a law that should satisfy the people, and yet leave the nobles in
possession of their dignities. On the other hand, the demands
of the Florentine people were injurious and unjust, and there-
fore did the nobility prepare itself for defence with greater
energy; and thus the people resorted to bloodshed and exile.
And the laws which were afterwards made were not for the
common benefit, but were wholly in favor of the victor. From
this resulted also that the victories of the people over the nobles
made Rome more virtuous, because the plebeians, in sharing with
the nobles the civil, military, and judicial administration, became
inspired with the same virtues that distinguished the nobles; so
that Rome grew at the same time in power and in virtue. But
in Florence, when the people were victors, the nobles, excluded
from the magistracies, found it necessary not only to be, but
also to appear, similar to the people, in their conduct, in their
opinions, and in their habits of life. Thence arose the changes
in their armorial bearings, and the mutations in the titles of
families, to which the nobles resorted for the sake of appearing
to belong to the people. So that the valor in arms and magna-
nimity of spirit which had existed amongst the nobles became
extinguished, and could not be kindled amongst the people, who
’ had never possessed it. Florence thus became steadily more
debased and abject; and whilst Rome, whose valor had degen-
erated into pride, was reduced to that condition that she could
not maintain herself without a prince, Florence came to that
condition that any wise legislator might easily have remodelled
her government in any form he pleased. All these things may
in part be clearly known by the reading of the preceding Book.
And having shown the origin of Florence, the commencement
of her liberty, and the causes of her dissensions, and how the
party struggles between the nobles and the people ended in the
tyranny of the Duke of Athens and the ruin of the nobility, it
remains for us now to narrate the enmities between the citizens
and the common people, and the various incidents which these
produced.

2. The power of the nobles being broken, and the war with
the Archbishop of Milan terminated (1353), there seemingly
remained no cause for trouble in Florence. But the evil for-
tune of our city, and its imperfect organization, caused difficul-
ties to arise between the families of the Albizzi and the Ricci,
which divided Florence the same as the feud between the Buon-

?

Book IIf.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 121

delmonti and the Uberti had done, and afterwards that of the
Donati and the Cerchi. The Popes, who resided at that time in
France, and the Emperors, who were in Germany, for the pur-
pose of preserving their influence in Italy, had sent there, at
different times, a large number of soldiers of various nationali-
ties ; so that there were at this time English, German, and Bre-
ton troops there. When the wars were over, these remained
without any pay, and levied contributions, under some chance
flag, from this or the other prince. Thus there came, in the
year 1358, one of these companies, under the captaincy of Mon-
seigneur Reale, a Provengal, into Tuscany. His arrival alarmed
all the cities of that province, and the Florentines not only
levied troops for the defence of the city, but many private citi-
zens — amongst others, the Albizzi and the Ricci — armed
themselves for their own safety. An old feud had divided
these two families, and each strove to oppress the other, with
the view to gaining the control of the government of the re-
public. They had, however, not yet come to arms, but opposed
each other on every occasion in the magistracies and councils.
Whilst the whole city was armed, a quarrel occurred in the old
market, and at once a great many people flocked tégether there,
as is usual under such circumstances. As the tumult spread, a
report came to the Ricci that the Albizzi were about to attack
them, and, in like manner, to the Albizzi that the Ricci were
coming to assail them. This roused the whole city; and the
magistrates had great difficulty in restraining the two families,
and to prevent a conflict, which accidentally and without the
fault of either had been reported. This incident, though slight,
yet inflamed the hostile spirit of both still more; and each
strove with greater diligence than ever to secure partisans for
themselves. As the ruin of the nobles had established such
equality amongst the citizens that the magistrates were more
respected than they had ever been before, they attempted by
ordinary legal means, and without any private violence, to turn
this occurrence to their own advantage.

3. We have narrated before how, after the victory of Charles,
the magistracy was appointed from the party of the Guelfs, and
that great authority was given them over the Ghibellines. But
time, various events, and the new dissensions, had caused these
regulations to fall into oblivion, so that many descendants of
the Ghibellines filled the offices of some of the highest magis-

122 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

tratures. Uguccione de’ Ricci, chief of that family, managed
therefore to have the law against the Ghibellines revived, as it
was generally believed that the Albizzi were descendants of that
party, they having come, many years since, from their native
town, Arezzo, to inhabit Florence (1354). Uguccione expected
that, by the revival of these laws, the Albizzi would be deprived
of the magistracies, as the old law provided that any descendant
of a Ghibelline should be condemned if found exercising the
functions of a magistrate. This design of Uguccione was made
known to Piero di Filippo degli Albizzi, who resolved to favor
it, fearing that, if he opposed it, he would thereby declare him-
self a Ghibelline. This law, therefore, renewed by the ambition
of Uguccione de’ Ricci, did not deprive Piero of his influence,
but rather increased it, and was the beginning of many calami-
ties; for no laws can be made more prejudicial to a republic
than such as are very far retrospective in their action. Piero
then, having supported the law which had been contrived by his
enemies to serve as an obstacle to him, found in it the very road
to greatness for himself; for, by placing himself at the head of
this new organization, his authority and influence steadily in-
creased, being more favored than any one else by this new fac-
tion of the Guelfs (13857). And, as there were no magistrates
to investigate who were Ghibellines, and the law which had been
revived being therefore of little value, it was provided that author-
ity should be given to the captains to denounce the Ghibellines ;
and being so denounced, to signify to them and to admonish
them that they must accept no magistracy ; and that whoever
failed to heed this admonition should be condemned. This gave
rise subsequently to the custom in Florence of designating all
such as had been deprived of the right to sit in the magistracies
as Admonished. The captains, whose audacity increased with
time, “ admonished ” without regard, not only such as deserved
it, but all such as suited them, according to the promptings of
avarice or ambition. Thus, from the year 1357, when this prac-
tice began, until the year 1366, more than two hundred citizens
were admonished. Thus the captains and the faction of the
Guelfs became very powerful; for every one, from fear of being
admonished, did honor to them, and especially to the chiefs
of the faction, who were Piero degli Albizzi, Messer Lapo Cas-
tiglionchio, and Carlo Strozzi. And, although the insolence of
their proceedings gave offence to many, yet the Ricci were more

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 123

dissatisfied by it than any others, for they felt that they them-
selves had been the cause of this abuse, by which they saw the
republic ruined, and their enemies, the Albizzi, greatly increased
in power, contrary to their design.

4. Uguccione de’ Ricci, therefore, finding himself a member
of the Signoria (1366), and wishing to put an end to this evil,
of which himself and his family had been the originators, caused
a new law to be enacted, that to the six captains of the quarters
three more should be added, two of whom should be from the
minor guilds, and that the denunciation of Ghibellines should
have to be confirmed by twenty-four Guelf citizens, appointed
for the purpose. This checked for a time the power of the cap-
tains in a measure, so that the admonishing ceased in great
part; and, although some were yet admonished, still they were
but few. The factions of the Albizzi and Ricci, however, con-
tinued to watch each other, and opposed all laws, enterprises,
and resolves from mutual hatred and jealousy. Thus things
went on with these dissensions from 1366 until 1871, when the
Guelf faction recovered power. Amongst the family of the
Buondelmonti there was a cavalier named Benchi, who, by his
merits in a war against the Pisans, had been made a citizen,
and in consequence had become qualified to be made one of the
Signoria. But when he expected to take his seat in that magis-
tracy, they made a new law, by which any noble who had been
made a citizen was prohibited from exercising that function.
This greatly irritated Messer Benchi, and, having allied himself
with Piero degli Albizzi, they resolved by admonitions to reduce
the power of the smaller citizens, and to make themselves sole
masters of the government. And by the credit Messer Benchi
had with the old nobility, and by that of Messer Piero with the
majority of the more influential citizens, they succeeded in de-
priving the Guelf party of power again; and, by new reforms,
they arranged matters so that they could dispose of the captains
and of the twenty-four citizens. Thereupon the practice of ad-
monishing was resumed with even more audacity than before,
and the house of the Albizzi, as chiefs of the Guelfs, steadily
increased in power. The Ricci, on the other hand, together
with their friends, did all in their power to check that pro-
ceeding, and thus the two parties lived in the greatest mutual
suspicion, each fearing every kind of wrong and violence from
the other.

124 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

5. In consequence of this a number of citizens, influenced
by their love of country, assembled in San Pietro Scheraggio
(1872), and, having conferred amongst themselves in relation
to these disorders, they went to the Signori, to whom the
one who enjoyed most consideration addressed the following
words : —

“Many of us, O magnificent Signori, doubted the propriety
“of assembling privately, although it was for public reasons,
“fearing lest we might be regarded as presumptuous or con-
“demned as ambitious. But seeing that many citizens assem-
“ble daily in the Loggie and in their houses, without any
“consideration, not for any purposes of general interest, but
“merely to serve their private ambition, we have thought that,
“inasmuch as these do not hesitate to meet for the destruction
“of the republic, we need have no apprehension in assembling
“for the public good and advantage. Nor do we care about
“the judgment which the others may form of us, for we know
“that they are indifferent as to our opinion of them. The
“same love of country, O Signori, which caused us to assemble
“in the first instance, now induces us to appear before you, to
“discuss the evils which already are so great, and which are
“daily increasing in our republic, and to proffer to you our
“aid in destroying them. Although the task may seem diffi-
“cult, yet you will succeed in accomplishing it whenever you
“choose to disregard all private considerations, and employ
“your authority supported by the public force. The general
“corruption of the other Italian cities, O magnificent Signori,
“has spread to Florence and infects our city daily more and
“more. For ever since Italy has ceased to be subject to the
“Imperial authority, her cities, being without any powerful
“check to control them, have organized their states and gov-
“ernments, not according to the principles of liberty, but ac-
“cording to the spirit of the factions that divided them. From
“this have sprung all the disorders and misfortunes that have
“afflicted this province. There is neither union nor friendship
“amongst the citizens, unless it be amongst such as are bound
“together by some villanous crime, committed either against
“the state or some private individual. And as all religion
“and the fear of God is dead in all their hearts, they value an
“oath or a pledge only so far as it may be useful to them-
“selves. Men employ them, not for the purpose of observing

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 125

“them, but solely as means to enable them more easily to
“deceive ; and just as this deceit succeeds more easily and
“securely, so much greater is the praise and glory derived
“from it; and therefore are dangerous men praised as being
“ingenious, and good men derided for being dupes. And thus
“do we see in fact all who can be corrupted, and all who can
“corrupt others, gather together in the cities of Italy. The
“young men are idle, and the old men lascivious, and every
“age and sex give themselves up to unbridled habits; and
“good laws are no remedy for this, being made useless by evil
“usages. Thence comes that avarice which we see so common
“amongst the citizens, and that craving, not for true glory, but
“for those false honors from which flow hatreds, enmities,
“dissensions, and factions, which, in turn, produce murders,
“exiles, and the afflictions of the good and the elevation of
“the wicked. For the good, confiding in their innocence, do
“not, like the wicked, seek extraordinary means for their de-
“fence, and to obtain honors; and thus are they ruined unde-
“fended and unhonored. From this example spring the love
“of factions and their power; for the wicked adhere to them
“from avarice and ambition, and the good from necessity.
“And what is most pernicious is to see the promoters and
“chiefs of these factions cloak their aims and designs with
“honest pretexts ; for on pretence of defending Liberty, either
“against the nobles or the people, they only seek to destroy
“her, for they all hate the very word Liberty. The reward
‘““which they desire to obtain by their victory is not the glory
“of having liberated the city, but the satisfaction of having
“overcome the others, and of having usurped the public au-
“thority. And having achieved that, there is nothing so unjust,
“cruel, or avaricious but they will dare do it. Hence the laws
“and ordinances are not made for the public, but for private
‘benefit; and hence wars and peace are resolved upon, not for
“the common glory, but for the satisfaction of a few. And
“if the other cities are full of such disorders, ours is more
“tainted by them than any of them; for here the laws and
“civil ordinances are always made, not according to the prin-
“ciples of liberty, but according to the ambition of that party
“which for the time has the ascendency. Hence it comes that,
“s0 soon as one party is expelled and one division extinguished,

“another one springs up in its place; for in a city which pre- —

126 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IIL.

“fers to maintain itself by factions rather than by laws, if one
“faction remains without opposition, it must of necessity divide
“aoainst itself; for the very private measures which it had
“previously originated for its own promotion will now prove
“insufficient for its defence. And the truth of this is demon-
“strated by the former and the present divisions of our city.
“Every one believed that, when the Ghibellines were crushed,
“the Guelfs would for a long time after live happy and hon-
“ored. But in a little while they divided into Bianchi and Neri ;
“and since the Bianchi have been put down, our city has never
“been without factions that were always fighting, now for the
“sake of the banished, and then again on account of the jeal-
“ousies between the people and the nobles. And by way of
“giving to others that which by agreement amongst ourselves
“we could not or would not possess, we surrendered our liber-
“ties first to King Robert, then to his brother, afterwards to
“his son, and finally to the Duke of Athens. And with all
“this we did not remain content in any condition, like men
“who are unable to agree to live in freedom, nor content to
“exist in servitude. Nor did we hesitate, (so much do our
“institutions favor dissensions,) whilst still under the govern-
“ment of a king, to prefer a low-born man of Agobbio to his
“majesty. For the honor of our city we must not recall the
“memory of the Duke of Athens, for his harsh and tyrannical
“spirit ought to have made us wise, and should have taught
“us how to live. And yet, no sooner was he driven out, than,
“being still armed, we fought amongst ourselves with more
“bitterness of hatred and fury than we ever displayed when
“combating him together; so that our old nobility remained
“vanquished and subject to the will of the people. Nor would
“it ever have been believed that after that any further cause
“for dissensions or disturbance would have arisen in Florence ;
“for an effectual check had been put to those who by their
“pride and insupportable ambition seemed to have been the
“cause of all preceding troubles. But experience shows us
“now how fallacious men’s opinions are, and how erroneous
“their judgment; for the pride and ambition of the nobles is
“not extinguished, but has only been taken from them to be
“assumed by our citizens, who now, according to the fashion
“of ambitious men, strive themselves to obtain the first rank
“in our republic. And having no other means of attaining it,

Boox III.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 127

“they have anew divided the city, and have revived the names
“of Guelfs and Ghibellines, which had been extinguished,
“and which it would have been well never to have resus-
“citated. As there is nothing permanent and stable in hu-
“man affairs, so Heaven has ordained that in all republics
“there are some fatal families who seem born to cause the
“ruin of the state. Of such our republic has been more pro-
“Jifie than any other, for it is not only one, but many, who
“have afflicted her. At first it was the Buondelmonti and
“the Uberti; afterwards the Donati and the Cerchi; and now,
“Q shameful and ridiculous fact! the Ricci and Albizzi per-
“turb and divide the city.

“We have not reminded you of the corrupt habits and of
“these ancient and constant dissensions for the purpose of
“alarming you, but only to recall to your memories the causes
“of the same; and to show you that, if you do not remem-
“ber them, they are at least fresh in our memories. And to
“tell you that these examples should not make you distrust
“your ability to arrest the present evils. For the power of
“those ancient families was so great, and the favors of the
“princes which they enjoyed were so important, that civil
“ordinances and regulations did not suffice to keep them in
“check. But now that the Empire has no forces here, so
“that the Pope has nothing to fear, and that all Italy and
“our republic have attained that degree of independence that
“they can govern themselves, there is no longer any difficulty.
“And our city above all, despite of the old examples to the
“contrary, can maintain itself not only united, but can reform
“its manners and institutions, provided you, O Signori, are
“resolved to have it so. And to this we advise you, moved
“by pity for our country, and not by any private passions.
“ Although the corruption of the city is great, yet we implore
“vou at once to destroy the evil that afflicts her, the madness
“that consumes her, and the passions that kill her. You must
“not attribute the ancient disorders to the nature of men, but
“rather to the times ; and as these are changed, you may hope
“for our city a happier state of things, by establishing a better
“government. Wisdom will triumph over the malignity of
“fortune, by putting a curb upon the ambition of those indi-
“viduals, and by annulling those ordinances that foster fac-
“tions, and by adopting such as are in harmony with liberty

128 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Book III.

“and civil institutions. And be you content now rather to
“make such laws in the spirit of kindness, which, if delayed,
“men will be necessitated to make by force of arms!”

6. The Signori were moved by this statement of facts, of
which they had been already cognizant; also by the authority
and advice of the deputation of citizens; and therefore they
confided to fifty-six citizens authority to provide for the safety
of the state. Certainly it is most true that the majority of
men are more capable of preserving an existing good order of
things, than of devising a new one themselves. And so it was

with these citizens, who thought more of destroying the present
| factions than of removing the causes of future ones ; so that they
neither accomplished the one nor the other. For they did not
destroy the causes of new factions, and by increasing the power
of one of those that existed over the other one, they exposed
the republic to increased danger. They, however, excluded
all the factions for three years from the magistracies, excepting
those that had been created for the Guelf party ; of these they
gave three places to the members of the Albizzi family, and
three to those of the Ricci; amongst these were Piero degli
Albizzi and Uguccione de’ Ricci. They prohibited all citizens
from entering the palace except during the sessions of the
magistrates; and provided that every citizen who was person-
ally maltreated or deprived of his goods might bring an ac-
cusation before the councils, and call upon the nobles to give
testimony in the case, and if the accused was convicted he was
to be subjected to fines. This provision diminished the bold-
ness of the Ricci faction, and increased that of the Albizzi; and
although the council had both factions equally in view when
making this regulation, yet the Ricci suffered by far the most
from it. For if the palace of the Signori was closed to Piero
Albizzi, yet that of the Guelfs was open to him, and it was
there where he enjoyed the most influence and authority. And
if at first he and his followers were active in “ admonishing,”
they became still more so after this affront. Other fresh causes
aided to increase this evil disposition.

7. The pontifical chair was occupied at this time by Gregory
IX. (1875), who, being at Avignon, governed Italy as his pre-
decessor had done, by legates, who by their avarice and pride
had afflicted many cities. One of these legates, who at that
time was at Bologna, availed of the occasion of the scarcity

POOR Le eR OE Fane

OE LO EC on Pee ee EE fete abe:

Boox III.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 129

which existed that year in Florence, and attempted to make
himself master of Tuscany. Not only did he not supply Flor-
ence with provisions, but by way of depriving them of future
harvests he attacked the Florentines with a large force so soon
as spring appeared, hoping to find them unarmed and distressed
by want, and therefore he counted upon an easy victory. And
perhaps he would have succeeded, if the army with which he
attacked them had not proved faithless and venal. For the
Florentines, having no other resource, gave to his soldiers one
hundred and thirty thousand florins, and thus induced them to
abandon the enterprise. Wars are often begun by the will of
others, but rarely are they terminated at their pleasure. This
war, commenced by the ambition of the legate, was continued
by the indignation of the Florentines. They formed an alliance
with Messer Bernabo Visconti, and with all the cities that were
hostile to the Church, and appointed eight citizens to direct
the war, with authority to act without appeal, and to spend
without rendering any accounts. Although Uguecione was
dead, yet this war against the Pope reanimated the adherents
of the Ricci faction, who had always supported Messer Bernabo
against the Albizzi, and opposed the Church; and they were
the more encouraged as the Eight were all hostile to the Guelf
faction. This caused Piero degli Albizzi, Messer Lapo di Casti-
glionchio, Carlo Strozzi, and the others, to unite more closely
against their adversaries. And whilst the Eight carried on the
war these “admonished.” The war lasted three years, and
was terminated only by the death of the Pope; it had been
conducted with so much ability, and gave such general satisfac-
tion, that the Eight were continued in office from year to year.
They were called “ Saints,” although they had paid but little
regard to the Censure, despoiled the churches of their goods,
and forced the clergy to perform the holy offices. Thus did
those citizens at that time value their country more than their
souls; and demonstrated to the Church, that as much as they
had at first, as her friends, defended her, so they could now, as
her enemies, injure her; for they caused all the Romagna, the
Marca, and Perugia to revolt.

8. Nevertheless, whilst they carried on so vigorous a war
against the Pope, they could not defend themselves against the
captains of the sections and their factions ; for the hatred of the
Guelfs against the Eight increased their audacity to that degree,

VOL. I. 9

130 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

that they insulted not only some of the most distinguished citi-
zens, but even the Eight themselves. And the arrogance of
the captains of the sections rose to that point, that they were
actually more feared than the Signori; so that no ambassador
came to Florence who had not also some commission to the cap-
tains. Pope Gregory being dead now, and Florence having no
longer any foreign war on hand, the internal discord and con-
fusion were very great ; for whilst on the one hand the audacity
of the Guelfs was insupportable, on the other hand there seemed
to be no means of abating it. And therefore it was thought that
they would of necessity have to come to arms, and thus to decide
which of the factions should prevail. The Guelf party com-
prised all the old nobles and the greater part of the most power-
ful citizens, of whom, as we have said, Messer Lapo, Piero, and
Carlo Strozzi were the heads. The other party was composed
of all the lesser citizens, and their chiefs were the committee
of Eight on the war, Messer Giorgio Scali and Tommaso Strozzi ;
and with these were united the Ricci, Alberti, and the Medici.
The remainder of the populace, as almost always happens, at-
tached themselves to the party of the malcontents. The chiefs
of the Guelfs found the forces of their adversaries very formida-
ble; and felt that they were in great danger whenever an ad-
verse Signoria should be disposed to put them down. Deeming
it well, therefore, to forestall this, they met together and exam-
ined the condition of the city and their own. They concluded
that the large increase in the number of the admonished, which
was laid entirely to their charge, had caused the whole city to
be hostile to them; which left them no other remedy than,
having already deprived the other party of the honors of office,
to take the city from them also, by seizing the palace of the
Signori and transferring the whole government to their own
faction. It was in this way that the old Guelfs had secured to
themselves the mastery over the city, by driving out all their
adversaries. All agreed to this course, but differed as to the
time of its execution. Messer Lapo was of opinion not to defer
action, affirming that nothing was so dangerous to success as
time itself, and especially so in their case, as in the next Sig-
noria Salvestro de’ Medici could easily be made Gonfaloniere,
whom they all knew to be opposed to their faction. Piero degli
Albizzi, on the other hand, was of opinion that delay was ad-
visable, because he thought they would need troops, and that

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 131

these could not be got together without exposing themselves to
a discovery of their designs, which would involve them in mani-
fest danger. He judged it necessary, therefore, that they should
at least await San Giovanni, which was near at hand, as, that
being a solemn festival day in the city, a great multitude would
assemble, amongst whom they could easily conceal as many
troops as they needed. And by way of preventing what was
feared with regard to Salvestro de’ Medici, he proposed to have
him admonished; and if they thought that this would not
do, then they should admonish some member of the college of
his quarter; so that when they should come to draw a new
Signoria, the election purses being empty, it might easily chance
that this one or some one of his colleagues might be drawn,
which would disqualify him from becoming Gonfaloniere. They
resolved upon this course, although Messer Lapo consented to
it most unwillingly, judging the delay to be injurious; and that
the time to do a thing is never in all respects convenient,
so that he who waits until everything suits will either never
attempt it, or if he does he will in most cases do it to his dis-
advantage. However, they admonished the college, but did
not succeed in disqualifying Salvestro; for the object eae
been discovered by the Hight, they managed so that a change
of Signori should not take place.

9. Salvestro, son of Messer Alemanno de’ Medici, was there-
upon drawn as Gonfaloniere. Being descended from a most
distinguished citizen family, he would not tolerate seeing the
people oppressed by a few powerful nobles. Having resolved
to put an end to this insolence, and seeing the people well dis-
posed towards himself, and being supported by many prominent
citizens, he communicated his designs to Benedetto Alberti,
Tommaso Strozzi, and to Messer Giorgio Scali, who promised to
render him whatever aid he required. They therefore secretly
prepared a law which renewed the Ordinances of Justice against
the nobles, and reduced the authority of the captains of the
sections, and afforded to the admonished the means of being
restored to the privilege of holding office. This law had to be
acted upon first in the colleges and afterwards in the councils ;
and Salvestro being Gonfaloniere, which gave him almost sov-
ereign power over the city, they attempted at the same time to
make as it were the experiment, and to obtain a result, and in-
duced Salvestro to assemble the colleges and the councils on

132 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

the same morning. The law was then proposed to the colleges
separately ; but being regarded as an innovation, it met with
such opposition from a few that it was not adopted. Salvestro,
finding himself thwarted at the first step, feigned a necessity of
being obliged to go out, and, without the others being aware of
it, he went into the councils; and there, mounting upon a high
place where he could be seen and heard by every one, he said:
“That he believed he had been made Gonfaloniere, not to adjudi-
“cate private matters for which there were the ordinary judges,
“but to guard the welfare of the state, to repress the insolence
“of the nobles, and to temper the rigor of those laws which
“were destroying the republic; and that, having diligently de-
“voted himself to these objects, he had, as far as it was possible
“for him, provided for the same. But the malignity of men op-
“posed his just efforts to that degree that they impeded the way
“for him to effect any good, and for them to resolve upon any-
“thing and even to hear him. Secing, therefore, that he could
“be of no further use to the state or the public good, he did
“not know why he should continue to hold an office, which
“either he did not deserve, or which others thought him un-
“worthy of. And therefore he desired to retire to his home,
“so that the people might replace him by some one who had
“more merit or better fortune.” Having spoken thus, he with-
drew from the council and returned to his house.

10. Those of the council who were cognizant of the matter,
and such others as desired the change, sounded the alarm;
whereupon the Signori and the colleges came running to them,
and, seeing their Gonfaloniere depart, they retained him by
entreaties, and by their authority made him return to the coun-
cil, which was in the greatest confusion, and where many dis-
tinguished citizens were menaced in most insulting terms.
Amongst these, Carlo Strozzi was seized by the breast by an
artisan, who would have killed him but that he was with diff-
culty protected by those who were near him. But the one who
made most noise, and caused the whole city to arm, was Messer
Benedetto degli Alberti, who, from the window of the palace,
called the people to arms with a loud voice, so that the Piazza
was quickly filled with armed men. Thereupon the colleges
accorded to menaces what before they had refused to simple
requests. The captains of the sections had meantime assem-
bled a great many people in their palace to consult how to de-

Boox IIL.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 133

fend themselves against the ordinances of the Signori. But
when they heard the tumult that had been raised, and under-
stood what the councils had resolved, they all fled to their
homes.

Let no one who introduces a change in the government of a’
city believe that he can stop it at his pleasure, or regulate it in
his own way. It was the intention of Salvestro to have this law
passed, and then to settle the government of the city; but the
thing turned out otherwise, for the discords stirred up by it
had alarmed everybody to that degree that the shops were
closed, the citizens fortified themselves in their houses, many
concealed their valuables in monasteries and churches, and
every one seemed to apprehend some impending catastrophe.
The guilds of the trades assembled, and each created a syndic.
Thereupon the Priors called together their colleges and these
syndies, and they conferred a whole day as to the best means of
tranquillizing the city to everybody’s satisfaction; but as they
differed in opinion, they came to no conclusion. On the follow-
ing day the guilds brought out their banners; and when the
Signori heard this, they became alarmed at the consequences,
and assembled the council to devise a remedy. Scarcely had
they met when a tumult was started, and in a moment the ban-
ners of the guilds, with a great many armed followers, were
seen in the Piazza. Whereupon the council, for the purpose of
giving the guilds and the people the hope of contenting them,
and to deprive them of all occasion for violence, invested the
Signori, the Colleges, the Eight of the War, the Captains of the
Sections, and the Syndics with a general power (called a “ Ba-
lia” in Florence) to reorganize the government of the city for
the common benefit. Whilst these things were being done,
some banners of the minor guilds, instigated by those who
desired to revenge themselves for the recent injuries received
at the hands of the Guelfs, separated themselves from the
others, and sacked and burnt the house of Messer Lapo da
Castiglionchio. _When he had heard that the Signoria were
proceeding against the Guelfs, and saw the people in arms, he
thought of no other means of safety than flight or concealment.
At first he hid himself in Santa Croce, and afterwards he fled,
in the disguise of a friar, to Casentino, where he was often
heard to blame himself for having joined Piero degli Albizzi,
and to blame Piero for having insisted upon delaying until San

134 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

Giovanni their attempt to seize the government. Piero and
Carlo Strozzi concealed themselves at the first outbreak, believ-
ing that, after it should have ceased, their numerous friends
and relatives would enable them to remain securely in Florence.
After the house of Messer Lapo had been burnt, many others
were likewise sacked and burnt, either from the general hatred,
or from private enmities; for disorders increase easily after
having once been started. The authors of these outrages, by
way of having accomplices who were impelled by even a greater
thirst for the goods of others, broke open the prisons and liber-
ated the prisoners; and then they sacked the monastery Degli
Agnoli and the convent of San Spirito, where a number of citi-
zens had concealed their valuables. Nor would the public treas-
ury have escaped from the hands of these miscreants had it not
been for the respect with which they were inspired by one of the
Signori, who, mounted on horseback and followed by a number
of armed men, resisted the fury of the multitude. This popular
fury was in a measure appeased by the authority of the Signori
and by the coming on of night. On the following morning the
Balia pardoned the “ admonished,” with the condition, however,
that they should remain disqualified from holding office for a
period of three years. The laws that had been made by the
Guelfs to the prejudice of the citizens were annulled, and
Messer Lapo da Castiglionchio and his consorts were declared
rebels, as well as such others as had incurred the general ha-
tred. After these acts, the names of the new Signori were pub-
lished, of whom Luigi Guicciardini was named Gonfaloniere,
which inspired the public with the hope that the disturbances
would be arrested, as they were universally regarded as men of
peace and lovers of public tranquillity.

11. The shops, however, were not reopened, and the citizens
did not disarm, and numerous guards patrolled throughout the
city all night. The Signori therefore did not assume their office
outside of the palace with the customary pomp, but did so in-
doors, and without any further ceremonies. These magistrates
thought that there was nothing more essential for them to do
at the outset of their holding office than to pacify the city.
They therefore caused the citizens to disarm, the shops to be
opened, and sent back from Florence a number of men who had
been called from the country by the citizens for their support.
They also established guards in many parts of the city; so that,

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 135

if the “ admonished ” had remained quiet, the city would have
been at peace. These, however, were not content to wait three
years to regain their privileges ; so that, to satisfy their desires,
the guilds reassembled anew, and demanded of the Signori that,
for the good and tranquillity of the city, they should ordain that
no citizen should at any time be liable to be “ admonished ” as
a Ghibelline who was either one of the Signori or of the colleges,
or any captain of a section, or council of any of the guilds. They
demanded, further, that new election purses should be made up
in the Guelf party, and that the existing ones should be burnt.
These demands were promptly adopted, not only by the Signori,
but also by the councils; in consequence of which the disturb-
ances, which had already recommenced, were stopped. But, as
men are never satisfied with merely recovering their own, but
wish also to have that which belongs to others and to satisfy
their revenge, so those who hoped to profit by disorders pointed
out to the artisans that they would never be secure unless a
number of their enemies were expelled and crushed. When
this became known to the Signori, they caused the officers of
the guilds to appear before them with their syndics, whom
Luigi Guicciardini addressed as follows : —

“ Were it not that these Signori and myself have known
“for a long while back that it is the fate of this city to be
“torn by internal dissensions the moment that foreign wars
“are ended, we should have been more surprised at the dis-
“turbances that have taken place, and should have looked
“upon them with greater displeasure. But as the evils to
“which one is accustomed produce less pain, we have borne
“the past disturbances patiently, they having been originated
“ wholly without any fault of ours; and in the hope that, like
“former troubles, they would soon come to an end, we have
“conceded your many and important demands. But foreseeing
“that, so far from being satisfied, you are disposed rather to
“inflict fresh injuries upon your fellow-citizens, and to demand
“ fresh proscriptions, our displeasure has increased with evil and
“unjust designs. And truly, if we could have believed that,
“during the time of our magistracy, we should have seen our
“city involved in ruin, either by our opposing you, or by our
“ conceding your demands, we should have tried to escape these
“honors, either by flight or exile. But hoping to have to deal
“with men who had some humanity in them, and some love of

136 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

“country, we accepted the magistracy cheerfully, hoping with
“our humility and spirit of concession to overcome your ambi-
“tion. But we now see from experience that the more humbly
“we bear ourselves, and the more we concede to you, the more
“arrogant you become, and the more unreasonable and unjust
“your demands. In speaking to you thus, our object is not to
“ offend you, but to make you reflect ; for we wish to tell you only
“that which will be of advantage to you, leaving to others to tell
“you what may be agreeable. But in good faith tell us what it
“is that in fairness you could still demand of us. You wanted
“to have the power taken from the captains of the sections; it
“was taken from them. You wanted the lists of their election
“ purses burnt, and that new ones should be made instead, and
“we conceded it. You wanted that the ‘admonished’ should
“be restored to their privileges; and that too was permitted.
“* At your request we have pardoned those who burnt houses and
“robbed churches ; and ever so many prominent and honored citi-
“zens have been sent into exile to satisfy you; and to please you,
“the nobles have been subjected to new restraints. Where is to
“be the end of your exactions, and for how long will you abuse
“our liberality ? Do you not see that we bear defeat with more
“patience than you do victory? What will your discords bring
“our city to? Have you forgotten that, when on a former occa-
“sion she was torn by dissensions, a low-born citizen of Lucca,
““ Castruccio, defeated her? A Duke of Athens, originally a pri-
“vate Condottiere of yours, subjugated her when she was thus
“divided. But when she was united, an Archbishop of Milan
“and a Pope himself failed to subdue her, and after many years
“of war gained nothing but shame. Why do you now wish by
“your discords to bring this city, which is at peace, to servitude,
“when so many powerful enemies failed to deprive her of her
“liberty? What else but servitude will you achieve by your
“‘dissensions ? What else but poverty will you gain by the rob-
“peries you have committed, or still design to commit? For
“the very property you take sustains the industries that feed our
“city, which without it could not be supported. And the prop-
“erty you have unlawfully taken, like any ill-acquired thing,
“you will neither know how to employ nor how to preserve, and
‘“indigence and famine will be the consequence for our city.
“The Signori and myself command you, and, if propriety admits,
“we entreat you, that for once you will stay your demands, and

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 137

“rest quict and content with the ordinances we have established.
“ And if nevertheless at any time you desire further changes,
“ask for it in a lawful manner, and not by tumults and with
“arms inhand. For if your demands are just, they will always
“be conceded ; and thus you will not afford to evil-minded per-
“sons the opportunity, at your charge and to your injury, to
“ruin your country.”

These words, so full of truth, made a deep impression upon
those citizens. They thanked the Gonfaloniere humbly for hav-
ing performed his duty to them as a good magistrate, and to the
city as a good citizen, promising always promptly to obey what-
ever commands might be given them. And the Signori, by way
of satisfying them, deputed two citizens for each of the greater
magistracies, who should confer with the syndics of the guilds
about such points as needed reform, and who should then report
to the Signori.

12. Whilst this was being arranged another disturbance
broke out, which proved much more injurious to the republic
than the first. The greater part of the burnings and robberies
that had taken place in the previous days had been committed
by the lowest people of the city; and those amongst them who
had been the most audacious feared that, when the more im-
portant differences should be quieted and composed, then they
would be punished for their crimes; and that, as it-always
happens, they would be abandoned by those who had instigated
them to these outrages. To this apprehension was added the
hatred which the populace felt towards the rich citizens and
the chiefs of the guilds, by whom they conceived themselves
insufficiently compensated for their labor, according to their
own ideas of what they justly merited. For in the time of
Charles I., when Florence was first divided into guilds, a chief
and a form of government were given to each ; and it was pro-
vided that the members of each guild should in all civil matters
be judged by their chiefs. The number of these guilds, as has
already been said, was at first twelve; afterwards they were
increased to twenty-one, and their power grew to that extent
that they soon controlled the government of the whole city.
And as there were amongst them some more or less honorable,
they divided themselves into major and minor guilds, seven
being called major and fourteen minor. From this division,
and from other causes which we have narrated above, sprung

138 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

the arrogance of the captains of the sections; for those citizens
who of old had been Guelfs, under whose government the office
of captain was always held in rotation, favored the citizens of the
major guilds, and persecuted those of the minor ones, together
with their defenders. Thence it came that so many tumults
arose against them, as we have narrated above. In organizing
the guilds there were found to be many trades at which the
small citizens and the low people worked, and which were not
constituted into separate guilds; and as these placed them-
selves under the different guilds, according to the nature of
their trades, it occurred that, when they were either not satis-
fied with their wages, or were in any way oppressed by their
employers, they had no other recourse except the magistrate of
that guild to which they had attached themselves, but who they
believed had never rendered them the justice to which they felt
themselves entitled. And of all the guilds that which always
had and still has the greatest number of members is that of the
manufacturers of wool; which from being the most powerful
was also the first in authority, and has always fed and still
feeds with its industry the greater part of the common people
and the small citizens.

13. The men of this lower class of the people then, those as
well who had placed themselves under the wool guild as those
who had joined other guilds, were greatly irritated for the
above given reasons. To this came their fears on account of
the burnings and robberies committed by them, and therefore
they held several meetings at night and discussed the events
that had taken place, as well as the danger to which they were
exposed. Hereupon some one who was bolder and more experi-
enced than the rest addressed them in the following words : —

“Tf we had to determine now whether to take up arms and
“burn and rob the houses of citizens and plunder churches,
“T should be one of those who would deem it dangerous to
“think of it; and perhaps I should approve the idea that tran-
“quil poverty is preferable to hazardous gain. But inasmuch
“as we are in arms and much evil has already been done, it
“seems to me that we should not think of laying down the
“former, but how to secure ourselves against the consequences
“of the evils committed. I certainly believe that, if nothing
“else were to compel us to that course, necessity would. You
“see the whole city is full of hatred and resentment against us.

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 139

“The citizens draw closer together; and the Signoria holds in
“all things with the magistrates. Believe me, they are laying
“snares for us, and new dangers are menacing our heads. We
“should therefore seek two things and have two aims in our
“deliberations ; the one to prevent our being chastised within
“the next few days for the acts we have committed, and the
“other to be able in the future to enjoy more liberty and to _
“live with more satisfaction than hitherto. In my opinion,

“therefore, if we wish to be pardoned for our past errors, we
“must commit new ones, doubling the evils and multiplying
“the burnings and robberies, and in that way strive to have
“numerous accomplices. For where the guilty are many, none
“will be punished; little faults are chastised, great and grave
“ones are rewarded. And when many suffer, few will seek to
“revenge themselves, for general injuries are borne with more
“patience than individual ones. The multiplying of our crimes,
“therefore, will make it easier for us to obtain pardon, and will
“ open the way to our having those things which we desire. It
“seems to me that our success is certain, for those who could
‘oppose us are rich and divided. Their disunion, therefore, will
“give us victory, and their riches, when they shall have become
“ours, will enable us to maintain it. Do not be alarmed by
“the antiquity of the blood for the shedding of which they
“reproach us; for all men, having sprung from the same be-
“oinning, have equally ancient blood, and are by nature all
“made alike. Strip yourselves naked, and you will see that
“you are the same; dress yourselves in their garments and
“them in yours, and doubtless you will appear noble and they
“ionoble; for it is only poverty and riches that make men
“unequal. It really grieves me that many of you should from
“mere conscience repent of your past acts, and be resolved to
“abstain from new ones. Certainly, if this be true, then you
“are not the men I took you to be; for neither conscience nor
“infamy should frighten you; victory never brings shame, no
“matter how obtained. Of conscience you should make no
“account at all; for where there is, as in your case, the fear of
“hunger and prisons, you cannot and should not be restrained
“by the fear of hell. And if you note the conduct of men, you
“will see that all who achieve great riches and power obtain
“them either by force or by fraud; and then they conceal the
“abomination of their acquisitions by falsely calling them gain,

140 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book III.

“so as to make it appear that they have come by them honestly.
“ And those who from too little prudence, or too great stupidity,
“avoid these modes of gain, will always grovel in servitude and
“noverty; for the Parnnul servants always remain servants,
“and the good men ever remain poor. None ever escape from
“servitude except the unfaithful and the audacious, and none
“from poverty except the fraudulent and the rapacious. For
“God and nature have placed the fortunes of men in their
“midst, where they are more easily got by rapine than by in-
“dustry, and are more accessible to evil practices than to good
“ones. Thence it comes that men devour each other, and the
“weakest always fare the worst. We must then use force
“whenever occasion is given us; and fortune can never offer
“us this to greater advantage than now. The citizens are still
“divided, the Signori full of doubts, and the magistrates are
“friohtened; thus we can easily overpower them before they
“become united and take courage. Thus we shall either re-
“main masters of the city, or we shall have such part of the
“oovernment of it that our errors will be pardoned, and we
“shall have the power to threaten them with fresh injuries.
“T confess that this course is audacious and dangerous; but
“where necessity presses, audacity is accounted prudence, and
“in great matters brave men never take note of danger. For
“those enterprises that begin with danger always end with
“reward, and there is no escape from danger except by danger.
“And moreover, I believe that where we see prisons, tortures,
“and death being prepared for us, there is more to be appre-
“hended from our remaining here than from any attempt to
“‘nlace ourselves in security; for in the first case the evil is
“certain, and in the other doubtful. How often have I heard
“vou complain of the avarice of your employers and of the in-
“justice of your magistrates! Now is the moment, not only to
“rid ourselves of them, but to make ourselves entirely their
“masters, so that they will have more cause to complain of
“vou, and fear you more, than you do them. The opportunity
“which present circumstances offers flies, and when it is lost
“you will strive in vain to recover it. You see the prepara-
“tions of your adversaries; let us anticipate their designs, and
“whichever of us resumes arms first will assuredly be the
“victor ; his enemies will be destroyed, and he will be advanced.
“From such a course many es us will derive honor, and all of
“us security !”

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 141

This address inflamed their already excited spirits still more
violently for evil, and they resolved to resume arms after they
should have secured more accomplices to act with them; and
they bound themselves by an oath mutually to suecor and stand
by each other whenever any one of them should be oppressed
by the magistrates.

14. Whilst these men were preparing to seize the state, the
Signori became informed of their designs through one Simone,
whom they had arrested on the Piazza, and who revealed to
them the whole conspiracy, and that it was intended on the
following day to begin the disturbances. Secing the danger
upon them, they at once assembled the colleges, and those
citizens who together with the syndics of the guilds were
laboring for the re-establishment of union in the city. It was
already evening before they had all assembled; they advised
the Signori also to call in the consuls of the guilds, who all
advised the immediate collecting of all the troops in Florence,
and that the Gonfalonieri should appear the next morning with
their companies fully armed in the Piazza. At the time when
Simone was being put to the torture and the citizens were
already assembling in the Piazza, one Niccolo da San Friano
was engaged in regulating the clock of the palace; and having

‘noticed what was going on, he returned home and stirred up
his whole neighborhood with alarm; so that in an instant
more than a thousand armed men collected in the Piazza di
San Spirito. The noise of this reached the other conspirators
and almost immediately the Piazzas of San Pier Maggiore and
San Lorenzo, which had been appointed as meeting-places,
became filled with armed men. The next morning, which
was the 21st of July, not over eighty men at arms had ap-
peared in the Piazza in support of the Signori, and not one
of the Gonfalonieri had come; for, having heard that the whole
city was in arms, they were afraid to leave their houses. The
first body of the populace that appeared in the Piazza was that
which had assembled at San Pier Maggiore; and on their arri-
val the men at arms made no movement. The other crowd,
from San Lorenzo, also came and joined them; and having
encountered no opposition, they demanded with terrible shouts
that the Signoria should release the prisoners. Seeing that
they were not given up at their threats, they determined to
resort to violence, and burnt the palace of Luigi Guicciardini;

142 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

so that the Signori for fear of worse gave them up the prison-
ers. No sooner was this done than they took the Gonfalon of °
Justice from the Executor, and proceeded under that banner
to burn the houses of a number of citizens, especially of such
as were hated by them from public or private reasons. And
many citizens to avenge private wrongs led the crowd to the
houses of their enemies ; for it merely needed one voice from
the multitude to cry out, “To this, or To that house!” for him
who bore the Gonfalon to turn in that direction. Amongst other
things they burnt all the records of the wool guild. Having
done much damage, and wishing to accompany their evil acts
with some laudable ones, they created Salvestro de’ Medici and
a number of other citizens Cavaliers, making altogether sixty-
four in number. Amongst these were Benedetto and Antonio
degli Alberti, Tommaso Strozzi, and others of their friends ;
although some of them accepted the title with great reluc-
tance. What is most remarkable in these occurrences is the
circumstance that, on the same day after having burnt the
houses of many persons, the rabble conferred upon the same
individuals the title of Cavalier (so near are benefits at times
to injuries): this happened to Luigi Guicciardini, the Gonfalo-
niere of Justice. The Signori, seeing themselves abandoned
in the midst of all these tumults by their armed force, by the
chiefs of the guilds, and by their Gonfalonieri, were confounded:
for no one had come to their support according to the ones
given; and out of sixteen gonfalons only two made their ap-
pearance, namely, that of the Golden Lion and that of the
Squirrel, under the command of Giovenco della Stufa and
Giovanni Cambi. And even these remained but a little while
in the Piazza; for when they perceived that they were not fol-
lowed by any of the others, they withdrew again. On the
other hand, some of the citizens, seeing the fury of this enraged
multitude, and that the palace was abandoned, stayed within
their houses; some followed the armed crowd, so that being
amongst them they might be the better able to protect their
own houses and those of their friends. And thus the force
of the rabble was increased, whilst that of the Signori was
diminished. The rioting continued all day, and when night
came the crowd stopped at the palace of Messer Stefano behind
the church of San Barnabas. Their number amounted to over
six thousand; and before day appeared-they forced the guilds

Boox III.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 148

by threats to send them their banners. And when morning
came they marched, with the Gonfalon of Justice and the
ensigns of the guilds at their head, to the palace of the Po-
desta; and upon his refusal to give them possession of it,
they attacked and seized it by force.

15. The Signori, desirous of giving proof of their willingness
to make terms with the rioters, seeing their own inability to
control them by force, sent four members of their colleges to
proceed to the palace of the Podesta and state their wishes
to the rioters. This deputation found that the leaders of the
populace, together with the syndics of the guilds and some
citizens, had already prepared the demands which they in-
tended to make of the Signori. They therefore returned to
the Signoria accompanied by four deputies from the populace,
who made the following demands :— That the wool guild should
no longer have any foreign judge ; — that three new guilds should
be created, one for the carders and dyers, another for the bar-
bers, doublet-makers, tailors, and similar crafts, and a third for
the smaller trades; and that two of the Signori should be
taken from these new guilds, and three from the fourteen
minor guilds ;— that the Signoria should provide houses for the
meetings of these new guilds ;—that none of the members of
these guilds should be constrained during the next two years
to pay any debt of less than fifty ducats ;— that the Monte de
Pieta (public pawn house) should charge no interest, and re-
ceive back only the principal sum loaned ;— that those who
were confined in prison and condemned should be set free and
acquitted ;—-and that the admonished should be reinstated in
all their privileges. They demanded many more things for
the benefit of their particular supporters; and, by way of the
reverse, they wanted a number of their enemies banished and
admonished. These demands, though dishonorable and inju-
rious to the republic, were yet promptly conceded by the Sig-
nori, the colleges, and the council of the people, for fear of still
worse. But to give full validity to their action it was necessary
that it should also be approved by the Council of the Commune.
And as both councils could not be called together on the same
day, it was agreed to defer the matter until the day following.
The guilds and the populace nevertheless seemed satisfied for
the moment, and promised that all rioting should cease so soon
as these new laws should be perfected.

144 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IIL.

The following morning, whilst the Council of the Commune
were deliberating, the impatient and inconstant multitude came
with their customary banners into the Piazza with such loud
and frightful shouting that the whole council and the Signori
became frightened. Whereupon Guerriante Marignuoli, one
of the Signori, moved more by fear than any other personal
motive, went down stairs on pretence of guarding the door of
the palace below, and fled to his house. Unable to conceal
himself as he went out, he was recognized by the crowd, but
no harm was done him. When the multitude saw him, how-
ever, they called out that all the Signori should leave the
palace, and if they did not, that they would kill their children
and burn their houses. In the midst of this the law was rati-
fied, and the Signori had gone back to their chambers, and the
council having descended below, without going out, remained
in the Loggia and in the court, despairing of the safety of the
city at seeing so much villany in the multitude, and such in-
disposition or cowardice in those who could have controlled or
put it down. The Signori also were confused and doubtful of
the safety of the country, secing themselves abandoned by
their adherents, and unsupported by either counsel or assist-
ance from any citizen. In their uncertainty as to what they
could or should do, Messer Tommaso Strozzi and Messer Bene-
detto Alberti, influenced either by selfish ambition, desiring to
remain masters of the palace, or perhaps because they believed
it best, persuaded the Signori to yield to the popular clamor,
and to return as private individuals to their houses. This
advice, given by those who had been the prime cause of the
disturbances, caused Alamanno Acciaiuoli and Niccolo del Bene
to become indignant, although the other members of the Sig-
noria yielded. And having recovered a little vigor, they said,
“that, if others wished to go away, they could not prevent
“them; but that they themselves would not before the expi-
“ration of their term of office give up their authority, even if it
“cost them their lives.” This difference of opinion redoubled
the fears of the Signori and the fury of the populace; so that
the Gonfaloniere, willing rather to end his magistracy with
shame than with danger, committed himself to the care of
Messer Tommaso Strozzi, who conducted him from the palace
to his house. The other Signori in like manner departed one
after the other; whereupon Alamanno and Niccolo, seeing

Book III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 145

themselves Icft alone, and not wishing to be regarded more
brave than wise, went away also. Thus the palace remained
in the hands of the mob, and the committee of the Hight on
the War, who had not yet laid down their office.

16. When the mob entered the palace, one Michele di Lando,
a wool-carder by trade, was carrying the standard of the Gonfa-
loniere. He took off his shoes, and, not being encumbered with
much clothing on his back, leaped upstairs; and on reaching
the audience hall of the Signori, he stopped, and turning to the
multitude, he said: “ You see this palace is yours, and the city
“is in your hands. What do you think should be done now ?”
To which all replied, “ that they wanted him to be Gonfaloniere
“ and Signore, and that he should govern the city and themselves
“as seemed to him best.” Michele accepted the office ; and being
a sagacious and prudent man, and more favored by nature than
by fortune, he resolved to restore the city to tranquillity, and
put a stop to the riots. And by way of keeping the people
occupied and giving himself time to arrange his plans, he
directed them to go and find a certain Nuto, who had been
designated by Messer Lapo da Castiglionchio as Bargello. The
greater part of those around him started upon this errand. And
by way of beginning with an act of justice the exercise of that
authority which he had obtained by favor, he published an order
forbidding all further plundering and burning; and for the pur-
pose of inspiring terror, he had a gibbet erected in the Piazza.
And, as a beginning of a reform of the government of the city,
he annulled the syndics of the guilds, and appointed new ones ;
deprived the Signori and the colleges of their magistratures,
and burnt the election purses containing the names of those to
be drawn for offices. Meantime Ser Nuto was brought into
the Piazza by the multitude, and hanged by one foot on the gib-
bet erected there; and the bystanders having each torn a piece
from his body, there was in a few minutes nothing left of him
but the foot by which he had been suspended. The Hight of the
War, on the other hand, believing that by the withdrawal of the
Signori they had become the chiefs of the city, had already
nominated the new Signori. When this became known to
Michele, he sent them word immediately to leave the palace,
for he wanted to show to everybody that he knew how to gov-
ern Florence without their advice. Thereupon he assembled
the syndics of the guilds, and created a Signoria, —four of the

VOL. I. 10

146 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

common people, two of the major, and two of the minor guilds.
Besides this, he appointed a new election, and divided the govy-
ernment into three parts, one of which was to belong to the
new guilds, one to the minor, and the third to the major guilds.
He gave to Messer Salvestro de’ Medici the income from the shops
on the Ponte Vecchio, and took for himself the Podesteria of
Empoli, and bestowed other benefits upon numerous other citi-
zens who had favored the people, not so much as rewards for
their exertions as for the purpose of protecting himself for all
time against their envy.

17. The common people thought that Michele, in his reforms
of the state, had been too partial to the greater citizens; and
that they themselves had not such part in the government as
was necessary for their own protection. Urged on, therefore, by
their habitual audacity, they again took to arms, and came
tumultuously with their banners into the Piazza, and demanded
that the Signoria should come down on to the Ringhiera, for
the purpose of deciding upon new measures for their safety
‘and advantage. Michele, seeing their insolence and not wishing
to excite their anger, without fully understanding what they
wanted, blamed their manner of demanding it, and advised
them to lay down their arms, and that then their demands
should be considered ; to which the Signoria could not yield with
dignity under the pressure of force. The crowd, incensed by
this against the palace, went to the Santa Maria Novella, where
they chose from amongst themselves eight chiefs, with ministers
and such other appointments as they thought would insure them
authority and public respect. Thus the city had two sets of
officers, and was controlled by two different governments. These
new chiefs decided amongst themselves that eight members,
chosen from the bodies of their guilds, should always reside
with the Signoria in the palace, who should confirm all the
resolves of the Signoria. They took from Messer Salvestro de’
Medici and from Michele di Lando all that they had conceded to
them by their former resolutions, and assigned to many amongst
themselves offices and subventions wherewith to support their
positions with dignity. By way of giving validity to these resolu-
_ tions, they deputed two of their number to the Signoria to de-
mand that their acts should be confirmed by the councils; sug-
gesting at the same time that, if not conceded by consent, they
would have it by force. These deputies laid their commission

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 147

before the Signori with great audacity and presumption ; they
reminded the Gonfaloniere of the rank which they had conferred
upon him and of the honor done him, and reproached him for
the ingratitude with which he had borne himself towards them.
Having closed their address with menaces, Michele could not
brook so much insolence ; and thinking more of his rank than
of the low condition from which he had sprung, it seemed to
him that such extraordinary insolence should be checked by
extraordinary means, and drew the sword which he had at his
side, and, after first inflicting severe wounds upon these deputies,
had them bound and imprisoned. When this became known to
the crowd, it excited them to fury; and believing that they
would be able to obtain by force of arms what had been refused
to them unarmed, they seized their arms with tumultuous frenzy,
and started to compel the Signori by violence. Michele, on the
other hand, fearful of what might happen, resolved to forestall
them, thinking that it would be more to his glory to attack the
enemy rather than to await him between four walls, and, like
his predecessor, be obliged to fly from the palace with dishonor
and shame. Having therefore collected a number of citizens,
who had already begun to see their previous error and to repent
it, he mounted a horse, and, followed by many armed men, he
went forth to Santa Maria Novella to encounter the multitude.
These, as we have said before, had formed a similar resolution,
and had started to go to the Piazza just about the same time
that Michele set out from the palace. Chance would have it
that they took different roads, so that they did not meet on the
way. When Michele returned, therefore, he found the Piazza in
possession of the multitude, who had already begun to attack the
palace. He at once attacked and defeated the rabble, and drove
a portion of them out of the city, compelling others to throw
down their arms and to conceal themselves. Having accom-
plished this victory, the city was restored to quiet by the mere
valor of the Gonfaloniere, who excelled at that time all other
citizens in courage, prudence, and goodness, and deserves to be
counted amongst the few men who have really benefited their
country. For had he been of an evil or ambitious disposition,
the republic would have lost all her liberties, and would have
fallen under a greater tyranny than that of the Duke of Athens.
But his natural goodness never permitted a single thought to
enter his mind that was contrary to the general good, and his

148 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

prudence caused him to conduct matters in such a way that
many of his own party gave him their confidence and yielded
to him, and those who did not he was enabled to control by
force of arms. This caused the common people to fear him,
and the better class of artisans to reflect, and to think what
a shame it was for them now to be obliged to bear with the vile
rabble, after having humbled the pride of the nobles.

18. At the time when Michele obtained this victory over the
common people, the new Signoria had already been drawn,
amongst whom were two of such vile and infamous condition
that everybody was desirous to free themselves of such dis-
grace. When, therefore, on the Ist of September, the new Sig-
nori assumed office, the Piazza was full of armed people ; and
before the old Signori were out of the palace, a tumultuous cry
arose amongst the armed men that they did not want any of
the low people to be Signori. The Signoria therefore, by way of
satisfying this demand, deprived those two of the magistracy.
One of these men was called Tira, and the other Baroccio; and
in their stead they appointed Messer Giorgio Scali and Fran-
cesco di Michele. They also cancelled the guild of the small
trades, and deprived all the members of that guild of the offices
they held, excepting Michele di Lando and Lorenzo di Puccio,
and some others of better quality. They divided the public
offices into two parts, one of which was given to the major and
the other to the minor guilds. Only of the Signori they re-
quired five always to be taken from minor and four from the
major guilds, and the Gonfaloniere should alternately be from
the one and the other.

This organization of the government for the time restored
quiet to the city. But although the government of the re-
public had been rescued from the hands of the populace,
yet the smaller trades retained more power than the noble
citizens, who had to yield to this state of things so as to pre-
vent the smaller tradesmen from being dissatisfied at being
deprived of the privilege of the guild. This arrangement was
also favored by those who desired to keep that party down
which under the name of Guelf had maltreated the citizens with
so much violence. Messer Giorgio Scali, Messer Benedetto Al-
berti, Messer Salvestro de’ Medici, and Messer Tommaso Strozzi
were amongst those who favored this organization of the gov-
ernment, as it left them, as it were, the chiefs of the city. The

Boox III.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 149

regulation of things in this wise confirmed the division between
the noble citizens and the smaller tradesmen, which had been
started by the ambition of the Ricci and the Albizzi. And as
this gave rise at various times to the gravest consequences,
which we shall have occasion frequently to mention, we shall
call one of these parties the citizens’ party, and the other that
of the populace. This state of things lasted three years, dur-
ing which banishments and death were abundant; for those
who governed lived in the greatest apprehension because of
the many malcontents within and without the city. The mal-
contents within attempted, or were suspected of attempting,
every day, some innovations. Those without, being entirely
unrestrained, and being encouraged now by some prince, now
by some republic, originated various dissensions, first in one
place and then in another.

19. At this time there happened to be at Bologna Giannozzo
da Salerno, captain of Charles of Durazzo, a descendant of the
kings of Naples. This prince, designing an attempt upon the
kingdom against Queen Joanna, kept his Captain Giannozzo in
that city through the favor of Pope Urban, who was hostile to
the queen. There were also at Bologna many banished Floren-
tines who kept up intimate relations with Charles. These
intrigues caused the governing magistrates of Florence much
uneasiness, and made them give ready ear to the evil reports
against the suspected citizens. In this state of things the
magistrates received information that Giannozzo was about to
appear before Florence with the banished, and that many within
were ready to arm and to surrender the city to him. Upon
this report many were accused; the first were Piero degli
Albizzi and Carlo Strozzi; and next, Cipriano Mangioni,
Messer Giacopo Sacchetti, Messer Donato Barbadori, Filippo
Strozzi, and Giovanni Anselmi; who were all arrested with
the single exception of Carlo Strozzi, who fled. To prevent
an armed rising in favor of these men, the Signori deputed
Messer Tommaso Strozzi and Messer Benedetto Alberti, with
a large armed force, to guard the city. The citizens who had
been arrested underwent an examination; but no guilt was
proved upon them, either by the accusations or by confronta-
tions, so that the Captain declined to condemn them; but
their enemies excited the people to such fury against them,
that they were by force condemned to death. Neither the

150 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book III.

greatness of his family, nor his ancient reputation of having
been honored and feared above all other citizens, could save
Piero degli Albizzi from his fate. On a former occasion, at a
great feast, either some friend, for the purpose of making him
more humble in his prosperity, or some enemy who wished to
threaten him with the fickleness of fortune, sent to Piero a
silver bow] filled with sweetmeats, amongst which a nail was
concealed. When this was discovered and seen by all the
guests, it was interpreted as intending to remind him that he
should nail fast the wheel of fortune, which, having carried him
to the summit, would otherwise, if permitted to complete its
turn, drag him to the bottom. This interpretation was verified
first by his ruin and afterwards by his death (1880).

After this execution the city remained in a great state of
confusion, owing to the mutual fears of the victors and the
vanquished. But still worse effects resulted from the appre-
hensions of the chiefs of the government, because the slight-
est incident caused them to inflict fresh injuries upon the
party, either by condemning or “ admonishing” their citizens,
or by sending them into exile. To this were added the fre-
quent new laws and ordinances made to strengthen the gov-
ernment. All these things caused great wrongs to those who
were suspect to the ruling faction, which appointed forty-six
individuals, who, together with the Signoria, should purge the re-
public of those who were suspected by the government. These
admonished thirty-nine citizens, made a number of citizens
noble, and reduced many nobles to the rank of citizens. And
to enable them to resist any attacks from without, they em-
ployed Giovanni Aguto (John Sharpe) an Englishman, greatly
reputed as a soldier, and who had for a long time conducted
wars for the Pope and others. Their apprehensions of dan-
ger from without arose from their having heard that Charles
of Durazzo was preparing for an attack upon the kingdom of
Naples with a large armed force, amongst which were many of
the banished Florentines. In consequence of this danger they
provided, in addition to the troops, a considerable sum of money ;
so that when Charles had reached Arezzo the Florentines paid
him forty thousand ducats on condition that he should not
molest them. Thence he went to attack the kingdom of Na-
ples, of which he succeeded in making himself master, and sent
the queen captive to Hungary. This victory revived and in-

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 151

creased the fears of those who held the government of Florence,
for they could not persuade themselves to believe that their
money would have more influence with the king than the an-
cient friendship that had existed between his house and the
Guelfs, whom they had oppressed with so many wrongs.

20. These increased fears produced an increase of injuries,
which in turn did not extinguish, but rather augmented, the
suspicions, so as to cause a general discontentment amongst
the people. To this came in addition the insolence of Messer
Giorgio Scali and Messer Tommaso Strozzi, who overpowered
with their authority that of the magistrates, so that everybody
lived in terror of being in turn maltreated by them, as they
were supported by the populace. Thus the government ap-
peared equally tyrannical to the well-disposed and the sedi-
tious. But as the arrogance of Messer Giorgio had at one
time or another to come to an end, it happened that one of
his familiars accused Giovanni di Cambio of having intrigued
against the state, who was however acquitted as not guilty by
the Captain. The judge therefore wished to inflict upon the
accuser the same penalty with which the guilty would have
been punished had he been convicted. And as Messer Gior-
gio had in vain employed entreaties and his authority to save
this man, he went, accompanied by Messer Tommaso Strozzi
and a number of armed followers, to liberate him by force ;
and they sacked the palace of the Captain, who only saved
himself by concealment. This act so irritated all the citizens
against Messer Giorgio that his enemies thought they could
crush him; and relieve the city not only of his tyranny, but
also of that of the populace who had kept it in subjection for
three years by their insolence. The Captain’s conduct also
afforded an excellent opportunity for this; for after the tumult
had subsided he went to the Signori and told them “ that he
“had willingly accepted the office to which their lordships had
“elected him, because he thought that he would have to serve
“just men, and that they would have taken up arms to support
“justice, and not to impede it. But having seen and experi-
“enced the government of the city and its manner of conduct,
“he desired, for the sake of avoiding peril and injury, volun-
“tarily to surrender that dignity which he had voluntarily
“accepted for the purpose of making himself useful, and on
“ account of the honor which it'conferred.” The Signori com-

152 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Book ITT.

forted the Captain, and reanimated his courage, promising
him indemnity for past injuries and security for the future.
And a portion of them having united with some citizens
whom they regarded as lovers of the public good, and less
suspect to the government, concluded to profit by this oppor-
tunity for liberating the city from the power of Messer Gior-
gio and the populace ; inasmuch as the mass of citizens had
become entirely alienated from him by this last display of his
insolence.

It seemed to them best therefore to avail of it before all those
whose indignation had been aroused against Messer Giorgio
Scali should have become reconciled to him; for they well
knew that the favor of the multitude is easily lost and won
by every little accident. They also deemed it necessary for
their success in this matter to draw into their alliance Messer
Benedetto Alberti, without whose concurrence the attempt
seemed hazardous to them. Messer Benedetto was a very rich,
humane, and austere man, and a great lover of the liberty of
his country, to whom all tyrannous proceedings were most
odious; it was easy, therefore, to satisfy him, and to obtain
his consent to the destruction of Messer Giorgio. The inso-
lence and tyrannical conduct of the Guelfs and of the noble
citizens had made him their enemy and the friend of the peo-
ple. But when he afterwards saw that the leaders of the peo-
ple’s party had become similar to those from whom he had
separated himself a short time previous, and that the wrongs
inflicted upon so many citizens had been committed wholly
without his concurrence, he abandoned the party of the peo-
ple for the same reasons that had caused him to take sides
with them. Having therefore drawn Messer Benedetto and
the chiefs of the guilds into their plans, and having provided
themselves with arms, Messer Giorgio was arrested and Messer
Tommaso fled. And on the following day Messer Giorgio Scali
was beheaded, which struck such terror into his party that no
one stirred, but all rather concurred in his destruction. When
Messer Giorgio saw himself led to death before the very people
who, but a short time before, had adored him, he complained of
his unfortunate fate, and of the malignity of the citizens, who,
having wrongfully injured him, had obliged him to favor and
honor a populace who were devoid alike of good faith and grati-
tude. And recognizing amongst the armed men Messer Bene-

Boox IIT.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 153

detto Alberti, he said to him: “And thou, Messer Benedetto,
“thou consentest that this wrong should be done to me; which,
“were I in thy place, I should never permit to be done to thee.
“But I tell thee, this day is the end of my troubles and the
“beginning of thine.” Then he blamed himself for having
confided too much in a people who were moved and corrupted
by every voice, every act, and every suspicion. And with such
lamentations he died, in the midst of his armed enemies, who
rejoiced at his death. After him some of his nearest friends
were put to death, and their bodies dragged through the streets
by the populace.

21. The whole city was moved by the death of Giorgio Scali.
His execution caused many persons to take up arms in support
of the Signoria and the Captain; many also did so from ambi-
tion or from fear. And thus the city was full of different fac-
tions, each having their own aims, which they wished to follow
out before laying down their arms. The ancient nobles, who
were called grandees, could not bear being excluded from the
public offices, and strove by every means to recover them;
and for that reason wished to see the captains of the sections
restored to their former authority. To the noble citizens and
the major guilds it was offensive to share the government
with the minor guilds and the common people; and the people
feared to lose the colleges of their guilds. These differences
caused frequent troubles in Florence during a year; at one
time the grandees took up arms, at another the major or the
minor guilds, and with these latter the common people; and
several times all were armed at once in different parts of the
city. Thus there occurred frequent fighting amongst them,
and with the men at arms of the palace, although the Signoria
did its utmost to remedy these disorders, at one time by yield-
ing, at others by force of arms. So that at last after two par-
liaments and several “ Balias,’ which were created for the
purpose of reforming the government, and after much damage,
many troubles and perils, a government was established, by
which all who had been banished since the time when Messer
Salvestro de’ Medici was Gonfaloniere were restored to their
country. All the offices and emoluments bestowed by the
Balia of 1878 were revoked; the Guelfs were restored to their
privileges; the two new guilds were deprived of their corpo-
rate powers and of their officers, and all their members were

154 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

placed in the old guilds. The office of Gonfaloniere of Justice
was taken from the minor guilds, and their share of the public
offices was reduced from one half to one third, and these were
only those of the lower grade.

Thus the party of the noble citizens and that of the Guelfs
recovered the government, which the party of the people lost
after having controlled it from the year 1378 until 1881, when
this new order of things was established.

22. This new government was not less injurious to the citi-
zens, nor less oppressive in its beginning, than the government
of the populace had been; for many noble citizens, who had
been the noted supporters of the latter, were banished at the
same time with the leaders of the populace. Amongst the lat-
ter was Michele di Lando, who was not saved from the fury of
the party by all the services he had rendered, and to which he
owed his authority at a time when an unbridled mob was de-
stroying the city. His country showed him little gratitude
for all his good deeds; an error often committed by princes
and republics, and one which often causes those who are
alarmed by such examples to injure their princes before they
have experienced their ingratitude. These condemnations to
exile and death, ever regrettable, greatly displeased Messer
Benedetto Alberti, who censured them both privately and
publicly. This caused him to be feared by the heads of the
government, for they regarded him as one of the chiefest sup-
porters of the populace, and believed that he had concurred
in the death of Messer Giorgio Scali, not because he had dis-
approved of his conduct, but with the view to remaining alone
in the control of the government. His language and conduct
afterwards increased this suspicion, so that the whole party
who now held the government kept their eyes upon him
watching for an opportunity to oppress him.

Whilst matters were thus within Florence, nothing very
grave disturbed their external relations, and if anything did
trouble them it was more from apprehension than from any
actual harm done. For it was at this time that Louis d’Anjou
came into Italy for the purpose of re-establishing Queen Joanna
on the throne of Naples and driving out Charles of Durazzo.
This passage of Louis alarmed the Florentines greatly, for
Charles asked their aid, in accordance with the custom of old
allies; and Louis, like those who seek to form new alliances,

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 155

demanded that they should remain neutral. Whereupon the
Florentines, by way of making a show of satisfying Louis, and
yet at the same time aiding Charles, dismissed from their ser-
vice Messer Giovanno Aguto, and had him transferred to that
of Pope Urban, who was a friend of Charles of Durazzo. This
trick was, however, quickly perceived by Louis, who considered
himself much injured thereby at the hands of the Florentines.
Whilst the war between Charles and Louis was being carried
on in Puglia, fresh troops came from France in support. of
Louis, who upon reaching Tuscany were conducted by the
exiled Aretines to Arezzo, where they expelled those who gov-
erned that city in the name of Charles. At the moment when
they contemplated changing the government of Florence in
the same way in which they had accomplished that of Arezzo,
Louis died, which caused a change in the fortunes of Puglia
and of Tuscany, for Charles secured himself in the possession
of the kingdom of Naples, which he had come near losing ;
and the Florentines, mistrusting their ability to defend their
own city, acquired Arezzo, which they purchased from the
troops who held it for Louis (1384). Charles thereupon, hay-
ing made sure of Puglia, went to Hungary, the crown of
which came to him by inheritance, leaving his wife and two
children, Ladislas and Joanna, who were still small, in Puglia;
but soon after having acquired the crown of Hungary he
died.

23. The accession of Charles to the throne of Hungary
caused solemn rejoicings in Florence, such as no other city
had ever indulged in even to celebrate any victory of their
own. Public and private magnificence shone out alike on
that occasion, and many private citizens vied in their festive
displays with the public ones. But none equalled in pomp
and sumptuousness that of the Alberti; for the display made
by them and the jousts given by them were not like those of
private individuals, but were truly worthy of princes. This
ostentation greatly increased the general hatred and envy of
the Alberti, which, added to the suspicion with which the
government regarded Messer Benedetto, was the cause of his
ruin. For those at the head of the government did not feel
easy on his account, fearing lest he might at any moment,
with the support of the people, recover his influence and power
and drive them from the city. Whilst the chiefs of the gov-

156 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Book III.

ernment were filled with these apprehensions, it happened that,
at the same time that Messer Benedetto was Gonfaloniere of
the Companies (1387), his son-in-law Messer Filippo Maga-
lotti was drawn as Gonfaloniere of Justice, which redoubled
the fears of the chiefs of the state; they thought that Messer
Benedetto was acquiring too much power, and the state incur-
ring too much danger. And desiring to remedy this without
creating any disturbance they induced Bese Magalotti, his
associate and enemy, to inform the Signori that Messer Fi-
lippo lacked the age required for the exercise of that office
and therefore ought not to hold it. The matter was exam-
ined into by the Signori, and some of them from hate, and
some for the purpose of preventing a bad precedent, declared
Messer Filippo incompetent to hold that dignity. And in his
place Bardo Mancini was drawn, who was utterly opposed to
the plebeian faction and personally hostile to Messer Bene-
detto. So soon as he entered upon this magistracy he created
a Balia, who, in the reassumption and reform of the state,
banished Messer Benedetto Alberti, and admonished the re-
mainder of the family with the exception only of Messer
Antonio. Before his departure Messer Benedetto called all
his relatives together, and seeing them sad and weeping he
addressed them as follows: “ Fathers and seniors, you see how
“fortune has ruined me and threatened you, at which I am
“not surprised, nor should you be; for such is ever the fate of
“those who, amongst the many wicked, wish to remain good,
“and who desire to sustain that which the majority seek to
“destroy. Love of country caused me to stand by Messer
“Salvestro de’ Medici and afterwards to keep aloof from Mes-
“ser Giorgio Scali. The same feeling made me detest the
“conduct of those who now hold the government; there being
“no one to chastise them, they also wanted no one to censure
“them. Iam content by my exile to relieve them of that fear
“which they have not only of me, but of every one that knows
“and recognizes their wicked and tyrannical conduct; and
“therefore do they threaten the others by my punishment.
“T do not lament my own fate, for the honors which my coun-
“try bestowed upon me, when she still enjoyed her liberty,
“cannot be taken from me now that she is enslaved; and the
‘“‘memory of my past life will always give me more pleasure
“than the unhappiness caused by my exile can give me pain.

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 157

“ But it grieves me much to see my country the prey of a few,
“and subject to their pride and avarice. For you, my dear
“relatives, I am sorry, for I doubt not that those ills which
“to-day terminate for me and commence for you will inflict
“oreater injuries upon you than they have donc upon me. I
“advise you therefore to fortify your courage against all mis-
“fortunes, and to bear yourselves in such manner that, if dis-
“asters befall you, (and you will have many,) every one will
“know that they have come upon you undeservedly and with-
“out any fault of your own.”

After that Messer Benedetto Alberti, by way of: preserving
out of Florence the same good reputation which he had en-
joyed within, made a pilgrimage to the sepulchre of Christ,
but on his return from there he died at Rhodes. His remains
were brought to Florence and buried there with the greatest
honors by those who in his lifetime had persecuted him with
every species of calumny and injury.

24. The family of the Alberti was not the only one that was
persecuted during these dissensions. Many other citizens were
also admonished and exiled. Amongst these were Piero Benini,
Matteo Alderotti, Giovanni and Francesco del Bene, Giovanni
Benci, and Andrea Adimari, and with these a great many of the
smaller artisans. Amongst the admonished were the Covoni,
the Rinucci, the Formiconi, the Corbizzi, the Mannelli, and the
Alderotti. It was customary to establish the Balia for a given
time ; but those citizens who composed the present one resigned
from motives of honesty, although their time had not yet expired.
Believing that they had satisfied the requirements of the state,
they desired now to lay down their office, according to custom.
When this became known, a number of persons rushed, armed,
to the palace, and demanded that, before resigning, they should
exile and admonish others. This displeased the Signori greatly ;
but they entertained these men with fair promises until they
had collected an armed force, and then they compelled them
from fear to lay down their arms, which their fury had caused
them to take up. Nevertheless, by way of satisfying in part this
angry spirit, and to deprive these plebeian mechanics still more
of authority, they provided that, whilst before the minor guilds
had been entitled to one third of the public offices, they should
henceforth have only afourth. And so that there should always
be amongst the Signori at least two in the closest confidence of

158 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

the government, they gave authority to the Gonfaloniere of Jus-
tice, and to four other citizens, to make a purse of chosen men,
from which two should be drawn for every Signoria.

25. The government being thus regulated six years after its
reorganization in 1381, things remained pretty quiet in Flor-
ence until the year 1393. It was at this time that Giovanni
Galeazzo Visconti, called Conte di Virtu, made his uncle, Messer
Bernabo, prisoner, and thereby became sovereign of all Lom-
bardy. Galeazzo thought that he might by force make himself
king of all Italy, as by fraud he had become Duke of Milan.
In the year 1390 he carried on a most obstinate war against the
Florentines, with such varying results that several times he
was more in danger of defeat than the Florentines, who in the
end would have lost if the Duke had not died. Nevertheless
the defence was spirited and wonderful for a republic, and the
end was much less unfortunate than might have been expected
from so frightfula war. For, after having taken Bologna, Pisa,
Perugia, and Sienna, and when he had already prepared the
crown with which to have himself crowned king of all Italy, the
Duke died. Thus death neither permitted him to enjoy his past
victories, nor the Florentines to regret their present losses. Dur-
ing the progress of this war with the Duke of Milan, Messer Maso
degli Albizzi was made Gonfaloniere of Justice, who, in conse-
quence of the death of Piero, had become the enemy of the
Alberti. And as the evil spirit of party still survived, Messer
Maso thought that, although Messer Benedetto had died in
exile, yet he would revenge himself upon the remaining mem-
bers of that family before laying down his magistracy. He
availed, therefore, of the occasion when some one was being
examined in relation to certain dealings with the rebels, who
named Alberto and Andrea degli Alberti, to have these promptly
arrested (1893). At this act the whole city became greatly ex-
cited, so that the Signori provided themselves with arms, called
the people to a parliament, and appointed a new Balia, by means
_ of which they exiled a number of citizens, and had new purses
made for the election of public officers. Amongst the exiled
were pretty much all the Alberti; many artisans were admon-
ished, and some were put to death. In consequence of all these
wrongs, the guilds and the small people rose in arms; for it
seemed to them as though they were being deprived of all honor
and of life itself. A portion of them came into the Piazza, an-

Boox III.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 159

other part went to the house of Messer Veri de’ Medici, who,
after the death of Messer Salvestro, had become head of that
family. By way of quieting those who had come into the Piazza,
the Signori put at their head as captains, with the banners of
the Guelfs and of the people in their hands, Messer Rinaldo
Gianfigliazzi and Messer Donato Acciaiuoli, who, being men of
the people, were likely to be more acceptable to them than any
others. Those who had gone to the house of Messer Veri
begged him to take the government of the city into his hands,
and to liberate them from the tyranny of those citizens who
were destroyers of good men and of the public good.

All who have recorded the events of these times agree that, if
Messer Veri’s ambition had exceeded his goodness, he might
without hindrance have made himself prince of the city. For
the grave injuries that, rightly or wrongly, had been done to the
guilds and their friends, had so exasperated their spirits that
they lacked nothing to assuage their thirst for vengeance but a
chief to lead them. Nor was there wanting some one to remind
Messer Veri of what he had it in his power to do; for Antonio
de’ Medici himself, who had been for a long time his bitter ene-
my, endeavored to persuade him to assume the sovereignty of the
republic. To which Messer Veri replied: “Thy threats when
“thou wast my enemy never caused me any fear, nor shall thy
“evil counsels now, since thou art my friend, mislead me to
“evil.” And then, turning to the multitude, he advised them
to be of good cheer, for he was willing to be their defender pro-
vided they would allow themselves to be advised by him. And
after having gone into their midst in the Piazza, he went up
from there into the palace before the Signori, and addressed
them as follows: “That he could in no way regret that his
“course of life had made him beloved by the people of Flor-
“ence; but that he was sorry indeed that they had formed such
“a judgment of him as his past life did not warrant. For, in-
“ asmuch as he had never shown either a spirit of turbulence or
“ambition, he did not know whence it came that the people
“believed that he would sanction disturbances, like a turbulent
“man, or that he would be willing to seize the government, like
“an ambitious one. He therefore begged the Signoria not to
“reckon the ignorance of the multitude as his crime ; for so far
“as he was concerned, he had submitted himself to their au-
“thority so soon as he was able to do so. And that he felt

160 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book III.

“sure that they would be content to use their good fortune
“ modestly, and that they would have more satisfaction in the
“ enjoyment of half a victory, with the safety of the city, than
“to ruin her by striving for a complete one.” Messer Veri was
praised by the Signori, who urged him to induce the people to
lay down their arms, and that then they would do what they
had been counselled to do by him and by other citizens. After
these words Messer Veri returned to the Piazza, and, having
united his companions with those that were led by Messer Ri-
naldo and Messer Donato, he said to them “ that he had found
“in the Signoria the best disposition towards them, and that
“he had discussed many matters with them; but, owing to the
“brief time and the absence of the magistrates, nothing definite
“had been concluded. Nevertheless he begged them to disarm
“and to obey the Signoria, assuring them that they would be
“moved more by humility than by pride, and more by prayers
“than by threats. And that they should neither lack their
“share in the public offices, nor in personal security, if they
“would be governed by him.” Under these assurances from
Messer Veri, the people returned to their homes.

26. So soon as the people had disarmed, the Signori fortified
the Piazza, and then enrolled two thousand reliable citizens
whom the government could trust, dividing them equally into
companies with orders to hold themselves in readiness, at the
first signal, to come to the support of the government. And
all those who were not so enrolled were forbidden to carry
arms (1394). These preparations being made, the Signori con-
demned to exile and death a number of artisans from amongst
those who had shown themselves most audacious during the
riots. And for the purpose of giving to the office of the Gon-
faloniere of Justice more majesty and consideration, they pro-
vided that no one should exercise that office who was not at
least forty-five years of age. They also made many other pro-
visions for strengthening the government which were alike
unsupportable to those against whom they were aimed and
odious to the good citizens of their own party, who could not
regard a government good and secure that had to protect itself
with so much violence. All these exceeding rigors were offen-
sive not only to those of the Alberti who remained in the city,
and to the Medici, to whom it seemed that the people had been
deceived, but also to many others who disapproved of so much

Boox III] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 161

violence. The first who attempted to oppose these measures
was Messer Donato di Jacopo Acciaiuoli; although he was one
of the great of the city, and rather the superior than the equal
of Messer Maso degli Albizzi, who from the events that occurred
during his gonfalonierate had been almost like the head of
the republic, yet could he not be satisfied in the midst of such
general discontent. Nor would he, like so many others, seck
his personal advantage in the general misfortunes; and there-
fore he thought of trying to obtain the recall of the banished,
or at least restore the admonished to the privilege of hold-
ing office. For this purpose he disseminated his opinions
amongst a number of citizens, demonstrating to them that it
was the only means of quieting the people, and of putting an
end to the discontent of the factions; he only waited to become
himself one of the Signori, to have his plans carried into effect.
But as in all human affairs delay brings weariness and haste
danger, so he tried to escape the former by tempting the latter.
Amongst the Signori were his relative Michele Acciaiuoli and
his friend Niccolo Ricoveri; this seemed to afford Messer Do-
nato an opportunity not to be lost, and he therefore requested
them to propose a law in the councils that should provide for
the restitution of the citizens. These two being persuaded by
him spoke to their associates on the subject, who replied, how-
ever, that they were indisposed to try new things, the benefit
of which was doubtful and the danger certain. Whereupon
Messer Donato, having first-tried in vain all other means, and
being greatly excited by anger, gave them to understand that,
since they were unwilling that the city should be reformed by
the means in hand, it would have to be done by force of arms.
These words so displeased them, that they communicated the
matter to the chiefs of the government, who had Messer Donato
summoned to appear before them; and being convicted by the
testimony of those to whom he had committed his message, he
was banished to Barletta (1396). Alamanno and Antonio de’
Medici were also banished, together with the entire branch of
that family who were descended from Messer Alamanno, and a
number of the lower class of artisans who were influential with
the common people. This occurred two years after the govern-
ment had been reorganized by Messer Maso.

27. The city of Florence being in this condition, with many
malcontents within and many banished without, it happened

VOL. I. ll

162 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

that there were amongst the latter at Bologna, Picchio Cavic-
ciulli, Tommaso de’ Ricci, Antonio de’ Medici, Benedetto degli
Spini, Antonio Girolami, Cristofano di Carlone, and two others
of low condition, but all brave young fellows and disposed to
take every risk for the sake of returning to their country.
These were secretly informed by Pigiello and Baroccio Cavic-
ciulli, who were living as “admonished” in Florence, that if
they would come into the city they would conceal them in their
houses, whence they could afterwards issue and kill Messer
Maso degli Albizzi and call the people to arms, who being dis-
contented could easily be induced to rise, especially as they
would be seconded by the Ricci, the Adimari, the Mannelli, and
many other families. Encouraged by their hopes to accept
this proposition, they came into the city on the 4th of August,
1397, and having secreted themselves in the appointed places,
they sent to watch the movements of Messer Maso, intending
to begin the riot with his death. Messer Maso left his house
and stopped at an apothecary’s shop near San Piero Maggiore.
The man who was watching him ran to inform the conspirators,
who, having armed themselves came to the place indicated, but
found that Messer Maso had already left. Nothing daunted,
however, by this failure of their first attempt, they went
towards the Old Market, where they killed one of the adverse
faction; and having raised a tumult and called the people to
arms by shouts of “ Liberty!” and “Death to the tyrants!”
thence they turned towards the New Market, and at the end of
the Calimara killed another man. They pursued their way with
the same cries, but finding that no one took up arms, they
went to the Loggia della Nighittosa; here they mounted a high
place, surrounded by a great multitude who had run there
more from curiosity than any intention of aiding them, and
with a loud voice they exhorted the people “to take up arms
“and to leave that servitude which they hated so much, affirm-
“ing that their object was to redress the grievances of the mal-
“content in the city, and not to avenge their own personal
“wrongs. That they had heard that many of them prayed
“God to give them the opportunity to be able to revenge them-
“selves, which He would do whenever they had a chief to lead
“them. But now that the opportunity was offered them, they
“stood looking at each other like stupid men, waiting until the
“promoters of their liberation were killed, and their own servi-

Boor III. } HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 163

“tude aggravated. And that they were astonished that those
“who were accustomed to take to arms for the slightest injury
“remained unmoved when their wrongs were so numerous, and
“were willing to submit to seeing so many of their fellow-
“citizens exiled and admonished; whilst it was now in their
“power to have the banished restored to their country and the
“admonished reinstated in their rights to hold office.” These
words, although true, yet did not move the multitude, either
because they were restrained by fear, or because the death of
the two men had made the murderers hateful to them. When
the instigators of the riot found that neither words nor deeds
had power to stir the multitude, and saw too late the danger of
attempting to make a people free who are in every way resolved
to remain slaves, they despaired of the enterprise and retreated
into the church of Santa Reparata, where they shut themselves
up, not to save their lives, but to defer death. The Signori,
disturbed by the first noise, armed and closed the palace ; but
when they learnt the facts and became aware who it was that
had originated the disturbance, they became reassured, and
commanded the Captain with a force of men-at-arms to go and
arrest the rioters. Thus without much difficulty the doors of
the temple were forced open and a portion of the conspirators
were killed whilst defending themselves, and a portion were
captured ; and from their examination it appeared that outside
of their number there were none others implicated except
Baroccio and Pigiello Cavicciulli, who were condemned to death
with the other conspirators.

28. (1400.) After this occurrence there happened another
of greater importance. As we have related above, the city was
carrying on a war at this time with the Duke of Milan, who,
finding himself unable to overcome the Florentines by open
force, resorted to indirect ways, and by means of the exiled
Florentines, of which Lombardy was full, he formed a plot to
which many in the city were parties. According to this it was
agreed that on a given day those of the Florentine exiles who
were skilled in arms should start from certain places in the
immediate vicinity of Florence and enter the city by crossing
the river Arno. These, together with their accomplices in the
city, were then to rush to the houses of the heads of the gov-
ernment, and after having killed these they were to reorganize
the government according to their own views. Amongst the

164 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox III.

conspirators within the city was one of the Ricci, called Sam-
miniato; and as often happens in conspiracies that few are in-
sufficient to carry it into effect, whilst many cause its discovery,
so in this instance, for whilst Samminiato sought associates
he found an informer. He confided the matter to Salvestro
Cavicciulli, whom the wrongs which his relatives and himself
had experienced at the hands of the government ought to have
made faithful to the cause of the conspirators. But heeding
more his present fears than his distant hopes of revenge, he
promptly revealed the whole plot to the Signori; these imme-
diately had Samminiato arrested and compelled him to confess
the whole conspiracy. But of all those who were parties to it
in the city none were captured except Tommaso Davizi, who,
coming from Bologna and being ignorant of what had taken
place in Florence, was arrested immediately upon his arrival ;
all the others, being alarmed by the arrest of Samminiato, made
their escape. Having punished Samminiato and Tommaso ac-
cording to their crimes, the Signoria gave a Balia to a number
of citizens, who, armed with this authority, should seek out the
offenders and make the government secure. These declared
as rebels six of the Alberti, two of the Medici, three of the
Scali, two of the Strozzi, Bindo Altoviti, Bernardo Adimari,
and many others of the people. They also admonished the en-
tire families of the Alberti, Ricci, and Medici for ten years,
exempting only a very few of them. Amongst those of the
Alberti who were not admonished was Messer Antonio, be-
cause he was regarded as a quiet and peaceful man. But as
the suspicions excited by this conspiracy were not entirely
allayed, a monk was taken prisoner who had been seen during
the time that the conspirators were communicating with each
other to pass repeatedly between Bologna and Florence. He
confessed that on several occasions he had brought letters for
Messer Antonio, who was thereupon promptly arrested, and
although he denied everything, yet he was convicted upon the
monk’s testimony, and banished to a distance of three hundred
miles from the city. And so that the Alberti should no longer
be a constant danger to the government, all of that family who
were over fifteen years of age were likewise banished.

29. This event occurred in the year 1400, and two years after
Duke Giovanni Galeazzo of Milan died; this put an end to the
war, which had lasted twelve years. At this epoch the govern-

Boox IIT.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 165

ment, having acquired more power and being now free from
external and internal enemies, undertook an attempt upon Pisa,
and conquered it gloriously, and retained it undisturbed from
1400 till 1423. Only in the year 1412 a new Balia was created
for the express purpose of crushing and exiling the Alberti,
which strengthened the government by new provisions and
bore down the Alberti with new impositions. Within this
period the Florentines also made war against Ladislas, king of
Naples, which was terminated by the death of the king in 1414.
In the course of this war Ladislas, finding himself unequal in
strength to the Florentines, ceded to them the city of Cortona,
of which he was lord. But shortly after that he recovered his
forces and renewed the war, which became much more doubtful
for the Florentines than it had been at first; and had it not
been closed by the death of the king, the same as the previous
war with the Duke of Milan, it would have exposed the liberties
of Florence to great danger. This war with the king of Naples
terminated no less happily for the Florentines than that with
the Duke of Milan; for the king died after having made him-
self master of Rome, Sienna, La Marca, and all the Romagna;
so that he lacked nothing but Florence to extend his power
into Lombardy. And thus death was always a better friend to
the Florentines than any other of their allies, and was more
effective in saving them than their own valor.

After the death of the king of Naples Florence enjoyed en-
tire tranquillity during eight years. At the end of that period
she was agitated again by the war with Philip, Duke of Milan,
and by the fresh breaking out of party violence, which was not
allayed until the destruction of that government which had
ruled from 1381 until 1434, and which had carried on so many
wars with so much glory, and added to the dominions of the
republic Arezzo, Pisa, Cortona, Livorno, and Montepulciano ;
and would have done even greater things if the old party feuds
had not been rekindled, as will be shown more particularly in
the following book.

FOURTH BOOK.

SUMMARY.

1. Defects in the government of republics: servitude and license. — 2. State
of Florence, and resumption of the internal government of the city. —3. Gio-
vanni di Bieci de’ Medici restores the authority of his family in Florence
(1420). — Filippo Visconti, Duke of Milan, tries to make terms with the
Florentines, and concludes peace with them. —4. Owing to the suspicions
which the Duke’s bold enterprises in Italy excite in the minds of the Floren-
tines, war breaks out (1424). — 5. Filippo seizes Furli.—6. The Florentines
are defeated near Furli by the Duke’s forces. —7. In consequence of this de-
feat the people murmur against those who have advised the war, but being
quieted by Rinaldo degli Albizzi they provide for the prosecution of the war.
—8. The new tax for the expenses of the war is the cause of disturbances.
—9. Rinaldo degli Albizzi advises the restoration of the nobles to the gov-
ernment. — 10. His advice is disapproved by Giovanni de’ Medici. —11. He
thereby gains in reputation with the masses, but is held in aversion by the
party of Messer Rinaldo (1426).— 12. Gallantry of Biagio del Melano in
defending the castle of Monte Petroso, and cowardice of Zanobi del Pino.
— 13. The Florentines form a league with the Lord of Faenza and with the
Venetians. — 14. Institution of the Catasto, under the advice chiefly of Gio-
vanni de’ Medici; which causes discontent amongst the rich. The parties
that originate in consequence (1427). —15. Peace with the Duke of Milan.
—16. Death of Giovanni de’ Medici (1429). — 17. Revolt of the people of
Volterra, which is however soon suppressed. —18. Niccolo Fortebraccio, re-
leased from the conduct of the Florentine armies, assails the Lucchese. —
19. Deliberations on the war with Lucca. —20. The Florentines appoint
commissioners for the enterprise against Lucca, and agree with Fortebraccio
to conduct the war in the pay of the republic, but that he must give up the
places he has taken. —21. Misgovernment of Seravezza by Astore Gianni. —
22. Arraignment of Rinaldo degli Albizzi.—23. Filippo Brunelleschi pro-
poses to inundate Lucca by damming up the Serchio, but does not succeed
(1430). — 24. The troops of the Duke come to the aid of the Lucchese,
and take some towns. — 25. Francesco Sforza causes the Lucchese to expel
their Signori. The Florentines are defeated by the troops of the Duke. —
26. Cosimo de’ Medici. His character and method for achieving greatness
(1433). —27. His growing power excites the suspicion of many citizens,
and especially of Niccolo da Uzano and his associates. —28. Rinaldo degli
Albizzi causes Bernardo Guadagni to be elected Gonfaloniere, and makes him

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE, 167

seize Cosimo and confine him in the palace. —29. The Albizzi attempt to
restore the nobles in the government, and take up arms against the Signoria.
— 30. Proceedings of the new Signoria in favor of Cosimo.— 31. Pope
Eugenius IV. in Florence constitutes himself the mediator for quieting the
tumults. — 32. Cosimo is reclaimed, and Rinaldo with the whole party of
the Albizzi is confined (1434). Glorious return of Cosimo to Florence.

1. Citres that govern themselves under the name of Repub-
lies, and especially such as are not well constituted, are exposed
to frequent revolutions in their government, which make them
pass, not, as is generally believed, from servitude to liberty, but
from servitude to license. For it is merely the name of liberty
that is extolled by the ministers of license, which are the popu-
lar faction, and by the ministers of servitude, which are the
nobles, neither one nor the other of these being willing to sub-
mit either to laws orto men. On the other hand, it is true that
when by good fortune some wise, good, and powerful citizen
arises in the republic, (which, however, seldom happens,) who
establishes laws that will quell the factious spirit of the nobles
and of the people, and restrain it so that it can do no harm, —
then I say that city may call herself truly free, and such a state
may be considered firm and stable. For being founded upon
good laws and institutions, it is not dependent upon the virtue
of one man for its maintenance, as is the case with the others.
Many of the republics of antiquity, whose governments endured
a long time, were endowed with such laws. And similar laws
and institutions will ever be needed in all those republics that
have often changed, and continue to change, their governments
from a state of tyranny to one of license, and from the latter
to the former. For in such there is not, and cannot be, any
stability, because of the violent enmities which each of them
provokes; for the one does not please the good men, and the
other displeases the wise ones; the one can easily work harm,
and the other can-with difficulty effect any good. In the
one, the insolent have too much authority, and in the other,
the foolish; and both one and the other require being sus-
tained by the virtue and good fortune of one man, who may
at any moment be removed by death, or his usefulness im-
paired by misfortune.

2. I say, therefore, that the organization of the government
that was established in Florence after the death of Messer
Giorgio Scali, in 1381, was maintained, first by the virtue of

168 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV,

Messer Maso degli Albizzi, and afterwards by that of Niccolo da
Uzano. The city remained tranquil from the year 1414 until
1422; for King Ladislas was dead, and the state of Lombardy
divided by parties, so that there was nothing from without or
within to disturb her quiet. After Niccolo da Uzano, the citi-
zens having most authority were Bartolommeo Valori, Nerone
di Nigi, Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi, Neri di Gino, and Lapo
Niccolini. The factions that sprung from the feud between the
Albizzi and Ricci, and which Messer Salvestro de’ Medici re-
kindled with so much violence, had never been extinguished ;
and although the popular party ruled only three years, having
been vanquished in 1881, yet, comprising as it did the greater
part of the citizens, it could never be entirely suppressed. Still
it is true that the frequent parliaments, and the continued
persecutions against its leaders from 13881 to 1400, had well-
nigh reduced it to nullity. The principal families that were
persecuted as the chiefs of that faction were the Alberti, the
Ricci, and the Medici, who many times had to suffer in their
persons and in their wealth; and those of them who still re-
mained in Florence were deprived of the honor of holding pub-
lic offices. These frequent chastisements humbled that party
so as almost entirely to destroy it. There remained neverthe-
less in the minds of many of them the remembrance of the
wrongs endured, and the desire to avenge them; but not find-
ing a favorable opportunity to vent that feeling, it remained
concealed within their hearts. Those noble citizens, who goy-
erned the city thus peaceably, committed two errors, which
proved the ruin of their government. The one was that, by
continued possession of power, they became overbearing; the
other, that mutual jealousies and long control of the govern-
ment caused them to relax that vigilance which they should
have exercised over those who were hostile and capable of in-
juring them.

3. Stimulating thus by their sinister conduct the hatred of
the masses, and neglecting to watch the dangers because they
did not fear them, or encouraging them by their jealousy of
each other, they enabled the Medici to recover their influence.
and authority. The first of them that began to rise again was
Giovanni di Bicci ; who, having amassed great wealth, and being
of a benign and humane disposition, was elevated to the supreme
magistracy by those who held the government in the year 1420.

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 169

This caused the greatest satisfaction to the mass of the people,
for they seemed to think that in him they had gained a defender ;
so that the most prudent men of the city became justly sus-
picious of him, seeing all the former ill-feeling to revive and
gain strength. Niccolo da Uzano therefore made it a point to
inform the other citizens of it, pointing out to them the danger
of encouraging any one who had so much influence with the
masses, and how easy it was to check disorders in the begin-
ning; but that, having once allowed them to gain headway, it
was difficult to remedy them; and that he well knew Giovanni
to possess many qualities superior to those of Messer Salvestro.
But Niccolo was not listened to by his compeers, who were
jealous of his reputation, and were desirous of securing associ-
ates for themselves so as to put him down. Whilst this state
of things prevailed in Florence, and dissensions began secretly
to be fomented again, Filippo Visconti, second son of Galeazzo,
who, by the death of his brother, had become sovereign of all
Lombardy, believing himself capable of undertaking almost any
enterprise, desired, above all things, to recover the mastery over
Genoa, which at that time enjoyed independence under the gov-
ernment of its Doge, Messer Tommaso da Campo Fregoso. But
he was doubtful whether success would be certain in this or
any other enterprise, unless he first concluded a new treaty
with the Florentines, and to have it made publicly known; for
he thought that the credit he would gain thereby would suffice
to enable him to accomplish his desires. He therefore sent
ambassadors to Florence to obtain such a treaty. Many citi-
zens advised that it should not be made, as, without any new
treaty, they ought to continue the peace with Filippo, which
had been maintained for so many years; for they knew the
great advantage which such a treaty would afford to Filippo,
and of how little benefit it would be to the city of Florence.
Many others thought it best to make such a treaty, and by vir-
tue of it to impose conditions upon Filippo, the transgression of
which would make his evil intentions manifest to everybody ;
and that then, in case he broke the peace, they might with the
greater justice make war against him. And thus, after the
matter had been much debated, a treaty of peace was concluded
(1421), in which Filippo pledged himself in no way to interfere
with anything on the Florentine side of the rivers Magra and .
Panaro.

170 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV,

4. So soon as this treaty was made, Filippo seized Brescia
(1422), and soon after he took Genoa, contrary to the expecta-
tions of those Florentines who had advised the making of the
treaty ; for they had believed that Brescia would be defended
by the Venetians, and that Genoa would be able to protect her-
self. And inasmuch as in the terms which Filippo had made
with the Doge of Genoa, he had left him Serezana, and other
places situated on this side of the Magra, on condition that he
should not part with them except to the Genoese, it was con-
sidered that Filippo had by this agreement violated the stipula-
tions of his treaty with Florence. He had, moreover, concluded
a treaty with the Legate of Bologna. These things caused great
uneasiness to our citizens, who, apprehensive of further troubles,
began to prepare means for their prevention. When this became
known to Filippo, he sent ambassadors to Florence, either to
justify himself, or to sound the feelings of the Florentines, or to
lull them into security. He professed to be astonished at their
suspicions, and offered to renounce all that he had done that
could give rise to any such feelings. These ambassadors pro-
duced no other effect than to divide the city; for that part of
the citizens who had most influence in the government thought
it advisable to arm, and to prepare themselves to thwart the
designs of the enemy; for if such preparations should cause
Filippo to remain quiet, then a war would be avoided, and there
would be every reason for a continuance of peace. Many others,
either from jealousy of those who held the government or from
fear of war, deemed it wrong so lightly to suspect an ally, whose
conduct had given no cause for such mistrust, but felt con-
vinced that the appointing of the Ten, and the hiring of troops,
meant war; which, if undertaken against so powerful a prince as
Filippo Visconti, would surely involve the city in ruin, without
~ the least prospect of any good resulting from it. For they could
not retain sovereignty over any territory they might acquire,
because of the Romagna lying between; and it would be impos-
sible for them to make themselves masters of the Romagna on
account of the proximity of the Church. Nevertheless the in-
fluence of those who wanted the republic to prepare for war
outweighed that of the advocates of peace. The Ten were ap-
pointed, troops were levied, and fresh taxes imposed, which,
bearing much heavier upon the lower classes than upon the
wealthy citizens, filled the city with complaints; and the con-

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. aig |

demnation of the ambition and avarice of the government were
general; they were accused of wishing to make an unnecessary
war only for the purpose of gratifying their passions and to
oppress the people.

5. The republic had not yet come to an open rupture with
the Duke, but everything was looked upon with suspicion ;
for Filippo had at the request of the Legate of Bologna (who
feared Messer Antonio Bentivogli, who, being banished, hap-
pened to be at Castel Bolognese) sent troops into that city
(1420), which being near the Florentine dominions kept the
republic full of apprehensions. But that which alarmed every-
body, and was the main cause for declaring war, was the at-
tempt which Duke Filippo made upon Furli. Giorgio Ordelaffi,
lord of Furli, upon his death had left his young son Tibaldo
under the guardianship of Duke Filippo; and although the
mother, being suspicious of this guardian, had sent her son to
her father Lodovico Alidossi, who was lord of Imola, yet was
she forced by the people of Furli to conform to the father’s
will, and place the boy in the hands of the Duke. Whereupon
Filippo, by way of removing all suspicion and the better to
conceal his intentions, ordered that the Marquis of Ferrara
should send Guido Torelli in his place with trogps to take
possession of the government of Furli. It was thus that this
place fell into the hands of Filippo. When this fact became
known at Florence, together with the news of the arrival of
troops at Bologna, it facilitated the determination to declare
war. Still there was great opposition to it, and Giovanni de’
Medici publicly counselled against it, pointing out that, how-
ever certain the Duke’s evil intentions were, yet it would be
better to wait until he should make an attack than at once to
move against him; for in the latter case the war would be
justified in the opinion of the other Italian sovereigns on the
part of the Duke as well as on their own part; and that then
they could not claim their assistance with the same confi-
dence as they might do if they allowed the Duke to manifest
his ambitious projects; and that, finally, people defend their
own homes with more courage and determination than they
attack those of others. To this it was replied, that one should
not await the enemy at home, but that it was better to go to
meet him, and that fortune favored the assailants more than
the defendants; and that it was less injurious, even if more

172 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

costly in money, to carry the war into the enemy’s country,
than to have it in one’s own. This opinion prevailed, and it
was resolved that the Ten should take all means for recover-
ing the city of Furli from the hands of the Duke.

6. Filippo, seeing the Florentines determined to take those
places which he had resolved to defend, threw off the mask,
and sent Agnolo della Pergola with a large force to Imola
(1424), so that the lord of that city, being obliged to look
to his own defence, could not think of the protection of his
grandson Tibaldo. When therefore Agnolo reached Imola,
the Florentine troops being still at Modigliana, and the weather
being so intensely cold that the ditches of the city were frozen,
he passed over them by stealth at night and entered the city,
capturing Lodovico Alidossi, whom he sent as prisoner to
Milan. Imola being lost and war openly declared, the Floren-
tines sent their troops to Furli, and began the siege of that
city by investing it on all sides; and to prevent the Duke’s
forces from uniting to relieve it, they employed the Count
Alberigo, who scoured the country daily from Zagonara to
the very gates of Imola. Agnolo della Pergola, seeing that
he could not safely succor Furli, because of the strong posi-
tion occupig¢d by the Florentine troops, bethought himself of
attempting the capture of Zagonara, judging that the Floren-
tines would not allow that place to be taken; and that, if they
wished to succor it, they would have to raise the siege of Furli
and come to battle under great disadvantage. He soon forced
the Count Alberigo to ask for terms of capitulation, which
were conceded to them, on condition that they should surren-
der the place if not relieved by the Florentines within fifteen
days. When this mishap became known in the Florentine
camp and in the city, every one was anxious not to allow
the enemy to obtain this victory, but unhappily they thereby
afforded him the opportunity of gaining a much greater one.
For having raised the camp of Furli to go to the rescue of
Zagonara, they encountered the enemy and were completely
routed, not so much by the valor of the Milanese as by the
inclemency of the weather ; for the Florentines, having marched
for several hours through deep mud in a pouring rain, found
the enemy fresh, and were easily defeated by him. Neverthe-
less, in so great a defeat, which become famous throughout all
Italy, none were killed excepting Lodovico degli Obizzi, to-

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 173

gether with two of his men, who having fallen from their
horses were suffocated in the mud.

7. This defeat threw all Florence into great consternation,
but mostly so those prominent citizens who had advised the
war; for they saw the enemy powerful, their own forces dis-
persed, without the support of allies, and their own people
irritated, who assailed them in all the public places with in-
sulting words, complaining of the heavy taxes imposed upon
them, and of the war, for which there was no cause, saying:
“Did they appoint the Ten to intimidate the enemy? Did
“they relieve Furli and rescue it from the hands of the Duke?
“We now see the result of their counsels, and what they are
“aiming at! It was not to defend liberty, which is hateful
“to them, but it was to increase their own power, which God
“has justly diminished. Nor is this the only enterprise with
“which they burdened the city, but there were several others ;
“for was not the war against King Ladislas similar to this
“one? To whom would they now fly for help? To Pope
“Martin, whom they had insulted, for the sake of Braccio ?
“To Queen Joanna, who had to throw herself into the arms
“of the king of Aragon because they had abandoned her?”
Besides these reproaches, they said all sorts of other insulting
things, as an irritated people is apt to do. The Signori there-
fore deemed it well to call together a number of citizens who
with good words should quiet the excited anger of the popu-
lace. Whereupon Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi, the oldest
remaining son of Messer Maso, who on the strength of his
own merits and the memory of his father aspired to the high-
est offices in the city, spoke at length, showing that “it was
“not wise to judge of things only by their results, for it often
“happened that the best considered undertakings did not come
“to a good end, whilst the most ill-advised were frequently
“successful. And-were we to approve evil counsels because
“of the good which occasionally has attended them, we should
“virtually be encouraging error, which might result disas-
“trously for the republic; for certainly evil counsels do not
“always produce happy results. And in the same way it
“would be an error to blame a judicious enterprise because
“it had had an unsuccessful issue ; for such a course would
“discourage the citizens from giving the city the benefit of
“their counsels, and to say that which they thought.” He

174 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

then pointed out the necessity that had existed for this war,
and how it would have been waged in Tuscany, if they had
not carried it into the Romagna. “ But since it was the will
“of God that their troops should have been beaten, their losses
‘would be still more serious if they abandoned themselves to
‘hopelessness ; if, however, they showed a bold front to for-
“tune, and made the best use of the means at their command,
“they would not feel the loss, nor would Duke Filippo enjoy
“the victory. Nor should they be alarmed by the cost of the
“war and the prospect of future taxation; for the latter could
“easily be modified, and the former would be much less in the
“future than what it had been in the past; for less money suf-
‘“‘ficed for defence than what was needed for attacking others.
“And finally he counselled them to follow the example of
“their fathers, who, undismayed by any reverses, had always
“defended themselves courageously against whoever assailed
“them.”

8. The citizens, reanimated by the discourse of Messer Ri-
naldo, engaged the services of the Count Oddo, son of Braccio,
and gave him as an adviser Niccolo Piccinino, a pupil of
Braccio’s, and the best reputed of all those who had fought
under his banner; to these they added other Condottieri, and
remounted a portion of their men who had lost their horses.
They appointed twenty citizens to levy new taxes, who, seeing
the prominent citizens much cast down by the late defeat,
taxed them without consideration. (1426.) These imposts
greatly offended many of the prominent citizens, who at first,
from a sense of propriety, had not complained of the taxes
for themselves, but objected to them on the general ground
of their being unjust, and therefore urged their repeal. This
proposition, however, was rejected when brought before the
council. Therefore, by way of making the harshness of the
tax felt the more, and to make it odious to the mass of the peo-
ple, these citizens contrived that the tax-gatherers should en-
force it with the utmost severity, giving them the authority to
kill any one who resisted the officers of the law. This gave
rise to many painful occurrences, by the wounding and killing
of citizens. It became evident that this course of proceeding
would soon provoke the old party violence, and many prudent
men feared some immediate misfortune. The great, who had
been accustomed to be treated with special regard, would not

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 175

submit to being thus spoliated, whilst the others wanted that
all should be taxed alike. In this state of things a number
of the principal citizens met, and concluded that it would be
necessary for them to reconstitute the government; inasmuch
as their indolence had encouraged the people to find fault
with the acts of the government, and had emboldened the
leaders of the masses. After several private conferences they
resolved all to meet again at an appointed time; when up-
wards of seventy citizens assembled in the church of San
Stefano, with the sanction of Messer Lorenzo Ridolfi and
Francesco Gianfigliazzo, members of the Signoria. Giovanni
de’ Medici did not meet with them, either because he was not
invited, being suspected, or because he did not wish to inter-
fere by opposing their views.

9. Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi addressed the assembly and
began by “ showing them the condition of the city, and how by
“their negligence Florence had fallen under the control of the
“populace, from whom it had been wrested by their fathers in
“1381. He reminded them of the iniquity of that government
“which had ruled from 1378 to 1381, and how every one present
“had to deplore the death of a father or grandfather in conse-
“quence; that the same dangers now threatened the republic,
“and that the city was relapsing into the same disorders. For
“already the people had laid a tax after their own fashion, and
“that they would very soon appoint the magistrates according
“to their pleasure, if they were not restrained by superior force
“or by more vigorous institutions. And that if this came to
“pass then the populace would occupy their places, and would
“overturn the government which for forty years had ruled the
“city with so much glory. That Florence would then be goy-
“erned either by chance, according to the caprice of the multi-
“tude, when the one party would indulge in every license and
“the other would be exposed to every danger; or the city would
“become subject to the rule of some one man, who would in the
“end make himself sovereign of it. And therefore he affirmed
“that every one who loved his country and valued his honor
“ought to rouse himself and remember the virtue of Bardo
“ Mancini, who by the ruin of the Alberti rescued the city from
“the dangers in which it then was. He showed them that the
“cause of the audacity of the multitude was to be found in the
“frequency of the elections, which they by their negligence had

176 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV.

“allowed to take place, and which had filled the palace with
“new and low people. He therefore concluded that there was
“but one way of remedying the evil, and that was to restore
“the government to the hands of the nobles; to deprive the
“minor guilds of all share in the public authority, and to re-
“duce their number from fourteen to seven; that thus the
“populace would have less influence in the councils, both by
“the diminution of their numbers as well as by the increased
“authority which it would give to the nobles, who, always pre-
“serving their old enmities, would be opposed to the others.
“ He assured them that it was true wisdom to make use of men
“according to the times; for if their fathers availed of the
“people to put down the insolence of the nobles, so, now that
“the nobles had become humble and the people insolent, it was
“wise to check the arrogance of the latter by the help of the
“former. And to enable them to carry this out, they might em-
“ploy either craft or force, to either of which means they could
“easily resort, as some of their friends were members of the
* Council of Ten, and could easily bring troops into the city.”

Messer Rinaldo was applauded and his counsels approved by
all; amongst others Messer Niccolo da Uzano said: “ All that
“ Messer Rinaldo has spoken is true, and the remedies proposed
“by him are good and sure provided they can be carried out
“without producing an open rupture in the city; which could
“be done if they could draw Messer Giovanni de’ Medici into
“their plans. For by his concurrence with them, the people,
“being deprived of their chief and their strength, could do no
“harm; but if he did not concur with them, nothing could
“be effected without arms, and he deemed any resort to arms
“perilous, either from failure of success or from not being able
“to enjoy the benefit of their victory. He modestly brought
“to their recollection his past record, how he wanted to remedy
“the difficulty at the time when it might have been done easily,
“but now the opportune moment had been allowed to pass
“when it might have been done without danger of greater evils ;
“and therefore there was now no other remedy left them but
“to gain Giovanni de’ Medici over to their side.” Messer Ri-
naldo was therefore commissioned to call upon Giovanni, and
try to draw him into their plans.

10. This gentleman executed his commission, and in the best
terms at his command he urged Giovanni to unite with them

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 177

in their effort, and not to encourage the multitude in their
audacity, which would lead to the ruin of the government and
the city. To which Giovanni replied: “That he believed it the
“duty of a good and wise citizen not to change the established
“institutions of the city, as there was nothing so injurious as
“such frequent changes, which always gave offence to many ;
“and where so many remained discontented, there was cause
“for apprehending every day some unhappy occurrence. He
“thought that their determination would have two most per-
“nicious results: the one, to give the public offices to those
“who, never having held them, would esteem the honor less,
“and who would have less cause of complaint if they did not
“have them; the other, to take the honors from those who,
“being accustomed to have them, would never rest until they
“were restored to them. And thus the injury done to the one
“would be much greater than the benefit bestowed upon the
“other, so that whoever might be the author of such a measure
“would gain but few friends by it, and make himself many
“enemies; and the latter would be more eager to injure him
“than the former to defend him, men being naturally more
“prone to revenge of injuries than to gratitude for benefits re-
“ceived, regarding the latter as onerous, whilst the former was
“alike sweet and profitable.” Then, turning to address Messer
Rinaldo personally, he said: “ And you, if you would remem-
“ber the things that have happened, and with how much craft
“and deceit things are carried-on in this city, you would be
“less eager in your resolve; for those who counsel it, after
“having with your aid deprived the people of their authority,
“will in turn take it again from you, with their aid whom the
“wrong done them will have converted into your enemies.
“ And it will happen to you as it did to Messer Benedetto Al-
“berti, who, persuaded by those who did not love him to con-
“sent to the destruction of Messer Giorgio Scali and Messer
“Tommaso Strozzi, was a short time after sent himself into
“exile by those who had thus persuaded him. He advised
“him, therefore, to think more maturely of these matters, and
“to imitate his father, who, for the sake of gaining the favor
“of the masses, had lowered the price of salt, and had provided
“that he who owed less than half a florin for taxes might pay
“it or not as he pleased; and that on the day of the meeting

“of the councils every one should be exempt from prosecution
VOL. I. 12

178 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV.

“by his creditors. And finally he concluded that, so far as re-
“garded himself, he was in favor of leaving the city under its
“present organization.”

11. When these negotiations became known, it increased the
esteem in which Giovanni was held, and the detestation of the
other citizens, from whom Giovanni kept himself aloof, so as
to discourage any one’s attempting to introduce innovations
under cover of his favor; and in all his conversations he gave
every one to understand that he did not wish to nurse factions,
but rather to destroy them; and so far as regarded himself, he
desired nothing but the union of the city. This caused many
of the adherents of his party to be dissatisfied, for they could
have wished that he should have shown himself more active in
these matters. Amongst these was Alamanno de’ Medici, who,
being of a violent temper, did not cease to urge him to perse-
cute his enemies and to favor his friends, condemning his cold-
ness and want of energy, to which he attributed the intrigues
of his enemies against him, which, he said, would some day
ruin his family and friends. He also encouraged Cosimo, the
son of Giovanni, to the same views. Nevertheless Giovanni,
from some revelations or predictions made to him, did not
swerve from his purpose; despite of which, however, the parties
had already declared themselves, and the city was in open divis-
ion. There happened at that time to be in the palace attached
to the service of the Signoria two chancellors, Ser Martino and
Ser Pagolo. The latter adhered to the party of Uzano, and the
former to that of the Medici; and Messer Rinaldo, seeing that
Giovanni would not agree with them, thought it advisable to
deprive Ser Martino of his office, hoping thereby to have the
palace afterwards more favorably disposed for his party. But
he was anticipated in this move by his adversaries, for Martino
was not only protected, but Ser Pagolo was deprived of office,
to the great displeasure and damage of his party. This would
immediately have produced evil consequences had it not been
for the war which threatened the republic, which had become
greatly alarmed by the defeat suffered at Zagonara. For whilst
these things were transpiring in Florence, Agnolo della Pergola
with the troops of the Duke had seized all the places which the
Florentines possessed in the Romagna, excepting only Castro-
caro and Modigliana; partly in consequence of the weakness of
the places, and partly owing to the defection of those in charge

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 179

of them. In the taking of these places two circumstances oc-
curred which show how true bravery is appreciated even by the
enemy, and how cowardice and villany are despised.

12. Biagio del Melano was castellan of the castle of Monte
Petroso, which was surrounded and closely pressed by the
enemy ; and seeing no means of saving the place, Biagio piled
clothing and straw in that part which was not yet in flames,
and, casting his two little sons upon the pile, he called out to
the enemy: “Take for yourselves the goods which Fortune
“has given me, and of which you can deprive me, but the
“treasures of my heart, which constitute my honor and glory,
“J shall neither yield nor can you take them from me!” The
enemy rushed in to save the children, and brought him ropes
and ladders so that he might save himself and them. But he
did not accept for himself, preferring to die in the flames
rather than be saved by the hands of his country’s enemies.
An instance truly worthy of the boasted examples of antiquity !
but more admirable than those, because more rare. The enemy
restored to the children of Biagio all the things they were able
to save, and sent them with the greatest care to their relatives.
Nor was the republic less kind to them, for they were sup-
ported during life at the public expense.

The reverse of this occurred at Galeata, where Zanobi dal
Pino was Podesta, who surrendered the fortress to the enemy
without making any defence, and moreover advised Agnolo to
leave the mountains of the Romagna and come into the hills
of Tuscany, where he could carry on the war more advanta-
geously and with less danger. Agnolo was disgusted by the
cowardice and baseness of Zanobi, and handed him over to his
servants, who, after much taunting, gave him nothing to eat
but paper painted with snakes, saying that by this means they
wanted to change him from a Guelf into a Ghibelline; and
thus he died in a few days from hunger.

13. In the midst of this Count Oddo, together with Niccolo
Piccinino, had entered the Val di Lamona for the purpose of
trying to force the lord of Faenza into an alliance with the
Florentines ; or at least to hinder Agnolo della Pergola from
freely scouring the Romagna. But that valley being naturally
strong, and its inhabitants accustomed to arms, Count Oddo
was killed and Niccolo Piccinino taken prisoner and sent to
Faenza. But fortune wanted the Florentines to obtain by

180 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

means of their losses what victory perhaps would not have
given them; for Niccolo prevailed upon the lord of Faenza
and his mother to become allies of the Florentines. By the
treaty resulting from this Niccolo was set free; but he did
not himself act up to the advice which he had given to others ;
for in negotiating with the city of Florence in relation to his
employment, they disagreed, either because the terms seemed
to him insufficient, or because he found better pay elsewhere.
For he abruptly left Arezzo, where he was in quarters, and
went into Lombardy, where he entered into the service of the
Duke Filippo. The Florentines, alarmed at this and frightened
by the enormous expenses, concluded that they were not able
to carry on this war alone; and therefore sent ambassadors to
the Venetians to pray them, whilst it was still easy for them
to do so, to oppose the greatness of one man, who, if they
allowed him to increase in power, would be as dangerous for
them as he was for the Florentines. The Venetians had been
advised to the same effect by Francesco Carmignuola, a man
highly esteemed in those days for his ability as a general, and
who had formerly been in the service of the Duke, but had sub-
sequently revolted against him; but they were doubtful as to
how far they could trust Carmignuola, thinking that his enmity
towards the Duke might possibly be only feigned. Whilst he
was thus suspected by the Venetians, the Duke had poison
administered to him by one of the servants of Carmignuola ;
the poison, however, was not sufficiently powerful to kill him,
though it reduced him to extremity. When the cause of his
illness was discovered, the Venetians gave up their suspicions,
and employed him in accordance with the advice of the Floren-
tines, and concluded a league with them, by which both parties
obligated themselves to carry on the war at joint expense ; and
that the conquests in Lombardy should belong to the Venetians,
and those in the Romagna and Tuscany to the Florentines ;
and Carmignuola was appointed the commander-in-chief of the
forces of the league. The war during the continuance of this
league was confined to Lombardy, where it was valiantly con-
ducted by Carmignuola, who in the course of a few months
took a number of places from the Duke, together with the city
of Brescia, the capture of which was regarded in those days
as something marvellous.

14. This war lasted from 1422 to 1427, so that the citizens

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 181

of Florence were tired of the taxes imposed upon them and
agreed to revise them (1427). And by way of equalizing
them according to the wealth of the citizens, they provided
that the taxes should be laid upon property, and that whoever
had to the value of one hundred florins should be assessed one
half a florin. As it was therefore the law and not men that had
to adjust this tax, it was regarded very onerous by the power-
ful citizens, who strenuously opposed the new system before it
was finally adopted. Giovanni alone supported it openly, and
thus it was passed. And because in the assessing of this tax
the property of each one was valued in the aggregate, which
the Florentines call “ accatastare” (to pile together), this tax
was called the “ Catasto.” This system in some measure put
a check upon the tyranny of the great, for they could no
longer oppress the lesser people, nor silence them with threats
in the councils, as they formerly could. The mass of the
people therefore gladly accepted this tax, but the great re-
ceived it with the greatest oppugnancy. But as it happens:
that men are never satisfied, and when they have obtained one
thing are not content with it, but desire something else, so the |
people, not content with the present equality of the tax, which ~
commenced with the passage of the law, demanded that it
should be made retroactive, and that it should be ascertained
how much too little the nobles had paid according to the Ca-
tasto; and that they should be made to pay as much as
would bring them even with those who, to enable them to pay
the taxes which they ought not to have paid, had been obliged
to sell their property. This demand alarmed the nobles much
more than the Catasto itself; and they did not cease to con-
demn it as being most unjust, especially in being put also upon
movable property, which, they argued, is possessed one day
and lost the next; and besides, that there were many persons
who kept their money concealed, so that the Catasto could
not touch it; to which they added, that those who left their
business to govern the republic should be taxed less, as it
should suffice that they gave their personal services ; and that
it was not just that the city should claim their property, as
well as their time and talents. The others, who were favora-
ble to the Catasto, replied, that, if the personal property varied,
the assessments could be varied accordingly, and by doing so
frequently, that inconvenience would be remedied. And of

182 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

those who kept their money concealed it was not necessary
to take any account, for their money brought them no return,
and therefore it was not reasonable that they should pay ; but
if they wanted to have profit from their money, they would
have to reveal it, in which case it would be taxed. And if it
did not please them to serve the republic, they might leave it
alone and need not trouble themselves about it; for it would
be easy to find well-disposed citizens who would willingly give
their money and their counsels to the city ; inasmuch as the ad-
vantages and honors resulting from their being in the govern-
ment were such that they ought to suffice them without wishing
to be exempt from taxation. But that the evil was not where
they said it was, and that the real cause of their regrets was
being no longer able to carry on the war without injury to
themselves, since they had to contribute to its expenses the
same as the others. And if the present measure had been
adopted sooner, they would never have made the war against
King Ladislas, nor the one against the Duke Filippo, both of
which had been made, not from necessity, but merely to enrich
some of the citizens. These ill feelings were calmed by Gio-
vanni de’ Medici, who argued that it was not well to revert to
the things of the past, but that they ought to provide for the
future. And if the taxes in the past had been unjust, they
should thank God that the means had been found to make
them just for the future; and he wanted that these means
should serve to unite, and not to divide the city, as would be
the case if they attempted to collect the taxes for the past so
as to make them equal to the present one; and that it was
better to be content with half a victory, for those who wanted
to gain too much often lost all. With these and other similar
arguments he quieted these discontents, and caused the retro-
spective tax not to be resolved upon.

15. Meantime, whilst the war with the Duke thus went on,
a peace was negotiated at Ferrara through the intervention of
the Pope’s Legate, the conditions of which, however, were from
the first disregarded by Filippo, so that the league resumed
arms anew; and having come to battle with the Duke’s forces,
these were routed at Maclovio (1428). After this defeat Fi-
lippo set new negotiations on foot for a treaty, which were ac-
ceded to by the Venetians and Florentines ; by the latter, from
jealousy of the Venetians, for it seemed to them that they had

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 183

spent enough to make others powerful; and by the former, be-
cause they had observed that Carmignuola after the defeat of
the Duke had become less active, so that they thought that they
could no longer trust him. Peace was therefore concluded in
1428; according to the terms of which the Florentines were to
receive back the places lost in the Romagna, and the Venetians
retained Brescia, besides which the Duke gave them Bergamo
with its territory. Florence had spent in this war the sum of
three and a half millions of ducats; and whilst the Venetians
had gained in power and possessions, the Florentines increased
their poverty and divisions. External peace being restored,
the internal dissensions recommenced. The great citizens,
unwilling to submit to the Catasto, and seeing no way of putting
an end to it, thought of means for augmenting the number of
opponents to that measure, so as to have more support in their
efforts to have it annulled. For this purpose they instructed
the official assessors to put the tax, in accordance with the
law, also upon the property of the inhabitants of the subject
districts, so as to ascertain whether any of that property be-
longed to the Florentines. All the inhabitants of the districts
were therefore cited to present, within a given time, written
schedules of their property. This caused the Volterrans to
send a deputation to protest against it to the Signoria, which
irritated the officials to that degree that they put eighteen of
them in prison. This aroused the indignation of the Vol-
terrans, but consideration for their imprisoned envoys caused
them to refrain from any violence.

16. About this time Giovanni de’ Medici fell sick, and,
feeling his illness to be mortal, he called his two sons, Cosimo
and Lorenzo, to him, and said to them: “I believe I have lived
“to the time appointed for me by God and nature at my birth.
“JT die content, for I leave you rich and healthy, and of such
“quality that, if you will follow in my footsteps, you can live
“in Florence honored and beloved by every one. Nothing
‘“‘makes me die so content as the reflection that I have never
“injured any one, but that rather, according to my ability, I
“have benefited all. I advise you to do the same; and if
“you desire to live securely, take only such share of the gov-
“ernment as the laws and the citizens may choose to bestow
“upon you, which will never expose you to envy or danger.
“For it is that which a man takes, not that which is given

184 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV.

“to him, that renders him odious to others; and thus you will
“always have much more than those who, wishing to take the
“share of others, lose their own, and who, before losing it live
“in constant anxiety. In this way have I, in the midst of so
“many enemies and divisions, not only maintained, but in-
“creased my influence in the city; and thus, if you follow my
“example, will you maintain and increase yours. But if you
“do otherwise, remember that your fate will not be different
“from that of those who within our memory have ruined them-
“selves and their families.”

Soon after this he died, in 1429, greatly regretted by every
one in Florence, as he deserved, because of his admirable quali-
ties. Giovanni was most charitable, and not only gave alms
to whoever asked them, but often succored the poor without
being solicited. He loved all mankind; he praised the good,
and had compassion upon the wicked. He never asked for
honors, but had them all. He never went to the palace unless
called there. He loved peace, and avoided war; he remem-
bered men in their adversity, and aided them in prosperity.
He was a stranger to public rapine, and only aimed to in-
crease the wealth of the state. As a magistrate he was cour-
teous; his eloquence was moderate, but his prudence very
great. The expression of his countenance was sad, but his
conversation was cheerful, and even facetious. He died rich
in treasure, but richer in good fame and the general affection.
The heritage he left both in wealth of fortune and of character
was not only maintained, but increased, by his son Cosimo.

17. The Volterran envoys were tired of being in prison,
and for the sake of obtaining their liberty they promised to
consent to what had been demanded of them. Being there-
upon liberated, they returned to Volterra at the moment when
the new priors of the city were about to assume their magis-
tracy. Amongst these one Giusto had been drawn, a plebeian
who had much influence with the populace, and one of those
who had been imprisoned by the Florentines. Being fired
with hatred against them on account of his private and the
public wrongs, and stimulated also by Giovanni di Contugi, a
noble who sat in the magistracy with him, he resolved to stir
up the people with the authority of the priors; and with the
support of the masses, whose favor he enjoyed, to rescue the
country from the hands of the Florentines, and to make him-

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 185

self master of it. By Giovanni’s advice Giusto took up arms,
scoured the country, captured the resident Florentine gov-
ernor, and with the consent of the people made himself lord
of Volterra. This occurrence greatly irritated the Floren-
tines ; but having concluded a peace with Duke Filippo, the
terms of which had just been settled, they judged that they
would still be able to recover Volterra. And by way of not
losing any time, they at once appointed Messer Rinaldo degli
Albizzi and Messer Palla Strozzi as commissaries to conduct
this enterprise. Giusto, in the mean time, anticipating that
he would be attacked by the Florentines, applied for assist-
ance to the people of Lucca and Sienna. The latter declined
on the ground of being in alliance with the Florentines ; and
Pagolo Guinigi, lord of Lucca, who was desirous of recover-
ing the good will of the people of Florence, which he supposed
he had lost during their war with the Duke Filippo when he
had declared himself the friend of the latter, not only refused
all aid to Giusto, but sent those who had come to ask it as
prisoners to Florence. The commissaries meantime, desiring to
fall upon the Volterrans unawares, assembled all their forces,
and raised a large body of infantry from the lower Val d’ Arno,
and marched upon Volterra. But Giusto, undismayed by hay-
ing been abandoned by his neighbors, and by the impending
attack of the Florentines, and relying upon the strength of the
place and the roughness of the country, prepared for defence.
There was in Volterra a certain Messer Arcolano, brother of
that Giovanni di Contugi who had persuaded Giusto to seize
the lordship, who had much influence with the nobility. He
called together certain of his confidential friends, and showed
-them how by this event God had come to the aid of their city
in its need; for if they would take up arms and deprive
Giusto of the lordship, and restore the city to the Florentines,
it would follow that they would remain the leading men of
the country, and preserve their ancient privileges. Having
agreed upon this, they went to the palace where the lord re-
sided; a portion of them remained below, whilst Messer Ar-
colano with three others ascended into the hall, where they
found Giusto with some citizens. They called him aside as
though they wished to confer with him upon some important
affair, and whilst conversing with him they led him into a
chamber, where Arcolano and his companions attacked him

186 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. (Boox IV.

with their swords. But they were not sufficiently quick in
their movements to prevent Giusto from drawing his sword,
so that before they killed him he wounded two of his assail-
ants severely. Unable, however, to resist so many, he was
slain, and his body thrown down to the lower floor of the
palace. The party of Messer Arcolano, having taken up arms,
gave the city up to the Florentine commissaries, who were
near by with their troops, and who entered the city without
further stipulations. This made the condition of the Volter-
rans much worse, for amongst other things the Florentines
secured the greater part of the territory from the city, and
reduced Volterra to a mere vicariate.

18. Volterra being thus, as it were, lost and regained at one
blow, there appeared no reasons for any new wars, had it not
been that ambition provoked another. Niccolo Fortebraccio,
a son of a sister of Braccio da Perugia, had been for a con-
siderable time in the service of the city of Florence during
the war with Duke Filippo. Upon the declaration of peace
he was discharged by the Florentines; but when the difficulty
with Volterra occurred he was still in quarters at Fucecchio,
where the commissaries charged with the enterprise against
Volterra made use of him and his men. It was generally
believed that whilst thus engaged Messer Rinaldo persuaded
Niccolo under some pretext to attack Lucca, pointing out to
him that, if he did so, it would cause the Florentines openly
to declare war against Lucca, and that then he would be made
commander of their forces. After Volterra was taken, and
when Niccolo had returned to his quarters at Fucecchio, per-
suaded either by Messer Rinaldo or of his own accord, he
seized, in November, 1429, with three hundred mounted men
and three hundred infantry, the Lucchese castles of Ruoti and
Compito, and then descended into the plain, where he took a
large amount of booty. When this became known in Florence
people of all sorts gathered in groups throughout Florence, the
greater part of which wanted war to be declared against Lucca.
Of the principal citizens who were in favor of this were the
Medici and their adherents; also Messer Rinaldo, who was
influenced either by the belief that it would be advantageous
for the republic, or perhaps by the ambitious hope that he
would be appointed to conduct the enterprise. Those who
were opposed to it were Niccolo da Uzano and his party. It

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 187

would almost seem incredible that in the same city there
should be such a diversity of opinion as to the undertaking
of this war; for those very citizens and the same people who,
after ten years of peace, had blamed the war undertaken
against Duke Filippo in defence of their own liberty, now,
after the heavy expenditures and affliction in which that war
involved the city, eagerly demanded that a war should be
undertaken against Lucca to rob her citizens of their liberty.
And, on the other hand, those who had been in favor of the
former war now strenuously opposed this one. Thus do opin-
ions change with time, and thus are the multitude ever more
ready to seize upon the goods of others than to defend their
own. And thus are men more influenced by the hope of gain
than by the fear of loss; for the latter, unless very near, ex-
cites no apprehension; and the former, being still remote,
creates hopes. And thus the people of Florence were filled
with hopes by the conquests already made and yet expected
to be made by Fortebraccio, and by the letters written by their
rectors from near Lucca. For the governors of Pescia and
Vico had written that, if permission were given them to receive
those castles that were willing to surrender to them, the whole
Lucchese territory would very quickly be acquired. Added to
this came the conduct of the envoy whom the lord of Lucca
had sent to Florence to remonstrate against the attack made
upon him by Fortebraccio, and to beg the Signoria not to
make war upon a neighbor and a city that had ever been their
friend. This envoy was called Messer Jacopo Viviani; he
had been imprisoned by Pagolo Guinigi, lord of Lucca, for
having conspired against him; and although found guilty,
yet his life was spared and he was pardoned by Pagolo, who,
in the belief that Messer Jacopo had also forgiven his injury,
intrusted him with this mission. But when Messer Jacopo
came to Florence, being more mindful of the danger he had
escaped than of the benefit received, he secretly counselled
the citizens in favor of the war against Lucca. This advice,
added to their hopes, caused the Signoria to assemble the
councils, at which four hundred and ninety-eight citizens came
together, before whom the question was discussed by the prin-
cipal men of Florence.

19. Amongst the first to speak in favor of the attempt against
Lucca was, as we have said above, Messer Rinaldo. He pointed

—_

188 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV.

out the advantages that would result from the acquisition, and
demonstrated the opportunity to be favorable, — Lucca being left
an easy prey to them by the Venetians and Duke Filippo. Nor
could the Pope intervene, being occupied with the affairs of the
kingdom of Naples. He furthermore showed the facility with
which the city could be taken, being enslaved by one of her own
citizens, and having lost her natural vigor and ancient zeal in
defence of her liberties; so that the city would be given up to
them, either by the people for the sake of ridding themselves of
their tyrant, or by the tyrant from fear of the people. He re-
cited the injuries done them by the lord of Lucca, his ill-will
against the Florentine republic, and how dangerous he would
prove if ever they should again be involved in war with either
the Pope or the Duke; and concluded by saying that no en-
terprise ever engaged in by the Florentines had been more easy,
more beneficial, or more just. Against this opinion Niccolo da
Uzano spoke as follows: “That the city of Florence had never
“attempted a more unjust nor more hazardous enterprise, and
“from which greater injury would result. And, first, because
“it was a Guelf city which it was proposed to attack, and one
“that had ever been friendly to the Florentine people, and had
“ many times, at her own peril, received in her bosom the Guelfs
“ who were not permitted to remain in their own country; and
“that never, within the memory of our times, had Lucca, when
“free, offended Florence; and that, if she had done so when
“enslaved, as formerly by Castruccio, and now by Pagolo, the
“ ouilt could not be imputed to her, but to her tyrant. And if
“they could make war against the tyrant without doing so
“against the citizens, it would displease him less; but as that
“could not be done, he could not consent that a city, hitherto
“their friend, should be despoiled of her liberty and her prop-
“erty. But as people nowadays took little account of what was
“just or unjust, he would not now touch upon that point, but
“would only look to the question of advantage to their own city.
“He believed that only those things should be called advan-
“tageous which could not readily be productive of injury; but
“he did not know how any one could call an undertaking use-
“ful in which the damage was certain and the benefit doubtful.
“The certain damage was the cost, which would be unavoidable,
“and which would be found so great that it should alarm a city
“that for a long while had enjoyed the repose of peace, and

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 189

‘much more so one that was wearied by a serious and pro-
“tracted war, as was the case with Florence. The benefit that
“ could possibly result from it would be the conquest of Lucca,
“which he confessed would be a great one; but that it was
“proper to consider the uncertainty in which that was involved,
“ which in his judgment was so great that he regarded the con-
“quest impossible. And that they must not believe that the
‘¢ Venetians and Duke Filippo would rest satisfied with such an
“ acquisition on their part; for the former only made pretence
“ of consent to,avoid appearing ungrateful, having but a short
“time before added so largely to their dominions by means of
“Florentine money. And Duke Filippo would be glad to see
“them involve themselves in new wars and expenditures, so
“that, when wearied and exhausted in all respects, he might
“the more safely assail them anew; and that whilst they were
“engaged in this undertaking, and full of high hopes of victory,
“the Duke would not lack means of aiding the Lucchese coy-
“ertly, either with money or by disbanding some of his troops,
“and letting them go to their assistance as soldiers of fortune.
“ He therefore advised them to abstain from the attempt, and
‘to live on such terms with the tyrant of Lucca as would cause
“him to increase the number of his enemies as much as possi-
“ble within the city ; for there would be no more convenient
“way of subjugating Lucca than to let her live under the rule
“of her tyrant, and to have her weakened and exhausted by
“him. For if the matter were managed prudently, things
“ would soon come to that point in Lucca that, the tyrant not
“being able to hold her, the city, being incapable of governing
“herself, would of necessity fall into their hands. But that he
“saw the feelings that had been stirred, and that his words
“were not listened to; yet this he would predict to them, that
“they were about to make a war in which they would expend a
“great deal of money and expose themselves to many dangers ;
“and, instead of taking Lucca, they would deliver her from her
“tyrant, and convert her from a friendly, feeble, and enslaved
“city into a free and hostile city, which in time would prove an
“obstacle to the greatness of their own republic.”

20. After the speeches in favor of and against the enterprise,
a secret vote was taken, according to custom; and of the whole
number present only ninety-eight were against it. The war
being therefore resolved upon, the Ten were appointed for its

190 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

conduct, and troops were levied, both mounted men and infan-
try. Messer Astorre Gianni and Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi
were appointed commissaries, and an arrangement was made
with Niccolo Fortebraccio to receive from him the places he had
taken, and for him to remain in the service of the Florentines
during the continuance of the war. When the commissaries
arrived with the army in the Lucchese territory, they divided
their forces; and Astorre extended himself through the plain
to Camajore and Pietrasanta, and Messer Rinaldo went towards
the mountains, judging that, if the city were cut off from the
country, it would then be easy to take it. These movements,
however, proved unfortunate ; not because they did not capture
places enough, but because their conduct of the war had sub-
jected them to various complaints and charges. And certainly
the conduct of Messer Astorre Gianni was justly liable to the
charges brought against him. There is near to Pietrasanta a
rich and populous valley called Seravezza. When its inhabit-
ants heard of the arrival of the commissaries, they went to meet
them, and begged to be received by them as loyal servants of
the Florentine people. Astorre made show of accepting the
proffer, and then sent his troops to occupy the passes and
strong places of the valley. Thereupon he caused all the men
of the valley to come together in their principal churches, where
he made them all prisoners, whilst his troops sacked and plun-
dered the whole country in the most cruel and rapacious man-
ner, respecting neither their sacred places nor their women,
whether maidens or married. When these proceedings became
known at Florence it caused the greatest indignation, not only
of the magistrates, but of the whole city.

21. Some of the men of Seravezza, who had escaped from the
hands of Astorre, rushed to Florence, and told the story of their
woes to every one in the streets; and being encouraged by many
who desired the punishment of the commissary, either because
of his infamous conduct or because he was of the opposite fac-
tion, they went to the Ten, demanding to be heard. And being
admitted, one of the men spoke as follows: “ We are certain,
“OQ magnificent Signori, that our words will find belief and
“compassion with your lordships, when you shall know how our
“country has been seized by your commissary, and how we have
“been treated by him. Our valley was evermore Guelf, as your
“ancient records will abundantly attest, and has often been a

Book IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 191

“safe refuge for your citizens when persecuted by the Ghibel-
“lines. Our ancestors, as well as ourselves, have ever honored
“the name of your illustrious republic as the head and chief of
“the Guelf party. So long as the Lucchese were Guelf, we
“cheerfully served their power; but since they have fallen
“under the yoke of the tyrant who has abandoned his old
“ friends and followed the Ghibelline party, we have obeyed by
“compulsion rather than of our own free will. And God
“knows how many times we have prayed him to give us an
“opportunity of manifesting our attachment to the old party.
“ But how blind men are in their desires! That which we
“longed for as being for our welfare has proved our ruin! For
“so soon as we heard that your banners were marching towards
“us, we went to meet your commissary, not as an enemy, but
“as our ancient lord; and placed our fortunes and ourselves
“into his hand, and commended ourselves to his good faith,
“believing that, if he had not the soul of a Florentine, yet he
“had at least that of a man. Your lordships will pardon us,
‘“‘ for we could not suffer worse than what we have suffered, and
“ speak from the heart. Your commissary has nothing of the
“man but the appearance, and nothing of the Florentine but
“the name. He is a deadly pest, a wild and cruel beast, a
“horrid monster, such as no writer has ever before imagined ;
“for after having called us together in our church, on pretence
‘of wishing to confer with us, he destroyed and burnt the whole
“valley, plundered the inhabitants of their substance, sacked,
“ despoiled, beat, and killed them, ravished the women, and
“violated the young maidens by dragging them from the arms
“of their mothers and giving them up to the lust of his sol-
“diers. Had we deserved all this ill treatment because of some
“injury done to the Florentine people or to him, or had he
“taken us with arms in hand defending ourselves, we should
“blame your commissary less, and rather accuse ourselves for
“ having by such injuries or by our arrogance deserved it. But
~ “having given ourselves up to him freely and unarmed, he
“afterwards robbed and maltreated us, and subjected us to
“such insults and ignominy that we are compelled to complain
“of it to you. And although we might have filled Lombardy
“with our lamentations, and spread the story of our wrongs
“ throughout Italy, to the eternal disgrace of your city, yet did
“we refrain from doing so, as we did not wish to stain so hon-

192 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. =<) [Boor Ey:

“ orable and benevolent a republic with the dishonesty and cru-
“elty of one of her evil-minded citizens, whose ravenous soul,
“though boundless and bottomless, we would have endeavored
‘to have satisfied with the larger part of our substance, so as
“thus to have saved the remnant, had we known his avarice
“and rapacity before. But as there is no longer time for that,
“‘ we desired to have recourse to you, and by you to relieve the
“ wretchedness of your subjects, so that other people may not
“be deterred by our unfortunate example from placing them-
“selves under your dominion. And if you are not moved by
“ our infinite ills, may the fear of God’s divine anger move you,
“‘ who has seen his temples sacked and burnt, and our people
“betrayed in his very bosom!” Having spoken thus, they
threw themselves upon the ground, crying and praying that their
goods and their country might be restored to them; and that,
although the Signoria could not restore to them their honor,
yet they should at least order the wives to be returned to
their husbands, and the children to their parents. These atro-
cities having already come to the knowledge of the Florentines,
and having them now heard attested by the very men who had
borne them, the magistrates were moved, and ordered Astorre
to return without delay, who was thereupon condemned and
admonished. They had the property of the people of Seravezza
collected, and what was found of it was restored to them; and
for the rest they were compensated in time in various ways.
22. Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi was reported by the other
party to be carrying on the war more for his own benefit than
for that of the Florentine people; and that since he had been
appointed commissary he had become lukewarm in his desire
to take Lucca, contenting himself with plundering the country
and filling his own estates with stolen cattle and his palace
with booty ; and that, not satisfied with the plunder made for
his private benefit by his followers, he purchased the soldiers’
share, so that from a commissary he had become a mere trader.
When these reports came to the ears of Messer Rinaldo, it
excited his proud and honorable spirit more than what was
becoming to so grave a man; and so perturbed him, that, in-
dignant against the magistrates and the citizens, and without
asking or awaiting leave of absence, he returned to Florence,
and presenting himself before the Ten, he said: “That he well
“knew the difficulty and danger of serving a divided city and

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 193

“an unbridled people; for the one magnified every report, and
“the other punished errors, but did not reward good actions,
“and accused doubtful ones. And however much a man might
“be victorious, yet no one would praise him; whilst every one
“is ready to condemn the slightest error, and overwhelm him
“with calumnies; for his own party will persecute him from
“jealousy, and the opposite party from hatred. Nevertheless I
“have never from fear of any idle complaint failed to do any
“act which I believed would prove a certain benefit to this city.
“True, the base dishonesty of the present calumnies has over-
“come my patience and excited my temper, and therefore do
“JT pray the magistrates that they will in the future be more
“ready to defend their citizens, so that they may devote them-
“selves with the greater energy to labor for the good of the
“country. And as it is not the custom of Florence to bestow
“ triumphal honors upon their successful commanders, it would
“at least be proper that they should defend them against mali-
“cious slanders; and that they ought to remember that they
“too were citizens of Florence, and that charges might at any
“moment be brought against them, and that then they would
“understand how deeply upright men were offended by base
“calumnies.” The Ten endeavored as far as they could to
placate Messer Rinaldo; but confided the further command of
the expedition to Neri di Gino and Alamanno Salviati, who,
instead of scouring the Lucchese territory, moved their camp
nearer to the city. And as the season was still cold they es-
tablished themselves at Campanola, where the commissaries
however seemed to think they were losing time; and when
they wanted to invest the place closer, the soldiers refused, on
account of the severity of the weather, although the Ten urged
the investment, and would take no excuse.

23. There lived at that time at Florence an eminent archi-
tect called Filippo di Ser Brunelleschi, who has filled our city
with his works, and whose merits were so great that after his
death a marble statue was erected to him in the principal
church of Florence, with an inscription at foot attesting his
great ability. Considering the position of the city of Lucca,
and the bed of the river Serchio, Brunelleschi demonstrated
how Lucca could be submerged; and so persuaded the Ten
that they ordered the experiment to be made; which unfortu-

nately, however, resulted only in the discomfiture of our own
VOL. I. 13

194 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV.

camp, and greater security to the enemy. For the Lucchese by
means of a dam raised the ground on the side whence the Ser-
chio came, and then at night broke the bank of the canal by
which the Florentines were conducting the river; so that the
water, meeting the raised ground on the side of Lucca, and the
open bank of the canal, spread itself over the whole plain, so
that, instead of being able to invest the city closer, the Floren-
tine camp had to be removed.

24. This project having failed, the Ten who had been re-
appointed sent as commissary Messer Giovanni Guicciardini,
who established his camp as promptly as possible near the
city. When, therefore, the lord of Lucca found himself so
closely pressed, by the advice of one Messer Antonio del Rosso,
the resident representative of Sienna at Lucca, he sent two
envoys, Messer Salvestro Trenta and Leonardo Buonvisi, to
the Duke of Milan, to ask assistance of him. But finding him
disinclined, they begged him secretly to send them troops, in
return for which they pledged themselves on behalf of the
people of Lucca to deliver Guinigi to him as prisoner, and then
to give him possession of the city; informing him at the same
time, that, if he did not accept this proposition at once, the
tyrant of Lucca would surrender the city to the Florentines,
which they had asked of him with many promises in return.
The Duke, fearing that this would be done, put aside all other
considerations, and directed Count Francesco Sforza, who was
in his pay, publicly to ask leave of him to go to the kingdom
of Naples; this leave being granted him, the Count Francesco
marched direct upon Lucca with his troops. Although the
Florentines understood this arrangement, yet being apprehen-
sive of its results, they sent to his friend Count Boccacino
Alamanni to interrupt this movement. When therefore the
Count Francesco came to Lucca, the Florentines withdrew with
their forces to Librafatta, whilst the Count promptly pitched
his camp before Pescia. Pagolo da Diaceto was deputy gov-
ernor of this place, and being counselled more by his fears
than by any other and better motive, he fled to Pistoja; so that
the place would have been lost, had it not been defended by
Giovanni Malavolti, who was there in garrison. The Count
Francesco therefore, unable to take Pescia at the first assault,
went thence to the Borgo alla Buggiano and took that, and also
burnt the neighboring castle of Stigliano. The Florentines,

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 195

seeing these disasters, resorted to a remedy that had saved
them many times before: knowing that, with the mercenary
nature of soldiers, corruption will succeed where force is in-
sufficient, they offered a sum of money to the Count to induce
him to depart and give them up the place. Francesco, finding
that he could extract no more money from the Lucchese,
promptly turned to extract it from those who had it to give;
and agreed with the Florentines, not to give them up Lucca,
which his honor would not permit him to do, but to abandon it
upon receiving from them the sum of fifty thousand ducats.
And having concluded a convention to this effect, so that the
people of Lucca might excuse him with the Duke, he offered to
assist them in expelling their tyrant.

25. Messer Antonio del Rosso, as we have said above, was
the Siennese envoy at Lucca, and he, by authority of the Count
Francesco, plotted with the citizens the ruin of Pagolo Guinigi.
The chiefs of this conspiracy were Piero Cennami and Gio-
vanni da Chivizano. Count Francesco was in quarters outside
of the city on the Serchio, and with him was Lanzilao, the son
of the Lord Pagolo. The conspirators, to the number of forty,
went armed to find Pagolo, who, aroused by the noise, went
towards them quite surprised, and demanded the reason of
their coming. To which Piero Cennami replied, that they had
for a long time been governed by him, and had been led to die
by hunger and the sword, surrounded by enemies, and there-
fore they were resolved to govern themselves in future, and
demanded of him the keys of the city and its treasure. To
which Pagolo replied, that the treasure was exhausted and
the keys of the city in their power; and he begged of them
only this one thing, that, inasmuch as his government had
been begun and continued without bloodshed, they might be
satisfied that it should terminate in like manner. Pagolo
Guinigi and his son were carried by Count Francesco to the
Duke at Milan, where both died in prison soon after. The
departure of the Count Francesco relieved Lucca of her tyrant
and Florence of the fear of his troops; whereupon the former
prepared for defence, and the latter resumed the offensive.
The Florentines appointed the Conte d@’ Urbino as their cap-
tain, who invested Lucca closely, thus obliging the inhabitants
again to have recourse to the Duke for assistance. He sent
Niccolo Piccinino to their assistance under a similar pretext

196 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV.

to that on which he had previously sent the Count Francesco.
When Niccolo was about to enter Lucca, our troops met him
on the Serchio, and on his attempting to cross the river they
came to battle with him and were routed, so that our commis-
sary with only a few of our troops escaped to Pisa. This de-
feat cast a gloom over our whole city; and as the expedition
against Lucca had been undertaken at the general desire of the
people, they knew not whom to blame; and inasmuch as they
could not censure those who had advised the war, they abused
those who had been charged with its conduct, and revived the
charges against Messer Rinaldo. But more than any one else
they censured Messer Giovanni Guicciardini, it being charged
against him that he might have terminated the war after the
departure of the Count Francesco, but that he had been bribed
with money, and had sent home a large sum; they even gave
the name of the person who had paid it, and of him who re-
ceived it. These rumors became so loud that the Captain of
the people, influenced by these reports, and urged on by those
of the opposite faction, summoned Messer Giovanni to appear
before him. Messer Giovanni appeared, full of indignation,
but his relatives exerted themselves so much in behalf of his
honor that the Captain abandoned the prosecution. After their
victory, the Lucchese not only recovered their own castles, but
took all those in the territory of Pisa, excepting Bientina, Cal-
cinaia, Livorno, and Librafatta (1433). And had it not been
that a conspiracy, which had been set on foot in Pisa, was dis-
covered, that city would also have been lost. The Florentines
thereupon reorganized their forces, and gave the command to
Micheletto, a pupil of the Count Francesco Sforza. The Duke
on the other hand followed up the victory; and to enable him
to carry on the war against the Florentines with greater power,
he induced the Genoese, the Siennese, and the lord of Piom-
bino to form a league for the defence of Lucca, and to secure
the services of Niccolo Piccinino as their commander, which
made the whole matter publicly known. Hereupon the Vene-
tians and Florentines renewed their league, and the war began
openly in Lombardy and Tuscany ; several battles were fought
in both territories, with varying fortune; so that both sides
became weary of the contest, and peace was concluded in the
month of May, 1433, according to the terms of which the
Florentines, Lucchese, and Siennese, who during the war had

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 197

seized each other’s castles, surrendered them all, and each re-
entered into possession of their own.

26. Whilst this war had been going on, the malign humors
of the factions were kept all along in a state of fermentation.
Cosimo de’ Medici, after the death of his father, displayed more
zeal in public affairs, and even more devotion and liberality
towards his friends, than his father had done; so that those
who had rejoiced at Giovanni’s death became greatly depressed
when they saw what Cosimo was. Cosimo was a man of rare
prudence, of grave but agreeable presence, and most liberal and
humane. He never attempted anything against the party op-
posed to him, or against the state, but endeavored to do good
to all; and by his generosity he won the attachment of a great
many citizens who became his partisans, so that his example
increased the cares of those who held the government, whilst
he judged that in this way he would be able to live in Florence
as securely, and exercise as much power, as any one else; or
if his adversaries from motives of ambition should attempt to
resort to extraordinary measures against him, that he would
be superior to them both in force of arms and by the support
of his friends. The persons mainly instrumental in promoting
the growth of his power were Averardo de’ Medici and Puccio
Pucci; the former by his audacity, and the latter by his pru-
dence and sagacity, contributed largely to increase the popu-
larity and influence of Cosimo. The counsels and judgment
of Puccio were so much esteemed, and were so well known by
everybody, that the party was named, not after Cosimo, but
after Puccio.

It was by a city thus divided that the expedition against
Lucca had been undertaken, by which the party feeling, instead
of being allayed, became only the more inflamed. And although
it had been the party of Cosimo that had been in favor of the
expedition, yet in its conduct many of the opposite party had
been employed, being some of the best reputed men in the re-
public. And as Averardo de’ Medici and the others of his party
could not prevent this, they strove by every device most indus-
triously to calumniate them, and whenever any reverse was
experienced, which happened repeatedly, it was ascribed, not
to fortune or to the strength of the enemy, but to the lack of
skill and prudence of the commissary. It was this that caused
the offences of Astorre de Gianni to be exaggerated; it was

198 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV.

this that caused the indignation of Messer Rinaldo degli Al-
bizzi, making him throw up his commission without leave; and
it was the same system of calumny that had caused the Captain
of the people to summon Messer Giovanni Guicciardini. From
this arose all the other troubles to which the magistrates and
the commissaries were subjected; for real evils were exagger-
ated, and unreal ones were invented, and both true and false
were alike believed by the people, who as a general thing hated
the accused.

27. This whole system and extraordinary mode of proceed-
ing were well understood by Niccolo da Uzano and the other
chiefs of the party; and they had often discussed together the
means for remedying them, but had not found any ; for to allow
these things to go on and increase seemed to them dangerous,
and any attempt to put an end to them difficult. Niccolo da
Uzano was the first to express himself openly dissatisfied with
these extraordinary proceedings; and therefore, whilst there
was war without and dissensions within the city, Niccolo Bar-
badori, desirous to induce Niccolo da Uzano to consent to the
destruction of Cosimo, went to see him at his house, where he
found him in his study wrapt in deep thought. He endeavored
to persuade him with such arguments as best he could to con-
cur with Messer Rinaldo in the expulsion of Cosimo, to which
Niccolo da Uzano replied in the following words : —

“Tt would be better for thee and thy family, as well as for
“our republic, that thou and the others who hold the same
“opinions as you do had beards of silver-white rather than of
“golden hue as thy name indicates, for then their counsels,
“ proceeding from hoary heads full of experience, would be wiser
“and more beneficial to everybody. For it seems to me that
“those who wish to drive Cosimo from Florence should, before
“doing anything else, measure their own strength and that of
“Cosimo. You have baptized this party of ours that of the
“nobles, and the other that of the people; even if the name
“corresponded with the truth, yet would success be doubtful,
“and we should have reason to fear rather than to hope, ac-
“cording to the example of that ancient nobility which was
“destroyed by the people. But we have much more to fear,
“for our party is dismembered, and that of the adversary com-
“pact and entire. In the first place Neri di Gino and Nerone
“di Nigi, two of our principal citizens, have never declared

Boox IV.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 199

“themselves in such a way that we could say they are more
“our friends than theirs. Many families and even houses are
“divided amongst themselves; for, owing to the jealousy of
‘“‘ brothers or relatives, they are opposed to us and support the
“other party. I will cite only the most striking cases; others
“will readily suggest themselves to you. Of the two sons of
“ Messer Maso degli Albizzi, Lucci has cast his fortunes with
“the Medici party from jealousy of his brother, Messer Rinaldo.
“In the house of the Guicciardini the two sons of Messer Luigi
“are divided, Piero being the enemy of Giovanni and support-
“ing the party of our adversaries. The same with Tommaso
“and Niccolo Soderini, who have openly declared against us
“from their hatred against their uncle Francesco; so that, if
“we consider well who are for them and who for us, I do not
“really know why our party more than theirs should be called
“that of the nobles. If it be because they have the people on
“their side, that places us only so much in a worse and them
“in a better position, in so far that, were it to come to arms or
“to voting, we should be unable to resist them. And if we
“still preserve our dignities, it arises from the ancient reputa-
“tion of our government, which maintained itself honorably
“during fifty years; but should it come to the test and our
“weakness be discovered, then we should also lose that dig-
“nity. And if thou wert to say to me that the justice of our
“cause should increase our influence and diminish theirs,
“J should reply, that that justice must be understood and
“believed in by others as it is by us, all of which, however,
“igs just the very reverse; for the reasons that influence us
“are founded wholly upon the suspicion that Cosimo aims at
“making himself sovereign of the city. Now, although we
“have that suspicion, yet the others have it not, and what
“is worse, they accuse us of the very thing that we charge
“upon him. :

“The acts of Cosimo which cause us to suspect him are that
“he aids everybody with his money, not only private persons,
“but even the state, and not only the Florentines, but even the
“ Condottieri; that he supports the citizens in their reclama-
“tions upon the magistrates; and that through the good will
“‘of the masses, which he enjoys, he has advanced several of
“his friends to the highest honors. The reasons, therefore,
“which we would have to adduce for expelling Cosimo would

200 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

“be that he is benevolent, serviceable to his friends, liberal, and
“beloved by everybody. Tell me a little now, what law is there
“against charity, liberality, and love? And although these are
“the very ways which all men adopt who aim at sovereignty,
“yet they are not so regarded in the case of Cosimo; nor have
“we sufficient credit to make them so regarded. For our past
“conduct has caused all confidence to be withdrawn from us;
“and the city of Florence, which is naturally partisan and cor-
“rupt from having always been divided into parties, will not
“listen to such accusations. But suppose that you were to
“sueceed in driving him out, — which might well be, having a
“Sionoria well disposed to it, — how can you ever prevent his
“return, when so many of his friends remain here, who will
“labor most ardently for his return? You will find it impos-
“sible to guard against this danger, for his friends are so
“numerous and have the support and good will of the masses.
“ And the more of his avowed friends you expel, the greater
“number of enemies will you make yourselves; so that in a
“Jittle while he would be recalled in spite of you, and all you
“ will have gained will be that you have driven him out a good
“man and that he returns a bad one; for his nature will be
“corrupted by those who will have recalled him, and whom he
“could not oppose being under such obligations to them. And
“should you wish to kill him, you will never succeed in doing
“it by legal means, for his money and your corruptible natures
“will always save him. But suppose him to be killed or ban-
“ished not to return, I do not see what our republic would gain
“by it; for if she were delivered from Cosimo she would be
“enslaved by Rinaldo. As for myself, lam one of those who
“desire that no one citizen shall exceed another in power and
“authority. But if either one of these two men must rule, then
“T know no reason for loving Messer Rinaldo more than Cosimo.
“And now I have nothing more to say to thee other than may
“God preserve our republic from having any one of her citizens
“become sovereign! but even if our sins should have deserved
“it, then may God preserve her from having to obey Messer
“Rinaldo! Do not then advise a course that would in every
“way prove injurious ; and do not imagine that being supported
“by a few, you could successfully oppose the will of the many ;
“for all these citizens, partly from ignorance and partly from
“malice, are ready to sell the republic; and fortune has so far

Book IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 201

‘favored them that they have found a purchaser. Govern thy-
“self, therefore, according to my advice, and look to living
“modestly, and so far as liberty is concerned, you will have
“as much cause for suspecting our party as the opposite one.
“And when trouble comes, you, having remained neutral, will
“be acceptable to everybody, and thus will you benefit, and not
“injure, your country !”

28. These words somewhat cooled the ardor of Barbadori,
so that matters remained quiet so long as the war with Lucca
lasted ; but when peace came, and with it the death of Niccolo
da Uzano, the city being without any war and without any
control, the evil humors again increased unrestrained. Messer
Rinaldo, who considered himself as remaining the sole chief
of his party, did not cease to entreat and importune all those
citizens whom he supposed might become Gonfalonieri, to arm
themselves and free the city from that man, who, from neces-
sity and by the malice of a few and the ignorance of the many,
would assuredly reduce the city to servitude. This course
pursued by Messer Rinaldo, and that taken by the adverse
party, kept the entire city in a state of apprehension; and
every time that a new magistracy was to be appointed, it was
publicly discussed how many of each party should be chosen ;
and at the drawing of the Signoria the whole city was aroused.
Every case that came before the magistrates, even the smallest,
became a cause of contention; secrets were divulged, and the
good and evil alike became objects of favor or disfavor; good
men and wicked were assailed alike, and no magistrate per-
formed his duty. Florence then being in this state of con-
fusion, and Messer Rinaldo ever anxious to break down the
power of Cosimo, and knowing that Bernardo Guadagni was
likely to become Gonfaloniere, he paid his taxes for him, so
that his indebtedness to the public treasury might not deprive
him of the right to hold that office. Having come now to the
drawing of the Signoria, fortune, ever favoring our dissensions,
caused Bernardo to be drawn as Gonfaloniere for the months
of September and October. Messer Rinaldo went promptly to
call upon him, and told him that the party of the nobles, as
well as the others who desired to live quietly, were rejoiced
that he had attained that dignity; and that it now behooved
him so to act that they should not have rejoiced in vain. He
then showed him the dangers to which they would be exposed

202 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

by disunion; and that there was no other way to secure union
but the destruction of Cosimo, —for he alone by his immoderate
wealth kept them weak; and that he had already raised him-
self so high that, if not prevented, he would make himself sover-
eign of Florence. And therefore it behooved a good citizen to
provide against this by calling the people to assemble in the
Piazza, and to reorganize the government 80 as to restore his
country to liberty. He recalled to him that Messer Salvestro
de’ Medici was enabled unjustly to check the greatness of the
Guelfs, to whom by the blood of their ancestors, spilt in the
service of the state, the government of right belonged ; and that
what Salvestro could unjustly do against so many, he ought
to be able justly to do against only one man. He counselled
him not to fear, for his friends were ready to aid and stand by
him with arms in hand; and that he need not regard the popu-
lace, which adored Cosimo, who however would obtain no bet-
ter support from them than what Messer Giorgio Scali had
received from them; nor need he fear the wealth of Cosimo,
which when he should once be in the hands of the Signoria
would then belong to them. And he concluded by telling him
that, if he followed these suggestions, he would make the repub-
lic secure and united, and himself glorious. To all this Ber-
nardo replied briefly, “that he judged it necessary to do as
“Rinaldo had told him; but as time was required to carry
“these suggestions into effect, he should attend to preparing
“himself to be ready with his forces, being persuaded that
“his colleagues would join him.” So soon as Bernardo had
assumed the magistracy, and had disposed his colleagues favor-
ably to the plan, and all points being agreed upon with Messer
Rinaldo, he summoned Cosimo, who, despite of the advice of |
numerous friends, appeared, relying more upon his innocence
than the mercy of the Signori. The moment Cosimo entered
the palace he was arrested; and Messer Rinaldo issued forth
from his house, together with many armed men and followed
by the whole party, and went to the Piazza, where the Signoria
caused the people to be assembled, and appointed a Balia of
two hundred persons to reorganize the government of the city.
So soon as they were able, this Balia discussed the questions
of reform and of the life and death of Cosimo. Many wanted
him sent into exile, others wanted his death, and some were
silent either from compassion for him or from fear of the

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 203

others; and this difference of opinion prevented anything
definite from being resolved upon.

In the tower of the palace of the Signoria there is a
chamber called the “ Alberghettino,’ occupying the entire
space of the tower; it was here that Cosimo was confined
under the charge of Federigo Malavolti. Hearing from this
place the assembling of the councils and the noise of arms in
the Piazza, and the frequent ringing of the bells for calling
the Balia together, Cosimo became apprehensive lest some
attempt should be made upon his life. But what he feared
still more was that his particular enemies might employ some
extraordinary means for encompassing his death; and there-
- fore he abstained from all food, so that within the space of
four days he had eaten nothing but a small piece of bread.
Federigo, having observed this, said to him: “You are afraid
“of being poisoned, Cosimo, and will kill yourself by starva-
“tion; it is little to my credit that you should believe me
“capable of lending myself to such an act of villany. I do
“not believe your life to be in danger, for you have many
“friends within and without the palace; and yet, if you should
“have to lose your life, be assured they would have to use
“other means than to employ me as a minister in depriving
“you of it; for I would not stain my hands with the blood of
“any man, and least of all yours, who have never offended me.
“ Be therefore of good cheer, take your food and live for your
“friends and your country; and so that you may do so with
“the greater confidence I will myself share your meals with
“you.” These words comforted Cosimo very much, and with
tears in his eyes he embraced and kissed Federigo, and thanked
him most earnestly and affectionately for this kind and com-
passionate act, promising to be most grateful to him if ever
‘fortune afforded him the opportunity. Cosimo being somewhat
restored, and whilst the citizens were still discussing his case,
it chanced that Federigo, for the purpose of giving Cosimo
pleasure, brought home with him to dinner a familiar friend of
the Gonfaloniere, called Il Farganaccio, a man of gay and face-
tious spirit. Having nearly finished dinner, Cosimo, thinking
to profit by the visit of this man, whom he knew extremely
well, beckoned to Federigo to leave the room, who, under-
standing the object, feigned to go out for something necessary
to complete the repast;—and the two being thus left alone

204 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

together, Cosimo, after some friendly words to Farganaccio,
gave him a written order upon the director of the Hospital of
Santa Maria Nuova for one thousand one hundred ducats; one
hundred of which he was to take for himself, and the one thou-
sand he was to carry to the Gonfaloniere and beg him to take
an early occasion to come to see Cosimo. Farganaccio ac-
cepted the commission, and the money was paid; whereupon
Bernardo Guadagni became more humane; and the conse-
quence was that Cosimo was banished to Padua, contrary to
the will of Messer Rinaldo, who wanted to have him put to
death. Averardo and many others of the house of Medici
were also banished, and with them Puccio and Giovanni Pucci.
And by way of intimidating those who were dissatisfied with
the exile of Cosimo, a Balia was given to the Eight of the
Guard and the Captain of the people. After these matters
were resolved upon, Cosimo was brought before the Signori,
on the 3d of October, 1483, who then announced to him the
limits of his banishment, and advised him strictly to conform
to them unless he wished them to proceed more harshly against
him and his property. Cosimo accepted the limits with cheer-
ful countenance, assuring them that wherever the Signoria might
send him, there he would cheerfully abide. He begged them
however, that, inasmuch as they had spared his life, they would
also afford him protection, for he was aware that there were
many in the Piazza who desired his blood. And then he
offered, wherever he might be, to place himself and all his sub-
stance at the service of the city, the people, and their lordships.
The Gonfaloniere kindly comforted him, kept him in the pal-
ace until nightfall, and then took him home with him to his
house and made him sup with him; after which he had him
conducted under a strong guard to the place of his banishment.
At every station Cosimo was received with honors, and he was
publicly called upon by the Venetians, who did him honor as
one high in office, and not as an exile.

29. Florence being thus widowed of so illustrious and be-
loved a citizen, was in a state of general consternation; the
supporters as well as the adversaries of Cosimo were equally
terror-stricken. So that Messer Rinaldo, foreseeing his future
ruin, yet by way of not seeming wanting to himself and his
party, called together a number of citizens, friendly to himself,
and addressed them as follows : —

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 205

“That he saw their impending doom, because they had
“allowed themselves to be overcome by the prayers, tears, and
“money of their enemies; and that they themselves did not
“perceive that in a little while it would be their turn to pray
“and weep; but that then their prayers would not be heard,
“nor would their tears move any one to compassion for them.
“That of the money they had accepted they would have to
“make restitution of the principal, and pay usurious interest
“with torments of death and exile. That it would have been
“better to have left things as they were, rather than to have
“spared the life of Cosimo and to allow his friends to remain
“in Florence; for great men must either not be touched at all,
“or destroyed entirely. And that he saw no other remedy
“now but to strengthen themselves in the city, so that when
“their enemies recovered their power, as they assuredly would
“erelong, they might be able to drive them out by force, which
“they would not be able to do by civil proceedings. That he
“repeated now what he had long since counselled them as
“their sole remedy, namely, to secure to themselves again the
“support of the great nobles, restoring and conceding to them
“all the honors of the city, and to strengthen themselves by
“that party, the same as their adversaries had done with the
“party of the people. That their own party would gain
“strength in proportion as they displayed more activity, more
“ability, more courage, and more influence; affirming that, if
“they did not avail of this last resource, he could not see by
“what other means they could preserve the government in the
“midst of so many enemies ; and in such case he only foresaw
“the speedy ruin of their party and of the city.”

Mariotto Boldovinetti, one of the assembled, opposed these
views, “ pointing out the pride and insupportable nature of the
“nobles, and that it would not do for them to subject them-
“selves to certain tyranny for the sake of avoiding the doubtful
“dangers apprehended from the people.” Whereupon Messer
Rinaldo, seeing that his counsels were not listened to, bewailed )
his own misfortunes and those of his party, imputing them
more to Heaven who wanted it thus, than to human ignorance |
and blindness. Matters being left in this way without any
necessary provision being made, a letter was found written by
Agnolo Acciaiuoli to Cosimo de’ Medici, making known to him
the favorable disposition of the city towards him, and advising

206 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book IV.

him to endeavor to stir up some war, and to secure for himself
the friendship of Neri di Gino. For he judged that, as the city
in such case would need money, they would find no one willing
to supply it, and that then the recollection of his liberality
would revive a most earnest desire for his return. And that,
if at the same time Neri should declare against Messer Rinaldo,
it would so weaken the party of the latter that it would be no
longer able to defend itself. This letter having fallen into the
hands of the magistrates, they had Messer Agnolo arrested,
put to the torture, and then sent into exile. But even this
example in no way abated the feeling in favor of Cosimo,

A twelvemonth had now nearly elapsed since the banishment
of Cosimo; and the end of August, 1434, having come, Niccolo
di Cocco was drawn as Gonfaloniere for the two following
months, and with him eight Signori, all partisans of Cosimo,
so that Messer Rinaldo and all his party became greatly
alarmed at this election of the Signoria. And as it was the
custom that three days are allowed to elapse before the new
Signori assume the magistracy, Messer Rinaldo again convened
the chiefs of his party, and pointed out to them the certain and
new dangers, and that their only remedy lay in taking up arms
and making Donato Velluti, who was then acting Gonfaloniere,
call the people to assemble in the Piazza, to appoint a new
Balia, deprive the newly elected Signori of the magistracy, and
create new ones to be placed at the head of the government,
burn the election purses, and by new elections to fortify them-
selves with friends. Many judged this plan safe and necessary ;
many others deemed it too violent, and likely to involve them
in serious difficulties. Amongst those who objected to it was
Messer Palla Strozzi, who was a quiet, courteous, and humane
man, and better qualified for the pursuit of letters than for the
restraining of a faction, and of contending with civil discords.
He said, “ That cunning or audacious measures always seemed
“well in the beginning, but afterwards became difficult in the
“execution, and in the end dangerous. And he believed that
“the fear of external war (the troops of the Duke being upon
“our frontiers in the Romagna) would cause the Signori to
“think more of that than of their internal dissensions. Should
“it become evident, however, that they were about to take a
“different course, (which they could not do without its becom-
“ing known,) then it would always be time enough ‘to take up

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 207

“arms, and act as the general good might require; which in
“that case, being done from necessity, would cause less excite-
‘ment to the people, and less difficulty to themselves.” It was
concluded, therefore, to let the new Signori come in, and that
their conduct should be closely watched, and if they attempted
to do anything adverse to the party, that then each should
take up arms and meet in the Piazza of San Pulinari, a place
near the palace, whence they might afterwards proceed wher-
ever it seemed necessary.

30. Having resolved upon this course, the meeting separated,
and the new Signoria entered upon the magistracy. The Gon-
faloniere, by way of making a reputation for himself, and strik-
ing terror into those who designed to oppose him, condemned
Donato Velluti, his predecessor, to prison for misappropriation
of the public funds. After that, he sounded his colleagues as
to the return of Cosimo, and finding them favorably disposed,
he conferred with those whom he supposed to be the chiefs of
the Medici party; and being encouraged by these, he cited
Messer Rinaldo, Ridolfi Peruzzi, and Niccolo Barbadori as being
the leaders of the opposite party. After this summons, Messer
Rinaldo thought that it would not do to delay action any longer,
and issued forth from his house with a great many armed fol-
lowers, and was promptly joined by Ridolfo Peruzzi and Niccolo
Barbadori. A great many other citizens joined the crowd, as
also numerous soldiers who happened in Florence, being with-
out any engagement; and all went, according to agreement, to
the Piazza of San Pulinari. Messer Palla Strozzi, however, al-
though he had collected a goodly number of men, did not come
out; and Messer Giovanni Guicciardini did the same; where-
upon Messer Rinaldo sent to request them to come out, and to
reprove them for their tardiness. Messer Giovanni replied, that
he would most effectually damage the other party if, by remain-
ing at home, he prevented his brother Piero from going to suc-
cor the Signoria in the palace. After repeated messages, Messer
Palla Strozzi came on horseback to San Pulinari, followed only
by two unarmed attendants on foot. Messer Rinaldo met and
reproved him severely for his remissness, and said, “that his
“not coming with the others arose either from want of good
“faith or lack of courage; and that a man who desired to en-
“joy the consideration that he did ought to avoid laying himself
“open to such charges; that he greatly deceived himself if he

208 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox IV.

“ believed that, by thus failing in his engagements to his own
“party, the enemy, in case of victory, would either spare his
“life or exempt him from exile. As regarded himself, in the .
“event of disaster, he would at least have the satisfaction of
“not having withheld his counsels before the danger, nor his
“ active support when danger had come. But as for him (Palla)
“ and the others like him, their regrets would be increased mani-
“ fold by the reflection that they had betrayed their country three
“times; once when they saved Cosimo, the second time when
“they rejected his advice, and the third time now by fail-
“ing to support him with arms.” Messer Palla’s answer to
these words was not sufficiently loud to be understood by the
bystanders ; but murmuring something, he turned his horse’s
head, and went back to his house.

The Signori, upon hearing that Messer Rinaldo and his party
had taken to arms, and seeing themselves abandoned; caused
the palace to be closed, and being without any one whom they
could consult, they were wholly at a loss what to do. Messer
Rinaldo on his part, however, by waiting for the forces that did
not come, delayed his arrival in the Piazza, and thus lost the
opportunity of victory ; for he afforded to the Signori time to
recover their courage and to provide for their defence, and
allowed many citizens to join the Signori, and to advise them
as to the means for inducing Rinaldo to disarm. Thereupon
some of the less suspected of the party of the Signori went to
Messer Rinaldo, saying that the Signoria did not know the cause
of this movement, that they never had any intention of offend-
ing him, and, although the subject of Cosimo had been dis-
cussed amongst them, yet they had never thought of permitting
his return; and that if this was the cause of Messer Rinaldo’s
suspicions, he might be reassured ; that they were quite willing
to have him come to the palace, where they would be glad to
see him, and that all his demands should be conceded to him.
Messer Rinaldo, however, was not persuaded by these words to
change his purpose, but he replied, “ that the only way to reas-
“sure him was for the Signori to return to private life, and that
“then the city would be reorganized for the benefit of all.” But
it invariably happens that, when the authority is equally divided
and the opinions differ, nothing is resolved upon that results in
good; and so in this case. Ridolfo Peruzzi, persuaded by the
words of those citizens, said that, “for himself, he desired noth-

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 209

“ing else than that Cosimo should not be permitted to return,
“and the Signoria’s agreeing to this seemed to him victory
“ enough, which he had no wish to increase by flooding the city
“with blood; and therefore he wished to obey the Signoria.”
And thereupon he went with all his followers to the palace, where
he was gladly received. Thus the delay of Messer Rinaldo at
San Pulinari, the want of courage of Messer Palla Strozzi, and
the going off of Ridolfo Peruzzi, had the effect of depriving
Messer Rinaldo of success in his attempt. The ardor of the
citizens who had followed him abated after the first excitement
was over; and his failure was made still more complete by the
authority of the Pope.

31. Pope Eugenius, having been expelled from Rome by the
people, happened to be in Florence at the time of these occur-
rences; and deeming it his duty to do what he could to tran-
quillize the city, he sent the Patriarch Giovanni Vitelleschi, who
was an intimate friend of Messer Rinaldo, to request him to
come to him, and to assure him that the Pope had sufficient
influence with and confidence in the Signoria to obtain for him
entire satisfaction and security, without the effusion of blood,
or danger to any citizen. Messer Rinaldo, therefore, being per-
suaded by his friend, went with all his followers to Santa Maria
Novella, where the Pope resided. Pope Eugenius explained to
him the pledge which the Signoria had given him, and that he
had the whole subject of difference in his hands, and that mat-
ters would be arranged according as he might deem best, when-
ever Messer Rinaldo should lay down his arms. Messer Rinaldo,
having seen the coldness of Messer Palla Strozzi and the fickle-
ness of Ridolfo Peruzzi, for want of a better course placed him-
self in the hands of the Pope, thinking that his authority would
anyhow have to be respected. The Pope thereupon caused Nic-
colo Barbadori, and the others who were waiting outside, to be
notified that they must go and disarm, whilst Messer Rinaldo
remained with the Pope to arrange the particulars of an agree-
ment with the Signoria ; whereupon they all dispersed and dis-
armed.

32. The Signori, seeing that their adversaries had disarmed,
continued the negotiations for an agreement through the inter-
vention of the Pope; but at the same time they sent secretly
into the mountains of Pistoja for infantry, which, as well as

their other men-at-arms, they introduced by night into Florence,
YOu. I: 14

210 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. i (Boor LY;

taking possession of all the strong points in the city. And then
they called the people together in the Piazza, and created a new
Balia, which, immediately after having been convened, restored
Cosimo to his country, as well as the others who had been exiled
with him. And of the adverse party, they banished Messer
Rinaldo degli Albizzi, Ridolfo Peruzzi, Niccolo Barbadori, and
Messer Palla Strozzi, together with many other citizens, to such
an extent that there were but few places in Italy to which some
of them were not banished, and even many places outside of Italy
were filled with these exiles.

Thus did Florence, by this and similar proceedings, deprive
herself not only of many good and worthy citizens, but of much
wealth and industry. The Pope, seeing such general destruction
befall those who, at his request, had laid down their arms, was
greatly dissatisfied, and condoled with Messer Rinaldo on the
wrong done him under his pledge, and counselled him to have
patience, and to hope for good from the mutability of fortune.
To which Messer Rinaldo replied: “ The little faith which those
“have shown me who should have believed in me, and the too
“ oreat faith which I had in you, have ruined me and my party.
“ But I blame myself more than any one else for having believed
“that you, who had been driven out of your own country, would
“be able to keep me in mine. I have had sufficient experience
“of the fickleness of Fortune, and, as I had but little confidence
‘“‘in her during prosperity, 1 am not now made unhappy by ad-
“versity ; for I know that whenever it shall please her she will
“ show herself more kind tome. But even should it never please
“her, I should value but little living in a city where the laws
“are less potent than men; for that country only is desirable
“where one can enjoy one’s substance and friends in security,
“and not that where you may easily be deprived of the former,
“and where your friends, from fear for their own, abandon you
“in your greatest need. It has ever been less painful for good
“and wise men to hear of the misfortunes of their country than
“to witness them; and it has ever been deemed more glorious
“to be reputed an honorable rebel than an enslaved citizen.”
He then parted from the Pope, full of indignation, repeatedly
recalling to himself his own counsels and the coldness of his
friends, and went away into exile. Cosimo, on the other hand,
having been notified of his restoration, returned to Florence ;
and it has seldom happened that a citizen, returning in triumph

Boox IV.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 211

from a victory, was received in his own country by such a
concourse of people, and with such demonstrations of good
will as those with which Cosimo was received on his return
from banishment. He was spontaneously greeted by every
one as the Benefactor of the People and as the Father of
his Country.

Pitt BOO.

SUMMARY.

1. Vicissitudes to which governments are subject in consequence of the
frequent mutations natural to all human affairs. —2. State of Italy. Armed
bodies of the Braccesca and the Sforzesca (1434). They combine against
the Pope, who is expelled by the Romans. Francesco Sforza makes terms
with the Pope. — 3. War between the Duke of Milan and the Pope, who is
joined by the Florentines and the Venetians. —4. Cosimo having returned
from exile, the party favorable to him, having increased in power and in
boldness, tyrannize over the opposite faction. —5. Joanna II., queen of
Naples, dies, and Regnier of Anjou and Alfonso of Aragon contend for the
crown; the latter, being defeated by the Genoese, is delivered by them into
the hands of the Duke of Milan, who becomes his friend, and he is liberated
by him (1435). —6. Factions of the Fregosa and the Adorna in Genoa. —
7. The Genoese, through the efforts of Francesco Spinola, drive out the Duke
of Milan’s governor. — 8. They form a league against the Duke with the
Florentines and the Venetians. The Duke of Milan is persuaded by Rinaldo
degli Albizzi and other Florentine exiles to make war against Florence. —
9. He sends his captain, Niccolo Piccinino, to the disadvantage of ‘Florence
(1436). — 10. Sforza, the commander of the Florentines, defeats Piccinino
under Barga; he moves thence against Lucca (1487), which is succored by
the Duke of Milan. —11. The Florentines march upon Lucca, which is
abandoned by the Duke of Milan.—12. The Duke returns to the disad-
vantage of the Florentines. —13. Bad faith of the Venetians to the Floren-
tines. — 14. Cosimo de’ Medici at Venice. The Florentines make peace
with the Lucchese (1438).—15. Pope Eugenius IV. consecrates the Metro-
politan Church, built after the designs of Arnolfo and Brunelleschi. —
16. Council of Florence, at which the union of the Greek and Latin Churches
is effected (1439).— 17. Niccolo Piccinino, in the name of the Duke of
Milan, invades many places belonging to the Church. —18. He attacks the
Venetians, who are succored by the Florentines with the Sforzesca troops.
—19. The war is continued with alternate success between Piccinino and
Sforza. — 20. Neri Capponi is sent to Venice. —21. Address of Capponi to
the Venetian Senate. — 22. The Count Sforza comes into Lombardy. —
23. Piccinino defeats the Venetians on the Lake of Garda. — 24. He takes
Verona. — 25. It is retaken by Sforza. — 26. The Duke of Milan turns
against the Florentines ; and the Venetians prevent Sforza from passing into
Tuscany to aid the Florentines (1440). —27. The Florentines make them-
selves masters of the Patriarch Vitelleschi, who, abusing the name of the

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 213

Pope, was betraying them. — 28. Niccolo Piccinino passes the Po. Tardi-
ness of the help of the Venetians to the Florentines. — 29. Piccinino in the
Romagna. — 30. Niccolo Piccinino makes himself master of Marradi, and
scours the country around Florence. — 31. He also takes, after much resist-
ance, the Castel San Niccolo, but does not succeed in taking Cortona. —
32. He is recalled to Lombardy by Duke Filippo. — 33. He is defeated by
the Florentines at Anghiari.—34. Death of Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi.
— 35. Neri Capponi goes to recover the Casentino. The Count Poppi sur-
renders. His speech before abandoning the state.

1. Tue general course of changes that occur in states is
from a condition of order to one of disorder, and from the
latter they pass again to one of order. For as it is not the fate
of mundane affairs to remain stationary, so when they have
attained their highest state of perfection, beyond which they
cannot go, they of necessity decline. And thus again, when
they have descended to the lowest, and by their disorders have
reached the very depth of debasement, they must of necessity
rise again, inasmuch as they cannot go lower. And thus they
always decline from good to bad, and from bad they rise again
to good. For virtue brings peace, and peace leisure, and leisure
begets disorder, and this in turn brings ruin; and in like man-
ner from ruin springs order, from order virtue, and from that
glory and good fortune. Whence it has been observed by wise
men that literature follows arms, and that in cities and in proy-
inces leaders of armies precede philosophers. For when brave
and well-disciplined armies have achieved victory, and victory
has produced peace, the vigor of warlike spirits cannot be ener-
vated by a more honorable indulgence than that of letters ;
nor can idleness enter any well-regulated communities under a
more alluring and dangerous guise. This was perfectly well
understood by Cato when the philosophers Diogenes and Carne-
ades were sent as ambassadors from Athens to the Senate of
Rome ; for when he saw the Roman youth begin to follow them
with admiration, Cato, well knowing the evil that would result
to the country from this excusable idleness, ordered that no
philosopher should thenceforth be received in Rome. For it
is thus that countries gradually come to their ruin; and when
they have become wise by misfortune, they return, as I have
said, to order, unless they remain oppressed by some extraordi-
nary power. These causes made Italy by turns now happy and
now wretched, first under the ancient Tuscans, and afterwards

214 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

under the Romans; and although no other state has since
arisen from the ruins of Rome that could in any way redeem
her former greatness, and which might well and gloriously
have been achieved by any virtuous and able prince, yet in
some of the new cities and states that have arisen out of the
ruins of Rome there was sufficient virtue and bravery, so that,
even if they did not dominate all the others, yet they succeeded
by their union and good organization in liberating and defend-
ing Italy from the Barbarians.
Amongst these states, that of Florence, even if less in extent,
yet was not less in power and influence than the others. Situ-
ated in the centre of Italy, rich and ever ready for attack,
Florence not only successfully sustained all wars made upon
her, but also gave victory to whomever she became allied. If
then the courage and ability of these new states did not insure
them any long-continued periods of peace, yet were they neither
exposed to great dangers from the asperities of war. For that
cannot be called peace when principalities assail each other ;
nor can that be called war where men do not kill each other,
and the cities are not sacked, nor the principalities ruined.
' Their wars had so declined in vigor that they were begun with-
| out fear, conducted without danger, and terminated without
damage; so that that virtue which in other countries is apt to
become extinguished by long-continued periods of peace, was
lost in the Italian provinces through cowardice, as will clearly
appear from what we shall write of the period from 1484 to
1504, and wherein we shall show how, in the end, the way was
opened again to the Barbarians, and how Italy sank to rest in
slavery to them. And if the actions of our princes, both at
home and abroad, do not inspire us with admiration for their
virtue and greatness, like those of the ancients, yet will they
perhaps be regarded with no less admiration for their other
qualities, seeing how many noble peoples were restrained and
controlled by such feeble and ill-constituted armies. And if
in the account of the events of this corrupt age we may not
have occasion to tell of bold deeds of soldiers, or of the ability
of the commanders, or of the patriotism of the citizens, it will
nevertheless show to what frauds and cunning devices the
| princes and soldiers and chiefs of republics resorted for the

sake of maintaining an influence which they did not merit.
/ This it will perhaps be not less useful to know than the events

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 215

of antiquity ; for if the latter kindle in generous hearts the de-
sire to imitate them, the former will teach them to contemn
and avoid similar baseness.

2. Italy had been brought by those who controlled her to the
point, then, that when by the agreement of the states a peace
was established it was quickly afterwards again disturbed by
those who had arms in hand; so that there was neither glory
won by war, nor quiet secured by peace. When, therefore,
peace was concluded in 1483 between the Duke of Milan and
the league, the hired soldiery, wishing to continue on a war
footing, turned against the Church. There were at that time
two bodies of mercenary troops in Italy, the Braccesca and the
Sforzesca. Count Francesco, son of Sforza, was chief of the
latter, and the commanders of the former were Niccolo Picci-
nino and Niccolo Fortebraccio. All the other Italian troops
attached themselves, as it were, to these two principal compa-
nies. The Sforzesca troops were the most appreciated of the
two, both on account of the valor and ability of the Count, as
also because of the promise which the Duke of Milan had made
him of the hand of his illegitimate daughter, the Lady Bianca ;
the prospect of which connection added greatly to the repu-
tation of Count Francesco. After the peace of Lombardy,
therefore, these two armed bodies assailed the Pope Eugenius.
Niccolo Fortebraccio was influenced in this by the ancient en-
mity which Braccio had always entertained towards the Church ;
the Count Francesco was moved by ambition; thus Niccolo
attacked Rome, whilst the Count made hinself master of La
Marca. In consequence of this the Romans, who did not want
war, drove Pope Eugenius from Rome, who, having escaped
with difficulty and danger, made his way to Florence. Consid-
ering the danger to which he was exposed, being abandoned by
the princes who had with so much satisfaction just laid down
their arms, which they were unwilling to resume again for the
sake of the Pope, Eugenius made terms with the Count Fran-
cesco and conceded to him the lordship of La Marca, although
Francesco had added insult to the injury of having seized it;
for in indicating the place whence he sent his letters to his
agents, he wrote, “From our hawk’s nest of Fermo, in spite of
“Peter and Paul.” Nor was he content with having obtained
possession of these places, but wanted to be made Gonfaloniere
of the Church; all of which Pope Eugenius conceded to him,

216 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

being more afraid of a hazardous war than of an ignominious
peace. The Count Francesco, having in this wise become the
friend of the Pope, attacked Niccolo Fortebraccio, and for many
months they fought within the territory of the Church with
varying successes, which resulted however altogether more to
the injury of the Pope and his subjects than to those who
were carrying on the war. Finally, through the intervention
of the Duke of Milan, an agreement was concluded by way of
a truce, whereby both remained in possession of the places they
had taken within the territory of the Church.

3. This war, extinguished at Rome, was rekindled in the
Romagna by Battista da Canneto, who killed several citizens
of the family of Grifoni in Bologna, and drove the Pope’s
governor, with others of his enemies, out of the city. And to
enable him forcibly to hold that state, he applied for help to
Duke Filippo, whilst the Pope by way of avenging the insult
asked aid from the Venetians and Florentines. Both the one
and the other obtained the desired assistance, so that in a very
little while two considerable armies found themselves face to
face in the Romagna.

Niccolo Piccinino commanded the forces of the Duke, and
the Venetian and Florentine troops were under the command
of Gattamelata and Niccolo da Tolentino. They came to battle
near Imola, and the Venetians and Florentines were routed,
and Niccolo da Tolentino was sent as prisoner to Milan, where
he died within a few days, either by unfair means or from grief
at his defeat. After this victory the Duke, either from having
been weakened by the late wars, or because he believed that
the league, having experienced this defeat, would disarm, did
not follow up his success, and thus gave time to the Pope and
his allies to gather their forces again. They appointed the
Count Francesco their general, and attempted to drive Niccolo
Fortebraccio from the states of the Church, and thus to termi-
nate the war which had been begun only for the benefit of the
pontiff. When the Romans saw the Pope take the field so
bravely, they sought to make terms with him, and sent a mes-
senger to him and received a commissioner from him in return.
Amongst the other places which Niccolo Fortebraccio had
taken, he held Tivoli, Montefiascone, Citta di Castello, and
Ascesi. Unable to keep the field, he had taken refuge in the
last-named place, where Count Francesco besieged him; and as

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 217

the siege was becoming a protracted one in consequence of the
vigorous defence of Niccolo, Duke Filippo thought it necessary
either to prevent the league from obtaining the victory, or so
to regulate his own movements that he might the better be
able afterwards to defend his own estates. With the view
therefore of making the Count raise the siege of Ascesi, he
ordered Niccolo Piccinino to make a diversion into Tuscany
through the Romagna; so that the league, deeming it more
important to defend Tuscany than to possess Ascesi, might
order the Count Francesco to dispute the passage of Niccolo,
who was already with his army at Furli. Francesco, on the
other hand, moved with his forces to Cesena, having left his
brother Lione in charge of his states and of the war in La
Marca. Whilst Piccinino sought to penetrate into Tuscany
and Count Francesco strove to prevent his passage, Niccolo
Fortebraccio attacked Lione, and after a glorious victory took
him prisoner, and destroyed his army; and following up this
success, he took possession with the same dash of many places
in La Marca. This greatly afflicted the Count Francesco, who
already imagined that all his states were lost; and leaving
part of his army to confront Piccinino, he turned with the rest
upon Fortebraccio, and fought and defeated him. Fortebraccio
was wounded and taken prisoner in this rout, and soon after
died of his wounds. This victory restored to the Pope all the
places that had been taken from him by Niccolo Fortebraccio,
and reduced the Duke of Milan to sue for peace, which was
concluded through the intervention of Niccolo da Este, Mar-
quis of Ferrara. By the conditions of this peace, also, the
places occupied by the Duke in the Romagna were restored
to the Church, and the troops of the Duke returned into Lom-
bardy. And Battista da Canneto (like all usurpers who main-
tain themselves in any state by the force and valor of others),
finding it impossible to-hold his position in Bologna, took to
flight ; whereupon Messer Antonio Bentivogli, chief of the
opposite party, returned.

4. All this took place during the time of Cosimo’s exile.
After his return those who had brought about his restoration,
and had themselves been so much wronged by the adverse
party, resolved anyhow to get control of the government.
The Signoria that succeeded to the magistracy for November
and December, not content with what had been done by their

218 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

predecessors for the party, prolonged and changed the place
of banishment of many, and sent many other citizens into
exile. And it was not so much the fact of belonging to the
opposite party that proved dangerous to citizens, but their
wealth, their relations, and their private friendships. If this
wholesale proscription had been accompanied by bloodshed, it
would have equalled those of Octavius or Sylla. In some in-
stances it was tainted with blood, for Antonio di Bernardo
Guadagni was beheaded, and likewise four other citizens,
amongst whom were Zanobi de’ Belfratelli and Cosimo Barba-
dori, who, having gone beyond the limits of their banishment,
and happening to be at Venice, the Venetians, valuing the
friendship of Cosimo more than their own honor, sent them to
Florence as prisoners, where they were basely put to death.
All this greatly increased the power of the party of Cosimo,
and struck terror into the hearts of his opponents, especially
when they saw that so powerful a republic as Venice sacrificed
its independence to the Florentines, which it was believed that
they had done, not so much to benefit Cosimo as for the pur-
pose of stimulating party feeling in Florence to a still higher
pitch, and by bloodshed to make the dissensions in our city still
more dangerous. For the Venetians regarded the union of the
Florentines as the only obstacle to their own aggrandizement.
The city being thus cleared of enemies or suspected enemies
of the government, the party in power began to bestow benefits
upon new people for the purpose of strengthening their party,
and restored to their country the Alberti family and other exiles.
All the great nobles with very few exceptions were reduced
from their rank to that of plebeians, and they divided and sold
the possessions of the exiled amongst themselves at very low
prices. After this they strengthened themselves by new laws
and ordinances, and had new elections made, withdrawing the
names of their enemies from the purses and filling them with
those of their friends. Admonished, however, by the ruin of
their adversaries, they concluded that even these packed elec-
tions would not suffice to enable them to keep the control of
the government in their hands; and therefore they resolved
that the magistrates who exercised the power of life and death
should always be chosen from amongst the chiefs of their party,
and that the officers who had charge of the imborsations for
the new elections, together with the old Signoria, should have

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 219

the power of appointing the new Signoria. They gave to the
Kight of the guard power over life and death, and provided
that the banished should not be able to return at the expira-
tion of their term without having first obtained the consent
of thirty-four out of the thirty-seven Signori and their col-
leagues. They prohibited all correspondence with the ban-
ished; and every word or sign or practice that in any way
displeased those who held the government was severely pun-
ished. And if any suspected individual still remained in
Florence who had not been reached by these repressive meas-
ures, he was oppressed by new impositions which they ordered
for the express purpose; so that in a little while, having ex-
pelled and impoverished the whole of the adverse party, they
secured themselves firmly in the government. And by way
of insuring to themselves foreign assistance, and at the same
time depriving those of it who might design to attack them,
they formed defensive alliances with the Pope, the Venetians,
and with the Duke of Milan.

5. Whilst the affairs of Florence were in this condition,
Joanna, queen of Naples, died, leaving by her will Regnier of
Anjou heir to the kingdom. Alfonso, king of Aragon; hap-
pened to be at that time in Sicily, and, having friendly rela-
tions with many of the Neapolitan barons, he prepared to take
possession of that kingdom. The Neapolitans and many of the
barons favored Regnier; the Pope, on the other hand, wanted
neither Regnier nor Alfonso to have the kingdom, but desired
that it should be administered by a governor of his own.
Meantime Alfonso came into the kingdom, and was received
by the Duke of Sessa; he brought with him some princes
whom he had taken into his pay, intending (as he already had
Capua, which the Prince of Taranto held in his name) to com-
pel the Neapolitans to acknowledge him as sovereign. Alfonso
also sent his fleet to attack Gaeta, which was held by the Nea-
politans. In consequence of this, the Neapolitans applied for
assistance to the Duke Filippo, who persuaded the Genoese to
take the enterprise in hand. These promptly armed a fleet for
the purpose, not only of complying with the wishes of the Duke,
their lord, but also to save their merchandise which they had
in Naples and in Gaeta. Alfonso, on the other hand, hearing
of this, increased his own fleet, and went in person with it to
meet the Genoese; and having encountered them above thg

220 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

island of Ponzio, the Aragonese fleet was defeated, and Al-
fonso together with many other princes made prisoner, and
delivered by the Genoese into the hands of Filippo. This
victory alarmed all the other princes of Italy, who feared the
power of Filippo; for they judged the opportunity favorable for
him to make himself master of the whole country. But, so
diverse are the minds of men, Filippo took exactly the opposite
course. Alfonso was a man of uncommon sagacity, and so
soon as he had an opportunity of speaking with Filippo, he
demonstrated to him “that it was a great error on his part to
“support Regnier in opposition to himself. For,” argued he,
“if Regnier should become king of Naples, he would make
“every effort to have Milan become the property of the king
“of France, so as to have friendly support near at hand, and
“not to be obliged in a moment of need to ask permission for
“the passage of his allies; and that Regnier could not secure
“this advantage for himself except by the ruin of Filippo in
“causing Milan to become French. But that, on the contrary,
“he, Alfonso, should he become king of Naples, would inter-
“vene in favor of Filippo; for having no other enemy to fear
“except the French, he would of necessity be obliged to love
“and be friends with —if not obey —him, who had it in his
“power to open the way to his enemies. And therefore, al-
“though the title of king would be Alfonso’s, yet the power
“and authority would really be Filippo’s. So that it really
“concerned him more than himself to reflect upon the danger
“of the one course and the advantage of the other, unless he
“preferred to gratify his own feelings rather than to assure
“the security of his state. For in the one case he would
“really be prince, and free; and in the other, being between
“two most powerful princes, he would either lose his state, or
“he would live in perpetual apprehension, and obey them like
“a slave.” These arguments had such an effect upon the
mind of the Duke, that, having changed his purpose, he set
Alfonso at liberty, and sent him honorably back to Genoa, and
thence to the kingdom of Naples. Alfonso landed at Gaeta,
which city, so soon as Alfonso’s liberation had become known,
had been taken possession of by some of the princes who were
his partisans.

6. The Genoese, seeing how the Duke without regard to
them had liberated the king, and how he had gained all honor

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 221

at their risk and expense, and how the credit of the liberation
accrued to Filippo, whilst the injury of the defeat and capture
was theirs, became greatly exasperated against him. When
the city of Genoa enjoyed her liberty, the chief of her govern-
ment was elected by free suffrage; he was called the Doge,
not because he was absolutely a prince, nor because he alone
decided upon public measures, but merely proposed, as chief
of the state, the measures which the magistrates and their
counsellors should resolve upon. There are many noble fami-
lies in this city, sufficiently powerful to make it difficult for
the magistrates to enforce obedience from them; foremost
amongst these are the families of the Fregosa and the Adorna.
The frequent dissensions in the city, and consequent destruc-
tion of the civil institutions of the state, result from this.
These families are constantly contending with each other for
the government, not by legal means, but with arms in hand;
whence it is that alternately one party is dominant and the
other oppressed. And it ordinarily happens that that party
which finds itself deprived of all share in the public offices and
honors has recourse to foreign arms, and thus subjects the
country, which they are not allowed to govern themselves, to
the rule of a stranger. This is the reason why Genoa has
so frequently been subject to the sovereigns of Lombardy,
and was so at the time when Alfonso of Aragon was made
prisoner.

Amongst the principal Genoese who were the cause of their
country being subjected to Duke Filippo had been Francesco
Spinola; who soon after having caused his country to be en-
slaved, as often happens in similar cases, became suspected by
the Duke. Incensed by this he had chosen a sort of voluntary
exile at Gaeta, where he happened to be at the time of the
naval fight with Alfonso; and having rendered gallant ser-
vices in this action, he thought that he had anew merited the
confidence and favor of the Duke, and could therefore live with
safety at Genoa. But he soon found that the Duke continued
his suspicions of him, for he could not believe that any one
who had betrayed his own country would be faithful to him.
Spinola resolved therefore to tempt fortune anew, and with one
blow to restore liberty to his country, and fame and security
to himself. He felt that he had no other means of regaining
the confidence of his fellow-citizens than by healing the wound

222 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

which he had inflicted. Seeing, therefore, the universal in-
dignation that had been excited against the Duke by his hay-
ing set King Alfonso at liberty, Spinola deemed the occasion
propitious for carrying his designs into effect; and communi-
cated his views to some friends whom he knew to hold the
same opinion with himself, and urged them to second him in
his attempt.

7. On the day of the festival of San Giovanni Battista, the
new governor, Arismino, who had been sent by Duke Filippo,
was making his official entrance into Genoa. He had already
entered the gates of the city accompanied by Opicino, the old
governor, and many of the Genoese, when Spinola, thinking
that it would not do to delay the execution of his design any
longer, issued forth from his house, all armed, and accompa-
nied by those whom he had drawn into his plans, and from the
piazza in front of his house he raised the cry of “ Liberty!”
It was wonderful to see the eagerness with which the citizens
rushed together at that cry; none of those who from interest
or any other cause were attached to the Duke had time to arm,
and were hardly able to think of the means of escape. The
new governor, Arismino, and some Genoese who were with
him, took refuge in the castle, which was guarded by some
troops of the Duke. The old governor, Opicino, presuming
that, if he should take refuge in the palace, where he had two
thousand armed men under his command, he would be able to
save himself or encourage his friends to defend themselves,
turned into the road leading to the palace; but before reaching
the piazza he was killed, and his body dragged through all
Genoa and torn in pieces. And the Genoese, having placed the
government in the hands of free magistrates, obtained posses-
sion in a few days of the castle and the other strongholds that
were in the hands of the Duke’s forces, and thus freed them-
selves entirely from the yoke of Filippo, Duke of Milan.

8. All these events in the beginning alarmed the princes of
Italy, making them fear that Duke Filippo would become too
powerful. But seeing now how his power in Genoa had come
to an end, they were encouraged to hope that they would be
able to keep his ambition in check; and notwithstanding the
recent treaty, the Florentines and Venetians formed an alliance
with the Genoese (1436). Whereupon Messer Rinaldo degli
Albizzi and the other chiefs of the banished Florentines, seeing

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 223

the prospect of fresh perturbations, and the altered aspect of
things, took hope of being able to induce Duke Filippo openly
to declare war against Florence. Rinaldo therefore went to
Milan, and spoke to the Duke as follows :—

“Tf we, formerly your enemies, come now confidently to
“supplicate your aid to enable us to return to our country,
“neither yourself nor any one else who observes the course
“of human events and the mutability of fortune should be
“surprised at it. Nor do we lack ample and manifest justifi-
“cation of our past and our present actions, or of our present
“conduct towards our country and our former conduct towards
“vou. No good man will ever find fault with any one who
“seeks to defend his country, in whatever way he may deem
“it proper to do so. Our aim never was to injure you, but to
“protect our country from injury ; and you can bear witness
“vourself that after the greatest victories of our league, when
‘“‘we knew you to be favorable to a real peace, we urged it even
“more than yourself; so that we really believe that we have
“never done a thing that could cause us to doubt our obtain-
“ing any reasonable favor from you. Nor can our country
“complain that we urge you now to take up those arms to
“assail her, against which we have before defended her with
“so much obstinacy ; for only that country merits the affection
“of all her citizens which in return loves all citizens equally,
“and not that country which favors a very few at the expense
“of the many. Nor should any one who raises arms against
“his country be condemned under all circumstances ; for cities,
“although they are complex bodies, yet very much resemble
“individual bodies. And as these are often afflicted with in-
“firmities that can only be cured with fire and steel, so in the
“former likewise similar troubles frequently occur, which
“any good and devoted citizen would sin more by leaving un-
“cured than by curing them, though it be with fire and steel.
“What greater malady, I ask, can there be for a republic than
“slavery ? What remedy was it ever more necessary to em-
“ploy than such as will relieve her of this evil? Those wars
“alone are just that are necessary, and those arms are merci-
“ful without which there is no hope. I know not what neces-
“sity can be greater than ours, nor what mercy can exceed
“that which saves our country from servitude. Assuredly
“then our cause is just and merciful, which fact should not

224 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

“be lost sight of by you or ourselves. Nor is justice lacking
“on your side, for the Florentines have not been ashamed,
“after concluding a peace with so much solemnity, to form an
“alliance with the Genoese, who are rebels from your author-
“ity; so that if pity for our cause does not move you, a just
“indignation at the insult thus offered you should move you, —
“the more so as the undertaking is an easy one. Do not allow
“yourself to be deterred by the past exhibitions of the power
“of the Florentine people, and of their obstinacy in defence ;
“these qualities might reasonably inspire you with apprehen-
“sions if the Florentines still possessed them in the same
“degree as formerly. But you will now find the very re-
“verse; for what power can a city have that has so lately
“driven out the best part of its wealth and industry? And
“how can you expect an obstinate defence from a people torn
“by such various and recent dissensions? The same dissen-
“sions prevent the wealth that still remains to them from
“being employed in the same way as formerly; for men will
“freely spend their fortunes when they see that it is for their
“own glory and for the honor and welfare of their country,
“because then they hope to recover in peace what the war has
“taken from them; but you cannot expect them to do the
“same when they find themselves equally oppressed in war
“and in peace, having in the one to bear the injuries of the
“enemy, and in the other the insolence of their rulers. For
“a people suffers more from the avarice of its magistrates
“than from the rapacity of an enemy; for of the latter you
“may sooner or later hope for an end, but of the former
“never. In your previous wars with Florence you had to
“contend against the entire republic, whilst now you would
“have to do so against only a very small portion. Then you
“came to take the government from a number of excellent
“citizens; now you would take it from the hands of only a
“few bad ones. Then you came to deprive the city of her
“liberty, but now you will go to restore it to her. It is not
“reasonable, therefore, to suppose that such different causes
“should produce the same effect; but rather should we look
“for certain success in this war, and how much that will add
“to the power of your own state you can readily judge. For
“Tuscany, having thus become your friend and ally, being
“bound to you by so many and such great obligations, will be

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 225

“worth more to you in your other undertakings than even
“Milan herself. And whilst at other times this acquisition
“would be regarded as the result of your ambition and vio-
“lence, it will now be looked upon as an act of justice and
“humanity. Do not, therefore, allow this favorable opportu-
“nity to be lost, and bear in mind that, if your former wars
“against Florence have brought you nothing but difficulty, ex-
“pense, and little credit, the present one will bring you with
“ease the greatest advantages and most honorable fame.”

9. It did not need so many words to persuade the Duke to
make war against the Florentines, for he was disposed to it
by an hereditary hatred and a blind ambition ; and was urged
to it, moreover, by the new offence of the alliance with the
Genoese. But his former expenditures, the dangers he had
run, and the recollection of recent losses, as well as the ex-
travagant hopes of the Florentine exiles, made him hesitate.
So soon as Duke Filippo had heard of the rebellion of the
Genoese, he had sent Niccolo Piccinino with all his forces, and
such infantry as he could collect in the country, to make an
effort to recover Genoa before the citizens should have time
to become settled and establish a new government, relying
much upon the citadel, which was still held for him. Although
Piccinino drove the Genoese over the mountains and took from
them the valley of Pozzenere, where they had fortified them-
selves, and compelled them to take refuge behind the walls
of the city, yet he found so much difficulty in advancing
further, owing to the obstinate defence made by the citizens,
that he was obliged to withdraw. Whereupon the Duke, at
the persuasion of the Florentine exiles, ordered Piccinino to
attack the eastern shore, and to push the war vigorously into
the Genoese territory on the frontier of Pisa, judging that this
device would leave him free to decide from time to time upon
the best course to follow. Niccolo thereupon attacked and
took Serezana, and after having done considerable damage he
marched upon Lucca; and for the purpose of allaying the
suspicions of the Florentines he started the report that he
was going down to the kingdom of Naples to assist the king
of Aragon. Upon the occurrence of these events Pope Euge-
nius left Florence and went to Bologna, where he negotiated
a new arrangement between the Duke and the league. He

represented to the Duke that, if he did not consent to this
VOL. I. 15

226 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

treaty, he should be obliged to transfer to the league the
Count Francesco Sforza, who was formerly his ally, but was
now in the military service of the Pope. Although the Pon-
tiff exerted himself very much in this matter, yet it was all
in vain; for the Duke would not make any terms until he
should first have recovered Genoa, whilst the league wanted
Genoa to remain entirely free; and thus each party, mistrust-
ing peace, prepared for war.

10. When, therefore, Niccolo Piccinino came to Lucca, the
Florentines became uneasy at his movements, and ordered Neri
di Gino, with the cavalry, into the Pisan territory; and they
obtained the Pope’s consent that the Count Francesco should
unite with him; and they established themselves, with their
army, at Santa Gonda. Piccinino, who was at Lucca, demanded
free passage for himself and his troops through the territory of
the republic to go on to Naples; and upon its being refused, he
threatened to take it by force. The two armies were nearly
equal in numbers and in the ability of their respective com-
manders, and therefore neither of them wished to expose them-
selves to the hazards of fortune, being, moreover, restrained by
the cold season (being in the month of December); and thus
they remained many days without either making any movement
to attack the other. Niccolo Piccinino, however, was the first
to move, it having been represented to him that, if he were to
make a night attack upon Vico Pisano, he would easily take it.
Niccolo made the attempt, but failed to take Vico; whereupon
he wasted the surrounding country, and plundered and burned
the Borgo San Giovanni alla Vena. This attempt (in great
measure useless, even if it had been successful) yet encouraged
Niccolo to advance further; and having ascertained that Count
Francesco and Neri di Gino had not moved, he attacked Santa
Maria in Castello and Filetto, and took them both. With all
this, the Florentine troops did not move, not because the Count
Francesco was afraid, but because the magistrates of Florence
had not yet definitely resolved upon war, out of teverence for
the Pope, who was still treating for peace. Niccolo, mistaking
the prudence and consideration of the Florentines for fear, felt
encouraged to still more fresh attempts, and resolved to attack
Barga with all his forces. This new attack caused the Floren-
tines to put aside all considerations, and not only to succor
Barga, but also to attack the territory of Lucca. Francesco

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 227

therefore, having gone to encounter Niccolo, engaged him in
battle and defeated him; and having almost entirely dispersed
his army, he raised the siege of Barga. The Venetians mean-
time, considering that Filippo Visconti had broken the peace,
sent their general, Francesco da Gonzaga, to Ghiaradadda, where
he ravaged the Duke’s territory to that degree that Filippo found
it necessary to recall Niccolo Piccinino from Tuscany. This re-
call of Piecinino, together with the victory which the Count Fran-
cesco had gained over him, encouraged the Florentines to make
an attempt upon Lucca, with the hope of taking it. In this at-
tempt they were neither restrained by fear, nor any other con-
sideration, seeing that Duke Filippo, the only power they had
to fear, was attacked by the Venetians, and that the Lucchese,
having received the enemies of Florence within their territory,
and permitted them from there to attack her, had thereby de-
prived themselves of all right to complain.

11. In April, however, Count Francesco set the army in mo-
tion ; but before invading the enemy’s territory the Florentines
wished to recover their. own, and recaptured Santa Maria in
Castello, and the other places occupied by Piccinino. They then
turned northward towards the Lucchese territory, and assailed
Camajore ; the inhabitants of which, though loyally attached to
their lords, surrendered, for the fear of a present enemy had
more power over them than their loyalty to a distant friend.
With similar success, the Florentines took Massa and Serezana.
Having accomplished this about the end of May, they moved
towards Lucca, and destroyed all the grain and growing crops,
burned the villages, cut down the vines and the trees, drove off
the cattle, and left no injury undone that can be inflicted upon
the bitterest enemy. The Lucchese, on the other hand, seeing
themselves abandoned by the Duke, and despairing of being able
to defend their country, abandoned it, and fortified the city with
all the means in their power, confident of being able to defend
it for some time, as they had plenty of soldiers within, and hop-
ing that in the mean time something would occur to save them,
as had been the case in the several previous attempts of the
Florentines upon Lucca. The only thing they feared was the
fickleness of the people, who, tired of the siege, might think
more of their own dangers than of the liberty of others, and
might thus force them to some disgraceful and injurious terms
of capitulation. With the view, therefore, of stimulating them

228 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

to the most energetic defence, they called the people together in
the Piazza, and one of the oldest and wisest citizens addressed
them as follows : —

“You know well that what is done from necessity merits
“neither praise nor censure. If, therefore, you accuse us of
“ having provoked this war with the Florentines by having re-
“ ceived the Duke’s troops in our territory, and allowed them
“thence to attack the Florentines, you will commit a very great
“error. You know well the ancient enmity of the people of
“ Florence towards you, which has its origin not in injuries done
“them by us, nor in any fear they have of you, but rather from
“ your weakness and their ambition ; for the one gives them the
“hope of being able to subjugate you, and the other urges them
“on to do it. Nor must you believe that any service you could
“render them would remove that desire from their minds, any
“more than that any offence you might give them could still
“more excite their desire to injure you. They think of nothing
“ but to rob you of your liberty, and you should think of nothing
“but to defend it; and whatever may be done by either party
“ to further these objects may cause us regret, but should not
“surprise us. Certainly we are much grieved that they should
“attack us, that they seize our places, burn our houses, and lay
“waste our country ; but which of us is foolish enough to be
“ surprised at it? for if we could we would do the same to them,
“or even worse. They pretend that they have begun this war
“ aeainst us because we received Niccolo; but had we not done
“so, they would have found some other pretext, and if thus the
* evil had been deferred, it would probably have been the greater:
“ Thus, the coming of Niccolo should not be charged with it, but
“rather your ill-fortune and the ambitious nature of the Floren-
“tines. Moreover, we could not have refused to receive the
“troops of the Duke of Milan; and having come as they did, it
“was not in our power to prevent them from attacking the
“Florentines. You know well that, without the support of
“some powerful ally, we could not save our city, and there is
“none that could have aided us more effectually and more in
“good faith than Duke Filippo. It was he who restored you
“your liberty ; it is reasonable, therefore, that we should look
“to him to aid us in maintaining it, and our enemies have no
“more determined foe than he. If, then, we had irritated the
“Duke for the sake of not offending the Florentines, we should

Boor V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 229

“have lost a good friend, and strengthened our enemy and made
“him more prompt in attacking us; so that it was better for us
“to have incurred this war, and preserve the friendship of Duke
“ Filippo, than for the sake of peace to have exposed ourselves
“to his enmity. We have the right, therefore, to hope that he
“will help us out of the danger to which he has subjected us,
“provided that we are true to ourselves. You well know with
“what fury the Florentines have several times attacked us, and
“how gloriously we have defended ourselves against them. And
“many a time we had no other hope than in God and time, and
“the one and the other have saved us; and why should we not
“ succeed now, if we defend ourselves courageously ? Then all
“Ttaly abandoned us to fall a prey to the Florentines ; but now
“ we have Duke Filippo of Milan with us, and have besides good
“ reason for believing that the Venetians would hesitate to offend
“us, as it is not to their interest that the power of Florence
“should increase. On former occasions when the Florentines
“ attacked us, they were more free from embarrassments and had
“more hope of assistance, and were of themselves stronger ;
“whilst we were in all respects weaker. For then we com-
“bated for a tyrant, but now we are defending ourselves.
“Then the glory of the defence accrued to others; now it is
“ours only. Then our assailants were united; but now they
“are divided amongst themselves, having filled all Italy with
“their banished citizens.

“But even if we had not all these encouragements, necessity
“alone commands us to the most determined resistance. Every
“enemy is reasonably to be feared, for they all aim at your de-
“struction and their own glory; but above all others should we
“fear the Florentines, for neither submission nor tribute nor the
“mastery over our city will satisfy them. They want our very
“persons and substance, so as to glut their cruelty and avarice
“with our blood and our possessions ; and therefore are they to
“be feared in every way by each one of you. Be not troubled,
“therefore, at seeing your fields wasted, your villages burnt,
“and your lands seized by them; for if we save this city, we
“shall of necessity save all the rest. But if we lose Lucca,
“then it would be of little avail for us to save all the other
“things. If we maintain our liberty, the enemy will find it
“difficult to hold the rest, which we should strive in vain to
“save if our liberty were lost. To arms, then, fellow-citizens !

230 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

“and when you combat, think that the reward of your victory
“will be not only the safety of your country, but that of your
“homes and of your children.”

These last words were received by the people with the utmost
enthusiasm, and with one voice they pledged themselves to die
rather than to yield or to entertain the thought of any arrange-
ment that would in the least stain their liberty ; and then they
set to work to make all necessary preparations for the defence
of the city.

12. The Florentine army meantime was not idle, and after
doing infinite damage to the country they took Monte Carlo by
capitulation, and then went into camp before Uzano; so that
the people of Lucca, hemmed in on all sides and deprived of
all hopes of succor, should surrender under the pressure of
hunger. The castle of Uzano, however, was strong and well
garrisoned, so that its capture was not as easy as the rest of
the country. The Lucchese, as was most natural, finding them-
selves so closely pressed, had recourse to the Duke of Milan,
employing prayers and remonstrances in their application, and
pointing out their own merits and the offences of the Floren-
tines, and how much it would encourage his other allies if he
came to their rescue, and how much they would be alarmed if
he abandoned them; and that, if they were destined to lose
their liberty and their lives, he on his part would lose not only
useful allies, but also his honor, and the confidence of all those
who hereafter might have occasion to expose themselves to
every danger from their devotion to him. They added tears
to their entreaties, so that, if Filippo should not be influenced
by his sense of obligation, he might perhaps be moved by com-
passion. So that the Duke, adding to his inveterate hatred of
the Florentines the new obligations he owed to the Lucchese,
and being above all desirous that the Florentines should not
agerandize their power by so important a conquest, resolved to
send a large force into Tuscany, or to make so vigorous an
attack upon the Venetians that the Florentines would be com-
pelled to desist from their attempt upon Lucca for the sake of
going to the assistance of the Venetians.

13. This being determined upon, the Florentines were quickly
informed that Duke Filippo was preparing to send a force into
Tuscany. This made the Florentines begin to give up all hopes
of taking Lucca; and to keep the Duke occupied in Lombardy

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 231

they urged the Venetians to attack him with all their forces.
But these were also alarmed because their commander, the Mar-
quis of Mantua, had left them, and had entered the service of
Duke Filippo. Finding themselves thus as it were disarmed,
they replied to the Florentines, that, so far from being able to
increase their efforts, they would hardly be able to continue the
war unless the Florentines could send them the Count Francesco
Sforza to command their army, and with the condition that he
should obligate himself to pass the Po in person. Without this
they would not adhere to their former treaty, according to which
he was not obliged to pass the river. For they were not will-
ing to carry on the war without a commander, and had no hope
of any but the Count Francesco; but unless he bound himself
to carry on the war wherever they might require it, he would
be of no value to them. The Florentines considered it impor-
tant that the war should be pushed with vigor in Lombardy ; at
the same time, they felt that their attack upon Lucca would
prove in vain; and they knew perfectly well that the Vene-
tians made this demand for Sforza, not so much because he
was indispensable to them as for the purpose of. preventing
them from making so important a conquest as that of Lucca.
The Count, on the other hand, was ready to go into Lombardy
at the pleasure of the league, but was unwilling to change the
terms of the original agreement with the Duke Filippo, as he
did not wish to forego the hope of his alliance to the Duke’s
daughter which he had promised him.

The Florentines were thus agitated by two different feelings ;
the one the desire to possess Lucca, and the other the fear of war
with the Duke of Milan. The latter, however, prevailed, as is
generally the case with fear ; and they consented that, after the
capture of Uzano, the Count Sforza should go into Lombardy.
There remained, however, one difficulty, which, not being within
the control of the Florentines, caused them more anxiety and
apprehension than the first: the Count was not willing to cross
the Po, and the Venetians would not accept him unless he did.
There being no other way of coming to an agreement except by
one party freely yielding the point to the other, the Florentines
persuaded the Count Francesco to obligate himself by a private
letter to the Signoria to pass the river, demonstrating to him
that such a private promise would not be considered an infrac-
tion of a public treaty ; and that he could manage afterwards

232 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V,

to avoid passing the river, which would have this advanta-
geous consequence,—that the Venetians would be obliged to
continue the war after it had once been begun, and that thus
the evil which the Florentines feared so much would be averted.
On the other hand, they argued with the Venetians, that this
private letter would be binding upon the Count, and that there-
fore they ought to be content with it; and that it was well to
afford him the means of preserving the appearance of respect
due to his future father-in-law; and that it would be of no
advantage to them to expose him without manifest necessity.
And thus the passage of the Count Sforza into Lombardy was
resolved upon; who, having taken Uzano and thrown up some
intrenchments around Lucca for the purpose of keeping the in-
habitants closely pressed, placed the conduct of the war in the
hands of the commissaries. He then passed the mountains and
went to Reggio, where the Venetians, suspicious of his advance
and wishing above all to assure themselves of his real intentions,
requested him to pass the Po, and there join their other forces.
The Count absolutely refused this ; so that high words passed
between him and the Venetian envoy, Andrea Mauroceno, each
accusing the other of presumption and bad faith. And after
much mutual recrimination, the one claiming not to be obliged
to perform that service and the other threatening to withhold
the stipulated payments, the Count Sforza returned to Tuscany
and the other to Venice. The Count was thereupon ordered by
the Florentines to encamp on the Pisan territory, hoping to in-
duce him to resume the war against Lucca, to which, however,
they found him indisposed; for the Duke Filippo, having heard
that the Count Francesco had refused to pass the Po out of
regard for him, hoped still by his means to save the Lucchese ;
and begged him to endeavor to bring about an amicable arrange-
ment between the Lucchese and the Florentines, and if possible
to include him also in the arrangement, giving Sforza the hope
that the promised marriage with his daughter might then take
place at his own pleasure. This hoped for marriage had great
weight with Count Francesco; for inasmuch as Duke Filippo had
no sons, he hoped thereby eventually to become himself the
sovereign of Milan. For this reason he embarrassed the move-
ments of the Florentines, and declared that he would not move
with the army unless the Venetians paid the amount due him
and continued him in command of the army. The payments

Boor V.]} HISTORY OF FLORENCE, 233

alone, however, did not satisfy him; for wishing to be assured
‘of the safety of his own states, he deemed it desirable to have
other support besides the Florentines, and therefore shrewdly
threatened that, if he were abandoned by the Venetians, he
would be obliged to look to his own interests, and make terms
with the Duke of Milan.

14. These cavillings and evasions displeased the Florentines
greatly, for they saw themselves disappointed in their attempt
upon Lucca, and began moreover to have some doubts as to
the safety of their own state if ever the Duke of Milan and
the Count Francesco should become allied. By way of in-
ducing, therefore, the Venetians to keep Sforza in command,
Cosimo de’ Medici went himself to Venice in the hope of being
able to influence them by his reputation. He discussed the
subject at length in their Senate, showing the condition of the
Italian governments, the extent of the forces of the Duke of
Milan, which armies were the most powerful and best reputed ;
and concluded that, if the Duke united with the Count Fran-
cesco, the Venetians might have to confine themselves again to
the sea, whilst the Florentines would have to fight for their lib-
erties. To this the Venetians replied: “That they knew their
“own strength, as well as that of the other Italian states, and
‘believed themselves in every way competent to defend them-
“selves; affirming at the same time that they were not in the
“habit of paying soldiers who served others, and that the Flor-
“entines had better pay the Count themselves, inasmuch as he
‘had been employed in their service. And that they deemed
“it more necessary, if they wished to continue in the free en-
“‘joyment of their institutions, to humble the pride of the
“Count Sforza than to pay him; for there was no limit to
“men’s ambition; and if the Count were now paid, it would
“not be long before he made other unfair and dangerous de-
‘mands. And therefore they deemed it well, once and for all,
“to check his insolence, instead of allowing it to grow until it
“became insupportable; and if the Florentines, either from
“fear or any other reason, wished to preserve the Count’s
“friendship, they might pay him themselves.”

And thus Cosimo had to return without any other conclusion.
The Florentines, nevertheless, urged the Count not to separate
himself from the league, to which he would willingly have ad-
hered but for his desire to conclude his marriage with the

234 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

daughter of Duke Filippo; this kept his mind in a state of
doubt, so that the slightest incident, as indeed it happened,
caused him to hesitate. Count Francesco had left his posses-
sions in La Marca in charge of Furlano, one of his principal
Condottieri, who was persuaded by the Duke of Milan to leave
the service of the Count and to enter into his pay. In conse-
quence of this, the Count, regardless of everything but his own
safety, formed a compact with the Duke, one of the conditions
of which was that the latter was not in any way to-interfere in
the affairs of the Romagna and of Tuscany. After making
this arrangement with Duke Filippo, the Count earnestly per-
suaded the Florentines to make terms with the Lucchese; and
pressed them in such manner, that, seeing they had no other
alternative, they concluded a treaty with them in April, 1488,
according to which the Lucchese preserved their independence,
and the Florentines kept Monte Carlo and several other places.
After that they filled all Italy with declarations of regret, say-
ing that, since both God and man were opposed to their subject-
ing Lucca to their government, they had concluded to make
peace with her. It seldom happens that any one regrets the
loss of his own property so much as the Florentines regretted
their failure to acquire that of others.

15. Although the Florentines were occupied at that time with
such important enterprises, yet they did not omit to give atten-
tion to their neighbors, and to adorn and improve their own
city. We have already related the death of Niccolo Forte-
braccio, who had been married to a daughter of the Count

Poppi, who at the time of the death of Niccolo held the Borgo |

of San Sepolero and the fortress of that place, which he had
commanded during the lifetime of his son-in-law in his name.
After his death he claimed to hold them as the dowry of his
daughter, and refused to yield them to the Pope, who de-
manded them as the property of the Church, and sent the
Patriarch with his army to recover them. The Count Poppi,
feeling himself unable to resist an attack, offered to turn these
places over to the Florentines, who however declined to accept
them. But when the Pope returned to Florence they inter-
ceded with him in behalf of the Count Poppi, but, failing to
bring about an agreement, the Patriarch attacked Casentino,
and took Prato Vecchio and Romena, which places he offered
also to the Florentines. They declined to accept them, unless

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 235

the Pope should first consent to their restoring them to the
Count Poppi. After long resisting, the Pope finally agreed to
it, but wanted the Florentines to promise to induce the Count to
surrender to him the Borgo of San Sepolcro. The Pope being
satisfied with this negotiation, the Florentines asked him per-
sonally to consecrate the cathedral of the city, called the Santa
Reparata, the construction of which had been begun a long
time previous, but which was now so far completed that they
could celebrate divine service in it. The Pope readily con-
sented; and for the greater magnificence of the city and the
cathedral, as well as for the greater honor of the Pope, the
Florentines had a platform constructed all the way from
the Santa Maria Novella, where the Pope resided, to the church
that was to be consecrated. This platform was eight feet wide
and four feet high, and was covered all over with the most
costly drapery, and was to serve only for the passage of the
Pope with his court, and the magistrates of the city, together
with such citizens as had been deputed to escort the pontiff,
whilst the other citizens and the people lined the streets,
the windows, and the church to witness so grand a specta-
cle. After the customary ceremonies, the Pope, by way of
giving a still greater proof of his affection for the city, be-
stowed the honor of knighthood upon Giuliano Davanzate,
a citizen of the highest repute, and who was at that time the
Gonfaloniere of Justice; and the Signoria, not wishing to ap-
pear less gracious than the Pope, gave to Giuliano the govern-
ment of Pisa for one year.

16. There were at this time (1439) some grave differences
between the Roman and the Greek Churches, so that they did
not agree upon any one point in the divine service. And as
there had been much discussion upon this subject at the last
Council of Basle by the prelates of the Western Church, it was
resolved that an effort-should be made to induce the Emperor
and the Greek prelates to attend the council, and to try if
possible to reconcile them to the Latin Church. Although
this proposition was derogatory to the majesty of the Greek
empire, and distasteful to the pride of its prelates, yet, being
at the time closely pressed by the Turks, and deeming them-
selves alone insufficient for their defence, they resolved to yield
to the invitation for the purpose of being able with the greater
certainty to ask for assistance. And thus the Emperor, with

236 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

the Patriarch and the other prelates and Greek barons, came
to Venice in compliance with the resolution of the Council of
Basle; but being alarmed by the plague which was then pre-
vailing, they resolved that their differences should be settled
at Florence. The Roman and Greek prelates having there-
upon met for many days in succession in the cathedral of
Florence, the Greeks yielded after repeated and protracted dis-
cussions, and the disputed points were agreed upon with the
Roman Church and the pontiff.

17. Peace having now been restored between the people of
Lucca and the Florentines, and an alliance formed between the
Duke of Milan and Count Francesco Sforza, it was thought that
the wars of Italy, and especially those that had so long plagued
Lombardy and Tuscany, would now cease; although that which
had originated in the kingdom of Naples between Regnier of
Anjou and Alfonso of Aragon was not likely to be settled ex-
cept by the ruin of either the one or the other. And although
the Pope was dissatisfied at the loss of so much of his territory,
and although the restless ambition of the Duke of Milan and of
the Venetians was notorious, yet it was supposed that the Pope
from necessity and the others from exhaustion would have to
remain quiet. But matters went differently; for neither the
Duke nor the Venetians were content in repose. Arms were
therefore again resumed, and Lombardy and Tuscany were once
more overrun by warring armies. The proud spirit of Duke
Filippo could not brook that the Venetians should possess Ber-
gamo and Brescia; and he was greatly annoyed at seeing them
in arms and constantly running over and disturbing many parts
of his territory. Thinking that he would be able not only to
keep the Venetians in check, but also to recover his possessions
whenever they should be abandoned by the Pope, the Floren-
tines, and the Count Francesco, Filippo resolved to take the
Romagna from the Pope; judging that, when once he held that
country, the Pope would not be able to molest him, and that the
Florentines, seeing the fire so near, would either not move from
fear, or would not be able readily to attack him. The Duke
was aware also of the indignation which the Florentines felt
against the Venetians on account of their disappointment in
regard to Lucca, and judged that on that account they would be
less disposed to take up arms in their behalf. As to the Count
Francesco, Filippo believed that the newly established alliance

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 237

between them, and the Count’s hope of marrying his daughter,
would keep him quiet; and to avoid responsibility, and to afford
no one any cause to attempt any movement, — particularly as
under his agreement with the Count Francesco he could not
attack the Romagna, — he directed Niccolo Piccinino to under-
take it himself, as though he had been prompted to it by his
own ambition. At the time of the agreement between Duke
Filippo and Count Francesco, Niccolo happened to be in the
Romagna; and by an understanding with the Duke he pre-
tended being indignant at this alliance between the Duke and
his inveterate enemy, the Count, and went with his troops to
Camarata, a place between Furli and Ravenna, where he forti-
fied himself as though he intended to remain there a long while,
or until he should determine upon some other course. The re-
port of Piccinino’s anger with the Duke having been very gen-
erally spread, Niccolo gave the Pope to understand how great
his services to the Duke had been, and how great the Duke’s
ingratitude ; who, from having the two principal captains in his
pay, conceived that he thereby in a measure controlled all the
armies of Italy, and intended to make himself the master of it.
But if his Holiness desired it, he would bring it about that, of
_ the two captains whom the Duke believed he controlled, one
should become his enemy, and the other should prove useless to
him. For if his Holiness would supply him with money and
agree to keep him in his pay, he would attack those portions
of the possessions of the Count which he had taken from the.
Church ; so that Count Francesco, having to look to the protec-
tion of his own property, would not be able to serve the ambi-
tion of Duke Filippo. The Pope, believing these representations,
which seemed reasonable to him, sent five thousand ducats to
Piccinino, and made him besides many promises of estates for
himself and his children. And although the Pope was cau-
tioned by several persons against this fraud, yet he would not
believe it, and would listen to no one who contradicted him.
The city of Ravenna was governed at that time, in the name
of the Holy See, by Ostasio da Palenta; and Niccolo, thinking
that there was no time to be lost in the execution of his de-
signs,—his son, Francesco Piccinino, having sacked Spoleto
in utter disregard of the Pope,—resolved to attack Ravenna,
either because he thought it an easy undertaking, or because
he had a secret understanding with Ostasio. And in a few

238 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

days after, he made the attack, and took Ravenna by capitula-
tion; after which be took Bologna, Imola, and Furli. And
what was truly astonishing was, that, of twenty castles in the
Romagna that were held by papal troops for the Church, there
remained not one that did not fall into the hands of Piccinino,
who, not content with outraging the Pope by sudden invasion,
added insult to injury, and wrote him that he deserved to have
these places taken from him, because he had not been ashamed
to attempt to break up the friendship that existed between the
Duke of Milan and himself, and because he had filled Italy with
letters falsely representing that Niccolo had betrayed the Duke
and gone over to the Venetians.

18. Niccolo, having thus made himself master of the Ro-
magna, left it in charge of his son, Francesco Piccinino, whilst
he himself with the greater part of his troops went into Lom-
bardy, where, having united with the Duke’s forces, he attacked
the territory of Brescia, of which he made himself master in
afew days, and then laid siege to the city itself. The Duke,
who wanted the Venetians to be abandoned to him as a prey,
disavowed the acts of Piccinino, and assured the Pope, the
Florentines, and the Count, that, if the conduct of Niccolo was
contrary to the treaties, it was equally so to his own wishes;
and he gave them to understand by confidential messengers
that he intended to make a signal demonstration against Nic-
colo for his disobedience whenever time and circumstances
should permit it. The Count and the Florentines had no
faith in these assurances, but believed, as in truth was the
case, that these late military movements had been made merely
to keep them quiet until the Duke should have subdued the
Venetians, who, being filled with pride and believing them-
selves able alone to resist the Duke’s forces, disdained to ask
help of any one, and carried on the war single-handed through
their general, Gattamelata. The Count Sforza was desirous of
going to the assistance of King Regnier with the consent of
the Florentines, if the events in the Romagna and Lombardy
had not detained him. And the Florentines would cheerfully
have consented, on account of the ancient friendship which
their city had always cherished for the house of France; but
that in such event the Duke would have given his support to
King Alfonso, from the friendship contracted with him in the
time of his need. Both however, being occupied with the wars

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 239

nearer home, abstained from more distant enterprises. In fact,
the Florentines, seeing the Romagna invaded by the Duke’s
forces and the Venetians beaten, like men who saw their own
ruin in that of others, begged the Count Francesco to come
into Tuscany, where they would devise what means might be
necessary to oppose the forces of the Duke Filippo, which were
now greater than they had ever been before ; affirming at the
same time that, if the Duke’s. insolence were not restrained,
every sovereign in Italy would soon suffer from it. Although
the Count Francesco knew the apprehensions of the Floren-
tines to be well founded, yet the desire to consummate his
connection with the Duke by the promised marriage was su-
preme with him; and the Duke, well knowing this desire, gave
him every encouragement, on condition that Sforza should not
take up arms against him. And as the young lady was now
of suitable age, things had several times been brought to that
point that all the preparations for the marriage had been made,
but the Duke upon one pretext or another had always set them
aside. At the same time, by way of maintaining and increas-
ing the Count’s confidence, he added deeds to his words, and
sent him thirty thousand florins, which he was to give him
according to the marriage contract.

19. Meantime the war in Lombardy continued, and the
Venetians lost daily more territory, and the fleets which
they had placed upon the rivers were taken by the ducal
forces. The whole country of Verona and Brescia was occu-
pied, and the two cities were so closely pressed that accord-
ing to general opinion they could hold out but a little while
longer. The Marquis of Mantua, who had for many years
been general of the forces of the republic, had quite unex-
pectedly left their service and gone over to the Duke of Milan ;
so that fear compelled them during the progress of the war to
do that which their pride would not allow them to do in the
beginning. For satisfied now that their only remedy was the
friendship of the Florentines and of the Count Francesco
Sforza, the Venetians began to solicit it, although with shame
and full of doubts; for they feared to receive from the Floren-
tines the same answer which they had given to them at the
time of the attempt of the Florentines upon Lucca, and in
their affair with the Count.

But they found the Florentines more ready to comply than

240 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

what they had hoped for, or than what they deserved for their
former conduct. So much more were the Florentines influ-
enced by their hatred of their ancient enemy, the Duke of
Milan, than by resentment at the disregard by the Venetians
of their old and habitual friendship. And having for some
time previous anticipated the necessity to which the Vene-
tians would be brought, they had pointed out to the Count
Francesco “how their ruin would involve his own, and how
“much he deceived himself in supposing that Duke Filippo
“would value him more when fortunate than in misfortune ;
“and that the only reason why he had promised him his
“daughter was the fear with which he had inspired him.
“And inasmuch as promises made under the pressure of ne-
“cessity are performed only under a similar pressure, so the
“Duke would also have to be kept in that condition with
“reoard to the promise of his daughter’s hand to Francesco,
“which could only be done by maintaining the power of the
“Venetians. He ought to bear in mind, therefore, that if the
“Venetians were to lose their inland possessions he would
“lose not only all the advantages which he had the right to
“expect from their alliance, but also those which he could
“hope for from the other Italian states, who were already
“alarmed by the disasters of Venice. And if he reflected well
“upon the condition of the different states of Italy, he would
“see that some were without means, and that others were hos-
“tile to him. Nor were the Florentines by themselves able
“to sustain him (as he had several times said himself), and
“therefore it was in every respect of the utmost importance
“for him to do all he could to maintain the Venetians power-
“ful by land.”

These arguments, added to the hatred which the Count
Francesco had conceived against Duke Filippo, by whom he
believed himself to have been duped in the matter of the
promised marriage, induced him to accede to a new agree-
ment; but he would not yet obligate himself to pass the Po.
This treaty was concluded in February, 1438; according to
it the Venetians made themselves responsible for two thirds
and the Florentines for one third of the expenses of the war;
and both agreed jointly to bear the expense of defending the
Count’s possessions in La Marca. The league were not satis-
fied with their forces, and added to them the lord of Faenza,

Boor V.]} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 241

the sons of Messer Pandolfo Malatesta da Rimini, and Pietro
Giampaolo Orsini. They also sought to seduce the Marquis
of Mantua by great promises to unite with them, but could
not tempt him to abandon the friendship and service of the
Duke of Milan. The lord of Faenza also, after having agreed
with the league for his services, finding that he could make
better terms for himself, went over to the Duke. This defec-
tion deprived the league of the hope of being speedily able to
dispose of the affairs of the Romagna.

20. Lombardy was at this time in a critical situation ; Bres-
cia was besieged by the forces of the Duke, and it was doubtful
whether she might not any day be obliged to surrender from
want of provisions. Verona, likewise, was so closely pressed,
that a similar fate was apprehended for her; and it was con-
sidered that, if either of these cities were lost, all further prep-
arations for war, as well as the amount of money expended
thus far, would be in vain. So that the league saw no other
remedy than to send the Count Sforza into Lombardy. This
course, however, presented three difficulties: the first was to
dispose the Count to pass the river Po, and to carry on the war
wherever they might direct; the second was that the Floren-
tines could not disguise from themselves that the sending the
Count Sforza so far away would leave them at the mercy of
the Duke, who might easily withdraw to some of his strong-
holds, keeping the Count at bay with a portion of his forces,
and with the rest bring back the Florentine exiles into Tus-
cany, of which the government in power at the time were
greatly afraid; and the third difficulty was as to the route
which the Count Sforza should take so as to get safely to
Padua, where the Venetian forces were stationed. Of these
three difficulties the second, which especially concerned the
Florentines, was the most serious. They however, knowing
the necessities of the case, and wearied by the Venetians, who
clamored with the utmost importunity for the Count Fran-
cesco, declaring that without him all would be lost, subordi-
nated their own apprehensions to the necessities of others.
There still remained then the question as to the route, the
safety of which it was resolved should be provided for by the
Venetians. Neri di Gino Capponi having been deputed to
treat with the Count upon this point, and to induce him to

pass the river, the Signoria of Florence deemed it proper that
VOL. I. 16

242 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

Neri should also proceed to Venice in order to make this bene-
fit the more acceptable to the Signoria of that city, and at the
same time to arrange with them for the safety of the route
and the passage of the river by the Count.

21. Neri thereupon departed from Cesena for Venice, where
he was received by the Signoria with more honors than had
ever been shown to any prince, for they believed that the safety
of the state depended upon his coming, and upon the arrange-
ments that were to be effected through his intervention. Neri,
having been introduced to the Senate, addressed that body and
the Doge in the following words : —

“Most illustrious Prince, the Signori of Florence have ever
“been of the opinion that the power of the Duke of Milan con-
“stituted the principal cause of danger to your republic and
“their own; and that the safety of the two states depended
“upon their respective greatness. Had your Signoria always
“been of the same opinion we should have been in better con-
“dition, and your state would have been secure from those
“dangers by which it is threatened at this time. But as you
“oave us neither your assistance nor your confidence at the
“time when you should have done so, we could not hasten to
“your relief in your troubles, and you could not ask it of us
“so promptly, having known us but slightly in your adversity
“and prosperity ; for you did not know that it is our nature
“to love those always whom we have loved once, and to hate
“forever those whom we have hated once. You know your-
“selves the love we have borne to your most illustrious Sig-
“noria; for you have seen how on different occasions we have,
“for your assistance, sent our troops and our treasure into
“Lombardy. And the whole world knows the hatred we bear
“and ever shall bear to Duke Filippo and the house of Vis-
“conti; and certainly neither ancient love nor hatred can read-
‘ily be effaced by new benefits or injuries. We have been and
“are still certain that we might have remained neutral in this
“war, to the great satisfaction of Duke Filippo, and with little
“risk to ourselves. For even if by your ruin he had made
“himself master of Lombardy, there were enough resources
“left to us in Italy to prevent our despairing of our safety ; for
“with the increase of the Duke’s power and possessions, he
“would have also increased the number of his enemies and
“their jealousy of him, and this would have involved him in

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE, 243

“fresh wars and difficulties. We also know what heavy ex-
“penses and imminent dangers we should have escaped by
“avoiding this war, and how, in consequence of our taking part
“in it with you, it might be transferred from Lombardy into
“Tuscany. But all these considerations are counterbalanced
“by the ancient affection which we cherish for your state, and
“therefore we resolved to succor your government with the
“same alacrity that we should have employed in defence of our
“own if it had been assailed. My government, judging that
“before anything else Verona and Brescia should be relieved,
“which it supposed could not be done without the Count, sent
“me first to persuade him to pass over into Lombardy, and to
“carry on the war wherever directed; for you know that he
“was not obliged to pass the river Po. This I have done, em-
“ploying the same arguments with him that have influenced
“us; and he, invincible as he is in arms, and unwilling to
“be outdone in courtesy, determined to exceed even the liber-
“ality which he had seen us extend to you. Fully aware
“of the danger to which his departure would expose Tus-
“cany, but seeing that we had subordinated our dangers to
“your welfare, he resolved also to subordinate his considera-
“tions for us to the same object. I come, therefore, to offer
“to you the Count Francesco, with seven thousand cavalry
“and two thousand infantry, ready to go and meet the enemy
“anywhere, and I beg you most earnestly, and my Signoria
“likewise entreats you, that, inasmuch as the number of troops
“exceeds what by his agreement with us the Count is obliged
“to furnish, you will compensate him with your wonted lib-
“erality, so that he may have no cause to regret having
“placed himself at your service, nor we at having persuaded
“him to it.”

Neri’s address was listened to by the Senate as though he
had been an oracle; and -they were so excited by it that they
did not wait for the Doge to reply, as is customary; but, rising
to their feet, the greater part of the Senators, with uplifted
hands, called out to thank the Florentines for this affectionate
and friendly service, and to thank Neri for having executed it
with so much zeal and promptness; promising at the same
time that it should never be cancelled from their hearts or those
of their descendants, and that their country should ever be a
common one to themselves and the Florentines.

244 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

22. When this excitement had subsided they discussed the
route which the Count Francesco should take, so that bridges,
pioneers, and all other necessary things, might be provided.
Four routes presented themselves: one by Ravenna, along the
sea, which, however, being in great part confined between the
sea and morasses, was not approved; the next was by the direct
road, but this was obstructed by a fortress called the Uccellino
which was held by the troops of the Duke, and would have to
be-taken before it could be passed, which it was difficult to do
in so short a time without delaying the succor so promptly
needed. The third route was by the forests of the lake, but
as the Po had risen over its banks, it made that route, not dif-
ficult, but impossible. There remained then the fourth, by the
Campagna of Bologna, crossing by the bridges of Puledrano,
Cento, and Piene, and passing on to Ferrara between Finale
and Bondeno; whence the army might be transferred by land
and water into the Paduan territory, there to join the Venetian
forces. This route, though very difficult and exposed to the
attacks of the enemy, was chosen for want of a better; and so
soon as it was made known to the Count, he started with the
utmost promptness, and reached the Paduan territory on the
20th of June. The arrival of the Count Sforza in Lombardy
filled all Venice with high hopes; and where at first the Vene-
tians had despaired of their safety, they now began to indulge
in hopes of new acquisitions. The first thing the Count did
was to march to the relief of Verona; to prevent this, Niccolo
Piccinino went with his army to Soave, a fortress between the
territories of Vicenza and Verona, and which was protected by
a ditch leading from the river Soave to the marshes of the
Adige. Count Francesco, seeing the road through the plains
impeded, judged that he might be able to pass around by the
mountains and in that way reach Verona, thinking that Niccolo
would not suspect his taking that route, which was steep and
rugged ; or if he did believe it, he would not be in time to pre-
vent him. And having supplied himself with provisions for
eight days, he passed the mountains with his forces and reached
the plains below Soave. Although Niccolo had thrown up some
intrenchments to embarrass Francesco on this road, yet he
was not able to hold them. Niccolo thereupon, seeing that the
enemy had passed where he had believed it impossible, and not
wishing to come to an engagement with him at disadvantage,

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 245

retreated, across the Adige, and Francesco entered Verona
without opposition.

23. The first difficulty having been so happily overcome, and
Verona relieved of the siege, there remained the second, namely,
to succor Brescia. This city lies, as it were, upon the lake of
Garda; so that, although besieged by land, it could always be
provisioned from the side of the lake. For this reason Duke
Filippo had intrenched himself with his forces along the lake,
and at the beginning of his successes had occupied all the
places that could afford aid to Brescia by means of the lake.
The Venetians also had galleys upon the lake, but not enough
to contend against the forces of the Duke. Count Francesco
therefore deemed it necessary to support the Venetian fleet
with his land forces, hoping easily to take those places that
prevented Brescia from obtaining supplies. Accordingly, he
laid siege to Bardolino, a fortress situated on the lake, hoping
that, when he should have taken that, the other places would
surrender. Fortune, however, did not favor Francesco in this
attempt, for a considerable portion of his forces fell sick, so
that he abandoned that enterprise and went to Zenio, a Vero-
nese fortress, which was healthy and well supplied with pro-
visions. Piccinino, seeing that the Count had withdrawn, and
unwilling to lose an opportunity, which he thought presented

‘itself, for making himself master of the lake, left his camp at

Vesagio, and with some chosen troops went upon the lake and
attacked the Venetian fleet with such vigor and fury that he
captured nearly the whole of it. In consequence of this victory
nearly all the strong places on the lake surrendered to Niccolo.
The Venetians, alarmed by this loss and fearing lest the Bres-
cians should capitulate in consequence, sent letters and mes-
sengers to Count Francesco, urging him to go to the relief of
that city. The Count, seeing that all chance of relieving Bres-
cia by way of the lake was lost, and that it was unapproachable
by the plains because of the ditches, intrenchments, and other
obstacles interposed by Niccolo, to attempt to pass which in
the face of a hostile army would be going to certain defeat,
resolved that, inasmuch as the road by the mountains had ena-
bled him to save Verona, it should equally serve him to succor
Brescia. Having formed this design Count Francesco left
Zenio, and went by the Val d’ Acri to the lake of San Andrea,
and came to Torboli and Peneda, above the lake of Garda.

246 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

Thence he went to Terma, which he besieged, as Brescia could
not be reached without that castle being taken first. Piccinino,
hearing of the Count’s movements, led his army to Peschiera,
and then went, together with the Marquis of Mantua and some
of his choicest troops, to encounter Francesco. And having
come to battle, Piccinino was defeated and his troops dispersed ;
some of them were taken prisoners, some made their way back
to the main body of the army, and some took refuge on board
of the fleet. Niccolo retreated to Terma, and, night having
come on, he thought that if he waited in that place until day-
light he would unavoidably fall into the hands of the enemy ;
and by way of escaping a certain danger he risked a doubtful
one. Of all his forces Niccolo had but one servant with him,
a German of remarkable strength, who had ever been most
faithful to him. Niccolo persuaded him to put him into a
sack, and to carry him on his shoulders to some safe place,
as though he were carrying his master’s armor. The troops
of Count Francesco were encamped around Terma, but in con-
sequence of the victory of the day, the whole camp was in dis-
order and without any guards, so that it was an easy matter
for the German to save his master; for having taken him on
his shoulders concealed in a sack, he passed through the camp
without any hindrance, and so soon as he was safe he con-
ducted Niccolo to his troops.

24. If this victory had been employed with as much wisdom
as it was achieved with good fortune, Brescia would have been
relieved, and the affairs of Venice would have been greatly
benefited. But being badly availed of, the joy of the Venetians
soon disappeared and Brescia remained in the same difficulties.
For Niccolo, having returned to his troops, resolved to cancel the
disgrace of his defeat by some new victory, and thus to deprive
the Venetians of the chance of relieving Brescia. He knew the
position of the citadel of Verona, and had learnt from prisoners
taken during the war how insufficiently it was guarded, and the
facility with which it might be taken. It seemed to him, there-
fore, that fortune had placed the means in his hands for re-
covering his honor, and of converting into grief the joy which
the enemy had derived from the recent victory. The city of
Verona is situated in Lombardy at the foot of the Alps that
separate Italy from Germany ; so that it is placed partly on the
mountain slope and partly in the plain. The river Adige issues

SeenON:

Boor V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 247

from the valley of Trent, and on entering Italy, instead of
spreading itself through the level country, turns sharply to the
left along the mountains and runs through the city of Verona,
not dividing it, however, into two equal parts, but leaving the
part on the side of the plain much larger than that which
lies on the slope of the mountain. Above this there are two
forts, the one called San Pietro and the other San Felice, and
which from their situation have the appearance of much greater
strength than they really have; but being so high, they domi-
nate the whole city. In the plain on the opposite side of the
Adige, and within the city walls, are two other forts about one
thousand paces distant from each other. One of these is called
the old, and the other the new citadel ; they are connected by
a wall which forms as it were the chord of the are which the
regular city wall describes, and which goes from one citadel to
the other. The whole space within these two walls is thickly
inhabited, and is called the Borgo di San Zeno. It was these
citadels and the Borgo which Niccolo Piccinino intended to
seize, thinking that he would readily succeed, either because of
the ordinary negligence of the garrison, or from their greater
negligence in consequence of the recent victory ; and knowing
that in war no enterprise is so likely to succeed as that which
the enemy thinks you incapable of accomplishing. Having
thereupon made a selection of his best men, Niccolo went at
night together with the Marquis of Mantua to Verona, and
without being heard he escaladed and captured the new citadel.
From there his troops descended into the place and burst open
the gate of San Antonio, by which they let in all the cavalry.
The garrison that held the old citadel for the Venetians, hear-
ing the noise only after the guard of the new citadel had been
killed, and concluding that it must be the enemy, began to
shout and ring the bells to call the people to arms. The citi-
zens being aroused were all in confusion; the most courageous
of them seized their arms, and rushed to the Piazza dei Rettori.
Meantime the troops of Niccolo had pillaged the Borgo di San
Zeno, and as they were advancing further the citizens recog-
nized that the ducal troops were within the city. And seeing
no means of defending themselves, they advised the Venetian
Rectors to take refuge in the fortress so as to save their persons
and the place ; representing to them that it was better for
Venice that they should save their lives and so rich a city for a

248 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

better fate, than, by attempting to avoid the present one, to
expose themselves to the danger of death and their city to de-
struction. And thus the Rectors and all the other Venetians
took refuge in the fortress of San Felice. After this some of
the first citizens went to meet Niccolo and the Marquis of Man-
tua, and supplicated them to prefer a rich city, which they might
possess with honor to themselves, to one that was devastated,
and which would only bring shame upon them; especially as
the fact of their having defended themselves entitled them
neither to the thanks of their former masters nor to the ven-
geance of the present ones. They were comforted by Niccolo
and the Marquis of Mantua, who restrained as far as they could
the license of the soldiery and protected the city from being
sacked. And being convinced that the Count Francesco would
endeavor to recover possession of Verona, they made every
effort to get the fortresses into their hands; and those which
they could not take they isolated by means of ditches and barri-
cades, so as to make it difficult for the enemy to enter them.
25. The Count Francesco was at Terma with his forces, and
when he heard the news of the capture of Verona he at first
discredited it; but when he became assured of its correctness,
he wanted with immediate haste to make good the first neglect.
All the captains of his army advised against this attempt upon
Verona and Brescia and in favor of going to Vicenza, so as not
to expose himself to being besieged by the enemy in his present
position ; but the Count would not listen to them, and persisted in
tempting fortune by his effort to recover Verona. And turning
in the midst of the discussion to the Venetian commissaries
and to Bernardetto de’ Medici, the Florentine commissary, he
promised them the certain recovery of the city, provided that
one of the forts held out until he came. Having thereupon
organized his men, he moved with the utmost rapidity upon
Verona. When Niccolo saw him coming, he believed him at first
to be going to Vicenza, as he had been advised by his captains ;
but when he afterwards saw the troops turn to go to the fort of
San Felice, he hastily attempted to organize its defence. But
it was too late; for no barricades had been made, and Niccolo’s
soldiers were scattered in the eager pursuit of plunder and con-
tributions, so that he could not collect them in time to prevent
Count Francesco’s men from entering the fort ; whence they
made a descent upon the city, and happily took it, to the dis-

Boox V.]} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 249

credit of Niccolo, and great damage to his men, who together
with the Marquis of Mantua fled first to the citadel, and then
through the open country to Mantua, where they joined the
other fragments of their forces that had escaped, and then went
to unite with those who were engaged in the siege of Brescia.
Thus was Verona won and lost by the ducal army within the
short space of four days. Winter having now set in and the
cold being very severe, the Count Francesco, after having first
with great difficulty sent provisions into Brescia, went into
quarters in Verona; and ordered some galleys to be built dur-
ing the winter at Torboli, so as to be well prepared by spring
for the relief of Brescia.

26. Duke Filippo, seeing the war stopped for the time, and
himself deprived of all hope of taking Verona and Brescia,
which he attributed entirely to the money and the counsels of
the Florentines, who could neither be alienated from their alli-
ance with the Venetians by the injuries they had received at
their hands, nor gained over to him by the promises which he
himself had made them, resolved to attack Tuscany, so as to
make the Florentines taste the fruit of the seed which they had
sown themselves. He was, moreover, urged to this resolution
by the banished Florentines and by Niccolo Piccinino. The
latter was influenced by his desire to acquire the estates of
Braccio, and to drive the Count out of La.Mareca; and the former
by their longing to return to their country, from which they had
been exiled; and both urged the Duke with opportune reasons
in conformity with their own desires. Niccolo pointed out to
him how he might send him into Tuscany, and yet continue the
siege of Brescia, as he was master of the lake and held all the
strong places on land, which were amply supplied with every-
thing, and had men and competent captains to resist the Count
Francesco should he attempt any fresh enterprise, which, how-
ever, he would hardly do without first relieving Brescia, and
that was impossible; and therefore he might carry the war into
Tuscany, without giving up his operations in Lombardy. He
also argued that the Florentines would be obliged, so soon as
he entered Tuscany, to recall the Count Francesco, or be de-
stroyed, and that, whatever course he might take, victory would
be the certain result. The Florentine exiles affirmed that, if
Niccolo with his army were to approach Florence, it would be
impossible for the people not to take up arms against the nobles,

250 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

being weary of their insolence, and of the burdens that had been
imposed upon them. They showed him that it was easy to ap-
proach Florence, and assured him that the way by Casentino
would be open to him, owing to the friendship existing between
Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi and the Count Poppi. Thus the
Duke Filippo, who was of his own accord inclined to go, was
confirmed by these persuasions in his resolve to engage in this
enterprise. The Venetians, on the other hand, notwithstanding
the severity of the winter, urged the Count most earnestly to go
to the relief of Brescia with all his forces. This the Count
Francesco declined, as being impossible at that season, and
advised them to wait until spring, and in the mean time to put
their fleet in order, so as to be able to aid Brescia at the same
time both by land and by water. This refusal greatly dissatis-
fied the Venetians, so that they became dilatory in supplying
provisions, which caused a great many desertions from the
army.

27. When the Florentines were informed of these movements,
they became greatly alarmed at seeing the war coming upon
them, whilst they had derived so little advantage from the
operations in Lombardy. They were no less disquieted by the
army of the Holy See; not that the Pope himself was hostile to
them, but because they saw his troops show more obedience to
the Patriarch, their mortal enemy, than to the Pope himself.
Giovanni Vitelleschi of Corneto, at first apostolic notary, be-
came afterwards Bishop of Recannati, and then Patriarch of
Alessandria; and having finally been made Cardinal, he was
called the Florentine Cardinal. He was courageous and astute,
and therefore knew how to win the confidence and affection of
the Pope, and to have himself appointed commander-in-chief of
the armies of the Church; and thus he obtained the direction
of all the wars in which the Pope became involved in Tuscany,
the Romagna, in the kingdom of Naples, and in Rome. In this
way he acquired such authority over the troops, and even over
the pontiff himself, that the latter feared to give him any or-
ders, and the troops would obey no one else. The Cardinal
Vitelleschi happened to be in Rome with his forces when the re-
port came that Niccolo Piccinino intended to invade Tuscany.
This increased the alarm of the Florentines ; for the Cardinal,
ever since the banishment of Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi, had
been extremely hostile to their government, because the agree-

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 251

ments made by his intervention between the parties had not
been observed, and had been used rather to the prejudice of
Messer Rinaldo, in having caused him to lay down his arms,
whereby he gave his enemies the opportunity of driving him from
Florence. The chiefs of the government of Florence thought,
therefore, that the time had come for recalling and indemnify-
ing Messer Rinaldo, lest he should join Niccolo in the event of
his coming into Tuscany. And they were the more apprehen-
sive on this point because it seemed to them ominous that Nic-
colo should have left Lombardy, at a moment when his enter-
prise there was all but successful, to engage in another that was
altogether doubtful ; and which they could not believe he would
have done unless he was acting upon some special intelligence,
or was meditating some covert treachery. They informed the
Pope of their apprehensions, who had already discovered his
error in having endowed another with too much authority. But
whilst the Florentines were in this state of suspense, fortune
showed them the way in which they could secure themselves
against the Patriarch. The government exercised at that time
a strict surveillance over all correspondence, so as to discover
whether any one was plotting against the state; and thus it
happened that letters were intercepted at Montepulciano which
the Patriarch had written to Niccolo Piccinino without the con-
currence of the Pope. These were immediately communicated
to the pontiff by the magistrates charged with the direction of
the war; and although these letters were written in unusual
characters, and their sense so involved as to make it difficult to
extract from them any distinct meaning, yet that very obscurity
and this dealing with the enemy so excited the suspicions of
the Pope that he resolved to assure himself of the reality, and
charged Antonio Rido of Padua with the task. Antonio was at
the time in command of the garrison of the Castel San Angelo
in Rome, and, immediately upon receiving this commission, pre-
pared himself for its execution, and quickly had an opportunity
for carrying it into effect. The Patriarch having resolved to
go into Tuscany, and wishing to leave Rome the following day,
notified the castellan to meet him upon the drawbridge of the
castle in the morning when he should pass, as he desired to
converse with him upon some matters. This seemed to Anto-
nio the very opportunity wished for. He accordingly instructed
some of his men what to do, and awaited the Patriarch upon the

252 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

drawbridge at the appointed time; and when the Patriarch was
fairly upon the bridge, he engaged him in conversation, and
then gave the appointed signal to his men to hoist the draw of
the bridge; and thus the Patriarch, from being a commander
of armies, in one instant became the prisoner of the castellan.
The Patriarch’s followers at the first moment were disposed to
make a disturbance, but became quict when told that it had
been done by order of the Pope himself. To the castellan’s as-
surances and kind words that all would yet be well, the Patriarch
replied, “ Great men do not take prisoners to let them go again,
“nor is it well to set those free who have been undeservedly
“ imprisoned.” He died soon afterwards in his captivity. The
Pope appointed in his stead Lodovico, the Patriarch of Aquileia,
to the command of his troops; and although he had never be-
fore been willing to involve himself in the wars of the league
with the Duke of Milan, yet now he agreed to take part in them,
and pledged himself to furnish four thousand mounted men and
two thousand infantry for the defence of Tuscany. >
28. The Florentines, although relieved of this apprehension,
were still afraid of Niccolo, and of the confusion of things in
Lombardy, resulting from the difference in the views of the
Venetians and the Count Francesco; and for the purpose of.
having a better understanding of these, they sent Neri di Gino
Capponi and Messer Giuliano Davanzate to Venice, with instruc-
tions to arrange the conduct of the war for the following season.
They charged Neri, after he should have ascertained the views
of the Venetians, to go to the Count and learn his views, and
to persuade him to such a course as the welfare of the league
might seem to require. Before reaching Ferrara these ambas-
sadors heard that Niccolo Piccinino had crossed the Po with six
thousand horse, which made them hasten their journey; and
having arrived at Venice, they found that the Signoria wanted
that, above all, immediate succor should be given to Brescia, as
that city could not hold out until spring, or until the new fleet
should be ready, and, unless promptly relieved, would have to
surrender to the enemy ; and that this would insure the Duke’s
success everywhere, and expose them to the loss of all their
inland possessions. Neri, therefore, went to Verona to hear
what the Count might have to say to the contrary, who demon-
strated to him, with ample reasons, that it would be useless at
that time to move upon Brescia, and would also endanger their

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 253

future movements. For considering the season, and the position
of Brescia, it could be of no possible benefit to her, and would
only disorganize and fatigue their own forces; so that when
afterwards the season came suitable for active operations, they
would be obliged to return to Verona with their army, for the
purpose of resupplying themselves with what had been con-
sumed in the winter, as well as to provide for the coming sum-
mer, so that the very time best adapted to warlike operations
would be consumed in going and returning. The Venetians
had sent Messer Orsatto Justiniani and Messer Giovanni Pisani
to Verona to treat with Sforza upon these matters; and after
much discussion, it was agreed between them that the Venetians
should pay him for the coming year the sum of eighty thousand
ducats, and to his troops forty ducats per lance; and that the
Count should be obliged, with his whole force, to attack the
Duke, so as to compel him to recall Niccolo into Lombardy,
from fear for his own safety. After concluding this arrange-
ment, they returned to Venice, and, on account of the large sum
of money to be paid the Venetians, were very dilatory in pro-
viding all the other things.

29. Niecolo Piccinino meantime followed his route, and had
already reached the Romagna. He prevailed over the sons of
Messer Pandolpho Malatesta to leave the Venetians and go over
to the Duke, which displeased the Venetians greatly, and the
Florentines even more, for they had counted upon being able to
resist the advance of Niccolo by that route. But seeing the
defection of the Malatesti they became alarmed, and feared
particularly lest their general, Pietro Giampaolo Orsini, who
was in the territory of the Malatesti, should be waylaid and
plundered, and they should be left as it were disarmed. The
Count was equally troubled by this intelligence, for he was afraid
that Niccolo’s going into Tuscany would cause him the loss of
La Marca; and being desirous to go to the relief of his own
home, he went to Venice, and upon being presented to the Doge
he pointed out to him that “his going into Tuscany would prove
“of greatest advantage to the league; inasmuch as the war
“should be carried wherever the enemy’s army and commander
“might be, and not against his strong places and garrisons.
“For the defeat of the enemy’s army would end the war; but
“if only his fortresses were taken and the army left entire, it
“would only have the effect of making the war go on with in-

254 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

“creased activity. At the same time Count Francesco affirmed
“that Tuscany and La Marca would be lost unless the most
“vigorous resistance were made to Niccolo; and these once
“Jost, there would be no help for Lombardy. But that so long
‘as there was the least chance of saving them he did not in-
“tend to abandon his subjects and his allies; and that he had
“come into Lombardy as a sovereign, and did not mean to leave
“it as a mere condottiere.” To all which the Doge replied:
“That it was manifest that, if Francesco left Lombardy and
“recrossed the Po with his army, the whole of their inland pos-
“sessions would be lost to the Venetians; and that in fact
“they were resolved not to incur any further expenditures in
“their defence, for it was not wise to defend anything that
“under any circumstances would be lost, and there was less dis-
“orace and harm in losing one’s states only than in losing one’s
“states and money at the same time. And if the loss of their
“inland possessions really resulted from Francesco’s leaving
“Lombardy, it would then be seen how important the influence
“of the Venetians was for the preservation of Tuscany and the
“Romagna. And therefore they were entirely opposed to his
“views, for they believed that, if he were victorious in Lom-
“bardy, he would be equally so everywhere else. And that
“victory would be easy for him there, because the departure of
“Niccolo had weakened the Duke so that he could crush him
“before he had time to recall Niccolo or provide himself with
“other means of defence. And that if Francesco would care-
“fully consider the whole subject, he would see that. the Duke
“had sent Piccinino into Tuscany for no other purpose than to
“withdraw the Count from his present enterprise, so as to trans-
“fer the war from his own door to some other place. So that
“if the Count were now to follow Niccolo, unless from some
“extreme necessity, the Duke would have the satisfaction of
“seeing his design successful. But that if the Count kept his
“troops in Lombardy, leaving Tuscany to take care of herself
“as best she could, the Duke would discover too late that by
“his unwise course he had lost Lombardy without having gained
“anything in Tuscany.” After each had given his views, it was
concluded to wait a few days to see what result the agree-
ment between Niccolo and the Malatesti might produce; and
whether the Florentines could depend upon Pierogiampaolo ;
and whether the Pope would act in good faith with the league,

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 255

according to his promise. A few days after having come to
this conclusion it was ascertained that the Malatesti had en-
tered into the agreement with Niccolo more from fear than
from any evil intention, and that Pierogiampaolo had moved
with his troops towards Tuscany, and that the Pope was even
more willing than before to aid the league. This information
gave fresh courage to the Count Francesco, who consented to
remain in Lombardy, and that Neri Capponi should return to
Florence with one thousand horse of his own, and five hun-
dred of those of the others. And if nevertheless matters in
Tuscany should take such a turn as to make the Count’s pres-
ence necessary there, that then he should depart regardless
of all other considerations. Neri reached Florence with his
troops in the month of April, and joined Giampaolo on the
same day.

30. Niccolo Piccinino meanwhile, having settled the affairs
of the Romagna, intended making a descent into Tuscany ;
and wishing to cross the mountains by the pass of San Bene-
detto and the valley of Montone, he found these places so well
defended by the courage of Niccolo da Pisa that he deemed it
useless to make any further attempts in that direction. The
Florentines, illy prepared for so sudden an attack, both as
regards men and officers, had sent a number of their citizens
with some hastily organized infantry to guard these mountain
passes. Amongst these was Messer Bartolommeo Orlandini, a
cavalier, who was placed in charge of the castle of Marradi
and the pass over the mountain there. Piccinino, having found
it impossible to get over the San Benedetto pass because of the
gallantry of its defenders, thought he might succeed in getting
over the pass of Marradi through the cowardice of those
charged with its defence. The castle of Marradi is situated
at the foot of the mountains that separate Tuscany from the
Romagna; although unprotected by walls on the side that
looks to the Romagna and the head of the valley of Lamona,
yet the river and the mountains, and the courageous character
of the inhabitants, made it very strong; for the men are loyal
and accustomed to bear arms; and the river has so eaten into
the rock, as it were, and has such precipitous banks, that it is
mpossible to approach it by the valley, so long as a small
sridge that crosses the stream is defended ; and the mountain
sides are so steep and rugged that it makes the place perfectly

256 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

secure. But the cowardice of Messer Bartolommeo made the
men under his command also cowards, and changed the natu-
ral strength of the place into weakness. For no sooner did he
hear of the approach of the enemy than he abandoned every-
thing and fled with all his men, never stopping until he reached
the Borgo San Lorenzo. Niccolo entered the abandoned place,
amazed at its not being defended, and rejoiced at being in
possession of it, descended to Mugello, where he took some
castles, and then halted his troops at Puliciano, whence he
scoured the whole country as far as the mountains of Fiesole,
and had even the audacity to cross the Arno and to pillage the
country within three miles of Florence, carrying off everything
movable.

31. The Florentines, on the other hand, were not dismayed ;
and before anything else they saw to giving stability to the
government, of which they had, however, no reason to doubt,
owing to the good will of the people towards Cosimo, and the
fact that they had confided the principal offices to a few of the
most powerful citizens, who administered them with firmness
and severity ; and there had been no indications of any dis-
content or desire for change on the part of the people. They
also knew, from the agreements made in Lombardy, the extent
of the forces with which Neri would return, and moreover ex-
pected the troops of the Pope. This hope sustained them until
the return of Neri, who, on finding the city in this state of
disorder and apprehension, resolved to take the field at once
for the purpose of checking Niccolo, and to put an end to his
pillaging the country. With what cavalry he had, and some
infantry raised entirely from the people, Neri issued from the
city and took Remole from the enemy ; and having established
his camp there, he prevented Niccolo from making further
depredations, and encouraged the Florentines to hope for
speedy relief from the proximity of the enemy. Niccolo, find-
ing that the tranquillity of the city had not been disturbed,
although Florence was entirely bare of troops, concluded that
it would be idle for him to waste his time there, and deter-
mined to attempt some other enterprise, so that the Floren-
tines might be induced to send their troops after him, and
thus afford him the opportunity of engaging them in battle ;
and if successful in that, he hoped to be equally prosperous in
his other operations.

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. PAY §

In Niccolo’s army was the Count Francesco di Poppi, who
had been an ally of the Florentines, but abandoned them
when the enemy came to Mugello. The Florentines had in
the beginning been doubtful of him, and for the purpose of
insuring his fidelity by benefits they increased his emoluments
and made him commissary over all the places in his neighbor-
hood. Yet so powerful is the devotion to party with some
men that neither benefits nor fear could make the Count
Poppi forget his attachment to Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi
and to the others who had constituted the late government of
Florence. So soon, therefore, as he heard of the approach of
Niccolo, he went to join him, and urged him with the greatest
solicitude to leave there and move to the Casentino, pointing
out to him the strength of the country, and how he might
from there in perfect security harass the enemy. Niccolo
acted upon his advice, and having arrived in the territory of
Casentino he seized Romena and Bibbiena, and then laid
siege to Castel San Niccolo. This castle is situated at the
foot of the mountains that separate the Casentino from the Val
TY Arno; its elevated position and ample garrison made its
sapture very difficult, although Niccolo assailed it with cata-
oults and other engines of war. The siege had lasted twenty
lays, during which the Florentines had gathered their troops,
qaving already collected three thousand horse under several
Jondottieri, commanded by Pierogiampaolo as general, and
Neri Capponi and Bernardo de’ Medici as commissaries. The
rarrison of the Castel San Niccolo sent four messengers to
hese commissaries to entreat them to come to their rescue.
daving examined the situation of the place, they found that
no assistance could be rendered except by way of the moun-
‘ains from the direction of the Val d’? Arno. But as the crest
#f these mountains could be occupied sooner by the enemy,
vho had less distance to go, and as they would not be able
0 conceal their movements from the enemy, so that if they
vere to attempt it unsuccessfully it might cause the destruc-
jon of their troops, the commissaries could only commend
the fidelity of the garrison, and advise them to surrender
when defence was no longer possible. Niccolo thereupon took
the castle, after a siege of thirty-two days; and this waste of
ime without any adequate result was in great part the cause
of the failure of this expedition. For had Niccolo remained

VOL. I. 17

258 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boor V.

with his troops in the vicinity of Florence, it would have pre-
vented the government from raising money from its citizens,
and would have embarrassed them in collecting troops and
making other provisions, from having the enemy so near
them instead of at a distance. And in that case the Floren-
tines would have been much more disposed to make terms
with Niccolo, seeing that the war would be a protracted one.
But the desire of the Count Poppi to revenge himself upon
those castellans who had so long been his enemies, caused
him to advise Niccolo to the course which he followed merely
for the purpose of satisfying the Count Poppi.

Following up his success, Niccolo took also Rassina and Chi-
usi, where the Count Poppi advised him to halt, pointing out to
him how he might there spread his forces between Chiusi and
Caprese and the Piene, and thus make himself master of the
Apennines, whence he might then descend at pleasure into the
Casentino, the Val d’ Arno, the Val di Chiana, and the Val di
Tevere, and be prepared for every movement the enemy might
make. But Niccolo, seeing the roughness of the country, said
to him “that his horses could not eat stones,’ and went off to
the Borgo San Sepolcro, where he met with a friendly recep-
tion ; and from here he made overtures to the people of Citta di
Castello, who however would not listen to him, being friends
of the Florentines. Being desirous also to secure the good
will of the people of Perugia, of which place he was a citizen,
Niccolo went there with forty horse, and was kindly received.
But in a few days he became suspect, and having in vain made
great efforts to bring over the Legate and the Perugians, he
accepted eight thousand ducats from them and returned to
his army. He then attempted to seduce Cortona from the
Florentines, but, the matter being discovered in time, his ef-
forts proved fruitless. One of the most prominent citizens of
Cortona was Bartolommeo di Senso, who, being about to go in
the evening by order of the captain to guard one of the gates,
was met by a countryman friend of his, who advised him not
to go unless he wished to be killed. Bartolommeo, determined
to probe this matter to the bottom, found out the arrangement
that had been secretly made with Niccolo, and which Bartolom-
meo made promptly known to the captain; who, after securing
the chiefs of the conspiracy, doubled the guards at the gates,
and then awaited the coming of Niccolo, according to the

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 259

agreement ; so that when Niccolo came at the appointed hour
of night, and found his plans discovered, he returned to his
quarters.

32. Whilst these events were taking place in Tuscany with
little advantage to the forces of Duke Filippo, affairs in Lom-
bardy went on in an equally unpropitious manner for him.
For so soon as the season permitted, the Count Francesco took
the field with his army; and as the Venetians had re-estab-
lished their fleet upon the lake, the Count wanted first of all
to make himself master on the water and drive the Duke from
the lake, judging that when this was done all the rest would
be easy. He therefore attacked the Duke’s fleet with that of
the Venetians, and succeeded in scattering it, and then with
his land forces he took the castles that were subject to the
Duke. When the other ducal troops that invested Brescia by
land heard of these losses they also withdrew, and thus Bres-
cia, after having been besieged for three years, was finally
relieved. After this victory the Count went in search of the
enemy, who had retreated to Soncino, a castle situated on the
river Oglio, dislodged him from his position, and forced him
to retreat to Cremona, where the Duke made head and de-
fended his states from that point. But being daily pressed
closer and closer by the Count Francesco, and fearing to lose
either the whole or a great part of his territory, the Duke
discovered the error he had made in sending Piccinino into
Tuscany. To retrieve this mistake he wrote to Niccolo telling
him the straits in which he found himself, and how unfor-
tunately his expedition had resulted, whereupon Niccolo left
Tuscany as quickly as possible, and returned to Lombardy.
The Florentines under their commissaries had meantime united
their forces with those of the Pope, and took position at Anghi-
ari, a castle situated at the foot of the mountains that divide
the Val di Tevere from the Val di Chiana, and four miles dis-
tant from the Borgo San Sepolero by a good road and a country
well suited to the movements of cavalry and military opera-
tions. And as they had been informed of the victories of the
Count Francesco, and of the recall of Niccolo Piccinino by
the Duke, they considered that they had succeeded in this
war without unsheathing their swords or burning powder, and
wrote to the commissaries to avoid any engagement, as Nic-
colo would not be able to remain many days longer in Tus-

260 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

cany. These instructions came to the knowledge of Niccolo,
who, aware of the necessity of leaving, and yet anxious to
leave nothing untried, resolved to bring on an engagement,
in the belief that he would find the enemy unprepared and
far from expecting a battle. He was encouraged in this de-
termination by Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi and the Count
Poppi, and the other Florentine exiles, who foresaw the cer-
tainty of their own destruction if Niccolo should leave; whilst
in case of a battle they might yet succeed in their enterprise,
or be honorably defeated. Having thus resolved, they moved
the army from its position between Citta di Castello and the
Borgo, and having arrived at the Borgo without the enemy
being aware of it, they raised two thousand men from that
country, who, trusting in the courage and skill of the general
and in his promises, and eager for plunder, followed him.

33. Niccolo thence directed his march upon Anghiari, with his
troops in battle array, and was already within less than two miles
of it when Michelotto Attendolo observed a great cloud of dust,
and, discovering it to be the enemy, gave the alarm. The con-
fusion in the Florentine camp was extreme, for their army gen-
erally observed but little discipline when in camp, and now,
believing the enemy far off, and more disposed to flight than to
fight, they were more than ordinarily negligent; so that they
were nearly all unarmed and away from their quarters, and
scattered in every direction, wherever their inclination or the
desire to escape the great heat of the day had led them. The
commissaries and captain, however, acted with such promptness
and energy that, before the arrival of the enemy, they got their
men to horse and in position to resist the shock of the enemy’s
charge. Michelotto, who had been the first to discover the ene-
my, was also the first to encounter him, and rushed with his
men upon the bridge over the stream that crosses the road not
far from Anghiari. Before the appearance of the enemy, Pie-
rogiampaolo Orsini had caused the ditches on each side of the
road between the bridge and Anghiari to be filled up. Miche-
lotto being now posted at the head of the bridge, Simoncino, the
Condottiere of the Church, together with the Legate, took posi-
tion on his right, and on his left the Florentine commissaries
with their captain, Pierogiampaolo Orsini, the infantry being
stationed all along on the upper side of the river. There was,
therefore, no way left open for the enemy to make an attack

Book V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 261

except straight over the bridge, which consequently was the
only point which the Florentines had to defend. And they had
ordered their infantry, in case the enemy should attempt to
leave the road for the purpose of attacking them in the flank,
to assail him with their crossbows, so as to prevent his wound-
ing their horses in the flank when they should pass the bridge.
Michelotto bravely sustained the charge of the first of the ene-
my, and would have repulsed them but that Astorre and Fran-
cesco Piccinino came up with a body of picked men, and threw
themselves with such fury upon Michelotto that they took the
bridge from him, and drove him back to the heights that rise
at the Borgo of Anghiari. They were, however, afterwards re-
pulsed by those who attacked them in the flank. This struggle
lasted two hours, the bridge being alternately held now by Nic-
colo and now by the Florentine troops. And although the
contest upon the bridge was equal, yet on either side Niccolo-
fought to great disadvantage ; for when his troops got across
the bridge, they found the enemy numerous, and able to manceu-
vre upon the level ground where the ditches had been filled
up, so that those who were exhausted could at once be replaced
by fresh men. But when the Florentines took the bridge, so
that their men could pass over, Niccolo was not able, in like
manner, to reinforce his men, being hemmed in by the ditches
and banks on either side of the road. And thus it happened
that, although Niccolo’s men took the bridge several times, yet
were they driven back each time by the fresh troops of the
enemy. But when the Florentines took the bridge, and their
men passed over into the road, Niccolo could not, on account of
the fury of the onset and the inconvenience of the ground, rein-
force his men; so that the front ranks got mixed up with the
rear, thus throwing one another into confusion, and obliging the
whole to turn back, whereupon they all, regardless of one another,
fled to the Borgo. Then the Florentines looked after the booty,
which was very large, consisting of prisoners, accoutrements,
and horses ; so that only about one thousand horse made their
escape with Niccolo. The men of the Borgo, who had followed
Niccolo for the sake of plunder, became themselves booty, for
they were all taken, and were obliged to be ransomed. The
banners and wagons also were taken. This victory proved
much more advantageous for Tuscany than injurious to Duke
Filippo; for if the Florentines had lost the battle, Tuscany

262 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book V.

would have been his; but the Duke losing it cost him only the
horses and accoutrements of his army, which could be replaced
without any serious outlay of money. Nor was there ever a
time when a war waged in the territory of others was less dan-
gerous for the invader than the present; and in so complete a
rout and so long a combat, which lasted nearly twenty-four
| hours, there was only one man killed, and he was not wounded
nor struck down by a valiant blow, but fell from his horse and
/ was trampled to death. Men fought in those days with so much
security, being mounted and protected by armor, that they were
safe against death; and although they often surrendered, yet
that was no reason why they should die. Whilst fighting, they
were protected by their armor, and when they could no longer
fight, they surrendered.

34. This battle, from the circumstances that attended and
followed it, furnishes a striking illustration of the wretched
military discipline that prevailed during those wars; for after
the enemy was beaten, and Niccolo driven into the Borgo, the
Florentine commissaries wished to follow and besiege him there,
so as to make the victory complete. But neither the Condottieri
nor the soldiers were willing to obey, alleging that they wanted
first to secure their plunder and attend to the wounded. And
what is most notable is, that the following day at noon, without
leave, and regardless of commissaries and captains, the soldiers
went off to Arezzo, and having deposited their plunder there,
they returned to Anghiari; a proceeding so contrary to all
good order and discipline that any mere remnant of a well-
disciplined army could easily and deservedly have deprived
them of that victory which they had achieved without merit.
Besides this, the commissaries wanted to keep the men-at-arms
that had been taken prisoners, so as to prevent the enemy from
reorganizing his forces; but they were all set at liberty, con-
trary to the express wish of the commissaries. It is wonderful
that so ill-disciplined an army should have had valor enough
to gain a victory, and that there should haye been such coward-
ice in the enemy as to allow himself to be beaten by such an
undisciplined force.

During the going to and returning of the Florentine soldiers
from Arezzo, Niccolo had time to get away with his men from
the Borgo, and to move towards the Romagna. The Florentine
exiles also fled with him, and, seeing all hope of returning to

Boox V.]} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 263

Florence lost, they scattered in various directions, within and
beyond Italy, according to the convenience of each. Of these,
Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi chose his abode at Ancona; and,
by way of gaining the heavenly fatherland after losing his ter-
restrial one, he made a pilgrimage to the sepulchre of Christ.
On his return from there, and whilst celebrating the nuptials of
his daughter, he died suddenly at table, fortunate in this, that
his death occurred at the least unhappy moment of his exile.
Equally honored in good and, in ill fortune, Messer Rinaldo
would have even received a higher consideration had it been
his fate to live in a city not torn by factions; for many of his
qualities, which proved injurious to him in a city divided by the
fury of parties, would have been a cause of high advancement
for him in a tranquil and undivided republic.

After the return of the men from Arezzo, and the departure
of Niccolo, the commissaries presented themselves before the
Borgo, the inhabitants of which were willing to yield themselves
to the Florentines, but these declined the offer ; and whilst these
negotiations were going on, the Pope’s Legate became suspicious
of the Florentine commissaries, lest they should wish to take
this place from the Church. This led to high words between
them; so that difficulties would have arisen between the Flor-
entines and the ecclesiastics if the misunderstanding had con-
tinued much longer; but as it was finally settled according to
the Legate’s wishes, matters were amicably arranged.

35. Whilst these things were taking place at the Borgo San
Sepolcro, word came that Niccolo Piccinino had gone towards
Rome, whilst other intelligence represented that he had gone
towards La Marca; whence the Legate and the Count Fran-
cesco’s troops deemed it best to go towards Perugia, so as to be
in position to afford assistance either to Rome or La Marca, to
whichever of the two Niccolo might have gone. With them
went Bernardo de’ Medici, whilst Neri Capponi went off with the
Florentine troops to recover the Casentino. This having been
resolved upon, Neri went to Rassina, which he took, as also Bib-
biena, Prato Vecchio, and Romena; and afterwards he besieged
the castle of Poppi, and invested it on two sides, the one towards
the plains of Certomondo, the other by the hill that stretches to-
wards Fronzola. The Count Poppi, imagining himself aban-
doned by God and men, had shut himself up in this castle, not
because he hoped for any help, but for the sake if possible of

264 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox V.

making better terms of surrender. When therefore closely
pressed by Neri, he asked for terms, and was granted as favor-
able conditions as he could have hoped for under the circum-
stances; namely, safety for himself and his sons, and all they
could carry away with them, but yielding the place and its
government to the Florentines. And whilst capitulating he
descended on to the bridge over the Arno, which river flows by
the foot of the place, and said to Neri, full of sorrow and afflic-
tion: “Had I justly measured my fortune and your power, I
“should now have to rejoice with you as a friend at your vic-
“tory, instead of being now obliged as an enemy to supplicate
“that my ruin may be less complete. But present fate, which
“brings to you glory and happiness, brings to me only sorrow
“and misery. I had horses, arms, subjects, state, and riches;
“what wonder, then, if I give them up reluctantly ? But as you
“are able and determined to command all Tuscany, we others
“of necessity have to obey. Had I not committed an error
“misfortune would not have befallen me, nor would you have
“had the opportunity of displaying your liberality ; if then you
“preserve me from entire ruin, you will give to the world an
“eternal example of clemency. Let your benevolence, therefore,
“exceed my fault, and leave at least this one house to the de-
“scendant of those from whom your ancestors have received in-
“numerable benefits.” ‘To which Neri replied, “ that relying too
“much upon those who were able to do but little had in great
“measure been the cause of his erring against the republic of
“Florence; and taking into view the present condition of the
“times made it necessary that he should surrender all his pos-
“sessions, and cede those places to Florence as an enemy which
“he had been unwilling to hold as a friend. For by his con-
“duct he had set such an example as could not be tolerated,
“and which under all circumstances would have proved injuri-
“ous to the republic, and that it was not himself, but his pos-
“sessions, that made him feared by the Florentines. But if he
“could obtain a principality and reside in Germany, it would be
“entirely satisfactory to the city of Florence, and out of regard
“for those ancestors to which he had alluded, they would
“favor his doing so.” To which the Count replied, in great
anger, that “he would like to see the Florentines at a much
“greater distance.” And thus breaking off all further friendly
discussion, the Count Poppi, seeing no help for it, ceded his

Boox V.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 265

castle, lands, and jurisdiction to the Florentines, and departed
with his wife and sons, and with all his chattels, lamenting and
complaining that he had lost a state which his ancestors had
possessed for four hundred years.

The news of these victories was received by the chiefs of
the government as well as by the people of Florence with the
greatest demonstrations of joy, and as Bernardetto de’ Medici
found the report of Niccolo Piccinino’s having gone either to
Rome or La Marea to be incorrect, he returned with his troops
to join Neri; and having afterwards gone together to Florence,
all the highest honors were decreed to them that it was the
custom of the city to bestow upon her most distinguished citi-
zens ; and they were received by the Signoria and the captains
of the sections, and afterwards by the whole city, in a triumphal
manner.

Six EBOOK.

SUMMARY.

1. Considerations upon the end of the war, and the utility of victories. —
2. The Duke of Milan treats with Count Francesco Sforza, captain of the
Venetians ; in consequence of which negotiations, ill-humors and suspicions
arise in the minds of the Count and the Venetians. — 3. Ravenna places her-
self under the power of Venice (1440). The Pope sells Borgo San Sepol-
cro to the Florentines. Niccolo Piccinino has the Venetian territory well
scoured during the winter. —4. The coming of spring and the resumption
of arms oblige Sforza to raise the siege of Martinengo. His victories have
made him so insolent that the Duke of Milan, by way of revenging himself
upon him, makes peace with his allies (1441). Francesco Sforza, according
to agreement, marries the daughter of the Duke, and receives Cremona as her
dower. — 5. Alfonso of Aragon stirs up afresh the war for the possession of
Naples, Benevento, and of other cities and places in the kingdom. The Duke
of Milan and the Pope form a league with him agaiust Sforza, and give the
conduct of the war into the hands of Niccolo Piccinino (1442). Regnier,
king of Naples, is driven out by Alfonso, and is honorably relieved by the
Florentines, who make common cause with him and Sforza. —6. Fresh dis-
cords in Florence. Jealousy against Neri di Gino Capponi (1443). — 7. Bal-
daccio d@’ Anghiari is killed by the treachery of Bartolommeo Orlandini. Re-
form of the government in favor of the Medici party (1444). —8. Death of
Niccolo Piccinino, and end of the war. —9. Annibale Bentivogli is killed in
Bologna by Battista Canneschi, and the latter is afterwards slain by the
people, whence grave disturbances arise in the city (1445). — 10. Santi, the
supposed son of Ercole Bentivogli, is called to Bologna to assume the gov-
ernment of the city. — 11. General war in Italy, with loss to the Duke of
Milan. — 12. The Duke comes to terms with Sforza. —13. Death of Duke

Filippo Visconti. The Milanese make Sforza their captain (1447). —

14. Negotiations of the Pope for the pacification of Italy, which are op-
posed by the Venetians. —15. Alfonso of Aragon assails the Florentines. —
16. He is constrained to sue for peace and to depart (1448). —17. Count
Sforza makes war against the Venetians, and is successful. — 18. Continua-
tion of the war. —19. The Count compels the Venetians to sue for peace. —
20. The terms of the peace not being satisfactory to the Milanese, they
make terms with the Venetians against Count Sforza. —21. They are
closely besieged by him. —22. The Count feigns to withdraw from the siege
of Milan. — 23, Diversity of opinions in Florence as regards their conduct

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 267

towards Sforza. —24. The Milanese, being anew besieged, and reduced to
extremity, rise against their magistrates and give themselves to the Count
Sforza (1450). — 25. League between the new Duke of Milan and the Flor-
entines on the one part, and the king of Naples and the Venetians on the
other part. — 26. Consequences of this league. —27. Emperor Frederick III.
at Florence (1451). War in Lombardy, between the Duke of Milan and
the Venetians. —28. Fernando, son of Alfonso, king of Naples, enters Tus-
cany against the Florentines (1452). — 29. Conspiracy of Messer Stefano
Porcari, in Rome, against the Pontifical government: it is discovered and he
is punished. —30. Gherardo Gambacorti, lord of the Val di Bagno, nego-
tiates with the king of Naples to give him the government, but his designs
. are frustrated by the courage and firmness of Antonio Gualandi (1453). —
31. Regnier of Anjou comes into Italy at the call of the Florentines, but soon
afterwards returns to France (1458). — 82. Through the Pope’s influence,
peace is concluded between the princes engaged in war (1454). — 33. Jacopo
Piccinino attacks the Siennese. The Turks are routed at Belgrade (1456).
— 34. Frightful storm in Italy. — 35. Genoa gives herself to the king of
France (1458). — 36. Death of Alfonso of Aragon, king of Naples. He is
succeeded by his son Ferdinand. Pope Calixtus II. dies, whilst meditating
the gift of the kingdom of Naples to his nephew, Piero Lodovico Borgia; and
Aineas Sylvius Piccolomini, of Sienna, is elected his successor under the name
of Pius IT. —37. Discord in Genoa between John of Anjou and the Fregosi,
to the disadvantage of the latter (1459). John of Anjou assails the kingdom
of Naples, and defeats King Ferdinand. — 38. The latter re-establishes him-.
self with the help of the Pope and the Duke of Milan (1460.) Genoa shakes
off the yoke of the French. John of Anjou, abandoned by Jacopo Piccinino,
is defeated in the kingdom of Naples, whence he retreats after defeat to the
island of Ischia, and returns thence to France (1462).

1. Ir has ever been the aim of those who make war to enrich
themselves and to impoverish the enemy ; and it is reasonable
that it should be so, for victories and conquests are sought for
no other object than to gain an increase of power and_ to
weaken the enemy. Whence it follows that those who are
impoverished by their own victories, or enfeebled by their con-
quests, have either gone beyond or fallen short of the object
for which the war was made. That prince or republic is en-
riched by war which crushes the enemy and remains master
of the booty and ransoms; and those are impoverished who,
although victorious, yet are unable to destroy their adversaries,
and have to leave the plunder and the ransoms to their sol-
diers. Such are unfortunate in defeat, and still more unfortu-
nate in victory; for, losing, they have to submit to the injuries
inflicted upon them by the enemy; and gaining, they have
to bear those of their friends, which are less excusable and

268 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox ‘Vi

harder to be borne, seeing that it obliges them to afflict the
subjects with fresh taxes and impositions. If then such go\
ernment has any feelings of humanity, it cannot altogeth:
rejoice at a victory by which all its citizens are afflicted.

The ancient and well-constituted republics were wont

victory to fill their treasuries with gold and silver, to distr:)
ute donations to the people, to remit taxes and tribute to the:
subjects, and to celebrate the victories with games and so!
emn festivities. But those of the period of which we write fir
exhausted the public treasury, and afterwards impoverish
their people, without securing themselves against renew
ageressions of the enemy; all of which results from the d:
orderly and wretched manner in which their wars were co)
ducted. For by merely despoiling the vanquished enemic
without keeping them prisoners or killing them, they cause :
these to defer a renewal of their attacks only until they cou
induce their employers to resupply them with arms and horse
Besides this, the booty and ransoms being left to the soldier:
the victorious prince or republic could not avail of them for th
further expenses of the war, which had to be wrung out of th:
bowels of their people; and the only result of these victoric
for the people was that it made their rulers more eager ani
reckless in their new impositions. And to such a point ha!
these soldiers carried the practice of war, that both victor an!
vanquished alike needed fresh supplies of money whenever the)
wanted to command their services; for the one had to re-equi
them, and the other had to give them fresh bounties to induce
them to serve; for as the soldiers of the former could not
serve without being remounted, so the others would not figh*
without fresh rewards. Thus the conqueror derived but little
advantage from his victory, and the conquered did not feel his
defeat so much ; for the vanquished had time to reorganize hi
forces, and the victor was not in condition to follow up his
successes.

2. This irregular and perverse military system enabled Niccok
Piccinino to remount his men before his defeat became known in
Italy, and to carry on the war more effectually than he had don
before. It was this system that enabled him, after the rout a
Terma (1440), to take Verona; it was this that permitted him
after having lost his army at Verona, to come with a strong force
into Tuscany; and it was this that enabled him, after having

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 269

been beaten at Anghiari and before reaching the Romagna, to
reappear in the field stronger than he had been before, so as to
inspire the Duke of Milan with the hope of being able to defend
Lombardy ; which, in consequence of his absence, was almost
looked upon as lost by the Duke. For, whilst Niccolo spread
consternation throughout Tuscany, Duke Filippo was reduced
to that point that he feared the loss of his entire possessions
before Niccolo, whom he had recalled, could come to his rescue
and check the impetuous progress of the Count Sforza. For the
purpose, therefore, of obtaining by a temporizing policy what
he could not achieve by force, the Duke resorted to such means
as had many times stood him in good stead in similar difficul-
ties. He sent Niccolo da Este, Prince of Ferrara, to Peschiera,
where Count Francesco then was, to persuade him to make
peace on his own account, and to point out to him that the
war was not to his advantage, because, if the Duke should be
so weakened as no longer to be able to maintain his influence,
the Count himself would be the first to suffer from it; for
he would lose consideration both with the Venetians and the
Florentines. And in proof of his good faith in desiring peace,
the Duke offered to Count Francesco the conclusion of the
marriage, and declared himself willing to send his daughter to
Ferrara, and pledged himself to place her in Francesco’s hands
upon the conclusion of peace. To all this Count Francesco re-
plied, that, if the Duke really desired peace, he could easily have
it, as it was equally wished for by the Venetians and the Flor-
entines ; but in truth he could hardly believe him, knowing that
he never.made peace except from necessity, which no sooner
passed than his passion for war would again control him. Nor
could he place any reliance upon his offer respecting the mar-
riage, having been already so many times deceived by him.
Nevertheless, upon the conclusion of peace, he would act in the
matter of the marriage as his friends might advise him.

3. The Venetians, who were always suspicious of their gen-
erals, even in matters that offered no occasion for it, very
naturally looked upon these negotiations with the greatest
suspicion, to remove which Count Sforza resumed the war
most actively. Nevertheless, ambition and the suspicions of
the Venetians had in so far cooled his ardor that he attempted
but little during the remainder of the season; so that, Niccolo
Piccinino having returned into Lombardy, and winter having

270 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI!

set in, both armies went into quarters, — the Count in Verona:
the Duke in Cremona, the Florentine troops in Tuscany, and
those of the Pope in the Romagna. After the victory at
Anghiari, these latter had attacked Furli and Bologna, for
the purpose of wresting them from the hands of Francesed
Piccinino, who governed them in the name of his father. Bui
they did not succeed in this attempt, owing to the gallan‘
defence made by Francesco. Nevertheless, the approach o!
the papal forces so alarmed the people of Ravenna with th
thought of being again brought under the dominion of th
Church, that, with the consent of their lord, Ostasio di Polente
they placed themselves under the protection of the Venetian:
who in reward for the place and territory they had received.
sent Ostasio, with his son, to die in Candia; so that he migl
not at any future time attempt to recover by force what fro.
lack of prudence he had surrendered to them. As the Pop
notwithstanding the victory at. Anghiari, lacked money fe
these various enterprises, he sold the castle of the Borgo Se
Sepolcro to the Florentines for the sum of twenty-five thou-
sand ducats. Matters being in this condition, and each ki
lieving himself secure from attack, owing to the winter se:
son, peace was no longer thought of, and least of all by ti:
Duke of Milan, who had been reassured by the presence «i!
Piccinino and the winter, and had therefore broken off
negotiations with the Count Francesco; and with the greate =:
diligence he remounted Niccolo’s forces and made every req'1i-
site provision for future military operations. When this »
came known to the Count Sforza, he went to Venice to conicr
with the Senate as to the operations during the next seaso)
Niccolo, on the other hand, having now fully reorganized |
forces, and seeing those of the enemy disordered, did not wi
for the coming of spring, but passed the Adda at the coldest s:
son (1441), and entered the Brescian territory, occupying
whole country excepting Adula and Acri, where he captu
two thousand of Sforza’s horse, who did not expect such »»
attack. But what most displeased the Count and alarmed |
Venetians was the defection of Ciarpellone, one of the Cou:
principal captains. So soon as advised of this the Count F:
cesco left Venice, and having arrived at Brescia he found * 10!
Niccolo, after having done this mischief, had returned to |:
quarters ; and finding active operations thus ended, he did :

Loox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. ZTE

deem it advisable to renew them. But as the season and the |
- enemy afforded him the opportunity of reorganizing his forces,
he resolved to avail of it, so as to be in condition, at the open-
ing of spring, to revenge himself for the injuries received. He
therefore caused the Venetians to recall the troops that served
under the Florentines in Tuscany, and to give the command to
Michelotto Attendolo, instead of Gattamelata, who had died.

4, At the opening of spring Niccolo Piccinino was the first
to take the field, and laid siege to Cignano, a castle some
twelve miles distant from Brescia. The Count Francesco went
to its relief, and the war was carried on in the usual fashion
by these two generals. Sforza, fearing for the city of Ber-
gamo, laid siege to Martinengo, a castle so situated that assist-
ance could thence easily be rendered to Bergamo, which was
closely pressed by Niccolo, who having foreseen that the enemy
could interfere with him only from Martinengo, had supplied
that castle with all the means of defence, so that the Count
was obliged to employ all his forces for its capture. Niccolo
thereupon took a position with his army that enabled him to
cut off the Count’s supplies, and protected himself by intrench-
ments so that the Count could not attack him without manifest
danger. And thus in the end it came to pass that the besiegers
were in greater danger than those who were besieged in Marti-
nengo; for the Count was no longer able to continue the siege
for want of supplies, nor to raise it without imminent danger ;
and it became evident that the Duke would have a manifest
victory, and the Venetians and the Count a decided defeat.
But Fortune, who never lacks means to aid her favorites and
injure their enemies, caused Niccolo, in consequence of his
anticipated victory, to become so filled with ambition and in-
solence that, regardless of all respect due to the Duke of
Milan or to himself, he sent word to the Duke, that, having
fought under his banner for a long time without ever acquir-
ing as much land as would serve him for burial, he wanted
now to understand from him what reward he was to have for
all his labors; that it was now in his power to deliver the
Duke’s enemies into his hands, and make him undisputed
master of Lombardy; but that he considered that a certain
victory should also have a certain reward, and therefore he
wanted the Duke to grant him the city of Piacenza, so that
when tired by his long military service he might have some

272 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

place where to repose himself. Nor was he ashamed, as a
last resort, to threaten the Duke with abandoning the enter-
prise unless his demands were acceded to. This insolent and
insulting message so offended Duke Filippo, that, rather than
yield to Piccinino’s demands, he resolved to give up the whole
enterprise. And thus the Duke, whom neither the many dan-
gers nor the threats of enemies could induce to give way, was
prompted to do so now by the insolence of his friend; and
accordingly he resolved to make terms with the Count Fran
cesco Sforza, and sent Antonio Guidobuono of Tortona to offer
him his daughter and conditions of peace, which were eagerly
accepted. And after a secret treaty of peace had been con-
cluded between them, the Duke sent to order Niccolo to make
a truce for one year with the Count Francesco, explaining to
him that he was weary of the expenses of the war and would
not forego a certain peace for a doubtful victory. Piccinino
was astonished at this determination, and unable to compre-
hend the reasons that induced the Duke to forego so glorious
a victory ; for he could not believe that the Duke, for the sake
of not rewarding his friend, should be willing to save his enemy.
He therefore objected to the Duke’s instructions in the manner
that seemed to him best, so that the Duke was constrained, by
way of making him submit, to threaten that unless he obeyed
he would hand him over as a prey to his soldiers and his ene-
mies. Whereupon Niccolo conformed to his orders, but much
with the same sort of feeling as one who is compelled to aban-
don his friends and his country, lamenting his unhappy fate
because at one moment Fortune and at another the Duke de-
prived him of victory over his enemies.

The truce having been concluded, the nuptials of the Lady
Bianca Visconti with the Count Francesco Sforza were cele-
brated, and as a dower her father the Duke gave her the city
of Cremona. This done, peace was formally concluded in
November, 1441, and was signed on the part of the Venetians
by Francesco Barbarico and Pagolo Trono, and on the part of
the Florentines by Agnolo Acciaiuoli; whereby the Venetians
gained Peschiera, Asola, and Leonato, a castle belonging to the
Marquis of Mantua.

5. Whilst the war in Lombardy had ceased, the disturbances
in the kingdom of Naples continued; and as fee could not be
composed, they led to a resumption of arms in Lombardy. For

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 278

whilst the war had been going on there King Regnier had been
deprived by Alfonso of Aragon of his entire kingdom except
the city of Naples. Alfonso, confident of victory, resolved,
whilst besieging Naples, also to take from Count Francesco
Sforza the town of Benevento, and other possessions which he
had in the neighborhood, thinking that he could do so without
risk, as the Count was occupied by the war in Lombardy. But
when the news of the peace in Lombardy reached Alfonso he be-
came afraid lest the Count Sforza should now intervene in favor
of Regnier; which, in truth, the latter was hoping for, having
already sent to solicit the Count to come to succor a friend and
to revenge himself upon an enemy. On the other hand, Alfonso
entreated Duke Filippo, by the friendship which he bore him,
to harass the Count Francesco, so that, being occupied by more
important matters, he would be compelled to give up all at-
tempts at interfering with him. Filippo acceded to this request,
not thinking that it would be an infraction of the peace that
had been concluded but a short time before to his great disad-
vantage. And therefore he gave Pope Eugene to understand
that now was the time to recover the places belonging to the
Church, and of which Count Francesco held possession; and
for this purpose he offered him the services of Niccolo Picci-
nino, who, since the conclusion of the peace, was with his
men in the Romagna, and whom he offered to pay during
such service. Pope Eugene eagerly accepted this suggestion,
both from the hate he bore the Count Francesco and from the
desire to get back his own. And although on a former occa-
sion he had been deluded with the same hope by Niccolo Picci-
nino, yet now he thought, as the Duke himself had intervened,
he need apprehend no disappointment; and having united his
forces with those of Niccolo, he attacked La Marca. Count
Sforza, surprised at so unexpected an attack, made head with
his forces and went to encounter the enemy. In the midst of
this King Alfonso took Naples (1442), so that the whole of the
kingdom, Castelnuovo alone excepted, fell under his dominion.
King Regnier, therefore, left a strong garrison in Castelnuovo
and departed, and was received with great honors upon his
arrival at Florence, where he remained a few days, and then,
seeing that he could no longer carry on the war, he went off
to Marseilles.

Meantime Alfonso had taken Castelnuovo ; and Sforza, find-
VOL. I. 18

274 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

ing himself unable to cope with the Pope and Piccinino in La
Marea, applied to the Venetians and Florentines for assistance
in men and money, pointing out to them that, if they did not
now make an effort to check the Pope and King Alfonso whilst
he himself was still living, they would very soon after his death
have to look to their own safety, for then Alfonso would unite
with Duke Filippo, and then they would divide Italy between
them. The Florentines and Venetians were for a time unde-
cided, partly because they did not deem it well to meddle with
the Pope and the king, and partly because they were occupied
with the affairs of Bologna. Annibale Bentivogli had driven
Francesco Piccinino from that city; and so as to be able to
defend himself against Duke Filippo, who favored Francesco,
he had asked for help from the Venetians and Florentines,
which they agreed to furnish him; so that, being engaged in
this affair, they could not decide to give the asked for aid to the
Count Sforza. But as it happened that Annibale had defeated
Francesco Piccinino, which it was supposed had settled the
troubles of Bologna, the Florentines determined to support the
Count Sforza. But, by way of securing themselves against Duke
Filippo, they first renewed the league with him. Duke Filippo
had been willing that war should be made against the Count
Sforza so long as King Regnier was in the field with an army ;
but seeing him ruined and deprived of the whole of his king-
dom, he did not like to have the Count also despoiled of all
his possessions, and therefore he not only consented that aid
should be given him, but he wrote to King Alfonso that he
would be pleased to see him return to his kingdom and no
longer make war against the Count Sforza. Alfonso very re-
luctantly, yet mindful of his obligations to the Duke, resolved
to comply with his request, and retreated with his forces be-
yond the Tronto.

6. Whilst these events were transpiring in the Romagna,
things were not quiet amongst the Florentines themselves. One
of the most prominent men in the government of Florence was
Neri di Gino Capponi, whose influence Cosimo de’ Medici feared
more than that of any other man. For besides the great esti-
mation in which he was held by the citizens, he had also great
influence with the soldiery, which he had gained by his bravery
and merit when at different times chief of the Florentine
armies. Besides this, the memory of the victories gained by

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 275

him and his father, Gino, who had taken Pisa, whilst he had de-
feated Niccolo Piccinino at Anghiari, made him much beloved by
many, and feared by those who did not wish to share the govern-
ment with any one else. Amongst the many generals of the
Florentine army at that time was Baldaccio d’ Anghiari, a most
distinguished soldier ; for there was no one in all Italy in those
days who excelled him in personal strength or courage; and
such was his reputation with the infantry, which he had always
commanded, that every man was ready to follow him blindly in
any enterprise. Baldaccio was devoted in friendship to Neri,
who loved him in return for his bravery, of which he had on
every occasion given the most signal proofs. This mutual
friendship excited the mistrust of other citizens, who, deeming
it dangerous to dismiss Baldaccio, and equally perilous to keep
him, resolved to destroy him; and fortune favored their intent.
Messer Bartolommeo Orlandini was Gonfaloniere of Justice at
that time. As we have related above, he had been sent to
guard the castle of Marradi at the time when Piccinino invaded
Tuscany, and had fled ignominiously on his approach, abandon-
ing that pass, which by nature was almost impregnable. Such
cowardice had disgusted Baldaccio, who publicly denounced, by
insulting words and letters, this want of courage of Messer Bar-
tolommeo, which caused the latter so much shame and anger
that he eagerly desired to revenge himself upon Baldaccio,
thinking to efface the infamy of his conduct by the death of
his accuser.

7. As this resentment of Messer Bartolommeo was well known
to the other citizens, they had no difficulty in persuading him to
destroy Baldaccio, and thus at one blow revenge himself for the
injuries received and rid the state of a man whom it was equal’y
dangerous to retain or dismiss from their service. Orla”dini
therefore, having resolved to kill Baldaccio, concealed a num-
ber of armed men in his chamber, and when Baldaccio came to
the Piazza, where he went daily to negotiate with the magistrates
about the pay of his troops, the Gonfaloniere sent for him, and
he obeyed the call without the least suspicion. Orlandini went
to meet him, and walked up and down with him several times
in the hall of the Signoria, discussing the subject of the pay of
his troops ; and when the right moment seemed to him to have
come, being near the chamber where the armed men lay con-
cealed, he gave a signal, upon which they rushed forth, and,

276 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

Baldaccio being unarmed, they quickly despatched him and
threw his dead body out of the window that looks towards the
custom-house, whence it was dragged into the Piazza and the
head cut off, which was exhibited during the whole day to the
people (1443). Baldaccio left an only son, which his wife,
Annalena, had borne him a few years previous, but he did not
long survive his father. Annalena, thus deprived of her hus-
band and son, and unwilling to unite herself again to another
man, converted her house into a convent, within which she
secluded herself, together with a number of other noble ladies
who had joined her, and where she led a most holy life until
her death. The convent which she founded, and which was
named after her, will preserve her memory forever. This
assassination of Baldaccio abated in a measure the power of
Neri, depriving him of influence and friends, which, however,
did not satisfy the citizens who held the government. For ten
years having passed since their accession to power, and the
authority of the Balia having expired, many of the people were
encouraged to speak and act in a manner not acceptable to
them; so that the chiefs of the state judged it necessary for the
preservation of their power to adopt measures for renewing
their authority by strengthening their friends and defeating
their enemies. They therefore caused the councils to create
a new Balia in 1444, which reformed the offices, gave authority
to a few to form the Signoria, renewed the chancery of reform,
taking it from Ser Filippo Peruzzi and placing at the head of
it one who should administer it in accordance with the wishes
of the nobles. They prolonged the term of banishment of the
exiles, imprisoned Giovanni di Simone Vespucci, deprived the
magistrates of the opposite party who were charged with the
making up of the lists from which the Signoria was drawn of
all the honors of public employment, and likewise the sons of
Piero Baroncelli, all the Serragli, Bartolommeo Fortini, Messer
Francesco Castellani, and many others. And by these means
they restored their own authority and influence, and humbled
the pride of their enemies, and of all whom they suspected of
being unfriendly to themselves.

8. Having thus remodelled and confirmed their government
within Florence, they turned their attention again to matters
without. Niccolo Piccinino, as we have related above, had
been abandoned by King Alfonso; whilst on the other hand

Book VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 277

the Count Francesco Sforza had recovered his strength through
the assistance afforded him by the Florentines; so that he
attacked Niccolo near Fermo, and routed him; so that having
lost nearly all his men, Piccinino took refuge with the remain-
ing few in Montecchio, where he fortified and defended him-
self so vigorously that he was able in a short while to gather
his scattered forces again, and in such numbers that he could
easily have defended himself against the Count Sforza, espe-
cially as winter was at hand, which obliged both generals to
send their troops into quarters. Piccinino devoted himself all
winter to reinforcing his army, in which he was aided by the
Pope and King Alfonso; so that when spring came, and the
two armies took the field, Niccolo proved so much the supe-
rior in force that Sforza was reduced to the greatest straits,
and would have been beaten if Niccolo’s plans had not been
thwarted by the Duke. Filippo had sent to request Niccolo
to come to him immediately, as he wished to confer with him
personally about some highly important matters; whereupon
Niccolo, eager to hear what it was, gave up a certain victory
for an uncertain advantage, and, leaving his son Francesco in
command, went himself to meet the Duke at Milan. When
the Count Sforza heard this he promptly resolved not to lose
the opportunity of attacking Niccolo’s forces during his ab-
sence; and having engaged them near Castel di Monte Loro,
he routed them and took Francesco Piccinino prisoner. When
Niccolo arrived at Milan he found that he had been deceived
by the Duke, and on hearing of the rout of his troops and the
capture of his son he died of grief, in the year 1445, at the
age of sixty-four, having been more able than fortunate as a
commander. He left two sons, Francesco and Jacopo Picci-
nino, who were not less able than their father, but even more
unfortunate. Thus ended, as it were, the army of the Braccios,
whilst that of Sforza, being always favored by fortune, became
more and more renowned.

The Pope, seeing the army of Piccinino defeated and himself
dead, and not having much confidence in the help from the
king of Aragon, sought to make peace with the Count Sforza,
which was concluded through the mediation of the Florentines.
By this treaty there were restored to the Pope the following
places in La Marca, namely, Osimo, Fabriano, and Ricanati,
whilst all the rest remained under the dominion of the Count
Sforza.

278 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VI.

9. After the peace of La Marca all Italy would have been
tranquil, had it not been disturbed by the Bolognese. The
two most powerful families of Bologna were the Canneschi
and the Bentivogli; Annibale was the chief of the latter, and
Battista of the former. By way of establishing a greater
degree of mutual confidence they had contracted a family
alliance between them. But it is much easier for men having
the same ambitious aims to contract a relationship than a
real friendship. After the expulsion of Niccolo Piccinino, Bo-
logna formed a league with the Venetians and the Florentines
through the agency of Annibale Bentivogli; but Battista Can-
neschi, knowing how desirous the Duke of Milan was to have
the city of Bologna favorably disposed towards him, secretly
intrigued with him for the murder of Annibale, and then to
bring the city under the dominion of Duke Filippo. And
having agreed as to the mode of proceeding, Battista attacked
Annibale with a body of his armed followers on the 24th of
June, 1445, and killed him, and then rushed through the town
proclaiming the Duke’s name. The Venetian and Florentine
commissaries, who were in Bologna at the time, retreated to
their houses so soon as they heard the noise. But seeing
afterwards that the people did not support the murderers, but
rather lamented the death of Annibale, and had gathered armed
and in great numbers in the Piazza, they took courage and
joined them; and having made a stand they attacked the
Canneschi, and in a few hours defeated them, killing a por-
tion and driving the rest from the city. Battista not having
been in time to make his escape, nor his enemies in time to
kill him, concealed himself in a barn behind the house, used
for the storage of grain. His enemies, having sought him in
vain all day, yet knowing that he had not left the city, so ter-
rified his servants with threats, that one of the boys from fear
showed them his master’s place of concealment. Having been
dragged from there still covered with his armor, Battista was
killed, and his body dragged through the city, and then burnt.
Thus the Duke of Milan’s authority had been enough to cause
Battista to engage in this attempt, but his power could not
intervene in time to save him.

10. The death of Battista and the flight of the Canneschi
having put an end to these troubles, the Bolognese however
still remained in great confusion, for there was none of the

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 279

family of the Bentivogli fit to take the government, Annibale
having left an only son called Giovanni, who was only six
years old. It was feared, therefore, that divisions would arise
amongst the friends of the Bentivogli, which would cause the
return of the Canneschi, and with them the ruin of their coun-
try and party. Whilst in this state of uncertainty, Francesco,
the former Count Poppi, who happened to be in Bologna, gave
the principal men of the city to understand that, if they de-
sired to be governed by one of the blood of the Bentivogli, he
could tell them where to find one. And he related to them
that about twenty years ago, Ercole Bentivogli, cousin of
Annibale, being at Poppi, had to his knowledge an intimacy
with a young girl of that castle, the result of which was the
birth of a boy named Santi, whom Ercole had several times
acknowledged as his child. Nor could it be denied, for who-
ever knew Ercole and the youth was struck by the remarka-
ble resemblance between them. The citizens put faith in these
representations, and promptly sent some of their number to
see the youth, and they managed through Cosimo and Neri to
have him given up to them. The putative father of Santi was
dead, so that he lived under the guardianship of an uncle,
called Antonio de Cascese, who was rich and without any son
of his own, and at the same time a great friend of Neri’s.
When the matter was made known to him, Neri advised him
that it would not do either to decline or to accept the offer
hastily ; and suggested that Santi should speak with the Bo-
lognese envoys in the presence of Cosimo. This was agreed
upon, and Santi was not only honored, but almost worshipped
by them, such was the power of party feeling in those days.
Nothing definite, however, was concluded, except that Cosimo
took Santi apart, and said to him: “No one can advise you
“in this matter so well as yourself, and you must take what-
“ever course your own feelings incline you to. For if you are
“the son of Ercole Bentivogli you will naturally choose to
“engage in such enterprises as shall be worthy of your father
“and his lineage; but if you are the son of Agnolo da Cascese
“you will remain in Florence and pass your life humbly in
“some branch of the wool business.” These words moved
the youth, who, although he had at first declined the proposi-
tion, yet now expressed himself ready to do whatever Cosimo
and Neri might decide upon. These promptly arranged mat-

280 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Boox VI.

ters with the Bolognese envoys, and the young man was hon-
orably provided with clothing, horses, and servants, and was
soon after conducted to Bologna by a numerous escort; and
the guardianship of the young son of Annibale and the gov-
ernment of the city were placed in his hands. He conducted
himself with so much prudence that, although his ancestors
had all been killed by their enemies, yet he passed his life in
peace and tranquillity, and died greatly honored.

11. After the death of Niccolo Piccinino and the peace of La
Marca, Duke Filippo, being in search of a captain to command
his troops, secretly negotiated with Ciarpellone, one of the best
captains of the Count Francesco Sforza. An engagement hav-
ing been agreed upon, Ciarpellone asked the Count Sforza for
leave to go to Milan, for the purpose of taking possession of
some castles that had been given to him in the late wars by the
Duke of Milan. The Count, mistrusting the real motive of this
journey, and with the view of thwarting the designs of the
Duke, first had Ciarpellone imprisoned, and soon after put to
death, alleging that he had discovered his plotting treason
against him. Duke Filippo was much displeased and angered
by this, whilst the Venetians and Florentines were gratified by
it, for they feared nothing more than a union between Duke
Filippo and the Count Sforza; but the Duke’s resentment gave
occasion for fresh wars in La Marca. Gismondo Malatesti,
lord of Rimini, and son-in-law to the Count Francesco Sforza,
hoped on this account to obtain the lordship of Pesaro; but
upon the taking of this town by the Count Sforza, he bestowed
it upon his brother, Alessandro, which greatly irritated Gis-
mondo. This feeling was increased still more when he saw his
enemy, Federigo di Montefeltro, invested by the Count Sforza
with the lordship of Urbino. All this caused Gismondo to
throw himself into the ranks of the party of the Duke Filippo,
and to solicit the Pope and the king of Naples to make war
upon the Count Sforza. The latter, for the purpose of making
Gismondo himself taste the first fruits of the war which he
wished for, resolved to forestall him, and therefore suddenly
attacked him. In consequence of this the Romagna and La
Marca were quickly involved in confusion; for Duke Filippo,
the king of Naples, and the Pope sent powerful aid to Gismon-
do, whilst the Florentines and Venetians provided the Count
Sforza with money, if not with men. Filippo, not content with

Boor VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 281

making war upon Sforza in the Romagna only, attempted also
to take Cremona and Pontremoli from him; but Pontremoli
was defended by the Florentines, and Cremona by the Vene-
tians. Thus the war was also renewed in Lombardy, where,
after general engagements in the Cremonese territory, Fran-
cesco Piccinino, general of the Duke of Milan’s forces, was
defeated by Michelotto and the Venetian troops, at Casale, in
1446. This victory made the Venetians conceive the hope of be-
ing able to drive Duke Filippo from his states ; they sent a com-
missary to Cremona, and attacked the Ghiaradadda, and took
the whole of it excepting Crema. Afterwards they crossed the
Adda, and scoured the country up to the very gates of Milan ;
in consequence of which the Duke had recourse to King Al-
fonso, begging him for assistance, and pointing out to him the
danger to which the kingdom of Naples would be exposed if
the Venetians should become masters of Lombardy. Alfonso
promised to send him troops, which, however, could not pass
into Lombardy except with great difficulty, unless with Count
Sforza’s consent.

12. Duke Filippo thereupon entreated Sforza not to abandon
his father-in-law, who was now old and blind; but the Count .
was offended with him for having provoked this war against
him. On the other hand, he did not like the aggrandizement
of the Venetians, and besides began to lack funds, which the
league provided but sparingly ; for the Florentines had no long-
er that fear of Filippo which had made them value the Count
Sforza so highly, and the Venetians desired his ruin, believing
him to be the only man that could take Lombardy from them.
Nevertheless, whilst Duke Filippo sought to draw the Count
into his pay, and offered him the command of all his troops
provided he would leave the Venetians and restore La Marca
to the Pope, the Venetians also sent messengers to him prom-
ising him the sovereignty of Milan if they should take it, and
the command in perpetuity of their forces, provided he carried
the war into La Marca and prevented Alfonso from sending
assistance into Lombardy. The promises of the Venetians
were large and tempting, and they had rendered important
services to the Count in having gone to war to save him Cre-
mona; and, on the other hand, the injuries received at the
hands of the Duke were still fresh in his mind, whilst his
promises were insignificant and not to be relied upon. With

282 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VI.

all this, the Count Sforza was in doubt as to which side he
should take; for on the one hand he was influenced by his
obligations to the league, his pledged faith, the recent benefits
received, and the promises for the future. On the other hand
were the entreaties of his father-in-law, and, above all, his sus-
picions that there was some secret poison concealed under the
great promises of the Venetians; and judging that, even in
case of victory, he would still be at their discretion, both as
regarded the government of Milan and the other promises, —
a position to which no prudent man should expose himself ex-
cept in case of necessity. These difficulties in coming to a
determination were removed by the ambition of the Venetians,
who, from some secret intelligence they had obtained, were
hopeful of taking Cremona, and had, under some other pretext,
sent their troops into the neighborhood of that city. But the
affair was discovered by those who guarded Cremona for the
Count Sforza, who now, regardless of all other considerations,
joined the Duke of Milan (1447).

13. Meantime Pope Eugenius had died, and Nicholas V.
had been chosen his successor; and Sforza was already with
his whole army at Cotignola, for the purpose of passing into
Lombardy, when news came to him of the death of the Duke
Filippo Visconti, on the last day of August, 1447. This intel-
ligence filled the Count Sforza with consternation, for his troops
did not seem to him in condition to proceed on account of their
pay being in arrears; he feared the Venetians, who were armed,
and were now his enemies, as he had so lately left them and
gone over to the Duke; he was apprehensive of King Alfonso,
who was his inveterate enemy, and he had nothing to hope
from the Pope or the Florentines, the latter being allies of the
Venetians, and the former hostile to him on account of his
having seized the lands of the Church. With all this he
resolved to face fortune, and to govern himself according to
circumstances ; for often valuable suggestions develop them-
selves in action that would otherwise not be thought of. He
took much hope from the belief that, if the Milanese wished to
defend themselves against the ambition of the Venetians, they
could not look to any one but himself for armed assistance.
He was therefore of good courage, and entered the Bolognese
territory ; and, passing by Modena and Reggio, he halted above
the Lenza, and sent to Milan to offer his services. After the

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 283

death of Duke Filippo a portion of the Milanese desired to live
as a republic, and a portion under a prince; and of those who
wanted a prince, some wanted the Count Sforza and others the
King Alfonso. Therefore, those who wanted a republic, being
more united, prevailed, and organized a government in their
fashion, which, however, was not obeyed by many of the other
cities of the duchy, who wanted to enjoy their independence the
same as Milan; and such as did not aspire to independence
were yet unwilling to submit to the rule of Milan. Lodi and
Piacenza gave themselves to the Venetians, and Pavia and Parma
declared themselves independent. When Count Sforza heard
of these complications he went to Cremona, where it was
agreed between the Milanese ambassadors and himself that he
should be the general of the Milanese on the same terms and
conditions as had been agreed upon between him and Duke
Filippo before his death; and further, that Sforza should have
Brescia, and in case of the capture of Verona he was to have
that city in place of Brescia, which he was then to give up.

14. After the assumption of the pontificate, and before the
death of the Duke, Pope Niccolo sought to restore peace
amongst the Italian princes; and for this purpose he endeav-
ored, together with the ambassadors whom the Florentines had
sent to congratulate him on his accession, to have a Diet con-
vened at Ferrara, for the negotiation of either a long truce or
a lasting peace. Accordingly there assembled in that city the
Legate of the Pope, the Venetian, the Milanese, and the Floren-
tine ambassadors; those of King Alfonso did not attend. He
himself was at Tivoli, with a large force of horse and foot, and
was disposed to support the Duke; and it was generally believed
that, after having drawn the Count Sforza over to their side,
they intended openly to attack the Venetians and the Floren-
tines; prolonging the negotiations for peace so as to afford
time to Sforza’s troops to pass into Lombardy. King Alfonso
had declared that, although his representatives were not pres-
ent, yet he would ratify whatever Duke Filippo might conclude.
The negotiations lasted some days, and after much debating it
was resolved to have either a truce for five years or a definite
peace, whichever might be approved of by the Duke Filippo.
But when the ducal envoys returned to Milan to obtain his
decision, they found the Duke dead. The Milanese wished,
nevertheless, to carry out the agreement; but the Venetians

284 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

were not willing, as they cherished the hope of becoming mas-
ters of Milan, particularly as they found that immediately after
the Duke’s death Lodi and Piacenza had voluntarily placed
themselves under their dominion. They expected, either by
treaties or by force, to strip Milan of all her possessions, and
then to press her so hard that she would surrender to them
before any one could come to her assistance ; and they were
the more confident of succeeding in this from the fact that
the Florentines had involved themselves in war with King
Alfonso.

15. King Alfonso, who was at Tivoli at that time, was deter-
mined to carry out the project of attacking Tuscany which he
had concerted with Duke Filippo, and thought that the war
which had been rekindled in Lombardy would afford him a
favorable opportunity. But before commencing open hostilities,
he was anxious to secure himself a foothold upon the Floren-
tine territory, and therefore opened negotiations with the castle
of Cennina in the Val d’ Arno, and took possession of it. The
Florentines, surprised by this unexpected attack, and sceing
the king engaged in open hostilities against them, levied troops,
created a Council of Ten on the war, and made all the other
customary preparations. Meantime Alfonso had advanced
with his army into the Siennese territory, and made every pos-
sible effort to draw that city over to his side; but the Siennese
remained true to their friendship for the Florentines, and
refused to admit the king into their city, or any of their other
places. They, however, supplied the king well with provisions,
for which they excused themselves on account of their own
weakness and the strength of the enemy. Alfonso had at first
contemplated entering the Florentine territory by way of the
Val d’ Arno; but this seemed to him now undesirable, either
because of his having lost Cennina again, or because he saw
that the Florentines had already to some extent provided them-
selves with troops. And therefore he turned towards Volterra,
and captured a number of castles in that territory. Thence
he entered the Pisan territory, and with the aid of the Counts
Arrigo and Fazio della Gherardesea he took some castles there.
After that he attacked Campiglia, but did not succeed in taking
it, as it was defended by the Florentines and the severity of
the winter. Alfonso thereupon left garrisons in the places he
had taken, both to defend them and to scour the country, and

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 285

retired himself with the remainder of his army into quarters in
the Siennese territory. The Florentines meantime, favored by
the season, made great exertions to provide themselves with
more troops ; their generals were Federigo, lord of Urbino, and
Gismondi Malatesti di Rimini; and although these generals
differed upon some points, yet the good sense and prudence of
the commissaries Neri di Gino and Bernardetto de’ Medici har-
monized their differences sufficiently to enable them to take the
field, although still midwinter, and to recover the places that
had been lost in the Pisan and in the Volterran territories.
And King Alfonso’s troops, which until then had scoured the
low country, were so effectually checked that they could with
difficulty maintain themselves in the places which they had
been left to guard. With the first opening of spring, the com-
missaries took position with their whole force at Spedaletto, to
the number of five thousand horse and two thousand foot ;
whilst King Alfonso with his forces, numbering fifteen thou-
sand, established himself within three miles of Campiglia. It
was supposed that he would lay siege to this place, but instead
of that he threw himself suddenly upon Piombino, hoping to
take it easily, as it was insufficiently supplied, and because he
thought that its possession would prove most advantageous to
him, and most damaging to the Florentines. For from there
he could harass and exhaust the Florentines by a long war,-
whilst he was able to procure supplies of every kind for himself
by sea, and at the same time keep the whole Pisan country
disturbed. The Florentines, therefore, were greatly disquieted
by this attack upon Piombino, and, having consulted as to the
best course to pursue, they resolved to remain with their army
encamped in the woods of Campiglia, hoping in that way to
force the king to depart, or to run the risk of a disgraceful
defeat. And for this reason they armed four small galleys
which they had at Livorno, and by means of which they trans-
ported three hundred men to Piombino, establishing themselves
at Caldane, where they could with difficulty be attacked ; for it
was deemed dangerous to remain encamped in the thickets of
the plains.

16. The Florentine army depended for its provisions upon the
surrounding country, which, being but sparsely inhabited, made
the supply very difficult. The soldiers consequently suffered
from want, and what they mainly lacked was wine, as the coun-

286 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VI.

try did not produce any; and as it could not be obtained from a
distance, it became impossible to supply the men. King Alfonso,
on the other hand, although closely pressed by the Florentines,
had abundance of everything, as he was able to obtain his sup-
plies by sea. The Florentines, therefore, wished to try whether
they could not also supply their troops by water, and for that
purpose they loaded their galleys with provisions; but being
met on the way by seven of the king’s galleys, these captured
two and put the others to flight. This loss deprived the Flor-
entine troops of all hopes of obtaining the needed provisions,
so that two hundred or more foragers deserted to the king,
mainly on account of the want of wine. The other troops com-
plained that they could not remain in that extremely hot country
without wine, as the water was not drinkable. The commissa-
ries therefore resolved to abandon that position, and to endeavor
to recover some of the castles that yet remained in the hands of
the king. Alfonso, on the other hand, though not suffering
from want of provisions, and superior in numbers, yet saw that
he could not succeed, owing to the fact that a large part of his
men were ill from the fevers that prevail in that swampy coun-
try during the warm season, so that many of them died, and
nearly all were more or less affected. Negotiations for peace
were therefore set on foot. The king demanded fifty thousand
florins and the unconditional surrender of Piombino. This
proposition was submitted to the government at Florence, and
many who were anxious for peace were willing it should be
accepted, affirming that they could not see how they were to
succeed in so costly awar. But Neri Capponi, who had gone to
Florence, dissuaded them with such arguments that all agreed
that the proposed terms could not be accepted. And it was
unanimously agreed to take the lord of Piombino under the
protection of the republic, promising to sustain him in war and
in peace, on condition that he should not surrender, but con-
tinue to defend himself, as he had done until then. When King
Alfonso heard of this determination, seeing that he could not
hope to take the place with an army so enfeebled by disease, he
raised the siege, after having suffered all the disasters of a defeat,
having lost over two thousand men; and with the remainder of
his army he withdrew to the Siennese territory, and thence to
his kingdom, furious against the Florentines, whom he threat-
ened with a renewal of the war during the next season.

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 287

17. Whilst these events were taking place in Tuscany, Count
Francesco Sforza, having become general of the Milanese forces,
sought, before everything else, to win, the friendship of Fran-
cesco Piccinino, who was also in the pay of the Milanese, so as
to secure his support in his undertakings, or at least to make
him less disposed to thwart them. He then took the field with
his army; and the people of Pavia, believing themselves unable
to resist him, and unwilling, on the other hand, to yield obedi-
ence to the Milanese, offered to give themselves to him on con-
dition that he should not subject them to the government of
Milan. Sforza greatly desired possession of this city, which he
thought would serve him admirably as a means for covering his
ulterior designs. And it was neither fear nor shame at break-
ing his faith that restrained him, for great men deem it a shame
to lose, but not to gain, by fraud and perfidy; but he appre-
hended that his accepting Pavia would so irritate the Milanese
as to cause them to transfer their allegiance to the Venetians.
And, on the other hand, he feared that, if he did not take it, it
would advance the interests of the Duke of Savoy, to whom
many citizens wished to give the city. In either case, it seemed
to him that he would lose the sovereignty of Lombardy. After
much reflection, however, he concluded that there was less dan-
ger in accepting Pavia, than in allowing it to be taken by some
one else; and therefore he resolved to accept the offer of the
people of Pavia, trusting to be able afterwards to satisfy the
Milanese by explaining to them how dangerous it would have
been to their cause had he declined Pavia. For in that case
the citizens would have given themselves to the Venetians or
to the Duke of Savoy, and that in either case it would have
been lost to them; and that they ought to be better satisfied to
have him for a neighbor and friend than such a power as either
of the others, which would be hostile to them. The Milanese
were much perplexed by this matter, which seemed to them to
disclose Sforza’s ambition, and the end at which he aimed.
But they deemed it best not to make their suspicions known,
as they did not know where else to turn, if they alienated the
Count from them, except to the Venetians, whose pride, and
the onerous conditions they were likely to impose, they feared
greatly. They resolved, therefore, not to break with the Count
Sforza, but for the present to avail of his aid in meeting the
impending difficulties, hoping that, when they should be relieved

288 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

of these, they would be able to rid themselves of the Count also.
In fact, they were assailed not only by the Venetians, but also
by the Genoese and by the Duke of Savoy, acting on behalf of
Charles of Orleans, a son of Duke Filippo’s sister. Sforza,
however, easily repulsed these latter enemies, so that the Mi-
lanese had only to fear the Venetians, who had raised a power-
ful army, and were trying to make themselves masters of all
Lombardy, holding already Lodi and Piacenza. The Count
Sforza besieged the latter city, and took and sacked it, after an
obstinate defence. After this, winter having set in, he led his
troops into quarters, and went himself to Cremona, where he
passed the winter in repose with his wife.

18. With the first return of spring, both the Venetian and the
Milanese armies took the field. The Milanese were desirous of
taking Lodi, and then to make peace with the.Venetians; for
the expenses of the war became daily more onerous, and they
seriously suspected their general, so that they became exceed-
ingly anxious for peace, to enable them to enjoy some repose,
and to make themselves secure against the Count Sforza. They
resolved, therefore, to have their army attempt the capture of
Caravaggio, hoping that when that castle should have been
taken Lodi would surrender. Sforza obeyed the wishes of the
Milanese, although his own intention had been to cross the
Adda, and to attack the Brescian territory. Having, therefore,
encamped before Caravaggio, he fortified himself with ditches
and intrenchments, so that, if the Venetians should attempt to
compel him to raise the siege, they would have to attack him
at great disadvantage. _The Venetians, on the other hand, ad-
vanced with their army, under command of Michelotto, to within
two bowshot lengths of Sforza’s camp, where they remained.
several days, and had a number of skirmishes with the Count’s
troops. Despite of this, Sforza continued to press the besieged
very hard, and reduced them to that point that there was noth-
ing left for them but to surrender. This caused the Venetians
the greatest uneasiness, for they regarded the loss of Caravaggio
as ruinous to their whole enterprise; and was the occasion of a
violent dispute between their generals as to the best means of
succoring it. They saw no other way than to seek the enemy
behind his intrenchments, which was in the highest degree dis-
advantageous for them; but they looked upon the preservation
of that castle as of such importance that the Venetian Senate,

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 289

naturally timid and averse to every doubtful and hazardous
course, were yet willing to risk all for the sake of saving Cara-
vaggio, rather than by its loss to incur the failure of their whole _
enterprise. They resolved, therefore, to attack the Count any-
how; and having started one morning at a very early hour,
they assailed him on the side where he was least protected ;
and at the first rush, as is often the case with sudden and un-
expected assaults, the whole Sforzescan army was thrown into
confusion. But the Count quickly restored order, so that the
Venetians, after desperate efforts to pass the intrenchments,
were not only repulsed, but put to flight, and so completely
routed that of the whole army, which consisted of over twelve
thousand horse, not one thousand were saved, and all the bag-
gage and camp equipage was captured. Never did the Vene-
tians experience a more complete and terrible defeat.

Amongst the booty and the prisoners taken was one of the Ve-
netian commissaries, who before the fight, and in fact during the
whole progress of the war, had spoken in the most abusive terms
of the Count Sforza, calling him a coward and a bastard. But
now, finding himself his prisoner after the defeat, and mindful
of his previous conduct, he was very melancholy and depressed,
for he feared that he would be dealt with according to his de-
serts. Having been brought before the Count all cowed and
frightened, according to the nature of proud and pusillanimous
men, who are insolent in prosperity and in adversity abject and
humble, he threw himself upon his knees before Sforza, be-
seeching him with tears to forgive him the insults and injuries
he had done him. The Count raised him up, took him by the
arm, and bade him be of good cheer and hope for the best; and
then he told him “that he wondered how a man of his prudence
“and gravity, or at least who wished to be considered as such,
“could fall into so great an error as to speak so abusively of
“one who did not deserve it. And as for the reproaches which
“he had cast upon him personally, he did not know how his
“father Sforza had conducted himself towards the lady Lucia,
“his mother, as he had not been present, and could not there-
“fore be in any way held responsible for their proceedings; so
“that he did not think that he merited either praise or blame
“for whatever they might have done. But that he knew well
“ that, in all matters which it had devolved upon him to do, he
“had conducted himself so that nobody could censure him ; of

VOL, I. 19

290 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

“ which he himself and his Senate could give the latest and best
“testimony. And then counselled him in future to be more
“ prudent in speaking of others, and more cautious in his enter-
“ prises.”

19. After this victory, the Count marched with his victori-
ous army into the Brescian territory and took possession of
the whole of it, and then pitched his camp within two miles
of Brescia. The Venetians, on the other hand, having ex-
perienced defeat, and apprehending, as indeed it happened, that
Brescia would be the first to be attacked, supplied it as quickly
and as well as they could with a garrison and munitions; and
then they set to work, with all diligence, to gather the frag-
ments of their army and to collect more troops, and called upon
the Florentines for assistance, according to the conditions of the
treaty. The Florentines, being now relieved of the war with
the King Alfonso, sent them fifteen thousand infantry and two
thousand horse,—which accession of force gave the Vene-
tians time to think of making terms. It was almost always
the fate of the republic of Venice, at that time, to fail in war
and to be successful in negotiations ; so that what they lost in
war was restored to them by peace many fold. The Venetians
were not ignorant of the mistrust which the Milanese had of
Count Sforza, and that the Count aimed, not at being their
general, but their sovereign. And as they could at will make
peace with either party, the one desiring it from ambitious
motives and the other from fear, they elected to make it with
the Count Sforza, and offered him their assistance in effecting
the desired acquisition ; persuading themselves that the Milan-
ese, on finding themselves duped by Sforza, would from resent-
ment subject themselves rather to any other authority than his,
and that, being brought to the condition that they could neither
defend themselves nor place any confidence in their general,
the Count, they would be obliged, not knowing where else to
go, to throw themselves into the arms of Venice. Having
resolved upon this course they sounded the Count’s disposition,
and found him greatly inclined to peace, being determined that
the victory of Caravaggio should prove to his own advantage,
and not to that of the Milanese. A treaty was therefore con-
cluded between them, according to which the Venetians obligat-
ed themselves to pay the Count the sum of thirteen thousand
florins per month, until he should have effected the acquisition

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE, PASE

of Milan, and moreover to furnish him during the war four
thousand horse and two thousand infantry. Sforza, on the
other hand, bound himself to restore to the Venetians the
places, prisoners, and whatever else he might have taken from
them during that war, and to remain satisfied with only those
places which Duke Filippo held at the time of his death.

20. When the news of this treaty became known to the
Milanese, they were more afflicted by it than they had before
been rejoiced at the victory of Caravaggio. The rulers of the
city lamented, the people complained, the women and children
cried, and all united in calling the Count disloyal and a traitor.
And although they did not believe that they could with prayers
and promises induce him to abandon his unjust intentions, yet
they sent ambassadors to him to see with what face and words
he would attempt to carry out his villany ; and having appeared
before Sforza, one of them addressed him as follows : —

“It is usual for those who desire to obtain anything by con-
“cession to employ prayers, gifts, or menaces, so that by the
“influence of pity, the hope of gain, or by fear, they may obtain
“a compliance with their request. But as these means are of
“no avail with cruel and avaricious men, and such as are filled
“with the pride of their power, it is vain to attempt to soften
“them with prayers, or to win them by gifts, or alarm them
-“with menaces. Knowing therefore now, although too late,
“your cruelty, ambition, and pride, we come not for the pur-
“pose of entreating you for anything, nor in the belief that we
“should obtain it even were we to ask for it; but to recall to
“your memory the benefits you have received at the hands
“of the people of Milan, and to show you with what ingrati-
“tude you have rewarded them ; so that, amidst the great afflic-
“tions we are experiencing, we may at least have the small
“gratification of upbraiding you as being the cause of them.
“For you must not forget what your condition was after the
“death of Duke Filippo. Then you were at enmity with the
“Pope and the king of Naples; you had betrayed the Floren-
“tines and Venetians, who became your enemies from their
“recent and just resentment, and from having no longer any
“need of your services. You found yourself exhausted by the
“war with the Church, having but few troops, and without
“allies or money, and hopeless of being able to maintain your
“states and ancient reputation ; all of which would easily have

292 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

“caused your overthrow had it not been for our confiding sim-
“plicity. For we received you in our homes because of the
“reverence we had for the happy memory of our Duke, with
“whom you had formed a relationship and recent friendship,
“believing that that friendship would be transferred to his
“heirs, and that if to the benefits you have received from him
“you were to add those which we have bestowed upon you, that
“friendship would not only be firm but unalterable ; and there-
“fore we added Verona or Brescia to the original stipulations
“of the convention. What more could we give or promise
“you? And what more, I say, could you at that time have
“had or have desired from us, or from any one else? The
“benefits which you have received at our hands were as un-
“expected by you as the evil which you have returned us
“therefor was unlooked for by us. Nor did you delay until
“now to manifest your iniquitous intentions towards us, for no
“sooner had you become the general of our armies than you
“accepted Pavia, contrary to all justice, which act ought to
“have revealed to us what your friendship would come to in
“the end. We bore this injury, thinking that this acquisition
“would satisfy your ravening ambition. But alas! those who
“aim at the whole will never be satisfied with only a part.
“You had promised us that whatever acquisitions you might
“make after that should inure to our benefit, for you knew
“well at the time that you could at one blow take from us
“what at different times you had conceded us. Such was your
“conduct after the victory at Caravaggio, which, having been
“achieved with our blood and treasure, was followed by our
“ruin. Alas! unhappy are those cities that have to defend
“their liberties against the ambition of a ruthless usurper! but
“twice unhappy are those that are obliged to rely for their
“defence upon mercenary and faithless arms like thine! May
“our example at least be of some value to posterity ; although
“we ourselves were not benefited by that of Thebes and Philip
“of Macedon, who, after overcoming her enemies, became her
“captain, and finally her enemy and master. We cannot, how-
“ever, be accused of any other fault than that of having con-
“fided too much in one whom we should have trusted but
“little ; for your past life and your ambition, which no state or
“station could ever satisfy, ought to have served us as a warn-
“ing. Nor ought we to have placed our hopes upon one who,

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 293

“having betrayed the lord of Lucca, wrung tribute from the
‘“‘Florentines and Venetians, treated our Duke with disrespect,
“and reviled the king of Naples, and, above all, one who so
“many times outraged God and the Church. Nor ought we
“ever to have supposed that the Milanese would have more
“power over the mind of Francesco Sforza than so many other
“potentates ; or that he would have observed towards us that
‘faith which to others he had so often violated. The want of
“prudence with which we are chargeable is, however, no ex-
“cuse for your perfidy; nor will it purge you of that infamy
“with which our just complaints will brand you before the
“whole world. Nor will it assuage the just stings of thy con-
“science when the arms which we prepared for the’ purpose
“of attacking and alarming others shall be employed by you
“acainst us; for you will feel yourself that you have merited
“the punishment that is reserved for parricides. And though
“your own ambition may blind you, yet the whole world, wit-
“ness to your iniquity, will make you open your eyes. Yes,
“God himself will open them for you, if it be true that perju-
“ries, violated faith, and treason be hateful to him, unless he
‘should continue forever as, for some occult reason, he seems
“to have been until now, the seeming friend of the evil-doers
“amongst men. Do not therefore anticipate a certain victory,
_ “which God in his just anger will prevent; for we are resolved
“to yield our liberty only with our lives; and even should we
“not be able to defend it, we would prefer to surrender it to any
‘other prince rather than to you. And if from the excess of
“our sins we should, contrary to our will, fall into your hands,
“rest assured that a reign begun by you in fraud and iniquity
“will end with you or your children in infamy and ruin.”

21. Count Sforza, although stung by every word the Milanese
had said, yet manifested neither by words nor gestures any ex-
traordinary displeasure. He replied that “he was content to
“ascribe to their angry feelings all their grave charges and the
“imprudence of their words, to which he would reply more par-
“ticularly if he were before any one who could be a judge of their
“differences ; for then it would appear that he had not injured
“the Milanese, but had merely taken precautions that they
“should not injure him. For they well knew their own conduct
“after the victory of Caravaggio, when, instead of rewarding
“him with Brescia or Verona, they sought to make peace with

294 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

“the Venetians, so that he would have had nothing but the
“burden of the quarrel, whilst they would have had the fruits
“of victory and the satisfaction of peace. They could not there-
“fore complain of his having concluded that peace which they
“themselves had been the first to try to make. And if he had
“delayed somewhat in taking this course, it was for him now to
“reproach them with that ingratitude with which they had up-
“braided him. And the truth or falsity of this would be made
“manifest at the end of the war by that God whom they invoked
“to avenge their wrongs, and who would also see who was most
“devoted to him, and which of the two had fought with most
“justice on their side.”

The ambassadors having left, the Count prepared to at-
tack the Milanese, and they in turn to defend themselves ;
and for this purpose they appointed to the command of their
forces Francesco and Jacopo Piccinino (whom the ancient
hatred between the Braccesca and Sforzesca had kept faith-
ful to the Milanese) to defend their liberties until they should
have succeeded at least in detaching the Venetians from the
Count Sforza, persuaded that these would not remain his faith-
ful allies long. Sforza, on the other hand, being fully cog-
nizant of all this, judged that it would be wise to bind the
Venetians to him by interest, where the treaty obligations were
insufficient to do so. And therefore in assigning to each their
respective share of the enterprise he agreed that the Venetians
should assail Crema, whilst he with his own troops would attack
the other parts of the state. This arrangement caused the
Venetians to adhere to their alliance with the Count Sforza
sufficiently long to enable him to take possession of the whole
Milanese territory ; and to press them so close in the city that
they could not obtain any supplies. So that, despairing of any
other help, they sent messengers to the Venetians to beg them
to have compassion upon their condition, and in accordance
with the custom of republics to support them in the defence
of their liberties, and not a tyrant whom, after he should have
succeeded in making himself master of their city, they would
be unable to resist in their turn. Nor was it likely, they added,
that Sforza would remain satisfied with the conditions of the
treaty, but would want to have the ancient limits of the state
recognized. The Venetians had not yet made themselves mas-
ters of Crema, and, desiring to do so before changing sides, they

Book VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 295

replied publicly to the Milanese envoys, that according to their
treaty with the Count they could not come to their assistance,
but privately they encouraged them to give the Signori of
Milan every hope of help from them.

22. Sforza was already so close upon Milan with his troops
that they were fighting in the suburbs ; whilst the Venetians,
having now taken Crema, thought the time had come for their
alliance with the Milanese, with whom they concluded a treaty,
one of the first conditions of which was that they were to aid
them in the defence of their liberty. This treaty made, they
ordered such of their troops as were with the Count to leave
his camp and retire into the Venetian territory. They also sig-
nified to the Count that they had made peace with the Milanese,
and gave him twenty days’ time to accept it also. Sforza was
not surprised at this action of the Venetians, which he had ex-
pected for some time and looked for any day. Nevertheless,
when it actually took place he could not but regret it, experi-
encing the same annoyance which the Milanese felt when he
deserted them. He asked for two days’ time to give his answer
to the Venetian ambassadors, resolving, however, to deceive
them, and not to desist from his enterprise. And therefore
he declared publicly that he was willing to accept the peace,
and sent ambassadors of his own to Venice with ample powers
to ratify it; but privately he instructed them under no circum-
stances to do so, but to delay its conclusion by various objec-
tions and cavillings. And by way of making the Venetians
believe the more that he was in earnest, he made a truce with
the Milanese for one month, and withdrew from the city, dis-
tributing his troops in quarters in the surrounding places which
he had taken. This course was the cause of his success and
of the ruin of the Milanese; for the Venetians, confident of
peace, became dilatory in making the necessary provisions for
the war, and the Milanese, seeing the truce concluded and the
enemy withdrawn, and having secured the alliance of the Vene-
tians, fully believed that Sforza had given up the enterprise.
This belief proved ruinous to them in two ways; one, because
they neglected to make the necessary dispositions for their
defence ; and the other, because, it being seedtime, they plant-
ed the whole country not occupied by the enemy with grain,
thus enabling Sforza the more easily to sustain himself and
starve them. All these things, which proved so injurious to

296 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VI.

the Milanese, were highly advantageous to the Count, besides
affording him time for the repose of his army, and to provide
reinforcements.

23. In this war in Lombardy the Florentines had not de-
clared themselves in favor of either of the belligerents, nor
had they given any support to the Count Sforza, either when he
defended the Milanese or afterwards ; for not standing in need
of it, the Count had not asked for it. The only thing the
Florentines had done was after the defeat at Caravaggio to send
assistance to the Venetians in virtue of the obligations of the
league. But Sforza being now reduced to his own forces, and
not knowing where to look for help, was obliged by necessity
to ask for help from the Florentines in the most pressing man-
ner. He addressed himself publicly to the government and
privately to his friends, and especially to Cosimo de’ Medici,
with whom he had always kept up an uninterrupted friend-
ship, and who had in all his enterprises counselled him faith-
fully and aided him liberally. Nor did Cosimo forsake him
now in his great strait, but aided him largely in his private
capacity and urged him to persevere in his present enterprise.
He endeavored also to make the city aid Sforza, in which, how-
ever, there was a difficulty. Neri di Gino Capponi was at
this period very influential in Florence (1449), and he thought
it would not be advantageous for Florence that Sforza should
succeed in making himself master of Milan; believing it to
be more for the benefit of all Italy that the Count should
ratify the peace rather than continue the war. In the first
instance he feared that the indignation of the Milanese against
Sforza would induce them to give themselves entirely to the
Venetians, which would be most dangerous to all; and next
it seemed to him that, if the Count should succeed in taking
Milan, the union of such large forces and such extensive pos-
sessions under one man would be most formidable, and that,
if Sforza had been insupportable as Count, as Duke he would
be wholly unbearable. He argued, therefore, that it would be
better for the republic of Florence, and for all Italy, that Sforza
should not increase his military power, and that Lombardy
should be divided into two republics, which should never be
allowed to combine for any attack upon others, whilst each by
itself would be too feeble to attempt it. And to effect this Neri
saw no better means than not to furnish aid to the Count, but

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 297

strictly to maintain the old league with the Venetians. The
friends of Cosimo did not accept this argument; for they feared
that Neri had reasoned thus, not because he deemed it for the
good of the republic, but because he did not wish Sforza, who
was the friend of Cosimo, to become Duke of Milan, which in the
opinion of Neri would strengthen the influence of Cosimo. On
the other hand, Cosimo pointed out that aiding the Count would
prove most beneficial to the republic, as well as to the whole of
Italy ; for it was not reasonable to suppose that the Milanese
would be able to maintain their independence, because the char-
acter of the citizens generally, their mode of life, and the ancient
factions in that city, were in all respects most unfavorable to a
republican form of government; so that it was necessary either
that Sforza should become Duke of Milan, or that the Milanese
should throw themselves into the arms of the Venetians. And
in that state of the case, Cosimo thought that none would be so
foolish as to doubt which would be the best for Florence, either
to have a powerful friend for neighbor, or a still more powerful
enemy. Nor could he believe that there was any reason to
apprehend that the Milanese, from their enmity to the Count,
would yield themselves to the Venetians; for the Count had a
party in Milan, whilst the Venetians had not; so that whenever
the Milanese should no longer be able to defend their liberty,
they would always be more apt to subject themselves to the
Count Sforza than to the Venetians. This diversity of opinion
kept Florence for some time in suspense; and finally it was re-
solved to send ambassadors to the Count Sforza to arrange a
treaty with him, with instructions to conclude it promptly in
case they found him strong and confident of victory ; otherwise,
to delay its conclusion on some pretext or other.

24. (1450.) The ambassadors had hardly reached Reggio,
when they learned that Sforza had taken Milan; for upon the
expiration of the truce the Count closed in upon the city with
his forces, in the hope of making himself master of it in spite
of the Venetians, inasmuch as they could render it no assist-
ance except from the side of the Adda, which route he could
easily block. And as it was winter time he was not afraid
that the Venetians would press him very close; so that he
hoped before the close of the winter to have secured the vic-
tory, especially as Francesco Piccinino had died, and_ his
brother Jacopo remained the only general of the Milanese.

298 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

The Venetians meantime sent an ambassador to Milan to ex-
hort the inhabitants to a vigorous defence, and to promise
them large and speedy succor. Some slight skirmishing oc-
curred during the winter between the Venetians and the
Count; but when the season became milder, the Venetian
forces, under command of Pandolfo Malatesti established them-
selves above the Adda, where they resolved to attack the
Count, and try the fortune of battle in aid of the Milanese.
Pandolfo himself, however, advised against the attempt, well
knowing the Count’s valor and that of his army, and believing
that it would be more safe to conquer him without fighting,
because the Count would be compelled to retire from want of
provisions and forage. He therefore counselled the holding
of that position, as they would thereby encourage the Milanese
to hope for speedy succor, and prevent their surrendering to
the Count. This plan was approved by the Venetians, partly
because they considered it a safe one, and partly also because
they had the hope that, by keeping the Milanese in this neces-
sitous condition, these would be forced to place themselves
under their government; for they had persuaded themselves
that the Milanese would never give themselves to the Count
because of the injuries they had received at his hands.

The Milanese were meantime reduced to the extremest mis-
ery ; and as that city habitually abounds in poor, many of these
died in the streets from starvation; so that the whole city
was filled with lamentations and disturbances which greatly
alarmed the magistrates, who, in consequence, took every pre-
caution to prevent the people from assembling together. The
multitude is always slow in being moved to evil, but, once so
disposed, the slightest accident will start them to violence.
Two men of low condition were conversing near the Porta
Nuova about the calamities of the city and their own misery,
and as to what means there were for their safety; a few
others began to join them, so that it very soon became a nu-
merous group. This gave rise to a report in Milan that the peo-
ple at the Porta Nuova were in arms against the magistrates.
Upon this all the lower classes, who were only awaiting an
opportunity, seized their arms, and chose for their captain
Gasparo da Vicomercato, and marched to where the magis-
trates were assembled. And this was done with such a rush
that all who were not able to fly were killed; amongst these

Boox VL] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 299

was Leonardo Veneto, the Venetian ambassador, whom the
people looked upon as the cause of the famine and as rejoicing
at their wretchedness, and therefore they killed him. Having
thus ina manner become masters of the city, they consulted
amongst themselves as to what should be done to relieve them
from all their troubles and give them peace ; and all agreed
that, inasmuch as they were not able to preserve their liberty,
it was best to take refuge under some prince who was com-
petent to defend them. Some were for calling in the King
Alfonso, some wanted the Duke of Savoy, and some the king
of France, but no one mentioned the name of Sforza, so strong
was still the feeling against him. But as the people could not
agree upon any other, Gasparo Vicomercato was the first to
suggest the name of Count Francesco Sforza, showing them
plainly that, “if they wanted to get rid of the war, there was
“no other way but to call him; for the people of Milan had
“need of a certain and immediate peace, and not of the distant
“hope of future succor.” He excused the attempt of the Count,
and blamed the Venetians and all the other princes of Italy,
who, some from ambition and some from avarice, were not
willing that they should enjoy independence and liberty. “And
‘as after all they would have to give up their liberty, it was
‘best to surrender it to some one who had the ability and skill
“to defend them; so that at least they might have peace as
“the result of their servitude, and not increased sufferings
‘“‘and perilous wars.” Gasparo was listened to with wonder-
“ful attention, and after he had finished speaking all cried out
that Count Sforza should be called in, and they deputed Gas-
paro for that purpose. He went by command of the people to
seek the Count, and made known to him the joyful and happy
news, which Sforza accepted most gladly. He entered Milan
as Prince on the 26th of February, 1450, and was received
with the greatest and most wonderful rejoicings by the very
men who but a short time before had loaded him with impre-
cations.

25. When the news of this revolution became known to the
government of Florence, they instructed their ambassadors,
who were on the way to the Count Sforza, instead of negotiating
a treaty with him, to congratulate him as Duke of Milan upon
his success. These ambassadors were received with greatest
distinction by the Duke and bountifully honored; for he well

300 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VI.

knew that he could not in all Italy have more faithful or
braver allies against the power of the Venetians than the
Florentines. For being relieved now of the fear of the. house
of Visconti, they felt that they would have to contend against
the combined forces of the Aragonese and the Venetians; for
the Aragonese kings of Naples were their enemies on account
of the friendship which the Florentine people had always borne
to the house of France; and as to the Venetians, they were
aware that their ancient fear of the Visconti had been trans-
ferred to themselves, and knowing with how much zeal the
former had persecuted the Visconti, they feared similar perse-
cutions now themselves, and therefore naturally sought their
ruin. Such were the considerations that induced the new
Duke so readily to form a friendship with the Florentines ;
whilst the Venetians and King Alfonso united against their
common enemies, obligating themselves mutually to put their
armies into the field simultaneously. King Alfonso was to
attack the Florentines, and the Venetians the Duke Fran-
cesco of Milan, who, being but recently established in that
state, was believed by them unable to sustain himself either
by his own forces or by the aid of others. But as the league
between the Florentines and the Venetians had not yet ex-
pired, and the King Alfonso, after the war of Piombino, had
made peace with the latter, it did not seem well to them to
break the peace unless they could first with some color of right
justify the war (1451). And therefore they both sent am-
bassadors to.Florence to explain that the league had not been
made for the purpose of attacking any one, but only for the
defence of their respective states. Afterwards the Venetian
ambassador complained “that the Florentines had allowed
“ Alessandro, the Duke’s brother, to pass with troops through
“Lunigiana into Lombardy; and moreover that they had been
“the authors and advisers of the treaty made between the Duke
“and the Marquis of Mantua; all of which acts, he affirmed,
“were adverse to their state and to the terms of the alliance
“existing between them; and therefore he reminded them
“amicably that he who offends wrongfully gives cause to the
“other party to be rightfully offended, and that he who breaks
“the peace must expect war.” The Signoria commissioned
Cosimo to reply, who in a lengthy and judicious speech went
over all the benefits conferred by his city upon the Venetian

Book VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 301

republic; he pointed out what extensive possessions they had
gained by means of the money, troops, and counsel of the
Florentines, and reminded them “that, since the friendship
“had originated with the Florentines, so they would never be
“the cause of enmity. And having ever been lovers of peace,
“they were well pleased with the treaty made between them,
“in so far as its object was peace, and not war. In truth, he
‘wondered much at the complaints made, and that so great
“a republic should make so much account of such a slight
‘and trivial cause. But even if it were a matter worthy of con-
“sideration, they wanted every one to understand that they
“intended their country to be free and open to everybody ; and
“that the Duke’s character was such, that, to enable him to
“form an alliance with Mantua, he had no need of either their
‘counsels or support. And therefore he thought that these
“complaints must have been caused by some other offence
“than what appeared on the surface. Be that, however, as it
“might, it would readily be seen by every one, that in propor-
“tion as the friendship of the Florentines was advantageous,
“so their enmity would prove dangerous.”

26. For the present the matter passed lightly over, and the
ambassadors retired seemingly satisfied; but the alliance of
the Venetians with the king of Naples, and their proceedings,
caused the Duke and the Florentines to fear a renewal of the
war, rather than to hope for a lasting peace. The Florentines,
therefore, formed an alliance with the Duke, and soon after the
hostile disposition of the Venetians began to manifest itself,
for they allied themselves with the Siennese, and expelled all
the Florentines and their dependents from their city and terri-
tory. King Alfonso very soon after did the same thing, wholly
regardless of the peace concluded the preceding year, and with-
out any just grounds or even color of pretext for such action.
The Venetians also sought to obtain possession of Bologna, and,
having armed the banished, they introduced them into the city
one night through one of the sewers. Their entrance was not
. perceived until they themselves raised the cry. Santi Benti-
vogli, being aroused by it, was told that the entire city was in
the hands of the rebels; and although he was urged by many
to save himself by flight, as he could not possibly save the
city by remaining, yet he resolved to face fortune; and having
armed, he encouraged his followers, and, making head with

302 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VL

a few friends, he attacked a portion of the rebels and routed
them, killing many and driving the rest from the city. By this
conduct Santi was said by every one to have given the best
proof of being of the true blood of the Bentivogli. These events
and demonstrations convinced the Florentines that other wars
were near at hand. They therefore made their usual prepara-
tions for defence, appointed a Council of Ten, engaged new Con-
dottieri, and sent envoys to Rome, Naples, Venice, Milan, and
- Sienna, to ask help of their friends, detect the suspicious, win
over the doubtful, and to discover the designs of the enemy.
From the Pope they received nothing but vague words, protes-
tations of good will, and counsels of peace; from the king of
Naples, vain excuses for having expelled the Florentines, and of-
fering a safe conduct to whoever might ask for it; and although
he sought in every way to conceal the fact that he had advised
the renewal of the war, yet the ambassadors became convinced
of his unfriendly disposition, and discovered many of his hos-
tile preparations against their republic. The league with the
Duke of Milan was strengthened by fresh mutual obligations,
and through the Duke’s mediation an alliance was concluded
with the Genoese, and all the old differences as to reprisals and
other complaints were adjusted, although the Venetians sought
in every possible way to disturb the settlement of these dis-
putes, and even appealed to the Sultan of Turkey to expel the
Florentines from his dominions. Such was the bitterness of
feeling with which they resumed this war; and so powerful was |
this thirst for dominion with them, that, regardless of every
consideration, they sought to destroy a people to whom they
were indebted for so much of their greatness. The Sultan,
however, gave no heed to their request. The Venetian Senate
forbade the Florentine ambassadors from entering the territory
>of that republic, alleging that, being bound by alliance to the
king of Naples, they could not listen to them without his par-
ticipation. The Siennese received the ambassadors with kindly
words, fearing lest they should be assailed and defeated before
their allies could come to their defence. They preferred, there-
fore, to lull into inaction an enemy whom they would be unable
to resist. The Venetians and the king of Naples, according
to what was then conjectured, wanted to send ambassadors to
- Florence to justify the war; but the Venetian ambassador
was not permitted to enter the Florentine dominions, and the

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 803

king’s ambassador being unwilling to undertake the office by
himself, that mission was left unaccomplished. And thus
the Venetians learned that the Florentines showed them even
less respect than they had shown the Florentines a few months
before.

27. In the midst of the general uneasiness caused by these
movements the Emperor Frederick LI. came to Italy to be
crowned. He entered Florence on the 80th of January, 1451,
and was received with the utmost demonstrations of honor by
the Signoria, and remained until the 6th of February, when he
departed for Rome for his coronation. This having been duly
solemnized, as also his nuptials with the Empress, who had
come there by sea, he returned to Germany, passing again
through Florence, where they paid him the same honors as at
his coming. After his return he bestowed the cities of Modena
and Reggio upon the Marquis of Ferrara, as a reward for ser-
vices rendered. The Florentines meantime did not cease their
preparations for the impending war; and by way of increasing
their reputation and intimidating the enemy, they, in conjunc-
tion with the Duke of Milan, formed a league with the king of
France for the mutual defence of their states, which treaty was
published throughout Italy with great pomp and manifestations
of gladness. With the opening of May, 1452, the Venetians
concluded no longer to defer open hostilities against the Duke,
and attacked him with six thousand infantry and sixteen thou-
sand horse, in the direction of Lodi; and at the same time the
Marquis of Monferrato, prompted either by his own ambition or
by the Venetians, assailed him near Alessandria. The Duke,
on the other hand, having collected eighteen thousand horse
and three thousand infantry, and having garrisoned Lodi and
Alessandria, as well as the other places where the enemy might
annoy him, attacked the Brescian territory, where he damaged
the Venetians seriously, ravaging the country in every direc-
tion and sacking the feeble towns. The Marquis of Mon-
ferrato having been defeated by the troops of the Duke, the
latter was enabled to move with greater force against the
Venetians, and to invade their territory.

28. Whilst the war was going on in Lombardy with vary-
ing and inconsiderable incidents little worthy of note, it had
also broken out in Tuscany between the Florentines and King
Alfonso, in which, however, there occurred no greater display

304 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

of gallantry nor any greater danger than in the operations in
Lombardy. Ferdinand, an illegitimate son of King Alfonso,
had come into Tuscany with twelve thousand men, under the
command of Federigo, lord of Urbino. His first attempt was
upon Foiano in the Val di Chiana, for, being friends with the
Siennese, they had entered the Florentine territory from that
side. The castle was small, with feeble walls; and although
having but few inhabitants, yet they were reputed, according
to the times, as brave and faithful. The Signoria of Florence
had sent, moreover, two hundred soldiers to garrison it. This
castle, so provided, was besieged by Ferdinand; and whether it
was the bravery of the men within, or the lack of it on the part
of the Neapolitans, it took Ferdinand thirty-six days before he
became master of it. This length of time afforded the republic
the opportunity to provide for the defence of the other and more
important places, by garrisoning them and making them in
every way more capable of defence than before. After the tak-
ing of the castle of Foiano, the enemy went to Chianti, where
they were unable to take two little villas owned by private indi-
viduals. Leaving these, therefore, they laid siege to Castellina,
a castle near Chianti, ten miles from Sienna, feeble as regards
artificial means of defence, and still more feeble as regards posi-
tion. But the weakness of the assailants could not overcome
the twofold weakness of the castle, for after forty-four days of
siege they were obliged shamefully to give it up. Such was
the terror of those armies, and so dangerous were those wars,
that places which nowadays are abandoned as incapable of
defence were in those days defended, being looked upon as
impregnable. Whilst Ferdinand remained encamped near
Chianti, he made many predatory incursions into the Floren-
tine territory, coming within six miles of the city of Florence,
to the great terror and damage of the Florentine subjects.
The Florentine army, to the number of eight thousand, under
Astorre da Faenza and Gismondo Malatesti, had been led to-
wards the castle of Colli, so as to keep them at a distance
from the enemy, for the purpose of avoiding an engagement.
For they thought that, so long as they had not been defeated in
a general battle, the war would result favorably to them. They
had no uneasiness about the small castles they had lost, and
which would be recovered at the re-establishment of peace ;
and they felt safe as to the larger cities, knowing that the enemy

Book VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 305

could not attack them. King Alfonso had also a fleet of about
twenty sail, galleys and small craft, lying in the Pisan waters,
and, whilst Ferdinand was carrying on the war by land, he
attacked with this fleet the castle of Rocca di Vada, which the
negligence of the castellan enabled him to take; and from
there they began to harass the surrounding country. The
Florentines, however, soon put a stop to this, by sending a
few soldiers to Campiglia, who kept the enemy strictly con-
fined to the seacoast.

29. The Pope took no part in these wars, other than to
endeavor to restore harmony amongst the parties, although
whilst avoiding foreign wars he experienced more dangerous
troubles at home. There lived at that time in Rome a citizen
called Messer Stefano Porcari, equally illustrious by his birth
and his learning, but still more so by the excellence of his
character. According to the nature of men who are eager for
glory, he desired to do, or to attempt to do, something worthy
of being remembered; and thus he concluded that he could do
nothing better than to attempt to rescue his country from the
hands of the prelates, and to restore the ancient laws and insti-
tutions, hoping, in the event of success, to be called a new
founder and second father of the city of Rome. He was encour-
aged to hope for success in this attempt by the general corrup-
tion of the prelates, and the discontent of the barons and the
Roman people; but what inflamed him still more was this
passage from the ode of Petrarch which begins, “Spirto gentil
che quelle membra reggi,” viz. :—

“Sopra il Monte Tarpeio, Canzon, vedrai
“Un cavalier ch’ Italia tutta onora,
“ Pensoso pit @’ altrui, che di se stesso.” *

Messer Stefano knew that poets are filled with a divine and
prophetic inspiration, and therefore thought that what Petrarch
had prophesied was sure to happen, and that to him was
reserved the distinction of carrying that glorious enterprise
into execution; believing himself in eloquence, learning, in-
fluence, and the number of friends, superior to any other
Roman. Deeply imbued with this idea, he could not control
himself with sufficient caution not to betray his design by his
speech, conduct, and mode of life. So that he became suspect

* “On the Tarpeian Mount, O Muse, thou lt see a knight honored by all

Italy, and more devoted to the interests of others than his own.”
VOL. I. 20

306 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VI.

to the Pope, who, for the purpose of depriving him of all oppor-
tunity of doing harm, banished Porcari to Bologna, and ordered
the governor of that city to make Porcari report himself daily.
Messer Stefano, however, was not discouraged from his purpose
by this first check, but rather pursued his object with increased
zeal; and by more cautious proceedings he kept up secret rela-
tions with his friends in Rome, and went to and fro between
Bologna and Rome with such celerity as to be back always in
time to present himself to the governor at the appointed periods.
Having drawn a sufficient number of persons into his project,

he resolved no longer to delay its execution, and directed his.

friends in Rome, on a given day, to prepare a splendid supper,
where all the conspirators should meet, with the understanding
that each was to bring with him his most trusty friends, and
he promised to be there himself before supper should be served.
Everything was done according to his directions, and Porcari
himself had already arrived in the house where the feast was to
take place. So soon as supper was served, Porcari appeared all
arrayed in garments of cloth of gold, and with collars, orders,
and other decorations, which gave him a majestic and com-
manding aspect; and having embraced each one of the com-
pany, he counselled them in a lengthy speech to take courage,
and to dispose their minds to the glorious enterprise in hand.
He then arranged the mode of proceeding, and ordered that one
part of them should, on the following morning, seize the pontif-
ical palace, and that the others should call the people of Rome
to arms. But during the night the matter was communicated
to the Pope; according to some, by treachery on the part of
some of the conspirators; according to others, because the
Pope knew of Porcari’s presence in Rome. Be this as it may,
during the night of the supper the Pope had Porcari and the
greater part of his associates seized, and, according to their
crime, put to death. Such was the end of this attempt; and
although some may praise Porcari’s intentions, yet every one
will blame his judgment; for all such enterprises, even if they
possess some shadow of glory in their conception, yet their
execution almost invariably ends in ruin.

30. The war in Tuscany had lasted nearly a year, and the
period had arrived, in 1453, for the armies to take the field,
when the Florentines saw Alessandro Sforza, brother of the
Duke Francesco, come to their aid with two thousand horse.

Bs

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 307

The Florentine army having been thus reinforced, whilst that
of the king was diminished, the Florentines deemed the occa-
sion favorable for recovering the places that had been taken
from them by the enemy, in which they succeeded with very
little trouble. They then besieged Foiano, which was sacked
in consequence of the negligence of the commissaries ; so that
the inhabitants became dispersed, and it was with difficulty
afterwards that they were induced to return by promises of
rewards and immunities from impositions. They also recovered
Rocca di Vada; for the enemy, seeing that they could not hold
it, burnt and abandoned it. Whilst these things were being
accomplished by the Florentines, the Aragonese army, having
no desire to approach that of the enemy, moved to the vicinity of
Sienna, whence they made numerous incursions into the Flor-
entine territory, committing robberies and disturbances, and
spreading general alarm. Nor did King Alfonso cease his ef-
forts to injure the enemy in other ways, to divide their forces,
and to dishearten them by various annoyances and attacks.
Gherardo Gambacorti was lord of the Val di Bagno; his an-
cestors as well as himself had, either from friendship or from
obligation, always been in the pay or under the protection of the
Florentines. King Alfonso opened secret negotiations with
him for the surrender of that district, in return for which he of-
fered him another principality in the kingdom of Naples. When
these negotiations became known at Florence the Signoria sent
an envoy to Gherardo for the purpose of ascertaining his inten-
tions, and to remind him of the obligations which he and his
ancestors owed the Florentines, and to exhort him to continue
loyal to that republic. Gherardo pretended to be astonished,
and affirmed with solemn oaths that such villanous thoughts
had never entered his mind, and that he would go in person to
Florence to prove his good faith; but being indisposed and
unable to go, he would send his son, whom he handed over
to the.ambassador to take with him to Florence as a hostage.
These assurances and demonstrations made the Florentines
believe in the sincerity of Gherardo, and that he had been
basely slandered by his accusers, and therefore they felt reas-
sured upon that point. Meantime Gherardo carried on the ne-
gotiations with the king with increased earnestness, and when
they were concluded, the king sent Fra Puccio, a Knight of
Jerusalem, with a considerable force, into the Val di Bagno

308 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

to take possession of Gherardo’s castles and towns. But the
people of the Val di Bagno, being devoted to the Florentines,
most unwillingly promised obedience to the royal commissaries.
Fra Puccio had nearly taken possession of the entire district,
and all he lacked was to make himself master of the castle of
Corzano. Whilst Gherardo was about to make the formal
transfer of this castle, there was amongst his followers who
surrounded him one Antonio Gualandi, a Pisan, young and
bold, who did not like this treason of Gherardo’s. Considering
the position of the castle, and judging from the expression of
the countenances and gestures of the garrison that they were ill
content with the proceeding, and seeing Gherardo standing at
the gate for the purpose of admitting the Aragonese troops,
Antonio went behind him and suddenly with both hands pushed
Gherardo outside of the castle gate, which he ordered the guard
to close upon such a villain, and to save the castle for the
Florentine republic. When this became known in Bagno and
the neighboring places, all the people took up arms against the
Aragonese, and having raised the Florentine banner they suc-
cessfully drove them out. When this intelligence reached
Florence they imprisoned the son of Gherardo, who had been
given to them asa hostage, and sent troops to Bagno to defend
the country for the republic, and to reduce that province, which
until then had been governed by its own prince, to a mere
vicariate. Gherardo, traitor alike to his government and to
his own son, escaped with much difficulty, leaving his wife and
family and all his possessions in the power of theenemy. This
occurrence was highly appreciated at Florence, for if King
Alfonso had succeeded in making himself master of that part
of the country, he could with little risk have made incursions
into the Val di Tevere and the Casentino, whence he could
have annoyed and harassed the republic to that degree that
the Florentines, with all their forces, would have been unable
to resist the Aragonese army, which was at Sienna.

31. Besides the preparations made in Italy for repelling the
forces of the hostile league, the Florentines had sent Messer
Agnolo Acciaiuoli as their ambassador to the king of France,
to induce him to empower King Regnier of Anjou to come into
Italy to aid his friends; and that then, once being in Italy, he
might again attempt the conquest of the kingdom of Naples;
and to this effect they promised him assistance of men and

Boox VI] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 309

money. Thus, whilst the war was being carried on in Tuscany
and Lombardy in the manner we have narrated, the ambassa-
dor concluded an arrangement with King Regnier to come into
Italy during June with three thousand four hundred horse ; and
upon his arrival at Alessandria the allies were to pay him
thirty thousand florins, and during the continuance of the war
ten thousand florins per month. But when King Regnier in
accordance with this arrangement wanted to pass into Italy, he
was prevented by the Duke of Savoy and the Marquis of Mon-
ferrato; who, being friends of the Venetians, refused him pas-
sage through their possessions. King Regnier was thereupon
advised by the Florentine ambassador to return to Provence,
and to come thence by sea into Italy with some of his forces,
and thereby to increase the preponderance of his friends.
And that, on the other hand, he should induce the king of
France to prevail upon the Duke of Savoy to allow the re-
mainder of his troops to pass through his territory. This ad-
vice was accepted and acted upon successfully; for Regnier
came by sea into Italy, and his troops were permitted, out of
regard for the king of France, to pass through Savoy. “King
Regnier was most honorably received by Duke Francesco; and
after uniting the French and Italian forces, they attacked the
Venetians with such vehemence, that they recovered in a little
while all the places which the Venetians had taken in the Cre-
monese territory. Not satisfied with this, they also occupied
the whole of the Brescian territory ; so that the Venetian army,
feeling no longer secure in the open field, retreated close under
the walls of Brescia. But upon the setting in of winter the
Duke deemed it prudent to move his troops into quarters, and
established King Regnier and his troops in Piacenza. Thus
the winter of 1453 was passed without any movement being
attempted ; but when the warm season returned, and the Duke
thought the time fit to take the field and to attempt to take
their inland possessions from the Venetians, King Regnier
notified the Duke that he was obliged to return to France.
This unexpected determination surprised the Duke most un-
pleasantly ; he went at once to dissuade King Regnier from
leaving, but neither entreaties nor promises could move him
from his resolve, and all he obtained from King Regnier was
an agreement to leave a portion of his forces, and to send his
son John to serve the league in his stead. The Florentines

310 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VL.

did not regret King Regnier’s departure, for having recovered
their own places and castles they no longer feared the king
of Naples, and on the other hand they did not wish that the
Duke should recover anything more than his places in Lom-
bardy. Regnier therefore departed, and according to promise
he sent his son into Italy, who without stopping in Lombardy
came direct to Florence, where he was received with the great-
est honors.

32. King Regnier’s departure caused Sforza readily to en-
tertain the idea of peace; and the Venetians, King Alfonso,
and the Florentines, being all tired of war, were equally de-
sirous of peace. The Pope likewise had manifested and still
expressed the greatest anxiety for it; for it was in that very
year that Sultan Mahomet had taken Constantinople, and had
made himself master of all Greece. This conquest alarmed all
Christendom, and more than all the rest the Venetians and
the Pope, who both seemed already to hear the tramp of the
infidel hosts on the soil of Italy. The Pope, therefore, invited
all the Italian states to send ambassadors to him with plenary
powers to establish a universal peace. They all complied with
this request ; but when the ambassadors met and came to dis-
cuss the merits of the question, they found great difficulty in
the negotiations. The king of Naples wanted the Florentines
to reimburse him the expenses of the war, whilst the Floren-
tines made the same pretensions. The Venctians demanded
Cremona from the Duke of Milan, whilst the Duke wanted
Bergamo from them, as also Brescia and Crema; so that it
really seemed impossible to solve these difficulties. And yet
that which seemed so difficult to accomplish at Rome by so
many ambassadors was easily effected by two negotiators at
Milan and Venice; for whilst the negotiations were being
protracted at Rome, the Duke of Milan and the Venetians con-
cluded the terms of an agreement on the 9th of April, 1454,
according to which each resumed the places which they had
before the war, and it was conceded to the Duke that he
might retake the places which the Dukes of Monferrato and
of Savoy had taken from him; and the other Italian princes
were allowed one month’s time to ratify this treaty. The Pope
and the Florentines, and with them the Siennese and the other
smaller powers, ratified it within the given time; and, more-
over, a peace for twenty-five years was concluded between the

Book VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 311

Florentines, the Duke of Milan, and the Venetians. Of all the
Italian princes, King Alfonso alone was dissatisfied with this
peace, for it seemed to him that in the making of it but little
regard was had to his dignity, he having been treated in the
matter not as a principal, but as a mere secondary party ; and
therefore he remained a long while undecided without letting
his intentions be known. But as the Pope and the other
princes sent many solemn embassies to him, he allowed him-
self finally to be persuaded, mainly by the Pope, and joined the
league with his son for thirty years. Thereupon King Alfonso
and the Duke of Milan concluded a double alliance by giving
their daughters reciprocally in marriage to each other’s sons.
By way of preserving, however, the seeds of war in Italy, King
Alfonso did not consent to make peace unless his allies first
conceded to him full liberty to make war, without injury to
them, against the Genoese, Gismondo Malatesti, and Astorre,
lord of Faenza. After concluding this treaty, his son Ferdi-
nand, who was at Sienna, returned to the kingdom of Naples,
having lost a large portion of his forces by his expedition into
Tuscany, and without having made any acquisition of territory.

33. A general peace having thus been established, the only
fear was that it would be disturbed by King Alfonso from his
enmity against the Genoese. But it happened otherwise ; for
the peace was not broken openly by Alfonso, but indirectly,
as is generally the case, by the ambition of the mercenary
soldiers. The Venetians, as was customary upon the estab-
lishment of peace, dismissed from their pay their Condottiere,
Jacopo Piccinino, with whom some other Condottieri, equally
without engagement, united, and passed into the Romagna,
and thence into the Siennese territory. There Jacopo halted
and commenced hostilities against the Siennese, by taking
some of their castles. It was in the beginning of these move-
ments, and in the early part of the year 1455, that Pope Nich-
olas died, and Calixtus IIT. was chosen his successor. This
Pope, for the purpose of repressing this fresh war in his imme-
diate vicinity, quickly collected what troops he could, and sent
them under his general, Giovanni Ventimiglia, against Jacopo,
together with the troops of the Florentines and those of the
Duke of Milan, who had already united for the purpose of sup-
pressing these disturbances. They came to an engagement
near Bolsena, and although Ventimiglia was taken prisoner,

312 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Book VI.

yet Jacopo was defeated and obliged to retreat to Pescaia; and
had he not been assisted with money by King Alfonso, he
would have been entirely destroyed. This gave rise to the
general belief that this attempt of Jacopo’s had been insti-
gated by King Alfonso; so that, deeming himself discovered,
Alfonso, for the purpose of conciliating his associates in the
general peace, whom he had in a measure alienated by this
feeble attempt at war, caused Jacopo to restore to the Siennese
the places which he had taken from them, and they paid him
twenty thousand florins; and after this arrangement, Alfonso
received Jacopo Piccinino, together with his troops, into the
kingdom. Notwithstanding that the Pope was thus engaged
in repressing Jacopo Piccinino, he did not cease to do all he
could to organize the means for averting the danger from
Christendom of being oppressed by the Turks. And for this
purpose he sent messengers and preachers throughout all
Christian lands, to exhort the princes and the people to arm
in defence of their faith, and to aid with their money and
their persons the enterprise against the common enemy. Thus
large collections of money were made in Florence; and many
people assumed the emblem of the red cross, in evidence of
their intention personally to take part in this war against the
infidels. There were also solemn processions, and no lack of
other demonstrations, both public and private, to aid the en-
terprise with their counsel and with money and men. But
this zeal for the crusade was somewhat checked by the in-
telligence that the Sultan, in his attempt to take Belgrade, a
fortress on the river Danube, in Hungary, had been defeated
and wounded by the Hungarians. Thus the alarm which the
taking of Constantinople had caused to the Pontiff and all
Christians having subsided, they proceeded more coolly in the
preparations for the war; and even in Hungary itself their
zeal was chilled by the death of their Vaivode, John Corvinus,
who had gained the victory at Belgrade.

34. But to return to the affairs of Italy. In the course of the
year 1456, when the disturbances caused by Jacopo Piccinino
were quelled, and men had in consequence laid down their arms,
it seemed as though the Almighty himself took them up in turn ;
for there occurred a most frightful tempest in Tuscany, causing
the most marvellous and unheard of effects. At one o’clock
in the morning on the 24th of August there arose a whirlwind

Book VI.} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 313

from the sea above Ancona, passing across Italy, and re-entering
the sea below Pisa, driving before it a huge mass of dense
clouds, which occupied a space of nearly two miles in width,
and, impelled by a superior force, natural or supernatural, was
broken up into many parts that seemed to be contending
amongst themselves. And these broken clouds, now mounting
towards heaven, now descending to the earth, rushed against
each other violently, now moving in circles with incredible
velocity, stirring up before them a tempest of inconceivable
violence, and throwing out frequent vivid flashes of lightning
of the utmost intensity. From these seemingly broken and
confused clouds, and these furious winds and frequent flashes,
there arose a noise exceeding anything that had ever been
heard from either thunder or earthquake, and which excited
such alarm that every one thought the end of the world had
come, and that the earth and the water and the heavens and
the whole world were about to return to their original chaos.
This frightful tornado caused unheard of and wonderful effects
wherever it passed, but more notably than elsewhere around
the castle of San Casciano. This castle is situated within eight
miles of Florence, on the hill that separates the valleys of Pisa
and Grieve. The most violent portion of this furious tem-
pest passed between the Borgo and the castle of San Andrea,
situated on the same hill, not, however, reaching San Andrea,
and just grazing San Casciano; so that only a few of the battle-
ments of the castle and some chimneys of houses were thrown
down. But within the space comprised between these two places
many houses were levelled with the ground. The roofs of the
churches of San Martino a Bagnuolo and Santa Maria della Pace
were carried off entire to a distance of more thana mile. <A
teamster and his mules were found dead in a valley near the
road. All the largest oaks and the strongest trees that did not
yield to the fury of the hurricane were not only stripped of their
branches, but torn up by the roots and carried to a great dis-
tance. When the tempest had passed and daylight came, the
people remained stupefied; for they saw their fields desolated
and wasted, they heard the lamentations of those who had their
homes and possessions destroyed and had left their relatives
and their cattle buried under the ruins; and all who saw and
heard this were filled with pity and extreme terror. No doubt
the Almighty wanted rather to threaten than to chastise Tus-

314 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

cany; for if so furious a tempest had passed over a city with
many houses and inhabitants, as it had passed amongst the
oaks and the other trees and the few scattered dwellings, beyond
all doubt the ruin and chastisement would have been far greater
than the mind can conceive. But the Almighty wanted rather
that these few instances should suffice to remind men of his
power.

35. But to resume where I left off, King Alfonso, as I have
said above, was not satisfied with this peace; and, seeing that
the war which Niccolo Piccinino, at his instigation, had begun
against the Siennese without any reasonable cause had not had
the success he had hoped for, Alfonso resolved to see what ad-
vantage he could gain from a war which he was authorized to
begin according to the articles of the treaty. And therefore he
attacked the Genoese by sea and by land, in the year 1456, re-
solved to restore the government of Genoa to the Adorni, and
take it from the Fregosi, who held it at the time; and, on the
other hand, he made Jacopo Piccinino pass the Tronto against
Gismondo Malatesti. Gismondo had thoroughly garrisoned all
his castles, and therefore cared little for Jacopo’s attack; so
that in this direction the king’s attempt proved entirely futile.
But that upon Genoa involved Alfonso and his realm in more
wars than he had foreseen or could have wished. Pietro Fre-
goso, at that time Doge of Genoa, fearing not to be able to re-
sist the attacks of Alfonso, resolved at least to yield what he
could not hold himself to some one else, who could defend it
from his enemies, and who at some future time might make
him a just compensation for so important a gift. He therefore
sent an ambassador to Charles VII., king of France, and offered
him the sovereignty of Genoa. Charles accepted the offer, and
sent John of Anjou, the son of King Regnier, to take posses-
sion of that place (1458), John having a short time before left
Florence and returned to France. King Charles believed that
John, who had adopted some Italian customs, was better quali-
fied to govern Genoa than any one else. He thought also that
John might proceed from there with an attempt to recover the
kingdom of Naples, of which his father, Regnier, had been dis-
possessed by Alfonso. John therefore departed for Genoa,
where he was received as a sovereign, and all the forces of the
city and the state placed at his disposal.

36. This occurrence disquieted Alfonso, for he felt that he

core ss

ee ee

foci aft

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 815

had drawn upon himself too powerful an enemy. But so far
from being intimidated by it, he pursued his enterprise against
Genoa with unhesitating courage, and had already sent the fleet
under Villamarina to Portofino, when he was suddenly taken
ill and died. This death relieved John and the Genoese from
the war that threatened them, and filled Ferdinand, who suc-
ceeded his father, Alfonso, on the throne of Naples, with appre-
hensions at having so considerable an enemy in Italy as John of
Anjou; besides, he mistrusted the fidelity of many of his barons,
lest love of change should cause them to desert him and go over
to the French. He also feared the Pope, whose ambition he
knew, and who, taking advantage of his having but so recently
succeeded to the crown, might attempt to wrest it from him.
Ferdinand’s only hope was in the Duke of Milan, who felt no
less solicitous about the kingdom than Ferdinand himself; for
he feared that the French, once masters of Naples, would at-
tempt also to get possession of Milan, which he knew they
might demand as legitimately belonging to them. The Duke
Francesco, therefore, immediately upon the death of Alfonso,
sent letters and troops to Ferdinand; the latter to aid him and
to add to his consideration, and the former to counsel him to
be of good cheer, promising that he would under no circum-
stances abandon him. The Pope, after the death of Alfonso,
resolved to bestow the crown of Naples upon his nephew, Pietro
Lodovico Borgia; and, by way of covering this attempt with the
appearance of honesty, and to secure the concurrence of the
other princes of Italy, he pretended publicly that he wanted to
make the kingdom a province of the Holy See. He therefore
urged the Duke of Milan not to afford any support to Ferdinand,
offering Sforza to leave him the places which he already pos-
sessed in the kingdom. But in the midst of these schemes and
labors Calixtus died, and was succeeded in the pontificate by
Pius Il., of the family of the Piccolomini of Sienna, and who
bore the name of Auneas Sylvius. This Pope, wholly occupied
with the advancement of Christianity and the honor of the
Church, and disregarding all private considerations, yielded to
the instances of the Duke of Milan, and crowned Ferdinand
king of Naples. Pius II. judged that he would sooner be able
to restore peace in Italy by sustaining him who was in posses-
sion of the kingdom, than by favoring the attempt of the French
to obtain it, or, like Calixtus, attempting to take it for himself.

316 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

Nevertheless Ferdinand, in return for this benefit, created An-
tonio, a nephew of the Pope’s, Prince of Malfi, and gave him
one of his illegitimate daughters for his wife; and, moreover,
restored Benevento and Terracina to the Church.

37. Thus it seemed that peace was restored to Italy, whilst
the pontiff was occupying himself to move all Christendom
against the Turks, in accordance with the beginning previously
made by Calixtus ; when dissensions arose between the Fregosi
and John of Anjou, lord of Genoa, which rekindled greater
and more important wars than those of the past. Pietrino Fre-
goso had retired to one of his castles on the coast of Genoa,
when it occurred to him that he had not been sufficiently remu-
nerated by John of Anjou according to the merits of himself and
his family, who had been mainly instrumental in making John
sovereign of that city; and this led to an open rupture between
them. Ferdinand rejoiced at this, for he saw in it his only
remedy and means of salvation; and therefore he supplied
Pietrino liberally with men and money, hoping by his means
to see John driven from Genoa. When this became known to
John he sent to France for reinforcements, with which he
marched against Pietrino, who was however very strong in con-
sequence of the extensive aid that had been sent him by Fer-
dinand. John of Anjou confined himself therefore merely to
the guarding of the city of Genoa; Pietrino succeeded one
night in entering the city and making himself master of some
positions in it, but when daylight came he was attacked by the
troops of John of Anjou and killed, and all his men were
either slain or made prisoners. This victory encouraged John
to attempt an invasion of the kingdom of Naples; and in
October, 1459, he sailed with a powerful fleet from Genoa for
that purpose, and landed at Baia, whence he marched to Sessa,
where he was favorably received by the Duke of that name.
John was joined by the Prince of Taranto, the Aquilani, and
many other princes and towns, so that the loss of the whole
kingdom seemed almost inevitable. Seeing this, Ferdinand had
recourse for assistance to the Pope and the Duke of Milan, and
by way of diminishing the number of his enemies he made terms
with Gismondo Malatesti (1460). This, however, irritated
Jacopo Piccinino, who was the natural enemy of Gismondo, to
that degree that he left the service of Ferdinand and went over
to John of Anjou. Ferdinand also sent money to Federigo,

Boox VI.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 317

lord of Urbino, who as quickly as possible gathered what, ac-
cording to the times, was considered a respectable army, with
which he met the enemy above the river Sarni; and having
brought on an engagement, King Ferdinand was routed, and
many of his principal officers were taken prisoners. After this
disaster the city of Naples alone, with a few princes and places,
remained faithful to Ferdinand. Jacopo Piccinino urged that
on the strength of this victory John should march upon Naples
and make himself master of the capital of the kingdom; but
John refused this advice, saying that he wanted first to deprive
Ferdinand of all his territory and then to assail Naples, think-
ing that, after having taken all the smaller places, the conquest
of the capital would be more easy. This determination, how-
ever, caused John to lose all the fruits of his victories ; for he
did not know how much more readily the members follow the
head than the head the members.

38. After his defeat Ferdinand had taken refuge in Naples,
where he was joined by the fugitives from the provinces ; he
raised some money by the least oppressive means, and formed
the nucleus of a little army. He sent again for assistance to
the Pope and the Duke of Milan, which was rendered by both
with the greatest alacrity, and more abundantly than before,
for they were in great apprehension lest Ferdinand should lose
the kingdom. After Ferdinand had gained some strength he
issued from Naples, and, once having begun to re-establish his
reputation, he recovered a number of the places he had lost.
But whilst this war was’progressing in the kingdom an occur-
rence took place which deprived John of Anjou of his pre-
ponderance, and of all chance of success in his attempt. The
Genoese were tired of the proud and grasping government of
the French, so that they rose in arms against the royal gov-
ernor, obliging him to take refuge in the Castelletto. In this
movement the Fregosi and the Adorni acted together, and were
aided by the Duke of Milan with men and money, for the pur-
pose both of recovering and preserving the state. King Regnier,
who came with a fleet to succor his son, in the hope of recov-
ering Genoa by means of the Castelletto, was so completely
beaten at the very landing of his troops that he was com-
pelled ignominiously to return to Provence. When this news
reached the kingdom of Naples, John of Anjou became greatly
alarmed ; nevertheless, he did not abandon his enterprise, but

318 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VI.

sustained the war for some time, aided by those barons who in
consequence of their rebellion had nothing good to expect from
Ferdinand. After many and various incidents the two royal
armies came to an engagement, in which John was defeated, near
Troia, in the year 1463. But he was less hurt by this defeat than
by the defection of Jacopo Piccinino, who went over to Ferdi-
nand. Thus deprived of his forces, John retreated to Ischia,
whence he soon after returned to France. This war had lasted
four years, and was lost by the negligence of him who by the
courage of his soldiers had many times achieved victory. The
Florentines took no ostensible part in this war; it is true that
they were requested by the ambassador of King John of Ara-
gon, who had come to the throne of that kingdom by the death
of Alfonso, to support the cause of his nephew Ferdinand, ac-
cording to their obligations under the treaty but lately formed
with his father, Alfonso. To which the Florentines replied,
“that they were under no obligations to Ferdinand, and that
“they were not going to assist the son in a war begun by his
“father ; and as it had been commenced without their knowl-
“edge or advice, so Ferdinand must get out of it and finish it
without their assistance.” The ambassador protested on be-
half of his sovereign, the king of Aragon, and claimed the
penalty of the obligations, and compensation for damages ; and
then departed indignant against the republic. Thus the Flor-
entines remained during the whole of that war at peace so far
as external affairs were concerned; but matters were by no
means tranquil within, as will be shown more particularly in
the following Books.

SEVENTH BOOK.

SUMMARY.

1. Connection between the affairs of the other principalities of Italy and
the history of Florence. Dissensions that are injurious to republics. Character
of such dissensions. —2. Cosimo de’ Medici and Neri Capponi make them-
selves powerful in different ways. Reform in the elections of magistrates
favorable to Cosimo. Discontent of the nobles on account of this reform.
—3. (1458.) The nobles have recourse to Cosimo, but he refuses them his
help so as to render himself more necessary. — 4. Tyranny and pride of Luca
Pitti and his party. —5. Death of Cosimo de’ Medici (1464). His munifi-
cence ; his policy. —6. His eulogy. —7. The Duke of Milan takes Genoa.
Ferdinand of Aragon assures himself, by treachery, of the adverse barons.
—8. Jacopo Piccinino is imprisoned, and dies. — 9. Useless efforts of Pope
Pius II. to move the Christians against the Turks (1465). Death of Duke
Francesco Sforza (1466).— 10. Conspiracy of Diotisalvi Neroni against
Piero de’ Medici. — 11. Continuance of the same subject. — 12. Festivities
in Florence. — 13. Fickleness of the Florentines with regard to Piero de’
Medici. — 14. Niccolo Soderini is elected Gonfaloniere. Great hopes enter-
tained of him, as regards the restoration of tranquillity in the city. —15. The
two parties take to arms. —16. The great majority of the citizens declare
for the Medici. —17. Reforms of the government in favor of Piero de’ Medici.
Dispersion of his enemies. Fall of Luca Pitti. —18. Letter of Agnolo
Acciaiuoli to Piero de’ Medici. —19. The Florentine exiles excite the Vene-
tians to a war against Florence. — 20. War between the Venetians and the
Florentines (1467), terminated by the peace of 1468. Death of Niccolo
Soderini. —21. Marriage of Lorenzo de’ Medici with Clarice d’ Orsini. —
22. Sixtus IV. created Pope. His character. —23. Piero de’ Medici tries
to check the acts of violence committed in Florence ; but is interrupted in his

efforts by death (1469). — 24. Messer Tommaso Soderini, a citizen of great <

reputation, joins the Medici. —25. Riot in Prato, originated by Bernardo
Nardi. —26. Bernardo has Petrucci, Podesta of Prato, taken prisoner, but
releases him.— 27. He is himself taken, and the disturbance is quieted. —
28. Corruption in the city of Florence. Burning of the church of Santo
Spirito (1471). — 29. Rebellion of Volterra. —30. Repressed by arms and
by the sack of the city (1472). —31. Origin of the enmity between Pope
Sixtus IV. and Lorenzo de’ Medici (1473). — 32. Carlo di Braccio of Peru-
gia attacks the Siennese; but withdraws afterwards by advice of the Flor-
entines (1476).— 33. Conspiracy against Galeazzo, Duke of Milan. —

320 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIL.

34. Giovanni Andrea Lampognano, Carlo Visconti, and Girolamo Olgiato
kill the Duke in San Stefano ; they are all three put to death, the first two
by the servants of the Duke, and the latter is decapitated by the public
executioner.

1. Ir may perhaps seem to those who have read the preced-
ing Book that, as a mere writer upon Florentine affairs, I have
dilated too much upon the events that occurred in Lombardy
and the kingdom of Naples. But as I have not in the past, so
I shall not in the future avoid such digressions ; for although I
have never engaged to write the history of Italy, yet that does
not seem to me a reason for omitting to mention all the im-
portant events that occurred within that country. For not to
narrate them would make our own immediate history less un-
derstood and appreciated, especially as it was the actions of the
other peoples and princes of Italy that were the most frequent
causes of those wars in which the Florentines deemed it their
duty to take part. Such was the case with the war between
John of Anjou and King Ferdinand, which gave rise to the bit-
ter enmity that sprung up between the latter and the Floren-
tines, and especially between that prince and the Medici family.
For King Ferdinand complained that in that war he had not
only been unassisted, but that favors had actually been shown
to his enemy ; and the resentment which he felt in consequence
became the cause of some of the greatest evils for Florence, as
our narrative will show. Having written of external affairs
up to the year 1463, it will be necessary for me to go back sev-
eral years, so as to be able to relate the internal troubles that
occurred in the mean time. But before that, I wish to say by
way of argument, as is our wont, that those who believe in
the possibility that union and harmony can be preserved in a
republic deceive themselves much by this hope. Certainly it
is true that some divisions injure a republic and others benefit
it; especially are those injurious that engender factions and
create partisans ; and those are beneficial to a republic that are
maintained without factions and partisans. A founder of a
republic thus, being unable to prevent dissensions from arising
in it, should at least provide against the danger of factions.
And for this he must know that there are two ways in which
citizens in a republic can achieve reputation and influence;
namely, either by public or by private means. Publicly it is
achieved either by gaining a battle, taking a town, performing

Boox VII] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 821

a mission with zeal and discretion, or counselling the republic
wisely and happily. By private ways it is acquired through
rendering services to this or that citizen, such as defending
him against the magistrates, aiding him with money, procuring
for him unmerited honors, and by courting popular favor with -
largesses and public games and amusements. Such modes of
proceeding give rise to factions and partisanship; and just as
influence gained by these means is dangerous, so does the for-
mer way benefit a republic when unaccompanied by factions, —
for then it is founded upon the public good, and not upon pri-
vate interests. And although it is impossible to provide means
for preventing bitter feuds from arising amongst citizens thus
grown powerful, nevertheless, not having any partisans who
follow them for their own private advantage, they cannot harm
the republic, but rather contribute to its benefit. For to over-
come their enemies they must devote themselves to the aggran-
dizement of the state; and above all must they watch each
other, so that no one may transgress the limits of the law.
The dissensions of Florence have always been accompanied by
factions, and therefore they have ever been pernicious; nor did
any successful faction ever remain united, except so long as the
opposite faction remained active; but when that had been com-
pletely crushed, then the dominant faction, no longer fearing
and being kept in check by it, and not being controlled within
itself by any regulations, became divided in itself and fell to
pieces. The party of Cosimo de’ Medici gained the ascendency
in 1454; but the defeated party being large and comprising
many most influential men, the former were for a time kept
united and humble by fear, so that they neither committed any
errors nor made themselves odious to the people by any wrong.
Thus every time the government had need of the people to re-
cover its authority, it always found them disposed to concede
to its chiefs whatever Balia or power they desired; and thus
in the period from 1434 to 1455 — that is, twenty-one years —
the power of a Balia was six times conceded them by the
councils.

2. There were in Florence, as we have already several times
stated, two most powerful citizens, Cosimo de’ Medici and Neri
Capponi. Of these Neri was one of those who had acquired
his influence by public means, so that he had many friends and
but few partisans. Cosimo, on the other hand, having made

VOL. I. 21

322 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

his way to his influential position by public as well as by pri-
vate means, had plenty of both friends and partisans ; and as
these two men remained united so long as they lived, they
always obtained without the least difficulty whatever they
wanted from the people; for in all their acts grace was always
mixed with the exercise of power. But in the year 1455, Neri
having died, and the opposite party being crushed, the govern-
ment experienced difficulty in resuming its authority. The
cause of this was the very friends of Cosimo themselves who
were most influential in the state; for they no longer feared
the adverse party, which had been crushed, and sought to di-
minish the power of Cosimo. This disposition gave rise to the
dissensions that occurred afterwards, in 1466; so that those
who controlled the government proposed in the general coun-
cils, where matters of the public administration are openly dis-
cussed, that it would be well not to have the powers of the
Balia renewed, and to close the election purses, and to have
the magistrates drawn by lot from the old Squittini or poll
lists. There were two ways for Cosimo to prevent the execu-
tion of this design; either to retake the government by force
with the partisans and adherents he had, and to put all the
others out; or to let things take their course and make his
friends comprehend, in good time, that it was not he, but
- themselves, whom they had deprived of power and influence
by the proposed measures. Of these two courses Cosimo chose
the latter; for he knew full well that in that form of govern-
ment he ran no risk, as the election purses were filled with the
names of his friends, and he could therefore resume the gov-
ernment whenever he pleased. When the magistrates of Flor-
ence were thereupon again drawn by lot, it seemed to the mass
of citizens as though they had recovered their liberties ; and
the magistrates gave their decisions, not according to the will
of the most powerful, but according to their own judgment, so
that now the friend of one influential citizen was defeated and
now that of another; and thus the men who were accustomed
to see their houses full of suitors and gifts, now saw them void
of clients and of substance. They also saw those become their
equals whom they had been in the habit of looking upon as
greatly inferior; and those who had been their equals, they
now saw their superiors. They found themselves no longer
respected nor honored, but often rather jeered and derided;

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 323

and the people spoke of them and of the republic openly on
the streets and in the piazzas without any respect; so that
they soon recognized the fact that they, and not Cosimo, had
lost the government. Cosimo pretended not to notice these
things, and whatever measures were proposed that favored the
people he was always the first to support them. But what
alarmed the higher classes most, and afforded Cosimo the
greatest opportunity to make them repent of their conduct,
was the re-establishment of the Catasto of 1427, according to
which the amount of taxes to be laid was fixed by law, and
not by the arbitrary will of men.

3. This law having been passed despite of their opposition,
and the magistrates appointed for its execution, the nobles
assembled and called upon Cosimo to beg him to rescue them
and himself from the hands of the people, and to restore to the
government that influence which had made him powerful and
them respected. To which Cosimo replied that he was will-
ing, but that he wished it done regularly and according to law,
and with the consent of the people, and not by violence, of
which he did not want to hear in any way. An attempt was
accordingly made by them in the councils to have a law passed
for the creation of a new Balia, but without success. Where-
upon the noble citizens turned to Cosimo and entreated him
in the most humble manner that he would agree to a parlia-
ment, which he refused altogether, desiring to see them brought
to that point that they should become fully sensible of their
error. And as Donati Cocchi, who was Gonfaloniere of Jus-
tice at the time, wanted to call a parliament without the con-
sent of Cosimo, the latter had the attempt so ridiculed by the
Signori that sat with him that Cocchi completely lost his rea-
son and was obliged to be sent home. But as it is never well
to let things go until they are wholly beyond the power of con-
trol, and Luca Pitti, who was a bold and audacious man, hay-
ing become Gonfaloniere of Justice, it seemed to Cosimo best
to leave the whole management of the matter to him ; so that
if the attempt should fail, and blame come of it, it might be
charged to Luca and not to himself. Luca therefore, in the
beginning of his magistracy, proposed several times to the peo-
ple to appoint a new Balia; but as he could not obtain their
consent, he threatened those who sat in the council with inso-
lent and insulting words, to which he soon after added deeds

324 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VII.

of like character; for in the month of August, 1458, on the
eve of San Lorenzo, having filled the palace with armed men,
he called the people together in the Piazza and compelled them
by force of arms to consent to that to which they had before
refused their voluntary assent. And having thereupon re-
sumed the government and created a Balia, and then appointed
the chief magistrates according to the judgment and pleasure
of a few, these by way of beginning with terror a government
which had originated in force, banished Messer Girolamo
Machiavelli and some others, and deprived many of the privi-
lege of holding office. This same Messer Girolamo was after-
wards declared a rebel for having transgressed the limits of
his banishment; and whilst travelling about in Italy endeavor-
ing to stir up the princes against his own country, he was cap-
tured at Lunigiana by the treachery of one of the Signori, and
having been carried to Florence, he was imprisoned and there
put to death.

4. This new government, during the eight years of its exist-
ence, was violent and insupportable ; for as Cosimo, already old
and wearied and enfeebled by ill health, could no longer per-
sonally take an active part in the affairs of government, the
city became a prey to the cupidity of a few of its citizens,
Luca Pitti, in reward for his services to the republic, was made
a noble, and he in return, by way of not being less gracious to
the citizens than they had been to him, ordered that those who
were till then called the Priors of the Trades, should, by way
of preserving at least the name of the substance which they
had lost, be called the Priors of Liberty. He also ordered that
the Gonfaloniere, who until then had his seat on the right
above the Rectors, should henceforth be seated in the midst
of the Priors. And to make it appear as though the Almighty
himself had participated in these doings, he ordered public
processions and solemn offices to be performed in gratitude
to God for the honors restored to them. The Signoria and
Cosimo bestowed rich presents upon Messer Luca Pitti, after
which the whole city vied in making him similar donations;
so that the amount of these gifts was estimated at not less
than twenty thousand ducats. Whence his authority increased
to that degree that it was no longer Cosimo, but Messer Luca
Pitti, who governed Florence. This so filled him with con-
fidence in his power that he commenced the construction of

Book Vil.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 325

two palaces, one at Florence, and the other at Ruciano, a
place about a mile distant from the city, which were both of
royal magnificence; especially the one in the city, which was
larger than any other that had ever been built by any private
citizen. To complete these palaces, Messer Luca did not hesi-
tate to resort to most extraordinary means; for not only the
citizens and private persons made him gifts, and aided him
with the material, &c. necessary for these buildings, but even
the common people made contributions and lent him their
help. Besides this, all the banished, and any one else that
had committed murder, or theft, or any other crime that made
him amenable to the penalties of the law, found a safe refuge
in that palace, provided he would in some way contribute to
its erection. The other citizens in the government, if they
did not build palaces as Luca Pitti did, yet were neither less
violent nor less rapacious than he was; so that if Florence
was not impoverished by foreign wars, she was ruined by her
own citizens. During this time, as we have said, occurred the
wars of the kingdom of Naples, and some which the Pope car-
ried on against the Malatesti in the Romagna, from whom he
desired to take Rimini and Cesena, which they held. Pope
Pius II. terminated his pontificate in the midst of these en-
terprises and the preparations for the expedition against the
Turks.

5. Whilst Florence continued agitated by her dissensions and
troubles, they also broke out in the party of Cosimo in the year
1455, from causes, already indicated, but which, as we have nar-
rated, he was enabled to quiet for the time by his prudence.
But with the year 1464 Cosimo’s illness became so aggravated
as to cause his death. Both friends and enemies alike de-
plored this event; for those who from public reasons did not
love him feared that after his decease they would be completely
ruined and destroyed ; for they had witnessed, even during his
lifetime, the rapacity of those whose excesses had been some-
what restrained by their regard for him. Nor had they much
confidence in his son Piero; for although he was a good man,
yet they judged that, being also in feeble health, and a novice
in the government, he might be obliged to have too much con-
sideration for those who controlled the government, and whose
rapacity, being now without any check, would in that case be-
come still more excessive. The regret at Cosimo’s death was

326 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VII.

therefore very general. Of all citizens not of the profession
of arms, Cosimo was the most illustrious and renowned, not
only of Florence, but also of any other republic of which we
have any record. For not only did he surpass all others in
wealth and influence, but also in liberality and sagacity; and
amongst all the other qualities on account of which he became,
as it were, sovereign in his own country, was his exceeding
generosity and munificence. His liberality became much more
manifest after his death; for when his son Piero wished to
ascertain his possessions, it was found that there was hardly
a citizen who held any sort of position to whom Cosimo had
not loaned heavy sums of money. And many times he re-
lieved, unsolicited, the necessities of noblemen so soon as he
became cognizant of them. His munificence is apparent from
the number of public edifices built by him; for in Florence he
erected the churches and convents of San Marco and San Lo-
renzo, and the monastery of Santa Verdiana; and on the hill
of Fiesole, San Girolamo and the Badia; and in the Mugello
he restored and supplied with new foundations a church of the
Minorite Friars. Besides these, he erected in Santa Croce, in
the Servi, in the Angioli, and in San Miniato the most splendid
altars and chapels, which he supplied, moreover, with costly
vestments and every other necessary for the establishment of
divine service. Besides these sacred edifices must be men-
tioned his private palaces, of which there was one in the city,
in all respects suitable to so great a citizen, and four without
the city, namely, one at Careggi, one at Fiesole, one at Caffa-
giuolo, and one at Trebbio, each of which was more like a royal
palace than the dwelling of a private citizen. And not satis-
fied that the magnificence of his edifices should be known in
Italy only, he built also in Jerusalem an asylum for poor and
infirm pilgrims, in the construction of which he expended a
very large amount of money. And although these palaces and
all his other works and acts were royal, and he was like a sov-
ereign in Florence, yet he so tempered his magnificence with
his prudence, that he never transcended the modesty of a civil-
ian. For in his intercourse and conversation, in his servants,
in his equipages, and in his whole mode of living, as also in
the family alliances which he established, he was ever the same
as any other modest citizen; for he knew that any extraordi-
nary display on all occasions excites much more envy than

Book VII.]} HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 327

what these things merit in reality, and that they should there-
fore be concealed with becoming modesty. And so, when he
had to marry his sons, he did not seek alliances with princely
houses, but he married John to Cornelia of the Alessandri
family, and Piero to Lucrezia de’ Tornabuoni; and of the
daughters of Piero, Bianco was married to Guglielmo de’ Pazzi,
and Nannina to Bernardo Rucellai. None either of the princes
or civil rulers of his time equalled him in intelligence ; whence
it came that in a city so liable to change, and a population
so variable, he was able to hold the government for thirty-
one years. His extreme prudence and sagacity enabled him to
foresee evil from afar, and whilst there was still time, either to
arrest its growth, or to prepare for it in such manner that in
case it should grow it might produce no mischief. Thus he
not only triumphed over the ambition of his rivals within the
republic, but he overcame even that of many foreign princes
so happily and with so much tact that he secured the alliance
of all for the benefit of his country, and thus remained equal or
superior to its enemies; and whoever opposed him lost both his
time and his money, or his state. The Venetians are a striking
proof of this, for in union with Cosimo they proved always su-
perior to Duke Filippo; and when separated from him they
were beaten and defeated, first by Filippo and then by Fran-
cesco; and when they combined with King Alfonso against the
Florentine republic, Cosimo, by his credit, so deprived Naples
and Venice of money that they were constrained to accept
such terms of peace as the Florentines chose to accord them.
The many internal and external troubles, then, which Cosimo
had to encounter, always terminated gloriously for him and dis-
astrously for his enemies; and thus his power and influence in
the city were increased by civil discords within, and the foreign
wars added to his power and reputation, so that he was enabled
to add to the possessions of the republic the Borgo of San
Sepolcro, Montedoglio, the Casentino, and the Val di Bagno.
And thus by his virtue and good fortune he destroyed all his
enemies and exalted his friends.

6. Cosimo was born in 1389, on the day of SS. Cosimo and
Damiano. His early life was full of troubles, as proved by his
exile, his imprisonment, and exposure to the danger of death ;
for, having accompanied Pope John XXIII. to the Council of
Constance, he was obliged, after the deposition of the Pope, to

328 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VII.

fly in disguise to save his life. But after his fortieth year he
lived most happily and prosperously ; so that not only those who
joined him in his public enterprises, but also those who admin-
istered his private wealth in various parts of Europe, partici-
pated in his prosperity, whence many families in Florence
acquired great riches, as was the case with the Tornabuoni,
the Benci, the Portinari, and the Sassetti; and besides these,
all those who depended upon his counsel and fortune gained
large wealth. Although he constantly spent large sums in the
building of churches and in charities, yet he complained some-
times to his friends that he had never been enabled to spend as
much in the honor of God but that he should be found a debtor
in his books. Cosimo was of ordinary stature, olive complexion,
and of venerable presence; he was without great erudition, but
most eloquent and full of natural prudence; obliging to his
friends, merciful to the poor, profitable in conversation, cau-
tious in counsel, and prompt in execution; and in his sayings
and replies he was subtle and grave. Messer Rinaldo degli
Albizzi, in the early part of his exile, sent him word “that the
“hen was hatching”; to which Cosimo replied, “that she could
“hatch but ill, being away from her nest.” And when other
exiles gave him to understand “that they did not sleep,” he
said “that he believed it, for he had deprived them of sleep.”
When Pope Pius II. was laboring to excite the princes of Italy
to a crusade against the Turks, Cosimo said “ that the Pope was
“an old man, and had_undertaken an enterprise only fit for a
“young man.” ‘To the Venetian ambassadors who came to
Florence together with those of King Alfonso to complain of
the republic, Cosimo uncovered his head, asking them the color
of his hair, and when they answered “ White,” he said, “It
“will not be long before your senators will have heads as white
“as mine.” <A few hours before his death, when his wife asked
him “ why he kept his eyes closed,” he answered, “To accus-
“tom them to it.” After his return from exile some citizens
said to him, “that the city was being desolated, and that it was
“an offence against God to drive so many good men out of it.”
Cosimo replied, “that it was better a city should be desolated
“than destroyed; that two yards of red cloth would make a
“gentleman, but that states could not be governed with rosary
“in hand”; which expression gave his enemies opportunity to
calumniate him, as being “a man who loved himself more than

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 329

“his country, and this world more than the next.” We might
adduce many more of his sayings, but these will suffice.

Cosimo was also a great lover and patron of literary men;
and this made him bring to Florence Argiropolo, a Greek by
birth and the most learned man of his time, so that he might
instruct the Florentine youth in the Greek language and other
branches of learning. He supported in his own house Marsilio
Ficino, the second father of the Platonian philosophy, to whom
he was so much attached that he gave him a property near
his own palace of Careggi, so that Marsilio might follow the
pursuit of letters with more convenience, and that he himself
might with greater facility enjoy his society. Thus his pru-
dence, his wealth, his good fortune, and his whole way of life
caused him to be feared and beloved by the people of Florence,
and to be in the most extraordinary degree esteemed, not only
by the princes of Italy, but of all Europe; thus leaving a
foundation for his descendants which enabled them to equal
him in virtue and greatly to surpass him in fortune. And the
authority and consideration which Cosimo enjoyed in Florence
he deserved to have equally throughout all Christendom. In the
latter part of his life, however, he experienced great affliction ;
for of his two sons, Piero and Giovanni, the latter, in whom he
had the most confidence, died, and the other was in such in-
firm health that he was unfit to attend to public or private busi-
ness ; so that, upon being carried through his palace after the
death of Giovanni, Cosimo observed with a sigh, “This is too
“large a house for so small a family.” His great soul also suf-
fered anguish at the thought of not having increased the Flor-
entine dominions by some honorable conquest; and he regretted
this the more as it seemed to him that he had been deceived by
Francesco Sforza, who, before becoming Duke, had promised
him that whenever he should become master of Milan he
would undertake the conquest of Lucca for the Florentines,
which promise he however never performed. For Count
Francesco changed his mind with his change of fortune; and
having become Duke of Milan, he wished to enjoy in peace
what he had won by war, and would therefore not engage in
any new enterprise either for Cosimo or any one else, and was
even indisposed to engage in any more wars unless forced to it
for his own defence. This was a source of the greatest annoy-
ance to Cosimo, who felt that he had undergone much trouble

330 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIL.

and expense for the benefit of a faithless and ungrateful man.
Besides this, he felt that the infirmity of his body would not
permit him to devote himself with his former zeal to either
public or private affairs, so that he thought he saw both going to
ruin; for Florence was being destroyed by her own citizens, and
his private fortune by his agents and his children. All these
things caused him much disquietude in the latter part of his
lite. Nevertheless he died full of glory and great renown, and
the city of Florence, as well as all Christian princes, condoled
with his son Piero upon his loss. His funeral was attended by
all the citizens with greatest pomp; and being interred in the
church of San Lorenzo, there was, by public decree, inscribed
over his tomb, “ FaTHER OF HIS COUNTRY.”

If, in speaking of the acts of Cosimo, I have followed the ex-
ample rather of those who write the biographies of princes, and
not that of those who write general history, no one need won-
der at it; for having been so rare a man in our republic, I felt
compelled to speak of him with the extraordinary praises
which he merited.

7. At this time, when Florence and Italy were in the above-
described condition, Louis, king of France, was involved in a
most serious war, which his barons had begun against him, and
in which they were aided by the Duke of Brittany, and by
Charles, Duke of Burgundy. This war was of such magnitude
that King Louis could not think of assisting Duke John of
Anjou in his attempt upon Genoa and Naples; and, judging
rather that he himself needed the help of others, he gave to
Francesco, Duke of Milan, the town of Savona, which had re-
mained in the possession of the French, giving him to under-
stand, at the same time, that he would not oppose Francesco’s
undertaking the conquest of Genoa, if he desired it. This offer
was accepted by Francesco, who, by the influence thus derived
from the king’s friendship, and the help afforded him by the
Adorni, succeeded in making himself master of Genoa. And,
not to appear ungrateful for the favors he had received at the
hands of the king of France, he sent fifteen hundred horse to
his assistance under the command of his eldest son, Galeazzo
Sforza. Thus Ferdinand of Aragon and Francesco Sforza re-
mained, the latter Duke of Lombardy and Prince of Genoa, and
the former king of the entire kingdom of Naples. And a family
alliance having been contracted between them, they considered

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 831

how they could establish themselves firmly enough in their
respective states to enable them to enjoy them in security dur-
ing their lives, and dying bequeath them freely to their heirs.
They deemed it necessary for this purpose that the king of

Naples should make sure of the barons who had offended him
in the war of John of Anjou, and that Duke Francesco should
destroy the Braccescan party, who were the natural enemies
of his family, and who had attained the highest reputation
under Jacopo Piccinino ; for this Piccinino was now the greatest
general of Italy, and, having no state of his own, was to be feared
by all who had any dominions, and most of all by the Duke
Francesco, who, conscious of the example which he himself had
set, seemed to think that he could neither enjoy his state quietly
himself, nor leave it securely to his son, so long as Jacopo Pic-
cinino lived. King Ferdinand therefore earnestly endeavored
to come to terms with the barons, employing every art for that
purpose. He happily succeeded ; for the barons saw very clearly
that they would be ruined if they continued at war with the
king, and were doubtful even of their safety if they trusted
and made terms with him; and as men always try to avoid
certain evils, it follows that princes can easily deceive persons
less powerful than themselves. The barons, seeing the mani-
fest danger of war, put faith in the peace offered by the king;
but, having placed themselves in his hands, were afterwards
destroyed by him in various ways and under various pretexts.
This example alarmed Jacopo Piccinino, who happened with his
troops at Sulmona; and to deprive the king of Naples of the
opportunity of crushing him, he opened negotiations with the
Duke Francesco for a reconciliation through the mediation of
some friends. And Sforza, having made him liberal offers, Ja-
copo resolved to place himself in his hands, and, accompanied
by one hundred mounted men, he went to meet him at Milan.

' 8. (1465.) Jacopo Piccinino had served a long time under
the father and with the brother of Duke Francesco, first for
Duke Filippo and afterwards for the people of Milan; so that
by long intercourse he had made many friends in Milan, and the
general good-will of the people towards him had been increased
by his present condition. For the fortunate prosperity and
present power of the Sforzas had excited much envy against
them, whilst adversity and long absence had created with the
same people a warm sympathy for Jacopo, and the greatest

832 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. (Book VIL.

desire to see him again. All of which became apparent on his
arrival ; for there were but few of the nobility who did not go to
meet him, and the streets through which he had to pass were
thronged with people eager to see him, and who shouted his
name and that of his family everywhere. These honors has-
tened his ruin, for the Duke’s apprehensions increased his desire
to destroy Jacopo; and to enable him to do so more covertly,
he determined to celebrate the nuptials of Jacopo with his ille-
gitimate daughter, Drusiana, to whom he had been for some
time affianced. After this Jacopo agreed with the Duke to
enter his service, with the title of captain of his forces, and one
hundred thousand florins for his maintenance. Having con-
cluded these arrangements, Jacopo went to Naples with his
wife, Drusiana, and a ducal ambassador, where he was gladly
and most honorably received, and for a succession of days en-
tertained with all sorts of festivities. But having asked leave
to go to Sulmona, where he had his troops, he was invited by
the king to a banquet in the castle, after which he and his son
were thrown into prison, where they were soon after put to
death. And thus Italian princes, dreading in others the virtue
of which they themselves were destitute, destroyed it; so that
from the want of it the country soon after fell into that state
of decadence which exposed it to such calamities and ruin.

9. Pope Pius II. had now settled the affairs of the Romagna,
and this period of general peace seemed to him favorable for
stirring up the Christians to move against the Turks. He
adopted for this purpose proceedings similar to those of his
predecessors. All the princes promised either money or men,
and more particularly King Matthias of Hungary and Duke
Charles of Burgundy, who promised to accompany him in per-
son, and were therefore appointed by the Pope as chiefs of the
whole enterprise. The Pope was so hopeful that he left Rome
and went to Ancona, where he had ordered the whole host of
crusaders to assemble, and where the Venetians had promised
him vessels for transporting them across to Sclavonia. After
the arrival of the pontiff in Ancona, there came together so
many people in that city that in a few days all the provisions
that were in the city, or that could be had from neighboring
places, were consumed, so that all began to suffer from famine.
Besides this, there was no money with which to purchase pro-
visions or arms for those that needed them, and neither King

ARE AED RSI EERE ONTO ES Ba I

cd ae

gotta a

PREF RTM ae BR ln ee PIT ceo

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 333

Matthias nor Duke Charles made his appearance. The Vene-
tians sent one of their captains with a few galleys, more for the
purpose of making a show of compliance with their pledges than
really to transport the army across into Sclavonia. In the midst
of all these troubles and disorders, the Pope, who was already
old and infirm, died, after which all returned to their homes.
The death of Pius II. occurred in 1465, and Paul II., a Venetian
by birth, was chosen his successor. It seemed about this time
as though all the principalities of Italy were to change their
rulers; for Francesco Sforza, Duke of Milan, also died in the
following year, after having held the dukedom sixteen years.
His son, Galeazzo, was proclaimed his successor. |

10. The death of this prince caused an increase of the dissen-
sions in Florence and accelerated their baneful effects. After
the death of Cosimo, his son Piero, who fell heir to his father’s
wealth and state, called to his assistance Diotisalvi Neroni, a
man of great influence and highly esteemed by the other citi-
zens, and in whom Cosimo had so much confidence that in
dying he recommended to Piero to be guided by Neroni’s advice
in all matters of state, as well as in the management of his
private fortune. Piero therefore manifested towards Diotisalvi
the same confidence that Cosimo had done; and as he desired
to conform to the injunctions of his father after his death, the
same as he had done during his lifetime, he requested Messer
Diotisalvi to advise him in relation to his patrimony as well as
the government of the city; and told him that, by way of mak-
ing a beginning with his private business, he would have all the
accounts of his assets and liabilities placed in his hands, so
that he might judge of the condition of his affairs, and in how
far they were well ordered or otherwise; and that then, after
having acquainted himself with them, he might advise him
in relation thereto according as his prudence might suggest.
Messer Diotisalvi promised to use all diligence and good faith
in every way. But when the accounts came and were examined
by him, he found that matters generally were in great disorder,
and impelled more by his ambition than by his love for Piero
or by the benefits formerly bestowed upon him by Cosimo, he
conceived the idea that it would be easy for him to rob Piero of
the credit and state which he had inherited from his father.
Messer Diotisalvi therefore advised Piero in a manner that
seemed entirely reasonable and honest, but under which his

334 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIL

ruin was concealed. He pointed out to him the disordered
condition of his affairs, and how much money would be required
to preserve his credit, and with it the reputation of his wealth
and his state; and he suggested to Piero that there was no
more honest means of re-establishing his disordered finances,
than to call in all the moneys which his father had outstanding
in the way of loans to so many strangers as well as citizens.
For Cosimo, to secure himself partisans in Florence and
friends elsewhere, had been most liberal in letting everybody
participate in his fortune, so that he had become creditor to
an amount neither small nor unimportant. Piero in his desire
to restore order in his affairs received the suggestion as a good
and honest one; but so soon as a demand for these outstanding
loans was made by his order, the citizens resented it as though
he wanted to rob them of their own, instead of asking merely
for what was his; and they said everything that was ill of him,
and calumniated him as an ingrate and a miser.

11. Messer Diotisalvi, seeing the general disfavor and un-
popularity which Piero had drawn upon himself by having
acted according to the advice which he himself had given him,
combined with Messer Luca Pitti, Messer Agnolo Acciaiuoli,
and Niccolo Soderini to deprive Piero both of his credit and of
the government. They were all actuated by different motives
in this. Messer Luca desired to succeed to the government in
place of Cosimo; for he had now become so powerful himself
that he disdained being subjected to Piero. Messer Diotisalvi,
knowing Messer Luca Pitti to be unfit for being at the head of
the government, imagined as a matter of course that, when
Piero should have lost his place and his influence, the govern-
ment would undoubtedly in a short time fall into his hands.
Niccolo Soderini wished the city to enjoy greater liberty, and
that it should be governed solely by the will of the magistrates.
Messer Agnolo had a special hatred of the Medici for the fol-
lowing reasons. His son Rafaelle had some time previously
married Alessandra de’ Bardi, who brought him a very large
dowry. Either from her own fault or that of others she had
been maltreated by her husband and her father-in-law ; where-
upon Lorenzo d’ Iarione, a relative of hers, touched by com-
passion for the young lady, went one night accompanied by. a
number of armed men and took her from the house of Messer
Agnolo. The Acciaiuoli complained of the injury thus done

Book VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 335

them by the Bardi, and the case was referred to Cosimo, who
decided that the Acciaiuoli should restore to Alessandra her
dowry, and it should then be left to her option to return to her
husband or not. Messer Agnolo seemed to think that Cosimo
had not treated him as a friend in this matter; and as he could
not revenge himself upon Cosimo, he resolved to do so upon his
son. These conspirators, although each animated by a different
private motive, yet gave out to the public that they had but one
common object, and affirmed that all they wanted was that the
city should be governed by the magistrates, and not merely by
the arbitrary will of a few citizens. Besides this the odium of
Piero and the reasons for attacking him were augmented by
the failure gf many merchants at that time, for which Piero was
publicly censured, because he had so unexpectedly called in all
his outstanding moneys, and had thereby caused these failures,
which were a disgrace and injury to the city. To all this it was
to be added that Piero was negotiating a marriage between his
oldest son, Lorenzo, and the lady Clarice of the house of Orsini,
which afforded additional opportunity for calumniating him.
For, they said, since he disdains a Florentine alliance for his
son, it is evident that he no longer regards himself a citizen
of Florence and intends to make himself sovereign of it; for he
who will not have his fellow-citizens for relatives must contem-
plate making them his slaves, and cannot therefore in reason
expect that they will remain his friends. The chiefs of this
conspiracy seemed to think that they held the victory in their
hands, because the greater part of the citizens followed them,
being deceived by the cry of Liberty, which the conspirators had
taken for their watchword by way of justifying their attempt.
12. Whilst the city was kept agitated by these movements,
some citizens who abhorred all civil discord thought it would be
well, if possible, to put a stop to them by some novel public
entertainments ; inasmuch as idle people are apt to become an
instrument in the hands of men disposed to sedition. To put
an end to this idleness, and to divert people’s thoughts from
matters of state and give them something else to occupy their
minds, they concluded that the year of mourning after Cosimo’s
death having elapsed, it would be well to offer some amusement
to.the people of the city; and therefore they ordered two most
magnificent festivals, such as had not yet been seen in Florence.
One was to be a representation of the nativity and the adoration

336 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

of the three Magi who had come from the East guided by a star ;
which was gotten up with such pomp and magnificence that the
preparation and performance of it occupied the whole city for
many months. The other was a tournament (for such they
call a spectacle that represents a contest between men on
horseback), where the first youths of the city should contend
with the most renowned ecavaliers of Italy. And amongst the
most distinguished Florentine youths was Lorenzo, eldest son
of Piero de’ Medici, who by his own personal bravery, and not
by any favoritism, carried off the first honors. After the con-
clusion of these festivities the citizens reverted to their former
thoughts, and each pursued his own projects with more zeal
than ever, which gave rise to great differences and troubles,
that were much increased by two occurrences: the one was the
want of the authority of the Balia, which had expired, and the
other the death of Francesco, Duke of Milan. In consequence
of the latter the new Duke Galeazzo had sent ambassadors to
Florence to confirm the agreements which his father had made
with the city ; one of which amongst other things provided for
the annual payment of a certain sum of money by the Flor-
entines. The leaders of the party opposed to the Medici took
occasion to object to this demand, and opposed it publicly in
council on the ground that the alliance had been made, not
with Galeazzo, but with Francesco, and was cancelled by the
death of the latter, and that there was no occasion for its
renewal, inasmuch as Galeazzo had not the same ability as
Francesco, and therefore they could not expect the same ad-
vantages from him; that they had had but little benefit from
the former, and would have still less from the latter; and if
any citizen wished to employ Galeazzo for his own private pur-
poses, it was contrary to the laws of the republic and to liberty.
Piero, on the other hand, pointed out that it would not be wise
to forego an alliance so very necessary to them from mere con-
siderations of money, and that there was nothing so beneficial
to the republic and to all Italy as their alliance with the Duke
of Milan, so that the Venetians seeing them united might not
attempt either by a feigned friendship or by open war to injure
the duchy. For so soon as they should find that the Floren-
tines were alienated from the Duke, they would take up arms
against him; and profiting by his youth and inexperience in the
government and want of allies, they could easily win him over

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 33T

either by fraud or by force, and in either case it would be seen
that it would lead to the ruin of the republic.

13. Piero’s arguments had no effect and were not accepted,
and soon the animosities began to show themselves openly.
The two parties met nightly at different places, the friends
of the Medici in the Crocetta, and their adversaries in the
Pieta. Anxious for Piero’s ruin, the latter had induced many
citizens to sign their names to a list as being favorable to the
enterprise. At one of their nightly meetings they discussed
particularly the mode of proceeding; for all were agreed that
the power of the Medici must be abated, but they differed as
to the best way of effecting it. One portion, which was the
most moderate, wanted, since Piero’s power under the Balia
was at an end, that they should watch and oppose his resump-
tion of it; and that being done, all agreed that the government
of the city should be left entirely to the councils and the magis-
trates, and that thus Piero’s authority would in a brief period
be destroyed ; and that it would then be seen that with the loss
of his authority and state he would also lose his commercial
credit, for his affairs were at that point that, if they were care-
ful not to allow him the use of the public funds, it would in-
evitably cause his financial ruin; after which he would be no
longer dangerous, for a man who falls by his own fault is not
sustained by his fellow-men like one who is thrust down by
others. Besides, they argued, if no extraordinary attempt
were made against him, he would have no grounds for arm-
ing himself or to call upon his friends for assistance; and if
nevertheless he should do so, it would only injure his cause
the more, and would excite such general mistrust of him that
it would make his ruin all the easier, and would afford the
others better opportunity for crushing him completely. Many
others of those assembled were not favorable to this slow mode
of proceeding, affirming that time would only benefit Piero, and
not them; for if now they were to content themselves with
ordinary proceedings, Piero would be in no danger whatsoever,
whilst they would be exposed to many; for those magistrates
who were his enemies would have to leave him the control of
the city, whilst his friends would make him sovereign and ruin
them, as happened in 1458;—and if the first suggestion had
been made by good men, the present advice was that of wise
ones; and therefore it would be best to agree to crush him

VoL. I. 22

338 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

now, whilst the minds of men were excited against him ;— and
that the way to accomplish it was to arm themselves within
the city and to employ the Marquis of Ferrara, so as not to be
without an army ; so that if a Signoria should be drawn that
was favorable to them, they might be prepared to avail of it
and act decisively. It was resolved thereupon to await the
drawing of the new Signoria, and to govern themselves accord-
ingly. Amongst the conspirators was Niccolo Fedini, who had
acted as their chancellor, but who, attracted by certain hopes,
disclosed all the projects of his enemies to Piero, and gave him
a list of the conspirators and of those who had subscribed their
names. Piero was alarmed at seeing the number and char-
acter of the citizens opposed to him; and having counselled
with his friends, he resolved also to prepare a list, and to ob-
tain the signatures of those who were favorable to him. And
having put the matter in the hands of some of his most trusted
friends, he was surprised to find the minds of the citizens so
variable and unstable, that many who had signed the list against
him now signed that in his favor.

14. Whilst matters were pending in this state of uncertainty,
the time came for the renewal of the supreme magistracy, on
which occasion Niccolo Soderini became Gonfaloniere of Jus-
tice. It was marvellous to see the crowd, not only of distin-
guished citizens, but even of the people, who accompanied him
to the palace. On his way thither an olive wreath was placed
upon his head, to signify that the country depended upon him
for her security and liberty. This instance, as well as many
others, proves how undesirable it is to accept an important
magistracy or principality with extraordinary expectations on
the part of the people; for being unable by your efforts to
fulfil them, (men ever desiring more than you are able to per-
- form,) you will in the end reap contempt and dishonor. Mes-
ser Tommaso and Niccolo Soderini were brothers ; Niccolo was
the more spirited and enterprising, of the two, and Tommaso
the more sagacious. The latter being a great friend of Piero
de’ Medici, and knowing at the same time his brother’s disposi-
tion, and that he had no other object but the liberty of the city
and to establish the government firmly and without injustice to
any one, advised him to have no ballotings made, so that the
election purses might be filled with the names of citizens de-
voted to their free institutions; which being done, he would

Boox VIL.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 339

see the government established and confirmed without dis-
turbance or harm to any one. Niccolo readily adopted his
brother’s advice, and thus wasted the period of his magistracy
in vain efforts, which his friends the conspirators allowed him
to do from jealousy, being unwilling that the reform of the
government should be effected through the authority of Niccolo,
and in the belief that they would yet be in time under another
Gonfaloniere. When Niccolo’s magistracy came to an end,
it became apparent that he had begun many things, but ac-
complished none; and thus he left his office with much less
honor than he had entered upon it.

15. This result strengthened the party of Piero; it confirmed
his friends in their hopes, and converted those hitherto neutral
into decided adherents. The parties being thus equalized,
many months elapsed without any further disturbances. Pi-
ero’s party, however, steadily grew in power, which aroused
his enemies, who conspired together and planned to do by
force what they had been incapable or unwilling to do by
means of the magistrates when it would have been easy.
They resolved therefore to have Piero, who was lying ill at
Careggi, assassinated; and for that purpose they caused the
Marquis of Ferrara to draw near the city with his troops, so
that after Piero’s death they might come armed into the Piazza
and cause the Signoria to establish a government according to
their will. For they hoped that, even if the whole of the Sig-
noria were not favorable to them, yet that those who were
opposed to them would be induced to yield from fear. Messer
Diotisalvi, the better to conceal his real intentions, often visited
Piero, argued with him about the restoration of harmony in
the city, and counselled him to effect it. But all these machi-
nations had been revealed to Piero; and, moreover, Messer
Domenico Martelli had given him to understand that Fran-
cesco Neroni, brother of Messer Diotisalvi, had solicited him
to join them, showing him that success was certain and their
object all but accomplished. Piero therefore resolved to be the
first to take up arms, and availed himself for that purpose of
the intrigues of his adversaries with the Marquis of Ferrara.
He feigned having received a letter from Messer Giovanni Ben-
tivogli, Prince of Bologna, making known to him that the Mar-
quis of Ferrara was on the other side of the river Albo with
troops; and that it was publicly said that he intended march-

340 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIL

ing upon Florence. And thus upon this pretended information
Piero took up arms and came to Florence followed by a crowd
of armed men. Whereupon all who belonged to his party
armed themselves also, and the opposite party did the same,
but with less order than the others, who had been prepared for
it, whilst Piero’s enemies were not yet ready for it according
to their plans. Messer Diotisalvi, whose dwelling was next to
Piero’s, did not feel himself secure there, but went alternately
to the palace to counsel the Signori to compel Piero to dis-
arm, and to Messer Luca Pitti to keep him firm to their party.
But the one who showed himself more active than all the oth-
ers was Messer Niccolo Soderini, who took up arms, and was
followed by nearly the entire population of his quarter, and
went to the house of Messer Luca Pitti, begging him to mount
his horse and come into the Piazza to support the Signoria,
which was with them, and that this would beyond all doubt
assure them the victory. He urged him at the same time not
to remain in his house, unless he wished either to be basely
crushed by his armed enemies, or shamefully deceived by his
unarmed ones, and that presently he would repent not having
acted up to his advice, when it however would be too late.
And that if he wished the destruction of Piero by war, he could
easily accomplish it; and if he wanted peace, it was better to
be in a position to dictate the terms than to be obliged to ac-
cept such as might be offered. But all these arguments had
no effect upon Messer Luca, whose resentment against Piero
had been calmed; having been beguiled by Piero with promises
of fresh alliances and other advantages, for he had already
married one of his nieces to Giovanni Tornabuoni. Luca
therefore advised Niccolo to lay down his arms and return
home, for it ought to satisfy him to see the city governed by
the magistrates, as would be the case; and that both sides
ought to disarm, and that the Signoria, the majority of whom
were favorable to their party, should be the judges of their
differences. Niccolo, being unable to influence Messer Luca
Pitti in any way, returned home, having however first said to
Luca: “I alone cannot secure the welfare of my city, but I can
“foretell the ills that will befall it. The course which you are
“taking will cause our country the loss of liberty, and to you
“the loss of your power and your substance, and to me and
“others the loss of our country.”

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 341

16. During these disturbances the Signoria caused the palace
to be closed, having shut themselves up in it together with the
magistrates; and showing favor neither to one nor the other
party. The citizens, and especially the adherents of the party
of Messer Luca Pitti, seeing Piero armed, and his adversaries
not, began to consider, not how they should injure Piero, but
rather how they should manage to become his friends. There-
upon the principal citizens, chiefs of the factions, met in the
palace in the presence of the Signoria, where all matters relat-
ing to the condition of the city and the reconciliation of the
parties were discussed by them. And as Piero in consequence
of his feeble condition could not be personally present, they all
resolved to go to him in his palace, with the single exception
of Niccolo Soderini, who, after placing his sons and his affairs
in the charge of his brother Tommaso, went away to his villa,
there to await the end of the matter, which he regarded as
unfortunate for himself and pernicious to his country. When
the other citizens had arrived at Piero’s, one of them, who had
been commissioned to speak for them, complained of the dis-
turbances that had occurred in the city, throwing the blame
mainly upon him who had first taken up arms; and, not know-
ing that this had been Piero, said that they had come to know
his wishes, and that if they accorded with the good of the city
they were ready to follow him. To which Piero replied:
“That it was not he who had first taken up arms that was to
“blame for the disturbances, but those who had first given
“occasion for arming, and that they would be less surprised
“at what he had done for his own safety, if they were to think
“more of what their conduct had been towards him; for then
“they would see that their mighty conclaves, the signing of
“lists, and the negotiations for taking from him the govern-
“ment of the city and of his very life, had caused him to arm.
“And that the fact that his armed followers had not left his
“palace was manifest proof of his having armed only for his
“own defence, and not for the purpose of assailing others; and
“that he wanted nothing else, and desired nothing so much as
“quiet and security for himself, and had never shown the
“slightest inclination or desire for anything else. For the
“authority of the Balia having ceased, he had never thought
“of any extraordinary means of re-establishing it; and that
“he was entirely satisfied to let the magistrates govern the

342 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

“city if that would content them. And that they ought to
“remember that Cosimo and his sons had known how to live
“and make themselves honored in Florence with or without the
“ Balia; and that it was not the house of Medici, but they them-
“selves, who had re-enacted the Balia in 1458, and if they did
“not want it now, no more did he; but that this did not sat-
“isfy them, for he had seen that they believed that they could
“not exist in Florence so long as he remained there, —a thing
“that he never could have believed or thought possible, that
“his friends and those of his father should imagine that they
“could not live in Florence with him, for he had never shown
“himself other than a quiet and peace-loving man.” And then
addressing himself to Messer Diotisalvi and his brother, who
were present, he reproached them in words full of gravity and
indignation with the benefits which they had received at the
hands of Cosimo, with the confidence which he himself had
reposed in them, and with their monstrous ingratitude. And
such was the force of his words that some of those present
would have laid violent hands on the Neroni if he had not
restrained them. Piero finally concluded by saying that he
was ready to approve all that they and the Signoria might re-
solve upon, and that for himself he asked nothing but to live
in peace and security. Many other matters were discussed,
but nothing definite resolved upon, except in a general way
that it was necessary to reform the city and reorganize the
government.

17. The office of Gonfaloniere of Justice was held at that
time by Bernardo Lotti, a man who had not the confidence of
Piero, who in consequence did not deem it proper to attempt
anything so long as Bernardo held that office; which Piero
however deemed of little importance, knowing that Bernardo’s
magistracy was nearly at an end. But when the election came
for Signori who were to sit for the months of September and
October in the year 1466, Ruberto Leoni was chosen to the
highest magistracy. So soon as he had taken office, all other
things being prepared, he called the people together in the
Piazza and created a new Balia, composed entirely of adhe-
rents of Piero, which soon after appointed the magistracies
wholly in accordance with the wishes of the new government.
All this alarmed the chiefs of the adverse faction, so that Mes-
ser Agnolo Acciaiuoli fled to Naples, and Messer Diotisalvi

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 343

Neroni and Niccolo Soderini to Venice. Messer Luca Pitti
remained in Florence, trusting in the promises made to him
by Piero, and in his new relationship with him. Those who
had fled were declared rebels, and all the Neroni family were
dispersed ; Messer Giovanni di Nerone, Archbishop of Flor-
ence, to avoid a worse fate, became a voluntary exile to Rome;
and many other citizens who suddenly departed were banished
to various places. Nor was all this deemed sufficient, but a
procession was ordered for the purpose of rendering thanks to
God for the preservation of the republic and the restoration of
union in the city. During this solemnity some citizens were
seized and put to the torture; a part of them were afterwards
killed, and the others banished. But in all this great vicissi-
tude of things the most notable example was that of Messer
Luca Pitti, who quickly learned the difference between victory
and defeat, and between honor and disgrace. His palace, which
previously had been visited by the greatest number of citizens,
became a perfect solitude. His friends and relatives not only
no longer accompanied him in the streets, but actually feared
to salute him; for a portion had been deprived of their digni-
ties and others of their property, and all were equally menaced.
The superb edifices which he had commenced were abandoned
by the builders, the benefits that were formerly showered upon
him became changed into reproaches, and the honors hereto-
fore bestowed upon him into infamy. Whereupon many, who
for some favor had presented him with costly gifts, now de-
manded them back as having been mere loans; and others
who had been in the habit of lauding him to the skies now
blamed him as an ingrate and a man of violence ; so that he
repented — but too late—not having followed the advice of
Messer Niccolo Soderini, rather to die honorably with arms in
hand, than to live dishonored amongst his victorious enemies.
18. Those who found themselves expatriated began to think
of various means for recovering that country in which they had
not known how to maintain themselves. Messer Agnolo Acci-
aiuoli however, being at Naples, before attempting any active
movement, wanted to ascertain the disposition of Piero, as to
whether there was any hope of a reconciliation with him, and
therefore wrote him a letter to the following effect: “I smile
“at the freaks of Fortune, and how in turn she converts friends
‘into enemies and enemies into friends. You may remember

344 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

“how, during your father’s exile, I, thinking more of that act
“of injustice than of my own danger, was subjected to the same
“wrong, and even came near losing my life. Nor have I ever,
“whilst Cosimo was living, failed to honor and support your
“house; neither have I since his death ever had the slightest
“intention of offending you. It is true that your feeble con-
“stitution, and the tender years of your sons, in a measure
“alarmed me; so that I judged it necessary to give such form
“to the government that, after your death, our country might
“not be exposed to ruin. This gave rise to the proceedings
“which were not intended against you, but for the good of my
“country, and which, if erroneous, deserve nevertheless to be
“forgiven on account of my good intentions and my past good
“conduct. Nor can I believe that, inasmuch as your house
“during so long a time has ever found me faithful, I shall not
“now find you merciful, or that all my former merits shall be
“cancelled by a single fault.”

Upon receipt of this letter Piero replied thus: “ Your smil-
“‘ing where you are is the reason why I do not weep; for were
“vou to be smiling in Florence, I should be crying in Naples.
“T confess that you have been well disposed towards my father,
“but you must admit that you have received much in return for
“it; so that your obligations to us were as much greater than
“ours to you, as deeds are of greater value than words. Having
‘“‘thus been well rewarded for the good you have done, you must
“ not be surprised now at the just retribution for your evil doings.
“Nor will your love of country excuse you; for no one will ever
“believe that Florence was less loved and its interests less pro-
“moted by the Medici than by the Accitiuoli. Live, therefore,
“in dishonor where you are, since you have not known how to
“Jive here in honor.”

19. Messer Agnolo, despairing therefore of obtaining pardon,
went to Rome, and united with the Archbishop of Florence and
the other banished Florentines to do all they could to destroy
the credit of the Medici in Rome, in connection with their com-
mercial operations. Piero contended against this with difficulty ;
still, by the aid of his friends, he thwarted their designs. Messer
Diotisalvi and Niccolo Soderini, on the other hand, made every
effort to stir up the Venetian Senate against their country, judg-
ing that, if the Florentines were involved in fresh wars, they
would not be able to sustain their government, which was still

Book VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 345

new and was detested. There happened to be at this time at
Ferrara Messer Giovan Francesco, son of Messer Palla Strozzi,
who, together with his father, had been driven from Florence
during the troubles of 1484. He enjoyed very high credit
amongst the other merchants, and was reputed exceedingly
rich. The new rebels demonstrated to Giovan Francesco the
great facility with which they could recover their country if the
Venetians were to declare war against Florence, which they
supposed the former would readily do, provided a share of the
expenses were contributed by themselves, but which otherwise
would be doubtful. Giovan Francesco, eager to revenge him-
self for the old injuries, gave ready ear to their suggestions, and
promised to aid such an attempt with all the means in his power.
Thereupon they went to the Doge, and complained of their exile,
which, they said, “ they had to suffer for no other fault than the
“ desire to have their country governed by equal laws and by the
“ magistrates, and to prevent a few private citizens from usurp-
“ing the authority of the government. They added that Piero
“ de’ Medici and his partisans, who were accustomed to the ways
“of tyrants, had treacherously taken up arms, and by deceit
‘induced them to lay down theirs; and then by fraud and vio-
“lence had driven them from their country. And not content
“ with this, they had availed of the Almighty himself as a means
“of crushing many others, who, relying upon the pledges given
“them, had remained in the city, and been seized during solemn
“and sacred ceremonies and supplications, and imprisoned or
“ nut to death; thus making the Almighty himself a participant
“in their treason, which was an impious and nefarious example.
“The exiles added that, to avenge these wrongs, they knew not
‘“‘where more effectually to look for assistance than to the Sen-
“ate of that state, which, having always enjoyed liberty them-
“selves, ought to have compassion upon those who had lost
“theirs. And therefore they appealed to freemen against ty-
“rants, and to the pious against the impious; and exhorted
“the Senate to remember that it was the family of the Medici
‘who had robbed them of Lombardy, when Cosimo, contrary to
“the will of other citizens, had favored and assisted Francesco
“Sforza. So that, if they were not moved by the justice of their
“ cause, the just hatred and desire for vengeance ought to make
“them accede to their request.”

20. The whole Senate was greatly moved by these last words,

346 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

and it was resolved that their captain, Bartolommeo Colione,
should attack the Florentine dominions. The army was got
together as soon as practicable (1467), and was joined by Er-
cole da Este, who had been sent by Borso, Marquis of Ferrara.
The Florentines being still unprepared, the enemy in the first
attack burnt the Borgo of Dovadole, and did some damage to
the surrounding country. But after the expulsion of the party
adverse to Piero, the Florentines had formed a new league with
Galeazzo, Duke of Milan, and with Ferdinand, king of Naples,
and had employed Frederick, Count of Urbino, as captain of
their forces. So that, having now re-established their relations
with their friends, they cared less for their enemies. Ferdinand
sent his oldest son, Alfonso, and Galeazzo came in person, each
with a suitable force. They all made head at Castrocaro, a
castle belonging to the Florentines, and situated at the foot of
the mountains that slope from Tuscany into the Romagna.
The enemy meantime withdrew towards Imola. According to
the custom of the times, a few slight skirmishes took place, but
neither party fairly attacked the other, or laid siege to any
place. Neither afforded the other an opportunity for coming to
a general engagement, but both, remaining in their tents, acted
with extraordinary cowardice. This conduct displeased the
Florentines, who found themselves involved in a war that cost
much and promised little. The magistrates complained of it
to those citizens who had been deputed as commissaries for the
conduct of the war. These replied that it was altogether the
fault of the Duke Galeazzo, who, having great authority and
but little experience, was incapable of devising measures of
utility himself and unwilling to listen to those who were able;
and that, so long as he remained with the army, it would be
impossible to achieve any act of gallantry or movement of ad-
vantage. The Florentines, therefore, gave the Duke to under-
stand that they esteemed it of great benefit and advantage to
them that he had come personally to their aid; for such a repu-
tation as his was of itself sufficient to alarm their enemies.
Nevertheless, they considered his health and the safety of his
state of more importance than their own convenience; for with
the safety of the former they could hope that all else would
prosper, but if that should suffer they would have reason to ap-
prehend all sorts of calamities. They did not, therefore, deem
it very safe for him to remain absent too long from Milan, being

Sa aaa ean ie werent yin OKS

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 347

yet new in the government, and having powerful enemies that
were not to be trusted, and who might easily take advantage of
his absence to set some plot afoot against him. And therefore
they advised him to return to his own state, and to leave a por-
tion of his troops for the defence of theirs. Galeazzo was
pleased at this proposition, and returned without further thought
to Milan. The Florentine captains who remained in command,
being now without any interference, and desirous of proving
that they had assigned the true reason for their slow progress,
now moved close up to the enemy, so as to bring on a regular
engagement, which lasted half a day without either party yield-
ing. Nor were any men killed; only a few horses were wounded
and some prisoners taken on both sides. Winter having now
set in, when it was customary for all armies to go into quarters,
Messer Bartolommeo Colione retired towards Ravenna, the Flor-
entine troops went into Tuscany, and the troops of the king of
Naples and the Duke of Milan returned to their respective coun-
tries. But as after this attack upon the Florentine state no dis-
turbances had broken out in the city, as had been promised by
the Florentine rebels, and as the pay of the hired troops was in
arrears, propositions were made for peace, which, after much
negotiation, was concluded (1468). The Florentine rebels,
therefore, being bereft of all hope, dispersed to various places.
Messer Diotisalvi went to Ferrara, where he was received and
supported by the Marquis Borso. Niccolo Soderini went to Ra-
venna, where he lived upon a small pension from the Venetians,
and died at an old age. He was esteemed as a just and cour-
ageous man, but slow and doubting in his resolves, which caused
him to lose the opportunity of victory as Gonfaloniere of Jus-
tice, which he strove in vain afterwards to recover as a private
citizen.

21. After the conclusion of peace, those citizens who re-
mained masters in Florence seemed to think their victory
incomplete unless they overwhelmed, not only their enemies,
but all who were suspect to their party, with every kind of
injury. They induced Bardo Altoviti, who was Gonfaloniere of
Justice at that time, anew to deprive many citizens of their
offices, and to banish many others, which increased the power
of their party and struck terror into the other. They exer-
cised this power without any consideration, and altogether
governed in such wise that it actually seemed as if God and

348 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIL.

fortune had given the city up to them as a prey. Piero de’
Medici knew little of these things, and could not even remedy
that little, being borne down by his infirmities; for he was so
drawn together that he was unable to use any of his faculties
except that of speech; so that all he could do was to beg and
exhort them to conduct themselves according to the laws, and
to enjoy the safety of their country rather than its ruin. And
by way of diverting the citizens of Florence he resolved to
celebrate the nuptials of his son Lorenzo with Clarice d’ Or-
sini, in a most sumptuous manner; and this was done with
all the pomp and splendor becoming so great a citizen. Ac-
cordingly, many days were spent in a variety of festivities,
balls, and representations from antiquity ; and for the purpose
of displaying still more the greatness of the house of Medici
and that of the state, there were added two grand military
spectacles, the one representing an open field battle by men on
horseback, and the other a siege and the storming of a town;
all of which were executed with the greatest order and skill.
22. Whilst these events were taking place in Florence, peace
prevailed throughout the rest of Italy, though accompanied
with much apprehension of the Turk, who in his wars upon
the Christians had taken Negropont, greatly to the discredit
and injury of the Christian name. At this time Borso, Mar-
quis of Ferrara, died, and was succeeded by his brother Ercole.
Gismondo da Rimini also died: he had been the persistent
enemy of the Church, and left his state as a heritage to his
son Ruberto, who afterwards became one of the ablest cap-
tains in the wars of Italy. Death also carried off Pope Paul;
and his successor was Sixtus IV., who had previously borne
the name of Francesco da Savona, a man of the lowest origin,
but who by his talents had become General of the Order of
St. Francis, and afterwards Cardinal. This pontiff was the
first to show the extent of the papal powers, and how much
of what were afterwards called errors could be concealed
under the pontifical authority. Amongst his family were
Piero and Girolamo, who were generally believed to be his
sons, though he concealed the fact by calling them by names
less compromising to his character. Piero, who was a brother
of a religious order, was raised by him to the dignity of Car-
dinal, with the title of San Sisto. To Girolamo he gave the
town of Furli, which he had taken from Antonio Ordelaffi,

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 349

whose ancestors had for a long time been princes of that
state. This ambitious mode of proceeding made Sixtus the
more influential with the princes of Italy, who all sought to
gain his friendship. The Duke of Milan gave his natural
daughter Catherine as wife to Girolamo, with the city of
Imola for her dower, which he had taken from Taddeo degli
Alidosi. Another alliance was contracted between this Duke
and King Ferdinand of Naples, by the marriage of Elizabeth,
daughter of Alfonso, the king’s oldest son, with Giovan Gale-
azzo, oldest son of the Duke of Milan.

23. Italy meantime remained pretty tranquil, the chief care
of her princes being to observe each other, and by marriages,
fresh alliances, and other bonds to secure themselves against
one another. Nevertheless during this general peace Florence
was greatly afflicted by her own citizens, whose ambition Piero
was unable to check, owing to his bodily infirmity. By way
of relieving his conscience, however, and to see whether he
could influence them by shame, he called all the leaders to
his palace, and addressed them as follows : —

“T could not have believed that the time would ever come
“when the conduct of my friends would have made me love
“and wish for my enemies, and that victory might have been
“defeat. For | thought that I was associated with men whose
“cupidity had some measure or bounds, and that they would
“have been satisfied with living securely and honored in their
“country, after having been avenged upon most of their ene-
“mies. But 1 see now how greatly I have deceived myself
“for so long a time; and how little I understood the natural
“ambition of men in general, and still less yours. For it
“seems that you are not content with being the chiefs in so
“oreat a city, and grasping for your small number all the
“honors, dignities, and emoluments that were formerly shared
“by many citizens. Nor does it suffice you to have distributed
“amongst yourselves the possessions of your enemies, or to
“load them with all the public burdens, whilst you are ex-
“empt from them, and enjoy all the public benefits; but you
“must also oppress them with every kind of injury. You
“despoil your neighbors of their goods, you sell justice, disre-
“ varding yourselves all civil judgments; you oppress the peace-
“ful and exalt the insolent; and I do not believe that there
“are in all Italy so many examples of violence and avarice

350 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIL

“as are to be found in this city. Has our city then given us
“life for no other purpose but to destroy hers? Has she hon-
“ored us so that we may bring dishonor upon her? Has she
“made us victorious so that we may the more effectually work
“her ruin? I protest to you by all that should be most sacred
“amongst good men, that, if you continue to conduct yourselves
“in such a manner that I shall have occasion to regret our vic-
“tory, I will act in such a manner that you shall have occasion
“to repent having misused it.”

Piero thereupon sent secretly for Messer Agnolo caer
to come to Caffagiuolo, and there talked with him at length
about the condition of the city; and there is no doubt that,
had not death interposed, Piero would have recalled all the
banished to Florence, so as to check the rapine of those
within the city. But death prevented the execution, of his
best intentions; for, borne down with the infirmities of the
body and anxiety of the mind, he died in the fifty-third year
of his age. His goodness and virtues never could be entirely
known to his country, having been almost to the end of his
life under the direction of his father, Cosimo de’ Medici; and
the few years that he survived him were consumed almost
wholly by civil contentions, and by his bodily infirmity. Piero
was buried in the church of San Lorenzo, near his father, and
his obsequies were conducted with all the pomp due to so illus-
trious a citizen. He left two sons, Lorenzo and Giuliano; and
although they inspired every one with the hope of their becom-
ing most useful to the republic, yet their youth caused general
misgivings.

24. Amongst the first citizens in the government of Flor-
ence, and by far superior to all the others, was Messer Tommaso
Soderini, whose sagacity and influence were known not only in
Florence, but to almost all the princes of Italy. After the
death of Piero de’ Medici, Messer Tommaso was looked up to
by the whole city, and many citizens called to pay their hom-
age to him at his house, as though he were chief of the state,
and many princes addressed him as such by letters. But he
was prudent, and knew perfectly well his position and that of
the Medici; he made no reply to the letters of the princes,
and advised the citizens that they ought to call upon the Med-
ici at their palace, and not upon him. And to show by deed
what he had advised in words, he called together the heads of

‘Book VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 351

the noble families in the convent of San Antonio, where he
also caused Lorenzo and Giuliano de’ Medici to come; and in
a grave and lengthy address he spoke of the condition of Italy,
of the character and disposition of her princes, and concluded
by saying that, “if they wished to live in union and peace in
“Florence, secure from internal dissensions and foreign wars,
“they must look to these youths, and maintain the renown of
“their house; for,’ said he, “men never complain of that to
“which they are accustomed, and although prompt in adopt-
“ing anything new, yet they tire of it very quickly. And it
‘“‘has ever been easier to maintain a government which by
“length of time has exhausted envy, than to set up a new
“one, which, for a multitude of reasons, may easily be de-
“ stroyed.”

After Messer Tommaso had concluded, Lorenzo arose to
speak; and although he was still very young, yet he expressed
himself with so much gravity and modesty that he inspired
every one with the hope that he would be what indeed he
afterwards became. And before the meeting separated, the
citizens swore that they would be as fathers to these youths;
and they in return pledged themselves to act as sons. Having
come to this conclusion Lorenzo and Giuliano were honored as
princes of the state, and they continued to act under the advice
of Messer Tommaso Soderini.

25. Whilst complete tranquillity, both internal and external,
thus prevailed in Florence, there being no war to disturb the
general quiet, an unexpected trouble occurred, which was as it
were the presage of future calamities. Amongst the families
that were involved in the ruin of the party of Messer Luca Pitti
was that of the Nardi; for Salvestro and his brothers, who were’
the chiefs of that family, were first exiled, and afterwards, in
consequence of the war against Florence under Bartolommeo
Colione, declared rebels. Amongst these was Bernardo, one
of the brothers of Salvestro, a young man of ardent and coura-
geous temper. Poverty made his exile unendurable to him; and
seeing that, in consequence of the establishment of peace, there
was no chance of his returning to Florence, he resolved to do
something by which to provoke a fresh war. For small be-
ginnings often produce great results, especially as men are ever
more ready to follow in any movement set on foot by others
than to originate one themselves. Bernardo had an extensive

352 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

acquaintance in Prato, and still more so in the district of
Pistoja, and was particularly intimate with the Palandras, who,
although tillers of the soil, yet counted amongst them many
men who, like the Pistojans in general, were used to arms and
bloodshed. Bernardo knew that they were malcontents, having
been ill treated by the Florentine magistrates in some of their
quarrels; he moreover knew the disposition of the men of
Prato, and their general resentment against the government,
which they deemed overbearing and grasping. All this en-
couraged him in the hope of being able to light a conflagration
in Tuscany by making the men of Prato revolt, who would
immediately have such large accessions that it would not be
in the power of the government to extinguish it. He com-
municated his project to Messer Diotisalvi, and asked him, in
case he should succeed in seizing Prato, what help he might
obtain through his intervention from the other princes. Mes-
ser Diotisalvi considered the undertaking most perilous, and
almost impossible of success. Seeing, however, that at the risk
of others he might have another chance at fortune, he advised
Bernardo to make the attempt, promising him most certain help
from Bologna and Ferrara if he managed to hold Prato for at
least two weeks. This promise filled Bernardo with the most
sanguine hopes, and he went secretly to Prato (1470), and, on
communicating his scheme to some of his friends, he found
them most favorably disposed. He met the same readiness
and disposition in the Palandras; and, after having agreed upon
the time and manner of proceeding, he communicated the whole
to Messer Diotisalvi.

26. Cesare Petrucci was at this time Podesta (or governor)
of Prato for the people of Florence. It was the custom of the
governors of this sort of places to keep the keys of the gates
near them; and whenever, especially in periods of tranquillity,
any one of the place asked for them, either to go out or to
come in, they were readily given him. Bernardo, who knew
this habit, presented himself about daybreak, with the Palan-
dras and about a hundred armed men, at the gate leading to
Pistoja; and his confederates within, who were cognizant of
his movements, had also armed themselves. One of these asked
the Podesta for the keys, pretending that one of the inhabitants
wished to come in. The Podesta, who had not the least sus-
picion, sent one of his servants with the keys; and when he was

ned Nat aE SOIR i

Boox VIL] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 353

sufficiently far from the palace, they were taken from him by
the conspirators, the gate was opened, and Bernardo with his
followers admitted. Having been joined by his confederates,
they divided into two bodies. The one led by Salvestro of
Prato seized the citadel, and the other, under Bernardo, took
the palace, and Cesare Petrucci, with all his family, were put
under guard. They then raised the alarm, and went through
the place shouting the ery of “ Liberty.” It was now daylight,
and many of the people, hearing this cry, rushed to the Piazza,
and, learning that the citadel was taken and the Podesta and
his family prisoners, they were astounded and perplexed to
know how this could have taken place. The eight citizens who
held the supreme authority of the place assembled in their
palace to confer as to what was to be done. Bernardo, having
gone through the town with his men, and finding that the
people did not follow him, upon learning that the Eight were
assembled, went to them and explained that the object of his
attempt was to liberate them and his country from servitude,
pointing out to them how great would be the glory of those
who took arms in favor of this cause, and who joined him in
this glorious attempt, which would assure them perpetual peace
and eternal fame. He reminded them of their ancient lib-
erties and of their present condition, and assured them of
certain assistance if they would only hold out for a few days
against whatever forces the Florentines might get together.
He averred that he had friends in Florence who would rise so
soon as they should hear that this place had resolved to sus-
tain his enterprise.

The Eight, however, were not moved by these words, and
replied: “That they knew not whether the people of Flor-
“ence were free or enslaved, being a matter that did not con-
“cern them; but they knew that, as regarded themselves, they
“wanted no further liberty than to obey the magistrates that
“ooverned Florence, and at whose hands they had never re-
“ceived any wrong that would warrant their taking up arms
“against them. And therefore they advised him to restore the
“Podesta to liberty, and to leave the place with his men, and
“speedily to withdraw from the danger in which he had so
‘“rashly placed himself.” Bernardo, however, was not alarmed
by these words, but resolved to see whether he could not influ-
ence the people of Prato by fear, since arguments had failed to

VOL. I. 23

854 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

do so. And by way of terrifying them, he resolved to put the
Podesta Petruccio to death, and ordered him to be hung at the
window of the palace. Cesare was already near the window,
with a halter around his neck, and when he saw Bernardo, who
was urging his death, he turned to him and said: “ Bernardo,
“you cause my being put to death, im the belief that the people
“of Prato will afterwards follow you; but the result will be
“just the contrary, for the reverence which the people of Prato
“have for the rectors who were sent here by the people of
“Florence is such that, when they shall see the wrong you have
“done me, it will excite them to such hatred of you as will
“assuredly cause your ruin. It is not my death, therefore, but
“rather my life, that can contribute to your success ; for were
“T to command that which you desire, they would much more
“readily obey me than you; and if they were to see me follow
“your orders, you would quickly attain the end you have in
“view.”

Bernardo, who seemed at a loss what course to take, deemed
this advice good, and therefore ordered Cesare to go upon the
balcony that overlooked the Piazza, and to command the peo-
ple to obey him. Having done this, Cesare was led back to
prison.

27. The weakness of the conspirators was, however, soon dis-
covered. A number of Florentines living in Prato came to-
gether, and amongst them Messer Giorgio Ginori, a Knight of
Rhodes, who was the first to take up arms against Bernardo,
who was running about the Piazza entreating the people to
follow him, and threatening them if they refused. Being
attacked by Messer Giorgio and his followers, Bernardo was
wounded and taken prisoner. This done, it was an easy
matter to liberate the Podesta, and to overpower the other
conspirators, who, having divided into several small parties,
were nearly all captured and put to death. Meantime the re-
port of this affair reached Florence, and being greatly exag-
gerated, the people were told that Prato was taken and the
Podesta with all his family killed, and the place filled with
enemies; that Pistoja was in arms, and many of her citizens
implicated in the conspiracy. The palace became quickly filled
with citizens, who had come together for the purpose of confer-
ring with the Signoria. Ruberto da San Severino, a captain of
high repute, happening to be in Florence at that juncture, it was

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 305

resolved to send him to Prato with what troops they were able
to collect. He was commissioned to approach the place and
take particular notice of everything, and to adopt such measures
as his prudence might suggest. Ruberto had but just passed the
castle of Campi when he was met by a messenger from Cesare
Petrucci, who informed him that Bernardo was prisoner and
his followers dispersed and killed, and all troubles ended. He
therefore returned to Florence, where Bernardo. was brought
soon after; and, when questioned by the magistrates as to the
truth of the affair, which seemed to them most feeble, he said
that he had made this attempt because he had resolved rather
to die in Florence than to live in exile, and that he wanted his
death to be marked by some noteworthy fact.

28. This disturbance having been crushed almost as soon as
begun, the citizens returned to their accustomed mode of life,
hoping to enjoy without further apprehensions that authority |
which they had established and confirmed for themselves.
This gave rise to those evils in the city which are most apt to
be generated in times of peace; for the young men became
more dissolute than usual, and beyond measure extravagant
in dress, carousings, and all other licentiousness ; and being idle
they spent their time in gaming, and with women, their chief
study being to appear splendidly attired and to be esteemed
shrewd and witty in speech, and he who could say the sharpest
things to the others was esteemed the cleverest. These evil
habits were carried still further through the example of the
courtiers of the Duke of Milan, who came with his lady and all
his court to Florence, in fulfilment of a vow (1471), and was
received with all the pomp and magnificence suitable to so
powerful a prince and an ally of the republic. Then was seen
a thing which in our day had never yet been witnessed; for it
being Lent, when the Church commands us to fast and eat no
‘flesh, this court, regardless of the ordinances of the Church
and of God, feasted daily upon meat. Many spectacles were
gotten up in honor of the Duke, amongst them one in the
church of San Spirito, where was represented the descent of
the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles; and in consequence of the
many lights on that occasion the entire church was burnt,
which was regarded by many as a manifestation of the wrath
of the Almighty in his indignation against us for our mis-
conduct. And if the Duke of Milan found in Florence abun-

356 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

dance of courtly pleasures and extravagant customs, he left
there many more than he found; so that the good citizens
deemed it necessary to restrain and put bounds to them by
sumptuary laws against extravagance in dress, feastings, and
funerals.

29. In the midst of this general tranquillity an unexpected
disturbance occurred in Tuscany. Some citizens of Volterra
had discovered an alum mine in that territory; and knowing
its value, and desiring to find parties who would contribute
money for its development and could protect it with their
authority, they applied to some Florentine citizens, and gave
them an interest in the profits to be derived from it. This
matter, as is frequently the case with new enterprises, was at
first but lightly esteemed by the citizens of Volterra; but in
time they recognized its value, and then, when too late, they
wanted to recover the lost profits, which in the beginning they
might easily have secured. They began to agitate the matter
in their councils, claiming that it was not proper that a mine
found upon public property should be worked for private profit.
Thereupon they sent ambassadors to Florence (1472), and the
matter was referred to certain citizens, who being either bribed
by the parties, or because they judged it to be right, decided
that it would be unjust on the part of the people of Volterra
to deprive their citizens of the fruit of their labor and indus-
try; and that the alum pits in question belonged of right to
those individuals who had developed them, but that it would be
proper that these should pay a certain yearly sum to the city of
Volterra in acknowledgment of her sovereign rights. This de-
cision, instead of diminishing, rather increased the excitement
and ill feeling of the people of Volterra, causing much agita-
tion in their councils, as well as throughout the whole city.
The people demanded the restoration of what they considered
had been taken from them, and the proprietors insisted upon
keeping what in the first instance they had purchased, and the
enjoyment of which had afterwards been confirmed to them by
the decision of the Florentines. In the disputes resulting from
this, a respectable citizen of Volterra, called “Il Pecorino,”
together with many others that had sided with him, were killed,
and their houses sacked and burned. And it was with diffi-
culty that the fury of the populace was restrained from putting
the Florentine rectors to death.

KESTER

Book VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 357

30. After this first outrage the people of Volterra resolved
before anything else to send ambassadors to Florence, who
were to give the Signoria to understand that, if they would
maintain the ancient privileges of Volterra, they would in
return continue their ancient allegiance. The reply to be
made to this was discussed at great length. Messer Tommaso
Soderini advised “that the Volterrans should be received in
“any way they were disposed to return; it seeming to him
“most inopportune to light a conflagration so near them that
“the flames of it would set their own house on fire; for he
“feared the character of the Pope and the power of the king
“of Naples, and had no confidence in the alliance of the Vene-
“tians, nor in that of the Duke of Milan, not knowing how
“much reliance could be placed upon the good faith of the
“one or the valor of the other, and remembering the trite ad-
“age, that a lean peace is better than a fat victory.” On the
other hand, Lorenzo de’ Medici, thinking the opportunity favor-
able for displaying the value of his counsel and prudence, and
being mainly urged to it by those who were jealous of the
authority of Messer Tommaso, maintained that the arrogance
of the Volterrans ought to be punished by force of arms; and
affirmed that, if they were not corrected in some exemplary
manner, it would encourage others to act in a similar manner,
regardless of all fear or respect for the Florentine authority.
This course was resolved upon, and the answer given to the
Volterrans was: “That they must not expect the continuation
“of those privileges which they themselves had destroyed, and
“that therefore they must submit to the decision of the Sig-
“noria or expect war.”

The ambassadors having returned with this answer, the
Volterrans prepared for defence; they fortified their town,
and called upon all the other Italian princes for assistance.
But a few only paid any attention to their call, and none
but the Siennese and the lord of Piombino gave them any
hope of succor. The Florentines, on the other hand, deeming
a prompt victory most important, assembled ten thousand in-
fantry and two thousand horse, who under the command of
Frederick, lord of Urbino, at once entered the Volterran ter-
ritory and quickly occupied the whole of it. They then laid
siege to the town, which, being situated upon a high and iso-
lated eminence, could only be assailed from the side of the

358 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. © [Boox VII.

church of San Alessandro. The Volterrans had hired about
a thousand soldiers for their defence, who, seeing the bold at-
tack made by the Florentines, lost confidence in their own
ability to resist, and were as slow in their defence as they
were prompt in daily offending the inhabitants of Volterra
by insults. The unfortunate citizens, being thus attacked by
their enemies from without, and oppressed by their friends
within, despaired of their safety and began to think of making
terms. And seeing no better way, they placed themselves in
the hands of the commissaries, who at once had the gates
opened, and admitted the larger part of the Florentine troops,
and then went to the palace where the priors were assembled
and ordered them to return to their homes. On their way
there one of the priors was in derision stripped by one of the
soldiers; and so much more ready are men for evil than for
good, that this beginning led to the destruction of the city,
which was sacked and pillaged an entire day by the soldiers.
Neither women nor sacred edifices were spared, and those who
had so illy defended as well as those who assailed her alike
despoiled the city of her substance. The news of this victory
was received with great joy by the people of Florence; and as
this undertaking had originated entirely with Lorenzo, his rep-
utation quickly rose to the highest point. But when Messer
Tommaso Soderini was taunted by one of his most intimate
friends for the advice which he had given, saying to him,
“What say you now since Volterra has been conquered ?”
Messer Tommaso replied, “To me the place seems rather lost
“than won; for if you had received Volterra back by agree-
“ment, that city would have proved a source of profit and of
“security to you; but having to hold it by force, it will prove
‘‘a source of weakness and anxiety to you in time of trouble,
“and of injury and expense in time of peace.”

31. At this time the Pope, eager to keep the states of the
Church to their allegiance, caused Spoleto to be sacked be-
cause her internal factions and dissensions had led her to
revolt; afterwards he besieged Citta di Castello for having
been guilty of a like contumacy. The lord of the latter place
was Niccolo Vitelli, who, being on terms of intimate friendship
with Lorenzo de’ Medici, obtained assistance from him, which,
though inadequate for Niccolo’s defence, yet was quite suffi-
cient to sow the first seeds of enmity between Sixtus IV. and

Book VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 859

the Medici, which soon after produced the most unhappy fruits ;
and these would not even have been so long in showing them-
selves had it not been for the death of Fra Piero, Cardinal of
San Sisto. For that cardinal had travelled through all Italy,
and had visited Venice and Milan, on pretence of witnessing
the marriage of Ercole, Marquis of Ferrara, and had sounded
the minds of those princes to ascertain how they were disposed
towards the Florentines. But upon his return to Rome he
died, and not without suspicion of having been poisoned by
the Venetians, who feared the power of Sixtus whenever he
should choose to avail of the talents and services of Fra Piero.
For although of low origin, yet so soon as he became cardinal
Piero exhibited such pride and ambition that neither the car-
dinalate nor even the pontificate seemed sufficient for him; for
he did not hesitate to give a feast in Rome that would have
been deemed extraordinary even for a king, and for which he
expended more than twenty thousand florins. Pope Sixtus IV.
being thus by death deprived of this minister, pursued his de-
signs more slowly. But as the Florentines, the Duke of Milan,
and the Venetians had renewed their league (1474), and had
left it open to the Pope and the king to join it also, Sixtus and
the king of Naples also formed an alliance between them-
selves, leaving it open for the other princes also to become
parties to it. And thus was Italy divided into two hostile
factions; and every day circumstances occurred that engen-
dered hatred between them, as was the case with regard to
the island of Cyprus, which was coveted by the king of Naples,
but was seized by the Venetians. This caused the bands of
union between the Pope and the king to be drawn still closer
together.

At this period Frederick, Prince of Urbino, was looked upon
as the most distinguished captain of Italy, and had repeatedly
commanded the Florentine forces in their wars. The Pope and
the king of Naples, for the purpose of depriving the hostile
league of this commander, resolved to win Frederick over to
their side. The Pope advised and the king begged him to come
and see him at Naples. Frederick complied, greatly to the sur-
prise and displeasure of the Florentines, who believed that he
would experience the same fate as Niccolo Piccinino; but the
reverse of this happened, for Frederick returned from Rome and
Naples laden with honors, and with the appointment as general

5360 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VII.

of that league. Nor did the Pope and the king omit to sound
the disposition of the lords of the Romagna and of Sienna for
the purpose of securing their alliance, so as to be able by their
help the more effectually to damage the Florentines. When
the latter became aware of this, they prepared by all available
means to provide against the ambitious designs of this league ;
and having lost Frederick of Urbino, they engaged Ruberto da
Rimini as their commander. They renewed their league with
Perugia, and formed an alliance with the lord of Faenza. The
Pope and the king of Naples alleged as the cause of their
enmity against the Florentines, that these wished to detach
them from the Venetians, and then form an alliance with these
themselves ; for the Pope judged that the Church would not be
able to maintain her influence, nor the Count Girolamo the
states of the Romagna if the Florentines and Venetians were
united. On the other hand the Florentines apprehended that
the king and the Pope desired to embroil them with the Vene-
tians, not for the sake of securing their alliance themselves,
but to be able the more easily to injure the Florentines. Thus
two years were passed in these mutual suspicions and jealous-
ies before any actual outbreak took place; and the first that
occurred was in Tuscany, though of but slight importance.

32. Braccio da Perugia, whom we have repeatedly mentioned
as one of the most distinguished soldiers of Italy, had left two
sons, Oddo and Carlo. The latter was still of very tender
years at the time of his father’s death, and the former had been
killed by the people of the Val di Lamona, as we have else-
where related. But when Carlo afterwards came to a suitable
age for military service he was engaged by the Venetians as
one of their Condottieri,— partly out of regard for the father’s
memory, and partly because of the hopes which they had con-
ceived of the young man’s- abilities. About this time his
engagement expired, and Carlo was unwilling to renew it
without first trying whether his name and his father’s reputa-
tion would not enable him to return to Perugia in some suitable
capacity. The Venetians readily assented to this, for they
knew from experience that every change generally contributed
to the increase of their power. Carlo therefore went to Tus-
cany, and finding the affairs of Perugia complicated by their
league with the Florentines, and being desirous that his move-
ments should result in something memorable, he attacked the

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 361

Siennese (1476), alleging that they were indebted to him for
services rendered by his father to their republic, which claims
he wanted satisfied. His attack was so impetuous that he came
near overturning their whole state. The citizens, seeing them-
selves assailed in this manner, and being always ready to credit
everything bad to the Florentines, persuaded themselves that it
had been done with their connivance, and made great com-
plaints of them to the Pope and the king of Naples. They
also sent ambassadors to Florence, who complained of the
great wrong done to their city, and demonstrated ingeniously
that without assistance Carlo would not have been able to in-
flict such injury upon them with such entire security to himself.
The Florentines protested against this accusation, and declared
themselves ready to do everything in their power to induce
Carlo to desist from doing the Siennese further harm, and that
the ambassadors might use any means they pleased to induce
Carlo to discontinue his attack. Carlo complained of this, and
pointed out to the Florentines that by failing to support him
they had deprived themselves of an important acquisition and
himself of great glory; for he promised to give them posses-
sion of the place in a short time, seeing the wretched cowardice
of the people of Sienna and the insufficiency of their means of
defence. Carlo therefore departed and returned to his former
employment in the service of the Venetians, and the Siennese,
although relieved from this serious danger through the media-
tion of the Florentines, yet remained full of indignation against
them, considering themselves under no obligations to those who
had rid them of an evil of which they had themselves been the
original cause.

33. Whilst matters between the king of Naples and the Pope
and in Tuscany were in the condition related above, an event
occurred in Lombardy that was of the greatest importance, and
was a presage of the greatest calamities. There was in Milan
a certain Cola Montano, a man of great learning and ambition,
who taught the Latin language to some of the youths of the first
families there. Either from hatred of the evil habits and mode
of life of the Duke Galeazzo Sforza, or from some other cause,
Cola expressed in all his teachings his detestation of being
obliged to live under such a prince; calling those happy to
whom fortune had granted the privilege of having been born
and living under a republic, and pointing out how all the most

362 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

celebrated men had been nurtured in republics, and not under
princes, inasmuch as the former cherish men of merit, whilst
despots try to crush them; for republics profit by the virtue of
others, whilst tyrants fear it. The young men whom he had
taken most into his intimacy were Giovanni Andrea Lam-
pognano, Carlo Visconti, and Girolamo Olgiato. He often dis-
cussed with them the vile nature of the Duke Galeazzo, and the
misfortune of those who were subjected to his government, and
so won the hearts and confidence of these young men that he
made them take an oath that, when they should have attained
a suitable age, they would deliver their country from the mis-
rule of this tyrant. The youths, filled with this desire, which
grew with their years, were hastened to the execution of their
design by the habits and mode of life of the Duke, and by the
personal injuries which they had received at his hands. Ga-
leazzo was licentious and cruel, and the frequent display of these
vices had made him most odious; for, not content with debauch-
ing noble ladies, he took pleasure in making it publicly known,
and the mere putting to death of men did not satisfy him unless
he could accompany it with some special cruelty. He was
charged even with the infamous crime of having caused the
death of his own mother; for seeming to feel in her presence
that he was not absolutely master, he bore himself towards her
in such manner that she resolved to withdraw to her estates
near Cremona, which she had received as her dower. But on
her way there she was seized with a sudden violent illness, and
died, which gave rise to the general belief that Galeazzo* had
caused her death. The Duke had dishonored Carlo and Giro-
lamo in the persons of their ladies, and had refused to concede
to Giovan Andrea the possession of the abbey of Miramondo,
which had been granted by the Pope to one of his near relatives.
These private injuries increased the determination of these
young men to revenge themselves, and to free their country
from so many ills. They thought that, whenever they should
succeed in killing the Duke, they would be supported, not only
by many of the nobles, but also by the entire people. Resolved
therefore to make the attempt, they had frequent meetings,
which however excited no attention, as their ancient intimacy
was well known. The killing of the Duke was the constant
subject of their discussions; and by way of training themselves
to the act, they practised striking each other in the breast and

Book VIL] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 363

sides with the sheaths of the poignards which they intended
using in reality. They also talked over the time and place
most suitable for success, and concluded that to attempt it in
the castle would not be safe; to do it during the chase seemed
uncertain and hazardous, and during the Duke’s walks through
the city difficult and impracticable. They determined, there-
fore, to kill him at some public show or festival, where they
were sure he would come, and where, under various pretences,
they might have their friends together. They concluded also,
that, in case some of them should for some reason be detained
at court, the others should nevertheless proceed to kill the
Duke with their weapons and with the aid of some of his armed
enemies.

34. The year 1476 was drawing to its close, and the feast of
the nativity of Christ was approaching; and, as the Duke was
in the habit of going on St. Stephen’s day with great pomp to
the church of that martyr, the conspirators thought that time
and that place would be the best for the execution of their de-
sign. On the morning of St. Stephen’s, therefore, they made
some of their most faithful friends and servants arm themselves,
pretending to be going to the aid of Giovan Andrea, who was
about to bring water into his grounds by means of an aqueduct,
which was being opposed by some of his jealous neighbors.
Followed by these armed men, they went to the church, alleging
that, before departing, they wanted to obtain the permission of
the Duke. They had also caused, under various other pre-
texts, a number of their friends and fellow-conspirators to meet
them at the church, hoping that when the deed was done all
these would stand by them and support them in the further
carrying out of their enterprise. For it was their intention,
after having slain the Duke, to go with these armed followers
to that part of the city where they believed it would be easiest
to induce the people to rise, and to make them take up arms
against the Duchess and the chiefs of the state, judging that
the people would be the more ready to follow them on account
of the scarcity of provisions, from which they were suffering
at the time. For it was a part of their plan to give up to pillage
the houses of Cecco Simonetta, Giovanni Botti, and Francesco
Lucani, all chiefs of the government, and thereby to secure the
support of the people and to restore liberty to them. Having
agreed upon the time and place, and steeled their hearts to the

364 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VII.

execution of their design, Giovan Andrea turned towards a
statue of San Ambrosio, saying, “O patron of this our city,
“thou knowest our intentions, and the object for which we are
“ready to incur such great danger; favor our enterprise, and
‘“‘ show thereby that injustice is hateful to you.” The Duke, on
the other hand, before coming to the church, had many forebod-
ings as to his approaching fate. For in the morning he put on
a cuirass, as he was often in the habit of doing, and almost
immediately took it off again, as though it inconvenienced him,
or its appearance displeased him. He wanted to hear mass in
the castle, but found that his chaplain had already gone with
all the vestments to the church of St. Stephen. Then he wanted
the Bishop of Como to celebrate mass instead ; but this prelate
alleged certain reasonable objections, so that the Duke was,
as it were, forced to go to the church. But before doing so,
he had his sons, Giovan Galeazzo and Ermes, brought to him,
and embraced and kissed them many times, seeming scarcely
able to tear himself away from them. But finally he resolved
to go, and left the castle, placing himself between the ambassa-
dors of Ferrara and Mantua, and went to the church. The con-
spirators meantime, by way of exciting less suspicion, as well
as to escape from the cold, which was very intense, withdrew
to a room belonging to the head priest of the church, who was
a friend of theirs. Upon hearing that the Duke was coming,
they entered the church, and Giovan Andrea and Girolamo
took their position to the right of the church door, and Carlo to
the left. Those who preceded the Duke had already come in,
when Galeazzo entered, surrounded by a crowd of followers
suitable to the ducal dignity on the occasion of so great a so-
lemnity.

The first to move were Lampognano and Girolamo. On
pretence of wishing to clear the way for the Duke, they ap-
proached him closely, and suddenly drawing their sharp dag-
gers, which they had concealed in their sleeves, they attacked
the Duke, Lampognano giving him two wounds, one in the
stomach and the other in the throat; Girolamo also struck him
in the throat and breast. Carlo Visconti, who had been placed
nearer the door, and the Duke having passed ahead of him,
could not strike him from the front, and therefore struck him
two blows from behind, one piercing the spine and the other the
shoulder. These wounds were inflicted upon the Duke so sud-

Boox VII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 865

denly and quickly that the Duke was down upon the ground
before any one was aware of the fact; nor could he do or say
anything, except in falling to call once upon Our Good Lady
for help. When the Duke was seen stretched upon the ground,
a great tumult took place, and many swords were drawn; and,
as generally happens on such unforeseen occasions, some fled
from the church, and some rushed to the scene of the tumult,
without any distinct knowledge as to the cause of it. But those
who were near the Duke, and had seen him struck, and had
recognized the assassins, pursued them. And of the conspira-
tors, Giovan Andrea, in attempting to escape from the church,
got amongst the women, who were there in great numbers, and,
as usual, seated upon the ground, so that, becoming entangled
in their dresses, he was overtaken by a negro, one of the Duke’s
grooms, and killed. Carlo was also killed by the bystanders ;
but Girolamo Olgiato, having got out from amongst the people
and the priests, and seeing his associates slain, and not knowing
whither to fly, went home to his house, where, however, neither
his father nor his brothers would receive him ; but his mother,
having compassion upon her son, recommended him to a priest,
an old friend of their family, who, having disguised Girolamo
in his own garments, took him to his own house, where he re-
mained two days, not without hope that some disturbance would
take place in Milan that would afford him a chance for escape.
But deceived in this hope, and fearing to be discovered in his
place of concealment, he attempted to fly in disguise ; but being
recognized, he fell into the hands of justice, and then confessed
the whole organization of the conspiracy. Girolamo was but
twenty-three years old, and displayed no less courage in death
than he had done by his conduct in this enterprise; for when
stripped and standing before the executioner, who, with sword
in hand, was ready to strike him, he said the following words
in Latin, in which language he was well versed: “ Mors acerba,
‘fama perpetua, stabit vetus memoria facti,’ —“ Death is bit-
“ter, but fame eternal, and the memory of this exploit will live
“forever.” The attempt of these unhappy young men was
planned with secrecy and executed with great intrepidity ; they
failed only because those upon whom they relied to aid and de-
fend them did neither the one nor the other. Let this example,
therefore, teach princes so to live and so to make themselves
respected and beloved that no one may hope for success in any

366 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VII.

attempt to assassinate them; and let conspirators remember
that it is a vain hope to expect the people, however discontented,
to follow them or share their dangers.

This event startled all Italy ; but those which occurred soon
after in Florence caused even greater consternation, for they
broke that peace which had endured for twelve years, as we
shall show in the following Book, which will have as sad and
tearful a conclusion as its beginning will be bloody and hor-
rible.

HiGil TH. BOOK.

SUMMARY.

1. Government of the family of the Medici in Florence. — 2. Differences
between the family of the Pazzi and that of the Medici. —3. Conspiracy of
the Pazzi, in which Pope Sixtus IV. and the king of Naples are impli-
cated. — 4. Continuation of the same.—5. Organization of the conspiracy.
6. Execution of the plot. Giuliano de’ Medici is killed ; Lorenzo saves him-
self. —7. The Archbishop Salviati, whilst attempting to make himself mas-
ter of the palace, is taken and hung. —8. Fate of the other conspirators. —
9. The dangers to which Lorenzo has been exposed increase the love of
the Florentines for him and his power. Punishment of the conspirators. —
10. The Pope excommunicates Florence, and together with the king of
Naples makes war upon the republic. Lorenzo speaks to the citizens as-
sembled in the palace. —11. The Florentines appeal to the future council ;
and seek the alliance of the Venetians. —12. The Venetians decline the
alliance. Beginning of the war. —13. Turbulence in Milan. Genoa rebels
against the Duke. —14. The peace negotiations proving unsuccessful, the
Florentines attack the forces of the Pope and of the Neapolitans, and drive
them back into the Pisan territory. —15. They invade the territory of the
Church, and rout the Papal forces at Perugia (1479). — 16. Victory of
the Duke of Calabria over the Florentines at Poggibonzi.—17. Lorenzo
de’ Medici resolves upon going to Naples to negotiate a peace with the king.
— 18. Lodovico Sforza, called ‘‘The Moor,” and his brothers, are recalled to
Milan. Consequent changes in the government of that state. —19. Lorenzo
de’ Medici concludes a peace with the king of Naples, which, however, is not
consented to by the Pope and the Venetians. — 20. The Turks attack and
take Otranto (1480). — 21. Reconciliation of the Florentines with the Pope.
— 22. New method of war in Italy. Discord between the Marquis of Fer-
rara and the Venetians (1481). —23. The king of Naples and the Floren-
tines attack the states of the Pope unsuccessfully. —24. The king of Naples,
the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines unite against the Venetians (1482). —
25. Rout of the Venetians at Bondeno (1483). — 26. The league is dissolved
(1484). —27. Discords between the Colonnesi and the Orsini. —28. Death
of Pope Sixtus IV. Election of Innocent VIII. — 29. Origin and state of the
Bank of San Giorgio. —30. War between the Florentines and the Genoese,
on account of Serezana. —31. Capture of Pietrasanta. —32. War between
the Pope and the king of Naples, for the possession of the city of Aquila
(1485) ; terminated by peace (1486). — 33. The Pope, having become

368 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

friendly to the Florentines, notwithstanding their having aided the king of
Naples in the last war, becomes mediator between them and the Genoese,
but is unsuccessful. The Genoese are defeated by the Florentines; they
lose Serezana, and give themselves to the Duke of Milan (1487). — 34. Boe-
colino da Osimo gives the city back to the Pope. Girolamo Riario, lord of
Furli, is killed by a conspiracy (1488). — 35. Galeotto Manfredi is killed by
the treachery of his wife; she is captured by the people of Faenza, and the
government of the city is committed to the charge of the Florentines (1492).
— 36. Death of Lorenzo de’ Medici. His eulogy.

1. Tue beginning of this Eighth Book being between two
conspiracies, the one already related and having occurred at
Milan, and the other to be narrated and occurring at Florence,
it would seem to be proper and in accordance with our usual
habit to discuss the nature and importance of conspiracies.
This we should gladly have done if the matter could be briefly
disposed of, and we had not already treated the subject at
length in another place. But having done so, we will now leave
it and pass to another, and will relate how, the government of
the Medici having overcome all its openly declared enemies,
and aiming to obtain undivided authority in the city and to
hold a position entirely apart from all the others in the re-
public, it became necessary that it should also subdue its secret
enemies. For whilst the Medici contended with some other
families of equal authority and influence, those citizens who
were jealous of their power could openly oppose them without
fear of being crushed at the very outset of their opposition ;
for the magistrates having become free, neither of the parties
_ had cause for apprehension. But after the victory of 1466
the whole government became as it were concentrated in the
hands of the Medici, who acquired so much authority that
those who were dissatisfied with it concluded that they must
either submit patiently, or resort to a conspiracy if they
wished to put an end to that state of things. But conspira-
cies rarely succeed, and very often cause the ruin of those
who set them on foot, whilst those against whom they were
aimed are only the more aggrandized thereby. So that a
sovereign who is assailed by such means, if he is not killed,
as was Galeazzo, Duke of Milan, (which rarely happens, how-
ever,) rises to greater power, and very often becomes bad after
having originally been good. For such attempts inspire a
prince with fear, and fear brings with it the necessity of se-

Re ee ee

Boox VIIT.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 369

curing himself, and this causes violence and wrong to others,
whence hatreds are engendered, which in turn often lead to
the ruin of the prince. And thus these conspiracies quickly
cause the ruin of those who originate them, and in the course
of time prove most injurious to those against whom they were
directed.

2. (1478.) Italy was divided at this time by two leagues,
as we have shown above; the Pope and the king of Naples
on the one side, and the Venetians, the Duke of Milan, and
the Florentines on the other; and although they had not yet
come to actual war, yet every day fresh causes occurred for its
breaking out. Above all, the Supreme Pontiff sought on all
occasions to injure the Florentines. Thus upon the death of
Messer Filippo de’ Medici, Archbishop of Pisa, the Pope, in
opposition to the wishes of the Signoria of Florence, invested
Francesco Salviati, a declared enemy of the Medici, with the
archbishopric. And as the Signoria were not willing to give
him possession of it, further difficulties resulted. Moreover,
the Pope did everything in Rome to favor the family of the
Pazzi, and took every occasion to show disfavor to the Medici.
The family of the Pazzi were at that time one of the most dis-
tinguished in Florence, both by their wealth and nobility. The
head of the family was Messer Jacopo, whom the people had
created a noble on account of his birth and wealth. He had
no children except one illegitimate son; but he had a num-
ber of nephews, the sons of his brothers, Messers Piero and
Antonio; the sons of the first were Guglielmo, Francesco,
Rinato, and Giovanni, and those of the other were Andrea,
Niccolo, and Galeotto. Cosimo de’ Medici, in view of the opu-
lence and rank of the Pazzi, had given his niece Bianca in
marriage to Guglielmo, hoping by this alliance to unite the
two families more closely, and to put an end to the hatreds
and enmities that were constantly arising from their mutual
suspicions. But so uncertain and fallacious are all human
calculations, that it turned out just the reverse; for some of
Lorenzo’s counsellors pointed out to him that it would be most
hazardous and adverse to his authority to unite so much wealth
and power in the hands of any one citizen; and for this reason
Messer Jacopo and his nephews did not obtain those places
and dignities, which in the estimation of other citizens they
seemed to merit. This was the first thing to excite the anger

VOL. I. 24

370 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Book VIII.

of the Pazzi and the apprehensions of the Medici, — and as the
one increased, the other grew likewise ; whence the Pazzi, on
every occasion when they came in competition with other citi-
zens, were not favorably regarded by the magistrates. Fran-
cesco dei Pazzi being at Rome, the Council of the Hight,
forgetful of that respect which it was customary to observe
towards distinguished citizens, compelled him for some slight
reason to return to Florence; so that the Pazzi complained of
it everywhere in offensive and disdainful language, which only
increased the suspicions of the others, and served to bring
more injuries upon themselves. Giovanni dei Pazzi had mar-
ried the daughter of Giovanni Borromei, an exceedingly rich
man, and whose entire wealth had descended on his death to
his daughter, who was his only child. But his nephew Carlo
held possession of some of his property, and, the matter having
come to litigation, a law was passed, by virtue of which the
wife of Giovanni dei Pazzi was despoiled of her paternal in-
heritance, which was conceded to Carlo; this wrong the Pazzi
ascribed altogether to the influence of the Medici. Giuliano
de’ Medici often remonstrated on this subject with his brother
Lorenzo, saying that he feared that by attempting to grasp. too
much they would lose all.

3. But Lorenzo in the heat of youth and power wanted to
direct everything himself, and wanted to have every one recog-
nize his authority. The Pazzi, on the other hand, proud of
their rank and wealth, could not bear to submit to all these
wrongs, and began to think of revenge. The first to propose
anything definite against the Medici was Francesco, who was
more sensitive and high-spirited than the others; so that he
resolved either to recover what he had lost, or to lose what he
possessed. And as the government of Florence was odious to
him, he lived almost entirely at Rome, where, according to the
custom of Florentine merchants, he carried on large financial
operations. And being intimately allied with the Count Giro-
lamo, they often complained to each other of the Medici, and
came to the conclusion that, if they wished to live secure, the
one in the enjoyment of his estates, and the other in his city,
it would be necessary to change the government of Florence ;
which they thought however could not be done without the
death of Giuliano and Lorenzo. They judged that the Pope
and the king would readily agree to this, provided they could

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 371

convince them of the facility with which this could be effected.
Having once taken up this idea, they communicated the whole
matter to Francesco Salviati, Archbishop of Pisa, who being
an ambitious man, and still smarting under a recent injury re-
ceived at the hands of the Medici, readily concurred with them.
And after examining as to the best course to be adopted, they
resolved, as the best means of insuring success, to draw Messer
Jacopo dei Pazzi into their plans, believing that without his
co-operation they could effect nothing. For this purpose it
was deemed best that Francesco dei Pazzi should go to Flor-
ence, and that the Archbishop and the Count Girolamo should
remain in Rome near the Pope, so as to be able to communi-
cate the matter to him at the proper time. Francesco found
Messer Jacopo more cautious and difficult than he had antici-
pated; and having so informed his friends at Rome, it was
thought necessary to influence him through higher authority.
Thereupon the Archbishop and the Count Girolamo communi-
cated the whole matter to Giovan Battista da Montesecco, the
Pope’s Condottiere, who had a high reputation as a soldier, and
was under obligations both to the Pope and the Count. But
he pointed out to them the difficulties and dangers of the un-
dertaking, which the Archbishop endeavored to explain away,
pointing out in turn the important aid which the Pope and the
king of Naples would lend to the enterprise ; and, above all,
the hatred which the citizens of Florence bore to the Medici,
the numerous relatives that would follow the Salviati and the
Pazzi, and the facility with which Giuliano and Lorenzo could
be killed, they being in the habit of walking through the city
unaccompanied and unsuspecting ; as also the ease with which
the government could be changed after their death. Battista
did not entirely believe all this, having heard many of the Flor-
entines speak very differently.

4, Whilst the conspirators were occupied with these projects
and discussions, Carlo, lord of Faenza, fell sick, so that his
speedy death was apprehended. The Archbishop and the Count
Girolamo thought this a suitable occasion for sending Giovan
Battista to Florence, and thence into the Romagna, on pre-
tence of recovering certain lands of his of which the lord of
Faenza had held possession. The Count therefore commis-
sioned Giovan Battista to seek an interview with Lorenzo, and
in his name to solicit his advice as to how best to proceed in

372 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIII.

this affair of the Romagna; and to confer with Francesco dei
Pazzi and then unitedly to endeavor to persuade Messer Jacopo
to come into their views. And to enable Giovan Battista to
bring to bear upon Messer Jacopo the authority of the Pope,
they caused him, before his departure, to have an interview
with the pontiff, who promised to give them all the assistance
in his power for their undertaking. Giovan Battista, having
arrived at Florence, called upon Lorenzo, who received him
most graciously, and advised him most kindly and judiciously
in relation to the points he had submitted to him. Giovan Bat-
tista was filled with admiration for Lorenzo, having found him
to all appearances quite a different man from what had been
represented to him; and he judged him to be gentle and wise,
and most amicably disposed towards the Count. Nevertheless
he wanted to confer with Francesco; but not finding him, as he
was absent at Lucca, he had an interview with Messer Jacopo,
who was at first quite indisposed to entertain the affair; but
before he left him he was somewhat moved by the authority of
the Pope, in consequence of which he requested Giovan Battista
to go on his trip to the Romagna and return, and said that mean-
time Francesco would be back in Florence, and they could then
discuss the matter more fully. Giovan Battista accordingly
went and returned, and after the pretended consultation with
Lorenzo about the affairs of the Count, he met Messer Jacopo
and Francesco dei Pazzi and succeeded in inducing Messer
Jacopo to consent to the enterprise. Thereupon they discussed
the mode of proceeding. Messer Jacopo did not think it practi-
cable whilst the two brothers Medici were in Florence, and
therefore suggested that they should wait until Lorenzo should
go to Rome, as it was generally reported he intended doing;
and that then the plot might be carried out. Francesco was
pleased at the idea of Lorenzo’s going to Rome, but maintained
that, even if he did not go there, both brothers might be killed
either at some wedding or play, or in church. And as to for-
eign aid, he thought that the Pope might get troops enough to-
gether under pretence of an attempt upon the castle of Monto-
ne, there being good reason for taking it from the Count Carlo,
on account of the disturbances which he had created in the
territory of Sienna and Perugia, which we have related above.
They came, however, to no further conclusion than that Fran-
cesco dei Pazzi and Giovan Battista should go to Rome and

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 373

there arrange everything with the Count and the Pope. The
subject was discussed anew in Rome, and finally it was con-
cluded that, the attempt upon Montone being determined upon,
Giovan Francesco da Tolentino, one of the Pope’s captains,
should go into the Romagna, and Messer Lorenzg da Cas-
tello into his own country, and that both should hold them-
selves in readiness, with their own companies and the troops of
their respective countries, to act according to the orders of the
Archbishop Salviati and Francesco dei Pazzi; that these should
come to Florence together with Giovan Battista da Montesecco,
and there provide everything necessary for the execution of
the plot, for which King Ferdinand, through his ambassador,
had promised all needed assistance. When the Archbishop and
Francesco dei Pazzi had come to Florence they drew Jacopo,
son of Messer Poggio, into their plot, a learned but ambitious
youth, and ever eager for novelty. They also drew in the two
Jacopo Salviatis, the one a brother and the other a relative of
the Archbishop. They furthermore brought in Bernardo Ban-
dini and Napoleone Franzesi, ardent youths, and greatly attached
to the family of the Pazzi. Amongst the foreigners who joined
besides the above named were Messer Antonio da Volterra, and
one Stefano, a priest, who taught Latin to the daughter of
Messer Jacopo dei Pazzi. Rinato dei Pazzi, a grave and pru-
dent man, and who well knew all the ills that flow from
similar enterprises, did not join in the conspiracy, but rather
expressed his detestation of it, and did all that he honestly
could do to break it up.

5. The Pope had sent Rafaelle di Riario, a nephew of the
Count Girolamo, to the University of Pisa for the purpose of
studying the ecclesiastical laws, and whilst still there the Pope
promoted him to the dignity of Cardinal. The conspirators
deemed it advisable to bring this Cardinal to Florence, so that
they might avail of his presence to conceal amongst his retinue
such associates as they might need, and who might thus take
part in the execution of the plot. The Cardinal came, and was
received by Messer Jacopo dei Pazzi at his villa of Montughi,
near Florence. The conspirators intended also, by his means,
to bring Lorenzo and Giuliano to the same place at the same
time, so that they might on that occasion put them both to
death. They managed therefore to have the Cardinal invited
by them to a banquet at their villa at Fiesole. Giuliano, how-

374 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

ever, either from chance or purposely, did not attend this ban-
quet. Having been disappointed in this plan, the conspirators
thought that, if they were to invite the Medici to a banquet in
Florence, both brothers would surely come. This being agreed
upon, Lorenzo and Giuliano were invited for Sunday, April 26,
1478; and the conspirators, confident of being able to kill them
in the midst of this feast, convened on Saturday night, and
made all necessary dispositions for the execution of their design
on the following day. But when Sunday came, Francesco was
notified that Giuliano would not appear at the banquet. The
chiefs of the conspiracy therefore met again, and concluded that
it would not do to postpone the execution any longer; as it
would be impossible to avoid discovery, the plot being known
to so many. They therefore resolved to kill them in the cathe-
dral church of Santa Reparata, where the two brothers would
come according to their custom, especially as the Cardinal was
to be there. They wanted Giovan Battista to undertake the
killing of Lorenzo, and Francesco dei Pazzi and Bernardo Ban-
dini were to despatch Giuliano. But Giovan Battista refused,
either because his feelings towards Lorenzo had become molli-
fied by the intercourse he had had with him, or for some other
reason. He said that he would never have audacity enough to
commit so great an outrage in church, and thus add sacri-
lege to treason. This was the beginning of the ruin of their
plot. For time pressing, they were obliged to intrust the kill-
ing of Lorenzo to Messer Antonio da Volterra and the priest
Stefano, who were both by nature and habit entirely unfit for
so great an undertaking; for if any act requires boldness and
intrepidity, and that resoluteness in life and disregard of death
which only great experience can give, it is such an occasion,
where it has often been seen that even men experienced in
arms and accustomed to blood have had their courage fail them.
But having finally decided upon this course, they agreed that the
signal for action should be when the priest, who celebrated the
principal mass, should take the communion; and in the mean
time the Archbishop Salviati with Jacopo di Messer Poggio
and their followers should seize the public palace, so that the
Signoria either voluntarily or by force would have to act with
them after the death of the two young Medici.

6. This arrangement having been determined upon, they
went into the church, where the Cardinal had already arrived

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 875

with Lorenzo de’ Medici. The church was crowded with peo-
ple, and divine service had already commenced, but Giuliano
had not yet come. Francesco dei Pazzi, therefore, together
with Bernardo, who had been designated to kill Giuliano,
went to his house, and by artful persuasion induced him to
go to the church. It is really a noteworthy fact that so much
hatred and the thoughts of so great an outrage could be con-
cealed under so much resoluteness of heart, as was the case
with Francesco and Bernardo; for on the way to church, and
even after having entered it, they entertained him with jests
and youthful pleasantries. And Francesco even, under pre-
tence of caressing him, felt him with his hands and pressed
him in his arms for the purpose of ascertaining whether he
wore a cuirass or any other means of protection under his
garments. Both Giuliano and Lorenzo de’ Medici knew the
bitter feelings of the Pazzi towards them, and their anxiety to
deprive them of the government of the state; but they had no
apprehensions for their lives, believing that, if the Pazzi were
to attempt anything, it would be by civil proceedings and not
by violence ; and therefore, not being apprehensive of their per-
sonal safety, they simulated a friendly feeling for them.

The murderers thus prepared placed themselves, some close
by the side of Lorenzo, which the great crowd in the church
enabled them to do easily without exciting suspicion, and the
others near to Giuliano. At the appointed moment Bernardo
Bandini struck Giuliano in the breast with a short dagger
which he had prepared for the purpose. After a few steps
Giuliano fell to the ground, and Francesco dei Pazzi threw
himself upon him covering him with wounds, and was so mad-
dened by the fury with which he assailed Giuliano that he
inflicted a severe wound upon himself in one of his legs. Mes-
ser Antonio and Stefano, on the other hand, attacked Lorenzo,
but after many blows succeeded only in wounding him slightly
in the throat; for either their irresolution, or the courage of
Lorenzo, who on finding himself assailed defended himself
with his weapon, or the interference of bystanders, defeated
all their efforts to kill him, so that becoming alarmed they
fled and concealed themselves, but being found were ignomini-
ously put to death, and their bodies dragged through the whole
city. Lorenzo, on the other hand, together with the friends he
had around him, shut himself up in the sacristy of the church.

376 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

Bernardo Bandini, seeing Giuliano dead, also killed Francesco
Nori, a devoted friend of the Medici, either because of some
old hatred, or because Francesco attempted to assist Giuliano.
And not content with these two murders, he rushed to seek
Lorenzo, so as to make good by his courage and swiftness
what the others by their cowardice and tardiness had failed to
do; but Lorenzo being shut up in the sacristy, Bernardo could
not carry out his intention. In the midst of these violent and
tumultuous scenes, which were so terrible that it seemed as
though the church itself were falling, the Cardinal took refuge
by the altar, where he was with difficulty saved by two priests,
until the alarm had somewhat abated, when the Signoria were
enabled to conduct him to his palace, where he remained: in
greatest apprehension until his liberation.

7. There happened at this time in Florence certain citizens
of Perugia, whom the violence of faction had driven from their
homes; these the Pazzi had drawn into their plot by promises
of restoring them to their country. The Archbishop Salviati,
who went to seize the palace together with Jacopo di Messer
Poggio and his relatives and friends, took these Perugians with
him; and having arrived at the palace he left a portion of
his followers below, with orders that, upon the first noise they
heard, they were at once to occupy the entrance of the palace,
whilst he himself with the larger number of the Perugians
rushed upstairs, where he found the Signoria at dinner, for it
was already late ; but after a short time he was admitted by
the Gonfaloniere of Justice, Cesare Petrucci. He entered with
a few of his followers, leaving the rest outside; the greater
portion of these shut themselves up in the chancelry, the door
of which was so arranged that, once closed, it could neither be
opened from the inside nor the outside without the key. The
Archbishop meantime, having entered the hall together with
the Gonfaloniere on pretence of having something to com-
municate to him on behalf of the Pope, addressed him in an
incoherent and suspicious manner, so that his language and
change of countenance excited such suspicion in the Gonfalo-
niere that he rushed out shouting, and, meeting Jacopo di
Messer Poggio, he seized him by the hair and gave him in
charge of two sergeants. The Signoria, having taken the
alarm, quickly seized such arms as chance supplied them,
and all those who had come upstairs with the Archbishop,

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 377

most of whom were shut up in the chancelry and the rest
terror-stricken, were either slain or thrown alive out of the
palace windows, between which the Archbishop, the two Ja-
copo Salviatis, and Jacopo di Messer Poggio were hanged.
Those who remained below had forced the guard and the gate,
and occupied the entire lower floor of the palace; so that the
citizens, who upon hearing the alarm had rushed to the palace,
could neither give aid nor counsel to the Signoria.

8. Meantime Francesco dei Pazzi and Bernardo Bandini, see-
ing that Lorenzo had escaped and that the one of them on whom
the success of the conspiracy mainly depended was seriously
wounded, became alarmed. Bernardo, with the same prompt-
ness and courage in behalf of his own safety that he had dis-
played against his enemies, the Medici, saved himself by flight.
Francesco, having returned to his own house, tricd to mount
on horseback, for it was arranged that they should ride through
the city and call the people to arms and liberty; but the wound
in his leg and the consequent great loss of blood prevented
him. He therefore undressed, and throwing himself naked
upon his bed, he begged Messer Jacopo to do what he himself
could not. Messer Jacopo, though old and unaccustomed to
scenes of violence, yet, by way of a last effort to save their
fortunes, mounted a horse, and, followed by about one hundred
armed men gathered for this purpose, went to the Piazza,
calling for help on behalf of the people and of liberty. But
the one having been made deaf by the wealth and liberality of
the Medici, and the other being unknown in Florence, his calls
remained unheeded by any one. The Signori, on the other
hand, who were masters of the upper part of the palace,
greeted him with stones and menaces. Whilst hesitating,
Messer Jacopo was met by his brother-in-law, Giovanni Ser-
ristori, who reproved him for the riot they had occasioned and
advised him to return home, as the other citizens had the
people’s welfare and liberty as much at heart as he. Messer
Jacopo, bereft of all hope therefore, and seeing the palace in
the hands of the enemy, Lorenzo safe,,and the people not dis-
posed to follow him, and being at a loss what else to do,
resolved if possible to save his life by flight, and with such
followers as were with him in the Piazza he left Florence to
go into the Romagna.

9. Meantime the whole city was in arms, and Lorenzo de’

378 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIIL.

Medici accompanied by many armed men had returned to his
house. The palace was recovered by the people, and those who
had seized it were all captured and put to death, and the name
of the Medici was shouted throughout the whole city ; whilst
the heads and limbs of the conspirators were paraded on pikes
or dragged through the streets, and the Pazzi were pursued by
everybody with violent abuse and acts of cruelty. Their houses
were already in the possession of the populace, and Francesco
was dragged naked from his bed and led to the palace, and
there hung by the side of the Archbishop and the others. But
it was impossible either on the way there or afterwards to
induce Francesco by any degree of maltreatment to say one
word of what had been said or done by the conspirators; and
fixedly looking in another direction he sighed in silence without
one word of complaint. Guglielmo dei Pazzi, brother-in-law
of Lorenzo, was saved in Lorenzo’s house, both on account of
his innocence and through the influence of his wife Bianca.
Every citizen, armed or not, called at Lorenzo’s house on this
occasion to offer him his personal service or his substance ;
such was the power and public favor which the house of Medici
had acquired by their prudence and liberality. Rinato dei
Pazzi was living in retirement at his villa when these disturb-
ances occurred. When he heard of the affair, he attempted to
fly in disguise, but was recognized on the road and captured
and carried to Florence; and although he repeatedly entreated
his captors to kill him on the road, yet he could not prevail
upon them to do it. Messers Jacopo and Rinato were con-
demned to death, and executed four days after the attempt
upon the Medici. Amongst the many persons that were killed
during those days, and whose limbs encumbered the highways,
Messer Rinato was the only one that excited commiseration ;
for he had ever been regarded as a wise and good man, and was
known to be free from that pride of which the other members
of the Pazzi family were accused. And so that these events
might not fail to serve as an extraordinary example, Messer
Jacopo, who at first was buried in the tomb of his ancestors,
was removed thence, like an excommunicated person, and in-
terred outside of the city walls. And even from there his
body was taken and dragged naked through the entire city
with the very rope with which he had been hanged ; and then,
as though unfit to be buried in the earth, the same persons who

Book VIIT.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 379

had dragged the body through the streets of Florence, cast it
into the waters of the river Arno, which were at that moment
unusually high. A truly memorable instance of the instability
of fortune, for a man to fall from such a position of wealth
and prosperity, to such a depth of misfortune, ruin, and dis-
grace. Messer Jacopo dei Pazzi was said to have had some
vices, amongst others gaming and swearing, which were com-
pensated for, however, by his many charities, for he gave
most liberally to the churches and the poor. It may also be
said in his favor, that, on the Saturday preceding the Sunday
that was devoted to so many murders, he discharged all his
debts, so as to save others from being involved in his misfor-
tunes; and returned with the most scrupulous care to the real
owners all the goods which he had in his own and in the public
warehouse belonging to others. Giovan Battista da Montesecco
was beheaded after a lengthy examination ; Napoleone Franzesi
escaped by flight from the punishment of death; Guglielmo
dei Pazzi was exiled; and such of his cousins as remained
alive were imprisoned in the lowest dungeons of the castle of
Volterra. All these disturbances being thus ended and the
conspirators punished, the obsequies of Giuliano de’ Medici
were celebrated with general lamentations; for he had possessed
as much liberality and humanity as could be desired in any one
born to such high fortune. He left a natural son, born a few
months after his death, who was named Giulio, and who had all
the virtues and good fortune now known to the whole world,*
and of whom we shall speak more fully when we come to the
affairs of the present day if God spares our life. The troops
that had been collected under Giovan Francesco da Tolentino
in the Romagna, and under Messer Lorenzo da Castello in the
Val di Tevere, and who were already on the march to Florence
to support the conspirators, returned home when they heard
of the disastrous failure of the enterprise.

10. As the hoped for changes in the government of Florence
did not take place, the Pope and the king of Naples resolved to
bring about by war what the conspiracy had failed to effect.
Both gathered their armies with all possible speed for the pur-
pose of attacking the government of Florence, publishing to
the world at the same time that all they wanted of the city of

* This Giulio de’ Medici afterwards became Pope under the name of Cle-
ment VII.

380 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

Florence was that they should remove Lorenzo de’ Medici from
it, he being the only one of all their citizens whom they re-
garded as an enemy. The king’s troops had already passed the
Tronto, and those of the Pope were at Perugia, when the latter,
by way of making the Florentines feel his spiritual as well as
his temporal power, excommunicated and anathematized them.
The Florentines, seeing such large forces moving against them,
made the utmost exertions to prepare for their defence. As
it was generally reported that this war was particularly aimed
at Lorenzo, he resolved before anything else to assemble the
Signori in the palace, and with them all the most distinguished
citizens, to the number of three hundred, whom he addressed in
| the following words: “I know not, most excellent Signori, and
“you, illustrious citizens, whether to lament with you at the
“events that have taken place, or whether to rejoice at them.
“Certainly, when I think of the deep deception and bitter
“hatred with which I was assailed and my brother murdered, I
“cannot but feel overwhelmed with sadness, and lament them
“with all my heart and soul. But on the other hand, when I
“consider with what promptitude, zeal, and love, and with what
“universal accord, my brother was avenged and myself de-
“fended, then I not only feel that I have cause for rejoicing,
“but actually have an inward feeling of exaltation and glory.
“For truly, if experience has shown that 1 have more enemies
“in the city than I had supposed, it has also proved to me that
“T have more ardent and devoted friends than I had ever be-
“lieved. I am forced, then, to lament with you on account of
“the wrongs done to others; but at the same time I must re-
“joice because of your kindness to me. But in proportion as
“these wrongs were unusual and unprecedented, and the less
“they were deserved by us, the more am | constrained to grieve
“at them. For consider, O illustrious citizens, to what a de-
“oree of ill fortune our house has been brought, that we could
“not be secure in the midst of friends and relatives, and not
“even in the church itself. Those who have occasion to fear
“for their lives generally look to their friends and relatives for
“aid; but we found ours armed for our destruction. The
“churches usually are a place of refuge for those who are per-
“secuted for private purposes or for reasons of state; but
“where others look for friendly aid, there we found assassins;
“and where parricides and murderers find an asylum, there

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE, ~381

“the Medici found their death! But God, who had never be-
“fore abandoned our house, has even now saved us, and has
“taken the defence of our just cause into his own hands.
“What injury have we done to any one to provoke such a de-
“sire for revenge? Truly those who have shown themselves
“such violent enemies of ours had never received any private
“wrongs at our hands; for had we been disposed to injure
“them, they would never have had the opportunity of injuring
“us. If they attribute to us any public wrongs they may
“have suffered, and of which I know nothing, they insult you
“more than us, and this palace and the majesty of this goy-
“ernment more than our house. For it would go to show that
“you have undeservedly wronged your own citizens on our
“account, which is very far from the truth; for you would no
“more have done it than we would have asked it. And who-
“ever will honestly seek for the truth of the matter will find
“that the advancement of our family has ever been by general
“consent, and for no other reason than because we have striven
“to oblige every one with kindness and liberality and with bene-
“fits. If, then, we have treated strangers thus, how can it be
“supposed that we would outrage our own relatives? If they
“were influenced by the desire for dominion, as would seem to
“have been the case from their seizing the palace and coming
“armed into the Piazza, then that of itself shows their detest-
“able ambition and damnable designs, and condemns them. If
“they did it from jealousy and hatred of our authority, then the
“offence was greater to you than to us; for it was you who
“cave us that authority. Certainly the authority which men
“usurp merits hatred, but not that which is gained by kindness,
“liberality, and munificence. And you know that our house
“never attained any rank to which they were uot raised by this
“Signoria and your unanimous consent. It was not force of
“arms and violence that brought my grandfather Cosimo back
“from exile, but it was your unanimous desire and approval ;
“and it was not my aged and infirm father who defended the
“state against its many enemies, but you defended him with
“your benevolence and authority. Nor could I (being at that
“time, as it were, but a boy) have maintained the rank and
“dignity of my house had it not been for your counsels and
“your favor. Our house never did and never could have
“directed the affairs of this republic, if you, jointly with them,

382 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIII.

“had not sustained and directed them. I know not, therefore,
“what reason they could have had for hating us, nor what just
“grounds for jealousy. Let them show hatred to their own
“ancestors, who, by their pride and avarice, lost that influence
“which ours knew how to acquire by the very opposite means
“and efforts. But admit even that the injuries done them by
‘us were very great, and that they were justified in seeking our
“destruction, yet this would not justify their attempt to seize
“this palace. Why league themselves with the king of Naples
“and the Pope against the liberties of this republic? Why
“break the long peace of Italy? They have no excuse for all
“this. Let them assail those who have wronged them, but let
“them not confound private enmities with public wrongs. It
“is this that increases our troubles and misfortunes even after
“their defeat ; for in their stead come the Pope and the king
“Sof Naples to make war upon us, which they assert is aimed at
“me and at my house. Would to God that this were true, for
“then the remedy would be prompt and sure; for I should not
“be so base a citizen as to prefer my safety to your dangers,
“but I would infinitely rather avert the danger from you at the
“risk of my own destruction. But as the powerful always
“cover their unjust acts with some less dishonest pretext, so
“have our enemies taken this mode of cloaking their ambitious
“designs. Should you, however, think differently, then I can
“only say that Iam in your hands; it is for you to direct me
“or not, as you please. You are my fathers and my defenders,
“and I shall submit at all times with pleasure to your instruc-
“tions, and shall never refuse, whenever it may seem good to
“you, to terminate with my own blood this war, which was
“beoun with that of my brother.”

The citizens could not refrain from tears whilst Lorenzo
spoke; and with the same feelings with which they had lis-
tened to him one of their number responded, saying that “the
“city of Florence recognized the great merits of himself and
“his family, and that Lorenzo might remain of good cheer ;
“for with the same promptitude with which they had avenged
“his brother’s death and saved his own life they would assure
“him his authority and influence, which he should never lose
“so long as they possessed their country.” And to make their
acts correspond with their words, they provided at once a
certain number of armed men to serve as a body guard to Lo-

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 383

renzo, to protect him against insidious attacks of domestic
enemies.

11. After that they attended to the preparations for war,
getting their troops together and raising large amounts of
money. They sent for assistance to the Duke of Milan and
to the Venetians, by virtue of the terms of their league with
them. And as the Pope had shown himself a wolf rather than
a shepherd, and to save themselves from being devoured like
guilty ones, they made every effort in their power to exonerate
themselves from the charges brought against them. They pub-
lished throughout all Italy a full account of the treason prac-
tised against them, showing the impiety and injustice of the
Pope, and how badly he exercised that pontificate which he
had wickedly obtained. For he had sent those whom he had
raised to the highest prelacy, in company with traitors and par-
ricides, to commit the most atrocious crime within a church, in
the midst of divine service and at the very moment of the cele-
bration of the holy sacrament. And then, having failed in the
attempt to murder the citizens and change the government of
the city and plunder it at his pleasure, he had laid an interdict
upon Florence and threatened and insulted her with his pontifi-
cal malediction. But, added they, if God be just and violence
be offensive to him, then certainly the conduct of his Vicar on
earth must greatly displease him ; and He would surely permit
an outraged people to appeal to him direct, as they were pre-
vented from doing so through the Pontiff. The Florentines
therefore, instead of accepting and obeying the interdict, obliged
the priests to perform divine service; they called a council in
Florence of all the prelates of Tuscany, and appealed to the
future council against the wrongs done them by the Pope. On
the other hand, the Pope did not lack reasons for justifying his
conduct, alleging that it was the duty of the Pope to crush all
tyrannies, to oppress the wicked and exalt the good, which he
was bound to do by all available means; and that it did not
become secular princes to imprison cardinals, hang bishops,
murder priests and dismember their bodies and drag them
through the streets, and to kill the innocent and the wicked
alike without distinction.

12. Notwithstanding all these quarrels and mutual crimina-
tions the Florentines restored the Cardinal, whom till then they
had held, to the Pope. Sixtus IV. however, regardless of every-

384 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

thing, attacked them with his entire forces, and with those of
the king of Naples. The two armies, under the command of
Alfonso, oldest son of King Ferdinand and Duke of Calabria,
with the Duke of Urbino as his general, entered Chianti
through the territory of the Siennese, who sided with the
enemy. They seized Radda and a number of other castles,
devastated the whole country, and then laid siege to Castellina.
These aggressions greatly alarmed the Florentines, for they
were yet without troops, and their allies were slow in sending
forward assistance. Although the Duke of Milan had ordered
some sent, yet the Venetians denied their obligation to assist
the Florentines in any private affairs ; for they argued that, as
the war was directed against private individuals, they were not
bound under the conditions of their league to render any as-
sistance, as private enmities were not to be defended at the
public expense. To induce the Venetians to take a more cor-
rect view of the case the Florentines deputed Messer Tom-
maso Soderini to the Senate of Venice; and meantime they
hired troops and appointed Ercole, Marquis of Ferrara, captain
of their army.

Whilst these preparations were going on, the enemy pressed
Castellina so close that its inhabitants, despairing of relief,
surrendered, after forty days’ resistance. Thence the enemy
turned towards Arezzo, and encamped before Monte a San
Savino. But the Florentine army, being now organized and
having marched to meet the enemy, took their position within
three miles of them, and harassed them to that degree that
Frederick of Urbino was obliged to ask for a truce of some
days. This was conceded by the Florentines, though so greatly
to their own disadvantage that those who had asked for it
were much astonished at its having been granted; for a
refusal would have obliged them to an ignominious retreat.
But having thus gained a respite, they reorganized their forces,
so that when the truce expired they took the castle of San
Savino in the very face of our troops. Winter having now set
in, the enemy retired to the Siennese territory for the purpose
of going into convenient winter quarters. The Florentines
also went into the most comfortable quarters they could find;
and the Marquis of Ferrara returned to his own possessions,
having gained small advantage for himself and still less for
the Florentines.

siatigcent stans iel sic

i EE Reg lho reac

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 385

13. It was at this time that Genoa became separated from
the government of Milan under the following circumstances.
After the murder of Galeazzo, his son Giovan Galeazzo being too
young to assume the government, dissensions arose between his
uncles, Lodovico, Ottaviano, and Ascanio Sforza, and the lady
Bona, his mother, each of them wishing to have the guardian-
ship of the young Duke. The lady Bona, dowager Duchess,
carried the day in this contention, through the advice of Messer
Tommaso Soderini, at the time Florentine ambassador at Milan,
and of Messer Cecco Simonetta, who had been the secretary of
Galeazzo. Whereupon the Sforzas fled from Milan; Ottaviano
was drowned in crossing the Adda, and the others were banished
to different places; and with them fled Ruberto da San Seve-
rino, who had abandoned the Duchess in these troubles and
joined the uncles. The disturbances in Tuscany having broken
out soon after this, and these princes hoping in these new events
to find opportunities for re-establishing their fortunes, left their
places of banishment, and tried each some new means for re-
turning to their country. King Ferdinand, seeing that the Flor-
entines were assisted in their need only by the government of
Milan, wanted to deprive them also of this assistance, and
therefore resolved to give the Duchess so much to occupy her
in her own state that she would not be able to supply any aid
to the Florentines. By means of Prospero Adorno and the
Signor Ruberto da San Severino, and the rebellious Sforzas, he
induced Genoa to revolt against the government of the Duke of
Milan. The Castelletto only remained in the possession of the
Milanese government; and the Duchess, basing her hopes upon
that, sent a large force of men to recover the city ; these, how-
ever, were defeated. Seeing the danger that might result to
the dominions of her son and to herself if this war continued,
(Tuscany being at that time all in confusion, and the Floren-
tines, upon whom her sole hopes rested, being themselves in
trouble,) the Duchess resolved that, if she could not keep Genoa
in subjection, she would at least have it for an ally. She agreed,
therefore, with Battistino Fregoso, the enemy of Prospero Adorno,
to turn the Castelletto over to him, and to make him sovereign
of Genoa, on condition that he should expel Prospero, and show
no favor to the rebellious Sforzas. Having concluded this ar-
rangement, Battistino, with the aid of the Castelletto and his

party, made himself master of Genoa, and, according to cus-
VOL. I. 25

386 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

tom, assumed the title of Doge. Thereupon the Sforzas and
Signor Ruberto were expelled by the Genoese, and went with
such troops as followed them to Lunigiana. The Pope and the
king of Naples, seeing the troubles of Lombardy settled, took
occasion, by means of these exiled Genoese, to attack Tuscany
in the direction of Pisa, so that the Florentines, by having to
divide their forces, might be weakened. And therefore they
arranged, winter being now over, to have the Signor Ruberto da
San Severino leave Lunigiana with his troops, and attack the
Pisan territory. The Signor Ruberto thereupon created the
greatest disturbance, taking and sacking many Pisan castles,
and devastating the country up to the very walls of the city of
Pisa.

14. About this time the Emperor of Germany and the kings of
France and of Hungary sent ambassadors to the Pope, who, on
their way to Rome, stopped at Florence, and there urged the
Florentine authorities also to send ambassadors to the Pope,
promising to do their utmost to bring the war to an end by a
satisfactory peace. The Florentines, for the sake of proving their
real desire for peace, did not refuse to make the experiment ;
and accordingly they sent ambassadors to Rome, who returned,
however, without any result. The Florentines thereupon, hav-
ing been attacked by one portion of the Italians and abandoned
by another, wished at least to secure for themselves the influ-
ence of the king of France, and for this purpose sent as ambas-
sador to that king Messer Donato Acciaiuoli, a man very learned
in Greek and Latin literature, and whose ancestors had always
held a high rank in the city of Florence. But on the way there
he died at Milan; whereupon his country, to compensate his
family and honor his memory, had him interred with the great-
est honors at the public expense, and bestowed upon his sons
exemption from taxes, and upon his daughters suitable mar-
riage dowers. Messer Donato was replaced by Messer Guido
Antonio Vespucci, a man thoroughly versed in imperial and pon-
tifical matters.

The invasion of the Pisan territory by Signor Ruberto trou-
bled the Florentines greatly, as is generally the case with
unexpected difficulties. For having a most serious war upon
their hands in the Siennese territory, they hardly knew how
to provide for the war in the Pisan country ; still they aided
the Pisans as far as they could with instructions and provis-

Boox VII] HISTORY OF FLORENCE, 387

ions. And by way of keeping the Lucchese to their allegiance,
so that they might not supply money or provisions to the en-
emy, they sent Messer Piero Gino di Neri Capponi there as an
ambassador. He was received by them, however, with so much
distrust, owing to the hatred of the Lucchese to the Florentines
on account of former injuries and constant fear, that he ran the
risk several times of being killed by the populace. Thus this
embassy gave rise rather to fresh animosities than to a new
union. The Florentines recalled the Marquis of Ferrara, and
took into their pay the Marquis of Mantua; and most earnestly
asked of the Venetians the Count Carlo, son of Braccio, and
Deifobo, son of the Count Jacopo, both of whom the Venetians
conceded to them after much cavilling ; for, having made a truce
with the Turk, they could make no valid excuse, and were
ashamed openly to disregard their obligations under the league.
The Counts Carlo and Deifobo came, therefore, with a considera-
ble number of troops, and, uniting these with all that could be
detached from the army which under the Marquis of Ferrara
was opposed to the forces of the Duke of Calabria, they moved
towards Pisa to encounter the Signor Ruberto, who was with
his troops near the river Serchio. And although he had made
show of an intention to await our forces, yet he did not, but
withdrew to Lunigiana, into the same encampment which he
had quitted when he entered the Pisan territory. After his
withdrawal, Count Carlo recovered all the places that had been
taken by the enemy in the Pisan country.

15. The Florentines, being thus relieved of the attacks in
the direction of Pisa, concentrated all their troops between
Colle and San Giminiano; but there being in that army, in
consequence of the accession of the Count Carlo, men who had
fought under the Sforzas, and some who had served under the
Braccios, the old hostility between them was quickly rekindled,
and they would probably have come to an open conflict if they
had been allowed to remain together. To avoid therefore this
minor evil, it was resolved to divide the forces, and to send
one part under the Count Carlo into the Perugine territory,
whilst the other part was to stop at Poggibonzi, where they
were to establish an intrenched camp, so as to be able to pre-
vent the enemy from penetrating into the Florentine territory.
They hoped in this way to oblige the enemy to divide his forces
also; for they thought that the Count Carlo would either take

388 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIII.

Perugia, where he was supposed to have many partisans, or
that the Pope would be obliged to send a large body of troops
to defend it. By way of embarrassing the Pope still more,
they further ordered that Messer Niccolo Vitelli, who had left
Citta di Castello, where Lorenzo, his enemy, commanded, should
move upon the place with a sufficient force to drive his adver-
sary out of it, and thus to withdraw it from its obedience to
the Pope.

At first it seemed as though fortune would favor the Floren-
tines, for Count Carlo made considerable progress in the Peru-
gine territory ; whilst Messer Niccolo Vitelli, although he had
not yet succeeded in taking Castello, yet had the superior force
in the field, so that he was enabled to pillage the surrounding
country without opposition. The troops that had been left at
Poggibonzi also scoured the country up to the very walls of
Sienna. But in the end all these fine prospects proved to be
delusive. In the first place the Count Carlo died in the midst
of his hopes of victory ; the consequences of his death, how-
ever, would have rather benefited the Florentines, if they had
known how to take proper advantage of the victory that fol-
lowed it. For no sooner had the death of Count Carlo become
known than the forces of the Church, which had been concen-
trated at Perugia, became elated with the hope of now being
able to crush the Florentine troops ; and upon taking the field
they established their camp above the lake (Trasimene) within
three miles of the enemy. On the other hand Jacopo Guic-
ciardini, commissary of the Florentine army, by the advice of
the famous Ruberto da Rimini, who since the death of the
Count Carlo was the first and most distinguished captain of
the army and who knew the cause of the enemy’s confidence,
resolved to await him. They came to an engagement by the
side of the lake, where the Carthaginian Hannibal had in-
flicted that memorable defeat upon the Romans, and the pon-
tifical army was completely routed. The news of this victory
was received at Florence with universal joy and great praise
of the captains; and it would have put an honorable end to
the war had not disorders broken out in the army which was
at Poggibonzi, and which deranged everything. And thus the
good achieved by the one army was wholly destroyed by the
disorders in the other. For the troops having taken much
booty in the Siennese territory, differences arose in the dis-

|

Book VITII.J — HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 389

tribution of it between the Marquis of Ferrara and the Mar-
quis of Mantua; so that it came to a conflict of arms between
them. These two captains assailed each other with the great-
est violence, to that degree that the Florentines concluded that
they could not with advantage keep both, and therefore it
was agreed to let the Marquis of Ferrara return home with
his troops.

16. The army being thus weakened and left without a chief,
and wholly disorganized, the Duke of Calabria, who was with
his forces at Sienna, resolved upon an attack, and promptly
executed his design. The Florentine troops, seeing themselves
assailed, and trusting neither to their arms, nor their superior
number, nor to their position, which was exceedingly strong,
fled at the mere sight of the cloud of dust, and without even
waiting to see the enemy they abandoned to him their ammu-
nition, their wagons, and all their artillery. Such cowardice
and lack of discipline were very frequent in the armies of those
days ; so that the turning of a horse’s head or tail would often
decide the success or failure of a battle. This rout enabled
the troops of the king of Naples to make an immense booty,
and filled the Florentines with dismay. For the city had been
afflicted not only with the war, but also with a fearful pesti-
lence, which had spread to that degree in the city that most
of the citizens, to escape death, had fled to their villas. What
made this defeat still more terrible was that those citizens who
had fled to their estates in the Val di Pisa and the Val d@’ Elsa,
upon hearing of the rout of the army, rushed at once back to
Florence, taking with them not only their families and house-
hold things, but even their laborers. It seemed almost as
though the enemy might at any moment appear before the
city. Those who were charged with the conduct of the war,
seeing this general disorder, directed the troops that had been
victorious in the Perugine district to abandon the attempt
upon Perugia, and to move to the Val d’ Elsa, there to arrest
the progress of the enemy, who after his victory ravaged the
country without opposition. And although these troops had
invested Perugia so closely that they expected every moment
to succeed in taking it, yet the Florentines were more anxious
to defend their own city than to continue their efforts in tak-
ing that of others. Thus that army, obliged to forego the
fruits of its fortunate successes, was marched to Casciano, a

390 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIIL

castle within eight miles of Florence ; it being considered that
they could not make a stand anywhere else until they should
have been joined by the remnants of their defeated army.
That portion of the enemy’s forces which was at Perugia,
being thus relieved by the withdrawal of the Florentines, be-
came more emboldened, and committed daily great depreda-
tions in the districts of Aretino and Cortona; whilst the
others, who had been victorious under the Duke of Calabria at
Poggibonzi, had made themselves masters of that place and
of Vico, and had sacked Certaldo; and after these captures
and plunderings they laid siege to the castle of Colle, which
was then considered exceedingly strong. Its garrison being
loyally devoted to the Florentines, it was hoped that they
would be able to hold the enemy at bay until the republic
could collect her forces again. The Florentines having con-
centrated all their forces at San Casciano, determined to ap-
proach the enemy, who was pressing Colle with all his might,
for the purpose of encouraging its inhabitants to hold out.
They hoped also that, when their proximity should become
known to the enemy, he would have to relax the energy of his
assaults upon Colle. Having thus resolved, the Florentines
raised their camp at San Casciano, and established it at San
Giminiano, within five miles of Colle; and from there they
daily harassed the Duke’s camp with their cavalry and other
light troops. This however did not suffice to relieve the peo-
ple of Colle, who, being short of all necessaries, surrendered
on the 18th of November, to the great displeasure of the Flor-
entines and the greatest joy of the enemy; and especially of
the Siennese, who, apart from their general hatred of the city
of Florence, had a particular animosity against the people
of Colle.

17. Severe winter had now set in, and the weather was too
unfavorable for the prosecution of the war. The Pope and the
king of Naples, either to encourage hopes of peace or to enable
them the more securely to enjoy the fruits of their victories,
offered to the Florentines a truce for a term of three months,
giving them ten days’ time for a reply to their proposition,
which was promptly accepted. But as it is always the case that
wounds are more keenly felt after the blood has cooled than at
the moment of their being received, so it was with the Floren-
tines, whom this brief repose only made the more sensible of

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 391

the afflictions experienced. The citizens accused each other
openly, and without regard or reserve, of the errors committed
in the war, pointing to the useless expenditures and the un-
just taxes. These charges circulated not only privately, but
were discussed with much bitterness in the public councils, so
that one of the citizens made bold to turn to Lorenzo de’ Med-
ici, and say: “The city is weary of war, and therefore it is
“necessary to think seriously of peace.” Whereupon Lorenzo,
who was fully aware of this necessity, held counsel with such
friends as he deemed most devoted and wise. And seeing that
the Venetians were lukewarm and not much to be relied upon,
and the Duke of Milan still a minor and himself involved in
civil discords, they promptly concluded that it would be best
for them to try and better their fortune by new alliances.
But they were in doubt as to whether it would be best to
throw themselves into the arms of the Pope or the king of
Naples.

Having examined the subject on all sides, they decided in fa-
vor of an alliance with the king, as being more stable and safe ;
for the shortness of the lives of the Popes, the changes caused
by the succession, the little fear which the Church has of tem-
poral princes, and her lack of consideration in taking sides, were
reasons why a secular prince could not entirely trust a Pontiff,
nor safely venture to share his fortunes. For whoever might
be the Pontiff’s ally in war and danger would also have him
to share in victory, but in defeat would be abandoned by him;
inasmuch as the Pontiff was always sure of being sustained
and defended by his spiritual powers and influence. Being
satisfied therefore that it would be more advantageous to se-
cure the friendship of the king of Naples, they thought the
best and most certain way to obtain this would be through the
personal presence of Lorenzo; because the greater the liberal-
ity displayed towards the king, the easier it would be to oblit-
erate the remembrance of the past enmity. Lorenzo, having
decided to accept this mission, committed the city and state to
the care of Messer Tommaso Scderini, who was the Gonfalo-
niere of Justice at that time, and left Florence in the beginning
of December. Upon his arrival at Pisa he wrote to the Signo-
ria in explanation of his departure, who in return, by way
of showing him all honor, and to enable him with the more
dignity and effect to treat with the king in relation to the

392 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIII.

peace, appointed him Ambassador of the Florentine republic
to the king of Naples, and gave him authority to conclude an
alliance with the king upon such conditions as he might deem
best for the republic.

18. About this same time the Signor Ruberto da San Seve-
rino, together with Lodovico and Ascanio Sforza (upon the
death of their brother Ottaviano), made a fresh attack upon
the state of Milan for the purpose of recovering the govern-
ment. Having seized Tortona, and the whole state of Milan
being in arms, the Duchess Bona was advised to readmit the
Sforzas to their country and to a share in the government, and
thereby to put an end to the civil contentions. The author of
this advice was Antonio Tassino, a native of Ferrara and a
man of low origin, who upon coming to Milan had fallen into
the hands of the Duke Galeazzo, who gave him as a valet to his
wife. Whether it was on account of his great personal beauty
or through some other secret influence, this man Tassino ob-
tained such an ascendency over the Duchess after her hus-
band’s death that he almost controlled the government. This
so displeased Messer Cecco Simonetta, a man distinguished by
his great sagacity and experience in public affairs, that he
sought by all means in his power to diminish this influence
of Tassino’s with the Duchess and others in the government.
Tassino observed this, and, by way of revenging himself and
of having some one near who would defend him against Messer
Cecco, he advised the Duchess to recall the Sforzas from ban-
ishment. Without consulting Messer Cecco on the matter, the
Duchess acted upon this advice, and restored the Sforzas to
their country. Whereupon Messer Cecco said to her, ‘“ The
“course you have taken will cost me my life, and you the loss
of your state.” And so it really proved soon after, for Messer
Cecco was put to death by order of Signor Lodovico, and, Tas-
sino being after a while expelled from the duchy, the Duchess
became so indignant that she left Milan, and resigned the
guardianship of her son into the hands of Lodovico, who thus
remained sole governor of the Duchy of Milan, which, as will
be shown hereafter, proved the ruin of all Italy.

Lorenzo de’ Medici had left for Naples, and all parties were
enjoying the truce, when suddenly and quite unexpectedly Lodo-
vico Fregoso, by a secret understanding with some of the inhab-
itants of Serezana, entered that city by stealth with a number

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 393

of armed men, seized the place, and imprisoned the Florentine
governor. This act of aggression greatly incensed the chiefs
of the Florentine government, who attributed it altogether to
sesret orders of King Ferdinand. They complained to the
Duke of Calabria, who was with the army at Sienna, that hos-
tilities had been recommenced pending the duration of the
truce. He made every effort to prove by letters and special
deputies that this affair had originated altogether without the
knowledge and consent of his father or himself. The Floren-
tines however regarded their condition as a most alarming one,
being without money, and the chief of their state in the hands
of the king of Naples, with an old war on hand against the
Pope and the king, and a new one with the Genoese, and
wholly without allies. For they had no hope of the Venetians,
and rather feared the government of Milan, as being liable to
change and unstable. The only one hope left to the Floren-
tines was the success which Lorenzo de’ Medici might have
with the king of Naples in his negotiations for peace.

19. Lorenzo had arrived by sea at Naples, where he was
received with great honors and expectations, not only by the
king, but also by the whole people ; for this great war having
had no other object than to crush him, the estimate of his own
power had been increased by the magnitude of that of his
enemies. Having been admitted to the presence of the king,
Lorenzo spoke so ably of the condition of Italy, of the dispo-
sition of its princes and peoples, of the good that might be
hoped for from peace and of the ills to be feared from war,
that the king, after having heard him, was even more aston-
ished by the greatness of his mind, the promptness of his
genius, and the solidity of his judgment, than he had been
before by Lorenzo’s ability single-handed to sustain so great a
war. After this the king treated him with still more distinc-
tion, and began to think that it would be better to let him
return to Florence as a friend rather than hold him as an
enemy. He nevertheless detained him on various pretexts
from December until March, not only for the purpose of be-
coming better acquainted with him, but also with the state of
affairs in Florence. Lorenzo meantime did not lack enemies
in Florence, who would gladly have seen the king keep and
treat him as he had done Jacopo Piccinino. And whilst pre-
tending to lament his detention at Naples, they spoke of it

394 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. '{Boox VIII.

everywhere in the city, but in the public councils they opposed
every measure that was favorable to Lorenzo. In this way
they spread the report that, if the king detained Lorenzo
much longer at Naples, there would certainly be a change in
the government of Florence. This caused the king to delay
the departure of Lorenzo; but as Florence continued in entire
tranquillity, Ferdinand gave Lorenzo leave to depart on the
6th of March, 1479, after having first secured his friendship
by every variety of gifts and demonstrations of love, and hav-
ing concluded between them a treaty of perpetual alliance for
the mutual protection of their states. Lorenzo thereupon re-
turned to Florence, greater even than before he left it, and was
received by the whole city with the greatest demonstrations of
joy, as his noble qualities and fresh services to the state de-
served, having exposed his own life for the sake of restoring
peace to his country. Two days after his arrival the treaty
made between the republic of Florence and the king of Naples
was published, according to which they obligated themselves
mutually to protect each other’s states, and that according to
the king’s decision all the places that had been taken from the
Florentines during the war should be restored to them, and
that the Pazzi, who were confined in the tower of Volterra,
should be set at liberty, and certain sums of money should be
paid at stated periods to the Duke of Calabria.

At the news of this treaty the Pope and the Venetians became
greatly incensed ; the former because of the want of considera-
tion with which he had been treated in this matter by the king,
and the Venetians for similar conduct on the part of the Floren-
tines ; for they felt that, having acted together in the war, they
ought to have been consulted in the conclusion of peace. When
this dissatisfaction became known to the Florentines, every one
feared that the peace concluded by Lorenzo-would only lead to
another and even more terrible war. The chiefs of the govern-
ment resolved therefore to concentrate the government, and to
confine the decisions to a limited number instead of a general
council; and accordingly they constituted a council of seventy
citizens, whom they invested with all necessary powers for
important action. This new institution checked the ardor of
those who were anxious for innovations ; and by way of estab-
lishing their authority the first thing this council of seventy
did was to ratify the treaty of peace concluded between Lo-

Boox VIII.) HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 395

renzo and the king, and to appoint and send as ambassadors to
the Pope Messer Antonio Ridolfi and Piero Nasi. Notwith-
standing the treaty of peace, however, Alfonso, Duke of Cala-
bria, remained with his army at Sienna, assigning as the reason
for his not leaving the civil dissensions that agitated that city.
The Duke Alfonso was at first encamped at a short distance
from Sienna; but these internal discords had reached that point
that he had to come into the city to act as arbiter between the
contending factions. On this occasion the Duke imposed heavy
fines upon many of the citizens; others he condemned to prison,
some to exile, and some to death ; so that by these severities he
excited the suspicions not only of the Siennese, but also of the
Florentines, that he desired to make himself sovereign of the
city. Florence seemed to be powerless to prevent it, because of
the new alliance with the king of Naples, and the resentment of
the Pope and the Venetians. This suspicion was entertained
not only by the people of Florence, at all times most subtle in-
terpreters of things, but was shared also by the chiefs of the
state ; and all firmly believed that our city had never before |
been in such danger of losing its liberties. But God, who in |
similar extremities has always taken the city of Florence under
his special protection, caused an unexpected event, which gave
the Pope and the kings as well as the Venetians more impor-
tant things to think of than the affairs of Florence.

20. The Grand Turk Mahomet had gone with a large mili-
tary and naval force to besiege Rhodes, and had assailed it
already during several months; but although his forces were
very numerous and he persevered in the siege with great obsti-
nacy, yet he found that of the besieged still greater, for they
defended themselves against his powerful assaults with such
bravery that Mahomet was obliged ignominiously to abandon
the siege. Whilst returning from Rhodes, a portion of his
fleet under Achmet Pacha turned towards Valona; and either
because he was tempted by the facility of the undertaking, or
because his master had so ordered him, this Pacha, in sailing
along the coast of Italy, suddenly landed four thousand men
and attacked the city of Otranto, which he quickly took and
sacked, putting all the inhabitants to the sword. (1480.)
Thereupon, with such means as were most conveniently at
hand, he fortified himself in that city and port, and having
collected a good body of cavalry he scoured and pillaged the

896 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

surrounding country. The king of Naples, hearing of this
attack and knowing the power of the assailant, despatched
messengers in every direction to make it known, and to ask for
help against the common enemy; and in the most pressing
manner ordered the immediate return of the Duke of Calabria
and his forces from Sienna.

21. Much as this attack of the Turks troubled the Duke
Alfonso and the rest of Italy, just so great was the joy it
caused to the Florentines and to the Siennese. The latter felt
as though they had recovered their liberty, and the former that
they had escaped from the danger of losing theirs. This opin-
ion was confirmed by the regrets of the Duke at being obliged
to leave Sienna, for he blamed fortune for having, by an un-
expected and untoward occurrence, deprived him of the op-
portunity of making himself master of Tuscany. This same
event caused the Pope to change his course; and whilst before
he would not listen to any Florentine ambassadors, he suddenly
became so affable that he gave ear to any one that would speak
to him on the subject of a general peace. The Florentines
were assured that, whenever they were disposed ‘to ask forgive-
ness of the Pope, it would be granted to them. Believing it
therefore to be well not to allow this occasion to pass, the Flor-
entines sent ambassadors to the Pontiff.

Upon their arrival in Rome the Pope at first put off, on vari-
ous pretences, granting them an audience; at last, however,
terms were agreed upon between the parties, and their future
relations settled, and the respective amounts were fixed which
each was to contribute in peace and in war. Thereupon the
ambassadors were admitted to the feet of the Pope, who
awaited them with great pomp in the midst of all his cardi-
nals. They apologized for the past, attributing it first to an
unavoidable necessity, then to the malignity of others, and to
the fury and just resentment of the populace. Then they ex-
patiated upon the unhappy fate of those who are compelled
either to fight or to die; and they argued that, as men are
ever willing to submit to anything to escape death, so they had
borne war, and interdicts, and all the ills that follow in their
train, for the sake of saving their country from slavery, which
in general was the cause of the death of republics. Neverthe-
less, if under the pressure of force they had committed any
fault, they had now come to make amends, and they trusted in

Boor VIII.) HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 397

that clemency of the Holy Father which, according to the ex-
ample of the blessed Redeemer, should cause him to receive
them in his compassionate arms. To this justification the
Pope replied in words full of haughtiness and anger, reproving
them for all they had done in the past against the Church.
Nevertheless, to act up to the precepts of God, he was willing
to grant them the pardon asked for; but gave them to under-
stand that he expected implicit obedience of them, and if they
failed in that they would lose, and justly, that liberty which
they had now been so near losing; and that those only merited
liberty who employed it in good works, and not in evil-doing,
for liberty abused injures both itself and others ; and to show
little respect to God, and still less to the Church, was not the
practice of free men; and that it was the duty not only of
princes, but of every Christian, to punish such. That there-
fore he had cause to complain of the past conduct of the Flor-
entines, having by their evil works provoked the war, and
supported it by still worse ones; which war had been termi-
nated more by the kindness of others than by any merits of
their own. Thereupon the draft of the treaty and the bene-
diction were read; to which, besides the conditions established
and agreed upon, the Pope added a clause to the effect that, if
the Florentines wished to enjoy that benediction, they should
at their expense keep fifteen galleys armed and ready so long
as the Turk continued his aggressions upon the kingdom of
Naples. The ambassadors complained earnestly of this addi-
tional burden, which formed no part of the original conditions
of the treaty, but neither prayers nor protestations could in-
duce the Pope to recede from this demand. After the return
of the ambassadors to Florence, the Signoria, for the purpose of
ratifying the treaty, sent Messer Guido Antonio Vespucci as
ambassador to Rome, who had but a short time previous re-
turned from a mission to France. He succeeded by his pru-
dence in obtaining a modification of the conditions of the
treaty, so as to make them more tolerable; he also received
many favors from the Pope, in proof of his more complete
reconciliation to the Florentines.

22. The affairs with the Pope being thus settled, and the
departure of the Duke of Calabria from Tuscany having re-
lieved both Florence and Sienna of all apprehensions of the
king of Naples, the Florentines availed of the continuance of

398 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIII.

the war with the Turk to press King Ferdinand for the restitu-
tion of their castles, which the Duke of Calabria upon his with-
drawal had left in the hands of the Siennese. The king feared
lest the Florentines should leave him in his necessity and de-
clare a fresh war against the Siennese, and thereby prevent
him from obtaining the assistance he looked for from the Pope
and the other Italian princes; he therefore consented to the
restoration of the castles, and thus bound the Florentines to
him by these new obligations. It is thus that force and neces-
sity, and not written treaty obligations, cause princes to ob-
serve their faith. Florence having recovered her castles, and
the new alliance being ratified, Lorenzo de’ Medici regained
all the reputation and influence of which the war first, and
then the peace (whilst there was a doubt as to the king’s in-
tentions) had deprived him; for there had been no lack of per-
sons at that time who calumniated Lorenzo openly, charging
him with having sold his country to save himself, and that
as the castles had been lost in the war, so would their liberty
be lost in peace. But now, their castles having been restored
to them, and an honorable peace having been concluded with
the king, and the republic having regained her ancient power,
public opinion changed entirely in Florence, a city ever eager
for gossip, and where matters are judged of by their success
rather than by the reasons that influenced them; and so they
lauded Lorenzo to the skies, saying that it was his sagacity
that had enabled them to recover by peace what they had lost
by the ill fortune of war; and that his counsels and good judg-
ment had effected more than armies and the power of the
enemy.

The attack of the Turk had, however, only deferred the war
which was about to break out because of the indignation of
the Pope and the Venetians at the conclusion of the peace be-
tween Lorenzo and King Ferdinand. But as the beginning
of that attack had been unlooked for and had been produc-
tive of good, so was its termination unexpected, and proved
the cause of great evils. Sultan Mahomet died very sud-
denly, and dissensions having arisen amongst his sons, the
Turkish troops that were in Puglia, being abandoned by their
chief, surrendered Otranto to the king. The fear which had
kept the Pope and the Venetians quiet having thus been re-
moved, fresh troubles were generally apprehended. On the

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 399

one side the Pope and the Venetians were leagued together,
and with them were the Genoese, the Siennese, and other
smaller powers; on the other side were the Florentines, the
king of Naples, and the Duke of Milan, who were joined by
the Bolognese and many other princes. The Venetians de-
sired to possess themselves of Ferrara, deeming themselves
justified in such an attempt, and having confident hopes of
success. The ground alleged by them was that the Marquis of
Ferrara claimed that he was no longer bound to accept a Vene-
tian vice-governor, nor to purchase any more salt from them,
inasmuch as the convention existing between them provided
that, after having borne these impositions for seventy years,
the city of Ferrara should be relieved of them. To this the
Venetians replied, that so long as the Marquis of Ferrara held
the Polesine, so long was he bound to purchase his salt from
them. And as the Marquis would not submit to this, the
Venetians deemed his refusal just cause for war. The mo-
ment seemed to them moreover opportune, seeing that the
Pope was much irritated against the Florentines and the king
of Naples. And by way of assuring to themselves the good-
will of the Pope still more, they received the Count Girolamo
when he came to Venice (1482) with the greatest demonstra-
tions of honor, and bestowed upon him the privileges of citi-
zenship and nobility, always the highest marks of distinction
which they could confer upon any one. By way of preparing
for this war, the Venetians levied new imposts and appointed
the Signor Ruberto da San Severino to the command of their
forces; who having been offended with the Signor Lodovico
Sforza, governor of Milan, had fled to Fortena, where he
stirred up some tumults, and then went to Genoa, where he
was at the time when he was called by the Venetians to be
made commander-in-chief of their forces.

23. When these hostile preparations became known to the
adverse league, they also set to work to prepare for war. The
Duke of Milan chose for his captain Frederick, lord of Urbino,
and the Florentines. took the Signor Costanzo di Pesaro. For
the purpose of sounding the Pope as to his intentions, and to
ascertain whether the Venetians had his consent to their attack
upon Ferrara, King Ferdinand sent the Duke Alfonso of Cala-
bria with his army across the river Tronto, applying to the
Pope for permission for Alfonso to pass into Lombardy to the

400 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

assistance of the Marquis of Ferrara, which the Pope absolutely
refused ; so that the king and the Florentines, no longer doubt-
ful as to the Pope’s disposition, resolved to press him with
their forces, hoping thereby to constrain him into an alliance
with themselves, or at least so to embarrass him as that he
should not be able to furnish any assistance to the Venetians.
These were already in the field and had begun hostilities
against the Marquis of Ferrara, and after having first ravaged
the country they next laid siege to Figarolo, a castle of much
importance to the possessions of the Marquis. The king and
the Florentines having resolved to attack the Pope, Alfonso,
Duke of Calabria, made incursions into the country towards
Rome, and with the aid of the Colonnesi, who had joined him
only because the Orsini united with the Pope, he did great
damage in that country. The Florentine troops on the other
land, “with Messer Niccolo Vitelli, attacked and took Citta di
Ghatcllo, drove out Messer hereeg who held it for the Pope,
and gave the sovereignty of it to Messer Niccolo.

The Pope thus found himself in the greatest strait, for the
city of Rome within was perturbed by factions, and without
his territory was overrun by enemies. Nevertheless, like a
man of courage, resolved to conquer and not to yield to the
enemy, he appointed the illustrious Ruberto da Rimini as his
captain, and made him come to Rome, where he had assem-
bled all his armed forces. Sixtus represented to Ruberto how
glorious it would be for him to relieve the Church from the
troubles from which she was suffering at the hands of the king
of Naples, and how great the obligations under which he would
lay not only himself but all his successors, and how this would
be recognized by all mankind, and even by the Almighty him-
self. Signor Ruberto, having first reviewed the Pope’s troops
and examined all his preparations, advised him to organize as
much infantry as possible, which was done with the greatest
zeal and promptitude. The Duke of Calabria was near Rome,
and daily scoured and pillaged the country up to the very gates
of the city. This so irritated the people that many of them
volunteered to serve with Ruberto in liberating Rome from the
presence of the enemy, all of whom the general gratefully ac-
cepted. The Duke of Calabria, informed of these preparations,
removed to some little distance from the city, thinking that
Ruberto would not venture so far out to encounter eae ; and

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 401

moreover he expected his brother Frederick, whom his father
had sent to him with fresh troops. Signor Ruberto, seeing that
his mounted force was nearly equal to that of the Duke, and
that in infantry he was greatly superior to him, marched out
from Rome in order of battle, and established a camp within
two miles of the enemy. Duke Alfonso, seeing the enemy upon
him so contrary to all his expectations, judged that he would
either have to fight, or to fly as though he had been defeated.
Thus constrained as it were by his unwillingness to do any-
thing unworthy of the son of a king, the Duke resolved to
fight, and faced the enemy. Lach general ranged his troops
in the customary order of battle, and the engagement was
begun, and lasted until noon. The battle was fought with
more courage than any other in Italy for fifty years past; for
over a thousand men remained dead upon the field. The re-
sult was a most glorious victory for the Church; for the enor- |
mous force of Papal infantry so harassed the Duke’s cavalry
that he was obliged to retreat, and the Duke himself would
have been made a prisoner if he had not been saved by a
number of Turks who were fighting under his banner. After
this victory Ruberto returned triumphantly to Rome, but en-
joyed his glory only for a very brief time; for having in con-
sequence of the fatigues of the day drank a great deal of water,
he was seized with a dysentery which killed him in a few days.
His obsequies were celebrated by the Pope with the greatest
pomp and distinction. Immediately after this victory the Pope
sent the Count Girolamo against Citta di Castello for the pur-
pose of recovering its possession, and also to make an attempt
upon the city of Rimini; for as Ruberto on his death left only
a young son, under the charge of his widow, the Pope thought
that it would be easy for him to gain possession of that city,
in which he would have readily succeeded if the widow of
Ruberto had not been protected by the Florentines, who op-
posed the Count Girolamo so vigorously that he failed entirely,
both in his attempt upon the castle and upon the town of
Rimini.

24. This was the state of things in the Romagna and in
Rome, when the Venetians took Figarolo and passed the Po
with their forces. The army of the Duke of Milan and the
Marquis of Ferrara were in disorder, for their commander, the
Count Frederick of Urbino, had fallen sick, and had himself

VOLs 1. 26

402 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIIL

transported to Bologna to be cured, but he died there. Thus
the affairs of the Marquis were on the decline, and the Vene-
tians became daily more hopeful of getting possession of Fer-
rara. On the other hand the king and the Florentines made
every effort to induce the Pope to come into their views, and
not having succeeded in making him yield to the force of arms,
they threatened him with the convocation of the council which
had already been proclaimed by the Emperor to be held at
Basle. The king’s ambassadors who were at Rome, and the
principal cardinals who were opposed to war, prevailed upon
the Pope to think of a general peace, and of the union of Italy.
Whereupon the Pontiff, actuated partly by fear and also be-
cause he saw that the aggrandizement of Venice would be the
ruin of the Church and of Italy, turned to make terms with the
league, and sent his nuncios to Naples, where a new league
was concluded for five years between the Pope, the king of
Naples, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines; leaving it
open to the Venetians also to join it if they so desired. This
being accomplished, the Pope sent word to the Venetians to
desist from their war upon Ferrara, which the Venetians re-
fused, but rather increased their efforts for the continuance of
the war; and having routed the troops of the Duke of Milan
and of the Marquis of Argenta, they approached so near to Fer-
rara that they established their camp in the very park of the
Marquis himself.

25. The league therefore thought that there was no time to
be lost in sending powerful assistance to that Signor; and ac-
cordingly they ordered the Duke of Calabria to proceed to Fer-
rara with his own troops and those of the Pope (1483). The
Florentines likewise sent all their forces there; and the better
to regulate the order of the campaign, the league held a diet at
Cremona, where were convened the Pope’s Legate with the
Count Girolamo, the Duke of Calabria, the Signor Lodovico
Sforza, Lorenzo de’ Medici, and many other Italian princes, who
there arranged all the particulars of the conduct of the war.
Convinced that there would be no more effectual way of succor-
ing Ferrara than by a powerful diversion, they wanted the Sig-
nor Lodovico Sforza to declare open war against the Venetians,
in behalf of the Duke of Milan. This he refused to do, fearing
to involve himself in a war which it might be impossible for
him to stop in his turn. It was resolved, therefore, to move

Boos VIII] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 403

their entire forces to Ferrara, and to detach four thousand
mounted men and eight thousand infantry, who should attack
the Venetians, who had only twenty-two hundred mounted men
and six thousand infantry. The first thing to do, however, in
the opinion of the league, was to destroy the flotilla which the
~ Venetians had on the Po; and having attacked it near Bondeno,
they scattered it, destroying over two hundred vessels, and tak-
ing prisoner Messer Antonio Justiniano, the Proveditore of the
fleet.

Seeing all Italy combined against them, the Venetians, by
way of magnifying their reputation, engaged the services of
the Duke of Lorraine, with two hundred mounted men; and
after the disaster to their fleet, they sent him with a part of
their army to keep the enemy at bay, and ordered the Signor
Ruberto da San Severino to cross the Adda with the remain-
der of their forces, and to proceed to Milan, there to raise the
cry of the Duke and the lady Bona, his mother. In this way
they hoped to stir up a revolution in Milan, believing that the
Signor Lodovico Sforza and his government were odious to the
people of that city. This attack caused great alarm at first, and
roused the whole city of Milan to arms; but in the end it re-
sulted very differently from the expectations of the Venetians,
for it caused the Signor Lodovico now to consent to do what at
first he had refused. And consequently, having left to the
Marquis of Ferrara four thousand horse and two thousand in-
fantry for the defence of his own possessions, the Duke of Cala-
bria, with twelve thousand horse and five thousand infantry,
entered the territory of Bergamo, and thence that of Brescia,
and after that the Veronese, and devastated almost the entire
country belonging to those three cities. The Venetians were
utterly unable to prevent this; in fact, it was with the utmost
difficulty that the Signor Ruberto succeeded in saving the cities
themselves. On the other hand, the Marquis of Ferrara had
also recovered the greater part of his territory, for the Duke of
Lorraine, who was opposed to him, was unable to resist him,
having but two thousand horse and one thousand infantry.
And thus during the whole year of 1488 the results of the war
were favorable for the league.

26. Winter having passed without any active hostilities, the
armies again took the field with the opening of spring. The
league had united ‘all their forces for the purpose of more

404 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

promptly crushing the Venetians; and if the war had been
maintained as in the preceding year, they would easily have
taken from the Venetians all the territory they held in Lom-
bardy, for their forces were reduced to six thousand horse and
five thousand infantry, whilst the league had thirteen thousand
horse and six thousand infantry; for the Duke of Lorraine,
having completed his engagement of one year, had returned
home. But as it often happens where there are many of equal
authority, differences will arise between them that will give the
victory to the enemy. After the death of Frederick Gonzaga,
Marquis of Mantua, who by his influence and authority had held
the Duke of Calabria and the Signor Lodovico Sforza to their
engagements, differences began to arise between them, which
soon ripened into jealousies. Giovan Galeazzo, Duke of Milan,
was now of suitable age to take the government into his own
hands; and having married the daughter of the Duke of Cala-
bria, the latter thought that his son-in-law, and not Signor Lo-
dovico Sforza, ought to govern the state; but Lodovico, aware
of the Duke’s desire, was resolved to prevent his carrying it into
effect. So soon as Lodovico’s disposition became known to the
Venetians, they seized upon the opportunity as a favorable one
to enable them, according to their wont, to recover by peace
what they had lost by war; and terms having been secretly
negotiated between them and Lodovico, they concluded a peace
in August, 1484. When this came to the knowledge of the
other members of the league, it caused them the greatest dis-
satisfaction, mainly because they saw that they would have to
restore to the Venetians the places they had taken from them,
and to leave in their hands Rovigo and the Polesine, which the
Venetians had taken from the Marquis of Ferrara, and which
would give them almost the same control over the city of Fer-
rara as they formerly had. Each member of the league seemed
to think that they had at great expense made a war, the conduct
of which had been creditable to them, but its termination igno-
minious ; for the places they had taken they would have to re-
store, whilst those they had lost they were not to recover.
They had nevertheless to accept the peace, for they were weary
of the expense of the war, and were unwilling, on account of
the defection and ambition of others, to risk their own fortune
any longer.

27. While these events were transpiring in Lombardy, the

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 405

Pope, through Messer Lorenzo, besieged Citta di Castello, for
the purpose of driving out Messer Niccolo Vitelli, who had been
abandoned by the league with the view of conciliating the Pope.
During this siege the adherents of Messer Niccolo made a sortie
and routed the enemy. Hereupon the Pope recalled the Count
Girolamo from Lombardy, and made him come to Rome to re-
organize and strengthen his forces, and then to renew the siege
of Citta di Castello. But having become satisfied afterwards
that it would be better to win Messer Niccolo over by peace
than to continue the war, he opened negotiations with him, and
reconciled him as best he could with his adversary, Messer Lo-
renzo. The Pope, however, was influenced to this course more
by his apprehensions of fresh troubles than by any love of peace ;
for he had observed an ugly spirit arising between the Colonnesi
and the Orsini. The king of Naples had during his war with
the Pope taken the territory of Tagliacozzo from the Orsini, and
bestowed it upon the Colonnesi, who were attached to his party.
Peace having afterwards been made between Sixtus IV. and
King Ferdinand, the Orsini demanded the restoration of their
possessions by virtue of the terms of the convention. The Pope
had several times signified to the Colonnesi his wish that they
should restore the territory in question; but neither the de-
mands of the Orsini nor the menaces of the Pope could induce
them to do so, but they rather committed fresh depredations
and outrages upon the Orsini. Thereupon the Pontiff, unable
to settle the difficulty, united his entire forces with those of the
Orsini against the Colonnesi, sacked their palaces in Rome, took
and killed those who attempted to defend them, and despoiled
them of the greater number of their castles. And thus these
troubles were quieted, not by peace, but by the ruin of one of
the parties.

28. Tranquillity had not yet been re-established either in
Genoa or in Tuscany. The Florentines kept the Count Antonio
da Marciano with an armed force on the confines of Serezana,
and whilst the war continued in Lombardy these annoyed the
people of Serezana by incursions and skirmishes. And in
Genoa Battistino Fregoso, Doge of that city, confiding in the
Archbishop Pagolo Fregoso, was seized and imprisoned by him,
together with his wife and children, whilst Pagolo made him-
self sovereign of the city. The Venetian fleet also attacked the
kingdom of Naples, and had taken Gallipolis and ravaged the

406 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

surrounding country. But all these disturbances ceased when
the peace in Lombardy was concluded, excepting in Tuscany
and in Rome; for five days after the proclamation of this peace
Pope Sixtus IV. died, either because he had reached the natural
term of his life, or because his end was hastened by the regret
he felt in consequence of the peace to which he had been so
greatly opposed. Sixtus IV. thus left Italy in peace, which
during his life he had constantly kept involved in war. His
death caused the Romans promptly to rise in arms; the Count
Girolamo retreated with his troops to the castle of San Angelo ;
the Orsini feared that the Colonnesi would attempt to avenge
the recent injuries they had inflicted upon them; and the Colon-
nesi demanded the restoration of their palaces and castles. All
this caused within a few days murders, robberies, and confla-
grations in many parts of the city. But the cardinals having
urged the Count Girolamo to restore the castle of San Angelo
to the Sacred College, and that he should himself retire to his
estates and relieve Rome of the presence of his troops, the
Count, desirous of securing to himself the favor of the future
Pope, obeyed, and restored the castle to the College of Cardinals
and withdrew with his troops to Imola. Whereupon the car-
dinals being relieved of further apprehensions, and the barons
having no longer the hope of being supported by the Count in
their contentions, the election of the new Pope was proceeded
with. After some debate the unanimous choice fell upon Gio-
van Battista Cibo, Cardinal of Malfetta, a Genoese, who as-
sumed the name of Innocent VIII. Being an affable and peace-
loving man, he induced the Romans to lay down their arms, and
thus succeeded in pacifying the city.

29. The Florentines could not remain quiet after the peace
of Lombardy ; for it seemed to them a dishonor and a shame
that a mere private gentleman should have dispossessed them of
the castle of Serezana. And as the stipulations of the treaty
of peace provided that each party, not only should have the
right to demand back the places they had lost, but even to
make war upon any one who should impede such restoration,
they promptly provided money and troops for the recovery of
Serezana by force. Whereupon Agostino Fregoso, who held
that castle, fearing that he should be unable to sustain so seri-
ous an attack with his private forces, made over the place to
the San Giorgio. As I shall have occasion more than once to

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 407

speak of the Genoese and of the San Giorgio, it appears to me
not out of place here to explain the character of this organiza-
tion and the usages of Genoa, it being one of the principal
cities of Italy. When the Genoese made peace with the Vene-
tians after that most important war which occurred between
them some years ago, their republic was unable to repay the
large sums of money which she had borrowed from her citizens
for the expenses of that war. The republic therefore con-
ceded to these creditors the customs revenues, on condition
that each citizen, in proportion to the principal sum loaned by
him to the state, should participate in those revenues until
their claims were satisfied in full. And to afford these ecredi-
tors a convenient place for meeting, they assigned to them for
that purpose the palace over the custom-house. These credi-
tors thereupon organized among themselves a system of gov-
ernment, appointing a council of one hundred, who should
decide upon everything concerning their common interests;
and a magistracy of eight citizens as chiefs of the whole, who
should carry the resolves of the council into execution. They
divided their credits into shares, which they called “Luoghi”
(places), and adopted as the title of their whole body the name
of San Giorgio.

Having thus organized their government, it happened that
the state had further need of money, and had recourse to
the San Giorgio for fresh loans. This association, being rich
and well managed, was able to supply all the money required ;
and the republic, on the other hand, in the same manner
as they had in the first instance conceded the customs to
the San Giorgio, so they now began to pledge their landed
possessions for these fresh loans; and thus the requirements
of money by the city and the loans made by the San Giorgio
went on increasing, until this association had placed under
their administration the greater part of the territory and the
cities subject to the Genoese government. The San Giorgio
governed and defended these, and every year they elected
Rectors by public vote, whom they sent to those cities and
places without any interference on the part of the state. The
result of this was that the citizens of Genoa began to look
upon the government as being a tyranny, and withdrew their
affections from it, which they transferred to the San Giorgio as
being wisely and impartially administered. It also gave rise to

408 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

the frequent and easy changes in the government of the repub-
lic, which at one moment accepted the rule of one of her own
citizens, and at another moment that of some foreign prince;
whilst the government of the San Giorgio always remained the
same. Thus when the Fregosi and the Adorni were contending
for the government of the republic, the greater part of the
citizens stood aloof, leaving the government a prey to the
victor. And when one or the other usurped the government
of the republic, the San Giorgio merely required of him an
oath strictly to observe the laws of their body, which to this
day have remained unchanged. For this association, having
arms, money, and a government of their own, their laws could

not be interfered with except at the risk of a certain and dan-
 gerous rebellion. Truly a rare example, and one which the
philosophers, with all the republics they have ever seen or im-
agined, never thought of, to witness within the same circle, and
amongst the same citizens, liberty and tyranny, integrity and
corruption, justice and license! for it is this organization alone
that preserves within the republic so many ancient and vener-
able customs. And if it should happen, as in course of time
it surely will, that the San Giorgio shall control the city alto-
gether, then will it be a republic more noteworthy even than
that of Venice.

30. It was to this San Giorgio, then, that Agostino Fregoso
transferred Serezana, which they received most willingly, and
at once undertook its defence. They immediately put a fleet
to sea, and sent troops to Pietrasanta, so as to cut off all com-
munication with the Florentine camp which had been estab-
lished near Serezana. The Florentines, on the other hand,
wanted to get possession of Pictrasanta, for without it the pos-
session of Serezana would have been of less value, the former
lying between the latter and Pisa. But they had no pretext for
attacking it unless the inhabitants, or whoever held the place,
opposed them in their efforts to take Serezana. And by way
of provoking such an act of hostility they sent a quantity of
munitions of war and provisions from Pisa to their camp, with
but a feeble escort, so that those in Pietrasanta might be
tempted by this valuable convoy to capture it. This plan
succeeded according to their wishes; for those in Pietrasanta
secing so great a prize before their eyes, promptly seized it.
This afforded to the Florentines legitimate grounds for attack-

Boox VIII.) HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 409

ing Pietrasanta; and, leaving Serezana aside, they laid siege
to Pietrasanta, which, being well garrisoned however, made a
stout defence. The Florentines, having placed their artillery in
the plain, erected a battery also on the hill above, so as to be
able to press the place from that side also. The commissary
of the Florentine army was Jacopo Guicciardini. Whilst the
siege of Pietrasanta was proceeding, the Genoese fleet took and
burnt the castle of Vada; and having landed their troops, they
scoured and pillaged the surrounding country. Messer Bon-
gianni Gianfigliazzi was sent against them with a body of horse
and infantry, and succeeded in checking their insolence in some
measure, so that they could no longer ravage the country with
such impunity. But the Genoese fleet continued to annoy the
Florentines ; it went to Livorno, and attacked the new tower
there with pontoons and other contrivances, and battered it for
some days with their artillery ; but finding that they could make
no impression upon it, they ignominiously withdrew.

31. In the mean time the siege of Pietrasanta progressed but
tardily, so that the enemy felt encouraged to make an attack
upon the battery on the hill, which they captured. This suc-
cess was most creditable to them, and filled the Florentine
forces with alarm to that degree that they came near being
thrown into complete disorder, and withdrew to a distance of
four miles from the place. The captains, seeing that it was
already October, contemplated going into winter quarters and
resuming the siege in the spring. When this cowardly con-
duct became known in Florence, it filled the chiefs of the state
with indignation, and they immediately appointed Antonio
Pucci and Bernardo del Nero as new commissioners to restore
to the army its former valor and prestige. These proceeded
at once to the camp with a large sum of money, and stated to
the captains the indignation of the Signoria and of the whole
city, unless they at once returned with the army to the walls of
Pietrasanta; and how they would cover themselves with in-
famy if so many captains, with so large a force, and having
opposed to them only a small garrison, were to fail in taking
so insignificant and weak a place. They showed them also
the immediate and prospective advantages that were expected
from this acquisition, and thus rekindled the courage of all, so
that they resolved at once to resume the siege. But before
anything else they determined to recover the battery, in the

410 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

capture of which it was seen how great an effect can be pro-
duced upon the minds of the soldiers by affability and kind-
ness; for Antonio Pucci, alternately encouraging one soldier
and promising rewards to another, taking one man by the
hand and embracing another, caused them all to rush to the
assault with such impetuosity that they carried the battery
at the first onset; though unhappily it involved the loss of
the Conte Antonio da Marciano, who was killed by a cannon-
ball. This success caused such terror to the besieged that they
began to talk of surrendering. Thereupon, with the view of
bringing the siege to a still more brilliant conclusion, Lorenzo
de’ Medici resolved to go in person to the camp; and in a very
few days after his arrival the castle of Pietrasanta was taken.
Winter had now set in, and therefore the captains deemed
it best not to attempt any further operations until spring,
especially as the unwholesome autumn air had caused much
sickness in the army, and many captains were seriously ill.
Amongst them Antonio Pucci and Messer Bongianni Gianfi-
gliazzo not only fell sick, but died, to the great regret of all;
for Antonio had won universal favor by his conduct at Pietra-
santa.

After the capture of this place, the people of Lucca sent am-
bassadors to Florence to demand Pietrasanta of them. They
claimed it on the ground that it had formerly belonged to them,
and that the stipulations of the treaty required the restitution
to the original owners of all the places that had been taken
by either one or the other party. The Florentines did not deny
the conditions of the treaty, but replied that they did not know
whether, according to the terms of peace that were in course of
negotiation between the Genoese and themselves, they would
have to restore Pietrasanta or not; and therefore they could
not act in the matter until that point had been settled. And
even in case that they should have to restore it, the Lucchese
would first have to reimburse them the expenses of the expedi-
tion, and to compensate them for the loss of so many of their
citizens ; and that when they had done that, they might hope to
get the place back. The whole winter was consumed in the
peace negotiations between the Genoese and the Florentines,
which were being carried on through the Pope at Rome; and,
as they were not concluded when spring came, the Florentines
would have resumed their operations against Serezana had it

5 ee

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 411

not been prevented by the illness of Lorenzo de’ Medici and the
war that had broken out between the Pope and the king of
Naples. Lorenzo suffered not only from an attack of gout,
which he had inherited from his father, but also from acute
pains in the stomach, which obliged him to go to the baths, in
hopes of being cured.

32. But the more important reason why the Florentines did
not renew their attempt upon Serezana was the war which we
have mentioned above, and which had its origin as follows.
The city of Aquila, though in part subject to the king of Na-
ples, yet was, as it were, almost free ; the Count Montorto was
one of her most distinguished citizens (1485). The Duke of
Calabria, being with his forces near the Tronto pretending to
quell certain disturbances that had arisen amongst the peas-
ants of that neighborhood, but with the real design of subject-
ing Aquila absolutely to the authority of the king of Naples,
sent for the Count Montorto on the pretext of desiring to avail
himself of his services in the matter of the disturbances. The
Count obeyed the summons without the least suspicion ; but
upon his arrival he was made prisoner by the Duke and sent
to Naples. When this became known at Aquila it stirred up
the whole city ; the people took to arms and killed the king’s
commissary, Antonio Concinello, together with a number of citi-
zens who were known to be adherents of his Majesty. And by
way of having some support in their rebellion, the Aquileians
raised the banner of the Church, and sent deputies to the Pope
tendering him the city and their allegiance; and praying him
as his own subjects to aid them against the tyranny of the
king.

The Pope boldly undertook their defence, for he hated the
king for private as well as public reasons. And as it hap-
pened that the Signor Ruberto da San Severino (who was an
enemy of the state of Milan) was at that moment without
any engagement, the Pope appointed him captain of his forces,
and requested him to come to Rome as speedily as possible ;
and solicited at the same time all the relatives and friends of
the Count Montorto to rise against the king. The princes of
Altemura, of Salerno, and of Bisignano accordingly took up
arms against King Ferdinand; who, seeing himself thus sud-
denly involved in war, had recourse to the Florentines and the
Duke of Milan for assistance. The Florentines hesitated at

412 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

first as to what course to take; but being bound by the terms
of their league with the king, they preferred to act in good
faith rather than to consult only their own safety and con-
venience. They engaged the services of the Orsini, and sent
all their own troops under the Count of Pittigliano towards
Rome in support of the king of Naples, who thereupon organ-
ized his forces in two divisions. One, under the Duke of Cala-
bria, he sent towards Rome, who together with the Florentine
troops was to oppose the army of the Church; and the other
division King Ferdinand himself led against the barons.

This war was carried on by both sides with varying success ;
but in the end the king proved everywhere victorious ; and in
the month of August, 1486, a peace was concluded through
the mediation of the king of Spain’s ambassadors. After these
reverses the Pope consented to the peace, being unwilling to
tempt fortune any longer. Thereupon all the Italian powers
united, excluding however the Genoese, as being rebels to the
state of Milan and usurpers of territory belonging to the Flor-
entines. Peace being thus established, the Signor Ruberto da
San Severino, who during the war had neither been very faith-
ful to the Pope nor very formidable to his opponents, was
ordered away from Rome by the Pope. He was pursued by
the troops of the Duke and the Florentines, and finding him-
self about to be overtaken after he had passed Cesena, he took
to flight, and reached Ravenna with less than one hundred
horsemen. The remainder of his men in part entered the ser-
vice of the Duke, and in part were destroyed by the peasants.
After the conclusion of peace and his reconciliation with the
barons the king caused Jacopo Cappolo and Antonello @’ Aversa,
together with their sons, to be put to death for having during
the war revealed his secrets to the Pontiff.

33. The experience of this war had shown to the Pope with
what fidelity and zeal the Florentines adhere to their allies ;
so that where he had previously hated them on account of
the Genoese, and because of the support they had given to the
king of Naples, he began now to like them and to show more
than ordinary favors to their ambassadors. Lorenzo de’ Med-
ici, observing this friendly disposition, encouraged it as much
as possible ; for he judged that it would add greatly to his in-
fluence and reputation if he could add the friendship of the
Pope to that which already existed between himself and the

ese niapae eae

Si tat cig a apis its “Sune
pag ta eiueiete cen senate ee A Roane Spas. eck SEAS

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 413

king of Naples. The Pontiff had a son named Francesco, for
whom he desired to procure states and allies who should be
able to aid him in maintaining such states after his father’s
death. And there was no one in Italy whose alliance seemed
to the Pope safer and more advantageous for his son than that
of Lorenzo de’ Medici; he managed therefore to have Lorenzo
give one of his daughters in marriage to Francesco. Having
formed this alliance, the Pope urged the Genoese to cede Sere-
zana amicably to the Florentines ; he pointed out to them that
they could not hold what Agostino Fregoso had sold, and that
Agostino had no right to transfer to the San Giorgio what did
not belong to him. But all his efforts to induce the Genoese
to give up Serezana proved unsuccessful; to the contrary
rather, for, whilst they were negotiating on the subject in
Rome, the Genoese armed a number of their vessels, and with-
out the Florentines being in any way aware of it they landed
three thousand infantry, who attacked the castle of Serezanello,
situated above Serezano, and in the possession of the Floren-
tines, and sacked and burnt the village adjoining it, and then
opened a vigorous fire upon the castle with their artillery.
This sudden attack was wholly unexpected by the Florentines,
who immediately gathered their forces under command of Vir-
ginio Orsini at Pisa, and at the same time sent complaints to
the Pope that, whilst he was negotiating for peace, the Genoese
had renewed the war upon them. They then sent Pietro Cor-
sini to Lucca to keep that city to her allegiance ; and also sent
Pagolantonio Soderini to Venice to ascertain the disposition
of that republic. They furthermore sent for assistance both
to the king of Naples and to Signor Lodovico Sforza, but ob-
tained none from either of them; the king saying that he was
afraid of the Turkish fleet, and Lodovico delaying on various
pretexts. It is thus that the Florentines in their own wars,
are almost invariably left to themselves, and find no one to
support them with the same ardor with which they aid others.
Being thus accustomed to it, they were not alarmed on this
occasion to find themselves abandoned by their allies. But
having raised a large force, they sent it under command of
Jacopo Guicciardini and Pietro Vettori against the Genoese,
who had established their camp on the upper side of the river
Magra.

The enemy meantime pressed Serezanello very hard with

414 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

mines and every other means of attack in their power. The
Florentine commissaries attempted to relieve this castle, and
the enemy did not refuse battle; an engagement ensued, in
which the Genoese were defeated, and Messer Luigi da Fiesco
and many other of their officers were made prisoners (1487).
This victory, however, did not frighten the people of Serezana
into thoughts of surrender, but rather disposed them to a still
more obstinate defence, and caused the Florentine commissa-
ries to push their attack with increased vigor; so that both
attack and defence were most gallant. The siege being thus
protracted, Lorenzo de’ Medici thought proper to take the
field himself; and having arrived in camp, the Florentine sol-
diers felt greatly encouraged by his presence, whilst the Sere-
zanese became disheartened, for seeing the persistence of the
Florentines in the attack and the coldness of the Genoese in
rendering them assistance, they surrendered freely and uncon-
ditionally to Lorenzo; and having thus placed themselves in the
hands of the Florentines they were treated with the greatest
humanity by them, with the exception of a few of the principal
authors of the revolt. During the siege Lodovico Sforza had
sent his forces to Pontremoli to make show of coming to the
assistance of the Florentines; but having secret intelligence
in Genoa, his partisans rose against the government, and with
the aid of Lodovico’s troops they gave the city to the Duke of
Milan.

34. At this time the Germans commenced a war against the
Venetians; and Boccolino da Osimo in La Marca induced the
town of Osimo to revolt against the Pope, and usurped the gov-
ernment of the place. After many eventful changes he was
persuaded by Lorenzo de’ Medici to restore the city to the
Pope, after which he went to Florence, where he lived for some
time much honored, under the protection of Lorenzo. Thence
he went to Milan, where, however, he did not find the same
good faith, for the Signor Lodovico Sforza had him put to
death. The Venetians being attacked were defeated by the
Germans near the city of Trent, and their general, the Signor
Ruberto da San Severino, killed. After this defeat, the Vene-
tians, with their usual good fortune, made a treaty with the
Germans, the conditions of which were so favorable for their
republic that it seemed as though they had been the victors,
and not the vanquished. About this time serious disturbances

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 415

also broke out in the Romagna. Francesco d’ Orso of Furli,
a man of high authority in that city, became suspect to the
Count Girolamo, and had been repeatedly threatened by him.
Francesco, living thus in constant apprehension, was advised
by his friends and relatives to forestall the Count and kill him,
and thus by the death of his enemy to ward off the danger
from himself. Having resolved to act upon this advice, and
his mind being firmly made up to it, Francesco chose as the
fittest time for the execution of his design the market day in
Furli; for on that day many of his friends, of whose assistance
he thought he might avail himself, would come into the city
without being expressly sent for. It was in the month of May,
when the Italians generally take their supper before dark ; the
conspirators thought it would be a convenient moment to kill
the Count after he should have finished his repast, as he then
generally went alone to his room whilst his family were still
at table.

Having decided upon this, Francesco went at the appointed
hour to the residence of the Count. He left his associates in
the antechamber, and having reached the room where the
Count Girolamo was, he requested one of the valets to in-
form him that he wished to speak with him. Francesco was
admitted, and finding Girolamo alone he killed him after a
few words of pretended conversation; he thereupon called in
his associates, and they killed the valet also. The commandant
of the place happening to come in at the same time to speak
with the Count, he was also slain as he entered the hall with
a few attendants. After these murders Francesco and his
followers threw the body of the Count Girolamo out of the
window, and created a great tumult; and raising the cry of
“The Church and Liberty!” they caused all the people to arm,
who hated the avarice and cruelty of the Count Girolamo; and
having sacked his house they took the Countess Caterina and
her children prisoners. The castle only remained to be taken
to bring their attempt to a successful termination; but the
castellan refused to surrender it. The conspirators therefore
requested the Countess to induce him to give it up, which she
promised to do provided they would allow her to go into the
castle, leaving her children in their hands as a pledge of her
good faith. They believed in her sincerity, and permitted her
to enter the castle; but so soon as she was inside she menaced

416 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Book VIII.

them with death and every kind of punishment in revenge for
the murder of her husband. The conspirators in return
threatened to kill her children, to which she replied, “That
she had the means of getting others.’ The conspirators
however became alarmed, seeing that they received no sup-
port from the Pope, and that the Signor Lodovico Sforza, the
uncle of the Countess, had sent troops to her assistance ; they

therefore carried off what they could, and went to Citta di ~

Castello. The Countess thereupon resumed the government,
and avenged the murder of her husband with every kind of
cruelty. The Florentines upon hearing of the death of the
Count deemed the occasion favorable to repossess themselves
of the castle of Piancaldoli, which some time back had been
taken from them by the Count Girolamo; and having sent
some troops there they recovered that castle, but at the cost
of the life of their most distinguished engineer Cecco, who was
killed on that occasion.

35. Besides these troubles in the Romagna, another of no
less moment occurred in the same province. Galeotto, lord of
Faenza, had for his wife the daughter of Giovanni Bentivogli,
prince of Bologna, who either from jealousy, or from having
been maltreated by her husband, or perhaps from her own
naturally bad disposition, had taken her husband in aversion,
and carried her hatred of him to that point that she resolved
to deprive him of his state and his life. Feigning to be sick,
she took to her bed, having previously arranged that when
Galeotto came to see her he should be killed by some of her
confidants, whom she was to conceal for that purpose in her
chamber. She had communicated her design to her father,
who hoped after the death of his son-in-law to become him-
self lord of Faenza. The time appointed for the execution of
the plot arrived, and Galeotto entered his wife’s chamber as
was his custom. After remaining some time in conversation
with her, his murderers rushed from their concealment and
killed him. The news of Galeotto’s death caused great excite-
ment in Faenza; the wife, with her little son Astorre, took
refuge in the castle, and the people rushed to arms. Messer
Giovanni Bentivogli, together with a certain Bergamino, one of
the Duke of Milan’s Condottieri, entered Faenza with a number
of armed followers ; the Florentine commissary, Antonio Boscoli,
happened to be there also at that time. These chiefs assem-

iat

vet

Boox VIII.] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 417

bled in the midst of the tumult, and were deliberating with
regard to the government of the place, when the men of the
Val di Lamona, who had rushed in in great number on hearing
of the disturbance, attacked Messer Giovanni and Bergamino ;
they killed the latter and took the other prisoner, and then,
raising the cry of “ Astorre and the Florentines!” they offered
the city to the Florentine commissary. When this affair

_ became known in Florence, it caused general dissatisfaction ;

nevertheless, they ordered Messer Giovanni and his daughter
to be liberated, and took charge of the city and of Astorre in
compliance with the wishes of the whole population. Many
other disturbances occurred during several years in La Marca
and at Sienna, after the main war between the greater princes
had been settled. These troubles, however, having been of little
moment, I deem it superfluous to relate them. It is true that
they were most frequent in Sienna after the departure of the
Duke of Calabria, on the termination of the war of 1478; and
after many changes, in which the people and the nobles pre-
vailed alternately, the nobles kept the upper hand. The most
influential amongst these were Pandolfo and Jacopo Petrucci,
who, the one by his sagacity and the other by his courage,
became as it were sovereigns of the city.

36. After the successful termination of the war of Serezana,
the Florentines lived in prosperous tranquillity until the death
of Lorenzo de’ Medici, in 1492; for after having established
peace by his good judgment and authority, Lorenzo devoted his
attention to the aggrandizement of the city and of his own fam-
ily. He married his eldest son, Piero, to Alfonsina, daughter
of the Cavaliere Orsini, and had his second son promoted to the
dignity of Cardinal, which was the more remarkable as it was
unprecedented, the youth having hardly completed his thirteenth
year. This was in fact a ladder by means of which his house
was enabled to mount to heaven itself, as indeed it happened in
the course of time. He could not provide equally good fortune
for his third son, as he was still too young when Lorenzo died.
Of his daughters, one was married to Jacopo Salviati, another
to Francesco Cibo, and a third to Piero Ridolfi; but the fourth,
who, by way of keeping the family united, had been married to
Giovanni de’ Medici, her cousin, died. In his commercial af-
fairs, however, Lorenzo was very unfortunate; for through the
irregularity of his agents, who managed his affairs, not like

VOL. I. 27

418 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. [Boox VIII.

those of a private individual, but of a prince, the greater part
of his private fortune was consumed; so that he was obliged
to call upon his country to aid him with large sums of money.
In consequence of this he gave up all commercial operations,
and turned his attention to landed property, as being a more
safe and solid wealth. He acquired large possessions in the
districts of Prato and Pisa, and in the Val di Pesa, and erected

upon them useful and elegant buildings, not like a private citi-

zen, but with truly royal magnificence.’ After that he directed
his attention to extending and embellishing’ the city of Flor-
ence, in which there was still much vacant land. Here he had
new streets laid out and built up with houses, whereby the city
was greatly enlarged and beautified. And to secure greater
quiet and security within the state, and to be able to resist and
combat its enemies at a greater distance from the city, he for-
tified the castle of Firenzuola, in the mountains towards Bo-
logna; in the direction of Sienna he began the restoration of
the Poggio Imperiale, which he fortified in the most complete
manner. Towards Genoa he closed the road to the enemy by
the acquisition of Pietrasanta and Serezana. Besides this,
he maintained his friends the Baglioni in Perugia with sub-
sidies and pensions, and the same with the Vitelli in Citta
di Castello; and in Faenza he kept a special governor; all of
which measures served as strong bulwarks to the city of
Florence.

In peaceful times he often entertained the people with various
festivities, such as jousts, feats of arms, and representations of
triumphs of olden times. He aimed to maintain abundance
in the city, to keep the people united, and the nobility honored.
He had the greatest love and admiration for all who excelled in
any art, and was a great patron of learning and of literary men,
of which his conduct towards Cristofano Landini and Messer
Demetrius the Greek furnishes the strongest proof. For this
reason the Count Giovanni della Mirandola, a man of almost
supernatural genius, was attracted by the magnificence of Lo-
renzo, and preferred to establish his home in Florence rather
than in any other part of Europe, all of which he had visited in
his travels. Lorenzo took the greatest delight in architecture,
music, and poetry; and many of his own poetic compositions,
enriched with commentaries, appeared in print. And, for the
purpose of enabling the Florentine youths to devote themselves

/
ties ics f

GERRI te.

Boox VIII. ] HISTORY OF FLORENCE. 419

to the study of letters, he established a university in the city of
Pisa, where he employed the most eminent men of all Italy as
professors. He built a monastery for Fra Mariano da Chianoz-
zona, of the order of St. Augustine, who was a most admirable
pulpit orator. And thus, beloved of God and Fortune, all his
enterprises were crowned with success, whilst those of his ene-
mies had the opposite fate. For besides the conspiracy of the
Pazzi, Battista Frescobaldi also attempted his assassination in
the church of the Carmine; and Baldinatto of Pistoja tried the
same at his villa. Each of these, together with their accom-
plices, suffered the most just punishment for their nefarious
attempts.

Thus Lorenzo’s mode of life, his ability and good fortune,
were recognized with admiration, and highly esteemed, not
only by all the princes of Italy, but also by those at a great dis-
tance. Matthias, king of Hungary, gave him many proofs of
his affection ; the Sultan of Egypt sent ambassadors to him with
precious gifts; and the Grand Turk gave up to him Bernardo
Bandini, the murderer of his brother. These proofs of regard
from foreign sovereigns caused Lorenzo to be looked upon with
the greatest admiration by all Italy; and his reputation was
daily increased by his rare ability, for he was eloquent and
subtle in speech, wise in his resolves, and bold and prompt in
their execution. Nor can he be charged with any vices that
would stain his many virtues, though very fond of women, and
delighting in the society of witty and sarcastic men, and even
taking pleasure in puerile amusements,— more so than would
seem becoming to so great a man, so that he was often seen
taking a part in the childish sports of his sons and daughters.
Considering, then, his fondness for pleasure, and at the same
time his grave character, there seemed as it were united in him
two almost incompatible natures. During his latter years he
was greatly afflicted with sufferings from his malady, the gout,
and oppressed with intolerable pains in his stomach, which in-
creased to that degree that he died in the month of April, 1492,
in the forty-fourth year of his age. Neither Florence nor all
Italy ever lost a man of higher reputation for prudence and
ability, or whose loss was more deplored by his country, than
Lorenzo de’ Medici. And as his death was to be followed by
the most ruinous consequences, Heaven gave many manifest
indications of it. Amongst these was that the highest pinnacle _

420 HISTORY OF FLORENCE. {Boox VIII.

of the church of the Santa Reparata was struck by lightning, so
that a large part of the: pinnacle fell to the earth, filling every
one with terror and amazement. All Florence then, as well as
all the princes of Italy, lamented the death of Lorenzo; in proof
of which there was not one who did not send ambassadors to
Florence to express his grief at so great a loss. And events
very soon after proved that they had just cause for their regrets ;
for Italy being deprived of Lorenzo’s counsels, no means could
be found to satisfy or check the ambition of Lodovico Sforza,
governor of the Duke of Milan. From this, soon after Lorenzo’s
death, there began to spring up those evil seeds of trouble,
which ruined and continue to cause the ruin of Italy, as there
was no one capable of destroying them.

END OF VOL. I.

University Press: John Wilson & Son, Cambridge.

University of Toronto
rary
Acme Library Card Pocket

| LOWE-MARTIN CO, LIMITED

| “PTOMOG *F°n fo ean 00 Bhs
| oT ( q Ty 33 r
p PP8UOTETp pue ‘Teor rod ‘Teo T1098 Ty ae t coal
STOOOEN ‘TT TeaeTyORR eile /

802 TS |

|

ye IIS ss
