The Prince (Edward Dacres, 1640)
======================================================================
Edward Dacres's 1640 translation, the first English Prince. Public domain. Project Gutenberg #15772.

THE PRINCE

NICHOLAS MACHIAVELLI,

to the Magnificent LAURENCE sonne
to PETER OF MEDICIS health.


They that desire to ingratiate themselves with a Prince, commonly use to
offer themselves to his view, with things of that nature as such persons
take most pleasure and delight in: whereupon we see they are many times
presented with Horses and Armes, cloth of gold, pretious stones, and
such like ornaments, worthy of their greatness. Having then a mind to
offer up my self to your Magnificence, with some testimony of my service
to you, I found nothing in my whole inventory, that I think better of,
or more esteeme, than the knowlege of great mens actions, which I have
learned by a long experience of modern affairs, and a continual reading
of those of the ancients. Which, now that I have with great diligence
long workt it out, and throughly sifted, I commend to your Magnificence.
And, however I may well think this work unworthy of your view; yet such
is your humanity, that I doubt not but it shall find acceptance,
considering, that for my part I am not able to tender a greater gift,
than to present you with the means, whereby in a very short time you may
be able to understand all that, which I, in the space of many years, and
with many sufferances and dangers, have made proof and gaind the
knowledge of. And this work I have not set forth either with elegancy of
discourse or stile, nor with any other ornament whereby to captivate the
reader, as others use, because I would not have it gain its esteem from
elsewhere than from the truth of the matter, and the gravity of the
subject. Nor can this be thought presumption, if a man of humble and low
condition venture to dilate and discourse upon the governments of
Princes; for even as they that with their pensils designe out countreys,
get themselves into the plains below to consider the nature of the
mountains, and other high places above; and again to consider the plains
below, they get up to the tops of the mountains; in like manner to
understand the nature of the people, it is fit to be a Prince; and to
know well the dispositions of Princes, sutes best with the understanding
of a subject. Your Magnificence then may be pleased, to receive this
small present, with the same mind that I send it; which if you shall
throughly peruse and consider, you shall perceive therein that I
exceedingly wish, that you may attain to that greatness, which your own
fortune, and your excellent endowments promise you: and if your
Magnificence from the very point of your Highness shall sometime cast
your eyes upon these inferior places, you shall see how undeservedly I
undergoe an extream and continual despight of Fortune.


THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS

CHAP. 1.

How many sorts of Principalities there are, and how many wayes they are
attained to, 263

CHAP. 2.

Of hereditary Principalities, 264

CHAP. 3.

Of mixt Principalities, 265

CHAP. 4.

Wherefore Darius his Kingdome, taken by Alexander, rebelled not against
his successors after Alexanders death, 273

CHAP. 5.

In what manner Cities and Principalities are to be governed, which
before they were conquered, lived under their own laws, 276

CHAP. 6.

Of new Principalities that are conquered by ones own armes and valor,
277

CHAP. 7.

Of new Principalities gotten by fortune and other mens forces, 281

CHAP. 8.

Concerning those who by wicked means have attaind to a Principality, 289

CHAP. 9.

Of the Civil Principality, 293

CHAP. 10.

In what manner the forces of all Principalities ought to be measured,
297

CHAP. 11.

Concerning Ecclesiastical Principalities, 299

CHAP. 12.

How many sorts of Military discipline there be; and touching mercenary
soldiers, 302

CHAP. 13.

Of Auxiliary Soldiers, mixt and natives, 307

CHAP. 14.

What belongs to the Prince touching military discipline, 310

CHAP. 15.

Of those things in respect whereof men, and especially Princes are
prais'd or disprais'd, 313

CHAP. 16.

Of Liberality and Miserableness, 315

CHAP. 17.

Of Cruelty and Clemency, and whether it is better to be belov'd or
feared, 318

CHAP. 18.

In what manner Princes ought to keep their word, 321

CHAP. 19.

That Princes should take a care not to incur contempt or hatred, 325

CHAP. 20.

Whether the Citadels and many other things, which Princes make use of,
are profitable or dammageable, 335

CHAP. 21.

How a Prince ought to behave himself to gain reputation, 339

CHAP. 22.

Touching Princes Secretaries, 343

CHAP. 23.

That Flatterers are to be avoyded, 344

CHAP. 24.

Wherefore the Princes of Italy have lost their States, 347

CHAP. 25.

How great power Fortune hath in humane affairs, and what means there is
to resist it, 349

CHAP. 26.

An exhortation to free Italy from the Barbarions, 353


THE PRINCE

Written by

NICHOLAS MACHIAVELLI,
Secretary and Citizen of Florence.


CHAP. I

How many sorts of Principalities there are, and how many wayes they are
attained to.


All States, all Dominions that have had, or now have rule over men, have
been and are, either Republiques or Principalities. Principalities are
either hereditary, whereof they of the blood of the Lord thereof have
long time been Princes; or else they are new; and those that are new,
are either all new, as was the Dutchy of Millan to Francis Sforce; or
are as members adjoyned to the hereditary State of the Prince that gains
it; as the Kingdom of Naples is to the King of Spain. These Dominions so
gotten, are accustomed either to live under a Prince, or to enjoy their
liberty; and are made conquest of, either with others forces, or ones
own, either by fortune, or by valor.


CHAP. II

Of Hereditary Principalities.


I will not here discourse of Republiques, because I have other where
treated of them at large: I will apply my self only to a Principality,
and proceed, while I weave this web, by arguing thereupon, how these
Principallities can be governed and maintained. I say then that in
States of inheritance, and accustomed to the blood of their Princes,
there are far fewer difficulties to keep them, than in the new: for it
suffices only not to transgress the course his Ancestors took, and so
afterward to temporise with those accidents that can happen; that if
such a Prince be but of ordinary industry, he shall allwaies be able to
maintain himself in his State, unless by some extraordinary or excessive
power he be deprived thereof; and when he had lost it, upon the least
sinister chance that befalls the usurper, he recovers it again. We have
in Italy the Duke of Ferrara for example hereof, who was of ability to
resist the Venetians, in the year 84, and to withstand Pope Julius in
the tenth for no other reason, than because he had of old continued in
that rule; for the natural Prince hath fewer occasions, and less heed to
give offence, whereupon of necessity he must be more beloved; and unless
it be that some extravagant vices of his bring him into hatred, it is
agreeable to reason, that naturally he should be well beloved by his own
subjects: and in the antiquity and continuation of the Dominion, the
remembrances and occasions of innovations are quite extinguished: for
evermore one change leaves a kind of breach or dent, to fasten the
building of another.


CHAP. III

Of mixt Principalities.


But the difficulties consist in the new Principality; and first, if it
be not all new, but as a member, so that it may be termed altogether as
mixt; and the variations thereof proceed in the first place from a
natural difficulty, which we commonly finde in all new Principalities;
for men do willingly change their Lord, beleeving to better their
condition; and this beliefe causes them to take armes against him that
rules over them, whereby they deceive themselves, because they find
after by experience, they have made it worse: which depends upon another
natural and ordinary necessity, forcing him alwaies to offend those,
whose Prince he newly becomes, as well by his soldiers he is put to
entertain upon them as by many other injuries, which a new conquest
draws along with it; in such manner as thou findest all those thine
enemies, whom thou hast endammaged in the seizing of that Principality,
and afterwards canst not keep them thy friends that have seated thee in
it, for not being able to satisfie them according to their expectations,
nor put in practice strong remedies against them, being obliged to them.
For however one be very well provided with strong armies, yet hath he
alwaies need of the favor of the inhabitants in the Countrey, to enter
thereinto. For these reasons, Lewis the twelfth, King of France,
suddenly took Milan, and as soon lost it; and the first time Lodwick his
own forces served well enough to wrest it out of his hands; for those
people that had opened him the gates, finding themselves deceived of
their opinion, and of that future good which they had promised
themselves, could not endure the distastes the new Prince gave them.
True it is, that Countreys that have rebelled again the second time,
being recovered, are harder lost; for their Lord, taking occasion from
their rebellion, is less respective of persons, but cares only to secure
himself, by punishing the delinquents, to clear all suspicions, and to
provide for himself where he thinks he is weakest: so that if to make
France lose Milan the first time, it was enough for Duke Lodwick to make
some small stir only upon the confines; yet afterwards, before they
could make him lose it the second time, they had need of the whole world
together against him, and that all his armies should be wasted and
driven out of Italy; which proceeded from the forenamed causes: however
though both the first and second time it was taken from him. The
generall causes of the first we have treated of; it remains now that we
see those of the second; and set down the remedies that he had, or any
one else can have that should chance to be in those termes he was,
whereby he might be able to maintain himself better in his conquest than
the King of France did. I say therefore, that these States which by
Conquest are annexed to the ancient states of their conqueror, are
either of the same province and the same language, or otherwise; and
when they are, it is very easy to hold them, especially when they are
not used to live free; and to enjoy them securely, it is enough to have
extinguished the Princes line who ruled over them: For in other matters,
allowing them their ancient conditions, and there being not much
difference of manners betwixt them, men ordinarily live quiet enough; as
we have seen that Burgundy did, Britany, Gascony, and Normandy, which so
long time continued with France: for however there be some difference of
language between them, yet can they easily comport one with another; and
whosoever makes the conquest of them, meaning to hold them, must have
two regards; the first, that the race of their former Prince be quite
extinguished; the other, that he change nothing, neither in their lawes
nor taxes, so that in a very short time they become one entire body with
their ancient Principality. But when any States are gaind in a Province
disagreeing in language, manners, and orders, here are the difficulties,
and here is there need of good fortune, and great industry to maintain
them; and it would be one of the best and livelyest remedies, for the
Conqueror to goe in person and dwell there; this would make the
possession hereof more secure and durable; as the Turk hath done in
Greece, who among all the other courses taken by him for to hold that
State, had he not gone thither himself in person to dwell, it had never
been possible for him to have kept it: for abiding there, he sees the
disorders growing in their beginnings, and forthwith can remedy them;
whereas being not there present, they are heard of when they are grown
to some height, and then is there no help for them. Moreover, the
Province is not pillaged by the officers thou sendest thither: the
subjects are much satisfied of having recourse to the Prince near at
hand, whereupon have they more reason to love him, if they mean to be
good; and intending to do otherwise, to fear him: and forrein Princes
will be well aware how they invade that State; insomuch, that making his
abode there, he can very hardly lose it. Another remedy, which is also a
better, is to send Colonies into one or two places, which may be as it
were the keys of that State; for it is necessary either to do this, or
to maintain there many horse and foot. In these colonies the Prince
makes no great expence, and either without his charge, or at a very
small rate, he may both send and maintain them; and gives offence only
to them from whom he takes their fields and houses, to bestow them on
those new inhabitants who are but a very small part of that State; and
those that he offends, remaining dispersed and poore, can never hurt
him: and all the rest on one part, have no offence given them, and
therefore a small matter keeps them in quiet: on the other side, they
are wary not to erre, for fear it befalls not them, as it did those that
were dispoild. I conclude then, that those colonies that are not
chargeable, are the more trusty, give the less offence; and they that
are offended, being but poor and scattered, can do but little harme, as
I have said; for it is to be noted, that men must either be dallyed and
flattered withall, or else be quite crusht; for they revenge themselves
of small dammages; but of great ones they are not able; so that when
wrong is done to any man, it ought so to be done, that it need fear no
return of revenge again. But in lieu of Colonies, by maintaining
soldiers there, the expence is great; for the whole revenues of that
State are to be spent in the keeping of it; so the conquest proves but a
loss to him that hath got it, and endammages him rather; for it hurts
that whole State to remove the army from place to place, of which
annoyance every one hath a feeling, and so becomes enemie to thee; as
they are enemies, I wis, who are outraged by thee in their own houses,
whensoever they are able to do thee mischief. Every way then is this
guard unprofitable. Besides, he that is in a different Province, (as it
is said) should make himself Head and defender of his less powerfull
neighbors, and devise alwaies to weaken those that are more mighty
therein, and take care that upon no chance there enter not any foreiner
as mighty as himself; for it will alwaies come to pass, that they shall
be brought in by those that are discontented, either upon ambition, or
fear; as the Etolians brought the Romans into Greece; and they were
brought into every countrey they came, by the Natives; and the course of
the matter is, that so soon as a powerfull Stranger enters a countrey,
all those that are the less powerfull there, cleave to him, provoked by
an envy they beare him that is more mighty than they; so that for these
of the weaker sort, he may easily gain them without any pains: for
presently all of them together very willingly make one lump with that he
hath gotten: He hath only to beware that these increase not their
strengths, nor their authorities, and so he shall easily be able by his
own forces, and their assistances, to take down those that are mighty,
and remain himself absolute arbitre of that Countrey. And he that playes
not well this part, shall quickly lose what he hath gotten; and while he
holds it, shall find therein a great many troubles and vexations. The
Romans in the Provinces they seiz'd on, observed well these points, sent
colonies thither, entertained the weaker sort, without augmenting any
thing their power, abated the forces of those that were mighty, and
permitted not any powerfull forreiner to gain too much reputation there.
And I will content my self only with the countrey of Greece for example
hereof. The Achayans and Etolians were entertained by them, the Macedons
kingdome was brought low, Antiochus was driven thence, nor ever did the
Achayans or Etolians deserts prevail so far for them, that they would
ever promise to enlarge their State, nor the perswasions of Philip
induce them ever to be his friends, without bringing him lower; nor yet
could Antiochus his power make them ever consent that he should hold any
State in that countrey: for the Romans did in these cases that which all
judicious Princes ought to do, who are not only to have regard unto all
present mischiefs, but also to the future, and to provide for those with
all industry; for by taking order for those when they are afarre off, it
is easie to prevent them; but by delaying till they come near hand to
thee, the remedy comes too late; for this malignity is grown incurable:
and it befalls this, as the physicians say of the hectick feaver, that
in the beginning it is easily cur'd, but hardly known; but in the course
of time, not having been known in the beginning, nor cured, it becomes
easie to know, but hard to cure. Even so falls it out in matters of
State; for by knowing it aloof off (which is given only to a wise man to
do) the mischiefs that then spring up, are quickly helped; but when, for
not having been perceived, they are suffered to increase, so that every
one sees them, there is then no cure for them: therefore the Romans,
seeing these inconvenients afar off, alwaies prevented them, and never
sufferd them to follow; for to escape a war, because they knew that a
war is not undertaken, but deferred for anothers advantage; therefore
would they rather make a war with Philip and Antiochus in Greece, to the
end it should not afterwards be made with them in Italy, though for that
time they were able to avoid both the one and the other, which they
thought not good to do: nor did they approve of that saying that is
ordinarily in the mouthes of the Sages of our dayes, _to enjoy the
benefits of the present time_; but that rather, to take the benefit of
their valor and wisdome; for time drives forward everything, and may
bring with it as well good as evil, and evil as good. But let us return
to France, and examine if any of the things prescribed have been done by
them: and we will speak of Lewis, and not of Charles, as of whom by
reason of the long possession he held in Italy we better knew the wayes
he went: and you shall see he did the clean contrary to what should have
been done by him that would maintain a State of different Language and
conditions. King Lewis was brought into Italy by the Venetians ambition,
who would have gotten for their shares half the State of Lombardy: I
will not blame his comming, or the course he took, because he had a mind
to begin to set a foot in Italy; but having not any friends in the
country, all gates being barred against him, by reason of King Charles
his carriage there, he was constrained to joyn friendship with those he
could; and this consideration well taken, would have proved lucky to
him, when in the rest of his courses he had not committed any error. The
King then having conquered Lombardy, recovered presently all that
reputation that Charles had lost him; Genua yeelded to him, the
Florentines became friends with him; the Marquess of Mantua, the Duke of
Ferrara, the Bentivolti, the Lady of Furli, the Lord of Faenza, Pesaro
Rimino, Camerino, and Piombino, the Lucheses, Pisans and Sienses, every
one came and offered him friendship: then might the Venetians consider
the rashness of the course they had taken, who, only to get into their
hands two Townes in Lombardy, made the King Lord of two thirds in Italy.
Let any man now consider with how small difficulty could the King have
maintained his reputation in Italy, if he had followed these aforenamed
rules, and secured and defended those his friends, who because their
number was great, and they weak and fearful, some of the Church, and
others of the Venetians were alwaies forced to hold with him, and by
their means he might easily have been able to secure himself against
those that were mightiest: but he was no sooner got into Milan, than he
took a quite wrong course, by giving ayd to Pope Alexander, to seize
upon Romania, and perceiv'd not that by this resolution he weakned
himself, ruining his own friends, and those had cast themselves into his
bosom, making the Church puissant, by adding to their Spiritual power,
they gaind their authority, and so much temporal estate. And having once
got out of the way, he was constrained to go on forward; insomuch as to
stop Alexanders ambition, and that he should not become Lord of all
Tuscany, of force he was to come into Italy: and this sufficed him not,
to have made the Church mighty, and taken away his own friends; but for
the desire he had to get the Kingdome of Naples, he divided it with the
King of Spain: and where before he was the sole arbitre of Italy, he
brought in a competitor, to the end that all the ambitious persons of
that country, and all that were ill affected to him, might have
otherwhere to make their recourse: and whereas he might have left in
that Kingdome some Vice-King of his own, he took him from thence, to
place another there, that might afterward chace him thence. It is a
thing indeed very natural and ordinary, to desire to be of the getting
hand: and alwaies when men undertake it, if they can effect it, they
shall be prais'd for it, or at least not blam'd: but when they are not
able, and yet will undertake it, here lies the blame, here is the error
committed. If France then was able with her own power to assail the
Kingdome of Naples, she might well have done it; but not being able, she
should not have divided it: and if the division she made of Lombardy
with the Venetians, deserv'd some excuse, thereby to set one foot in
Italy; yet this merits blame, for not being excused by that necessity.
Lewis then committed these five faults; extinguisht the feebler ones,
augmented the State of another that was already powerful in Italy,
brought thereinto a very puissant forreiner, came not thither himself to
dwell there, nor planted any colonies there: which faults while he
liv'd, he could not but be the worse for; yet all could not have gone so
ill, had he not committed the sixt, to take from the Venetians their
State; for if he had not enlarg'd the Churches territories nor brought
the Spaniard into Italy, it had bin necessary to take them lower; but
having first taken those other courses, he should never have given way
to their destruction; for while they had been strong, they would alwaies
have kept the others off from venturing on the conquest of Lombardy. For
the Venetians would never have given their consents thereto, unless they
should have been made Lords of it themselves; and the others would never
have taken it from France, to give it them: and then they would never
have dar'd to go and set upon them both together. And if any one should
say, that King Lewis yeelded Romania to Alexander, and the Kingdome of
Naples to Spain, to avoid a war; I answer with the reasons above
alledged, that one should never suffer any disorder to follow, for
avoiding of a war; for that war is not sav'd, but put off to thy
disadvantage. And if any others argue, that the King had given his word
to the Pope, to do that exploit for him, for dissolving of his marriage,
and for giving the Cardinals Cap to him of Roan; I answer with that
which hereafter I shall say touching Princes words, how they ought to be
kept. King Lewis then lost Lombardy, for not having observ'd some of
those termes which others us'd, who have possessed themselves of
countries, and desir'd to keep them. Nor is this any strange thing, but
very ordinary and reasonable: and to this purpose I spake at Nantes with
that French Cardinal, when Valentine (for so ordinarily was Cæsar Borgia
Pope Alexanders son call'd) made himself master of Romania; for when the
Cardinal said to me, that the Italians understood not the feats of war;
I answered, the Frenchmen understood not matters of State: for had they
been well vers'd therein, they would never have suffer'd the Church to
have grown to that greatness. And by experience we have seen it, that
the power hereof in Italy, and that of Spain also, was caused by France,
and their own ruine proceeded from themselves. From whence a general
rule may be taken, which never, or very seldom fails, _That he that
gives the means to another to become powerful, ruines himself_; for that
power is caus'd by him either with his industry, or with his force; and
as well the one as the other of these two is suspected by him that is
grown puissant.


CHAP. IV

Wherefore Darius his Kingdome taken by Alexander, rebelled not against
Alexanders Successors after his death.


The difficulties being consider'd, which a man hath in the maintaining
of a State new gotten, some might marvaile how it came to pass, that
Alexander the great subdued all Asia in a few years; and having hardly
possessed himself of it, died; whereupon it seemed probable that all
that State should have rebelled; nevertheless his Successors kept the
possession of it, nor found they other difficulty in holding it, than
what arose among themselves through their own ambition. I answer, that
all the Principalities whereof we have memory left us, have been
governed in two several manners; either by a Prince, and all the rest
Vassals, who as ministers by his favor and allowance, do help to govern
that Kingdom; or by a Prince and by Barons, who not by their Princes
favor, but by the antiquity of blood hold that degree. And these kinds
of Barons have both states of their own, and Vassals who acknowledge
them for their Lords; and bare them a true natural affection. Those
States that are govern'd by a Prince and by Vassals, have their Prince
ruling over them with more authority; for in all his countrey, there is
none acknowledged for superior, but himself: and if they yeeld obedience
to any one else, it is but as to his minister and officer, nor beare
they him any particular good will. The examples of these two different
Governments now in our dayes, are, the Turk, and the King of France. The
Turks whole Monarchy is govern'd by one Lord, and the rest are all his
Vassals; and dividing his whole Kingdom into divers Sangiacques or
Governments, he sends several thither, and those he chops and changes,
as he pleases. But the King of France is seated in the midst of a
multitude of Lords, who of old have been acknowledg'd for such by their
subjects, and being belov'd by them, enjoy their preheminencies; nor can
the King take their States from them without danger. He then that
considers the one and the other of these two States, shall find
difficulty in the conquest of the Turks State; but when once it is
subdu'd, great facility to hold it. The reasons of these difficulties in
taking of the Turks Kingdom from him, are, because the Invader cannot be
called in by the Princes of that Kingdom, nor hope by the rebellion of
those which he hath about him, to be able to facilitate his enterprize:
which proceeds from the reasons aforesaid; for they being all his
slaves, and oblig'd to him, can more hardly be corrupted; and put case
they were corrupted, little profit could he get by it, they not being
able to draw after them any people, for the reasons we have shewed:
whereupon he that assails the Turk, must think to find him united; and
must rather relie upon his own forces, than in the others disorders: but
when once he is overcome and broken in the field, so that he cannot
repair his armies, there is nothing else to be doubted than the Royal
blood, which being once quite out, there is none else left to be feard,
none of the others having any credit with the people. And as the
conqueror before the victory could not hope in them; so after it, ought
he not to fear them. The contrary falls out in Kingdoms governed as is
that of France: for it is easie to be enterd by the gaining of any Baron
in the Kingdom; for there are alwaies some malecontents to be found, and
those that are glad of innovation. Those for the reasons alledg'd are
able to open thee a way into that State, and to further thy victory,
which afterwards to make good to thee, draws with it exceeding many
difficulties, as well with those that have ayded thee, as those thou
hast supprest. Nor is it enough for thee to root out the Princes race:
for there remaine still those Lords who quickly will be the ring-leaders
of new changes; and in case thou art not able to content these, nor
extinguish them, thou losest that State, whensoever the occasion is
offerd. Now if thou shalt consider what sort of government that of
Darius was, thou shalt find it like to the Turks dominion, and therefore
Alexander was necessitated first to defeat him utterly, and drive him
out of the field; after which victory Darius being dead, that State was
left secure to Alexander, for the reasons we treated of before: and his
successors, had they continued in amity, might have enjoy'd it at ease:
nor ever arose there in that Kingdome other tumults, than those they
themselves stir'd up. But of the States that are order'd and grounded as
that of France, it is impossible to become master at such ease: and from
hence grew the frequent rebellions of Spain, France, and Greece against
the Romans, by reason of the many Principalities those States had:
whereof while the memory lasted, the Romans were alwayes doubtfull of
the possession of them; but the memory of them being quite wip't out, by
the power and continuance of the Empire, at length they enjoy'd it
securely; and they also were able afterwards fighting one with another,
each of one them to draw after them the greater part of those provinces,
according as their authority had gain'd them credit therein: and that
because the blood of their ancient Lords was quite spent, they
acknowledg'd no other but the Romans. By the consideration then of these
things, no man will marvaile that Alexander had so little trouble to
keep together the State of Asia; and that others have had such great
difficulties to maintain their conquest, as Pyrrhus, and many others;
which proceeds not from the small or great valour of the conquerour, but
from the difference of the subject.


CHAP. V

In what manner Cities and Principalities are to be govern'd, which,
before they were conquer'd, liv'd under their own Laws.


When those States that are conquered, as it is said, have been
accustomed to live under their own Laws, and in liberty, there are three
wayes for a man to hold them. The first is to demolish all their strong
places; the other, personally to goe and dwell there; the third, to
suffer them to live under their own Laws, drawing from them some
tribute, and creating therein an Oligarchy, that may continue it in thy
service: for that State being created by that Prince, knowes it cannot
consist without his aid and force, who is like to doe all he can to
maintain it; and with more facility is a City kept by meanes of her own
Citizens, which hath been us'd before to live free, than by any other
way of keeping. We have for example the Spartans and the Romans; the
Spartans held Athens and Thebes, creating there an Oligarchy: yet they
lost it. The Romans to be sure of Capua, Carthage, and Numantia,
dismantell'd them quite, and so lost them not: they would have kept
Greece as the Spartans had held them, leaving them free, and letting
them enjoy their own Laws; and it prospered not with them: so that they
were forc'd to deface many Cities of that province to hold it. For in
truth there is not a surer way to keep them under, than by
demolishments; and whoever becomes master of a City us'd to live free,
and dismantells it not, let him look himselfe to bee ruin'd by it; for
it alwayes in time of rebellion takes the name of liberty for refuge,
and the ancient orders it had; which neither by length of time, nor for
any favours afforded them, are ever forgotten; and for any thing that
can be done, or order'd, unlesse the inhabitants be disunited and
dispers'd, that name is never forgotten, nor those customes: but
presently in every chance recourse is thither made: as Pisa did after so
many yeeres that she had been subdu'd by the Florentines. But when the
Cities or the Provinces are accustomed to live under a Prince, and that
whole race is quite extirpated: on one part being us'd to obey; on the
other, not having their old Prince; they agree not to make one from
among themselves: they know not how to live in liberty, in such manner
that they are much slower to take armes; and with more facility may a
Prince gaine them, and secure himselfe of them. But in Republiques there
is more life in them, more violent hatred, more earnest desire of
revenge; nor does the remembrance of the ancient liberty ever leave
them, or suffer them to rest; so that the safest way, is, either to
ruine them, or dwell among them.


CHAP. VI

Of new Principalities, that are conquer'd by ones own armes and valour.


Let no man marvaile, if in the discourse I shall make of new
Principalities, both touching a Prince, and touching a State, I shall
alledge very famous examples: for seeing men almost alwayes walk in the
pathes beaten by others, and proceed in their actions by imitation; and
being that others wayes cannot bee exactly follow'd, nor their vertues,
whose patterne thou set'st before thee, attain'd unto; a wise man ought
alwayes to tread the footsteps of the worthiest persons, and imitate
those that have been the most excellent: to the end that if his vertue
arrive not thereto, at least it may yeeld some favour thereof, and doe
as good Archers use, who thinking the place they intend to hit, too
farre distant, and knowing how farr the strength of their bow will
carry, they lay their ayme a great deale higher than the mark; not for
to hit so high with their arrow, but to bee able with the help of so
high an aime to reach the place they shoot at. I say, that in
Principalities wholly new, where there is a new Prince, there is more
and lesse difficulty in maintaining them, as the vertue of their
Conquerour is greater or lesser. And because this successe, to become a
Prince of a private man, presupposes either vertue, or fortune; mee
thinks the one and other of these two things in part should mitigate
many difficulties; however he that hath lesse stood upon fortune, hath
maintain'd himselfe the better. Moreover it somewhat facilitates the
matter in that the Prince is constrain'd, because he hath not other
dominions, in person to come and dwell there. But to come to these who
by their own vertues, and not by fortune, attain'd to be Princes; the
excellentest of these are Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus, and such like;
and though of Moses we are not to reason, he onely executing the things
that were commanded him by God; yet merits he well to be admir'd, were
it only for that grace that made him worthy to converse with God. But
considering Cyrus, and the others, who either got or founded Kingdomes,
we shall find them all admirable; and if there particular actions and
Lawes be throughly weigh'd, they will not appeare much differing from
those of Moyses, which he receiv'd from so Sovraigne an instructer. And
examining their lives and actions, it will not appeare, that they had
other help of fortune, than the occasion, which presented them with the
matter wherein they might introduce what forme they then pleas'd; and
without that occasion, the vertue of their mind had been extinguish'd;
and without that vertue, the occasion had been offer'd in vaine. It was
then necessary for Moses to find the people of Israel slaves in Ægypt,
and oppress'd by the Ægyptians, to the end that they to get out of their
thraldome, should bee willing to follow him. It was fit that Romulus
should not be kept in Albia, but expos'd presently after his birth, that
he might become King of Rome, and founder of that City. There was need
that Cyrus should find the Persians discontented with the Medes
government, and the Medes delicate and effeminate through their long
peace. Theseus could not make proof his vertue, had not he found the
Athenians dispers'd. These occasions therefore made these men happy, and
their excellent vertue made the occasion be taken notice of, whereby
their countrey became enobled, and exceeding fortunate. They, who by
vertuous waies, like unto these, become Princes, attain the Principality
with difficulty, but hold it with much ease; and the difficulties they
find in gaining the Principality, arise partly from the new orders and
courses they are forc'd to bring in, to lay the foundation of their
State, and work their own security. And it is to be consider'd, how
there is not any thing harder to take in hand, nor doubtfuller to
succeed, nor more dangerous to mannage, than to be the chief in bringing
in new orders; for this Chief finds all those his enemies, that thrive
upon the old orders; and hath but luke warme defenders of all those that
would do well upon the new orders, which luke-warme temper proceeds
partly from fear of the opposers who have the laws to their advantage;
partly from the incredulity of the men who truly beleeve not a new
thing, unless there be some certain proof given them thereof. Whereupon
it arises, that whensoever they that are adversaries, take the occasion
to assayle, they do it factiously; and these others defend but cooly, so
that their whole party altogether runs a hazzard. Therefore it is
necessary, being we intend throughly to discourse this part, to examine
if these innovators stand of themselves, or if they depend upon others;
that is, if to bring their work to effect, it be necessary they should
intreat, or be able to constrain; in the first case they allwayes
succeed ill, and bring nothing to pass; but when they depend of
themselves, and are able to force, then seldom it is that they hazzard.
Hence came it that all the prophets that were arm'd, prevail'd; but
those that were unarm'd, were too weak: for besides what we have
alledg'd, the nature of the people is changeable, and easie to be
perswaded to a matter; but it is hard also to settle them in that
perswasion. And therefore it behoves a man to be so provided, that when
they beleeve no longer, he may be able to compel them thereto by force.
Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus would never have been able to cause
their Laws to be obey'd, had they been disarm'd; as in our times it
befel Fryer Jerome Savanarola, who perished in his new constitutions,
when the multitude began not to beleeve him; neither had he the means to
keep them firme, that had beleev'd; not to force beleefe in them that
had not beleev'd him. Wherefore such men as these, in their proceedings
find great difficulty, and all their dangers are in the way, and these
they must surmount by their vertue; but having once master'd them, and
beginning to be honored by all, when they have rooted those out that
envi'd their dignities, they remain powerful, secure, honorable, and
happy. To these choice examples, I will add one of less remark; but it
shall hold some proportion with them, and this shall suffice me for all
others of this kind, which is Hiero the Siracusan. He of a private man,
became Prince of Siracusa, nor knew he any other ayd of fortune than the
occasion: for the Siracusans being oppress'd, made choyce of him for
their Captain, whereupon he deserv'd to be made their Prince: and he was
of such vertue even in his private fortune, that he who writes of him,
sayes, he wanted nothing of reigning, but a Kingdom; this man
extinguish'd all the old soldiery, ordaind the new; left the old
allyances, entertained new; and as he had friendship, and soldiers that
were his own, upon that ground he was able to build any edifice; so that
he indured much trouble in gaining, and suffered but little in
maintaining.


CHAP. VII

Of new Principalities, gotten by fortune, and other mens forces.


They who by fortune only become Princes of private men, with small pains
attain to it, but have much ado to maintain themselves in it; and find
no difficulty at all in the way, because they are carried thither with
wings: but all the difficulties arise there, after they are plac'd in
them. And of such sort are those who have an estate given them for
money, by the favor of some one that grants it them: as it befell many
in Greece, in the cities of Jonia, and Hellespont; where divers Princes
were made by Darius, as well for his own safety as his glory; as also
them that were made Emperors; who from private men by corrupting the
soldiers, attaind to the Empire. These subsist meerly upon the will, and
fortune of those that have advanced them; which are two voluble and
unsteady things; and they neither know how, nor are able to continue in
that dignity: they know not how, because unless it be a man of great
understanding and vertue, it is not probable that he who hath always
liv'd a private life, can know how to command: neither are they able,
because they have not any forces that can be friendly or faithful to
them. Moreover those States that suddenly fall into a mans hands, as all
other things in nature that spring and grow quickly, cannot well have
taken root, nor have made their correspondencies so firm, but that the
first storm that takes them, ruines them; in case these, who (as it is
said) are thus on a sudden clambred up to be Princes, are not of that
worth and vertue as to know how to prepare themselves to maintain that
which chance hath cast into their bosoms, and can afterwards lay those
foundations, which others have cast before they were Princes. For the
one and the other of these wayes about the attaining to be a Prince, by
Vertue, or by Fortune, I will alledge you two examples which have been
in the dayes of our memory. These were Francis Sforza, and Cæsar Borgia;
Francis by just means and with a great deal of vertue, of a private man
got to be Duke of Millan; and that which with much pains he had gaind,
he kept with small ado. On the other side Cæesar Borgia (commonly termed
Duke Valentine) got his state by his Fathers fortune, and with the same
lost it; however that for his own part no pains was spar'd, nor any
thing omitted, which by a discreet and valorus man ought to have been
done, to fasten his roots in those Estates, which others armes or
fortune had bestowed on him; for (as it was formerly said) he that lays
not the foundations first, yet might be able by means of his
extraordinary vertues to lay them afterwards, however it be with the
great trouble of the architect, and danger of the edifice. If therefore
we consider all the Dukes progresses, we may perceive how great
foundations he had cast for his future power, which I judge a matter not
superfluous to run over; because I should not well know, what better
rules I might give to a new Prince, than the pattern of his actions; and
however the courses he took, availd him not, yet was it not his fault,
but it proceeded from an extraordinary and extream malignity of fortune.
Pope Alexander the sixt, desiring to make the Duke his son a great man,
had a great many difficulties, present and future: first he saw no way
there was whereby he might be able to make him Lord of any State, that
was not the Churches; and if he turnd to take that from the Church, he
knew that the Duke of Milan, and the Venetians would never agree to it;
for Faenza and Riminum were under the Venetians protection. Moreover, he
saw that the armes of Italy, and those whereof in particular he might
have been able to make some use, were in their hands, who ought to fear
the Popes greatness; and therefore could not any wayes rely upon them:
being all in the Orsins and Colonies hands, and those of their faction.
It was necessary then, that those matters thus appointed by them should
be disturbed, and the States of Italy disordered, to be able safely to
master part of them, which he then found easie to do, seeing the
Venetians upon three considerations had us'd the means to bring the
French men back again into Italy: which he not only did not withstand,
but furthered, with a resolution of King Lewis his ancient marriage. The
King then past into Italy with the Venetians ayd, and Alexanders
consent; nor was he sooner arrived in Milan, than the Pope had soldiers
from him for the service of Romania, which was quickly yeelded up to him
upon the reputation of the Kings forces. The Duke then having made
himself master of Romania, and beaten the Colonies, desiring to hold it,
and proceed forward, two things hindered him: the one, his own soldiers,
which he thought were not true to him; the other, the French mens good
wills; that is to say, he feared that the Princes soldiers, whereof he
had served himself, would fail him, and not only hinder his conquest,
but take from him what he had gotten; and that the King also would serve
him the same turn. He had experience of the Orsini upon an occasion,
when after the taking of Faenza he assaulted Bolonia, to which assault
he saw them go very cold. And touching the King, he discovered his mind,
when having taken the Dutchy of Urbin, he invaded Tuscany; from which
action the King made him retire; whereupon the Duke resolved to depend
no more upon fortune, and other mens armes. And the first thing he did,
was, to weaken the Orsini, and Colonnies factions in Rome: for he gain'd
all their adherents that were gentlemen, giving them large allowances,
and honoring them according to their qualities with charges and
governments; so that in a few months the good will they bare to the
parties was quite extinguisht, and wholly bent to the Duke. After this,
he waited an occasion to root out the Orsini, having before dispersed
those of the family of Colonnia, which fell out well to his hand; and he
us'd it better. For the Orsini being too late aware, that the Dukes and
the Churches greatness was their destruction, held a Council together in
a dwelling house of theirs in the country adjoyning to Perusia. From
thence grew the rebellion of Urbin, and the troubles of Romania, and
many other dangers befell the Duke, which he overcame all with the help
of the French: and having regained his reputation, trusting neither
France, nor any forrein forces, to the end he might not be put to make
trial of them again, he betook himself to his sleghts; and he knew so
well to disguise his intention, that the Orsins, by the mediation of
Paul Orsine, were reconciled to him, to whom the Duke was no way wanting
in all manner of courtesies whereby to bring them into security, giving
them rich garments, money, and horses, til their own simplicities led
them all to Sinigallia, into his hands. These heads being then pluck'd
off, and their partisans made his friends; the Duke had laid very good
foundations, to build his own greatness on, having in his power all
Romania with the Dutchy of Urbin, and gained the hearts of those people,
by beginning to give them some relish of their well being. And because
this part is worthy to be taken notice of, and to be imitated by others,
I will not let it escape. The Duke, when he had taken Romania, finding
it had been under the hands of poor Lords who had rather pillag'd their
subjects, than chastis'd or amended them, giving them more cause of
discord, than of peace and union, so that the whole countrey was fraught
with robberies, quarrels, and other sorts of insolencies; thought the
best way to reduce them to termes of pacification, and obedience to a
Princely power, was, to give them some good government: and therefore he
set over them one Remiro D'Orco, a cruel hasty man, to whom he gave an
absolute power. This man in a very short time setled peace and union
amongst them with very great reputation. Afterwards the Duke thought
such excessive authority serv'd not so well to his purpose, and doubting
it would grow odious, he erected a civil Judicature in the midst of the
countrey, where one excellent Judge did Preside, and thither every City
sent their Advocate: and because he knew the rigors past had bred some
hatred against him, to purge the minds of those people, and to gain them
wholly to himself, he purpos'd to shew, that if there was any cruelty
used, it proceeded not from any order of his, but from the harsh
disposition of his Officers. Whereupon laying hold on him, at this
occasion, he caus'd his head to be struck off one morning early in the
market place at Cesena, where he was left upon a gibbet, with a bloody
sword by his side; the cruelty of which spectacle for a while satisfied
and amaz'd those people. But to return from whence we have digressd: I
say, that the Duke finding himself very strong, and in part out of doubt
of the present dangers, because he was arm'd after his own manner, and
had in some good measure suppress'd those forces, which, because of
their vicinity, were able to annoy him, he wanted nothing else to go on
with his Conquest, but the consideration of France: for he knew, that
the King, who now, though late, was advis'd of his error, would never
suffer him: and hereupon he began to seek after new allyances, and to
waver with France, when the French came towards Naples against the
Spaniards, who then besieged Gagetta; and his design was only to be out
of their danger, which had been effected for him, had Pope Alexander
lived. And thus were his businesses carried touching his present estate.
As for the future, he had reason to doubt lest the new successor to the
Papacy would not be his friend, and would endeavor to take that from him
that Alexander had bestowed on him; and he thought to provide for this
foure waies: First by rooting out the races of all those Lords he had
dispoyled, whereby to take those occasions from the Pope. Secondly, by
gaining all the gentlemen of Rome, whereby he might be able with those
to keep the Pope in some awe. Thirdly, to make the Colledge of Cardinals
as much at his devotion as possibly might be. Fourthly, by making of so
large Conquests, before the Popes death, as that he might be able of
himself to withstand the first fury of his enemies. Three of these fowre
at Pope Alexanders death he had effected, and the fourth he had neare
brought to a point. For of those Lords he had stript, he put to death as
many as he could come at, and very few escap'd him: he gaind him the
Roman Gentlemen: and in the Colledge he had made a great faction. And
touching his new Conquest, he had a designe to become Lord of Tuscany.
And he had possessed himself already of Perusia, and Pombin, and taken
protection of Pisa: and so soon as he should have cast off his respect
to France (which now he meant to hold no longer) being the French were
now driven out of the Kingdome of Naples by the Spaniards, so that each
of them was forc'd to buy his friendship at any termes; he was then to
leap into Pisa. After this Lucca and Siena were presently to fall to
him, partly for envy to the Florentines, and partly for fear. The
Florentines had no way to escape him: all which, had it succeeded with
him, as without question it had, the very same year that Alexander dy'd,
he had made himself master of so great forces, and such reputation, that
he would have been able to have stood upon his own bottom, without any
dependance of fortune, or resting upon others helps, but only upon his
own strength and valor. But Alexander dy'd five years after that he had
begun to draw forth his sword: and left him setled only in the State of
Romania, with all his other designes in the ayre, sick unto death,
between two very strong armies of his enemies; and yet was there in this
Duke such a spirit and courage; and he understood so well, how men are
to be gaind, and how to be lost, and so firm were the grounds he had
laid in a short time, that, had he not had those armies upon his back,
or had been in health, he would have carried through his purpose in
spight of all opposition; and that the foundations he grounded upon were
good, it appeard in that Romania held for him above a moneth, and he
remained secure in Rome, though even at deaths doore: and however the
Baglioni, Vitelli, and Orsini came into Rome; yet found they none would
take their parts against him. And this he was able to have effected,
that if he could not have made him Pope whom be would, he could have
hindred him that he would not should be Pope. But had he been in health
when Alexander dy'd, every thing had gone easily with him; and he told
me on that day that Julius the second was created Pope, that he had
fore-thought on all that which could happen, in case his father chanc'd
to dye, and for every thing provided its remedy, this onely excepted,
that he foresaw not that he should at the same time be brought unto
deaths dore also. Having then collected all the Dukes actions, me thinks
I could not well blame him, but rather (as I have here done) set him as
a pattern to be followed by all those who by fortune and others armes
have been exalted to an Empire. For he being of great courage, and
having lofty designes, could not carry himself otherwise; and the only
obstacle of his purposes was the brevity of Alexanders life, and his own
sickness. Whoever therefore deemes it necessary in his entrance into a
new Principality, to secure himself of his enemies, and gain him
friends, to overcome either by force or by cunning, to make himself
beloved, or feared of his people, be followed and reverenced by his
soldiers, to root out those that can, or owe thee any hurt, to change
the ancient orders with new wayes, to be severe, and yet acceptable,
magnanimous, and liberall; to extinguish the unfaithfull soldiery, and
create new; to maintain to himself the armities of Kings and Princes, so
that they shall either with favor benefit thee, or be wary how to offend
thee; cannot find more fresh and lively examples than the actions of
this man. He deserves to be found fault withall for the creation of
Julius the second, wherein an evil choice was made for him: for, as it
is said, not being able to make a Pope to his mind, he could have
withheld any one from being Pope; and should never have consented that
any one of those Cardinals should have got the Papacy, whom he had ever
done harme to; or who having attaind the Pontificate were likely to be
afraid of him: because men ordinarily do hurt either for fear, or
hatred. Those whom he had offended, were among others, he who had the
title of St. Peter ad Vincula, Colonna, St. George, and Ascanius; all
the others that were in possibility of the Popedome, were such as might
have feard him rather, except the Cardinal of Roan, and the Spaniards;
these by reason of their allyance and obligation with him, the other
because of the power they had, having the Kingdome of France on their
party; wherefore the Duke above all things should have created a
Spanyard Pope, and in case he could not have done that, he should have
agreed that Roan should have been, and not St. Peter ad Vincula. And
whoever beleeves, that with great personages new benefits blot on the
remembrance of old injuries, is much deceiv'd. The Duke therefore in
this election, was the cause of his own ruine at last.

    Till wee come to this seaventh Chapter, I find not any thing
    much blame-worthy, unlesse it be on ground he layes in the
    second Chapter; whereupon hee builds most of this Fabrick, viz.
    That Subjects must either be dallyed or flatterd withall, or
    quite crusht. Whereby our Author advises his Prince to support
    his authority with two Cardinall Vertues, Dissimulation, and
    Cruelty. He considers not herein that the head is but a member
    of the body, though the principall; and the end of the parts is
    the good of the whole. And here he goes against himselfe in the
    twenty sixt Chapter of his Rep. 1. 1. where hee blames Philip of
    Macedon for such courses, terming them very cruell, and against
    all Christian manner of living; and that every man should refuse
    to be a King, and desire rather to live a private life, than to
    reigne so much to the ruine of mankind. The life of Cæsar
    Borgia, which is here given as a paterne to new Princes, we
    shall find to have been nothing else but a cunning carriage of
    things so, that he might thereby first deceive and inveigle, and
    then suppresse all those that could oppose or hinder his
    ambition. For if you runne over his life, you shall see the
    Father Pope Alexander the sixt and him, both imbarqued for his
    advancement, wherein they engag'd the Papall authority, and
    reputation of Religion; for faith and conscience these men never
    knew, though they exacted it of others: there was never promise
    made, but it was only so farre kept as servd for advantage;
    Liberality was made use of: Clemency and Cruelty, all alike, as
    they might serve to worke with their purposes. All was
    sacrific'd to ambition; no friendship could tye these men, nor
    any religion: and no marvell: for ambition made them forget both
    God and man. But see the end of all this cunning: though this
    Cæsar Borgia contrived all his businesse so warily, that our
    Author much commends him, and hee had attaind neere the pitch of
    his hopes, and had provided for each misadventure could befall
    him its remedy; Policy shewd it selefe short-sighted; for hee
    foresaw not at the time of his Fathers death, he himself should
    bee brought unto deaths doore also. And me thinks this Example
    might have given occasion to our Author to confesse, that surely
    there is a God that ruleth the earth. And many times God cutts
    off those cunning and mighty men in the hight of their purposes,
    when they think they have neare surmounted all dangers and
    difficulties. 'To the intent that the living may know, that the
    most high ruleth in the Kingdome of men, and giveth it to
    whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.'
    Daniel. 4. 17.


CHAP. VIII

Concerning those who by wicked meanes have attaind to a Principality.


But because a man becomes a Prince of a private man two wayes, which
cannot wholly be attributed either to Fortune or Vertue, I think not fit
to let them passe me: howbeit the one of them may be more largely
discoursed upon, where the Republicks are treated of. These are, when by
some wicked and unlawfull meanes a man rises to the Principality; or
when a private person by the favour of his fellow Citizens becomes
Prince of his countrey. And speaking of the first manner, it shall be
made evident by two Examples, the one ancient, the other moderne,
without entring otherwise into the justice or merit of this part; for I
take it that these are sufficient for any body that is forc'd to follow
them. Agathocles the Sicilian, not of a private man onely, but from a
base and abject fortune, got to be King of Siracusa. This man borne but
of a Potter, continued alwayes a wicked life throughout all the degrees
of this fortune: neverthelesse he accompanied his lewdnesse with such a
courage and resolution, that applying himselfe to military affaires, by
the degrees thereof he attained to bee Prætour of Siracusa, and being
setled in that degree, and having determined that he would become
Prince, and hold that by violence and without obligation to any other,
which by consent had been granted him: and to this purpose haveing had
some private intelligence touching his designe with Amilcar the
Carthaginian, who was imployd with his army in Sicily, one morining
gatherd the people together and the Senate of Syracusa, as if he had
some what to advise with them of matters belonging to the Commonwealth,
and upon a signe given, caus'd his souldiers to kill his Senatours, and
the richest of the people; who being slaine, he usurp'd the Principality
of that City without any civill strife: and however he was twice broken
by the Carthaginians, and at last besieged, was able not onely to defend
his own City, but leaving part of his own army at the defence thereof,
with the other invaded Affrique, and in a short time freed Siracusa from
the siege, and brought the Carthaginians into extreme necessity, who
were constraind to accord with him, be contented with the possession of
Affrique, and quitt Sicily to Agathocles. He then that should consider
the actions and valour of this man, would not see any, or very few
things to be attributed unto Fortune; seeing that as is formerly sayd,
not by any ones favour, but by the degrees of service in warre with many
sufferings and dangers, to which he had risen, he came to the
Principality; and that hee maintained afterwards with so many resolute
and hazardous undertakings. Yet cannot this be term'd vertue or valour
to slay his own Citizens, betray his friends, to be without faith,
without pitty, without religion, which wayes are of force to gaine
dominion, but not glory: for if Agathocles his valour bee well weighd,
in his enturing upon, and comming off from dangers, and the greatnesse
of his courage, in supporting and mastering of adversities, no man can
see why he should be thought any way inferiour even to the ablest
Captaines. Notwithstanding his beastly cruelty and inhumanity with
innumerable wickednesses, allow not that he should be celebrated among
the most excellent men. That cannot then be attributed to Fortune or
Vertue, which without the one or the other was attaind to by him. In our
dayes, while Alexander the sixth held the sea, Oliverotte of Fermo, who
some few yeeres before had been left young by his parents, was brought
up under the care of an uncle of his on the mothers side, called John
Foliani, and in the beginning of his youth given, by him to serve in the
warres under Paulo Vitelli: to the end that being well instructed in
that discipline, he might rise to some worthy degree in the warrs.
Afterwards when Paulo was dead, he served under Vitellozzo his brother,
and in very short time, being ingenious, of a good personage, and brave
courage, he became one of the prime men among the troops he served in:
but thinking it but servile to depend upon another, he plotted by the
ayd of some Citizens of Fermo (who lik'd rather the thraldome of their
City than the liberty of it) and by the favour of the Vitelli, to make
himselfe master of Fermo; and writ to John Foliani, that having been
many yeeres from home, he had a mind to come and see him and the City,
and in some part take notice of his own patrimony; and because he had
not imployd himselfe but to purchase honour, to the end his Citizens
might perceive, that he had not vainely spent his time, he had a desire
to come in good equipage and accompanied with a hundred horse of his
friends and servants; and he intreated him that he would be pleasd so to
take order, that he might be honourably received by the inhabitants of
Fermo, which turnd as well to his honor that was his uncle, as his that
was the nephew. In this, John faild not in any office of courtesie due
to his nephew: and caused him to be well receivd by them of Fermo, and
lodged him in his own house: where having passed some dayes, and stayd
to put in order somewhat that was necessary for his intended villany, he
made a very solemne feast, whether he invited John Foliani, and all the
prime men of Fermo: and when all their chear was ended, and all their
other entertainments, as in such feasts it is customary, Oliverotto of
purpose mov'd some grave discourses; speaking of the greatnesse of Pope
Alexander, and Cæsar his son, and their undertakings; where unto John
and the others making answer, he of a sudden stood up, saying, that
those were things to be spoken of in a more secret place, and so retir'd
into a chamber, whether John and all the other Citizens followd him; nor
were they sooner set downe there, than from some secret place therein
camp forth diverse souldiers, who slew John and all the others: after
which homicide Oliverotto got a horsebacke and ravaged the whole towne,
and besieged the supreme Magistrate in the palace, so that for feare
they were all constraind to obey him, and to settle a government,
whereof hee made himselfe Prince; and they being all dead who, had they
been discontented with him, could have hurt him; he strengthned himselfe
with new civill and military orders, so that in the space of a yeer that
he held the Principality, he was not only secure in the City of Fermo,
but became fearefull to all his neighbours; and the conquest of him
would have prov'd difficult, as that of Agathocles, had he not let
himselfe been deceivd by Cæsar Borgia, when at Sinigallia, as before was
said, he took the Orsini and Vitelli: where he also being taken a yeere
after he had committed the parricide, was strangled together with
Vitellozzo (whome he had had for master both of his vertues and vices.)
Some man might doubt from whence it should proceed, that Agathocles, and
such like, after many treacheries and crueltyes, could possibly live
long secure in his own countrey, and defend himselfe from his forrein
enemies, and that never any of his own Citizens conspir'd against him,
seeing that by means of cruelty, many others have never been able even
in peaceable times to maintaine their States, much lesse in the
doubtfull times of warre. I beleeve that this proceeds from the well, or
ill using of those cruelties: they may bee termd well us'd (if it bee
lawfull to say well of evill) that are put in practice only once of
necessity for securities sake, not insisting therein afterwards; but
there is use made of them for the subjects profit, as much as may be.
But those that are ill us'd, are such as though they bee but few in the
beginning, yet they multiply rather in time, than diminish. They that
take that first way, may with the help of God, and mens care, find some
remedy for their State, as Agathocles did: for the others, it is
impossible they should continue. Whereupon it is to be noted, that in
the laying hold of a State, the usurper thereof ought to runne over and
execute all his cruelties at once, that he be not forced often to
returne to them, and that he may be able, by not renewing of them, to
give men some security, and gaine their affections by doing them some
courtesies. Hee that carries it otherwise, either for fearefullnesse, or
upon evill advice, is alwayes constraind to hold his sword drawne in his
hand; nor ever can hee rely upon his subjects, there being no
possibility for them, because of his daily and continuall injuries, to
live in any safety: for his injuries should bee done altogether, that
being seldomer tasted, they might lesse offend; his favours should bee
bestowd by little, and little to the end they might keep their taste the
better; and above all things a Prince must live with his subjects in
such sort, that no accident either of good or evill can make him vary:
for necessity comming upon him by reason of adversities, thou hast not
time given thee to make advantage of thy cruelties; and the favours
which then thou bestowest, will little help thee, being taken as if they
came from thee perforce, and so yeeld no returne of thanks.


CHAP. IX

Of the Civill Principality.


But comming to the other part, when a principall Citizen, not by
villany, or any other insufferable violence, but by the favour of his
fellow-citizens becomes Prince of his native countrey: which we may
terme a Civill Principality; nor to attaine hereunto is Vertue wholly or
Fortune wholly necessary, but rather a fortunate cunning: I say, this
Principality is climb'd up to, either by the peoples help, or the great
mens. For, in every City we finde these two humours differ; and they
spring from this, that the people desire not to be commanded nor
oppressed by the great ones, and the great ones are desirous to command
and oppresse the people: and from these two several appetites, arise in
the City one of these three effects, either a Principality, or Liberty,
or Tumultuary licentiousnesse. The Principality is caused either by the
people, or the great ones, according as the one or other of these
factions have the occasion offerd; for the great ones seeing themselves
not able to resist the people, begin to turne the whole reputation to
one among them, and make him Prince, whereby they may under his shadow
vent their spleenes. The people also, not being able to support the
great mens insolencies, converting the whole reputation to one man,
create him their Prince, to be protected by his authority. He that comes
to the Principality by the assistance of the great ones, subsists with
more difficulty, than he that attaines to it by the peoples favour; for
he being made Prince, hath many about him, who account themselves his
equalls, and therefore cannot dispose nor command them at his pleasure.
But he that gaines the Principality by the peoples favor, finds himselfe
alone in his throne, and hath none or very few neare him that are not
very supple to bend: besides this, the great ones cannot upon easie
termes be satisfied, or without doing of wrong to others, where as a
small matter contents the people: for the end which the people propound
to themselves, is more honest than that of the great men, these desiring
to oppresse, they only not to be oppressed. To this may be added also,
that the Prince which is the peoples enemy, can never well secure
himselfe of them, because of their multitude; well may hee bee sure of
the Nobles, they being but a few. The worst that a Prince can look for
of the people become his enemy, is to be abandoned by them: but when the
great ones once grow his enemies, he is not only to feare their
abandoning of him, but their making of a party against him also: for
there being in them more forecast and craft, they alwayes take time by
the forelocks whereby to save themselves, and seeke credit with him who
they hope shall get the mastery. The Prince likewise is necessitated
alwayes to live with the same people, but can doe well enough without
the same great men; he being able to create new ones, and destroy them
again every day, and to take from them, and give them credit as he
pleases: and to cleare this part, I say, that great men ought to be
considerd two wayes principally, that is, if they take thy proceedings
so much to heart, as to engage their fortunes wholly in thine, in case
they lye not alwayes catching at spoyle, they ought to be well honourd
and esteem'd: those that bind themselves not to thy fortune, are to be
considerd also two wayes; either they doe it for lack of courage, and
naturall want of spirit, and then shouldst thou serve thy selfe of them,
and of them especially that are men of good advice; for if thy affaires
prosper, thou dost thy selfe honour thereby; if crost, thou needst not
feare them: but when they oblige not themselves to thee of purpose, and
upon occasion of ambition, it is a signe they think more of themselves
than of thee: and of these the Prince ought to beware, and account of
them as his discoverd enemyes: for alwayes in thy adversity they will
give a hand too to ruine thee. Therefore ought hee that comes to be
Prince by the peoples favour, keepe them his friends: which he may
easily doe, they desiring only to live free from oppression: but he that
becomes Prince by the great mens favour, against the will of the people,
ought above all things to gaine the people to him, which he may easily
effect, when he takes upon him their protection: And because men when
they find good, where they look for evill, are thereby more endered to
their benefactour, therefore growes the people so pliant in their
subjection to him, as if by their favours he had attaind his dignity.
And the Prince is able to gaine them to his side by many wayes, which
because they vary according to the subject, no certaine rule can be
given thereupon; wherefore we shall let them passe I will only conclude,
that it is necessary for a Prince to have the people his friend;
otherwise in his adversities he hath no helpe. Nabis Prince of the
Spartans supported the siege of all Greece, and an exceeding victorious
army of the Romans, and against those defended his native countrey and
State, and this suffic'd him alone, that as the danger came upon him, he
secur'd himself of a fewer; whereas if the people had been his enemy,
this had nothing availd him. And let no man think to overthrow this my
opinion with that common proverb, that He who relyes upon the people,
layes his foundation in the dirt; for that is true where a private
Citizen grounds upon them, making his account that the people shall free
him, when either his enemyes or the Magistrates oppresse him: In this
case he should find himself often deceiv'd, as it befell the Gracchyes
in Rome, and in Florence George Scali: but he being a Prince that
grounds thereupon, who can command, and is a man of courage, who hath
his wits about him in his adversityes, and wants not other preparations,
and holds together the whole multitude animated with his valour and
orders, shall not prove deceiv'd by them, and shall find he hath layd
good foundations. These Principalityes are wont to be upon the point of
falling when they goe about to skip from the civil order to the
absolute: for these Princes either command of themselves, or by the
Magistrate; in this last case their State is more weak and dangerous,
because they stand wholly at the will and pleasure of these Citizens,
who then are set over the Magistrates, who especially in adverse times
are able with facility to take their State from them either by rising up
against them, or by not obeying them; and then the Prince is not at hand
in those dangers to take the absolute authority upon him: for the
Citizens and subjects that are accustomed to receive the commands from
the Magistrates, are not like in those fractions to obey his: and in
doubtfull times he shall alwayes have greatest penury of whom he may
trust; for such a Prince cannot ground upon that which he sees in
peaceable times, when the Citizens have need of the State; for then
every one runs, and every one promises, and every one will venture his
life for him, where there is no danger neare; but in times of hazzard,
when the State hath need of Citizens, there are but few of them then,
and so much the more is this experience dangerous, in that it can be but
once made. Therefore a prudent Prince ought to devise a way whereby his
Citizens alwayes and in any case and quality of time may have need of
his government, and they shall alwaies after prove faithfull to him.


CHAP. X

In what manner the Forces of all Principalities ought to be measured.


It is requisite in examining the quality of those Principalities, to
have another consideration of them, that is, if a Prince have such
dominions, that he is able in case of necessity to subsist of himself,
or else whether he hath alwaies need of another to defend him. And to
cleer this point the better, I judge them able to stand of themselves,
who are of power either for their multitudes of men, or quantity of
money, to bring into the field a compleat armie, and joyn battel with
whoever comes to assail them: and so I think those alwaies to stand in
need of others help, who are not able to appear in the field against the
enemy, but are forc'd to retire within their walls and guard them.
Touching the first case, we have treated already, and shall adde somwhat
thereto as occasion shall require. In the second case, we cannot say
other, save only to encourage such Princes to fortifie and guard their
own Capital city, and of the countrey about, not to hold much account;
and whoever shall have well fortified that town, and touching other
matters of governments shall have behaved himself towards his subjects,
as hath been formerly said, and hereafter shall be, shall never be
assaild but with great regard; for men willingly undertake not
enterprises, where they see difficulty to work them through; nor can
much facility be there found, where one assails him, who hath his town
strong and wel guarded, and is not hated of his people. The cities of
Germany are very free; they have but very little of the countrey about
them belonging to them; and they obey the Emperor, when they please, and
they stand not in fear, neither of him nor any other Potentate about
them: for they are in such a manner fortified, that every one thinks the
siege of any of them would prove hard and tedious: for all of them have
ditches, and rampires, and good store of Artillery, and alwaies have
their publick cellars well provided with meat and drink and firing for a
yeer: besides this, whereby to feed the common people, and without any
loss to the publick, they have alwaies in common whereby they are able
for a year to imploy them in the labor of those trades that are the
sinews and the life of that city, and of that industry whereby the
commons ordinarily supported themselves: they hold up also the military
exercises in repute, and hereupon have they many orders to maintain
them. A Prince then that is master of a good strong city, and causeth
not himself to be hated, cannot be assaulted; and in case he were, he
that should assail him, would be fain to quit him with shame: for the
affairs of the world are so various, that it is almost impossible that
an army can lie incampt before a town for the space of a whole yeer: and
if any should reply, that the people having their possessions abroad, in
case they should see them a fire, would not have patience, and the
tedious siege and their love to themselves would make them forget their
Prince: I answer that a Prince puissant and couragious, will easily
master those difficulties, now giving his subjects hope, that the
mischief will not be of durance; sometimes affright them with the
cruelty of their enemies, and other whiles cunningly securing himself of
those whom he thinks too forward to run to the enemy. Besides this by
ordinary reason the enemy should burne and waste their countrey, upon
his arrival, and at those times while mens minds are yet warme, and
resolute in their defence: and therefore so much the less ought a Prince
doubt: for after some few dayes, that their courages grow coole, the
dammages are all done, and mischiefs received, and there is no help for
it, and then have they more occasion to cleave faster to their Prince,
thinking he is now more bound to them, their houses having for his
defence been fired, and their possessions wasted; and mens nature is as
well to hold themselves oblig'd for the kindnesses they do, as for those
they receive; whereupon if all be well weigh'd, a wise Prince shall not
find much difficulty to keep sure and true to him his Citizens hearts at
the beginning and latter end of the siege, when he hath no want of
provision for food and ammunition.


CHAP. XI

Concerning Ecclesiastical Principalities.


There remains now only that we treat of the Ecclesiastical
Principalities, about which all the difficulties are before they are
gotten: for they are attained to either by vertue, or Fortune; and
without the one or the other they are held: for they are maintaind by
orders inveterated in the religion, all which are so powerfull and of
such nature, that they maintain their Princes in their dominions in what
manner soever they proceed and live. These only have an Estate and
defend it not; have subjects and govern them not; and yet their States
because undefended, are not taken from them; nor their subjects, though
not govern'd, care not, think not, neither are able to aliene themselves
from them. These Principalities then are only happy and secure: but they
being sustained by superior causes, whereunto humane understanding
reaches not, I will not meddle with them: for being set up and
maintained by God, it would be the part of a presumptuous and rash man
to enter into discourse of them. Yet if any man should ask me whence it
proceeds, that the Church in temporal power hath attaind to such
greatness, seeing that till the time of Alexander the sixt, the Italian
Potentates, and not only they who are entituled the potentates, but
every Baron and Lord though of the meanest condition in regard of the
temporality, made but small account of it; and now a King of France
trembles at the power thereof; and it hath been able to drive him out of
Italy, and ruine the Venetians; and however this be well known, me
thinks it is not superstitious in some part to recall it to memory.
Before that Charles King of France past into Italy, this countrey was
under the rule of the Pope, Venetians, the King of Naples, the Duke of
Milan, and the Florentines. These Potentates took two things principally
to their care; the one, that no forreiner should invade Italy; the other
that no one of them should inlarge their State. They, against whom this
care was most taken, were the Pope and the Venetians; and to restrain
the Venetians, there needed the union of all the rest, as it was in the
defence of Ferrara; and to keep the Pope low, they served themselves of
the Barons of Rome, who being divided into two factions, the Orsini and
Colonnesi, there was alwaies occasion of offence between them, who
standing ready with their armes in hand in the view of the Pope, held
the Popedome weak and feeble: and however sometimes there arose a
couragious Pope, as was Sextus; yet either his fortune, or his wisdome
was not able to free him of these incommodities, and the brevity of
their lives was the cause thereof; for in ten years, which time, one
with another, Popes ordinarily liv'd, with much ado could they bring low
one of the factions. And if, as we may say, one had near put out the
Colonnesi, there arose another enemy to the Orsini, who made them grow
again, so that there was never time quite to root them out. This then
was the cause, why the Popes temporal power was of small esteem in
Italy; there arose afterwards Pope Alexander the sixt, who of all the
Popes that ever were, shewed what a Pope was able to do with money and
forces: and he effected, by means of his instrument, Duke Valentine, and
by the ocasion of the French mens passage, all those things which I have
formerly discoursed upon in the Dukes actions: and however his purpose
was nothing at all to inlarge the Church dominions, but to make the Duke
great; yet what he did, turnd to the Churches advantage, which after his
death when the Duke was taken away, was the heir of all his pains.
Afterwards succeeded Pope Julius, and found the Church great, having all
Romania, and all the Barons of Rome being quite rooted out, and by
Alexanders persecutions, all their factions worne down; he found also
the way open for the heaping up of moneys, never practised before
Alexanders time; which things Julius not only follow'd, but augmented;
and thought to make himself master of Bolonia, and extinguish the
Venetians, and chase the French men out of Italy: and these designes of
his prov'd all lucky to him, and so much the more to his praise in that
he did all for the good of the Church, and in no private regard: he kept
also the factions of the Orsins and Colonnesi, in the same State he
found them: and though there were among them some head whereby to cause
an alteration; yet two things have held them quiet; the one the power of
the Church, which somewhat affrights them; the other because they have
no Cardinals of their factions, who are the primary causes of all the
troubles amongst them: nor shall these parties ever be at rest, while
they have Cardinals; because they nourish the factions both in Rome, and
abroad; and the Barons then are forced to undertake the defence of them:
and thus from the Prelates ambitions arise the discords and tumults
among the Barons. And now hath Pope Leo his Holiness found the Popedome
exceeding puissant, of whom it is hoped, that if they amplified it by
armes, he by his goodness, and infinite other vertues, will much more
advantage and dignifie it.


CHAP. XII

How many sorts of Military discipline there are and touching Mercenary
soldiers.


Having treated particularly of the qualities of those Principalities,
which in the beginning I propounded to discourse upon, and considered in
some part the reasons of their well and ill being, and shewd the waies
whereby many have sought to gain, and hold them, it remains now that I
speak in general of the offences and defences, that may chance in each
of the forenamed. We have formerly said that it is necessary for a
Prince to have good foundations laid; otherwise it must needs be that he
go to wrack. The Principal foundations that all States have, as well
new, as old, or mixt, are good laws, and good armes; and because there
cannot be good laws, where there are not good armes; and where there are
good armes, there must needs be good laws, I will omit to discourse of
the laws, and speak of armes. I say then that the armes, wherewithall a
Prince defends his State, either are his own, or mercenary, or
auxiliary, or mixt. Those that are mercenary and auxiliar, are
unprofitable, and dangerous, and if any one holds his State founded upon
mercenary armes, he shall never be quiet, nor secure, because they are
never well united, ambitious, and without discipline, treacherous, among
their friends stour, among their enemies cowardly; they have no fear of
God, nor keep any faith with men; and so long only defer they the doing
of mischief, till the enemy comes to assul thee; and in time of peace
thou art despoyled by them, in war by thy enemies: the reason hereof is,
because they have no other love, nor other cause to keep them in the
field, but only a small stipend, which is not of force to make them
willing to hazard their lives for thee: they are willing indeed to be
thy soldiers, till thou goest to fight; but then they fly, or run away;
which thing would cost me but small pains to perswade; for the ruine of
Italy hath not had any other cause now a dayes, than for that it hath
these many years rely'd upon mercenary armes; which a good while since
perhaps may have done some man some service, and among themselves they
may have been thought valiant: but so soon as any forrein enemy
appeared, they quickly shewed what they were. Whereupon Charles the King
of France, without opposition, made himself master of all Italy: and he
that said, that the causes thereof were our faults, said true; but these
were not those they beleeved, but what I have told; and because they
were the Princes faults, they also have suffered the punishment. I will
fuller shew the infelicity of these armes. The mercenary Captains are
either very able men, or not: if they be, thou canst not repose any
trust in them: for they will alwaies aspire unto their own proper
advancements, either by suppressing of thee that art their Lord, or by
suppressing of some one else quite out of thy purpose: but if the
Captain be not valorous, he ordinarily ruines thee: and in case it be
answered, that whoever shall have his armes in his hands, whether
mercenary or not, will do so: I would reply, that armes are to be
imployed either by a Prince, or Common-wealth. The Prince ought to go in
person, and performe the office of a commander: the Republick is to send
forth her Citizens: and when she sends forth one that proves not of
abilities, she ought to change him then; and when he does prove
valorous, to bridle him so by the laws, that he exceed not his
commission. And by experience we see, that Princes and Republiques of
themselves alone, make very great conquests; but that mercenary armes
never do other than harme; and more hardly falls a Republick armed with
her own armes under the obedience of one of her own Citizens, than one
that is armed by forrein armes. Rome and Sparta subsisted many ages
armed and free. The Swissers are exceedingly well armed, and yet very
free. Touching mercenary armes that were of old, we have an example of
the Carthagians, who near upon were oppress'd by their own mercenary
soldiers, when the first war with the Romans was finished; however the
Carthagians had their own Citizens for their Captains. Philip of Macedon
was made by the Thebans after Epaminondas his death, General of their
Armies; and after the victory, he took from them liberty. The Milaneses
when Duke Philip was dead, entertaind Francis Sforza into their pay
against the Venetians, who having vanquisht their enemie at Caravaggio,
afterwards joyned with them, where by to usurp upon the Milaneses his
Masters. Sforza his father, being in Joan the Queen of Naples pay, left
her on a sudden disarmed; whereupon she, to save her Kingdom, was
constraind to cast her self into the King of Arrragon's bosome. And in
case the Venetians and the Florentines have formerly augmented their
State with these kind of armes, and their own Captains, and yet none of
them have ever made themselves their Princes, but rather defended them:
I answer, that the Florentines in this case have had fortune much their
friend: for of valorous Captains, which they might any way fear, some
have not been victors, some have had opposition, and others have laid
the aim of their ambitions another way. He who overcame not, was John
Aouto, of whose faith there could no proof be made, being he vanquisht
not; but every one will acknowledge, that, had he vanquisht, the
Florentines were at his discretion. Sforza had alwaies the Bracceschi
for his adversaries, so that they were as a guard one upon another.
Francis converted all his ambition against Lombardy. Braccio against the
Church, and the Kingdome of Naples. But let us come to that which
followed a while agoe. The Florentines made Paul Vitelli their General,
a throughly advis'd man, and who from a private fortune had rose to very
great reputation: had he taken Pisa, no man will deny but that the
Florentines must have held fast with him; for had he been entertained in
their enemies pay, they had no remedy; and they themselves holding of
him, of force were to obey him. The Venetians, if we consider their
proceedings, we shall see wrought both warily and gloriously, while
themselves made war, which was before their undertakings by land, where
the gentlemen with their own Commons in armes behav'd themselves
bravely: but when they began to fight by land, they lost their valor,
and follow'd the customes of Italy; and in the beginning of their
enlargement by land, because they had not much territory, and yet were
of great reputation, they had not much cause to fear their Captains; but
as they began to extend their bounds, which was under their Commander
Carminiola, they had a taste of this error: for perceiving he was
exceeding valorous, having under his conduct beaten the Duke of Milan;
and knowing on the other side, how he was cold in the war, they judg'd
that they could not make any great conquest with him; and because they
neither would, nor could cashier him, that they might not lose what they
had gotten, they were forced for their own safeties to put him to death.
Since they have had for their General Bartholomew of Berganio, Robert of
St. Severin, the Count of Petilian, and such like: whereby they were to
fear their losses, as well as to hope for gain: as it fell out
afterwards at Vayla, where in one day they lost that, which with so much
pains they had gotten in eight hundred years: for from these kind of
armes grow slack and slow and weak gains; but sudden and wonderfull
losses: And because I am now come with these examples into Italy, which
now these many years, have been governd by mercenary armes, I will
search deeper into them, to the end that their course and progress being
better discoverd, they may be the better amended. You have to
understand, that so soon as in these later times the yoak of the Italian
Empire began to be shaken off, and the Pope had gotten reputation in the
temporality, Italy was divided into several States: for many of the
great cities took armes against their Nobility; who under the Emperors
protection had held them in oppression; and the Pope favored these,
whereby he might get himself reputation, in the temporality; of many
others, their Citizens became Princes, so that hereupon Italy being come
into the Churches hands as it were, and some few Republicks, those
Priests and Citizens not accustomed to the use of armes, began to take
strangers to their pay. The first that gave reputation to these soldiers
was Alberick of Como in Romania. From his discipline among others
descended Brachio and Sforza, who in their time were the arbitres of
Italy; after these followed all others, who even till our dayes have
commanded the armes of Italy; and the success of their valor hath been,
that it was overrun by Charles, pillaged by Lewis, forc'd by Ferdinand,
and disgrac'd by the Swissers. The order which they have held, hath
been, first whereby to give reputation to their own armes to take away
the credit of the Infantry. This they did, because they having no State
of their own, but living upon their industry, their few foot gave them
no reputation, and many they were not able to maintain; whereupon they
reduc'd themselves to cavalery, and so with a supportable number they
were entertained and honored: and matters were brought to such termes,
that in an army of twenty thousand soldiers you should not find two
thousand foot. They had moreover us'd all industry to free themselves
and their soldiers of all pains and fear, in their skirmishes, not
killing, but taking one another prisoners, and without ransome for their
freedom; they repaired not all to their tents by night, nor made
palizado or trench thereabout, nor lay in the field in the summer: and
all these things were thus contrived and agreed of among them in their
military orders, whereby (as is said) to avoid pains and dangers,
insomuch as they have brought Italy into slavery and disgrace.


CHAP. XIII

Of Auxiliary Soldiers, mixt, and native.


The Auxiliary forces, being the other kind of unprofitable armes, are,
when any puissant one is called in, who with his forces comes to assist
and defend thee; such as in these later times did Pope Julius use, who
having seen the evil proof of his mercenary soldiers in the enterprize
of Ferrara, applied himself to the Auxiliaries, and agreed with
Ferdinand King of Spain, that with his Forces he should aid him. These
armes may be profitable and advantagious for themselves; but for him
that calls them in, hurtfull; because in losing, thou art left defeated;
and conquering, thou becomest their prisoner. And however that of these
examples the ancient stories are full fraught; yet will I not part from
this of Pope Julius the second, which is as yet fresh: whose course
could not have been more inconsiderate, for the desire he had to get
Ferrara, putting himself wholly into strangers hands: but his good
fortune caused another cause to arise, that hindred him from receiving
the fruit of his evil choice; for his Auxiliaries being broken at
Ravenna, and the Swissers thereupon arriving, who put the Conquerors to
flight beyond all opinion, even their own and others, he chanced not to
remain his enemies prisoner, they being put to flight, nor prisoner to
his Auxiliaries, having vanquished by other forces than theirs. The
Florentines being wholly disarmed, brought ten thousand French to Pisa
for to take it: by which course they ran more hazzard, than in any time
of their troubles. The Emperor of Constantinople, to oppress his
neighbors, brought into Greece ten thousand Turks, who when the war was
ended, could not be got out thence, which was the beginning of Greeces
servitude under the Infidels. He then that will in no case be able to
overcome, let him serve himself of these armes; for they are much more
dangerous than the mercenaries; for by those thy ruine is more suddenly
executed; for they are all united, and all bent to the obedience of
another. But for the mercenaries to hurt thee, when they have
vanquished, there is no more need of time, and greater occasion, they
not being all united in a body, and being found out and paid by thee,
wherein a third that thou mak'st their head, cannot suddenly gaine so
great authority, that he can endammage thee. In summe, in the
mercenaries their sloth and lazinesse to fight is more dangerous: in the
auxiliaries their valour. Wherefore a wise Prince hath alwayes avoyded
these kind of armes, and betaken himselfe to his owne, and desired
rather to loss with his owne, than conquer with anothers, accounting
that not a true victorie which was gotten with others armes. I will not
doubt to alleadge Cæsar Borgia, and his actions. This Duke entred into
Romania with auxiliarie armes, bringing with him all French souldiers:
but afterwards not accounting those armes secure, bent himselfe to
mercenaries, judging lesse danger to be in those, and tooke in pay the
Orsini and the Vitelli, which afterwards in the proof of them, finding
wavering, unfaithful, and dangerous, he extinguishd, and betook himselfe
to his owne; and it may easily be perceiv'd what difference there is
between the one and the other of these armes, considering the difference
that was between the Dukes reputation, when he had the French men alone,
and when he had the Orsini and Vitelli; but when he remaind with his
own, and stood of himselfe, we shall find it was much augmented: nor
ever was it of grate esteeme, but when every one saw, that he wholly
possessed his owne armes. I thought not to have parted from the Italian
examples of late memory; but that I must not let passe that of Hiero the
Siracusan, being one of those I formerly nam'd. This man (as I said
before) being made general of the Siracusans forces, knew presently that
mercenary souldiery was nothing for their profit in that they were
hirelings, as our Italians are; and finding no way either to hold, or
cashier them made them all bee cut to peeces, and afterwards waged warre
with his owne men, and none others. I will also call to memory a figure
of the old Testament serving just to this purpose. When David presented
himselfe before Saul to goe to fight with Goliah the Philistins
Champion, Saul to encourage him, clad him with his owne armes, which
David when he had them upon back, refused, saying, he was not able to
make any proofe of himself therein, and therefore would goe meet the
enemy with his own sling and sword. In summe, others armes either fall
from thy shoulders, or cumber or streighten thee. Charls the seventh,
Father of Lewis the eleventh, having by his good fortune and valour set
France at liberty from the English, knew well this necessity of being
arm'd with his owne armes, and settled in his Kingdome the ordinances of
men at armes, and infantry. Afterwards King Lewis his sonne abolisht
those of the infantry, and began to take the Swissers to pay; which
errour follow'd by the others, is (as now indeed it appeares) the cause
of that Kingdomes dangers. For having given reputation to the Swissers,
they have renderd all their own armes contemptible; for this hath wholly
ruind their foot, and oblig'd their men at armes to forrein armes: for
being accustomed to serve with the Swissers, they think they are not
able to overcome without them. From whence it comes that the French are
not of force against the Swissers, and without them also against others
they use not to adventure. Therefore are the French armies mixt, part
mercenaries, and part natives, which armes are farre better than the
simple mercenaries or simple auxiliaries, and much inferiour to the
natives; and let the said example suffice for that: for the Kingdome of
France would have been unconquerable, if Charles his order had been
augmented and maintaind: but men in their small wisdome begin a thing,
which then because it hath some favour of good, discovers not the poyson
that lurkes thereunder, as I before said of the hectick feavers.
Wherefore that Prince which perceives not mischiefes, but as they grow
up, is not truely wise; and this is given but to few: and if we consider
the first ruine of the Romane Empire, we shall find it was from taking
the Goths first into their pay; for from that beginning the forces of
the Romane Empire began to grow weak, and all the valour that was taken
hence was given to them. I conclude then that without having armes of
their owne, no Principality can be secure, or rather is wholly oblig'd
to fortune, not having valour to shelter it in adversity. And it was
alwayes the opinion and saying of wise men, that nothing is so weak and
unsetled, as is the reputation of power not founded upon ones owne
proper forces: which are those that are composed of thy subjects, or
Citizens, or servants; all the rest are mercenary or auxiliary; and the
manner how to order those well, is easie to find out, if those orders
above nam'd by me, shall be but run over, and if it shall be but
consider'd, how Philip Alexander the Great his Father, and in what
manner many Republicks and Princes have armd and appointed themselves,
to which appointments I referre my selfe wholly.


CHAP. XIV

What belongs to the Prince touching military Discipline.


A prince then ought to have no other ayme, nor other thought, nor take
any thing else for his proper art, but warr, and the orders and
discipline thereof: for that is the sole arte which belongs to him that
commands, and is of so great excellency, that not only those that are
borne Princes, it maintains so; but many times raises men from a private
fortune to that dignity. And it is seene by the contrary, that when
Princes have given themselves more to their delights, than to the
warres, they have lost their States; and the first cause that makes thee
lose it, is the neglect of that arte; and the cause that makes thee
gaine it, is that thou art experienc'd and approvd in that arte. Francis
Sforza by being a man at armes, of a private man became Duke of Milan;
and his sons by excusing themselves of the troubles and paines belonging
to those imployments of Princes, became private men. For among other
mischiefes thy neglect of armes brings upon thee, it causes thee to be
contemnd, which is one of those disgraces, from which a Prince ought to
keepe himselfe, as hereafter shall be sayd: for from one that is disarmd
to one that is armd there is no proportion; and reason will not, that he
who is in armes, should willingly yeeld obedience to him that is
unfurnishd of them, and that he that is disarmd should be in security
among his armed vassalls; for there being disdaine in the one, and
suspicion in the other, it is impossible these should ever well
cooperate. And therefore a Prince who is quite unexperienced in matter
of warre, besides the other infelicities belonging to him, as is said,
cannot be had in any esteeme among his souldiers, nor yet trust in them.
Wherefore he ought never to neglect the practice of the arte of warre,
and in time of peace should he exercise it more than in the warre; which
he may be able to doe two wayes; the one practically, and in his labours
and recreations of his body, the other theoretically. And touching the
practick part, he ought besides the keeping of his own subjects well
traind up in the discipline and exercise of armes, give himselfe much to
the chase, whereby to accustome his body to paines, and partly to
understand the manner of situations, and to know how the mountaines
arise, which way the vallyes open themselves, and how the plaines are
distended flat abroad, and to conceive well the nature of the rivers,
and marrish ground, and herein to bestow very much care, which knowledge
is profitable in two kinds: first he learnes thereby to know his own
countrey, and is the better enabled to understand the defence thereof,
and afterwards by meanes of this knowledge and experience in these
situations, easily comprehends any other situation, which a new he hath
need to view, for the little hillocks, vallies, plaines, rivers, and
marrish places. For example, they in Tuscany are like unto those of
other countries: so that from the knowledge of the site of one country,
it is easie to attain to know that of others. And that Prince that wants
this skill, failes of the principall part a Commander should be furnisht
with; for this shows the way how to discover the enemy, to pitch the
camp, to lead their armies, to order their battells, and also to besiege
a town at thy best advantage, Philopomenes Prince of the Achayans, among
other praises Writers give him, they say, that in time of peace, he
thought not upon any thing so much as the practise of warre; and
whensoever he was abroad in the field to disport himselfe with his
friends, would often stand still, and discourse with them, in case the
enemies were upon the top of that hill, and we here with our army,
whether of us two should have the advantage, and how might we safely goe
to find them, keeping still our orders; and if we would retire our
selves, what course should we take if they retir'd, how should we follow
them? and thus on the way, propounded them all such accidents could
befall in any army; would heare their opinions, and tell his owne, and
confirme it by argument; so that by his continuall thought hereupon,
when ever he led any army no chance could happen, for which he had not a
remedy. But touching the exercise of the mind, a Prince ought to read
Histories, and in them consider the actions of the worthiest men, marke
how they have behav'd themselves in the warrs, examine the occasions of
their victories, and their losses; wherby they may be able to avoyd
these, and obtaine those; and above all, doe as formerly some excellent
man hath done, who hath taken upon him to imitate, if any one that hath
gone before him hath left his memory glorious; the course he took, and
kept alwaies near unto him the remembrances of his actions and worthy
deeds: as it is said, that Alexander the great imitated Achilles; Cæsar
Alexander, and Scipio Cyrus. And whoever reads the life of Cyrus,
written by Xenophon, may easily perceive afterwards in Scipio's life how
much glory his imitation gaind him, and how much Scipio did conforme
himselfe in his chastity, affability, humanity, and liberality with
those things, that are written by Xenophon of Cyrus. Such like wayes
ought a wise Prince to take, nor ever be idle in quiet times, but by his
paines then, as it were provide himself of store, whereof he may make
some use in his adversity, the end that when the times change, he may be
able to resist the stormes of his hard fortune.


CHAP. XV

Of those things, in respect whereof, men, and especially Princes, are
praised, or dispraised.


It now remaines that we consider what the conditions of a Prince ought
to be, and his termes of government over his subjects, and towards his
friends. And because I know that many have written hereupon; I doubt,
lest I venturing also to treat thereof, may be branded with presumption,
especially seeing I am like enough to deliver an opinion different from
others. But my intent being to write for the advantage of him that
understands me, I thought it fitter to follow the effectuall truth of
the matter, than the imagination thereof; And many Principalities and
Republiques, have been in imagination, which neither have been seen nor
knowne to be indeed: for there is such a distance between how men doe
live, and how men ought to live; that he who leaves that which is done,
for that which ought to be done, learnes sooner his ruine than his
preservation; for that man who will professe honesty in all his actions,
must needs goe to ruine among so many that are dishonest. Whereupon it
is necessary for a Prince, desiring to preserve himselfe, to be able to
make use of that honestie, and to lay it aside againe, as need shall
require. Passing by then things that are only in imagination belonging
to a Prince, to discourse upon those that are really true; I say that
all men, whensoever mention is made of them, and especially Princes,
because they are placed aloft in the view of all, are taken notice of
for some of these qualities, which procure them either commendations or
blame: and this is that some one is held liberal, some miserable,
(miserable I say, nor covetous; for the covetous desire to have, though
it were by rapine; but a miserable man is he, that too much for bears to
make use of his owne) some free givers, others extortioners; some
cruell, others pitious; the one a Leaguebreaker, another faithfull; the
one effeminate and of small courage, the other fierce and couragious;
the one courteous, the other proud; the one lascivious, the other
chaste; the one of faire dealing, the other wily and crafty; the one
hard, the other easie; the one grave, the other light; the one
religious, the other incredulous, and such like. I know that every one
will confesse, it were exceedingly praise worthy for a Prince to be
adorned with all these above nam'd qualities that are good: but because
this is not possible, nor doe humane conditions admit such perfection in
vertues, it is necessary for him to be so discret, that he know how to
avoid the infamie of those vices which would thrust him out of his
State; and if it be possible, beware of those also which are not able to
remove him thence; but where it cannot be, let them passe with lesse
regard. And yet, let him not stand much upon it, though he incurre the
infamie of those vices, without which he can very hardly save his State:
for if all be throughly considerd, some thing we shall find which will
have the colour and very face of Vertue, and following them, they will
lead the to thy destruction; whereas some others that shall as much
seeme vice, if we take the course they lead us, shall discover unto us
the way to our safety and well-being.

    The second blemish in this our Authours book, I find in his
    fifteenth Chapter: where he instructs his Prince to use such an
    ambidexterity as that he may serve himselfe either of vertue, or
    vice, according to his advantage, which in true pollicy is
    neither good in attaining the Principality nor in securing it
    when it is attaind. For Politicks, presuppose Ethiques, which
    will never allow this rule: as that a man might make this small
    difference between vertue, and vice, that he may indifferently
    lay aside, or take up the one or the other, and put it in
    practise as best conduceth to the end he propounds himselfe. I
    doubt our Authour would have blamd Davids regard to Saul when 1
    Sam. 24. in the cave he cut off the lap of Sauls garment, and
    spared his head; and afterwards in the 26. when he forbad
    Abishai to strike him as he lay sleeping. Worthy of a Princes
    consideration is that saying of Abigal to David 1 Sam. 25. 30.

    'It shall come to passe when the Lord shall have done to my Lord
    according to all that he hath spoken concerning thee, and shall
    have appointed thee Ruler over Israel, that this shall be no
    grief to thee, nor offence of heart unto my Lord, that thou hast
    forborne to shed blood, etc.'

    For surely the conscience of this evill ground whereupon they
    have either built, or underpropped their tyranny, causes men, as
    well _metus_ as _spes in longum projicere_, which sets them a
    work on further mischiefe.


CHAP. XVI

Of Liberality, and Miserablenesse.


Beginning then at the first of the above mentioned qualities, I say that
it would be very well to be accounted liberall: neverthelesse,
liberality used in such a manner, as to make thee be accounted so,
wrongs thee: for in case it be used vertuously, and as it ought to be,
it shall never come to be taken notice of, so as to free thee from the
infamie of its contrary. And therefore for one to hold the name of
liberal among men, it were needfull not to omit any sumptuous quality,
insomuch that a Prince alwayes so dispos'd, shall waste all his
revenues, and at the end shall be forc'd, if he will still maintaine
that reputation of liberality, heavily to burthen his subjects, and
become a great exactour; and put in practise all those things that can
be done to get mony: Which begins to make him hatefull to his subjects,
and fall into every ones contempt, growing necessitous: so that having
with this liberality wrong'd many, and imparted of his bounty but to a
few; he feels every first mischance, and runs a hazard of every first
danger: Which he knowing, and desiring to withdraw himself from, incurs
presently the disgrace of being termed miserable. A Prince therefore not
being able to use this vertue of liberality, without his own damage, in
such a sort, that it may be taken notice of, ought, if he be wise, not
to regard the name of Miserable; for in time he shall alwaies be
esteemed the more liberal, seeing that by his parsimony his own revenues
are sufficient for him; as also he can defend himself against whoever
makes war against him, and can do some exploits without grieving his
subjects: so that he comes to use his liberality to all those, from whom
he takes nothing, who are infinite in number; and his miserableness
towards those to whom he gives nothing, who are but a few. In our dayes
we have not seen any, but those who have been held miserable, do any
great matters; but the others all quite ruin'd. Pope Julius the second,
however he serv'd himself of the name of Liberal, to get the Papacy, yet
never intended he to continue it, to the end he might be able to make
war against the King of France: and he made so many wars without
imposing any extraordinary tax, because his long thrift supplyed his
large expences. This present King of Spain could never have undertaken,
nor gone through with so many exploits, had he been accounted liberal.
Wherefore a Prince ought little to regard (that he may not be driven to
pillage his subjects, that he may be able to defend himself, that he may
not fall into poverty and contempt, that he be not forced to become an
extortioner) though he incurre the name of miserable; for this is one of
those vices, which does not pluck him from his throne. And if any one
should say, Cæsar by his liberality obtained the Empire, and many others
(because they both were, and were esteemd liberal) attaind to exceeding
great dignities. I answer, either thou art already come to be a Prince,
or thou art in the way to it; in the first case, this liberality is
hurtful; in the second, it is necessary to be accounted so; and Cæsar
was one of those that aspired to the Principality of Rome. But if after
he had gotten it, he had survived, and not forborne those expences, he
would quite have ruined that Empire. And if any one should reply; many
have been Princes, and with their armies have done great exploits, who
have been held very liberal. I answer, either the Prince spends of his
own and his subjects, or that which belongs to others: in the first, he
ought to be sparing; in the second, he should not omit any part of
liberality. And that Prince that goes abroad with his army, and feeds
upon prey, and spoyle, and tributes, and hath the disposing of that
which belongs to others, necessarily should use this liberality;
otherwise would his soldiers never follow him; and of that which is
neither thine, nor thy subjects, thou mayest well be a free giver, as
were Cyrus, Cæsar and Alexander; for the spending of that which is
anothers, takes not away thy reputation, but rather adds to it, only the
wasting of that which is thine own hurts thee; nor is there any thing
consumes itself so much as liberality, which whilest thou usest, thou
losest the means to make use of it, and becomest poore and abject; or to
avoid this poverty, an extortioner and hatefull person. And among all
those things which a Prince ought to beware of is, to be dispised, and
odious; to one and the other of which, liberality brings thee. Wherefore
there is more discretion to hold the stile of Miserable, which begets an
infamy without hatred, than to desire that of Liberal, whereby to
incurre the necessity of being thought an extortioner, which procures an
infamy with hatred.


CHAP. XVII

Of Cruelty, and Clemency, and whether it is better to be belov'd, or
feard.


Descending afterwards unto the other fore-alledged qualities, I say,
that every Prince should desire to be held pitiful, and not cruel.
Nevertheless ought he beware that he ill uses not this pitty. Cæsar
Borgia was accounted cruel, yet had his cruelty redrest the disorders in
Romania, setled it in union, and restored it to peace, and fidelity:
which, if it be well weighed, we shall see was an act of more pitty,
than that of the people of Florence, who to avoyd the terme of cruelty,
suffered Pistoya to fall to destruction. Wherefore a Prince ought not to
regard the infamy of cruelty, for to hold his subjects united and
faithfull: for by giving a very few proofes of himself the other way, he
shall be held more pittiful than they, who through their too much pitty,
suffer disorders to follow, from whence arise murthers and rapines: for
these are wont to hurt an intire universality, whereas the executions
practised by a Prince, hurt only some particular. And among all sorts of
Princes, it is impossible for a new Prince to avoyd the name of cruel,
because all new States are full of dangers: whereupon Virgil by the
mouth of Dido excuses the inhumanity of her Kingdom, saying,

  _Res dura et Regni novitas me talia cogunt
  Moliri et latè fines custode tenere._

  My hard plight and new State force me to guard
  My confines all about with watch and ward.

Nevertheless ought he to be judicious in his giving belief to any thing,
or moving himself thereat, nor make his people extreamly afraid of him;
but proceed in a moderate way with wisdome, and humanity, that his too
much confidence make him not unwary, and his too much distrust
intolerable; from hence arises a dispute, whether it is better to be
belov'd or feard: I answer, a man would wish he might be the one and the
other: but because hardly can they subsist both together, it is much
safer to be feard, than be loved; being that one of the two must needs
fail; for touching men, we may say this in general, they are unthankful,
unconstant, dissemblers, they avoyd dangers, and are covetous of gain;
and whilest thou doest them good, they are wholly thine; their blood,
their fortunes, lives and children are at thy service, as is said
before, when the danger is remote; but when it approaches, they revolt.
And that Prince who wholly relies upon their words, unfurnished of all
other preparations, goes to wrack: for the friendships that are gotten
with rewards, and not by the magnificence and worth of the mind, are
dearly bought indeed; but they will neither keep long, nor serve well in
time of need: and men do less regard to offend one that is supported by
love, than by fear. For love is held by a certainty of obligation, which
because men are mischievous, is broken upon any occasion of their own
profit. But fear restrains with a dread of punishment which never
forsakes a man. Yet ought a Prince cause himself to be belov'd in such a
manner, that if he gains not love, he may avoid hatred: for it may well
stand together, that a man may be feard and not hated; which shall never
fail, if he abstain from his subjects goods, and their wives; and
whensoever he should be forc'd to proceed against any of their lives, do
it when it is to be done upon a just cause, and apparent conviction; but
above all things forbeare to lay his hands on other mens goods; for men
forget sooner the death of their father, than the loss of their
patrimony. Moreover the occasions of taking from men their goods, do
never fail: and alwaies he that begins to live by rapine, finds occasion
to lay hold upon other mens goods: but against mens lives, they are
seldome found, and sooner fail. But where a Prince is abroad in the
field with his army, and hath a multitude of soldiers under his
government, then is it necessary that he stands not much upon it, though
he be termed cruel: for unless he be so, he shall never have his
soldiers live in accord one with another, nor ever well disposed to any
brave piece of service. Among Hannibals actions of mervail, this is
reckoned for one, that having a very huge army, gathered out of several
nations, and all led to serve in a strange countrey, there was never any
dissention neither amongst themselves, nor against their General, as
well in their bad fortune as their good. Which could not proceed from
any thing else than from that barbarous cruelty of his, which together
with his exceeding many vertues, rendred him to his soldiers both
venerable and terrible; without which, to that effect his other vertues
had served him to little purpose: and some writers though not of the
best advised, on one side admire these his worthy actions, and on the
otherside, condemn the principal causes thereof. And that it is true,
that his other vertues would not have suffic'd him, we may consider in
Scipio, the rarest man not only in the dayes he liv'd, but even in the
memory of man; from whom his army rebel'd in Spain: which grew only upon
his too much clemency, which had given way to his soldiers to become
more licentious, than was well tollerable by military discipline: for
which he was reprov'd by Fabius Maximus in the Senate, who termed him
the corrupter of the Roman soldiery. The Locrensians having been
destroyed by a Lieutenant of Scipio's, were never reveng'd by him, nor
the insolence of that Lieutenant punisht; all this arising from his
easie nature: so that one desiring to excuse him in the Senate, said,
that there were many men knew better how to keep themselves from faults,
than to correct the faults of other men: which disposition of his in
time would have wrong'd Scipio's reputation and glory, had he therewith
continu'd in his commands: but living under the government of the
Senate, this quality of his that would have disgrac'd him not only was
conceal'd, but prov'd to the advancement of his glory. I conclude then,
returning to the purpose of being feard, and belov'd; insomuch as men
love at their own pleasure, and to serve their own turne, and their fear
depends upon the Princes pleasure, every wise Prince ought to ground
upon that which is of himself, and not upon that which is of another:
only this, he ought to use his best wits to avoid hatred, as was said.


CHAP. XVIII

In what manner Princes ought to keep their words.


How commendable in a Prince it is to keep his word, and live with
integrity, not making use of cunning and subtlety, every one knows well:
yet we see by experience in these our dayes, that those Princes have
effected great matters, who have made small reckoning of keeping their
words, and have known by their craft to turne and wind men about, and in
the end, have overcome those who have grounded upon the truth. You must
then know, there are two kinds of combating or fighting; the one by
right of the laws, the other meerly by force. That first way is proper
to men, the other is also common to beasts: but because the first many
times suffices not, there is a necessity to make recourse to the second;
wherefore it behooves a Prince to know how to make good use of that part
which belongs to a beast, as well as that which is proper to a man. This
part hath been covertly shew'd to Princes by ancient writers; who say
that Achilles and many others of those ancient Princes were intrusted to
Chiron the Senator, to be brought up under his discipline: the moral of
this, having for their teacher one that was half a beast and half a man,
was nothing else, but that it was needful for a Prince to understand how
to make his advantage of the one and the other nature, because neither
could subsist without the other. A Prince then being necessitated to
know how to make use of that part belonging to a beast, ought to serve
himself of the conditions of the Fox and the Lion; for the Lion cannot
keep himself from snares, nor the Fox defend himself against the Wolves.
He had need then be a Fox, that he may beware of the snares, and a Lion
that he may scare the wolves. Those that stand wholly upon the Lion,
understand not well themselves. And therefore a wise Prince cannot, nor
ought not keep his faith given when the observance thereof turnes to
disadvantage, and the occasions that made him promise, are past. For if
men were all good, this rule would not be allowable; but being they are
full of mischief, and would not make it good to thee, neither art thou
tyed to keep it with them: nor shall a Prince ever want lawfull
occasions to give colour to this breach. Very many modern examples
hereof might be alledg'd, wherein might be shewed how many peaces
concluded, and how many promises made, have been violated and broken by
the infidelity of Princes; and ordinarily things have best succeeded
with him that hath been nearest the Fox in condition. But it is
necessary to understand how to set a good colour upon this disposition,
and to be able to fain and dissemble throughly; and men are so simple,
and yeeld so much to the present necessities, that he who hath a mind to
deceive, shall alwaies find another that will be deceivd. I will not
conceal any one of the examples that have been of late. Alexander the
sixth, never did any thing else than deceive men, and never meant
otherwise, and alwaies found whom to work upon; yet never was there man
would protest more effectually, nor aver any thing with more solemn
oaths, and observe them less than he; nevertheless, his cousenages all
thriv'd well with him; for he knew how to play this part cunningly.
Therefore is there no necessity for a Prince to be endued with all above
written qualities, but it behooveth well that he seem to be so; or
rather I will boldly say this, that having these qualities, and alwaies
regulating himself by them, they are hurtfull; but seeming to have them,
they are advantageous; as to seem pittiful, faithful, mild, religious,
and of integrity, and indeed to be so; provided withall thou beest of
such a composition, that if need require to use the contrary, thou
canst, and knowest how to apply thy self thereto. And it suffices to
conceive this, that a Prince, and especially a new Prince, cannot
observe all those things, for which men are held good; he being often
forc'd, for the maintenance of his State, to do contrary to his faith,
charity, humanity, and religion: and therefore it behooves him to have a
mind so disposd, as to turne and take the advantage of all winds and
fortunes; and as formerly I said, not forsake the good, while he can;
but to know how to make use of the evil upon necessity. A Prince then
ought to have a special care, that he never let fall any words, but what
are all season'd with the five above written qualities, and let him seem
to him that sees and hears him, all pitty, all faith, all integrity, all
humanity, all religion; nor is there any thing more necessary for him to
seem to have, than this last quality: for all men in general judge
thereof, rather by the sight, than by the touch; for every man may come
to the sight of him, few come to the touch and feeling of him; yvery man
may come to see what thou seemest, few come to perceive and understand
what thou art; and those few dare not oppose the opinion of many, who
have the majesty of State to protect them: And in all mens actions,
especially those of Princes wherein there is no judgement to appeale
unto men, forbeare to give their censures, till the events and ends of
things. Let a Prince therefore take the surest courses he can to
maintain his life and State: the means shall alwaies be thought
honorable, and commended by every one; for the vulgar is over-taken with
the appearance and event of a thing: and for the most part of people,
they are but the vulgar: the others that are but few, take place where
the vulgar have no subsisteance. A Prince there is in these dayes, whom
I shall not do well to name, that preaches nothing else but peace and
faith; but had he kept the one and the other, several times had they
taken from him his state and reputation.

    In the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth Chap, our Author
    descends to particulars, perswading his Prince in his sixteenth
    to such a suppleness of disposition, as that upon occasion he
    can make use either of liberality or miserableness, as need
    shall require. But that of liberality is to last no longer than
    while he is in the way to some designe: which if he well weigh,
    is not really a reward of vertue, how ere it seems; but a bait
    and lure to bring birds to the net. In the seventeenth Chap, he
    treats of clemency and cruelty, neither of which are to be
    exercis'd by him as acts of mercy or justice; but as they may
    serve to advantage his further purposes. And lest the Prince
    should incline too much to clemency, our Author allows rather
    the restraint by fear, than by love. The contrary to which all
    stories shew us. I will say this only, cruelty may cut of the
    power of some, but causes the hatred of all, and gives a will to
    most to take the first occasion offerd for revenge. In the
    eighteenth Chap, our Author discourses how Princes ought to
    govern themselves in keeping their promises made: whereof he
    sayes they ought to make such small reckoning, as that rather
    they should know by their craft how to turne and wind men about,
    whereby to take advantage of all winds and fortunes. To this I
    would oppose that in the fifteenth Psal. v. 5. He that sweareth
    to his neighbor, and disappointeth him not, though it were to
    his own hindrance. It was a King that writ it, and me thinks the
    rule he gave, should well befit both King and Subject: and
    surely this perswades against all taking of advantages. A man
    may reduce all the causes of faith-breaking to three heads. One
    may be, because he that promised, had no intention to keep his
    word; and this is a wicked and malitious way of dealing. A
    second may bee, because hee that promisd, repents of his promise
    made; and that is grounded on unconstancy, and lightness in that
    he would not be well resolved before he entred into covenant.
    The third may be, when it so falls out, that it lyes not in his
    power that made the promise to performe it. In which case a man
    ought to imitate the good debter, who having not wherewithall to
    pay, hides not himself, but presents his person to his creditor,
    willingly suffering imprisonment. The first and second are very
    vitious and unworthy of a Prince: in the third, men might well
    be directed by the examples of those two famous Romans, Regulus
    and Posthumius. I shall close this with the answer of Charles
    the fifth, when he was pressed to break his word with Luther for
    his safe return from Wormes; _Fides rerum promissarum etsi toto
    mundo exulet, tamen apud imperatorem cam consistere oportet_.
    Though truth be banisht out of the whole world, yet should it
    alwaies find harbour in an Emperors breast.

[Sidenote: _Gulielmus Xenocarus_ in vit. Car. Quinti.]


CHAP. XIX

That Princes should take a care, not to incurre contempt or hatred.


But because among the qualities, whereof formerly mention is made, I
have spoken of those of most importance, I will treat of the others more
briefly under these qualityes that a Prince is to beware, as in part is
above-said, and that he fly those things which cause him to be odious or
vile: and when ever he shall avoid this, he shall fully have plaid his
part, and in the other disgraces he shall find no danger at all. There
is nothing makes him so odious, as I said, as his extortion of his
subjects goods, and abuse of their women, from which he ought to
forbear; and so long as he wrongs not his whole people, neither in their
goods, nor honors, they live content, and he hath only to strive with
the Ambition of some few: which many waies and easily too, is
restrain'd. To be held various, light, effeminate, faint-hearted,
unresolv'd, these make him be contemnd and thought base, which a Prince
should shun like rocks, and take a care that in all his actions there
appear magnanimity, courage, gravity, and valor; and that in all the
private affairs of his subjects, he orders it so, that his word stand
irrevocable: and maintain himself in such repute, that no man may think
either to deceive or wind and turn him about: that Prince that gives
such an opinion of himself, is much esteemed, and against him who is so
well esteemed, hardly are any conspiracies made by his subjects, or by
forreiners any invasion, when once notice is taken of his worth, and how
much he is reverenced by his subjects: For a Prince ought to have two
fears, the one from within, in regard of his subjects; the other from
abroad, in regard of his mighty neighbors; from these he defends himself
by good armes and good friends; and alwayes he shall have good friends,
if he have good armes; and all things shall alwaies stand sure at home,
when those abroad are firme, in case some conspiracy have not disturbed
them; and however the forrein matters stand but ticklishly; yet if he
have taken such courses at home, and liv'd as we have prescribed, he
shall never be able (in case he forsake not himself) to resist all
possibility, force and violence, as I said Nabis the Spartan did: but
touching his subjects, even when his affairs abroad are setled, it is to
be fear'd they may conspire privily; from which a Prince sufficiently
secure himself by shunning to be hated or contemned, and keeping himself
in his peoples good opinion, which it is necessary for him to compass,
as formerly we treated at large. And one of the powerfullest remedies a
Prince can have against conspiracies, is, not to be hated nor dispised
by the universality; for alwaies he that conspires, beleeves the Princes
death is acceptable to the subject: but when he thinks it displeases
them, he hath not the heart to venture on such a matter; for the
difficulties that are on the conspirators side, are infinite. By
experience it is plain, that many times plots have been laid, but few of
them have succeeded luckily; for he that conspires, cannot be alone, nor
can he take the company of any, but of those, who he beleeves are
malecontents; and so soon as thou hast discover'd thy self to a
malecontent, thou givest him means to work his own content: for by
revealing thy treason, he may well hope for all manner of favour: so
that seeing his gain certain of one side; and on the other, finding only
doubt and danger, either he had need be a rare friend, or that he be an
exceeding obstinate enemy to the Prince, if he keeps his word with thee.
And to reduce this matter into short termes: I say, there is nothing but
jealousie, fear, and suspect of punishment on the conspirators part to
affright him; but on the Princes part, there is the majesty of the
principality, the laws, the defences of his friends and the State, which
do so guard him, that to all these things the peoples good wills being
added, it is unpossible any one should be so head-strong as to conspire;
for ordinarily where a traytor is to feare before the execution of his
mischiefe, in this case he is also to feare afterwards, having the
people for his enemy when the fact is commited, and therefore for this
cause, not being able to hope for any refuge. Touching this matter, many
examples might be brought; but I will content my selfe to name one which
fell out in the memory of our Fathers. Annibal Bentivolii, grand Father
of this Annibal who now lives, that was Prince in Bolonia, being slaine
by the Canneschi that conspir'd against him, none of his race being
left, but this John, who was then in swadling clouts; presently the
people rose upon this murder, and slew all the Canneschi which proceeded
from the popular affection, which the family of the Bentivolii held then
in Bolonia: which was so great, that being there remain'd not any, now
Anniball was dead, that was able to manage the State; and having notice
that in Florence there was one borne of the Bentivolii, who till then
was taken for a Smiths sonne: the citizens of Bolonia went to Florence
for him, and gave the government of their City to him, which was rul'd
by him, untill John was of fit yeares to governe. I conclude then, that
a Prince ought to make small account of treasons, whiles he hath the
people to friend: but if they be his enemies and hate him, he may well
feare every thing, and every one. And well ordered States, and discreet
Princes have taken care withall diligence, not to cause their great men
to fall into desperation, and to content the people, and so to maintaine
them: for this is one of the most important businesses belonging to a
Prince. Among the Kingdomes that are well orderd and governd in our
dayes, is that of France, and therein are found exceeding many good
orders, whereupon the Kings liberty and security depends: of which the
chiefe is the Parliament, and the authority thereof: for he that founded
that Kingdome, knowing the great mens ambition and insolence; and
judgeing it necessary there should be a bridle to curbe them; and on the
other side knowing the hatred of the Commonalty against the great ones,
grounded upon feare, intending to secure them, would not lay this care
wholly upon the King, but take this trouble from him, which he might
have with the great men, in case he favourd the Commonalty; or with the
Commonalty, in case he favourd the great men; and thereupon set up a
third judge, which was that, to the end it should keep under the great
ones, and favour the meaner sort, without any imputation to the King. It
was not possible to take a better, nor wiser course then this; nor a
surer way to secure the King, and the Kingdome. From whence we may draw
another conclusion worthie of note, that Princes ought to cause others
to take upon them the matters of blame and imputation; and upon
themselves to take only those of grace and favour. Here againe I
conclude, that a Prince ought to make good esteeme of his Nobility; but
not thereby to incur the Commons hatred: It would seeme perhaps to many,
considering the life and death of many Romane Emperours, that they were
examples contrary to my opinion, finding that some have liv'd worthily,
and shewd many rare vertues of the minde, and yet have lost the Empire,
and been put to death by their owne subjects, conspiring against them.
Intending then to answer these objections, I shall discourse upon the
qualities of some Emperours, declaring the occasions of their ruine, not
disagreeing from that which I have alledgd; and part thereof I will
bestow on the consideration of these things, which are worthy to be
noted by him that reads the actions of those times: and it shall suffice
me to take all those Emperours that succeeded in the Empire from Marcus
the Philosopher to Maximinus, who were Mercus and Commodus his sonne,
Pertinax, Julian, Severus, Antonius, Caracalla his sonne, Macrinus,
Heliogabalus, Alexander, and Maximin. And first it is to be noted, that
where in the other Principalities, they are to contend only with the
ambition of the Nobles, and the insolence of the people; the Romane
Emperours had a third difficulty, having to support the cruelty and
covetousnesse of the souldiers, which was so hard a thing, that it
caused the ruine of many, being hard to satisfy the souldiers, and the
people; for the people love their quiet, and therefore affect modest
Princes; and the souldiers love a Prince of a warlike courage, that is
insolent, cruell, and plucking from every one: which things they would
have them exercise upon the people, whereby they might be able to double
their stipends, and satisfie their avarice and cruelty: whence it
proceeds, that those Emperours who either by Nature or by Art, had not
such a reputation, as therewith they could curbe the one and the other,
were alwayes ruind: and the most of them, specially those who as new men
came to the principality, finding the difficulty of those two different
humours, applyed themselves to content the souldiers, making small
account of wronging the people, which was a course then necessary; for
the Princes not being able to escape the hatred of every one, ought
first endeavour that they incurre not the hatred of any whole
universality; and when they cannot attaine thereunto, they are to
provide with all industry, to avoyd the hatred of those universalities
that are the most mighty. And therefore those Emperors, who because they
were but newly call'd to the Empire, had need of extraordinary favours,
more willingly stuck to the soldiers, than to the people; which
neverthelesse turnd to their advantage, or otherwise, according as that
Prince knew how to maintaine his repute with them. From these causes
aforesayd proceeded it, that Marcus Pertinax, and Alexander, though all
living modestly, being lovers of justice, and enemies of cruelty,
courteous and bountifull, had all from Marcus on ward, miserable ends;
Marcus only liv'd and dy'd exceedingly honoured: for he came to the
Empire by inheritance, and was not to acknowledge it either from the
soldiers, nor from the people: afterwards being accompanyed with many
vertues, which made him venerable, he held alwayes whilst he liv'd the
one and the other order within their limits, and was never either hated,
or contemnd. But Pertinax was created Emperour against the soldiers
wills, who being accustomed to live licentiously under Commodus, could
not endure that honest course that Pertinax sought to reduce them to:
Whereupon having gotten himself hatred, and to this hatred added
contempt, in that he was old, was ruind in the very beginning of his
government. Whence it ought to be observed, that hatred is gaind as well
by good deeds as bad; and therefore as I formerly said, when a Prince
would maintaine the State, he is often forced not to be good: for when
that generality, whether it be the people, or soldiers, or Nobility,
whereof thou thinkst thou standst in need to maintain thee, is
corrupted, it behoves thee to follow their humour, and content them, and
then all good deeds are thy adversaries. But let us come to Alexander
who was of that goodnesse, that among the prayses given him, had this
for one, that in fourteen yeers wherein he held the Empire, he never put
any man to death, but by course of justice; neverthelesse being held
effeminate, and a man that suffered himselfe to be ruled by his mother,
and thereupon fallen into contempt, the army conspird against him. Now
on the contrary discoursing upon the qualities of Commodus, Severus,
Antonius, Caracalla, and Maximinus, you shall find them exceeding
cruell, and ravinous, who to satisfie their soldiers, forbeare no kinde
of injury that could be done upon the people; and all of them, except
Severus, came to evill ends: for in Severus, there was such
extraordinary valour, that while he held the soldiers his freinds,
however the people were much burthend by him, he might alwayes reigne
happily: for his valour rendred him so admirable in the souldiers and
peoples sights; that these in a manner stood amazd and astonishd, and
those others reverencing and honoring him. And because the actions of
this man were exceeding great, being in a new Prince, I will briefly
shew how well he knew to act the Foxes and the Lions parts; the
conditions of which two, I say, as before, are very necessary for a
Prince to imitate. Severus having had experience of Julian the Emperours
sloth, perswaded his army (whereof he was commander in Sclavonia) that
they should doe well to goe to Rome to revenge Pertinax his death, who
was put to death by the Imperiall guard; and under this pretence, not
making any shew that he aspird unto the Empire, set his army in march
directly towards Rome, and was sooner come into Italy, than it was
knowne he had mov'd from his station. Being ariv'd at Rome, he was by
the Senate chosen Emperour for feare, and Julian slaine. After this
beginning, two difficulties yet remaind to Severus, before he could make
himselfe Lord of the whole State; the one in Asia, where Niger the
Generall of those armies had gotten the title of Emperour, the other in
the West with Albinus, who also aspird to the Empire: and because he
thought there might be some danger to discover himselfe enemy to them
both, he purposed to set upon Niger, and cozen Albinus, to whom he writ,
that being elected Emperour by the Senate, he would willingly
communicate it with him; and thereupon sent him the title of Cæsar, and
by resolution of the Senate, tooke him to him for his Colleague; which
things were taken by Albinus in true meaning. But afterwards when
Severus had overcome and slaine Niger, and pacified the affaires and in
the East, being returned to Rome, he complaind in the Senate of Albinus,
how little weighing the benefits received from him, he had sought to
slay him by treason, and therefore was he forc'd to goe punish his
ingratitude: afterwards he went into France, where he bereft him both of
his State and life, whoever then shall in particular examine his
actions, shall finde he was a very cruell Lion, and as crafty a Fox: and
shall see that he was alwayes feard and reverenc'd by every one, and by
the armies not hated; and shall nothing marvell that he being a new man,
was able to hold together such a great Empire: for his extraordinary
reputation defended him alwayes from that hatred, which the people for
his extortions might have conceiv'd against him. But Antonius his sonne,
was also an exceeding brave man, and endued with most excellent
qualities, which causd him to be admird by the people, and acceptable to
the souldiers, because he was a warlike man, enduring all kind of
travell and paines, despising all delicate food, and all kinde of
effeminacy, which gaind him the love of all the armies: neverthelesse
his fiercenesse and cruelty were such, and so hideous, having upon many
particular occasions put to death a great part of the people of Rome,
and all those of Alexandria, that he grew odious to the world, and began
to be feard by those also that were neare about him; so that he was
slaine by a Centurion in the very midst of his army. Where it is to be
noted, that these kinde of deaths, which follow upon the deliberation of
a resolv'd and obstinate minde, cannot by a Prince be avoyded: for every
one that feares not to dye, is able to doe it; but a Prince ought to be
lesse afraid of it because it very seldome falls out. Only should he
beware not to doe any extreame injury to any of those of whom he serves
himself, or that he hath near about him in any imployment of his
Principality, as Antonius did: who had reproachfully slaine a brother of
that Centurion; also threatned him every day, and neverthelesse
entertaind him still as one of the guards of his body, which was a rash
course taken, and the way to destruction, as befell him. But let us come
to Commodus for whom it was very easie to hold the Empire, by reason it
descended upon him by inheritance, being Marcus his sonne, and it had
been enough for him to follow his fathers footsteps, and then had he
contented both the people and the soldiers: but being of a cruell and
savage disposition, whereby to exercise his actions upon the people, he
gave himselfe to entertaine armies, and those in all licentiousnesse. On
the other part not maintaining his dignity, but often descending upon
the stages to combate with fencers, and doing such other like base
things, little worthy of the Imperiall majesty, he became contemptible
in the soldiers sight; and being hated of one part, and despisd of the
other, he was conspird against, and slaine. It remaines now, that we
declare Maximinus his conditions, who was a very warlike man; and the
armies loathing Alexanders effeminacy, whereof I spake before, when they
had slain him, chose this man Emperour, who not long continued so,
because two things there were that brought him into hatred and contempt;
the one because he was very base, having kept cattell in Thrace, which
was well knowne to every one, and made them to scorne him; the other,
because in the beginning of his Principality having delayd to goe to
Rome, and enter into possession of the Imperiall throne, he had gaind
the infamy of being thought exceeding cruell, having by his Prefects in
Rome, and in every place of the Empire, exercisd many cruelties,
insomuch that the whole world being provok'd against him to contempt for
the basenesse of his blood; on the other side upon the hatred conceiv'd
against him for feare of his crulty; first Affrica, afterwards the
Senate, with all the people of Rome and all Italy, conspired against
him, with whom his own army took part; which incamping before Aquileya,
and finding some difficulty to take the town, being weary of his
cruelties, and because they saw he had so many enemies, fearing him the
lesse, slew him. I purpose not to say any thing either of Heliogabalus,
Macrinus, or Julian, who because they were throughly base, were sudenly
extinguished: but I will come to the conclusion of this discourse; and I
say, that the Princes of our times have lesse of this difficulty to
satisfie the Soldiers extraordinarily in their government; for
notwithstanding that there be some considerations to be had of them, yet
presently are those armies dissolved, because none of these Princes do
use to maintaine any armies together, which are annex'd and inveterated
with the governments of the provinces, as were the armies of the Romane
Empire. And therefore if then it was necessary rather to content the
soldiers than the people, it was because the soldiers were more
powerfull than the people: now is it more necessary for all Princes,
(except the Turk and the Souldan) to satisfie their people than their
soldiers, because the people are more mighty than they; wherein I except
the Turk, he alwayes maintaining about his person 12000 foot, and 15000
horse, upon which depends the safety and strength of his Kingdome; and
it is necessary that laying aside all other regard of his people, he
maintaine these his friends. The Souldans Kingdome is like hereunto,
which being wholy in the souldiers power, he must also without respect
of his people keep them his friends. And you are to consider, that this
State of the Souldans differs much from all the other Principalities:
For it is very like the Papacy, which cannot be termd an hereditary
Principality: nor a new Principality: for the sons of the deceasd Prince
are not heires and Lords thereof, but he that is chosen receives that
dignity from those who have the authority in them. And this order being
of antiquity, cannot be termd a new Principality, because therein are
none of those difficulties that are in new ones: for though the Prince
be new, yet are the orders of that state ancient, and ordaind to receive
him, as if he were their hereditary Prince. But let us returne to our
matter; whosoever shall consider our discourse before, shall perceive
that either hatred, or contempt have caus'd the ruine of the afore-named
Emperors; and shall know also, from it came that part of them proceeding
one way, and part a contrary; yet in any of them the one had a happy
success, and the others unhappy: for it was of no availe, but rather
hurtful for Pertinax and Alexander, because they were new Princes, to
desire to imitate Marcus, who by inheritance came to the Principality:
and in like manner it was a wrong to Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximus,
to imitate Severus, because none of them were endued with so great valor
as to follow his steps therein. Wherefore a new Prince in his
Principality cannot well imitate Marcus his actions; nor yet is it
necessary to follow those of Severus: but he ought make choyce of those
parts in Severus which are necessary for the founding of a State; and to
take from Marcus those that are fit and glorious to preserve a State
which is already established and setled.


CHAP. XX

Whether the Citadels and many other things which Princes often make use
of, are profitable or dammageable.


Some Princes, whereby they might safely keep their State, have disarmed
their subjects; some others have held the towns under their dominion,
divided into factions; others have maintain'd enmities against
themselves; others have appli'd themselves to gain them, where they have
suspected at their entrance into the government; others have built
Fortresses; and others again have ruined and demolished them: and
however that upon all these things, a man cannot well pass a determinate
sentence, unless one comes to the particulars of these States, where
some such like determinations were to be taken; yet I shall speak of
them in so large a manner, as the matter of it self will bear. It was
never then that a new Prince would disarme his own subjects; but rather
when he hath found them disarmed, he hath alwaies arm'd them. For being
belov'd, those armes become thine; those become faithful, which thou
hadst in suspicion; and those which were faithful, are maintaind so; and
thy subjects are made thy partisans; and because all thy subjects cannot
be put in armes, when thou bestowest favors on those thou armest, with
the others thou canst deal more for thy safety; and that difference of
proceeding which they know among them, obliges them to thee; those
others excuse thee, judgeing it necessary that they have deservd more,
who have undergone more danger, and so have greater obligation: but when
thou disarmst them, thou beginst to offend them, that thou distrustest
them, either for cowardise, or small faith; and the one or the other of
those two opinions provokes their hatred against thee; and because thou
canst not stand disarmed, thou must then turn thy self to mercenary
Soldiery, whereof we have formerly spoken what it is, and when it is
good; it can never be so much as to defend thee from powerful enemies,
and suspected subjects; therefore as I have said, a new Prince in a new
Principality hath alwaies ordaind them armes. Of examples to this
purpose, Histories are full. But when a Prince gains a new State, which
as a member he adds to his ancient dominions, then it is necessary to
disarme that State, unless it be those whom thou hast discoverd to have
assisted thee in the conquest thereof; and these also in time and upon
occasions, it is necessary to render delicate and effeminate, and so
order them, that all the arms of thy State be in the hands of thy own
Soldiers, who live in thy ancient State near unto thee. Our ancestors
and they that were accounted Sages, were wont to say that it was
necessary to hold Pistoya in factions, and Pisa with Fortresses; and for
this cause maintaind some towns subject to them in differences, whereby
to hold it more easily. This, at what time Italy was ballanc'd in a
certain manner, might be well done; but mee thinks it cannot now a dayes
be well given for a precept; for I do not beleeve, that divisions made
can do any good; rather it must needs be, that when the enemy approaches
them, Cities divided are presently lost; for alwaies the weaker part
will cleave to the forrein power, and the other not be able to subsist.
The Venetians (as I think) mov'd by the aforesaid reasons, maintaind the
factions of the Guelfes and Gibellins, in their townes; and however they
never suffered them to spill one anothers blood, yet they nourish'd
these differences among them, to the end that the citizens imployd in
these quarrels, should not plot any thing against them: which as it
proved, never serv'd them to any great purpose: for being defeated at
Vayla, presently one of those two factions took courage and seizd upon
their whole State. Therefore such like waies argue the Princes weakness;
for in a strong principality they never will suffer such divisions; for
they shew them some kind of profit in time of peace, being they are able
by means thereof more easily to mannage their subjects: but war comming,
such like orders discover their fallacy. Without doubt, Princes become
great, when they overcome the difficulties and oppositions that are made
against them; and therefore Fortune especially when she hath to make any
new Prince great, who hath more need to gain reputation than an
hereditary Prince, causes enemies to rise against him, and him to
undertake against them: to the end he may have occasion to master them,
and know that ladder, which his enemies have set him upon, whereby to
rise yet higher. And therefore many think, that a wise Prince when he
hath the occasion, ought cunningly to nourish some enmity, that by the
suppressing thereof, his greatness may grow thereupon. Princes,
especially those that are new, have found more faith and profit in those
men, who in the beginning of their State, have been held suspected, than
in those who at their entrance have been their confidents. Pandulphus
Petrucci, Prince of Siena, governd his State, more with them that had
been suspected by him, than with the others. But of this matter we
cannot speak at large, because it varies according to the subject; I
will only say this, that those men, who in the beginning of a
Principality were once enemies, if they be of quality so that to
maintain themselves they have need of support, the Prince might alwaies
with the greatest facility gain for his; and they are the rather forced
to serve him faithfully, insomuch as they know it is more necessary for
them by their deeds to cancel that sinister opinion, which was once held
of them; and so the Prince ever draws from these more advantage, than
from those, who serving him too supinely, neglect his affairs. And seing
the matter requires it, I will not omit to put a Prince in mind, who
hath anew made himself master of a State, by means of the inward helps
he had from thence that he consider well the cause that mov'd them that
favor'd him to favor him, if it be not a natural affection towards him;
for if it be only because they were not content with their former
government, with much pains and difficulties shall he be able to keep
them long his friends, because it will be impossible for him to content
them. By these examples then which are drawn out of ancient and modern
affaires, searching into the cause hereof, we shall find it much more
easie to gain those men for friends, who formerly were contented with
the State, and therefore were his enemies: than those, who because they
were not contented therewith, became his fiends, and favor'd him in
getting the mastery of it. It hath been the custome of Princes, whereby
to hold their States more securely, to build Citadels, which might be
bridles and curbs to those that should purpose any thing against them,
and so to have a secure retreat from the first violences. I commend this
course, because it hath been used of old; notwithstanding Nicholas
Vitelli in our dayes hath been known to demolish two Citadels in the
town of Castello, the better to keep the State; Guidubaldo Duke of Urbin
being to return into his State, out of which he was driven by Cæsar
Borgia, raz'd all the Fortresses of that Countrey, and thought he should
hardlyer lose that State again without them. The Bentivolii returning
into Bolonia, used the like courses. Citadels then are profitable, or
not, according to the times; and if they advantage thee in one part,
they do thee harme in another; and this part may be argued thus. That
Prince who stands more in fear of his own people than of strangers,
ought to build Fortresses: but he that is more afraid of strangers than
of his people, should let them alone. Against the house of Sforza, the
Castle of Milan, which Francis Sforza built, hath and will make more
war, than any other disorder in that State: and therefore the best
Citadel that may be, is not to incurre the peoples hatred; for however
thou holdest a Fortress, and the people hate thee, thou canst hardly
scape them; for people, when once they have taken armes, never want the
help of strangers at their need to take ther parts. In our dayes we
never saw that they ever profited any Prince, unless it were the
Countess of Furli, when Count Hieronymo of Furli her husband was slain;
for by means thereof she escap'd the peoples rage, and attended aid from
Milan, and so recover'd her State: and then such were the times that the
stranger could not assist the people: but afterwards they serv'd her to
little purpose, when Cæsar Borgia assaild her, and that the people which
was her enemy, sided with the stranger. Therefore both then, and at
first, it would have been more for her safety, not to have been odious
to the people, than to have held the Fortresses. These things being well
weigh'd then, I will commend those that shall build up Fortresses, and
him also that shall not; and I will blame him, howsoever he be, that
relying upon those, shall make small account of being hated by his
people.


CHAP. XXI

How a Prince ought to behave himself to gain reputation.


There is nothing gains a Prince such repute as great exploits, and rare
tryals of himself in Heroick actions. We have now in our dayes Ferdinand
King of Arragon the present King of Spain: he in a manner may be termed
a new Prince; for from a very weak King, he is now become for fame and
glory, the first King of Christendome, and if you shall wel consider his
actions, you shall find them all illustrious, and every one of them
extraordinary. He in the beginning of his reign assaild Granada, and
that exploit was the ground of his State. At first he made that war in
security, and without suspicion he should be any waies hindred, and
therein held the Barons of Castiglias minds busied, who thinking upon
that war, never minded any innovation; in this while he gaind credit and
authority with them, they not being aware of it; was able to maintain
with the Church and the peoples money all his soldiers, and to lay a
foundation for his military ordinances with that long war, which
afterwards gaind him exceeding much honor. Besides this, to the end he
might be able hereamong to undertake greater matters, serving himself
alwaies of the colour of religion, he gave himself to a kind of
religious cruelty, chasing and dispoyling those Jewes out of the
Kingdome; nor can this example be more admirable and rare: under the
same cloke he invaded Affrick and went through with his exploit in
Italy: and last of all hath he assaild France, and so alwaies proceeded
on forwards contriving of great matters, which alwaies have held his
subjects minds in peace and admiration, and busied in attending the
event, what it should be: and these his actions have thus grown, one
upon another, that they have never given leisure to men so to rest, as
they might ever plot any thing against them. Moreover it much avails a
Prince to give extraordinary proofes of himself touching the government
within, such as those we have heard of Bernard of Milan, whensoever
occasion is given by any one, that may effectuate some great thing
either of good or evil, in the civil government; and to find out some
way either to reward or punish it, whereof in the world much notice may
be taken. And above all things a Prince ought to endeavor in all his
actions to spread abroad a fame of his magnificence and worthiness. A
Prince also is well esteemed, when he is a true friend, or a true enemy;
when without any regard he discovers himself in favor of one against
another; which course shall be alwaies more profit, than to stand
neuter: for if two mighty ones that are thy neighbors, come to fall out,
or are of such quality, that one of them vanquishing, thou art like to
be in fear of the vanquisher, or not; in either of these two cases, it
will ever prove more for thy profit, to discover thy self, and make a
good war of it: for in the first case, if thou discoverest not thy
selfe, thou shalt alwaies be a prey to him that overcomes, to the
contentment and satisfaction of the vanquisht; neither shalt thou have
reason on thy side, nor any thing else to defend or receive thee. For he
that overcomes, will not have any suspected friends that give him no
assistance in his necessity: and he that loses, receives thee not,
because thou wouldest not with thy armes in hand run the hazzard of his
fortune. Antiochus passed into Greece, thereunto induc'd by the
Etolians, to chace the Romans thence: and sent his Ambassadors to the
Achayans, who were the Romans friends, to perswade them to stand
neuters; on the other side the Romans moved them to joyne armes with
theirs: this matter came to be deliberated on in the council of the
Achayans, where Antiochus his Ambassador encouraged them to stand
neuters, whereunto the Romans Ambassador answerd; Touching the course,
that is commended to you, as best and profitablest for your State, to
wit, not to intermeddle in the war between us, nothing can be more
against you: because, not taking either part, you shall remain without
thanks, and without reputation a prey to the conqueror. And it will
alwaies come to pass that he who is not thy friend, will requite thy
neutrality; and he that is thy friend, will urge thee to discover thy
self by taking arms for him: and evil advised Princes; to avoyd the
present dangers, folow often times that way of neutrality, and most
commonly go to ruine: but when a Prince discovers himself strongly in
favor of a party; if he to whom thou cleavest, overcomes; however that
he be puissant, and thou remainest at his disposing, he is oblig'd to
thee, and there is a contract of friendship made; and men are never so
openly dishonest, as with such a notorious example of dishonesty to
oppress thee. Besides victories are never so prosperous, that the
conqueror is like neglect all respects, and especially of justice. But
if he to whom thou stickst, loses, thou art received by him; and, while
he is able, he aydes thee, and so thou becomest partner of a fortune
that may arise again; the second case, when they that enter into the
lists together, are of such quality, that thou needest not fear him that
vanquisheth, so much the more is it discretion in thee to stick to him;
for thou goest to ruine one with his assistance, who ought to do the
best he could to save him, if he were well advised; and he overcomming,
is left at thy discretion; and it is unpossible but with thy ayd he must
overcome. And here it is to be noted, that a Prince should be well aware
never to joyn with any one more powerfull than himself, to offend
another, unless upon necessity, as formerly is said. For when he
overcomes, thou art left at his discretion, and Princes ought avoid as
much as they are able, to stand at anothers discretion. The Venetians
took part with France against the Duke of Milan, and yet could have
avoided that partaking, from which proceeded their ruine. But when it
cannot be avoyded, as it befel the Florentines when the Pope and the
King of Spain went both with their armies to Lombardy, there the Prince
ought to side with them for the reasons aforesaid. Nor let any State
think they are able to make such sure parties, but rather that they are
all doubtfull; for in the order of things we find it alwaies, that
whensoever a man seeks to avoid one inconvenient, he incurs another. But
the principal point of judgement, is in discerning between the qualities
of inconvenients, and not taking the bad for the good. Moreover a Prince
ought to shew himself a lover of vertue, and that he honors those that
excel in every Art. Afterwards ought he encourage his Citizens, whereby
they may be enabled quickly to exercise their faculties as well in
merchandise, and husbandry, as in any other kind of traffick, to the end
that no man forbear to adorne and cultivate his possessions for fear
that he be despoyled of them; or any other to open the commerce upon the
danger of heavy impositions: but rather to provide rewards for those
that shall set these matters afoot, or for any one else that shall any
way amplifie his City or State. Besides he ought in the fit times of the
year entertain the people with Feasts and Maskes; and because every City
is devided into Companies, and arts, and Tribes, he ought to take
special notice of those bodies, and some times afford them a meeting,
and give them some proof of his humanity, and magnificence; yet withall
holding firme the majestie of his State; for this must never fail in any
case.


CHAP.   XXII

Touching Princes Secretaries.


It is no small importance to a Prince, the choyce he makes, of servants
being ordinarily good or bad, as his wisdome is. And the first
conjecture one gives of a great man, and of his understanding, is, upon
the sight of his followers and servants he hath about him, when they
prove able and faithful, and then may he alwaies be reputed wise because
he hath known how to discern those that are able, and to keep them true
to him. But when they are otherwise, there can be no good conjecture
made of him; for the first error he commits, is in this choyce. There
was no man that had any knowledge of Antonio of Vanafro, the servant of
Pandulfus Petrucci Prince of Sicily, who did not esteem Pandulfus for a
very discreet man, having him for his servant. And because there are
three kinds of understandings; the one that is advised by it self; the
other that understands when it is informed by another; the third that
neither is advised by it self nor by the demonstration of another; the
first is best, the second is good, and the last quite unprofitable.
Therefore it was of necessity, that if Pandulfus attaind not the first
degree, yet he got to the second; for whenever any one hath the
judgement to discerne between the good and the evil, that he does and
sayes, however that he hath not his distinction from himself, yet still
comes he to take notice of the good or evil actions of that servant; and
those he cherishes, and these he suppresses; insomuch that the servant
finding no means to deceive his master, keeps himself upright and
honest. But how a Prince may throughly understand his servant, here is
the way that never fails. When thou seest the servant study more for his
own advantage than thine, and that in all his actions, he searches most
after his own profit; this man thus qualified, shall never prove good
servant, nor canst thou ever relie upon him: for he that holds the
Sterne of the State in hand, ought never call home his cares to his own
particular, but give himself wholly over to his Princes service, nor
ever put him in minde of any thing not appertaining to him. And on the
other side the Prince to keep him good to him, ought to take a care for
his servant, honoring him, enriching, and obliging him to him, giving
him part both of dignities and offices, to the end that the many honors
and much wealth bestowed on him, may restrain his desires from other
honors, and other wealth, and that those many charges cause him to fear
changes that may fall, knowing he is not able to stand without his
master. And when both the Princes and the servants are thus disposed,
they may rely the one upon the other: when otherwise, the end will ever
prove hurtfull for the one as well as for the other.


CHAP. XXIII

That Flatterers are to be avoyded.


I will not omit one principle of great inportance, being an errour from
which Princes with much difficulty defend themselves, unlesse they be
very discreet, and make a very good choice; and this is concerning
flatterers; whereof all writings are full: and that because men please
themselves so much in their own things, and therein cozen themselves,
that very hardly can they escape this pestilence; and desiring to escape
it, there is danger of falling into contempt; for there is no other way
to be secure from flattery, but to let men know, that they displease
thee not in telling thee truth: but when every one hath this leave, thou
losest thy reverence. Therefore ought a wise Prince take a third course,
making choyce of some understanding men in his State, and give only to
them a free liberty of speaking to him the truth; and touching those
things only which he inquires of, and nothing else; but he ought to be
inquisitive of every thing, and hear their opinions, and then afterwards
advise himself after his own manner; and in these deliberations, and
with every one of them so carrie himself, that they all know, that the
more freely they shall speak, the better they shall be liked of: and
besides those, not give eare to any one; and thus pursue the thing
resolved on, and thence continue obstinate in the resolution taken. He
who does otherwise, either falls upon flatterers, or often changes upon
the varying of opinions, from whence proceeds it that men conceive but
slightly of him. To this purpose I will alledge you a moderne example.
Peter Lucas a servant of Maximilians the present Emperor, speaking of
his Majesty, said that he never advised with any body, nor never did any
thing after his own way: which was because he took a contrary course to
what we have now said: for the Emperor is a close man, who communicates
his secrets to none, nor takes counsel of any one; but as they come to
be put in practise, they begin to be discovered and known, and so
contradicted by those that are near about him; and he as being an easy
man, is quickly wrought from them. Whence it comes that what he does to
day, he undoes on the morrow; and that he never understands himself what
he would, nor what he purposes, and that there is no grounding upon any
of his resolutions. A Prince therefore ought alwayes to take counsell,
but at his owne pleasure, and not at other mens; or rather should take
away any mans courage to advise him of any thing, but what he askes: but
he ought well to aske at large, and then touching the things inquird of,
be a patient hearer of the truth; and perceiving that for some respect
the truth were conceald from him, be displeased thereat. And because
some men have thought that a Prince that gaines the opinion to bee wise,
may bee held so, not by his owne naturall indowments, but by the good
counsells he hath about him; without question they are deceivd; for this
is a generall rule and never failes, that a Prince who of himselfe is
not wise, can never be well advised, unlesse he should light upon one
alone, wholly to direct and govern him, who himself were a very wise
man. In this case it is possible he may be well governd: but this would
last but little: for that governor in a short time would deprive him of
his State; but a Prince not having any parts of nature, being advised of
more then one, shall never be able to unite these counsels: of himself
shall he never know how to unite them; and each one of the Counsellers,
probably will follow that which is most properly his owne; and he shall
never find the meanes to amend or discerne these things; nor can they
fall out otherwise, because men alwayes prove mischievous, unlesse upon
some necessity they be forc'd to become good: we conclude therefore,
that counsells from whencesoever they proceed, must needs take their
beginning from the Princes wisdome, and not the wisdome of the Prince
from good counsells.

    In this Chapter our Authour prescribes some rules how to avoyd
    flattery, and not to fall into contempt. The extent of these two
    extreames is so large on both sides, that there is left but a
    very narrow path for the right temper to walke between them
    both: and happy were that Prince, who could light on so good a
    Pilote as to bring him to Port between those rocks and those
    quicksands. Where Majesty becomes familiar, unlesse endued with
    a super-eminent vertue, it loses all awfull regards: as the
    light of the Sunne, because so ordinary, because so common, we
    should little value, were it not that all Creatures feele
    themselves quickned by the rayes thereof. On the other side,
    _Omnis insipiens arrogantiâ et plausibus capitur_, Every foole
    is taken with his owne pride and others flatteryes: and this
    foole keeps company so much with all great wise men, that hardly
    with a candle and lantern can they be discernd betwixt. The
    greatest men are more subject to grosse and palpable flatteries;
    and especially the greatest of men, who are Kings and Princes:
    for many seek the Rulers favour. _Prov._ 28. 26. For there are
    divers meanes whereby private men are instructed; Princes have
    not that good hap: but they whose instruction is of most
    importance, so soone as they have taken the government upon
    them, no longer suffer any reproovers: for but few have accesse
    unto them, and they who familiary converse with them, doe and
    say all for favour. Isocrat, to Nicocles, All are afraid to give
    him occasion of displeasure, though by telling him truth. To
    this purpose therefore sayes one; a Prince excells in learning
    to ride the great horse, rather than in any other exercise,
    because his horse being no flatterer, will shew him he makes no
    difference between him and another man, and unlesse he keepe his
    seate well, will lay him on the ground. This is plaine dealing.
    Men are more subtile, more double-hearted, they have a heart and
    a heart neither is their tongue their hearts true interpreter.
    Counsell in the heart of man is like deepe waters; but a man of
    understanding will draw it out. _Prov._ 20. 5. This
    understanding is most requisite in a Prince, inasmuch as the
    whole Globe is in his hand, and the inferiour Orbes are swayed
    by the motion of the highest. And therefore surely it is the
    honour of a King to search out such a secret: _Prov._ 25. 2. His
    counsellours are his eyes and eares; as they ought to be dear to
    him, so they ought to be true to him, and make him the true
    report of things without disguise. If they prove false eyes, let
    him pluck them out; he may as they use glasse eyes, take them
    forth without paine, and see never a whit the worse for it. The
    wisdome of a Princes Counsellours is a great argument of the
    Princes wisdome. And being the choyce of them imports the
    Princes credit and safety, our Authour will make him amends for
    his other errours by his good advice in his 22 Chap. whether I
    referre him.


CHAP. XXIV

Wherefore the Princes of Italy have lost their States.


When these things above said are well observ'd, they make a new Prince
seeme as if he had been of old, and presently render him more secure and
firme in the State, than if he had already grown ancient therein: for a
new Prince is much more observd in his action, than a Prince by
inheritance; and when they are known to bee vertuous, men are much more
gaind and oblig'd to them thereby, than by the antiquity of their blood:
for men are much more taken by things present, than by things past, and
when in the present they find good, they content themselves therein, and
seeke no further; or rather they undertake the defence of him to their
utmost, when the Prince is not wanting in other matters to himself; and
so shall he gaine double glory to have given a beginning to a new
Principality, adornd, and strengthnd it with good lawes, good arms, good
friends, and good examples; as he shall have double shame, that is born
a Prince, and by reason of his small discretion hath lost it. And if we
shall consider those Lords, that in Italy have lost their States in our
dayes, as the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and others; first we
shall find in them a common defect, touching their armes, for the
reasons which have been above discoursd at length. Afterwards we shall
see some of them, that either shall have had the people for their
enemies; or be it they had the people to friend, could never know how to
assure themselves of the great ones: for without such defects as these,
States are not lost, which have so many nerves, that they are able to
maintaine an army in the feld. Philip of Macedon, not the father of
Alexander the Great, but he that was vanquished by Titus Quintius, had
not much State in regard of the greatnesse of the Romanes and of Greece
that assail'd him; neverthelesse in that he was a warlike man and knew
how to entertaine the people, and assure himself of the Nobles, for many
yeares he made the warre good against them: and though at last some town
perhaps were taken from him, yet the Kingdome remaind in his hands
still. Wherefore these our Princes who for many yeares had continued in
their Principalities, for having afterwards lost them, let them not
blame Fortune, but their own sloth; because they never having thought
during the time of quiet, that they could suffer a change (which is the
common fault of men, while faire weather lasts, not to provide for the
tempest) when afterwards mischiefes came upon them, thought rather upon
flying from them, than upon their defence, and hop'd that the people,
weary of the vanquishers insolence, would recall them: which course when
the others faile, is good: but very ill is it to leave the other
remedies for that: for a man wou'd never go to fall, beleeving another
would come to take him up: which may either not come to passe, or if it
does, it is not for thy security, because that defence of his is vile,
and depends not upon thee; but those defences only are good, certaine,
and durable, which depend upon thy owne selfe, and thy owne vertues.


CHAP. XXV

How great power Fortune hath in humane affaires, and what meanes there
is to resist it.


It is not unknown unto me, how that many have held opinion, and still
hold it, that the affaires of the world are so governd by fortune, and
by God, that men by their wisdome cannot amend or alter them; or rather
that there is no remedy for them: and hereupon they would think that it
were of no availe to take much paines in any thing, but leave all to be
governd by chance. This opinion hath gain'd the more credit in our
dayes, by reason of the great alteration of things, which we have of
late seen, and do every day see, beyond all humane conjecture: upon
which, I sometimes thinking, am in some parte inclind to their opinion:
neverthelesse not to extinguish quite our owne free will, I think it may
be true, that Fortune is the mistrisse of one halfe of our actions; but
yet that she lets us have rule of the other half, or little lesse. And I
liken her to a precipitous torrent, which when it rages, over-flows the
plaines, overthrowes the trees, and buildings, removes the earth from
one side, and laies it on another, every one flyes before it, every one
yeelds to the fury thereof, as unable to withstand it; and yet however
it be thus, when the times are calmer, men are able to make provision
against these excesses, with banks and fences so, that afterwards when
it swels again, it shall all passe smoothly along, within its channell,
or else the violence thereof shall not prove so licentious and hurtfull.
In like manner befals it us with fortune, which there shewes her power
where vertue is not ordeind to resist her, and thither turnes she all
her forces, where she perceives that no provisions nor resistances are
made to uphold her. And if you shall consider Italy, which is the seat
of these changes, and that which hath given them their motions, you
shall see it to be a plaine field, without any trench or bank; which had
it been fenc'd with convenient vertue as was Germany, Spain or France;
this inundation would never have causd these great alterations it hath,
or else would it not have reach'd to us: and this shall suffice to have
said, touching the opposing of fortune in generall. But restraining my
selfe more to particulars, I say that to day we see a Prince prosper and
flourish and to morrow utterly go to ruine; not seeing that he hath
alterd any condition or quality; which I beleeve arises first from the
causes which we have long since run over, that is because that Prince
that relies wholly upon fortune, runnes as her wheele turnes. I beleeve
also, that he proves the fortunate man, whose manner of proceeding meets
with the quality of the time; and so likewise he unfortunate from whose
course of proceeding the times differ: for we see that men, in the
things that induce them to the end, (which every one propounds to
himselfe, as glory and riches) proceed therein diversly; some with
respects, others more bold, and rashly; one with violence, and th'other
with cunning; the one with patience, th'other with its contrary; and
every one of severall wayes may attaine thereto; we see also two very
respective and wary men, the one come to his purpose, and th'other not;
and in like maner two equally prosper, taking divers course; the one
being wary the other head-strong; which proceeds from nothing else, but
from the quality of the times, which agree, or not, with their
proceedings. From hence arises that which I said, that two working
diversly, produce the same effect: and two equaly working, the one
attains his end, the other not. Hereupon depends the alteration of the
good; for if to one that behaves himself with warinesse and patience,
times and affaires turne so favourably, that the carriage of his
businesse prove well, he prospers; but if the times and affaires chance,
he is ruind, because he changes not his manner of proceeding: nor is
there any man so wise, that can frame himselfe hereunto; as well because
he cannot go out of the way, from that whereunto Nature inclines him: as
also, for that one having alwayes prosperd, walking such a way, cannot
be perswaded to leave it; and therefore the respective and wary man,
when it is fit time for him to use violence and force, knows not how to
put it in practice, whereupon he is ruind: but if he could change his
disposition with the times and the affaires, he should not change his
fortune. Pope Julius the second proceeded in all his actions with very
great violence, and found the times and things so conformable to that
his manner of proceeding that in all of them he had happy successe.
Consider the first exploit he did at Bolonia, even while John Bentivolio
lived: the Venetians were not well contented therewith; the King of
Spaine likewise with the French, had treated of that enterprise; and
notwithstanding al this, he stirrd up by his own rage and fiercenesse,
personally undertook that expedition: which action of his put in
suspence and stopt Spaine and the Venetians; those for feare, and the
others for desire to recover the Kingdome of Naples; and on the other
part drew after him the King of France; for that King seeing him already
in motion, and desiring to hold him his friend, whereby to humble the
Venetians, thought he could no way deny him his souldiers, without doing
him an open injury. Julius then effected that with his violent and heady
motion, which no other Pope with all humane wisdome could ever have
done; for if he had expected to part from Rome with his conclusions
settled, and all his affaires ordered before hand, as any other Pope
would have done, he had never brought it to passe: For the King of
France would have devised a thousand excuses, and others would have put
him in as many feares. I will let passe his other actions, for all of
them were alike, and all of them prov'd lucky to him; and the brevity of
his life never sufferd him to feele the contrary: for had he litt upon
such times afterwards, that it had been necessary for him to proceed
with respects, there had been his utter ruine; for he would never have
left those wayes, to which he had been naturally inclind. I conclude
then, fortune varying, and men continuing still obstinate to their own
wayes, prove happy, while these accord together: and as they disagree,
prove unhappy: and I think it true, that it is better to be heady than
wary; because Fortune is a mistresse; and it is necessary, to keep her
in obedience to ruffle and force her: and we see, that she suffers her
self rather to be masterd by those, than by others that proceed coldly.
And therefore, as a mistresse, shee is a friend to young men, because
they are lesse respective, more rough, and command her with more
boldnesse.

    I have considered the 25 Chapter, as representing me a full view
    of humane policy and cunning: yet me thinks it cannot satisfie a
    Christian in the causes of the good and bad successe of things.
    The life of man is like a game at Tables; skill availes much I
    grant, but that's not all: play thy game well, but that will not
    winne: the chance thou throwest must accord with thy play.
    Examine this; play never so surely, play never so probably,
    unlesse the chance thou castest, lead thee forward to advantage,
    all hazards are losses, and thy sure play leaves thee in the
    lurch. The sum of this is set down in Ecclesiastes chap. 9. v.
    11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battell to the strong:
    neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
    understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but time and
    chance hapeneth to them all. Our cunning Author for all his
    exact rules he delivere in his books, could not fence against
    the despight of Fortune, as he complaines in his Epistle to this
    booke. Nor that great example of policy, Duke Valentine, whome
    our Author commends to Princes for his crafts-master, could so
    ruffle or force his mistresse Fortune, that he could keep her in
    obedience. Man can contribute no more to his actions than vertue
    and wisdome: but the successe depends upon a power above. Surely
    there is the finger of god; or as Prov. 16. v. 33. 'The lot is
    cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the
    Lord.' It was not Josephs wisdome made all things thrive under
    his hand; but because the Lord was with him; and that which he
    did, the Lord made it to prosper, Gen. 39. Surely this is a
    blessing proceeding from the divine providence, which beyond
    humane capacity so cooperateth with the causes, as that their
    effects prove answerable, and sometimes (that we may know there
    is something above the ordinary causes) the success returns with
    such a supereminency of worth, that it far exceeds the vertue of
    the ordinary causes.


CHAP. XXVI

An Exhortation to free Italy from the Barbarians.


Having then weighed all things above discours'd, and devising with my
self, whether at this present in Italy the time might serve to honor a
new Prince, and whether there were matter that might minister occasion
to a wise and valorous Prince, to introduce such a forme, that might do
honor to him, and good to the whole generality of the people in the
countrey: me thinks so many things concurre in favor of a new Prince,
that I know not whether there were ever any time more proper for this
purpose. And if as I said, it was necessary, desiring to see Moses his
vertue, that the children of Israel should be inthrald in Ægypt; and to
have experience of the magnanimity of Cyrus his mind, that the Persians
should be oppress'd by the Medes; and to set forth the excellency of
Theseus, that the Athenians should be dispersed; so at this present now
we are desirous to know the valor of an Italian spirit, it were
necessary Italy should be reduc'd to the same termes it is now in, and
were in more slavery than the Hebrews were; more subject than the
Persians, more scatterd than the Athenians; without head, without order,
battered, pillaged, rent asunder, overrun, and had undergone all kind of
destruction. And however even in these later dayes, we have had some
kind of shew of hope in some one, whereby we might have conjectur'd,
that he had been ordained for the deliverance hereof, yet it prov'd
afterwards, that in the very height of all his actions he was curb'd by
fortune, insomuch that this poore countrey remaining as it were without
life, attends still for him that shall heal her wounds, give an end to
all those pillagings and sackings of Lombardy, to those robberies and
taxations of the Kingdome, and of Tuscany, and heal them of their soars,
now this long time gangren'd. We see how she makes her prayers to God,
that he send some one to redeem her from these Barbarous cruelties and
insolencies. We see her also wholly ready and disposed to follow any
colours, provided there be any one take them up. Nor do we see at this
present, that she can look for other, than your Illustrious Family, to
become Cheiftain of this deliverance, which hath now by its own vertue
and Fortune been so much exalted, and favored by God and the Church,
whereof it now holds the Principality: and this shall not be very hard
for you to do, if you shall call to mind the former actions, and lives
of those that are above named. And though those men were very rare and
admirable, yet were they men, and every one of them began upon less
occasion than this; for neither was their enterprize more just than
this, nor more easie; nor was God more their friend, than yours. Here is
very great justice: for that war is just, that is necessary; and those
armes are religious, when there is no hope left otherwhere, but in them.
Here is an exceeding good disposition thereto: nor can there be, where
there is a good disposition, a giant difficulty, provided that use be
made of those orders, which I propounded for aim and direction to you.
Besides this, here we see extraordinary things without example effected
by God; the sea was opened, a cloud guided the way, devotion poured
forth the waters, and it rain'd down Manna; all these things have
concurred in your greatness, the rest is left for you to do. God will
not do every thing himself, that he may not take from us our free will,
and of that glory that belongs to us. Neither is it a marvel, if any of
the aforenamed Italians have not been able to compass that, which we may
hope your illustrious family shall: though in so many revolutions of
Italy, and so many feats of war, it may seem that the whole military
vertue therein be quite extinguisht; for this arises from that the
ancient orders thereof were not good; and there hath since been none
that hath known how to invent new ones. Nothing can so much honor a man
rising anew, as new laws and new ordinances devised by him: these things
when they have a good foundation given them, and contain in them their
due greatness, gain him reverence and admiration; and in Italy their
wants not the matter wherein to introduce any forme. Here is great
vertue in the members, were it not wanting in the heads. Consider in the
single fights that have been, and duels, how much the Italians have
excel'd in their strength, activity and address; but when they come to
armies, they appear not, and all proceeds from the weakness of the
Chieftaines; for they that understand the managing of these matters, are
not obeyed; and every one presumes to understand; hitherto there having
not been any one so highly raised either by fortune or vertue, as that
others would submit unto him. From hence proceeds it, that in so long
time, and in so many battels fought for these last past 20 years, when
there hath been an army wholly Italian, it alwaies hath had evil
success; whereof the river Tarus first was witness, afterwards
Alexandria, Capua, Genua, Vayla, Bolonia, Mestri. Your Illustrious
family then being desirous to tread the footsteps of these Worthyes who
redeem'd their countreys, must above all things as the very foundation
of the whole fabrick, be furnished with soldiers of your own natives:
because you cannot have more faithful, true, nor better soldiers; and
though every one of them be good, all together they will become better
when they shall find themselves entertained, commanded, and honored by
their own Prince. Wherefore it is necessary to provide for those armes,
whereby to be able with the Italian valor to make a defence against
forreiners. And however the Swisse infantry and Spanish be accounted
terrible; yet is there defect in both of them, by which a third order
might not only oppose them, but may be confident to vanquish them: for
the Spaniards are not able to indure the Horse, and the Swisse are to
feare the foot, when they incounter with them, as resolute in the fight
as they; whereupon it hath been seen, and upon experience shall be
certain, that the Spaniards are not able to beare up against the French
Cavalery, and the Swisses have been routed by the Spanish Foot. And
though touching this last, there hath not been any entire experience
had, yet was there some proof thereof given in the battel of Ravenna,
when the Spanish Foot affronted the Dutch battalions, which keep the
same rank the Swisses do, where the Spaniards with their nimbleness of
body, and the help of their targets entred in under their Pikes, and
there stood safe to offend them, the Dutch men having no remedy: and had
it not been for the Cavalery that rusht in upon them, they had quite
defeated them. There may then (the defect of the one and other of these
two infantries being discoverd) another kind of them be anew ordained,
which may be able to make resistance against the Horse, and not fear the
Foot, which shall not be a new sort of armes, but change of orders. And
these are some of those things which ordained a new, gain reputation and
greatness to a new Prince. Therefore this occasion should not be let
pass, to the end that Italy after so long a time may see some one
redeemer of hers appear. Nor can I express with what dearness of
affection he would be received in all those countreys which have
suffered by those forrein scums, with what thirst of revenge, with what
resolution of fidelity, with what piety, with what tears. Would any
gates be shut again him? Any people deny him obedience? Any envy oppose
him? Would not every Italian fully consent with him? This government of
the Barbarians stinks in every ones nostrils. Let your Illustrious
Family then undertake this worthy exployt with that courage and those
hopes wherewith such just actions are to be attempted; to the end that
under your colours, this countrey may be enabled, and under the
protection of your fortune that saying of Petrarch be verifyed.

  _Virtù contr' al fuore
  Prendera l'arme, e fia il combatter corto:
  Che l'antico valore
  Ne gli Italici cor non è morto._

  Vertue against fury shall advance the fight,
  And it i' th' combate soon shall put to flight:
  For th' old Roman valor is not dead,
  Nor in th' Italians brests extinguished.

FINIS