The Historical, Political, and Diplomatic Writings of Niccolò Machiavelli, Vol. 2 (Niccolò Machiavelli (Christian E. Detmold, trans.), 1513)
==========================================================
Machiavelli's complete works in Detmold's translation (1882-91, 4 vols.) - Discourses, Florentine Histories, Art of War, the comedies, letters and diplomatic writings; the founder of modern political science entire. Vol. 2 of 4.

HISTORICAL, POLITICAL, AND DIPLOMATIC

vos | EEN GS

OF

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI

IRANSLATED FROM THE ITALIAN

BY

Chistian Fy DETVMORD

IN FOUR VOLUMES

Vor. cL.

oy Oectee bis @ 1
JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY
1882

Copyright, 1882,
By CHRISTIAN E. DETMOLD.

All rights reserved.

UNIvERSITY PRESS:

Joun WILSON AND Son, CAMBRIDGE.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME IL

PAGE
POE ey lye oe i get a eh ery tee ten ie ye) tenes peer te 1
DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST TEN BOOKS OF
TITUS  LIVIUS:
Pinker BOOK. ane ee ee ee ee
SECOND COOK 3 ee oR
PE EPERRT SOO Ree ee ee re i an ot She ees es OD

FUOUGH TS OF A STATESMAN: 30 3). oe se es a

<\

ay 5
i +
7 |
5 =
7
Y s i _ 7
o Ay eee ¥
- ae G
eos ‘
Aree a
ae
at
ee
. nen a
oo a _
c oon tae 3s
er a

oe
-

|
:

eee tN CE:

VOL. I. 1

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI

TO THE

MAGNIFICENT LORENZO, SON OF PIERO DE’ MEDICI.

THosE who desire to win the favor of princes generally en-
deavor to do so by offering them those things which they them-
selves prize most, or such as they observe the prince to delight
in most. Thence 7 is that princes have very often presented
to them horses, arms, cloth of gold, precious stones, and simi-
lar ornaments worthy of their greatness. Wishing now my-
self to offer to your Magnificence some proof of my devotion,
I have found nothing amongst all I possess that I hold more
dear or esteem more highly than the knowledge of the actions
of great men, which I have acquired by long experience of
modern affairs, and a continued study of ancient history.

These [ have meditated upon for a long time, and examined
with great care and diligence; and having now written them
out in a small volume, I send this to your Magnificence. And
although I judge this work unworthy of you, yet I trust that
your kindness of heart may induce you to accept it, consider-
ing that I cannot offer you anything better than the means of
understanding in the briefest time all that which I have learnt
by so many years of study, and with so much trouble and dan-
ger to myself.

I have not set off this little work with pompous phrases, nor
filled it with high-sounding and magnificent words, nor with
any other allurements or extrinsic embellishments with which
many are wont to write and adorn their works; for I wished

THE PRINCE.

that mine shotau uerive credit only from the truth of the mat-
ter, and that the importance of the subject should make it
acceptable.

And I hope it may not be accounted presumption if a man
of lowly and humble station ventures to discuss and direct the
conduct of princes; for as those who wish to delineate coun-
tries place themselves low in the plain to observe the form and
character of mountains and high places, and for the purpose of
studying the nature of the low country place themselves high
upon an eminence, so one must be a prince to know well the
character of the people, and to understand well the nature of
a prince one must be of the people.

May your Magnificence then accept this little gift in the
same spirit in which I send it; and if you will read and con-
sider it well, you will recognize in it my desire that you may
attain that greatness which fortune and your great qualities
promise. And if your Magnificence will turn your eyes from
the summit of your greatness towards those low places, you
will know how undeservedly I have to bear the great and con-
tinued malice of fortune.

a

ee ee eh NC,

CHAPTER I.

HOW MANY KINDS OF PRINCIPALITIES THERE ARE, AND IN WHAT
MANNER THEY ARE ACQUIRED.

ALL states and governments that have had, and have at
present, dominion over men, have been and are either repub-
lics or principalities.

The principalities are either hereditary or they are new.
Hereditary principalities are those where the government has
been for a long time in the family of the prince. New prin-
cipalities are either entirely new, as was Milan to Francesco
Sforza, or they are like appurtenances annexed to the heredi-
tary state of the prince who acquires them, as the kingdom of
Naples is to that of Spain.

States thus acquired have been accustomed either to live
under a prince, or to exist as free states; and they are ac-
quired either by the arms of others, or by the conqueror’s own,
or by fortune or valor.

CHAPTER II.
OF HEREDITARY PRINCIPALITIES.

I witt not discuss here the subject of republics, having
treated of them at length elsewhere, but will confine myself
only to principalities ; and following the above indicated order
of distinctions, I will proceed to discuss how states of this kind
should be governed and maintained. I say, then, that heredi-

6 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. III.

tary states, accustomed to the line of their prince, are main-
tained with much less difficulty than new states. For it is
enough merely that the prince do not transcend the order of
things established by his predecessors, and then to accommodate
himself to events as they occur. So that if such a prince has
but ordinary sagacity, he will always maintain himself in his
state, unless some extraordinary and superior force should de-
prive him of it. And even in such a case he will recover it,
whenever the occupant meets with any reverses. We have in
Italy, for instance, the Duke of Ferrara, who could not have
resisted the assaults of the Venetians in 1484, nor those of
Pope Julius IJ. in 1510, but for the fact that his family had
for a great length of time held the sovereignty of that domin-
ion. For the natural prince has less cause and less necessity
for irritating his subjects, whence it is reasonable that he should
be more beloved. And unless extraordinary vices should cause
him to be hated, he will naturally have the affection of his
people. For in the antiquity and continuity of dominion the
memory of innovations, and their causes, are effaced ; for each
change and alteration always prepares the way and facilitates
the next.

CHAPTER III.
OF MIXED PRINCIPALITIES.

Bot it is in a new principality that difficulties present them-
selves. In the first place, if it be not entirely new, but com-
posed of different parts, which when taken all together may as
it were be called mixed, its mutations arise in the beginning
from a natural difficulty, which is inherent in all new princi-
palities, because men change their rulers gladly, in the belief
that they will better themselves by the change. It is this be-
lief that makes them take up arms against the reigning prince ;
but in this they deceive themselves, for they find afterwards
from experience that they have only made their condition
worse. This is the inevitable consequence of another natural
and ordinary necessity, which ever obliges a new prince to vex
his people with the maintenance of an armed force, and by an
infinite number of other wrongs that follow in the train of

Cuap. IIT.] THE PRINCE. 7

new conquests. Thus the new prince finds that he has for
enemies all those whom he has injured by seizing that prin-
cipality ; and at the same time he cannot preserve as friends
even those who have aided him in obtaining possession, because
he cannot satisfy their expectations, nor can he employ strong
. measures against them, being under obligations to them. For
however strong a new prince may be in troops, yet will he
always have need of the good will of the inhabitants, if he
wishes to enter into firm possession of the country.

It was for these reasons that Louis XII., king of France,
having suddenly made himself master of Milan, lost it as
quickly, Lodovico Sforza’s own troops alone ‘having sufficed
to wrest it from him the first time. For the very people who
had opened the gates to Louis XII., finding themselves deceived
in their expectations of immediate as well as prospective ad-
vantages, soon became disgusted with the burdens imposed by
the new prince.

It is very true that, having recovered such revolted provinces,
it is easier to keep them in subjection; for the prince will
avail himself of the occasion of the rebellion to secure himself,
with less consideration for the people, by punishing the guilty,
watching the suspected, and strengthening himself at all the
weak points of the province. Thus a mere demonstration on
the frontier by Lodovico Sforza lost Milan to the French the
first time; but to make them lose it a second time required
the whole world to be against them, and that their armies
should be dispersed and driven out of Italy; which resulted
from the reasons which I have explained above. Nevertheless,
France lost Milan both the first and the second time.

The general causes of the first loss have been sufficiently
explained ; but it remains to be seen now what occasioned the
loss of Milan to France the second time, and to point out the
remedies which the king had at his command, and which might
be employed by any other prince under similar circumstances
to maintain himself in a conquered province, but which King
Louis XII. failed to employ.

I will say then, first, that the states which a prince acquires
and annexes to his own dominions are either in the same coun-
try, speaking the same language, or they are not. When they
are, it is very easy to hold them, especially if they have not
been accustomed to govern themselves; for in that case it suf-

8 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. IIT.

fices to extinguish the line of the prince who, till then, has
ruled over them, but otherwise to maintain their old institu-
tions. There being no difference in their manners and cus-
toms, the inhabitants will submit quietly, as we have seen in
the case of Burgundy, Brittany, Gascony, and Normandy, which
provinces have remained so long united to France. For al-
though there are some differences of language, yet their cus-
toms are similar, and therefore they were easily reconciled to
each other. Hence, in order to retain a newly acquired state, |
regard must be had to two things: one, that the line of the |
ancient sovereign be entirely extinguished ; and the other, that |
the laws be not changed, nor the taxes increased, so that the ‘
new may, in the least possible time, be thoroughly incorporated
with the ancient state.

But when states are acquired in a country differing in lan-
ouage, customs, and laws, then come the difficulties, and then
it requires great good-fortune and much sagacity to hold them ;
and one of the best and most efficient means is for the prince
who has acquired them to go and reside there, which will
make his possession more secure and durable. Such was the
course adopted by the Turk in Greece, who even if he had
respected all the institutions of that country, yet could not
possibly have succeeded in holding it, if he had not gone to
reside there. For being on the spot, you can quickly remedy
disorders as you see them arise; but not being there, you do
not hear of them until they have become so great that there is
no longer any remedy for them. Besides this, the country will
not be despoiled by your officials, and the subjects will be satis-
fied by the easy recourse to the prince who is near them, which
contributes to win their affections, if they are well disposed,
and to inspire them with fear, if otherwise. And other powers .
will hesitate to assail a state where the prince himself resides,
as they would find it very difficult to dispossess him.

The next best means for holding a newly acquired state is to’
establish colonies in one or two places that are as it were the.
keys to the country. Unless this is done, it will be necessary |
to keep a large force of men-at-arms and infantry there for its
protection. Colonies are not very expensive to the prince;
they can be established and maintained at little, if any, cost to
him ; and only those of the inhabitants will be injured by him
whom he deprives of their homes and fields, for the purpose of

Cuap. ITI.] THE PRINCE. 9

_ bestowing them upon the colonists; and this will be the case
only with a very small minority of the original inhabitants.
And as those who are thus injured by him become dispersed
and poor, they can never do him any harm, whilst all the other
inhabitants remain on the one hand uninjured, and therefore
easily kept quiet, and on the other hand they are afraid to stir,
lest they should be despoiled as the others have been. I con-
clude then that such colonies are inexpensive, and are more
faithful to the prince and less injurious to the inhabitants
generally ; whilst those who are injured by their establishment
become poor and dispersed, and therefore unable to do any
harm, as I have already said. And here we must observe that
men must either be flattered or crushed; for they will revenge
themselves for slight wrongs, whilst for grave ones they cannot.
The injury therefore that you do to a man should be such that
you need not fear his revenge.

But if instead of colonies an armed force be sent for the
preservation of a newly acquired province, then it will involve
much greater expenditures, so that the support of such a guard'
may consume the entire revenue of the province; so that this
acquisition may prove an actual loss, and will moreover give
greater offence, because the whole population will feel ag-
grieved by having the armed force quartered upon them in
turn. Every one that is made to suffer from this inconve-
nience will become an enemy; and these are enemies that
can injure the prince, for although beaten yet they remain in
their homes. In every point of view, then, such a military
guard is disadvantageous, just as colonies are most useful.

A prince, moreover, who wishes to keep possession of a
country that is separate and unlike his own, must make him-
self the chief and protector of the smaller neighboring powers.
He must endeavor to weaken the most powerful of them, and
must take care that by no chance a stranger enter that prov-

ince who is equally powerful with himself; for strangers are
never called in except by those whom an undue ambition or
fear have rendered malcontents. It was thus in fact that the
AKitolians called the Romans into Greece; and whatever other
country the Romans entered, it was invariably at the request
of, the inhabitants.

The way in which these things happen is generally thus: so
soon as a powerful foreigner enters a province, all those of its

~

10 THE PRINCE. = [Cuap. IIT.

inhabitants that are less powerful will give him their adhesion,
being influenced thereto by their jealousy of him who has
hitherto been their superior. So that, as regards these petty
lords, the new prince need not be at any trouble to win them —
over to himself, as they will all most readily become incor-
porated with the state which he has there acquired. He has
merely to see to it that they do not assume too much authority,
or acquire too much power; for he will then be able by their |
favor, and by his own strength, very easily to humble those ;
who are really powerful; so that he will in all respects remain —
the sole arbiter of that province. And he who does not man-
age this part well will quickly lose what he has acquired ; and
whilst he holds it, he will experience infinite difficulties and
vexations. The Romans observed these points most carefully
in the provinces which they conquered ; they established colo-
nies there, and sustained the feebler chiefs without increasing
their power, whilst they humbled the stronger, and permitted
no powerful stranger to acquire any influence or credit there.
I will confine myself for an example merely to the provinces
of Greece. The Romans sustained the Achaians and the Atto-
lians, whilst they humbled the kingdom of Macedon and ex-
pelled Antiochus from his dominions; but neither the merits
of the Achaians or of the Adtolians caused the Romans to permit
either of them to increase in power; nor could the persuasions
of Philip induce the Romans to become his friends until after
first having humbled his power; nor could the power of An-
tiochus make them consent that he should hold any state in
that province.

Thus in all these cases the Romans did what all wise princes
ought to do; namely, not only to look to all present troubles,
but also to those of the future, against which they provided
with the utmost prudence. For it is by foreseeing difficulties
from afar that they are easily provided against; but awaiting —
their near approach, remedies are no longer in time, for the
malady has become incurable. It happens in such cases, as the
doctors say of consumption, that in the early stages it is easy
to cure, but difficult to recognize; whilst in the course of time,
the disease not having been recognized and cured in the begin-
ning, it becomes easy to know, but difficult to cure. And thus
it is in the affairs of state; for when the evils that arise in it
are seen far ahead, which it is given only to a wise prince to

Cuar. III] THE PRINCE. 11

do, then they are easily remedied ; but when, in consequence of
not having been foreseen, these evils are allowed to grow and
assume such proportions that they become manifest to every
one, then they can no longer be remedied.

The Romans therefore, on seeing troubles far ahead, always
strove to avert them in time, and never permitted their growth |
merely for the sake of avoiding a war, well knowing that the
war would not be prevented, and that to defer it would only be
an advantage to others; and for these reasons they resolved
upon attacking Philip and Antiochus in Greece, so as to pre-
vent these from making war upon them in Italy. They might
at the time have avoided both the one and the other, but would
not do it; nor did they ever fancy the saying which is nowa-
days in the mouth of every wiseacre, “to bide the advantages
of time,” but preferred those of their own valor and prudence;
for time drives all things before it, and may lead to good as
well as to evil, and to evil as well as to good.

But let us return to France, and examine whether she has
done any one of the things that we have spoken of. I will say
nothing of Charles VIII., but only of Louis XII., whose pro-
ceedings we are better able to understand, as he held possession
of Italy for a greater length of time. And we shall see how
he did the very opposite of what he should have done, for the
purpose of holding a state so unlike his own.

King Louis XII. was called into Italy by the ambition of the
Venetians, who wanted him to aid them in conquering a por-
tion of Lombardy. I will not blame the king for the part he
took ; for, wishing to gain a foothold in Italy, and having no
allies there, but rather finding the gates everywhere closed
against him in consequence of the conduct of King Charles
VIII, he was obliged to avail himself of such friends as he
could find; and would have succeeded in his attempt, which
was well planned, but for an error which he committed in his
subsequent conduct. The king, then, having conquered Lom-
bardy, quickly recovered that reputation which his predecessor,
Charles VIII., had lost. Genoa yielded; the Florentines became
his friends; the Marquis of Mantua, the Duke of Ferrara, the
Bentivogli, the lady of Furli, the lords of Faenza, Pesaro,
Rimini, Camerino, and Piombino, the Lucchese, the Pisanese,
and the Siennese, all came to meet him with offers of friend-
ship. The Venetians might then have recognized the folly of

12 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. ITI.

their course, when, for the sake of gaining two cities in Lom-
bardy, they made King Louis master of two thirds of Italy.
Let us see now how easily the king might have maintained
his influence in Italy if he had observed the rules above given.
Had he secured and protected all these friends of his, who were
numerous but feeble, — some fearing the Church, and some the
Venetians, and therefore all forced to adhere to him,—he might
easily have secured himself against the remaining stronger
powers of Italy. But no sooner in Milan than he did the very
opposite, by giving aid to Pope Alexander VI. to enable him to
seize the Romagna. Nor did he perceive that in doing this he

weakened himself, by alienating his friends and those who had |

thrown themselves into his arms; and that he had made the

Church great by adding so much temporal to its spiritual ,
power, which gave it already so much authority. Having ©
committed this first error, he was obliged to follow it up; so

that, for the purpose of putting an end to the ambition of Pope
Alexander VI., and preventing his becoming master of Tus-
cany, he was obliged to come into Italy.

Not content with having made the Church great, and with

having alienated his own friends, King Louis, in his eagerness |

to possess the kingdom of Naples, shared it with the king of
Spain ; so that where he had been the sole arbiter of Italy, he

established an associate and rival, to whom the ambitious and ©

the malcontents might have a ready recourse. And whilst he
could have left a king in Naples who would have been his
tributary, he dispossessed him, for the sake of replacing him
by another who was powerful enough in turn to drive him
out.

The desire of conquest is certainly most natural and common

amongst men, and whenever they yield to it and are success- !

ful, they are praised; but when they lack the means, and yet
attempt it anyhow, then they commit an error that merits
blame. If, then, the king of France was powerful enough by
himself successfully to attack the kingdom of Naples, then he
was right to do so; but if he was not, then he should not have
divided it with the king of Spain. And if the partition of
Lombardy with the Venetians was excusable because it en-
abled him to gain a foothold in Italy, that of Naples with the
Spaniard deserves censure, as it cannot be excused on the
ground of necessity.

_

~~

—

Cuar. IIL.] THE PRINCE. 13

Louis XII. then committed these five errors: he destroyed
the weak; he increased the power of one already powerful in
Italy ; he established a most powerful stranger there ; he did
not go to reside there himself; nor did he plant any colonies
there. These errors, however, would not have injured him dur-
ing his lifetime, had he not committed a sixth one in attempt-
ing to deprive the Venetians of their possessions. For if Louis
had not increased the power of the Church, nor established the
Spaniards in Italy, it would have been quite reasonable, and
even advisable, for him to have weakened the Venetians; but
having done both those things, he ought never to have con-
sented to their ruin; for so long as the Venetians were power-
ful, they would always have kept others from any attempt upon
Lombardy. They would on the one hand never have permitted
this unless it should have led to their becoming masters of it,
and on the other hand no one would have taken it from France
for the sake of giving it to the Venetians; nor would any one
have had the courage to attack the French and the Venetians
combined. And should it be said that King Louis gave up the
Romagna to Pope Alexander VI., and divided the kingdom of

Naples with the Spaniard for the sake of avoiding a war, then '

submit to an evil for the sake of avoiding a war. For a war
is never avoided, but is only deferred to one’s own disadvan-
tage.

And should it be argued, on the other hand, that the king
felt bound by the pledge which he had given to the Pope to
conquer the Romagna for him in consideration of his dissolv-
ing the king’s marriage, and of his bestowing the cardinal’s
hat upon the Archbishop of Rouen, then I meet that argument
with what I shall say further on concerning the pledges of
princes, and the manner in which they should keep them.

King Louis then lost Lombardy by not having conformed to
any one of the conditions that have been observed by others,
who, having conquered provinces, wanted to keep them. Nor
is this at all to be wondered at, for it is quite reasonable and
common. I conversed on this subject with the Archbishop of
Rouen (Cardinal d’Amboise) whilst at Nantes, when the Duke
Valentino, commonly called Cesar Borgia, son of Pope Alex-
ander VI., made himself master of the Romagna. On that
occasion the Cardinal said to me, that the Italians did not un-

4

I reply with the above stated reasons, that no one should ever .

j

14 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. IV.

derstand the art of war. To which I replied that the French
did not understand statesmanship; for if they had understood
it, they would never have allowed the Church to attain such
greatness and power. For experience proves that the great-
ness of the Church and that of Spain in Italy were brought
about by France, and that her own ruin resulted therefrom.
From this we draw the general rule, which never or rarely
fails, that the prince who causes another to become powerful
thereby works his own ruin; for he has contributed to the
power of the other either by his own ability or force, and both
the one and the other will be mistrusted by him whom he has
thus made powerful.

CHAPTER IV.

WHY THE KINGDOM OF DARIUS, WHICH WAS CONQUERED BY
‘ ALEXANDER, DID NOT REVOLT AGAINST THE SUCCESSORS OF
ALEXANDER AFTER HIS DEATH.

Ir we reflect upon the difficulties of preserving a newly
acquired state, it seems marvellous that, after the rapid con-
quest of all Asia by Alexander the Great, and his subsequent
death, which one would suppose most naturally to have pro-
voked the whole country to revolt, yet his successors maintained
their possession of it, and experienced no other difficulties in
holding it than such as arose amongst themselves from their
own ambition.

I meet this observation by saying that all principalities of
which we have any accounts have been governed in one of
two ways; viz. either by one absolute prince, to whom all
others are as slaves, some of whom, as ministers, by his grace
and consent, aid him in the government of his realm ; or else
by a prince and nobles, who hold that rank, not by the grace
of their sovereign, but by the antiquity of their lineage. Such
nobles have estates and subjects of their own, who recognize
them as their liege lords, and have a natural affection for
them.

In those states that are governed by an absolute prince and
slaves, the prince has far more power and authority ; for in

Cua. IV.] THE PRINCE. 15

his entire dominion no one recognizes any other superior but
him; and if they obey any one else, they do it as though to
his minister and officer, and without any particular affection
for such official. Turkey and France furnish us examples of
these two different systems of government at the present time.
The whole country of the Turk is governed by one master ;
all the rest are his slaves; and having divided the country
into Sanjacs, or districts, he appoints governors for each of
these, whom he changes and replaces at his pleasure.

But the king of France is placed in the midst of a large
number of ancient nobles, who are recognized and acknowl-
edged by their subjects as their lords, and are held in great
affection by them. They have their rank and prerogatives, of
which the king cannot deprive them without danger to himself.
In observing now these two principalities, we perceive the dif-
ficulty of conquering the empire of the Turk, but once con-
quered it will be very easily held. The reasons that make
the conquest of the Turkish empire so difficult are, that the
conqueror cannot be called into the country by any of the
great nobles of the state; nor can he hope that his attempt
could be facilitated by a revolt of those who surround the
sovereign ; which arises from the above given reasons. For
being all slaves and dependants of their sovereign, it is more
difficult to corrupt them; and even if they were corrupted,
but little advantage could be hoped for from them, because
they cannot carry the people along with them.

Whoever therefore attacks the Turks must expect to find
them united, and must depend wholly upon his own forces,
and not upon any internal disturbances. But once having
defeated and driven the Turk from the field, so that he cannot
reorganize his army, then he will have nothing to fear but the
line of the sovereign. This however once extinguished, the
conqueror has nothing to apprehend from any one else, as
none other has any influence with the people ; and thus, having
had nothing to hope from them before the victory, he will have
nothing to fear from them afterwards.

The contrary takes place in kingdoms governed like that of
France; for having gained over some of the great nobles of
the realm, there will be no difficulty in entering it, there being
always malcontents and others who desire a change. These,
for the reasons stated, can open the way into the country for

16 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. IV.

the assailant, and facilitate his success. But for the conqueror
to maintain himself there afterwards will involve infinite diffi-
culties, both with the conquered and with those who have aided
him in his conquest. Nor will it suffice to extinguish the line
of the sovereign, because the great nobles remain, who will
place themselves at the head of new movements ; and the con-
queror, not being able either to satisfy or to crush them, will
lose the country again on the first occasion that presents
itself.

If now we consider the nature of the government of Darius,
we shall find that it resembled that of the Turk, and therefore
it was necessary for Alexander to attack him in full force, and
drive him from the field. After this victory and the death of
Darius, Alexander remained in secure possession of the king-
dom for the reasons above explained. And if his successors
had remained united, they might also have enjoyed possession
at their ease; for no other disturbances occurred in that em-
pire, except such as they created themselves.

Countries, however, with a system of government like that
of France, cannot possibly be held so easily. The frequent in-
surrections of Spain, France, and Greece against the Romans
were due to the many petty princes that existed in those states ;
and therefore, so long as the memory of these princes endured,
the Romans were ever uncertain in the tenure of those states.
But all remembrance of these princes once effaced, the Romans
became secure possessors of those countries, so long as the
growth and power of their empire endured. And even after-
wards, when fighting amongst themselves, each of the parties
were able to keep for themselves portions of those countries,
according to the authority which they had acquired there ; and
the line of their sovereigns being extinguished, the inhabitants
recognized no other authority but that of the Romans.

Reflecting now upon these things, we cannot be surprised
at the facility with which Alexander maintained himself in
Asia; nor at the difficulties which others experienced in pre-
serving their conquests, as was the case with Pyrrhus and
many others, and which resulted not from the greater or lesser
valor of the conqueror, but from the different nature of the
conquered states.

Cuap. V.] THE PRINCE. 17

CHAPTER V.

HOW CITIES OR PRINCIPALITIES ARE TO BE GOVERNED THAT
PREVIOUS TO BEING CONQUERED HAD LIVED UNDER THEIR
OWN LAWS.

CoNQUERED states that have been accustomed to liberty and
the government of their own laws can be held by the con-
queror in three different ways. The first is to ruin them;
the second, for the conqueror to go and reside there in person ;
and the third is to allow them to continue to live under their
own laws, subject to a regular tribute, and to create in them a
government of a few, who will keep the country friendly to the
conqueror. Such a government, having been established by
the new prince, knows that it cannot maintain itself without
the support of his power and friendship, and it becomes its
interest therefore to sustain him. A city that has been ac-
customed to free institutions is much easier held by its own
citizens than in any other way, if the conqueror desires to
preserve it. The Spartans and the Romans will serve as ex-
amples of these different ways of holding a conquered state.

The Spartans held Athens and Thebes, creating there a
government of a few; and yet they lost both these states
again. ‘The Romans, for the purpose of retaining Capua, Car-
thage, and Numantia, destroyed them, but did not lose them.
They wished to preserve Greece in somewhat the same way
that the Spartans had held it, by making her free and leaving
her in the enjoyment of her own laws, but did not succeed ;
so that they were obliged to destroy many cities in that coun-
try for the purpose of holding it. In truth there was no other
safe way of keeping possession of that country but to ruin it.
And whoever becomes master of a city that has been accus-
tomed to liberty, and does not destroy it, must himself expect
to be ruined by it. For they will always resort to rebellion in
the name of liberty and their ancient institutions, which will
never be effaced from their memory, either by the lapse of
time, or by benefits bestowed by the new master. No. matter
what he may do, or what precautions he may take, if he does
not separate and disperse the inhabitants, they will on the first
occasion invoke the name of liberty and the memory of their

VOL. II. 2

18 THE PRINCE. (Cuar. VI.

ancient institutions, as was done by Pisa after having been \
held over a hundred years in subjection by the Florentines. |

But it is very different with states that have been accus-
tomed to live under a prince. When the line of the prince is
once extinguished, the inhabitants, being on the one hand
accustomed to obey, and on the other having lost their ancient
sovereign, can neither agree to create a new one from amongst
themselves, nor do they know how to live in liberty ; and thus
they will be less prompt to take up arms, and the new prince
will readily be able to gain their good will and to assure him-
self of them. But republics have more vitality, a greater spirit
of resentment and desire of revenge, for the memory of their
ancient liberty neither can nor will permit them to remain
quiet, and therefore the surest way of holding them is either
to destroy them, or for the conqueror to go and live there.

CHAPTER VI.

OF NEW PRINCIPALITIES THAT HAVE BEEN ACQUIRED BY THE
VALOR OF THE PRINCE AND BY HIS OWN TROOPS.

LET no one wonder if, in what I am about to say of entirely
new principalities and of the prince and his government, I cite
the very highest examples. For as men almost always follow
the beaten track of others, and proceed in their actions by imi-
tation, and yet cannot altogether follow the ways of others, nor
attain the high qualities of those whom they imitate, so a wise
man should ever follow the ways of great men and endeavor to
imitate only such as have been most eminent; so that even if
his merits do not quite equal theirs, yet that they may in some
measure reflect their greatness. He should do as the skilful
archer, who, seeing that the object he desires to hit is too dis-
tant, and knowing the extent to which his bow will carry, aims
higher than the destined mark, not for the purpose of sending
his arrow to that height, but so that by this elevation it may
reach the desired aim.

I say then that a new prince in an entirely new principality
will experience more or less difficulty in maintaining himself,
according as he has more or less courage and ability. And as

Cuap. V1.] THE PRINCE. 19

such an event as to become a prince from a mere private in-
dividual presupposes either great courage or rare good fortune,
it would seem that one or the other of these two causes ought

in a measure to mitigate many of these difficulties. But he |

who depends least upon fortune will maintain himself best;
which will be still more easy for the Prince if, having no other
state, he is obliged to reside in his newly acquired principality.

To come now to those who by their courage and ability, and
not by fortune, have risen to the rank of rulers, I will say
that the most eminent of such were Moses, Cyrus, Romulus,
Theseus, and the like. And although we may not discuss
Moses, who was a mere executor of the things ordained by
God, yet he merits our admiration, if only for that grace which
made him worthy to hold direct communion with the Almighty.
But if we consider Cyrus and others who have conquered or
founded empires, we shall find them all worthy of admiration ;
for if we study their acts and particular ordinances, they do
not seem very different from those of Moses, although he had
so great a teacher. We shall also find in examining their acts
and lives, that they had no other favor from fortune but op-
portunity, which gave them the material which they could
mould into whatever form seemed to them best; and without
such opportunity the great qualities of their souls would have
been wasted, whilst without those great qualities the opportu-
nities would have been in vain.

It was necessary then for Moses to find the people of Israel
slaves in Egypt, and oppressed by the Egyptians, so that to
escape from that bondage they resolved to follow him. It was
necessary that Romulus should not have been kept in Alba,
and that he should have been exposed at his birth, for him to
have become the founder and king of Rome. And so it was
necessary for Cyrus to find the Persians dissatisfied with the
rule of the Medes, and the Medes cffeminate and enfecbled by
long peace. And finally, Theseus could not have manifested
his courage had he not found the Athenians dispersed. These
opportunities therefore made these men fortunate, and it was
their lofty virtue that enabled them to recognize the opportuni-
ties by which their countries were made illustrious and most
happy. Those who by similar noble conduct become princes
acquire their principalities with difficulty, but maintain them
with ease; and the difficulties which they experience in acquir-

—

20 THE PRINCE. (Car. VI.

ing their principalities arise in part from the new ordinances
and customs which they are obliged to introduce for the pur-
pose of founding their state and their own security. We must
bear in mind, then, that there is nothing more difficult and
dangerous, or more doubtful of success, than an attempt to
introduce a new order of things in any state. For the inno-
vator has for enemies all those who derived advantages from
the old order of things, whilst those who expect to be bene-
fited by the new institutions will be but lukewarm defenders.
This indifference arises in part from fear of their adversaries
who were favored by the existing laws, and partly from the
incredulity of men who have no faith in anything new that is
not the result of well-established experience. Hence it is that,
whenever the opponents of the new order of things have the
opportunity to attack it, they will do it with the zeal of parti-
sans, whilst the others defend it but feebly, so that it is dan-
gerous to rely upon the latter.

If we desire to discuss this subject thoroughly, it will be
necessary to examine whether such innovators depend upon
themselves, or whether they rely upon others; that is to say,
whether for the purpose of carrying out their plans they have
to resort to entreaties, or whether they can accomplish it by
force. In the first case they always succeed badly, and fail
to conclude anything; but when they depend upon their own
strength to carry their innovations through, then they rarely
incur any danger. Thence it was that all prophets who came
with arms in hand were successful, whilst those who were not
armed were ruined. For besides the reasons given above, the
dispositions of peoples are variable ; it is easy to persuade them
to anything, but difficult to confirm them in that belief. And
therefore a prophet should be prepared, in case the people will
not believe any more, to be able by force to compel them to
that belief.

Neither Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, nor Romulus would have
been able to make their laws and institutions observed for any
length of time, if they had not been prepared to enforce them
with arms. This was the experience of Brother Girolamo
Savonarola, who failed in his attempt to establish a new order
of things so soon as the multitude ceased to believe in him;
for he had not the means to keep his believers firm in their
faith, nor to make the unbelievers believe. And yet these

Cuap. VII.) THE PRINCE, 21

great men experienced great difficulties in their course, and
met danger at every step, which could only be overcome by
their courage and ability. But once having surmounted them,
then they began to be held in veneration ; and having crushed
those who were jealous of their great qualities, they remained
powerful, secure, honored, and happy.

To these great examples I will add a minor one, which
nevertheless bears some relation to them, and will suffice me
for all similar cases. This is Hiero of Syracuse, who from a
mere private individual rose to be prince of Syracuse, although
he owed no other favor to fortune than opportunity; for
the Syracusans, being oppressed, elected him their captain,
whence he advanced by his merits to become their prince.
And even in his condition as a private citizen he displayed
such virtue, that the author who wrote of him said that
he lacked nothing of being a monarch excepting a kingdom.
Hiero disbanded the old army and organized a new one; he
abandoned his old allies and formed new alliances; and having
thus an army and allies of his own creation, he had no diff-
culty in erecting any edifice upon such a foundation; so that
although he had much trouble in attaining the principality,
yet he had but little in maintaining it.

CHAPTER VII:

OF NEW PRINCIPALITIES THAT HAVE BEEN ACQUIRED BY THE AID
OF OTHERS AND BY GOOD FORTUNE.

THOSE who by good fortune only rise from mere private sta-
tion to the dignity of princes have but little trouble in achiey-
ing that elevation, for they fly there as it were on wings; but
their difficulties begin after they have been placed in that high
position. Such are those who acquire a state either by ena
of money, or by the favor of some powerful monarch wh
bestows it upon them. Many such instances occurred in
Greece, in the cities of Ionia and of the Hellespont, where
men were made princes by Darius so that they might hold
those places for his security and glory. And such were those

22 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. VII.

Emperors who from having been mere private individuals at-
tained the Empire by corrupting the soldiery. These remain
simply subject to the will and the fortune of those who be-
stowed greatness upon them, which are two most uncertain
and variable things. And generally these men have neither
the skill nor the power to maintain that high rank. They
know not (for unless they are men of great genius and ability,
it is not reasonable that they should know) how to command,
having never occupied any but private stations ; and they can-
not, because they have no troops upon whose loyalty and at-
“neiinens they can depend.

Moreover, states that spring up yiGalenlee like other things
in nature that are born and attain their growth rapidly, cannot
have those roots and supports that will protect them from de-

struction by the first unfavorable weather. Unless indeed, as.

has been said, those who have suddenly become princes are
gifted with such ability that they quickly know how to prepare
themselves for the preservation of that which fortune has cast
into their lap, and afterwards to build up those foundations
which others have laid before becoming princes.

In illustration of the one and the other of these two ways of
becoming princes, by valor and ability, or by good fortune, I
will adduce two examples from the time within our own mem-
ory; these are Francesco Sforza and Cesar Borgia. Francesco,
by legitimate means and by great natural ability, rose from a pri-
vate citizen to be Duke of Milan; and having attained that high
position by a thousand efforts, it cost him but little trouble
afterwards to maintain it. On the other hand, Cesar Borgia,
commonly called Duke Valentino, acquired his state by the
eood fortune of his father, but lost it when no longer sustained
by that good fortune; although he employed all the means and
did all that a brave and prudent man can do to take root in
that state which had been bestowed upon him by the arms and
eood fortune of another. For, as we have said above, he who
does not lay the foundations for his power beforehand may be
able by great ability and courage to do so afterwards; but it
will be done with great trouble to the builder and with danger
to the edifice.

If now we consider the whole course of the Duke Valentino
we shall see that he took pains to lay solid foundations for his
future power; which I think it well to discuss. For I shoul

J

CHAP. Vis | THE PRINCE. 23

not know what better lesson I could give to a new prince, than »
to hold up to him the example of the Duke Valentino’s eondncey
And if the measures which he adopted did not insure his final
success, the fault was not his, for his failure was due to the ex-
treme and extraordinary malignity of fortune. Pope Alexan-
der VI. in his efforts to aggrandize his son, the Duke Valentino,
encountered many difficulties, immediate and prospective. In
the first place he saw that there was no chance of making him
master of any state, unless a state of the Church; and he knew
that neither the Duke of Milan nor the Venetians would con-
sent to that. Faenza and Rimini were already at that time
under the protection of the Venetians ; and the armies of Italy,
especially those of which he could have availed himself, were in
the hands of men who had cause to fear the power of the Pope,
namely the Orsini, the Colonna, and their adherents; and
therefore he could not rely upon them.

It became necessary therefore for Alexander to disturb the
existing order of things, and to disorganize those states, in
order to make himself safely master of them. And this it
was easy for him to do; for he found the Venetians, influenced
by other reasons, favorable to the return of the French into
Italy; which not only he did not oppose, but facilitated by
dissolving the former marriage of King Louis XII. (so as
to enable him to marry Ann of Brittany). The king there-
upon entered Italy with the aid of the Venetians and the
consent of Alexander; and no sooner was he in Milan than
the Pope obtained troops from him to aid in the conquest of
the Romagna, which was yielded to him through the influence
of the king.

The Duke Valentino having thus acquired the Romagna,
and the Colonna being discouraged, he both wished to hold;
that province, and also to push his possessions still further,
but was prevented by two circumstances. The one was that:
his own troops seemed to him not to be reliable, and the other
was the will of the king of France. That is to say, he feared
lest the Orsini troops, which he had made use of, might fail
him at the critical moment, and not only prevent him from
acquiring more, but even take from him that which he had
acquired ; and that even the king of France might do the same.
Of the disposition of the Orsini, the Duke had a proof when,
after the capture of Faenza, he attacked Bologna, and saw with

24 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. VII.

what indifference they moved to the assault. And as to the
king of France, he knew his mind; for when he wanted to
march into Tuscany, after having taken the Duchy of Urbino,
King Louis made him desist from that undertaking. The Duke
resolved therefore to rely no longer upon the fortune or the
arms of others. And the first thing he did was to weaken the
Orsini and the Colonna in Rome, by winning over to himself
all the gentlemen adherents of those houses, by taking them
into his own pay as gentlemen followers, giving them liberal
stipends and bestowing honors upon them in proportion to,
their condition, and giving them appointments and commands ;
so that in the course of a few months their attachment to their
factions was extinguished, and they all became devoted follow-
ers of the Duke.

After that, having successfully dispersed the Colonna faction,
he watched for an opportunity to crush the Orsini, which soon
presented itself, and of which he made the most. For the Or-
sini, having been slow to perceive that the aggrandizement of
the Duke and of the Church would prove the cause of their ruin,
convened a meeting at Magione, in the Perugine territory, which
gave rise to the revolt of Urbino and the disturbances in the
Romagna, and caused infinite dangers to the Duke Valentino,
all of which, however, he overcame with the aid of the French.
Having thus re-established his reputation, and trusting no longer
in the French or any other foreign power, he had recourse to
deceit, so as to avoid putting them to the test. And so well
did he know how to dissemble and conceal his intentions that
the Orsini became reconciled to him, through the agency of the
Signor Paolo, whom the Duke had won over to himself by means
of all possible good offices, and gifts of money, clothing, and
horses. And thus their credulity led them into the hands of
the Duke at Sinigaglia.

The chiefs thus destroyed, and their adherents converted into
his friends, the Duke had laid sufficiently good foundations for
his power, having made himself master of the whole of the
Romagna and the Duchy of Urbino, and having attached their
entire population to himself, by giving them a foretaste of the
new prosperity which they were to enjoy under him. And as
this part of the Duke’s proceedings is well worthy of notice, and
may serve as an example to others, I will dwell upon it more
fully.

Cuap. VII.] THE PRINCE. 25

Having conquered the Romagna, the Duke found it under the
control of a number of impotent petty tyrants, who had devoted
themselves more to plundering their subjects than to governing
them properly, and encouraging discord and disorder amongst
them rather than peace and union; so that this province was
infested by brigands, torn by quarrels, and given over to every
sort of violence. He saw at once that, to restore order amongst
the inhabitants and obedience to the sovereign, it was necessary
to establish a good and vigorous government there. And for
this purpose he appointed as governor of that province Don Ra-
miro d’ Orco, a man of cruelty, but at the same time of great
energy, to whom he gave plenary power. In a very short time
D’ Oreo reduced the province to peace and order, thereby gain-
ing for him the highest reputation. After a while the Duke
found such excessive exercise of authority no longer necessary
or expedient, for he feared that it might render himself odious.
He therefore established a civil tribunal in the heart of the
province, under an excellent president, where every city should
have its own advocate. And having observed that the past
rigor of Ramiro had engendered some hatred, he wished to
show to the people, for the purpose of removing that feeling
from their minds, and to win their entire confidence, that, if
any cruelties had been practised, they had not originated with
him, but had resulted altogether from the harsh nature of his
minister. He therefore took occasion to have Messer Ramiro
put to death, and his body, cut into two parts, exposed in the
market-place of Cesena one morning, with a block of wood and
a bloody cutlass left beside him. The horror of this spectacle
caused the people to remain for a time stupefied and satisfied.

But let us return to where we started from. I say, then, that
the Duke, feeling himself strong enough now, and in a measure
secure from immediate danger, having raised an armed force of
his own, and having in great part destroyed those that were
near and might have troubled him, wanted now to proceed with
his conquest. The only power remaining which he had to fear
was the king of France, upon whose support he knew that he
could not count, although the king had been late in discovering
his error of having allowed the Duke’s aggrandizement. The
Duke, therefore, began to look for new alliances, and to prevar-
icate with the French about their entering the kingdom of Na-
ples for the purpose of attacking the Spaniards, who were then

26 THE PRINCE, [Cuap. VII.

engaged in the siege of Gaeta. His intention was to place
them in such a position that they would not be able to harm
him; and in this he would have succeeded easily if Pope Alex-
ander had lived.

Such was the course of the Duke Valentino with regard to
the immediate present, but he had cause for apprehensions as
to the future; mainly, lest the new successor to the papal chair
should not be friendly to him, and should attempt to take from
him what had been given him by Alexander. And this he
thought of preventing in several different ways: one, by extirpat-

ing the families of those whom he had despoiled, so as to deprive |

the Pope of all pretext of restoring them to their possessions ;
secondly, by gaining over to himself all the gentlemen of Rome,
so as to be able, through them, to keep the Pope in check; third-
ly, by getting the College of Cardinals under his control; and,
fourthly, by acquiring so much power before the death of Alex-
ander that he might by himself be able to resist the first attack

|

of his enemies. Of these four things he had accomplished three '

at the time of Alexander’s death; for of the petty tyrants whom
he had despoiled he had killed as many as he could lay hands
on, and but very few had been able to save themselves; he
had won over to himself the gentlemen of Rome, and had se-
cured a large majority in the sacred college; and as to further
acquisitions, he contemplated making himself master of Tusca-
ny, having already possession of Perugia and Piombino, and hav-
ing assumed a protectorate over Pisa. There being no longer
occasion to be apprehensive of France, which had been deprived
of the kingdom of Naples by the Spaniards, so that both of these
powers had to seek his friendship, he suddenly seized Pisa.
After this, Lucca and Sienna promptly yielded to him, partly
from jealousy of the Florentines and partly from fear. Thus
Florence saw no safety from the Duke, and if he had succeeded
in taking that city, as he could have done in the very year of
Alexander’s death, it would have so increased his power and
influence that he would have been able to have sustained him-
self alone, without depending upon the fortune or power of any
one else, and relying solely upon his own strength and courage.

But Alexander died five years after the Duke had first un-
sheathed his sword. He left his son with only his government
of the Romagna firmly established, but all his other possessions
entirely uncertain, hemmed in between two powerful hostile ar-

Cuar. VIL] THE PRINCE. 27

mies, and himself sick unto death. But such were the Duke’s
energy and courage, and so well did he know how men are either
won or destroyed, and so solid were the foundations which he
had in so brief a time laid for his greatness, that if he had not
had these two armies upon his back, and had been in health, he
would have sustained himself against all difficulties. And that
the foundations of his power were well laid may be judged by
the fact that the Romagna remained faithful, and waited quietly
for him more than a month; and that, although half dead with
sickness, yet he was perfectly secure in Rome; and that, al-
though the Baglioni, Vitelli, and Orsini came to Rome at the
time, yet they could not raise a party against him. Unable to
make a Pope of his own choice, yet he could prevent the elec-
tion of any one that was not acceptable to him. And had the
Duke been in health at the time of Alexander’s death, every-
thing would have gone well with him; for he said to me on the
day when Julius II. was created Pope, that he had provided for
everything that could possibly occur in case of his father’s
death, except that he never thought that at that moment he
should himself be so near dying.

Upon reviewing now ali the actions of the Duke, I should not
know where to blame him ; it seems to me that I should rather
hold him up as an example (as I have said) to be imitated by all
those who have risen to sovereignty, either by the good fortune
or the arms of others. For being endowed with great courage,
and having a lofty ambition, he could not have acted otherwise
under the circumstances; and the only thing that defeated his
designs was the shortness of Alexander’s life and his own
bodily infirmity.

Whoever, then, in a newly acquired state, finds it necessary
to secure himself against his enemies, to gain friends, to con-
quer by force or by cunning, to make himself feared or beloved
by the people, to be followed and revered by the soldiery, to de-
stroy all who could or might injure him, to substitute a new for
the old order of things, to be severe and yet gracious, magnani-
mous, and liberal, to disband a disloyal army and create a new
one, to preserve the friendship of kings and princes, so that they
may bestow benefits upon him with grace, and fear to injure him,
—such a one, I say, cannot find more recent examples than those
presented by the conduct of the Duke Valentino. The only thing
we can blame him for was the election of Julius II. to the Pon-

28 THE PRINCE. rCuap. VIIL

tificate, which was a bad selection for him to make ; for, as has
been said, though he was not able to make a Pope to his own
liking, yet he could have prevented, and should never have con-
sented to, the election of one from amongst those cardinals whom
he had offended, or who, if he had been elected, would have had
occasion to fear him, for either fear or resentment makes men
enemies.

Those whom the Duke had offended were, amongst others,
the Cardinals San Pietro in Vincola, Colonna, San Giorgio, and
Ascanio. All the others, had they come to the pontificate; would
have had to fear him, excepting D’Amboise and the Spanish car-
dinals ; the latter because of certain relations and reciprocal ob-
ligations, and the former because of his power, he having France
for his ally. The Duke then should by all means have had one
of the Spanish cardinals made Pope, and failing in that, he
should have supported the election of the Cardinal d’Amboise,
and not that of the Cardinal San Pietro in Vincola. For who-
ever thinks that amongst great personages recent benefits will
cause old injuries to be forgotten, deceives himself greatly. The
Duke, then, in consenting to the election of Julius I. committed
an error which proved the cause of his ultimate ruin.

CHAPTER VIII.
OF SUCH AS HAVE ACHIEVED SOVEREIGNTY BY MEANS OF CRIMES.

Bout as there are also two ways in which a person may rise
from private station to sovereignty, and which can neither be
attributed to fortune nor to valor, it seems to me they should
not be left unnoticed ; although one of these ways might be
more fully discussed when we treat of republics. These two
modes are, when one achieves sovereignty either by wicked and
nefarious means, or when a private citizen becomes sovereign
of his country by the favor of his fellow-citizens. I will ex-
plain the first by two examples, the one ancient and the other
modern; and without entering otherwise into the merits of
these cases, I judge they will suffice to any one who may find
himself obliged to imitate them.

Cuap. VIII] THE PRINCE. 29

Agathocles, a Sicilian, rose to be king of Syracuse, not only
from being a mere private citizen, but from the lowest and
most abject condition. He was the son of a potter, and led a
vicious life through all the various phases of his career. But
his wickedness was coupled with so much moral and physical
courage, that, having joined the army, he rose by successive
steps until he became Praetor of Syracuse. Having attained
that rank he resolved to make himself sovereign, and to retain
by violence, and regardless of others, that which had been in-
trusted to him by public consent. For this purpose he came to
an understanding with Hamilcar the Carthaginian, who was at
that time carrying on war with his army in Sicily; and having
one morning called an assembly of the people and the Senate of
Syracuse, as though he wished to confer with them about pub-
lic affairs, he made his soldiers, at a given signal, slay all the
Senators and the richest of the people, and then seized the
sovereignty of that city without any resistance on the part of
the citizens. Although afterwards twice defeated by the Car-
thaginians, and finally besieged by them in Syracuse, he not
only defended that city, but, leaving a portion of his forces
to sustain the siege, he crossed the sea with the other part
and attacked Africa, thus raising the siege of Syracuse in a
short time, and driving the Carthaginians to the extremest
necessity, compelling them to make terms with him, and to
remain content with the possession of Africa, and leave Sicily
to him.

Whoever now reflects upon the conduct and valor of Agatho-
cles will find in them little or nothing that can be attributed
to fortune ; for, as I have said, he achieved sovereignty, not by
the favor of any one, but through his high rank in the army,
which he had won by a thousand efforts and dangers, and he
afterwards maintained his sovereignty with great courage, and
even temerity. And yet we cannot call it valor to massacre
one’s fellow-citizens, to betray one’s friends, and to be devoid
of good faith, mercy, and religion; such means may enable a
man to achieve empire, but not glory. Still, if we consider the
valor of Agathocles in encountering and overcoming dangers,
and his invincible courage in supporting and mastering adver-
sity, we shall find no reason why he should be regarded inferior
to any of the most celebrated captains. But with all this, his
outrageous cruelty and inhumanity, together with his infinite

30 THE » PRINCE. (Cap. VIII.

crimes, will not permit him to be classed with the most cele-
brated men. We cannot therefore ascribe to either valor or
fortune the achievements of Agathocles, which he accomplished
without either the one or the other.

In our own times, during the pontificate of Alexander VLI.,
Oliverotto da Fermo, having been left an orphan, was brought
up by his maternal uncle, Giovanni Fogliani, and was in early
youth placed in the military service under Paolo Vitelli; so
that, after having been thoroughly trained and disciplined, he
might attain prominent rank in the army. After the death of
Paolo, he served under his brother Vitellozzo; and became in a
very short time, by his intelligence, his bodily strength and in-
trepidity, one of the foremost men in his service. But deeming
it servile to act under the command of others, he planned, to-
gether with some of the citizens of Fermo who preferred servi-
tude to the liberty of their country, and with the concurrence of
Vitellozzo, to seize Fermo and make himself lord of the same.
With this object he wrote to his uncle, Giovanni Fogliani, that,
having been absent from home for several years, he desired now
to come to see him and his native city, and also to look up his
patrimony ; and that, having until then striven only to acquire
honor, he desired to show his fellow-citizens that he had not
labored in vain ; and therefore he wished to come in splendid
style, accompanied by one hundred cavaliers, friends of his.
He begged his uncle, therefore, to be pleased to arrange that the
inhabitants of Fermo should give him an honorable reception,
which would be an honor not only to him, but also to Giovanni,
who was his near relative and had brought him up. Giovanni
therefore omitted no courtesies due to his nephew, and caused
the citizens of Fermo to give him an honorable reception, as
well as lodgings in their houses for himself and all his ret'nue.
After spending some days in Fermo, and arranging all that was
necessary for the execution of his villanous design, Oliverotto
gave a sumptuous entertainment, to which he invited his uncle
Giovanni and all the principal citizens of Fermo. After the
dinner and the other entertainments that are customary on such
occasions, Oliverotto artfully started a grave discussion respect-
ing the greatness of Pope Alexander VI. and his son Cesar
Borgia and their enterprises. When Giovanni and the others
replied to his remarks, Oliverotto suddenly arose, saying that
these things were only to be spoken of in private places, and

Cuar. VIII.) THE PRINCE, 31

withdrew to another room, whither Giovanni and the other
citizens followed. No sooner had they seated themselves there,
than some of Oliverotto’s soldiers rushed out from concealment
and massacred Giovanni and all the others.

After this murder Oliverotto mounted his horse, rode through
the streets of Fermo, and besieged the supreme magistrates in
the palace, who, constrained by fear, obeyed him, and formed
a government of which Oliverotto made himself sovercign.
And as all those who, as malcontents, might have injured
him, had been put to death, Oliverotto fortified himself in
his position with new institutions, both civil and military, so
that for the space of a year, during which he held the sover-
eignty, he was not only secure in the city of Fermo, but had
become formidable to all his neighbors; so that it would have
been as difficult to overcome him as Agathocles, had he not
allowed himself to be deceived by Cesar Borgia, when, as I have
related, he entrapped the Orsini and the Vitelli at Sinigaglia,
where Oliverotto was also taken and strangled, together with
Vitellozzo, his master in valor and in villany, just one year
after he had committed parricide in having his uncle Giovanni
Fogliani assassinated.

Some may wonder how it was that Agathocles, and others
like him, after their infinite treason and cruelty, could live for
any length of time securely in the countries whose sovereignty
they had usurped, and even defend themselves successfully
against external enemies, without any attempts on the part
of their own citizens to conspire against them; whilst many
others could not by means of cruelty maintain their state even
in time of peace, much less in doubtful times of war. I believe ;
that this happened according as the cruelties were well or ill|
applied; we may call cruelty well applied (if indeed we may '
call that well which in itself is evil) when it is committed once |
from necessity for self-protection, and afterwards not persisted |
in, but converted as far as possible to the public good. Jl
applied: cruelties are those which, though at first but few, yet
increase with time rather than cease altogether. Those who
adopt the first practice may, with the help of God and man,
render some service to their state, as had been done by Agatho-
cles ; but those who adopt the latter course will not possibly be
able to maintain themselves in their state. Whence it is to be
noted that in taking possession of a state the conqueror should

32 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. IX,

well reflect as to the harsh measures that may be necessary,
and then execute them at a single blow, so as not to be obliged
to renew them every day; and by thus not repeating them, to
assure himself of the support of the inhabitants, and win them
over to himself by benefits bestowed. And he who acts other-
wise, either from timidity or from being badly advised, will be
obliged ever to be sword in hand, and will never be able
to rely upon his subjects, who in turn will not be able to rely
upon him, because of the constant fresh wrongs committed by
him. Cruelties should be committed all at once, as im that way]
each separate one is less felt, and gives less offence; benefits, '
on the other hand, should be conferred one at a time, for in that \
way they will be more appreciated. But above all a prince
should live upon such terms with his subjects that no accident,
either for good or for evil, should make him vary his conduct
towards them. For when adverse times bring upon you the
necessity for action, you will no longer be in time to do evil;
and the good you may do will not profit you, because it will be
regarded as having been forced from you, and therefore will
bring you no thanks.

CHAPTER IX.
OF CIVIL PRINCIPALITIES.

But let us come now to that other case, when a prominent
citizen has become prince of his country, not by treason and
violence, but by the favor of his fellow-citizens. This may
be called a civil principality ; and to attain it requires neither
ereat virtue nor extraordinary good fortune, but rather a happy
shrewdness. I say, then, that such principalities are achieved
either by the favor of the people or by that of the nobles; for
in every state there will be found two different dispositions,
which result from this, — that the people dislike being ruled
and oppressed by the nobles, whilst the nobles seek to rule and
oppress the people. And this diversity of feeling and interests
engenders one of three effects in a state: these are either a
principality, or a government of liberty, or license. <A princi-
pality results either from the will of the people or from that of

Cuar. IX.] THE PRINCE. 33

the nobles, according as either the one or the other prevails
and has the opportunity. For the nobles, seeing that they can-
not resist the people, begin to have recourse to the influence
and reputation of one of their own class, and make him a
prince, so that under the shadow of his power they may give
free scope to their desires. The people also, seeing that they
cannot resist the nobles, have recourse to the influence and
reputation of one man, and make him prince, so as to be pro-
tected by his authority. He who becomes prince by the aid of
the nobles will have more difficulty in maintaining himself
than he who arrives at that high station by the aid of the peo-
ple. For the former finds himself surrounded by many who
in their own opinion are equal to him, and for that reason
he can neither command nor manage them in his own way.
But he who attains the principality by favor of the people
stands alone, and has around him none, or very few, that will
not yield him a ready obedience. Moreover, you cannot satisfy
the nobles with honesty, and without wrong to others, but it is
easy to satisfy the people, whose aims are ever more honest
than those of the nobles; the latter wishing to oppress, and the
former being unwilling to be oppressed. I will say further,
that a prince can never assure himself of a people who are
hostile to him, for they are too numerous; the nobles on the
other hand being but few, it becomes easy for a prince to make
himself sure of them.

The worst that a prince may expect of a people who are un-
friendly to him is that they will desert him; but the hostile
nobles he has to fear, not only lest they abandon him, but also
because they will turn against him. For they, being more far-
sighted and astute, always save themselves in advance, and
seek to secure the favor of him whom they hope may be suc-
cessful. The prince also is obliged always to live with the
same people; but he can do very well without the same nobles,
whom he can make and unmake at will any day, and bestow
upon them or deprive them of their rank whenever it pleases
him. The better to elucidate this subject, we must consider
the nobles mainly in two ways; that is to say, they either shape
their conduct so as to ally themselves entirely to your fortunes,
or they do not. Those who attach themselves to you thus,
if they are not rapacious, are to be honored and loved. Those
who do not attach themselves to you must be regarded in two

VOL. II. 3

34 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. IX.

ways. Either they are influenced by pusillanimity and a natu-
ral lack of courage, and then you may make use of them, and
especially of such as are men of intelligence; for in prosperity
they will honor you, and in adversity you need not fear them.
But if they purposely avoid attaching themselves to you from
notions of ambition, then it is an evidence that they think more
of their own interests than of yours; and of such men a prince
must beware, and look upon them as open enemies, for when
adversity comes they will always turn against him and contrib-
ute to his ruin.

Any one, therefore, who has become a prince by the favor
of the people, must endeavor to preserve their good will, which
will be easy for him, as they will ask of him no more than that
he shall not oppress them. But he who, contrary to the will
of the people, has become prince by the favor of the nobles,
should at once and before everything else strive to win the
good will of the people, which will be easy for him, by taking
them under his protection. And as men, when they receive
benefits from one of whom they expected only ill treatment,
will attach themselves readily to such a benefactor, so the peo-
ple will become more kindly disposed to such a one than if he
had been made prince by their favor. Now a prince can se-
cure the good will of the people in various ways, which differ
with their character, and for which no fixed rules can be given.
I will merely conclude by saying that it is essential for a prince /
to possess the good will and affection of his people, otherwise
he will be utterly without support in time of adversity. Nabis,
prince of Sparta, sustained the attacks of all Greece, and of a
victorious Roman army, and successfully defended his country
and his state against them; and when danger came, it was
enough for him to be assured of a few supporters, which would
not have sufficed if the people had been hostile to him. And
let no one contravene this opinion of mine by quoting the trite
saying, that “he who relies upon the people builds upon quick-
“sand”; though this may be true when a private citizen places
his reliance upon the people in the belief that they will come
to his relief when he is oppressed by his enemies or the magis-
trates. In such a case he will often find himself deceived; as
happened in Rome to the Gracchi, and in Florence to Messer
Scali. But it being a prince who places his reliance upon
those whom he might command, and being a man of courage

Cnar. X.] THE PRINCE. 35

and undismayed by adversity, and not having neglected to make
proper preparations, and keeping all animated by his own cour-
ageous example and by his orders, he will not be deceived by
the people ; and it will be seen that the foundations of his state
are laid solidly.

Those princes run great risks who attempt to change a civil
government into an absolute one; for such princes command
either in person or by means of magistrates. In the latter case,
their state is more feeble and precarious; for the prince is in
all things dependent upon the will of those citizens who are
placed at the head of the magistracy, who, particularly in times
of adversity, may with great ease deprive him of the govern-
ment, either by open opposition or by refusing him obedience.
For when danger is upon him, the prince is no longer in time
to assume absolute authority; for the citizens and subjects
who have been accustomed to receive their commands from
the magistrates will not be disposed to yield obedience to the
prince when in adversity. Thus in doubtful times there will
ever be a lack of men whom he can trust. Such a prince can-
not depend upon what he observes in ordinary quiet times, when
the citizens have need of his authority ; for then everybody runs
at his bidding, everybody promises, and everybody is willing to
die for him, when death is very remote. But in adverse times,
when the government has need of the citizens, then but few
will be found to stand by the prince. And this experience is
the more dangerous as it can only be made once.

A wise prince, therefore, will steadily pursue such a course
that the citizens of his state will always and under all circum-
stances feel the need of his authority, and will therefore always
prove faithful to him.

CHAPTER X.

IN WHAT MANNER THE POWER OF ALL PRINCIPALITIES SHOULD
BE MEASURED.

IN examining the nature of the different principalities, it is
proper to consider another point; namely, whether a prince is
sufficiently powerful to be able, in case of need, to sustain him-

36 THE PRINCE. (Cuar. X.

self, or whether he is obliged always to depend upon others for
his defence. And to explain this point the better, I say that,
/in my judgment, those are able to maintain themselves who,
from an abundance of men and money, can put a well-appointed
army into the field, and meet any one in open battle that may
attempt to attack them. And I esteem those as having need
of the constant support of others who cannot meet their ene-
mies in the field, but are under the necessity of taking refuge
behind walls and keeping within them. Of the first case I
have already treated, and shall speak of it again hereafter as
occasion may require. Of the second case I cannot say other-
wise than that it behooves such princes to fortify the cities
where they have their seat of government, and to provide them
well with all necessary supplies, without paying much attention
to the country. For any prince that has thoroughly fortified
the city in which he resides, and has in other respects placed
himself on a good footing with his subjects, as has been ex-
plained above, will not be readily attacked. For men will ever
be indisposed to engage in enterprises that present manifest
difficulties ; and it cannot be regarded as an easy undertaking
to attack a prince in a city which he has thoroughly fortified,
and who is not hated by his people.

The cities of Germany enjoy great liberties; they own little
land outside of the walls, and obey the Emperor at their pleas-
ure, fearing neither him nor any other neighboring power; for
they are so well fortified that their capture would manifestly
be tedious and difficult. They all have suitable walls and
ditches, and are amply supplied with artillery, and always keep
in their public magazines a year’s supply of provisions, drink,
and fuel. Moreover, by way of feeding the people without ex-
pense to the public, they always keep on hand a common stock
of raw materials to last for one year, so as to give employment
in those branches of industry by which the people are accus-
tomed to gain their living, and which are the nerve and life of
the city. They also attach much importance to military exer-
cises, and have established many regulations for their proper
practice.

A prince, then, who has a well-fortified city, and has not
made himself odious to his people, cannot be readily attacked ;
and if any one be nevertheless rash enough to make the at-
tempt, he would have to abandon it ignominiously, for the

Cuar. XI.] THE PRINCE. 37

things of this world are so uncertain that it seems almost im-
possible that any one should be able to remain a whole year
with his army inactive, carrying on the siege.

And if any one were to argue that, if the people who have
possessions outside of the city were to see them ravaged and
destroyed by the enemy, they would lose their patience, and
that their selfish desire to protect their property would cause
them to forget their attachment to the prince, I would meet
this objection by saying, that a powerful and valiant prince
will easily overcome this difficulty by encouraging his subjects
with the hope that the evil will not endure long, or by alarm-
ing them with fears of the enemy’s cruelty, or by assuring him-
self adroitly of those who have been too forward in expressing
their discontent.

It is, moreover, reasonable to suppose that the enemy will
ravage and destroy the country immediately upon his arrival
before the city, and whilst its inhabitants are still full of cour-
age and eager for defence. The prince, therefore, has the less
ground for apprehension, because, by the time that the ardor
of his people has cooled somewhat, the damage has already
been done, and the evil is past remedy. And then the people
will be the more ready to stand by their prince, for they will
regard him as under obligations to them, their houses having
been burnt and their property ravaged in his defence. For
it is the nature of mankind to become as much attached to
others by the benefits which they bestow on them, as by those
which they receive.

All things considered, then, it will not be difficult for a pru-
dent prince to keep up the courage of his citizens in time of
siege, both in the beginning as well as afterwards, provided
there be no lack of provisions or means of defence.

CHAPTER XI.
OF ECCLESIASTICAL PRINCIPALITIES.

IT remains now only to speak of ecclesiastical principalities,
in the attainment of which all difficulties occur beforehand. To
achieve them requires either virtue or good fortune; but they

=

38 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. XI.

are maintained without either the one or the other, for they are ;
sustained by the ancient ordinances of religion, which are so |
powerful and of such quality that they maintain their princes
in their position, no matter what their conduct or mode of life |
may be. These are the only princes that have states without |
the necessity of defending them, and subjects without governing |
them; and their states, en ceiecded are not taken from
them, whilst their subjects are indifferent to the fact that they
are not governed, and have no thought of the possibility of
alienating themselves from their princes.

These Deccan principalities, then, are the only ones ,
‘ that are secure and happy; and being under the direction of -
‘that supreme wisdom to which human minds cannot attain, I -
will abstain from all further discussion of them; for they are
/ raised up and sustained by the Divine Power, and it would be
(a bold and presumptuous office for any man to discuss them. _

Nevertheless, if any one asks how it comes that the Church
has acquired such power and greatness in temporal matters,
whilst previous to Alexander VI. all the Italian potentates, and
even the great barons and the smallest nobles, paid so little re-
gard to the temporal power of the Church, whilst now a king of
France trembles before it, and this power has been able to drive
him out of Italy and to ruin the Venetians, I shall not deem it
superfluous to recall to memory the circumstances of the growth
of this temporal power, although they are well known.

Before King Charles VIII. of France came into Italy, that
country was under the rule of the Pope, the Venetians, the
king of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines. These
powers were obliged always to keep in view two important
points: the one, not to permit any foreign power to come into
Italy with an armed force; and the other, to prevent each other
from further aggrandizement.

Those who had to be most closely watched by the others
were the Pope and the Venetians. To restrain the latter
required the united power of all the others, as was the case in
the defence of Ferrara; and to keep the Pope in check they
availed themselves of the barons of Rome, who were divided
into two factions, the Orsini and the Colonna; there being
constant cause of quarrel between them, they were always with
arms in hand, under the very eyes of the Pope, which kept the
papal power weak and infirm.

Caap. XI.] THE PRINCE. 39

And although now and then a courageous Pope arose, who
succeeded for a time in repressing these factions, as for instance
Sixtus IV., yet neither wisdom nor good fortune could ever
relieve them entirely from this annoyance. The cause of this
difficulty was the shortness of their lives; for in the ten years
which is about the average length of the life of a Pope, it would
be difficult for him to crush out either one of these factions
entirely. And if, for instance, one Pope should have succeeded
in putting down the Colonna, another one, hostile to the Orsini,
would arise and resuscitate the Colonna, but would not have
the time to put down the Orsini. This was the reason why the
temporal power of the Popes was so little respected in Italy.

Afterwards Alexander VI. came to the Pontificate, who, more
than any of his predecessors, showed what a Pope could accom-
plish with the money and power of the Church. Availing him-
self of the opportunity of the French invasion of Italy, and the
instrumentality of the Duke Valentino, Alexander accomplished
all those things which I have mentioned when speaking of the
actions of the Duke. And although Alexander’s object was not
the aggrandizement of the Church, but rather that of his son,
the Duke, yet all his efforts served to advance the interests of
the Church, which, after his death and that of his son, fell heir
to all the results of his labors.

Soon after came Julius I]., who found the Church powerful,
and mistress of the entire Romagna, with the Roman barons
crushed and the factions destroyed by the vigorous blows of
Alexander. He also found the way prepared for the accumula-
tion of money, which had never been employed before the time
of Alexander. Julius II. not only continued the system of
Alexander, but carried it even further, and resolved to acquire
the possession of Bologna, to ruin the Venetians, and to drive
the French out of Italy, in all of which he succeeded. And
this was the more praiseworthy in him, inasmuch as he did all
these things, not for his own aggrandizement, but for that of
the Church. He furthermore restrained the Orsini and the
Colonna factions within the limits in which he found them upon
his accession to the Pontificate ; and although there were some
attempts at disturbances between them, yet there were two
things that kept them down: one, the power of the Church,
which overawed them; and the other, the fact that neither of
them had any cardinals, who were generally the fomenters

40 THE PRINCE. (Cuar. XII.

of the disturbances between them. Nor will these party feuds
ever cease so long as the cardinals take any part in them. For
it is they who stir up the factions in Rome as well as elsewhere,
and then force the barons to sustain them. And it is thus that
the ambition of these prelates gives rise to the discord and the
disturbances amongst the barons.

His Holiness Pope Leo X. thus found the Church all-powerful
on his accession ; and it is to be hoped that, if his predecessors
have made the Church great by means of arms, he will make
her still greater and more venerable by his goodness and his
infinite other virtues.

CHAPTER XII.
OF THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF TROOPS, AND OF MERCENARIES.

Havine discussed in detail the characteristics of all those
kinds of principalities of which I proposed at the outset to
treat, and having examined to some extent the causes of their
success or failure, and explained the means by which many
have sought to acquire and maintain them, it remains for me
now to discuss generally the means of offence and defence
which such princes may have to employ, under the various
circumstances above referred to.

We have said how necessary it is for a prince to lay solid
foundations for his power, as without such he would inevitably
be ruined. The main foundations which all states must have,
whether new, or old, or mixed, are good laws and good armies.
And as there can be no good laws where there are not good
armies, so the laws will be apt to be good where the armies are
so. I will therefore leave the question of the laws, and confine
myself to that of the armies. I say, then, that the armies with
which a prince defends his state are either his own, or they are
mercenaries or auxiliaries, or they are mixed. Mercenary and
auxiliary troops are both useless and dangerous; and if any
one attempts to found his state upon mercenaries, it will never
be stable or secure ; for they are disunited, ambitious, and with-
out discipline, — faithless, and braggarts amongst friends, but
amongst enemies cowards, and have neither fear of God nor

Cua. XII. THE PRINCE. 41

good faith with men; so that the ruin of the prince who de-
pends on them will be deferred only just so long as attack is
delayed; and in peace he will be spoliated by his mercenaries,
and in war by his enemies: The reason of all this is, that
mercenary troops are not influenced by affection, or by any
other consideration except their small stipend, which is not
enough to make them willing to die for you. They are ready ©
to serve you as soldiers so long as you are at peace; but when
war comes, they will either run away or march off. There is
no difficulty in demonstrating the truth of this; for the pres-
ent ruin of Italy can be attributed to nothing else but to the
fact that she has for many years depended upon mercenary
armies, who for a time had some success, and seemed brave
enough amongst themselves, but so soon as a foreign enemy
came they showed what stuff they were made of. This was |
the reason why Charles VIII., king of France, was allowed to
take Italy with scarcely an effort, and as it were with merely
a piece of chalk.* Those who assert that our misfortunes
were caused by our own faults speak the truth; but these
faults were not such as are generally supposed to have been
the cause, but those rather which I have pointed out; and as
it was the princes who committed these faults, so they also
suffered the penalties.

I will demonstrate more fully the unhappy consequences of
employing mercenary armies. Their commanders are either
competent, or they are not; if they are, then you cannot trust
them, because their chief aim will always be their own ag-
grandizement, either by imposing upon you, who are their em-
ployer, or by oppressing others beyond your intentions; and
if they are incompetent, then they will certainly hasten your
ruin. If now you meet these remarks by saying that the same
will be the case with every commander, whether of mercenary
troops or others, I reply, that, inasmuch as armies are em-
ployed either by princes or by republics, the prince should
always in person perform the duty of commanding his army,
and a republic should send one of her own citizens to command
her troops, and in case he should not be successful, then they

* This expression of taking Italy “as it were with merely a piece of chalk ”
(col gesso) was made use of by Alexander VI., and means that Charles VIII.
had merely to send a quartermaster ahead with “a piece of chalk” to mark
the houses in which the French troops were to be quartered.

42 THE PRINCE. (Car. XIL

must change him; but if he is victorious, then they must be
careful to keep him within the law, so that he may not exceed
his powers. Experience has shown that princes as well as repub
lics achieve the greatest success in war when they themsclve
direct the movements of their own armies, whilst mercenary
troops do nothing but damage; and that a republic that has ar-
mies of her own is much less easily subjected to servitude by one
of her own citizens, than one that depends upon foreign troops. _

Thus Rome and Sparta maintained their liberties for many
centuries by having armies of their own; the Swiss are most
thoroughly armed, and consequently enjoy the greatest inde-
pendence and liberty. The Carthaginians, on the other hand,
furnish an example of the danger of employing mercenaries,
for they came very near being subjugated by them at the close
of the first war with Rome, although they had appointed some
of their own citizens as commanders. After the death of Epam-
inondas, the Thebans made Philip of Macedon commander
of their army, who after having been victorious deprived the
Thebans of their liberty. The Milanese, after the death of
Duke Philip, employed Francesco Sforza against the Vene-
tians; after having defeated them at Caravaggio, he combined
with them to subjugate his employers, the Milanese. The
father of Francesco Sforza, who was commander in the service
of Queen Joanna of Naples, suddenly left her entirely without
troops, in consequence of which she was compelled to throw
herself upon the protection of the king of Aragon, to save her
kingdom. And if the Venetians and the Florentines formerly
extended their dominions by means of mercenaries, and with-
out their commanders attempting to make themselves princes
of the country, but rather defending it loyally, I can only say
that the Florentines were greatly favored by fortune in that
respect. For of the valiant captains whose ambition they might
have feared, some were not victorious, some never met an en-
emy, and others directed their ambition elsewhere. Amongst
those who were not victorious was Giovanni Aguto,* whose good
faith was never put to the test, he having been unsuccessful in
the field; although it will be generally admitted that, had he
been successful, the Florentines would have been at his mercy.
The Sforzas and the Bracceschi were always opposed to each
other, which caused Francesco to direct his ambition towards

* John Sharpe, an English soldier of fortune.

Cuap. XII] THE PRINCE. 43

Lombardy, whilst Braccio turned his towards the Church and
the kingdom of Naples.

But let us come now to occurrences of more recent date.
The Florentines had conferred the command of their troops
upon Paolo Vitelli, a soldier of the greatest ability, who had
risen from private station to the highest post and reputation.
No one will deny that, if he had succeeded in taking Pisa, the
Florentines would have been obliged to submit to him; for
had he gone over to the enemy, they would have been helpless,
and if they kept him they would have been obliged to submit
to his terms.

If now we look at the Venetians, we shall find that they
carried on their wars securely and gloriously so long as they
confined themselves to their proper element, the water, where
they conducted their operations most bravely with their nobles
and their own people. But when they engaged in wars on
land, they no longer acted with their customary bravery, and
adopted the habit of the other Italian states of employing
mercenary troops. And although at the beginning of the
growth of their dominion on land they had no occasion to
have any serious apprehensions of their commanders, because
their own reputation was great and their possessions on land
small, yet when they extended these, which was under the
captaincy of Carmignuola, they became sensible of their error.
For although they were aware that it was by his superior con-
duct that they had defeated the Duke of Milan, yet on observ-
ing his lukewarmness in the further conduct of the war, they
concluded that they could no longer hope for victory under his
command. Still they dared not dismiss him for fear of losing
what they had gained, and therefore they deemed it necessary
for their own security to put him to death.

After that, the Venetians employed as generals of their
forces Bartolommeo da Bergamo, Ruberto da San Severino, the
Count Pittigliano, and the like, with whom they had reason
rather to apprehend losses than to expect successes; as indeed
happened afterwards at Vaila, where in one battle they lost
what had taken them eight hundred years of great labor to
acquire; for with this kind of troops acquisitions are feeble
and slow, whilst losses are quick and extraordinary.

Having thus far confined my examples to Italy, which has
been for many years controlled by mercenary armies, I will

44 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. XII.

now go back to an earlier period in discussing this subject ;
so that, having seen the origin and progress of the system, it
may be the more effectually corrected. You must know, then,
that in the earlier times, so soon as the Roman Empire began
to lose its power and credit in Italy, and when the Pope ac-
quired more influence in temporal matters, Italy became sub-
divided into a number of states. Many of the large cities took
up arms against their nobles, who, encouraged by the Emperor,
had kept them oppressed. The Church, by way of increasing
her own influence in temporal matters, favored this revolt of
the cities against their nobles. In many other cities the su-
preme power was usurped by some of their own citizens, who
made themselves princes of the same. Thus it was that Italy,
as it were, passed under the dominion of the Church and cer-
tain republics. And as these citizens and prelates were not
accustomed to the management of armies, they began to hire
foreigners for this purpose. The first who brought this sort
of military into high repute was Alberigo da Como, a native of
the Romagna. It was under his discipline that Braccio and
Sforza were trained, and these in turn became the arbiters
of Italy. They were succeeded by all those others who up to
our time have led the armies of Italy; and the result of all
their valor was that she was overrun by the French under
Charles VIII., ravaged and plundered by Louis XII., oppressed
by Ferdinand of Spain, and insulted and vituperated by the
Swiss.

The course which these mercenary leaders pursued for the
purpose of giving reputation and credit to their own mounted
forces was, first, to decry and destroy the reputation of the
infantry of the several states. They did this because, having
no territorial possessions of their own, and being mere soldiers
of fortune, they could achieve no reputation by means of a
small body of infantry, and for a larger force they could not
furnish subsistence. And therefore they confined themselves
to cavalry, a smaller force of which enabled them the more
readily to gain success and credit, and was at the same time
more easily subsisted. In this way they brought matters to
that point, that in an army of twenty thousand there were not
over two thousand infantry.

Moreover, they used all means and ingenuity to avoid expos-
ing themselves and their men to great fatigue and danger, and

Cuap. XIII. ] THE PRINCE, 45

never killing each other in their encounters, but merely taking
prisoners, who were afterwards liberated without ransom. They
never make any night attacks when besieging a place, nor did
the besieged make any night sorties; they never properly in-
trenched their camps, and never kept the field in winter. All
these practices were permitted by their rules of war, which
were devised by them expressly, as we have said, to avoid
hardships and danger; so that Italy was brought to shame
and slavery by this system of employing mercenary troops.

CHAPTER XIII.
OF AUXILIARIES, AND OF MIXED AND NATIONAL TROOPS.

AUXILIARY troops, which are the other kind which I have
characterized in the preceding chapter as useless, are such as
are furnished by a powerful ally whom a prince calls upon to
come with his troops to aid and defend him; as was done quite
lately by Pope Julius II., who, having had sad proof of the inef-
ficiency of mercenaries in his attempt upon Ferrara, resorted to
auxiliaries, and arranged with Ferdinand of Spain to send his
armies to his assistance.

Troops of this kind may be useful and good in themselves,

but they are always dangerous for him who calls them to his |
aid; for if defeated, he remains undone, and if victorious, then |

he is in their power like a prisoner. And although I could
adduce numerous examples of this from ancient history, yet
I will here cite that of Pope Julius II., which is still fresh in
our minds, and whose conduct in that respect could not well
have been more imprudent than what it was. For, wishing to
take Ferrara, he placed himself entirely in the hands of a
foreigner. Fortunately for him, however, an incident occurred
which saved him from the full effect of his bad selection; for
his auxiliaries having been defeated at Ravenna, the Swiss
suddenly appeared on the field and put the victors to igno-
minious flight. And thus Julius IJ. escaped becoming prisoner
either to his enemies who had fled, or to his auxiliaries; for
the enemy’s defeat was not due to their assistance, but to that
of others.

46 THE PRINCE. [Cuap. XIII.

The Florentines, having no army of their own, and wishing
to get possession of Pisa, employed for that purpose ten thou-
sand French troops, and were involved in greater danger by
them than they had ever experienced from any other difficulty.
The Emperor of Constantinople, by way of resisting the attacks
of his neighbors, put ten thousand troops into Greece, who at
the termination of the war refused to leave the country again ;
and this was the beginning of the subjection of Greece to the
infidels.

Whoever, then, desires not to be victorious, let him employ
auxiliary troops, for they are much more dangerous even than
mercenaries. For your ruin is certain with auxiliaries, who are
' all united in their obedience to another; whilst mercenaries,
even after victory, need more time and greater opportunity to
injure you, for they are not one homogeneous body, and have
been selected by yourself and are in your pay, and their com-
mander being appointed by you, he cannot so quickly gain
sufficient influence over these troops to enable him to injure
you. In short, with mercenaries the danger les in their cow-
ardice and bad faith; whilst with auxiliaries their valor con-
stitutes the danger.

A wise prince, therefore, should ever avoid employing either
one of them, and should rely exclusively upon his own troops,
and should prefer defeat with them rather than victory with
the troops of others, with whom no real victory can ever be
won. In proof of this, I shall not hesitate again to cite the
conduct of Cesar Borgia. This Duke entered the Romagna
with auxiliaries, taking there only French troops, with whom
he took Imola and Furl. But thinking afterwards that these
troops were not reliable, he had recourse to mercenaries,
whom he deemed less dangerous, and engaged the Orsini and
the Vitelli. These, however, proved themselves by their con-
duct to be uncertain, faithless, and dangerous ; and therefore
the Duke destroyed them, and then relied upon his own troops
exclusively. The difference between the one and the other of
these troops is easily seen when we look at the reputation
of the Duke Valentino at the time when he employed the
Orsini and the Vitelli, and when he had none but his own
troops; for then his credit increased steadily, and the Duke
was never more highly esteemed than when every one saw
that he was thoroughly master of his armies.

Cuap. XIII] THE PRINCE. 47

I did not intend to depart from Italian and recent instances,
and yet I cannot leave unnoticed the case of Hiero of Syracuse,
being one of those to whom I have referred before. Having been
made general of the Syracusan army, as before stated, he quickly
perceived that mercenary troops were not useful, their com-
manders being appointed in a similar manner as our Italian
Condottieri. And as it seemed to Hiero that he could neither
keep nor dismiss them with safety, he had them all put to
death and cut to pieces, and thenceforth carried on the war
exclusively with troops of his own.

I will also recall to memory an illustration from the Old
Testament applicable to this subject. David having offered to
go and fight the Philistine bully, Goliath, Saul, by way of en-
couraging David, gave him his own arms and armor, which
David however declined, after having tried them, saying that
he could not make the most of his strength if he used those
arms; and therefore he preferred to meet the enemy with no
other arms but his sling and his knife. In short, the armor of
another never suits you entirely ; it is either too large and falls
off your back, or weighs you down, or it is too tight.

Charles VII., father of Louis XI., king of France, having by
his valor and good fortune delivered France from the English}
recognized the necessity of depending solely upon his own'
armies, and organized in his kingdom regular companies of,
artillery, cavalry, and infantry. His son, Louis XI., afterwards
disbanded the infantry, and began to hire Swiss soldiers in
their stead. This error, being followed by others, is now seen
to have been the cause of the dangers to which that kingdom
was exposed; for by giving prominence to the Swiss, Louis
depreciated his own troops, and having disbanded his own in-
fantry entirely, and accustomed his mounted forces to the sup-
port of the Swiss, they felt that they could have no success
without them. Thence it came that the French could not hold
their own against the Swiss, and without their support they
could not stand against others. And thus the French armies
have remained mixed, that is to say, partly their own troops
and partly mercenaries; which, although better than either
auxiliaries or mercenaries alone, yet makes them much worse
than if they were composed exclusively of their own troops.
Let this example suffice; for the kingdom of France would
have been invincible if the military system established by

48 THE PRINCE. [Cuap. XIV.

Charles VII. had been persevered in and extended. But the
short-sightedness of men leads them to adopt any measure that
for the moment seems good, and which does not openly reveal
the poison concealed under it, as I have said above of hectic
fevers. |

A prince, then, who does not promptly recognize evils as they
arise, cannot be called wise ; but unfortunately this faculty is
given to but few. And if we reflect upon the beginning of the |
ruin of the Roman Empire, it will be found to have resulted
solely from hiring the Goths for its armies; for that was the ,
first cause of the enervation of the forces of the Empire; and |
the valor of which the Romans divested themselves was thus |
transferred to the Goths.

T conclude, then, that no prince can ever be secure that has
not an army of his own; and he will become wholly dependent
upon fortune if in times of adversity he lacks the valor to
defend himself. And wise men have ever held the opinion,
that nothing is more weak and unstable than the reputation
of power when not founded upon forces of the prince’s own;
by which I mean armies composed of his own subjects or
citizens, or of his own creation ;—all others are either mer-
cenaries or auxiliaries.

The means for organizing such armies of his own will readily
be found by the prince by studying the method in which Philip
of Macedon, father of Alexander the Great, and many republics
and princes, organized their armies, to which I refer in all
respects.

CHAPTER XIV.
OF THE DUTIES OF A PRINCE IN RELATION TO MILITARY MATTERS.

A PRINCE, then, should have no other thought or object so
much at heart, and make no other thing so much his especial
study, as the art of war and the organization and discipline of
his army; for that is the only art that is expected of him who
commands. And such is its power, that it not only maintains
in their position those who were born princes, but it often
enables men born in private station to achieve the rank of
princes. And on the other hand, we have seen that princes

Cuar. XIV.] THE PRINCE. 49

who thought more of indulgence in pleasure than of arms
have thereby lost their states.

Thus the neglect of the art of war is the principal cause of
the loss of your state, whilst a proficiency in it often enables
you to acquire one. Francesco Sforza, from being skilled in
arms, rose from private station to be Duke of Milan; and his
descendants, by shunning the labors and fatigue of arms, re-
lapsed into the condition of private citizens.

Amongst the other causes of evil that will befall a prince
who is destitute of a proper military force is, that it will make
him contemned; which is one of those disgraces against which
a prince ought especially to guard, as we shall demonstrate fur-
ther on. For there is no sort of proportion between one who
is well armed and one who is not so; nor is it reasonable that
he who is armed should voluntarily obey the unarmed, or
that a prince who is without a military force should remain
secure amongst his armed subjects. For when there is disdain
on the one side and mistrust on the other, it is impossible that
the two should work well together. A prince, then, who 187
not master of the art of war, besides other misfortunes, cannof}
be respected by his soldiers, nor can he depend upon them.
And therefore should the practice of arms ever be uppermost
in the prince’s thoughts; he should study it in time of peace
as much as in actual war, which he can do in two ways, the
one by practical exercise, and the other by scientific study. As
regards the former, he must not only keep his troops well dis-
ciplined and exercised, but he must also frequently follow the
chase, whereby his body will become inured to hardships, and
he will become familiar with the character of the country,
and learn where the mountains rise and the valleys debouch,
and how the plains lie; he will learn to know the nature of
rivers and of the swamps, to all of which he should give the
greatest attention. For this knowledge is valuable in many
ways to the prince, who thereby learns to know his own coun-
try, and can therefore better understand its defence. Again,
by the knowledge of and practical acquaintance with one
country, he will with greater facility comprehend the character
of others, which it may be necessary for him to understand.
For instance, the mountains, valleys, plains, rivers, and swamps
of Tuscany bear a certain resemblance to those of other prov-
inces ; so that by the knowledge of the character and forma-

VOL. 11, 4

50 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. XIV.

tion of one country he will readily arrive at that of others.
A prince who is wanting in that experience lacks the very first
essentials which a commander should possess; for that knowl-
edge teaches him where to find the enemy, to select proper
places for intrenchments, to conduct armies, regulate marches,
and order battles, and to keep the field with advantage.

Amongst other praises that have been accorded by different
writers to Philopcemen, prince of the Achaians, was, that in
time of peace he devoted himself constantly to the study of
the art of war; and when he walked in the country with
friends, he often stopped and argued with them thus: “ Sup-
“pose the enemy were on yonder mountain, and we should
“happen to be here with our army, which of the two would
“have the advantage? How could we go most safely to find
“the enemy, observing proper order? If we should wish to
“retreat, how should we proceed? and if the enemy were to
“retreat, which way had we best pursue him?” And thus
in walking he proposed to his friends all the cases that pos-
sibly could occur with an army, hearing their opiaions, and giv-
ing his own, and corroborating them with reasons; so that by
these continued discussions no case could ever arise in the con-
duct of an army for which he had not thought of the proper
remedy. As regards the exercise of the mind, the prince
should read history, and therein study the actions of eminent
men, observe how they bore themselves in war, and examine
the causes of their victories and defeats, so that he may imitate
the former and avoid the latter. But above all should he fol-
low the example of whatever distinguished man he may have
chosen for his model; assuming that some one has been
specially praised and held up to him as glorious, whose actions
and exploits he should ever bear in mind. Thus it is told
of Alexander that he imitated Achilles, and of Cesar that he
had taken Alexander for his model, as Scipio had done with
Cyrus. And whoever reads the life of Cyrus, written by
Xenophon, will not fail to recognize afterwards, in the life
of Scipio, of how much value this imitation was to him, and
how closely the latter conformed in point of temperance, affa-
bility, humanity, and liberality to the accounts given of Cyrus
by Xenophon.

A wise prince then should act in like manner, and should
never be idle in times of peace, but should industriously lay

Cur. XV.] THE PRINCE. 51

up stores of which to avail himself in times of adversity ; so
that, when Fortune abandons him, he may be prepared to resist
her blows.

CHAPTER XV.

OF THE MEANS BY WHICH MEN, AND ESPECIALLY PRINCES, WIN
APPLAUSE, OR INCUR CENSURE,

Ir remains now to be seen in what manner a prince should
conduct himself towards his subjects and his allies; and know-
ing that this matter has already been treated by many others,
I apprehend that my writing upon it also may be deemed pre-
sumptuous, especially as in the discussion of the same I shall
differ from the rules laid down by others. But as my aim is to /
write something that may be useful to him for whom it is in-
tended, it seems to me proper to pursue the real truth of the
matter, rather than to indulge in mere speculation on the same;
for many have imagined republics and principalities such as
have never been known to exist in reality. For the manner in
which men live is so different from the way in which they ought
to live, that he who leaves the common course for that which
he ought to follow will find that it leads him to ruin rather
than to safety. For aman who, in all respects, will carry out
only his professions of good, will be apt to be ruined amongst
so many who are evil. A prince therefore who desires to main-
tain himself must learn to be not always good, but to be so or
not as necessity may require.\ Leaving aside then the imagi-"
nary things concerning pring€s, and confining ourselves only to
the realities, I say that all men when they are spoken of, and
more especially princes, from being in a more conspicuous posi-
tion, are noted for some quality that brings them either praise
or censure. ‘Thus one is deemed liberal, another miserly (mz-
sero) to use a Tuscan expression (for avaricious is he who by
rapine desires to gain, and miserly we call him who abstains
too much from the enjoyment of his own). One man is es-
teemed generous, another rapacious; one cruel, another merci-
ful; one faithless, and another faithful; one effeminate and
pusillanimous, another ferocious and brave; one affable, an-
other haughty; one lascivious, another chaste; one sincere,

Bf THE PRINCE. [Cuar. XVI.

the other cunning; one facile, another inflexible; one grave,
another frivolous; one religious, another sceptical ; and so on.

I am well aware that it would be most praiseworthy for a
prince to possess all of the above-named qualities that are es-
teemed good; but as he cannot have them all, nor entirely
observe them, because of his human nature which does not
permit it, he should at least be prudent enough to know how to
avoid the infamy of those vices that would rob him of his state;
and if possible also to guard against such as are likely to en-
danger it. But if that be not possible, then he may with less
hesitation follow his natural inclinations. Nor need he care
about incurring censure for such vices, without which the pres-
ervation of his state may be difficult. For, all things con-
sidered, it will be found that some things that seem like virtue
will lead you to ruin if you follow them; whilst others, that
apparently are vices, will, if followed, result in your safety and
well-being.

CHAPTER XVI.
OF LIBERALITY AND PARSIMONIOUSNESS.

To begin with the first of the above-named qualities, I say
that it is well for a prince to be deemed liberal; and yet
liberality, indulged in so that you will no longer be feared,
will prove injurious. For liberality worthily exercised, as it
should be, will not be recognized, and may bring upon you the
reproach of the very opposite. For if you desire the reputa-
tion of being liberal, you must not stop at any degree of
sumptuousness ; so that a prince will in this way generally con-
sume his entire substance, and may in the end, if he wishes
to keep up his reputation for liberality, be obliged to subject
his people to extraordinary burdens, and resort to taxation,
and employ all sorts of measures that will enable him to pro-
cure money. This will soon make him odious with his people ;
and when he becomes poor, he will be contemned by everybody ;
so that having by his prodigality injured many and benefited
few, he will be the first to suffer every inconvenience, and be
exposed to every danger. And when he becomes conscious of

Cuar. XVI.] THE PRINCE. 53

this and attempts to retrench, he will at once expose himself to
the imputation of being a miser.

A prince then, being unable without injury to himself to
practise the virtue of liberality in such manner that it may be
generally recognized, should not, when he becomes aware of
this and is prudent, mind incurring the charge of parsimoni-

ousness. For after a while, when it is seen that by his pru-,

dence and economy he makes his revenues suffice him, and that,
he is able to provide for his defence in case of war, and engage
in enterprises without burdening his people, he all be con-
sidered liberal enough by all those from whom he takes noth-'
ing, and these are the many; whilst only those to whom he’
does not give, and which are the few, will look upon him as
parsimonious.

In our own times we have not seen any great things accom-
plished except by those who were regarded as parsimonious; all
others have been ruined. Pope Julius II., having been helped
by his reputation of liberality to attain the Pontificate, did not
afterwards care to keep up that reputation to enable him to
engage in war against the king of France; and he carried on
ever so many wars without levying any extraordinary taxes.
For his long-continued economy enabled him to supply the
extraordinary expenses of his wars.

If the present king of Spain had sought the reputation of
being liberal, he would not have been able to engage in so many
enterprises, nor could he have carried them to a successful issue.

A prince, then, who would avoid robbing his own subjects, and -

be able to defend himself, and who would avoid becoming poor

and abject or rapacious, should not mind incurring the reputa- °

tion of being parsimonious; for that is one of those vices that

~~

will enable him to maintain his state. And should it be alleged |

that Julius Cesar attained the Empire by means of his liberal-
ity, and that many others by the same reputation have achieved
the highest rank, then I reply, that you are either already a
prince, or are in the way of becoming one; in the first case
liberality would be injurious to you, but in the second it cer-
tainly is necessary to be reputed liberal. Now Cesar was aim-
ing to attain the Empire of Rome; but having achieved it, had
he lived and not moderated his expenditures, he would assur-
edly have ruined the Empire by his prodigality.

And were any one to assert that there have been many princes

54 THE PRINCE. (Cuar. XVII.

who have achieved great things with their armies, and who were
. accounted most liberal, I answer that a prince either spends his
own substance and that of his subjects, or that of others. Of
the first two he should be very sparing, but in spending that of
others he ought not to omit any act of liberality. The prince
who in person leads his armies into foreign countries, and sup-
ports them by plunder, pillage, and exactions, and thus dispenses
the substance of others, should do so with the greatest liberality,
as otherwise his soldiers would not follow him. For that which
belongs neither to him nor to his own subjects, a prince may
spend most lavishly, as was done by Cyrus, Cesar, and Alex-
ander. The spending of other people’s substance will not di

minish, but rather increase, his reputation; it is only and
spending of his own that is injurious to a prince.

And there is nothing that consumes itself so quickly as lib-
erality ; for the very act of using it causes it to lose the faculty
of being used, and will either impoverish and make you con-
temned, or it will make you rapacious and odious. And of all
the things against which a prince should guard most carefully
is the incurring the hatred and contempt of his subjects. Now,
liberality will bring upon you either the one or the other; there
is therefore more wisdom in submitting to be called parsimo-
nious, which may bring you blame without hatred, than, by aim-
ing to be called liberal, to incur unavoidably the reputation of
rapacity, which will bring upon you infamy as well as hatred.

CHAPTER XVII.

OF CRUELTY AND CLEMENCY, AND WHETHER IT IS BETTER TO BE
LOVED THAN FEARED.

Cominc down now to the other aforementioned qualities, I
say that every prince ought to desire the reputation of being
merciful, and not cruel; at the same time, he should be careful
not to misuse that mercy. Cesar Borgia was reputed cruel, yet
by his cruelty he reunited the Romagna to his states, and re-
stored that province to order, peace, and loyalty; and if we
carefully examine his course, we shall find it to have been really
much more merciful than the course of the people of Florence,

Cuap. XVII.] THE PRINCE. De

who, to escape the reputation of cruelty, allowed Pistoja to be

destroyed. <A prince, therefore, should not mind the ill Sone

of cruelty, when he can thereby keep his subjects united and
loyal; for a few displays of severity will really be more merciful,
than to allow, by an excess of clemency, disorders to occur,’
which are apt to result in rapine and murder; for these injure
a whole community, whilst the executions ordered by the prince
fall only upon a few individuals. And, above all others, the
new prince will find it almost impossible to avoid the reputation
of cruelty, because new states are generally exposed to many
dangers. It was on this account that Virgil made Dido to ex-
cuse the severity of her government, because it was still new,
saying, —
“Res dura, et regni novitas me talia cogunt
Moliri, et late fines custode tueri.” *

A prince, however, should be slow to believe and to act; nor

should he be too easily alarmed by his own fears, and should
proceed moderately and with prudence and humanity, so that ,

an excess of confidence may not make him incautious, nor too ;
much mistrust make him intolerant. This, then, gives rise to
the question ‘ whether it be better to be beloved than feared, or
‘“‘to be feared than beloved.” It will naturally be answered that
it would be desirable to be both the one and the other; but as
it is difficult to be both at the same time, it is much more safe
to be feared than to be loved, when you have to choose between
the two. For it may be said of men in general that they are

—_

ungrateful and fickle, dissemblers, avoiders of danger, and |

ereedy of gain. So long as you shower benefits upon them,
they are all yours; they offer you their blood, their substance,
their lives, and their children, provided the necessity for it is
far off; but when it is near at hand, then they revolt. And the
prince who relies upon their words, without having otherwise
provided for his security, is ruined; for friendships that are
won by rewards, and not by greatness and nobility of soul,
although deserved, yet are not real, and cannot be depended
upon in time of adversity.

Besides, men have less hesitation in offending one who makes
himself beloved than one who makes himself feared; for love

* “« My cruel fate,
And doubts attending an unsettled state,
Force me to guard my coasts from foreign foes.”
DRYDEN.

—————

i

56 THE PRINCE. (Cuar. XVII.

holds by a bond of obligation which, as mankind is bad, is |
broken on every occasion whenever it is for the interest of the
obliged party to break it. But fear holds by the apprehension‘
of punishment, which never leaves men. A prince, however,
should make himself feared in such a manner that, if he has/
not won the affections of his people, he shall at least not incu
their hatred ; for the being feared, and not hated, can go very,
well together, if the prince abstains from taking the substance!
of his subjects, and leaves them their women. And if you/
should be obliged to inflict capital punishment upon any one,
then be sure to do so only when there is manifest cause and
proper justification for it; and, above all things, abstain fromy
taking people’s property, for men will sooner forget the death
of their fathers than the loss of their patrimony. Besides, there
will never be any lack of reasons for taking people’s property ;
and a prince who once begins to live by rapine will ever find
excuses for seizing other people’s property. On the other hand,
reasons for taking life are not so easily found, and are more
readily exhausted. But when a prince is at the head of his
army, with a multitude of soldiers under his command, then it
is above all things necessary for him to disregard the reputa-
tion of cruelty; for without such severity an army cannot be
kept together, nor disposed for any successful feat of arms.
Amongst the many admirable qualities of Hannibal, it is re-
lated of him that, having an immense army composed of a very
great variety of races of men, which he led to war in foreign
countries, no quarrels ever occurred amongst them, nor were
there ever any dissensions between them and their chief, either
in his good or in his adverse fortunes; which can only be ac-
counted for by his extreme cruelty. This, together with his
boundless courage, made him ever venerated and terrible in the
eyes of his soldiers; and without that extreme severity all his
other virtues would not have sufficed to produce that result.
Inconsiderate writers have, on the one hand, admired his
sreat deeds, and, on the other, condemned the principal cause
of the same. And the proof that his other virtues would not
have sufficed him may be seen from the case of Scipio, who was
one of the most remarkable men, not only of his own time, but
in all history. His armies revolted in Spain solely in conse-
quence of his extreme clemency, which allowed his soldiers
more license than comports with proper military discipline.

rp

Cuap. XVIII.) THE PRINCE. Di

This fact was censured in the Roman Senate by Fabius Maxi-
mus, who called Scipio the corrupter of the Roman soldiers.
The tribe of the Locrians having been wantonly destroyed by
one of the licutenants of Scipio, he neither punished him for
that nor for his insolence,— simply because of his own easy
nature; so that, when somebody wished to excuse Scipio in the
Senate, he said, “‘ that there were many men who knew better
‘how to avoid errors themselves than to punish them in oth-
“ers.” This easy nature of Scipio’s would in time have dimmed
his fame and glory if he had persevered in it under the Empire ;
but living as he did under the government of the Senate, this
dangerous quality of his was not only covered up, but actually
redounded to his honor.

To come back now to the question whether it be better to be
beloved than feared, I conclude that, as men love of their own
free will, but are inspired with fear by the will of the prince, a
wise prince should always rely upon himself, and not upon the
will of others; but, above all, should he always strive to avoid
being hated, as I have already said above.

CHAPTER XVIII.
IN WHAT MANNER PRINCES SHOULD KEEP THEIR FAITH.

It must be evident to every one that it is more praiseworthy
for a prince always to maintain good faith, and practise in-
tegrity rather than craft and deceit. And yet the experience
of our own times has shown that those princes have achieved
great things who made small account of good faith, and who
understood by cunning to circumvent the intelligence of others;
and that in the end they got the better of those whose actions
were dictated by loyalty and good faith. You must know,
therefore, that there are two ways of carrying on a contest;
the one by law, and the other by force. The first is practised
by men, and the other by animals; and as the first is often
insufficient, it becomes necessary to resort to the second.

A prince then should know how to employ the nature of man,
and that of the beasts as well. This was figuratively taught
by ancient writers, who relate how Achilles and many other

58 THE PRINCE. (Cuar. XVIII.

princes were given to Chiron the centaur to be nurtured, and
how they were trained under his tutorship; which fable means
nothing else than that their preceptor combined the qualities
of the man and the beast; and that a prince, to succeed, will
have to employ both the one and the other nature, as the one
without the other cannot produce lasting results.

It being necessary then for a prince to know well how to
employ the nature of the beasts, he should be able to assume
both that of the fox and that of the lion; for whilst the latter
cannot escape the traps laid for him, the former cannot defend
himself against the wolves. A prince should be a fox, to know
the traps and snares; and a lion, to be able to frighten the
wolves; for those who simply hold to the nature of the lion
do not understand their business.

A sagacious prince then cannot and should not fulfil his
pledges when their observance is contrary to his interest, and
when the causes that induced him to pledge his faith no
longer exist. If men were all good, then indeed this precept
would be bad; but as men are naturally bad, and will not ob-
serve their faith towards you, you must, in the same way, not
observe yours to them; and no prince ever yet lacked legiti-
mate reasons with which to color his want of good faith. In-
numerable modern examples could be given of this; and it
could easily be shown how many treaties of peace, and how
many engagements, have been made null and void by the faith-
lessness of princes; and he who has best known how to play
the fox has ever been the most successful.

But it is necessary that the prince should know how to soy
this nature well, and how to be a great hypocrite and eee
bler. For_men are so simple, and yield so mueh to immediate
necessity, that the deceiver will never lack dupes. “I will men-
tion one of the most recent examples. Alexander VI. never
did nor ever thought of anything but to deceive, and always
found a reason for doing so. No one ever had greater skill in
asseverating, or who affirmed his pledges with greater oaths
and observed them less, than Pope Alexander; and yet he was
always successful in his deceits, because he knew the weakness
of men in that particular.

It is not necessary, however, for a prince to possess all the
above-mentioned qualities ; but it is essential that he should at
least seem to have them. I will even venture to say, that to

A ?

Cuar. XVIII.) THE PRINCE. ob

have and to practise them constantly is pernicious, but to seem
to have them is useful. For instance, a prince should seem to
be merciful, faithful, humane, religious, and upright, and should
even be so in reality ; but he should have his mind so trained
that, when occasion requires it, he may know how to change to
the opposite. And it must be understood that a prince, and
especially one who has but recently acquired his state, cannot
perform all those things which cause men to be esteemed as
good; he being often obliged, for the sake of maintaining his
state, to act contrary to humanity, charity, and religion. And
therefore is it necessary that he should have a versatile mind,
capable of changing readily, according as the winds and changes
of fortune bid him; and, as has been said above, not to swerve
from the good if possible, but to know how to resort to evil if
necessity demands it.

A prince then should be very careful never to allow anything
to escape his lips that does not abound in the above-named
five qualities, so that to see and to hear him he may seem all
charity, integrity, and humanity, all uprightness, and all piety.
And more than all else is it necessary for a prince to seem to.
possess the last quality ; for mankind in general judge more
by what they see and hear than by what they feel, every one
being capable of the former, and but few of the latter. Every-
body sees what you seem to be, but few really feel what you
are; and these few dare not oppose the opinion of the many,
who are protected by the majesty of the state; for the actions
of all men, and especially those of princes, are judged by the
result, where there is no other judge to whom to appeal.

A prince then should look mainly to the successful mainte-
nance of his state. The means which he employs for this will
always be accounted honorable, and will be praised by every-
body ; for the common people are always taken by appearances
and by results, and it is the vulgar mass that constitutes the
world. But avery few have rank and station, whilst the many
have nothing to sustain them. A certain prince of our time,
whom it is well not to name, never preached anything but
peace and good faith; but if he had always observed either the
one or the other, it would in most instances have cost him his
reputation or his state.

60 THE PRINCE. [Cuap. XIX.

CHAPTER XIX.
A PRINCE MUST AVOID BEING CONTEMNED AND HATED.

Havine thus considered separately the most important of
the above-mentioned qualities which a prince should possess,
I will now briefly discuss the others under this general maxim:
that a prince should endeavor, as has already been said, to
avoid everything that would tend to make him odious and con-
temned. And in proportion as he avoids that will he have
performed his part well, and need fear no danger from any
other vices. Above all, a prince makes himself odious by ra-
pacity, that is, by taking away from his subjects their property
and their women, from which he should carefully abstain.
The great mass of men will live quietly and contentedly, pro-
vided you do not rob them of their substance and their honor;
so that you will have to contend only with the ambition of a
few, which is easily restrained in various ways.

A prince becomes despised when he incurs by his acts the
reputation of being variable, inconstant, effeminate, pusillani-
mous, and irresolute; he should therefore guard against this
as against a dangerous rock, and should strive to display in all
his actions grandeur, courage, gravity, and determination. And
in judging the private causes of his subjects, his decisions
should be irrevocable. Thus will he maintain himself in such
esteem that no one will think of deceiving or betraying him.
The prince, who by his habitual conduct gives cause for such
an opinion of himself, will acquire so great a reputation that
it will be difficult to conspire against him, or to attack him;
provided that it be generally known that he is truly excellent,
and revered by his subjects. For there are two things which
a prince has to fear: the one, attempts against him by his own
subjects; and the other, attacks from without by powerful for-
eigners. Against the latter he will be able to defend himself
by good armies and good allies, and whoever has the one will
not lack the other. And so long as his external affairs are
kept quiet, his internal security will not be disturbed, unless
it should be by a conspiracy. And even if he were to be as-
sailed from without, if he has a well-organized army and has
lived as he should have done, he will always (unless he should

Cusp, XIX] THE PRINCE. 61

give way himself) be able to withstand any such attacks, as

we have related was done by Nabis, tyrant of Sparta. But

even when at peace externally, it nevertheless behooves the

prince to be on his guard, lest his subjects conspire against

him secretly. He will, however, be sufficiently secure against

this, if he avoids being hated and despised, and keeps his sub-

jects well satisfied with himself, which should ever be his aim,

as I have already explained above. Not to be hated nor con-

temned by the mass of the people is one of the best safeguards

for a prince against conspiracies; for conspirators always be-

lieve that the death of the prince will be satisfactory to the |
people; but when they know that it will rather offend than ,
conciliate the people, they will not venture upon such a course,/
for the difficulties that surround conspirators are infinite.

Experience proves that, although there have been many con-
spiracies, yet but few have come to a good end; for he who
conspires cannot act alone, nor can he take any associates ex-
cept such as he believes to be malcontents ; and so soon as you
divulge your plans to a malcontent, you furnish him the means
wherewith to procure satisfaction. For by denouncing it he
may hope to derive great advantages for himself, seeing that
such a course will insure him those advantages, whilst the
other is full of doubts and dangers. He must indeed be a very
rare friend of yours, or an inveterate enemy of the prince, to
observe good faith and not to betray you.

But to reduce this matter to a few words, I say that on the
side of the conspirator there is nothing but fear, jealousy, and
apprehension of punishment; whilst the prince has on his side
the majesty of sovereignty, the laws, the support of his friends
and of the government, which protect him. And if to all this
be added the popular good will, it seems impossible that any
one should be rash enough to attempt a conspiracy against him.
For ordinarily a conspirator has cause for apprehension only
before the execution of his evil purpose ; but in this case, having
the people for his enemies, he has also to fear the consequences |
after the commission of the crime, and can look nowhere for
a refuge. Upon this point I might adduce innumerable ex-
amples, but will content myself with only one, which occurred
within the memory of our fathers. Messer Annibale Benti-
vogli, grandfather of the present Messer Annibale, being
prince of Bologna, was murdered by the Canneschi, who had

62 THE PRINCE. [Cuap. XIX.

conspired against him, and there remained of his family one
Messer Giovanni, who was still in his infancy. Immediately
after the murder of Messer Annibale, the people rose and killed
all the Canneschi. This was the consequence of the popularity
which the Bentivogli enjoyed in those days in Bologna, and
which went to that extent that after the death of Messer Anni-
bale, when there remained not one of the family in Bologna
capable of governing the state, the people received information
that there was a Bentivogli in Florence who, until then, had
been reputed the son of a blacksmith. They sent a deputation
to him at Florence and conferred the government of the city
upon him, which he exercised undisturbed until Messer Gio-
vanni came to be of suitable age to assume it himself. I con-
clude, that a prince need apprehend but little from conspira-
cies, provided he possess the good will of his people, which is
one of the most important points that a prince has to look to.

Amongst the well-organized and well-governed kingdoms of
our time is that of France, which has a great many excellent
institutions that secure the liberty and safety of tle king. The
most important of these is the Parliament, and its authority ;
for the founder of that kingdom knew the: ambition and inso-
lence of the nobles, and judged it necessary to put a bit into
their mouths with which to curb them. He knew at the same
time the hatred of the mass of the people towards the nobles,
based upon their fears. Wishing to secure both,.and yet un-
willing to make this the special care of the king, so as to re-
lieve him of the responsibility to the nobles of seeming to favor
the people, and to the people of favoring the nobles, he insti-
tuted the Parliament to act as a judge, which might, without
reference to the king, keep down the great, and favor the weak.
Nor could there be a wiser system, or one that affords more
security to the king and his realm.

We may also draw another notable conclusion from this,
namely, that princes should devolve all matters of responsi-
bility upon others, and take upon themselves only those o
grace. I conclude then anew, that a prince should treat his
nobles with respect and consideration, and should avoid at the
same time making himself odious to his people. It may per-
haps seem to many that, considering the life and death of
many Roman Emperors, their example contradicts my opin-
ions, seeing that some who have led most exemplary lives, and

/

Cuap. XIX.] THE PRINCE. 63

displayed most noble qualities of the soul, yet lost the Empire,
or were even killed by their followers, who had conspired against
them. I desire to meet this objection, and will therefore dis-
cuss the characters of some of those Emperors, showing that
the causes of their ruin were not different from those adduced
by me above; and I will present some considerations that are
important to the student of the history of those times. In this
I shall confine myself to those Emperors that succeeded one
another from Marcus, the philosopher, to Maximinius ; namely,
Marcus, his son Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Severus, Anto-
ninus Caracalla his son, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander,
and Maximinius.

And I must remark at the outset, that, where in other princi-
palities the prince had to contend only with the ambition of the
nobles and the insolence of the people, the Roman Emperors
had to meet a third difficulty, in having to bear with the cruelty
and cupidity of the soldiers, which were so great that they
caused the ruin of many, because of the difficulty of satisfying
at the same time both the soldiers and the people; for the
people love quiet, and for that reason they revere princes who
are modest, whilst the soldiers love a prince of military spirit,
and who is cruel, haughty, and rapacious. And these qualities
the prince must practise upon the people, so as to enable him
to increase the pay of the soldiers, and to satisfy their avarice
and cruelty. Whence it came that all those Emperors were
ruined who had not, by their natural or acquired qualities, the
necessary influence that would enable them to restrain at
the same time the soldiers and the people. Most of them,
therefore, and especially those who had but recently attained
the sovereignty, knowing the difficulty of satisfying two such
different dispositions, sought rather to satisfy the soldiers, and
cared but little about oppressing and offending the people. And
this course was unavoidable for them; for inasmuch as princes
generally cannot prevent being hated by some, they ought first
of all to strive not to be hated by the mass of the people; but
failing in this, they should by all means endeavor to avoid being
hated by the more powerful. And therefore those Emperors
who, by reason of having but recently acquired the Empire, had
need of extraordinary favors, attached themselves more readily
to the soldiery than to the people; which, however, was advan-
tageous to them or not only according as such Emperor knew

64 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. XIX.

how to maintain his ascendency over them. These were the
reasons why Marcus, Pertinax, and Alexander, being all three
men of modest lives, lovers of justice, enemies to cruelty,
humane, and benevolent, came to a bad end, Marcus alone
excepted, who lived and died much honored; but he had suc-
ceeded to the Empire by inheritance, and was not indebted for
it either to the soldiers or to the favor of the people. He was,
moreover, endowed with many virtues, which made him gen-
erally revered ; and so long as he lived he always kept both the
soldiery and the people within their proper bounds, and thus
was neither hated nor contemned. But Pertinax was made
emperor contrary to the will of the army, which, having been
accustomed under Commodus to a life of unrestrained license,
could not bear the orderly life to which Pertinax wished to
constrain them. Having thus incurred their hatred, to which
disrespect became added on account of his age, he was ruined
at the very outset of his reign. And here I would observe that
hatred may be caused by good as well as by evil works, and
therefore (as I have said above) a prince who wants to pre-
serve his state is often obliged not to be good; for when the
mass of the people or of the soldiery, or of the nobles, whose
support is necessary for him, is corrupt, then it becomes the
interest of the prince to indulge and satisfy their humor; and
it is under such circumstances that good works will be inju-
rious to him. Let us come now to Alexander, who was so
good that, amongst other merits, it was said of him that dur-
ing the fourteen years of his reign not one person was put to
death by him without regular judicial proceedings. But being
regarded as effeminate, and as allowing himself to be governed
by his mother, he fell into disrespect, and the soldiery con-
spired against him and killed him.

Discussing now, by way of the opposite extreme, the qualities
of Commodus, Severus, Antoninus Caracalla, and Maximinius,
we find them to have been most cruel and rapacious ; and that,
for the sake of keeping the soldiers satisfied, they did not hesi-
tate to commit every kind of outrage upon the people; and that
all of them, with exception of Septimus Severus, came to a bad
end. The latter possessed such valor that, although he imposed
heavy burdens upon the people, yet, by keeping the soldiers his
friends, he was enabled to reign undisturbed and happily; for
his bravery caused him to be so much admired by the soldiers

Cuap. XIX.] THE PRINCE, 65

and the people that the latter were in a manner stupefied and
astounded by it, whilst it made the former respectful and
satisfied.

And as the actions of Severus were really great, considering
that he was a prince of but recent date, I will show how well
he knew to play the part of the fox and of the lion, whose
natures a prince should be able to imitate, as I have shown
above. Severus, knowing the indolence of the Emperor Julian,
persuaded the troops which he commanded in Slavonia that it
would be proper for them to go to Rome to avenge the death of
Pertinax, who had been killed by the Imperial Guard. Under
this pretext, without showing that he aspired to the Empire, he
moved the army to Rome, and was in Italy before it was known
even that he had started. On his arrival in Rome the Senate,
under the influence of fear, elected Severus Emperor, Julian
having previously been slain.

After this beginning, Severus had yet two difficulties to
overcome before he could make himself master of the entire
state: the one in Asia, where Niger, commander of the army
of the East, had himself proclaimed Emperor; and the other in
the West, caused by Albinus, who also aspired to the Empire.
Deeming it dangerous to declare himself openly the enemy
of both, Severus resolved to attack Niger and to deceive Al-
binus; and therefore he wrote to the latter that, having been
elected Emperor by the Senate, he wished to share that dignity
with him, and accordingly sent him the title of Cesar, and
accepted him as his colleague, by resolution of the Senate.
Albinus received it all as truth; but after Severus had defeated
and slain Niger, and quieted matters in the Hast, he returned
to Rome and complained in the Senate that Albinus, little
grateful for the benefits which he had bestowed upon him, had
plotted treason and murder against him, and that therefore it
was incumbent upon him to go and punish this ingratitude and
treason. Severus thereupon went into France to seek Albinus,
and deprived him of his state and his life.

If now we examine minutely the conduct of Severus, we shall
find that he combined the ferocity of the lion with the cunning
of the fox, and that he was feared and revered by every one,
and was not hated by the army. Nor ought we to be surprised
to find that, although a new man, he yet should have been able
to maintain himself at the head of so great an empire; for his

VOL. II. 5

66 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. XIX.

eminent reputation saved him always from incurring the hatred
of the people, which his rapacity might otherwise have pro-
voked.

Antoninus Caracalla, the son of Severus, was also a man
possessed of eminent qualities and rare gifts, which made him
admired by the people and acceptable to the soldiery. For he
was a military man, capable of enduring every fatigue, despising
the delicacies of the table and every other effeminacy, which
made him beloved by all the army. But his ferocity and
cruelty were so great and unprecedented that, having on several
occasions caused a large number of the people of Rome to be
put to death, and at another time nearly the entire population
of Alexandria, he became odious to the whole world, and began
to be feared even by his immediate attendants, and finally was
killed by a centurion in the midst of his army. Whence we
may observe that princes cannot always escape assassination
when prompted by a resolute and determined spirit; for any
man who himself despises death can always inflict it upon
others. But as men of this sort are rare, princes need not be
very apprehensive about them; they should, however, be most
careful not to offend grievously any of those who serve their
persons, or who are around and near them in the service of the
state. It was in this respect that Caracalla erred, for he had
contumeliously slain a brother of a centurion, whom he had
also threatened repeatedly, and yet kept him as one of his
body-guard; which was a most reckless thing to do, and well
calculated to prove ruinous to Antoninus Caracalla, as it
finally did.

But we come now to Commodus, who might have kept the
Empire with great ease, having inherited it as the son of Mar-
cus Aurelius. All he had to do was to follow in the footsteps
of his father, which would have satisfied both the people and
the army. But being of a cruel and bestial nature, he began
by entertaining the army and making it licentious, so as to
enable him the more freely to indulge his rapacity upon the
people. And on the other hand he made himself contemptible
in the eyes of his soldiers, by disregarding his own dignity,
and descending into the arena to combat with gladiators, and
doing other disgraceful things wholly unworthy of the imperial
majesty. Being thus hated by the people and contemned by
the army, a conspiracy was set on foot against him and he
was killed.

Cuap. XIX.] THE PRINCE, 67

It remains now for me to discuss the character of Maximin-
ius. He was a most warlike man; and the army being tired
of the effeminacy of Alexander Severus, of which I have spoken
above, they elected Maximinius to the Empire after the death
of Alexander. But he did not retain it very long, for two
circumstances made him both odious and despised. One was
his extremely low origin, having been a shepherd in Thracia
(which was generally known, and caused him to be held in
great contempt by every one), and the other was his delay,
when elected Emperor, to go to Rome, there to take possession
of the imperial throne. He had moreover earned the reputa-
tion of extreme cruelty, in consequence of the many acts of
ferocity which he had committed through the agency of his
prefects in Rome and elsewhere. Being thus despised by the
whole world on account of his low origin, and on the other
hand hated because of his cruelty, a conspiracy was formed
against him, first in Africa, and then by the Senate and people
of Rome and all Italy. His army joined in the conspiracy, for
being engaged in the siege of Aquileia and finding difficulty
in taking it, they became tired of his harshness; and seeing
that he had so many enemies, they lost their fear of him and
put him to death.

I care not to discuss either Heliogabalus, or Macrinus, or
Julian, who, being utterly contemptible, came quickly to an
end; but will conclude this discourse by saying that the
princes of our times are not subjected to the same difficulties
in their governments by the extraordinary demands of their
armies. For although they are obliged to show them some
consideration, yet they are easily disposed of, as none of the
sovereigns of the present day keep their armies constantly
together, so as to become veterans in the service of the govern-
ment and the administration of the provinces, as was the case
in the time of the Roman Empire. And if in those days it
was necessary to have more regard to the armies than to the
people, because of their greater power, it nowadays behooves
princes rather to keep the people contented, for they have more
influence and power than the soldiers. The Grand Turk and
the Sultan of Egypt form an exception to this rule, for the
Turk always keeps himself surrounded by twelve thousand
infantry and fifteen thousand cavalry, on which the strength
and security of his empire depends; he must therefore keep

68 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. XIX.

these troops devoted to himself, regardless of all considera-
tion for the people.

It is much the same with the government of the Sultan of
Egypt, which being entirely under the control of the army, it
behooves him also, regardless of the people, to keep the soldiery
his friends. And here I would remark that the government
of the Sultan of Egypt differs from all other principalities,
although in some respects similar to the Christian Pontificate,
which cannot be called either an hereditary or a new princi-
pality. For when the Sultan dies, his sons do not inherit the
government, but it devolves upon whoever is elected to that
dignity by those who have authority in the matter. And as
this system is consecrated by time, it cannot be called a new
principality; for it is free from all the difficulties that apper-
tain to new principalities. For even if the prince be new, the
institutions of the state are old, and are so organized as to
receive the elected the same as though he were their heredi-
tary lord.

But to return to our subject, I say, that whoever reflects
carefully upon the above discourse will find that the ruin of
the above-mentioned Emperors was caused by either hatred or
contempt; and he will also see how it happened that, whilst
some of them having proceeded one way and some in the oppo-
site, In some instances the one had a happy, and the other an
unhappy end. For in the case of Pertinax and Alexander,
both being new princes, it was useless and dangerous for them
to attempt to imitate Marcus, who had inherited the Empire.
And in the same way it was ruinous for Caracalla, Commo-
dus, and Maximinius to imitate Severus, for neither of them
possessed the noble qualities necessary to enable them to fol-
low in his footsteps.

A prince, therefore, who has but recently acquired his princi-
pality, cannot imitate the conduct of Marcus Aurelius; nor is
it necessary for him to imitate that of Septimus Severus. But
he should learn from Severus what is necessary to found a
state, and from Marcus what is proper and glorious for the
preservation of a state that is already firmly established.

Omar. XX. THE PRINCE. 69

CHAPTER XX.

WHETHER THE ERECTION OF FORTRESSES, AND MANY OTHER THINGS
WHICH PRINCES OFTEN DO, ARE USEFUL, OR INJURIOUS.

Some princes, with a view to a more secure tenure of their
states, have disarmed their subjects; some have kept the
countries subject to them divided into different parties; others
have purposely encouraged enmities against themselves ; whilst
others again have endeavored to win the good will of those
whom in the beginning of their reign they suspected of hostile
feelings. Some have built fortresses, whilst others have de-
molished and razed those that existed. Now although I can-
not pronounce any definite judgment as to these different ways
of proceeding, without examining the particular condition of
those states where similar proceedings are to be applied, yet
I will treat the subject in that general way of which it is sus-
ceptible.

It has never happened that a new prince has disarmed his
subjects; on the contrary rather, if he has found them un-
armed, he has armed them, and in that way has made them
as it were his own, and made those faithful who before were
suspect; whilst those who were loyal to him before will re-
main so, and thus he will convert his subjects into his partisans
and supporters. And although a prince cannot arm all his
subjects, yet by giving certain advantages to those whom he
does arm, he secures himself the better against the others who
are not armed, and who will excuse the preference shown to
those whom the prince has armed and thereby laid under obli-
gations to himself. For the others will excuse him, and will
recognize the necessity of rewarding those who are exposed to
greater danger, and who have more onerous duties to perform. ,

But a prince who disarms his subjects will at once offend
them, by thus showing that he has no confidence in them, but
that he suspects men either of cowardice or want of loyalty,
and this will cause them to hate him. And as the prince -
cannot remain without an armed force, he will have to resort
to mercenaries, the objections to which I have fully set forth
in a preceding chapter. And even if these mercenaries were
not absolutely bad, they would still be insufficient to protect

70 THE PRINCE. (Cuar. XX.

the prince against powerful enemies, and suspected subjects.
Therefore, as I have said, new princes should always establish
armed forces in their newly acquired principalities; for which
history furnishes us abundance of precedents.

But when a prince acquires a new state, which he annexes as
an appendage to his old possessions, then it is advisable for him
to disarm the inhabitants of the new state, excepting those who,
upon the acquisition of the same, declared in the prince’s favor.
But even these it will be well for him to weaken and enervate
when occasion offers; so that his armed forces shall be -organ-
ized in such a way as to consist entirely of his own subjects,
natives of his original state.

‘Our ancestors, and those who were regarded as wise, used to
say that the way to hold Pistoja was through party divisions,
and Pisa by means of fortresses. Accordingly they encouraged
such party divisions in some of the towns that were subject to
them, for the purpose of holding them the more easily. This
may have been very well in those times when the different
powers of Italy were to some extent evenly balanced; but it
does not seem to me that such a precept is applicable at the
present day, for I do not believe that party divisions purposely
made are ever productive of good. To the contrary rather,;
cities divided against themselves are easily lost, on the approach
of an enemy; for the weaker party will always unite with th
external foe, and then the other will not be able to maintair
itself.

The Venetians, influenced I believe by the above reasons, en-
couraged the feuds between the Guelfs and the Ghibellines in
the cities that were subject to them; and although they never
allowed them to come to bloody conflicts, yet they fomented
their quarrels sufficiently to keep the citizens occupied with
their own dissensions, so that they could not turn against the
Venetians. This, however, did not result as they had designed,
for after the defeat at Vaila one of the parties promptly took
courage, and deprived the Venetians of the entire state. Meas-
ures of this kind, therefore, argue weakness in a prince, for a
strong government will never allow such divisions; they can}
be of advantage only in time of peace, as by their means sub-
jects may be more easily managed, but in case of war the
fallacy of this system becomes manifest. Princes undoubtedly
become great by overcoming all difficulties and oppositions that

Cuar. XX.] THE PRINCE. TL

may spring up against them; and therefore does Fortune, when
she intends to make a new prince great (for whom it is more
important to acquire a reputation than for an hereditary prince),
cause enemies to arise and make attempts against the prince,
so as to afford him the opportunity of overcoming them, and
that he may thus rise higher by means of the very ladder
which his enemies have brought against him. And therefore
the opinion has been held by many, that a wise prince should,
when opportunity offers, adroitly nurse some enmities against
himself, so that by overcoming them his greatness may be
increased.

Princes, and more especially new ones, have often met with
more fidelity and devotion in the very men whom at the begin-
ning of their reign they mistrusted, than in those upon whom
they at first confidently relied. Thus Pandolfo Petrucci, prince
of Sienna, governed his state more by the aid of those whom
he at first regarded with suspicion, than by that of any of his
other subjects. But no general rules can be laid down for
this, as the prince must in this respect be governed by circum-
stances. I will only observe that those men who at the begin-
ning of a prince’s reign are hostile to him, and who are yet so
situated that they need his support for their maintenance, will
always be most easily won over by him; and they will be
obliged to continue to serve him with the greater fidelity, be-
cause of the importance of their effacing by their good conduct
the bad opinion which the prince had formed of them at the
beginning. And thus the prince will derive more useful service
from these than from such as from over confidence in their
security will serve his interests negligently.

And since the subject requires it, I will not omit to remind
the prince who has but recently acquired a state by the favor
of its citizens to consider well the reasons that influenced those
who favored his success. For if it was not a natural affec-
tion for him, but merely their dissatisfaction with the previous
government, then he will have much trouble and difficulty
in preserving their attachment, for it will be almost impos-
sible for the prince to satisfy their expectations. Now if
we carefully study the reasons of this from the examples
which both ancient and modern history furnish us, we shall
find that it is much easier for a prince to win the friendship
of those who previous to his acquisition of the state were

-~

72 THE PRINCE. [CHap. XX.

content with its government, and who must therefore have
been hostile to him, than of those who, from being malcon-
tents under the previous government, became his friends, and
favored his seizing the state.

It has been the general practice of princes, for the purpose
of holding their states securely, to build fortresses to serve as
a curb and check upon those who might make an attempt
against the government, and at the same time to afford the
prince a secure place of refuge against the first attack. I ap-
prove of this system, because it was practised by the ancients ;
and yet we have seen in our own times that Messer Niccolo
Vitelli dismantled two fortresses in Citta di Castello, so as to
enable him to hold that place. Guidobaldo, Duke of Urbino,
on returning to his state, whence he had been driven by Cesar
Borgia, razed all the fortresses of that province to their very
foundations; for he thought that it would be more difficult for
him to lose that state a second time without those fortresses.
The Bentivogli did the same thing on their return to Bologna.
Fortresses then are useful or not, according to circumstances ;
and whilst in one way they are advantageous, they may in an-
other prove injurious to a prince. The question may therefore
be stated thus. <A prince who fears his own people more than
he does foreigners should build fortresses; but he who has
more cause to fear strangers than his own people should do
without them. The citadel of Milan, built by Francesco Sforza,
has caused, and will yet cause, more trouble to the house of
Sforza than any other disturbance in that state. The best for-
tress which a prince can possess is the affection of his people ;
for even if he have fortresses, and is hated by his people, the
fortresses will not save him; for when a people have once risen
in arms against their prince, there will be no lack of strangers
who will aid them.

In our own times we have seen but one instance where for-
tresses have been of advantage to a ruler, and that was the
case of the Countess of Furli, when her husband, the Count
Girolamo, was killed; for the castle of Furli enabled her to
escape from the fury of the people, and there to await assist-
ance from Milan, so as to recover her state, the circumstances
at the time being such that the people could not obtain assist-
ance from strangers. Later, however, when she was assailed
by Cesar Borgia, the people of Furli, being hostile to her, united

Cuap. XXI_.] THE PRINCE. 73

with the stranger, and then the castle was no longer of any
ereat value to her. Thus she would have been more secure if
she had not been hated by her people, than she was in possess-
ing the castle.

After a full examination of the question, then, | approve of
those who build fortresses, as well as those who do not. But I
blame all those who, in their confident reliance upon such strong-
holds, do not mind incurring the hatred of their own people.

CHAPTER XXI.

HOW PRINCES SHOULD CONDUCT THEMSELVES TO ACQUIRE A
REPUTATION.

of great enterprises and the setting a noble example in his ow

person. We havea striking instance of this in Ferdinand of
Aragon, the present king of Spain. He may be called, as it
were, a new prince; for, from being king of a feeble state, he
has, by his fame and glory, become the first sovereign of Chris-
tendom; and if we examine his actions we shall find them all
most grand, and some of them extraordinary. In the beginning
of his reign he attacked Granada, and it was this undertaking
that was the very foundation of his greatness. At first he
carried on this war leisurely and without fear of opposition ; for
he kept the nobles of Castile occupied with this enterprise, and,
their minds being thus engaged by war, they gave no attention
to the innovations introduced by the king, who thereby acquired
a reputation and an influence over the nobles without their
being aware of it. The money of the Church and of the people
enabled him to support his armies, and by that long war he
succeeded in giving a stable foundation to his military establish-
ment, which afterwards brought him so much honor. Besides
this, to be able to engage in still greater enterprises, he always
availed himself of religion as a pretext, and committed a pious
cruelty in spoliating and driving the Moors out of his kingdom,
which certainly was a most admirable and extraordinary ex-
ample. Under the same cloak of religion he attacked Africa,
and made a descent upon Italy, and finally assailed France.

Noturne makes a prince so much esteemed as the ein hisow

74 THE PRINCE. (Car. XXI.

And thus he was always planning great enterprises, which kep
the minds of his subjects in a state of suspense and admiration,,
and occupied with their results. And these different enter-
prises followed so quickly one upon the other, that he never
gave men a chance deliberately to make any attempt against
himself.

It is also important for a prince to give striking examples of
his interior administration, (similar to those that are related
of Messer Bernabo di Milano,) when an occasion presents itself
to reward or punish any one who has in civil affairs either ren- ‘
dered great service to the state, or committed some crime, so
that it may be much talked about. But, above all, a prince
should endeavor to invest all his actions with a character of
grandeur and excellence. A prince, furthermore, becomes
esteemed when he shows himself either a true friend or a real
enemy ; that is, when, regardless of consequences, he declares
himself openly for or against another, which will always be
more creditable to him than to remain neutral. For if two of
your neighboring potentates should come to war ainongst them-
selves, they are either of such character that, when either of
them has been defeated, you will have cause to fear the con-
queror, or not. In either case, it will always be better for you
to declare yourself openly and make fair war; for if you fail to
do so, you will be very apt to fall a prey to the victor, to the
delight and satisfaction of the defeated party, and you will
have no claim for protection or assistance from either the one
or the other. For the conqueror will want no doubtful friends,
who did not stand by him in time of trial; and the defeated
party will not forgive you for having refused, with arms in
hand, to take the chance of his fortunes.

When Antiochus came into Greece, having been sent by the
JEtolians to drive out the Romans, he sent ambassadors to
the Achaians, who were friends of the Romans, to induce them
to remain neutral; whilst the Romans, on the other hand, urged
them to take up arms in their behalf. When the matter came
up for deliberation in the council of the Achaians, and the
ambassadors of Antiochus endeavored to persuade them to
remain neutral, the Roman legate replied: “ As to the course
“which is said to be the best and most advantageous for
“vour state, not to intervene in our war, I can assure you
“that the very reverse will be the case; for by not interven-

Cuar. XXI.] THE PRINCE. T5

“ing you will, without thanks and without credit, remain a
“ prize to the victor.”

And it will always be the case that he who is not your friend
will claim neutrality at your hands, whilst your friend will ask
your armed intervention in his favor. Irresolute princes, for
the sake of avoiding immediate danger, adopt most frequently
the course of neutrality, and are generally ruined in conse-
quence. But when a prince declares himself boldly in favor of
one party, and that party proves victorious, even though the
victor be powerful, and you are at his discretion, yet is he bound
to you in love and obligation ; and men are never so base as to
repay these by such flagrant ingratitude as the oppressing you
under these circumstances would be.

Moreover, victories are never so complete as to dispense the
victor from all regard for justice. But when the party whom
you have supported loses, then he will ever after receive you as
a friend, and, when able, will assist you in turn; and thus you
will have become the sharer of a fortune which in time may be
retrieved. |

In the second case, when the contending parties are such that
you need not fear the victor, then it is the more prudent to give
him your support; for you thereby aid one to ruin the other,
whom he should save if he were wise; for although he has
defeated his adversary, yet he remains at your discretion, inas-
much as without your assistance victory would have been impos-
sible for him. And here it should be noted, that a prince ought
carefully to avoid making common cause with any one more
powerful than himself, for the purpose of attacking another
power, unless he should be compelled to do so by necessity.
For if the former is victorious, then you are at his mercy; and
princes should, if possible, avoid placing themselves in such a
position. :

The Venetians allied themselves with France against the
Duke of Milan, an alliance which they could easily have avoided,
and which proved their ruin. But when it is unavoidable, as
was the case with the Florentines when Spain and the Pope
united their forces to attack Lombardy, then a prince ought to
join the stronger party, for the reasons above given. Nor is it
to be supposed that a state can ever adopt a course that is
entirely safe; on the contrary, a prince must make up his mind
to take the chance of all the doubts and uncertainties ; for such

76 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. XXII.

is the order of things that one inconvenience cannot be avoided
except at the risk of being exposed to another. And it is the
province of prudence to discriminate amongst these incon-
veniences, and to accept the least evil for good.

A prince should also show himself a lover of virtue, and
should honor all who excel in any one of the arts, and should
encourage his citizens quietly to pursue their vocations, whether
of commerce, agriculture, or any other human industry ; so that
the one may not abstain from embellishing his possessions for
fear of their being taken from him, nor the other from opening
new sources of commerce for fear of taxes. But the prince
should provide rewards for those who are willing to do these
things, and for all who strive to enlarge his city or state. And
besides this, he should at suitable periods amuse his people with
festivities and spectacles. And as cities are generally divided
into guilds and classes, he should keep account of these bodies,
and occasionally be present at their assemblies, and should set
an example of his affability and magnificence ;_ preserving,
however, always the majesty of his dignity, which should never
be wanting on any occasion or under any circumstances.

CHAPTER XXII.
OF THE MINISTERS OF PRINCES.

THE choice of his ministers is of no slight importance to a
prince; they are either good or not, according as the prince
himself is sagacious or otherwise; and upon the character of
the persons with whom a prince surrounds himself depends
the first impression that is formed of his own ability. If his
ministers and counsellors are competent and faithful, he will
be reputed wise, because he had known how to discern their
capacity and how to secure their fidelity; but if they prove
otherwise, then the opinion formed of the prince will not be
favorable, because of his want of judgment in their first selec-
tion. Every one who knew Messer Antonio di Venafro as the
minister of Pandolfo Petrucci, prince of Sienna, judged Pan-
dolfo to be a man of great sagacity in having chosen Messer
Antonio for his minister.

Cuar. XXII] THE PRINCE. : iW

There are three sorts of intellect: the one understands
things by its own quickness of perception; another under-
stands them when explained by some one else; and the third
understands them neither by itself nor by the explanation of
others. The first is the best, the second very good, and the
third useless. Now we must admit that Pandolfo did not
belong to the first order, but rather to the second. For when-
ever a prince has the sagacity to recognize the good or the evil
that is said or done, he will, even without being a genius, be
able to judge whether the minister’s actions are good or bad ;
and he will praise the one and censure the other. And thus
the minister, secing that he cannot hope to deceive the prince,
will continue to serve him faithfully. But the true way for
a prince to know his minister is as follows, and never fails.
Whenever he sees that the minister thinks more of himself
than of the prince, and that in all his doings he seeks his own
advantage more than that of the state, then the prince may be
sure that that man will never be a good minister, and is not
to be trusted. For a man who has the administration of a
state in his hands, should never think of himself, but only of
the prince, and should never bring anything to his notice that
does not relate to the interest of the government.

On the other hand, the prince, by way of securing the devo-
tion of his minister, should think of him and bind him to him-
self by obligations; he should bestow riches upon him, and
should share the honors as well as the cares with him; so that
the abundance of honors and riches conferred by the prince
upon his minister may cause the latter not to desire either the
one or the other from any other source, and that the weight
of cares may make him dread a change, knowing that without
the prince he could not sustain it. And when the relations
between the prince and his minister are thus constituted, they
will be able to confide in each other; but if they be other-
wise, then one or the other of them will surely come to a bad
end.

78 THE PRINCE. (Cuar. XXIII.

CHAPTER XXIII.
HOW TO AVOID FLATTERERS.

I witt not leave unnoticed an important subject, and an evil
against which princes have much difficulty in defending them-
selves, if they are not extremely prudent, or have not made good
choice of ministers; and this relates to flatterers, who abound
in all courts. Men are generally so well pleased with them-,
selves and their own acts, and delude themselves to such a
degree, that it is with difficulty they escape from the pest of,
flatterers ; and in their efforts to avoid them they expose them-|
selves to the risk of being contemned. There is no other way;
of guarding against adulation, than to make people understand
that they will not offend you by speaking the truth. On the
other hand, when every one feels at liberty to tell you the truth,
they will be apt to be lacking in respect to you. A prudent
prince therefore should follow a middle course, choosing for
ministers of his government only wise men, and to these only
should he give full power to tell him the truth, and they should
only be allowed to speak to him of those things which he asks
of them, and of none other. But then the prince should ask
them about everything, and should listen to their opinions and
reflect upon them, and afterwards form his own resolutions.
And he should bear himself towards all his advisers in such
manner that each may know that the more freely he speaks,
the more acceptable will he be. But outside of these he should
not listen to any one, but follow the course agreed upon, and
be firm in his resolves. Whoever acts otherwise will either
be misled by his flatterers, or will vacillate in his decisions,
because of the variety of opinions; and this will naturally re-
sult in his losing in public estimation.

I will cite one modern example to this effect. Padre Luca,
in the service of the present Emperor Maximilian, in speaking
of his Majesty, says that he “counsels with no one, and yet
“never does anything in his own way”; which results from
his following the very opposite course to that above indicated ;
for the Emperor is a reserved man, who never communicates
his secrets to any one, nor takes advice from anybody. But
when he attempts to carry his plans into execution and they

On + aT ee “i

Cuap. XXIII. ] THE PRINCE. 79

begin to be known, then also do they begin to be opposed by
those whom he has around him; and being easily influenced,
he is diverted from his own resolves. And thence it comes
that he undoes one day what he has done the day before, and
that one never knows what he wants or designs to do; and
therefore his conclusions cannot be depended upon.

A prince nevertheless should always take counsel, but only
when he wants it, and not when others wish to thrust it upon
him; in fact, he should rather discourage persons from tender-
ing him advice unsolicited by him. But he should be an ex-
tensive questioner, and a patient listener to the truth respecting
the things inquired about, and should even show his anger in
case any one should, for some reason, not tell him the truth.

Those who imagine that a prince who has the reputation of
sagacity is not indebted for it to his own natural gifts, but to
the good counsels of those who surround him, certainly deceive
themselves. For it may be taken as a general and infallible
rule, that a prince who is not naturally wise cannot be well
advised; unless he should perchance place himself entirely in
the hands of one man, who should guide him in all things, and
who would have to be a man of uncommon ability. In such a
case a prince might be well directed, but it would probably not
last long, because his counsellor would in a short time deprive
him of his state. But a prince who is not wise himself, and
counsels with more than one person, will never have united
counsels ; for he will himself lack the ability to harmonize and
combine the various counsels and suggestions. His advisers
will only think of their own advantage, which the prince will
neither know how to discern nor how to correct.

And things cannot well be otherwise, for men will always
naturally prove bad, unless some necessity constrains them to
be good. Whence we conclude that good counsels, no matter |
whence they may come, result wholly from the prince’s own 7
sagacity ; but the wisdom of the prince never results from good
counsels.

80 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. XXIV.

CHAPTER XXIV.

THE REASON WHY THE PRINCES OF ITALY HAVE LOST THEIR
STATES.

A supictous observation of the above-given rules will cause
a new prince to be regarded as though he were an hereditary
one, and will very soon make him more firm and secure in his
state than if he had grown old in its possession. For the
actions of anew prince are much more closely observed and
scrutinized than those of an hereditary one; and when they
are known to be virtuous, they will win the confidence and
affections of men much more for the new prince, and make his
subjects feel under greater obligations to him, than if he were
of the ancient line. For men are ever more taken with the
things of the present than with those of the past; and when
they find their own good in the present, then they enjoy it and
seek none other, and will be ready in 2very way to defend the
new prince, provided he be not wanting to himself in other
respects. And thus he will have the double glory of having
established a new principality, and of having strengthened and
adorned it with good laws, good armies, good allies, and good
examples. And in the same way will it be a double shame
to an hereditary prince, if through want of prudence and abil-
ity he loses his state.

If now we examine the conduct of those princes of Italy
who in our day have lost their states, such as the king of
Naples, the Duke of Milan, and others, we shall note in them
at once a common defect as regards their military forces, for
the reasons which we have discussed at length above. And we
shall also find that in some instances the people were hostile to
the prince; or if he had the good will of the people, he knew
not how to conciliate that of the nobles. For unless there be
some such defects as these, states are not lost when the prince
has energy enough to keep an army in the the field.

Philip of Macedon, not the father of Alexander the Great,
but he who was vanquished by Titus Quintus, had not much of
a state as compared with Rome and Greece, who attacked him ;
yet being a military man, and at the same time knowing how
to preserve the good will of the people and to assure himself

Cuap. XXV.] THE PRINCE, 81

of the support of the nobles, he sustained the war against the
Romans and Greeks for many years; and although he finally
lost some cities, yet he preserved his kingdom.

Those of our princes, therefore, who have lost their domin-
ions after having been established in them for many years,
should not blame fortune, but only their own indolence and
lack of energy; for in times of quiet they never thought of the
possibility of a change (it being a common defect of men in
fair weather to take no thought of storms), and afterwards,
when adversity overtook them, their first impulse was to fly,
and not to defend themselves, hoping that the people, when
disgusted with the insolence of the victors, would recall them.
Such a course may be very well when others fail, but it is
very discreditable to neglect other means for it that might
have saved you from ruin; for no one ever falls deliberately,
in the expectation that some one will help him up, which
either does not happen, or, if it does, will not contribute to
your security; for it is a base thing to look to others for your
defence instead of depending upon yourself. That defence
alone is effectual, sure, and durable which depends upon your-
self and your own valor.

CHAPTER XXY.

OF THE INFLUENCE OF FORTUNE IN HUMAN AFFAIRS, AND HOW
IT MAY BE COUNTERACTED.

I am well aware that many have held and still hold the
opinion, that the affairs of this world are so controlled by For-
tune and by the Divine Power that human wisdom and foresight
cannot modify them; that, in fact, there is no remedy against
the decrees of fate, and that therefore it is not worth while
to make any effort, but to yield unconditionally to the power
of Fortune. This opinion has been generally accepted in our
times, because of the great changes that have taken place,
and are still being witnessed every day, and are beyond all
human conjecture.

In reflecting upon this at times, I am myself in some
measure inclined to that belief; nevertheless, as our free will

VOL. II. 6

82 THE PRINCE. [Cuar, XXV.

is not entirely destroyed, I judge that it may be assumed as
true that Fortune to the extent of one half is the arbiter of
our actions, but that she permits us to direct the other half,
or perhaps a little less, ourselves. I compare this to a swollen
river, which in its fury overflows the plains, tears up the trees
and buildings, and sweeps the earth from one place and de-
posits it in another. Every one flies before the flood, and
yields to its fury, unable to resist it; and notwithstanding this
state of things, men do not when the river is in its ordinary
condition provide against its overflow by dikes and walls, so
that when it rises it may flow either in the channel thus pro-
vided for it, or that at any rate its violence may not be en-
tirely unchecked, nor its effects prove so injurious. It is the
same with Fortune, who displays her power where there is no
organized valor to resist her, and where she knows that there
are no dikes or walls to control her.

If now you examine Italy, which is the seat of the changes
under consideration, and has occasioned their occurrence, you
will see that she is like an open country, without dikes or any
other protection against inundations ; and that if she had been
protected with proper valor and wisdom, as is the case with
Germany, Spain, and France, these inundations would either
not have caused the great changes which they did, or they -
would not have occurred at all.

These remarks I deem sufficient as regards resisting fortunc
in general; but confining myself now more to particular cases,
I say that we see a prince fortunate one day, and ruined the
next, without his nature or any of his qualities being changed.
I believe this results mainly from the causes which have been
discussed at length above; namely, that the prince who relies
entirely upon fortune will be ruined according as fortune
varies. I believe, further, that the prince who conforms his
conduct to the spirit of the times will be fortunate; and in tho]
same way will he be unfortunate, if in his actions he disre-
gards the spirit of the times. For we see men proceed in
various ways to attain the end they aim at, such as glory and
riches: the one with circumspection, the other with rashness ;
one with violence, another with cunning; one with patience,
and another with impetuosity; and all may succeed in their
different ways. We also see that, of two men equally prudent,
the one will accomplish his designs, whilst the other fails; and

Cuap. XXV.] THE PRINCE, 83

in the same way we see two men succeed equally well by two
entirely different methods, the one being prudent and the other
rash; which is due to nothing else than the character of the
times, to which they either conform in their proceedings or not.
Whence it comes, as I have said, that two men by entirely dif-
ferent modes of action will achieve the same results; whilst of
two others, proceeding precisely in the same way, the one will
accomplish his end, and the other not. This also causes the
difference of success; for if one man, acting with caution and
patience, is also favored by time and circumstances, he will be
successful; but if these change, then will he be ruined, unless,
indeed, he changes his conduct accordingly. Nor is there any
man so sagacious that he will always know how to conform to
such change of times and circumstances; for men do not
readily deviate from the course to which their nature inclines
them; and, moreover, if they have generally been prosperous
by following one course, they cannot persuade themselves that it
would be well to depart from it. Thus the cautious man, when
the moment comes for him to strike a bold blow, will not know
how to do it, and thence will he fail; whilst, if he could have
changed his nature with the times and circumstances, his usual
good fortune would not have abandoned him.

Pope Julius II. was in all his actions most impetuous; and

‘ the times and circumstances happened so conformably to that

a

mode of proceeding that he always achieved happy results. —

Witness the first attempt he made upon Bologna, when Messer
Giovanni Bentivogli was still living. This attempt gave um-
brage to the Venetians, and also to the kings of Spain and
France, who held a conference on the subject. But Pope Julius,
with his habitual boldness and impetuosity, assumed the direc-
tion of that expedition in person; which caused the Spaniards
and the Venetians to remain quiet in suspense, the latter from
fear, and the others from a desire to recover the entire kingdom
of Naples. On the other hand, the Pope drew the king of
France after him; for that king, seeing that Julius had already
started on the expedition, and wishing to gain his friendship
for the purpose of humbling the Venetians, judged that he could
not refuse him the assistance of his army without manifest in-
jury to himself.

Pope Julius II., then, achieved by this impetuous movement
what no other pontiff could have accomplished with all possible

84 THE PRINCE. [Cuar. XXVI.

human prudence. for had he waited to start from Rome until
all his plans were definitely arranged, and everything carefully
organized, as every other pontiff would have done, he would
certainly never have succeeded ; for the king would have found
a thousand excuses, and the others would have caused him a
thousand apprehensions. I will not dwell upon the other ac-
tions of Julius Il., which were all of a similar character, and
have all succeeded equally well. The shortness of his life
saved him from experiencing any reverses; for if times had
supervened that would have made it necessary for him to
proceed with caution and prudence, he would assuredly have
been ruined; for he could never have deviated from the course
to which his nature inclined him.

I conclude, then, inasmuch as Fortune is changeable, that

men who persist obstinately in their own ways will be success- _
ful only so long as those ways coincide with those of Fortune ;

and whenever these differ, they fail. But, on the whole, I judge
impetuosity to be better than caution; for Fortune is a woman,
and if you wish to master her, you must strike and beat her,
and you will see that she allows herself to be more easily van-

|

quished by the rash and the violent than by those who proceed ‘

more slowly and coldly. And therefore, as a woman, she ever |
favors youth more than age, for youth is less cautious and

more energetic, and commands Fortune with greater audacity.

CHAPTER XXVI.
EXHORTATION TO DELIVER ITALY FROM FOREIGN BARBARIANS.

REVIEWING now all I have said in the foregoing discourses,
and thinking to myself that, if the present time should be favor-
able for Italy to receive and honor a new prince, and the oppor-
tunity were given to a prudent and virtuous man to establish
a new form of government, that would bring honor to himself
and happiness to the mass of the Italian people, so many things
would combine for the advantage of such a new prince, that, so
far as I know, no previous time was ever more favorable for
such a change. And if, as I have said, it was necessary for the
purpose of displaying the virtue of Moses that the people of

Cuap. XXVI.] THE PRINCE. 85

Israel should be held in bondage in Egypt; and that the Per-
sians should be opposed to the Medes, so as to bring to light
the greatness and courage of Cyrus; and that the Athenians
should be dispersed for the purpose of illustrating the excellence
of Theseus; so at present, for the purpose of making manifest
the virtues of one Italian spirit, it was necessary that Italy
should have been brought to her present condition of being in a
worse bondage than that of the Jews, more enslaved than the
Persians, more scattered than the Athenians, without a head,
without order, vanquished and despoiled, lacerated, overrun by
her enemies, and subjected to every kind of devastation.

And although, up to the present time, there may have been
some one who may have given a gleam of hope that he was
ordained by Heaven to redeem Italy, yet have we seen how, in
the very zenith of his career, he was so checked by fortune that
poor Italy remained as it were lifeless, and waiting to see who
might be chosen to heal her wounds,—to put an end to her
devastation, to the sacking of Lombardy, to the spoliation and
ruinous taxation of the kingdom of Naples and of Tuscany, —
and who should heal her sores that have festered so long.
You see how she prays God that he may senl some one who
shall redeem her from this cruelty and barbarous insolence.
You see her eagerly disposed to follow any 'anner, provided
there be some one to bear it aloft. But there is no one at pres-
ent in whom she could place more hope than in your illustrious
house, O magnificent Lorenzo! which, with its virtue and for-
tune, favored by God and the Church, of which it is now the
head, could make an effectual beginning of her deliverance.
And this will not be difficult for you, if you will first study
carefully the lives and actions of the men whom I have named
above. And although these men were rare and wonderful, they
were nevertheless but men, and the opportunities which they
had were far less favorable than the present; nor were their
undertakings more just or more easy than this; neither were
they more favored by the Almighty than what you are. Here,
then, is great justice ; for war is Just when it is necessary, and
a resort to arms is beneficent when there is no hope in any-
thing else. The opportunity is most favorable, and when that
is the case there can be no great difficulties, provided you follow
the course of those whom I have held up to you as examples.
Although in their case extraordinary things, without parallel,

86 THE PRINCE. (Cuap. XXVI.

were brought about by the hand of God,—the sea divided for
their passage, a pillar of cloud pointed their way through the
wilderness, the rock poured forth water to assuage their thirst,
and it rained manna to appease their hunger,—yet your great-
ness combines all, and on your own efforts will depend the re-
sult. God will not do everything; for that would deprive us of
our free will, and of that share of glory which belongs to us.

Nor should we wonder that not one of the Italians whom I
have mentioned has been able to accomplish that which it is
to be hoped will be done by your illustrious house; for if in so
many revolutions in Italy, and in the conduct of so many wars,
it would seem that military capacity and valor have become ex-
tinct, it is owing to the fact that the old military system was
defective, and no one has come forward capable of establishing
anew one. And nothing brings a man who has newly risen
so much honor as the establishing of new laws and institutions
of his own creation; if they have greatness in them and become
well established, they will make the prince admired and revered ;
and there is no lack of opportunity in Italy for the introduction
of every kind of reform. The people have great courage, pro-
vided it be not wanting in their leaders. Look but at their sin-
ele combats, and their encounters when there are but a few on
either side, and see how superior the Italians have shown them-
selves in strength, dexterity, and ability. But when it comes
to their armies, then these qualities do not appear, because of
the incapacity of the chiefs, who cannot enforce obedience from
those who are versed in the art of war, and every one believes
himself to be so; for up to the present time there have been
none so decidedly superior in valor and good fortune that the
others yielded him obedience. Thence it comes that in so
great a length of time, and in the many wars that have occurred
within the past twenty years, the armies, whenever wholly
composed of Italians, have given but poor account of them-
selves. Witness first Taro, then Alessandria, Capua, Genoa,
Vaila, Bologna, and Mestri.

If, then, your illustrious house is willing to follow the ex-
amples of those distinguished men who have redeemed their
countries, you will before anything else, and as the very founda-
tion of every enterprise, have to provide yourself with a national
army. And you cannot have more faithful, truer, and better
soldiers than the Italians. And whilst each individual is good,

Cuap. XXVI.] THE PRINCE, 87

they will become still better when they are all united, and know
that they are commanded by their own prince, who will honor
and support them. It is necessary, therefore, to provide troops
of this kind, so as to be able successfully to oppose Italian valor
to the attacks of foreigners.

And although the infantry of the Swiss and of the Spaniards
is looked upon as terrible, yet both of them have a defect, which
will permit a third organization not only to resist them, but
confidently hope to vanquish them. For the Spaniards cannot
withstand the shock of cavalry, and the Swiss dread infantry,
when they encounter it in battle as obstinate as themselves.
Whence we have seen, what further experience will prove more
fully, that the Spaniards cannot resist the French cavalry, and
that the Swiss succumb to the Spanish infantry. And although
we have not yet had a full trial of the latter, yet have we had a
fair specimen of it in the battle of Ravenna, where the Spanish
infantry confronted the line of battle of the Germans, who have
adopted the same system as the Swiss; and where the Spaniards
with great agility, and protected by their bucklers, rushed under
the pikes of the Germans, and were thus able to attack them
securely without the Germans being able to prevent it; and had
it not been for the cavalry which fell upon the Spaniards, they
might have destroyed the entire German infantry.

Knowing, then, the defects of the one and the other of these
systems of infantry, you can organize a new one that shall avoid
these defects, and shall be able to resist cavalry as well as in-
fantry. And this is to be done, not by a change of arms, but
by an entirely different organization and discipline. This is
one of the things which, if successfully introduced, will give
fame and greatness to a new prince.

You must not, then, allow this opportunity to pass, so that
Italy, after waiting so long, may at last see her deliverer ap-
pear. Nor can I possibly express with what affection he would
be received in all those provinces that have suffered so long
from this inundation of foreign foes!—with what thirst for
vengeance, with what persistent faith, with what devotion, and
with what tears! What door would be closed to him? Who
would refuse him obedience? What envy would dare oppose
him? What Italian would refuse him homage? This bar-
barous dominion of the foreigner offends the very nostrils of
everybody!

88 THE PRINCE. [Cuap. XXVI.

Let your illustrious house, then, assume this task with that
courage and hopefulness which every just enterprise inspires ;
so that under your banner our country may recover its ancient

fame, and under your auspices may be verified the words of
Petrarca : —
“ Virtt contro al furore
Prendera |’ arme, e fia il combatter corto ;
Chel antico valore

Negli Italici cuor non é ancor morto.”
Canz. XVI. v. 93-96.

DISCOURSES

ON THE

Pikst TEN BOOKS OF TMITUs LIVIUs.

res

=

may, .
eure
a? eae

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI

TO

ZANOBI BUONDELMONTE AND COSIMO RUCELLAI,

GREETING.

Wir this I send you a gift which, if it bears no proportion
to the extent of the obligations which I owe you, is neverthe-
less the best that I am able to offer to you; for I have endeay-
ored to embody in it all that long experience and assiduous
research have taught me of the affairs of the world. And as
neither yourselves nor any one else can ask more than that
of me, you cannot complain that I have not given you more;
though you may well complain of my lack of talent when my
arguments are poor, and of the fallacies of my judgment on
account of the errors into which I have doubtless fallen many
times. This being so, however, I know not which of us has
the greater right to complain, —I, that you should have forced
me to write what I should never have attempted of my own
accord, or you, that I should have written without giving you
cause to be satisfied.

Accept it, then, as one accepts whatever comes from friends,
looking rather to the intention of him who gives, than to the
thing offered. And believe me, that I feel a satisfaction in
this, that, even if I have often erred in the course of this
work, I have assuredly made no mistake in having chosen
you above all other friends to whom to dedicate these dis-
courses. In doing this, I give some proof of gratitude, although
I may seem to have departed from the ordinary usage of writ-
ers, who generally dedicate their works to some prince; and,

92 DISCOURSES ON: TITUS LIVIUS.

blinded by ambition or avarice, praise him for all the virtuous
qualities he has not, instead of censuring him for his real vices,
whilst I, to avoid this fault, do not address myself to such as
are princes, but to those who by their infinite good qualities
are worthy to be such; not to those who could load me with
honors, rank, and wealth, but rather to those who have the
desire to do so, but have not the power. For to judge rightly,
men should esteem rather those who are, and not those who
can be generous; and those who would know how to govern
states, rather than those who have the right to govern, but lack
the knowledge.

For this reason have historians praised Hiero of Syracuse,
a mere private citizen, more than Perseus of Macedon, mon-
arch though he was; for Hiero only lacked a principality to be
a prince, whilst the other had nothing of the king except the
diadem. Be it good or bad, however, you wanted this work,
and such as it is I send it to you; and should you continue in
the belief that my opinions are acceptable to you, I shall not
fail to continue to examine this history, as I promised you in
the beginning of it. Farewell!

DISCOURSES

ON THE

FIRST TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS.

HERS? BOOK,

INTRODUCTION.

AutTHoucH the envious nature of men, so prompt to blame
and so slow to praise, makes the discovery and introduction of
any new principles and systems as dangerous almost as the ex-
ploration of unknown seas and continents, yet, animated by that
desire which impels me to do what may prove for the common
benefit of all, I have resolved to open a new route, which has
not yet been followed by any one, and may prove difficult and
troublesome, but may also bring me some reward in the appro-
bation of those who will kindly appreciate my efforts.

And if my poor talents, my little experience of the present
and insufficient study of the past, should make the result of
my labors defective and of little utility, I shall at least have
shown the way to others, who will carry out my views with
greater ability, eloquence, and judgment, so that if I do not
merit praise, I ought at least not to incur censure.

When we consider the general respect for antiquity, and how
often —to say nothing of other examples—a great price is
paid for some fragments of an antique statue, which we are
anxious to possess to ornament our houses with, or to give to
artists who strive to imitate them in their own works; and
when we see, on the other hand, the wonderful examples which
the history of ancient kingdoms and republics presents to us,
the prodigies of virtue and of wisdom displayed by the kings,
captains, citizens, and legislators who have sacrificed them-

94 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST. [Boox I.

selves for their country, — when we see these, I say, more ad-
mired than imitated, or so much neglected that not the least
trace of this ancient virtue remains, we cannot but be at the
same time as much surprised as afflicted. The more so as in
the differences which arise between citizens, or in the maladies
to which they are subjected, we see these same people have re-
course to the judgments and the remedies prescribed by the
ancients. The civil laws are in fact nothing but decisions
given by their jurisconsults, and which, reduced to a system,
direct our modern jurists in their decisions. And what is the
science of medicine, but the experience of ancient physicians,
which their successors have taken for their guide? And yet
to found a republic, maintain states, to govern a kingdom, or-
ganize an army, conduct a war, dispense justice, and extend
empires, you will find neither prince, nor republic, nor captain,
nor citizen, who has recourse to the examples of antiquity !
This neglect, [ am persuaded, is due less to the weakness to
which the vices of our education have reduced the world, than
to the evils caused by the proud indolence which prevails in
most of the Christian states, and to the lack of real knowledge
of history, the true sense of which is not known, or the spirit
of which they do not comprehend. Thus the majority of those
who read it take pleasure only in the variety of the events which
history relates, without ever thinking of imitating the noble
actions, deeming that not only difficult, but impossible; as
though heaven, the sun, the elements, and men had changed
the order of their motions and power, and were different from
what they were in ancient times.

Wishing, therefore, so far as in me lies, to draw mankind
from this error, I have thought it proper to write upon those
books of Titus Livius that have come to us entire despite the
malice of time; touching upon all those matters which, after
a comparison between the ancient and modern events, may
seem to me necessary to facilitate their proper understanding.
In this way those who read my remarks may derive those ad-
vantages which should be the aim of all study of history; and
although the undertaking is difficult, yet, aided by those who
have encouraged me in this attempt, I hope to carry it suffi-
ciently far, so that but little may remain for others to carry it
to its destined end.

Cuap. I.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 95

CHAPTER I.

OF THE BEGINNING OF CITIES IN GENERAL, AND ESPECIALLY THAT
OF THE CITY OF ROME.

THose who read what the beginning of Rome was, and what
her lawgivers and her organization, will not be astonished that
so much virtue should have maintained itself during so many
centuries; and that so great an empire should have sprung
from it afterwards. To speak first of her origin, we will pre-

mise that all cities are founded either by natives of the country
or by strangers. The little security which the natives found

in living dispersed ; the impossibility for each to resist isolated,
either because of the situation or because of their small num-
ber, the attacks of any enemy that might present himself; the
difficulty of uniting in time for defence at his approach, and
the necessity of abandoning the greater number of their re-
treats, which quickly became a prize to the assailant, — such
were the motives that caused the first inhabitants of a country
to build cities for the purpose of escaping these dangers. They
resolved, of their own accord, or by the advice of some one who
had most authority amongst them, to live together in some
place of their selection that might offer them greater conve-
niences and greater facility of defence. Thus, amongst many
others were Athens and Venice; the first was built under the
authority of Theseus, who had gathered the dispersed inhab-
itants; and the second owed its origin to the fact that several
tribes had taken refuge on the little islands situated at the
head of the Adriatic Sea, to escape from war, and from the
Barbarians who after the fall of the Roman Empire had overrun
Italy. These refugees of themselves, and without any prince
to govern them, began to live under such laws as seemed to
them best suited to maintain their new state. In this they
succeeded, happily favored by the long peace, for which they
were indebted to their situation upon a sea without issue, where
the people that ravaged Italy could not harass them, being with-
out any ships. Thus from that small beginning they attained
that degree of power in which we see them now.

The second case is when a city is built by strangers; these
may be either freemen, or subjects of a republic or of a prince,

‘ —_—_—

wae
$

2) oo

96 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I.

who, to relieve their states from an excessive population, or to
defend a newly acquired territory which they wish to preserv>
without expense, send colonies there. The Romans founded
many cities in this way within their empire. Sometimes cities
are built by a prince, not for the purpose of living there, but
merely as monuments to his glory ; such was Alexandria, built
by Alexander the Great. But as all these cities are at their
very origin deprived of liberty, they rarely succeed in makin:
ereat progress, or in being counted amongst the great powers.
Such was the origin of Florence; for it was built either by the
soldiers of Sylla, or perhaps by the inhabitants of Mount Fie-
sole, who, trusting to the long peace that prevailed in the reign
of Octavian, were attracted to the plains along the Arno. Flor-
ence, thus built under the Roman Empire, could in the begin-
ning have no growth except what depended on the will of its
master.

The founders of cities are independent when they are people
who, under the leadership of some prince, or by themselves,
have been obliged to fly from pestilence, war, or famine, that
was desolating their native country, and are seeking a new
home. These either inhabit the cities of the country of which
they take possession, as Moses did; or they build new ones, as
was done by Atneas. In such case we are able to appreciate
the talents of the founder and the success of his work, which
is more or less remarkable according as he, in founding the
city, displays more or less wisdom and skill. Both the one
and the other are recognized by the selection of the place
where he has located the city, and by the nature of the laws
which he establishes in it. And as men work either from ne-
cessity or from choice, and as it has “been observed that virtue
has more sway ee labor is the result of necessity rather
than of choice, it is a matter of consideration whether it might
not be better to select for the establishment of a city a sterile
region, where the people, compelled by necessity to be indus-
trious, and therefore less given to idleness, would be more
united, and less exposed by the poverty of the country to occa-
sions for discord; as was the case with Ragusa, and several
other cities that were built upon an ungrateful soil. Such a
selection of site would doubtless be more useful and wise if
men were content with what they possess, and did not desire
to exercise command over others.

Cuar. I.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. oT

Now, as people cannot make themselyes secure except by
being powerful, it is necessary in the founding of a city to
avoid a sterile country. On the contrary, a city should be
placed rather in a region where the fertility of the soil affords
the means of becoming great, and of acquiring strength to
repel all who might attempt to attack it, or oppose the devel-
opment of its power. As to the idleness which the fertility
of a country tends to encourage, the laws should compel men to
labor where the sterility of the soil does not do it; as was done
ke those skilful and sagacious legislators who have inhabited
very agreeable and fertile countries, such as are apt to make
men idle and unfit for the exercise of valor. These by way of
an offset to the pleasures and softness of the climate, imposed
upon their soldiers the rigors of a strict discipline and severe
exercises, so that they became better warriors than what na-
ture produces in the harshest climates and most sterile coun-
tries. Amongst these legislators we may cite the founders of
the kingdom of Egypt: despite of the charms of the climate,
the severity of the institutions there formed excellent men ;
and if great antiquity had not buried their names in obliv-
ion, we should see that they deserved more praise than Alex-
ander the Great and many others of more recent memory.
And whoever has examined the government of the Pachas of
Egypt and the discipline of their Mameluke militia before it
was destroyed by the Sultan Selim of Turkey, will have seen
how much they dreaded idleness, and by what variety of exer-
cises and by what severe laws they prevented in their soldiers
that effeminacy which is the natural fruit of the softness of
their climate.

I say, then, that for the establishment of a city it is wisest
to select the most fertile spot, especially as the laws ean pre-
vent the ill effects that would otherwise result from that very
fertility.

When Alexander the Great wished to build a city that
should serve as a monument to his glory, his architect, Dino-
crates, pointed out to him how he could build a city on Mount
Athos, which place he said, besides being very strong, could
be so arranged as to give the city the appearance of the hu-
man form, which would make it a wonder worthy of the great-
ness of its founder. Alexander having asked him what the
inhabitants were to live upon, he replied, “ That I have not

VOL. II. if

Ee

98 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I

thought of”; at which Alexander smiled, and, leaving Mount
Athos as it was, he built Alexandria, where the inhabitants
would be glad to remain on account of the richness of the
country and the advantages which the proximity of the Nile
and the sea afforded them.

If we accept the opinion that Aineas was the founder of
Rome, then we must count that city as one of those built
by strangers; but if Romulus is taken as its founder, then
must it be classed with those built by the natives of ee coun-
try. Either way it will be seen that_Rome was from_the first
free and independent ; and we shall also see (as we shall show
further on) to how many privations the laws of Romulus, of
Numa, and of others subjected its inhabitants ; so that neither
the fertility of the soil, nor the proximity of the sea, nor their
many victories, nor the greatness of the Empire, could corrupt
them during several centuries, and they maintained there more
virtues than have ever been seen in any other republic.

The great things which Rome achieved, and of which Titus
Livius has preserved the memory, have been the work either
of the government or of private individaals ; and as they relate
either to the affairs of the interior or of the exterior, I shall
begin to discourse of those internal operations of the govern-
ment which I believe to be most noteworthy, and shall point
out their results. This will be the subject of the discourses
that will compose this First Book, or rather First Part.

CHAPTER II.

OF THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF REPUBLICS, AND OF WHAT KIND
THE ROMAN REPUBLIC WAS.

I wit leave aside what might be said of cities which from
their very birth have been subject to a foreign power, and will
speak only of those whose origin has been independent, and
which from the first governed themselves by their own laws,
whether as republics or as principalities, and whose constitu-
tion and laws have differed as their origin. Some have had
at the very beginning, or soon after, a legislator, who, like
Lycurgus with the Lacedemonians, gave them by a single

Cuapr. IT. ] THN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIOUS. J9

act al} the laws they needed. Others have owed theirs to
chance and to events, and have received their laws at different
times, as Rome did. It is a great good fortune for a republic
to have a legislator sufficiently wise to give her laws so regulated
that, without the necessity of correcting them, they afford secu-
rity to those who live under them. Sparta observed her laws for
more than eight hundred years without altering them and with-
out experiencing a single dangerous disturbance. Unhappy, on
the contrary, is that republic which, not having at the begin-
ning fallen into the hands of a sagacious and skilful legislator,
is herself obliged to reform her laws. More unhappy still is
that republic which from the first has diverged from a good
constitution. And that republic is furthest from it whose
vicious institutions impede her progress, and make her leave
the right path that leads to a good end; for those who are in
that condition can hardly ever be brought into the right road.
Those republics, on the other hand, that started without having
even a perfect constitution, but made a fair beginning, and are
capable of improvement, — such republics, I say, may perfect
themselves by the aid of events. It is very true, however, that
such reforms are never effected without danger, for the ma-
jority of men never willingly adopt any new law tending to
change the constitution of the state, unless the necessity of
the change is clearly demonstrated ; and as such a necessity
cannot make itself felt without being accompanied with dan-
ger, the republic may easily be destroyed before having per-
fected its constitution. That of Florence is a complete proof
of this: reorganized after the revolt of Arezzo, in 1502, it was
overthrown after the taking of Prato, in 1512.

Having proposed to my self to treat of the kind of govern-
ment established at Rome, and of the events that led to its
perfection, I must at the beginning observe that some of the
writers on politics distinguished three kinds of government,
viz. the monarchical, the aristocratic, and the democratic ; ai

maintain that the Ieoletons of a people must choose from
these three the one that seems to them most suitable. Other
authors, wiser according to the opinion of many, count six
kinds of governments, three of which are very bad, and three
good in themselves, but so liable to be corrupted that they
become absolutely bad. The three good ones are those which
we have just named; the three bad ones result from the degra-

100 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Book I.

dation of the other three, and each of them resembles its corre-
sponding original, so that the transition from the one to the
other is very easy. Thus monarchy becomes tyranny ; aris-
tocracy degenerates into oligarchy; and the popular govern-
ment lapses readily into licentiousness. So that a legislator
who gives to a state which he founds, either of these three
forms of government, constitutes it but for a brief time; for no
precautions can prevent either one of the three that are reputed
good, from degenerating into its opposite kind; so great are in
these the attractions and resemblances between the good and
the evil. ;

Chance has given birth to these different kinds of govern-
ments amongst men; for at the beginning of the world the in-
habitants were few in number, and lived for a time dispersed,
like beasts. As the human race increased, the necessity for
uniting themselves for defence made itself felt; the better to
attain this object, they chose the strongest and most coura-
geous from amongst themselves and placed him at their head,
promising to obey him. Thence they began to know the good
and the honest, and to distinguish them from the bad and vi-
cious ; for seeing a man injure his benefactor aroused at once
two sentiments in every heart, hatred against the ingrate and
love for the benefactor. They blamed the first, and on the con-
trary honored those the more who showed themselves grateful,
for each felt that he in turn might be subject to a like wrong ;
and to prevent similar evils, they set to work to make laws,
and to institute punishments for those who contravened them.
Such was the origin of justice. This caused them, when they
had afterwards to choose a prince, neither to look to the strong-
est nor bravest, but to the wisest and most just. But when
they began to make sovereignty hereditary and non-elective,
the children quickly degenerated from their fathers ; and, so far
from trying to equal their virtues, they considered that a prince
had nothing else to do than to excel all the rest in luxury, in-
dulgence, and every other variety of pleasure. The prince
consequently soon drew upon himself the general hatred. An
object of hatred, he naturally felt fear; fear in turn dictated to
him precautions and wrongs, and thus tyranny quickly devel-
oped itself. Such were the beginning and causes of disorders,
conspiracies, and plots against the sovereigns, set on foot, not
by the feeble and timid, but by those citizens who, surpassing

Cuapr. IT.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 101

the others in grandeur of soul, in wealth, and in courage, could
not submit to the outrages and excesses of their princes.

Under such powerful leaders the masses armed themselves
against the tyrant, and, after having rid themselves of him, sub-
mitted to these chiefs as their liberators. These, abhorring the
very name of prince, constituted themselves a new government;
and at first, bearing in mind the past tyranny, they governed
in strict accordance with the laws which they had established
themselves; preferring public interests to their own, and to
administer and protect with greatest care both public and
private affairs. The children succeeded their fathers, and
ignorant of the changes of fortune, having never experienced
its reverses, and indisposed to remain content with this civil
equality, they in turn gave themselves up to cupidity, ambition,
libertinage, and violence, and soon caused the aristocratic gov-
ernment to degenerate into an oligarchic tyranny, regardless of
all civil rights. They soon, however, experienced the same fate
as the first tyrant; the people, disgusted with their govern-
ment, placed themselves at the command of whoever was will-
ing to attack them, and this disposition soon produced an
avenger, who was sufficiently well seconded to destroy them.
The memory of the prince and the wrongs committed by him
being still fresh in their minds, and having overthrown the
oligarchy, the people were not willing to return to the govern-
ment of a prince. A popular government was therefore re-
solved upon, and it was so organized that the authority should
not again fall into the hands of a prince or a small number of
nobles. And as all governments are at first looked up to with
some degree of reverence, the popular state also maintained
itself for a time, but which was never of long duration, and
lasted generally only about as long as the generation that had
established it; for it soon ran into that kind of license which
inflicts injury upon public as well as priv ate interests. Each
individual only consulted his own passions, and a thousand
-acts of injustice were daily committed, so that, constrained by
~ necessity, or directed by the eile of some good man, or
for the purpose of escaping from this anarchy, they returned
anew to the government of a prince,.and from this they gener-
ally lapsed again into anarchy, step by step, in the same manner
and from the same causes as we have indicated.

Such_is the-cirele-which all republics are destined to run

102 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I.

through. Seldom, however, do they come back to the original
form of government, which results from the fact that their
duration is not sufficiently long to be able to undergo these
repeated changes and preserve their existence. But it may
well happen that a republic lacking strength and good counsel
in its difficulties becomes subject after a while to some neigh-
boring state, that is better organized than itself; and if such
is not the case, then they will be apt to revolve indefinitely in
the circle of revolutions. I say, then, that all kinds of govern-
ment are defective; those three which we have qualified as
good because they are too short-lived, and the three bad ones
because of their inherent viciousness. Thus sagacious legis-
lators, knowing the vices of each of these systems of govern-
ment by themselves, have chosen one that should partake of
all of them, judging that ‘to be the most stable and solid. In
fact, when there is combined under the same constitution a
prince, a nobility, and the power of the people, then these three
powers will watch and keep each other reciprocally in check.
Amongst those justly celebrated for having established such
a constitution, Lycurgus beyond doubt merits the highest
praise. He organized the government of Sparta in such man-
ner that, in giving to the king, the nobles, and the people each
their portion of authority and duties, he created a government
which maintained itself for over eight hundred years in the
most perfect tranquillity, and reflected infinite glory upon this

legislator. On the other hand, the constitution given by Solon _

to the Athenians, by which he established only a popular goy-
ernment, was of such short duration that before his death he
saw the tyranny of Pisistratus arise. And although forty
years afterwards the heirs of the tyrant were expelled, so that
Athens recovered her liberties and restored the popular govern-
ment according to the laws of Solon, yet it did not last over a
hundred years; although a number of laws that had been over-
looked by Solon were adopted, to maintain the government
against the insolence of the nobles and the license of the popu-
lace. The fault he had committed in not tempering the power
of the people and that of the prince and his nobles, made the
duration of the government of Athens very short, as compared
with that of Sparta.

But let us come to Rome. Although she had no legislator like
Lycurgus, who constituted her government, at her very origin,

Cuapr. II.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 103

in a manner to secure her liberty for a length of time, yet the
disunion which existed between the Senate and the people pro-
duced such extraordinary events, that chance did for her what
the laws had failed todo. Thus, if Rome did not attain the
first degree of happiness, she at least had the second. Her first
institutions were doubtless defective, but they were not in con-
flict with the principles that might bring her to perfection.
For Romulus and all the other kings gave her many and good
laws, well suited even to a free people; but as the object of
these princes was to found a monarchy, and not a republic,
Rome, upon becoming free, found herself lacking all those
institutions that are most essential to liberty, and which her.
kings had not established. And although these kings lost their
empire, for the reasons and in the manner which we have
explained, yet those who expelled them appointed immediately
two consuls in place of the king; and thus it was found that
they had banished the title of king from Rome, but not the
regal power. The government, composed of Consuls and a
Senate, had but two of the three elements of which we have
spoken, the monarchical and the aristocratic; the popular
power was wanting. In the course of time, however, the inso-
lence of the nobles, produced by the causes which we shall see
further on, induced the people to rise against the others. The
nobility, to save a portion of their power, were forced to yield
a share of it to the people; but the Senate and the Consuls
retained sufficient to maintain their rank in the state. It
was then that the Tribunes of the people were created,
which strengthened and confirmed the republic, being now
composed of the three elements of which we have spoken
above. Fortune favored her, so that, although the authority
passed successively from the kings and nobles to the people,
by the same degrees and for the same reasons that we have
spoken of, yet the royal authority was never entirely abolished
to bestow it upon the nobles; and these were never entirely
deprived of their authority to give it to the people; but a
combination was formed of the three powers, which ren-
dered the constitution perfect, and this perfection was attained.
by the disunion of the Senate and the people, as we shall
more fully show in the following two chapters.

104 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

CHAPTER III.

OF THE EVENTS THAT CAUSED THE CREATION OF TRIBUNES IN
ROME; WHICH MADE THE REPUBLIC MORE PERFECT.

Aut those who have written upon civil institutions demon-
strate (and history is full of examples to support them) that
whoever desires to found a state and give it laws, must start
with assuming that all men are bad and ever ready to display —
their vicious nature, whenever they may find occasion for it.
If their evil disposition remains concealed for a time, it must
be attributed to some unknown reason; and we must assume
that it lacked occasion to show itself; but time, which has
been said to be the father of all truth, does not fail to bring
it to light. After the expulsion of the Tarquins the greatest
harmony seemed to prevail between the Senate and the people.
The nobles seemed to have laid aside all their haughtiness and
assumed popular manners, which made them supportable even
to the lowest of the citizens. The nobility played this role so
long as the Tarquins lived, without their motive being divined ;
for they feared the Tarquins, and also lest the ill-treated peo-
ple might side with them. Their party therefore assumed all
possible gentleness in their manners towards the people. But
so soon as the death of the Tarquins had relieved them of their
apprehensions, they began to vent upon the people all the
venom they had so long retained within their breasts, and lost
no opportunity to outrage them in every possible way ; which
is one of the proofs of the argument we have advanced, that
men act right only upon compulsion; but from the moment
that they have the option and liberty to commit wrong with
impunity, then they never fail to carry confusion and disorder
everywhere. It is this that has caused it to be said that pov-
erty and hunger make men industrious, and that tle law makes
men good; and if fortunate circumstances cause good to be
done without constraint, the law may be dispensed with. But
when such happy influence is lacking, then the law immediately
becomes necessary. Thus the nobles, after the death of the
Tarquins, being no longer under the influence that had re-
strained them, determined to establish a new order of things,
which had the same effect as the misrule of the Tarquins dur-

Cuar. IV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 105

ing their existence ; and therefore, after many troubles, tumults,
and dangers occasioned by the excesses which both the nobles
and the people committed, they came, for the security of the
people, to the creation of the Tribunes, who were endowed with
so many prerogatives, and surrounded with so much respect,
that they formed a powerful barrier between the Senate and the
people, which curbed the insolence of the former.

CHAPTER IV.

THE DISUNION OF THE SENATE AND THE PEOPLE RENDERS THE
REPUBLIC OF ROME POWERFUL AND FREE.

I SHALL not pass over in silence the disturbances that oc-
curred in Rome from the time of the death of the Tarquins to
that of the creatiog of the Tribunes; and shall afterwards re-
fute the opinion of those who claim that the Roman republic
has always been a theatre of turbulence and disorder, and that
if its extreme good fortune and the military discipline had not
supplied the defects of her constitution, she would have de-
served the lowest rank amongst the republics.

It cannot be denied that the Roman Empire was the result
of good fortune and military discipline; but it seems to me
that it ought to be perceived that where good discipline prevails
there also will good order prevail, and good fortune rarely fails
to follow in their train. Let us, however, go into details upon
this point. I maintain that those who blame the quarrels of
the Senate and the people of Rome condemn that which was
the very origin of liberty, and that they were probably more
impressed by the cries and noise which these disturbances occa-
sioned in the public places, than by the good effect which they
produced; and that they do not consider that in every republic
there are two parties, that of the nobles and that of the people ;
and all the laws that are favorable to liberty result from the
opposition of these parties to each other, as may easily be seen
from the events that occurred in Rome. From the time of the
Tarquins to that of the Gracchi, that is to say, within the space
of over three hundred years, the differences between these par-
ties caused but very few exiles, and cost still less blood; they

106 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

cannot therefore be regarded as having been very injurious and
fatal to a republic, which during the course of so many years saw
on this account only eight or ten of its citizens sent into exile,
and but a very small number put to death, and even but a few
condemned to pecuniary fines. Nor can we regard a republic as
disorderly where so many virtues were seen to shine. For good
examples are the result of good education, and good education
is due to good laws; and good laws in their turn spring from
those very agitations which have been so inconsiderately con-
demned by many. For whoever will carefully examine the re-
sult of these agitations will find that they have neither caused
exiles nor any violence prejudicial to the general good, and
will be convinced even that they have given rise to laws that
were to the advantage of public liberty. And if it be said that
these are strange means, —to hear constantly the cries of the
people furious against the Senate, and of a Senate declaiming
against the people, to see the populace rush tumultuously
through the streets, close their houses, and even leave the city
of Rome,—I reply, that all these things can alarm only those
who read of them, and that every free state ought to afford the
people the opportunity of giving vent, so to say, to their ambi-
tion; and above all those republics which on important occa-
sions have to avail themselves of this very people. Now such
were the means employed at Rome; when the people wanted to
obtain a law, they resorted to some of the extremes of which we
have just spoken, or they refused to enroll themselves to serve
in the wars, so that the Senate was obliged to satisfy them
in some measure. The demands of a free people are rarely
pernicious to their liberty; they are generally inspired by
oppressions, experienced or apprehended; and if their fears
are ill founded, resort is had to public assemblies where the
mere eloquence of a single good and respectable man will make
them sensible of their error. “The people,’ says Cicero,
“although ignorant, yet are capable of appreciating the truth,
“and yield to it readily when it is presented to them by a man
“ whom they esteem worthy of their confidence.”

One should show then more reserve in blaming the Roman
government, and consider that so many good effects, which
originated in that republic, cannot but result from very good
causes. If the troubles of Rome occasioned the creation of
Tribunes, then they cannot be praised too highly ; for besides

Cuar. V.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 107

giving to the people a share in the public administration, these
Tribunes were established as the most assured guardians of
Roman liberty, as we shall see in the following chapter.

CHAPTER V.

TO WHOM CAN THE GUARDIANSHIP OF LIBERTY MORE SAFELY BE
CONFIDED, TO THE NOBLES OR TO THE PEOPLE? AND WHICH OF
THE TWO HAVE MOST CAUSE FOR CREATING DISTURBANCES,
THOSE WHO WISH TO ACQUIRE, OR THOSE WHO DESIRE TO CON-
SERVE?

Aut the legislators that have given wise constitutions to
republics have deemed it an essential precaution to establish a
guard and protection to liberty; and according as this was
more or less wisely placed, liberty endured a greater or less
length of time. As every republic was composed of nobles and
people, the question arose as to whose hands it was best to con-
fide the protection of liberty. The Lacedzemonians, and in our
day the Venetians, gave it into the hands of the nobility ; but
the Romans intrusted it to the people. We must examine,
therefore, which of these republics made the best choice. There
are strong reasons in favor of each, but, to judge by the results,
we must incline in favor of the nobles, for the liberties of
Sparta and Venice endured a longer space of time than those
of Rome. But to come to the reasons, taking the part of Rome
first, I will say, that one should always confide any deposit to
those who have least desire of violating it; and doubtless, if
we consider the objects of the nobles and of the people, we
must see that the first have a great desire to dominate, whilst
the latter have only the wish not to be dominated, and con-
sequently a greater desire to live in the enjoyment of liberty ;
so that when the people are intrusted with the care of any
privilege or liberty, being less disposed to encroach upon it,
they will of necessity take better care of it; and being unable
to take it away themselves, will prevent others from doing so.

On the contrary, it is said, in favor of the course adopted by
Sparta and Venice, that the preference given to the nobility, as
guardians of public liberty, has two advantages: the first, to

108 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

yield something to the ambition of those who, being more
engaged in the management of public affairs, find, so to say, in
the weapon which the office places in their hands, a means of
power that satisfies them; the other, to deprive the restless
spirit of the masses of an authority calculated from its véry
nature to produce trouble and dissensions, and apt to drive the
nobles to some act of desperation, which in time may cause
the greatest misfortunes. Rome is even adduced as an example
of this; for having confided, it is said, this authority to the
tribunes of the people, these were seen not to be content with
having only one Consul taken from this class, but wanted both
to be plebeians. They afterwards claimed the Censure, the Pre-
toriate, and all the other dignities of the republic. And not
satisfied with these advantages, and urged on by the same vio-
lence, they came in the end to idolize all those whom they saw
disposed to attack the nobles, which gave rise to the power of
Marius and to the ruin of Rome.

And, truly, whoever weighs all these reasons accurately may
well remain in doubt which of the two classes he would choose
as the guardians of liberty, not knowing which would be least
dangerous, — those who seek to acquire an authority which they
have not, or those who desire to preserve that which they already
possess. After the nicest examination, this is what I think
may be concluded from it. The question refers either to a re-

public that desires to extend its empire,as Rome, or to a state

that confines itself merely to its own preservation. In the
first case Rome should be imitated, and in the second the ex-
ample of Sparta and Venice should be followed; and in the
next chapter we shall see the reasons why and the means by
which this is to be done.

To come back now to the question as to which men are

most dangerous in a republic, those who wish to acquire power
or those who fear to lose that which they possess, I will remark
that Menenius and M. Fulvius, both plebeians, were named, the
one Dictator and the other Commander of the Cavalry, to make
investigations on the occasion of a conspiracy formed at Capua
against Rome. They were also commissioned to find out all
those who from ambition and by extraordinary means sought. to
obtain the Consulate and the other important offices of the repub-
lic. The nobility, believing that such an authority given to the
Dictator was aimed against them, spread the report throughout

Cuap. VI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 109

the city that it was not they who sought thus to arrive at these
honors from ambition or by illicit proceedings, but rather the
plebeians, who, trusting neither to their birth nor their personal
merits, thus employed extraordinary means to obtain these
honors, and they particularly charged it upon the Dictator him-
self. This accusation was so actively followed up that Mene-
nius felt himself obliged to convoke an assembly of the people;
where, after having complained of the calumnies spread against
him by the nobles, he deposed the Dictatorship and submitted
himself to the judgment of the people. The cause having been
pleaded, Menenius was absolved. On that occasion there was
much discussion as to which was the most ambitious, he who
wished to preserve power or he who wished to acquire it; as
both the one and the other of these motives may be the cause
of great troubles. It seems, however, that they are most fre-
quently occasioned by those who possess; for the fear to lose
stirs the same passions in men as the desire to gain, as men
do not believe themselves sure of what they already possess
except by acquiring still more; and, moreover, these new acqui-
sitions are so many means of strength and power for abuses;
and what is still worse is that the haughty manners and inso-
lence of the nobles and the rich excite in the breasts of those
who have neither birth nor wealth, not only the desire to pos-
sess them, but also the wish to revenge themselves by depriving
the former of those riches and honors which they see them
employ so badly.

CHAPTER VI.

WHETHER IT WAS POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH IN ROME A GOVERN-
MENT CAPABLE OF PUTTING AN END TO THE ENMITIES EXIST-
ING BETWEEN THE NOBLES AND THE PEOPLE.

WE have discussed above the effects of the quarrels between
the people and the Senate. These same differences having con-
tinued to the time of the Gracchi, when they became the cause
of the loss of liberty, one might wish that Rome had done the
great things we have admired, without bearing within her
bosom such cause of discords. It seems to me therefore im-
portant to examine whether it was possible to establish a

110 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

government in Rome that could prevent all these misunder-
standings ; and to do this well, we must necessarily recur to
those republics that have maintained their liberties without
such enmities and disturbances; we must examine what the
form of their government was, and whether that could have
been introduced in Rome.

In Sparta we have an example amongst the ancients, and in
Venice amongst the moderns; to both these states I have
already referred above. Sparta had a king and a senate, few
in number, to govern her; Venice did not admit these distinc-
tions, and gave the name of gentlemen to all who were entitled
to have a part in the administration of the government. It
was chance rather than foresight which gave to the latter this
form of government; for having taken refuge on those shal-
lows where the city now is, for the reasons mentioned above,
the inhabitants soon became sufficiently numerous to require a
regular system of laws. They consequently established a gov-
ernment, and assembled frequently in council to discuss the
interests of the city. When it seemed to them that they were
sufficiently numerous to govern themselves, they barred the
way to a share in the government to the newly arrived who
came to live amongst them; and finding in the course of time
that the number of the latter increased sufficiently to give
reputation to those who held the government in their hands,
they designated the latter by the title of “ gentlemen,” and the
others were called the popular class. This form of government
had no difficulty in establishing and maintaining itself without
disturbances; for at the moment of its origin all those who in-
habited Venice had the right to participate in the government,
so that no one had cause to complain. Those who afterwards
came to live there, finding the government firmly established,
had neither a pretext for, nor the means of, creating disturb-
ances. They had no cause, for the reason that they had not
been deprived of anything; and they lacked the means, because
they were kept in check by those who held the government,
and who did not employ them in any affairs that might tempt
them to seize authority. Besides, the new-comers in Venice
were not sufficiently numerous to have produced a dispropor-
tion between the governing and the governed, for the number
of nobles equalled or exceeded that of the others; and thus
for these reasons Venice could establish and preserve that
form of government.

Cuap. VI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 111

Sparta, as I have said, being governed by a king and a
limited senate, could maintain itself also for a long time,
because there were but few inhabitants, and strangers were not
permitted to come in; besides, the laws of Lycurgus had ob-
tained such influence that their observance prevented even the
slightest pretext for trouble. It was also the easier for the
citizens to live in union, as Lycurgus had established equality
in fortunes and inequality in conditions; for an equal poverty
prevailed there, and the people were the less ambitious, as the
offices of the government were given but to a few citizens, the
people being excluded from them; and the nobles in the exer-
cise of their functions did not treat the people sufficiently ill to
excite in them the desire of exercising them themselves. This
last advantage was due to the kings of Sparta; for being placed
in this government, as it were, between the two orders, and
living in the midst of the nobility, they had no better means of
maintaining their authority than to protect the people against
all injustice ; whence these neither feared nor desired author-
ity, and consequently there was no motive for any differences
between them and the nobles, nor any cause for disturbances ;
and thus they could live for a long time united. Two principal
causes, however, cemented this union: first, the inhabitants of
Sparta were few in number, and therefore could be governed
by a few; and the other was, that, by not permitting strangers
to establish themselves in the republic, they had neither oppor-
tunity of becoming corrupt, nor of increasing their population
to such a degree that the burden of government became diffi-
cult to the few who were charged with it.

In examining now all these circumstances, we see that the
legislators of Rome had to do one of two things to assure to
their republic the same quiet as that enjoyed by the two repub-
lics of which we have spoken; namely, either not to employ
the people in the armies, like the Venetians, or not to open the
doors to strangers, as had been the case in Sparta. But the
Romans in both took just the opposite course, which gaye to
the people greater power and infinite occasion for disturbances.
But if the republic had been more tranquil, it would necessarily
have resulted that she would have been more feeble, and that
she would have lost with her energy also the ability of achiey-
ing that high degree of greatness to which she attained ; so that
to have removed the cause of trouble from Rome would have

112 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

been to deprive her of her power of expansion. And thus it is
seen in all human affairs, upon careful examination, that you
cannot avoid one inconvenience without incurring another. If
therefore you wish to make a people numerous and warlike, so
as to create a great empire, you will have to constitute it in
such manner as will cause you more difficulty in managing it;
and if you keep it either small or unarmed, and you acquire
other dominions, you will not be able to hold them, or you will
become so feeble that you will fall a prey to whoever attacks
you. And therefore in all our decisions we must consider well
what presents the least inconveniences, and then choose the
best, for we shall never find any course entirely free from ob-
jections. Rome then might, like Sparta, have created a king
for life, and established a limited senate ; but with her desire to
become a great empire, she could not, like Sparta, limit the
number of her citizens; and therefore a king for life and a
limited senate would have been of no benefit to her so far as
union was concerned. If any one therefore wishes to establish
an entirely new republic, he will have to consider whether he
wishes to have her expand in power and dominion like Rome,
or whether he intends to confine her within narrow limits. In
the first case, it will be necessary to organize her as Rome was,
and submit to dissensions and troubles as best he may; for
without a great number of men, and these well armed, no re-
public can ever increase. In the second case, he may organize
her like Sparta and Venice; but as expansion is the poison of
such republics, he must by every means in his power prevent
her from making conquests, for such acquisitions by a feeble
republic always prove their ruin, as happened to both Sparta
and Venice; the first of which, having subjected to her rule
nearly all Greece, exposed its feeble foundations at the slight-
est accident, for when the rebellion of Thebes occurred, which
was led by Pelopidas, the other cities of Greece also rose up
and almost ruined Sparta.

In like manner, Venice, having obtained possession of a great
part of Italy, and the most of it not by war, but by means of
money and fraud, when occasion came for her to give proof of
her strength, she lost everything in a single battle. I think,
then, that to found a republic which should endure a long time
it would be best to organize her internally like Sparta, or to
locate her, like Venice, in some strong place; and to make her

Cuar. VI.J TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 113

sufficiently powerful, so that no one could hope to overcome her
readily, and yet on the other hand not so powerful as to make
her formidable to her neighbors. In this wise she might long
enjoy her independence.| For there are but two motives for
making war against a republic: one, the desire to subjugate
her; the other, the apprehension of being subjugated by her.
The two means which we have indicated remove, as it were,
both these pretexts for war; for if the republic is difficult to
be conquered, her defences being well organized, as I presup-
pose, then it will seldom or never happen that any one will
venture upon the project of conquering her. If she remains
quiet within her limits, and experience shows that she enter-
tains no ambitious projects, the fear of her power will never
prompt any one to attack her; and this would even be more
certainly the case if her constitution and laws prohibited all
aggrandizement. And I certainly think that if she could be
kept in this equilibrium it would be the best political existence,
and would insure to any state real tranquillity. But as all hu-
man things are kept in a perpetual movement, and can never
remain able. states naturally either rise or dooce. and ne-
cessity compels them to many acts to which reason will not
influence them; so that, having organized a republic competent
to maintain herself without expanding, still, if forced by neces-
sity to extend her territory, in such case we shall see her foun-
dations give way and herself quickly brought to ruin. And
thus, on the other hand, if Heaven favors her so as never to be
involved in war, the continued tranquillity would enervate her,
or provoke internal dissensions, which together, or either of
them separately, will be apt to prove her ruin. Seeing then
the impossibility of establishing in this respect a perfect equi-
librium, and that a precise middle course cannot be maintained,
it is proper in the organization of a republic to select the most
honorable course, and to constitute her so that, even if necessity
should oblige her to expand, she may yet be able to preserve
her acquisitions. To return now to our first argument, 1 be-
lieve it therefore necessary rather to take the constitution of
Rome as a model than that of any other republic, (for I do
not believe that a middle course between the two can be
found,) and to tolerate the differences that will arise between
the Senate and the people as an unavoidable inconvenience
in achieving greatness like that of Rome. Besides the other
VOL. II. 8

114 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

reasons alleged, which demonstrate the creation and authority
of the Tribunes to have been necessary for the protection of
liberty, it is easy to see the advantage which a republic must
derive from the faculty of accusing, which amongst others was
bestowed upon the Tribunes, as will be seen in the following
chapter.

CHAPTER VII.

SHOWING HOW NECESSARY THE FACULTY OF ACCUSATION IS IN A
REPUBLIC FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF LIBERTY.

No more useful and necessary authority can be given to
those who are appointed as guardians of the liberty of a state,
than the faculty of accusing the citizens to the people, or to
any magistrate or council, for any attempt against public lib-
erty.. Such a system has two very marked advantages for a
republic. The first is, that the apprehension of being accused
prevents the citizens from attempting anything against the
state, and should they nevertheless attempt it, they are imme-
diately punished, without regard to persons. The other is, that
it affords a way for those evil dispositions that arise in one
way or another against some one citizen to vent themselves ;
and when these ferments cannot in some way exhaust them-
selves, their promoters are apt to resort to some extraordinary
means, that may lead to the ruin of the republic. Nothing, on
the other hand, renders a republic more firm and stable, than
to organize it in such a way that the excitement of the ill-
humors that agitate a state may have a way prescribed by law
for venting itself. This can be demonstrated by many exam-
ples, and particularly by that of Coriolanus, which Titus Livius
mentions, where he says that the Roman nobility was much
irritated against the people, because they believed that the
people had obtained too much authority by the creation of the
Tribunes who defended them; and as Rome at the time was
suffering greatly from want of provisions, and the Senate had
sent to Sicily for supplies of grain, Coriolanus, who was a de-_
clared enemy of the popular faction, suggested to the Senate
that it afforded a favorable opportunity for them to chastise
the people, and to deprive them of the authority they had ac-

Cuap, VII] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 115

quired and assumed to the prejudice of the nobility, by not
distributing the grain, and thus keeping the people in a fam-
ished condition. When this proposition came to the ears of
the people, it excited so great an indignation against Coriolanus,
that, on coming out of the Senate, he would have been killed in
a tumultuary manner, if the Tribunes had not summoned him
to appear before them and defend his cause. This occurrence
shows, as we have said above, how useful and necessary it is
for a republic to have laws that afford to the masses the oppor-
tunity of giving vent to the hatred they may have conceived
against any citizen; for if there exist no legal means for this,
they will resort to illegal ones, which beyond doubt produce
much worse effects. For ordinarily when a citizen is op-
pressed, and even if an injustice is committed against him, it
rarely causes any disturbance in the republic; for this oppres-
sion has been effected by neither private nor foreign forces,
which are most destructive to public lhberty, but is effected
solely by the public force of the state in accordance with the
established laws, which have their prescribed limits that cannot
be transcended to the injury of the republic.

And to corroborate this opinion by examples, let the case of
Coriolanus suffice, and let any one reflect how much evil would
have resulted to the Roman republic if he had been killed in that
popular outbreak ; for that would have been an offence of private
individuals against a private individual, which kind of offences
generate fear, and fear seeks for means of defence, and for
that purpose seeks partisans, and from partisans arise factions
in cities, and factions cause their ruin. But as the matter was
disposed of by those who had the legal authority, it prevented
all those evils that would have resulted from the exercise of
private force. We have seen in our time what troubles oc-
curred in Florence because the populace could not vent their
anger against one of her citizens, in the case of Francesco
Valori, who was almost like a prince in that city, and being
looked upon by many as an ambitious man, who by haughti-
ness and audacity attempted to transcend the civil authority,
and there being no way in Florence for resisting this except
by a faction opposed to his, it resulted that Valori, having no
fear of anything but some extraordinary proceeding, began to
enlist partisans who might defend him. On the other hand,
those who opposed him, being without legal means for repress-

116 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

ing him, employed illegal ones, which naturally led to an armed
conflict. But if he could have been reached by lawful means,
the influence of Valori would have been crushed, and he would
have been the only sufferer ; but being obliged to resort,to ille-
gal measures, not only he, but many other noble citizens, suf-
fered in consequence. We may also adduce in support of the
above-expressed conclusion the incident which occurred in
Florence in connection with Pietro Soderini, and which re-
sulted wholly from the fact that there were no means in that
republic for bringing charges against the ambition of powerful
citizens. For to accuse a noble before only eight judges did
not suffice; the number of the judges should be many, for the
few are apt to favor the few in their decisions. Thus, if there
had been in Florence a tribunal before which the citizens could
have preferred charges against Soderini, their fury against him
might have been assuaged without calling in the Spanish troops;
or if he had not been liable to the charges, no one would have
dared to bring them against him, for fear of being himself ac-
cused in turn; and thus on both sides the animosity would
have ceased, which occasioned so much trouble.

Whence we may conclude that, whenever the aid of foreign
powers is called in by any party in a state, it is to be ascribed
to defects in its constitution, and more especially to the want
of means for enabling the people to exhaust the malign humors
that spring up among men, without having recourse to extraor-
dinary measures; all of which can easily be provided against by
instituting accusations before numerous judges, and giving these
sufficient influence and importance. These things were so well
organized in Rome that, with the many dissensions between the
Senate and the people, neither the one nor the other, nor any
private citizen, ever attempted to avail of foreign force; for
having the remedy at home, there was no occasion to look for
it elsewhere. And although the above examples are abun-
dantly sufficient to prove this, yet I will adduce another, men-
tioned by Titus Livius in his history. At Chiusi (Clusium), in
those days one of the most famous cities of Tuscany, a certain
Lucumones had violated the sister of Arnutes, and, unable to
revenge himself because of the power of the offender, Arnutes
went to call in the aid of the Gauls, who at that time ruled
over the country now called Lombardy, and urged them to
come with an armed force to Clusium, pointing out to them the

Cuap. VIII. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS.: LT

advantage they would obtain for themselves by thus avenging
him. Certainly, if Arnutes had been able to secure redress by
the laws of his city, he would never have had recourse to the
Barbarians.

But just as useful as accusations are in a republic, just so
useless and pernicious are calumnies, as we shall show in the
next chapter.

CHAPTER VIII.

IN PROPORTION AS ACCUSATIONS ARE USEFUL IN A REPUBLIC, SO
ARE CALUMNIES PERNICIOUS.

Despite of the courage displayed by Furius Camillus in lib-
erating Rome from the yoke of the Gauls, which caused all
the citizens of Rome to yield him the first place without deem-
ing themselves degraded thereby, Manlius Capitolinus could
not brook that so much honor and glory should be bestowed
upon him; for, having himself saved the Capitol, he consid-
ered that he had contributed as much to the salvation of Rome
as Furius Camillus, and that he was in no way inferior to him
in military talents. So that, tormented by envy, he could not
rest on account of the glory of his rival; and, finding that
he could not sow discord amongst the Senators, he turned to
the people and spread various sinister reports amongst them.
Amongst other things, he circulated a statement that the
amount of money which had been collected for payment to the
‘Gauls had never been paid over to them, but had been appro-
priated by some private citizens ; and that, if it were recovered
from them, it might be most advantageously applied for the
public good, by alleviating the taxes of the people, or by the
extinction of some other debt. These statements produced a
great impression among the people; so that, many of them
came together at the house of Manlius, and, at his instigation,
commenced to create disturbances in the city. This greatly
displeased the Senate, who, deeming the occasion momentous
and perilous, created a Dictator, who should take cognizance
of the facts and repress the audacity of Manlius; whereupon
the Dictator had him promptly summoned. They met in the
public place, the Dictator surrounded by the nobles, and Manlius

118 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

in the midst of the people. Manlius was called upon to specify
the persons who had appropriated the money in question, ac-
cording to his reports, as the Senate was as anxious as the
people to know them. To this Manlius made no particular
reply, but in an evasive manner said that it was unnecessary
to mention the names, as they knew them very well already ;
whereupon the Dictator had him incarcerated. This shows
how much detested calumnies are in republics, as well as under
any other government, and that no means should be left un-
employed to repress them in time. Now, there is no more ef-
fectual way for putting an end to calumnies than to introduce
the system of legal accusations, which will be as beneficial to
republics as calumnies are injurious. On the other hand, there
is this difference, namely, that calumnies require neither wit-
nesses, nor confrontings, nor any particulars to prove them,
so that every citizen may be calumniated by another, whilst
accusations cannot be lodged against any one without being
accompanied by positive proofs and circumstances that demon-
strate the truth of the accusation. Accusations must be
brought before the magistrates, or the people, or the councils,
whilst calumnies are spread in public places as well as in
private dwellings; and calumnies are more practised where
the system of accusations does not exist, and in cities the
constitution of which does not admit of them. The lawgiver
of a republic, therefore, should give every citizen the right to
accuse another citizen without fear or suspicion ; and this being
done, and properly carried out, he should severely punish ca-
lumniators, who would have no right to complain of such pun-
ishment, it being open to them to bring charges against those
whom they had in private calumniated. And where this sys-
tem is not well established there will always be great disorders,
for calumnies irritate, but do not chastise men; and those who
have been thus irritated will think of strengthening them-
selves, hating more than fearing the slanders spread against
them.

This matter, as has been said, was perfectly organized at
Rome, but has always been badly managed in our city of Flor-
ence. And as in Rome this institution was productive of much
good, so at Florence the lack of it did much harm. And
whoever reads the history of that city will see to how many
calumnies those citizens were exposed who occupied themselves

Cur. VL] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 119

with the most important public affairs. Of one it was reported
that he had robbed the public treasury ; of another, that he had
failed in such or such an enterprise because he had been bribed ;
and of a third, that he had caused this or that public incon-
venience for the purpose of serving his own ambition. This
gave rise in every direction to hatreds amongst the citizens,
whence divisions arose, and from these sprung factions that
proved the ruin of the state. If the system of accusations
and the punishment of calumniators had been established in
Florence, those endless scandals and disturbances that occurred
would never have taken place ; for those citizens who had been
either condemned or absolved could not have injured the city,
and there would have been a much less number accused than
there had been calumniated, as it would not have been as easy
to accuse as to calumniate any one. And amongst the other
means which ambitious citizens frequently employed to achieve
power was this practice of calumniating, which, when employed
against one noble citizen who opposed the ambitious projects
of another, did much for the latter; for by taking the part of
the people and confirming them in the ill opinion which they
had of the nobles, he made them his friends.

I might adduce many examples of this, but will content my-
self with only one. The Florentine army which besieged Lucca
was under the command of Messer Giovanni Guicciardini, Flor-
entine commissioner. Whether it was due to his bad manage-
ment or to his ill fortune, the siege proved unsuccessful. What-
ever the case may have been, Messer Giovanni was charged with
having been bribed by the authorities of Lucca. This calumny,
favored by his enemies, drove Messer Giovanni almost to des-
peration ; and although he was anxious to place himself in the
hands of the Captain to justify himself, yet he never was
allowed the opportunity, there being no means in the repub-
lic that made such a course possible. This gave rise to the
greatest indignation amongst the friends of Messer Giovanni,
who constituted the majority of the nobles, and also amongst
those who desired a change in the government of Florence.
This difficulty, together with other similar causes, increased
to that degree that it resulted in the ruin of the republic.

Thus Manlius Capitolinus was a calumniator, and not an
accuser; and the Romans showed in his case how calumnia-
tors ought to be punished. For they ought to be made to be

120 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I,

accusers; and, if the accusation proves true, they should be
rewarded, or at least not punished; but if it proves not to be
true, then they should be punished as Manlius was.

CHAPTER IX.

TO FOUND A NEW REPUBLIC, OR TO REFORM ENTIRELY THE OLD
INSTITUTIONS OF AN EXISTING ONE, MUST BE THE WORK OF ONE
MAN ONLY.

Ir may perhaps appear to some that I have gone too far into
the details of Roman history before having made any mention
of the founders of that republic, or of her institutions, her re-
ligion, and her military establishment. Not wishing, therefore,
to keep any longer in suspense the desires of those who wish to
understand these matters, I say that many will perhaps con-
sider it an evil example that the founder of a civil society, as
Romulus was, should first have killed his brother, and then
have consented to the death of Titus Tatius, who had been
elected to share the royal authority with him; from which it
might be concluded that the citizens, according to the example
of their prince, might, from ambition and the desire to rule,
destroy those who attempt to oppose their authority. This
opinion would be correct, if we do not take into consideration
the object which Romulus had in view in committing that
homicide. But we must assume, as a general rule, that it never
or rarely happens that a republic or monarchy is well consti-
tuted, or its old institutions entirely reformed, unless it is done
by only one individual ; it is even necessary that he whose mind
has conceived such a constitution should be alone in carrying it
into effect. A sagacious legislator of a republic, therefore, whose
object is to promote the public good, and not his private inter-
ests, and who prefers his country to his own successors, should
concentrate all authority in himself; anda wise mind will never
censure any one for having employed any extraordinary means
for the purpose of establishing a kingdom or constituting a re-
public. It is well that, when the act accuses him, the result
should excuse him; and when the result is good, as in the case
of Romulus, it will always absolve him from blame. For he is

Cuap. IX.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 121

to be reprehended who commits violence for the purpose of de-
‘stroying, and not he-who employs it for beneficent purposes.
The lawgiver should, however, be sufficiently wise and virtuous
not to leave this authority which he has assumed either to his
heirs or to any one else; for mankind, being more prone to evil
than to good, his successor might employ for evil purposes the
power which he had used only for good ends. Besides, although
one man alone should organize a government, yet it will not en-
dure long if the administration of it remains on the shoulders of
a single individual; it is well, then, to confide this to the charge
of many, for thus it will be sustained by the many. Therefore,
as the organization of anything cannot be made by many, because
the divergence of their opinions hinders them from agrecing as
to what is best, yet, when once they do understand it, they will
not readily agree to abandon it. That Romulus deserves to be
excused for the death of his brother and that of his associate,
~and that what he had done was for the general good, and not
for the gratification of his own ambition, is proved by the fact
that he immediately instituted a Senate with which to consult,
and according to the opinions of which he might form his reso-
lutions. And on carefully considering the authority which
Romulus reserved for himself, we see that all he kept was the
command of the army in case of war, and the power of convoking
the Senate. This was seen when Rome became free, after the
expulsion of the Tarquins, when there was no other innovation
made upon the existing order of things than the substitution of
two Consuls, appointed annually, in place of an hereditary king ;
which proves clearly that all the original institutions of that
city were more in conformity with the requirements of a free and -
civil society than with an absolute and tyrannical government.
The above views might be corroborated by any number of
examples, such as those of Moses, Lycurgus, Solon, and other
founders of monarchies and republics, who were enabled to es-
tablish laws suitable for the general good only by keeping for
themselves an exclusive authority; but all these are so well
known that I will not further refer to them. I will adduce only
one instance, not so celebrated, but which merits the considera-
tion of those who aim to become good legislators: it is this.
Agis, king of Sparta, desired to bring back the Spartans to
the strict observance of the laws of Lycurgus, being convinced
that, by deviating from them, their city had lost much of her

122 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

ancient virtue, and consequently her power and dominion ; but
the Spartan Ephores had him promptly killed, as one who at-
tempted to make himself a tyrant. His successor, Cleomenes,
had conceived the same desire, from studying the records and
writings of Agis, which he had found, and which explained his
aims and intentions. Cleomenes was convinced that he would
be unable to render this service to his country unless he pos-
sessed sole authority; for he judged that, owing to the ambi-
tious nature of men, he could not promote the interests of the
many against the will of the few; and therefore he availed of a
convenient opportunity to have all the Ephores slain, as well as
all such others as might oppose his project, after which he
restored the laws of Lycurgus entirely. This course was calcu-
lated to resuscitate the greatness of Sparta, and to give Cleom-
enes a reputation equal to that of Lycurgus, had it not been for
the power of the Macedonians and the weakness of the other
Greek republics. For being soon after attacked by the Mace-
donians, and Sparta by herself being inferior in strength, and
there being no one whom he could call to his aid, he was de-
feated ; and thus his project, so just and laudable, was never put
into execution. Considering, then, all these things, I conclude
that, to found a republic, one must be alone; and that Romulus —
deserves to be absolved from, and not blamed for, the death of
Remus and of Tatius.

CHAPTER X.

IN PROPORTION AS THE FOUNDERS OF A REPUBLIC OR MONARCHY
ARE ENTITLED TO PRAISE, SO DO THE FOUNDERS OF A TYRANNY
DESERVE EXECRATION.

Or all men who have been eulogized, those deserve it most
who have been the authors and founders of religions; next
come such as have established republics or kingdoms. After
these the most celebrated are those who have commanded ar-
mies, and have extended the possessions of their kingdom or
country. To these may be added literary men, but, as these
are of different kinds, they are celebrated according to their
respective degrees of excellence. All others— and their num-

Cuap. X.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIKIUS. 123

ber is infinite — receive such share of praise as pertains to the
exercise of their arts and professions. On the contrary, those
are doomed to infamy and universal execration who have de-
stroyed religions, who have overturned republics and kingdoms,
who are enemies of virtue, of letters, and of every art that is
useful and honorable to mankind. Such are the impious and
violent, the ignorant, the idle, the vile and degraded. And
there are none so foolish or so wise, so wicked or so good, that,
in choosing between these two qualities, they do not praise
what is praiseworthy and blame that which deserves blame.
And yet nearly all men, deceived by a false good and a false
glory, allow themselves voluntarily or ignorantly to be drawn
towards those who deserve more blame than praise. Such as
by the establishment of a republic or kingdom could earn eter-
nal glory for themselves incline to tyranny, without perceiving
how much glory, how much honor, security, satisfaction, and
tranquillity of mind, they forfeit; and what infamy, disgrace,
blame, danger, and disquietude they incur. And it is impossi-
ble that those who have lived as private citizens in a republic,
or those who by fortune or courage have risen to be princes of
the same, if they were to read history and take the records of
antiquity for example, should not prefer Scipio to Cesar; and
that those who were (originally) princes should not rather
choose to be like Agesilaus, Timoleon, and Dion, than Nabis,
Phalaris, and Dionysius; for they would then see how thor-
oughly the latter were despised, and how highly the former
were appreciated. They would furthermore see that Timoleon
and the others had no less authority in their country than Di-
onysius and Phalaris, but that they enjoyed far more security,
and for a much greater length of time. Nor let any one be de-
ceived by the glory of that Cesar who has been so much cele-
brated by writers; for those who praised him were corrupted
by his fortune, and friehtened by the long duration of the em-
pire that Was maintained under his name, and which did not
permit writers to speak of him with freedom. And if any one
wishes to know what would have been said of him if writers
had been free to speak their minds, let them read what Cati-
line said of him. Cesar is as much more to be condemned, as
he who commits an evil deed is more guilty than he who merely
has the evil intention. He will also see how highly Brutus was
eulogized ; for, not being allowed to blame Czesar on account

124 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

of his power, they extolled his enemy. Let him also note how
much more praise those Emperors merited who, after Rome be-
came an empire, conformed to the laws like good princes, than
those who took the opposite course ; and he will see that Titus,
Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus, and Marcus Aurelius did
not require the Pretorians nor the multitudinous legions to
defend them, because they were protected by their own good
conduct, the good will of the people, and by the love of the
Senate. He will furthermore see that neither the Eastern nor
the Western armies sufficed to save Caligula, Nero, Vitellius,
and so many other wicked Emperors, from the enemies which
their bad conduct and evil lives had raised up against them.
And if the history of these men were carefully studied, it
would prove an ample guide to any prince, and serve to show
him the way to glory or to infamy, to security or to perpetual
apprehension. For of the twenty-six Emperors that reigned
from the time of Cesar to that of Maximinius, sixteen were
assassinated, and ten only died a natural death; and if, amongst
those who were killed, there were one or two good ones, like
Galba and Pertinax, their death was the consequence of the
corruption which their predecessors had engendered amongst
the soldiers. And if amongst those who died a natural death
there were some wicked ones, like Severus, it was due to their
extraordinary good fortune and courage, which two qualities
rarely fall to the lot of such men. He will furthermore learn
from the lessons of that history how an empire should be or-
ganized properly; for all the Emperors that succeeded to the
throne by inheritance, except Titus, were bad, and those who
became Emperors by adoption were all good, such as the five
from Nero to Marcus Aurelius; and when the Empire became
hereditary, 16 came to ruin. Let any prince now place him-
self in the times from Nerva to Marcus Aurelius, and let him
compare them with those that preceded and followed that pe-
riod, and let him choose in which of the two he would like to
have been born, and in which he would like to have reigned.
In the period under the good Emperors he will see the prince
secure amidst his people, who are also living in security; he
will see peace and justice prevail in the world, the authority
of the Senate respected, the magistrates honored, the wealthy
citizens enjoying their riches, nobility and virtue exalted, and
everywhere will he see tranquillity and well-being. And on

Cuap. X.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 195

the other hand he will behold all animosity, license, corruption,
and all noble ambition extinct. During the period of the good
Emperors he will see that golden age when every one could hold
and defend whatever opinion he pleased; in fine, he will sce
the triumph of the world, the prince surrounded with reverence
and glory, and beloved by his people, who are happy in their se-
curity. If now he will but glance at the times under the other
Emperors, he will behold the atrocities of war, discords and se-
dition, cruelty in peace as in war, many princes massacred,
many civil and foreign wars, Italy afflicted and overwhelmed
by fresh misfortunes, and her cities ravaged and ruined; he
will see Rome in ashes, the Capitol pulled down by her own
citizens, the ancient temples desolate, all religious rites and
ceremonies corrupted, and the city full of adultery ; he will be-
hold the sea covered with ships full of flying exiles, and the
shores stained with blood. He will see innumerable cruelties
in Rome, and nobility, riches, and honor, and above all virtue,
accounted capital crimes. He will see informers rewarded, ser-
vants corrupted against their masters, the freedmen arrayed
against their patrons, and those who were without enemies be-
trayed and oppressed by their friends. And then will he ree-
ognize what infinite obligations Rome, Italy, and the whole
world owed to Cesar. And surely, if he be a man, he will be
shocked at the thought of re-enacting those evil times, and be
fired with an intense desire to follow the example of the good.
And truly, if a prince be anxious for glory and the good opinion
of the world, he should rather wish to possess a corrupt city,
not to ruin it wholly like Cesar, but to reorganize it like Rom-
ulus. For certainly the heavens cannot afford a man a greater
opportunity of glory, nor could men desire a better one. And
if for the proper organization of a city it should be necessary
to abolish the principality, he who had failed to give her good
laws for the sake of preserving his rank may be entitled to
some excuse; but there would be none for him who had been
able to organize the city properly and yet preserve the sover-
elenty. And, in fine, let him to whom Heaven has vouchsafed
such an opportunity reflect that there are two ways open to
him; one that will enable him to live securely and insure him
glory after death, and the other that will make his life one
of constant anxiety, and after death consign him to eternal
infamy.

126 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

CHAPTER XI.
OF THE RELIGION OF THE ROMANS.

ALTHOUGH the founder of Rome was Romulus, to whom, like
a daughter, she owed her birth and her education, yet the gods
did not judge the laws of this prince sufficient for so great
an empire, and therefore inspired the Roman Senate to elect
Numa Pompilius.as his successor, so that he might regulate all
those things that had been omitted by Romulus. Numa, find-
ing a very savage people, and wishing to reduce them to civil
obedience by the arts of peace, had_recourse to religion as the
most necessary and assured support of any civil society; and
he established it upon such foundations that for many centuries
there was nowhere more fear of the gods than in that republic,
which greatly facilitated all the enterprises which the Senate or
its great men attempted. Whoever will examine the actions of
the people of Rome as a body, or of many individual Romans,
will see that these citizens feared much more to break an oath
than the laws; like men who esteem the power of the gods more
than that of men. This was particularly manifested in the con-
duct of Scipio and Manlius Torquatus; for after the defeat
which Hannibal had inflicted upon the Romans at Cannz many
citizens had assembled together, and, frightened and trembling,
agreed to leave Italy and fly to Sicily. When Scipio heard of
this, he went to meet them, and with his drawn sword in hand
he forced them to swear not to abandon their country. Lucius
Manlius, father of Titus Manlius, who was afterwards called
Torquatus, had been accused by Marcus Pomponius, one of the
Tribunes of the people. Before the day of judgment Titus went
to Marcus and threatened to kill him if he did not promise to
withdraw the charges against his father; he compelled him
to take an oath, and Marcus, although having sworn under the
pressure of fear, withdrew the accusation against Lucius. And
thus these citizens, whom neither the love of country nor the
laws could have kept in Italy, were retained there by an oath
that had been forced upon them by compulsion ; and the Tribune
Pomponius disregarded the hatred which he bore to the father,
as well as the insult offered him by the son, for the sake of
complying with his oath and preserving his honor; which can

Caar, 31] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 127

be ascribed to nothing else than the religious principles which
Numa had instilled into the Romans. And whoever reads
Roman history attentively will see in how great a degrce re-
ligion served in the command of the armies, in uniting the
people and keeping them well conducted, and in covering the
wicked with shame. So that if the question were discussed
whether Rome was more indebted to Romulus or to Numa, I
believe that the highest merit would be conceded to Numa; for
where religion exists it is easy to introduce armies and dis-
cipline, but where there are armies and no religion it is difficult
to introduce the latter. And although we have seen that
Romulus could organize the Senate and establish other civil and
military institutions without the aid of divine authority, yet it
was very necessary for Numa, who feigned that he held con-
verse with a nymph, who dictated to him all that he wished to
persuade the people to; and the reason for all this was that
Numa mistrusted his own authority, lest it should prove insuf-
ficient to enable him to introduce new and unaccustomed ordi-
nances in Rome. In truth, there never was any remarkable
lawgiver amongst any people who did not resort to divine
authority, as otherwise his laws would not have been accepted
by the people; for there are many good laws, the importance of
which is known to the sagacious lawgiver, but the reasons for
which are not sufficiently evident to enable him to persuade
others to submit to them; and therefore do wise men, for the
purpose of removing this difficulty, resort to divine authority.
Thus did Lycurgus and Solon, and many others who aimed at
the same thing.

The Roman. people, then, admiring the wisdom and ie
of Numa, yielded in all things to his advice. It is true that
those were very religious tice, and the people with whom
Numa had to deal were very untutored and superstitious, which
made it easy for him to carry out his designs, being able to im-
press upon them any new form. And doubtless, if any one
wanted to establish a republic at the present time, he would find
it much easier with the simple mountaineers, who are almost
without any civilization, than with such as are accustomed to
live in cities, where civilization is already corrupt; as a sculptor
finds it easier to make a fine statue out of a crude block of
marble than out of a statue badly begun by another. Consider-
ing, then, all these things, I conclude that the religion intro-

128 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

duced by Numa into Rome was one of the chief causes of the
prosperity of that city; for this religion gave rise to good laws,
and good laws bring good fortune, and from good fortune results
happy success in all enterprises. And as the observance of
divine institutions is the cause of the greatness of republics, so
the disregard of them produces their ruin; for where the fear
of God is wanting, there the country will come to ruin, unless
it be sustained by the fear of the prince, which may temporarily
supply the want of religion. But as the lives of princes are
short, the kingdom will of necessity perish as the prince fails in
virtue. Whence it comes that kingdoms which depend entirely
upon the virtue of one man endure but for a brief time, for his
virtue passes away with his life, and it rarely happens that it is
renewed in his successor, as Dante so wisely says :—
“?T ig seldom human wisdom descends from sire to son;

Such is the will of Him who gave it,

That at his hands alone we may implore the boon.”

The welfare, then, of a republic or a kingdom does not consist
in having a prince who governs it wisely dur:ng his lifetime,
but in having one who will give it such laws that it will main-
tain itself even after his death. And although untutored and
ignorant men are more easily persuaded to adopt new laws or
new opinions, yet that does not make it impossible to persuade
civilized men who claim to be enlightened. The people of
Florence are far from considering themselves ignorant and
benighted, and yet Brother Girolamo Savonarola succeeded in
persuading them that he held converse with God. I will not
pretend to judge whether it was true or not, for we must speak
with all respect of so great a man; but I may well say that an
immense number believed it, without having seen any extra-
ordinary manifestations that should have made them believe it ;
but it was the purity of his life, the doctrines he preached, and
the subjects he selected for his discourses, that sufficed to make
the people have faith in him. Let no one, then, fear not to be
able to accomplish what others have done, for all men (as we
have said in our Preface) are born and live and die in the same
way, and therefore resemble each other.

Cap. XII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 129

CHAPTER XII.

THE IMPORTANCE OF GIVING RELIGION A PROMINENT INFLUENCE IN
A STATE, AND HOW ITALY WAS RUINED BFCAUSE SHE FAILED
IN THIS RESPECT THROUGH THE CONDUCT OF THE CHURCH OF
ROME.

PRINCES and republics who wish to maintain themselves free
from corruption must above all things preserve the purity of all
religious observances, and treat them with proper reverence; for
there is no greater indication of the ruin of a country than to
see religion contemned. And this is easily understood, when
we know upon what the religion of a country is founded ; for
the essence of every religion is based upon some one main
principle. The religion of the Gentiles had for its foundation
the responses of the oracles, and the tenets of the augurs and
aruspices; upon these alone depended all their ceremonies,
rites, and sacrifices. For they readily believed that the Deity
which could predict their future good or ill was also able to
bestow it upon them. Thence arose their temples, their sacri-
fices, their supplications, and all the other ceremonies; for the
oracle of Delphos, the temple of Jupiter Ammon, and other cel-
ebrated oracles, kept the world in admiration and devoutness.
But when these afterwards began to speak only in accordance
with the wishes of the princes, and their falsity was discovered
by the people, then men became incredulous, and disposed to
disturb all good institutions. It is therefore the duty of princes
and heads of republics to uphold the foundations of the religion
of their countries, for then it is easy to keep their people relig-
ious, and consequently well conducted and united. And there-
fore everything that tends to favor religion (even though it
were believed to be false) should be received and availed of to
strengthen it; and this should be done the more, the wiser the
rulers are, and the better they understand the natural course
of things. Such was, in fact, the practice observed by saga-
cious men; which has given rise to the belief in the miracles
that are celebrated in religions, however false they may be.
For the sagacious rulers have given these miracles increased
importance, no matter whence or how they originated; and
their authority afterwards gave them credence with the people.

VOL. 1, 9

130 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST — [Boox I.

Rome had many such miracles; and one of the most remarka-
ble was that which occurred when the Roman soldiers sacked
the city of Veli; some of them entered the temple of Juno, and,
placing themselves in front of her statue, said to her, “ Will you
come to Rome?” Some imagined that they observed the statue
make a sign of assent, and others pretended to have heard her
reply, “Yes.” Now these men, being very religious, as report-
ed by Titus Livius, and having entered the temple quietly, they
were filled with devotion and reverence, and might really have
believed that they had heard a reply to their question, such as
perhaps they could have presupposed. But this opinion and
belief was favored and magnified by Camillus and the other
Roman chiefs.

And certainly, if the Christian religion had from the_he-
ginning been maintained according to the principles of its
founder, the Christian states and republics would have been
much more united and happy than what they are. Nor can
there be a greater proof of its decadence than to witness the
fact that_the nearer people are to the Church of Rome, which
is the head of our religion, the less religious are they. And
"whoever examines the principles upon which that religion is
founded, and sees how widely different from those principles
its present practice and application are, will judge that her ruin
or chastisement is near at hand. But as there are some of
the opinion that the well-being of Italian affairs depends upon
the Church of Rome, I will present such arguments against that
opinion as occur to me; two of which are most important, and
cannot according to my judgment be controverted. The first
is, that the evil example of the court of Rome has destroyed all
piety and religion in Italy, which brings in its train infinite im-
proprieties and disorders; for as we may presuppose all good
where religion prevails, so where it is wanting we have the
right to suppose the very opposite. We Italians then owe to
the Church of Rome and to her priests our having become irre-
ligious and bad; but we owe her a still greater debt, and one
that will be the cause of our ruin, namely, that the Church
has kept and still keeps our country divided. And certainly a
country can never be united and happy, except when it obeys
wholly one government, whether a republic or a monarchy, as
is the case in France and in Spain; and the sole cause why
Italy is not in the same condition, and is not governed by either

Cuap. XIII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 131

one republic or one sovereign, is the Church; for having ac-
quired and holding a temporal dominion, yet she has never had
sufficient power or courage to enable her to seize the rest of the
country and make herself sole sovereign of all Italy. And on
the other hand she has not been so feeble that the fear of losing
her temporal power prevented her from calling in the aid of a
foreign power to defend her against such others as had become
too powerful in Italy ; as was seen in former days by many
sad experiences, when through the intervention of Charlemagne
she drove out the Lombards, who were masters of nearly all
Italy; and when in our times she crushed the power of the
Venetians by the aid of France, and afterwards with the assist-
ance of the Swiss drove out in turn the French. The Church,
then, not having been powerful enough to be able to master all
~Ttaly, nor having permitted any other power to do so, has been
the cause why Italy has never been able to unite under one
head, but has always remained under a number of princes and
lords, which occasioned her so many dissensions and so much
weakness that she became a prey not only to the powerful
barbarians, but of whoever chose to assail her. This we other
Italians owe to the Church of Rome, and to none other. And
any one, to be promptly convinced by experiment of the truth of
all this, should have the power to transport the court of Rome
to reside, with all the power it has in Italy, in the midst of
the Swiss, who of all peoples nowadays live most according to
their ancient customs so far as religion and their military sys-
tem are concerned ; and he would see in a very little while that
the evil habits of that court would create more confusion in
that country than anything else that could ever happen there.

CHAPTER XIII.

HOW THE ROMANS AVAILED OF RELIGION TO PRESERVE ORDER IN
THEIR CITY, AND TO CARRY OUT THEIR ENTERPRISES AND SUP-
PRESS DISTURBANCES.

Ir does not seem to me from my purpose to adduce here
some examples to show how the Romans employed religion for
the purpose of reorganizing their city, and to further their en-

132 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

terprises. And although there are many instances to be found
in the writings of Titus Livius, yet I will content myself with
the following. The Romans having created the Tribunes with
consular powers, and selected all but one from the plebeian or-
der, and a pestilence and famine having occurred in that year
accompanied by some extraordinary phenomena, the nobles
availed of this occasion of the new creation of the Tribunes,
saying that the gods were angry because Rome had been want-
ing in respect to the majesty of her empire; and that there
was no other way of placating the gods but by restoring the
election of the Tribunes to its original plan. The result was,
that the people, under the influence of religious fear, selected
the Tribunes altogether from amongst the patricians.

It was also seen at the siege of the city of Veli, that the
captains of the Roman army used religion to keep their sol-
diers disposed to any enterprise; for when the Lake Albano
rose in that year in a very extraordinary manner, and the sol-
diers, tired of the long siege, wished to return to Rome, the
leaders invented the story that Apollo and certain other oracles
had predicted that the city of the Veienti would be taken in
the year when Lake Albano should overflow its banks. The
soldiers, having taken new hope from these predictions as to
the capture of the city, bore the fatigues of the war and the
siege cheerfully, and pushed the siege with so much energy that
Camillus, who had been made Dictator, succeeded in taking
that city after a siege of ten years’ duration. And thus re-
ligion judiciously used promoted the capture of Veii, and the
restitution of the tribunate to the patricians, either of which,
without that means, would have been with difficulty accom-
plished.

I will not omit to cite another example much to the purpose.
The Tribune Terentillus occasioned great disturbances by pro-
mulgating a certain law, for reasons which we shall explain
further on; and one of the first means to which the patri-
cians resorted for the suppression of these tumults was re-
ligion, which they employed in two different ways. The first
was the exhibition of the Sibylline Books, which predicted that,
in consequence of domestic dissensions, the liberties of Rome
would be seriously imperilled in that year; the fraud, although
discovered by the Tribunes, yet so filled the minds of the people
with terror that they were no longer disposed to follow them.

Cuap. XIIT.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 133

The second mode was when one Appius Erdonius, with a num-
ber of bandits and four thousand slaves, seized the Capitol at
night, which caused general apprehension for the safety of the
city itself, in case the Equeans and Volscians, eternal enemies
of Rome, should attack her at that moment. The Tribunes nev-
ertheless persisted with great obstinacy in the promulgation of
the Terentillan law, saying that the capture of the Capitol was
merely fictitious ; whereupon Publius Rubetius, a grave citizen
of great authority, left the Senate, and with alternate entreat-
ies and menaces harangued the people, pointing out to them
the unreasonableness of their demands, and constrained them
to swear that they would not refuse obedience to the Consul.
The people, thus forced to obedience, recovered the Capitol; but
in the taking of it the Consul Publius Valerius lost his life, and
in his stead Titus Quintius was immediately chosen Consul.
He, not wishing to afford the people any repose or opportu-
nity of thinking again of the Terentillan law, ordered them to
leave Rome and to march against the Volscians; saying that
they were bound to follow him, because of the oath they had
taken to obey the Consul. To this the Tribunes objected, say-
ing that the oath referred to the Consul that had been killed,
and not to Titus Quintius. The people, however, according to
Titus Livius, preferred to obey the Consul rather than believe
the Tribunes, and he speaks as follows in favor of their an-
cient religion: “They had not yet come to that neglect of the
“reverence for the gods which prevails nowadays, nor to in-
“terpreting their oaths or the laws to suit themselves.” And
the Tribunes, fearing to lose all their authority, agreed with
the Consul to submit to him, and that for one year nothing
more should be said about the Terentillan law, and, on the
other hand, that for one year the Consuls should not lead the
people from Rome to war. And thus religion enabled the
Senate to overcome that difficulty which without it they could
never have done.

134 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

CHAPTER XIV.

~ THE ROMANS INTERPRETED THE AUSPICES ACCORDING TO NECES-
SITY, AND VERY WISELY MADE SHOW OF OBSERVING RELIGION,
EVEN WHEN THEY WERE OBLIGED IN REALITY TO DISREGARD
IT; AND IF ANY ONE RECKLESSLY DISPARAGED IT, HE WAS
PUNISHED.

THE system of auguries was not only, as we have said above,
the principal basis of the ancient religion of the Gentiles, but
was also the cause of the prosperity of the Roman republic.
Whence the Romans esteemed it more than any other institu-
tion, and resorted to it in their Consular Comitil, in commen-
cing any important enterprise, in sending armies into the field,
in ordering their battles, and in every other important civil or
military action. Nor would they ever have ventured upon any
expedition unless the augurs had first persuaded the soldiers
that the gods promised them victory. Amongst other arus-
pices the armies were always accompanied by a certain class
of soothsayers, termed Pollari (guardians of the sacred fowls),
and every time before giving battle to the enemy, they re-
quired these Pollari to ascertain the auspices; and if the fowls
ate freely, then it was deemed a favorable augury, and the sol-
diers fought confidently, but if the fowls refused to eat, then
they abstained from battle. Nevertheless, when they saw a
good reason why certain things should be done, they did them
anyhow, whether the auspices were favorable or not; but then
they turned and interpreted the auguries so artfully, and in
such manner, that seemingly no disrespect was shown to their
religious belief. This was done by the Consul Papirius on the
occasion of a most important battle with the Samnites, which -
forever enfeebled and broke the power of this warlike people.
For Papirius in conducting the war against them found himself
face to face with them; and as victory seemed to him certain,
and wishing therefore to proceed to battle, he ordered the Pol-
lari to ascertain the auspices. The fowls, however, did not eat ;
but the chief of the Pollari, seeing the great desire of the army
to fight, and the confidence in victory which the general as
well as the soldiers manifested, and being unwilling to deprive
the army of this opportunity of achieving a success, reported

Cuap. XIV. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 135

to the Consul that the auspices were proceeding favorably ;
whereupon Papirius set his squadrons in order for battle. But
one of the Pollari told certain soldiers that the fowls had not
eaten, and they repeated it to Spurius Papirius, the nephew of
the Consul; and when he reported this to his uncle, the latter
promptly replied, that he expected him to do his duty well,
and that, as regarded himself and the army, the auspices were
favorable, and if the Pollarius had told a lie, it would come
back upon him to his prejudice. And so that the result might
correspond with the prognostication, he commanded his lieu-
tenants to place the Pollari in the front ranks of the battle ;
and thus it happened that, in marching upon the enemy, the
chief of the Pollari was accidentally killed by an arrow from the
bow of a Roman soldier. When the Consul heard this, he said
that all went well and with the favor of the gods, for by the
death of this liar the army had been purged of all guilt, and
that whatever anger the gods might have felt against him had
been thereby appeased. And thus by apparently accommo-
dating his designs to the auspices, Papirius resolved to give
battle without letting his soldiers perceive that he had in any
particular neglected his religious duties.

Appius Pulcher acted just the contrary way in Sicily during
the first Punic war; for wishing to fight the Carthaginian
army, he caused the Pollari to ascertain the auspices; and
when they reported that the fowls did not eat, he said, “‘ Then
let us see whether they will drink,” and had them thrown into
the sea; he then went to battle, and was defeated. For which
he was punished at Rome, whilst Papirius was rewarded ; not
so much because the one had been beaten and the other victo-
rious, but because the one had contravened the auspices with
prudence, and the other with temerity. Nor had this system
of consulting the auspices any other object than to inspire the
soldiers on the eve of battle with that confidence which is the
surest guaranty of victory. This system was practised not
only by the Romans, but also by other peoples, of which it seems
to me proper to adduce an example in the following chapter.

136 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

CHAPTER XV.

HOW THE SAMNITES RESORTED TO RELIGION AS AN EXTREME REM-
EDY FOR THEIR DESPERATE CONDITION.

THE Samnites had been repeatedly defeated by the Romans,
and had been completely routed in Tuscany, their armies de-
stroyed, and their generals killed. Their allies, such as the
Tuscans, Gauls, and Umbrians, had also been beaten, so that
“they could not hold out any longer with their own forces, or
‘‘ with those of their allies; yet would they not desist from the
‘war, and sooner than give up the unsuccessful defence of their
“liberty, they preferred risking defeat rather than not make one
“more attempt at victory”; and therefore resolved upon one
last supreme effort. And knowing that to conquer they must
inspire their soldiers with obstinate courage, for which there
was no more efficient means than religion, they resolved, by the
advice of Ovius Paccius, their high priest, to renew one of their
ancient religious practices, which was arranged in the following
manner. A solemn sacrifice was first made to their gods, and
then, in the midst of the bleeding victims and smoking altars,
they made all the chiefs of the army swear never to give up the
fight. After this, they called in their soldiers one by one, and
there, before these altars and surrounded by centurions with
drawn swords in their hands, they made them swear, first, not
to reveal anything they had seen or heard; and then, with hor-
rid imprecations and incantations, they exacted an oath from
them, and a pledge to the gods, promptly to go wherever com-
manded by their chiefs, and not to fly from the enemy, and to
kill instantly whomever they saw flying; and if they failed in
any particular in the compliance with this oath, it would be
visited upon their families and descendants. Some of the men
who were frightened and refused to swear were instantly put to
death by the centurions ; so that those who followed were ter-
rified by the spectacle, and all took the oath. And by way of
giving a more imposing effect to their assembled troops, they
clothed one half of them in white, with crests and plumes on
their casques; and thus they took position at Aquilonia. Pa-
pirius marched against them, and by way of encouraging his
soldiers he said to them, “ Those crests and plumes cannot in-

Cuap. XVI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 137

‘‘ flict wounds, and neither will paint or gilding prevent Roman
“javelins from piercing their shields.’ And to diminish the
impression which the oath of the enemy had produced upon his
men, he said that such an oath was calculated to inspire fear,
and not courage, in those who had taken it; for it caused them
at the same time to fear their own citizens, their gods, and their
enemies. So that, when they came to battle, the Samnites were
defeated ; for the Roman valor, and the fears of the Samnites,
who remembered their former defeats, overcame all the obsti-
nacy which their religion and their oath had infused into them.
Nevertheless it showed that the Samnites knew of no more
powerful means of reviving hope and reanimating their former
courage ; and proves in the most ample manner how much con-
fidence religious faith, judiciously availed of, will inspire. And
although this example might perhaps be deemed to belong else-
where, as the event occurred amongst a foreign people, yet, as
it refers to one of the most important institutions of the repub-
lic of Rome, I have thought it proper to mention it here in sup-
port of what I have said on that subject, and so as not to be
obliged to recur to it hereafter.

CHAPTER XVI.

A PEOPLE THAT HAS BEEN ACCUSTOMED TO LIVE UNDER A PRINCE
PRESERVES ITS LIBERTIES WITH DIFFICULTY, IF BY ACCIDENT IT
HAS BECOME FREE.

Many examples in ancient history prove how difficult it is for
a people that has been accustomed to live under the government
of a prince to preserve its liberty, if by some accident it has re-
covered it, as was the case with Rome after the expulsion of the
Tarquins. And this difficulty is a reasonable one; for such a
people may well be compared to some wild animal, which (al-
though by nature ferocious and savage) has been as it were
subdued by having been always kept imprisoned and in servi-
tude, and being let out into the open fields, not knowing how
to provide food and shelter for itself, becomes an easy prey to
the first one who attempts to chain it up again. The same
thing happens to a people that has not been accustomed to self-

138 DISCOURSES ON THE FinsT [Boox I.

government; for, ignorant of all public affairs, of all means of
defence or offence, neither knowing the princes nor being known
by them, it soon relapses under a yoke, oftentimes much heavier

than the one which it had but just shaken off. This difficulty

occurs even when the body of the people is not wholly corrupt ;
but when corruption has taken possession of the whole people,
then it cannot preserve its free condition even for the shortest
possible time, as we shall see further on; and therefore our
argument has reference to a people where corruption has not
yet become general, and where the good still prevails over the
bad. To the above comes another difficulty, which is, that the
state that becomes free makes enemies for itself, and not friends. _
All those become its enemies who were benefited by the tyran-
nical abuses and fattened upon the treasures of the prince, and
who, being now deprived of these advantages, cannot remain
content, and are therefore driven to attempt to re-establish the
tyranny, so as to recover their former authority and advantages.
A state then, as I have said, that becomes free, makes no
friends ; for free governments bestow honors a.id rewards only
according to certain honest and fixed rules, outside of which
there are neither the one nor the other. And such as obtain
these honors and rewards do not consider themselves under ob-
ligations to any one, because they believe that they were entitled
to them by their merits. Besides the advantages that result to
the mass of the people from a free government, such as to be
able freely to enjoy one’s own without apprehension, to have
nothing to fear for the honor of his wife and daughters, or for
himself, —all these, I say, are not appreciated by any one whilst
he is in the enjoyment of them; for no one will confess himself
under obligation to any one merely because he has not been in-
jured by him.

Thus it is that a state that has freshly achieved liberty
makes enemies, and no friends. And to prevent this incon-
venience, and the disorders which are apt to come with it,
there is no remedy more powerful, valid, healthful, and neces-
sary than the killing of the sons of Brutus, who, as history
shows, had conspired with other Roman youths for no other
reason than because under the Consuls they could not have the
same extraordinary advantages they had enjoyed under the
kings; so that the liberty of the people seemed to have become
their bondage. Whoever undertakes to govern a people under

Cuap. XVI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 139

the form of either republic or monarchy, without making sure of
those who are opposed to this new order of things, establishes
a government of very brief duration. It is true that I regard
as unfortunate those princes who, to assure their government
to which the mass of the people is hostile, are obliged to resort
to extraordinary measures; for he who has but a few enemies
can easily make sure of them without great scandal, but he
who has the masses hostile to him can never make sure of
them, and the more cruelty he employs the feebler will his au-
thority become ; so that his best remedy is to try and secure the
good will of the people. Although I have departed in this dis-
course from my subject, in speaking sometimes of a republic
and sometimes of a prince, yet I will say a few words more, so
as not to be obliged to come back to this matter.

A prince, then, who wishes the good will of a people that is
hostile to him, (I speak of such princes as have been tyrants in
their country,) should first of all ascertain what the people re-
ally desire, and he will always find that they want two things:
one, to revenge themselves on those who have been the cause
of their enslavement, and the other, to recover their liberty.
The first of these desires the prince may satisfy entirely, and
the second in part. As to the first, the following is an example
in point. When Clearchus, tyrant of Heraclea, had been ban-
ished, a dissension arose between the people and the nobles of
Heraclea. The latter, finding themselves the feebler of the two,
resolved to recall Clearchus; and having conspired together, they
placed him in opposition to the popular faction of the people of
Heraclea, and thus deprived the people of their liberty. Clear-
chus, finding himself placed between the insolence of the nobles
on the one hand, whom he could in no way content or control,
and the rage of the popular faction on the other hand, who
could not support the loss of their liberty, resolved suddenly to
rid himself of the importunities of the nobles, and to secure to
himself the good will and support of the people. Availing of a
favorable opportunity, he had all the nobles massacred, to the
extreme satisfaction of the people ; and in this way he satisfied
one of the wishes of the people, namely, the desire of revenge.
But as to the other popular desire, that of recovering their lib-
erty, the prince, not being able to satisfy that, should examine
the causes that make them desire to be free; and he will find
that a small part of them wish to be free for the purpose of

140 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

commanding, whilst all the others, who constitute an immense
majority, desire liberty so as to be able to live in greater secu-
rity. For in all republics, however organized, there are never
more than forty or fifty citizens who attain a position that
entitles them to command. As this is a small number, it is
easy to make sure of them, either by having them put out of
the way, or by giving them such a share of the public honors
and offices as, according to their condition, will in great meas-
ure content them. The others, who only care to live in secu-
rity, are easily satisfied by institutions and laws that confirm at
the same time the general security of the people and the power
of the prince. When a prince does this, and the people see
that by no chance he infringes the laws, they will in a very
little while be content, and live in tranquillity. An example of
this is the kingdom of France, where there would be no secu-
rity but for the fact that the king there has bound himself by
a number of laws that provide for the security of all his people.
Those who organized that state wanted that the kings should
dispose of the army and treasury at their own will, but that in
all other matters they should conform to the laws. That sov-
ereign, therefore, or that republic, which fails from the start to
secure its authority, should do so on the first occasion, as the
Romans did; and he who allows the opportunity to pass will
repent too late not having done what he should have done in
the beginning. The Romans, being not yet corrupted when
they recovered their liberty, were able to maintain it after the
death of the sons of Brutus and the expulsion of the Tarquins,
by means of such laws and institutions as we have treated of
above. But if the people had been corrupt, then there would
have been no sufficient remedies found in Rome or elsewhere to
maintain their liberty, as we shall show in the next chapter.

CHAPTER XVII.

A CORRUPT PEOPLE THAT BECOMES FREE CAN WITH GREATEST
DIFFICULTY MAINTAIN ITS LIBERTY.

I TuHInk that it was necessary for royalty to be extinguished
in Rome, else she would in a very short time have become

Cuar. XVII] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 141

feeble and devoid of energy. For the degree of corruption to
which the kings had sunk was such that, if it had continued
for two or three successive reigns, and had extended from the
head to the members of the body so that these had become
also corrupt, it would have been impossible ever to have re-
formed the state. But losing the head whilst the trunk was
still sound, it was easy to restore Rome to liberty and proper
institutions. And it must be assumed as a well-demonstrated
truth, that a corrupt people that lives under the government
of a prince can never become free, even though the prince
and his whole line should be extinguished; and that it would
be better that the one prince should be destroyed by another.
For a people in such condition can never become settled unless
a new prince be created, who by his good qualities and valor
can maintain their liberty ; but even then it will last only dur-
ing the lifetime of the new prince. It was thus that the free-
dom of Syracuse was preserved at different times by the valor
of Dion and Timoleon during their lives, but after their death
the city relapsed under the former tyranny. But there is not
a more striking example of this than Rome itself, which after
the expulsion of the Tarquins was enabled quickly to resume
and maintain her liberty; but after the death of Cesar, Calig-
ula, and Nero, and after the extinction of the entire Cesarean
line, she could not even begin to re-establish her liberty, and
much less preserve it. And this great difference in the con-
dition of things in one and the same city resulted entirely
from this fact, that at the time of the Tarquins the Roman
people was not yet corrupt, whilst under the Cesars it became
corrupt to the lowest degree. For to preserve her sound and
ready to expel the kings in the time of the Tarquins, it sufficed
merely that they should take an oath never to permit any of
them ever to reign again in Rome; but in the time of the Ce-
sars the authority of Brutus with all the Eastern legions was
insufficient to keep her disposed to preserve that liberty which
he, in imitation of the first Brutus, had restored to her. This
was the result of that corruption which had been spread
amongst the people by the faction of Marius, at the head of
which was Cesar, who had so blinded the people that they did
not perceive the yoke they were imposing upon themselves. .
And although the example of Rome is preferable to all others,
yet will I cite on this subject some instances amongst peoples

142 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boor T.

known in our times. And therefore I say that no change, how-
ever great or violent, could ever restore Milan and Naples to
liberty, because the whole people of those states were thor-
oughly corrupt. This was seen after the death of Philip Vis-
conti, when Milan attempted to recover her liberty, but knew
not how, nor was she able to maintain it. It was a great good
fortune for Rome, therefore, that no sooner did her kings be-
come corrupt than they were expelled, before the corruption
had time to extend to the heart of the people. This corruption
caused endless disturbances in Rome; but as the intention of
the people was good, these troubles, instead of harming, rather
benefited the republic. And from this we may draw the con-
clusion that, where the mass of the people is sound, disturb-
ances and tumults do no serious harm; but where corruption
has penetrated the people, the best laws are of no avail, unless
they are administered by a man of such supreme power that
he may cause the laws to be observed until the mass has been
restored to a healthy condition. And I know not whether such
a case has ever occurred, or whether it possibly ever could
occur (as I have said above). For if a state or city in deca-
dence, in consequence of the corruption of the mass of its peo-
ple, is ever raised up again, it must be through the virtue of
some one man then living, and not by the people ; and so soon
as such a man dies, the people will relapse into their corrupt
habits; as was the case in Thebes, which by the virtue of
Epaminondas could, during his lifetime, maintain the form of
a republic and its dominion, but immediately upon his death
relapsed into anarchy. And the reason of this is that one man
cannot live long enough to have time to bring a people back
to good habits which for any length of time has indulged in
evil ones. Or if one of extreme long life, or two continuous
virtuous successors, do not restore the state, it will quickly
lapse into ruin, no matter how many dangers and how much
bloodshed have been incurred in the effort to restore it. For
such corruption and incapacity to maintain free institutions
results from a great inequality that exists in such a state;
and to reduce the inhabitants to equality requires the appli-
cation of extraordinary measures, which few know how, or are
’ willing, to employ ; as will be shown more fully elsewhere.

Cuar. XVIII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 143

~ CHAPTER AVIT.

HOW IN A CORRUPT STATE A FREE GOVERNMENT MAY BE MAIN-
TAINED, ASSUMING THAT ONE EXISTS THERE ALREADY; AND
HOW IT COULD BE INTRODUCED, IF NONE HAD PREVIOUSLY
EXISTED.

I BELIEVE it will not be amiss to consider whether in a state
that has become corrupt a free government that has existed
there can be maintained; or if there has been none before,
whether one could be established there. Upon this subject I
must say that either one of them would be exceedingly diffi-
cult. And although it is impossible to give any definite rules
for such a case, (as it will be necessary to proceed according to
the different degrees of corruption,) yet, as it is well to rea-
son upon all subjects, I will not leave this problem without
discussing it. I will suppose a state to be corrupt to the last
degree, so as to present the subject in its most difficult aspect,
there being no laws nor institutions that suffice to check a
general corruption. For as good habits of the people require
good laws to support them, so laws, to be observed, need good
habits on the part of the people. Besides, the constitution and

_laws established in a republic at its very origin, when men were

‘still pure, no longer suit when men have become corrupt and

bad. And although the laws may be changed according to
circumstances and events, yet it is seldom or never that the
constitution itself is changed; and for this reason the new
laws do not suffice, for they are not in harmony with the consti-
tution, that has remained intact. To make this matter better
understood, I will explain how the government of Rome was
constituted and what the nature of the laws was, which to-
gether with the magistrates restrained the citizens. The con-
stitution of the state reposed upon the authority of the people,
the Senate, the Tribunes, and the Consuls, and upon the man-
ner of choosing and creating the magistrates, and of making
the laws. These institutions were rarely or never varied by
events; but the laws that restrained the citizens were often
altered, such as the law relating to adultery, the sumptuary
laws, that in relation to ambition, and many others, which were
changed according as the citizens from one day to another

144 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

became more and more corrupt. Now the constitution remain-
ing unchanged, although no longer suitable to the corrupt
people, the laws that had been changed became powerless for
restraint ; yet they would have answered very well if the consti-
tution had also been modified at the same time with the laws.
And the truth that the original institutions were no longer
suitable to a corrupt state is clearly seen in these two main
points, —the creation of the magistrates, and the forms used
in making the laws. As regards the first, the Roman peo-
ple bestowed the consulate and the other principal offices only
on such as asked for them. This system was very good in
the beginning, because only such citizens asked for these
places as deemed themselves worthy of them, and a refusal
was regarded as ignominious; so that every one strove to make
himself esteemed worthy of the honor. But when the city had
become corrupt, this system became most pernicious; for it
was no longer the most virtuous and deserving, but the most
powerful, that asked for the magistratures ; and the less power-
ful, often the most meritorious, abstained from being candi-
dates from fear. This state of things did not come all at
once, but by degrees, as is generally the case with other vices.
For after the Romans had subjugated Africa and Asia, and
had reduced nearly all Greece to their obedience, they felt as-
sured of their liberty, and saw no enemies that could cause
them any apprehension. This security and the weakness of
the conquered nations caused the Roman people no longer to
bestow the consulate according to the merits of the candidates,
but according to favor; giving that dignity to those who best
knew how to entertain the people, and not to those who best
knew how to conquer their enemies. After that they de-
scended from those who were most favored to such as had
most wealth and power, so that the really meritorious became
wholly excluded from that dignity. Now as to the mode of
making the laws. At first a Tribune or any other citizen had
the right to propose any law, and every citizen could speak in
favor or against it before its final adoption. This system was
very good so long as the citizens were uncorrupted, for it is
always well in a state that every one may propose what he
deems for the public good; and it was equally well that every
one should be allowed to express his opinion in relation to it,
so that the people, having heard both sides, may decide in favor

Car. XVIII] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 145

of the best. But when the citizens had become corrupt, this
system became the worst possible, for then only the powerful
proposed laws, not for the common good and the liberty of all,
but for the increase of their own power, and fear restrained all
the others from speaking against such laws; and thus the peo-
ple were by force and fraud made to resolve upon their own
ruin.

It was necessary therefore, if Rome wished to preserve her lib-
erty in the midst of this corruption, that she should have modi-
fied her constitution, in like manner as in the progress of her
existence she had made new laws; for institutions and forms
should be adapted to the subject, whether it be good or evil,
inasmuch as the same form cannot suit two subjects that are
essentially different. But as the constitution of a state, when
once it has been discovered to be no longer suitable, should be
amended, either all at once, or by degrees as each defect becomes
known, I say that both of these courses are equally impossible.
For a gradual modification requires to be the work of some
wise man, who has seen the evil from afar in its very begin-
ning; but it is very likely that such a man may never rise up
in the state, and even if he did he will hardly be able to per-
suade the others to what he proposes; for men accustomed to
live after one fashion do not like to change, and the less so as
they do not see the evil staring them in the face, but pre-
sented to them as a mere conjecture.

As to reforming these institutions all at once, when their
defects have become manifest to everybody, that also is most
difficult; for to do this ordinary means will not suffice; they
may even be injurious under such circumstances, and therefore
it becomes necessary to resort to extraordinary measures, such
as violence and arms, and above all things to make one’s self
absolute master of the state, so as to be able to dispose of it at
will. And as the reformation of the political condition of a
state presupposes a good man, whilst the making of himself
prince of a republic by violence naturally presupposes a bad
one, it will consequently be exceedingly rare that a good man
should be found willing to employ wicked means to become
prince, even though his final object be good; or that a bad
man, after having become prince, should be willing to labor for
good ends, and that it should enter his mind to use for good
purposes that authority which he has acquired by evil means.

VOL. Il. 10

146 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

From these combined causes arises the difficulty or impossi-
bility of maintaining liberty in a republic that has become
corrupt, or to establish it there anew. And if it has to be in-
troduced and maintained, then it will be necessary to reduce
the state to a monarchical, rather than a republican form of
government; for men whose turbulence could not be controlled
by the simple force of law can be controlled in a measure only
by an almost regal power. And to attempt to restore men to
good conduct by any other means would be either a most cruel
or an impossible undertaking. This, as I have related above,
was done by Cleomenes, who for the sake of being alone in the
government had all the Ephores massacred ; and if Romulus for
the same object killed his brother and the Sabine Titus Tatius,
and if both he and Cleomenes afterwards employed their power
well, we must nevertheless bear in mind that neither of them
had to deal with a people so tainted with corruption as that
we have considered in this chapter, and therefore they could
desire the good and conform their measures accordingly to
achieve it.

CHAPTER XIX.

IF AN ABLE AND VIGOROUS PRINCE IS SUCCEEDED BY A FEEBLE
ONE, THE LATTER MAY FOR A TIME BE ABLE TO MAINTAIN HIM-
SELF ; BUT IF HIS SUCCESSOR BE ALSO WEAK, THEN THE LATTER
WILL NOT BE ABLE TO PRESERVE HIS STATE.

In carefully examining the characters and conduct of Romu-
lus, Numa, and Tullus, the first three kings of Rome, we see
that she was favored by the greatest good fortune in having her
first king courageous and warlike, the second peace-loving and
religious, and the third equally courageous with Romulus, and
preferring war to peace. For it was important for Rome that
in the beginning there should arise a legislator capable of en-
dowing her with civil institutions; but then it was essential
that the succeeding kings should equal Romulus in virtue and
valor, otherwise the city would have become effeminate and a
prey to her neighbors. Whence we may note that a successor
of less vigor and ability than the first king may yet be able to
maintain a state established by the genius and courage of his

Cur XIX] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 147

predecessor, and may enjoy the fruits of his labors. But if
it should happen that his life be a long one, or that his suc-
cessor should not have the same good qualities and courage
as the first king, then the government will necessarily go to
ruin. And so, on the contrary, if one king succeeds another of
equally great abilities and courage, then it will often be seen
that they achieve extraordinary greatness for their state, and
that their fame will rise to the very heavens. David was be-
yond doubt a most extraordinary man in war, in learning, and
in superior judgment; and such was his military ability that,
having conquered and crushed his neighbors, he left a peaceful
kingdom to his son Solomon, which he was able to maintain
by the arts of peace and of war, and could thus happily enjoy
the results of his father’s virtue and valor. But he could not
thus transmit it to his son, Rehoboam, who had neither the
merits of his grandfather nor the good fortune of his father ;
and it was with difficulty, therefore, that he remained heir of
the sixth part of the kingdom. The Sultan Bajazet of Turkey,
although preferring peace to war, yet could enjoy the labors
of his father Mahomet, who, having, like David, crushed his
neighbors, left him a firmly established kingdom, which he
could easily preserve with the arts of peace. But the empire
would have gone to ruin if his son Soliman, the present Sultan,
had resembled the father, and not the grandfather ; but it was
seen that he even exceeded the glory of the grandfather.

I say then, that, according to these examples, the successor
of a wise and vigorous prince, though himself feeble, may
maintain a kingdom, even if it be not constituted like France,
which is maintained by the force of its ancient institutions ;
and I call that prince feeble who is incapable of carrying on war.
I conclude, then, that the genius and courage of Romulus were
such that it left Numa competent to govern Rome for many
years by the arts of peace. He was succeeded by Tullus,
whose courage and warlike disposition exceeded even that of
Romulus. After him came Ancus, who was gifted by nature
to shine equally in peace and in war. At first he was disposed
to follow the ways of peace, but he soon perceived that his
neighbors regarded him as effeminate, and esteemed him but
little ; so that he concluded that, if he wished to maintain the
Roman state, he must devote himself to war, and imitate Rom-
ulus, and not Numa Pompilius. Let all princes then who

148 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox I.

govern states take example from this, that he who follows
the course of Numa may keep or lose his throne, according to
chance and cicumstances; but he who imitates the example
of Romulus, and combines valor with prudence, will keep his
throne anyhow, unless it be taken from him by some persistent
and excessive force. And we may certainly assume that, if
Rome had not chanced to have for her king a man who knew
how by force of arms to restore her original reputation, she
would not have been able, except with greatest difficulty, to
gain a firm foothold and achieve the great things she did.
And thus so long as she was governed by kings was she ex-
posed to the danger of being ruined by a feeble or a wicked one.

CHAPTER XX.

TWO CONTINUOUS SUCCESSIONS OF ABLE AND VIRTUOUS PRINCES
WILL ACHIEVE GREAT RESULTS; AND AS WELL-CONSTITUTED
REPUBLICS HAVE, IN THE NATURE OF THINGS, A SUCCESSION
OF VIRTUOUS RULERS, THEIR ACQUISITIONS AND EXTENSION
WILL CONSEQUENTLY BE VERY GREAT.

AFTER Rome had expelled her kings she was no longer ex-
posed to the dangers which we have spoken of above, as
resulting from a succession of feeble or wicked kings; for the
sovereign authority was vested in the Consuls, who obtained
that authority not by inheritance, or fraud, or violent ambition,
but by the free suffrages of the people, and were generally
most excellent men. Rome, having the benefit of the virtue
and good fortune of these men from time to time, was thus
enabled to attain her utmost grandeur in no greater length
of time than she had existed under the rule of kings. For if,
as has been seen, two successive good and valorous princes are
sufficient to conquer the world, as was the case with Philip
of Macedon and Alexander the Great, a republic should be able
to do still more, having the power to elect not only two suc-
cessions, but an infinite number of most competent and vir-
tuous rulers one after the other; and this system of electing
a succession of virtuous men should ever be the established
practice of every republic.

Cuar. XXI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 149

CHAPTER XXI.

PRINCES AND REPUBLICS WHO FAIL TO HAVE NATIONAL ARMIES,
ARE MUCH TO BE BLAMED.

Sucn princes and republics of modern times as have no
national troops for defence or attack ought well to be ashamed
of it; for they should bear in mind that, according to the ex-
ample of Tullus, their not having armies of their own is not
from the want of men fit for military service, but that the
fault is wholly theirs, in not knowing how to make soldiers of
their men. For when Tullus ascended the throne, after forty
years of peace, he did not find a man that had ever borne
arms in war; but as he, contemplated making war, he neither
attempted to avail himself of the Samnites, the Tuscans, nor
of any other people accustomed to fight, but, like a most saga-
cious prince, he resolved to employ only his own subjects ; and
such was his skill and courage that he promptly created an
excellent army within his own kingdom. And there is nothing
more true than that, if there are no soldiers where there are
men, it is not owing to any natural or local defect, but is sole-
ly the fault of the prince; in proof of which I cite the follow-
ing most recent example. Everybody knows that quite lately
the king of England attacked the kingdom of France, and em-
ployed for that purpose no other soldiers except his own sub-
jects; and although his own kingdom had been for over thirty
years in profound peace, so that he had at first neither soldiers
nor captains who had seen any active military service, yet he
did not hesitate with such troops to assail a kingdom that had
many experienced commanders and good soldiers, who had
been continually under arms in the Italian wars. He was en-
abled to do this because he was a sagacious prince, and his
kingdom was well ordered, so that in time of peace the military
art had not been neglected. Pelopidas and Epaminondas, both
of Thebes, after having liberated that city and rescued her from
the yoke of the Spartan rule, found themselves in a city accus-
tomed to servitude, and in the midst of an effeminate people.
Such, however, was their wisdom and valor that they did not
hesitate to put the Thebans under arms, and to take the field
with them against the Spartans, whom they defeated. The

150 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

historian who tells this says, that these two great citizens
proved in a short time that it was not Lacedemon alone that
gave birth to warriors, but that they were produced in all coun-
tries where men were found capable of instructing others in the
art of war; as was seen in the case of Tullus, who trained the
Romans to war. And Virgil could not state this fact and ex-
press his approbation of it better than in the following words:
‘And Tullus converted his indolent men into brave soldiers.”

CHAPTER XXII.

WHAT WE SHOULD NOTE IN THE CASE OF THE THREE ROMAN
HORATII AND THE ALBAN CURATII.

Tutuus, king of Rome, and Metius, king of Alba, agreed that
that people should be master of the other whose three champi-
ons should overcome those of the other in an «appointed combat.
All three of the Curatii were killed, and only one of the Roman
Horatii survived; and consequently Metius, king of the Albans,
and his people, became subject to the Romans. When this sur-
viving Horatius returned to Rome he met his sister, who was
contracted in marriage to one of the slain Curatii; and when
he heard her lamenting the death of her lover he killed her.
He was judicially tried for this crime, and after a long discussion
was acquitted, not so much on account of his own merit as on ac-
count of the prayers of his father. Now there are three things
to be noted in these occurrences: the first, that one should never
risk his whole fortune with only a portion of his forces; the
second, that in a well-ordered state a man’s merits should never
extenuate his crimes; and the third, that it is never wise to
enter into agreements the observance of which is doubtful. For
the loss of independence is a matter of such supreme impor-
tance to a state that it is not to be supposed that any king or
people will ever remain satisfied that the action of three of
their citizens should subject them to servitude ; as was seen in
the case of Metius, who, although immediately upon the victory
of the Horatii he confessed himself conquered and promised
obedience to Tullus, yet on the very first expedition in which
he had to take part against the Veienti he attempted by fraud

Cray, XXII) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS ZLIVIUS. 151

to evade his obligations, like one who perceives too late the im-
prudence of the agreement he has made. Having said enough
upon this third point, we will treat more fully of the others in
the following chapters.

CHAPTER XXIII.

ONE SHOULD NEVER RISK ONE’S WHOLE FORTUNE UNLESS SUP-
PORTED BY ONE’S ENTIRE FORCES, AND THEREFORE THE MERE
GUARDING OF PASSES IS OFTEN DANGEROUS.

Ir was never deemed wise to risk one’s whole fortune without
employing at the same time one’s whole forces, and which may
be done in different ways. One is the acting like Tullus and
Metius, when they committed the entire fortunes of their coun-
tries, and so many brave men as both had in their armies, to
the valor of only three of their citizens, who constituted but a
minimum part of their respective forces. They did not per-
ceive that by so doing all the labors of their predecessors in
organizing the republic so as to insure it a long and free exist-
ence, and to make her citizens defenders of their liberty, were
as it were made nugatory, by putting it in the power of so few
to lose the whole. On the part of the Romans, they could cer-
tainly not have done a more ill considered thing. The same
fault is almost always committed by those who, upon the ap-
proach of an enemy, attempt to hold the difficult approaches,
and to guard the passes; which course will almost always
prove dangerous, unless you can conveniently place all your
forces there, in which case that course may be adopted ; but if
the locality be so rugged that you cannot keep and deploy all
your forces there, then it is dangerous. I am induced to think
so by the example of those who, when assailed by a powerful
enemy, their country being surrounded by mountains and rug-
ged places, never attempted to combat the enemy in the passes
or mountains, but have always gone either to meet him in ad-
vance of these, or, when they did not wish to do that, have
awaited his coming in easy and open places; the reason of
which is the one I have above alleged. For you cannot em-
ploy a large force in guarding rugged and mountainous places ;

~
-__—.
—-.,

152 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

be it that you cannot obtain provisions there for any length of
time, or that the defiles are so narrow as to admit of only a
small number of men, so that it becomes impossible to sustain
the shock of an enemy who comes in large force. Now for
the enemy it is easy to come in full force, for his intention is
to pass, and not to stop there; whilst on the contrary he who
has to await the approach of the enemy cannot possibly keep
so large a force there, for the reason that he will have to es-
tablish himself for a longer time in those confined and sterile
places, not knowing when the enemy may come to make the
attempt to pass. And once having lost the pass which you
had hoped to hold, and upon which your people and army had
confidently relied, they are generally seized with such terror
that they are lost, without your having even been able to test
their courage ; and thus you lose your whole fortune from hav-
ing risked only a portion of your forces.

It is well known what difficulties Hannibal encountered in
passing the Alps that separate Lombardy from France, as well
as the mountains that divide Lombardy from ‘Tuscany ; never-
theless, the Romans awaited him first on the Ticino, and after-
wards in the plains of Arezzo; for they preferred rather to
expose their army to being defeated in a place where they
themselves had a chance of being the victors, than to move it
to the mountains, to be destroyed there by the difficulties of
the locality. And whoever reads history attentively will find
that very few of the best commanders have attempted to hold
such passes, for the very reasons which I have given, and be-
cause they cannot close them all; the mountains being in that
respect like the open country, in having not only well known
roads that are generally used, but also many others, which, if
unknown to strangers, are yet familiar to the people of the
country, by whose aid any invader may always be guided to
any desired point. Of this we have a most notable and recent
example in 1515, when Francis I., king of France, wanted to
enter Italy for the purpose of recovering the state of Lombardy.
Those who opposed him in this attempt, relied mainly upon
their confident expectations that the Swiss would arrest his
march in the mountain passes. But the event proved that
their confidence was vain, for the king of France, leaving aside
the two or three passes that were guarded by the Swiss, came
by another route hitherto quite unknown, and was in Italy

Caar. XXIV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 153

and upon them before they knew anything of it; so that their
terror-stricken troops retreated to Milan, and the entire Milan-
ese population yielded themselves to the French, having been
disappointed in their hopes that the French would be kept out
by the difficulty of passing the Alps.

CHAPTER XXIV.

WELL-ORDERED REPUBLICS ESTABLISH PUNISHMENTS AND REWARDS
FOR THEIR CITIZENS, BUT NEVER SET OFF ONE AGAINST THE
OTHER.

THE services of Horatius had been of the highest importance
to Rome, for by his bravery he had conquered the Curatii; but
the crime of killing his sister was atrocious, and the Romans
were so outraged by this murder that he was put upon trial for
his life, notwithstanding his recent great services to the state.
Now, in looking at this matter superficially, it may seem like
an instance of popular ingratitude; but a more careful ex-
amination, and reflection as to what the laws of a republic
ought to be, will show that the people were to blame rather
for the acquittal of Horatius than for having him tried. And
the reason for this is, that no well-ordered republic should ever
cancel the crimes of its citizens by their merits; but having
established rewards for good actions and penalties for evil ones,
and having rewarded a citizen for good conduct who afterwards
commits a wrong, he should be chastised for that without
regard to his previous merits. And a state that properly ob-
serves this principle will long enjoy its liberty; but if otherwise,
it will speedily come to ruin. For if a citizen who has rendered
some eminent service to the state should add to the reputation
and influence which he has thereby acquired the confident
audacity of being able to commit any wrong without fear of
punishment, he will in a little while become so insolent and
overbearing as to put an end to all power of the law. But to
preserve a wholesome fear of punishment for evil deeds, it is
necessary not to omit rewarding good ones; as has been seen
was done by Rome. And although a republic may be poor and
able to give but little, yet she should not abstain from giving

154 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

that little; for even the smallest reward for a good action —no
matter how important the service to the state—vwill always be
esteemed by the recipient as most honorable. The story of
Horatius Cocles and of Mutius Scevola is well known; how the
one, single-handed, kept back the enemy to give time for the de-
struction of a bridge, and how the other burned his hand off for
having erred in his attempt to take the life of Porsenna, king
of the Tuscans. As a reward for their eminent services the
city of Rome gave to each of them two acres of land. The
story of Manlius Capitolinus is equally well known; having
saved the Capitol from the Gauls who were besieging it, he
received from each of those who had been shut up in it with
him a small measure of flour, which (according to the current
prices of things in those days in Rome) was a reward of con-
siderable value and importance. But when Manlius afterwards,
inspired by envy or his evil nature, attempted to stir up a rebel-
lion, and sought to gain the people over to himself, he was,
regardless of his former services, precipitated from that very
Capitol which it had been his previous glory to have saved.

CHAPTER XXV.

WHOEVER WISHES TO REFORM AN EXISTING GOVERNMENT IN A FREE
STATE SHOULD AT LEAST PRESERVE THE SEMBLANCE OF THE OLD
FORMS.

He who desires or attempts to reform the government of a
state, and wishes to have it accepted and capable of maintaining
itself to the satisfaction of everybody, must at least retain the
semblance of the old forms; so that it may seem to the people
that there has been no change in the institutions, even though
in fact they are entirely different from the old ones. For the
great majority of mankind are satisfied with appearances, as
though they were realities, and are often even more influenced
by the things that seem than by those that are. The Romans
understood this well, and for that reason, when they first recov-
ered their liberty, and had created two Consuls in place of a king,
they would not allow these more than twelve lictors, so as not
to exceed the number that had served the king. Besides this,

Cuap. XXVI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 155

the Romans were accustomed to an annual sacrifice that could
only be performed by the king in person; and as they did not
wish that the people, in consequence of the absence of the king,
should have occasion to regret the loss of any of their old cus-
toms, they created a special chief for that ceremony, whom they
called the king of the sacrifice, and placed him under their high
priest ; so that the people enjoyed these annual sacrificial cere-
monies, and had no pretext, from the want of them, for desiring
the restoration of the kings. And this rule should be observed
by all who wish to abolish an existing system of government in
any state, and introduce a new and more liberal one. For as
all novelties excite the minds of men, it is important to retain

in such innovations as much as possible the previously existing
forms. And if the number, authority, and duration of the term
of service of the magistrates be changed, the titles at least ought
to be preserved. This, as I have said, should be observed by
whoever desires to convert an absolute government either into
a republic or a monarchy; but, on the contrary, he who wishes
to establish an absolute power, such as ancient writers called a
tyranny, must change everything, as we shall show in the follow-
ing chapter.

CHAPTER XXVI.

A NEW PRINCE IN A CITY OR PROVINCE CONQUERED BY HIM
SHOULD ORGANIZE EVERYTHING ANEW.

WHOEVER becomes prince of a city or state, especially if the
foundation of his power is feeble, and does not wish to establish
there either a monarchy or a republic, will find the best means
for holding that principality to organize the government en-
tirely anew (he being himself a new prince there); that is, he
should appoint new governors with new titles, new powers, and
new men, and he should make the poor rich, as David did when
he became king, “ who heaped riches upon the needy, and dis-
“missed the wealthy empty-handed.” Besides this, he should
destroy the old cities and build new ones, and transfer the in-
habitants from one place to another; in short, he should leave
nothing unchanged in that province, so that there should be
neither rank, nor grade, nor honor, nor wealth, that should not

156 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

be recognized as coming from him. He should take Philip of
Macedon, father of Alexander, for his model, who by proceed-
ing in that manner became, from a petty king, master of all
Greece. And his historian tells us that he transferred the
inhabitants from one province to another, as shepherds move
their flocks from place to place. Doubtless these means are
cruel and destructive of all civilized life, and neither Christian
nor even human, and should be avoided by every one. In fact,
the life of a private citizen would be preferable to that of a
king at the expense of the ruin of so many human beings.
Nevertheless, whoever is unwilling to adopt the first and hu-
mane course must, if he wishes to maintain his power, follow

the latter evil course. But men generally decide upon a mid- _

dle course, which is most hazardous; for they know neither
how to be entirely good or entirely bad, as we shall illustrate
by examples in the next chapter.

CHAPTER XXVILI.

SHOWING THAT MEN ARE VERY RARELY EITHER ENTIRELY GOOD
OR ENTIRELY BAD.

WHEN Pope Julius II. went, in the year 1505, to Bologna to
expel the Bentivogli from that state, the government of which
‘they had held for a hundred years, he wanted also to remove
Giovanpaolo Baglioni from Perugia, who had made himself the
absolute master of that city; for it was the intention of Pope
Julius to destroy all the petty tyrants that occupied the pos-
sessions of the Church. Having arrived at Perugia with that
purpose, which was well known to everybody, he did not wait
to enter the city with his army for his protection, but went in
almost alone, although Giovanpaolo had collected a large force
within the city for his defence. And thus, with the customary
impetuosity which characterized all his acts, Julius placed him-
self with only a small guard in the hands of his enemy Baglioni,
whom he nevertheless carried off with him, leaving a governor
in his stead to administer the state in the name of the Church.
Sagacious men who were with the Pope observed his temerity
and the cowardice of Baglioni, and could not understand why

Cuap. XXVIII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 157

the latter had not by a single blow rid himself of his enemy,
whereby he would have secured for himself eternal fame and
rich booty, for the Pope was accompanied by all the cardinals
with their valuables. Nor could they believe that he had re-
frained from doing this either from goodness or conscientious
scruples ; for no sentiment of piety or respect could enter the
heart of a man of such vile character as Giovanpaolo, who had
dishonored his sister and murdered his nephews and cousins
for the sake of obtaining possession af the state; but they con-
cluded that mankind were neither utterly wicked nor perfectly
good, and that when a crime has in itself some grandeur or
magnanimity they will not know how to attempt it. Thus
Giovanpaolo Baglioni, who did not mind open incest and _ par-
ricide, knew not how, or, more correctly speaking, dared not,
to attempt an act (although having a justifiable opportunity)
for which every one would have admired his courage, and which
would have secured him eternal fame, as being the first to show
these prelates how little esteem those merit who live and gov-
ern as they do; and as having done an act the greatness of
which would have overshadowed the infamy and all the danger
that could possibly result from it.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

WHY ROME WAS LESS UNGRATEFUL TO HER CITIZENS THAN
ATHENS.

In reading the history of republics we find in all of them
a degree of ingratitude to their citizens; this, however, seems
to have been the case to a less extent in Rome than in Athens,
and perhaps less even than in any other republic. In seeking
for the reason of this difference, so far as Rome and Athens
are concerned, I believe it was because Rome had less cause for
mistrusting her citizens than Athens. In fact, from the time
of the expulsion of the kings until Sylla and Marius, no Roman
citizen ever attempted to deprive his country of her liberty ; so
that, there being no occasion to suspect her citizens, there was
consequently no cause for offending them inconsiderately. The
very contrary happened in Athens, for Pisistratus had by fraud

158 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I,

robbed her of her liberty at the very time of her highest pros-
perity ; so soon as she afterwards recovered her freedom, re-
membering the injuries received and her past servitude, she
resented with the utmost harshness, not only all faults, but the
mere semblance of faults, on the part of her citizens. It was
this that gave rise to the exile and death of so many of her
illustrious men, and thence came the practice of ostracism and
every other violence which that city exercised at various times
against some of her noblest citizens. It is a very true saying
of political writers, that those states which have recovered
their liberty treat their citizens with greater severity than such
as have never lost it. A careful consideration of what has been
said on this subject will show that Athens is neither to be
blamed, nor Rome to be praised, for their respective conduct,
and that it necessarily resulted entirely from the difference of
the events that occurred in those cities; for a penetrating ob-
server will not fail to see that, if Rome had been deprived of
her liberty in the manner Athens was, she would not have been
more indulgent to her citizens than the latter. We may judge
very correctly of this by her treatment of Collatinus and Pub-
lius Valerius after the expulsion of the kings; the first was
exiled for no other reason than that he bore the name of the
Tarquins, and the other was equally sent into exile because he
had excited suspicion by building a house on Mount Ccelius.
Seeing then how suspicious and severe Rome showed herself in
these two cases, we may fairly judge that she would have been
liable to the charge of ingratitude, the same as Athens, if she
had been offended by her citizens in the beginning of her ex-
istence, before she had grown powerful. And so as not to be
obliged to return to this subject of ingratitude, I shall con-
tinue what I have to say in relation to it in the next chapter.

CHAPTER XXIX.

WHICH OF THE TWO IS MOST UNGRATEFUL, A PEOPLE OR A
PRINCE.

Ir seems to me proper here, in connection with the above
subject, to examine whether the people or a prince is more

Cusp, XXIX] TEN BOCKS°OF TITUS LIVIUS. 159

liable to the charge of ingratitude; and by way of illustrating
this question the better, I set out by saying that the vice of
ingratitude springs either from avarice or fear. For when a
people or a prince has sent a general on some important
expedition where by his success he acquires great glory, the
prince or people is in turn bound to reward him. But if in-
stead of such reward they dishonor and wrong hin, influenced
thereto by avarice, then they are guilty of an inexcusable wrong,
which will involve them in eternal infamy. And yet there are
many princes who commit this wrong, for which fact Tacitus
assigns the reason in the following sentence: “ Men are more
“ready to repay an injury than a benefit, because gratitude
‘is a burden and revenge a pleasure.” But when they fail to
reward, or rather when they offend, not from avarice, but from
suspicion and fear, then the people or the prince have some ex-
cuse for their ingratitude. We read of many instances of this
kind; for the general who by his valor has conquered a state
for his master, and won great glory for himself by his victory
over the enemy, and has loaded his soldiers with rich booty,
acquires necessarily with his own soldiers, as well as with those
of the enemy and with the subjects of the prince, so high a
reputation, that his very victory may become distasteful, and a
cause for apprehension to his prince. For as the nature of men
is ambitious as well as suspicious, and puts no limits to one’s
good fortune, it is not impossible that the suspicion that may
suddenly be aroused in the mind of the prince by the victory
of the general may have been aggravated by some haughty ex-
pressions or insolent acts on his part; so that the prince will
naturally be made to think of securing himself against the am-
bition of his general. And to do this, the means that suggest
themselves to him are either to have the general killed, or
to deprive him of that reputation which he has acquired with
the prince’s army and the people, by using every means to
prove that the general’s victory was not due to his skill and
courage, but to chance and the cowardice of the enemy, or to
the sagacity of the other captains who were with him in that
action.

After Vespasian, whilst in Judwa, had been proclaimed Em-
peror by his army, Antonius Primus, who was at the head
of an army in Illyria, took sides with him, and marched
straight into Italy against Vitellius, then Emperor in Rome,

160 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I.

and in the most gallant manner routed two Vitellian armies,
and made himself master of Rome; so that Mutianus, who had
been sent there by Vespasian, found everything achieved and
all difficulties overcome. The reward which Antonius received
for this service was that Mutianus deprived him of the com-
mand of the army, and gradually reduced his authority in Rome
to nothing; so that Antonius, indignant, went to see Vespasian,
who was eels in Asia, who ee is in such manner that,
being soon after deprived of all rank, he died almost in dear
History is full of similar examples.

We have seen in our own day with how much courage and
perseverance Gonsalvo de Cordova conducted the war in N aples
for King Ferdinand of Aragon against the French; how he de-
feated them, and conquered the kingdom for Ferdinand ; and
how he was rewarded by his king, who left Spain and came to
Naples, and first deprived Gonsalvo of his command of the army,
and then took the control of the strong places from him, and
finally carried him off with him to Spain, where Gonsalvo soon
after died in obscurity.

Fear and suspicion are so natural to princes that they can-
not defend themselves against them, and thus it is impossi-
ble for them to show gratitude to those who, by victories
achieved under their banners, have made important conquests
for them. If then a prince cannot prevent himself from
committing such wrongs, it is surely no wonder, nor matter
worthy of more consideration, if a people acts in a similar
manner. For as a free city is generally influenced by two
principal objects, the one to aggrandize herself, and the other
to preserve her liberties, it is natural that she should occasion-
ally be betrayed into faults by excessive eagerness in the pur-
suit of either of these objects. As to the faults that result
from the desire for aggrandizement, we shall speak in another
place ; and those resulting from the desire to preserve her liberty
are amongst others the following, namely, to injure those citi-
zens Whom she should. reward, and to suspect those in whom
she should place most confidence. And although the effects
of such conduct occasion great evils in a republic that is al-
ready corrupt, and which often lead to despotism, — as was seen
under Cesar in Rome, who took for himself by force what in-
gratitude had refused him, — still, in a republic not yet entirely
corrupt, they may be productive of great good in preserving her

Coir, SAIS) TEN BOOKS.On TILUS TIVi0s, 161

freedom for a greater length of time; as the dread of punish-
ment will keep men better, and less ambitious.

It is true that, of all the people that ever possessed a great
empire, the Romans were the least ungrateful ; for it may be
said that no other instance of their ingratitude can be cited than
that of Scipio; for Coriolanus and Camillus were both exiled
on account of the outrages which they had committed upon the
people. The one was never pardoned, because he always pre-
served an implacable hatred against the people; but the other
was not only recalled from exile, but was for the entire re-
mainder of his life honored like a prince. The ingratitude to
Scipio arose from jealousy such as never before had been felt
towards any one else, and which resulted from the greatness
of the enemy whom Scipio had conquered, from the great repu-
tation which his victory after so long and perilous a war had
given him, from the rapidity of his actions and the popular
favor which his youth, his prudence, and other remarkable vir-
tues had won for him. All of these were so great that every-
body in Rome, even the magistrates, feared his influence and
authority, which offended the intelligent men of Rome as an
unheard of thing. And his manner of life was such that Cato
the elder, who was reputed a man of the purest character, was
the first to complain of him, saying that no city could call her-
self free where a citizen was feared by the magistrates. So
that if in this case the people of Rome followed the opinion of
Cato, they are entitled to that excuse which, as I have said
above, those peoples and princes may claim who are ungrate-
ful from suspicion and fear. In concluding, then, this discourse,
I say that, as the vice of ingratitude is usually the consequence
of either avarice or fear, it will be seen that the peoples never
fall into this error from avarice, and that fear also makes them
less liable to it than princes, inasmuch as they have less reason
for fear, as we shall show further on.

VOU i: ll

162 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox I.

CHAPTER XXX.

HOW PRINCES AND REPUBLICS SHOULD ACT TO AVOID THE VICE
OF INGRATITUDE, AND HOW A COMMANDER OR A _ CITIZEN
SHOULD ACT SO AS NOT TO EXPOSE HIMSELF TO IT.

A PRINCE, to avoid the necessity of living in constant mistrust
or of being ungrateful, should command all his expeditions in
person, as the Roman Emperors did in the beginning, and as
the Sultan does at the present time, and as in fact all valiant
princes ever have done and will do. For if victorious, all the
glory and fruits of their conquests will be theirs ; but if they
are not present themselves at the action, and the glory of vic-
tory falls to the share of another, then it will seem to them
that the conquest will not profit them unless they extinguish
that glory of another which they have failed to achieve them-
selves. Thus they become ungrateful and unjust, and in that
way their loss will be greater than their gain. But if from
indolence or want of sagacity they remain idle at home, and
confide the expedition to a commander, then I have no advice
to give them but to follow their own inspirations. But I say
to the commander, judging that he will not be able to escape
the fangs of ingratitude, that he must do one of two things:
either he must leave the army immediately after victory, and
place himself at the disposal of his prince, carefully avoiding
all show of insolence or ambition, so that the prince, deprived
of all grounds of fear or suspicion, may reward him or at least
not wrong him; or if this does not suit him, then he must
boldly adopt the other course, and act in all respects as though
he believed the conquest were for his own account, and not for
his prince, —conciliating to himself the good will of his army
and of the subjected people, forming friendships and alliances
with the neighboring princes, occupying the strongholds with
his own men, corrupting the chiefs of his army and making
sure of such as he cannot corrupt,— and in this wise seek to
punish his prince in advance for the ingratitude which he is
likely to show him. And there is no other way for him to do.
But, as I have already said, men neither know how to be en-
tirely good nor wholly bad; and it so happens almost invaria-
bly that a general, after a great victory, is unwilling to leave

Coap. XXXI.] TEN BOOKS “OF TITUS LIVIUS. 1638

his army, and to conduct himself with becoming modesty, and
knows not how to take a decided course, which has in itself
something honorable and grand; and thus he remains unde-
cided, and whilst in this ambiguous state he is crushed.

A republic that wishes to avoid the vice of ingratitude cannot
employ the same means as a prince; that is to say, she cannot
go and command her own expeditions, and is obliged therefore
to confide them to some one of her citizens. But it is proper
that I should suggest as the best means to adopt the same
course that Rome did, in being less ungrateful than others,
and which resulted from her institutions. For as the whole
city, nobles and plebeians, devoted themselves to the business
of war, there arose at all times in Rome so many brave and
victorious generals, that the people had no cause for mistrust-
ing any one of them, there being so many that they could
watch each other. And thus they kept themselves so pure,
and careful not to give the least umbrage, that they afforded
the people not the least ground for suspecting them of ambi-
tion; and if any of them arrived at the dictatorship, their
greatest glory consisted in promptly laying this dignity down
again ; and thus, having inspired no fear or mistrust, they gave
no cause for ingratitude. A republic, then, that wishes not to
have cause for ingratitude, should adopt the same system of
government as Rome; and a citizen who desires to avoid the
fangs of ingratitude should observe the same conduct as that
of the Roman citizens.

CHAPTER XXXII.

SHOWING THAT THE ROMAN GENERALS WERE NEVER SEVERELY
PUNISHED FOR ANY FAULTS THEY COMMITTED, NOT EVEN WHEN
BY THEIR IGNORANCE AND UNFORTUNATE OPERATIONS THEY
OCCASIONED SERIOUS LOSSES TO THE REPUBLIC.

Tue Romans (as we have shown above) were not only less
ungrateful than other republics, but were also more lenient and
considerate in the punishment of the generals of their armies.
For if their misconduct was intentional, they punished them
humanely ; and if it was caused by ignorance, they not only

164 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I.

did not punish them, but rewarded and honored them never-
theless. This mode of proceeding had been well considered by
them; for they judged that it was of the greatest importance
for those who commanded their armies to have their minds
entirely free and unembarrassed by any anxiety other than how
best to perform their duty, and therefore they did not wish to
add fresh difficulties and dangers to a task in itself so difficult
and perilous, being convinced that, if this were done, it would
prevent any general from operating vigorously. Suppose, for
instance, that they had sent an army into Greece against Philip
of Macedon, or into Italy against such tribes as had at first
gained some victories over them. Now, the commander of
such an expedition would naturally feel the weight of all the
cares attendant on such enterprises, and which are very great.
But if in addition to these anxieties the mind of the general
had been disturbed by the examples of other generals who had
been crucified, or otherwise put to death, for having lost battles,
it would have been impossible for him, under the influence of
such apprehensions, to have proceeded vigorously. Judging,
therefore, that the ignominy of defeat would be sufficient pun-
ishment for such a commander, they did not wish to terrify
him with other penalties.

The following is an instance of how they punished inten-
tional faults. Sergius and Virginius were encamped before
Veii, each commanding a separate division of the army; Sergius
being placed on the side where the Tuscans could make an at-
tack, and Virginius on the opposite side. It happened that,
Sergius being attacked by the Faliscans and other tribes, he
preferred being beaten by them and put to flight rather than
apply to Virginius for assistance ; and, on the other hand, Vir-
ginius, waiting for his colleague to humble himself, was willing
rather to see his country dishonored, and the army of Sergius
routed, than march unsolicited to his succor. Certainly a very
bad case and worthy of note, and well calculated to cause un-
favorable conjectures as to the Roman republic, if both these
generals had not been punished. It is true that, whilst any
other republic would have inflicted capital punishment upon
them, they were subjected by Rome only to a pecuniary fine.
Not but what their misconduct merited severer punishment, but
because the Romans, for the reasons above explained, would
not vary from their established custom.

Guar. XXXIL) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 165

As regards faults committed from ignorance, there is not
a more striking example than that of Varro, whose temerity
caused the defeat of the Romans by Hannibal at Canne,
which exposed the republic to the loss of her liberty. Never-
theless, as it was from ignorance, and not from evil intention,
they not only did not punish him, but actually rendered him
honors; and on his return, the whole order of Senators went
to meet him, and, unable to congratulate him on the result of
the battle, they thanked him for having returned to Rome, and
for not having despaired of the cause of the republic.

When Papirius Cursor wanted to have Fabius put to death
for having, contrary to his orders, given battle to the Samnites,
amongst the other reasons which the father of Fabius opposed
to the obstinacy of the Dictator was this,—that after the most
bloody defeats the Roman people had never treated their gen-
erals as Papirius Cursor wanted to treat his victorious son.

CHAPTER XXXII.

A REPUBLIC OR A PRINCE SHOULD NOT DEFER SECURING THE
GOOD WILL OF THE PEOPLE UNTIL THEY ARE THEMSELVES IN
DIFFICULTIES.

AutTHoucH the Romans happily always treated the people
with liberality, yet when danger came upon them, and Por-
senna attacked Rome for the purpose of restoring the Tarquins,
the Senate was doubtful whether the people might not rather
accept the restoration of the kings than undergo a war; and to
assure themselves of the people, they relieved them of the im-
post on salt and of all other taxes, saying that the poor did
enough for the public benefit in rearing their children; and
although in consequence of this liberality the people submitted
to the hardships and privations of siege, famine, and war, yet
let no one, trusting to this example, defer securing the good
will of the people until the moment of danger; for they will
never succeed in it as the Romans did. For the masses will
think that they do not owe the benefits you have bestowed upon
them to you, but to your adversaries; and fearing that, when
the danger is past, you will again take from them what under

166 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

the pressure of danger you conceded to them, they will feel
under no obligations to you. The reason why this proceeding
turned out well for the Romans was that the government was
still new and not yet firmly established, and the people had
seen that other laws had been enacted for their benefit, such,
for instance, as that of the appeal to the people; and thus they
were easily persuaded that the relief from taxation which had
been granted to them was not caused so much by the approach
of the enemy as by the disposition of the Senate to favor them.
Besides this, the memory of the kings, by whom they had been
wronged ona maltreated in various ways, was still fresh in their
minds. And as it is rare that similar circumstances concur,
so it is equally rare that similar remedies avail; and therefore
republics as well as princes should think in advance what ad-
versities may befall them, and of whom they may have need in
time of trouble, and then they should comport themselves to-
wards these in the manner they might deem necessary in case
danger should come upon them. And whoever acts differently,
whether prince or republic, and more especially a prince, and
supposes from the above-related fact that it is time enough by
benefits to secure the good will of the people when danger has
come upon him, deceives himself greatly ; for ‘not only will he
fail to obtain the good will of the people, but he will accelerate
his own destruction.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

WHEN AN EVIL HAS SPRUNG UP WITHIN A STATE, OR COME UPON
IT FROM WITHOUT, IT IS SAFER TO TEMPORIZE WITH IT RATHER
THAN TO, ATTACK IF VIOLENTLY.

As the Roman republic grew in reputation, power, and do-
minion, the neighboring tribes, who at first had not thought of
how great a danger this new republic might prove to them, be-
gan (too late, however) to see their error; and wishing to rem-
edy their first neglect, they united full forty tribes in a league
against Rome. Hereupon the Romans resorted, amongst other
measures which they were accustomed to employ in urgent
dangers, to the creation of a dictator; that is to say, they gave

Omar, XXXL] “TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 167

the power to one man, who, without consulting any one else,
could determine upon any course, and could have it carried into
effect without any appeal. This measure, which on former oc-
casions had proved most useful in overcoming imminent perils,
was equally serviceable to them in all the critical events that
occurred during the growth and development of the power of
the republic. Upon this subject we must remark, first, that
when any evil arises within a republic, or threatens it from
without, that is to say, from an intrinsic or extrinsic cause,
and has become so great as to fill every one with apprehension,
the more certain remedy by far is to temporize with it, rather
than to attempt to extirpate it; for almost invariably he who
attempts to crush it will rather increase its force, and will ac-
celerate the harm apprehended from it. And such evils arise
more frequently in a republic from intrinsic than extrinsic
causes, as it often occurs that a citizen is allowed to acquire
more authority than is proper; or that changes are permitted
in a law which is the very nerve and life of liberty; and then
they let this evil go so far that it becomes more hazardous to
correct it than to allow it to run on. And it is the more diffi-
cult to recognize these evils at their origin, as it seems natural
to men always to favor the beginning of things; and these
favors are more readily accorded to such acts as seem to have
some merit in them, and are done by young men. For if in a
republic a noble youth is seen to rise, who is possessed of some
extraordinary merits, the eyes of all citizens quickly turn to
him, and all hasten to show him honor, regardless of conse-
quences; so that, if he is in any way ambitious, the gifts of
nature and the favor of his fellow-citizens will soon raise him
to such a height that, when the citizens become sensible of the
error they have committed, they have no longer the requisite
means for checking him, and their efforts to employ such as
they have will only accelerate his advance to power.

Many instances of this might be cited, but I will confine my-
self to one which occurred in our own city of Florence. Cosimo
de’ Medici, to whom the house of Medici owes the beginning of
its greatness, obtained such reputation and authority through
his own sagacity and the ignorance of his fellow-citizens, that he
became a cause of apprehension to the government, and that the
other citizens judged it hazardous to offend him, but more dan-
gerous still to allow him to go on. At that time there lived in

168 : DISCOURSES ON THE FIEST [Boox I.

Florence Niccolo Uzzano, reputed a man of consummate ability
in matters of state, who, having committed the first error of not
foreseeing the danger that might result from the great influ-
ence of Cosimo, would never permit the Florentines, so long as
he lived, to commit the second error of trying to destroy Cosi-
mo, judging that any such attempt would lead to the ruin of
the state, as in fact proved to be the case after his death. For
the citizens, regardless of the counsels of Uzzano, combined
against Cosimo and drove him from Florence. The conse-
quence was that the partisans of Cosimo, to resent this insult,
shortly afterwards recalled him and made him prince of the
republic, which position he never would have attained but for
the previous hostility manifested towards him. The same thing
happened in Rome with regard to Cesar, who by his courage
and merits at first won the favor of Pompey and of other prom-
inent citizens, but which favor was shortly after converted into
fear; to which Cicero testifies, saying ‘that Pompey had begun
“too late to fear Cesar.” This fear caused them to think of
measures of safety, which however only accelerated the ruin of
the republic.

I say, then, that inasmuch as it is difficult to know these evils
at their first origin, owing to an illusion which all new things
are apt to produce, the wiser course is to temporize with such
evils when they are recognized, instead of violently attacking
them; for by temporizing with them they will either die out of
themselves, or at least their worst results will be long deferred.
And princes or magistrates who wish to destroy such evils
must watch all points, and must be careful in attacking them
not to increase instead of diminishing them, for they must not
believe that a fire can be extinguished by blowing upon it.
They should carefully examine the extent and force of the evil,
and if they think themselves sufficiently strong to combat it,
then they should attack it regardless of consequences ; other-
wise they should let it be, and in no wise attempt it. For it
will always happen as I have said above, and as it did happen
to the neighboring tribes of Rome; who found that it would
have been more advantageous, after Rome had grown so much
in power, to placate and keep her within her limits by peaceful
means, than by warlike measures to make her think of new in-
stitutions and new defences. For their league had no other
effect than to unite the people of Rome more closely, and to

Coar. XXXIV.] ‘TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 169

make them more ready for war, and to cause them to adopt
new institutions that enabled them in a brief time to increase
their power. One of these was the creation of a Dictator, by
which new institution they not only overcame the most immi-
nent dangers, but obviated also an infinity of troubles in which
they would otherwise have been involved.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE AUTHORITY OF THE DICTATORSHIP HAS ALWAYS PROVED
BENEFICIAL TO ROME, AND NEVER INJURIOUS; IT IS THE AU-
THORITY WHICH MEN USURP, AND NOT THAT WHICH IS GIVEN
THEM BY THE FREE SUFFRAGES OF THEIR FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THAT IS DANGEROUS TO CIVIL LIBERTY.

SomE writers have blamed those Romans who first intro-
duced the practice of creating Dictators, as being calculated
in time to lead to despotism in Rome; alleging that the first
tyrant of that city governed her under the title of Dictator, and
saying that, if it had not been for this office, Caesar never could
under any other public title have imposed his despotism upon
the Romans. Evidently the subject could not have been thor-
oughly considered by those who advance this opinion, so gen-
erally adopted without good reasons; for it was neither the
name nor the rank of the Dictator that subjected Rome to
servitude, but it was the authority which citizens usurped to
perpetuate themselves in the government. And if the title of
Dictator had not existed in Rome, some other would have been
taken; for power can easily take a name, but a name cannot
give power. And it is seen that the dictatorship, whenever
created according to public law and not usurped by individual
authority, always proved beneficial to Rome; it is the magis-
tracies and powers that are created by illegitimate means
which harm a republic, and not those that are appointed in the
regular way, as was the case in Rome, where in the long course
of time no Dictator ever failed to prove beneficial to the re-
public. The reason of this is perfectly evident: first, before a
citizen can be in a position to usurp extraordinary powers,
many things must concur, which in a republic as yet uncor-

170 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox I.

rupted never can happen; for he must be exceedingly rich, and
must have many adherents and partisans, which cannot be
where the laws are observed; and even if he had them, he
would never be supported by the free suffrages of the people,
for such men are generally looked upon as dangerous. Besides
this, Dictators were appointed only for a limited term, and not
in perpetuity, and their power to act was confined to the par-
ticular occasion for which they were created. This power con-
sisted in being able to decide alone upon the measures to be
adopted for averting the pressing danger, to do whatever he
deemed proper without consultation, and to inflict punishment
upon any one without appeal. But the Dictator could do noth-
ing to alter the form of the government, such as to diminish
the powers of the Senate or the people, or to abrogate existing
institutions and create new ones. So that, taking together the
short period for which he held the office, and the limited powers
which he possessed, and the fact that the Roman people were as
yet uncorrupted, it is evident that it was impossible for him to
exceed his powers and to harm the republic; which on the con-
trary, as all experience shows, was always benefited by him.
And truly, of all the institutions of Rome, this one deserves
to be counted amongst those to which she was most indebted
for her greatness and dominion. For without some such an
institution Rome would with difficulty have escaped the many
extraordinary dangers that befell her; for the customary pro-
ceedings of republics are slow, no magistrate or council being
permitted to act independently, but being in almost all in-
stances obliged to act in concert one with the other, so that
often much time is required to harmonize their several opin-
ions; and tardy measures are most dangerous when the oc-
casion requires prompt action. And therefore all republics
should have some institution similar to the dictatorship. The
republic of Venice, which is pre-eminent amongst modern
ones, had reserved to a small number of citizens the power
of deciding all urgent matters without referring their decis-
ions to a larger council. And when a republic lacks some
such system, a strict observance of the established laws will
expose her to ruin; or, to save her from such danger, the laws
will have to be disregarded. Now in a well-ordered republic
it should never be necessary to resort to extra-constitutional
measures ; for although they may for the time be beneficial, yet

Coar, XXXV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. LG |

the precedent is pernicious, for if the practice is once estab-
lished of disregarding the laws for good objects, they will in a
little while be disregarded under that pretext for evil purposes.
Thus no republic will ever be perfect if she has not by law pro-
vided for everything, having a remedy for every emergency,
and fixed rules for applying it. And therefore I will say, in
conclusion, that those republics which in time of danger cannot
resort to a dictatorship, or some similar authority, will generally
be ruined when grave occasions occur. It is well to note with
reference to this institution how wisely the Romans had pro-
vided the mode of electing the Dictator. For as his creation
reflected in some measure discredit upon the Consuls, who as
chiefs of the republic had to submit to his authority the same
as the other citizens, and apprehending that this might possibly
excite indignation amongst the citizens, it was decided that the
nomination of the Dictator should be made by the Consuls them-
selves; so that when an emergency occurred in which Rome
needed this quasi regal power, the Consuls, having the right of
creating it themselves, might, thus be less sensitive than if it
were imposed upon them by others. For the wounds and every
other evil that men inflict upon themselves spontaneously, and
of their own choice, are in the long run less painful than those
inflicted by others. In later times, however, the Romans, in-
stead of appointing a Dictator, used to confer that extraordinary
power upon the Consuls in these words: “Let the Consuls see
“that the republic suffers no detriment.” But to return now to
our subject, I conclude that the neighboring tribes of Rome, in
attempting to oppress her, caused her not only to adopt new
means for defending herself, but also to prepare with greater
force, abler counsels, and greater authority to attack them.

CHAPTER XXXYV.

THE REASON WHY THE CREATION OF DECEMVIRS IN ROME WAS
INJURIOUS TO LIBERTY, NOTWITHSTANDING THAT THEY WERE
CREATED BY THE FREE SUFFRAGES OF THE PEOPLE.

THE election of ten citizens by the Roman people to make
the laws in Rome, who in course of time became tyrants, and

172 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

regardlessly destroyed her liberty, seems to be in contradiction
with what I have said in the preceding chapter; namely, that
the authority which is violently usurped, and not that which is
conferred by the free suffrages of the people, is hurtful to repub-
lics. In this, however, there are two things to be considered ;
namely, the manner in which the authority is bestowed, and
the length of time for which it is given. For when full power

is confer red for any length of time (and I call a year or more a

long time) it is alyiee dangerous, and will be productive of
good or ill effects, according as those upon whom it is conferred
are themselves good or bad. And if we examine the power
given to the Decemvirs and that of the Dictators, we shall find
that of the former beyond comparison the greater. For at the
creation of a Dictator, the Tribunes, the Consuls, and the Senate
all remained with their respective powers, of which they could
not be deprived by the Dictator. And even if he could have
removed any one from the consulate or from the Senate, yet he
could not abrogate the senatorial order and make new laws him-
self. So that the Senate, the Consuls, and the Trib:nes, remain-
ing in full authority, served as it were as a guard to watch that
the Dictator did not transcend his powers. But in the creation
of the Decemvirs just the opposite was the case; for their
appointment cancelled that of the Consuls and Tribunes, and
to the Decemvirs the power was given to make new laws, and in
fact to do everything that the Roman people were competent to
do. So that, finding themselves alone, without Tribunes or
Consuls, and without the necessity of appealing to the Roman
people, and having therefore no one to watch them, they were
enabled in the second year, instigated by the ambition of Appius,
to become overbearing, and to abuse their power. And there-
fore, when we said that an authority conferred by the free suf-
frages of the people never harmed a republic, we presupposed
that the people, in giving that power, would limit it, as well as
the time during which it was to be exercised. But if from hav-
ing been deceived, or from any other reason, they are induced
to give this power imprudently, and in the way in which the
Roman people gave it to the Decemvirs, then the same thing
will happen to them as happened to the Romans. This is easily
proved by examining the causes that kept the Dictators within
the limits of their duties, and those which made the Decemvirs
transcend theirs; and by examining, further, the conduct of

Coarp. XXXVI} JEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 173

those republics that were well constituted, in giving power for
any length of time, as the Spartans did to their kings, and
as the Venetians gave to their Doges. In both these cases we
see that guardians were appointed to watch that neither the
king nor the Doge could abuse the power intrusted to him.
Nor is it of any advantage in such a case that the mass of the
people is not corrupt, for absolute authority will very quickly
corrupt the people, and will create friends and partisans for
itself. Nor is it any disadvantage to be poor and without family
influence, for riches and every other favor will quickly run after
power, as we shall show in the case of the creation of the De-
cemvirs.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

CITIZENS WHO HAVE BEEN HONORED WITH THE HIGHER OFFICES
SHOULD NOT DISDAIN LESS IMPORTANT ONES.

THE Romans had made Marcus Fabius and C. Manilius Con-
suls, and had gained a most glorious victory over the Veienti
and the Etruscans, which, however, cost the life of Quintus
Fabius, brother of the Consul, and who had himself been Con-
sul the year before. This ought to make us reflect how well
the institutions of that city were calculated to make her great,
and what an error other republics commit in deviating from her
system. For although the Romans were great lovers of glory,
yet they did not esteem it dishonorable to obey those whom
they had at a previous time commanded, or to serve in that army
of which themselves had been chiefs. This custom is entirely
contrary to the opinion, rules, and practice of our times; and
in Venice they even yet hold to the error that a citizen who has
once held a high post under the state would be dishonored by
accepting a lower one; and the city consents to what she cannot
change. However honorable this may be for a private citizen,
yet for the public it is absolutely useless. A republic can and
should have more hope and confidence in that citizen who from
a superior grade descends to accept a less important one, than
in him who from an inferior employment mounts to the exer-
cise of a superior one; for the latter cannot reasonably be
relied upon unless he is surrounded by men of such respectability

174 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

and virtue that his inexperience may in some measure be com-
pensated for by their counsel and authority. If they had had
the same prejudice in Rome as in Venice and the other modern
states, so that a man who had once been Consul had refused to
return to the army except in the quality of Consul, it would
have given rise to infinite inconveniences, greatly to the preju-
dice of public liberty, because of the errors of the new men in
office, as well as of their ambition, which they could indulge the
more freely, not having any men around them in whose presence
they would be afraid to commit such faults; and thus they
would have been more unrestrained, which would have resulted
ereatly to the public detriment.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

WHAT TROUBLES RESULTED IN ROME FROM THE ENACTMENT OF
THE AGRARIAN LAW, AND HOW VERY WRONG IT IS TO MAKE
LAWS THAT ARE RETROSPECTIVE AND CONTRARY TO OLD ESTAB-
LISHED CUSTOMS.

Ir was a saying of ancient writers, that men afflict them-
selves in evil, and become weary of the good, and that both
these dispositions produce the same effects. For when men
are no longer obliged to fight from necessity, they fight from
ambition, which passion is so powerful in the hearts of men
that it never leaves them, no matter to what height they may
rise. The reason of this is that nature has created men so that
they desire everything, but are unable to attain it; desire being
thus always greater than the faculty of acquiring, discontent
with what they have and dissatisfaction with themselves result
from it. This causes the changes in their fortunes; for as some
men desire to have more, whilst others fear to lose what they
have, enmities and war are the consequences; and this brings
about the ruin of one province and the elevation of another.
I have made these remarks because the Roman people were not
content with having secured themselves against the nobles by
the creation of the Tribunes, to which they had been driven by
necessity. Having obtained this, they soon began to fight from
ambition, and wanted to divide with the nobles their honors

Cair XXX VIE] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS FIVIUS. 175

and possessions, being those things which men value most.
Thence the frenzy that occasioned the contentions about the
agrarian law, which finally caused the destruction of the Roman
republic. Now, as in well-regulated republics the state ought |
to be rich and the citizens poor, it was evident that the agrarian
law was in some respects defective ; it was either in the begin-
ning so made that it required constant modifications; or the
changes in it had been so long deferred that it became most
obnoxious because it was retrospective in its action; or per-
haps it had been good in the beginning, and had afterwards be-
come corrupted in its application. But whichever it may have
been, this law could never be discussed in Rome without caus-
ing the most violent excitement in the city. There were two
principal points in this law; one provided that no citizen could
possess more than a certain number of acres of land, and the
other that all the lands taken from their enemies should be
divided amongst the Roman people. This. affected the nobles
disadvantageously in two ways; for those who had more land
than the law allowed (which was the case with the greater part
of the nobles) had to be deprived of it; and by dividing amongst
the people the lands taken from the enemy, it took from the
nobles the chance of enriching themselves thereby, as they had
previously done. Now, as it was a powerful class that had been
thus affected, and who considered resistance to this law as a de-
fence of the public good, whenever the subject was brought up,
it occasioned, as we have said, the most violent disturbances.
The nobles used all patience and every means in their power
to gain time and delay action upon the subject, either by calling
out an army, or by getting one Tribune to oppose another who
had proposed the law, or sometimes by yielding in part, or even
by sending a colony to any place where lands were to be divided.
This was done with the country of Antium, respecting which
this law had caused a dispute; and therefore a colony drawn
from amongst the citizens of Rome was sent there, to whom
that country was assigned. In reference to this, Titus Livius
makes the notable remark, that “it was difficult to find any one
“in Rome willing to inscribe his name to go to that colony; so
‘‘much more ready were the people to desire possessions in
“Rome than to go and have them in Antium.”

The troubles about this agrarian law continued to disturb
Rome for some time, so that the Romans began to send their

176 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

armies to the extreme ends of Italy, or even beyond; after
which matters were seemingly calmed down, owing to the fact
that the lands taken from the enemy were at a great distance
from Rome, and remote from the eyes of the people, and were
situated where it was not easy to cultivate them, and conse-
quently they were less desirable. Besides this, the Romans
became less disposed to deprive their vanquished enemies of
their lands, as they had done before ; and when they did so
deprive any of them of their possessions, they sent colonies to
occupy them; so that from these several causes the agrarian
law lay, as it were, dormant until the time of the Gracchi,
who, Hite having revived it, wholly destroyed the Roman re-
anne For the power of the adversaries of the law had in-
creased twofold in the mean time, and its revival excited such
feelings of hatred between the people and the Senate, that it
led to violence and bloodshed beyond all bounds or precedent.
So that, the magistrates being unable to check these disturb-
ances, and neither party having any confidence in the public
authorities, they both resorted to private expedients, and each
of the factions began to look for a chief capable of defending
them against the other. In these extreme troubles and dis-
orders the people began to cast their eyes upon Marius, on
account of his reputation, which was so great that they had
made him Consul four times in succession, and with such
short intervals between these several consulates that he was
enabled to nominate himself three times more for that office.
The nobility, seeing no other remedy against these abuses,
gave their favor to Sylla, and made him chief of their party.
Thus civil war was provoked, and after much bloodshed and
varied fortunes the nobility retained the upper hand. In the
time of Cesar and Pompey these troubles were revived, Czesar
placing himself at the head of the party of Marius, and Pom-
pey upholding that of Sylla; conflicts of arms ensued, and
Cesar remained master and became the first tyrant of Rome,
so that that city never afterwards recovered her liberty.

Such was the beginning and the end of the agrarian law. And
as I have demonstrated elsewhere that the differences between
the Senate and the people had been instrumental in preserving
liberty in Rome, because they had given rise to the enactment
of laws favorable to liberty, therefore the results of this agra-
rian law may seem in contradiction with that previous conclu-

Coir XXXVIIE] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. — =111

sion. But I do not on that account change my opinion, for
the ambition of the nobles is so great, that, if it is not repressed
by various ways and means in any city, it will quickly bring
that city to ruin. So that if the contentions about the agra-
rian law needed three hundred years to bring Rome to a state
of servitude, she would have been brought there much quicker
if the people, by these laws and other means, had not for so
great a length of time kept the ambition of the nobles in check.
This shows us also how much more people value riches than
honors; for the Roman nobility always yielded to the people
without serious difficulties in the matter of honors, but when
it came to a question of property, then they resisted with so
much pertinacity that the people, to satisfy their thirst for
riches, resorted to the above-described extraordinary proceed-
ings. The chief promoters of these disorders were the Grac-
chi, whose intentions in this matter were more praiseworthy
than their prudence. For to attempt to eradicate an abuse
that has grown up in a republic by the enactment of retro-
spective laws, is a most inconsiderate proceeding, and (as we
have amply discussed above) only serves to accelerate the fatal
results which the abuse tends to bring about; but by temporiz-
ing, the end will either be delayed, or the evil will exhaust
itself before it attains that end.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

FEEBLE REPUBLICS ARE IRRESOLUTE, AND KNOW NOT HOW TO
TAKE A DECIDED PART; AND WHENEVER THEY DO, IT IS MORE
THE RESULT OF NECESSITY THAN OF CHOICE.

THE prevalence of a terrible pestilence in Rome made the
Volscians and Equeans think the moment favorable for attack-
ing her. They therefore raised a powerful army, and assviled
the Latins and Ernicians, who seeing their country ravaged
felt constrained to notify the Romans, so that they might come
to their defence; but they, being afflicted by the pestilence,
replied to the application of the Latins and Ernicians that
they must defend themselves with their own armies, as they
were not then in condition to aid them. In this we recognize

VOL. II. 12

178 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

the sagacity as well as the generosity of the Roman Senate,
who, although it was their policy under all circumstances to
remain the chief source for directing the resolves and actions
of their subjects, yet they were never ashamed when necessity
obliged them to adopt a course different from their usual cus-
tom, or at variance with previous resolutions. I say this, be-
cause on other occasions the same Senate had forbidden those
same people to arm and defend themselves ; so that to a less
sagacious Senate it would have seemed a lowering of their dig-
nity now to concede to these people the privilege of their own
defence. But this Senate always judged things as they ought to
be judged, and always took the least objectionable course as the
best. They well knew the evil of not being able to defend their
subjects, and of allowing them to arm and defend themselves
without the assistance of the Romans, for the reason given, and
for many others that are easily understood ; nevertheless, know-
ing that the Latins and Ernicians would have armed themselves
anyhow from necessity, the enemy being upon them, they took
the honorable course, and decided that wnat these people would
have been obliged to do anyhow should be done with their sanc-
tion; so that, having once disobeyed from necessity, they might
not accustom themselves to disobeying from choice.

And although this would seem the proper course for every
republic to have pursued under the circumstances, yet fecble
and ill-advised republics would never have known how to do
it, nor how to gain honor to themselves from an occasion
of necessity. The Duke Valentino had taken Faenza, and
forced Bologna to submit to his terms; wishing after that to
return to Rome by way of Tuscany, he sent a messenger to
Florence to ask permission for the passage of himself and his
army through their territory. The authorities of Florence held
a consultation as to what they should do under the circum-
stances, but no one advised granting the permission ; in which
respect they did not follow the Roman policy. For as the
Duke had a very strong army, and the Florentines being al-
most without troops, so that they could not have prevented
him from passing, it would have been much more to their
eredit and honor if the Duke had passed with their permission
rather than by force ; as it was, they had nothing but shane,
which would have been greatly less if they had acted differ-
ently. But it is the worst fault of feeble republics to be irreso-

Caav: XXKVIIL] TEN BOOKS OF TTTCS LIVIUS. 179

lute, so that whatever part they take is dictated by force; and
if any good results from it, it is caused less by their sagacity
than by their necessity. I will cite two other instances of this
which occurred in our time, and in our own city of Florence.

In the year 1500, when King Louis XII. of France had re-
taken Milan he was anxious to restore Pisa to the Florentine’,
so as to receive the fifty thousand ducats that had been prom-
ised him for such restitution. He sent his army towards Pisa
under command of M. de Beaumont, who, although French,
was yet a man in whom the Florentines had great confidence.
This general placed his army between Cascina and Pisa, with
the view of assailing the walls of the latter city; but after
having been a few days engaged in making preparations for
the assault, the Pisans sent a deputation to him with offers
to give up the city to the French army, on condition that he
should pledge himself in the king’s name not to hand over the
city to the Florentines until four months after the surrender.
The Florentines wholly refused to assent to such an arrange-
ment, and the consequence was that, after having commenced
the siege, M. de Beaumont was obliged to raise it and retire
with shame. This refusal on the part of the Florentines had
no other cause than their mistrust of the king of France, into
whose hands they had been obliged to place themselves in con-
sequence of their own irresoluteness; and in thus not trusting
him, they lost sight of the fact, that it would have been much
easier for the king to have restored Pisa to them after once
being inside of the city, and had he then not given it up to
them, he would openly have exposed his perfidy; but not
having the city, he could only make them a promise of it,
which promise they had to purchase of him. It would there-
fore have been much more to their advantage to have con-
sented to M. de Beaumont’s taking Pisa under any pledge, as
was proved by subsequent experience in the year 1502.

When Arezzo revolted, the king of France sent to the aid
of the Florentines the Signor Imbault, with a body of French
troops. Very soon after arriving near Arezzo he began to
negotiate with the Aretines as to terms of surrender; these
were willing to give up the place on certain pledges, similar
to those asked by the Pisans. The proposition was rejected
in Florence; and when this became known to the Signor Im-
bault, he concluded that the Florentines little understood their

180 DISCOURSES ON THE. FIRST [Book I.

interests, and took upon himself to conclude the negotiations
of surrender without the participation of the Florentine com-
missioners ; and accordingly he entered Arezzo with his troops,
giving the Florentines to understand that they were fools and
did not understand the ways of the world, and that, if they
wanted Arezzo, they should let the king know it, who was much
better able to give it to them with his troops inside of that city
than when they were outside of it. There was no end to the
abuse heaped upon the Signor Imbault by the Florentines, until
at last they found out that,if M. de Beaumont had acted in a
similar manner, they would have had Pisa as they had Arezzo.

And so, to return to our subject, irresolute republics never
take a wise course except by force; for their weakness never
allows them to resolye upon anything where there is a doubt ;
and if that doubt is not overcome by some force, they remain
forever in a state of suspense.

CHAPTER XXXIX.
THE SAME ACCIDENTS OFTEN HAPPEN TO DIFFERENT PEOPLES.

WHOEVER considers the past and the present will readily
observe that all cities and all peoples are and ever have been
animated by the same desires and the same passions; so that
it is easy, by diligent study of the past, to foresee what is
likely to happen in the future in any republic, and to apply
those remedies that were used by the ancients, or, not finding
any that were employed by them, to devise new ones from
the similarity of the events. But as such considerations are
neglected or not understood by most of those who read, or, if
understood by these, are unknown by those who govern, it fol-
lows that the same troubles generally recur in all republics.

The city of Florence, having after the year 1494 lost a
portion of her dominions, such as Pisa and other places, was
obliged to make war upon him who held these places; and
as he was powerful, they expended great sums of money with-
out any advantage. These large expenditures necessitated
heavy taxes, and these caused infinite complaints from the
people ; and as the war was conducted by a council composed

Cuap, XXXIX.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 181

of ten citizens who were called “the Ten of the War,” the mass
of the people began to hold them in aversion, as being the
cause of the war and its expenses, and began to persuade
themselves that, if this council were done away with, the war
would also be ended. Thus when the time came for reap-
pointing the Ten, they allowed their term to expire without
renewing the council, and committed their functions to the
Signoria. This course was the more pernicious, as it not only
did not relieve them of the war, as the people had persuaded
themselves that it would, but it removed the men who had
conducted it with prudence, and produced altogether such dis-
order, that they lost, besides Pisa, Arezzo and many other
places; so that the people, perceiving the error they had com-
mitted, and that the cause of the evil was the fever and not
the physician, re-established the Council of Ten.

A similar ill-feeling had arisen in Rome against the Consuls ;
for the people, seeing one war growing out of another, and that
there was no prospect of repose for them, instead of charging
the cause of ‘these wars, as they should have done, upon the am-
bition of their neighbors who sought to overwhelm them, attrib-
uted it to the ambition of the nobles, who, unable to oppress
the people within the city of Rome where they were defended
by the Tribunes, wished to lead the people outside of Rome,
where, being without any support or protection, they could op-
press them at will. And therefore they thought that it would
be necessary either to remove the Consuls altogether, or to
regulate their power in such manner that they should have no
authority over the people either at home or abroad. The first
who attempted to introduce such a law was one of the Tribunes
named Terentillus; he proposed the creation of a Council of
Five to examine into the powers of the Consuls and to limit it.
This greatly excited the nobles, to whom it seemed as though
the very majesty of the empire would thereby be annihilated,
and that the nobility would lose all rank in the republic.
Nevertheless, such was the obstinacy of the Tribunes that the
consular dignity was abolished; and after some other regula-
tions it was finally resolved rather to create Tribunes with con-
sular powers, than to continue the Consuls, so great was their
aversion to that office and authority. And this system was
continued for a long time, until they saw the error they had
committed, and re-established the Consuls; just as in Florence
they returned to the Council of Ten.

182 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Book I.

CHAPTER XL.

OF THE CREATION OF THE DECEMVIRS IN ROME, AND WHAT IS
NOTEWORTHY IN IT; AND WHERE WE SHALL CONSIDER AMONGST
MANY OTHER THINGS HOW THE SAME ACCIDENTS MAY SAVE
OR RUIN A REPUBLIC.

As I wish particularly to discuss the events that followed the
creation of the Decemvirs in Rome, it seems to me not super-
fluous to narrate first all that happened in consequence of this
creation, and afterwards to discuss the more notable points ;
many of which are well worthy of careful reflection by those
who wish to maintain the liberty of a republic, as well as those
who desire to suppress it. For we shall see in this discussion
many errors committed by the Senate, as well as by the people,
prejudicial to liberty; and many errors committed by Appius,
chief of the Decemvirate detrimental to that tyranny which he
intended to have established in Rome. After many contentions
between the people and the nobles respecting the adoption of
new laws in Rome, by which the liberty of the state should be
firmly established, it was agreed to send Spurius Posthumus
with two other citizens to Athens for copies of the laws which
Solon had given to that city, so that they might model the new
Roman laws upon those. After their return to Rome a com-
mission had to be appointed for the examination and prepara-
tion of the new laws, and for this purpose ten citizens were
chosen for one year, amongst whom was Appius Claudius, a
sagacious but turbulent man. And in order that these might
make such laws irrespective of any other authority, they sup-
pressed all the other magistracies in Rome, and particularly the
Tribunes and the Consuls; the appeal to the people was also
suppressed, so that this new magistracy of ten became absolute
masters of Rome. Appius very soon absorbed all the authority
of his colleagues in himself by reason of his favor with the
people; for he had made himself so popular by his manners,
that it seemed a wonder how he could in so short a time have
acquired, as it were, a new nature and anew spirit, having until
then been regarded as a cruel persecutor of the people. The
Ten bore themselves very civilly and modestly, having but ten
lictors to walk before him whom they had elected to preside

Cuap. XL. ] TEN BOOKS OF JITUS LIVITUS. 183

over them; and although they had absolute authority, yet, when
they had occasion to punish a Roman citizen for homicide, they
cited him before the people and made them judge him.

These Decemvirs wrote their laws upon ten tablets, and be-
fore finally confirming them exposed them in public, in order
that they might be read and discussed by everybody, and that
they might learn whether the laws were in any way defective,
so that they might be amended before their final confirmation.
Hereupon Appius caused a rumor to be circulated throughout
Rome, that, if two more tablets were added to the ten, the laws
would be still more perfect, so that this opinion, generally
accredited, afforded the people the opportunity to reappoint the
Ten for another year, of which they readily availed, partly be-
cause it relieved them from renominating Consuls, and partly
because they hoped also to remain without Tribunes, who were
the judges of their causes, as has been said above. When it
was resolved, therefore, to reappoint the Ten, the whole nobility
strove to obtain these honors, and amongst the foremost was
Appius ; and such was his urbanity towards the people in asking
for it, that it began to excite suspicion amongst his colleagues,
‘‘for they could not possibly believe that there could be such
“spontaneous affability with so much natural arrogance and
“pride.” And as they feared to oppose him openly, they resolved
to do it by artifice; and although he was the youngest of them
all, they devolved upon him the authority to propose the future
Ten to the people, believing that he would observe the practice
of others to whom this confidence had been shown, and not
propose himself, which was regarded in Rome as an improper
and ignominious thing to do. “ But he, in fact, converted the
“impediment into his opportunity,’ and did not hesitate to
nominate himself as the very first, to the astonishment and
disgust of all the nobles; and then he nominated nine others to
suit himself. This renewal of the Decemvirs for another year
began to show to the people and the nobility the mistake they
had made. For Appius “quickly put an end to his assumed
“character” and began to display his innate arrogance; and in
the course of a few days he animated his colleagues with his
own spirit, and, for the purpose of intimidating the people and
the Senate, they employed, instead of twelve lictors, one hun-
dred and twenty. For some days the fear was general, and
very soon after they began to disregard the Senate and to beat

184 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Book I.

the people; and if any of them had been maltreated by one
Decemvir and appealed for redress to another, he was treated
worse on that appeal than he had been in the first instance; so
that the people, having become sensible of their error, began,
full of affliction, to look for help to the nobles, “there to catch a
“breath of liberty where before they had feared servitude, to
“avoid which they had brought the republic to this condition.”
To the nobles this affliction of the people was welcome, for they
hoped that, “wearied of the existing state of things, they would
‘themselves come to desire the re-establishment of the Consuls.”
The last days of the year now had come, and the additional
two tables of the laws were made, but not yet published. The
Decemvirs took occasion thence to continue the exercise of their
office, and began to use violence in order to retain the govern-
ment, and to make the young nobles their satellites, upon
whom they bestowed the possessions of those whom they con-
demned; “by which gifts these youths were corrupted, so as
“to prefer their own license to the general liberty.” °

It happened at this time that the Sabines and Volscians
began a war against the Romans; the apprehension of which
made the Decemvirs sensible of the weakness of their govern-
ment, for without the Senate they could not make war, and to
assemble it seemed to them the loss of their authority. Com-
pelled by necessity, however, they resolved upon doing so, and
having assembled the Senate, many of the Senators, and par-
ticularly Valerius and Horatius, spoke strongly against the
arrogance of the Ten; and their authority would have been
entirely destroyed had it not been that the Senate, on account
of the jealousy of the people, was unwilling to display its au-
thority; thinking that, if the Decemvirs resigned their office
voluntarily, the Tribunes of the people might possibly be re-
established. ‘They resolved, therefore, upon the war, and two
armies were put into the field, commanded in part by the De-
cemvirs. Appius remained in Rome to conduct the govern-
ment of the city; it was then that he became enamored of
Virginia, and on his attempting to carry her off by force, her
father Virginius killed her to save her from her ravisher. This
provoked violent disturbances in Rome and in the army, who,
having been joined by the people of Rome, marched to the
Mons Sacer, where they remained until the Decemvirs abdi-
cated their magistracy, and the Consuls and Tribunes were re-

Cuap. XL. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 185

established, and Rome was restored to its ancient liberty and
form of government.

Here we must note that the necessity of creating the tyranny
of the Decemvirs in Rome arose from the same causes that
generally produce tyrannies in cities; that is to say, the too
great desire of the people to be free, and the equally too great
desire of the nobles to dominate. And if the two parties do
not agree to secure liberty by law, and cither the one or the
other throws all its influence in favor of one man, then a tyr-
anny is the natural result. The people and the nobles of Rome
agreed to create the Decemvirs, and to endow them with such
great powers, from the desire which the one party had to de-
stroy the consular office, and the other that of the Tribunes.
Having created the Ten, it seemed to the people that Appius
had come over to them and would aid them to keep the nobility
down, and therefore they supported him. Now when a people
goes so far as to commit the error of giving power to one
man so that he may defeat those whom they hate, and if this
man be shrewd, it will always end in his becoming their ty-
rant. For with the support of the people he will be enabled to
destroy the nobility, and after these are crushed he will not
fail in turn to crush the people; and by the time that they
become sensible of their own enslavement, they will have no
one to look to for succor. This is the course which all those
have followed who have imposed tyrannies upon republics.
And if Appius had done the same, his despotism would have
had more vitality, and would not have been overthrown so
quickly ; but he did exactly the reverse, and could not have
acted with more imprudence. For to hold his despotic au-
thority he made himself the enemy of those who had given it
to him, and who could have maintained him in it; and he
equally made himself the friend of those who had in no way
contributed to it, and who could do nothing to keep him in it;
and he ruined those who were his friends, and sought to make
those his friends who never could become so. For although it
is the nature of the nobility to desire to dominate, yet those
who have no share in such domination are the enemies of the
tyrant, who can never win them all over to him, because of
their extreme ambition and avarice, which are so great that
the tyrant can never have riches and honors enough to bestow
to satisfy them all. And thus Appius, in abandoning the

186 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

people and allying himself with the nobles, committed a mani-
fest error, both for the reasons above stated, and because, to
hold a government by violence, it is necessary that the op-
pressor should be more powerful than the oppressed. Whence
it is that those tyrants who have the masses for friends and
the nobles for enemies are more secure in the possession of
their power, because their despotism is sustained by a greater
force than that of those who have the people for their enemies
and the nobles for their friends. For with the support of the
people his internal forces suffice to sustain him, as was the
ease with Nabis, the tyrant of Sparta, when he was assailed by
all Greece and the Romans; he made sure of the few nobles,
and having the people his friends he succeeded in defending
himself by their aid, which he never would have been able to
do had the people been hostile to him. But the internal forces
of the other class, being but few in numbers, are insufficient to
maintain him, and therefore it becomes necessary to look for
support elsewhere; and this may be of three different kinds.
One is to have a body guard composed of foreigners; another
is to arm the people of the country, and have them serve in
place of the people of the city; and the third is to form an
alliance with powerful neighbors able to defend you. By care-
fully employing these means a tyrant may still be able to
maintain himself, notwithstanding that the people are opposed
to him. But Appius could not arm the country people for his
support, the country and city of Rome being one and the same
thing; and what he might have done he knew not how to do,
and so his power was lost at the very outset. Both the Senate
and the people of Rome committed the greatest errors in the
creation of the Decemvirate; and although we have main-
tained, in speaking of the Dictator, that only self-constituted
authorities, and never those created by the people, are danger-
ous to liberty, yet when the people do create a magistracy, they
should do it in such a way that the magistrates should have
some hesitation before they abuse their powers. But the peo-
ple of Rome, instead of establishing checks to prevent the
Decemvirs from employing their authority for evil, removed
all control, and made the Ten the only magistracy in Rome;
abrogating all the others, because of the excessive eagerness of
the Senate to get rid of the Tribunes, and that of the people to
destroy the consulate. This blinded them so that both con-

Cuar. XLI.] TEN. BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 187

tributed to provoke the disorders that resulted from the Decem-
virate. “For,” as King Ferdinand said, “men often act like
‘certain small birds of prey, who, prompted by their nature,
“pursue their victims so eagerly that they do not see the larger
“bird above them, ready to pounce down upon and kill them.”

This discourse, as we proposed in the beginning, will have
shown the error which the Roman people committed in their
efforts to save their liberty, as well as the error of Appius in
attempting to seize despotic powers.

CHAPTER XII.

IT IS IMPRUDENT AND UNPROFITABLE SUDDENLY TO CHANGE FROM
HUMILITY TO PRIDE, AND FROM GENTLENESS TO CRUELTY.

BESIDES the other errors committed by Appius in attempting
to maintain his tyranny, that of changing too suddenly from
one quality to the extreme opposite was of no little moment.
Although his astuteness in deceiving the people by simulating
to be of their party was well employed, and equally so the
means he used to bring about the reappointment of the Ten, as
well as his audacity in nominating himself, contrary to the
expectations of the nobles, and in naming colleagues to suit his
own purposes; yet it was very ill-judged in him suddenly to
change his character, and from having been a friend of the
people, all at once to show himself their enemy, — from being
humane to become haughty, and from being easy of access to
become difficult, —and to do this so suddenly and without ex-
cuse that everybody could see the falseness of his soul. For he
who for a time has seemed good, and for purposes of his own
wants to become bad, should do it gradually, and should seem
to be brought to it by the force of circumstances; so that, before
his changed nature deprives him of his former friends, he may
have gained new ones, and that his authority may not be di-
minished by the change. Otherwise his deception will be dis-
covered, and he will lose his friends and be ruined.

188 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

CHAPTER XLII.
HOW EASILY MEN MAY BE CORRUPTED.

In connection with this matter of the Decemvirate, we should
notice also how easily men are corrupted and become wicked,
although originally good and well educated. This may be ob-
served in those young nobles whom Appius had chosen for his
followers, and who, for the small advantages they derived from
it, became supporters of his tyranny; also in Quintus Fabius,
one of the second Decemvirate, who, having been one of the
best of men, but blinded by a little ambition and seduced by
the villany of Appius, changed his good habits into the worst,
and became like Appius himself. Al this, if carefully studied
by the legislators of republics and monarchies, will make them
more prompt in restraining the passions of men, and depriving
them of all hopes of being able to do wrong with impunity.

CHAPTER XLITI.

THOSE ONLY WHO COMBAT FOR THEIR OWN GLORY ARE GOOD AND
LOYAL SOLDIERS.

WE will consider in this chapter how great a difference there
is between an army that is well disposed, and which fights for
its own glory, and one that is ill disposed, and has to fight only
for the ambition of another; for whilst the Roman armies were
habitually victorious under the Consuls, they were invariably
beaten under the Decemvirs. This example in part explains
the reasons of the uselessness of mercenary troops, who have
nothing to make them fight but the small stipend they receive,
which is not and cannot be sufficient to make them loyal, or
so devoted as to be willing to die for you. For armies that
have no such affection towards him for whom they fight as to
make them his partisans, will never have bravery enough to
resist an enemy who has the least courage. And as this love
and devotion can only be found in your own subjects, it is
necessary for the purpose of holding a government, or to main-

Cuar. XLIV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 189

tain a republic or kingdom, to have your army composed of
your own subjects, as will be seen to have been done by all
those whose armies have achieved great successes. The Ro-
man armies under the Decemvirs had the same courage as
before, but they had not the same disposition, and therefore did
not achieve the customary good results. But so soon as the
rule of the: Decemvirs had been destroyed, and the armies be-
gan again to fight as freemen, they became animated by their
ancient spirit, and consequently their enterprises resulted hap-
pily, as of old.

CHAPTER XLIV.

A MULTITUDE WITHOUT A CHIEF IS USELESS; AND IT IS NOT WELL
TO THREATEN BEFORE HAVING THE POWER TO ACT.

Tue death of Virginia had caused the Roman people to
retire, armed, to the Mons Sacer. The Senate sent ambassa-
dors to them to ask by what authority they had abandoned
their captains and retired to the mountains, and so _ highly
was the authority of the Senate respected, that, the people
being without a chief, no one dared to answer; as Titus Livius
says, ‘not for want of plenty to say in reply, but because they
“lacked some one to make the answer for them”; which is a
case in point showing the uselessness of a multitude without a
head. Virginius perceived this difficulty, and by his order they
appointed twenty military Tribunes to act as their chiefs, to
answer for them and to confer with the Senate. They de-
manded that the Senators Valerius and Horatius should be
sent to them, and that they would make known their will to
them. But these Senators would not go until after the Ten
had resigned their magistracy ; after which, having arrived at
the Mons Sacer, where the people were, these demanded of
them the re-establishment of the Tribunes of the people, and
that no magistrates should be appointed without an appeal to
the people; and, furthermore, that all the Decemvirs should
be delivered up to them, as they wanted to burn them alive.
Valerius and Horatius approved of their first demands, but ob-
jected to the latter as impious, saying, “ You condemn cruelty,

190 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Book I.

‘and fall into the same crime yourselves”; and advised them
to say nothing about the Decemvirs, as they themselves would
see that their office and authority should be taken from them,
and that the people afterwards would not lack opportunity to
satisfy their vengeance. From this we plainly see the folly and
imprudence of demanding a thing, and saying beforehand that
it is intended to be used for evil; and that one should never
show one’s intentions, but endeavor to obtain one’s desires any-
how. For it is enough to ask a man to give up his arms, with-
out telling him that you intend killing him with them ; after
you have the arms in hand, then'you can do your will with
them.

CHAPTER XLY.

IT IS A BAD EXAMPLE NOT TO OBSERVE THE LAWS, ESPECIALLY
ON THE PART OF THOSE WHO HAVE MADE THEM; AND IT IS
DANGEROUS FOR THOSE WHO GOVERN CITIES TO HARASS THE
PEOPLE WITH CONSTANT WRONGS.

THE agreement between the Senate and the people having
been carried into effect, and Rome restored to her ancient
form of government, Virginius cited Appius before the peo-
ple to defend his cause. He appeared accompanied by many
nobles. Virginius insisted upon his being imprisoned, where-
upon Appius loudly demanded to appeal to the people.  Vir-
ginius maintained that he was unworthy of the privilege of
that appeal, which he had himself destroyed, and not entitled
to have for his defenders the very people whom he _ had
offended. Appius replied that the people had no right to
violate that appeal which they themselves had instituted with
so much jealousy. But he was nevertheless incarcerated, and
before the day of judgment came he committed suicide. And
although the crimes of Appius merited the highest degree of
punishment, yet it was inconsistent with a proper regard for
liberty to violate the law, and especially one so recently made.
For | think that there can be no worse example in a republic
than to make a law and not to observe it; the more so when
it is disregarded by the very parties who made it.

In the year 1494 Florence had reformed its government with

Cuap. XLV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. io

the aid of Brother Girolamo Savonarola (whose writings exhibit
so much learning, prudence, and courage); and amongst other
provisions for the security of the citizens a law had been made
which permitted an appeal to the people from the decisions
which the Council of Hight and the Signoria might render in
cases affecting the state, which had involved great discussions
and difficulties in its passage. It happened that shortly after
its confirmation five citizens were condemned to death by the
Signoria on account of crimes against the state; and when
these men wished to appeal to the people, they were not
allowed to do so, in manifest disregard of the law. This
occurrence did more than anything else to diminish the influ-
ence of Savonarola; for if the appeal was useful, then the
law should have been observed, and if it was not useful, then it
should never have been made. And this circumstance was
the more remarked, as Brother Girolamo in his many subse-
quent preachings never condemned those who had broken the
law, and rather excused the act in the manner of one unwill-
ing to condemn what suited his purposes, yet unable to excuse
it wholly. Having thus manifested his ambitious and partial
spirit, it cost him his reputation and much trouble.

A government also does great wrong constantly to excite
the resentment of its subjects by fresh injuries to this or that
individual amongst them. This was the case after the Decem-
virate, for all the Ten and many other citizens were at different
times accused and condemned, so as to create the greatest alarm
amongst the nobles, for it seemed as though these condemna-
tions would never cease until the entire nobility should have
been destroyed. All this would have produced the worst ef-
fects if the Tribune Marcus Duellius had not prevented it by
issuing an edict that for the period of one year no one should
be allowed to cite or accuse a Roman citizen, and this re-
assured the whole nobility. These examples show how dan-
gerous it is for a republic or a prince to keep the minds of
their subjects in a state of apprehension by pains and penalties
constantly suspended over their heads. And certainly no more
pernicious course could be pursued; for men who are kept in
doubt and uncertainty as to their lives will resort to every
kind of measure to secure themselves against danger, and will
necessarily become more audacious and inclined to violent
changes. It is important, therefore, cither never to attack

192 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

any one, or to inflict punishment by a single act of rigor, and
afterwards to reassure the public mind by such acts as will
restore calmness and confidence.

CHAPTER XLVI.

MEN RISE FROM ONE AMBITION TO ANOTHER: FIRST, THEY SEEK
TO SECURE THEMSELVES AGAINST ATTACK, AND THEN THEY
ATTACK OTHERS.

THE people of Rome, having recovered their liberty, resumed
their original rank in the state, and obtained even more influ-
ence than before by means of a number of laws that confirmed
their power. It seemed reasonable, therefore, that Rome should
now enjoy a period of quiet. But experience proved the con-
trary, for every day there were new dissensions and disorders.
As Titus Livius has most judiciously given the causes that
produced these, it seems to me proper to quote his own words,
where he says: “The pride of the people or of the nobles
‘always increased as the opposite party was humbled; when
“the people kept within proper bounds, the young nobles began
“to insult them, and the Tribunes could do little to prevent it,
“being themselves outraged. The nobles, on the other hand,
“although they felt that their young men were too insolent,
“vet, seeing that the restraints imposed by law could not be
“observed, preferred that they should be transgressed by their
“own party rather than by the people. And thus the desire of
“liberty caused one party to raise themselves in proportion as
“they oppressed the other. And it is the course of such move-
“ments that men, in attempting to avoid fear themselves, give
“others cause for fear; and the injuries which they ward off
“from themselves they inflict upon others, as though there were
“a necessity either to oppress or to be oppressed.” In this we
see one of the modes in which republics are brought to ruin, and
how men rise from one ambition to another; and we recognize
the truth of the sentence which Sallust puts into the mouth
of Cesar, “that all evil examples have their origin in good
“beginnings.” The ambitious citizens of a republic seeck- in
the first instance (as we have said above) to make themselves

Cor XUVIL|> SEN BOOKS OF TITUS EIVIUS. 193

sure against the attacks, not only of individuals, but even of
the magistrates. To enable them to do this, they seek to gain
friends, either by apparently honest ways, or by assisting men
with money, or by defending them against the powerful; and
as this seems virtuous, almost everybody is readily deceived by
it, and therefore no one opposes it, until the ambitious indi-
vidual has, without hindrance, grown so powerful that private
citzens fear him and the magistrates treat him with considera-
tion. And when he has risen to that point, no one at the begin-
ning having interfered with his greatness, it becomes in the end
most dangerous to attempt to put him down, for the reasons I
have given above when speaking of the danger of trying to
abate an evil that has already attained a considerable growth
in a city; so that in the end the matter is reduced to this, that
you must endeavor to destroy the evil at the risk of sudden
ruin, or, by allowing it to go on, submit to manifest servitude,
unless the death of the individual or some other accident inter-
venes to rid the state of him. For when it has once come to
that point that the citizens and the magistrates are afraid to
offend him and his adherents, it will afterwards not require
much effort on his part to make them render judgments and
attack persons according to his will. For this reason republics
should make it one of their aims to watch that none of their
citizens should be allowed to do harm on pretence of doing good,
and that no one should acquire an influence that would injure
instead of promoting liberty; of which we shall speak more at
length in another place.

CHAPTER XLY 1.

ALTHOUGH MEN ARE APT TO DECEIVE THEMSELVES IN GENERAL
MATTERS, YET THEY RARELY DO SO IN PARTICULARS.

THE people of Rome, as has been related above, having be-
come disgusted with the name of Consul, wanted either to have
the Consuls chosen from amongst the plebeians, or that their
powers should be limited. The nobility, unwilling to discredit
the consular dignity by either of such changes, took a middle
course, and consented that four Tribunes should be created,

VOL. II. 13

eee en ——__—___

194 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Book I.

with consular powers, who might be taken either from the
nobles or the plebeians. This satisfied the people, as it seemed
to destroy the consulate, and to give them a share in the highest
magistracy. This gave rise toa remarkable case; for when the
election of these Tribunes came on, and the people might have
elected all plebeians, they chose, instead, all from the patri-
cians, whence Titus Livius says: “The result of this election
“teaches us how different minds are during the contentions
“for liberty and for honors, from what they are when they have
“to give an impartial judgment after the contest is over.” In
examining whence this difference arises, I believe that it comes
from this, that men are apt to deceive themselves upon general
matters, but not so much so when they come to particulars.
As a general thing, the Roman people believed themselves
entitled to the consulate, being the majority in the city, and
having to bear more of the dangers of war, and as it was the
vigor of their arms that preserved the liberty of Rome and
established its power. And (as I have said) as their desire
seemed to them reasonable, they were resolved to obtain it by
any means. But when they had to judge of the particular
qualifications of their individual candidates, they discovered
their unfitness, and therefore decided that not one of them was
worthy of that dignity, to which as a body they considered
themselves entitled. Thus ashamed of their own candidates,
they had recourse to those whom they deemed worthy of the
office. ‘Titus Livius, naturally admiring this decision, says:
“ Where will you find nowadays this modesty and equity, this
“loftiness of soul, whch in those days pervaded the whole
“ neople ?”

In corroboration of this example we may adduce another
notable one which occurred in Capua, after Hannibal had de-
feated the Romans at Cannze. Whilst all Italy rose up in
consequence of this defeat, Capua still remained in a state of
insubordination, because of the hatred that existed between the
people and the Senate. Pacovius Calanus being at that time
one of the supreme magistrates, and foreseeing the dangers that
would result from the disorders in that city, resolved by means
of the authority of his office to try and reconcile the people and
the Senate; with this purpose he caused the Senate to be
assembled, and stated to them the animosity which the people
felt towards them, and the danger to which they were exposed

Crp XLVI) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVrus. 195

of being massacred by them if the city were given up to Hanni-
bal in consequence of the defeat of the Romans. He then added,
that, if they would leave it to him to manage the matter, he
would find means of restoring harmony between the two orders;
but that, for this purpose, he would shut them up in their palace,
and by seemingly putting them into the power of the people he
would save them. The Senators yielded to his suggestion ;
whereupon Pacovius shut the Senate up in their palace, and
then assembled the people and said to them that “the time had
“ arrived when they might subdue the pride of the nobles and
“revenge themselves for the injuries received at their hands,
“and that he held the Senate shut up in their palace for this
“purpose. But believing that they would be unwilling to allow
“the city to be without a government, it would be necessary,
“before killing the old Senators, to choose new ones; and that
“therefore he had put the names of all the Senators into an
“urn, and would proceed to draw them in their presence, and
“that one after another those who were drawn should die, after
“their successors had been elected.” And ‘when the first was
drawn and his name proclaimed the people raised a great noise,
calling him proud, arrogant, and cruel; but when Pacovius
asked them to choose another in his place, the whole assembly
became quiet, and after a little time one was named by the
people; but at the mention of his name some began to whistle,
some to laugh, some to speak ill of him in one way, and some
in another; and thus, one after another, those that were named
were pronounced by them unworthy of the senatorial dignity,
so that Pacovius took occasion to speak to them as follows:
“ Since you are of the opinion that the city would fare ill with-
“out a Senate, and as you cannot agree upon the successors
“of the old Senators, it seems to me it would be well for you to
“become reconciled with the present Senate, for the fear to
“which they have been subjected has in great measure hum-
“bled them, and you will now find in them that humanity
“which you in vain look for elsewhere.” This suggestion pre-
vailed, and a reconciliation between the two orders followed,
and the people, when they came to act upon particulars, dis-
covered the error into which they had fallen in looking at the
subject in general. |

After the expulsion in 1414 of the principal citizens from
Florence, there being no regular government, but rather a cer-

196 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boor I.

tain ambitious license, so that things were going from worse to
worse, many of the popular party, seeing the ruin of the city,
and not comprehending the cause of it, attributed it to a few
powerful citizens, who fomented these disorders so as to enable
them to make a government to suit themselves, and to deprive
them of their liberty. They went through the Loggia and pub-
lic places speaking against those prominent citizens, and threat-
ening that, if ever they should themselves become members of
the Signoria, they would unveil their deceitful practices, and
would punish them for it. It happened in several instances
that these citizens did attain to the highest magistracy, and
when they had risen to that place, and were enabled to see
matters more closely, they discovered the real causes of the
disorders, and the dangers that threatened the state, as well as
the difficulty of remedying them. And seeing that the times,
and not the men, caused the disorders, they promptly changed
their opinions and actions, because the knowledge of things in
particular had removed from their minds that delusion into
which they had fallen by looking at things in general. So that
those who at first had heard them speak whilst they were still
private citizens, and afterwards saw them remain inactive when
they had risen to the supreme magistracy, believed that this
was caused, not by the real knowledge of things, but by their
having been perverted and corrupted by the great. And as this
happened with many, and repeatedly, it gave rise to a saying,
“That these people have one mind in the public places, and
“another mind in the palace.” Reflecting now upon all that
has been said, we sce that the quickest way of opening the eyes
of the people is to find the means of making them descend to
particulars, seeing that to look at things only in a general way
deceives them; as Pacovius did with regard to Capua and the
Roman Senate. I believe also that we may conclude from it
that no wise man should ever disregard the popular judgment
upon particular matters, such as the distribution of honors and
dignities; for in these things the people never deceive them-
selves, or, if they do, it is much less frequently than a small
body would do, who had been especially charged with such
distributions. Nor does it seem to me superfluous to show
in the following chapter the course which the Senate took to
deceive the people in the distributions that devolved upon
them.

Gar, XIX) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS JIVIUS. 197

CHAPTER XLVIII.

ONE OF THE MEANS OF PREVENTING AN IMPORTANT MAGISTRACY
FROM BEING CONFERRED UPON A VILE AND WICKED INDIVIDUAL
IS TO HAVE IT APPLIED FOR BY ONE STILL MORE VILE AND
WICKED, OR BY THE MOST NOBLE AND DESERVING IN THE
STATE.

WHEN the Roman Senate apprehended lest the Tribunes with
consular powers should be taken from amongst the plebeians,
they adopted one of the two following methods: either they
caused the most distinguished and influential men of Rome to
become candidates, or by suitable means they bribed some of
the most sordid and ignoble to come forward as candidates at
the same time with the better quality of plebeians, who usually
asked for these offices. This latter course caused the people to
be ashamed of bestowing them upon such candidates, and the
former course made them ashamed to refuse them to such hon-
orable citizens. All of which corroborates what I have main-
tained in the preceding chapter, that in general matters the
people are apt to deceive themselves, but rarely in particulars.

CHAPTER XLIX.

IF CITIES WHICH FROM THEIR BEGINNING HAVE ENJOYED LIBERTY,
LIKE ROME, HAVE FOUND DIFFICULTIES IN DEVISING LAWS THAT
WOULD PRESERVE THEIR LIBERTIES, THOSE THAT HAVE HAD
THEIR ORIGIN IN SERVITUDE FIND IT IMPOSSIBLE TO SUCCEED IN
MAKING SUCH LAWS.

THE progress of the Roman republic demonstrates how dif-
ficult it is in the constitution of a republic to provide necessary
laws for the maintenance of liberty ; for notwithstanding the
many laws established, first by Romulus, and afterwards by
Numa, by Tullus Hostilius, and by Servius, and finally by the
Decemvirs created for that purpose, yet fresh necessities con-
stantly developed themselves in the management of the affairs
of that city, which made it indispensable to enact new laws.

198 ‘DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

This was the case when they instituted the Censorship, which
was one of the most important provisions that helped to pre-
serve the liberties of Rome, so long as liberty existed there.
For the Censors being the supreme arbiters of the manners and
customs of the Romans, they became the most potent instru-
ment in retarding the progress of corruption in Rome. But
it was a serious mistake to create these Censors for a term of
five years, although it was corrected after a brief time by the
prudence of the Dictator Mamercus, who by a new law reduced
the term of office of that new magistracy to eighteen months;
which so irritated the Censors then in office that they deprived
Mamercus of the right of entrance into the Senate, which act was
much blamed by the people as well as by the patricians. And
as history does not inform us whether Mamercus had any rem-
edy against this, we must assume either that history is defective
upon this point, or that the Roman laws in that respect were not
good; for it is not well that a republic should be constituted in
such fashion that a citizen can be oppressed without recourse
for having promulgated a law for the benefit of liberty.

But to return to our subject, I say that the institution of
this new magistracy gives rise to the reflection, that if a city,
which from its origin has enjoyed liberty but has of itself
become corrupt, has great difficulties in devising good laws for
the maintenance of liberty, it is not to be wondered at if a city
that had its origin in servitude finds it, not only difficult, but
actually impossible, ever to organize a government that will
secure its liberty and tranquillity. This, as will be seen, was
the case with the city of Florence, which from her first begin-
ning had been subjected to the Roman Empire, and, having
always existed under a forcign government, remained for a
long time in this subject condition without ever attempting to
free herself. And when afterwards the opportunity occurred
for her to gain her liberty in a measure, she began by making a
constitution that was a mixture of her old and bad institutions
with new ones, and consequently could not be good. And
thus she has gone on for the two hundred years of which we
have any reliable account, without ever having a government
that could really be called a republic. The difficulties which
Florence experienced have ever been the same in those cities
whose origin was similar to hers. And although Florence
repeatedly gave ample authority, by public and free suffrage, to

Gus. XLIX.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 199

a few of her citizens to reform the government, yet these never
organized it for the general good, but always with the view of
benefiting their own party, which, instead of establishing order
in the city, only tended to increase the disorders. And to illus-
trate my argument by some particular instance, I will observe
that one of the most important points to be considered by him
who wishes to establish a republic is the question in whose
hands he shall place the power over the life and death of its
citizens. The constitution of Rome was excellent upon this
point, for there an appeal to the people was the ordinary prac-
tice, and when an important case occurred, where it would have
been perilous to delay execution by such an appeal, they had re-
course to the Dictator, who had the right of immediate execu-
tion ; this, however, was resorted to only in cases of extreme
necessity. But in Florence, and in other cities who like her had
their origin in servitude, the power of life and death was lodged
in the hands of a stranger, sent by the prince to exercise that
power. When these cities afterwards became free, they left
that power in the hands of a foreigner, whom they called “ the
Captain.” But the facility with which he could be corrupted by
the powerful citizens made this a most pernicious system; and
in the course of the mutations of their governments that sys-
tem was changed, and a council of eight citizens was appointed
to perform the functions of the Captain; which only made mat-
ters worse, for the reason which we have given elsewhere, that
a tribunal of a few is always under the control of a few pow-
erful citizens.

Venice knew well how to guard against such an abuse. There
the Council of Ten had power to punish any citizen without
appeal; but as this number would have been insufficient to
punish the powerful, although they had the authority, they
established the Council of Forty. Moreover the Council of the
Pregadi (which is the highest council) had the power of capital
punishment. So that where there was an occasion there was
also not wanting a tribunal capable of keeping the most power-
fulin check. It is no wonder, then, — seeing that even in Rome,
where the laws had been made by herself with the aid of her
most sagacious citizens, every day fresh occasions arose that
made it necessary to have new laws for the protection of
liberty, — that in other cities whose beginnings were vicious
such difficulties should present themselves as made a proper
organization impossible.

200 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

CHAPTER L.

NO COUNCIL OR MAGISTRATE SHOULD HAVE IT IN THEIR POWER
TO STOP THE PUBLIC BUSINESS OF A CITY.

WHEN Quintius Cincinnatus and Julius Mentus were Consuls
of Rome, a disagreement arose between them, which caused an
interruption of all the public business of the state. When this
came to the knowledge of the Senate, they advised the creation
of a Dictator, who might do what the discord between the Con-
suls had prevented them from doing. But the Consuls, dis-
agreeing upon every other matter, agreed only in this one
thing, — not to appoint a Dictator. So that the Senate, having
no alternative, had recourse to the assistance of the Tribunes,
who together with the Senate forced the Consuls to obedience.
Whence we should note, in the first instance, the usefulness of
the tribunate, which served not only to restrain the violence of
the nobles against the people, but also against each other; and,
secondly, that the institutions of a city never should place it in
the power of a few to interrupt all the important business of
the republic. For instance, if you give to a council authority
to distribute honors and offices, or devolve upon any magis-
tracy the administration of a certain business, it is proper to
impose upon them either the necessity of doing it under all
circumstances, or to provide that, in case of their not doing it
themselves, it can and shall be done by some one else; other-
wise, the constitution would be defective upon this point, and
likely to involve the state in great dangers, as we have seen
would have been the case in Rome, if they could not have
opposed the authority of the Tribunes to the obstinacy of the
Consuls.

In the republic of Venice the Grand Council distributed the
honors and the offices; it happened several times that this
body, from discontent or some erroneous suggestions, did not
appoint successors to the magistrates of the city or of the
provinces. This caused the greatest possible disorders, for all
of a sudden both the city and its subject provinces lacked their
legitimate judges; nor could they obtain anything if the ma-
jority of the council was not either satisfied or deceived. And
this inconvenience would have led to the worst consequences

<—

Cuap. LI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 201

for the city, if the prudent citizens had not provided against it,
by availing of the first convenient occasion to make a law that
all the public functionaries in the city and in the provinces
should never vacate their offices until their successors had
been elected and were ready to fill their places. And thus
they deprived the Grand Council of the power to expose the
republic to great dangers by arresting all public business.

CHAPTER LI.

A REPUBLIC OR A PRINCE MUST FEIGN TO DO OF THEIR OWN
LIBERALITY THAT TO WHICH NECESSITY COMPELS THEM.

PRUDENT men make the best of circumstances in their actions,
and, although constrained by necessity to a certain course, make
it appear as if done from their own liberality. This discretion
was wisely used by the Roman Senate when they resolved to
pay the soldiery out of the public treasury, who before had been
obliged to maintain themselves. But as the Senate perceived
that war could not be carried on for a length of time in this
manner, as they could neither lay siege to places nor move ar-
mies to a distance, and judging it necessary to be able to do
both, they resolved to pay them from the public funds; yet they
did it in such a manner as to gain credit for that to which neces-
sity compelled them; and this favor was so acceptable to the
populace that Rome was wild with joy, thinking it a great bene-
fit, which they had never expected and would not have sought
themselves. And although the Tribunes endeavored to expose
this delusion, showing that it made the burden of the people
heavier instead of easier, still they could not prevent its accept-
ance by the people. This burden was further increased by the
manner in which the Senate levied the taxes, imposing the
heaviest and largest upon the nobility, and requiring them to
pay first of all.

BS
SS
bo

DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox I.

CHAPTER LIL.

THERE IS NO SURER AND LESS OBJECTIONABLE MODE OF RE-
PRESSING THE INSOLENCE OF AN INDIVIDUAL AMBITIOUS OF
POWER, WHO ARISES IN A REPUBLIC, THAN TO FORESTALL HIM
IN THE WAYS BY WHICH HE EXPECTS TO ARRIVE AT THAT
POWER.

We have seen in the preceding chapter how much credit the
patricians gained with the people of Rome by the apparent
benefit bestowed upon them, both by the pay granted to the
soldiers as well as by the manner of distributing the imposts.
If the nobility had understood how to maintain this feeling,
all causes for further disturbances would have been removed,
and the Tribunes would have lost the influence which they had
over the people of Rome. For in truth there is no better nor
easier mode in republics, and especially in such as are corrupt,
for successfully opposing the ambition of any citizen, than to
occupy in advance of him those ways by which he expects to
attain the rank he aims at. If this mode had been employed
by the adversaries of Cosimo de’ Medici, it would have been
much better than to expel him from Florence; for if they
had adopted his plan of favoring the people, they would have
succeeded without any disturbances or violence in depriving
him of the weapons which he himself employed with so much
skill.

Pietro Soderini had obtained great influence in the city of
Florence by no other means than by gaining the good will of
the people, which gave him the reputation of being a great
friend of liberty; it would have been a much easier and more
honest way for those who envied his reputation and influence,
as well as less hazardous for themselves and less injurious to
the city, to have forestalled him in the ways by which he gained
his power, rather than to oppose him in such manner as to
involve in his destruction also the ruin of the whole republic.
For if they had taken from his hands the weapon that gave
him his strength, (which might easily have been done,) they
could have opposed him boldly and without suspicion in all the
councils and public assemblies. It may be said, perhaps, that
if those citizens who hated Pietro committed an error in leay-

Cuap. LIT.] TEN BOOKS? Or JITUS-2IVIUs. 2038

ing him the means of gaining such influence with the people,
Pietro himself erred in turn in not seizing in advance the
means which his adversaries employed to make him feared as
a dangerous man; which was excusable, however, in Soderini,
as it would have been difficult for him to have done so, nor
would it have been honest in him, for the means employed
against him consisted merely in favoring the Medici. It was
in that way that his enemies attacked and finally ruined him.
Pietro could not therefore in honesty have adopted a course by
which through his influence he would have destroyed that lib-
erty of which he was considered the especial guardian. Such
a change to the side of the Medici on the part of Soderini
could not have been made suddenly, nor could it have been
kept secret. And the very moment that it should have been
discovered that he had become friendly to the Medici, he would
have become suspect and odious to the people, and would thus
have afforded his enemies much better opportunity for destroy-
ing him than they had had previously.

Before deciding upon any course, therefore, men should well
consider the objections and dangers which it presents ; and if
its perils exceed its advantages, they should avoid it, even
though it had been in accordance with their previous determi-
nation; for to do otherwise would expose them to a similar
experience as that of Cicero, who, wishing to destroy the credit
and power of Mark Antony, only increased it. For Antony,
having been declared an enemy of the Senate, had collected a
large army, composed in great part of soldiers who had served
under Cesar; Cicero wishing to withdraw these soldiers from
him, advised the Senate to employ Octavian, and to send him
with the army and the Consuls against Antony, alleging that
so soon as the soldiers of Antony should hear the name of
Octavian, the nephew of Cesar, and who had himself called
Cesar, they would leave the former and join Octavian; and
that Antony, thus bereft of support, would easily be crushed.
But it resulted just the other way, for Antony managed to
win Octavian over to himself, who, abandoning Cicero and the
Senate, allied himself with the former, which brought about
the complete ruin of the party of the patricians. This might
easily have been foreseen, and therefore they should not have
followed the advice of Cicero, but should have borne in mind
the name and character of him who had vanquished his ene-

204 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I.

mies with so much glory, and seized for himself the sovereignty
of Rome; and then they might have known that they could not
expect from his adherents anything favorable to liberty.

CHAPTER LIIL.

HOW BY THE DELUSIONS OF SEEMING GOOD THE PEOPLE ARE
OFTEN MISLED TO DESIRE THEIR OWN RUIN; AND HOW THEY
ARE FREQUENTLY INFLUENCED BY GREAT HOPES AND BRAVE
PROMISES.

Arter the capture of the city of the Veienti, the Roman
people became possessed of the idea that it would be advanta-
geous for the city of Rome if one half of its inhabitants were
to go and settle at Veli; arguing that, inasmuch as that city
was rich in lands and houses and near to Rome, one half of the
Roman citizens might thus enrich themselves without in any
way disturbing by their proximity the public affairs of Rome.
This project seemed to the Senate and the most sagacious men
of Rome useless, and fraught with danger, so much so that
they declared openly that they would rather suffer death than
give their consent. When the subject came to be discussed, the
people became so much excited against the Senate that it would
have led to violence and bloodshed, had not the Senate sheltered
itself behind some of the oldest and most esteemed citizens,
the reverence for whom restrained the people from carrying
their insolence farther. Here we have to note two things; first,
that the people often, deceived by an illusive good, desire their
own ruin, and, unless they are made sensible of the evil of the
one and the benefit of the other course by some one in whom
they have confidence, they will expose the republic to infinite
peril and damage. And if it happens that the people have no
confidence in any one, as sometimes will be the case when they
have been deceived before by events or men, then it will in-
evitably lead to the ruin of the state. Dante says upon this
point in his discourse “On Monarchy,” that the people often
shout, “ Life to our death, and death to our life!” It is this
want of confidence on the part of the people that causes good
measures to be often rejected in republics, as we have related

Cuar. LIIL] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 205

above of the Venetians, who when attacked by so many enemies
could not make up their minds to conciliate some of them by
giving to them what they had taken from others; it was this
that brought the war upon them, and caused the other powers
to form a league against them before their final ruin.

If we consider now what is easy and what difficult to per-
suade a people to, we may make this distinction: either what
you wish to persuade them to represents at first sight gain
or loss, or it seems brave or cowardly. And if you propose
to them anything that upon its face seems profitable and cour-
ageous, though there be really a loss concealed under it which
may involve the ruin of the republic, the multitude will ever
be most easily persuaded to it. But if the measure proposed
seems doubtful and likely to cause loss, then it will be diffi-
cult to persuade the people to it, even though the benefit and
welfare of the republic were concealed under it. All this is
supported by numerous examples amongst the Romans as well
as strangers, and both in modern and in ancient times.

It was this that produced the unfavorable opinion in Rome
of Fabius Maximus, who could not persuade the people of
Rome that it would be advantageous for that republic to pro-
ceed slowly with the war, and to bear the assaults of Hannibal
without engaging in battle with him ; because the Roman peo-
ple considered this course as cowardly, and did not see the
advantages that would be gained by it, and Fabius had not
the faculty of demonstrating these to them. The people are
apt to be so blinded upon questions of courage that, although
the Roman people had committed the great error of giving au-
thority to the commander of the cavalry of the army of Fabius
to engage in battle contrary to the will of Fabius, so that the
Roman camp would have been broken up but for the prudence
of Fabius, which remedied the error; yet this experience did
not suffice them, for they subsequently made Varro Consul,
for no other reason than because he had proclaimed in all the
streets and public places of Rome that, if only authority were
given to him, he would cut Hannibal to pieces. This occa-
sioned the battle and defeat of Canne, and almost caused the
ruin of Rome. I will adduce another striking example upon
this point. Hannibal had been eight or ten years in Italy, and
had drenched the soil of the whole country with the blood of
the Romans, when there presented himself before the Senate

206 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I.

one M. Centenius Penula, a man of the vilest character, (al-
though he had held some command in the militia,) and offered,
if they would give him authority to collect an army of volun-
teers in whatever place in Italy he pleased, he would in the
least possible time deliver Hannibal dead or alive into their
hands. This proposition seemed most foolhardy to the Senate ;
nevertheless, fearing that, if they refused him and the proposi-
tion should afterwards become known to the people, it might
give rise to disturbances or Jealousy and ill feeling against the
senatorial order, they acceded to the request of Penula, prefer-
ring to expose all who might follow him to the greatest danger,
rather than run the risk of causing fresh discontents amongst
the people; well knowing how readily they would accept such
a-proposition, and how difficult it would be to dissuade them
from it. Centenius Penula therefore went with an unorganized
and undisciplined crowd to find Hannibal, and no sooner did
he mect him than himself and all his followers were routed
and cut to pieces.

In the city of Athens in Greece, Nicias, one of the most
wise and prudent of men, could not persuade the people that
it would not be well for them to make war upon Sicily; and
the Athenians resolved upon it, contrary to the advice of their
wisest men, and the ruin of Athens was the consequence.
When Scipio was made Consul, and wished to have the prov-
ince of Africa, he promised to all the destruction of Carthage ;
and when the Senate declined to accord him that province,
because of the adverse opinion of Fabius Maximus, he threat-
ened to bring the matter before the people, well knowing that
similar propositions always find favor with the people.

We may also cite on this point some examples drawn from
the history of our own city of Florence. Messer Ercole Benti-
vogli, commander of the Florentine troops, and Antonio Gia-
comini, after having defeated Bartolommeo d’ Alviano at San
Vincenti, went to lay siege to Pisa, which enterprise was re-
solved upon by the people in consequence of the brave prom-
ises made by Messer Ercole, although many of the most
prudent citizens objected, but could not prevent it, being
carried away by the general will of the people, who relied
upon the commander’s brilliant promises.

I say then that there is no easier way to ruin a republic,
where the people-have—pewer, than toinvolyve them in daring

Cuap. LIV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 207

enterprises; for where the people have influence they will
always be ready to engage in them, and no contrary opinion
will prevent them. But if such enterprises cause the ruin of
states, they still more frequently cause the ruin of the particu-
lar citizens who are placed at the head to conduct them. For
when defeat comes, instead of the successes which the people
expected, they charge it neither upon the ill fortune or incom-
petence of their leaders, but upon their wickedness and igno-
rance; and generally either kill, imprison, or exile them, as
happened to many Carthaginian and Athenian generals. Their
previous victories are of no advantage to them, for they are
all cancelled by present defeat, as was the case with our Gia-
comini, who, in consequence of his failure to take Pisa, which
the people expected, as he had promised it, fell into such dis-
grace with the people that, notwithstanding his previous good
services, his life was saved only through the humanity of the
authorities, who protected him against the people.

CHAPTER LIV.

HOW MUCH INFLUENCE A GREAT MAN HAS IN RESTRAINING AN
EXCITED MULTITUDE.

THE second thing to note in connection with the subject of
the preceding chapter is, that nothing is so apt to restrain an
excited multitude as the reverence inspired by some grave and
dignified man of authority who opposes them; and therefore
it is not without reason that Virgil says :—

“ And when they saw a man of grave aspect
And full of virtue and of years,
At once they all were hushed,

And, listening, stood with eager ears.”
Therefore whoever is at the head of an army, or whoever hap-
pens to be a magistrate in a city where sedition has broken
out, should present himself before the multitude with all possi-
ble grace and dignity, and attired with all the insignia of his
rank, so as to inspire the more respect. A few years since
Florence was divided into two factions, who called themselves
the Frateschi and the Arrabiati (madmen). On coming to

208 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

arms, the Frateschi were beaten; amongst these was Paolan-
tonio Soderini, a citizen then in high repute. During these
disturbances the people went armed to his house with the in-
tent of sacking it. Messer Francesco, his brother, then Bishop
of Volterra, and now Cardinal, happened by chance to be in
the house; and so soon as he heard the noise and saw the
crowd, he dressed himself in his best garments, and over them
he put his episcopal chasuble, and then went to mect the
armed mob, and by the influence of his person and his words
he stopped their further violence, which was ‘much talked
about and praised in the city for many days.

I conclude, then, that there is no better or safer way of
appeasing an excited mob than the presence of some man of
imposing appearance and highly respected. And to come back
to the preceding text, we see with what obstinacy the Roman
people had taken up the plan of going to Veii, because they
deemed it advantageous and did not perceive the danger it
involved ; and how the discontent of the people, which had been
excited by the opposition of the Senate to this project, would
have led to violence, had not their fury been restrained by the
most grave and reverend Senators.

CHAPTER LV.

PUBLIC AFFAIRS ARE EASILY MANAGED IN A CITY WHERE THE BODY
OF THE PEOPLE IS NOT CORRUPT; AND WHERE EQUALITY EX-
ISTS, THERE NO PRINCIPALITY CAN BE ESTABLISHED; NOR CAN
A REPUBLIC BE ESTABLISHED WHERE THERE IS NO EQUALITY.

Havine sufficiently discussed the subject as to what is to be
hoped and feared for states that are corrupt, it seems to me not
amiss now to examine a resolution of the Senate of Rome in
relation to the vow which Camillus had made, to give the tenth
part of the booty taken from the Veienti to Apollo. These
spoils having fallen into the hands of the Roman people, and
there being no other way of having a correct account of it, the
Roman Senate issued an edict that every one should bring to
the public treasury one tenth part of the booty he had received.
And although this decree was not carried into effect, the Sen-

Cuar. LV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS-LIVIUS. 2C9

ate having devised other ways and means for satisfying Apollo
and the people, nevertheless we can see from that resolution
how entirely the Senate trusted in the honesty of the people;
and how confident they were that no one would fail to return
exactly what had been ordered by that edict. And on the
other hand we sec how the people never for a moment thought
of evading it in any way by giving less than what they ought
to give, and how they preferred rather to relieve themselves of
this imposition by open demonstrations of indignation. This
example, together with the many others heretofore cited, proves
how much probity and religion these people had, and how much
good there was to be hoped for from them. And truly, where
this probity does not exist, no good is to be expected, as in
fact it is vain to look for anything good from those coun-
tries which we see nowadays so corrupt, as is the case above
all others with Italy. France and Spain also have their share
of corruption, and if we do not see so many disorders and
troubles in those countries as is the case daily in Italy, it is
not so much owing to the goodness of their people, in which
they are greatly deficient, as to the fact that they have each a
king who keeps them united not only by his virtue, but also by
the institutions of those kingdoms, which are as yet preserved
pure.

In Germany alone do we see that probity and religion still
exist largely amongst the people, in consequence of which many
republics exist there in the full enjoyment of liberty, observing
their laws in such manner that no one from within or without
could venture upon an attempt to master them. And in proof
that the ancient virtue still prevails there in great part, I will
cite an example similar to that given above of the Senate and
people of Rome. When these republics have occasion to spend
any considerable amount of money for public account, their
magistrates or councils, who have authority in these matters,
impose upon all the inhabitants a tax of one or two per cent of
their possessions. When such a resolution has been passed ac-
cording to the laws of the country, every citizen presents him-
self before the collectors of this impost, and, after having taken
an oath to pay the just amount, deposits in a strong-box provided
for the purpose the sum which according to his conscience he
ought to pay, without any one’s witnessing what he pays. From
this we may judge of the extent of the probity and religion that

VOL. II. 14.

210 DISCOURSES ON: THE FIRST [Boox I.

still exist amongst those people. And we must presume that
every one pays the true amount, for if this were not the case
the impost would not yield the amount intended according to
the estimates based upon former impositions; the fraud would
thus be discovered, and other means would be employed to col-
lect the amount required. This honesty is the more to be ad-
mired as it is so very rare that it is found only in that country ;
and this results from two causes. The one is, that the Germans
have no great commerce with their neighbors, few strangers
coming amongst them, and they rarely visiting foreign coun-
tries, but being content to remain at home and to live on what
their country produces, and to clothe themselves with the wool
from their own flocks, which takes away all occasion for inti-
mate intercourse with strangers and all opportunity of corrup-
tion. Thus they have been prevented from adopting either
French, Spanish, or Italian customs, and these nations are the
great corrupters of the world. The other cause is, that those
republics which have thus preserved their political existence
uncorrupted do not permit any of their citizens to be or to live
in the manner of gentlemen, but rather maintain amongst them
a perfect equality, and are the most decided enemies of the
lords and gentlemen that exist in the country; so that, if by
chance any of them fall into their hands, they kill them, as
being the chief promoters of all corruption and troubles.

And to explain more clearly what is meant by the term gen-
tlemen, I say that those are called gentlemen who live idly upon
the proceeds of their extensive possessions, without devoting
themselves to agriculture or any other useful pursuit to gain
a living. Such men are pernicious to any country or republic ;
but more pernicious even than these are such as have, besides
their other possessions, castles which they command, and sub-
jects who obey them. This class of men abound in the king-
dom of Naples, in the Roman territory, in the Romagna, and
in Lombardy ; whence it is that no republic has ever been able
to exist in those countries, nor have they been able to pre-
serve any regular political existence, for that class of men are
everywhere enemies of all civil government. And to attempt
the establishment of a republic in a country so constituted
would be impossible. The only way to establish any kind of
order there is to found a monarchical government; for where
the body of the people is so thoroughly corrupt that the laws:

Crap. LV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 21t

~ some superior power which, Sutnies a_royal_hand, and with full ~~
~ and absolute powers, may put a curb upon the excessive ambi-

tion and corruption of the _powertul. This is verified by the

“example of Tuscany, where in a comparatively small extent of

territory there have for a long time existed three republics,
Florence, Sienna, and Lucca; and although the other cities of
this territory are in a measure subject to these, yet we see that
in spirit and by their institutions they maintain, or attempt to
maintain their liberty ; all of which is due to the fact that there
are in that country no lords possessing castles, and exceedingly
few or no gentlemen. On the contrary, there is such a general

-equality that it would be easy for any man of sagacity, well

versed in the ancient forms of civil government, to introduce
a republic there; but the misfortunes of that country have been
so great that up to the present time no man has arisen who has
had the power and ability to do so.

We may then draw the following conclusion from what has
been said: that if any one should wish to establish a republic
in a country where there are many gentlemen, he will not suc-
ceed until he has destroyed them all; and whoever desires to
establish a kingdom or principality where liberty and equality
prevail, will equally fail, unless he withdraws from that gen-
eral equality a number of the boldest and most ambitious
spirits, and makes gentlemen of them, not merely in name
but in fact, by giving to them castles and possessions, as well
as money and subjects; so that surrounded by these he may
be able to maintain his power, and that by his support they
may satisfy their ambition, and the others may be constrained
to submit to that yoke to which force alone has been able to
subject them. And as in this way definite relations will be
established between the ruler and his subjects, each will be
maintained in their respective ranks. But to establish a re-
public in a country better adapted to a monarchy, or a monar-
chy where a republic would be more suitable, requires a man
of rare genius and power, and therefore out of the many that
have attempted it but few have succeeded; for the greatness
of the enterprise frightens men so that they fail even in the
very beginning. Perhaps the opinion which I have expressed,
that a republic cannot be established where there are gentle-
men may seem to be contradicted by the experience of the

212 DISCOURSES: ON THE FIRST (Boox I.

Venetian republic, in which none but gentlemen could attain to
any rank or public employment. And yet this example is in
no way opposed to my theory, for the gentlemen of Venice are
so more in name than in fact; for they have no great revenues
from estates, their riches being founded upon commerce and
movable property, and moreover none of them have castles or
jurisdiction over subjects, but the name of gentleman is only a
title of dignity and respect, and is in no way based upon the
things that gentlemen enjoy in other countries. And as all
other republics have different classes under different names, so
Venice is divided into gentlemen and commonalty, and the for-
mer have all the offices and honors, from which the latter are
entirely excluded; and this distribution causes no disorders in
that republic, for the reasons elsewhere given. Let republics,
then, be established where equality exists, and, on the con-
trary, principalities where ereat inequality prevails ; otherwise
the governments will lack proper proportions and have but
little durability.

CHAPTER LVI.

THE OCCURRENCE OF IMPORTANT EVENTS IN ANY CITY OR COUN-
TRY IS GENERALLY PRECEDED BY SIGNS AND PORTENTS, OR BY
MEN WHO PREDICT THEM.

WHENCE it comes I know not, but both ancient and modern
instances prove that no great events ever occur in any city or
country that have not been predicted by soothsayers, revela-
tions, or by portents and other celestial signs. And not to go
from home in proof of this, everybody knows how the descent
into Italy of Charles VIII., king of France, was predicted by
Brother Girolamo Savonarola; and how, besides this, it was
said throughout Italy that at Arezzo there had been seen and
heard in the air armed men fighting together. Moreover every-
body remembers how, before the death of Lorenzo de’ Medici
the elder, the highest pinnacle of the dome of Florence was
struck by a bolt from heaven, doing great damage to that
building. Itis also well known how, before Pietro Soderini, who
had been made Gonfaloniere for life, was expelled and deprived
of his rank by the people of Florence, the palace itself was

Cuar. LVII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 213

struck by lightning. Many more examples might be adduced,
which I leave, however, lest I should become tedious. I will
relate merely what, according to Titus Livius, happened before
the coming of the Gauls to Rome. One Marcius Cedicius, a
plebeian, reported to the Senate that, passing through the Via
Nuova at midnight, he had heard a voice louder than that of
any man which commanded him to notify the Senate that the
Gauls were coming to Rome. To explain these things a man
should have knowledge of things natural and supernatural,
which I have not. It may be, however, as certain philoso-
phers maintain, that the air is peopled with spirits, who by
their superior intelligence foresee future events, and out of
pity for mankind warn them by such signs, so that they may
prepare against the coming evils. Be this as it may, however,
the truth of the fact exists, that these portents are invariably
followed by the most remarkable events.

CHAPTER LVH.

THE PEOPLE AS A BODY ARE COURAGEOUS, BUT INDIVIDUALLY
THEY ARE COWARDLY AND FEEBLE.

AFTER the ruin of their country by the invasion of the Gauls,
many Romans had gone to live at Veii, contrary to the consti-
tution and the orders of the Senate. To remedy this evil the
Senate published an edict commanding every one to return
within a given time to inhabit Rome, on pain of certain penal-
ties. At first those against whom this edict was aimed made
light of it and derided it, but when the prescribed time ap-
proached they all hastened to obey. Titus Livius says on this
point, “From being brave and insolent as a body, fear made
“them individually obedient.” And truly nothing can better
illustrate the character of a multitude than this example; for
they are often audacious and loud in their denunciations of the
decisions of their rulers, but when punishment stares them in
the face, then, distrustful of each other, they rush to obey.
Thus we see that whatever may be said of the good or evil
disposition of the people is of little consequence, if you are
well prepared to assert and maintain your authority should

tf)

214 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

they be well disposed, and to defend yourself if their disposi-
tion be otherwise. This has reference specially to such evil
dispositions as arise in the minds of the people from causes
other than the loss of liberty, or that of a prince to whom they
are much attached and who is still living; in such cases the
most powerful remedies are required to restrain them, as these
causes are more formidable than any others. But indisposi-
tions arising from other causes are easily controlled, especially
if the multitude have no chief to whom they can look for sup-
port; for whilst on the one hand a loose mob ‘without any
leader is most formidable, yet on the other hand it is also most
cowardly and feeble; and even if they are armed they will be
easily subdued, if you can only shelter yourself against their
first fury ; for when their spirits are cooled down a little, and
they see that they have all to return to their homes, they begin
to mistrust themselves, and to think of their individual safety
either by flight or submission. An excited multitude, therefore,
that wishes to avoid such a result will have promptly to create
a chief for itself, who shall direct and keep them united, and
provide for their defence; as the Roman people did when,
after the death of Virginia, they left Rome and appointed from
amongst themselves twenty Tribunes for their protection. And
unless they do this they will experience what Titus Livius has
said in the above-quoted words, that united in one body they
are brave and insolent, but when afterwards each begins to
think of his own danger, they become cowardly and feeble.

CHAPTER LVIII.
THE PEOPLE ARE WISER AND MORE CONSTANT THAN PRINCES.

Titus Livivs as well as all other historians affirm that noth-

. . . . . ‘e
ing is more uncertain and inconstant than the multitude; for

lL ————— = °
it appears from-what-he-relates-of the actions of men, that in

many instances the multitude, after having condemned a man
to death, bitterly lamented it, and most earnestly wished him
back. This was the case with the Roman people and Manlius
Capitolinus, whom they had condemned to death and afterwards
most earnestly desired him back, as our author says in the fol-

Guar, LVI) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 215

lowing words: ‘No sooner had they found out that they had
“nothing to fear from him, than they began to regret and to
‘wish him back.” And elsewhere, when he relates the events
that occurred in Syracuse after the death of Hieronymus,
nephew of Hiero, he says: “It is the nature of the multitude
‘either humbly to serve or insolently to dominate.” JI know
not whether, in undertaking to defend a cause against the accu-
sations of all writers, I do not assume a task so hard and so
beset with difficulties as to oblige me to abandon it with shame,
or to go on with it at the risk of being weighed down by it.
Be that as it may, however, I think, and ever shall think, that
it cannot be wrong to defend one’s opinions with arguments
founded upon reason, without employing force or authority.

I say, then, that individual men, and especially princes, may
be charged with the same defects of which writers accuse the
people ; for whoever is not controlled by laws will commit the
same errors as an unbridled multitude. This may easily be
verified, for there have been and still are plenty of princes, and
a few good and wise ones, such, I mean, as needed not the curb
that controlled them. Amongst these, however, are not to be
counted either the kings that lived in Egypt at that ancient period
when that country was governed by laws, or those that arose in
Sparta; neither such as are born in our day in France, for that
country is more thoroughly regulated by laws than any other of
which we have any knowledge in modern times. And those
kings that arise under such constitutions are not to be classed
amongst the number of those whose individual nature we have
to consider, and see whether it resembles that of the people;
but they should be compared with a people equally controlled
by law as those kings were, and then we shall find in that mul-
titude the same good qualities as in those kings, and we shall
see that such a people neither obey with servility nor command
with insolence. Such were the people of Rome, who, so long
as that republic remained uncorrupted, neither obeyed basely
nor ruled insolently, but rather held its rank honorably, sup-
porting the laws and their magistrates. And when the un-
righteous ambition of some noble made it necessary for them to
rise up in self-defence, they did so, as in the case of Manlius,
the Decemvirs, and others who attempted to oppress them; and
so when the public good required them to obey the Dictators
aud Consuls, they promptly yielded obedience. And if the

Z16 DISCOGUKSES ON THE FIRST {Boox I.

Roman people regretted Manlius Capitolinus after his death, it
is not to be wondered at; for they regretted his virtues, which
had been such that the remembrance a them filled every one
with pity, and would have had the power to produce the same
effect upon any prince; for all writers agree that virtue is to
be admired and praised, even in one’s oes And if intense
desire could have restored Manlius to life, the Roman people
would nevertheless have pronounced the same judgment against
him as they did the first time, when they took him from prison
and condemned him to death. And so we have seen princes
that were esteemed wise, who have caused persons to be put to
death and afterwards regretted it deeply; such as Alexander
the Great with regard to Clitus and other friends, and Herod
with his wife Mariamne. But what our historian says of the
character of the multitude does not apply to a people regulated
by laws, as the Romans were, but to an unbridled multitude,
such as the Syracusans; who committed all the excesses to
which infuriated and unbridled men abandon themselves, as
did Alexander the Great and Herod in the above-mentioned
cases.

Therefore, the character of the people is not to be blamed,
any more an that of princes, for both alike are liable to
err when they are without any control. Besides the exam-

amongst the Reman Ikxmperors and other faves and princes,
who have displayed as much inconstancy and recklessness as
any populace ever did. Contrary to the general opinion, then,
which maintains that the people, when they govern, are incon-
sistent, unstable, and ungrateful, | conclude and affirm that
these defects are not more natural to the people than they are
to princes. To charge the people and princes equally with
them may be the truth, but to except princes from them would
be a great mistake. Fora people that governs and is well regu-
lated by laws will be stable, prudent, and grateful, as much
so, and even more, according to my opinion, than a prince,
although he be esteemed wise; and, on the other hand, a
prince, freed from the restraints of the law, will be more un-
grateful, inconstant, and imprudent than a people similarly
situated. The difference in their conduct is not due to any
difference in their nature (for that is the same, and if there be
any difference for good, it is on the side of the people); but

Cuar. LVIII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 217

to the greater or less respect they have for the laws under
which they respectively live. And whoever studies the Roman
people will see that for four hundred years they have been
haters of royalty, and lovers of the glory and common good of
their country ; and he will find any number of examples that
will prove both the one and the other. And should any one
allege the ingratitude which the Roman people displayed to-
wards Scipio, I shall reply the same as I have said in another
place on this subject, where I have demonstrated that the
people are less ungrateful than princes. But as regards pru-
dence and stability, I say that the people are more prudent and
stable, and have better judgment than a prince; and it is not
without good reason that it is said, “The voice of the people is
“the voice of God”; for we see popular opinion prognosticate
events in such a wonderful manner that it would almost seem
as if the people had some occult virtue, which enables them to
foresee the good and the evil. As to the people’s capacity of
judging of things, it is exceedingly rare that, when they hear
two orators of equal talents advocate different measures, they
do not decide in favor of the best of the two; which proves
their ability to discern the truth of what they hear. And if
occasionally they are misled in matters involving questions of
courage or seeming utility, (as has been said above,) so is a
prince also many times misled by his own passions, which are
much greater than those of the people. We also sce that in
the election of their magistrates they make far better choice
than princes; and no people will ever be persuaded to elect a
man of infamous character and corrupt habits to any post of
dignity, to which a prince is easily influenced in a thousand
different ways. When we see a people take an aversion to
anything, they persist in it for many centuries, which we never
find to be the case with princes. Upon both these points the
Roman people shall serve me as a proof, who in the many elec-
tions of Consuls and Tribunes had to regret only four times
the choice they had made. The Roman people held the name
of king in such detestation, as we have said, that no extent of
services rendered by any of its citizens who attempted to usurp
that title could save him from his merited punishment. We
furthermore see the cities where the people are masters make
the greatest progress in the least possible time, and much
greater than such as have always been governed by princes ;

Ue

es 1

218 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox I.

as was the case with Rome after the expulsion of the kings,
and with Athens after they rid themselves of Pisistratus; and
this can be attributed to no other cause than that the govern-
ments of the people are better than those of princes.

It would be useless to object to my opinion by referring to
what our historian has said in the passages quoted above, and
elsewhere ; for if we compare the faults of a people with those
of princes, as well as their respective good qualities, we shall
find the people vastly superior in all that is good and glorious.
And if princes show themselves superior in the making of laws,
and in the forming of civil institutions and new statutes and
ordinances, the people are superior in maintaining those insti-
tutions, laws, and ordinances, which certainly places them on
a par with those who established them.

And finally to sum up this matter, I say that both govern-
ments of princes and of the people have lasted a long time,
but both required to be regulated by laws. For a prince who
knows no other control but his own will is like a madman, and
“a people that can do as it pleases will hardly-be- wise Tf now
‘we compare a prince who_iscontroled-bylaws, and a people
‘that is untrammelled by them, we shall find more virtue in the
people than in the prince; and if we compare them when both
are freed from such control, we shall see that the people are
guilty of fewer excesses than the prince, and that the errors
of the people are of less importance, and therefore more easily

remedied. For a licentious and mutinous people may easily be
brought back to good conduct by the influence and persuasion

Bom ‘good man, but an evil-minded prince is not amenable to

“such influences, and therefore there is no other remedy against
him but cold Oe We may judge then from this of the rela-
tive defects of the one and the other; if words suffice to cor-
rect those of the people, whilst those of the prince can only
be remedied by violence, no one can fail to sce that where
the greater remedy is required, there also the defects must be
greater. The follies which a people commits at the moment of
its greatest license are not what is most to be feared; it is not
the immediate evil that may result from them that inspires
apprehension, but the fact that such general confusion might
afford the opportunity for a tyrant to seize the government.
But with evil-disposed princes the contrary is the case; it is
the immediate present that causes fear, and there is hope only

Cuap. LIX.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 219

in the future; for men will persuade themselves that the ter-
mination of his wicked life may give them a chance of liberty.
Thus we see the difference between the one and the other to
be, that the one touches the present and the other the future.
The excesses of the people are directed against those whom
they suspect of interfering with the public good; whilst those
of princes are against apprehended interference with their in-
dividual. interests. The general prejudice against the people
results from the fact that everybody,can freely and fearlessly
speak ill of them in mass, even whilst they are at the height
of their power; but a prince can only be spoken of with the
greatest circumspection and apprehension. And as the sub-
ject leads me to it, I deem it not amiss to examine in the fol-
lowing chapter whether alliances with a republic or with a
prince are most to be trusted.

CHAPTER LIX.

LEAGUES AND ALLIANCES WITH REPUBLICS ARE MORE TO BE
TRUSTED THAN THOSE WITH PRINCES.

As it is of daily occurrence that princes or republics contract
leagues or friendships with each other, or that in ike manner
treaties and alliances are formed between a republic and a
prince, it seems to me proper to examine whose faith is most
constant and most to be relied upon, that of a republic or that
of a prince. In examining the whole subject I believe that in
many instances they are equal, but that in others there is a dif-
ference ; and I believe, moreover, that agreements which are
the result of force will no more be observed by a prince than by
a republic, and, where either the one or the other is appre-
hensive of losing their state, that to save it both will break
their faith and be guilty of ingratitude. Demetrius, called the
Conqueror of Cities, had conferred infinite benefits upon the ©
Athenians. It happened that, having been defeated by his enc-
mies, he took refuge in Athens as a city that was friendly to
him, and which he had laid under obligations; but the Athe-
nians refused to receive him, which gave Demetrius more pain
than the loss of his men and the destruction of his army.

220 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book I,

Pompey, after his defeat by Cesar in Thessaly, took refuge in
Keypt with Ptolemy, whom on a former occasion he had rein-
stated in his kingdom, but was treacherously put to death by
him. Both these instances are attributable to the same rea-
sons; yet we see that the republic acted with more human-
ity and inflicted less injury than the prince. Wherever fear
dominates, there we shall find equal want of faith in both,
although the same influence may cause either a prince or a
republic to keep faith at the risk of ruin. For it may well
happen that the prince is the ally of some powerful poten-
tate, who for the moment may not be able to assist him, but
who, the prince may hope, will be able to reinstate him in his
possessions; or he may believe that, having acted as his parti-
san, his powerful ally will make no treaties or alliances with
his enemies. Such was the fate of those princes of the king-
dom of Naples who adhered to the French party. And with
regard to republics this occurred with Saguntum in Spain,
which hazarded her own safety for the sate of adhering to
the Roman party; and with Florence when in the year 1512
she followed the fortune of the French. Taking all things
together now, I believe that in such cases which involve immi-
nent peril there will be found somewhat more of stability in
republics than in princes. For even if the republics were in-
spired by the same feelings and intentions as the princes, yet
the fact of their movements being slower will make them take
more time in forming resolutions, and therefore they will less
promptly break their faith.

Allianees are broken from considerations of interest; and
in this respect republics are much more careful in the observ-
ance of treaties than princes. It would be easy to cite in-
stances where princes for the smallest advantage have broken
their faith, and where the greatest advantages have failed to
induce republics to disregard theirs; as in the case of the
proposal of Themistocles to the Athenians, when in a general
assembly he told them that he had something to suggest that
“would be of greatest advantage to their country; but that it
was of such a nature that he could not disclose it publicly
without depriving them of the opportunity of availing of it.
The people of Athens therefore appointed Aristides to whom
Themistocles might communicate his suggestion, upon which
they would decide according to the judgment of Aristides.

Cuap. LX.] TEN BOOKS: OF TITUS LIVIUS. 221

Themistocles thereupon showed him that the fleet of united
Greece, relying upon the treaty still in force, was in such
position that they could easily make themselves masters of it
or destroy it, which would make the Athenians arbiters of all
Greece. Whereupon Aristides reported to the people that the
proposed plan of Themistocles was highly advantageous but
most dishonest, and therefore the people absolutely rejected
it; which would not have been done by Philip of Macedon,
nor many other princes, who would only have looked to the
advantages, and who have gained more by their perfidy than
by any other means.

I do not speak of the breaking of treaties because of an occa-
sional non-observance, that being an ordinary matter; but I
speak of the breaking of treaties from some extraordinary
cause; and here I believe, from what has been said, that the
people are less frequently guilty of this than princes, and are—
therefore more to be trusted.

CHAPTER LX.

HOW THE CONSULATES AND SOME OTHER MAGISTRACIES WERE BE-
STOWED IN ROME WITHOUT REGARD TO THE AGE OF PERSONS.

WE see from the course of history that the Roman republic,
after the plebeians became entitled to the consulate, admitted
all its citizens to this dignity without distinction of age or birth.
In truth, age never formed a necessary qualification for public
office; merit was the only consideration, whether found in
young or old men. This is evidenced by the case of Valerius
Corvinus, who was made Consul at twenty-three years of age;
it was he who said to his soldiers that “the consulate was the
“reward of merit, and not of birth.” Upon this subject much
may be said. As regards birth, that point was conceded from
necessity, and the same necessity that existed in Rome will be
felt in every republic that aims to achieve the same success as
Rome; for men cannot be made to bear labor and privations
without the inducement of a corresponding reward, nor can
they be deprived of such hope of reward without danger. It was
proper, therefore, that the people should at an early period have

222. DISCOURSES ON TITUS LIVIUS. [Boor I.

had the hope of obtaining the right to the consulate, and that
they should nurse that hope for a while, without realizing it;
and when after a while that hope no longer sufficed them, the
reality had to be conceded to them. The state that does not ad-
mit its people to a share of its glory may treat them in its own
way, as we have discussed elsewhere; but a state that wishes to
undertake what Rome has done cannot make such a distinction.

And admitting that this may be so with regard to birth, then
the question of age is necessarily also disposed of; for in elect-
ing a young man to an office which demands the prudence of an
old man, it is necessary, if the election rests with the people,
that he should have made himself worthy of that distinction
by some extraordinary action. And when a young man has so
much merit as to have distinguished himself by some notable
action, it would be a great loss for the state not to be able
to avail of his talents and services; and that he should have to
wait until old age has robbed him of that vigor of mind and
activity of which the state might have the benefit in his earlier
age, as Rome had of Valerius Corvinus, of Scipio, of Pompey,
and of many others who had the honors of triumph when very
young men.

SwCOND BOOK,

INTRODUCTION. Me

‘Men ever praise the olden time, and find fault with the _
present, though often without reason. They are such parti-
sans of the past that they extol not only the times which
they know only by the accounts left of them by historians,
but, having grown old, they also laud all they remember to
have seen in their youth. Their opinion is generally errone-
ous in that respect, and I think the reasons which cause this
illusion are various. ‘The first I believe to be the fact that we
never know the whole truth about the past, and very frequently
writers conceal such events as would reflect disgrace upon their
century, whilst they magnify and amplify those that lend lustre
to it. The majority of authors obey the fortune of conquerors
to that degree that, by way of rendering their victories more
glorious, they exaggerate not only the valiant deeds of the
victor, but also of the vanquished; so that future generations
of the countries of both will have cause to wonder at those
men and times, and are obliged to praise and admire them to
the utmost. Another reason is that men’s hatreds generally
spring from fear or envy. Now, these two powerful reasons
ot hatred do not exist for us with regard to the past, which
can no longer inspire either apprehension or envy. But it
is very different with the affairs of the present, in which we
ourselves are either actors or spectators, and of which we have
a complete knowledge, nothing being concealed from us; and
knowing the good together with many other things that are
displeasing to us, we are forced to conclude that the present
is inferior to the past, though in reality it may be much more
worthy of glory and fame. I do not speak of matters per-
taining to the arts, which shine by their intrinsic merits, which
time can neither add to nor diminish; but I speak of such

224 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox IT.

things as pertain to the actions and manners of men, of which
we do not possess such manifest evidence.

I repeat, then, that this practice of praising and decrying is
very general, though it cannot be said that it is always erro-
neous ; for sometimes our judgment is of necessity correct,
human affairs being in a state of perpetual movement, always
either ascending or declining. We see, for instance, a city or
country with a government well organized by some man of
superior ability; for a time it progresses and attains a great
prosperity through the talents of its lawgiver. ° Now, if any
one living at such a period should praise the past more than
the time in which he lives, he would certainly be deceiving
himself; and this error will be found due to the reasons above
indicated. But should he live in that city or country at the
period after it shall have passed the zenith of its glory and in
the time of its decline, then he would not be wrong in praising
the past. Reflecting now upon the course of human affairs, I
think that, as a whole, the world remains, very much in the
same condition, and the good in it always balances the evil;
but the good and the evil change from one country to another,
as we learn from the history of those ancient kingdoms that
differed from each other in manners, whilst the world at large
remained the same. The only difference being, that all the
virtues that first found a place in Assyria were thence trans-
ferred to Media, and afterwards passed to Persia, and from
there they came into Italy and to Rome. And if after the fall
of the Roman Empire none other sprung up that endured for
any length of time, and where the aggregate virtues of the
world were kept together, we nevertheless see them scattered
amongst many nations, as, for instance, in the kingdom of
France, the Turkish empire, or that of the Sultan of Egypt,
and nowadays the people of Germany, and before them those
famous Saracens, who achieved such great things and con-
quered so great a part of the world, after having destroyed
the Roman Empire of the East. The different peoples of
these several countries, then, after the fall of the Roman Em-
pire, have possessed and possess still in great part that virtue
which is so much lamented and so sincerely praised. And those
who live in those countries and praise the past more than the
present may deceive themselves; but whoever is born in Italy
and Greece, and has not become either an Ultramontane in Italy

InTROD. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 225

or a Turk in Greece, has good reason to find fault with his own
and to praise the olden times; for in their past there are many
things worthy of the highest admiration, whilst the present has
nothing that compensates for all the extreme misery, infamy,
and degradation of a period where there is neither observance
of religion, law, or military discipline, and which is stained by
every species of the lowest brutality ; and these vices are the
more detestable as they exist amongst those who sit in the
tribunals as judges, and hold all power in their hands, and
claim to be adored.

But to return to our argument, I say that, if men’s judg-
ment is at fault upon the point whether the present age be
better than the past, of which latter, owing to its antiquity,
they cannot have such perfect knowledge as of their own
period, the judgment of old men of what they have seen in
their youth and in their old age should not be false, inas-
much as they have equally seen both the one and the other.
This would be true, if men at the different periods of their
lives had the same judgment and the same appetites. But as
these vary (though the times do not), things cannot appear
the same to men who have other tastes, other delights, and
other considerations in age from what they had in youth. For
as men when they age lose their strength and energy, whilst
their prudence and judgment improve, so the same things that
in youth appeared to them supportable and good, will of neces-
sity, when they have grown old, seem to them insupportable
and evil; and when they should blame their own judgment
they find fault with the times. Moreover, as human desires
are insatiable, (because their nature is to have and to do every-
thing whilst fortune limits their possessions and capacity of
enjoyment,) this gives rise to a constant discontent in the
human mind and a weariness of the things they possess; and
it is this which makes them decry the present, praise the past,
and desire the future, and all this without any reasonable
motive. I know not, then, whether I deserve to be classed with
those who deceive themselves, if in these Discourses I shall laud
too much the times of ancient Rome and censure those of our
own day. And truly, if the virtues that ruled then and the
vices that prevail now were not as clear as the sun, I should
be more reticent in my expressions, lest I should fall into the

very error for which I reproach others. But the matter being
VOL. Ib 15

226 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

so manifest that everybody sees it, I shall boldly and openly
say what I think of the former times and of the present, so as
to excite in the minds of the young men who may read my writ-
ings the desire to avoid the evils of the latter, and to prepare
themselves to imitate the virtues of the former, whenever for-
tune presents them the occasion. For it is the duty of an hon-
est man to teach others that good which the malignity of the
times and of fortune has prevented his doing himself; so that
amongst the many capable ones whom he has instructed, some
one perhaps, more favored by Heaven, may perforin it.

Having in the preceding Book treated of the conduct of the
Romans in matters relating to their internal affairs, I shall in
this Book speak of what the Roman people did in relation to
the aggrandizement of their empire.

CHAPTER I.

THE GREATNESS OF THE ROMANS WAS DUE MORE TO THEIR VALOR
AND ABILITY THAN TO GOOD FORTUNE.

Many authors, amongst them that most serious writer Plu-
tarch, have held the opinion that the people of Rome were
more indebted in the acquisition of their empire to the favors
of Fortune than to their own merits. And amongst other rea-
sons adduced by Plutarch is, that by their own confession it
appears that the Roman people ascribed all their victories to
Fortune, because they built more temples to that goddess than
to any other deity. It seems that Livius accepts that opinion,
for he rarely makes a Roman speak of valor without coupling
fortune with it. Now I do not share that opinion at all, and
do not believe that it can be sustained; for if no other republic
has ever been known to make such conquests, it is admitted
that none other was so well organized for that purpose as
Rome. It was the valor of her armies that achieved those
conquests, but it was the wisdom of her conduct and the nature
of her institutions, as established by her first legislator, that
enabled her to preserve these acquisitions, as we shall more
fully set forth in the succeeding chapters. But it is said that
the fact that the Roman people never had two important wars on

Cuapr. I.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 227

hand at the same time was due more to their good fortune than
their wisdom; for they did not engage in war with the Latins
until they had beaten the Samnites so completely that the
Romans themselves had to protect them with their arms; nor
did they combat the Tuscans until after they had subjugated
the Latins, and had by repeated defeats completely enervated
the Samnites. Doubtless if these two powerful nations had
united against Rome whilst their strength was yet unbroken,
it may readily be supposed that they could have destroyed the
Roman republic.

But however this may have been, certain it is that the Ro-
mans never had two important wars to sustain at the same
time; but it rather appears that the beginning of one caused
the termination of the other, or that the ending of one gave
rise to the next. This is readily seen by examining the suc-
cession of their wars; for, leaving aside the one they were
engaged in before the capture of Rome by the Gauls, we see
that whilst they fought against the Equeans and the Vol-
scians at a time when these nations were still powerful, no
other people rose up to attack them at the same time. But
when these were subdued, then occurred the war against the
Samnites; and although the Latins revolted before that war
was concluded, yet when this revolt broke out the Samnites
had already formed a league with the Romans, and it was by
the aid of their army that they broke down the pride of the
Latins. And when these were subdued, the war with the Sam-
nites was renewed ; but the repeated defeats inflicted upon them
by the Romans had so enfeebled their forces, that, when the
war with the Tuscans occurred, that also was quickly termi-
nated. But the Samnites rose up once more when Pyrrhus
came into Italy; and when he was beaten and driven back to
Greece, the first war with the Carthaginians was begun, which
was hardly terminated before the combined Gauls conspired
against Rome, and poured down through the various passes of
the Alps in great numbers, but were defeated with terrible
carnage between Popolonia and Pisa, where now stands the
tower of San Vincenti. After this war was finished, the Ro-
mans were not engaged in any other of importance during a
period of twenty years; for they only fought the Ligurians and
a remnant of Gauls who were in Lombardy. And thus they
remained until the second Carthaginian war broke out, and

228 DISCOGCKSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

occupied them for sixteen years. When this had been most
gloriously concluded, the Macedonian war occurred; and after
that the war with Antiochus and Asia. When these had been
victoriously terminated, there remained in the whole world
neither prince nor republic that could, alone or unitedly, have
resisted the Roman power. Considering now the succession
of these wars, prior to the last victory, and the manner in
which they were conducted, we cannot fail to recognize in
them a combination of good fortune with the greatest valor
and prudence. And if we examine into the cause of that good
fortune we shall readily find it; for it is most certain that
when a prince or a people attain that degree of reputation that
all the neighboring princes and peoples fear to attack him,
none of them will ever venture to do it except under the force
of necessity ; so that it will be, as it were, at the option of that
potent prince or people to make war upon such neighboring
powers as may seem advantageous, whilst adroitly keeping
the others quiet. And this he can easily do, partly by the
respect they have for his power, and partly because they are
deceived by the means employed to keep them quiet. And
other powers that are more distant and have no immediate in-
tercourse with him, will look upon this as a matter too remote
for them to be concerned about, and will continue in this error
until the conflagration spreads to their door, when they will
have no means for extinguishing it except their own forces,
which will no longer suffice when the fire has once gained the
upper hand. I will say nothing of how the Samnites remained
indifferent spectators when they saw the Volscians and Eque-
ans defeated by the Romans; and not to be too prolix I will
at once come to the Carthaginians, who had already acquired
great power and reputation when the Romans were fighting
with the Samnites and the Tuscans; for they were masters of
all Africa, they held Sardinia and Sicily, and had already a
foothold in Spain. Their own power, and the fact that they
were remote from the confines of Rome, made them indifferent
about attacking the Romans, or succoring the Samnites. and
Tuscans, but they did what men are apt to do with regard to
a growing power, they rather sought by an alliance with the
Romans to secure their friendship. Nor did they become
aware of the error they had committed until after the Romans,
having subjugated all the nations situated between them and

Cuap. II.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS, 229

the Carthaginians, began to contest the dominion of Sicily and
Spain with them. The same thing happened to the Gauls as
to the Carthaginians, and also to King Philip of Macedon and to
Antiochus. Each one of these believed that, whilst the Romans
were occupied with the other, they would be overcome, and that
then it would be time enough either by peace or war to secure
themselves against the Romans. So that I believe that the good
fortune which followed the Romans in these parts would have
equally attended other princes who had acted as the Romans
did, and had displayed the same courage and sagacity.

It would be proper and interesting here to show the course
which the Romans adopted when they entered the territory
of an enemy, but that we have already explained this at
length in our treatise of “The Prince.” I will only say in
a few words that they always endeavored to have some friend
in these new countries who could aid them by opening the
way for them to enter, and also serve as a means for re-
taining their possession. Thus we see that by the aid of
the Capuans they entered Samnium, and through the Camer-
tini they got into Tuscany; the Mamertini helped them into
Sicily, the Saguntines into Spain, Masinissa into Africa, and
the Massilians and Eduans into Gaul. And thus they never
lacked similar support to facilitate their enterprises, both in
the acquisition and preservation of new provinces. And those
people who will observe the same mode of proceeding will find
that they have less need of fortune than those who do not.
And to enable everybody to know how much more the valor
and ability of the Romans served them in the conquest of their
empire than Fortune, we will discuss in the following chapter
the characters of the different peoples whom the Romans had
to encounter, and with what obstinate courage they defended
their liberty.

CHAPTER II.

WHAT NATIONS THE ROMANS HAD TO CONTEND AGAINST, AND
WITH WHAT OBSTINACY THEY DEFENDED THEIR LIBERTY.

NOTHING required so much effort on the part of the Romans
to subdue the nations around them, as well as those of more

230 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

distant countries, as the love of liberty which these people
cherished in those days; and which they defended with so
much obstinacy, that nothing but the exceeding valor of the
Romans could ever have subjugated them. For we know from
many instances to what danger they exposed themselves to
preserve or recover their liberty, and what vengeance they
practised upon those who had deprived them of it. The les-
sons of history teach us also, on the other hand, the injuries
people suffer from servitude. And whilst in our own times
there is only one country in which we can say that free com-
munities exist, in those ancient times all countries contained
numerous cities that enjoyed entire liberty. In the times of
which we are now speaking, there were i. Italy from the moun-
tains that divide the present Tuscany from Lombardy, down
to the extreme point, a number of independent nations, such as
the Tuscans, the Romans, the Samnites, and many others, that
inhabited the rest of Italy. Nor is there ever any mention of
there having been other kings besides those that reigned in
Rome, and Porsenna, king of the Tuscans, whose line became
extinct in a manner not mentioned in history. But we do see
that, at the time when the Romans went to besiege Veii, Tus-
cany was free, and so prized her hberty and hated the very
name of king, that when the Veienti had created a king in
their city for its defence, and applied to the Tuscans for help
against the Romans, it was resolved, after repeated delibera-
tions, not to grant such assistance to the Veienti so long as
they lived under that king; for the Tuscans deemed it not
well to engage in the defence of those who had voluntarily
subjected themselves to the rule of one man. And it is easy
to understand whence that affection for liberty arose in the
people, for they had seen that cities never increased in domin-
ion or wealth unless they were free. And certainly it is won-
derful to think of the greatness which Athens attained within
the space of a hundred years after having freed herself from
the tyranny of Pisistratus; and still more wonderful is it to
reflect upon the greatness which Rome achieved after she was
rid of her kings. The cause of this is manifest, for it is not
individual prosperity, but the general good, that makes cities
great; and certainly the general good is regarded nowhere
but in republics, because whatever they do is for the common
benefit, and should it happen to prove an injury to one or

Cuap. II.] TEN BOOKS, OF TITUS LIVIUS, 231

more individuals, those for whose benefit the thing is done are
so numerous that they can always carry the measure against
the few that are injured by it. But the very reverse happens
where there is a prince whose private interests are generally
in opposition to those of the city, whilst the measures taken
for the benefit of the city are seldom deemed personally advan-
tageous by the prince. This state of things soon leads to a
tyranny, the least evil of which is to check the advance of the
city in its career of prosperity, so that it grows neither in
power nor wealth, but on the contrary rather retrogrades.
And if fate should have it that the tyrant is enterprising, and
by his courage and valor extends his dominions, it will never
be for the benefit of the city, but only for his own; for he will
never bestow honors and office upon the good and brave citi-
zens over whom he tyrannizes, so that he may not have occa-
sion to suspect and fear them. Nor will he make the states
which he conquers subject or tributary to the city of which he
is the despot, because it would not be to his advantage to make
that city powerful, but it will always be for his interest to keep
the state disunited, so that each place and country shall recog-
nize him only as master; thus he alone, and not his country,
profits by his conquests. Those who desire to have this opin-
ion confirmed by many other arguments, need but read Xeno-
phon’s treatise “ On Tyranny.”

It is no wonder, then, that the ancients hated tyranny
and loved freedom, and that the very name of Liberty should
have been held in such esteem by them; as was shown
by the Syracusans when Hieronymus, the nephew of Hiero,
was killed. When his death became known to his army,
which was near Syracuse, it caused at first some disturb-
ances, and they were about committing violence upon his
murderers ; but when they learnt that the cry of Liberty had
been raised in Syracuse, they were delighted, and instantly
returned to order. Their fury against the tyrannicides was
quelled, and they thought only of how a free government
might be established in Syracuse. Nor can we wonder that
the people indulge in extraordinary revenge against those who
have robbed them of their liberty; of which we could cite
many instances, but will quote only one that occurred in Cor-
cyra, a city of Greece, during the Peloponnesian war. Greece
was at that time divided into two parties, one of which ad-

2382 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Book IT.

hered to the Athenians, and the other to the Spartans, and
a similar division of parties existed in most of the Greek cities.
It happened that in Corcyra the nobles, being the stronger
party, seized upon the liberties of the people; but with the
assistance of the Athenians the popular party recovered its
power, and, having seized the nobles, they tied their hands be-
hind their backs, and threw them into a prison large enough
to hold them all. They thence took eight or ten at a time,
under pretence of sending them into exile in different direc-
tions ; but instead of that they killed them with many cruel-
ties. When the remainder became aware of this, they resolved
if possible to escape such an ignominious death; and having
armed themselves as well as they could, they resisted those
who attempted to enter the prison; but when the people heard
this disturbance, they pulled down the roof and upper portion
of the prison, and suffocated the nobles within under its ruins.
Many such notable and horrible cases occurred in that country,
which shows that the people will avenge their lost liberty with
more energy than when it is merely threatened.

Reflecting now as to whence it came that in ancient times
the people were more devoted to liberty than in the present, I
believe that it resulted from this, that men were stronger in
those days, which I believe to be attributable to the difference
of education, founded upon the difference of their religion and
ours. For, as our religion teaches us the truth and the true
way of life, it causes us to attach less value to the honors and
possessions of this world; whilst the Pagans, esteeming those
things as the highest good, were more energetic and ferocious
in their actions. We may observe this also in most of their
institutions, beginning with the magnificence of their sacrifices
as compared with the humility of ours, which are gentle solem-
nities rather than magnificent ones, and have nothing of energy
or ferocity in them, whilst in theirs there was no lack of pomp
and show, to which was superadded the ferocious and bloody
nature of the sacrifice by the slaughter of many animals, and
the familiarity with this terrible sight assimilated the nature of
men to their sacrificial ceremonies. Besides this, the Pagan
religion deified only men who had achieved great glory, such
as commanders of armies and chiefs of republics, whilst ours
glorifies more the humble and contemplative men than the men
of action. Our religion, moreover, places the supreme happi-

Cuap. II.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 238

ness in humility, lowliness, and a contempt for worldly objects,
whilst the other, on the contrary, places the supreme good in
grandeur of soul, strength of body, and all such other qualities
as render men formidable; and if our religion claims of us for-
titude of soul, it is more to enable us to suffer than to achieve
great deeds.

These principles seem to me to have made men feeble, and
caused them to become an easy prey to evil-minded men, who
can control them more securely, seeing that the great body of
men, for the sake of gaining Paradise, are more disposed to
endure injuries than to avenge them. And although it would
seem that the world has become effeminate and Heaven dis-
armed, yet this arises unquestionably from the baseness of men,
who have interpreted our religion according to the promptings
of indolence rather than those of virtue. For if we were to
reflect that our religion permits us to exalt and defend our
country, we should see that according to it we ought also to
love and honor our country, and prepare ourselves so as to be
capable of defending her. It is this education, then, and this
false interpretation of our religion, that is the cause of there
not being so many republics nowadays as there were anciently ;
and that there is no longer the same love of liberty amongst
the people now as there was then. I believe, however, that an-
other reason for this will be found in the fact that the Roman
Empire, by force of arms, destroyed all the republics and free
cities; and although that empire was afterwards itself dis-
solved, yet these cities could not reunite themselves nor re-
organize their civil institutions, except in a very few instances.

Be that, however, as it may, the Romans found everywhere
a league of republics, well armed for the most obstinate de-
fence of their liberties, showing that it required the rare
ability and extreme valor of the Romans to subjugate them.
And to give but one example of this, we will confine our-
selves to the case of the Samnites, which really seems maryel-
lous. This people Titus Livius himself admits to have been so
powerful and valiant in arms that, until the time of the Con-
sul Papirius Cursor, grandson of the first Papirius, a period
of forty years, they were able to resist the Romans, notwith-
standing their many defeats, the destruction of their cities,
and much slaughter. That country, which was then so thickly
inhabited and contained so many cities, is now almost a desert ;

234 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

and yet it was originally so powerful and well governed that it
would have been unconquerable by any other than Roman valor. '
It is easy to discover the cause of this different state of things,
for it all comes from this, that formerly that people enjoyed
freedom, and now they live in servitude; for, as I have already
said above, only those cities and countries that are free can
achieve greatness. Population is greater there because mar-
riages are more free and offer more advantages to the citizen;
for people will gladly have children when they know that they
can support them, and that they will not be deprived of their
patrimony, and where they know that their children not only
are bern free and not slaves, but, if they possess talents and
virtue can arrive at the highest dignities of the state. In free
countries we also see wealth increase more rapidly, both that
which results from the culture of the soil and that which is
produced by industry and art; for everybody gladly multiplies
those things, and seeks to acquire those goods the posses-
sion of which he can tranquilly enjoy. Thence men vie with
each other to increase both private and public wealth, which
consequently increase in an extraordinary manner. But the
contrary of all this takes place in countries that are subject to
another; and the more rigorous the subjection of the people, the
more will they be deprived of all the good to which they had
previously been accustomed. And the hardest of all servitudes
is to be subject to a republic, and this for these reasons: first,
because it is more enduring, and there is no hope of escaping
from it; and secondly, because republics aim to enervate and
weaken all other states so as to increase their own power.
This is not the case with a prince who holds another country
in subjection, unless indeed he should be a barbarous devastator
of countries and a destroyer of all human civilization, such as
the princes of the Orient. But if he be possessed of only ordi-
nary humanity, he will treat all cities that are subject to him
equally well, and will leave them in the enjoyment of their arts
and industries, and measurably all their ancient institutions.
So that if they cannot grow the same as if they were free, they
will at least not be ruined whilst in bondage; and by this is
understood that bondage into which cities fall that become sub-
ject to a stranger, for of that to one of their own citizens we
have already spoken above.

Considering now all that has been said, we need not wonder

Cuap. III] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 235

at the power which the Samnites possessed, so long as they
were free, nor at the feeble condition to which they afterwards
became reduced when they were subjugated. Titus Livius testi-
fies to this in several instances, and mainly in speaking of the
war with Hannibal, where he states that the Samnites, pressed
by a legion of Romans which was at Nola, sent messengers to
Hannibal to implore his assistance. These said in their address
that for a hundred years they had combated the Romans with
their own soldiers and generals, and had many times sustained
the contest against two consular armies and two Consuls at
once; but that now they had been reduced so low that they
were hardly able to defend themselves against the one small
Roman legion that was stationed at Nola.

CHAPTER III.

ROME BECAME GREAT BY RUINING HER NEIGHBORING CITIES, AND
BY FREELY ADMITTING STRANGERS TO HER PRIVILEGES AND
HONORS.

“Orescit interea Roma, Albe ruinis.” Those who desire a
city to achieve great empire must endeavor by all possible
means to make her populous; for without an abundance of
inhabitants it is impossible ever to make a city powerful.
This may be done in two ways; either by attracting population
by the advantages offered, or by compulsion. The first is to
make it easy and secure for strangers to come and establish
themselves there, and the second is to destroy the neighbor-
ing cities, and to compel their inhabitants to come and dwell in
yours. These principles were so strictly observed by the Ro-
mans, that, in the time of the sixth king, Rome had already
eighty thousand inhabitants capable of bearing arms. The
Romans acted like a good husbandman, who for the purpose
of strengthening a tree and making it produce more fruit and
to mature it better, cuts off the first shoots it puts out, so that
by retaining the sap and vigor in the trunk the tree may after-
wards put forth more abundant branches and fruit. And that
this is a good plan for aggrandizing a city and extending its
empire, is proved by the example of Sparta and Athens, both

236 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

most warlike republics, and regulated by most excellent laws;
and yet they did not attain the same greatness as Rome, which
was far less well regulated. No other reason can be assigned
for this than the above; for Rome, from having by the above
two methods increased its population, was enabled to put two
hundred thousand men into the field, whilst Sparta and Ath-
ens could not raise more than twenty thousand each. And
this resulted not from Rome’s being more favorably situated,
but solely from the difference in their mode of proceeding. For
Lycurgus, the founder of the Spartan republic, believing that
nothing would more readily destroy his laws than the admix-
ture of new inhabitants, did everything possible to prevent
strangers from coming into the city. Besides prohibiting
their obtaining citizenship by marriage, and all other inter-
course and commerce that bring men together, he ordered that
in his republic only leather money should be used, so as to
indispose all strangers from bringing merchandise into Sparta,
or exercising any kind of art or industry there, so that the city
never could increase in population. Now, as all the actions of
men resemble those of nature, it is neither natural nor possible
that a slender trunk should support great branches; and thus
a small republic cannot conquer and hold cities and kingdoms
that are larger and more powerful than herself, and if she
does conquer them, she will experience the same fate as a tree
whose branches are larger than the trunk, which will not be
able to support them, and will be bent by every little breeze
that blows. Such was the case with Sparta when she had con-
quered all the cities of Greece; but no sooner did Thebes re-
volt, than all the other cities revolted likewise, and the trunk
was quickly left without any branches. This could not have
happened to Rome, whose trunk was so strong that it could
easily support all its branches. The above modes of proceed-
ing, then, together with others of which we shall speak here-
after, made Rome great and most powerful, which Titus Livius
points out in these few words: “ Rome grew, whilst Alba was
“ ruined.”

Cuap. IV. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 2al

CHAPTER IV.

THE ANCIENT REPUBLICS EMPLOYED THREE DIFFERENT METHODS
FOR AGGRANDIZING THEMSELVES.

WuHoeEver has studied ancient history will have found that
the republics had three methods of aggrandizement. One of
these was that observed by the ancient Tuscans, namely, to
form a confederation of several republics, neither of which had
any eminence over the other in rank or authority ; and in their
conquests of other cities they associated these with themselves,
in a similar manner to that practised by the Swiss nowadays,
and as was done anciently in Greece by the Achaians and the
Adtolians. But as the Romans had many wars with the Tus-
cans, I will (by way of illustrating the first method) give a
more particular account of these people. Before the establish-
ment of the Roman empire, the Tuscans were very powerful in
Italy, both by land and by sea; and although we have no par-
ticular history of them, yet there are some traditions and ves-
tiges of their greatness ; and it is known that they sent a colony
to the shores of the sea north of them, which they called Adria,
and which became so important that it gave its name to that
sea, which is still called the “Adriatic.” It is also known
that they subjected to their authority the entire country
stretching from the Tiber to the foot of the Alps, comprising
the main body of Italy ; although two hundred years before the
Romans became so powerful the Tuscans lost their dominion
over that part of the country which is now called Lombardy.
This province had been seized and occupied by the Gauls, who
either from necessity, or attracted by the soft climate and the
fruits of Italy, and especially the wine, came there led by their
chief Bellovesus ; and having routed and driven out its inhabit-
ants, they established themselves there and built numerous
cities, and gave that country their own name of Gallia, which
it bore until subjugated by the Romans. The Tuscans then
lived in perfect equality, and employed for their aggrandize-
ment the first method mentioned above. Their confederation
consisted of twelve cities, amongst which were Clusium, Veil,
Fiesole, Volterra, and others, who governed their empire ; their
conquests, however, could not extend beyond Italy, a consider-

238 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

able part of which remained still independent of them for
reasons which we will state further on.

The second method employed by the ancient republics for
their aggrandizement was to make associates of other states ;
reserving to themselves, however, the rights of sovereignty,
the seat of empire, and the glory of their enterprises. This
was the method observed by the Romans. The third method
was to make the conquered people immediately subjects, and
not associates, and was practised by the Spartans and Athenians.
Of these three methods the latter is perfectly useless, as was
proved by these two republics, who perished from no other
cause than from having made conquests which they could not
maintain. For to undertake the government of conquered
cities by violence, especially when they have been accustomed
to the enjoyment of liberty, is a most difficult and troublesome
task; and unless you are powerfully armed, you will never
secure their obedience nor be able to govern them. And to
enable you to be thus powerful it becomes necessary to have
associates, by whose aid you can increase the population of your
own city; and as neither Sparta nor Athens did either of these
things, their conquests proved perfectly useless. Rome, on the
contrary, followed the second plan, and did both things, and
consequently rose to such exceeding power; and as she was the
only state that persistently adhered to this system, so she was
also the only one that attained such great power. Having
created for herself many associates throughout Italy, she
granted to them in many respects an almost entire equality,
always, however, reserving to herself the seat of empire and
the right of command; so that these associates (without being
themselves aware of it) devoted their own efforts and blood to
their own subjugation. For so soon as the Romans began to
lead their armies beyond the limits of Italy, they reduced other
kingdoms to provinces, and made subjects of those who, having
been accustomed to live under kings, were indifferent to becom-
ing subjects of another; and from having Roman governors,
and having been conquered by Roman arms, they recognized
no superior to the Romans. Thus the associates of Rome
in Italy found themselves all at once surrounded by Roman
subjects, and at the same time pressed by a powerful city like
Rome; and when they became aware of the trap into which
they had been led, it was too late to remedy the evil, for Rome

Cuap. IV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 239

had become too powerful by the acquisition of foreign prov-
inces, as also within herself by the increased population which
she had armed. And although these associates conspired to-
gether to revenge the wrongs inflicted upon them by Rome,
yet they were quickly subdued, and their condition made even
worse ; for from associates they were degraded to subjects.
This mode of proceeding (as has been said) was practised only
by the Romans; and a republic desirous of aggrandizement
should adopt no other plan, for experience has proved that
there is none better or more sure.

The first method of which we have spoken, that of forming
confederations like those of the Tuscans, Achaians, and Adto-
lians, or the Swiss of the present day, is next best after that
practised by the Romans; for if it does not admit of extensive
conquests, it has at least two other advantages: the one, not
to become easily involved in war, and the other, that whatever
conquests are made are easily preserved. The reason why a
confederation of republics cannot well make extensive con-
quests is, that they are not a compact body, and do not have a
central seat of power, which embarrasses consultation and con-
centrated action. It also makes them less desirous of dominion,
for, being composed of numerous communities that are to share
in this dominion, they do not value conquests as much as a
single republic that expects to enjoy the exclusive benefit of
them herself. Furthermore, they are governed by a council,
which naturally causes their resolutions to be more tardy than
those that emanate from a single centre. Experience has
also shown that this system of confederation has certain limits,
which they have in no instance transgressed ; being composed
of twelve or fourteen states at most, they cannot well extend
beyond that number, as their mutual defence would become
difficult, and therefore they seek no further extension of their
dominion, — either because necessity does not push them to it,
or because they see no advantage in further conquests, for the
reason given above. For in such case they would have to do
one of two things: either to continue adding other states to
their confederation, which would then become so numerous
as to create confusion, or they would have to make the con-
quered people subjects. And as they see the difficulties of
this, and the little advantage that would result from it, they
attach no value to an extension of their dominion. When

Se

240 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

therefore these confederations have become sufficiently strong
by their number, so that they consider themselves secure, they
are apt to do two things: one, to take smaller states under
their protection, and thus to obtain money from them which
they can easily divide amongst themselves; and the other is
to engage in the military service and pay of one prince or an-
other, as the Swiss do nowadays, and as we read in history was
done by those mentioned above. Titus Livius gives us proof
of this when he relates how Philip, king of Macedon, being
engaged in negotiations with Titus Quintius Flaminius in pres-
ence of one of the preetors of the Autohans, addressed that pre-
tor and reproached him with the avarice and lack of good faith
of the AXttolians; saying that “they were not ashamed to take
‘military service under any one, and at the same time supply
“troops to his enemy, so that the Adtolian colors were often
“seen in both opposing armies.” We see therefore that this
system of confederations has always been the same, and has
ever produced the same results. We also see that to make
conquered people subjects has ever been a source of weakness
and of little profit, and that when carried too far it has quickly
proved ruinous to the conqueror. And if this system of mak-
ing subjects is disadvantageous to warlike republics, how much
more pernicious must it be for such as have no armies, as is
the case with the Italian republics of our day ?

All this proves, therefore, the excellence of the plan adopted
by the Romans, which is the more to be admired as they had
no previous example to guide them, and which has not been
followed by any other state since Rome. As to the system of
confederations, that has been followed only by the Swiss, and
by the Suabian league. In conclusion, we will state that many
wise institutions of the Romans, both as regards the goy-
ernment of their internal and external affairs, have not only
not been imitated in our times, but have not even been taken
into account by any one, being deemed by some not to have
been founded in truth, by some to be impossible, and by others
inapplicable and useless; so that by remaining in this igno-
rance Italy has become the prey of whoever has chosen to
attack her. But if it has seemed too difficult to imitate the
example of the Romans, certainly that of the ancient Tuscans
should not be deemed so, especially by the Tuscans of the
present day. For if they failed to acquire that power in Italy

Cuap. V.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 241

which the Roman method of proceeding would have given them,
they at least lived for a long time in security, with much glory
of dominion and of arms, and high praise for their manners
and religion. This power and glory of the ancient Tuscans
was first checked by the Gauls, and afterwards crushed by the
Romans; and was so completely annihilated, that, although
two thousand years ago the power of the Tuscans was very
great, yet now there is scarcely any memento or vestige of it.
And this has caused me to consider as to whence this oblivion
of things arises, which I propose to discuss in the following
chapter.

CHAPTER V.

THE CHANGES OF RELIGION AND OF LANGUAGES, TOGETHER WITH
THE OCCURRENCE OF DELUGES AND PESTILENCES, DESTROY THE
RECORD OF THINGS.

To those philosophers who maintain that the world has ex-
isted from eternity, we might reply, that, if it were really of
such antiquity, there would reasonably be some record beyond
five thousand years, were it not that we see how the records
of time are destroyed by various causes, some being the acts
of men and some of Heaven. Those that are the acts of men
are the changes of religion and of language; for when a new
sect springs up, that is to say a new religion, the first effort
is (by way of asserting itself and gaining influence) to destroy
the old or existing one; and when it happens that the founders
of the new religion speak a different language, then the de-
struction of the old religion is easily effected. This we know
from observing the proceedings of the Christians against the
heathen religion ; for they destroyed all its institutions and all
its ceremonies, and effaced all record of the ancient theology.
It is true that they did not succeed in destroying entirely the
record of the glorious deeds of the illustrious men of the an-
cient creed, for they were forced to keep up the Latin language
by the necessity of writing their new laws in that tongue; but
if they could have written them in a new language (bearing
in mind their other persecutions), there would have been no
record whatever left of preceding events. Whoever reads the

VOL. U. 16

242 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

proceedings of St. Gregory, and of the other heads of the Chris-
tian religion, will see with what obstinacy they persecuted all
ancient memorials, burning the works of the historians and of
the poets, destroying the statues and images and despoiling
everything else that gave but an indication of antiquity. So
that, if they had added a new language to this persecution,
everything relating to previous events would in a very short
time have been sunk in oblivion.

It is reasonable to suppose that what the Christians prac-
tised towards the Pagans, these practised in like manner upon
their predecessors. And as the religions changed two or three
times in six thousand years, all memory of the things done
before that time was lost; and if nevertheless some vestiges
of it remain, they are regarded as fabulous, and are believed by
no one; as is the case with the history of Diodorus Siculus,
who gives an account of some forty or fifty thousand years,
yet is generally looked upon as being mendacious, and I believe
with justice.

As to causes produced by Heaven, they are such as destroy
the human race, and reduce the inhabitants of some parts of
the world to a very few in number; such as pestilence, fam-
ine, or inundations. Of this the latter are the most impor-
tant, partly because they are most universal, and partly because
the few that escape are chiefly ignorant mountaineers, who,
having no knowledge of antiquity themselves, cannot trans-
mit any to posterity. And should there be amongst those who
escape any that have such knowledge, they conceal or pervert
it in their own fashion, for the purpose of gaining influence
and reputation; so that there remains to their successors only
just so much as they were disposed to write, and no more.
And that such inundations, pestilences, and famines occur
cannot be doubted, both because all history is full of accounts
of them, and because we see the effects of them in the oblivion
of things, and also because it seems reasonable that they should
occur. For in nature as in simple bodies, when there is an ac-
cumulation of superfluous matter, a spontaneous purgation
takes place, which preserves the health of that body. And so
it is with that compound body, the human race; when countries
become overpopulated and there is no longer any room for all
the inhabitants to live, nor any other places for them to go to,
these being likewise all fully occupied, — and when human cun-

Cuap. VI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 243

ning and wickedness have gone as far as they can go, — then of
necessity the world must relieve itself of this excess of popula-
tion by one of those three causes; so that mankind, having
been chastised and reduced in numbers, may become better and
live with more convenience. Tuscany then, as I have said
above, was once powerful, religious, and virtuous; it had its
own customs and language; but all this was destroyed by the
Roman power, so that there remained nothing of it but the
memory of its name.

CHAPTER VI.
OF THE MANNER IN WHICH THE ROMANS CONDUCTED THEIR WARS.

Havine explained the means which the Romans employed
for their aggrandizement, we will now show how they con-
ducted their wars; and we shall see with how much prudence
they deviated in all their actions from the methods univer-
sally adopted by other nations, so as to make their road to
supreme power easy. The object of those who make war,
either from choice or ambition, is to conquer and to maintain
their conquests, and to do this in such a manner as to enrich
themselves and not to impoverish the conquered country. To
do this, then, the conqueror should take care not to spend too
much, and in all things mainly to look to the public benefit;
and therefore he should imitate the manner and conduct of
the Romans, which was first of all to “make the war short
“and sharp,” as the French say; for as they always put power-
ful armies into the field, they brought all the wars which they
had with the Latins, the Samnites, and the Tuscans to a very
speedy conclusion. And if we note all they did from the
foundation of Rome until the siege of Veil, we shall observe
that all their expeditions were completed in six, ten, or at
most twenty days. For it was their custom so soon as war
was declared to take the field immediately with their armies,
and promptly to meet the enemy and give him battle; and
when they had gained it, the enemy (to save his country from
being devastated) came to terms, and the Romans condemned
him to cede a portion of his territory, which they converted

244 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

into private possessions, or established colonies upon it, and
which, from being situated upon their confines, served as a
guard to the Roman frontier, with equal benefit to the colon-
ists who received these possessions and to Rome, which was
thus guarded without expense. Nor can any plan be more
effectual, secure, or more beneficial ; for so long as the enemy
remained quiet, so long did that guard suffice; and if he came
out in force to threaten the colony, the Romans also took the
field in force and quickly engaged him in battle and defeated
him, and, having imposed upon him heavier conditions than
before, they returned home. And thus they increased from
day to day their reputation with their enemies, as well as their
strength within their own state. They adhered closely to this
system until after the siege of Veii, when they changed it.
And to enable them to carry on longer wars, and at greater
distances, they began to pay their soldiers, which until then
they had not done, not deeming it necessary for short wars.
But notwithstanding their paying their troops so as to enable
them to keep the field longer, yet they never varied from their
original system of finishing the wars as quickly as possible,
according to time and place; nor did they ever omit the estab-
lishment of colonies. For apart from their usual custom, the
ambition of the Consuls also contributed to make the wars
short, for being elected only for one year, the half of which
they were obliged to remain in quarters, they naturally wanted
to finish the wars quickly, so as to enable them to have the
honors of triumph; and the establishment of colonies proved of
the greatest public advantage and convenience. In the distri-
bution of the booty the Romans, however, made some changes.
In this they were not so liberal as they had been at first,
partly because it did not seem to them so necessary since the
soldiers received regular pay, and partly because the booty was
so much larger that they applied it to the enriching of the
public treasury, so that they might be able to carry on their
enterprises without subjecting the city to any contributions ;
and in this way the public treasury became in a short time
very rich. These two ways, then, of disposing of the booty
and of establishing colonies caused the Romans to become
enriched by their wars, whilst less wise states were impover-
ished by theirs; and this at last came to such a point that a
Consul was not considered as having merited the honors of

Cuap. VII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 245

triumph if he did not bring home to the treasury large quan-
tities of gold and silver, and all sorts of other booty.

And by their above-described conduct in terminating each
war promptly, but exhausting at the same time their enemies
by the constant renewal of the wars, and by defeating their
armies and devastating their territories, and imposing condi-
tions that were most advantageous to themselves, the Romans
steadily increased their wealth and power.

CHAPTER VII.
HOW MUCH LAND THE ROMANS ALLOWED TO EACH COLONIST.

Ir is difficult to find out the truth as to the precise extent of
land which the Romans conceded to each colonist. I believe
they gave them more or less, according to the locality where
they established the colony ; but I judge that, under all circum-
stances and in all localities, the quantity of land bestowed was
small. For the reasons, first, that they might send a greater
number of men to the colonies, who were to serve as a guard
to the country; and, secondly, because the Romans were poor
at home, and it would not have been reasonable that they
should have wished their colonists to become accustomed to
too much abundance.

Titus Livius tells us that, after the taking of Veii, the
Romans established a colony there, and distributed to each
man three and seven twelfths jugers, equal to two and two
thirds acres English measure. For besides the above con-
siderations, they judged that it was not the extent of land,
but its good cultivation, that made wealth. It is necessary also
that each colony should have public pastures for their cattle,
and forests to supply wood for fuel, without which no colony
could exist.

246 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

CHAPTER VIII.

THE REASONS WHY PEOPLE LEAVE THEIR OWN COUNTRY TO
SPREAD OVER OTHERS.

SIncE we have discussed above the manner in which the
Romans conducted their wars, and how the Tuscans were
attacked by the Gauls, it seems to me not foreign to the sub-
ject to point out that there are two different kinds of war.
The one springs from the ambition of princes or republics
that seek to extend their empire; such were the wars of
Alexander the Great, and those of the Romans, and those
which two hostile powers carry on against each other. These
wars are dangerous, but never go so far as to drive all its in-
habitants out of a province, because the conqueror is satisfied
with the submission of the people, and generally leaves them
their dwellings and possessions, and even the enjoyment of
their own institutions. The other kind of war is when an en-
tire people, constrained by famine or war, leave their country
with their families for the purpose of seeking a new home in
a new country, not for the purpose of subjecting it to their
dominion as in the first case, but with the intention of taking
absolute possession of it themselves and driving out or killing
its original inhabitants. This kind of war is most frightful and
cruel; and it is of this kind of war that Sallust speaks at the
end of the history of Jugurtha, when he says that, after Jugur-
tha was vanquished, they heard of the movements of the Gauls,
who were coming into Italy. He then tells us that the Romans
had combated all the other nations only for the purpose of
subjecting them to their empire, but that in their contest with
the Gauls each side fought for its very existence. A prince or
a republic that assails another country is satisfied merely to
kill its chiefs, but when an entire people aims to possess itself
of a country and to live upon that which gives support to its
original inhabitants, it must necessarily destroy them all.

The Romans had three such most dangerous wars to sustain.
The first was when Rome itself was taken by the same Gauls,
who, as we have said, had taken Lombardy from the Tuscans,
and established themselves in that country. Titus Livius as-
signs two causes for this invasion: the first, which I have

Caar. VIII. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 247

already mentioned, was that the Gauls were tempted by the
delicious fruits, and especially the wine of Italy, which they
had not in their own country ; the second was that Gaul was
so overpopulated that the country could not support all its in-
habitants, and therefore its chiefs deemed it necessary that a |
portion of them should go in search of a new country for their
dwelling-place. Having formed that resolution they chose as
captains of those who were to leave Bellovesus and Sicovesus,
two of their princes, of whom the first came into Italy and the
other went to Spain. It was this descent of Bellovesus into
Italy that led to the occupation of Lombardy, and afterwards
to the first attack of the Gauls upon Rome. The second war
with the Gauls occurred soon after the first Carthaginian war,
and it was then that the Romans slaughtered over two hun-
dred thousand Gauls between Piombino and Pisa. The third
war of this kind was when the Teutons and the Cimbrians
came into Italy, who, after having defeated several Roman
armies, were themselves utterly vanquished by Marius. The
Romans then were victorious in these three most perilous
wars ; and it required all their energy to enable them to be
successful ; for we see that when their armies afterwards lost
their ancient valor, the Roman Empire was destroyed by simi-
lar hordes, such as the Goths, Vandals, and others, who made
themselves masters of the whole Western Empire.

These tribes migrated from their own countries, as we have
said above, driven by hunger, or war, or some other scourge,
which they had experienced at home and which obliged them
to seek new dwelling-places elsewhere. Sometimes they came
in overwhelming numbers, making violent irruptions into other
countries, killing the inhabitants and taking possession of
their goods, establishing new kingdoms and changing the very
names of the countries. This was done by Moses, and equally
by those Barbarian tribes that took possession of the Roman
Empire. In fact, the new names which we find in Italy and
in other countries have no other origin than in the fact of
being so called by their new occupants; such for instance as
Lombardy, which was called Cisalpine Gaul, whilst France
was called Transalpine Gaul, and now it is called after the
. Franks who conquered it. Slavonia was called Illyria, Hun-
gary Pannonia, England Britannia; and thus many other
countries have changed names, to enumerate which would be

248 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

tedious. Moses also changed the name of that part of Syria
which he occupied into Judea. And as I have said above that
peoples are sometimes driven from their own countries by war,
which obliges them to seek new dwelling-places, I will cite the
example of the Maurusians, originally inhabiting Syria, who,
when they heard of the coming of the Hebrews, considered
themselves not strong enough to resist them, and therefore
deemed it best to leave their country and save themselves,
rather than to attempt to save the former and be themselves
destroyed. They therefore left Syria with their families and
went into Africa, where they established themselves, after
driving away the original inhabitants whom they found there.
And thus the same people, who were incapable of defending
their own country, yet could seize and occupy that of others.
Procopius, who wrote an account of the war which Belisarius
carried on against the Vandals who had taken possession of
Africa, relates that he himself had seen inscriptions on certain
columns in the places that were inhabited by these Maurusians,
in these words: “ We Maurusians who fled from before Jesus
“the Robber, son of Nava,’ — whence we see the reason of their
having left Syria. Those people, therefore, who are driven from
their own country by the extremest necessity are the most dan-
gerous, and can be resisted only when opposed by formidable
armies. But when such as are obliged to leave their own
country are not numerous, then of course they are less dan-
gerous than a whole people such as we have spoken of; for
they cannot then effect anything by force, but must employ
cunning and address to obtain possession of some abiding-
place; and having succeeded in this, they must seek to main-
tain themselves there by friendships and alliances. It was
thus that Auneas did, and Dido and the Massilians and others,
who all maintained themselves in the places where they had
established themselves with the consent of the inhabitants of
those countries.

The great hordes of Barbarians that have overrun other
countries have nearly all come from Scythia, a cold and sterile
country, whence they were compelled to migrate, the popula-
tion being very great and the country too poor to support it ;
there being many causes that drove them away, and none to
retain them. And if there have been no similar irruptions
of Barbarians during the past few hundred years, it is owing

Cuap. IX.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 249

to a variety of reasons. The first was the great migration that
occurred at the time of the decline of the Roman Empire,
when more than thirty entire tribes left Scythia. The second
was that Germany and Hungary, whence also similar swarms
of people had issued, have so improved their countries that
their population can exist there with comfort, and therefore
have no occasion for migrating. And furthermore the men
of these two nations are most warlike, and thus serve as a
dike and bulwark to keep the Scythians, whose country joins
theirs, from presuming to pass them. There have been also
at times great movements amongst the Tartar hordes, but these
have been checked by the Hungarians and the Poles, who have
often boasted that had it not been for their armies both Italy
and the Church would many atime have felt the pressure of
these Tartar hordes. Let this suffice of those people.

CHAPTER IX.

WHAT THE CAUSES ARE THAT MOST FREQUENTLY PROVOKE WAR
BETWEEN SOVEREIGNS.

THE cause of the war between the Romans and the Samnites,
who had for a long time been allies, was that which generally
produces ruptures between great powers. This cause is some-
times due to accident, or it results from the policy of the party
that desires to make the war. Between the Romans and the
Samnites the cause of war was accidental; for the intention
of the Samnites in attacking the Sidicians, and afterwards
the Campanians, was not to provoke war with the Romans.
But the Campanians, being hard pressed, appealed for help to
Rome, against the wishes both of the Romans and the Samnites,
and gave themselves entirely to the Romans, who for their de-
fence had to take the war upon themselves, believing that they
could not with honor avoid it. For although they felt that it
was not reasonable that they should defend the Campanians
against the Samnites, who were their own allies, yet it seemed
to them that it would be disgraceful in them not to defend them
as voluntary subjects; persuaded that, if they did not under-
take their defence, it would have the effect of alienating forever

250 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

all those who might desire to come voluntarily under their
dominion. And as the aim of Rome was empire and glory,
and not repose, they could not decline this opportunity.

A similar occasion gave rise to the first war against the Car.
thaginians, when the Romans undertook the defence of the
Messenians in Sicily, which may also be attributed to accident.
But the second war between the Romans and Carthaginians
was not accidental; for Hannibal, the Carthaginian general,
assailed the Saguntines, who were the allies of the Romans in
Spain, not so much for the purpose of injuring the Saguntines
as to provoke the Romans to arms, so as to have occasion to
combat them and pass into Italy. This mode of provoking new
wars as always been common amongst potentates, who want
at least to make a show of respect for treaties. For if I desire
to make war upon any prince with whom I have concluded
treaties that have been faithfully observed for a length of time,
I shall attack some friend or ally of his under some color of
justification, well knowing that, in thus attacking his friend,
he will resent it, and I shall then have grounds for declaring
war against him; or, if he does not resent it, he will thereby
manifest his weakness and lack of fidelity in not defending an
ally entitled to his protection. And one or the other of these
means will make him lose his reputation, and facilitate the exe-
cution of my designs.

We must note, in relation to the course of the Campanians
in giving themselves as voluntary subjects to the Romans by
way of inducing these to assume the war against the Samnites,
that the best remedy which a city has, that is unable to defend
herself alone, and is yet resolved anyhow to resist her aggres-
sor, is to give herself freely to whomever she desires for her
defender; as the Campanians did to the Romans, and the Flor-
entines to King Robert of Naples, who, though unwilling to
defend them as friends, yet defended them afterwards as sub-
jects against the power of Castruccio of Lucca, when he pressed
them hard.

Cuap. X.] LEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVICS. 251

CHAPTER X.

MONEY IS NOT THE SINEWS OF WAR, ALTHOUGH IT IS GEN-
ERALLY SO CONSIDERED.

EVERY one may begin a war at his pleasure, but cannot so
finish it. A prince, therefore, before engaging in any enter-
prise should well measure his strength, and govern himself
accordingly ; and he must be very careful not to deceive him-
self in the estimate of his strength, which he will assuredly do
if he measures it by his money, or by the situation of his coun-
try, or the good disposition of his people, unless he has at the
same time an armed force of his own. For although the above
things will increase his strength, yet they will not give it to
him, and of themselves are nothing, and will be of no use
without a devoted army. Neither abundance of money nor
natural strength of the country will suffice, nor will the loyalty
and good will of his subjects endure, for these cannot remain
faithful to a prince who is incapable of defending them. Nei-
ther mountains nor lakes nor inaccessible places will present
any difficulties to an enemy where there is a lack of brave
defenders. And money alone, so far from being a means of
defence, will only render a prince the more liable to being
plundered. There cannot, therefore, be a more erroneous opin-
ion than that money is the sinews of war. This was said by
Quintus Curtius in the war between Antipater of Macedon and
the king of Sparta, when he tells that want of money obliged
the king of Sparta to come to battle, and that he was routed ;
whilst, if he could have delayed the battle a few days, the news
of the death of Alexander would have reached Greece, and in
that case he would have remained victor without fighting.
But lacking money, and fearing the defection of his army,
who were unpaid, he was obliged to try the fortune of battle,
and was defeated; and in consequence of this, Quintus Curtius
affirms money to be the sinews of war. This opinion is con-
stantly quoted, and is acted upon by princes who are unwise
enough to follow it; for relying upon it, they believe that plenty
of money is all they require for their defence, never thinking
that, if treasure were sufficient to insure victory, Darius would
have vanquished Alexander, and the Greeks would have tri-

252 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST | (Boor IL

umphed over the Romans; and, in our day, Duke Charles the
Bold would have beaten the Swiss; and, quite recently, the
Pope and the Florentines together would have had no difficulty
in defeating Francesco Maria, nephew of Pope Julius II., in the
war of Urbino. All that we have named were vanquished by
those who regarded good troops, and not money, as the sinews
of war. Amongst other objects of interest which Croesus, king
of Lydia, showed to Solon of Athens, was his countless treas-
ure; and to the question as to what he thought of his power,
Solon replied, “ that he did not consider him powerful on that
‘account, because war was made with iron, and not with gold,
‘and that some one might come who had more iron than he,
‘and would take his gold from him.’ When after the death
of Alexander the Great an immense swarm of Gauls descended
into Greece, and thence into Asia, they sent ambassadors to the
king of Macedon to treat with him for peace. The king, by way
of showing his power, and to dazzle them, displayed before
them great quantities of gold and silver; whereupon the am-
bassadors of the Gauls, who had already as good as signed the
treaty, broke off all further negotiations, excited by the intense
desire to possess themselves of all this gold; and thus the
very treasure which the king had accumulated for his defence
brought about his spoliation. The Venetians, a few years ago,
having also their treasury full, lost their entire state without
their money availing them in the least in their defence.

I maintain, then, contrary to the general opinion, that the
sinews of war are not gold, but good soldiers; for gold alone
will not procure good soldiers, but good soldiers will always pro-
cure gold. Had the Romans attempted to make their wars with
gold instead of with iron, all the treasure of the world would
not have sufficed them, considering the great enterprises they
were engaged in, and the difficulties they had to encounter.
But by making their wars with iron, they never suffered for
the want of gold; for it was brought to them, even into their
camp, by those who feared them. And if want of money
forced the king of Sparta to try the fortune of battle, it was
no more than what often happened from other causes; for we
have seen that armies short of provisions, and having to starve
or hazard a battle, will always prefer the latter as the more
honorable course, and where fortune may yet in some way
favor them. It has also often happened that a general, seeing

Cuap. X.] TEN: BOOKS OF TITUS LIViUs: 253

that his opposing enemy is about to receive reinforcements, has
preferred to run the risk of a battle at once, rather than wait
until his enemy is reinforced and fight him then under greater
disadvantage. We have seen also in the case of Asdrubal,
when he was attacked upon the river Metaurus by Claudius
Nero, together with another Roman Consul, that a general who
has to choose between battle or flight will always prefer to
fight, as then, even in the most doubtful case, there is still a
chance of victory, whilst in flight his loss is certain anyhow.

There are, then, an infinity of reasons that may induce a
general to give battle against his will, and the want of money
may in some instances be one of them; but that is no reason
why money should be deemed the sinews of war, which more
than anything else will influence him to that course. I repeat
it again, then, that it is not gold, but good soldiers, that insure
success in war. Certainly money is a necessity, but a second-
ary one, which good soldiers will overcome; for it is as impos-
sible that good soldiers should not be able to procure gold, as it
is impossible for gold to procure good soldiers. History proves
in a thousand cases what I maintain, notwithstanding that
Pericles counselled the Athenians to make war with the entire
Peloponnesus, demonstrating to them that by perseverance and
the power of money they would be successful. And although
it is true that the Athenians obtained some successes in that
war, yet they succumbed in the end; and good counsels and
the good soldiers of Sparta prevailed over the perseverance
and money of the Athenians. But the testimony of Titus
Livius upon this question is more direct than any other, where,
in discussing whether Alexander the Great, had he come into
Italy, would have vanquished the Romans, he points out that
there are three things pre-eminently necessary to success in
war,—plenty of good troops, sagacious commanders, and good
fortune ; and in examining afterwards whether the Romans or
Alexander excelled most in these three points, he draws his
conclusion without ever mentioning the subject of money. The
Campanians, when requested by the Sidicians to take up arms
in their behalf against the Samnites, may have measured their
strength by their money, and not by their soldiers; for having
resolved to grant the required assistance, they were constrained
after two defeats to become tributary to the Romans to save
themselves.

bS
cn
phe

DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boor IL

CHAPTER XI.

IT IS NOT WISE TO FORM AN ALLIANCE WITH A PRINCE THAT
HAS MORE REPUTATION THAN POWER.

Titus Livius, wishing to show the error of the Sidicians in
trusting to the aid of the Campanians, and the mistake of the
latter in thinking themselves able to help them, could not have
expressed this idea more forcibly than in these words: “ The
‘‘Campanians brought a greater name in aid of the Sidicians
“than forces for their protection.” Whence we should conclude
that the alliances made with princes who on account of their re-
moteness cannot conveniently come to your assistance, or who
lack the power to do so from internal dissensions or from any
other cause, bring more reputation than substantial help to
those who rely upon them. This happened in our day to the
Florentines, when they were assailed in 1479 by the Pope and
the king of Naples, and when they derived from their alliance
with the king of France “more reputation than protection.”
The same thing would also happen to any one who should
engage in any enterprise relying upon the friendship of the
Emperor Maximilian; for that would be one of those alliances
that would bring to him who made it “more reputation than
“ protection,” like what we have said of the Campanians and
the Sidicians.

The Campanians, then, made a mistake in imagining them-
selves more powerful than they were in reality; and thus
a want of proper judgment sometimes causes men, who are
incompetent to defend themselves, to engage in war for the
defence of others. This was done also by the Tarentines,
who, when the Roman army was opposing that of the Samnites,
sent ambassadors to the Roman Consul to let him know that
they wanted peace between the two nations, and that they were
ready to make war upon the one that should refuse peace.
Whereupon the Consul, laughing at their proposition, caused
his bugles to sound to battle in presence of the ambassadors,
and commanded his army to attack the enemy; thus showing
to the Tarentines by act and not by words of what answer he
deemed their proposal worthy.

Having discussed in the present chapter the wrong course

Cuap. XII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 255

which princes sometimes take for the defence of others, I will
in the next speak of the means they should employ for their
own defence.

CHAPTER Ail.

WHETHER IT IS BETTER, WHEN APPREHENDING AN ATTACK, TO
AWAIT IT AT HOME, OR TO CARRY THE WAR INTO THE ENEMY’S

COUNTRY.

I HAVE heard men of much practical experience in the art
of war discuss the question whether, supposing there to be two
princes of nearly equal power, one of whom, being the most
spirited, has declared war against the other, it be better for
the latter to await the attack within his own territory, or to
march directly into the country of the former and attack him;
and I have heard them give good reasons in favor of either
proceeding. Those favoring the latter course cited the advice
given by Croesus to Cyrus, to whom, upon arriving at the con-
fines of the Messagetes, their queen, Tamiris, sent to ask which
course he preferred, whether to come into her kingdom and at-
tack her there, in which case she would await him, or that she
should come out to meet him beyond her confines. When the
matter was under discussion, Croesus, contrary to the opinion
of the others, advised Cyrus to attack Tamiris within her own
possessions, alleging that,if he were to defeat her away from
her country, he would not be able to take her kingdom from
her, as she would in that case have time to recover; but if he
vanquished her within her dominions, he would be able to fol-
low her in her flight, and thus, without giving her time to
recover, he could deprive her of her state. They cited also
the advice which Hannibal gave to Antiochus, when that king
contemplated war against the Romans, on which occasion that
general pointed out to him that the Romans could never be
beaten except in Italy, for there he could turn against them
their arms, their allies, and their wealth; but if he combated
them away from Italy, leaving them that country undisturbed,
he would leave them a never-failing source of supply of forces
whenever they might need them; and he concluded that it
would be easier to take the city of Rome from the Romans

256 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

than their empire, and all Italy sooner than her provinces.
They furthermore adduced the case of Agathocles, who, not
being able to sustain the attacks of the Carthaginians at
home, became the assailant himself, and reduced them to the
necessity of suing for peace. They also cited Scipio, who,
to relieve Italy, carried the war into Africa.

Those of the opposite opinion maintained that the greatest
evil that can be inflicted upon an enemy is to draw him away
from his own country; and, in support of that opinion, quoted
the Athenians, who, so long as they made war at their con-
venience at home, were always victorious, but when they
sent their army to a distance from home into Sicily, lost their
liberty. They cited the poetic fable, according to which An-
tus, king of Libya, being attacked by Hercules the Egyptian,
proved unconquerable so long as he remained within the limits
of his own kingdom, but when he was drawn away from home
by the artfulness of Hercules lost his state and his life. This
gave rise to the fable that the giant Antaus, in his contest
with Hercules, recovered his strength whenever thrown to the
ground, the earth being his mother; and therefore Hercules,
upon observing this, lifted him high in the air and crushed
him. Amongst modern instances they cited the well-known
case of King Ferdinand of Naples, esteemed one of the wisest
princes of his time. When, two years before his death, the
report came to him that Charles VIII, king of France, in-
tended to attack him, he at once set to work to prepare for
the war; but falling sick and about to die, he left, amongst
other instructions to his son Alfonso, the advice to await the
enemy within his kingdom, and on no account to move his
forces outside of his own dominions. Alfonso, however, did
not heed this advice, but sent his army into the Romagna, and, —
without fighting, lost it and his state. Besides the instances
quoted, the reasons brought forward in favor of one or the
other opinion were, that he who attacks acts with more spirit
than he who awaits the attack, and so inspires the troops
with greater confidence; by attacking the enemy in his own
country, you deprive him also of many advantages in availing
of his resources ; his subjects, who are plundered, can afford
him no assistance, and the presence of the enemy constrains
the prince to be more considerate in exacting money or too
many other services from them; so that, as Alexander said,

Cuap. XII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 257

the very sources that enable him to sustain the war will be
dried up. Besides, the attacking troops, being in a strange
country, feel the necessity of fighting, which very necessity
inspires them with greater courage.

On the other hand, it is said that by awaiting the enemy
many advantages are gained, for without inconveniencing your
own people you may cause great inconvenience to the enemy
in the supply of provisions and all the other things that an
army requires. By the better knowledge of the country you
can impede the enemy’s designs; and the facility of uniting
all your troops enables you to oppose him with greater num-
bers, whilst he has not been able to withdraw all his forces
from his own country. And then in case of defeat you can
more readily reorganize your army, because many of your sol-
diers will escape, finding ready places of refuge near at hand.
Nor have you to send to a distance for reinforcements, so that
you are enabled to employ all your forces without risking all
your fortune, whilst in a distant war you risk all your fortune
without being able to employ all your forces. Some by way
of more effectually weakening the enemy permit him to enter
some days’ march into their country, and allow him to take
a number of places, so that his army may be weakened by his
having to garrison those places, and then they may be able
to combat him the more easily.

But to say now what I think on the subject, I believe that we
must make this distinction. A country is either well armed, as
that of the Romans was, or as that of the Swiss is nowadays ;
or it is not well armed, as was the case with the Carthaginians,
and is at present with France and Italy. In the latter case

you must keep the enemy at a distance; for as your strength
' consists in your money, and not in soldiers, you are lost when-
ever you are prevented from availing of your financial re-
sources, and nothing interferes so much with that as war
within your own territory. The Carthaginians are an instance
of this: so long as they were undisturbed at home, their reve-
nues enabled them to carry on the war against the Romans;
but when they were attacked in their own country, they were
not able even to resist Agathocles. The Florentines could not
defend themselves against Castruccio, lord of Lucca, who had
attacked them at home, so that they were obliged to give them-
selves to Robert of Naples to obtain his protection. But after

VOL. Il. ivé

258 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox II.

the death of Castruccio these same Florentines had the cour-
age to attack the Duke of Milan within his own dominions, and
to deprive him of his state. As much courage as they dis-
played in the war at a distance, just so much weakness did
they exhibit in the war at home. But when nations are armed
as the Romans were and the Swiss are, then it becomes the
more difficult to overcome them the nearer home they are at-
tacked; for then these states can unite more forces to resist
an invasion than to attack an enemy ata distance. Nor does
the authority of Hannibal affect my opinion upon that point;
for his passions and his interests dictated the counsel he had
given to Antiochus. For if the Romans had experienced in
Gaul three such defeats as they suffered at the hands of Han-
nibal in Italy, they would certainly have been ruined; for
they could not have availed of the fragments of their armies
as they did in Italy, and could not have reorganized them with
the same ease; nor could they have resisted the enemy so well
with the same forces. They never sent mere than fifty thou-
sand men to invade any province; but to defend themselves
at home against the Gauls after the first Punic war, they put
eighteen hundred thousand men under arms. Nor could they
have vanquished the Gauls in Lombardy as they did in Tus-
cany, for they could not have moved so large a force against
that numerous enemy at so great a distance, nor carried on
the war there with the same advantages. The Cimbrians
routed a Roman army in Germany, and the Romans could not
repair the disaster; but when the Cimbrians came into Italy,
the Romans were able to unite all their forces and destroyed
the Cimbrians. The Swiss are easily beaten when away from
home, where they cannot send more than thirty or forty thou-
sand men; but it is most difficult to overcome them at home,
where they are able to gather together a hundred thousand
men.

I conclude then, again, that a prince who has his people well
armed and disciplined for war should always await a powerful
and dangerous enemy at home, and should not go to meet him
at a distance. But a prince whose subjects are unarmed, and
the country unaccustomed to war, should always keep it as
far away from home as possible; and thus both one and the
other will best defend themselves, each in his own way.

Onir. X11] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 259

CHAPTER XIII.

CUNNING AND DECEIT WILL SERVE A MAN BETTER THAN FORCE
TO RISE FROM A BASE CONDITION TO GREAT FORTUNE.

I BELIEVE it to be most true that it seldom happens that men
rise from low condition to high rank without employing either
force or fraud, unless that rank should be attained either by
gift or inheritance. Nor do I believe that force alone will ever
be found to suffice, whilst it will often be the case that cun-
ning alone serves the purpose; as is clearly seen by whoever
reads the life of Philip of Macedon, or that of Agathocles the
Sicilian, and many others, who from the lowest or most moder-
ate condition have achieved thrones and great empires. Xeno-
phon shows in his Life of Cyrus the necessity of deception to
success: the first expedition of Cyrus against the king of Ar-
menia is replete with fraud, and it was deceit alone, and not
force, that enabled him to seize that kingdom. And Xenophon
draws no other conclusion from it than that a prince who
wishes to achieve great things must learn to deceive. Cyrus
also practised a variety of deceptions upon Cyaxares, king of
the Medes, his maternal uncle ; and Xenophon shows that with-
out these frauds Cyrus would never have achieved the great-
ness which he did attain. Nor do I believe that there was
ever a man who from obscure condition arrived at great power
by merely employing open force; but there are many who have
succeeded by fraud alone, as, for instance, Giovanni Galeazzo
Visconti in taking the state and sovereignty of Lombardy
from his uncle, Messer Bernabo. And that which princes are
obliged to do in the beginning of their rise, republics are equally
obliged to practise until they have become powerful enough so
that force alone suffices them. And as Rome employed every
means, by chance or choice, to promote her aggrandizement,
so she also did not hesitate to employ fraud; nor could she
have practised a greater fraud than by taking the course we
have explained above of making other peoples her allies and
associates, and under that title making them slaves, as she
did with the Latins and other neighboring nations. For first
she availed of their arms to subdue their mutual neighbors,
and thus to increase her state and reputation ; and after having

260 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

subdued these, her power increased to that degree that she
could subjugate each people separately in turn. The Latins
never became aware that they were wholly slaves until they
had witnessed two defeats of the Samnites, and saw them
obliged to accept the terms of peace dictated to them. As
this victory greatly increased the reputation of the Romans
with the more distant princes, who felt the weight of their
name before experiencing that of their arms, so it excited
envy and apprehension in those who had seen and felt their
arms, amongst whom were the Latins. And this jealousy and
fear were so powerful that not only the Latins, but also the
colonies which the Romans had established in Latium, together
with the Campanians, whose defence the Romans had but a
short time previously undertaken, conspired together against
the Romans. The Latins began the war in the way we have
shown that most wars are begun, not by attacking the Romans,
but by defending the Sidicians from the Samnites, against
whom the latter were making war with the permission of the
Romans. And that it is true that the Latins began the war
because they had at last become aware of the bad faith of the
Romans is demonstrated by Titus Livius, when at an assem-
bly of the Latin people he puts the following words into the
mouth of Annius Setinus, a Latin Pretor: “For if now we
“can bear servitude under the specious name of equal con-
*‘ federates,” &c.

We sce therefore that the Romans in the early beginning of
their power already employed fraud, which it has ever been
necessary for those to practise who from small beginnings wish
to rise to the highest degree of power; and then it is the less
censurable the more it is concealed, as was that practised by
the Romans.

CHAPTER Aly:

MEN OFTEN DECEIVE THEMSELVES IN BELIEVING THAT BY HUMIL-
ITY THEY CAN OVERCOME INSOLENCE.

WE often see that humility not only is of no service, but is
actually hurtful, especially when employed towards insolent
men, who from jealousy or some other motive have conceived

Cuap. XIV. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 261

a hatred against you. Of this our historian gives proof on the
occasion of the war between the Romans and Latins. For
when the Samnites complained to the Romans that the Latins
had attacked them, the Romans, unwilling to irritate the Lat-
ins, declined to forbid them to continue that war: this not
only had the desired effect of not irritating them, but actually
encouraged them to that degree that they almost immediately
displayed open enmity towards the Romans. This appears
from the words employed by the same Latin Pretor Annius,
at the same assembly mentioned above, when he said: “ You
“have put their patience to the proof in refusing them troops ;
“who can doubt that this would have excited their resentment,
‘and yet they have quietly borne this vexation. They have
“heard that we are arming against their allies the Samnites,
“and yet have not stirred from their city. Whence then
“comes their great modesty, but from their knowledge of our
“nower and their own?” These words show in the clearest
manner to what degree the patience of the Romans increased
the insolence of the Latins. And therefore no prince should
ever forego his rank, nor should he ever voluntarily give up
anything (wishing to do so honorably) unless he is able or
believes himself able to hold it. For it is almost always better
(matters having come to the point that he cannot give it up in
the above manner) to allow it to be taken from him by force,
rather than by the apprehension of force. For if he yields it
from fear, it is for the purpose of avoiding war, and he will
rarely escape from that; for he to whom he has from cow-
ardice conceded the one thing will not be satisfied, but will
want to take other things from him, and his arrogance will
increase as his esteem for the prince is lessened.\ And, on the
other hand, the zeal of the prince’s friends will be chilled on
seeing him appear feeble or cowardly. But if, so soon as he
discerns his adversary’s intention, he prepares his forces, even
though they be inferior, the enemy will begin to respect him,
and the other neighboring princes will appreciate him the
more; and seeing him armed for defence, those even will
come to his aid who, seeing him give up himself, would never
have assisted him.

This reasoning applies to the case when there is only one
enemy ; but when there are several, it will always be a wise
plan for the prince to yield something of his possessions to

262 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book II.

some one of them, either for the purpose of gaining him over
if war has already been declared, or to detach him from the
enemies that are leagued against him.

CHAPTER XV.

FEEBLE STATES ARE ALWAYS UNDECIDED IN THEIR RESOLVES ;
AND SLOW RESOLVES ARE INVARIABLY INJURIOUS.

In connection with this war between the Latins and the Ro-
mans, and its origin, we should observe that it is well in all
deliberations to come at once to the essential point, and not
always to remain in a state of indecision and uncertainty.
This was evidenced in the council which the Latins held on
the occasion when they contemplated detaching themselves
from the Romans. For the Romans, being apprised of the evil
disposition of the Latin people, wished to assure themselves
upon that point, and to see whether they might regain their
friendship without resorting to arms, and therefore requested
the Latins to send eight of their citizens to Rome for a confer-
ence. When the Latins were informed of this, conscious of
having done many things that were displeasing to the Romans,
they convoked a council to decide as to who should go to
Rome, and to instruct them as to what they should say. And
whilst discussing the matter, their Pretor Annius said these
words: “TIT hold it to be of the highest importance for our in-
“terests that we should think rather of what we shall do than
“what we shall say; when we have decided upon that, it will
“be easy to accommodate our words to our acts.” Certainly a
most correct maxim, and one that should be borne in mind by
all princes and republics; for it is impossible to explain one’s
self properly when in doubt and indecision as to what is to be
done; but once resolved and decided, it is easy to find suitable
words. I have the more willingly remarked upon this point
as I have often known such indecision to interfere with
proper public action, to the detriment and shame of our re-
public. And it will always happen that in doubtful cases,
where prompt resolution is required, there will be this inde-
cision when weak men have to deliberate and resolve. Slow

Cuap. XV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS, 263

and dilatory deliberations are not less injurious than indecis-
ion, especially when you have to decide in favor of an ally;
for tardiness helps no one, and generally injures yourself. It
ordinarily arises from lack of courage or force, or from the
evil disposition of those who have to deliberate, being influ-
enced by passion to ruin the state or to serve some personal
interests, and who therefore do not allow the deliberations to
proceed, but thwart and impede them in every way. Good citi-
zens therefore never impede deliberations, especially in matters
that admit of no delay, even if they see the popular impulse
tending to a dangerous course.

After the death of Hieronymus, tyrant of Syracuse, and
whilst the war between the Carthaginians and Romans was at
its height, a difference arose amongst the Syracusans whether
they should declare in favor of the Romans or the Cartha-
ginians. And party feeling ran so high that the matter re-
mained undecided, and they came to no conclusion until finally
Apollonides, one of the first men of Syracuse, in a speech full
of good sense, showed them “that those were to blame who
“were of the opinion that they should adhere to the cause of
“the Romans, and not those who wanted them to support the
“Carthaginians; but that their indecision and tardiness in
“determining either one way or the other was greatly to be
“deprecated, because that indecision would assuredly lead to
“the ruin of the republic; but when they once had decided
“upon a course, whatever it might be, they might then hope
“to derive some advantage from it.” Titus Livius could not
have shown the disadvantages of indecision more strikingly
than by this example. He shows it also in the case of the
Latins, when they had asked the Lavinians for help against
the Romans. These delayed so long before determining upon
it, that, when they had finally just marched out of the city to
render the wished for succor, the news came that the Latins
were routed; this caused their Pretor Milonius to say, “ that
“this short march would cost them dear with the Romans; for
“if they had decided at once either to assist the Latins or not,
“they would in the latter case not have irritated the Romans ;
“and in the former case, their help, having come in time, might
“by the junction of their forces have enabled the Latins to be
“victorious ; but that, by delaying their decision, they could
but lose in either case,” —as indeed it happened.

264 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Boox II.

If the Florentines had acted upon this principle they would
not have suffered so much trouble and injury from the French,
when King Louis XII. of France came into Italy to attack
Lodovico, Duke of Milan. For when that king meditated this
descent, he sought the alliance of the Florentines; and their
ambassadors to the king agreed with him that Florence should
remain neutral, on condition that the king after arriving in
Italy should take their state under his protection, and that the
republic should have one month’s time to ratify this treaty.
But this ratification was protracted so long by those who most
imprudently favored the cause of Duke Lodovico, that before
it was done the king had already been victorious; and when
finally the Florentines wished to ratify the treaty, he declined
it, seeing that the friendship of the Florentines was not a
voluntary but a forced one. This cost the Florentines a great
deal of money, and came near losing them their state, as hap-
pened to them another time afterwards from a similar cause.
And this course was the more reprehensible cs it was not even
of service to Duke Lodovico, who, had he been victorious,
would have shown even more resentment against the Floren-
tines than King Louis did.

Although I have already in another chapter treated of the
evils resulting to republics from such weakness, yet, as the
opportunity presented itself anew, I wished to repeat it, because
it seems to me one of the things which republics similar to
ours should note especially.

CHAPTER XVI.

WHEREIN THE MILITARY SYSTEM DIFFERS FROM THAT OF THE
ANCIENTS.

THE most important battle ever fought by the Romans in
any war was that with the Latins during the consulate of Tor-
quatus and Decius. As by the loss of this battle the Latins, as
a matter of course, became slaves to the Romans, so would the
latter have become slaves to the Latins if these had been victo-
rious. Titus Livius is also of the same opinion; and represents
the two armies to have been in all respects equal as regards

Cuap. XVI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 265

numbers, discipline, bravery, and obstinacy, the only difference
having been in the commanders, those of the Roman army havy-
ing displayed more skill and heroism than those of the Latins.
We also observe, in the course of this battle, two unprecedented
occurrences, the like of which have hardly ever been known
since; for to sustain the courage of their soldiers, and render
them obedient to command and more determined in action, one
of the two Consuls killed himself, and the other slew his son.
The equality which Titus Livius says existed between the two
armies resulted from the fact that they had for a long time
combated together, spoke the same language, had the same
discipline and the same arms; and therefore their order of
battle was the same, and the very names of the divisions of
their armies and their officers were identical. Being then
of equal strength and courage, it was necessary that something
extraordinary should occur to give greater steadiness and ob-
stinacy to the courage of the one than the other; for, as we
have said elsewhere, victory depends upon this stubbornness,
for so long as that endures in the combatants, no army will
ever turn its back. And to make that spirit more enduring in
the hearts of the Romans than with the Latins, partly chance
and partly the heroism of the Consuls gave occasion to Tor-
quatus to sacrifice his son, and Decius to kill himself.

In demonstrating this equality of the two contending armies,
Titus Livius gives the whole organization of the Roman armies,
and their order of battle; as he has explained this very fully, I
shall not repeat it here, but will only remark upon such points
as seem to me especially noteworthy, and the neglect of which
by all the commanders of our times has given rise to great dis-
orders in the armies during battle. I say, then, that from the
evidence of Titus Livius we gather that the Roman armies were
composed of three main divisions; the first was called “ Has-
tati,” the second “ Principi,” and the third “ Triarii,” and each
of these divisions had its cavalry. In the ordering of a battle
they placed the Hastati in front, directly behind came the Prin-
cipi, and the third rank was formed of the Triarii. The cav-
alry of all of them were placed to the right and left of each line,
and these squadrons, from their form and the place they occu-
pied, were called “ Ale,” or wings, because they seemed like
two wings of the body of the army. The division of the Hastati,
which was in front, was closely serried, so that they might more

266 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

effectually strike the enemy, or sustain the shock of his attack.
The line of the Principi (not being the first to engage in the
fight, and bound to support the first line when it was struck or
in danger of being overcome) was not closely serried like the
first, but kept its ranks open so as to receive within them the
first, without being thrown into confusion by it, whenever
the pressure of the enemy obliged them to retreat. The third
line, or the Triarii, had to keep its ranks even more open than
the second, so that in case of need it might receive within them
the lines of both the Hastati and the Principi. These three
lines thus deployed began the battle, and if the line of the
Hastati was forced or beaten, they retreated within the open
ranks of the Principi, and the two lines thus united into one
renewed the fight; and if these were also forced and repulsed,
they all fell back within the open ranks of the Triarii, and all
three lines, now forming but one body, again resumed the bat-
tle ; and if they were overpowered (having no further reserve
to fall back upon) the day was lost. And a3 every time that
the line of the Triarii became engaged, the army was con-
sidered in danger, it gave rise to the saying, “The matter has
“come to the Triarii,” which was as much as to say, “ We have
“come to our last resource.”

The commanders of our day, having entirely abandoned the
ancient military organization and discipline, have also aban-
doned this plan of order of battle, which is none the less a most
important one. For a general who disposes his army in such
manner that it can rally three several times in the course of a
battle, must have fortune against him three times before being
defeated, and must have an enemy opposed to him sufficiently
superior to overcome him three times. But if an army can re-
sist only a single shock, as is the case nowadays with the Chris-
tian armies, it may easily lose the battle; for with the slightest
disorder even the most mediocre courage may carry off the vic-
tory. And what prevents our armies from being able to rally
three times is the abandonment of the old Roman method of
receiving one rank within another; and this has arisen from
the present system of order of battle, which has one of these
two defects: either the troops are formed shoulder to shoulder
in one line, so as to present a very wide front and very little
depth, which makes the order of battle very weak, being so
thin; or, by way of making it stronger, they reduce the width

Caap. XVI.] TEN BOOKS OF -TITUS LIVIUS. 267

of front, and form their troops according to the Roman fashion.
In the latter case, if the first rank is broken, it will be unable
to fall back into the second rank, which has no open spaces to
receive it, and they will fall into utter confusion, and be disor-
ganized ; for if the front rank be struck, it will recoil upon the
second line, and if the second line wishes to come to the front,
it is impeded by the first. Thus the first hne pushing upon
the second, and the second upon the third, there ensues such
confusion that the slightest accident may cause the loss of the
whole army.

At the battle of Ravenna, which according to our modern
ideas was a well-contested battle, in which the French com-
mander, Gaston de Foix, was killed, the French and Spanish
troops formed in the manner first above described, that is
to say, the two armies were placed side by side, so as to
present a very wide front and but little depth. And this
is the order generally adopted by modern commanders when
they have a large plain for their battle-ground, as at Ravenna ;
for they are so convinced of the disorder produced by the fall-
ing back of the first line upon the second, that they avoid as
much as possible the system of several successive lines, and
form a wide front, as we have-explained. But when the na-
ture of the country restricts them in this, they are obliged to
adopt the other system, without thinking of preventing its dis-
advantages. In similar disorder their cavalry rides through
the enemy’s country for the purpose of plunder, or some other
hostile purpose. At Santo Regolo and elsewhere, in the war
which the Florentines carried on against the Pisans on account
of their rebellion, after the coming into Italy of Charles VIII.,
king of France, the Florentines owed their defeat to nothing
but their own cavalry, which being in front was repulsed by the
enemy, and, being thrown back upon the Florentine infantry,
broke through their lines; whereupon all the rest of the army
turned their backs and took to flight. Messer Criaco del Borgo,
general of the Florentine infantry, has repeatedly assured me
himself that he would never have been routed but for his own
cavalry. The Swiss, who are masters in the modern art of
war, whenever they serve with the French, are above all careful
to place themselves at the wings, so that, in case the cavalry of
their allies is repulsed, it may not be thrown back upon them.

Although this would seem easy to understand, and even

268 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

more easy to do, yet there has been thus far not one of our
modern commanders who has imitated the method of the ancient
Romans, and corrected the faults of the modern system. They
divide their armies also into three corps, calling the first the
‘“ Vanguard,” the second the “Corps of Battle,’ and the third
the “ Rear-guard”; but this division is of little use to them,
except in providing quarters for them separately ; for in active
service it is rare that they do not unite them all into one body,
so that all share the same fortune of battle. And generally, by
way of excusing their ignorance, they allege that the force
of the artillery will not allow them in the present day to follow
the ancient practices; but this point we will discuss in the fol-
luwing chapter, where we shall examine the question whether
the use of artillery really prevents the adoption of the ancient
method.

CHAPTER XVII.

OF THE VALUE OF ARTILLERY TO MODERN ARMIES, AND WHETHER
THE GENERAL OPINION RESPECTING IT IS CORRECT.

CoNSIDERING the many open field fights, or pitched battles as
they are called in our day, that were fought by the Romans at
various times, I have reflected upon the opinion so universally
entertained, that, if artillery had existed in ancient times, the
Romans would not have been allowed so easily to conquer prov-
inces and make other peoples tributary to themselves; nor
would they in any way have been able to extend their dominions
so largely. It is further said, that the use of these fire-arms
prevents men from displaying the same personal valor as they .
could in ancient times; that it is more difficult to join battle
than formerly, and that the same organization and discipline
of armies cannot be preserved ; and that henceforth the battles
will be fought mainly by artillery. I deem it, therefore, not
from our purpose to examine whether these opinions are cor-
rect, and in how far the introduction of artillery has increased
or diminished the strength of armies, and whether it gives or
takes away from good commanders the opportunity of acting
valiantly.

I shall begin by examining the first proposition, that the

Guay, XVIL) © TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 269

Romans never could have carried their conquests so far if
artillery had been in use in their time. To this I reply, that
wars are either defensive or aggressive, and thus we must in-
quire first whether artillery be most useful for attack or for
defence. Whatever may be said on either side of the question,
I believe that it is beyond comparison more damaging to him
who has to defend himself than to him who attacks. My reason
for saying this is, that he who is on the defensive is either
within some fortified place, or he is in camp protected by in-
trenchments. If he is within a fortified place, it is either a
small one, such as they generally are, or it is a large one. In
the first case he is certainly lost, for the power of artillery is
such that even the strongest walls will in a few days be battered
down by it; and if he who is within has not a considerable
space for retreat, and cannot protect himself by new ditches and
earthworks, he is lost, and will not be able to resist the enemy,
who will rush in through the breach in the wall, and whatever
artillery he may have will in that case be of no use to him, for
it is a maxim that artillery cannot resist an assault of troops in
mass; and thus the fury of the Ultramontanes has never been
resisted by those defending fortified places. The assaults of
the Italians in battle are easily resisted when made, not in
serried masses, but in small detachments, which assaults they
very properly call skirmishes; and when they deliberately at-
tempt in this disorderly manner to enter a breach where there
is artillery, they go to manifest destruction, for in such case
the artillery within is effective. But when a breach is assaulted
by troops in dense masses, where one pushes upon the other,
unless impeded by ditches and earthworks, they will succeed in
entering any place; and although some will be killed, yet not
so many as to prevent the victory. The truth of this has been
demonstrated by many captures of strong places by the Ultra-
montanes in Italy, and especially that of Brescia; for when
that city had revolted against the French, the citadel being
still held by the king of France, the Venetians, by way: of
resisting the attacks of those who might enter the place, had
mounted artillery in every convenient place, in front and flank,
along the streets that lead from the citadel to the city. The
French commander, Gaston de Foix, however, paid no attention
to this, but marched down on foot with his troops, through the
midst of the artillery, and took the city; and according to

270 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST - -[Boox IL

report his troops did not suffer seriously. Thus, whoever is
besieged in a small place, having no space to enable him to
retreat behind ditches and earthworks, after the walls are
breached, and having to rely for his further defence solely
upon his artillery, will quickly be lost. But supposing that
you have to defend a large place, with ample space for con-
venient retreat, even then I maintain that the employment of
artillery is without comparison more advantageous for the be-
siegers than the besieged. For to make artillery damage the
besieger it must necessarily be placed higher than the level
of the surrounding country, otherwise every little earthwork
that the enemy may throw up will secure him against all your
efforts to injure him; so that being obliged to raise your artil-
lery upon your walls, or to elevate it in some other way above
the level of the country, you expose yourself to two difficulties :
the first, that you cannot thus place artillery of the same cali-
ber and power as the besieger’s, as that requires considerable
space; the second is, that even if you should be able thus to
place your guns, you cannot make your batteries secure against
the artillery of the assailant, who has the advantage of being
able to place his on higher ground, having all the conve-
nience of space for manceuvring his guns which the besieged
lacks. So that it is impossible for him who defends the place
to keep his guns in an elevated position if the besieger has
plenty and powerful artillery ; and if his batteries are too low,
then they are to a great extent useless, as we have said above.
Thus the defence of fortified cities depends upon the arms and
valor of the garrison, the same as in ancient times, and upon
artillery of small caliber, and the little advantage derived from
that is almost entirely counterbalanced by disadvantages ; for
it obliges you to give but little elevation to your walls and to
bury them, as it were, in the ditches; so that when you come
to a hand-to-hand fight after the walls are breached or the
ditches filled up, you will be at greater disadvantage than be-
fore; and therefore, as we have said above, the use of artillery
is of greater advantage to the besieger than to the besieged.

In the third case, when you intrench yourself in camp, so as
not to be forced to deliver battle except at your convenience or
advantage, I maintain that under those circumstances you have
generally no better means for defence or combat than what the
ancients had; and often even your artillery operates to your

Gur XVIld TEN BOOKS OF TITUS: LIVIUS. 271

disadvantage, for if the enemy turns your intrenchments so as
to get into your rear, and has but slightly the advantage of you
in the ground, which may easily happen, so as to place him but
a little higher than you are, or should he attack you before
your intrenchments are sufficiently completed to cover you
effectually, he may quickly dislodge you, and thus there is
nothing left you but to issue from your intrenchments and
come to battle. This happened to the Spaniards at the battle
of Ravenna, who, being posted between the river Ronco and
an earthwork which had not been raised high enough, and the
French having slightly the advantage of the ground, were
forced by the latter to leave their intrenchments and come to
open battle. But supposing, as must often happen, that you
have chosen the highest ground in the neighborhood for your
camp, and that your intrenchments are good and sufficient, so
that owing to your position and your other preparations the
enemy does not venture to attack you, in that case he will
resort to the same means as the ancients did when the adver-
sary had placed himself in an impregnable position; that is,
he will scour the country, plunder the towns and villages of
your allies, and cut off your supplies of provisions, so that you
will be forced to abandon your intrenchments and come to
battle, where your artillery will avail you but little, as we shall
show further on. If now we recall to mind the manner in
which the Romans made war, and remember that all their
wars were aggressive and not defensive, we must see (from
all that has been said above) that they would have had even
ereater advantages if they had had the use of artillery, and
that their conquests would have been even more rapid than
they were.

Now, as to the second proposition, that, since the introduction
of artillery men cannot display the same personal bravery as an-
ciently, I maintain that, where men have to present themselves
to the fire in small and scattered numbers, they are exposed to
greater danger than when in ancient times they had to escalade
a place, or make similar assaults, in which they had to act, not
in a compact body, but singly and one after the other. It is also
true that the lives of the commanders and principal officers of
the armies are more exposed now than formerly; for as they
can be reached everywhere by the artillery, it is of no use for
them to place themselves in the rear ranks, protected by their

272 DISCOURSES ON THE FIEST {Boox II.

best men. Nevertheless, we see that these dangers rarely cause
any extraordinary losses; for places that are well supplied with
artillery are not taken by escalade, nor are they attempted to
be taken by feeble assaults, but are regularly besieged, as was
done in ancient days. And even with such places as can be
taken by assault, the danger is not much greater now than
then; for even in those days the ancients did not lack means
of defending their places by throwing projectiles upon the
enemy, which, although not so noisy as cannon, yet were
equally effective in the killing of men. As to the danger
of death to which commanders and leaders of bands are
said to be more exposed nowadays, the twenty-four years
during which the last war in Italy was protracted furnish
fewer examples of generals killed than any ten years of war
of the ancients. For with the exception of the Count Louis
de Mirandola, who was killed at Ferrara when the Venetians
besieged that city a few years ago, and the Duke of Nemours,
who was killed at Cirignuola, none were killed by artillery ;
for Gaston de Foix was killed by the sword, and not by a
bullet. So that if men nowadays give less proof of valor
than formerly, it is not chargeable to the introduction of artil-
lery, but to bad discipline and the feebleness of the armies,
which being in the ageregate deficient in courage and vigor,
cannot show it in their individual parts.

As to the other proposition advanced, that there are nowa-
days no more hand-to-hand fights, and that hereafter war will
be made altogether with artillery, I maintain that this opinion
is wholly erroneous, and will be so regarded by all those gen-
erals who desire to manage their armies in the manner of the
ancients. For whoever wishes to form a good army must, by
real or sham fights, train his troops to attack the enemy sword
in hand, and to seize hold of him bodily; and he must rely
more upon infantry than upon cavalry, for reasons which I will
explain further on. And by thus relying upon the infantry,
and upon the above-indicated mode of training them, artillery
will prove entirely useless. For the infantry, in engaging the
enemy hand to hand, can more easily escape the effects of the
artillery than it could in ancient times the rush of the elephants
and the scythe chariots, and other now obsolete means of attack
which the Roman infantry had to encounter, and against which
they knew how to defend themselves. And they would most

Cusp. XVIL| | TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 273

probably have found also the means of escaping the effects of
the artillery, as the time during which its fire is most damaging
is so much less than that during which the elephants and the
scythe chariots were dangerous. For whilst these carried dis-
order into the ranks in the very midst of the fight, the artillery
interferes with you only at the beginning of the battle, and then
it is easily avoided by the infantry, either by availing of the
natural cover of the ground, or by lying down during the fire.
And experience has shown even this to be hardly necessary,
especially with regard to heavy artillery, which cannot be so
accurately directed; for when aimed too high the balls pass over
you, and when too low they do not reach you. And when you
have engaged the enemy hand to hand, then it is perfectly
evident that neither light nor heavy artillery can do you any
more damage; for if the enemy has planted his guns in the
front, they will fall into your hands, and if in the rear, then
they will damage his own troops sooner than yours ; and if he
places his guns on the flank, they cannot injure you to that
degree but that you can rush up and capture them, the same
as in the first case. All this cannot be gainsaid, for we have
seen how the Swiss at Novara, in 1518, without cavalry or
artillery, went to encounter the French, who were well pro-
vided in their intrenchments with artillery, and routed them
without suffering much from the effect of the guns. And the
reason of this is, that, besides the other things mentioned
above, the artillery, to be well served, needs to be protected
by walls, ditches, or earthworks; and if it lacks this protection
it is either captured or becomes useless, as generally happens
in open field battles, when it is protected only by men. On
the flank the artillery cannot be employed differently from
what the ancients did their catapults and other engines of
war, which were always placed outside of the squadrons, so
that they should not break the ranks; and whenever they
were hard pushed by cavalry or other troops, they promptly
took shelter behind the legions. And whoever employs artil-
lery differently does not understand the matter well, and re-
lies upon that which may easily disappoint him. And if the
Turks by means of their artillery gained the victory over the
Persians and the Egyptians, it resulted from no other merit
than the unusual noise, which frightened the cavalry. I will
conclude this chapter, therefore, by saying that artillery is
VOL. 4. 18

274 DISCOUKSES ON THE FIEST [Boox IT.

useful in an army when the soldiers are animated by the same
valor as that of the ancient Romans, but without that it is per-
fectly inefficient, especially against courageous troops.

CHAPTER XVIII.

ACCORDING TO THE AUTHORITY OF THE ROMANS AND: THE EXAM-
PLE OF ANCIENT ARMIES WE SHOULD VALUE INFANTRY MORE
THAN CAVALRY.

It can be clearly demonstrated by many arguments and
facts, that in all their military operations the Romans valued
foot soldiers more than cavalry, and that they based all their
plans upon the former. This is proved by many instances,
one of the most striking of which occurred at the battle with
the Latins near the Lake Regillus; when the Roman army had
already begun to give way, they made their cavalry dismount
to assist the infantry, and, thus supported, they renewed the
fight and carried off the victory. This shows clearly that the
Romans relied more upon the same men when on foot than
on horseback. They employed the same expedient in several
other combats, and found it always of greatest value in mo-
ments of danger. I care not for the opinion of Hannibal upon
this point, who, on seeing at the battle of Canne that the
Roman Consul made the cavalry dismount, by way of derid-
ing this manceuvre, said, “I would rather they should deliver
“them to me bound.” Although this was the opinion of a
most distinguished soldier, yet, if we have to decide the ques-
tion upon authority, | would rather trust to that of the Roman
republic, and the many eminent commanders which she pro-
duced, than to the single opinion of Hannibal; although even
without referring to authorities there are plenty of manifest
reasons. For a man on foot can go into many places where
he could not penetrate on horseback; infantry can be made
to preserve their ranks, and can be taught to reform them
when broken; whilst it is difficult to make horses keep their
ranks, and impossible to reform them when once broken.
Besides this we find amongst horses (the same as amongst
men) some that lack spirit and some that have too much.

Cue, XVIIL) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS ZIVIUS. 275

And it often happens that a spirited horse is ridden by a
coward, or a timid horse by a man of courage; however this
disparity may arise, it renders both useless, and invariably
causes disorder. Well-disciplined infantry can easily break
a squadron of cavalry, but it is with the greatest difficulty that
cavalry can break the ranks of infantry. This opinion is cor-
roborated not only by many examples of ancient and modern
times, but is also sustained by the authority of those who
study and direct the affairs of civilized societies; from which
it appears that at first war was made exclusively with cavalry,
because disciplined infantry had not yet been organized ; but
no sooner was this done than it was at once found to be more
useful than cavalry, which, however, is also very necessary in
armies, for the purposes of reconnoissance, to secure and ray-
age the country, to pursue a flying enemy, and to oppose the
adversary’s cavalry. But the infantry must ever be regarded
and valued as the very foundation and nerve of an army.

And thus amongst the greatest faults of the Italian princes,
which have made Italy slave to the foreigner, is that they
have made too little account of infantry, having given all
their care and attention to mounted troops. This error has
been caused by the evil disposition of the commanders and the
ignorance of the rulers; for during the past twenty-five years
the Italian armed forces have been entirely under the control
of men who held no government or state, who were in a meas-
ure mere soldiers of fortune, whose chief thought was to pro-
mote their own influence and reputation by their arms, whilst
the princes themselves were wholly without any armed force
of theirown. And as these adventurers could not keep a large
force of foot soldiers in their pay, having no subjects of whom
they could avail for that purpose, and as a small number would
not have had the effect of making them formidable, they em-
ployed mounted men; for the pay of two or three hundred
horse kept a condottiere in credit, and this payment was not
so large but what princes possessing states could conveniently
meet it. And to facilitate this and maintain their own credit,
they did all they could to destroy all affection for and reputa-
tion of the infantry, and to transfer it to their mounted men ;
and so increased this disorder, that the infantry constituted
the smallest part of some of the largest armies. This practice,
together with other disorders which occurred at the same time,

276 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boo IT.

so enfeebled our armies that Italy has remained ever since an
easy victim of the Ultramontanes. This error of preferring
cavalry to infantry is proved still more palpably by another
Roman example. The Romans were besieging Sora, and a
squadron of cavalry having issued from the city for the pur-
pose of harassing the Roman camp, the master of the Roman
horse went to meet it with his cavalry, and came to a hand-to-
hand fight with them. Chance would have it that at the first
shock both captains were killed; the combat continued never-
theless, though both parties were left without any one to direct
them, when the Romans, the more easily to overcome the
enemy, dismounted, thus forcing the others to do the same in
self-defence ; the Romans, however, carried off the victory.
Nothing could more conclusively prove the superiority of in-
fantry over cavalry than this instance; for in the other cases
cited, the Consuls caused the cavalry to dismount for the pur-
pose of assisting the infantry, which was suffering and needed
support, but here it was neither to help their own nor to com-
bat the enemy’s infantry, but it was a combat of cavalry against
cavalry, and despairing of success the Romans judged that by
dismounting victory would be more easy, and the result proved
their judgment correct. I maintain further that a well-disci-
plined body of infantry can only be overcome with greatest
difficulty, and then only by another body of infantry. Crassus
and Mark Antony invaded Parthia, and advanced many days’
journey into the interior with a Roman army composed of a
large body of infantry and but few horse. They had to en-
counter the innumerable cavalry of the Parthians, and Crassus
with a portion of the army was slain; but Mark Antony saved
himself and the remainder of the army in the most gallant
manner. But even in this mishap of the Romans we see how
greatly superior infantry is to cavalry; for although being in
a wide and open country, where there are but few mountains
and still fewer rivers, remote from the sea and far from all
conveniences, yet Mark Antony saved himself most skilfully,
according to the judgment of the Parthians themselves; and
the entire Parthian cavalry never ventured to attack his ranks.
And the loss of Crassus is shown by a careful examination of
the history of this expedition to have been more the result of
deception than because he was overpowered, for even in his
greatest straits the Parthians never dared to attack him in

Cuar. XVII] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 277

front, but hovered upon his flank, and by interrupting his
supplies and deluding him by false promises of provisions
they reduced him to the last extremity.

I believe I should have greater difficulty in proving the
superiority of infantry over cavalry, were it not that there are
plenty of modern examples which bear amplest testimony upon
this point. We have seen nine thousand Swiss at Novara at-
tack and defeat ten thousand horse and as many infantry, for
the cavalry could do them no harm, and, the infantry being for
the most part Gascons and ill-disciplined, the Swiss made no
account of them. We have subsequently seen twenty-six thou-
sand Swiss at Marignan attack Francis I., king of France,
whose army consisted of twenty thousand horse and forty
thousand infantry, and one hundred pieces of‘ artillery ; and
if they were not victorious, as at Novara, they nevertheless
fought most bravely during two entire days, and though de-
feated in the end, yet they saved the half of their army. Mar-
cus Attilius Regulus risked with his infantry not only the
attack of the Numidian cavalry, but also the charge of the ele-
phants; and although unsuccessful in carrying out his designs,
yet it was not because his infantry was not such but what he
believed it capable of overcoming those difficulties. I repeat,
therefore, that to be able to overcome a well-ordered infantry,
it is necessary to oppose to them one even better organized and
disciplined, otherwise defeat is certain.

In the time of Filippo Visconti, Duke of Milan, some sixteen
thousand Swiss descended into Lombardy. The Duke, having
at that time Carmignuola in his service as captain, sent him
with about five thousand horse and a small body of infantry
to meet the Swiss. This commander, not knowing the Swiss
method of fighting, went to meet them with his mounted men,
presuming that he would be able to rout them at the first
shock ; but he found them immovable, and, having lost a large
number of his men, he retreated. Being however a most able
and courageous soldier, and full of resources in every emer-
gency, he reformed his men and renewed the attack, after
having first made all his men-at-arms dismount, whom he
placed in front of his infantry, and thus assailed the Swiss,
who were unable to defend themselves against them. The
men-at-arms of Carmignuola being now on foot and well
armed, and protected by armor, easily penetrated the ranks of

278 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

the Swiss, without themselves suffering much harm; and hav-
ing once broken the ranks of the adversary they did them
great damage, so that of all the Swiss none escaped except
such as were spared by the humanity of Carmignuola.

I believe that many recognize the superiority of infantry
over cavalry, but the times are unhappily such that neither
the example of the ancients or the moderns, nor the admission
of their having been in error, will suffice to induce the princes
of the present day to alter their minds, or to make them thiuk
that to give reputation to the army of any state it is necessary
to revive the discipline of the ancients, cherish and honor it,
and give it life, so that in return it may give life and reputa-
tion to the state. And as they deviate from this, so they devi-
ate from the other matters referred to above; and thus it is
that their conquests become a burden to the state, instead of
contributing to its greatness, as we shall show further on.

CHAPTER XIX.

CONQUESTS MADE BY REPUBLICS THAT ARE NOT WELL CONSTI-
TUTED, AND DO NOT FOLLOW IN THEIR CONDUCT THE EXAM-
PLE OF THE ROMANS, ARE MORE CONDUCIVE TO THEIR RUIN
THAN TO THEIR ADVANCEMENT.

Tue false opinions, founded upon bad examples, that have
been introduced amongst us in this corrupt century, prevent
men from liberating themselves from the force of their accus-
tomed habits. Would it have been possible thirty years ago
to have persuaded an Italian that ten thousand infantry could
have attacked, in an open plain, ten thousand cavalry and as
many infantry? and not only to have fought, but actually to
have defeated them, as we have seen that the Swiss did at the
battle of Novara, already referred to? And although history
is full of such examples, yet they would not have believed it;
and if they had, they would have said that nowadays the
troops are better armed, and that a squadron of mounted men
would be able to charge a solid wall of rock, and therefore
could not be resisted by mere infantry. And with such erro-
neous arguments their judgments are corrupted, forgetting that

Cuap. XIX.] TEN: BOCKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 279

Lucullus, with a comparatively small body of infantry, routed
one hundred and fifty thousand cavalry of King Tigranes,
amonest which there was a corps perfectly similar to the men-
at-arms of the present day. The fallacy of these opinions had
to be demonstrated by the example of the troops of the Ultra-
montanes. And as we have to admit the truth of what history
tells us in regard to the infantry of the ancients, so we ought
also to believe in the truth and utility of their other institutions ;
thus republics and princes would have committed fewer errors,
and would have been stronger in resisting the assaults of any
enemy that might unawares have come upon them. They would
not have put their hope in flight, and those who had the direc-
tion of the government of states would have been better able
to point out the means of aggrandizement, or the means of
preservation. They would have believed that to increase the
number of their citizens, to gain allies instead of subjects, to
establish colonies to guard the conquered territories, to turn
all booty over to the public treasury, to subdue the enemy by
incursions and battles and by sieges, to keep the state rich and
the individual citizen poor, and above all to maintain a well-
disciplined army,—that all these are the true means of ageran-
dizing a republic and founding a great empire. And if these
means had not suited them, they would at least have been
convinced that acquisitions by any other means would lead to
the ruin of a state; they would have put a curb upon all am-
bition by regulating the internal affairs of their city by good
laws and customs, prohibiting all conquests and confining
themselves merely to providing for their security and defence ;
as is done by the republics of Germany, who live in that
manner, and have thus enjoyed their liberty for a long time.
Nevertheless (as I have said when discussing the difference
between a state organized for conquest and one that aims only
at its own preservation) it is impossible for a republic to re-
main long in the quiet enjoyment of her freedom within her
limited confines; for even if she does not molest others, others
will molest her, and from being thus molested will spring the
desire and necessity of conquests, and even if she has no foreign
foes, she will find domestic enemies amongst her own citizens,
for such seems to be the inevitable fate of all large cities. The
fact that the free cities of Germany have been able to exist in
this fashion for a length of time, is owing to certain conditions

280 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book ILI.

prevailing in that country, such as are not found elsewhere,
and without which they could not have maintained their insti-
tutions and existence. That part of Germany of which I
speak was formerly subject to the Roman Empire, the same
as France and Spain; but during the decadence of that em-
pire, when its dominion was reduced to Germany, the more
powerful cities of that country began to free themselves by
purchase, according to the weakness or necessity of the Em-
perors, by the payment of a small annual quit-rent. And
gradually all the cities that held directly from the Emperor,
and were not subject to any prince, purchased their lberty
in like manner. It happened at about the same time when
these cities bought their freedom, that certain communities
subject to the Duke of Austria revolted against him; amongst
these were Fribourg, the Swiss, and others, who, prospering
from the start, gradually became formidable to their neigh-
bors; and this was particularly the case with the Swiss com-
munities. And thus Germany is now divided between the
Emperor, certain princes, the republics called free or im-
perial cities, and the Swiss communities; and the reason why
amongst these states with such a diversity of forms of govy-
ernment we see no wars, or only wars of short duration, is
that this shadow of an Emperor, although having no direct
power, yet has so much influence over them that, by interpos-
ing his authority as a conciliator and mediator, he quickly puts
an end to any differences that occur between them. The most
important wars, and those that have lasted longest, were those
between the Swiss and the Duke of Austria; and although for
a long while past the Emperor and the Duke of Austria have
been one and the same person, yet he has never been able to
overcome the courage of the Swiss, and force alone has been
able to bring about treaties of peace between them. Nor has
the rest of Germany afforded him much help against the Swiss,
partly because the free cities do not wish to interfere with
those who desire to live in freedom like themselves, and partly
because the princes are unable to assist him from poverty, or
unwilling, from jealousy of his power. The free cities of Ger-
many, then, can live in the tranquil enjoyment of their small
domain, having no occasion for wishing to increase it, because
of the protection of the Imperial authority; and they live
nnited within their walls because they have an enemy near

Cuap. XIX. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 281

who would quickly avail himself of any internal dissension to
seize and occupy their cities. But if Germany were differently
constituted, they would have to seek to aggrandize themselves,
and would have to abandon their quiet life.

As the same conditions do not exist in other countries they
cannot adopt the same system as these free imperial cities,
but must seek to increase their power by leagues and_alli-
ances, or to extend it like the Romans. And whoever at-
tempts any other mode will quickly come to ruin, for in a
thousand ways, and for many reasons, acquisitions of territory
may prove injurious; for one may well extend one’s dominion
without increasing one’s power, but the acquisition of do-
minion without power is sure to bring with it ruin. Whoever
impoverishes himself by war acquires no power, even though
he be victorious, for his conquests cost him more than they are
worth. This the Venetians did, and the Florentines, who were
much weaker when they held, the one Lombardy, and the
other Tuscany, than they were when the one was satisfied with
the dominion of the sea, and the other with her six miles of
territory. All of which resulted from their desire of aggran-
dizement, without the knowledge of the proper means. And
they deserve the more blame, as they had less excuse, having
before their eyes the method practised by the Romans, which
they might have followed, whilst the Romans, having no pre-
cedents to guide them, had to develop the system exclusively
by their own sagacity. Moreover acquisitions sometimes prove
most injurious even to a well-regulated republic, when they
consist either in a city or province that has been enervated
by pleasures and luxury; for these indulgences and habits
become contagious by intercourse with the inhabitants. This
happened to the Romans when they took Capua, and after-
wards also to Hannibal; and if this city had been at a greater
distance from Rome, and if the excesses of the soldiers had
not been so promptly corrected, or if Rome herself had at that
time been in the least degree corrupted, the acquisition of
Capua would undoubtedly have proved the ruin of the Roman
republic. Titus Livius bears witness to this in the following
words: “Capua, the seat of all sensual pleasures and least
“conducive to military discipline, had already turned the cap-
“tivated spirits of the soldiers from the remembrance of their
“own country.” And truly cities or provinces of similar char-

282 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

acter revenge themselves upon their conquerors without battles
and without blood; for by communicating to them their own
corrupt habits and manners, they expose them to being van-
quished by whoever chooses to attack them. Juvenal well
understood this when he says in one of his satires that the
conquest of foreign countries had caused the Romans to adopt
foreigi manners and customs, and that, in exchange for their
accustomed frugality and other most admirable virtues, “ Glut-
“tony and luxury dwell there, and will avenge the conquered
“universe.” If then conquests proved so very nearly perni-
cious to Rome, in the days when she displayed so much wis-
dom and virtue in her conduct, what would the consequence
be to {hose who deviate so far from that example? And what
would it be, if to the other errors (which we have discussed so
fully above) they add the employment of mercenaries or aux-
iliary troops? The dangers so frequently resulting from that
we will point out in the next chapter.

CHAPTER XX.

OF THE DANGERS TO WHICH PRINCES AND REPUBLICS ARE EX-
POSED THAT EMPLOY AUXILIARY OR MERCENARY TROOPS.

Were it not that I have in another work of mine treated at
length of the uselessness of mercenaries and auxiliaries, and of
the advantage of having national troops, I should discuss that
subject more fully here; as it is, however, I shall refer to it but
briefly, for I do not think that I ought to pass it over entirely,
having found a most striking example of it related by Titus
Livius. I understand by auxiliary troops such as a prince or
republic sends to your aid, but which are paid, and the com-
mander of which is appointed by the prince or republic. Titus
Livius relates the following. The Romans had on different oc-
casions defeated the Samnites with the troops which had been
sent from Rome to aid the Capuans; and having relieved these
of the war of the Samnites, they returned to Rome, leaving,
however, two legions in the country for the protection of the
Capuans, who had been deprived of their garrison, so as to save
their city from falling again a prey to the Samnites. These

Cuap. XX. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIvVivs. 283

legions, plunged in idleness, became so fond of Capua that, for-
getful of their own country and of the respect due to the Senate,
they conspired to make themselves masters of that country,
which they had defended with their valor, deeming the inhabit-
ants, who were incapable of protecting themselves, unworthy of
its possession. When this plot became known to the Romans,
they suppressed and punished it, as we shall more fully relate
when we come to speak of conspiracies.

I repeat, then, that of all kinds of troops, auxiliaries are the
most dangerous; for the prince or republic that calls them to
their assistance has no control or authority whatever over
them, as that remains entirely with him who sends them;
for, as I have said, auxiliary troops that are sent you by any
prince are under officers appointed by him, under his banner,
and are paid by him, as was the case with the army sent by
the Romans to Capua. Such troops, when victorious, generally
plunder as well him to whose assistance they were sent as the
enemy against whom they have been employed; and this they
do either from the perfidy of the prince who sends them, or
from their own ambition. And although it was not the in-
tention of the Romans to break the treaty and convention they
had made with the Capuans, yet the opportunity and facility of
taking the country from the Capuans seemed so great to the
soldiers that it suggested the thought and prompted the at-
tempt. We might cite many more examples, but this one
suffices, together with that of the people of Rhegium, who lost
their city and their lives by a legion which the Romans had
sent there to garrison the place. <A prince or republic, then,
should adopt any other course rather than bring auxiliaries into
their state for its defence, especially when their reliance is
wholly upon them; for any treaty or convention with the ene-
my, however hard the conditions, will be less hard to bear than
the danger from auxiliaries. And if we read carefully the his-
tory of the past, and observe the course of present events, we
shall find that for one who derived benefit from auxiliaries
there are an endless number who have been disappointed. And
in truth no more favorable opportunity could be presented to an
ambitious prince or republic for seizing a city or a province,
than to be asked to send troops there to assist in its defence.
And therefore any one whose ambition so far misleads him as
to call in strangers to aid in his defence, or in an attack upon

284 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

others, seeks to acquire that which he will not be able to hold,
and which after acquiring will be easily taken from him. But
the ambition of men is such that, to gratify a present desire,
they think not of the evils which will in a short time result
from it. Nor will they be influenced by the examples of anti-
quity, which I have cited upon this and other points ; for if they
were, they would see that the more liberality they show to their
neighbors, and the less desire they manifest to rob them of
their territory, the more readily will those neighbors throw
themselves into their arms, as we shall see further on from the
conduct of the Capuans.

CHAPTER XXI.

THE FIRST PREHTOR SENT BY THE ROMANS ANYWHERE WAS TO
CAPUA, FOUR HUNDRED YEARS AFTER THEY BEGAN TO MAKE
WAR UPON THAT CITY.

WE have shown very fully in preceding chapters how differ-
ently the Romans proceeded towards the peoples they con-
quered from what is done in the present day by those who
extend their jurisdiction; and how they left the people of those
places which they did not destroy in the enjoyment of their
own laws and institutions, even when they made subjects of
them, and not mere allies; and how they avoided leaving any
evidence of the Roman authority there, but simply imposed
upon the people certain conditions, and so long as these were
faithfully compled with, so long did they maintain those people
in their dignity and state. And we know that this system was
practised by them until they carried their conquests beyond the
confines of Italy, and began to reduce the conquered kingdoms
and states to the condition of provinces. The most striking
illustration of this was that the first Prator whom they sent
to any place was to Capua; and this was done not from any
ambitious views of their own, but because they had been re-
quested to do it by the Capuans themselves. For dissensions
having arisen between them, they deemed it necessary to have
some Roman citizen reside in their city who should restore
order and union amongst them. Influenced by this example

Cuap. XXI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 285

and impelled by a similar necessity, the people of Antium asked
the Romans to send them also a Pretor. So that Titus Livius
says, in relation to this incident, “that the Romans conquered
‘as much by their justice as by their arms.” We see, there-
fore, how much this mode of proceeding facilitated the ag-
erandizement of the Roman Empire; for those cities mainly
that are accustomed to enjoy liberty, and to be governed by
their own citizens, remain more quiet and content under a gov-
ernment which they do not see (even should it involve some
inconvenience) than under one which they have daily before
their eyes, and which would seem constantly to remind them
of their servitude. Another advantage resulting to a prince
from being thus at a distance is his not having under his imme-
diate control the judges and magistrates that decide civil and
criminal causes, as no sentence pronounced by them will bring
censure or odium upon him, and thus he escapes many occa-
sions for calumny and hatred.

I might cite many examples of ancient times in support of
the truth of what I say, but will only adduce one recent one
in Italy. It is well known that Genoa has several times been
taken by the French, and the king has always (with the ex-
ception of the present time) sent French governors there to
administer it in his name. Only at the present time he has
allowed the city to govern itself by a Genoese governor, not
because the king preferred it, but from the force of circum-
stances. And most assuredly, if we examine which of these
two modes gives most security to the king and satisfaction to
the Genoese, we shall find it to be the latter. Besides this the
people will the more readily throw themselves into your arms,
the less disposition you manifest to subjugate them ; and they
will be the less apprehensive of any attempt on your part upon
their liberties, the more humane and affable you show yourself
towards them. It was this affability and liberality that caused
the Capuans to apply to the Romans for a Pretor. If, on the
other hand, the Romans had manifested. the shghtest desire te
send one there, it would at once have excited jealousy in the
minds of the Capuans, and would have alienated them from
the Romans.

But why need we go to Capua and to Rome for examples,
when we have plenty in Florence and in Tuscany? Every one
knows how the city of Pistoja long since placed herself volun-

286 DISCOURSES ON -THE FIRST [Boox II.

tarily under the dominion of the Florentines ; and it is equally
well known what bitter enmity exists between the Florentines,
the Pisans, the Lucchese, and the Siennese. This diversity of
affection has not arisen because the Pistojans do not value
their liberty as highly as the others do theirs, or do not esteem
themselves as much as the others do; but because the Flor-
entines have always borne themselves lke brothers towards
the Pistojans, and like enemies towards the others. It was this
that induced the Pistojans to place themselves voluntarily un-
der the government of Florence, whilst the others always have
made, and continue to make, the most strenuous efforts to avoid
becoming subject to the Florentines. And doubtless, if the
Florentines had attached their neighbors to themselves by
treaties of amity, or by rendering them assistance, instead of
frightening them off, they would now be the undisputed masters
of Tuscany. Ido not mean to say by this, however, that arms
and force are never to be employed, but that they should be
reserved as the last resort when other means sail.

CHAPTER XXII.

HOW OFTEN THE JUDGMENTS OF MEN IN IMPORTANT MATTERS
ARE ERRONEOUS.

THOSE who have been present at any deliberative assemblies
of men will have observed how erroneous their opinions often
are; and in fact, unless they are directed by superior men, they
are apt to be contrary to all reason.. But as superior men in
corrupt republics (especially in periods of peace and quiet) are
generally hated, either from jealousy or the ambition of others,
it follows that the preference is given to what common error
approves, or to what is suggested by men who are more desirous
of pleasing the masses than of promoting the general good.
When, however, adversity comes, then the error is discovered,
and then the people fly for safety to those whom in prosperity
they had neglected, as we shall show at length in its proper
place. Certain events also easily mislead men who have not
a great deal of experience, for they have in them so much that
resembles truth that men easily persuade themselves that they

Cuap. XXII] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 287

are correct in the judgment they have formed upon the subject.
Such was the error committed by the Latins when they fol-
lowed the advice of the Prator Numicius, after they had been
defeated by the Romans; and such also was the error, so gen-
erally believed in a few years ago, when Francis L, king of
France, attempted the conquest of Milan, which was defended
by the Swiss.

When, after the death of Louis XII., Francis, Duke of
Angouléme, succeeded to the throne of France, he desired
to recover for his kingdom the Duchy of Milan, which a
few years previously had been taken by the Swiss, with the
aid of Pope Julius II. For this purpose he wanted to have
allies in Italy to facilitate his enterprise; and besides the
Venetians, whom King Louis had already gained over, he tried
to secure the support of the Florentines and of Pope Leo X.,
deeming their alliance most important to his success, inasmuch
as the king of Spain had troops in Lombardy, and the forces
of the Emperor of Germany held Verona. The Pope, however,
did not yield to the solicitations of the French king, but was
persuaded by his counsellors (according to report) to remain
neutral. These had demonstrated to him that the surest means
of victory for the Church would be to have neither the king of
France nor the Swiss too powerful in Italy, and that, if he
wished to restore the Church to her former lberty, it was
necessary to free her from the yoke of both the one and the
other of these powers. And as it would be impossible to
overcome either of them separately, and still less both of
them together, it would be best to allow either of them to
defeat the other, and that then the Church, with the aid of
her friends, could with safety assail the one that had remained
victorious. And certainly a more favorable opportunity than
the present could not offer for the execution of this plan, as
both parties were in the field face to face, and the Pope had his
forces well organized, and might show himself on the confines
of Lombardy, near to both armies, under color of wishing
merely to protect his own possessions, where he could remain
quietly until a battle should take place, which it was reasonable
to suppose would be a bloody one, both armies being equally
strong and brave; and that this would leave the victor so weak-
ened that it would be easy for the Pope to attack and defeat
him; and that thus he would, with great glory to himself, re-

288 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

main master of Lombardy and arbiter of all Italy. The result,
however, proved how completely erroneous this judgment was.
The Swiss were defeated after a most bloody fight; but the
Spanish and Papal troops, so far from presuming to attack the
victorious French, took to flight. Nor would that have availed
for their safety, had it not been for the humanity or indifference
of the French king, who cared not for a second victory, but was
satisfied to conclude a treaty of peace with the Church.

The advice under which the Pope had acted in this matter
was founded upon reasons which, taken separately, were sound
enough, but viewed as a whole were entirely false. For it
rarely happens that the victor in a battle loses many of his
men; he loses only those that are killed in the fight, and none
by flight; and in the heat of the action, when men are contend-
ing hand to hand, few are actually killed, because such a com-
bat lasts but a short time. But even if it were continued
longer, and many of the victorious army were slain, the pres-
tige which follows victory and the terror which it brings with
it are such that it greatly outweighs the loss which the con-
queror suffers by the death of his men. So that an army that
attacks him in the belief that he has been weakened, would
find itself greatly mistaken, unless it should be sufficiently
powerful to be able to have contended with him at any time
even before the victory. In such case it may, according to its
valor and fortune, either win or lose; but even then, the army
that has already fought a battle and been victorious will have
rather the advantage over the other. This was conclusively
proved by the experience of the Latins, both because of the
error committed by the Pretor Numicius and by the ills which
those people suffered who believed him when, after the defeat
of the Latins by the Romans, he went through all Latium
crying that now was the time for attacking the Romans, be-
cause they had been so weakened by the battle which they
had fought with the Latins, and because the victory which
they had gained was really only such in name, inasmuch as
their losses had been quite as great as though they had been
defeated, and that the smallest force that were now to oppose
them would completely destroy them. In consequence of which
the people who accepted the advice of Numicius raised a new
army, but were quickly beaten by the Romans, and suffered
all the evils that will ever befall those who hold similar
erroneous opinions.

Cuap. XXIII.] LEN BOOKS Of TITUS LIVICS. 289

CHAPTER XXIII.

HOW MUCH THE ROMANS AVOIDED HALF-WAY MEASURES WHEN
THEY HAD TO DECIDE UPON THE FATE OF THEIR SUBJECTS.

‘¢Sucu was the state of things in Latium that they could
“neither bear peace nor war.” Of all the unhappy conditions
to which princes or republics can be reduced, the most un-
happy is that when they are unwilling to accept peace and
incapable of sustaining war; and to this condition those are
reduced who consider themselves oppressed by the terms of
peace, and who, if they wished to make war, would have to yield
themselves a prey to their allies, or victims to their enemies.
And all this results from following evil counsels, and from
taking a wrong course because of not having estimated their
forces correctly, as has been shown above. Princes or repub-
lics who form a proper estimate of their forces will hardly ever
be reduced to a condition similar to that of the Latins, who
made terms with the Romans when they ought not to have
done it, and declared war when they should not have done it;
and so managed that both the friendship and the enmity of
Rome proved equally injurious to them. The Latins were de-
feated and reduced to the greatest extremities, first by Manlius
Torquatus, and afterwards by Camillus, who after having com-
pelled them to surrender at discretion, and having placed
Roman garrisons in all their towns and taken hostages from
each, returned to Rome and reported to the Senate that all
Latium was in the hands of the Roman people. And as the
action of the Roman Senate on this occasion was very remark-
able and worthy of being noted, so that it may serve as an
example to any prince to whom a similar occasion may be
presented, I shall quote the very words which Livius puts into
the mouth of Camillus, which show both the manner in which
the Romans proceeded in their aggrandizement, and how in all
decisions of state they avoided half-way measures and always
went to extremes. For government consists mainly in so keep-
ing your subjects that they shall be neither able nor disposed
to injure you; and this is done by depriving them of all means
of injuring you, or by bestowing such benefits upon them that
it would not be reasonable for them to desire any change of

VOL. Il. 19

290 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

fortune. This will be best understood, first from the proposition
of Camillus, and then from the decision of the Senate upon the
subject. “The immortal gods thus leave you masters of the
“ course you have to take, and have placed it in your hands to
“decide whether Latium shall exist or not. You can secure
“a perpetual peace with Latium by employing, according to
“your choice, either severity or clemency. Will you proceed
‘with cruel severity against the vanquished who have surren-
“dered to you at discretion? If so, you are at liberty to destroy
“all Latium; or will you rather, in accordance with the ex-
“ample of your ancestors, increase the power of the Roman
“republic by granting to the vanquished the rights of citizen-
“ship? If so, you have now the opportunity for most glorious
“increase. Certainly that empire is the most firm and assured
“where obedience is cheerfully rendered ; whilst, therefore, the
“minds of these people are in a state of stupor and suspense
“between hope and fear, it behooves you to assure yourselves
“either by severity or by bestowing benefits upon them.” This
proposition of Camillus was followed by the resolve of the Sen-
ate in conformity with the address of the Consul; so that they
sought town after town of any importance in Latium, and either
heaped benefits upon them or destroyed them; granting to some
exemptions and privileges, giving them the rights of citizen-
ship, and making in every way sure of them. The others were
destroyed; colonies were sent there, and the inhabitants were
transferred to Rome, or so entirely dispersed that they could
neither by arms nor in any other way do any injury to Rome.
And it was thus that the Romans never took any unde-
cided middle course in important affairs, as I have stated
above. All princes and republics should imitate this example,
and this is the course which the Florentines ought to have
adopted when in 1502 Arezzo and the entire Val di Chiana
revolted. Had they done so, they would have fairly estab-
lished their dominion over them, and have greatly increased
the city of Florence, and given her those fields which she
lacked for her subsistence. But they took that middle course
which is pernicious in the extreme, when the question to be
decided affects the fate of men. They exiled a portion of the
Aretines, and a portion of them they condemned to death; and
all of them were deprived of their ancient rank and honors,
which they had enjoyed in their city, and yet the city itself

Cuar. XXUL] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 291

was left entire. And when some one in the public councils
advised the destruction of Arezzo, those who were deemed
the most prudent replied, that it would be but little honor
for the republic to destroy that city, inasmuch as it would
have the appearance of their having done it because Florence
lacked the power to hold it. This was one of those specious
reasons that seem true, but are not; on the same principle we
should not be able to kill a parricide, or any other criminal or
infamous person, lest it should be deemed dishonorable to the
prince to show that he lacked force to restrain a single person.
And those who reason thus do not see that often individual
men, and sometimes a whole city, will act so culpably against
the state that as an example to others and for his own secu-
rity the prince has no other remedy but to destroy it entirely.
Honor consists in being able, and knowing when and how, to
chastise evil-doers ; and a prince who fails to punish them, so
that they shall not be able to do any more harm, will be regarded
as either ignorant or cowardly. The propriety of the decisions
of the Romans, when required to make any, is proved also by
the judgment given against the Privernati. And here we must
remark two things from the text of Livius; the one where he
says, above, that rebellious subjects must either be conciliated
by benefits or destroyed; and the other, where he points out
the advantage of frankness and courage, especially when exhib-
ited in the presence of judicious men. The Roman Senate was
assembled to judge the inhabitants of Privernum, who had re-
volted, but had by force been brought back to obedience to the
Romans. The Privernati had sent a number of their citizens
to implore the clemency of the Roman Senate, and having been
brought into the presence of that body, one of them was asked
by a Senator, “ What punishment he thought that his people
“had deserved?” To which the Privernate answered, “ That
“punishment which men merit who believe themselves worthy
“of liberty.” Whereupon the Consul replied, “If we remit
“your punishment, what sort of a peace may we hope to con-
“clude with you?” To which the other responded, “An eter-
“nal and sincere peace, if you grant us good conditions; but
“if otherwise it will be but of short duration.” And although
this reply displeased some, yet the wiser part of the Senate
said, “that this was the answer of a free and brave man, and
“that they could not believe that either a people or an indi-

292 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox ILI.

‘vidual would otherwise than from necessity remain in a con-
“ dition that was painful to them; and that there could be no re-
“ liance upon any peace unless it was voluntary, and that it was
“hopeless to look for good faith from those who were treated
‘as slaves.” After these words the Senate resolved that the
Privernati should be admitted to the citizenship of Rome, and
in conferring the honor of these privileges upon them, said,
“that men who hold their liberty above everything else were
“worthy of being Roman citizens.” So much did .the frank
and high-minded reply of the Privernati please the magnani-
mous Romans; in fact, any other would have been false and
cowardly. And those who believe men to be otherwise, espe-
cially such as are or consider themselves free, deceive them-
selves; and under this illusion they are apt to take a course
that is neither good in itself nor satisfactory to those who are
affected by it. And this occasions the frequent rebellions and
the ruin of states.

But to come back to my proposition, I conclude from the two
examples given that, when a decision has to be made involving
the fate of powerful cities that are accustomed to free institu-
tions, they must either be destroyed, or conciliated by bene-
fits. Any other course will be useless; and, above all, half
measures should be avoided, these being most dangerous, as
was proved by the Samnites, who, when they had hemmed the
Romans in between the Caudine forks, disregarded the advice
of an old man, who counselled them either to let the Romans
depart honorably, or to kill them all. And by taking the
middle course of disarming them and obliging them to pass
under a yoke, they let them depart with shame and rage in their
hearts. So that the Samnites soon after found, to their cost,
how salutary the old man’s advice had been, and how injurious
the course which they had adopted, as we shall more fully show
in another place.

CHAPTER XXIV.
FORTRESSES ARE GENERALLY MORE INJURIOUS THAN USEFUL.

Ir may perhaps seem to the learned men of our time that the
Romans acted without proper consideration when, in their de-

Cuap, XXIV.) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUCS. 293

sire to make sure of the people of Latium and of the city of
Privernum, they did not build some fortresses there to serve as
a check, and as a guaranty of their fidelity ; especially as it is a
general saying of our wiseacres in Florence that Pisa and other
similar cities should be held by citadels. Doubtless, if the Ro-
mans had been of the same composition, they would have con-
structed fortresses; but as they were men of very different
courage, judgment, and power, they did not build them. And
so long as Rome was free, and adhered to her old customs and
admirable constitution, they never built fortresses to hold either
cities or countries which they had conquered, although they
preserved some of the strong places which they found already
existing. Seeing, then, the mode of proceeding of the Romans
in this respect, and that of the princes of our present time, it
seems to me proper to examine whether it is well to build for-
tresses, and whether they are of benefit or injury to him who
builds them. We must consider, then, the object of fortresses,
with reference to their serving as a means of defence against
a foreign enemy as well as against one’s own subjects.

In the first case, I maintain they are unnecessary, and in the
second decidedly injurious. I will begin by explaining why they
are injurious in the second case, and therefore say that when-
ever either princes or republics are afraid lest their subjects
should revolt, it results mainly from the hatred of the subjects
on account of the bad treatment experienced from those who
govern them; and this comes either from the belief that they
can best be controlled by force, or from lack of sound judgment
in governing them. And one of the things that induce the
belief that they can be controlled by force is the possession of
fortresses with which to menace them; and thus the ill treat-
ment that engenders hatred in the subjects arises in great
measure from the fact that the prince or republic hold the
fortresses, which (if this be true) are therefore by far more
injurious than useful. For in the first instance (as has been
said) they cause you to be more violent and audacious to-
wards your subjects; and next, they do not afford the security
which you imagine; for all the measures of force and violence
that you employ to hold a people amount to nothing, except
these two: either you must keep a good army always ready to
take the field, as the Romans did; or you must scatter, dis-
organize, and destroy the people so completely that they can in

294 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

no way injure you; for, were you merely to impoverish them,
“the spoliated still have their arms”; if you disarm them,
“their fury will serve them instead of arms”; if you kill
the chiefs and continue to oppress the others, new chiefs will
spring up like the heads of the Hydra. If you build fortresses
they may serve in time of peace to encourage you to oppress
your subjects; but in time of war they are most useless, be-
cause they will be assailed by the enemy as well as by your
subjects, and cannot possibly resist both. And if.ever they
were useless, it is now in our day, on account of the power of
artillery, in consequence of which small places, where you can-
not retreat behind second intrenchments, cannot possibly be
defended, as has been explained above.

I will discuss this subject in a more familiar manner. Prince
or republic, you would either keep the people of your own city
in check by means of fortresses, or you wish to hold a city that
has been taken in war. I shall turn to the prince, and say to
him that “nothing can be more useless than such a fortress for
“keeping your own citizens in check, for the reasons given
“above; for it will make you more prompt and regardless in
“oppressing them, which will expose you to ruin by exciting
“your subjects against you to that degree that you will not be
“able to defend the very citadel that has provoked it.” A good
and wise prince, desirous of maintaining that character, and to
avoid giving the opportunity to his sons to become oppressive,
will never build fortresses, so that they may place their reliance
upon the good will of their subjects, and not upon the strength
of citadels. And although Count Francesco Sforza, who had
become Duke of Milan, and was reputed a sagacious man,
caused a citadel to be built at Milan, yet I maintain that in
that respect he did not prove himself wise, for the result de-
monstrated that that citadel, so far from giving security to
his heirs, proved their ruin; for in the belief that, being per-
fectly secure by the protection which this citadel afforded, they
might with impunity outrage and oppress their citizens, they
indulged in all sorts of violence, which made them so odious
that they lost their state at the first attack of an enemy; and
the citadel, which during peace had done them so much harm,
was of no service in defending them in war. For if they had
not had it, and had not unwisely treated their citizens so
harshly, they would sooner have discovered their danger, and

Cuar. XXIV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 295

would have retreated ; and would then have been able to resist
the impetuous assault of the French more bravely without the
citadel, but supported by the good will of their people, than with
the citadel and the hostility of their people.

In truth, fortresses are of no advantage to you in any way,
for they are lost either by the treachery of those who are put to
guard them, or by the violence of the assailants, or by famine.
And if you want to have any benefit from fortresses, and have
them serve you in recovering the state that you may have lost,
when the only thing that remains to you is the citadel, you
must have an army with which you can attack the enemy that
has dispossessed you of your state; and if you have such an
army you would recover your state anyhow, even if there were
no such citadel,—in fact, even more easily, for the people would
be more friendly to you, because they would not have received
bad treatment at your hands when you were relying upon
your fortress. And experience has shown that the citadel of
Milan was of no use, either to the Sforzas or to the French, in
times of adversity for either the one or the other; but that it
rather wrought harm and ruin to both, because in consequence
of their reliance upon it they gave no thought to holding that
state by means of more just and proper government. Guido-
baldo, Duke of Urbino, son of Frederick, who in his day was
esteemed one of the most distinguished captains, was driven
from his state by Cesar Borgia, son of Pope Alexander VI.
When afterwards in the course of events he regained his pos-
sessions, he caused all the fortresses in the state to be de-
stroyed, because he believed them to be injurious. For, being
beloved by his subjects, he did not need them on their account,
and with regard to his enemies, he had seen that he could not
hold them without an army in the field, and therefore he re-
solved to destroy them. Pope Julius II., after having driven
the Bentivogh out of Bologna, built a citadel there, and then
caused one of his governors to have some of the people assassi-
nated. This caused a revolt, and the Pope quickly lost the
citadel; so that it proved to have been of no use to him, but
rather an injury, the more so as it might have been of some
service had he borne himself differently towards the people.
Niccolo da Castello, father of the Vitelli, having returned to his
country whence he had been exiled, promptly razed two for-
tresses that had been built by Sixtus LV., deeming that it was

296 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

only the good will of the people, and not the fortresses, that
could maintain him in that state. But the most recent and
most notable instance, and the one most fit to prove the futility
of building and the advantage of destroying fortresses, is that
which occurred at Genoa in our immediate time. It is well
known that in 1507 Genoa revolted against Louis XIIL., king
of France, who came with all his forces to recover that city,
and, having succeeded in this, he caused the construction of
the most formidable citadel that had ever been built; for ow-
ing to its situation and other circumstances, it seemed actually
impregnable, being placed upon the point of a high hill that
extended into the sea, called by the Genoese Codefa, and thus
commanding the entire port of Genoa, and a considerable por-
tion of the surrounding country. It happened afterwards, in
the year 1512, that the French, being driven out of Italy, Genoa
revolted in spite of the citadel (which remained in the hands of
the French). The government was seized by Ottaviano Fre-
goso, who, after sixteen months of great effort, took the city
by famine. Every one believed, and many advised, that he
would preserve the citadel as a refuge in any event; but being
a very sagacious man, and knowing that it was the good will of
the people, and not fortresses, that maintain princes in their
states, he had the citadel destroyed. And thus, instead of
founding his state upon the strength of the fortress, but upon
his valor and prudence, he has held it ever since to this day.
And where formerly a thousand foot soldiers sufficed to over-
turn the government of Genoa, more than ten thousand could
not now injure him; which shows that the destruction of the
citadel did no more injure Ottaviano than the building of it
protected the king of France; for when the latter was able to
come into Italy at the head of an army, he recovered Genoa
without the aid of a citadel; but without such an army he
could not hold Genoa, although he had the support of a citadel,
the building of which caused him great expense and its loss
much disgrace, whilst to Ottaviano the taking of it brought
much glory and its destruction great advantage.

But let us come now to republics that build fortresses, not
within their own territory, but in that which they conquer.
And if the example of France and Genoa does not suffice to
expose the fallacy of this, the case of Florence and Pisa cer-
tainly will; for the Florentines built a citadel to hold that city,

Cur. XXIV.| YEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 297

ignorant of the principle that to hold a city that had always
hated everything that bore the name of Florentine, that had
enjoyed free institutions, and that had resorted to rebellion as a
refuge for liberty, it was necessary to follow the practice of the
old Romans, either to convert her into an ally and associate, or
to destroy her entirely. How much reliance can be placed upon
fortresses was shown when King Charles came into Italy, to
whom they all surrendered, either through the treachery of their
governors, or from fear of a worse fate. If there had been no
citadel the Florentines would not have based their hopes of
holding Pisa upon this means, and the king of France never
would have been able in that way to deprive the Florentines of
that city. The means which they in that case would have em-
ployed to hold Pisa until then, would perhaps have sufficed to
preserve it altogether, and certainly would have stood the test
better than the citadel.

I conclude, then, that to hold one’s own country fortresses
are injurious, and to hold conquered territory they are useless.
The authority of the Romans is enough for me: they razed the
strong places in the countries which they wished to hold, and
never built any new ones. And if the example of Tarentum in
ancient times, and that of Brescia in modern times, be quoted
in opposition to my opinion, both of which places were recov-
ered from their revolted inhabitants by means of their citadels,
I reply, that for the recovery of Tarentum Fabius Maximus was
sent at the beginning of the year with the entire army, and he
would have succeeded in retaking that city independent of the
citadel, although he made use of it; for if the citadel had not
existed, he would have found other means of accomplishing the
same end. And truly I do not see of what sort of advantage
a fortress can be, if to recover possession of your country it is
necessary to send a consular army with a Fabius Maximus to
command it. That the Romans would have retaken Tarentum
anyhow is proved by the example of Capua, where there was
no citadel, and which they recovered by the mere valor of their
army. But let us come to Brescia. I say that it rarely hap-
pens, as it did in this case, that when a city revolts, and whilst
the citadel remains in your hands, you should have a powerful
army near at hand, like that of the French; for Gaston de
Foix was with his army at Bologna, and the moment he heard
of the loss of Brescia he marched his army there, and, having

298 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Boox II.

arrived, recovered the place by means of the citadel. But the
citadel of Brescia to be thus of service needed a Gaston de
Foix with the French army to come to its support within three
days. Thus this example does not suffice to controvert the in-
stances I have adduced; for a number of fortresses have been
taken and retaken in the wars of our times, according as the
one or the other party were the stronger or the weaker in
the field; not only in Lombardy, but also in the Romagna, in
the kingdom of Naples, and in fact throughout all Italy. But
as to the building of fortresses for defence against foreign
enemies, I say that they are not needed by those peoples or
kingdoms that have good armies; for good armies suffice for
their icfence without fortresses, but fortresses without good
armies are incompetent for defence. Experience proves this
to be the case with those who manage their government and
other affairs well, as was the case with the Romans and Spar-
tans; for whilst the Romans built no fortresses, the Spartans
not only refrained from doing so, but even did not permit
their city to be protected by walls, for they wanted to rely
solely upon the valor of their men for their defence, and upon
no other means. And therefore when a Spartan was asked
by an Athenian whether he did not think the walls of Athens
admirable, he replied, “ Yes, if the city were inhabited by
“women.”

The prince, then, who has a good army, may have upon
his frontiers, or on the sea, some fortresses that may for
some days hold an enemy in check, to enable the prince to
gather his forces; such fortresses may occasionally be useful
to him, but not necessary. But when the prince has not a
good army, then fortresses whether within his territory or upon
the frontiers are either injurious or useless to him; injurious,
because they are easily lost, and when lost are turned against
him; and even if they are so strong that the enemy cannot
take them, he will march by with his army and leave them in
the rear; and thus they are of no benefit, for good armies, un-
less opposed by equally powerful ones, march into the enemy’s
country regardless of cities or fortresses, which they leave in
their rear. We have many instances of this in ancient history ;
and Francesco Maria did the same thing quite recently, when,
marching to attack Urbino, he left ten hostile cities behind
him without paying the least attention to them. A prince

Char XXV) YEN BOOKS OF TITCS LIVIUS, 299

then, who can raise a good army, need not build any for-
tresses; and one who cannot should not build any. It is
proper enough that he should fortify the city in which he
resides, so as to be able to resist the first shock of an enemy,
and to afford himself the time to negotiate, or to obtain aid
from without for his relief; but anything more is mere waste
of money in time of peace, and useless in time of war. And
thus whoever reflects upon all I have said upon the subject
will see that the same wisdom which inspired the Romans in
all other matters equally guided them in their decisions re-
specting the Latins and the Privernati, when, instead of rely-
ing upon fortresses, they secured the allegiance of these people
by wiser and more magnanimous means.

CHAPTER XXV.

IT IS AN ERROR TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE INTERNAL DISSEN-
SIONS OF A CITY, AND TO ATTEMPT TO TAKE POSSESSION OF
IT WHILST IN THAT CONDITION.

THE dissensions between the people and the nobility in the
Roman republic were so great, that the Veienti together with
the Tuscans, thought the opportunity favorable for crushing
out the name of Rome entirely; and having formed an army
and made incursions into the Roman territory, the Senate sent
Cn. Manlius and M. Fabius against them; and when they had
moved their army near to that of the Veienti, these began with
insults and attacks to abuse and offend the Romans, with such
a degree of temerity and insolence that it caused the Romans
to forget their dissensions and to become united; so that when
it came to a regular battle between them and the Veienti and
Tuscans, the Romans completely defeated and routed them.
This shows how apt men are to deceive themselves (as we
have shown above) in deciding upon what course they are to
take, and how frequently they lose where they had confidently
hoped to win. The Veienti thought that, by assailing the Ro-
mans at a moment when they were divided by internal dissen-
sions, they would have an easy victory over them; but their
very attack restored union amongst the Romans, and that

300 DISCOURSES ON THE FIKST [Boox II.

caused the defeat of the Veienti. These dissensions in re-
publics are generally the result of idleness and peace, whilst
apprehension and war are productive of union; and therefore
if the Veienti had been wise, the more they had seen the Ro-
mans divided amongst themselves, the more they would have
kept war away from them, and should have tried to subjugate
them by the arts of peace. The way to do this is to try and
win the confidence of the citizens that are divided amongst
themselves, and to manage to become the arbiter between
them, unless they should have come to arms; but having come
to arms, then sparingly to favor the weaker party, so as to
keep up the war and make them exhaust themselves, and not
to give them occasion for the apprehension, by a display of your
forces, that you intend to subjugate them and make yourself
their prince. And if this course be well carried out, it will
generally end in your obtaining the object you aim at. The
city of Pistoja (as I have said in another chapter) did not
come to the republic of Florence by any other than the above
means; for its people being divided amongst themselves, the
Florentines favored first one party and then the other, and
brought them to that point that, wearied of their disturbed
existence, they threw themselves spontaneously into the arms
of Florence. The city of Sienna changed her government
through the influence of the Florentines only when these aided
her with small and unimportant favors; for had these favors
been large and of importance, the Siennese would immediately
have united in defence of the existing government. I will add
one more example to the above. Filippo Visconti, Duke of
Milan, often made war upon Florence, relying upon her inter-
nal dissensions, but was always the loser; so that he said, in
lamenting his unsuccessful attempts, that “the follies of the
“ Florentines have cost him two millions in gold.”

The Veienti and the Tuscans then (as I have said above)
were deluded by the hope of being able to take advantage of
the dissensions of the Romans, and were in the end defeated
by them in battle. And in the same way will all those be
deceived who in a similar manner and for similar reasons
believe that they can subjugate a people.

Cusp, XXXVI] TEN BOOKS OF TITCS LIVIUs. 501

CHAPTER XXVI.

CONTEMPT AND INSULTS ENGENDER HATRED AGAINST THOSE
WHO INDULGE IN THEM, WITHOUT BEING OF ANY ADVANTAGE
TO THEM.

I HOLD it to be a proof of great prudence for men to abstain
from threats and insulting words towards any one, for nei-
ther the one nor the other in any way diminishes the strength
of the enemy; but the one makes him more cautious, and the
other increases his hatred of you, and makes him more perse-
vering in his efforts to injure you. This was seen in the case
of the Veienti, of whom we have spoken in the preceding chap-
ter, who added insulting words against the Romans to the in-
juries of war, which no prudent captain should permit his
soldiers to indulge in, for they inflame and excite the enemy
to revenge, and in no way impede his attacking you (as has
been said), so that they are in fact so many weapons that will
be turned against you. <A striking instance of this occurred
in Asia, when Gabades, eee of the Persians, having
for a nes time besieged Amida and becoming weary of the
siege, resolved to abandon it; and having already broken up
his camp, the inhabitants of the place came upon the walls,
and, inflated with the thought of victory, assailed his army
with every kind of insult, vilifyi ing them and accusing and re-
proaching them for their peice and poltroonery. ‘Gabades,
irritated by this, changed his mind and resumed the siege, mae
his indignation at Aik insults so stimulated his efforts, that
he took the city in a few days, and gave it up to sack and pil-
lage. The same thing happened to the Veienti, who, not con-
tent with making war upon the Romans, outraged them with
insulting words, advancing up to the very stockade of their
camp to fling insults at them, thus irritating the Romans more
by their words than their arms; so that the soldiers, who at
first had fought unwillingly, now constrained the Consuls to
bring on a battle, in which they made the Veienti suffer the
penalties of their insolence. It is the duty, therefore, of every
good general of an army, or chief of a republic, to use all
proper means to prevent such insults and reproaches from be-
ing indulged in by citizens or soldiers, either amongst them-

302 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST. [Boox II.

selves or against the enemy ; for if used against an enemy they
give rise to the above-described inconveniences, and between
the soldiers and the citizens it is even worse, unless they are
promptly put a stop to, as has ever been done by prudent
rulers. The Roman legion that had been left at Capua, having
conspired against the Capuans, (as we shall relate in its place,)
and this conspiracy having given rise to a sedition which was
quelled by Valerius Corvinus, one of the stipulations of the
convention that was concluded with them provided ,the sever-
est penalties against whoever should at any time reproach the
soldiers with this selection. Tiberius Gracchus, who in the war
with Hannibal had been called to the command of a certain
number of slaves, who had been armed because of the scarcity
of freemen, ordered amongst the first things that the penalty
of death should be inflicted upon whoever reproached any of
them with their former servitude; so dangerous did the Ro-
mans esteem it to treat men with contempt, or to reproach
them with any previous disgrace, because nothing is more irri-
tating and calculated to excite greater indignation than such
reproaches, whether founded upon truth or not; “for harsh
“‘ sarcasms, even if they have but the least truth in them, leave
“ their bitterness rankling in the memory.”

CHAPTER XXVII.

WISE PRINCES AND REPUBLICS SHOULD CONTENT THEMSELVES
WITH VICTORY; FOR WHEN THEY AIM AT MORE, THEY GENER-
ALLY LOSE.

THE use of insulting language towards an enemy arises
generally from the insolence of victory, or from the false hope
of victory, which latter misleads men as often in their actions
as in their words; for when this false hope takes possession of
the mind, it makes men go beyond the mark, and causes them
often to sacrifice a certain good for an uncertain better. And
as this matter well merits consideration, it seems to me better
to demonstrate it by ancient and modern examples, rather than
attempt to do so by arguments, which will not do as well.
After Hannibal had defeated the Romans at Canna, he sent

Coar XXVIL) ZEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 303

messengers to Carthage to announce his victory and to ask for
support. The question as to what should be done was warmly
discussed in the Senate of Carthage. Hanno, an old and saga-
cious citizen, advised that they should prudently avail of the
victory to make peace with the Romans, which, he argued,
they could do now with much more favorable conditions, hay-
ing been victorious, than they could possibly have expected
if they had been defeated ; and. that the object of the Cartha-
ginians should be to show to the Romans that, whilst they were
able to combat them, yet having won a victory they were not
disposed to risk losing the fruits of it by the hope of still fur-
ther successes. The Carthaginian Senate did not adopt this
course, though they recognized the wisdom of it after the op-
portunity was lost. After Alexander the Great had conquered
the entire Orient, the republic of Tyre, (most eminent and
powerful in those days, the city being situated upon the water
like that of the Venetians,) seeing the success and power of
Alexander, sent ambassadors to him to assure him of their
friendly disposition, and of their readiness to render him obe-
dience, but that they could not consent to receive him or his
forces within their city. Whereupon Alexander became indig-
nant that a city should attempt to close her gates to him when
all the rest of the world had thrown open theirs; he declined
to receive the ambassadors, and, refusing the terms offered to
him, he began to lay siege to the city. Tyre being surrounded
by water, and abundantly supplied with provisions and all
munitions necessary for her defence, Alexander found after
four months of siege that the taking of the city would require
more of his time and glory than most of his other conquests
had done, and therefore resolved to try negotiations and to con-
cede to the Tyrians all they themselves had asked. But the
Tyrians on their part, having become elated, now refused to
make terms, and killed the messengers whom Alexander had
sent to them. This so enraged Alexander that he assaulted
the city with such vigor that he captured and destroyed her,
and made slaves of her men. In the year 1502 a Spanish
army came into the Florentine dominions for the purpose of
reinstating the Medici in the government of Florence, and to
levy contributions from the city ; the Spaniards had been called
there by the citizens themselves, who had encouraged them
with the hope that they would take up arms in their favor so

804 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

soon as they should have entered the Florentine territory. But
when the Spaniards had arrived in the plains of Florence, they
found no one coming to their support, and having run out of
provisions they attempted to open negotiations; but the citi-
zens of Florence had become insolent, and declined all terms.
The loss of Prato and the ruin of their own state were the
consequence of this conduct. Princes that are attacked can-
not then commit a greater error, especially when their assailant
ereatly exceeds them in power, than to refuse all accommoda-
tion, and more particularly when it has been offered; for no
terms will ever be so hard but what they will afford some ad-
vantage to him who accepts them, so that he really obtains
thereby a share of the victory. And therefore the people of
Tyre should have been satisfied to have Alexander accept the
propositions which he had at first refused; for it would have
been victory enough for them to have made so great a con-
queror, with arms in hand, come to their own terms. And
so it should also have sufficed the Florentines, and it would
have been a great victory for them, if the Spaniards had
yielded in something to their will, without accomplishing all
their own designs, which had for their object to change the
government of Florence, to detach it from France, and to levy
contributions from it. If out of these three objects the Span-
lards had gained two, leaving to the people of Florence the
first, namely its government, it would have been to some ex-
tent an honorable and satisfactory arrangement for both par-
ties, and the people ought not to have cared about the two
last points provided they preserved their liberty ; nor should
they (even if they had seen a chance of a greater and almost
certain victory) have exposed their independence to the haz-
ards of fortune, because that was their last stake, which no
prudent man will ever risk except from extreme necessity.
Hannibal left Italy after sixteen years of triumphs, having
been recalled by the Carthaginians to come to the rescue of
his own country; he found Asdrubal and Syphax utterly
beaten, the kingdom of Numidia lost, Carthage confined to
the limits of her walls, and having no other resources to look
to but him and his army. Knowing that this was the last re-
source of his country, Hannibal did not want to risk it without
having first tried all other means, and was not ashamed to ask
for peace, convinced that peace and not war was the only

Guar. XXVIIL] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 305

means of saving his country. The Romans having refused his
request, he resolved to fight, though almost certain of defeat,
judging that there might possibly be a chance of his being
victorious, and that at least he should lose gloriously. And
if so great and valiant a general as Hannibal, with his entire
army, sought peace rather than risk a battle, seeing that his
defeat would expose his country to enslavement, what should
any less valiant and experienced generals do? But men al-
ways commit the error of not knowing where to limit their
hopes, and by trusting to these rather than to a just measure
of their resources, they are generally ruined.

CHAPTER XXVIUTI.

HOW DANGEROUS IT IS FOR A REPUBLIC OR A PRINCE NOT TO
AVENGE A PUBLIC OR A PRIVATE INJURY.

Wuat men will do from indignation and resentment is
clearly seen from what happened to the Romans when they
had sent the three Fabii as ambassadors to the Gauls, who
had come to attack the Tuscans, and more especially the city
of Clusium. The inhabitants having sent to Rome for assist-
ance, the Romans sent ambassadors to the Gauls to notify
them to abstain from making war upon their allies, the Tus-
cans. These ambassadors being more accustomed to act than
to speak, and having arrived at the place at the very mo-
ment when the Tuscans and Gauls were engaged in battle,
threw themselves upon the latter to combat them. Having
been recognized by these, all the resentment which before
they had felt towards the Tuscans was now turned against
the Romans; and was increased even, because the Gauls com-
plained through their ambassadors to the Romans of this
wrong, and having demanded as a reparation therefor that
the three Fabii should be delivered up to them, the Romans
not only did not surrender or punish them in any way, but at
the next assembling of the Comitii they were made Tribunes,
with consular powers. Whenthe Gauls saw the very men
who should have been chastised thus rewarded with honors,
they regarded it as an intentional insult and disgrace to them-

VOL. II. 20

306 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

selves; and, exasperated by anger and indignation, they attacked
Rome and captured the whole city, excepting only the Capitol.
This misfortune was brought upon themselves by the Romans,
through nothing but their disregard of justice, and because
their ambassadors, who had violated the laws of nations, in-
stead of being punished, had been rewarded with high honors.

This shows how careful republics and princes should be to
avoid similar wrongs, either to an entire people or to an in-
dividual; for if any man be grievously wronged, either by a
state or by another individual, and satisfactory reparation be
not made to him, if he lives in a republic he will revenge him-
self, even if it involves the ruin of the state, and if he lives
under a prince, and be at all high-spirited, he will never rest
until he have revenged himself upon him in some way, though
he may see that it will cause his own ruin. To prove the
truth of this, we have a most flagrant and authentic instance in
the case of Philip of Macedon, father of Alexander the Great.
Amongst the followers of his court was Pausanias, a noble
youth of rare beauty, of whom Attalus, one of the chief offi-
cers of Philip, had become greatly enamored; and having
several times pressed Pausanias to yield to his unnatural
desires, which the youth had indignantly repelled, Attalus re-
solved by perfidy and force to obtain what he could not have
otherwise. He therefore gave a grand banquet, to which he
invited Pausanias, amongst a number of other nobles. After
all had feasted and were filled with wine, he had Pausanias
seized and carried to a retired place; and after having vented
his own unnatural lust upon him, by way of subjecting him
to still greater shame he caused a number of his other guests
to subject him to a similar abuse. Pausanias repeatedly com-
plained to Philip of this outrage, who for a while indulged him
with the promise of revenge; but he not only failed to perform
it, but promoted Attalus to the governorship of one of the
Greek provinces. Whereupon Pausanias, seeing his enemy
honored instead of being chastised, turned his whole resentment
from him who had wronged him against Philip, for not having
avenged him; and one morning, on the solemn occasion of the
nuptials of the daughter of Philip with Alexander of Epirus,
whilst Philip, accompanied by the two Alexanders, his son and
son-in-law, was on his way to the temple to celebrate the mar-
riage of his daughter, Pausanias slew him. This example,

Cuar. XXIX.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 307

very similar to that of the Romans, should make all rulers
remember never to esteem a man so lightly as to believe that,
having heaped injuries and insults upon him, he will not seek
to revenge himself, even at the risk of his own life.

CHAPTER XXIX.

FORTUNE BLINDS THE MINDS OF MEN WHEN SHE DOES NOT WISH
THEM TO OPPOSE HER DESIGNS.

Ir we observe carefully the course of human affairs, we shall
often notice accidents and occurrences against which it seems
to be the will of Heaven that we should not have provided.
And if the events to which I refer occurred at Rome, where
there was so much virtue, so much religion, and such order,
it is no wonder that similar circumstances occur even much
more frequently in a city or province deficient in the above
advantages. As the case in point is most remarkable in proy-
ing the power of Heaven over human affairs, Titus Livius
relates it at length in the most effective language, saying that
“Heaven, wishing to make the Romans feel its power, first
‘caused the Fabii, who had been sent as ambassadors to the
“Gauls, to commit a grave error; and then, in consequence of
“this act, it excited the Gauls to make war upon Rome. After-
“wards, Heaven ordained that nothing worthy of the Roman
“people should be done to meet this war, having first caused
“Camillus, the only citizen capable of averting so great an
“evil, to be exiled to Ardea; and afterwards, the same people
“who had repeatedly created a Dictator to check the impetuous
“attacks of the Volscians and other neighboring enemies, failed
“to do so when the Gauls were marching upon Rome.” They
also displayed great lack of zeal and diligence in their levies
of troops, which were very insufficient; and altogether they
were so slow in taking up arms, that they were barely in time
to encounter the Gauls upon the river Allia, ten miles from
Rome. Here the Tribunes established their camp, without any
sign of their customary diligence, without proper examination
of the ground, without surrounding the camp with either ditch
or stockade, and without any of those precautions which divine

308 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

or human reason would prompt. And in their order of battle
they formed their ranks open and feeble, so that neither the
soldiers nor the captains did anything worthy of the Roman
discipline; for they fought without bloodshed, and fled even
before they were fairly attacked. The greater part of the
army went off to Veii, and the rest retreated to Rome, where
they went direct to the Capitol, without entering even their
own houses. And the Senate, so far from defending Rome
(any more than the others), did not even close its gates; a
portion sought safety in flight, and a portion took refuge in
the Capitol with the remnant of the army. It is true that in
the defence of this citadel they employed some method and
prudence; they did not encumber it with useless men; they
supplied it with all the provisions possible, so as to be able to
support a long siege; and the crowd of useless old men,
women, and children fled and dispersed in great part to the
neighboring places, and the others remained in Rome, a prey to
the Gauls; so that any one who had read of the deeds done by
this people so many years before, and had then witnessed their
conduct on that occasion, could not possibly have believed
them to be the same people. And Titus Livius, who has
given an account of all the above troubles, concludes by say-
ing, “Fortune thus blinds the minds of men when she does
“not wish them to resist her power.”

Nothing could be more true than this conclusion; and there-
fore men who habitually live in great adversity or prosperity de-
serve less praise or less blame. For it will generally be found
that they have been brought to their ruin or their greatness
by some great occasion offered by Heaven, which gives them the
opportunity, or deprives them of the power, to conduct them-
selves with courage and wisdom. It certainly is the course of
Fortune, when she wishes to effect some great result, to select
for her instrument a man of such spirit and ability that he will
recognize the opportunity which is afforded him. And thus, in
the same way, when she wishes to effect the ruin and destruc-
tion of states, she places men at the head who contribute to
and hasten such ruin; and if there be any one powerful
enough to resist her, she has him killed, or deprives him of
all means of doing any good. The instances cited show
clearly how Fortune, by way of strengthening Rome and
carrying her to that greatness to which she attained, deemed

Caan XXX | o TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 809

it necessary to subject her to defeat, (as we shall show in
the beginning of the following Book,) but did not wish to
ruin her entirely. And therefore we see how she caused Ca-
millus to be exiled, but not killed; how she caused the city of
Rome to be taken by the Gauls, but not the citadel; and in
the same way she caused the Romans to do nothing well for
the protection of the city, whilst in their preparations for the
defence of the Capitol they omitted nothing. To permit Rome
to be taken, Fortune caused the greater part of the troops
who were beaten on the river Allia to go to Veii, and thus
seemingly cut off all means for saving the city; and yet, at
the same time whilst doing all this, she prepared everything
for the recovery of Rome. She caused almost an entire army
to go to Veli, and Camillus to be exiled to Ardea, so that,
under the command of a general with a reputation untarnished
by the disgrace of defeat, a sufficient body of troops might be
brought together for the recapture of the city.

I might cite some modern examples in confirmation of the
views I have advanced, but do not deem it necessary, as that of
the Romans suffices. I repeat, then, as an incontrovertible
truth, proved by all history, that men may second Fortune,
but cannot oppose her; they may develop her designs, but
cannot defeat them. But men should never despair on that
account; for, not knowing the aims of Fortune, which she
pursues by dark and devious ways, men should always be
hopeful, and never yield to despair, whatever troubles or ill
fortune may befall them.

CHAPTER XXX.

REPUBLICS AND PRINCES THAT ARE REALLY POWERFUL DO NOT
PURCHASE ALLIANCES BY MONEY, BUT BY THEIR VALOR AND
THE REPUTATION OF THEIR ARMIES.

Tue Romans were besieged in the Capitol, and although in
expectation of succor from Veii and from Camillus, yet, driven
by hunger, they came to terms with the Gauls, according to
which they were to pay them a certain amount of gold; but
whilst in the act of concluding this arrangement, the gold

310 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

being already in the scales, Camillus arrived with his army,
which according to Livius was caused by Fortune, “ who did
“not want that the Romans should live as having purchased
“their freedom with gold.” It is noteworthy that not only in
this instance, but also in the whole course of the existence of
the Roman republic, the Romans never made any acquisitions
by means of money; nor did they ever purchase a peace, but
secured it always by the valor of their arms, which I do not
believe can be said of any other republic.
Amongst the other indications by which the power of a repub-
lic may be recognized is the relation in which they live with
their neighbors; if these are tributary to her by way of secur-
ing her friendship and protection, then it is a sure sign that
that republic is powerful. But if these neighboring states,
though they may be more feeble than herself, draw money from
her, then it is a sure indication of great weakness on the part
of the republic. Let any one read the whole history of Rome,
and he will see that the Massilians, the Eduans, the isle of
Rhodes, Hiero of Syracuse, the kings Eumenes and Masi-
nissa, all living near the confines of the Roman Empire, for no
other reason than to secure to themselves its friendship and
protection, contributed materially to its needs and expenses
by large tributes. On the other hand, we see in the case of
feeble states, and to begin with our own Florence in the past
century and at the period of her greatest glory, that there was
not a petty lord in the Romagna that did not draw a pension
from her, besides also allowing pensions to Perugia, Castello,
and other neighboring cities. But the very reverse would have
been the case if Florence had been warlike and powerful; for
then they would have paid tribute to her for the advantage of
having her protection, and instead of selling their friendship
to Florence they would have had to purchase hers. The Flor-
entines, however, are not the only ones that can be reproached
with this habitual cowardice; the Venetians acted in the same
way, and even the king of France, who with so great a king-
dom became tributary to the Swiss and to the king of England ;
and this resulted solely from their having disarmed their peo-
ples, and because the king of France and the other states
mentioned preferred the immediate advantage of being able to
oppress their subjects, and to avoid an imaginary rather than
a real evil, to doing that which would have assured their own

Coar, XXX.) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 311

tranquillity and the permanent happiness of their states. Such
a cowardly policy may for a time insure quiet, but will inevi-
tably lead in the end to irretrievable injury and ruin.

It would be tedious to relate how many times the Floren-
tines, the Venetians, and the kingdom of France have bought
off wars with money; and how many times they subjected
themselves to an ignominy to which the Romans submitted
once only. It would be equally tedious to relate how many
places the Florentines and the Venetians have purchased with
money, which afterwards caused great disorders; showing that
what has been purchased with gold cannot be defended with
iron. ‘The Romans continued their high-minded course so long
as they enjoyed liberty, but when they submitted to the rule
of Emperors, and these Emperors began to be corrupted, pre-
ferring the shade of the palace to the sun of the camp, then
they also began to buy off the Parthians, the Germans, and
other neighboring peoples, which was the beginning of the
ruin of this great empire. These are some of the unhappy
consequences of disarming the people; whence also results
another and even greater evil, namely, that the more the
enemy penetrates into your country, the more will he dis-
cover your weakness. for princes and republics who act
thus will oppress the people of the interior of their states so
as to procure men whom they can send to the frontiers to
keep off the enemy. It gives rise also to the practice of giv-
ing subsidies to the princes and peoples that are near the
confines of the state, to serve as a bulwark and keep the enemy
at a distance. This enables the states that practise this system
to make some resistance at their frontiers, yet when the enemy
has once passed these, they can present no further obstacle to
him. And yet they do not see how much their mode of pro-
ceeding is opposed to all good principles; for it is the heart
and vital parts of the body that should be protected and de-
fended, and not the extremities, for without the latter life is
possible, but without the former death is certain; and states
like those described above keep their hands and feet armed,
but leave their heart unprotected. The evils which Florence
has suffered from this system have often been seen, and may
be seen any day; for whenever a hostile army passed the fron-
tiers of the republic and approached the centre, all further
resistance was vain. It is but a few years since that the Vene-

312 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox IT.

tians afforded similar proof of the truth of what I say; and if
their city were not surrounded by water, we should have seen
the end of it. The same results have not been so often expe-
rienced in France, because that kingdom is so great that it has
few enemies that are her superiors. Nevertheless, when the
English attacked France in the year 1518, the whole country
trembled, and the king, as well as everybody else, was of the
opinion that the loss of a single battle would deprive him of
his state.

With the Romans the very opposite was the case, for the
nearer the enemy approached the city of Rome the more pow-
erful he found the resistance. The coming of Hannibal into
Italy shows that after three defeats, and after the loss of so
- many officers and men, the Romans not only were able to sus-

tain the war, but actually proved victorious. All of which was
the consequence of having the heart of the state well armed,
and making little account of the extremities; for the founda-
tion of the power of Rome consisted in the people of Rome itself,
the Latin people, and the other allies and colonies of Rome in
Italy, whence they drew soldiers enough to enable them to con-
quer and hold the world. The truth of this is shown by the
question asked by Hanno, the Carthaginian, of the messengers
whom Hannibal had sent to Carthage after the battle of Canne.
These, having magnified the deeds of Hannibal, were asked by
Hanno “whether any of the Roman people had come to sue
“for peace, and whether any of the cities of Latium or any of
“the colonies had revolted against Rome.” And when they
replied in the negative to both these questions, Hanno said,
“In that case the war is but begun.”

From what I have said in this and in preceding chapters, we
see how very different the conduct of modern republics is from
that of the ancients. In consequence of this we daily see re-
markable losses, and still more wonderful conquests ; for where
men have but little wisdom and valor, Fortune more signally
displays her power; and as she is variable, so the states and
republics under her influence also fluctuate, and will continue
to fluctuate until some ruler shall arise who is so great an
admirer of antiquity as to be able to govern such states so
that Fortune may not have occasion, with every revolution of
the sun, to display her influence and power.

Coar. XXXI-) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 313

CHAPTER XXXI.

HOW DANGEROUS IT IS TO TRUST TO THE REPRESENTATIONS OF
EXILES.

It seems to me not amiss to speak here of the danger of
trusting to the representations of men who have been expelled
from their country, this being a matter that all those who gov-
ern states have to act upon almost daily; and I touch upon
it the more willingly, as Titus Livius gives a most memora-
ble instance of it, though in a measure foreign to the subject
he treats upon. When Alexander the Great went with his
army into Asia, Alexander of Epirus, his brother-in-law and
uncle, came with his army into Italy, having been called there
by the banished Lucanians, who had held out the hope to him
that by their means he would be able to seize that whole coun-
try ; and when Alexander, upon their assurances and the hopes
held out by them, had come into Italy, they killed him, because
they had been promised by the citizens of Lucania permission
to return to their homes if they would assassinate Alexander.
We see, then, how vain the faith and promises of men are who
are exiles from their own country. As to their faith, we have
to bear in mind that, whenever they can return to their coun-
try by other means than your assistance, they will abandon
you and look to the other means, regardless of their promises
to you. And as to their vain hopes and promises, such is their
extreme desire to return to their homes that they naturally
believe many things that are not true, and add many others on
purpose; so that, with what they really believe and what they
say they believe, they will fill you with hopes to that degree
that if you attempt to act upon them you will incur a fruitless
expense, or engage in an undertaking that will involve you
in ruin. The example of Alexander of Epirus, just cited,
will suffice to prove the truth of this; but I will add that of
Themistocles the Athenian, who, having been declared a rebel,
fled to Darius in Asia, and made such representations and
promises to him if he would attack Greece, that Darius allowed
himself to be persuaded to undertake it. But when Themis-
tocles found that he could not fulfil those promises, he poi-
soned himself, either from shame or from the fear of punish-

314 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

ment. And if so eminent aman as Themistocles could com-
mit so great an error, we may judge to what extent men of
less virtue allow themselves to be misled by their desires and
their passions. A prince therefore should be slow in under-
taking any enterprise upon the representations of exiles, for he
will generally gain nothing by it but shame and serious injury.
And as cities are rarely taken by surprise or by means of secret
intelligence with those within, it seems to me it will not be out
of place if I treat of this in the following chapter, and at the
same time give some account of the method practised by the
Romans in taking cities.

CHAPTER XXXII.
OF THE METHOD PRACTISED BY THE ROMANS IN TAKING CITIES.

THE Romans, being much given to war, did everything re-
lating to it in the most advantageous manner, as well in the
providing of money as in every other requirement. And there-
fore they avoided all regular sieges of cities, deeming that the
expense and inconveniences of a siege exceeded the advantages
of the capture, and consequently they regarded every other
mode of taking a city as more advantageous than a regular
siege; and thus with all their wars, during so many years,
there are but very few instances of regular sieges made by
them. Their mode of taking cities was either by assault or by
voluntary surrender on the part of the city, the capture by as-
sault being either by open force and violence, or by a mixture
of force and fraud. The capture by open force was by assault
without breaking the walls; this was termed “attacking the
“city crown fashion,’ because they surrounded the city with
the entire army and assailed it from all sides at once; and
they often succeeded by a single attack of this kind in taking
even the strongest cities, as was the case when Scipio took New
Carthage in Spain. But when this assault did not succeed,
then they breached the walls with battering rams and other
engines of war; sometimes they mined subterraneous passages
by which they entered the city, and it was in this way that
they took Veii; or to bring them on a level with those who

Cuar. XXXII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 315

defended the walls, they constructed wooden towers, or made
earth embankments against the outside of the walls, so as to
be at the same height with the defenders. By the first mode
of attack the besieged were exposed to the greatest and most
sudden dangers; for being attacked on all sides at once they
could never have troops enough in any one place for defence,
or to relieve those who had been on duty, or if they had, the
resistance was not equal at all points, and if the besiegers suc-
ceeded in forcing a single point, all the rest was lost. And
therefore, as I have said, the open assault was generally the
most successful; but when it failed at the first attempt, it was
rarely repeated, because it was dangerous for an army to ex-
tend itself so considerably that it would not be able to resist a
sortie of the besieged; besides, an assault of that kind was very
fatiguing to the soldiers, and apt to throw them into disorder,
and therefore they usually tried this method of attack but once,
and as a surprise to the besieged. The breaching of the walls
was resisted by those within, by repairs and by throwing up
new ramparts behind the wall that was breached, the same as
is done at the present day. The mines were met by counter-
mines, in which the besieged opposed the enemy with arms or
other means, one of which was to fill barrels with feathers,
which they placed in the mines and set fire to them, so that
the stench and smoke might impede the entrance of the enemy.
The attack by means of towers the besieged endeavored to thwart
by setting them on fire; and as to the embankments against
the exterior of the walls, these were counteracted by making
openings in the lower part of the wall against which the em-
bankment was being made, through which the earth which the
besiegers heaped up against the wall was drawn away from
within, thus preventing the raising of the embankment from
the outside. This system of attacks cannot be continued long,
and if not promptly successful other means must be adopted,
or the siege abandoned. This was the course adopted by Scipio
on his arrival in Africa; having made an unsuccessful attempt
to take Utica, he raised the siege and went to meet the Cartha-
ginian army in the field. And this is the proper course, unless
a regular siege is undertaken, as was done by the Romans at
Veii, Capua, Carthage, Jerusalem, and other similar places,
which they took in that way.

The capture of cities by violence and stealth has been often

316 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox II.

attempted by the Romans and others, but has proved success-
ful in but few instances. This was the case with Palzpolis,
which the Romans carried by means of secret intelligence with
the inhabitants. The slightest obstacles often disconcert this
plan, and obstacles present themselves at almost every step.
For either the secret communications are discovered before
the execution of the plan, which happens very easily, either by
the treachery of those to whom the secret has been communi-
cated, or by difficulties in the execution, having to deal with
enemies with whom it is not permitted to hold any communi-
cation. But even if the conspiracy is not discovered in its
progress, yet a thousand difficulties will arise in its execution ;
for if you arrive a little before or a little after the appointed
moment, all is spoilt. The least unusual noise, as the cac-
kling of the geese of the Capitol, the slightest change in the
order agreed upon, or the least fault or smallest error, will in-
volve the whole enterprise in ruin. To these difficulties add
the darkness of night, which naturally increases’ the apprehen-
sions of those engaged in such hazardous enterprises; and as
the greater part of the men employed in such expeditions are
wholly unacquainted with the situation of the country or the
place where they are led, the slightest unforeseen accident con-
founds them and fills them with fear and trouble, so that the
merest shadow will cause them to turn back. No one has ever
been more successful in these stealthy nocturnal expeditions
than Aratus of Sicyon, who displayed as much courage in
these as he showed cowardice in those that were carried on
openly in broad daylight; which may be attributable to some
special occult merit which he possessed, rather than to any
natural facility in achieving success in such attempts, which
are so often projected and but rarely put in practice, and which
still more rarely prove successful.

In obtaining possession of cities by surrender, the rendition
is either voluntary or forced. The first results from some ex-
trinsic necessity that constrains a city to come to you for pro-
tection, as Capua did to the Romans, either from the desire
of being well governed, or attracted by the good government
which the prince bestows upon those who have voluntarily
given themselves to him; it was in this way that the Rhodians,
the Massilians, and others submitted voluntarily to the Ro-
mans. As to the compulsory surrender of a city, this occurs

Coie XXXL] <THEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 317

either in consequence of a long siege, or when a city finds her
territory being ruined by incursions, depredations, and every
kind of spoliation, which she is unable to prevent except by
surrender. Of all the methods described, it was this of which
the Romans made use most frequently ; and during more than
four and a half centuries they thus harassed their neighbors
with constant incursions, battles, and depredations, and then
by means of treaties obtained all possible advantages over
them, as we have already said several times. And they al-
ways came back to this system, although they tried all the
others, which they found more perilous and less advantageous.
For a regular siege involves time and expense; an open as-
sault is doubtful and fraught with danger, and the employ-
ment of fraud or conspiracy is most uncertain in its results.
The Romans saw that by the defeat of an enemy’s army they
conquered a kingdom in a day, whilst the siege of a city which
is obstinately defended may consume many years.

CHAPTER XXXII.

THE ROMANS LEFT THE COMMANDERS OF THEIR ARMIES ENTIRELY
UNCONTROLLED IN THEIR OPERATIONS.

I THINK that, to read the history of Livius with profit, we
should carefully reflect upon all the principles that governed
the conduct of the Senate and people of Rome. Amongst other
things most worthy of consideration is the question as to the
power and authority with which they clothed their Consuls,
Dictators, and other commanders of the armies whom they
sent into the field. This authority was of the most unlimited
character, so that the Senate reserved to itself no other power
than that of declaring new wars and ratifying treaties of peace,
all other matters being remitted to the arbitrament and power
of the Consul; so that, when the Senate and the people of
Rome had resolved upon a war, (as, for instance, that against
the Latins,) all the details of the campaign were left to the
discretion and authority of the Consul, who could bring on a
battle or not, and lay siege to this or that place, as seemed to
him proper. The truth of this is established by very many

318 DISCOURSES ON TITUS LiVIUS. [Boox II.

examples, and more especially by that which occurred on the
occasion of an expedition against the Tuscans. The Consul
Fabius had defeated them near Sutrium, and intended after
that to pass through the Ciminian forest and enter the Tuscan
territory. Not only did he not consult the Senate upon this
movement, but he did not even notify'them of his intentions,
although the war had to be carried on in a new, unknown
country, full of difficulties and dangers. The course adopted
by the Se on this occasion proves it also; for having heard
of the victory gained by Fabius, and eontine lest he might
attempt to pass through the forest into Tuscany, they sent
two legates to Fabius to advise him not to undertake to enter
Tuscany in that way. But when these arrived, Fabius had
already passed the forest, and had won a victory over the Tus-
cans; so that, instead of opposing his operations, they carried
back the news of his conquest and of the glory he had achieved.

Now, if we reflect upon this conduct on the part of the Sen-
ate, we shall see that it was eminently wise; for if they had re-
quired the Consul to conduct the war under orders from them,
so to say, from hand to hand, it would have made Fabius less
circumspect, and more slow in his operations ; for he would not
have considered the glory of victory as all his own, but as
being shared by the Senate, by whose orders and counsels he
had been governed. Besides this, the Senate would have un-
dertaken to advise upon a matter which they could not have
understood; for although there were many of the Senators who
had great experience in war, yet not being on the spot, and not
knowing the endless particulars which it is necessary to know
to counsel wisely, they would have been liable to commit the
most serious errors in attempting to instruct the Consul. And
therefore they were willing that he should act entirely upon his
own responsibility, and that he should reap all the glory, the
love of which, they judged, would be his best check and rule of
conduct.

I have the more willingly remarked upon this subject because
I see that the republics of the present day, such as the Vene-
tians and the Florentines, act very differently, so that, if their
generals, providers, or commissaries wish merely to place a
battery of artillery, they want to know and direct it; a system
which is worthy of about the same praise as their conduct in
all other respects, and which has brought them to the condition
in which they now find themselves.

TE UR = OOK:

CHAPTER I.

TO INSURE A LONG EXISTENCE TO RELIGIOUS SECTS OR REPUB-
LICS, IT IS NECESSARY FREQUENTLY TO BRING THEM BACK TO
THEIR ORIGINAL PRINCIPLES.

THERE is nothing more true than that all the things of this
world have a limit to their existence; but those only run the
entire course ordained for them by He that do not allow
their body to become disorganized, but keep it unchanged in the
manner ordained, or if they change it, so do it that it shall be for
their advantage, and not to their injury. And as I speak here
of mixed bodies, such as republics or religious sects, I say that

those changes are beneficial that bring them back to their origi-

nal principles. And those are the best-constituted bodies, and ~~

have the Tongest existence, which possess the intrinsic means
of frequently renewing themselves, or such as obtain this reno-
vation in consequence of some extrinsic accidents. And it is
a truth clearer than light that, without such renovation, these
bodies cannot continue to exist; and the means of renewing
them is to bring them back to their original principles. For,
as all religious republics and monarchies must have within
themselves some goodness, by means of which they obtain their
first growth and reputation, and as in the process of time this
goodness becomes corrupted, it will of necessity destroy the
body unless something intervenes to bring it back to its normal
condition. Thus, the doctors of medicine say, in speaking of
the human body, that “ every day some ill humors gather which
““must be cured.”

This return of a republic to its original principles is either
the result of extrinsic accident or of intrinsic prudence. As
an instance of the first, we have seen how necessary it was

320 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book III.

that Rome should be taken by the Gauls, as a means of her
renovation or new birth; so that, being thus born again, she
might take new life and vigor, and might resume the proper
observance of justice and religion, which were becoming cor-
rupt. This is clearly seen from the history of Livius, where
he shows that, in calling out her army against the Gauls, and
in the creation of Tribunes with consular powers, the Romans
observed no religious ceremonies whatsoever. In the same way
they not only ata not deprive the three Fabii of their rank for
having, “contrary to the law of nations,” fought against the
come but actually raised them to the dignity of “Tribunes.
And we may readily presume that they made less account of
the good institutions and laws established by Romulus and
other wise princes, than what was reasonable and necessary to
preserve their liberties. It needed, then, this blow from with-
out to revive the observance of all the institutions of the state,
and to show to the Roman people, not only the necessity of
maintaining religion and justice, but also of honoring their good
citizens, and making more account of their virtue than of the
ease and indulgence of which their energy and valor seemed
to deprive them. This admonition succeeded completely ; for
no sooner was Rome retaken from the Gauls than they renewed
all their religious institutions, punished the Fabii for having
fought the Gauls contrary to the law of nations; and then they
appreciated so highly the valor and excellence of Camillus that
the Senate and the other orders in the state laid aside all envy
and jealousy, and confided to him all the burden of the affairs
of the republic.

It is necessary then (as has been said) for men who live
associated together under some kind of regulations often to
be brought back to themselves, so to speak, either by external
or internal occurrences. As to the latter, they are either the
result of a law, that obliges the citizens of the association often
to render an account of their conduct; or some man of supe-
rior character arises amongst them, whose noble example and
virtuous actions will produce the same effect as such a law.
This good then in a republic is due either to the excellence of
some one man, or to some law; and as to the latter, the insti-
tution that brought the Roman republic back to its original
principles was the creation of the Tribunes of the people, and
all the other laws that tended to repress the insolence and am-

Cuap. I.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS. LiVvivs. 321

bition of men. But to give life and vigor to those laws re-
quires a virtuous citizen, who will courageously aid in their
execution against the power of those who transgress them.

The most striking instances of such execution of the laws,
anterior to the capture of Rome by the Gauls, were the death
of the sons of Brutus, that of the Decemvirs, and that of the
corn-dealer, Spurius Melius; and after the taking of Rome
by the Gauls, the death of Manlius Capitolinus, that of the
son of Manlius Torquatus, the punishment inflicted by Papirius
Cursor upon his master of cavalry, Fabius, and the accusation
of the Scipios. As these were extreme and most striking cases
they caused on each occasion a return of the citizens to the
original principles of the republic; and when they began to
be more rare, it also began to afford men more latitude in be-
coming corrupt, and the execution of the laws involved more
danger and disturbances. It would be desirable therefore that
not more than ten years should elapse between such execu-
tions, for in the long course of time men begin to change their
customs, and to transgress the laws; and unless some case
occurs that recalls the punishment to their memory and re-
vives the fear in their hearts, the delinquents will soon become
so numerous that they cannot be punished without danger.

In relation to this subject it was said by the magistrates who
governed Florence from the year 1484 until 1494 that it was
necessary every five years to resume the government, and that
otherwise it would be difficult to maintain it. By “resuming
the government” they meant to strike the people with the
same fear and terror as they did when they first assumed the
government, and when they had inflicted the extremest punish-
ment upon those who, according to their principles, had con-
ducted themselves badly. But as the recollection of these
punishments fades from men’s minds, they become emboldened
to make new attempts against the government, and to speak
ill of it, and therefore it is necessary to provide against this,
by bringing the government back to its first principles. Such
a return to first principles in _a republic is sometimes Gaused
_ by the simple virtues of one man, without depending upon
any law that incites him to the infliction of extreme punish-
ments; and yet his good example has such an influence that
the good men strive to imitate him, and the wicked are
as!) ned to lead a life so contrary to his example. Those par-

Poh Ely 21

322 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

ticularly, who in Rome effected such beneficial results were
Horatius Cocles, Scevola, Fabricius, the two Decii, Regulus
Attilius, and some others, who by their rare and virtuous ex-
ample produced the same effect upon the Romans as laws and
institutions would have done. And certainly if at least some
such signal punishments as described above, or noble examples,
had occurred in Rome every ten years, that city never would
have become so corrupt; but as both became more rare, cor-
ruption increased more and more. In fact, after Marcus Regu-
lus we find not a single instance of such virtuous example ;
and although the two Catos arose, yet there was so long an
interval between Regulus and them, and between the one Cato
and the other, and they were such isolated instances, that their
example could effect but little good; and especially the latter
Cato found the citizens of Rome already so corrupt that he
utterly failed to improve them by his example. Let this suf-
fice so far as regards republics.

Now with regard to religions we shall see that revivals are
equally necessary, and the best proof of this is furnished by
our own, which would have been entirely lost had it not been
brought back to its pristine principles and purity by Saint
Francis and Saint Dominic; for by their voluntary poverty
and the example of the life of Christ, they revived the senti-
ment of religion in the hearts of men, where it had become
almost extinct. The new orders which they established were
so severe and powerful that they became the means of saving
religion from being destroyed by the licentiousness of the pre-
lates and heads of the Church. They continued themselves to
live in poverty; and by means of confessions and preachings
they obtained so much influence with the people, that they
were able to make them understand that it was wicked even
to speak ill of wicked rulers, and that it was proper to render
them obedience and to leave the punishment of their errors to
God. And thus these wicked rulers do as much evil as they
please, because they do not fear a punishment which they do
not see nor believe. This revival of religion then by Saint
Francis and Saint Dominic has preserved it and maintains it
to this day. Monarchies also have need of renewal, and to
bring their institutions back to first principles. The kingdom
of France shows us the good effects of such renewals; for this
monarchy more than any other is governed by laws and ord:-

Cuap. IT. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 323

nances. The Parliaments, and mainly that of Paris, are the
conservators of these laws and institutions, which are renewed
by them from time to time, by executions against some of the
princes of the realm, and at times even by decisions against the
king himself. And thus this kingdom has maintained itself
up to the present time by its determined constancy in repress-
ing the ambition of the nobles; for if it were to leave them
unpunished, the disorders would quickly multiply, and the end
would doubtless be either that the guilty could no longer be
punished without danger, or that the kingdom itself would be
broken up.

We may conclude, then, that nothing is more necessary for
an association of men, either as a religious sect, republic, or
monarchy, than to restore to it from time to time the power
and reputation which it had in the beginning, and to strive to
have either good laws or good men to bring about such a re-
sult, without the necessity of the intervention of any extrinsic
force. For although such may at times be the best remedy,
as in the case of Rome (when captured by the Gauls), yet it
is so dangerous that it is in no way desirable. But to show
how the actions of some men in particular made Rome great,
and produced the most excellent effects in that city, I will
make them the subject of the discourses of this Third Book,
with which I shall close my reflections upon the first Ten
Books of the history of Titus Livius. And although the ac-
tions of some of the kings were great and remarkable, yet as
history treats of them very fully I shall leave them aside, and
not speak of them, excepting so far as regards some things
which they did for their personal advantage; and shall begin
with Junius Brutus, the father of Roman liberty.

CHAPTER IL.

IT MAY AT TIMES BE THE HIGHEST WISDOM TO SIMULATE
FOLLY.

No one ever displayed so much sagacity, or was esteemed
so wise on account of any distinguished act, as Junius Brutus
deserves to be esteemed for his simulation of folly. And

324 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

although Titus Livius gives but one reason that induced him to
this simulation, namely, that he might live in greater security
and preserve his patrimony, yet if we well consider his conduct
we are led to believe that he had another reason, which was
that by thus avoiding observation he would have a_ better
chance of destroying the kings, and of liberating his country,
whenever an opportunity should offer. And that such was
really his thought may be seen, first, from his interpretation
of the oracle of Apollo, when he pretended to have, fallen and
kissed the earth, hoping thereby to propitiate the gods to his
projects; and afterwards, when on the occasion of the death
of Lucretia, in the midst of the father, husband, and other
relatives, he was the first to pluck the dagger from her breast
and to make all present swear henceforth to suffer no king to
reign in Rome.

All those who are dissatisfied with their ruler should take
a lesson from this example of Brutus; they should measure
and weigh well their strength, and if sufficieatly powerful to
be able to declare themselves his enemies, and to make open
war against the prince, then they should take that course as
the least dangerous and most honorable. But if their condi-
tion be such that their forces do not suffice for open war against
the prince, then they should seek by every art to win his friend-
ship, and for this purpose employ all possible means, such as
adopting his tastes, and taking delight in all things that give
him pleasure. Such intimacy will insure you tranquillity with-
out any danger, and enable you to share the enjoyment of the
prince’s good fortune with him, and at the same time afford you
every convenience for satisfying your resentment. True, some.
people say that one should not keep so close i tobe
‘Snvolved in their ruin, nor so far away but what in case of their
ruin you might-thereby advance your own fortunes. This mid-
dle course would undoubtedly be the best to pursue, but as I
believe that impossible, one of the above-described modes must
be adopted, — either to go away from them entirely, or to at-
tach yourself very closely to them; and whoever attempts
any other way, even though he be a personage of distinction,
exposes himself to constant danger. Nor will it do for him to
say, “I do not care for anything; I desire neither honor nor
“profit; all I want is to live quietly and without trouble,’ — for
such excuses would not be admitted. Men of condition cannot

Cuap, III.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS: 325

choose their way of living, and even if they did choose it sin-
cerely and without ambition, they would not be believed ; and
were they to attempt to adhere to it, they would not be allowed
to do so by others.

It is advisable then at times to feign folly, as Brutus did ;
and this is sufficiently done by praising, speaking, seeing, and
doing things contrary to your way of thinking, and merely
to please the prince. And as I have spoken of the sagacity of
Brutus in recovering the liberty of Rome, let me now speak of
his severity in maintaining it.

CHAPTER III.

TO PRESERVE THE NEWLY RECOVERED LIBERTY IN ROME, IT WAS
NECESSARY THAT THE SONS OF BRUTUS SHOULD HAVE BEEN
EXECUTED.

THE severity of Brutus was not only useful, but necessary for
the maintenance of that liberty in Rome which he had restored
to her; and certainly it is one of the rarest examples within
the memory of man for a father not only to sit in judgment
and condemn his own sons, but actually to be present at their
execution. Every student of ancient history well knows that
any change of government, be it from a republic to a tyranny,
or from a tyranny to a republic, must necessarily be followed
by some terrible punishment of the enemies of the existing
state of things. And whoever makes himself tyrant of a state
and does not kill Brutus, or whoever restores liberty to a state
and does not immolate his sons, will not maintain himself in
his position long. Having already in another place treated
this subject at length, I refer to what I have there said, and
confine myself now to citing a single and most remarkable ex-
ample, taken from the history of our own country. It is that of
Pietro Soderini, who believed that he would be able by patience
and gentleness to overcome the determination of the new sons
of Brutus to return to another form of government; in which,
however, he greatly deceived himself. And although his natu-
ral sagacity recognized the necessity of destroying them, and
although the quality and ambition of his adversaries afforded

326 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boor III.

him the opportunity, yet he had not the courage to do it. For
he thought, and several times acknowledged it to his friends,
that boldly to strike down his adversaries and all opposition
would oblige him to assume extraordinary authority, and even
legally to destroy civil equality ; and that, even if he should not
afterwards use this power tyrannically, this course would so
alarm the masses that after his death they would never again
consent to the election of another Gonfalonier for life, which he
deemed essential for the strengthening and maintaining of the
government. This respect for the laws was most praiseworthy
and wise on the part of Soderini. Still one should never allow
an evil to run on out of respect for the law, especially when the
law itself might easily be destroyed by the evil; and he should
have borne in mind, that as his acts and motives would have to
be judged by the result, in case he had been fortunate enough
to succeed and live, everybody would have attested that what he
had done was for the good of his country, and not for the
advancement of any ambitious purposes of his own. Moreover, |
he could have regulated matters so that his successors could not
have employed for evil the means which he had used for benefi-
cent purposes. But Soderini was the dupe of his opinions, not
knowing that malignity is neither effaced by time, nor placated
by gifts. So that by failing to imitate Brutus he lost at the
same time his country, his state, and his reputation.

In the following chapter I propose to show that it is equally
difficult to save a monarchy as to save a republic.

CHAPTER IV.

A PRINCE CANNOT LIVE SECURELY IN A STATE SO LONG AS
THOSE LIVE WHOM HE HAS DEPRIVED OF IT.

THE assassination of Tarquinius Priscus by the sons of Ancus,
and the death of Servius Tullus caused by Tarquinius Superbus,
prove how difficult and dangerous it is to deprive any one of a
kingdom and leave him his life, even though you try to concili-
ate him by benefits. We see how Tarquinius Priscus was de-
ceived by the seemingly lawful possession of the sovereignty of
Rome, which had been bestowed upon him by the people and

Cuap, V.] ZEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 327

confirmed by the Senate. He could not believe that resentment
would so master the sons of Ancus that they would not be sat-
isfied to submit to him, to whom all Rome yielded obedience.
Servius Tullus in like manner deceived himself in supposing
that he could win the sons of Tarquin with benefits. Thus the
first may serve as a warning to all princes that they will never
be safe so long as those live whom they have deprived of their
possessions ; and as to the second, it should remind every poten-
tate that old injuries can never be cancelled by new benefits,
and the less so when the benefits are small in proportion to the
injury inflicted. Certainly Servius Tullus showed little sagacity
when he supposed that the sons of Tarquin would remain con-
tent to be the sons-in-law of him whose kings they felt them-
selves entitled to be. And this desire to reign is so powerful
that it not only dominates the minds of those born with the ex-
pectation of a throne, but also that of those who have no such
expectations. This was well illustrated by the wife of Tarquin
the younger, daughter of Servius, who, urged on by this mad
desire, regardless of all filial piety, stirred up her husband to
deprive her father of his life and kingdom ; so much more did
she value being a queen than being the daughter of a king. If,
then, Tarquinius Priscus and Servius Tullus lost the kingdom
from not knowing how to assure themselves of those whose
thrones they had usurped, Tarquinius Superbus lost it by a dis-
regard of the laws established by his predecessors, as we shall
show in the next chapter.

CHAPTER V.

OF THE CAUSES THAT MAKE A KING LOSE THE THRONE WHICH
HE HAS INHERITED.

SERVIuS TuLLus, having been assassinated by Tarquinius
Superbus, left no heirs; so the latter could reign with entire
security, not having to fear the dangers to which his predeces-
sors had fallen victims. And although the manner in which
he had obtained possession of the kingdom was irregular and
odious, still, if he had conformed to the ancient institutions of
the former kings, neither the Senate nor the people would ever

328 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Book III.

have risen against him to deprive him of the throne. Tarquin
was driven from Rome, not because his son Sextus had vio-
lated Lucretia, but because he had disregarded the laws of the
kingdom and governed it tyrannically ; having deprived the
Senate of all authority, which he appropriated to himself, and
having diverted the funds intended for the improvement of the
public places and buildings, which the Senate had carried on
with so much satisfaction, to the construction of his own palace,
greatly to the disgust of the Senate; despoiling Rome in a
short time of all the liberties which she had enjoyed under pre-
vious kings. And not content with having incurred the enmity
of the Senate, he also aroused the people against himself, un-
like his predecessors, by obliging them to perform all sorts of
mechanical labor. So that, having disgusted all Rome by his
many acts of cruelty and pride, he disposed the minds of the
Romans to revolt against him on the first occasion that might
offer. And if the incident of Lucretia had not occurred, some
other would have produced the same effect; for had Tarquin
conducted himself like the previous kings, when his son Sextus
committed that crime Brutus and Collatinus would have ap-
pealed to Tarquin for vengeance against Sextus, instead of
stirring up the Roman people as they did.

Princes should remember, then, that they begin to lose their
state from the moment when they begin to disregard the laws
and ancient customs under which the people have lived con-
tented for a length of time, And if, having thus lost their
state, they should ever become wise enough to see with what
facility princes preserve their thrones who conduct themselves
prudently, they would regret their loss the more, and would
condemn themselves to greater punishments than that to which
others have doomed them. For it is much easier to be beloved
by the good than the wicked, and to obey the laws than to
enforce them; and if kings desire to know what course they
have to pursue to do this, they need take no other trouble than
to follow the example of the lives of good rulers, such as Timo-
leon of Corinth, Aratus of Sicyon, and the like, whose lives
they will find to have afforded as much security and satisfaction
to him who ruled as to those who were governed ; which should
make kings desire to imitate them, as is easily done. For
when men are well governed, they neither seek nor desire any
other liberty; as was experienced by the two above-named

Cuap. VI. |] ZEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 329

princes, whom their people constrained to reign to the end of
their lives, though they often wished to retire to private life.

Having discussed in the preceding chapters the evil dispo-
sitions that are apt to be stirred up against princes, and the
conspiracy set on foot by the sons of Brutus against their coun-
try, and those formed against Tarquinius Priscus and Servius
Tullus, it seems to me nevertheless not amiss to treat this
subject at length in the following chapter, it being a matter
well worthy of the attention of princes and subjects.

CHAPTER VI.
OF CONSPIRACIES.

It seems to me proper now to treat of conspiracies, being a
matter of so much danger both to princes and subjects; for
history teaches us that many more princes have lost their lives
and their states by conspiracies than by open war. But few
can venture to make open war upon their sovereign, whilst
every one may engage in conspiracies against him. On the
other hand, subjects cannot undertake more perilous and fool-
hardy enterprises than conspiracies, which are in every respect
most difficult and dangerous; and thence it is that, though so
often attempted, yet they so rarely attain the desired object.
And therefore, so that princes may learn to guard against such
dangers, and that subjects may less rashly engage in them, and
learn rather to live contentedly under such a government as
Fate may have assigned to them, I shall treat the subject at
length, and endeavor not to omit any point that may be useful
to the one or the other. And certainly that is a golden sen-
tence of Cornelius Tacitus, where he says “that men should
“honor the past and obey the present; and whilst they should
“desire good princes, they should bear with those they have,
“such as they are” ;— and surely whoever acts otherwise will
generally involve himself and his country in ruin.

In entering upon the subject, then, we must consider first
against whom conspiracies are formed; and it will be found
generally that they are made either against the country or
against the prince. It is of these two kinds that I shall

35 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

speak at present; for conspiracies that have for their object
the surrender of any town to an enemy that besieges it, or that
have some similar purpose, have already been sufficiently dis-
cussed above. In the first instance we will treat of those that
are aimed against the sovereign, and examine the causes that
provoke them; these are many, though one is more important
than all the rest, namely, his being hated by the mass of the
people. For when a prince has drawn upon himself universal
hatred, it is reasonable to suppose that there are some particu-
lar individuals whom he has injured more than others, and
who therefore desire to revenge themselves. This desire is
increased by seeing the prince held in general aversion. A
prince, then, should avoid incurring such universal hatred ;
and, as I have spoken elsewhere of the way to do this, I will
say no more about it here. If the prince will avoid this general
hatred, the particular wrongs to individuals will prove less
dangerous to him; partly because men rarely attach sufficient
importance to any wrong done them to expose themselves to
great danger for the sake of avenging it, and partly because,
even if they were so disposed and had the power to attempt it,
they would be restrained by the general affection for the prince.
The different wrongs which a prince can inflict upon a subject
consist either in an attempt upon his possessions, his person,
or his honor. In matters of personal injury, threats are worse
than the execution ; in fact, menaces involve the only danger,
there being none in the execution, for the dead cannot avenge
themselves, and in most cases the survivors allow the thought
of revenge to be interred with the dead. But he who is threat-
ened, and sees himself constrained by necessity either to dare
and do or to suffer, becomes a most dangerous man to the
prince, as we shall show in its proper place. Besides this kind
of injury, a man’s property and honor are the points upon
which he will be most keenly sensitive. A prince, then, should
be most careful to avoid touching these; for he can never
despoil a man so completely but what he will cherish a deter-
mined desire for revenge. As to attacking men’s honor, that
of their wives is what they feel most, and after that their being
themselves treated with indignity. It was an outrage of this
nature that armed Pausanias against Philip of Macedon, and
such indignities have caused many others to rise against their
princes. In our day, Julius Belanti would not have conspired

Cuap. VI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 331

against Pandolfo, tyrant of Sienna, had it not been that the
latter, having accorded him one of his daughters in marriage,
afterwards took her away from him, as we shall relate in its
place. The principal cause of the conspiracy of the Pazzi
against the Medici was the inheritance of Giovanni Borromeo,
of which they had been deprived by an order of the Medici.

There is another and still more powerful motive that makes
men conspire against their princes, and that is the desire to
liberate their country from the tyranny to which it has been
subjected by the prince. It was this that stirred up Brutus
and Cassius against Cesar; it was this that excited others
against the Falari, the Dionysii, and other usurpers. And no
tyrant can secure himself against such attacks, except by volun-
tarily giving up his usurpation. But as none of them ever take
this course, there are but few that do not come to a bad end;
and thence this verse of Juvenal’s : —

‘Ad generum Cereris sine cede et vulnere pauci
Descendunt reges, et sicca morte tyranni.” *

The perils incurred by conspirators are great, as I have said
above, because they present themselves at every moment.
There is danger in plotting and in the execution of the plot,
and even after it has been carried into effect. A plot may be
formed by a single individual or by many; the one cannot be
called a conspiracy, but rather a determined purpose on the
part of one man to assassinate the prince. In such case the
first of the three dangers to which conspiracies are exposed is
avoided; for the individual runs no risk before the execution
of his plot, for as no one possesses his secret, there is no dan-
ger of his purpose coming to the ears of the prince. Any
individual, of whatever condition, may form such a plot, be he
great or small, noble or plebeian, familiar or not familiar with
the prince; for every one is permitted on occasions to speak to
the prince, and has thus the opportunity of satisfying his ven-
geance. Pausanias, of whom I have spoken elsewhere, killed
Philip of Macedon as he was proceeding to the temple, sur-
rounded by a thousand armed men, and having his son and
his son-in-law on either side. But Pausanias was a noble, and
well known to the prince. A poor and abject Spaniard stabbed

* “Few kings descend to the dark abode of Ceres without wounds or slaughter,
‘‘and tyrants never die a natural death.”

302 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox III.

King Ferdinand of Spain in the neck; the wound was not mor-
tal, but it showed nevertheless that this man had the audacity
as well as the opportunity of striking the prince. A Turkish
Dervish drew a scymitar upon Bajazet, the father of the present
Grand Turk; he did not wound him, but it shows that this
man too had the audacity and the opportunity to have done
it, had he so chosen. I believe it is not uncommon to find
men who form such projects (the mere purpose involving
neither danger nor punishment), but few carry them into ef-
fect; and of those who do, very few or none escape being
killed in the execution of their designs, and therefore but few
are willing to incur such certain death.

But let us leave the plots formed by single individuals, and
come to conspiracies formed by a number of persons. These,
I say, have generally for their originators the great men of the
state, or those on terms of familiar intercourse with the prince.
None other, unless they are madmen, can engage in conspira-
cies; for men of low condition, who are not int‘mate with the
prince, have no chance of success, not having the necessary
conveniences for the execution of their plots. In the first
place, men of no position have not the means of assuring them-
selves of the good faith of their accomplices, as no one will en-
gage in their plot without the hope of those advantages that
prompt men to expose themselves to great dangers. And thus,
so soon as they have drawn two or three others into their
scheme, some one of them denounces and ruins them. But
supposing even that they have the good fortune not to be be-
trayed, they are nevertheless exposed to so many difficulties in
the execution of the plot, from being debarred free access to
the prince, that it seems almost impossible for them to escape
ruin in the execution. For if the great men of a state, who
are in familiar intercourse with the prince, succumb under the
many difficulties of which we have spoken, it is natural that
these difficulties should be infinitely increased for the others.
And therefore those who know themselves to be weak avoid
them, for where men’s lives and fortunes are at stake they are
not all insane; and when they have cause for hating a prince,
they content themselves with cursing and vilifying him, and
wait until some one more powerful and of higher position than
themselves shall avenge them. Still, if one of this class of per-
sons should be daring enough to attempt such an undertaking,

Cuap, VI.] TEN BOOKS°OF TITUS LIVIUsS: 833

he would merit praise rather for his intention than for his
prudence.

We see, then, that conspiracies have generally been set on
foot by the great, or the friends of the prince; and of these, as
many have been prompted to it by an excess of benefits as by
an excess of wrongs. Such was the cause of the conspiracy of
Perennius against Commodus, of Plautianus against Severus,
and of Sejanus against Tiberius. All these men had been so
loaded with riches, honors, and dignities by their Emperors
that nothing seemed wanting to complete their power and to
satisfy their ambition but the Empire itself; and to obtain that
they set conspiracies on foot against their masters, which all
resulted, however, as their ingratitude deserved. More re-
cently, however, we have seen the conspiracy of Jacopo Appi-
ano succeed against Piero Gambacorte, prince of Pisa; this
Jacopo owed his support, education, and reputation to Piero,
and yet he deprived him of his state. The conspiracy of Cop-
pola against Ferdinand of Aragon, in our own day, was of the
same character; Coppola had attained such greatness that he
seemed to lack nothing but the throne, and to obtain this he
risked his life, and lost it. And certainly if any conspiracy
of the great against a prince is likely to succeed, it should be
one that is headed by one, so to say, almost himself a king,
who can afford the conspirators every opportunity to accomplish
his design ; but, blinded by the ambition of dominion, they are
equally blind inthe conduct of the conspiracy, for if their vil-
lany were directed by prudence, they could not possibly fail of
success. A prince, then, who wishes to guard against con-
spiracies should fear those on whom he has heaped benefits
quite as much, and even more, than those whom he has
wronged; for the latter lack the convenient opportunities which
the former have in abundance. The intention of both is the
same, for the thirst of dominion is as great as that of revenge,
and even greater. A prince, therefore, should never bestow so
much authority upon his friends but that there should always
be a certain distance between them and himself, and that
there should always be something left for them to desire ;
otherwise they will almost invariably become victims of their
own imprudence, as happened to those whom we have men-
tioned above.

But to return to our subject. Waving said that conspiracies

334 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST. (Book III.

are generally made by the great, who have free access to the
prince, let us see now what their results have been, and what
the causes were that influenced their success or their failure.
As we have said above, there are in all conspiracies three dis-
tinct periods of danger. The first is in the organization of
the plot, and as but few have a successful issue, it is impossi-
ble that all should pass happily through this first stage, which
presents the greatest dangers; and therefore I say that it re-
quires the extremest prudence, or great good fortune, that a
conspiracy shall not be discovered in the process of formation.
Their discovery is either by denunciation or by surmises. De-
nunciation is the consequence of treachery or of want of pru-
dence on the part of those to whom you confide your designs ;
and treachery is so common that you cannot safely impart
your project to any but such of your most trusted friends as
are willing to risk their lives for your sake, or to such other
malcontents as are equally desirous of the prince’s ruin. Of
such reliable friends you may find one or two; but as you are
necessarily obliged to extend your confidence, it becomes im-
possible to find many such, for their devotion to you must be
greater than their sense of danger and fear of punishment.
Moreover, men are very apt to deceive themselves as to the
degree of attachment and devotion which others have for them,
and there are no means of ascertaining this except by actual
experience; but experience in such matters is of the utmost
danger. And even if you should have tested the fidelity of
your friends on other occasions of danger, yet you cannot
conclude from that that they will be equally true to you on
an occasion that presents infinitely greater dangers than any
other. If you attempt to measure a man’s good faith by the
discontent which he’ manifests towards the prince, you will be
easily deceived, for by the very fact of communicating to him
your designs, you give him the means of putting an end to his
discontent ; and to insure his fidelity, his hatred of the prince
or your influence over him must be very great. It is thus
that so many conspiracies have been revealed and crushed in
their incipient stage; so that it may be regarded almost as a
miracle when so important a secret 1s preserved by a number
of conspirators for any length of time. Such however was the
case in the conspiracy of Piso against Nero, and in our times
that of the Pazzi against Lorenzo and Giuliano de’ Medici, of

Cuapr. VI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS -LIVICs: 339

which more than fifty persons were cognizant, and which yet
remained undiscovered till the moment of its execution.
Discovery from lack of prudence occurs when any one of the
conspirators speaks incautiously, so that a servant or third per-
son overhears it, as happened to the sons of Brutus, who in the
arranging of their plot with the messengers of Tarquin were
overheard by a slave, who denounced them. Or it may occur
from thoughtlessness, when some one communicates the secret
to his wife or child, or to some other indiscreet person, as was
done by Dinnus, one of the conspirators with Philotas against
Alexander, who confided the plot to Nicomachus, a lad of
whom he was enamored, who told it to his brother Cibal-
linus, who at once communicated it to the king. As to dis-
covery by conjecture, we have an instance of it in the Pisonian
conspiracy against Nero. The day before he was to have killed
Nero, Scevinus, one of the conspirators, made his testament ;
he ordered his freedman Melichius to sharpen an old, rusty
poniard, enfranchised all his slaves and distributed money
amongst them, and had bandages made for tying up wounds.
Melichius surmised from these various acts what was going on,
and denounced it to Nero. Scevinus was arrested, and with
him Natales, another conspirator, with whom he had been seen
to converse secretly for a length of time. As their depositions
respecting that conversation did not agree, they were forced to
confess the truth, and thus the conspiracy was discovered to
the ruin of all that were implicated. When the number of ac-
complices in a conspiracy exceeds three or four, it is almost
impossible for it not to be discovered, either through treason,
imprudence, or carelessness. The moment more than one of
the conspirators is arrested, the whole plot is discovered; for
it will be impossible for any two to agree perfectly as to all
their statements. If only one be arrested, and he be a man
of courage and firmness, he may be able to conceal the names
of his accomplices ; but then the others, to remain safe, must
be equally firm, and not lay themselves open to discovery by
flight, for if any one of them proves wanting in courage, whether
it be the one that is arrested or one of those that are at lib-
erty, the conspiracy is sure to be discovered. Titus Livius
cites a very remarkable instance that occurred in connection
with the conspiracy against Hieronymus, king of Syracuse.
Theodorus, one of the conspirators, having been arrested, con-

336 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox ITI.

cealed with the utmost firmness the names of the other con-
spirators, and charged the matter upon the friends of the king ;
and, on the other hand, all the other conspirators had such con-
fidence in the courage of Theodorus, that not one of them left
Syracuse, or betrayed the least sign of fear. The conduct of a
conspiracy then is exposed to all such dangers before it can be
carried into execution ; and to avoid these perils the following
remedies present themselves. The first and most certain, I
should rather say the only one, is not to afford your associates
in the plot any time to betray you; and therefore you should
confide your project to them at the moment of its execution,
and not sooner. Those who act thus are most likely to escape
the first of the three dangers, and frequently also the others ;
and therefore have their enterprises almost always succeeded.
And any man of prudence will always be able to govern him-
self in this wise. |

I will cite two examples of this. Nelematus, unable to bear
the tyranny of Aristotimus, tyrant of Epirus, assembled in his
house a number of friends and relatives, and urged them to
liberate their country from the yoke of the tyrant. Some of
them asked for time to consider the matter, whereupon Nele-
matus made his slaves close the door of his house, and then
said to those he had called together, “ You must either go now
“and carry this plot into execution, or I shall hand you all
‘over as prisoners to Aristotimus.” Moved by these words,
they took the oath demanded of them, and immediately went
and carried the plot of Nelematus successfully into execution.
A Magian having by craft usurped the throne of Persia, and
the fraud having been discovered by Ortanus, one of the gran-
dees of the realm, he conferred with six other princes of the
state as to the means of ridding themselves of this usurper.
When one of them inquired as to the time when they should
act, Darius, one of the six assembled by Ortanus, arose and
said, “We must either go now at this very moment and carry
“it into execution, or I shall go and denounce you all,” where-
upon they all arose, and, without affording any one time to re-
pent, they carried their design into execution without difficulty.
The Astolians acted much in the same way in ridding them-
selves of Nabis, tyrant of Sparta. They sent Alexamenes, one
of their citizens, with thirty horse and two hundred infantry, to
Nabis, on pretence of rendering him assistance ; but they gave

Cuar. VI.) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 337

secret instructions to Alexamenes to slay Nabis, and enjoined
the others, on pain of exile, strictly and most implicitly to obey
the orders of Alexamenes, who accordingly went to Sparta,
and kept the secret until the moment when he succeeded in
killing Nabis. In this manner then did Nelematus, Ortanus,
and Alexamenes avoid the dangers that attend the conduct of
conspiracies before their execution, and whoever follows their
example will be equally fortunate in escaping them. And to
prove that it is in the power ot every one to act in the same
way, I will cite the case of Piso, to which I have already re-
ferred above. Piso was a man of the highest consideration
and distinction in Rome, and the familiar companion of Nero,
who reposed entire confidence in him, and often went to dine
with him at his villa. Piso then might have attached to him-
self a few men of intelligence and courage, well qualified for
such an attempt as he contemplated. This would have been
an easy thing to do for a man of such high position; and then,
when Nero was in his gardens, he might have communicated
his project to them and have stirred them by a few words to
do what they would not have had time to refuse, and which
could not have failed of success.

And thus, if we examine all the other instances, but few will
be found where the conspirators might not have acted in the
same way; but men not accustomed to the affairs of this world
often commit the greatest mistakes, and especially in matters
that are so much out of the ordinary course as conspiracies.
One should therefore never open himself on the subject of a
conspiracy except under the most pressing necessity, and only
at the moment of its execution; and then only to one man,
whose fidelity he has thoroughly tested for a long time, and
who is animated by the same desire as himself. One such is
much more easily found than many, and therefore there is
much less danger in confiding your secret to him; and then,
even if he were to attempt to betray you, there is some chance
of your being able to defend yourself, which you cannot when
there are many conspirators. I have heard many wise men. say
that you may talk freely with one man about everything, for
unless you have committed yourself in writing the “yes” of
one man is worth as much as the “no” of another; and
therefore one should guard most carefully against writing, as
against a dangerous rock, for nothing will convict you quicker

VOL. II. 22

338 DISCOURSES ON THE FIAST [Book III.

than your own handwriting. Plautianus, wishing to have the
Emperor Severus and his son Antoninus killed, committed
the matter to the Tribune Saturninus; he however, instead of
obeying Plautianus, resolved to betray him, and, fearing that
in aceusing him he would be less believed than Plautianus,
he exacted from him an order in his own handwriting to at-
test his authority. Plautianus, blinded by his ambition, gave
him such a written order, which the Tribune used to accuse
and convict him. Plautianus denied his guilt with such au-
dacity, that without this written order and other indications
he never would have been convicted. You may escape, then,
from the accusation of a single individual, unless you are con-
victed by some writing or other pledge, which you should be
careful never to give. In the Pisonian conspiracy there was
a woman named Epicaris, who had formerly been a mistress of
Nero’s. She deemed it advisable to have amongst the con-
spirators the commander of a trireme, who was one of Nero’s
body-guards. She communicated the plot to him, but without
naming the conspirators. The commander, however, betrayed
her confidence, and denounced Epicaris to Nero; but she de-
nied it with such audacity as to confuse Nero, who did not
condemn her.

There are two risks, then, in communicating a plot to any
one individual: the first, lest he should denounce you volun-
tarily ; the second, lest he should denounce you, being himself
arrested on suspicion, or from some indications, and being con-
victed and forced to it by the torture. But there are means of
escaping both these dangers: the first, by denial and by alleging
personal hatred to have prompted the accusation; and the
other, by denying the charge, and alleging that your accuser
was constrained by the force of torture to tell lies. But the
most prudent course is not to communicate the plot to any
one, and to act in accordance with the above-cited examples ;
and if you cannot avoid drawing some one into your confidence,
then to let it be not more than one, for in that case the danger
is much less than if you confide in many.

Another necessity may force you to do unto the prince that
which you see the prince about to do to you; the danger of
which may be so pressing as not to afford you the time to pro-
vide for your own safety. Such a necessity ordinarily insures
success, as the following two instances will suffice to prove.

Cuap. V1.] LEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIvs. 539

The Emperor Commodus had amongst his nearest friends and
intimates Letus and Electus, two captains of the Pretorian sol-
diers; he also had Marcia as his favorite concubine. As these
three had on several occasions reproved him for the excesses
with which he had stained his own dignity and that of the
Empire, he resolved to have them killed, and wrote a list of
the names of Marcia, Letus, and Electus, and of some other
persons, whom he wanted killed the following night. Having
placed this list under his pillow, he went to the bath; a favorite
child of his, who was playing in the chamber and on the bed,
found this list, and on going out with it in his hand was met
by Marcia, who took the list from the child. Having read it,
she immediately sent for Letus and Electus, and when these
three had thus become aware of the danger that threatened
them, they resolved to forestall the Emperor, and without. los-
ing any time they killed Commodus the following night. The
Emperor Antoninus Caracalla was with his armies in Mesopo-
tamia, and had for his prefect Macrinus,a man more fit for
civil than military matters. As is always the case with bad
rulers, they are in constant fear lest others are conspiring to
inflict upon them the punishment which they are conscious of
deserving; thus Antoninus wrote to his friend Maternianus in
Rome to consult the astrologers as to whether any one was
aspiring to the Empire, and to advise him of it. Maternianus
wrote back that Macrinus was thus aspiring; and this letter
fell into the hands of Macrinus before it reached the Emperor.
He at once directed his trusted friend, the Centurion Martialis,
whose brother had been slain by Caracalla a few days before,
to assassinate him, which he succeeded in doing. From this
we see that the necessity which admits of no delay produces
the same effect as the means employed by Nelematus in Epirus,
of which I have spoken above. It also proves the truth of what
I said in the beginning of this discourse, that to threaten is
more dangerous for princes, and more frequently causes con-
spiracies, than the actual injury itself; and therefore princes
should guard against indulging in menaces. For you must
bind men to you by benefits, or you must make sure of them
in some other way, but never reduce them to the alternative of
having either to destroy you or perish themselves.

As to the dangers that occur in the execution of a conspiracy,
these result either from an unexpected change in the order of

340 DISCOURSES ON THE FIEST {Boox ITI.

proceeding, or from the lack of courage in those who are
charged with the execution of the plot, or from some error
on their part, owing to want of foresight in leaving some of
those alive whom it was intended to have killed. There is
nothing that disturbs or impedes the actions of men more than
when suddenly, and without time to reflect, the order of things
agreed upon has to be entirely changed. And if such a change
causes embarrassment in ordinary affairs, it does so to an in-
finitely greater degree in war or in conspiracies; for in such
matters nothing is more essential than that men should firmly
set their minds on performing the part that has been assigned to
them. And if men have their minds fixed for some days upon a
certain order and arrangement, and this be suddenly changed,
it is impossible that this should not disturb them so as to defeat
the whole plot. So that it is much better to carry out any
such project according to the original plan, even if it should
present some inconveniences, rather than to change the order
agreed upon and incur a thousand embarrassments. And this
will occur, if there be not time to reorganize the project en-
tirely ; for when there is time for that, men can suit themselves
to the new order of things.

The conspiracy of the Pazzi against Lorenzo and Giuliano
de’ Medici is well known. ‘These were to dine on the appointed
day with the Cardinal of San Giorgio, and it was agreed
amongst the conspirators to kill the Medici at this dinner.
They had distributed amongst themselves the several roles, as
to who was to kill them, who was to seize the palace, and who
was to scour the city to rouse the people to liberty. It hap-
pened that whilst the Medici, the Pazzi, and the Cardinal were
at some great solemnity in the cathedral church of Florence,
it became known that Giuliano would not dine with the Car-
dinal on that day. Hereupon the conspirators hastily met, and
resolved to do in the church what they had intended to do in
the house of the Cardinal. This disarranged all their plans,
for Giambattisto Montesecco refused to consent to the murder
in the church, which obliged them to make an entire change
and distribute the roles to different persons, who, not having
time fully to prepare themselves, committed such mistakes as
to cause themselves to be crushed in the execution.

Want of firmness in the execution arises either from respect,
or from the innate cowardice of him who is to commit the act.

Cuap, VI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 841

Such is the majesty and reverence that ordinarily surrounds
the person of a prince, that it may easily mitigate the fury of
a murderer, or fill him with fear. Marius having been taken
prisoner by the Minturnians, they sent a slave to kill him, who
was so overcome by the presence of this great man, and by the
memory of his glory, that his courage and strength failed him
at the thought of killing Marius. Now if a man in chains, in
prison, and overwhelmed by misfortune can still exert such an
influence, how much more is to be feared from a prince who
is free, and clothed in all the pomp and ornaments of royalty,
and surrounded by his court? And whilst all this pomp is
calculated to inspire fear, an affable and courteous reception
may equally disarm you.

Some of the subjects of Sitalees, king of Thrace, conspired
against him. The day for the execution of their plot being
fixed, they went to the place agreed upon where the king was,
but not one of them made a movement to strike him; so that
they returned without having made the attempt, and without
knowing what had prevented them, and reproached each other.
They committed the same fault several times, so that the con-
spiracy was discovered, and they suffered punishment for the
crime which they might have committed, but did not.

Two brothers of Alfonso, Duke of Ferrara, plotted against
his life, and employed for the execution of their plot one
Giannes, the Duke’s almoner and musician, who several times
at their request brought the Duke to them; so that they might
on each occasion have killed him, but neither of them had
the courage to do it. The conspiracy was discovered, and they
bore the penalty of their wickedness and their imprudence.
Their neglect to profit by the opportunities afforded them for
the execution of their design could have arisen only from two
causes; either the presence of the prince imposed upon them
and filled them with fear, or they were disarmed by some act
of kindness on his part. Failure in the execution of such de-
signs results from lack of prudence or courage; men are seized
by one or the other of these feelings, which confuse their brains
and make them say and do things that they ought not.

And nothing can better prove the fact that men’s minds are
thus seized and confounded than the fact stated by Titus Liv-
ius of Alexamenes the AStolian, who wanted to kill Nabis of
Sparta, of whom I have already spoken. When the time for

342 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

the execution of his design had come, and he was about to
make known to his soldiers what they would have to do, as
Titus Livius says, “ He collected his own spirits, which were
“confused by the greatness of the undertaking.” For it is
impossible that one should not be confused at such a moment,
even though possessed of firmness and courage, and accus-
tomed to the use of the sword and to seeing men killed.
Therefore only men experienced in such affairs should be
chosen as the instruments of execution, and none other should
be trusted, though they be reputed to be most courageous ; for
you cannot be sure of any man’s courage in great affairs, un-
less it has been tested by actual experience. For the confusion
of the mind at the important moment may cause the sword to
drop from a man’s hand, or may make him say things that
will be equally ruinous.

Lucilla, the sister of the Emperor Commodus, ordered Quin-
tianus to kill him. He lay in wait for Commodus at the en-
trance of the amphitheatre ; and on stepping up to him with
drawn dagger, he cried, “ The Senate sends you this!” which
caused Quintianus to be arrested before he had time to strike
Commodus. Messer Antonio da Volterra, having been ap-
pointed to kill Lorenzo de’ Medici, as we have related above,
called out, on approaching him, “Ah, traitor!” This mere
word saved Lorenzo and defeated the attempt.

Conspiracies against single individuals are generally apt to
fail, for the reasons I have adduced; but when undertaken
against two or more persons, they fail much easier. Such
conspiracies present so many difficulties that it is almost im-
possible they should succeed. In fact, to strike two blows of
this kind at the same instant and in different places is im-
practicable, and to attempt to do so at different moments of
time would certainly result in the one’s preventing the other.
So that, if it is imprudent, rash, and doubtful to conspire
against a single prince, it amounts to folly to do so against
two at the same time. And were it not for the respect
which I have for the historian, I should not be able to be-
lieve possible what Herodianus relates of Plautianus, when he
charged the centurion Saturninus by himself to kill Severus
and Caracalla, who lived separately in different places; for it
is so far from being reasonable, that nothing less than the
authority of Herodianus could make me believe it. Some

Cuap. VI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 843

young men of Athens conspired against Diocles and Hippias,
tyrants of Athens; they succeeded in killing Diocles, but
missed Hippias, who avenged him. Chion and Leonidas, of
Heraclea, disciples of Plato, conspired against the tyrants
Clearchus and Satirus; they slew Clearchus, but Satirus, who
remained, avenged him. The Pazzi, whom I have mentioned
several times, succeeded only in killing Giuliano. Thus con-
spiracies against several persons at the same time should be
avoided; they do no good to the conspirators, nor to the coun-
try, nor to any one, but rather cause the tyrants that survive
to become more cruel and insupportable than before, as was
the case with those of Florence, Athens, and Heraclea, already
mentioned above. It is true that the conspiracy of Pelopidas
to deliver his country, Thebes, from her tyrants, succeeded
most happily, despite of all those obstacles; and he conspired
not only against two, but against ten tyrants, and, so far
from having ready access to them, he had been declared a
rebel and had been banished. With all this, he was enabled
to come to Thebes to slay the tyrants and free his country.
But he succeeded thus mainly through the assistance of a cer-
tain Charon, privy counsellor of the tyrants, who facilitated
his access to them and the consequent execution of his plot.
Let no one, however, be seduced by this example; for it was
an almost impossible enterprise, and its success was a marvel,
and was so regarded by the historians, who speak of it as a
most extraordinary and unprecedented event. The execution
of such a plot may be interrupted by the least false alarm, or
by some unforeseen accident at the moment of its execution.
The morning of the day when Brutus and his fellow-con-
spirators intended to kill Ceasar, it happened that the latter
had a long conversation with Cn. Popilius Lena, one of the
conspirators. This was observed by the other conspirators,
who at once imagined that Popilius had denounced the con-
spiracy to Cesar, and were tempted to assassinate Cesar on
the spot, and not to wait until he should reach the Senate ;
and they would have done so, had they not observed that after
the conversation Cesar made no extraordinary movement,
which reassured them. These false apprehensions are not to
be disregarded and should be carefully considered, the more
so as it is very easy to be surprised by them; for a man who
has a guilty conscience readily thinks that everybody is speak-

344 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox III.

ing of him. You may overhear a word spoken to some one
else that will greatly disturb you, because you think it has
reference to you, and may cause you either to discover the
conspiracy by flight, or embarrass its execution by hastening
it before the appointed time. And this will happen the more
easily the more accomplices there are in the conspiracy.

As to the unforeseen accidents, of course no idea can be given
of them; they can only be illustrated by examples that should
serve as a caution. Julio Belanti of Sienna (of whom I have
already made mention) hated Pandolfo for having taken his
daughter away from him after having first given her to him
as his wife. He resolved to kill him, and thus chose his time.
Pandolfo went almost daily to visit a sick relative, and in going
there he passed before Julio’s house, who, having observed it,
arranged to have the conspirators there to assassinate Pan-
dolfo when he passed. He concealed them, well armed, behind
the house door, whilst one of them was stationed at the win-
dow to watch for the coming of Pandolfo, and to give a signal
when he should be near the door. Pandolfo came, and the
signal was given by the conspirator at the window; but at that
moment a friend met and stopped Pandolfo, whilst some who
were with him moved on, and, upon hearing the noise of arms
within the door of Julio, they discovered the ambush, so that
Pandolfo was enabled to save himself, and Julio, with his ac-
complices, was obliged to fly from Sienna. This accidental
meeting with a friend prevented the execution of the plot, and
thwarted the designs of Julio. Such accidents, being rare,
cannot be foreseen nor prevented; though one should endeavor
to foresee all that can happen, so as to guard against it.

It only remains for us now to speak of the dangers’ that
follow the execution of a plot; of which there is really but
one, namely, when some one is left who will avenge the prince
that is killed. He may have brothers or sons, or other rela-
tives, who inherit the principality, and who have been spared
by your negligence or for some of the reasons we have men-
tioned above, and who will avenge the prince. This happened
to Giovan Andrea da Lampognano, who, together with other
conspirators, had killed the Duke of Milan, who left a son and
two brothers, who in time avenged the murdered Duke. But
truly in such cases the conspirators are not to be blamed, be-
cause there is no help for it. There is no excuse for them,

Cuap. VI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 345

however, when from want of foresight or negligence they
permit any one to escape. Some conspirators of Furli killed
the Count Girolamo, their lord, and took his wife and children,
who were of tender age, prisoners. Believing, however, that
they could not be secure if they did not obtain possession of
the castle, which the castellan refused to surrender, the Lady
Catharine, as the Countess was called, promised to the con-
spirators to procure its surrender if they would allow her to
enter it, leaving them her children as hostages. Upon this
pledge the conspirators consented to let her enter the castle ;
but no sooner was she within than she reproached them for
the murder of the Count, and threatened them with every
kind of vengeance. And to prove to them that she cared not
for her children, she pointed to her sexual parts, calling out to
them that she had wherewith to have more children. Thus
the conspirators discovered their error too late, and suffered
the penalty of their imprudence in perpetual exile. But of
all the perils that follow the execution of a conspiracy, none
is more certain and none more to be feared than the attach-
ment of the people to the prince that has been killed. There
is no remedy against this, for the conspirators can never secure
themselves against a whole people. As an instance of this, I
will cite the case of Julius Cesar, who, being beloved by the
people, was avenged by them; for having driven the conspira-
tors from Rome, they were the cause of their being all killed
at various times and places.

_Conspiracies against the state are less dangerous for those
engaged in them than plots against the life of the sovereign.
In their conduct there is not so much danger, in their execu-
tion there is the same, and after execution there is none. In
the conduct of the plot the danger is very slight, for a citizen
may aspire to supreme power without manifesting his intentions
to any one; and if nothing interferes with his plans, he may
carry them through successfully, or if they are thwarted by
some law, he may await a more favorable moment, and attempt
it by another way. This is understood to apply to a republic
that is already partially corrupted ; for in one not yet tainted
by corruption such thoughts could never enter the mind of
any citizen. Citizens of a republic, then, may by a variety of
ways and means aspire to sovereign authority without incurring
great risks. If republics are slower than princes, they are also

346 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book III.

less suspicious, and therefore less cautious; and if they show
more respect to their great citizens, these in turn are thereby
made more daring and audacious in conspiring against them.

Everybody has read the account written by Sallust of the
conspiracy of Catiline, and knows that, after it was discovered,
Catiline not only stayed in Rome, but actually went to the Sen-
ate, and said insulting things to the Senate and the Consul; so
great was the respect in which Rome held the citizens. And
even after his departure from Rome, and when he was already
with the army, Lentulus and the others would not have been
seized if letters in their own handwriting had not been found,
which manifestly convicted them. Hanno, one of the most
power‘ul citizens of Carthage, aspired to the tyranny of the
state, and arranged to poison the whole Senate on the occasion
of his daughter’s marriage, and then to make himself sovereign.
When this plot was discovered, the Senate did nothing more
than to pass a decree limiting the expense of feasts and wed-
dings; such was the respect which the Carthaginians had for
so great a citizen as Hanno.

It is true that in the execution of a conspiracy against one’s
country there are greater difficulties and dangers to surmount.
For it is very rare that the forces of a conspirator suffice
against so many; and it is not every one that controls an army,
like Cesar, or Agathocles, or Cleomenes, and the like, who by
a single blow made themselves masters of their country. For
such men the execution is sure and easy, but others who have
not the support of such forces must employ deceit and cunning,
or foreign aid.

As to the employment of deceit and cunning, I give the follow-
ing instances. Pisistratus, after the victory which he had gained
over the people of Megara, was greatly beloved by the people
of Athens. One morning he went forth from his house wound-
ed, and charged the nobility with having attacked him from
jealousy, and demanded permission to keep a guard of armed
followers for his protection, which was accorded him. This
first step enabled him easily to attain such power that he soon
after made himself tyrant of Athens. Pandolfo Petrucci re-
turned with other exiles to Sienna, where he was appointed to
the command of the guard of the government palace, a subordi-
nate employ which others had refused. Nevertheless, this com-
mand gave him in time such influence and authority that in a

Cuap. VI.] LEN BOOKS  OF- TITUS LIVLUS. 347

little while he became prince of the state. Many others have
employed similar means, and have in a short time, and without
danger, acquired sovereign power. Those who have conspired
against their country with their own forces, or by the aid of
foreign troops, have had various success, according to their
fortune. Catiline, whose conspiracy we have already spoken of,
succumbed. Hanno, whom we have also mentioned, having
failed in his attempt with poison, armed his partisans to the
number of many thousands, and perished with them. Some of
the first citizens of Thebes, wishing to obtain absolute control
of the state, called to their aid a Spartan army, and seized the
government. Thus, if we examine all the conspiracies at-
tempted by men against their country, we find none, or but
very few, that have failed in their conduct; but in their execu-
tion they have either met with success or failure. Once, how-
ever, carried into effect, they involve no other dangers but
such as are inherent to absolute power; for he who has become
a tyrant is exposed only to the natural and ordinary dangers
which tyranny carries with it, and against which there are no
other remedies than those indicated above.

Those are the considerations that have presented themselves
to me in treating the subject of conspiracies; and if I have
noted only those where the sword is the instrument employed,
and not poison, it is because the course of both is absolutely
the same. It is true that the latter are in proportion more
dangerous, as their success is more uncertain, for it is not
every one that has the means of employing poison; it must,
therefore, be intrusted to such as have, and that very ne-
cessity causes the dangers. Furthermore, many reasons may
prevent a poison from proving mortal, as in the case of Com-
modus. Those who had conspired against him, seeing that
he would not take the poisoned draught they had offered to
him, and yet being resolved upon his death, were obliged to
strangle him.

There is, then, no greater misfortune for a prince than that a
conspiracy should be formed against him ; for it either causes
his death, or it dishonors him. If the conspiracy succceds, he
dies; if it be discovered, and he punishes the conspirators
with death, it will always be believed that it was an invention
of the prince to satisfy his cruelty and avarice with the blood
and possessions of those whom he had put to death. I will,

348 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Boox III.

therefore, not omit offering an advice to princes or republics
against whom conspiracies may have been formed. If they
discover that a conspiracy exists against them, they must, be-
fore punishing its authors, endeavor carefully to know its nature
and extent,— to weigh and measure well the means of the con-
spirators, and their own strength. And if they find it powerful
and alarming, they must not expose it until they have provided
themselves with sufficient force to crush it, as otherwise they
will only hasten their own destruction. They should there-
fore try to simulate ignorance of it, for if the conspirators
should find themselves discovered, they will be forced by neces-
sity to act without consideration. As an instance of this, we
have the case of the Romans, who had left two legions at
Capua to protect its inhabitants against the Samnites. The
commanders of these legions (as we have related elsewhere)
conspired to make themselves masters of the city. When this
became known at Rome, the new Consul Rutilius was directed
to sce to its being prevented; and by way of lulling the con-
spirators into security, he published that the Senate had re-
solved to continue the legions in garrison at Capua. The
captains and soldiers, believing this, and thinking, therefore,
that they had ample time for the execution of their design,
made no attempt to hasten it, and thus waited until they per-
ceived that the Consul was separating them from each other.
This excited their suspicions, and caused them to expose their
intentions, and to proceed to the execution of their plot. There
could not be a more forcible example than this for both parties ;
for it shows how dilatory men are when they think that they
have time enough, and, on the other hand, how prompt they
are in action when impelled by necessity. A prince or a repub-
lic who, for their own advantage, wish to defer the disclosure
of a conspiracy, cannot use a more effectual means for that
purpose than artfully to hold out to the conspirators the pros-
pect of an early and favorable opportunity for action; so that,
whilst waiting for that, or persuaded that they have ample
time, the prince or republic will themselves gain time to over-
whelm the conspirators. Those who act differently will ac-
eclerate their own ruin, as was the case with the Duke of
Athens and Guglielmo de’ Pazzi. The Duke, having become
tyrant of Florence, and being apprised that there was a con-
spiracy on foot against him, had one of the conspirators seized

Cap. VIT.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 549

without further inquiry into the matter. This caused the
others at once to take to arms, and to wrest the government
from him. Guglielmo de’ Pazzi was commissary in the Val de
Chiano in the year 1501. Having heard that a conspiracy had
been organized in Arezzo in favor of the Vitelli, for the purpose
of taking that place from the Florentines, he immediately went
there, and without considering the strength of the conspirators
or measuring his own, and wholly without any preparation, he
had one of the conspirators seized by the advice of his son, the
Bishop of Arezzo. Hereupon the others immediately took to
arms, declared the independence of Arezzo, and made Gugli-
elmo prisoner.

But when conspiracies are feeble, they can and ought to be
crushed as promptly as possible; in such case, however, the
two instances we shall quote, and which are almost the direct
opposites of each other, should not in any way be imitated.
The one is that of the above-named Duke of Athens, who,
to prove his confidence in the attachment of the Florentines
to him, had the man who denounced the conspiracy to him
put to death. The other is that of Dion of Syracuse, who by
way of testing the fidelity of some one whom he suspected or-
dered Callippus, in whom he had entire confidence, to pretend
to be conspiring against him. Both, however, ended badly ;
the first discouraged the accusers, and encouraged those who
were disposed to conspire; and the other paved the way for his
own destruction, and was, as it were, the chief of the conspiracy
against himself, as was proved by experience, for Callippus,
being able to conspire with impunity against Dion, plotted so
well that he deprived him of his state and his life.

CHAPTER VIL.

THE REASONS WHY THE TRANSITIONS FROM LIBERTY TO SERVITUDE
AND FROM SERVITUDE TO LIBERTY ARE AT TIMES EFFECTED
WITHOUT BLOODSHED, AND AT OTHER TIMES ARE MOST SAN-
GUINARY.

THE question may suggest itself to some persons why it is
that, in the many changes that carry a state from freedom to

850 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Book III.

tyranny, and from servitude to liberty, some are effected by
bloodshed, and others without any. In fact, history shows that
in such changes sometimes an infinite number of lives are sac-
rificed ; whilst at other times it has not cost the life of a single
person. Such was the revolution in Rome which transferred the
government from the kings to the consuls, where only the Tar-
quins were expelled, and no one else suffered injury. This
depends upon whether the state that changes its form of govern-
ment does so by violence, or not. When effected by violence
the change will naturally inflict suffering upon many; these in
turn will desire to revenge themselves, and from this desire
of revenge results the shedding of blood. But when such a
change is effected by the general consent of the citizens, who
have made the state great, then there is no reason why the
people should wish to harm any one but the chiefs of the state.
Such was the case with the government of the kings in Rome,
and the expulsion of the Tarquins; and such was that of the
Medici in Florence, whose ruin and expulsion in the year 1494
involved none but themselves. Such revolutions are very rarely
dangerous. But those that are effected by men from motives
of revenge are most dangerous, and have ever been of a nature
to make us tremble with fear and horror in reading of them.
History is so full of these that I will not dilate upon them
here.

CHAPTER VIII.

WHOEVER WISHES TO CHANGE THE GOVERNMENT OF A REPUBLIC
SHOULD FIRST CONSIDER WELL ITS EXISTING CONDITION.

WE have already shown that an evil-disposed citizen cannot
effect any changes for the worse in a republic, unless it be
already corrupt. Besides the reasons elsewhere given, this con-
clusion is confirmed by the examples of Spurius Cassius and
Manlius Capitolinus. This Spurius, being an ambitious man
and wishing to obtain the supreme power in Rome, endeavored
to gain the favor of the people by numerous benefits, such as
the selling to them the lands taken from the Hernicians. This
opened the eyes of the Senate to his ambitious projects, and he
became suspected, even by the people, to that point, that when

Cuar. VIII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 351

he offered them the proceeds of the sale of the grain which the
government had caused to be brought from Sicily, the people
refused it altogether ; for it seemed to them as though Spurius
offered it as the price of their liberty. But if this people had
been corrupt, they would, so far from refusing this offer, have
accepted it, and thus have opened the way for Spurius to the
tyranny which now they closed against him.
The example of Manlius is even more forcible, and proves
how this evil ambition to rule cancels the noblest qualities of
_mind and body, and the most important services rendered to a
state. We sce that this ambition had its origin with Manlius
in his jealousy of the honors bestowed upon Camillus; and so
blinded was he by it, that, regardless of the manners and cus-
toms of Rome, and without examining the condition of the
state, which was not yet prepared to accept a vicious form of
government, he set to work to stir up disturbances in Rome
against the Senate and the institutions of his country. Here
we recognize the perfection of the constitution of Rome, and
the excellent character of its population; for on the occasion
of the fall of Manlius, not one of the nobility (so ardent gener-
ally in their mutual support and defence) made the slightest
effort in his favor; nor did any of his relatives make any
attempt to support him. And whilst the families of others
accused were in the habit of showing themselves near them,
all covered with dust and in deep mourning and sadness, for
the purpose of exciting the commiseration of the people for the
accused, not one of the family of Manlius appeared near him.
The Tribunes of the people, so accustomed always to favor
every measure that seemed for the advantage of the people,
and the more so in proportion as it was adverse to the interests
of the nobility, in this instance united with the nobles for the
purpose of suppressing a common enemy. And finally the peo-
ple of Rome, ever most jealous of its own interests, and eagerly
in favor of everything that was adverse to the nobles, had at
first shown themselves well disposed towards Manlius; but the
moment the Tribunes summoned him and brought his case
before them, the same people, having now from defenders be-
come judges, condemned him, without regard to his former
services, to suffer the death penalty. I therefore think that
there is no fact in history that more effectually shows the
excellence of the Roman constitution than this example, where

302 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

not a single person of the whole city stirred to defend a citi-
zen gifted with the best qualities, and who had rendered the
most signal services to the public, as well as to private individ-
uals. Jor the love of country had more power over them than
any other sentiment; and they thought so much more of its
present dangers, to which the ambition of Manlius exposed
them, than of his past services, that they saw no other way of
relieving themselves of those dangers than by his death. And
Titus Livius says: “ Thus ended the career of this man, who
“would have been memorable had he not been born in a free
“ community.”

This brings us to two important considerations: the first,
that the means of attaining glory are different in a republic
that is corrupt from what they are in a republic that still pre-
serves its institutions pure; and the second, (which is in a
measure comprised in the first,) that men in their conduct,
and especially in their most prominent actions, should well
consider and conform to the times in which they live) And
those who, from an evil choice or from natural inclination, do
not conform to the times in which they live, will in most
instances live unhappily, and their undertakings will come to a
bad end; whilst, on the contrary, success attends those who
conform to the times. And doubtless we may conclude from
the words of our historian that, if Manlius had been born in the
times of Marius and Sylla, when the people were already cor-
rupt, and when he could have moulded them according to his
ambition, he would have achieved the same results and suc-
cesses as Marius and Sylla, and the others who after them
aspired to the tyranny. And in the same way, if Sylla and
Marius had lived in the times of Manlius, they would have been
crushed in their first attempt. For a man may well by his
conduct and evil ways begin to corrupt a people, but it is im-
possible for him to live long enough to enjoy the fruits of it.
And even if it were possible that by length of time he should
succeed, the natural impatience of the people, which cannot
brook delay in the indulgence of their passion, would prove an
obstacle to his success, so that by too much haste, or from
error, he would be led to engage in his attempt at the wrong
time, and thus end in failure.

To usurp supreme and absolute authority, then, in a free
state, and subject it to tyranny, the people must have already

Cuap. IX.] THN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 353

become corrupt by gradual steps from generation to genera-
tion. And all states necessarily come to this, unless (as we
have shown above) they are frequently reinvigorated by good
examples, and brought back by good laws to their first princi-
ples. Manlius thus would have been regarded as a rare and
memorable man if he had lived in a corrupt republic. And
therefore all such as desire to make a change in the govern-
ment of a republic, whether in favor of liberty or in favor of
tyranny, must well examine the condition of things, and from
that judge of the difficulties of their undertaking. For it is
as difficult to make a people free that is resolved to live in
servitude, as it is to subject a people to servitude that is de-
termined to be free. Having argued above that in any such
attempts men should well consider the state of the times and
govern themselves accordingly, I will develop this subject
more fully in the next chapter.

CHAPTER IX.

WHOEVER DESIRES CONSTANT SUCCESS MUST CHANGE HIS CON-
DUCT WITH THE TIMES.

I HAVE often reflected that the causes of the success or fail-
ure of men depend upon their manner of suiting their conduct
to the times. We see one man proceed in his actions with
passion and impetuosity ; and as in both the one and the other
case men are apt to exceed the proper limits, not being able
always to observe the just middle course, they are apt to err in
both. But he errs least and will be most favored by fortune
who suits his proceedings to the times, as I have said above, and
always follows the impulses of his nature. Every one knows
how Fabius Maximus conducted the war against Hannibal
with extreme caution and circumspection, and with an utter
absence of all impetuosity or Roman audacity. It was his
good fortune that this mode of proceeding accorded perfectly
with the times and circumstances. For Hannibal had arrived
in Rome whilst still young and with his fortunes fresh; he
had already twice routed the Romans, so that the republic
was as it were deprived of her best troops, and greatly dis-

VOL. II. 23

B04 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox ITI.

couraged by her reverses. Rome could not therefore have
been more favored by fortune, than to have a commander
who by his extreme caution and the slowness of his move-
ments kept the enemy at bay. At the same time, Fabius could
not have found circumstances more favorable for his character
and genius, to which fact he was indebted for his success and
glory. And that this mode of proceeding was the result of his
character and nature, and not a matter of choice, was shown
on the occasion when Scipio wanted to take the same troops
to Africa for the purpose of promptly terminating the war.
Fabius most earnestly opposed this, like a man incapable of
breaking from his accustomed ways and habits; so that, if he
had been master, Hannibal would have remained in Italy, be-
cause Fabius failed to perceive that the times were changed.
But Rome was a republic that produced citizens of various
character and dispositions, such as Fabius, who was excellent
at the time when it was desirable to protract the war, and
Scipio, when it became necessary to terminate it. It is this
which assures to republics greater vitality and more endur-
ing success than monarchies have; for the diversity of the
genius of her citizens enables the republic better to accommo-
date herself to the changes of the times than can be done by
a prince. For any man accustomed to a certain mode of pro-
ceeding will never change it, as we have said, and consequently
when time and circumstances change, so that his ways are no
longer in harmony with them, he must of necessity succumb.
Pietro Soderini, whom we have mentioned several times al-
ready, was in all his actions governed by humanity and pa-
tience. He and his country prospered so long as the times
favored this mode of proceeding; but when afterwards circum-
stances arose that demanded a course of conduct the opposite
to that of patience and humanity, he was unfit for the occa-
sion, and his own and his country’s ruin were the consequence.
Pope Julius Il. acted throughout the whole period of his pon-
tificate with the impetuosity and passion natural to his char-
acter; and as the times and circumstances well accorded with
this, he was successful in all his undertakings. But if the
times had changed so that different counsels would have been
required, he would unquestionably have been ruined, for he
could not have changed his character or mode of action.
That we cannot thus change at will is due to two causes ;

Cuap. X.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 500

the one is the impossibility of resisting the natural bent of our
characters; and the other is the difficulty of persuading our-
selves, after having been accustomed to success by a certain
mode of proceeding, that any other can succeed as well. It is
this that causes the varying success of a man; for the times
change, but he does not change his mode of proceeding. The
ruin of states is caused in like manner, as we have fully
shown above, because they do not modify their institutions to
suit the changes of the times. And such changes are more
difficult and tardy in republics; for necessarily circumstances
will oecur that will unsettle the whole state, and when the
change of proceeding of one man will not suffice for the
occasion.

Having made mention of Fabius Maximus, and the manner
in which he held Hannibal at bay, it seems to me opportune
in the next chapter to examine the question whether a general
who is resolved anyhow to give battle to the enemy can be
prevented by the latter from doing so.

CHAPTER X.

A GENERAL CANNOT AVOID A BATTLE WHEN THE ENEMY IS RE-
SOLVED UPON IT AT ALL HAZARDS.

“ CnEIUS SULPITIUS, appointed Dictator against the Gauls,
“protracted the war by refusing to commit himself to the
“fortunes of battle against an enemy whose position was being
‘“‘daily made worse by time and the disadvantages of the coun-
“try.” When an error is very generally adopted, I believe it
to be advantageous often to refute it; and therefore, although
I have already several times pointed out how much we differ
in our important actions from the ancients, yet it seems to me
not superfluous once more to repeat it here. It is especially in
matters relating to the art of war that we deviate from the
practice of the ancients, for in this respect we do not observe
any of the principles that were so much esteemed by them.
And this defect arises from this, that the republics and princes
of the present day abandon the charge of their armies to others,

356 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Boox III.

so as to avoid themselves the cares and dangers attending it.
And if we nevertheless occasionally see a king in our times
march in person with his army, it must not be supposed that
he will introduce a more laudable system; for even if he
does expose himself to the fatigue, it is for the sake of pomp
only, and not from any praiseworthy motive. And yet these
princes in only occasionally showing themselves with their ar-
mies, whilst reserving to themselves the title of commander,
are less in fault than republics, and most especially those of
Italy. These, trusting entirely to others, understand them-
selves nothing of what pertains to war, and yet wish to decide
upon eyerything, so as to preserve at least the appearance of
sovereignty, and in their decisions they commit a thousand
errors. And although I have already elsewhere spoken of
some, yet I will not refrain here from referring to one of the
most important instances.

When these indolent princes or effeminate republics send a
general with an army into the field, the wisest order they think
they can give him is never to risk a battle, and above all things
to avoid a general action. In this they think they imitate the
salutary prudence of Fabius Maximus, who by delaying battle
saved the Roman republic; but they do not understand that in
most cases such a commission is either impracticable or danger-
ous. For we must hold it as a principle that a general who
wishes to keep the field cannot avoid a battle when the enemy
is determined upon fighting. And thus such orders are as much
as to say to him, “ Give battle at your enemy’s convenience, but
“not at your own.” To keep the field and yet to avoid a battle
there is no other safe way than to keep at least fifty thousand
men at a good distance from the enemy, and to keep good watch
so that in case of his approach you may have time to retreat
farther. Another way is to shut yourself up in a city. But
both the one and the other of these courses are replete with
danger. In the first case you leave the country open to be pil-
laged by the enemy ; and certainly a brave prince would prefer
the fortune of battle rather than to prolong the war with such
damage to his people. The second plan will manifestly ruin
you; for if you shut yourself up with your army in a city you
will be besieged, and in a short time hunger will compel you to
surrender. Therefore, to avoid battle by either of these means
is equally dangerous. The course taken by Fabius in occupy-

Cuap. X. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS: 857

ing naturally strong positions is good when you have an army
so formidable that the enemy dares not attack you. Nor can it
be said that Fabius sought to avoid a battle; all he wanted
was to fight when it should be to his advantage. In fact,
if Hannibal had attacked him, Fabius would have met and
fought him; but Hannibal never dared to offer him battle
in the manner that suited Fabius. Thus the one and the
other equally avoided a combat; but if either one of them
had been resolved to bring it on anyhow, the other would
have had but three ways of avoiding it,—the two we have
just mentioned, or flight.

A thousand examples attest the truth of what I have ad-
vanced, and especially the war which the Romans carried on
against Philip of Macedon, father of Perseus. Philip, attacked
by the Romans, wished to avoid the combat, and for this pur-
pose, in imitation of Fabius Maximus in Italy, posted himself
with his army on the summit of a mountain, where he strongly
fortified himself, judging that the Romans would never venture
to come and attack him there. But they did attack and drive
him from that position, and forced him to fly with the greater
part of his troops. And what saved him from being entirely
cut to pieces was the irregularity of the country, which pre-
vented the Romans from pursuing him. Philip then resolved
not to fight, but, being posted near the Romans, was obliged to
fly ; and having learnt by this experience that keeping on the
heights did not avail him in his wish to avoid a battle, and un-
willing to shut himself up in a city, he resolved to adopt the
other plan of keeping at many miles’ distance from the Roman
camp. Thus, when they marched into one province he moved
off to another, and whenever the Romans left one country he
entered it. But finding in the end that the prolonging of the
war by these means only made his condition worse, and that his
own subjects were by turns oppressed by the enemy and by him-
self, he resolved to try the chance of combat, and thus came to
a regular battle with the Romans.

It is advantageous, then, not to fight when your army is in
the condition of that of Fabius, or that of Cn. Sulpicius; that
is to say, when you have so formidable an army that the enemy
dares not come to attack you in your intrenchments; or that
he is upon your territory without having gained a foothold, so
that he suffers from want of provisions. In such cases it is

358 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

a wise course to follow, for the reason given by Titus Livius;
namely, “It is well for a general not to risk the chance of
“battle with an enemy whose position is daily made worse by
“time and the disadvantages of the country.” But in any
other case a battle cannot be avoided without dishonor and
danger; for to fly like Philip is the same as being defeated,
and is the more humiliating the less proof you have given of
your courage. And if Philip succeeded in saving himself by
flight, another, unless equally favored by the country, will fail.
No one will pretend to say that Hannibal was not a master in
the art of war; and if, when he was opposed to Scipio in Africa,
he had found it to his advantage to prolong the war, he cer-
tainly would have done so. And perhaps, being a good gen-
eral, and having a good army, he might have done as Fabius did
in Italy; but as he did not do so we must suppose that he was
influenced by important considerations. But a prince who has
an army composed of various materials, and finds that from
want of money or friendly support he can no longer keep his
army together, must be utterly demented if he does not take
his chance of battle before his army shall have fallen to pieces;
for by waiting he is sure to lose, but by trying a battle he may
possibly be victorious. Another point deserving consideration
is, that even in losing a battle a commander should at least
endeavor to save his glory ; and surely there is more glory in
being overcome by force than in losing from any other cause.
Tt was this consideration. that must have influenced Hannibal.
Scipio, on the other hand, even if Hannibal had wished to pro-
tract the war and had lacked the courage to attack him in
his strongholds, was not suffering any privations, for he had
already defeated Syphax, and had made himself master of so
great a part of Africa that he could have held his ground there
with as much security and convenience as in Italy. Such was
not the position of Hannibal when opposed to Fabius, nor of
the Gauls when they were opposed to Sulpicius. Still less can
a general avoid coming to battle when he attempts to penetrate
with his army into the interior of the enemy’s country ; if the
enemy opposes him he will be obliged to fight, and still more
will he be obliged to give battle if he should attempt to be-
siege a town. This happened in our day to Charles, Duke
of Burgundy, who, having pitched his camp before Morat, a
town belonging to the Swiss, was attacked and routed by

Cuap. XI. ] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 309

them. The same thing occurred to the French army when
encamped before Novara, where they were equally defeated by
the Swiss.

CHAPTER XI.

WHOEVER HAS TO CONTEND AGAINST MANY ENEMIES MAY NEVER-
THELESS OVERCOME THEM, THOUGH HE BE INFERIOR IN POWER,
PROVIDED HE IS ABLE TO RESIST THEIR FIRST EFFORTS.

TuE power of the Tribunes of the people in Rome was very
great, as has already been said several times, but it was neces-
sary to restrain the ambition of the nobles, who would other-
wise have corrupted the republic much more than it was
already. Nevertheless, as all human institutions (as has been
observed elsewhere) contain some inherent evil that gives rise
to unforeseen accidents, it becomes necessary to provide against
these by new measures. The Tribunes had become insolent
and formidable to the nobility and to all Rome, and would
have become dangerous to the liberties of the republic had not
Appius Claudius pointed out the way for the Romans to pro-
tect themselves against the ambition of the Tribunes. As
there was always to be found amongst them some one more
easily intimidated or corrupted than the others, or some lover
of the public good, Claudius advised that they should oppose
such a one to his colleagues whenever these wanted to pass
any act contrary to the wishes of the Senate. This expedient
tempered the formidable authority of the Tribunes, and for
a long while proved most advantageous to Rome; and it has
caused me to reflect that the presumption of success should
always be in favor of a single power contending against a com-
bination, however superior in numbers and power. For inde-
pendent of the infinity of circumstances of which an individual
can take advantage better than a combination of many, the
former will always have the opportunity, with a little address,
to create divisions between the latter, and thus to weaken any
powerful combination. I will not adduce here any examples
of antiquity, of which there are many, but will confine my-
self to instances of our own times only. In the year 1484 all
Italy leagued together against the Venetians; who, after losing

360 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox IIT.

everything, and being unable to keep the field any longer, suc-
ceeded in corrupting Ludovico Sforza, governor of Milan, and
concluded a treaty with him by which they not only recovered
all the territory they had lost, but actually seized a portion of
the principality of Ferrara. And thus, although they had been
losers in war, yet they proved to be gainers in peace. <A few
years since a general league was formed against France, but
before the termination of the war Spain broke from the league,
and made terms with France, so that the other confederates
were soon afterwards constrained also to come to terms with
her. We may therefore with reasonable certainty presume
that when a number of princes combine to make war upon a
single one, the latter will triumph over the combination, pro-
vided he has courage and strength enough to resist the first
shock and bide events by temporizing. But if he cannot do
this, he is exposed to a thousand dangers, as was the case with
the Venetians in 1508. If at that time they could have held
their own against the French army until they could gain over
some of those who had combined against them, they would
have escaped the disasters by which they were overwhelmed.
But being without an army that could temporarily hold the
French in check, and thus having no time to detach any one
power from the league, they were crushed. In fact, we see
that the Pope, after having recovered what belonged to him,
became their friend; and so did Spain; and both of these
powers would gladly have saved to the Venetians their posses-
sions in Lombardy if they could have done it, so as to prevent
France from becoming so powerful in Italy. The: Venetians
might, by sacrificing a part, have saved the rest; this would
have been a wise course for them to pursue, provided they had
done so before seeming to be forced to it by necessity ; but
after the war was actually begun, such a course would have
been disgraceful, and probably of little advantage. Before the
war only a few of the citizens of Venice could discern the dan-
ger, still fewer perceived the remedy, and none advised it. But
to return to what I said at the beginning of this discourse, I
conclude that, as the Roman Senate found the means for saving
the country from the ambition of the Tribunes, who were many,
so will any one prince find a remedy, when assailed by many
enemies, provided he has wisdom and skill, by suitable means,
to create such misunderstandings between them as will cause
their disunion.

Cuap. XII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 361

CHAPTER XII.

A SKILFUL GENERAL SHOULD ENDEAVOR BY ALL MEANS IN HIS
POWER TO PLACE HIS SOLDIERS IN THE POSITION OF BEING
OBLIGED TO FIGHT, AND AS FAR AS POSSIBLE RELIEVE THE
ENEMY OF SUCH NECESSITY.

WE have already pointed out the advantage of necessity in
human actions, and to what glorious achievements it has given
rise. Some moral philosophers have even maintained that
without it neither the hand nor the tongue of man, the two
noblest instruments of his glory, would have served his pur-
pose perfectly, nor carried human works to that height of per-
fection which they have attained. The ancient commanders of
armies, who well knew the powerful influence of necessity, and
how it inspired the soldiers with the most desperate courage,
neglected nothing to subject their men to such a pressure,
whilst, on the other hand, they employed every device that in-
genuity could suggest to relieve the enemy’s troops from the
necessity of fighting. Thus they often opened the way for the
enemy to retreat, which they might easily have barred; and
closed it to their own soldiers for whom they could with ease
have kept it open. Whoever then desires that a city should
make an obstinate resistance, or that an army should fight with
determination in the field, should above all things endeavor to
inspire them with the conviction of the necessity for their
utmost efforts. A skilful general, then, who has to besiege a
city, can judge of the difficulties of its capture by knowing and
considering to what extent the inhabitants are under the ne-
cessity of defending themselves. If he finds that to be very
urgent, then he may deem his task in proportion difficult ; but
if the motive for resistance is feeble, then he may count upon
an easy victory. Thence it comes that it is more difficult to
reduce a country to subjection that has revolted, than it was to
conquer it originally. For not having given any special offence
before the conquest that would cause them to fear punishment,
they yield easily; but having offended by the rebellion and fear-
ing the penalty, they defend themselves with great obstinacy.

Such a determined resistance may also be caused by the nat-
ural hatred between neighboring princes and republics, which

362 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Boox III.

arises from rivalry and the thirst of dominion. The case of
Tuscany proves that this is especially the case with republics.
This spirit of rivalry and contention will ever make it diffi-
cult for republics to subjugate each other. Whoever, there-
fore, carefully examines the character of the neighboring pow-
ers of the republics of Florence and of Venice will not wonder,
as many do, that Florence has expended more money and
made fewer conquests than Venice. This is due to the fact
that the Venetians have had to do with neighbors less obstinate
in defence than those with whom Florence has had to contend,
the cities in the vicinity of Venice being accustomed to live
under the domination of princes, and not as free states; for
those who live in servitude are indifferent to a change of mas-
ters, in fact in most cases they rather desire it. So that Venice
(although she has had more powerful neighbors than Flor-
ence) found these neighboring cities less obstinate in defence
than Florence, which is entirely surrounded by free states.

To return to my subject, then, I say that a captain who be-
sieges a city should strive by every means in his power to re-
lieve the besieged of the pressure of necessity, and thus diminish
the obstinacy of their defence. He should promise them a full
pardon if they fear punishment, and if they are apprehensive
for their liberties he should assure them that he is not the
enemy of the public good, but only of a few ambitious persons
in the city who oppose it. Such a course will often facilitate
the siege and capture of cities. Artifices of this kind are
quickly appreciated by the wise, but the people are generally
deceived by them. Blinded by their eager desire for present
peace, they do not see the snares that are concealed under these
liberal promises, and thus many cities have fallen into servi-
tude. This was the case with Florence in our immediate times,
and in ancient times with Crassus and his army. Crassus well
knew that the promises of the Parthians were not to be trusted,
and that they were made merely for the purpose of removing
from the minds of the Roman soldiers the impression of the ne-
cessity of defending themselves. Yet so blinded were these by
the offers of peace that had been made by the enemy, that Cras-
sus could not induce them to make a vigorous resistance.

The Samnites, instigated by the ambition of a few, disre-
garded their treaties with the Romans; and made incursions
upon and pillaged the territory of some of the Roman allies.

Cuap. XII.] LEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVICS: 363

After that, they sent ambassadors to Rome to ask for peace,
offering restitution of what they had plundered, and to deliver
up the authors of the disorders and the pillage. Their prop-
osition was rejected by the Romans, and the ambassadors re-
turned to Samnium hopeless of any accommodation. There-
upon Claudius Pontius, at that time commander of the Samnite
army, pointed out to them in a remarkable speech that the
Romans were resolved upon war under any circumstances, and
that, although they themselves desired peace, yet they were thus
forced to accept the war, adding these words: “ War is just for
“those who are forced to it by necessity, and Heaven favors
“those who have no hope but in their arms.” It was upon this
necessity that he based his hope of victory with his soldiers.
And not to be obliged to return to this subject, 1 think it
well here to cite the most noteworthy examples from Roman
history that illustrate my proposition. C. Manilius had led his
army against the Veientes, and, a part of the troops of the lat-
ter having forced a passage into his intrenchments,-Manilius
rushed with a detachment to the support of his men, and closed
up all the issues of his camp, so that the Veientes could not
escape. Finding themselves thus shut in, they began to com-
bat with such desperate fury that they killed Manilius, and
would have destroyed the rest of the Roman army if one of the
Tribunes had not the sagacity to open a way for them to escape.
This shows that the Veientes, when constrained by necessity,
fought with the most desperate valor; but when they saw the
way open for their escape, they thought more of saving them-
selves than of fighting. The Volscians and Equeans having
entered with their troops upon Roman territory, the Romans
sent two Consuls with armies against them. Becoming en-
gaged in battle, the Volscian army under command of Vettius
Messius suddenly found itself shut in between their own in-
trenchments, which were occupied by the Romans, and the
other Roman army. And seeing that they would have to
perish or cut their way out with the sword, Messius addressed
his soldiers in the following words: “Follow me! You have
“no walls nor ditches to encounter, but only men armed like
“yourselves. Equals in valor, you have the advantage of ne-
“cessity, that last and most powerful of weapons!” It is thus
that Titus Livius styles necessity “the last and most powerful
“weapon.” Camillus, the most experienced of the Roman

364 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

generals, had penetrated with his army into the city of Veii,
for the purpose of facilitating its capture; and to deprive the
enemy of the extreme necessity of defending himself, he or-
dered his soldiers, in a voice loud enough to be heard by the
Veientes, not to harm those that should be disarmed. This
caused the latter to lay down their arms, and the city was
taken almost without bloodshed. This example was afterwards
imitated by several other generals.

CHAPTER XIII.

WHETHER AN ABLE COMMANDER WITH A FEEBLE ARMY, OR A
GOOD ARMY WITH AN INCOMPETENT COMMANDER, IS MOST TO
BE RELIED UPON.

CortoLanus, having been exiled from Rome, went to the
Volscians, where he formed an army with which he returned
to Rome to revenge himself upon his countrymen. But he
soon withdrew again, influenced more by his affection for his
mother than by the forees of the Romans. On this occasion
Titus Livius says: “It became evident that the Roman repub-
“lic was more indebted for her aggrandizement to the merit
“of her generals than to that of their armies, seeing that
“the Volscians had until then always been defeated, and
“that they became victorious only when led by Coriolanus.”
And although Livius advances this opinion, yet we find many
instances in history where the soldiers, deprived of their cap-
tains, have given wonderful proofs of valor, and displayed
more order and intrepidity after the death of their Consuls
than before. It was thus with the army which the Romans
had in Spain under the Scipios, which, after the loss of both
its commanders, not only saved itself by its bravery, but actu-
ally defeated the enemy, and saved that province to the repub-
lic. So that on the whole we shall find many instances of bat-
tles won solely by the valor of the soldiers, and many others
where the same result was achieved by the courage of the gen-
eral alone. So that we may conclude that they are equally
dependent one upon the other.

It may be well here to consider which of the two is most to

Cuap, XIII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 865

be feared, a good army badly commanded, or a good commander
with abad army. According to the judgment of Cesar, neither
one nor the other is worth much; for when he went into Spain
against Afranius and Petreius, who had a good army under their

orders, he said that he cared little about that, “as he was

“marching against an army without a chief,’ meaning thereby
the weakness of the commanders. And, on the other hand,
when he went into Thessaly against Pompey, he said “ that he
“was marching against a leader without an army.” We may
consider here also another matter, namely, whether it be easier
for a good captain to form a good army, or for a good army to
form a good captain. Upon this point I say that the question
would seem to be decided, inasmuch as it is much easier for the
many who have merit to find or instruct one to be equally good,
than for the one to form the many. Lucullus was wholly in-
experienced in war when he was sent against Mithridates ;
nevertheless, being placed at the head of a good army that had
already very superior officers, he soon became a good com-
mander. The Romans, being in want of men, armed a number
of slaves and gave them to Sempronius Gracchus to be trained,
who in a brief time made a good army of them. After Pe-
lopidas and Epaminondas had delivered their country, Thebes,
from the yoke of the Spartans, they made in a very short time
the best kind of soldiers out of the Theban peasants; so that
they were not only able to sustain the shock of the Spartan
troops, but actually to defeat them. Thus the matter is about
even; for if either one of the two, the army or the commander,
be good, they will be apt to make the other good likewise. But
a good army without an able commander often becomes insolent
and dangerous, as was the case with the Macedonian army after
the death of Alexander, and with the veteran troops in the civil
wars of Rome. And therefore I am disposed to believe that
you can more safely rely upon a competent gencral, who has
the time to instruct his men and the facilities for arming them,
than upon an insolent army with a chief tumultuously chosen
by them. Those generals, therefore, deserve double praise and
glory who not only had to conquer, but had actually to form
and train their troops before meeting the enemy. For in this
they have shown that twofold merit the union of which is so
rare that many commanders, if they had been obliged to per-
form the same task, would not have obtained that celebrity
which they have achieved.

366 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

CHAPTER XLV.

OF THE EFFECT OF NEW STRATAGEMS AND UNEXPECTED CRIES IN
THE MIDST OF BATTLE.

We have numerous instances of the important effect pro-
duced by some unforeseen incident caused by something new
that is seen or heard in the midst of a conflict or heat of battle.
One of the most striking examples of this occurréd in the
battle between the Romans and the Volscians, when Quintius
saw one wing of his army give way, and cried out to them in
a loud voice to stand firm, as the other wing was victorious.
These words reanimated the courage of his soldiers, and
caused dismay amongst those of the enemy, so that Quintius
carried off the victory. And if such a ery can produce such
an effect in a well-disciplined army, its influence is infinitely
greater upon a tumultuous and undisciplined body, who are all
moved by similar impulses. I will adduce a notable example
of this, which occurred in our own times. A few years ago
the city of Perugia was divided into two factions, the Oddi and
the Baglioni. The latter held the government and had exiled
the former, who, with the aid of their friends, gathered an
army, and established themselves at a convenient place near
Perugia. One night they entered the city by the aid of their
partisans, and, without being perceived, succeeded in making
themselves masters of the public square. As the streets were
all barred with chains, they had a man precede them with an
iron club to break the fastenings of these chains, so that
horses might be able to pass. Only one more that closed the
public square remained to be broken, and already the cry of
“To arms!” had been raised in the city. Closely pressed by
those that followed him, the man who was charged to break
the chains, unable to raise his arms for the purpose, called out
to those pressing upon him to fall back. This ery of “Fall
back!” taken up from rank to rank, caused the hindmost to
fly; the others, one by one, followed them with such a rush
that it ended in a complete rout. And thus by this slight acci-
dent the whole project of the Oddi was thwarted. This shows
the necessity of discipline in an army, not only to make them
combat with order, but also to prevent any slight accident from

Cur, XIV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 367

creating confusion. And it is just for this reason that an un-
disciplined multitude is useless in war; for the least unex:
pected noise or word will throw them into confusion, and make
them take to flight. Anda good commander should therefore,
amongst his other regulations, specially appoint persons to re-
ceive his orders and transmit them to the others; and he should
accustom his soldiers not to listen to any but their regular offi-
cers, and direct the officers to give no orders but such as ema-
nate from the commander. The non-observance of this rule
has often caused the greatest misfortunes.

As to new stratagems, when the armies are engaged in con-
flict, every captain should endeavor to invent such as will en-
courage his own troops and dishearten those of the enemy.
This is one of the most efficacious means of achieving victory.
In proof of which I will cite the example of the Roman Dic-
tator C. Sulpicius, who, being about to come to battle with the
Gauls, armed all the teamsters and camp-followers, and mount-
ed them upon the mules and other beasts of burden, and sup-
plied them with standards, so as to seem like regular cavalry.
These he placed behind a hill, with orders to show themselves
to the enemy at a given signal during the heat of battle. This
artifice, being carried out as ordered, so alarmed the Gauls as
to cause them to lose the day. A good general, then, has to
do two things; the one, to try by novel stratagems to create
alarm amongst the enemy; and the other, to be on his guard to
discover those that the enemy may attempt to practise upon
him, and to render them fruitless. It was thus that the Indian
king acted against Semiramis. This queen, seeing that the
king had a great many elephants, tried to frighten him by
showing him that she had quite as many. She therefore
ordered a number of sham elephants made of the hides of
buffaloes and cows, which she had placed upon camels and
sent to the front. But the stratagem was discovered by the
king, and proved, not only useless, but damaging to Semiramis.
The Dictator Mamercus was carrying on the war against the
Fidenati. These, for the purpose of frightening the Roman
army, caused, in the midst of an action, a number of soldiers
to issue forth from the city with burning torches at the end
of their lances, hoping that the Roman soldiers, struck by
the novelty of the thing, might break their ranks, and thus
create confusion. Here it is well to observe that such arti-

368 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

fices may safely and with advantage be employed when they
have more the appearance of reality than of fiction; for then
their seeming strength will prevent the prompt discovery of
their weakness. But when they are manifestly rather fictitious
than real, they should either not be employed, or they should
be kept at such a distance that their real character cannot be
so quickly discovered, as Sulpicius did with his muleteers.
Otherwise, when too near, their real weakness will be quickly
discovered, and then they do more harm than good, as was the
case with the sham elephants of Semiramis, and the torches
of the Fidenati. For although these did at the first moment
somewhat disturb the Roman soldiers, yet when the Dictator
discovered it he called out to them to be ashamed to fly from
the smoke like insects. “Return to the combat,’ he shouted
to them, “and with their own torches burn their city of Fidena,
“which your benefits could not placate.” Thus was the arti-
fice of the Fidenati rendered futile, and the battle won by the
Romans.

CHAPTER XY.

AN ARMY SHOULD HAVE BUT ONE CHIEF: A GREATER NUMBER
IS DETRIMENTAL.

THE Fidenati, having revolted, massacred the colony which
the Romans had established at Fidena. To avenge this out-
rage the Romans appointed four Tribunes with consular powers,
one of whom remained to guard Rome, while the other three
were sent against the Fidenati and Veientes. These three
Tribunes gained nothing but dishonor in this expedition, in
consequence of the dissensions that had arisen between them.
For this dishonor they were themselves alone responsible ; and
it was only the valor of their soldiers that saved them from
experiencing a serious check. The Romans, having perceived
the cause of this disorder, resorted to the creation of a Dic-
tator; so that one man might restore that order which the
three Tribunes had destroyed. Thence we may see the use-
lessness of several commanders in one army, or in a city that
is besieged. And Titus Livius could not more forcibly illus-

Cuap. XV.] TEN BOOKS OF J1iUs LIViCs. 369

trate this than when he says: “ Three Tribunes with consular
“powers proved how useless it is to confide the command of
“an army to several chiefs; for each one holding opinions of
“his own, which the others would not adopt, they afforded
“the enemy the opportunity to take advantage of their dissen-
“sions.” And although this example proves sufficiently the
disadvantages resulting from a plurality of commanders for an
army in time of war, yet by way of still further elucidating
this truth, I will cite one or two other instances of both an-
cient and modern times. When Louis XII., king of France,
had retaken Milan in the year 1500, he sent his troops to Pisa,
with orders to restore that city to the Florentines ; whereupon
the government of Florence sent there as commissioners Gio-
vanbattista Ridolfi and Luca d’ Antonio degli Albizzi. As Gio-
vanbattista enjoyed a great reputation, and was the older of
the two, Luca left the entire management of affairs to him;
and although he did not exhibit his ambition by opposing him,
yet he manifested it by his silence and by the indifference and
contempt with which he treated everything that was done, so
that, neither aiding in the actions in the field nor in council,
one would have supposed him to be a man destitute of all ability.
But he soon proved the very opposite, when, in consequence
of something that had occurred, Giovanbattista was obliged to
return to Florence. Then Luca, remaining in sole command,
displayed his worth by his great valor, skill, and wisdom ; all
of which were lost so long as he had a colleague who shared
in the command. I will quote once more, in confirmation of
what I have advanced, the authority of Titus Livius. This
historian, referring to the circumstance that the Romans had
sent Quintius and Agrippa against the Equeans, adds, that the
latter begged his colleague to take upon himself the sole con-
duct of the war, saying to him, “In important affairs it is
“necessary for success that the principal authority should
“reside in one man only,” This is just the contrary of what
is done by our princes and republics of the present day ; who
confide to several commissaries and chiefs the administration
of places subject to them, which creates an inconccivable con-
fusion. And if we seek for the causes of the reverses expe-
rienced by the Italian and French armies in our times, we
shall find that to have been the most powerful of all the
causes. So that we may truly conclude that it is better to
VOL. 1, 24

370 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Book III.

confide any expedition to a single man of ordinary ability,
rather than to two, even though they are men of the highest
merit, and both having equal authority.

CHAPTER XVI.

IN TIMES OF DIFFICULTY MEN OF MERIT ARE SOUGHT AFTER, BUT
IN EASY TIMES IT IS NOT MEN OF MERIT, BUT SUCH AS HAVE
RICHES AND POWERFUL RELATIONS, THAT ARE MOST IN FAVOR.

It ever has been, and ever will be the case, that men of rare
and extraordinary merit are neglected by republics in times of
peace and tranquillity; for jealous of the reputation which
such men have acquired by their virtues, there are always in
such times many other citizens, who want to be, not only their
equals, but their superiors. The Greek historian Thucydides
gives the following striking instance of this. The Athenian
republic, having obtained the advantage in the Peloponnesian
war, having checked the pride of the Spartans and subjected
almost all Greece to their rule, acquired such reputation that
she conceived the project of conquering Sicily. This enter-
prise was much debated in Athens. Alcibiades and some
other citizens, thinking more of the honor they could gain by
it than of the public good, were much in favor of it, and hoped
that the direction of it would be intrusted to them. But Ni-
cias, one of the most influential citizens of Athens, opposed it,
and the principal reason which he adduced against it, when
addressing the people (who had faith in him), was this: that
in advising them against this war he counselled them to what
was against his own interest, for he well knew that so long
as Athens remained at peace there were many -citizens who
wanted to take precedence of him; but he also knew that there
was not a citizen who would pretend to show himself his supe-
rior, or even his equal, in time of war. Thus showing that it
is the common fault of republics in tranquil times to make
small account of men of merit. And it is a twofold cause of
indignation for such men to see themselves deprived. of the
rank to which they are entitled, and to be associated with, and
often even subordinated to unworthy men, who are their infe-

Cuap. XVI.] TEN BOOKS .OF TITUS LIVIUS, O71

riors in capacity. This defect in republics has often caused
great evils ; for those citizens who feel themselves so unjustly
depreciated, and knowing it to be the result of the peace and
tranquillity which the state enjoys, will stir up troubles and
kindle fresh wars to the detriment of the republic.

In reflecting upon the means for remedying this evil, I
believe I have found two. _ The first is to keep the Ghier
poor, so that their wealth and lack of virtue may neither
corrupt themselves nor enable them to corrupt others; and
the second, so to organize for war as to be ever prepared for
it, and Aan to have need of men of merit and reputation,
as Rome did in her early days. For as this city always kept
armies in the field, there was constant opportunity for the em-
ployment of men of ability; nor could rank be withheld from
aman who deserved it, neither could it be bestowed upon an-
other who did not merit it. And if, notwithstanding this, it
was at times done, either by mistake or by way of trial, it
caused at once such disorders and dangers that they quickly
returned to the regular course. But other republics, which
are not constituted like Rome, and who engage in war only
when compelled by necessity, cannot avoid this inconvenience,
but are rather constantly led into it. And this will always
produce evil consequences whenever the meritorious citizen,
who has thus been neglected, is disposed to be vindictive, and
has influence and partisans in the city. Rome avoided this
evil practice for a time ; but after she had conquered Carthage
and Antiochus, (as we have said elsewhere,) and no longer fear-
ing other wars, she also seems to have confided the conduct
of her armies indifferently to whoever aspired to it, looking
less to the merits and ability of the man than to such other
qualifications as assured him favor with the people. For we
see that the consulate was several times refused to Paulus
milius, and that he obtained it only when the war with the
Macedonians occurred, which being deemed perilous, the com-
mand of the army was by general consent committed to him.

When after the year 1490 the city of Florence was involved
in many wars, and her citizens had given but indifferent proof
of their ability, the city by chance found a man who showed
himself capable of commanding her armies. This was Anto-
nio Giacomini; and so long as Florence had difficult wars on
hand, all the ambition of her citizens ceased, and Antonio had

372 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox ITT.

no competitors for the part of commissary and chief of the
army. But when there was a war that presented no dangers,
and promised only honors and credit, then there were so many
applicants that, in the appointment of three commissaries for
the conduct of the siege of Pisa, Antonio was left out. And
although the injury that resulted to the state from not having
sent Antonio was not evident to all, yet it could most easily be
conjectured. For Pisa, being destitute of munitions and _ pro-
visions, would quickly have been forced to surrender at dis-
cretion to the Florentines, if Antonio had been in command.
But the siege, being conducted by wholly incompetent men,
was protracted to that degree that the Florentines had to
resort to the purchase of the city, which they might otherwise
have taken by force. Such an indignity might well have had
an effect upon Antonio, and he must have been very good and
forbearing not to have desired to revenge himself for it, either
by the ruin of the state (which he could have occasioned) or
by the destruction of some of his particular rivals. A republic
should guard against similar dangers, as we will show more
fully in the following chapter.

CHAPTER XVII.

A PERSON WHO HAS BEEN OFFENDED SHOULD NOT BE INTRUSTED
WITH AN IMPORTANT ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT.

A REPUBLIC should take great care not to intrust with an im-
portant administration one who has been gravely offended.
Claudius Nero, who left the army with which he was confront-
ing Hannibal, and, taking a portion of the same, went with it
into La Marca to meet the other Consul, in order to engage
Asdrubal before he could form a junction with Hannibal, found
himself in front of Asdrubal, and surrounded him with his
forces in a place where he had to fight at a disadvantage or
die of starvation; but he was so craftily entertained by As-
drubal with propositions of an agreement, as to enable him to
make his escape and defeat Nero’s opportunity of crushing him.
This becoming known in Rome, the Senate and people deemed
it a grievous blunder, making him the constant topic of con-

Cuae. XVIII), TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVICS. 373

versation about the city, to his great disgrace and shame. But
afterwards becoming Consul and being sent against Hannibal
he acted in the manner above indicated, which involved such
great danger that all Rome was troubled and in doubt until
the news came of Asdrubal’s rout. Claudius, being subse-
quently interrogated as to the reasons for taking so danger-
ous a course, by which without extreme necessity he had jeop-
arded the liberty of Rome, answered that he did so, knowing
that if successful he should regain the glory lost in Spain; and
if unsuccessful, and his plan should have an adverse issue, he
would be revenged on that city and those citizens who had so
ungratefully and indiscreetly offended him. And if such an
affront could rouse to such passion a citizen of Rome in those
days when Rome was yet incorrupt, we can imagine what might
be done by a citizen of a city in a condition unlike that of Rome
at that time. Hence, no adequate remedies existing for similar
disorders arising in republics, it follows that it is impossible to
establish a perpetual republic, because in a thousand unforeseen
ways its ruin may be accomplished.

CHAPTER XVIII.

NOTHING IS MORE WORTHY OF THE ATTENTION OF A GOOD GEN-
ERAL THAN TO ENDEAVOR TO PENETRATE THE DESIGNS OF THE
ENEMY.

EpAMINONDAS the Theban said that nothing was more neces-
sary and useful for a general than to know the intentions and
projects of the enemy. And the more difficult it is to acquire
such knowledge, the more praise he deserves who succeeds in
conjecturing it correctly. Nor is it as difficult to understand
the designs of the enemy as it is at times to comprehend his
actions ; and often it is less difficult to appreciate what he is
doing at a distance, than what he does at the moment and near
by. For it has happened many a time that, when a battle has
lasted until nightfall, the victor thinks himself beaten, and the
defeated imagines himself to have been victorious. Such errors
have caused men to resolve upon acts that proved their ruin;

374 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book III.

as happened to Brutus and Cassius, the latter of whom perished
in consequence of just such an error. For although the wing
commanded by Brutus had been victorious, yet Cassius thought
that it had been defeated, and that consequently the whole army
was beaten; so that, despairing of his safety, he killed himself.
We have an instance almost of the same kind in our own times,
in the battle of Santa Cecilia (Marignan) in Lombardy, between
Francis I., king of France, and the Swiss. Night having come
on, that portion of the Swiss troops which had not been broken
through believed themselves to be victorious, not knowing that
the others had been routed and slain. This error was the cause
of their not saving themselves; for they awaited the morning
to renew the contest that proved so disastrous to them. And
this same error came near causing the loss of the army of the
Pope and of the king of Spain, which, upon the false news of
victory, had crossed the Po, and, had it advanced any farther,
would have become prisoners to the French, who were victo-
rious.

The Roman and Equean armies fell into a similar error.
The Consul Sempronius, having attacked the latter, the battle
lasted all day until evening, with varying fortunes for both
sides. When night came on, both armies, half beaten, did not
return to their encampments, but retired to the neighboring
heights, where they believed themselves secure. The Roman
army divided into two parts; one followed the Consul, and the
other a centurion named Tempanius, whose valor had saved
the Roman army on that day from being entirely defeated.
When morning came, the Roman Consul, without knowing any-
thing more of the enemy, marched towards Rome, and the
Equean army retreated likewise. Each of them believed the
other to have been victorious, and therefore retreated, regard-
less of leaving their encampments a prey to the other. It
happened that Tempanius, who with the remainder of the Ro-
man army was also retreating, learnt from some wounded
Equeans that their captain had withdrawn, and had abandoned
their encampments. Upon this news, he returned to the Ro-
man intrenchments, and saved them, and afterwards destroyed
those of the Equeans, and then marched to Rome victorious.
This victory, as we see, consisted only in his having been the
first to learn the discomfiture of the enemy. And this should
make us reflect that it may often happen that two armies op-

Cusp. XVIIE | TEN: BOOKS OF TITUS -LIVIUS. 375

posed to each other may both be equally damaged, and suffer-
ing from the same necessity ; in such case, the victory will be
for him who is first informed of the condition of the other.

I will further cite upon this point the following domestic in-
cident of modern times. In the year 1498 the Florentines had
a powerful army before Pisa, and pressed that city very closely.
The Venetians, having undertaken its protection, and seeing no
other means of saving it, resolved to make a diversion by at-
tacking the Florentine territory in the rear. They accordingly
entered it by the Val di Lamona with a powerful army, occupied
the Borgo di Marradi, and laid siege to the castle of Castiglione,
which crowns the hill above. The Florentines, hearing of this,
resolved at once to succor Marradi, without, however, reducing
their force before Pisa. They organized new infantry and cav-
alry, and sent them, under command of Jacopo Quarto d’ Ap-
piano, Lord of Piombino, and the Count Rinuccio da Marciano.
When these forces reached the heights above Marradi, the Vene-
tians withdrew from before Castiglione into the Borgo below.
After the two armies had been facing each other for some days,
both began to suffer from want of provisions and other neces-
saries; and neither daring to attack the other, and ignorant of
their respective sufferings, both resolved to raise their camp
and to withdraw. the Venetians towards Berzighella and Faenza,
and the Florentines towards Casaglia and the Mugello. When
morning came, and each army had commenced sending off its
trains, it chanced that a woman came from the Borgo di Mar-
radi into the camp of the Florentines, (deeming herself pro-
tected by her age and poverty,) desiring to see some of her
people who served there. From her the Florentine command-
ers learnt that the Venetian troops were marching off. En-
couraged by this news, they changed their intentions, and went
in pursuit of the Venetians, as though they had driven them
from their intrenchments; and wrote to Florence that they had
repulsed the Venetians, and gained a victory. But this victory
was due to nothing else than to their having by chance been the
first to learn that the enemy was retreating; had this, on the
other hand, been first known to the Venetians, it would have
given the victory to them.

376 DISCOURSES OF THE FIkSE [Book IIL.

CHAPTER XIX,

WHETHER GENTLE OR RIGOROUS MEASURES ARE PREFERABLE IN
GOVERNING THE MULTITUDE.

Wuitst the Roman republic was disturbed by the dissensions
between the nobles and the people, a war occurred; and they
sent their armies into the field under the command of Quintius
and Appius Claudius. Appius, naturally cruel and rude in his
mode of commanding, was badly obeyed by his troops; so that
he had to fly from his province as though he had been beaten.
Quintius, on the other hand, being of a gentle and humane dis-
position, was cheerfully obeyed by his men, and returned to
Rome victorious ; whence it would seem that a multitude is more.
easily governed by humanity and gentleness than by haughti-
ness and cruelty. Nevertheless, Cornelius Tacitus (followed in
this respect by many other writers) holds the opposite opinion,
and says, “To govern the multitude, severity is worth more
“than gentleness.” In attempting to reconcile these two op-
posite opinions, we must consider whether the people to be gov-
erned are your equals or your subjects. If they are your equals,
then you cannot entirely depend upon rigorous measures, nor
upon that severity which Tacitus recommends. And as the
people of Rome divided the sovereignty with the nobles, any
one who had temporarily become chief of the state could not
rule them with harshness and cruelty. And we have frequently
seen those Roman generals who made themselves beloved by
their armies, and managed them with gentleness, obtain more
success than those who made themselves feared in an extraordi-
nary manner, unless the latter were gifted with uncommon vir-
tues, as was the case with Manlius Torquatus. But he who has
to command subjects, such as Tacitus speaks of, should employ
severity rather than gentleness, lest these subjects should be-
come insolent, and trample his authority under foot, because
of too great indulgence. This severity, however, should be
employed with moderation, so as to avoid making yourself odi-
ous, for no prince is ever benefited by making himself hated.
And the best way not to excite such hatred is to respect the
property of the subjects; as to their lives, no prince ever de-
sires those, unless secretly animated by the spirit of rapine.

Coie XG) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 377

But when influenced by that spirit, bloodshed will ever occur ;
and in that case the desire and pretexts for it will not be Hate
ing, as I have elsewhere demonstrated at length. | Thus, Quin-
tius was more entitled to praise than Appius; ont the ate
of Tacitus can be approved only when confined within just lim-
its, and not applied in the manner of Appius. Having spoken
of the effects of severity and gentleness, it seems to me not
superfluous to show how an act of humanity had more influ-
ence with the Faliscians than the power of arms.

CHAPTER XX.

AN ACT OF HUMANITY PREVAILED MORE WITH THE FALISCIANS
THAN ALL THE POWER OF ROME.

CAMILLUS was besieging the city of the Faliscians, and had
surrounded it, when a teacher charged with the education of
the children of some of the noblest families of that city, for
the purpose of ingratiating himself with Camillus and the
Romans, led these children, on pretence of making them take
exercise, into the Roman camp; and presenting them to Camil-
lus, said to him, “ By means of these children as hostages, you
“will be able to compel the city to surrender.” Camillus not
only declined the offer, but had the teacher stripped and his
hands tied behind his back, and then hada rod put into the
hands of each of the children wherewith he directed them to
whip him all the way back to the city. Upon learning this
fact, the citizens of Faliscia were so much touched by the
humanity and integrity of Camillus, that they surrendered the
place to him without any further defence. This example shows
that an act of humanity and benevolence will at all times have
more influence over the minds of men than violence and
ferocity. It also proves that provinces and cities which no
armies and no engines of war, nor any other efforts of human
power, could conquer, have yielded to an act of humanity, be-
nevolence, chastity, or generosity. History furnishes many
other instances of this besides the one just cited. It tells us
how the Roman arms could not drive Pyrrhus out of Italy,
but that the magnanimity of Fabricius in making known to

378 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox IIT.

him the offer of his confidential servant to poison him caused
Pyrrhus to leave it voluntarily. It also shows us that the
taking of New Carthage, in Spain, did not give Scipio Afri-
canus so much reputation as the example of chastity which he
gave in restoring intact to her husband a young and beautiful
wife, whose honor he had respected; which act gained him
the hearts of all Spain. History also shows us how much the
people desire to find such virtues in great men, and how much
they are extolled by historians and biographers of princes, and
by those who trace their proper course of conduct. ‘Amongst
these, Xenophon takes great pains to show how many victories,
how much honor and fame, Cyrus gained by his humanity and
affability, and by his not having exhibited a single instance of
pride, cruelty, or luxuriousness, nor of any other of the vices
that are apt to stain the lives of men. And yet we see that
Hannibal, by following the very opposite course, achieved also
ereat fame and great victories; it seems to me well, therefore,
to discuss the causes of this in the following chapter.

CHAPTER XXI.

WHY HANNIBAL BY A COURSE OF CONDUCT THE VERY OPPOSITE
OF THAT OF SCIPIO YET ACHIEVED THE SAME SUCCESS IN
ITALY AS THE LATIER DID IN SPAIN.

I rHink it astonishing to see some generals achieve by the
very opposite course of conduct the same results that have been
attained by those who have conformed to the rules we have
recommended above. This would make it seem that victories
do not depend upon one or the other course of conduct, and
that the virtues which we have extolled in the preceding chap-
ter do not render you more happy nor more powerful, inasmuch
as both glory and reputation are often acquired by the very
opposite means. Let us return to the case of the two above-
named generals for the purpose of better illustrating my idea.
Scipio, from the moment he entered Spain, gained the affection
and respect of the people of that province by his humanity and
benevolence. Hannibal, on the contrary, conducted himself in
Italy with violence, cruelty, rapine, and every kind of perfidy.

Cuap. XXI.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS: LIVivs. 379

Yet he obtained the same success that Scipio had in Spain.
For nearly all the cities of Italy, and entire populations, revolted
in his favor. In seeking for the causes of this difference, we
find several. The first is the love of novelty, which manifests
itself equally in those who are well off and in those who are
not. For, as we have said elsewhere, and with truth, men get
tired of prosperity, just as they are afflicted by the reverse.
This love of change, then, so to speak, opens the way to every
one who takes the lead in any innovation in any country. If
he is a stranger they run after him, and if he is of the country
they surround him, increase his influence, and favor him in
every way; so that, whatever his mode of proceeding and con-
duct may be, he will succeed in making rapid progress. In the
second place, men are prompted in their actions by two main
motives, namely, love and fear; so that he who makes himself
beloved will have as much influence as he who makes himself
feared, although generally he who makes himself feared will
be more readily followed and obeyed than he who makes him-
self beloved. It matters little, therefore, to any general by
which of these two systems he proceeds, provided he be a man
of sufficient courage and ability to have made a great reputa-
tion for himself. For when this is as great as was the case
with Hannibal and Scipio, it cancels all the errors which a gen-
eral may commit, either by an excess of gentleness or by too
ereat severity. Either of these extremes may be productive of
ereat evils, that will be apt to prove ruinous to a prince; for
he who carries too far the desire to make himself beloved will
soon become contemned, if he deviates in the shghtest degree
from the true path; and the other, who aims at making himself
feared, will make himself hated, if he goes in the least degree
too far; and our nature does not permit us always to keep
the just middle course. Either extreme, therefore, must be
compensated for by some extraordinary merits, such as those
of Hannibal and Scipio; and yet we see how the conduct of
both of these brought them disgrace as well as the highest
success.

Of their successes we have already spoken; let us look now
at the misfortunes which they experienced. That of Scipio oc-
curred when his soldiers combined with some of his allies and
revolted, for which there was no other cause than that they did
not fear him. For men are so restless that the slightest open-

380 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Boox III.

ing for their ambition causes them quickly to forget all the
affection for him with which the humanity of the prince had
inspired them. This was the case with the soldiers and allies
of Scipio; so that to arrest the evil he was obliged to adopt
measures of the extremest severity, which until then he had so
carefully avoided. As to Hannibal, there is no particular in-
stance where his cruelty and perfidy caused him any immediate
injury; but we may well presume that Naples and many other
cities remained faithful to Rome solely from fear of Hanni-
bal’s cruelty. This much is certain, that his ferocity made him
more hated by the Roman people than any other enemy which
that republic ever had. So that whilst they informed Pyrrhus,
even whilst he was still in Italy with his army, of the offer
made to them by his physician to poison him, yet they never
forgave Hannibal; and, though disarmed and a fugitive, they
pursued him so relentlessly that he killed himself to avoid fall-
ing into their hands. But if the impiousness, perfidy, and
cruelty of Hannibal had such disastrous consequences for him
in the end, he had on the other hand a very great advantage
from it, and which has excited the admiration of all the histo-
rians; namely, that in his army, although composed of men of
so many different nations, there never occurred any dissensions
amonest themselves, or any sedition against him. This could
only be ascribed to the terror which he personally inspired, and
which was so great that, combined with his high reputation for
courage and ability, it kept his soldiers quiet and united.

I conclude, then, that it matters little whether a general
adopts the one or the other course, provided he be possessed of
such high ability as to enable him to achieve success by either
line of conduct; for, as has been said, both have their defects
and their dangers, unless compensated for by extraordinary
talent and courage. Having shown that Scipio and Hannibal,
the one by most praiseworthy and the other by most detestable
conduct, attained the same results, I think I ought not to omit
speaking also of two other Roman citizens who acquired equal

glory by different methods, though both most praiseworthy.

Cue, XXL] TEN. BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 381

CHAPTER XXII.

HOW MANLIUS TORQUATUS BY HARSHNESS, AND VALERIUS COR-
VINUS BY GENTLENESS, ACQUIRED EQUAL GLORY.

THERE were in Rome at the same time two distinguished
generals, Manlius Torquatus and Valerius Corvinus. Equals
in bravery, triumphs, and reputation, they achieved these ad-
vantages, so far as the enemy was concerned, by the same
merits and conduct; but as regards their armies, and the
treatment of their men, their manner differed widely. Man-
lius commanded with the utmost severity, and subjected his
soldiers without intermission to great labor and fatigue. Vale-
rius, on the other hand, treated his soldiers with the highest
degree of humanity and affability. Thus the one, by way of
securing the obedience of his troops, had his own son put to
death, whilst the other never injured any one. Nevertheless,
with such difference of manner, both obtained the same success
against the enemy and in favor of the republic, as well as in
their own interests. For no soldier ever resisted their orders
to fight, or ever rebelled against them, or in the slightest way
opposed their will; although Manlius commanded with such
harshness, that the Romans gave the name of “ Manlian de-
crees’’ to all such as exceeded the ordinary severity. We
have to examine now, first, whence it came that Manlius
deemed it necessary to be so rigid, whilst Valerius was so hn-
mane ; and, next, how it was that both these opposite methods
produced the same effect; and, finally, which of the two it is
best and most advantageous to imitate.

If we carefully consider the character of Manlius from the
time that Titus Livius first begins to mention him, we shall
find that he was a man of exceeding courage, devoted to his
father and to his country, and most respectful to his superiors.
These things we know from his defence of his father against
a Tribune ; from his single combat with a Gaul, whom he slew ;
and from the words which he addressed to the Consul before
engaging in that combat: “I will never fight against the enemy
“without your orders, not even if I were perfectly certain of
“victory.” When aman of this character comes to command,
he desires to have all men like himself; his vigorous character

382 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book III.

is reproduced in his orders; and these once given, he will re-
quire their strict observance. For it is a certain rule, that he
who gives severe orders must see them executed with severity,
otherwise he will find himself deceived. And here we may
note that he who wishes to be obeyed must know how to com-
mand; and those give proof of knowing this who properly
estimate their own strength with reference to that of those
who have to obey, and who commands only when he finds
them to bear a proper proportion to each other, and who ab-
stains from commanding when that proportion is wanting.
And therefore it was said by a wise man, that to hold the
government of a republic by violence, it was necessary that
there should be a proper proportion between him who holds
by force and those whom he thus subjects to his control.
And whenever that just proportion exists, he may expect his
tenure of power to be enduring. But when the oppressed is
more powerful than the oppressor, then the latter will daily
have occasion to fear his overthrow.

But to return to our subject, I say that to give vigorous or-
ders requires a vigorous mind; and he who has that strength
of mind, and commands, cannot enforce the execution of his
orders by gentle means. And he who lacks such vigor of mind
must be careful not to order anything extraordinary; but in
ordinary matters he may act with his natural gentleness, for
ordinary punishments are not imputed to the prince, but to the
laws and to the necessity of preserving order. We must believe
then that Manlius was constrained to the exercise of so much
rigor by the excessive severity of his orders, to which he was
impelled by his natural character. Such severity is useful in
a republic, because it brings her back to her first principles,
and to her ancient virtue. A republic would be perpetual
that has the good fortune often to find men who by their ex-
ample restore the laws to their original purity and force, (as
we have said elsewhere,) and not only prevent her from fall-
ing into decadence, but rather carry her in the opposite direc-
tion. Thus Manlius was one of those who by the strictness
of his commands kept up the military discipline in Rome;
constrained to this, first by his natural character, and next by
the desire for the strict observance of those orders which his
innate temperament had caused him to issue. Valerius, on
the other hand, was able to act according to his naturally

Cuar. XXII] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 383

gentle and humane character, for he asked nothing more of his
troops than a compliance with those duties to which the Ro-
man armies were accustomed. The enforcement of this disci-
pline, being wisely regulated, and not being made onerous to
the soldiers, sufficed to make him honored; so that Valerius
had no occasion to punish, as there were none that trans-
gressed this discipline; and if perchance there had been any,
they would have imputed their punishment (as has been said)
to the established regulations, and not to the cruelty of their
chief. Valerius was thus enabled to indulge the promptings
of his natural humanity, by which he secured the contentment
and good will of his soldiers. Thus these two generals, being
equally obeyed, achieved the same results by two entirely dif-
ferent methods. Those who attempt to imitate them expose
themselves to contempt and hatred, which can only be avoided
by the possession of extraordinary merits, as I have said when
speaking of Hannibal and Scipio.

It remains for us now to examine which of these two meth-
ods is the best, and this I believe to be a debatable question,
for both have been equally praised by the writers. Neverthe-
less, those who have written on the subject of the proper con-
duct of princes incline more to the method of Valerius than
to that of Manlius; and Xenophon, whom I have already
quoted, in relating several instances of the humanity of Cy-
rus, speaks of him very much as Titus Livius does of Vale-
rius. When this distinguished Roman was named Consul and
marched against the Samnites, he addressed his soldiers on the
eve of battle in the same spirit of humanity that characterized
all his acts. After reporting his address, Titus Livius says:
‘No other general was ever more familiar with his soldiers ;
“he cheerfully shared all the fatigues with the lowest of his
“men. In the various military games, such as contests of
“strength or speed, he never objected to measuring himself with
“the first that offered; and whether victorious or defeated, he
“ever preserved the same countenance and the same affabil-
“ity. In his actions he was ever courteous and benign, and in
“speech, ever as mindful of the liberty of others as of his own
“dignity. In the exercise of the magistratures he was the
“same as when a solicitant for them, which best characterizes
“the true friend of popular government.” Titus Livius speaks
no less honorably of Manlius, and shows that his severity in

384 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

having his own son put to death rendered the army so obedi-
ent to him, that it enabled him to achieve the victory over the
Latians; and he goes on to praise him to that degree, that,
after having related all the particulars of the battle, and the
difficulties and perils which the Roman troops had to en-
counter in the achievement of that victory, he concludes by
attributing it exclusively to the valor of Manlius. And in
comparing the forces of the Roman armies, he affirms again
that the victory had been assured by that portion which was
commanded by Manlius. Thus, in examining all that writers
have said upon the subject of our discourse, it is difficult to
arrive at a precise judgment. Nevertheless, so as not to leave
the matter undecided, I say that the conduct of Manlius is
more praiseworthy and less perilous for a citizen who lives
under the laws of a republic; inasmuch as it operates entirely
for the benefit of the state, and can never favor private ambi-
tion. For by such conduct a man can never create any parti-
sans for himself; severe towards everybody, aud devoted only
to the public good, a commander by such means will never
gain any particular friends, such as we have called partisans.
Thus this course of conduct can only be of the greatest benefit
and value in a republic, as it looks only to the public good, and
is in no way open to the suspicion of individual usurpation. But
with the system of Valerius, quite the contrary is the case; for
although it produces the same effects so far as the public ser-
vice is concerned, yet it is calculated to inspire doubts and
mistrust, on account of the special devotion of the soldiers to
their chief to which it will give rise, and which might be pro-
ductive of bad effects against the public liberty, in case of his
being continued in command for any length of time. And if
no such evil results were caused by the humane conduct of
Valerius Publicola, it must be attributed to the fact, that the
minds of the Romans were not yet corrupt, and that he did
not remain in continuous command for any great length of
time.

But if the question were with regard to a prince, as Xen-
ophon treats it, then we should in all respects take Valerius
for a model, and not Manlius; for a prince should aim at hay-
ing the obedience and affection of his soldiers, as well as of
his subjects. His strict observance of the laws will insure him
obedience and the reputation of being virtuous; and his affa-

Cuap. XXIT.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVICS. 385

bility, humanity, and benevolence, and the other good qualities
of Valerius, and of those which Xenophon praise in Cyrus,
will make him beloved. For the affections of the people for a
prince, and the devotion to him of the army, accord perfectly
well with all the other interests of the state. But in a repub-
lic, the exclusive devotion of the army to its chief does not
accord with the other institutions, which oblige him to observe
the laws and obey the civil magistrates. We read in the an-
cient history of the Venetian republic, that, on one occasion
when their galleys returned to the city, a quarrel occurred
between the sailors and the people, which increased to a tu-
mult and a resort to arms. Neither the public force, nor the
respect for the principal citizens, nor the fear of the magis-
trates, could quell this disturbance; but the sudden appearance
of a gentleman who the year before had commanded these
mariners, and had won their affection, caused them to desist
from the fight and to depart. The prompt submission of the
sailors to this gentleman excited the suspicions of the Senate
to that degree, that they deemed it well to assure themselves
of him by imprisonment and death.

I conclude, then, that the character and conduct of Valerius
is advantageous in a prince, but pernicious in a citizen, not
only as regards his country, but also in regard to himself;
pernicious for the state, because they prepare the way for a
tyranny; and for himself, because in rendering him suspect
to his fellow-citizens, it constrains them to take precautions
against him that will prove detrimental to him. And, on the
other hand, I affirm that the severity of Manlius is dangerous
to the interests of a prince, but favorable to a citizen, and
above all to the country. And it seldom turns to his preju-
dice, unless the hatred which it excites should be embittered
by the suspicions which his great reputation and other virtues
may inspire; as we will show when speaking of Camillus in
the next chapter.

VOL. 1. 95

386 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book IIT.

CHAPTER XXIII.
THE REASONS WHY CAMILLUS WAS BANISHED FROM ROME.

WE have shown above that a character like that of Valerius
is apt to prove injurious to his country and himself, and that one
like Manlius benefits his country, but at times also injures him-
self. This is clearly shown by the example of Camillus, who in
his conduct resembled Manlius rather than Valerius. And
therefore Titus Livius in speaking of him says, “ The soldiers
“hated him, but admired his virtues.” His vigilance, prudence,
magnanimity, and the good discipline and order which he ob-
served in all his expeditions and in the command of his army,
excited the admiration of his troops; whilst their hatred re-
sulted from his being more severe in his punishments than gen-
erous in his rewards. Titus Livius gives the following as the
causes of the dislike of Camillus by his soldiers. First, he
did not divide with the other spoils the money resulting from
the sale of the property of the Veientes, but turned it over to
the public treasury. Secondly, on the occasion of his trium-
phal entry into Rome he had his triumphal car drawn by four
white horses, which caused his men to say that his pride was
so great that he wished to rival the Sun. And the third was,
that he had made a vow to consecrate to Apollo the tenth part
of all the booty taken from the Veientes; and to enable him to
fulfil this sacred pledge he was obliged to make the soldiers
surrender a portion of what they had already appropriated to
themselves.

This example shows the causes that most easily render a
prince odious to his people, the principal one of which is to
deprive them of anything that is advantageous and useful to
them; this they never forget, and the least occasion reminds
them of it; and as these occur almost daily, their resentment is
also daily revived. Another cause is to show yourself proud
and presumptuous ; this is most hateful to the people, especially
to such as live under a free government; and although this
pomp and pride may in no way inconvenience them, yet it ren-
ders those who indulge in it most odious. Princes, therefore,
should carefully avoid this rock; for to incur hatred without
any advantage is the greatest temerity and imprudence.

Cusp XXIV] TEN BOOKS OF TITUs LIViICs. O87

CHAPTER XXIV.

THE PROLONGATION OF MILITARY COMMANDS CAUSED ROME
THE LOSS OF HER LIBERTY.

Ir we study carefully the conduct of the Roman republic, we
. discover two causes of her decadence; the one was the dissen-
sions consequent upon the agrarian laws, and the other the
prolongation of her military commands. If these matters had
been better understood in the beginning, and proper remedies
applied, the liberties of Rome would have endured longer, and
she would probably have enjoyed greater tranquillity. And
although the prolongation of these powers does not seem to
have engendered any actual disturbances, yet the facts show
how injurious the authority which citizens acquired thereby
proved to civil liberty. But these inconveniences might have
been avoided if those other citizens to whom the prolongation of
the magistracies were conceded had been as wise and as virtu-
ous as L. Quintius. His good qualities were indeed a notable
example; for when an agreement had been concluded between
the people and the Senate, and the military powers of the Trib-
unes had been extended by the people for one year in the belief
that they would be able to restrain the ambition of the nobles,
the Senate, from a spirit of rivalry and a desire not to appear
less powerful than the people, wanted also to extend the term
of the consulate of L. Quintius. But he absolutely opposed this
determination, saying that they should strive rather to destroy
the evil examples, than to add to their number by others and
worse ones; and he demanded the creation of new Consuls. If
the citizens of Rome generally had shared the virtue and pru-
dence of L. Quintius, they would never have permitted the prac-
tice of the prolongation of the magistracies, which custom led
to the prolongation of the military commands, which in time
proved the ruin of this republic.

The first to whom such prolongation of a military command
was granted was P. Philo, who was engaged in the siege of
Palepolis at the time when his consulate was about to expire.
The Senate, believing that he would soon accomplish the cap-
ture of that city, instead of sending him a successor named
him Proconsul; and thus he was the first who held that office.

388 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

Although the Senate had been actuated in this matter only by
considerations of public utility, yet it was this example which in
time caused Rome the loss of her liberty. For the farther the
Roman armies went from Rome, the more necessary did such
prolongation of the military commands seem to the Senate, and
the more frequently did they practise it. Two evils resulted
from this: the first, that a less number of men became expe-
rienced in the command of armies, and therefore distinguished
reputation was confined to a few; and the other, that, by the
general remaining a long while in command of an army, the
soldiers became so attached to him personally that they made
themselves his partisans, and, forgetful of the Senate, recog-
nized no chief or authority but him. It was thus that Sylla
and Marius were enabled to find soldiers willing to follow their
lead even against the republic itself. And it was by this means
that Caesar was enabled to make himself absolute master of his
country. Thus, if Rome had not prolonged the magistracies
and the military commands, she might not so soon have at-
tained the zenith of her power; but if she had been slower in
her conquests, she would have also preserved her liberties the
longer.

CHAPTER XXYV.

OF THE POVERTY OF CINCINNATUS, AND THAT OF MANY OTHER
ROMAN CITIZENS.

WE have argued elsewhere that it is of the greatest advantage
in a republic to have laws that keep her citizens poor. Although
there does not appear to have been any special law to this effect
in Rome, (the agrarian law having met with the greatest oppo-
sition,) yet experience shows that even so late as four hundred
years after its foundation there was still great poverty in Rome.
We cannot ascribe this fact to any other cause than that poverty
never was allowed to stand in the way of the achievement of
any rank or honor, and that virtue and merit were sought for
under whatever roof they dwelt; it was this system that made
riches naturally less desirable. We have a manifest proof of
this on the occasion when the Consul Minutius and his army
were surrounded by the Equeans, and all Rome was full of ap-

Coir, 24V.)> LEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUs, 389

prehensions lest the army should be lost, so that they resorted
to the creation of a Dictator, their last remedy in times of diffi-
culty. They appointed L. Quintius Cincinnatus, who at the time
was on his little farm, which he cultivated with his own hands.
This circumstance is celebrated by Titus Livius in the following
golden words: “ After this let men not listen to those who pre-
“fer riches to everything else in this world, and who think that
‘there is neither honor nor virtue where wealth does not flow.”
Cincinnatus was engaged in ploughing his fields, which did not
exceed four acres, when the messengers of the Senate arrived
from Rome to announce his election to the dictatorship, and to
point out to him the imminent danger of the Roman republic.
He immediately put on his toga, gathered an army, and went to
the relief of Minutius; and having crushed and despoiled the
enemy, and freed the Consul and his army, he would not permit
them to share the spoils, saying, “I will not allow you to par-
“ ticipate in the spoils of those to whom you came so near falling
“a prey.” He deprived Minutius of the consulate, and reduced
him to the rank of lieutenant, saying to him, “ You will re-
“main in this grade until you have learned to be Consul.”
Cincinnatus had chosen for his master of cavalry L. Tarquin-
ius whose poverty had obliged him to fight on foot. Let us note
here how Rome honored poverty, (as has been said,) and how
four acres of land sufficed for the support of so good and great
a citizen as Cincinnatus. We find also that poverty was still
honored in the times of Marcus Regulus, who when command-
ing an army in Africa asked permission of the Roman Senate
to return to look after his farm, which was being spoiled by the
laborers in whose charge it had been left by him. These instan-
ces suggest two reflections: the one, that these eminent citizens
were content to remain in such poverty, and that they were sat-
isfied merely to win honor by their military achievements, and
to leave all the profits of them to the public treasury ; for if
they had thought of enriching themselves by their wars, they
would have cared little whether their fields were being spoiled
or not; and the other, as to the magnanimity of these citizens,
who, when placed at the head of an army, rose above all princes
solely by the grandeur of their souls. They regarded neither
kings nor republics; nothing astonished and nothing inspired
them with fear. Having returned to private life, they were
frugal, humble, and devoted to the care of their little proper-

390 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST © [Boox III.

ties, obedient to the magistrates, and respectful to their supe-
riors, so that it seems almost impossible that the same mind
should be able to bear such great changes. This state of things
continued at the time of Paulus milius, and these were the last
bright days of the republic, when a citizen who had enriched
Rome by his triumphs yet remained himself poor. And so much
was this poverty still esteemed at that time, that Paulus, by way
of rewarding some one who had distinguished himself in war,
presented his son-in-law with a silver cup, which was the first
piece of this metal that had ever come into his house.

I might demonstrate here at length that poverty produces
better fruits than riches,—that the first has conferred honor
upon cities, countries, and religions, whilst the latter have
only served to ruin them,—were it not that this subject
has been so often illustrated by other writers.

CHAPTER AAV.
HOW STATES ARE RUINED ON ACCOUNT OF WOMEN.

A DIFFERENCE arose in the city of Ardea between the patri-
cians and plebeians, on account of a rich heiress, who had been
demanded in marriage by a plebeian and a noble at the same
time. The young woman, having lost her father, her guardians
wanted to give her to the plebeian, but the mother preferred the
noble. This gave rise to such disturbances that they actually
came to arms; the entire nobility armed in support of the
young noble, and all the people in favor of the plebeian. The
latter, having been overcome, left Ardea, and sent to the Vol-
scians for assistance, whilst the nobles applied to Rome. The
Volscians, having arrived first, surrounded and besieged Ardea.
When the Romans came, they shut in the Volscians between
their army and the walls of the town, and pressed them so hard
that, constrained by want of provisions, the Volscians were
obliged to surrender at discretion. When the Romans entered
the city, they put to death all the chiefs of the sedition, and
re-established order. This occurrence suggests several points
for reflection; first, we see that women have been the cause
of great dissensions and much ruin to states, and have caused

Cuar. XXVIL] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 891

great damage to those who govern them. We have seen, in
the history of Rome, that the outrage committed upon Lnu-
cretia deprived the Tarquins of their throne, and the attempt
upon Virginia caused the Decemvirs the loss of their authority.
Thus, Aristotle mentions as one of the first causes of the ruin
of tyrants the outrages committed by them upon the wives and
daughters of others, either by violence or seduction ; and we
have discussed this subject at length when treating of conspira-
cies. I say, therefore, that absolute princes and rulers of re-
publics should not be indifferent to this subject, but should well
reflect upon the disorders that may arise from such causes, and
should see that proper remedies be applied in time, ere they
involve their state or republic in loss and shame. This hap-
pened to the people of Ardea, who, after having permitted the
quarrel amongst their citizens (which we have mentioned above)
to grow to that degree that it led to civil war, were obliged
afterwards, by way of restoring union, to ask the intervention
of strangers, which is a great step to a loss of independence.
But let us come to another subject for reflection, namely, the
means of restoring union and harmony to a city, of which we
shall treat in the following chapter.

CHAPTER XXVII.

OF THE MEANS FOR RESTORING UNION IN A CITY, AND OF THE
COMMON ERROR WHICH SUPPOSES THAT A CITY MUST BE KEPT
DIVIDED FOR THE PURPOSE OF PRESERVING AUTHORITY.

WE observe, from the example of the Roman Consuls in
restoring harmony between the patricians and plebeians of
Ardea, the means for obtaining that object, which is none other
than to kill the chiefs of the opposing factions. In fact, there
are only three ways of accomplishing it; the one is to put the
leaders to death, as the Romans did, or to banish them from
the city, or to reconcile them to each other under a pledge not
to offend again. Of these three ways, the last is the worst,
being the least certain and effective; for it is impossible that,
after dissensions that have caused so much bloodshed and other
outrages, a foreed peace should be enduring. The parties meet-

392 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

ing each other daily face to face will with difficulty abstain from
mutual insults, and in their daily intercourse fresh causes for
quarrel will constantly occur.

The city of Pistoja furnishes a most striking example in
point. Fifteen years ago that city was divided into two fac-
tions, the Panciatichi and the Cancellieri, and this division con-
tinues to the present day; but then they were in arms, whilst
now they have laid them down. After many disputes, they had
come to bloodshed, to the pulling down of houses, plundering
each other’s property, and every other kind of hostilities; and
the Florentines, upon whom it devolved to restore order in that
city, always employed for that purpose the third means, namely,
conciliation, which, however, invariably led to greater troubles
and disorders. So that, tired of this method, they resorted to
the second; that is, they removed the chiefs of the factions by
imprisoning some and exiling others to various places; and
thus they succeeded in restoring order in a manner that could
and does endure to this day. Doubtless, however, the first
means (that of putting the chiefs of the factions to death)
would have been the most effectual, but would have required a
power and courage not to be expected from a feeble republic
like Florence, which could with difficulty employ even the sec-
ond method.

These, as I have said in the beginning, are some of the er-
rors which the princes of our day are apt to commit. When
they are called upon on great occasions to take decided meas-
ures, they ought to examine the conduct of the ancients on
similar occasions. But the weakness of the princes of the
present day, caused by an effeminate education and want of in-
struction, makes them regard the maxims of the ancients as
inhuman, or impossible of application. And certainly mod-
ern opinions are very far from the truth when they maintain,
as some wise men of our city did not long since, that “ Pistoja
‘must be controlled by means of factions, and Pisa by means
‘of fortresses.” They do not see that both of these means
would have been equally useless. I will say nothing here of
fortresses, having discussed that subject at length in a former
chapter; but I will show how nothing is to be gained by at-
tempting to control cities by means of keeping alive factions.
For it is impossible either for prince or republic to preserve
an equal influence over both the old factions, it being in the

Cuar. XXVII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 598

nature of man in all differences of opinion to prefer either the
one side or the other. Thus, one of the parties being malcontent,
you will lose the city on the occasion of the first war, it being
impossible to hold it against enemies from without and within.
If the government of the city is a republic, then there is no .
surer way of corrupting the citizens, and to divide the city
against itself, than to foment the spirit of faction that may pre-
vail there ; for each party will strive by every means of corrup-
tion to secure friends and supporters, which gives rise to two
most serious evils: first, that a government which changes
often, according to the caprice of the one or the other faction,
can never be good, and consequently never can secure to itself
the good will and attachment of its citizens; and, secondly, that
such favoring of factions keeps the republic of necessity divided.
The historian Biondo attests the truth of this when he says,
in speaking of the Florentines and Pistojans: “The Floren-
“tines, whilst endeavoring to restore harmony in Pistoja, be-
“came divided amongst themselves.” The evils resulting from
such a division are manifest. In the year 1501, Florence lost
Arezzo, the Val di Tevere, and the Val di Chiana, which were
taken from her by the Vitelli and the Duke Valentino. The
king of France sent a Seigneur de Lant to cause a restitution
to the Florentines of all the places they had lost. The Seigneur
de Lant, finding in all the castles only men claiming to belong
to the party of Marzocco,* censured this division most severely,
saying that, if in France any one of the subjects were to call
himself of the-king’s party, he would immediately be punished,
because such a remark could have no other meaning than that
there were people in the country who were opposed to the king,
who wanted the whole realm to be his friends, and that it
should be united and without parties. But all these diversities
of opinion and modes of governing spring from the weakness of
those who are at the head of governments, and who, lacking
the requisite force and energy to preserve their states, resort
to such expedients; which in times of tranquillity may occa-
sionally be of service, but when trouble and adversity come,
then their fallacy becomes manifest.

* Marzocco was the name familiarly given by the people of Florence to the
marble lion supporting the arms of Florence, at the door of the Palazzo Vecchio.
Thence the party supporting the government of Florence was called the party
of Marzocco. The marble lion is attributed to the chisel of Donatello.

394 DISCOUTSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE ACTIONS OF CITIZENS SHOULD BE WATCHED, FOR OFTEN SUCH
AS SEEM VIRTUOUS CONCEAL THE BEGINNING OF TYRANNY.

Tue city of Rome was afflicted by a famine; and as the pub-
lic magazines were insufficient to supply the deficiency of food,
a citizen named Spurius Melius, who was very rich: for those
times, resolved to lay in a private stock of grain and feed the
people at his own expense. This liberality attracted crowds of
people, and so won him the popular favor that the Senate, fear-
ing the evil consequences that might arise from it, and for the
purpose of putting an end to the evil before it should grow too
great, created, expressly against Spurius, a Dictator, who had
him put to death. This shows that very often actions that seem —
good on the surface, and which cannot reasonably be objected
to, may become oppressive and highly dangerous to a republic,
unless they are corrected betimes. To explain this matter more
fully, I say that a republic that has no distinguished citizens
cannot be well governed; but, on the other hand, it is often the
great in‘ueuce of such distinguished citizens that is the cause
of states being reduced to servitude. And to prevent this the
institutions of the state should be so regulated that the influ-
ence of citizens shall be founded only upon such acts as are of
benefit to the state, and not upon such as are injurious to the
public interests or liberty. And therefore attention must be
given to the means employed by citizens for acquiring such
influence ; and these are twofold, either public or private. The
former are when a citizen gains reputation and influence by
serving the state well with his counsels or his actions. The
way to such honors should be open to every citizen, and suitable
rewards should be established, that will be satisfactory and
honorable to those who merit them. Reputation and influence
gained by such pure and simple means will never prove dan-
gerous to any state. But when they are acquired by private
means, then they become most dangerous and pernicious. These
private ways consist in benefiting this or the other private in-
dividual, by lending them money, marrying their daughters,
sustaining them against the authority of the magistrates, and
bestowing upon them such other favors as to make partisans of

Coir, Xk | @ PEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 395

them. This encourages those who are thus favored to corrupt
the public and to outrage the laws. A well-regulated republic,
therefore, should open the way to public honors to those who
seek reputation by means that are conducive to the public good ;
and close it to those whose aim is the advancement of private
ends.| It was thus that Rome decreed the reward of triumphs
and other honors to such of her citizens as had acted well for
the public good; whilst, on the other hand, she ordered accusa-
tions to be brought against those who under various pretexts
aimed to make themselves powerful for private ends. And
when such accusations did not suffice, in consequence of the
people’s being blinded by a sort of false and illusory advantage,
they created a Dictator, who, armed with regal powers, caused
them to return to the true path of duty from which they had
strayed; as was seen in the punishment of Spurius Melius.
And if one such transgression were allowed to go unpunished,
it might lead to the ruin of the republic, for it would then be
difficult to force back the ambitious to the true path of duty.

CHAPTER XXIX.

THE FAULTS OF THE PEOPLE SPRING FROM THE FAULTS OF THEIR
RULERS.

Ler not princes complain of the faults committed by the
people subjected to their authority, for they result entirely
from their own negligence or bad example. In examining
the people who in our day have been given to brigandage and
other vices of that kind, we see that these arise entirely from
the faults of their rulers, who were guilty of similar abuses.
Before Pope Alexander VI. had crushed the petty tyrants that
ruled the Romagna, that country presented an example of all
the worst crimes. The slightest causes gave rise to murder
and every species of rapine; and this was due exclusively to
the wickedness of the princes, and not to the evil nature of the
people, as alleged by the former. For these princes, being poor,
yet wishing to live in luxury like the rich, were obliged to re-
sort to every variety of robbery. And amongst other dishonest
means which they employed was the making of laws prohibit-

396 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

ing some one thing or another; and immediately after, they
were themselves the first to encourage their non-observance,
leaving such transgressions unpunished until a great number
of persons had been guilty of it, and then suddenly they turned
to prosecute the transgressors; not from any zeal for the law,
but solely from cupidity, in the expectation of obtaining money
for commuting the punishment. These infamous proceedings
caused many evils; the worst of them was that the people be-
came impoverished without being corrected, and that then the
stronger amongst them endeavored to make good their losses
by plundering the weaker. This gave rise to all the evils of
which we have spoken above, and which are chargeable exclu-
sively upon the princes. Titus Livius confirms this assertion
when he relates how the Roman ambassadors, who were charged
with carrying to Delphos a portion of the spoils taken at Veii
and consecrated to Apollo, were captured by the corsairs of Li-
pari in Sicily, and carried on shore. The Prince Timasitheus,
on being informed what gifts these ambassadors were carrying
and their destination, conducted himself like a Roman, although
a native of Lipari. He pointed out to his people how impious
it would be to seize such a gift, and with the general consent
allowed the ambassadors to depart with all their things. Upon
which the historian remarks in the following terms: “ 'Tima-
“ sitheus inspired the multitude with a sentiment of religion,
‘and they always imitate their rulers.” And Lorenzo de’ Med-
ici confirms this idea by saying: “The example of the prince
“is followed by the masses, who keep their eyes always turned
“upon their chief.”

CHAPTER XXX.

A CITIZEN WHO DESIRES TO EMPLOY HIS AUTHORITY IN A REPUB-
LIC FOR SOME PUBLIC GOOD MUST FIRST OF ALL SUPPRESS ALL
FEELING OF ENVY: AND HOW TO ORGANIZE THE DEFENCE OF
A CITY ON THE APPROACH OF AN ENEMY.

Tue Roman Senate, upon learning that new levies of troops
had been made throughout Tuscany for the purpose of attack-
ing Rome, and that the Latins as well as the Hernicians, who

Cam. (3X2 =TEN. BOOKS OF FITUS LIVIUS: 397

until then had been friends of the Romans, had now united
with the Volscians, Rome’s implacable enemies, judged that
this would be a most dangerous war. Camillus, who happened
at the time to be Tribune with consular powers, thought that
they might dispense with the creation of a Dictator, if his
colleagues (the other Tribunes) would yield to him supreme
authority. To this they promptly assented, “ persuaded,” says
Titus Livius, “that the adding to the authority of Camillus
“would not in the least detract from theirs.” Camillus at once
availed of the powers thus conferred upon him, and ordered the
immediate raising of three armies. The first he wanted to com-
mand himself against the Tuscans; of the second he made
Quintus Servilius general, with orders to remain in the envi-
rons of Rome to oppose the Latins and Hernicians in case they
should attempt any movement; and the third he placed under
command of Lucius Quintus, with instructions to guard the
city and defend the gates and the Senate in any event that
might arise. In addition to this he ordered Horatius, one of
his colleagues, to provide arms and provisions and all other
supplies necessary in time of war. He furthermore confided to
Cornelius, another colleague of his, the care of presiding over
the Senate and public assemblies, so that he might propose the
measures which it might be necessary to take from day to day.
Thus were the Tribunes in those days equally disposed to com-
mand or to obey for the well-being of the state. This example
shows us what great services a good and wise man can render
to his country, when his virtues and goodness have silenced
envy, which so often prevents men from being useful by depriv-
ing them of the authority necessary for important occasions.
Envy may be extinguished in two ways: either by some ex-
traordinary and difficult occasion, when every one fears his own
destruction, and therefore lays aside all ambition, and eagerly
obeys any one whom he supposes capable of averting the dan-
ger by his virtues and talents. Such was the case with Camil-
lus, who, having given so many proofs of his eminent merit,
was three times made Dictator; and having always adminis-
tered this high office for the public good and without any sclf-
ish views, other men did not fear his greatness and did not deem
it discreditable to acknowledge their own inferiority to a man
of such distinguished worth and reputation. The observation
of Titus Livius upon this circumstance was therefore very just.

208 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

The other way of destroying envy is, when either violence or a
natural death carries off those of your rivals who on seeing
you acquire such reputation and greatness cannot patiently
bear your being more distinguished than themselves. If men
of this kind live in a corrupt city, where education has not
been able to infuse any spirit of eood into their minds, it is im-
possible that they should be restrained by any chance, but they
would be willing rather to see their country ruined than not to
attain their purpose, or not to satisfy their perverse natures.
To overcome such envy and evil passions there is no other rem-
edy but the death of those who harbor them. And when for-
tune is so propitious to a virtuous man as to deliver him from
such rivals by their natural death, he becomes glorious without
violence, and may then display his virtues to their full extent
without hindrance and without offence to anybody. But when
he has not such good fortune, he must strive nevertheless by
all possible means to overcome this difficulty, and relieve him-
self of such rivals before attempting any enterprise. And who-
ever reads the Bible attentively will find that Moses, for the
purpose of insuring the observance of his laws and institutions,
was obliged to have a great many persons put to death who
opposed his designs under the instigation of no other feelings
than those of envy and jealousy. Brother Girolamo Savonarola
fully understood the necessity of this course, which was recog-
nized also by Pietro Soderini, Gonfalonier of Florence. Savona-
rola, however, could not put it into practice for want of power
and authority; still, he was not remiss in doing all he could,
for his sermons abound with accusations and invectives against
the wise of this world, for it was thus he styled the jealous
opponents of his doctrines. The other, Soderini, believed that
he would be able in time to silence envy by his affability and
good fortune, and by bestowing benefits upon some of his ad-
versaries. Feeling himself young, and being loaded with public
favors on account of his conduct, he hoped to triumph over the
jealousy of his rivals without any violence or public disturb-
ance. But he forgot that in such matters nothing is to be
expected from time, that goodness does not suffice, and that
benefits will not placate envious malignity. So that both these
men came to their ruin, which was caused by their lack of
knowledge or power to crush envy.

Let us now come to the other part of our subject, namely,

Cime XXXL) FEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 399

the orders given by Camillus, inside and outside of the city, for
the safety of Rome. And it is truly with good reason that
historians such as Titus Livius give a more exact and detailed
account of certain events, so that future generations may learn
therefrom how to defend themselves under similar circum-
stances. And here we must remark that there is not a more
ineffectual and hazardous mode of defending a city than to do
it in a disorderly and tumultuous manner. This is shown by
the precaution which Camillus took to raise a third regular
army for the protection of the city, which was then and may
still be regarded by some to have been superfluous, inasmuch
as the people of the city were warlike and used to arms. And
therefore they considered it unnecessary to raise a special army,
as it would have been sufficient to arm the citizens when oc-
casion should require it. But Camillus thought differently,
and every wise person will share his opinion; for he never
would permit a multitude to take to arms without order or dis-
cipline. And according to his example, any one charged with
the defence of a city should avoid, as a dangerous rock, the
arming of a tumultuous multitude; but he should select and
enroll those whom he wants to arm, and teach them whom they
have to obey, the places for assembling, and where to march;
and then he must order those who are not enrolled to remain
at home to protect their houses. Those who adopt this system
in a city that is attacked will easily be able to defend it, whilst
those who act otherwise and disregard the example of Camillus
will surely fail.

CHAPTER XXXI.

GREAT MEN AND POWERFUL REPUBLICS PRESERVE AN EQUAL DIG-
NITY AND COURAGE IN PROSPERITY AND ADVERSITY.

Amonast the admirable sayings and doings related of Camil-
lus by our historian, Titus Livius, for the purpose of showing
how a great man conducts himself, he puts the following words
into his mouth: “ My courage has neither been inflated by the
“dictatorship nor abated by exile.” These words show that a
truly great man is ever the same under all circumstances; and

400 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

if his fortune varies, exalting him at one moment and oppress-
ing him at another, he himself never varies, but always pre-
serves a firm courage, which is so closely interwoven with his
character that every one can readily see that the fickleness of
fortune has no power over him. The conduct of weak men is
very different. Made vain and intoxicated by good fortune,
they attribute their success to merits which they do not possess,
and this makes them odious and insupportable to all around
them. And when they have afterwards to meet a. reverse of
fortune, they quickly fall into the other extreme, and become
abject and vile. Thence it comes that princes of this char-
acter think more of flying in adversity than of defending them-
selves, like men who, having made a bad use of prosperity, are
wholly unprepared for any defence against reverses. These
virtues and vices are met with in republics as well as in indi-
viduals.

Rome and Venice furnish us an example of this. No ill for-
tune ever made the former abject, nor did success ever make
her insolent. This was clearly shown after the defeat which
the Romans experienced at Cann, and after their victory over
Antiochus. For this defeat, although most alarming, being the
third, never discouraged them; but they put new armies into
the field, and refused to violate their constitution by ransoming
their prisoners. Nor did they sue for peace with either Hanni-
bal or Carthage; and repelling all such base suggestions, they
thought only of combating anew, and supplied their want of men
by arming their old men and slaves. When the Carthaginian
Hanno heard this, he pointed out to the Senate of Carthage of
how little importance the defeat of the Romans at Canne really
was. And thus we see that periods of difficulty neither alarmed
nor discouraged the Romans. On the other hand, they were
not made insolent by prosperity ; for when Antiochus, before
engaging in battle with them, in which he was defeated, sent
messengers to Scipio to ask for peace, the latter named the
conditions on which he was willing to grant it; which were, that
Antiochus should retire beyond Syria, and leave the rest of the
country to the control of the Romans. Antiochus declined
these terms, but accepted battle, and was defeated; whereupon
he sent his messengers back to Scipio with orders to accept
the conditions previously offered by him. Scipio added no
further conditions to those which he had named before his vic-

Cusp, XXXL OPEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS, 401

tory, saying: “The Romans do not lose their courage in defeat,
“nor does victory make them overbearing.”

The conduct of the Venetians was exactly the opposite of this;
for in good fortune (which they imagined entirely the result of
a skill and valor which they did not possess) they carried their
insolence to that degree that they called the king of France a
son of St. Mark. They had no respect for the Church, nor for
any other power in all Italy ; and had the presumption to think
of creating another empire similar to that of the Romans.
Afterwards, when their good fortune abandoned them, and
they suffered a partial defeat at Vaila at the hands of the king
of France, they not only lost the greater part of their state by
a rebellion, but, under the influence of their cowardly and
abject spirit, they actually made large concessions of territory
to the Pope and the king of Spain, and were so utterly demor-
alized that they sent ambassadors to the Emperor, and made
themselves tributary to him; and by way of moving the Pope
to compassion, they addressed him the most humiliating letters
of submission. And to this wretchedness were they reduced
within the short space of four days, and after a but partial
defeat. Their army, after having sustained a fight, retreat-
ed; about the half of it was attacked and beaten; but one of
their Proveditori saved himself, and reached Verona with over
twenty thousand men, horse and foot. If there had been but
one spark of true valor in the Venetians, they could easily have
recovered from this check, and faced Fortune anew; for they
would still have been in time either to have conquered, or to
have lost less ignominiously, or to have concluded a more hon-
orable peace. But their miserable baseness of spirit, caused by
a wretched military organization, made them lose at a single
blow their courage and their state. And thus it will ever
happen to those who are governed in the same way that the
Venetians were ; for insolence in prosperity and abjectness in
adversity are the result of habit and education. If this be vain
and feeble, then their conduct will likewise be without energy.
But if the education be of an opposite nature, then it will pro-
duce men of a different character; it will enable them to know
the world better, and will teach them to be less elated in good
fortune, and less depressed by adversity. And what we say of
individuals applies equally to the many who constitute a repub-
lic, and who will form themselves according to the manners and

institutions that prevail there.
VOU If, 26

402 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

Although I have elsewhere maintained that the foundation
of states is a good military organization, yet it seems to me
not superfluous to repeat here that, without such a military
organization, there can neither be good laws nor anything else
good. The necessity of this appears on every page of Roman
history. We also see that troops cannot be good unless they
are well disciplined and trained, and this cannot be done with
any troops other than natives of the country; for a state is
not and cannot be always engaged in war, therefore troops
must be trained and disciplined in time of peace, and this can
only be done with subjects of the state, on account of the ex-
pense. Camillus had taken the field with his army against the
Tuscans, as has been related above; and when his soldiers
beheld the extent of the enemy’s army, they were alarmed by
their own inferiority in numbers, believing that they would not
be able to resist the enemy’s onset. When this apprehension
of the troops came to the ears of Camillus, he. showed himself
to his army, and, going through the camp, he spoke personally
to the men here and there; and then, without making any
change in the disposition of his forces, he said, “ Let every
‘man do what he has learned, and is accustomed to do.” In
reflecting upon the conduct and words of Camillus to reanimate
his troops, we cannot but conclude that he would not have
acted and spoken thus to his troops unless they had been dis-
ciplined and trained in time of peace as well as in war. For a
commander cannot depend upon untrained soldiers who have
learned nothing, nor can he expect them to do anything well.
And if a second Hannibal were to command such troops, he
would nevertheless be ruined, for a general cannot be every-
where during a battle. If he have not beforehand filled his
soldiers with the same spirit that animates himself, and if he
have not trained them promptly and precisely to obey his orders,
he will inevitably be beaten. Now, any republic that adopts the
military organization and discipline of the Romans, and strives
by constant training to give her soldiers experience and to
develop their courage and mastery over fortune, will always
and under all circumstances find them to display a courage and
dignity similar to that of the Romans. But a republic unpro-
vided with such military force, and which relies more upon the
chances of fortune than upon the valor of her citizens, will
experience all the vicissitudes of fortune, and will have the
same fate as the Venetians. :

Cuap. XXXII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 403

CHAPTER XXXII.
OF THE MEANS ADOPTED BY SOME TO PREVENT A PEACE.

Two of the Roman colonies, Circea and Velitre had revolted,
hoping to be sustained by the Latins; but the defeat of these
deprived them of that hope, and therefore a number of their
citizens advised the sending of deputies to Rome to sue for peace
and offer their submission to the Senate. The authors of the
rebellion objected to this, fearing that all the punishment would
fall upon their heads; and to put an end to all further discus-
sions about peace they stirred up the multitude to take up arms
and make incursions into the Roman territory. And certainly,
if any one desires a people or a prince to abandon all idea of a
peaceful settlement with another, then there is no more certain
and effectual way than to make them commit some outrageous
act against those with whom you wish to prevent them from
making peace. For the fear of punishment which they are con-
scious of having deserved by that outrage will ever keep them
from coming to terms. After the first Punic war the soldiers
whom the Carthaginians had employed in Sicily and Sardinia re-
turned to Africa when peace was concluded. Being dissatisfied
with their pay, they rose against the Carthaginians, and having
chosen two chiefs from amongst themselves, Mathus and Spen-
dius, they seized a number of places belonging to the Carthagin-
ians and sacked several of them. The Carthaginians, anxious
to exhaust all other means for reducing these revolted troops
to submission before coming to arms, sent their former com-
mander, Asdrubal, to them, supposing him on that account to
have some influence with them. Upon his arrival, Mathus and
Spendius, for the purpose of destroying all hopes of reconcilia-
tion and to make war inevitable, persuaded the soldiers to kill
Asdrubal, together with all the other Carthaginian citizens whom
they held prisoners. Whereupon they not only massacred them,
but first subjected them to every kind of torment, and then
crowned this villany by proclaiming that all the Carthaginians
who might thereafter fall into their hands would be subjected
to a similar death. This resolve, which they carried into execu-
tion, made the contest of these rebels with the Carthaginians
most crucl and obstinate.

404 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST {Book III.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

TO INSURE VICTORY THE TROOPS MUST HAVE CONFIDENCE IN
THEMSELVES AS WELL AS IN THEIR COMMANDER.

To make an army victorious in battle it is necessary to in-
spire them with confidence, so as to make them believe that the
victory will be theirs under any circumstances. But to give an
army such confidence they must be well armed and disciplined,
and the men must know each other; such confidence and disci-
pline, however, can exist only where the troops are natives of
the same country, and have lived together for some time. It is
necessary also that they should esteem their general, and have
confidence in his ability; and this will not fail to be the case
when they see him orderly, watchful, and courageous, and that
he maintains the dignity of his rank by a proper reputation.
All this he will do by punishing faults, by not fatiguing his
troops unnecessarily, by strictly fulfilling his promises, by show-
ing them that victory is easy, and by concealing or making light
of the dangers which he discerns from afar. These maxims
well observed are the best means of inspiring the troops with
that confidence which is the surest pledge of victory. The
Romans were in the habit of resorting to religion for the pur-
pose of inspiring their armies with confidence; and availed of
auspices and auguries in the creation of their consuls, in the
levying of troops, and before sending their armies into the field
or engaging in battle. Without this no prudent captain would
ever have hazarded an action, fearful of defeat if his soldiers had
not been assured beforehand that they would have the gods on
their side. And any consul or general who would have dared
to combat contrary to the auspices would have been punished,
as was done in the case of Claudius Pulcher. And although we
find evidences of this practice throughout the history of Rome,
yet we have still more conclusive proof of it in the words which
Titus Livius puts into the mouth of Appius Claudius; who,
complaining to the people of the insolence of their Tribunes,
points out how by their means the auguries and other religious
observances had been neglected and corrupted, saying: “ It
‘pleases them now to deride these religious practices, for they
“care not whether the fowls eat, or whether they come slowly

Cuar. XXXIIL.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 405

“out of their cages, or whether a bird sings; these are trifles
“for them; but such small matters are not to be contemned, for
“it was by their strict observance that our ancestors made this
“republic great.” In fact it is little things of this kind that
keep the soldiers united and confident, and these are essential
elements of victory; though without courage they avail nothing.

The Prenestines, having taken the field against the Romans,
took up a position on the river Allia, where the Romans had
been defeated by the Gauls; hoping that the memories of that
locality would inspire their own soldiers with confidence, and
discourage the Romans. Although the probabilities were in
favor of this for the reasons above given, yet the event showed
that true courage is not affected by such trifling incidents.
Our historian expresses this thought extremely well by the
words which he puts into the mouth of the Dictator in speaking
to his master of cavalry: “* You see the enemy, trusting to for-
“tune, has chosen his position on the Allia; do you, trusting to
“the arms and valor of your men, attack the very centre of
“their line of battle.” For real courage, good discipline, and
confidence founded upon so many victories cannot be extin-
guished by matters of such slight moment; nor can a vain idea
inspire men animated by such feelings with fear, or a momen-
tary disorder seriously injure them. This was clearly proven
in the war against the Volscians, where there were two Consuls,
both named Manlius. Having imprudently sent a part of their
army to pillage the country, it happened that those who had
been thus sent and those who remained in camp were both
surrounded by the enemy at the same time; and from this
danger they were delivered by their own valor, and not by the
prudence of the Consuls. Whereupon Titus Livius says, “ The
“army, even without a chief, was saved by its own indomitable
“valor.” I will not omit mentioning here an expedient em-
ployed by Fabius the first time he led his army into Tuscany.
Wishing to inspire them with confidence, which he felt to be the
more necessary as they were in a country entirely new to them
and opposed to an enemy whom they had not met before, he
addressed his troops before going into battle; and after giving
them many reasons for anticipating victory, he said “ that he
“could give them other good reasons that would make their
“victory certain, but that it would be dangerous to reveal them
“at that moment.” This artifice so judiciously employed well
deserves to be imitated.

406 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST (Book III.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

HOW THE REPUTATION OF A CITIZEN AND THE PUBLIC VOICE AND
OPINION SECURE HIM POPULAR FAVOR}; AND WHETHER THE
PEOPLE OR PRINCES SHOW MOST JUDGMENT IN THE CHOICE
OF MAGISTRATES. |

We have related elsewhere how Titus Manlius, subsequently
called Torquatus, saved his father, Lucius Manlius, from an
accusation brought against him by Marcus Pomponius, Tribune
of the people. And although the manner of it was somewhat
violent and extraordinary, yet so far from censuring him for
it, the people were so touched by this display of filial piety
that, when they had to nominate military Tribunes, they ap-
pointed Titus Manlius as one of the two. This result, I think,
should make us reflect upon the manner in which the people
form their judgment of the men to be appointed to public
offices; so that we may see whether our conclusion is correct,
that the people show more wisdom in their selection than
princes. I say, then, that the people are guided in their choice
either by what is said of a man by the public voice and fame,
even if by his open acts he appears different, or by the precon-
ceptions or opinion which they may have formed of him them-
selves. And these are based either upon the character of the
fathers of such men, who were so eminent and influential in
the republic that the people suppose the sons will be like them
unless by their actions they have given proof of the contrary,
or that opinion is founded upon the individual conduct of the
parties in question. The best means of judging of this is to
ascertain whether they choose for their companions men of
known respectability, good habits, and generally well reputed.
For there is no better indication of a man’s character than the
company which he keeps; and therefore very properly a man
who keeps respectable company acquires a good name, for it
is impossible that there should not be some similitude of char-
acter and habits between him and his associates. Or indeed
a man acquires this good reputation by some extraordinary
act, which, although relating to private matters, will still ob-
tain him celebrity if it be honorably performed. And of these
three things that give a man a good reputation, the last is

Cusp. XXXIV.| TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 407

the most influential. For the first, being founded upon the
merits of a man’s father or relations, is so fallacious, that it
makes no lasting impression and is soon effaced altogether,
unless sustained by the individual merits of him who has to
be judged. The second, which makes a man known by the
company he keeps, and by his social conduct, is better than
the first, but inferior to that which is founded upon his indi-
vidual actions; for unless a man has by these given some
proof of himself, his reputation will depend merely upon pub-
lic opinion, which is most unstable. But the third course,
being founded entirely upon a man’s own actions, will from
the start give him such a name that it will require a long
course of opposite conduct to destroy it. Men who are born in
a republic, therefore, should adopt this last course, and strive
to distinguish themselves by some remarkable action.

This is what many of the young men of Rome did, either by
proposing some law that was for the general good, or by pre-
ferring charges against some powerful citizen as a transgressor
of the laws; or by some similar and novel act that would cause
them to be talked about. Such conduct is necessary not only
for the purpose of achieving a name and fame, but also to pre-
serve and increase it. To do this requires a frequent repeti-
tion of similar acts ; as was done by Titus Manlius throughout
the entire course of his life. For after having gained his first
reputation by the gallant and extraordinary manner in which
he defended his father, a few years later he slew a Gaul in
single combat, and took from him that golden chain which
afterwards gave him the name of Torquatus. Nor did this
suffice him, for later, when already of mature age, he killed his
own son for having engaged in fight without orders, although
he had defeated the enemy. These three acts gave to Manlius,
and will give him for all time to come, more celebrity than all
the victories he won and all the triumphs with which he was
honored, and which were not exceeded by any other Roman.
And the reason of this is, that in his victories he had many
rivals, but in these particular acts he had very few or none.
The elder Scipio did not win as much glory by all his triumphs
as by the courageous manner in which he, whilst still a youth,
defended his father on the Ticino, and by his having, after the
defeat at Cann, made a number of young Romans swear upon
his ensanguined sword that they would not leave Italy, as they

408 DISCOURSES (ON THE FIRST [Book IIL

had contemplated doing. These two acts were the beginning
of his glory, and paved the way for his triumphs in Spain and
Africa. He added still greater lustre to his fame by his send-
ing back in Spain a daughter to her father, and a young wife
to her husband. Such conduct is necessary not only for those
citizens who desire to achieve distinction for the purpose of
obtaining honorable employment in their republics, but equally
so for princes to enable them to maintain their dignity and
reputation in their dominions. For nothing so certainly se-
cures to a prince the public esteem as some such remarkable
action or saying dictated by his regard for the public good,
showing him to be magnanimous, liberal, and just, and which
action or saying is of a nature to become familiar as a proverb
amongst his subjects. But to return to our first proposition,
I say that when the people begin to bestow office upon a citi-
zen, influenced thereto by the three above-given reasons, they
act wisely. They do still better, however, when they base their
choice upon a number of good actions known to have been per-
formed by him; for in that case they are never deceived. 1
speak only of such offices and grades as are given to men in
the beginning before they have established their reputation by
confirmed experience, and before they have time to fall into
an opposite course of conduct. Thus the people are always
less liable to the influence of erroneous opinions and corrup-
tion than princes; although it might happen that the people
are deceived by public opinion and the fame and acts of a man,
supposing him to be better than he really is, which would not
happen to a prince, who would be informed of it by his coun-
sellors. Therefore, so that the people might not lack similar
counsel, the wise lawgivers of republics have ordered that, in
the appointment of men to the highest positions, where it
would be dangerous to place inefficient persons, every citizen
should be allowed, and in fact it should be accounted honora-
ble for him, to publish in the assemblies the defects of any one
named for public office; so that the people, fully informed,
might form a more correct judgment. That such was the
established custom at Rome is proved by the speech which
Fabius Maximus made to the people at the time of the second
Punic war. When the Consuls were to be chosen, popular fa-
vor inclined towards T. Otacilius. Fabius deeming him unfit
for that important post in such difficult times, spoke against

Cusp XN | PE BOOKS OF TITUS LIV iIUs. 409

him, and pointed out his insufficiency, so as to prevent the
nomination of Otacilius, and caused the popular choice to
fall upon one more worthy of that dignity. The people then
are influenced in the choice of their magistrates by the best
evidences they can obtain of the qualifications of the candi-
dates, and are less liable to error than princes when equally
counselled. Every citizen, therefore, who desires to win the
favor of the people, should strive to merit it by some notable
action, according to the example of Titus Manlius.

CHAPTER XXXYV.

OF THE DANGER OF BEING PROMINENT IN COUNSELLING ANY
ENTERPRISE, AND HOW THAT DANGER INCREASES WITH THE
IMPORTANCE OF SUCH ENTERPRISE.

Ir is too lengthy and important a matter to attempt here to
discuss the danger of becoming the chief promoter of any new
enterprise that affects the interests of the many, and the diffi-
culties of directing and bringing it to a successful conclusion,
and then to maintain it. Leaving such a discussion, therefore,
till a more convenient occasion, I shall speak here only of those
dangers to which those expose themselves who counsel a repub-
lic or a prince to undertake some grave and important enter-
prise in such a manner as to take upon themselves all the
responsibility of the same. For as men only judge of matters
by the result, all the blame of failure is charged upon him who
first advised it; whilst in case of success he receives com-
mendations, but the reward never equals the punishment. The
present Sultan Selim, called the Grand Turk, having prepared
(according to the report of some who have come from that
country) to make war upon Syria and Egypt, was advised by
one of his Pashas, who was stationed on the borders of Per-
sia, rather to march against the Shah. Influenced by this
advice, the Sultan started upon that enterprise with a very
powerful army. Having arrived in that country, where there
are vast deserts and little water, he experienced all the same
difficulties that had in ancient times caused the loss of several
Roman armies there. These difficulties were so overwhelming,

410 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book III.

that, although always successful against the enemy, yet he saw
a large part of his army destroyed by pestilence and famine.
This so infuriated the Sultan against the Pasha who had ad-
vised this enterprise that he put him to death. History relates
many instances of citizens having been sent into exile for
having counselled enterprises that terminated unsuccessfully.
Some Roman citizens were foremost in urging the selection of
Consuls from amongst the people. It happened that the first
one so chosen was defeated with his army in the field, and the
originators of that system would certainly have been punished
if the party to conciliate which it was adopted had not been
so powerful. Certainly those who counsel princes and repub-
lics are placed between two dangers. If they do not advise
what seems to them for the good of the republic or the prince,
regardless of the consequences to themselves, then they fail of —
their duty; and if they do advise it, then it is at the risk of -
their position and their lives; for all men are blind in this,
that they judge of good or evil counsels only by. the result.

In reflecting as to the means for avoiding this dilemma of
either disgrace or danger, I see no other course than to take
things moderately, and not to undertake to advocate any enter-
prise with too much zeal; but to give one’s advice calmly and
modestly. Jf then either the republic or the prince decides to
follow it, they may do so, as it were, of their own will, and not
as though they were drawn into it by your importunity. In
adopting this course it is not reasonable to suppose that either
prince or republic will manifest any ill will towards you on
account of a resolution not taken contrary to the wishes of
the many. For the danger arises when your advice has caused
the many to be contravened. In that case, when the result is
unfortunate, they all concur in your destruction. And al-
though by following the course which I advise you may fail
to obtain that glory which is acquired by having been one
against many in counselling an enterprise which success has
justified, yet this 1s compensated for by two advantages. The
first is, that you avoid all danger; and the second consists in
the great credit which you will have if, after having modestly
advised a certain course, your counsel is rejected, and the adop-
tion of a different course results unfortunately. And although
you cannot enjoy the glory acquired by the misfortunes of your
republic or your prince, yet it must be held to be of some ac-
count.

CHAP. AAXVI| TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 411

I do not believe that I can give a better advice upon this
point than the above ; for to advise men to be silent and to
withhold the expression of any opinion would render them
useless to a republic, as well as to a prince, without avoiding
danger. For after a while they would become suspect, and
might even experience the same fate as that which befell a
certain friend of King Perseus of Macedon. This king hay-
ing been defeated by Paulus Aimilius, and having fled with a
few adherents, it happened that, in discussing the late events,
one of them began to point out to Perseus the many errors he
had committed, to which he ascribed his ruin. “Traitor,”
exclaimed the king, in turning upon him, ‘“‘you have waited
“until now to tell me all this, when there is no longer any
“time to remedy it” ;—-and with these words he slew him with
his own hands. Thus was this man punished for having been
silent when he should have spoken, and for having spoken
when he should have been silent: his having withheld his
counsel from the king did not save him from danger. I be-
lieve, therefore, that it is best to adopt the course I have
advised above.

CHAPTER. XAXVI,

THE REASON WHY THE GAULS HAVE BEEN AND ARE STILL
LOOKED UPON AT THE BEGINNING OF A COMBAT AS MORE
THAN MEN, AND AFTERWARDS AS LESS THAN WOMEN.

THE audacity of that Gaul who defied to single combat any
Roman of the army on the Arno, and his subsequent combat
with T. Manlius, recalls to my mind the saying of Titus Livius,
“that the Gauls at the beginning of a fight are more than
“men, but in the course of the combat they become less than
“women.” In reflecting upon the causes to which this is at-
tributed, I believe the general opinion to be true, that it is
owing to their natural temperament. But we must not infer
from this that this temperament, which makes them so fero-
cious in the beginning, may not be so disciplined by training
that they will preserve their valor up to the very end of the
fight. And to prove this I maintain that there are three

412 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

different characters of troops. One combines warlike ardor
with discipline: this produces true valor, like that of the Ro-
mans. All history shows that a proper discipline prevailed in
their armies, and had done so for a long time. For in a well-
ordered army no one should do anything except in accordance
with the regulations ; and accordingly we find that the Roman
armies (which having vanquished the world may well serve as
an example to all others) neither ate nor slept, nor performed
any other act, military or civil, unless according to the order
of the Consul. And armies that do not observe such a system
cannot in reality be called armies; and if nevertheless they
sometimes seem to merit the name, it is more by their ardor
and a sort of blind impulse than by their steady valor. But
where that ardor is properly disciplined, it employs its impetu-
osity at the right time and with moderation ; and no difficulties
ean abate or disconcert it. For good order sustains the cour-
age and reanimates that ardor with the hope of victory, which
will never fail if discipline be preserved. The reverse of this
happens to armies that have ardor without discipline: such
was the case with the Gauls, who were wholly wanting in disci-
pline during combat. For if they did not overthrow the enemy
by their first furious onset, upon which they relied for victory,
not being sustained by a well-regulated valor, and having noth-
ing besides their impetuosity to give them confidence, they
failed when that first ardor was cooled. But with the Romans
it was very different; less mindful of danger because of the
good order which they preserved during battle, they felt as-
sured of victory, and continued the fight with firm and obsti-
nate courage, and manifested the same valor at the end as at
the beginning of battle, the heat of the contest rather inflam-
ing their courage than otherwise. The third kind of armies
are such as have neither natural courage nor discipline. Of
this kind are the Italian armies of our time, which are en-
tirely useless. Unless they fall upon an enemy that by some
accident has taken to flight, they are never victorious. With-
out citing any special instances, we have daily proofs of their
total lack of valor. The testimony of Titus Livius shows us
how good armies are formed, and how bad ones are made.
Upon this latter point I will quote the remarks of the Dictator
Papirius Cursor, when he wanted to punish Fabius, his master
of cavalry. ‘Let none,” said he, “fear either men or the gods ;

Car. XXXVI] YEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 413

“let them disregard the orders of the commanders and the
“auspices; let the soldiers, unprovided with anything, roam
“loosely through the country of friend or foe, forgetful of their
“oaths, from which they absolve themselves at will; let them
“desert their colors, disregard the orders for assembling; let
“them fight indiscriminately by day or by night, in favorable
“or unfavorable positions, and with or without the orders of
“their commanders; let them be faithless to their flag and dis-
“regard all discipline,—and then we shall have a confused and
“blind assemblage, more like a vile rabble of brigands than a
“solemn and imposing army.”

This discourse will readily show whether our modern troops
are a blind and chance rabble, or whether they constitute
solemn and imposing armies; and how much they lack from
deserving to be called armies, and how far they are from hay-
ing the impetuous ardor and discipline of the Romans, or even
the mere impetuosity of the Gauls.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

WHETHER SKIRMISHES ARE NECESSARY BEFORE COMING TO A GEN-
ERAL ACTION, AND HOW TO KNOW A NEW ENEMY IF SKIRMISHES
ARE DISPENSED WITH.

Ir seems that in all the actions of men, besides the general
difficulties of carrying them to a successful issue, the good is
accompanied by some special evil, and so closely allied to it
that it would seem impossible to achieve the one without en-
countering the other. This is evident in all human affairs, and
therefore the good is achieved with difficulty, unless we are so
aided by Fortune that she overcomes by her power the natural
and ordinary difficulties.

I am reminded of the truth of this by the combat between
Manlius Torquatus and the Gaul, of which Titus Livius says:
“So decisive was the influence of this action upon the whole
“war, that the army of the Gauls, after having precipitately
“left their camp, retreated behind the Tiber, and thence into
“Campania.” I consider, then, on the one hand, that a good
captain should avoid every unimportant action that may never-

414 DISCOURSES ON THRE FIRST [Book ITI.

theless produce a bad effect upon his army. For he must be
altogether reckless to engage in any action in which he cannot
employ his entire force, and where yet he hazards his whole for-
tune, as [ have already demonstrated elsewhere in condemning
the guarding of passes. On the other hand, I consider that
a prudent general, who has to encounter a new and untried
enemy that has a reputation, should, before engaging in a gen-
eral action, afford his troops the opportunity of testing such an
enemy by slight skirmishes; so that, by learning to-know him
somewhat, and how to meet him, they may be relieved of any
fear which the fame and report of the enemy may have caused
them. I look upon this as a most essential duty of a general ;
in fact, he will feel the necessity of it himself when he sees that
he would be marching to certain defeat, unless by some such
slight experience he first removes the terror which the enemy’s
reputation may have engendered in the hearts of his troops.
When Valerius Corvinus was sent by the Romans against
the Samnites, who were new enemies, with whom his troops
never before had measured themselves, he made them engage
the Samnites first in some slight skirmishes, “lest,” as Titus
Livius says, ‘a new war and a new enemy should cause them
“fear.” Nevertheless, there is great danger lest a defeat in
such slight combats should increase that fear and apprehension
in your soldiers, and thus produce the very opposite effect from
what you designed; for i such event, instead of reassuring
them, they will be discouraged. So that this is one of those
cases where the evil lies so near the good, and is so commingled
with it, that it is easy to encounter the one in thinking to take
the other.

On this subject, then, I say that a skilful commander should
avoid with the utmost care everything that can possibly tend
to discourage his army. And as nothing is so likely to do this
as a check in the beginning, a general should beware of small
combats, and should not permit them unless he can engage in
them with decided advantage and the certain hope of victory.
He should not attempt to guard any passes where he cannot
employ his whole foree; nor should he hold any strong places
except such as would involve his own destruction in their loss ;
and then he should manage their defence in such a manner
that, in case of their being besieged, he may go to their relief
with his entire foree. All other places he should leave un-

Cuar. XXXVII.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 415

defended; for the loss of any place that a general abandons,
without his army having experienced any reverse, will neither
dim the glory of his arms nor his hope of victory. But the
loss becomes a danger and real misfortune when you had in-
tended to defend it, and every one believes that you attempted
to do so; it is then that a matter of so little moment may cause
the loss of the whole war, as in the case of the Gauls. Philip
of Macedon, father of Perseus, a man of warlike character and
much renown in his day, having been attacked by the Romans,
judged that he would not be able to defend all his possessions,
and therefore abandoned a portion of them after having laid
them waste, convinced that the loss of his reputation in hay-
ing failed to defend them would be more pernicious to him
than the loss of the country which he abandoned a prey to
the enemy as a thing of little value. The Romans, after the
defeat of Canne, when their affairs were in a very bad condi-
tion, refused all aid to a number of their allies, and even to
some of their own subjects, advising them to defend them-
selves as best they were able. This was a much wiser course
than to undertake a defence which they could not make good ;
for in that case they would have sacrificed both their friends
and their own strength, whilst as it was they only lost their
friends.

But to return to the subject of skirmishes. I say that if a
general is unavoidably forced to engage in some against a new
enemy, he should do so only with such advantages on his side
as to expose him to no danger of defeat. Or rather, he should
do as Marius did (which in fact would be the better way) when
marching against the Cimbrians. This savage people, who
came to plunder Italy, spread general terror before them by
their numbers and ferocity, and because they had already de-
feated one Roman army. Marius, therefore, deemed it neces-
sary, before engaging in battle with them, to do something to
disabuse the minds of his army of the erroneous opinion which
fear had caused them to form of the enemy. And, as a most
sagacious commander, he encamped his army several times in
positions where the Cimbrian hordes had to pass in view of
them. Thus, he wanted his soldiers, from the security of their
intrenchments, to become accustomed to the sight of that ene-
my; so that, seeing that irregular multitude, encumbered with
all sorts of impediments, partly armed with useless weapons

416 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST ([Boox IIT.

and partly without arms, they might be reassured, and become
eager to meet them in battle. This was a wise proceeding
on the part of Marius, and should be diligently imitated by
others, so as to avoid the dangers which I have pointed out
above, and not to be obliged to do as the Gauls, “ who, alarmed
“by some slight cause, retreated behind the Tiber into Cam-
“npania.” Having cited Valerius Corvinus in this discourse, I
will, according to his own words, point out in the next chap-
ter what a general should really be.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

WHAT QUALITIES A COMMANDER SHOULD POSSESS TO SECURE THE
CONFIDENCE OF HIS ARMY.

VaLerius Corvinus, as I have said above, was sent with an
army against the Samnites, who were new enemies to the Ro-
mans. On this occasion, by way of reassuring his soldiers and
to make them know the enemy, he caused them to engage in
some slight skirmishes with the Samnites. Not satisfied with
this, he harangued his troops before coming to a general battle ;
and after recalling their valor and his own, he pointed out to
them, in the most effective manner, how little importance they
should attach to such an enemy. From the words which Titus
Livius makes him say, we may note what a general should
really be in whom an army could have confidence. These
words were as follows: “Consider, then, under whose lead
“and auspices you are about to go into battle, and whether he
“to whom you are listening is merely a magniloquent orator,
“terrible only in words; or whether he is skilled in military
“matters and himself able to deal blows, to lead on the ban-
“ners, and to combat in the thickest of the fight. I want you
“to follow my actions, and not merely my words; not my
“orders only, but the example of him who by his right arm
“has thrice achicved the consulate and the highest glory.”
These words, well considered, will teach any one how to bear
himself so as properly to fill the position of general; and who-
ever acts differently will, instead of gaining fame, find himself
in time deprived of that grade which he may have acquired by

Cuar. XXXIX.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 417

good fortune or ambition. For it is not titles that honor men,
but men honor the titles. We should also bear in mind at the
very outset, in treating of this subject, that, if great command-
ers have employed extraordinary means for reassuring vet-
eran troops, much greater precautions are necessary with fresh
troops that have never before met an enemy face to face. For
if an unaccustomed enemy can inspire veteran troops with ter-
ror, that feeling must be infinitely greater with raw troops, who
for the first time encounter an enemy of any kind. And yet
we have seen many times able commanders by their prudence
triumph oyer all these difficulties; as was the case with the
Roman Gracchus and the Theban Epaminondas, of whom we
have spoken elsewhere, who both with fresh troops vanquished
the best-disciplined veterans. The course which they adopted
to accomplish this was to exercise their raw levies for some
months in sham battles, and to accustom them to obedience
and order, so that afterwards they led them with the greatest
confidence into actual battles. No commander, therefore, need
despair of forming good troops so long as he does not lack
men; and a prince who has plenty of men, and yet has not
good soldiers, has to blame only his own indolence and want of
skill, and not the cowardice of the men.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

A GENERAL SHOULD POSSESS A PERFECT KNOWLEDGE OF THE
LOCALITIES WHERE HE IS CARRYING ON A WAR.

Amoncst other essentials for a general is the knowledge of
localities and countries, without which general and particular
knowledge he cannot successfully undertake any enterprise.
And although the acquirement of every science demands prac-
tice, yet to possess this one perfectly requires more than any
other. This practice, or rather this special knowledge of local-
ities, is better acquired by the chase than in any other exercise.
And therefore the ancient writers say of those heroes who in
their day ruled the world, that they were nursed in the forests
and brought up to the chase. For, besides this special knowl-

edge of localities, the chase also teaches many other things that
VOL. II. 27

418 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

are necessary in war. And Xenophon, in his Life of Cyrus,
tells us that, when the latter was about to attack the king of
Armenia, in assigning to his captains their several parts he
recalled to them that this was nothing more than one of those
hunting expeditions which they had so often made with him;
comparing those whom he placed in ambush in the mountains
to the men that are sent into the woods to spread the nets, and
those who were sent to scour the plains to the men who rouse
the game from its lair to drive it into the nets. I cite this to
show that, according to Xenophon, the chase is an imitation of
war; and therefore this exercise is honorable and necessary
for rulers. Nor is there any better or more convenient means
of acquiring a knowledge of countries than the chase; for it
makes those who indulge in it perfectly familiar with the char-
acter of the country. And it is a fact that a man who has
familiarized himself thoroughly with one country afterwards
readily comprehends the nature of all other countries; for all
countries resemble each other in their general conformation, so
that the knowledge of one facilitates the knowledge of others.
But a man who has never acquired a practical knowledge of
one rarely or perhaps never attains the knowledge of another
country, unless after a great length of time. But he who has
that practice will at a glance know how such a plain lies, how
such a mountain rises, or where such a valley leads; and all
similar things which his former practice has taught him.

The truth of this Titus Livius shows by the example of Pub-
lius Decius, when he served as military Tribune in the army
which the Consul Cornelius commanded against the Samnites.
This Consul, having taken position with his army in a valley
where they might easily have been shut in by the Samnites,
Publius Decius, recognizing the danger, said to him, “Do you
“see yonder point, that rises above the enemy? That is our
“only hope of safety if we promptly seize upon it; for the
“ Samnites have blindly neglected it.” Before reporting these
words of Decius, Livius says: “ Publius Decius, the military
“Tribune, had observed a hill rising above the enemy’s camp,
“ difficult of access for an army with all its impediments, but
“ easy for light troops.” Being thereupon sent by the Consul to
occupy that point with three thousand soldiers, he saved the
Roman army; and intending to take advantage of the night to
get away, and save his men also, Titus Livius makes him

Cuap. XL. ] TEN BOOKS OF AITUS LIVIUsS. 419

say these words to his men: “‘ Follow me, and whilst yet a
“little daylight remains, let us examine where the enemy’s out-
“ posts are placed, and by what passage we may escape.’ And
“lest he should be remarked by his dress of a general, he
‘‘ clothed himself in the garb of a simple soldier to make this
“reconnoissance.” Whoever reflects upon this passage in Liv-
ius will see how useful and necessary it is for a general to know
the character of the country ; for if Decius had not known and
understood it, he would not have been able to judge of the im-
portance for the Roman army to possess themselves of that hill;
nor would he have been able to discern from a distance whether
that hill was accessible or not. And after having obtained pos-
session of it, he could not have reconnoitred from a distance
the issues by which he could rejoin the Consul with the main
body of the army, despite of the enemy, who was all around
him, nor the places guarded by the enemy. It was therefore
of the utmost importance that Decius had such a thorough
knowledge of the country, which enabled him, by the taking of
that hill, to save the Roman army, and afterwards to save him-
self and the troops he had with him by knowing how to escape
the enemy by whom he was surrounded.

CHAPTER XL.
DECEIT IN THE CONDUCT OF A WAR IS MERITORIOUS.

ALTHOUGH deceit is detestable in all other things, yet in the
conduct of war it is laudable and honorable; and a commander
who vanquishes an enemy by stratagem is equally praised with
one who gains victory by force. This is proved by the judg-
ment of those who have written the lives of great men, and
who give much credit to Hannibal and others who were most
remarkable in that respect. History gives so many examples
of this that I need not cite any of them here. But I will say
this, that I do not confound such deceit with perfidy, which
breaks pledged faith and treaties; for although states and
kingdoms may at times be won by perfidy, yet will it ever bring
dishonor with it. But I speak of those feints and stratagems
which you employ against an enemy that distrusts you, and in

420 DISCOURSES ONi THE FIRST [Boox III.

the employment of which properly consists the art of war.
Such was that practised by Hannibal when he feigned flight
on the lake of Perugia (Thrasimene), for the purpose of hem-
ming in the Consul and the Roman army; and when he at-
tached blazing fagots to the horns of his cattle to enable him
to escape from the hands of Fabius Maximus. Such was also
the stratagem of Pontius, general of the Samnites, to draw the
Romans into the defiles of the Caudine Forks. Having con-
eealed his army behind a mountain, he sent a number of his
soldiers disguised as herdsmen with droves of cattle into the
plains. These, on being captured and interrogated by the Ro-
mans as to the whereabouts of the Samnite army, answered,
according to the instructions of Pontius, that it was engaged
in the siege of the town of Nocera. The Consuls, believing it,
entered the defiles of Caudium, where they were promptly
hemmed in by the Samnites. This victory won by stratagem
would have been most glorious for Pontius had he followed
the advice of his father, who wanted him either to allow the
Romans to pass out entirely free, or to kill them all; but not
to take any half-way measures, which, as we have said else-
where, are always pernicious, “and never make a friend nor
“rid you of an enemy.”

CHAPTER XLLI.

ONE'S COUNTRY MUST BE DEFENDED, WHETHER WITH GLORY OR
WITH SHAME; IT MUST BE DEFENDED ANYHOW.

As stated above, the Roman Consul and his army were shut
in by the Samnites, who proposed to him the most ignominious
conditions, such as to pass under a yoke, and to send the army
back to Rome disarmed; which filled the Consul and the army
with despair. But the Legate Lentulus said, “That for the
“purpose of saving the country no propositions ought to be
“rejected. The safety of Rome depended upon that army, and
“he maintained that it ought to be saved at any price; that
“the defence of their country was always good, no matter
“whether effected by honorable or ignominious means. That
“if the army were saved, Rome would in time be able to wipe

Cusp. XU) TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 421

“out that disgrace; but if the army were lost, even if they
“died most gloriously, Rome and her liberties would also be
“lost.” This advice of Lentulus was followed; and the case
deserves to be noted and reflected upon by every citizen who
finds himself called upon to counsel his country. For where
the very safety of the country depends upon the resolution to
be taken, no considerations of justice or injustice, humanity or
cruelty, nor of glory or of shame, should be allowed to prevail.
But putting all other considerations aside, the only question
should be, What course will save the life and liberty of the
country? The French follow this maxim by words and deeds
in defending the majesty of their king and the greatness of
France ; for nothing excites their impatience more than to hear
any one say that such or such a thing is discreditable to the
king. For they say that their king can suffer no shame from
any resolutions he may take, whether in good or in ill fortune ;
for whether he be victor or vanquished is a matter that only
concerns the king.

CHAPTER XLII.
PROMISES EXACTED BY FORCE NEED NOT BE OBSERVED.

Wuen the Consuls returned to Rome with their troops dis-
armed and the insult to which they had been subjected at the
Caudine Forks, the Consul Sp. Posthumius was the first who
said in the Senate, that the peace agreed to at Caudium ought
not to be observed. He maintained that this peace did not
bind the Roman people, but only himself individually and
those others who had assisted in concluding it. And therefore,
if the people wished to free themselves from all its obligations,
they need only send him and the others back as prisoners to
the Samnites. He urged this advice so persistently that the
Senate agreed to it, and sent him and the others as prisoners
to the Samnites, protesting against the validity of the peace.
And fortune so favored Posthumius in this matter that the
Samnites declined to keep him, so that when he returned to
Rome he was more honored there on account of the reverse
he had suffered, than was Pontius by the Samnites for the

422 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

victory he had gained. This case suggests two points for
reflection: the one, that a general may acquire glory in any
action; in victory it follows as a matter of course, and in de-
feat it may be acquired, either by showing that it was not due
to any fault of his, or by promptly doing some act that neu-
tralizes the effects of the defeat. The other point is, that there
is no disgrace in disregarding promises that have been exacted
by force. Promises touching public affairs, and which have
been given under the pressure of force, will always be disre-
garded when that force no longer exists, and this involves no
dishonor. History offers us many examples of this, and even
in the present times we have daily instances of it. Not only
do princes pay no attention to pledges which they have been
forced to give, when that force has ceased to exist, but they
frequently disregard equally all other promises, when the mo-
tives that induced them no longer prevail. Whether such con-
duct be praiseworthy or not on the part of princes, has been
so fully discussed in our treatise of “ The Prince,” that we
will not touch upon that question any further here.

CHAPTER XLITI.

NATIVES OF THE SAME COUNTRY PRESERVE FOR ALL TIME THE
SAME CHARACTERISTICS.

WISE men say, and not without reason, that whoever wishes
to foresee the future must consult the past; for human events
ever resemble those of preceding times. This arises from the
fact that they are produced by men who have been, and ever
will be, animated by the same passions, and thus they must
necessarily have the same results. It is true that men are
more or less virtuous in one country or another, according to
the nature of the education by which their manners and habits
of life have been formed. It also facilitates a judgment of the
future by the past, to observe nations preserve for a long time
the same character; ever exhibiting the same disposition to
avarice, or bad faith, or to some other special vice or virtue.
Whoever reads attentively the history of our city of Florence,
and observes the events of our more immediate times, will find

Cuar. XLIIL] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 423

that the Germans and the French are full of avarice, pride,
cruelty, and bad faith, from which evil qualities our city has
suffered greatly at various times. As to the want of good
faith, everybody knows how often the Florentines have paid
money to King Charles VIII., upon his promising to restore
to them the citadel of Pisa; which promises, however, he
never fulfilled, thereby exhibiting his want of good faith and
his greed of money. Let us come, however, to more recent
events. Everybody may have heard of what happened in the
war which the Florentines carried on against the Visconti,
Dukes of Milan; and how Florence, having no other resources
lett, thought of calling the Emperor into Italy, in the expecta-
tion that he would devote his reputation and forces to assailing
Lombardy. The Emperor promised to come with a sufficient
force to carry on the war against the Visconti, and to defend
Florence against their power, on condition that the Florentines
should pay him one hundred thousand ducats before starting,
and a like sum after he should have entered Italy. The Flor-
entines agreed to these terms and made both the first and the
second payment; but when the Emperor had reached Verona,
he turned back without doing anything, alleging as a reason
that the Florentines had not fulfilled their part of the agree-
ment.

Thus, if Florence had not been constrained by necessity, or
carried away by passion, and had studied and known the an-
cient habits of the barbarians, she would not have allowed
herself to have been deceived by them on this occasion, as
well as on several others. For the Gauls have constantly pre-
served the same characteristics, and have on every occasion,
and towards everybody, displayed the same conduct as accord-
ing to history they did in ancient times towards the Tuscans.
These being hard pressed by the Romans, having been several
times routed and put to flight by them, and finding their own
forces insufficient to resist the assaults of the Romans, called
to their aid the Gauls from beyond the Alps, agreeing to give
them a sum of money on condition that they should unite their
forces to those of the Tuscans, and march together against the
Romans. Thereupon the Gauls, after having received the
money from the Tuscans, refused to take up arms in their
behalf; pretending that they had received this money, not for
the purpose of making war against the Romans, but to induce

424 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Boox III.

them to abstain from plundering the country of the Tuscans.
And thus were the Tuscan people deprived, by the avarice and
bad faith of the Gauls, both of their money and of the assist-
ance upon which they had counted from them. So that we
see from this example of the ancient Tuscans, and by that of
the Florentines of the present day, that the Gauls of old and
the modern French have ever conducted themselves in the
same manner; and thus we may readily judge to what extent
princes may place confidence in them.

CHAPTER XLIV.

IMPETUOSITY AND AUDACITY OFTEN ACHIEVE WHAT ORDINARY
MEANS FAIL TO ATTAIN.

THE Samnites being hard pressed by the Romans, and unable
to keep their army in the field against them, resolved, after
having garrisoned their towns, to pass with their entire army
into Tuscany. They hoped thus by the presence of their army
to induce the Tuscans, notwithstanding the truce between them
and the Romans, to take up arms against them, which they had
refused to the ambassadors sent by the Samnites. In the in-
terview which these had with the Tuscans, and especially in
their efforts to explain the reasons that had induced them to
take up arms again, they made use of a remarkable expression,
saying, “that they had revolted against the Romans, because
“peace was more burdensome for men that are enslaved than
“war is for men that are free.’ And thus partly by persua-
sion, and partly by the presence of their army, they induced
the Tuscans also to take up arms. From this we should con-
clude that, when one prince wishes to obtain something from
another, he must not, when the occasion permits, give him
time for deliberation. But he must act so as to make the
other see the necessity of prompt decision, and that a refusal or
delay may cause an immediate and dangerous indignation.

We have seen this course successfully practised in our time
by Pope Julius II. towards the French ; and by Gaston de Foix,
general of the king of France, towards the Marquis of Mantua.
For Julius Il., wishing to drive the Bentivogli from Bologna,

Coar. XLIV.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 425

deemed it would be necessary for him in this matter to secure
the assistance of the French army and the neutrality of the
Venetians. Having for some time solicited the one and the
other, and having received only evasive answers, he resolved,
by not giving them any further time, to force both the French
and the Venetians to a compliance with his wishes. He there-
fore left Rome with as many troops as he could gather, and
marched upon Bologna, and sent word to the Venetians to
remain neutral, and to the king of France to send his forces
to aid him. Pressed by the short time given them for delibera-
tion, and seeing that, if they refused or temporized, they would
excite the indignation of the Pope, they yielded to his wishes ;
the king of France sent him troops, and the Venetians re-
mained neutral. The Count de Foix was with his army at
Bologna, when he heard of the revolt of Brescia; and wishing
to go to recover that city, there were two routes open to him.
The one lay through the dominions of the king, but it was
long and difficult; the other and shorter route was through
the territory of the Marquis of Mantua. He was obliged not
only to traverse the dominions of this Marquis, but to enter
them he had to pass over certain dikes raised between the
lakes and swamps of which that region is full, and which are
closed and guarded by fortresses. Gaston de Foix resolved
to take this shorter route, and by way of removing all obsta-
cles, and not to give the Marquis time for deliberation, he at
once put his army on the march, and signified to the Marquis
to send him the keys to the fortresses that commanded this
passage. The Marquis, surprised by this prompt and unex-
pected determination on the part of the Count de Foix, sent
him the keys; which he would never have done if the French
general had displayed less impetuosity. For the Marquis
would have had a good excuse for refusing his demand, being
in alliance with the Pope and the Venctians, and one of his
sons being in the hands of the Pontiff. But being taken aback
by the prompt action of Gaston de Foix, he yielded, for the
reasons which we have given above. The Tuscans acted in
the same way towards the Samnites, being forced by the pres-
ence of the Samnite army to take up arms against Rome,
which till then they had refused.

426 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book 111].

CHAPTER XLV.

WHETHER IT IS BETTER IN BATTLE TO AWAIT THE SHOCK OF THE
ENEMY, AND THEN TO ATTACK HIM, OR TO ASSAIL HIM FIRST
WITH IMPETUOSITY.

Tue Roman Consuls Decius and Fabius were with their
respective armies opposed to the Samnites and the Tuscans ;
and as they both delivered battle on the same day, it is well
to examine which of the two different methods adopted by
these Consuls was the best. Decius attacked the enemy with
his entire foree, and with the utmost impetuosity; whilst Fa-
bius contented himself with merely sustaining the shock of
the enemy, judging a slow and deliberate attack to be the
most advantageous, and reserved the ardor of his troops for
the last, when the enemy’s eagerness for combat and his fire
had somewhat cooled down. The result proved the plan of
Fabius much more successful than that of Decius. Exhausted
by their first impetuous efforts, Decius saw his troops more
disposed to flight than to combat; and to achieve by death
that glory which he had failed to win by victory, he sacrificed
himself for the Roman legions in imitation of his father’s ex-
ample. When Fabius heard this, he determined to achieve no
less glory living than what his colleague had acquired by
dying; and throwing all his forces, which he had reserved
for that purpose, upon the enemy, he gained a most signal
victory. From this we see that the method of Fabius is the
most certain and most worthy of imitation.

CHAPTER 21.

THE REASONS WHY THE SAME FAMILY IN A CITY ALWAYS PRE-
SERVES THE SAME CHARACTERISTICS.

Ir seems that not only do cities differ from each other by
their manners and institutions, producing either men of harsh
or gentle character, but such differences are observable also
between families of the same city. The proof of this may be

Crap, XLVI] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 427

found in every city; and we read of many instances of it in
Rome. For we find that the men of the family of Manlius
were severe and inflexible; the Publicoli were affable and
lovers of the people, whilst the Appii were ambitious and hos-
tile to the people ; and so on, each family having its own dis-
tinctive characteristics. This cannot be attributed only to the
blood, for that is necessarily modified by marriage; but must
be the result of the difference of education in the several fami-
lies. For it is of great importance whether a youth in his ten-
der years hears any act praised or censured; this necessarily
makes a lasting impression upon his mind, and becomes after-
wards the rule of his life for all time. For if this were not so,
it would not have been possible that the Appii should all have
had the same inclinations, and have been agitated by the same
passions. ‘Titus Livius has observed this in several of them,
and especially in that Appius who was made Censor. When
his colleague, after the expiration of eighteen months, laid
down that magistracy, in accordance with the provisions of
the law, he declined to do the same, alleging that, according
to the first law made by the Censors, he was entitled to hold
that office for five years. And although several public meet-
ings were held on the subject, and numerous disturbances
occurred in consequence, yet they found no means to make
him resign, and he held the office in opposition to the will of
the people and the majority of the Senate. In reading his
speech against P. Sempronius, the Tribune of the people, we
cannot fail to note throughout the real Appian insolence, and
at the same time we cannot but remark the goodness and gen-
tleness displayed by an infinite number of citizens in respect-
ing the auspices and obeying the laws of their country.

428 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book III.

CHAPTER XLVIL.

LOVE OF COUNTRY SHOULD MAKE A GOOD CITIZEN FORGET
PRIVATE WRONGS.

THE Consul Manlius was wounded in a fight during the war
against the Samnites, and as his army, in consequence of his
being disabled, were exposed to great danger, the Roman Sen-
ate judged it necessary to send Papirius Cursor as Dictator to
supply the place of the Consul. But as the law required that
the Dictator should be named by Fabius, who was at that time
at the head of the armies in Tuscany, and being known to be
hostile to Papirius, the Senate feared that he might refuse to
nominate him. They therefore sent two deputies to entreat
him to put aside his personal hatreds, and to nominate Papirius
Consul for the general good. Moved by his love of country,
Fabius made that nomination, although he manifested, by his
silence and other indications, his aversion to him. This should
serve as an example to all who desire to be regarded as good
citizens.

CHAPTER XLVIIL.

ANY MANIFEST ERROR ON THE PART OF AN ENEMY SHOULD
MAKE US SUSPECT SOME STRATAGEM.

Fuuvius, having been left as lieutenant of the Roman army
in Tuscany, whilst the Consul had gone to assist at some re-
ligious ceremonies, the Tuscans attempted to draw him into
an ambush which they had placed near the Roman camp. For
this purpose they sent some soldiers, disguised as herdsmen,
with a drove of cattle, who approached the intrenchments
within sight of the Romans. The lieutenant, wondering at
their presumption, which did not seem reasonable to him, sus-
pected and discovered the deceit, and thus defeated the design
of the Tuscans. This instance will serve to show that the
commander of an army should always mistrust any manifest
error which he sees the enemy commit, as it invariably con-
ceals some stratagem. For it is not reasonable to suppose that

Cuar. XLIX.] TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 429

men will be so incautious. But the desire of victory often
blinds men to that degree that they see nothing but what
seems favorable to their object. After their victory over the
Romans on the Allia, the Gauls marched upon Rome, and,
finding the gates open and unguarded, they remained a whole
day and night without entering, fearing some stratagem, and
unable to believe that the Romans were so cowardly and so
ill-advised as to abandon their city. When the Florentines, in
1508, went to besiege Pisa, Alfonso del Mutolo, a citizen of that
town, who had fallen into their hands, promised, if they would
grant him his liberty, to deliver to them one of the gates of
Pisa. His offer was accepted, and he was set free. After-
wards he came several times to confer on the subject with the
deputies of the commissaries, but never concealed his visits,
coming openly and accompanied by several Pisans, whom he
left apart whilst conferring with the Florentines. From this
circumstance his duplicity might readily have been conjec-
tured; for it was not reasonable that he should have treated
a matter of this kind so openly if he had been acting in good
faith. But the eager desire to possess Pisa so blinded the
Florentines that, under his guidance, they advanced to the
gate of Lucca, where, by the double treason of the said
Alfonso, they lost in a discreditable manner a number of
their officers and men.

CHAPTER XLIX.

A REPUBLIC THAT DESIRES TO MAINTAIN HER LIBERTIES NEEDS ©
DAILY FRESH PRECAUTIONS: IT WAS BY SUCH MERITS THAT
FABIUS OBTAINED THE SURNAME OF MAXIMUS.

WE have already said elsewhere, that in a great republic there
are constantly evils occurring requiring remedies which must
be efficacious in proportion to the importance of the occasion.
And if ever any city experienced strange and unforeseen ills,
it was Rome. Such, for instance, as the plot which the Ro-
man ladies seem to have formed to kill their husbands, so that
many had actually poisoned them, whilst others had prepared
the poison for the purpose. Such was also the conspiracy of

430 DISCOURSES ON THE FIRST [Book III.

the Bacchanals, discovered at the time of the Macedonian war,
in which many thousands of men and women were implicated.
This conspiracy would have proved very dangerous to Rome
had it not been discovered in time; and if the Romans had
not been accustomed to punish the guilty, even if they were
in great numbers. Even if we had not an infinity of other evi-
dences of the greatness of this republic, it would be made
manifest by the extent of her executions, and the character of
the punishment she inflicted upon the guilty. Rome did not
hesitate to have a whole legion put to death according to a
judicial decision, or to destroy an entire city, or to send eight
or ten thousand men into exile with such extraordinary con-
ditions as could hardly be complied with by one man, much
less by so many. It was thus she banished to Sicily the sol-
diers that had unfortunately allowed themselves to be defeated
at Cann, imposing upon them the conditions not to live in any
cities, and to take their meals standing. But the most terrible
of her executions was the system of decimation in her armies,
when, by lot, one soldier out of every ten was put to death. It
was impossible to devise a more terrible punishment, where a
great number were involved, than this. For when any crime
is committed by a multitude, where the individual authors can-
not be ascertained, it is impossible to punish them all, there
being so many. To chastise a part, leaving the others un-
punished, would be unjust to the first, whilst the others would
feel encouraged to commit fresh crimes. But where all have
merited death, and only every tenth man is punished by lot,
these will have occasion to complain only of fate; whilst those
who escape will be careful not to commit other crimes, for fear
that the next time the lot might fall to them. The poisoners
and the Bacchanals were punished as the greatness of their
crimes merited.

Although the consequences of such evils in a republic are
bad, yet they are not mortal, for there is always time to correct
them. But it is not the same with such evils as affect the
state itself; for unless they are checked and corrected by some
wise hand, they will cause the ruin of the state. The liberality
with which the Romans used to grant the privileges of citizen-
ship to strangers had attracted a great many new families to
Rome. These began to exercise so great an influence in the
elections that it sensibly changed the government, and caused

Cup XLIX.| TEN BOOKS OF TITUS LIVIUS. 431

it to deviate from the institutions and principles of the men
who had been accustomed to direct it. When Quintus Fabius,
who was Censor at that time, observed this, he had all the new
families that had caused this disorder enrolled into four tribes ;
so that, being confined to such narrow limits, they should not
corrupt all Rome. Fabius had well comprehended the evil,
and promptly and without difficulty applied a suitable remedy ;
which was so well received by the republic, that it earned him
the surname of Maximus.

oe

ie

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

Von 98

PREFATORY NOTE.

Tuts collection of maxims, extracted from the works of Machiavelli, was
made by an eminent Italian jurist and man of letters, who selected and ar-
ranged them to show the injustice of the charges against the writings of
Machiavelli, resulting from an unfair prejudice and imperfect understanding
of his sentiments. The little book was printed in Rome, with the entire
approval of the Papal censors, in the year 1771. Subsequently a corrected
edition was printed at Lausanne in Switzerland, enriched with a polished
dedicatory letter, pretending to have been written by Machiavelli himself
to his son. This letter was so exactly in the style of Machiavelli that it
deceived the public, and even those best acquainted with his writings. To
give it still more a varnish of authenticity, a little note was added to the
letter intended to make it appear that it had been found amongst the papers
of Francesco del Nero.

Supposing that it may be interesting to the reader, a translation of this
letter is subjoined.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI TO HIS SON BERNARDO.

In these few pages, my son, you have the substance of many volumes,
the fruit of many years of labor of mine, and of the immense labor of
others during many centuries. Study then, whilst still young yourself, the
thoughts of a head blanched by age. I know that some one has poured
out his venom against my writings because he has formed his judgment
upon each one separately, instead of all together, and has looked more to
the words than the spirit; as if one could judge correctly of a work or a
science or art from a single part, and not the whole together, or could judge
of the colors without regard to the drawing. These sentences, my son,
if you are more favored by Heaven than myself, will serve you as a sufficient
training for the safe management of affairs and the carrying them to a
happy end. Vale!

* FRANCISCI PETRI DEL Nero, An. 1522.

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

CHAPTER I.
RELIGION.

1. Att enterprises to be undertaken should be for the
honor of God and the general good of the country. ~~

2. The fear of God facilitates every enterprise undertaken
by governments.

8. Wherever there is religion, there every good may be
presupposed ; and where it is lacking, there all evil may be
presupposed.

4. As the observance of Divine worship is the cause of the
greatness of states, so the disregard of Divine worship is the
cause of their ruin.

5. The non-observance of religion and of laws are vices
that are the more detestable as they are caused by those who
govern.

6. It is impossible that he who governs should himself be
respected by those who disregard the Deity.

7. In well-constituted governments the citizens fear more
to break their oaths than the laws; because they esteem the
power of God more than that of men.

8. Governments that wish to maintain themselves incorrupt
must above all else maintain religious ceremonies uncorrupted,
and hold them always in the highest veneration.

9. If in all the governments of the Christian republic reli-
gion were maintained as it was instituted by its Divine Founder,
the state and the Christian republics would be much more
united and happy than what they are now.

10. To show little reverence to God, and still less to the
Church, is not the act of a free man, but of one that is disso-
lute, and more inclined to evil than to good.

438 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

11. The disregard of all devotion and of all religion brings
with it many troubles and infinite disorders.

12. St. Francis and St. Dominic, by their poverty and the
example of the life of Christ, brought back the Christian re-
ligion into the minds of men, and restored it to its original
principles.

13. The Christian religion, having shown us the truth and
the true way, should be interpreted according to ae and
not according to idleness.

14. It is not proper that men should pass their holidays in
idleness and in places of pleasure.

15. Amongst all the qualities that distinguish a citizen in
his country is his being above all other men liberal and mt-
nificent, especially in the construction of public edifices, such
as churches, monasteries, and retreats for the poor, for the in-
firm, and for pilgrims.

16. The good citizen, although constantly spending money
in the building of churches and in charities, yet complains that
he has never been able to spend so much in honor of God but
what he finds himself His debtor on his books.

17. It is proper to thank God, when in his infinite goodness
he deigns to accord to a state or to a citizen some mark of
approval, which the one has merited by its greatness, and the
other by his rare virtues and wisdom.

CHAPTER II.
PEACE AND WAR.

~¥ 1. A coop and wise prince should love peace and avoid war.
2. Those who counsel a prince haye to fear lest he should
have some one near him who in time of peace desires war,
because he cannot gain his living without it.
3. Arms should be reserved for the last extremity, when all
other means prove insufficient.
pga: ees pripce who has any feelings of humanity cannot al-
together rejoice at a victory that spreads sorrow amongst all
his subjects.
5. The increase of power and state brings with it an in-

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 439

crease of enmity and envy, the invariable sources of war and
disaster.

6. That government alone is durable which rests upon the
free will of the governed.

7. He who, blinded by ambition, rises to a place from
which he cannot rise any higher, necessarily prepares for a most
disastrous fall.

8. In a well-constituted government, wars, peace, and al-
liances are decided upon, not for the satisfaction of the few,
but for the general good.

9, That war is just which is necessary. oS.
10. The people will complain of a war made without reason.
11. Not he who first takes to arms is the cause of the mis-

chief, but he who gives the first cause for taking to arms.

12. Princes should remember that wars are begun at the
will of others, but are not terminated at the will of others.

13. Whenever victory impoverishes or conquests enfeeble
us, we ought to abandon them, or we shall not arrive at the
aim for which the war is made.

14. He who is impoverished by war cannot acquire strength,
even though he is victorious, for he expends more than what _,
he gains by his conquests.

15. In badly organized governments, victories first empty
the treasury; after that they impoverish the people without
securing them against the enemy. Thence the victor enjoys
his victory but little, and the enemy does not feel the loss.

16. We must guard against the conquest of such cities or
provinces as revenge themselves upon the victor without fight-
ing and without blood; but who by corrupting him with their
evil habits expose him to be overcome by whoever assails him.

17. The valor of men is pleasing even to the enemy, whilst
cowardice and malice are despised.

18. He who makes too much account of the cuirass, and
wishes to be honored with it on, incurs no loss that he values
so much as that of his reputation.

19. Even in war but little glory is derived from any fraud
that involves the breaking of a given pledge and of agreements
made.

20. An ally should prefer his pledged faith to advantages
or to perils.

21. The greatest and most important care for the com-

440 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

mander of an army is to have near him men that are faithful,
experienced in war, and prudent, with whom he can constantly
counsel and discuss as to his own troops and those of the
enemy, from whom he can learn which are the most numerous,
which the best armed, the best mounted, and the best drilled,
which the most able to bear privations, and on which to rely
most, whéther on infantry or cavalry.

22. No qualities are calculated to win for a commander the
good will of the people so much as examples of chastity and
justice.

23. Hven in war it is a cruel, inhuman, and impious thing to
dishonor the women, to debauch the virgins, and not to spare
temples and holy places.

24. An act of humanity and clemency has more influence
with men than an act of ferocity and violence; and there are
many instances when provinces or cities that would not yield
to arms, to engines of war, or to any other human force, have
surrendered to an example of humanity, piety, charity, or gen-
erosity. History has many proofs of this. The capture of
Carthagena in Spain did not give Scipio Africanus so great a
reputation as the example of chastity which he gave when he
restored a beautiful young wife intact to her husband. The
fame of this act won him the friendship of all Spain. We
see from this how much the people desire that those who are
above them should possess these virtues, and how much they
are praised by historians; and by those who write the lives of
princes, as well as by those authors who teach them how to
bear themselves. Amongst these Xenophon takes the ercatest
pains to show what honors, what victories, and what glory
Cyrus won by being humane and affable, and by not having
given any proofs of pride, cruelty, or luxuriousness, or of any
other vice that stains the lives of men.

25. It is never wise to drive an enemy to desperation.

26. People readily subject themselves to the empire of him
who treats the vanquished as brothers, and not as enemies.

27. Whoever is harsh and cruel in commanding is badly
obeyed by his subjects; but whoever is kind and humane
meets with ready obedience.

28. To command a multitude it is better to be humane than
proud, and merciful rather than cruel.

29. Those Roman commanders who made themselves _be-

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 441

loved by their armies, and managed them with condescension,
achieved greater advantages than those who made themselves
extraordinarily feared by their soldiers.

80. Humanity, affability, and a courteous reception on the
part of the commander, have great influence upon the minds of
the soldiers; and the giving advice to the one, the promising to
another, the taking one by the hand and embracing another,
makes them rush with impetuosity to the attack.

31. It is important in armies strictly to distribute rewards
and punishments to those who by their good or evil conduct
have merited praise or blame. In this way great control is
obtained over the troops. .

32. The respect for the commander, his habits, and his other
great qualities, often cause an immediate suspension of arms.

33. The prince who has plenty of subjects, and lacks sol-
diers, should not complain of the cowardice of men, but of his
own indolence and want of wisdom.

34. An army which disregards justice, and consumes in a
reckless manner its means of subsistence, cannot escape want.
For the first disorder causes the non-arrival of provisions, and
the other useless consumption of those that do arrive.

35. The morals of a soldier should be looked to above all else.
He must have honesty and a sense of shame; otherwise he will
prove but an instrument of scandal and the first cause of cor-
ruption. For it is impossible to believe that either valor or any-
thing praiseworthy can result from a dishonest education, or an
impure and immodest mind.

36. If in republics or monarchies it is necessary to have
special ordinances for keeping men loyal, peaceful, and in the
fear of God, then is it doubly necessary with soldiers. For
where should the country look for more devotion than in him
who has promised to die for her? Where should she look for
greater love of peace than in him who can only be injured by
war? And where should there be more fear of God than in
him who, being every day exposed to an infinity of dangers, has
more need of Divine aid than any one else ?

37. The disreputable, the idle, the unbridled, the impious,
the fugitives from paternal control, blasphemers, gamblers, and
in all respects the badly brought up, should not be accepted as
soldiers; for nothing can be more contrary to good discipline
than such habits.

4492 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

38. Women and odious games should be prohibited in
armies; soldiers should be so constantly exercised, both indi-
vidually and collectively, that they have no time left them to
think of women, or games, or anything else that renders them
seditious and useless.

39. A well-regulated government selects for war men in the
flower of their age, when the legs, the hands, and the eye re-
spond to each other; and it waits not until the men come to an
age when the forces diminish and wickedness increases.

40. Arms in the hands of national troops, and given them
by the laws and regulations, have never done any injury, but
have rather always proved useful; and republics maintain them-
selves longer untainted by means of such arms, than without
them.

41. We should imitate the ancients in the boldness and
strength of their actions, and not in those that were feeble and
effeminate.

42. We should pray God to grant victory to him who brings
safety and peace to Christendom.

43. Whoever is content with a moderate victory will always
be the better for it; for those who wish to carry it too far
often lose.

44, A city that voluntarily surrenders can afford you ad-
vantage and security ; but to be obliged to hold a city by force
causes you weakness and injury in times of adversity; and in
peaceful times it causes loss and expense. ,

45. To conclude an agreement it is necessary to cancel the
difficulties that have arisen.

46. An agreement concluded with good intentions is main-
tained the best.

47. It is the business of a good prince, after the termination
of war, to turn his mind to his own greatness and to that of his
state.

48. A man proves himself excellent in war and in peace,
when in the former he proves himself victorious, and when in
the latter he greatly benefits his state and his people.

49. A prince who excels in the conduct of affairs will re-
cover in peace twofold what he has lost in war.

50. The way for a prince to maintain his state is to be
armed with troops of his own, to show love and affection to his
subjects, and friendship to his neighbors.

ee

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 443

CHAPTER III.
THE ADMIRABLE LAW OF NATIONS BORN WITH CHRISTIANITY.

1. Wir the Gentiles the men vanquished in war were
either killed, or they remained in perpetual slavery, where they
led a most miserable existence. The cities that were taken
were either destroyed, or the inhabitants, after having been
stripped of their goods and possessions, were expelled and
scattered throughout the world, so that the unfortunate in war
led the most miserable existence. But the Christian religion
has been the cause that but few of the vanquished are killed,
and none are kept long in captivity. For they can easily lib-
erate themselves; and the cities, though they have a thousand
times rebelled, are not destroyed, and the inhabitants are left
in the enjoyment of their possessions.

2. Our Christian princes, in the midst of their conquests,
show an equal affection for the cities that have become subject
to them; they leave them almost all their ancient institutions,
and all their industries; differing in that respect from the bar-
barous potentates of the East, who are devastators of the coun-
tries and destroyers of all civilization amongst men.

CHAPTER IV.
VICES THAT HAVE MADE THE GREAT THE PREY OF THE SMALL.

1. THosE ancient princes deceived themselves when they
thought that the art of well governing their states consisted in
knowledge, in writings, in making a cautious reply, in inditing
a clever letter, in displaying in their words and sayings smart-
ness and quickness, in skilfully contriving a fraud, in adorning
themselves with gems and with gold, in sleeping and eating
with greater splendor than others. in surrounding themselves
with luxuries and indulging in licentiousness, in bearing them-
selves towards their subjects with avarice and pride, in spoiling
in idleness, in bestowing grades in the army by favor, in treat-
ing with neglect whoever had distinguished himself by some

44-4 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

praiseworthy action, and in requiring that their words should
be accepted as the responses of oracles. Unhappy men! they
did not perceive that by all this they prepared themselves to
fall victims to whoever chose to. attack them. Witness Italy,
where three of the most powerful states were pillaged and
laid waste, because the princes who governed them persisted
in similar errors, and lived in the same disorder.

CHAPTER V.
LAWS.

1. We ought to attachlittle-value-to living in-a-citywhere

the laws are less powerful than men. That country only is

desirable where you can enjoy your substance and your friends
in security, and not that where your property can be easily
taken away from you, and where your friends, for fear of their
own property, abandon you in your greatest need.

2. A state cannot exist securely unless it has bound itself
by many laws, in which the security of all its population is
comprised.

3. Whoever is not restrained by the laws commits the same
error as an unrestrained mob.

4. The power of the law is capable of overcoming every
obstacle, even that of the nature of the territory.

5. As the preservation of good morals needs good laws, so
the laws, to maintain themselves, require good morals.

6. To prevent good morals from being corrupted and
changed into bad morals, the Iegislator must restrain the
human passions and deprive men of all hope of being able to
trespass with impunity.

7. It is the laws that make men good.

8. Good laws give rise to good education.

9, Good education produces good examples.

10. In a well-constituted government the laws are made for
the public good, and not to satisfy the ambition of a few.

11. To despoil any one of his goods by new laws, at a
time when he claims them with justice before the tribunals,
is a wrong that will bring with it the greatest dangers to the

legislator.

ee ee ae

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 445

‘12. Where a thing works well by itself without the support
of the law, there law is not necessary.

13. No law should ever stain the cledged faith of public
engagements.

14. No more injurious laws can be made than such ag are
retroactive to a great extent of time.

15. Laws should not go back upon things of the past, but
should thoroughly provide for the future.

16. Nothing does so much honor to a man newly risen to
eminence, as to make new laws and new regulations devised by
himself. If these, when once established, show that they have
grandeur in them, then will they render the man an object of
reverence and admiration.

17. It does not suffice for the welfare of a state to have
a prince who governs wisely during his life; but it is necessary
to have one who regulates matters in such a manner that.even
after his death the state shall maintain itself.

18. A general rule that never fails is this: make no change

where there is no defect, as that produces nothing but disorder.
But where there is nothing but disorder, the less you leave of
the old, the less will there remain of what is bad.
./19. The governments that are best regulated and have most
vitality are those which, by means of their institutions, can re-
new themselves. And the way to renew themselves is, to bring
the government back to its original principles; as, for instance,
to make the people resume their observances of religion and of
justice when these begin to become corrupt.

20. That state may call itself happy which has produced a
man so wise that he gives to the state laws so regulated that
the people can live under them securely without the necessity
of reforming them.

21. The reformer of laws must act with prudence, justice,
and integrity, and must manage in such manner that from his
reforms shall result the good, the welfare of his people, jus-
tice, and the well-regulated life of the citizens.

22. That law can never be praised which conceals many
defects under small advantage.

446 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

CHAPTHR: 41.
JUSTICE.

~. 1. A GOOD prince must preserve perfect justice in his states,
and in giving audiences he must be affable and gracious.

2. He must watch diligently that justice have its full
course.

3. By favoring justice, you show that injustice displeases
you.

4. Judges, to have dignity and consideration, should be of
an advanced age.

5. It is necessary that the judges should be numerous; for
when there are but few, they always act with regard to the
convenience of the few.

6. It is the duty and office of every man who claims
justice to demand it by legal means, and never to employ
force.

7. We must employ all proper means to repress violence
and force, and that whoever claims justice shall employ the
reeular way for obtaining it, and aid no one to employ force
or violence.

8. Respecting condemnations, none but such as are for civil
offences should be commuted; but no condemnation for crimi-
nal offences should ever be commuted.

9. A well-constituted government should prevent the dis-
orders arising from equal condemnations, which impoverish
both parties, who will in consequence continue to aggravate
each other.

10. In condemnations there should be used humanity, mod-
eration, and mercy.

11. It is proper for relatives to adjust their differences ami-
eably rather than by litigation; to settle them by compromise
is laudable.

12. To avoid causing trouble to both parties, the judge, after
having heard and thoroughly examined the case, should make
every effort to reconcile the parties to each other, which would
be a most praiseworthy act.

13. The judge, after having heard both parties and the argu-
ments of each, should in a kindly way, and without compulsion,

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 447

by the sole force of justice, endeavor to reconcile the parties to
each other; which is a laudable act. But if he fails in this
effort, then he must administer reason and justice according
to the laws.

14. The judge must listen kindly to all parties, and render
justice to each with impartiality.

15. The judge must hear and diligently examine the cause,
and must render justice to either of the parties, according as
reason and honesty demand.

16. In writing or speaking to a judge, asking him to favor
your cause, you must not say to him anything else than that,
if he can aid you without departing from exact justice, you
would esteem it very much.

CHAPTER VII.
PUBLIC CHARGES.

1. THE imposts, to be equal, must be distributed by the law,
and not by any one man.

2. Sumptuousness obliges the prince to impose extraordi-
nary charges upon the people, and to see that the public treas-
ury is well supplied.

3. Expenditures engender exactions, and exactions produce
complaints.

4. By economy the prince becomes able to show liberality to
all those from whom he takes nothing, and these are number-
less; but it is regarded as avarice by those to whom he gives
nothing, and these are but few.

5. In the exaction of taxes we must above all have pity on
the misery and sufferings of the people, so as to preserve them
as much as possible to the country.

6. It is eminently proper to feel pity for the poor and
wretched. You must therefore show them compassion, for it
is cruel to attempt to get anything where there is nothing.

7. The wretchedness of the people demands that, in the ex-
action of taxes, you should show them mercy and moderation,
by bearing with them, and not trying to get from them more
than they can possibly pay.

448 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN,

8. By honest and ordinary proceedings, the taxes can be
reduced to what is just and reasonable.

9. In public works the officials should bear themselves with
humanity and moderation towards the laborers of the country ;
and they should not exasperate them, especially in disastrous
times, when they need compassion more than severity. In
fact, the principal object of public works is public health, util-
ity, and the good of the country in propitious times; but not
to impoverish the inhabitants and excite their discontent.

10. In the carrying on of public works, the laborers of the
country should be treated in so kindly a fashion that they come
to work voluntarily rather than by compulsion; in fact, a gov-
ernment should have the happiness of the people more at heart
than the construction of its public works.

11. Such public works should be carried on with the most
becoming and kindly treatment of the workmen, so as not to
drive them to despair.

CHAPTER VIII.
OF AGRICULTURE, COMMERCE, POPULATION, LUXURY, AND SUPPLIES.

1. IN moderate and peaceful governments the wealth result-
ing from agriculture and the arts increases most rapidly ; for
every one eagerly aims to increase and secks to acquire those
goods which he believes that he can enjoy in security. Whence
it comes that all men vie with each other in the production of
private and public wealth, both of which thus increase in the
most marvellous manner.

2. Public security and the protection of the laws are the
sinews of agriculture and of commerce. The prince should
therefore encourage his subjects quietly to devote themselves
to the pursuits of agriculture and commerce, as well as to all
other human industries ; so that the one may not abstain from
embellishing his possessions for fear of their being taken from
him, and that the other may not hesitate to open a new traffic
for fear of taxes. But he should reward those who are willing
to devote themselves to these occupations, and who in any way
contribute to the enlargement of the city or state.

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 449

8. Landed possessions are more stable and solid riches
than those that are founded on commercial industries.

4, The Romans believed very justly that it was not from
the extent of territory, but from good cultivation, that riches
are derived.

5. It is impossible to make a large city without an abundant
population; and this is obtained by a benign government in
keeping the roads open, to induce strangers to come and live
there, and so that every one may gladly make that city his
dwelling-place.

6. Under mild and moderate governments the population is
always more numerous ; because marriages there are more free
and more desired. For every one will gladly have children,
when he is sure of being able to support them, and has no
fear of their being despoiled of their patrimony; and when
he knows not only that they are born free and not slaves,
but that by means of their own merits they may even become
great.

T. A state increases by being the asylum for the persons
that are expelled and dispersed by other states.

8. Colonies cannot successfully organize themselves with-
out pastures in common, where every one can pasture his cat-
tle; and forests in common, where every one may take his
firewood.

9, Banishments deprive cities of their inhabitants, of their
wealth, and of their industries.

10. The people are rich when they live as though they were
poor, and when no one attaches importance to what he has not,
but only to that which he needs.

11. The people are rich when the money does not go out of
their country, when they are content with what their country
produces, and when money is constantly brought into their
country by those who want the products of their industry,
which they supply to foreign countries.

12. Well-regulated governments have public magazines,
where they keep stores of provisions, drink, and firewood suffi-
cient for at least one year.

13. Well-regulated governments, for the purpose of assuring
the subsistence of the people without loss to the treasury,
should always keep on hand one year’s supply in common of

raw materials, so as to keep the people actively employed in
VOL. II.

450 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

those industries which are the nerve and life of the city, and
by means of which the people earn their bread.

14. Those provinces where there is money and order are
the nerve and sinews of the state.

CHAPTER IX.
# THE EVILS OF IDLENESS.

1. IpLENESS engenders many evils destructive of good mor-
als; for young men without occupation and without restraint
spend far beyond their means in dressing, feasting, and licen-
tiousness. Being idle, they waste their time and substance with
gaming and with women. ‘Their study is to appear dressed
in rich garments, to express themselves in cunning and subtle
language; and he who can thus most dexterously wound others
is most esteemed ; and the precepts of the Church are entirely
disregarded.

2. A state where the inhabitants pass the greater part of .
their time in idleness cannot produce men suitable for the con-
duct of business. 7

3. Idle people are most frequently used as tools by those
who desire a disturbance.

4, If the situation of a city conduces of itself to idleness,
then the laws should impose upon the inhabitants those neces-
sities to which nature does not oblige them. And the rulers
should imitate those wise people who, living in the most agree-
able and fertile countries, where the men were given to idle-
ness and indisposed to every severe exercise, for the purpose
of obviating the disadvantages which idleness would have added
to the softness of the climate, subjected the inhabitants to the
necessity of labor and severe exercise.

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 451

CHAPTER X.
ILL EFFECTS OF A CORRUPT GOVERNMENT.

1. In a corrupt government there is neither union nor
friendship amongst the citizens, unless it be amongst those
who are accomplices in some villany.

2. Asin corrupt governments all religion and fear of God are
extinct, so an oath and a given pledge have lost all value, ex-
cept when they can be employed for the purpose of gaining
some advantage. Men avail themselves of them, not for the
purpose of observing them, but because they serve them as a
means for deceiving the more easily; and the more easily
and securely the fraud succeeds, the more praise and glory are
derived from it. The bad men, therefore, are praised as clever,
and the honest men are blamed as imbeciles.

3. In a corrupt government the young men are idle and the
old men lascivious, and every age and sex given over to abomi-
nable practices ; which cannot be remedied even by good laws,
as these have become corrupt by common practice.

4, From this corruption arise that rapacity which is notice-
able in every citizen, and that thirst, not for real glory, but for
those discreditable honors which are the sources of hatred, en-
mity, disagreements, and plots; these are a cause of affliction
to the good, and of triumph to the wicked. For the good, con-
fiding in their innocence, do not, like the wicked, seek some
one who will defend and honor them by extraordinary means,
so that undefended and unhonored the good are ruined.

5. From this example of corruptiom arises the love of parties
and their power; to these the wicked attach themselves from
rapacity and ambition, and the good from necessity. And what
is most mischievous is to see how the originators of these par-
ties cover their aims and intentions with some pious name or
title.

6. It results from this corruption that the ordinances and
laws are not made for the public good, but for personal and
individual advantage.

7. This corruption causes wars, peace, and alliances to be
concluded, not for the common glory, but for the satisfaction
of the few.

AD? THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

8. In a city tainted by such disorders, the laws, the statutes,
and the civil ordinances are not made for the public good, but
have ever been and ever will be established to satisfy the am-
bition of the dominant party.

CHAPTER XI.
NOTABLE PRECEPTS AND MAXIMS.

1. GREAT modesty is essential to good manners. You must
never do an act or say a word that can cause displeasure. You
must be reverent to your superiors, modest with your equals,
and affable to your inferiors. These things will make you be-
loved by the whole city.

2. One of the most important things in this world is to
know one’s self, and properly to measure the forces of one’s
mind, and one’s condition.

5. Those only deserve to be free who apply themselves to
good works, and not to evil ones; for liberty badly employed
injures itself and others.

4. To the generous mind, the speaking of the truth gives
pleasure, especially when in the presence of wise men.

5. The consideration derived from one’s father or ances-
tors is fallacious, and is quickly lost when not sustained by
one’s own virtue.

6. In judging of the acts of others, we must never cover a
dishonest act with an honest reason, nor tarnish a praiseworthy
act as having been done for a contrary purpose.

7. Forgiveness springs from a generous spirit.

8. The wise and good man should be content to leave to
angry spirits the grave offences resulting from their own vio-
lent words.

9. A good citizen should forget his own private wrongs for
the love of the public good.

10. Whoever offends wrongfully, gives to others the right to
offend him rightfully.

11. The beginning of enmity is injury, and benefits are the
beginning of friendship; and he makes a great mistake who,
wishing to make another his friend, begins by injuring him.

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 453

12. No merciful thought can enter the heart of a dissolute
villain.

13. The virtuous man who knows the world is daily less
gladdened by good actions, and less saddened by evil ones.

14. A resolute spirit shows that misfortune has no power
over it.

15. Superior men retain in all the vicissitudes of fortune the
same courage and the same dignity. Weak-minded men become
intoxicated in prosperity, attributing all their good fortune to
virtues which they never knew, and thus they become insup-
portable and odious to all those whom they have around them.

16. It is the nature of proud and cowardly men to be inso-
lent in prosperity, and in adversity abject and humble.

17. Fraud is detestable in every action.

18. That man will never be regarded as good, who, for the
purpose of always making a profit from an occupation which he
carries on, proves himself rapacious, fraudulent, and violent.

19. An evil principle can only produce alike evil results.

20. Evil-disposed men constantly fear that others will do to
them what they are conscious of deserving.

21. Of all the insults that can be offered to men, that which
touches the honor of their wives is most keenly felt.

22. There is no more certain indication of a man’s character
than the company he keeps. A man who frequents honest
company acquires deservedly a good name; for it is impossible
that he should not somewhat resemble his associates.

23. A man who has been a good friend to others finds good
friends in turn.

24. In time of adversity one learns to know the fidelity of
one’s friends.

25. There is nothing which a man should not cheerfully
spend to serve a friend.

26. It is impossible without tears to recall to memory the
loss of one who was gifted with all those qualities that can be
desired in a good friend, or in a citizen by his country.

27. When fortune has robbed us of a friend, then there is no
other consolation than to try, as far as possible, to enjoy his
memory, and to recall all the wise things he has said, and all
the good things he has done.

28. There never was and never will be a law that prohibits
or censures and condemns mercy, liberality, and benevolence.

454 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

29. It is the duty of a virtuous man, who has been prevented
by the malignity of fortune from doing good, to teach it to
others; so that they, more favored by Heaven than he was,
may be able to practise it.

30. The good citizen should be compassionate, and not only
give charity to those who ask it, but should frequently supply
the wants of the poor without being asked.

31. The good citizen should relieve others in adversity, and
sustain them in prosperity.

32. The good citizen should love everybody, praise the good,
and have compassion for the bad.

33. There is no gain in benefiting one to offend the many.

34. We must esteem him who is, not him who can be lib-
eral.

30. Nothing makes us meet death with more cheerfulness
than to remember that we have never injured any one, but
rather benefited everybody.

CHAPTER XII.
BEAUTIFUL EXAMPLE OF A GOOD FATHER OF A FAMILY.

1. Nicomaco was a grave, resolute, and respectable man.
He spent his time honorably, rose early in the morning, and,
after hearing mass, attended to laying in the provisions for
the day. After that, if he had any business in the public
square, in the market, or with the magistrates, he attended to
it. And when he had nothing to do, he either amused himself
in discussing serious matters with some neighbor, or he with-
drew at home into his library, where he reviewed his writings
and regulated his accounts. After that he dined pleasantly
with ne family, and during dinner he conversed with his son,
gave him good advice, and taught him to know mankind; and
by some example ae from ancient or modern times, he
instructed him how to live. After that he went out and em-
ployed the remainder of the day in attending to business, or
in grave and honest amusements. When evening came the
Ave Maria always found him at home, where he remained
awhile with his family by the fireside, if it was winter, and

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 455

then returned to his library to revise the business he had done,
and then at the third hour all enjoyed a cheerful supper. This
habit of life was an example to all the others in the house,
which every one was ashamed not to imitate; and thus every-
thing went its regular and cheerful course.

CHAPTER XIII.
THE GOOD PRINCE.

1. THE good prince, by his rare and virtuous example, pro-
duces in the government as it were the same effect as the laws
and regulations. For the real virtues of a prince have so much
influence that the good men desire to imitate him, and the bad
ones are ashamed to follow a different course of life.

2. The eminent qualities of the prince make him feared and
beloved by his subjects, and most highly esteemed by other
princes; and thus he leaves to his descendants authority
founded upon a broad basis.

3. It is often seen that, when two princes of great virtue
succeed each other, they achieve the greatest results, so that
their fame rises to heaven. David doubtless excelled in war,
in knowledge, and in judgment; and so great was his valor
that, after having vanquished and humbled his neighbors, he
left to his son Solomon a tranquil kingdom, which he could
preserve and embellish with the arts of peace and war, and
thus could enjoy happily the benefits of his father’s virtues.

4. The successive reign of two valorous princes is sufficient,
so to say, to conquer the whole world.

5. Nothing causes a prince to be more esteemed than when
he renders himself famous by some act or wise saying, con-
sistent with the public good, and which shows the prince to be
magnanimous, liberal, and just, and which becomes familiar
as a proverb amongst all his subjects.

6. A prince should aim to have the obedience and affection
of his subjects. He obtains their obedience by being himself
a strict observer of the law, and by having the reputation of
being brave. And he wins their affection by affability, hu-
manity, and benevolence.

456 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

7. It is much easier for a good and wise prince to be beloved
by the good than by the bad, and to obey the laws rather than
to wish to control them. And to know how to arrive at this,
he need undergo no other trouble than to copy like a mirror
the lives of good princes, such as Timoleon of Corinth, Arato
of Sicyon, and others like them. In their lives he will find
such security and such satisfaction, for him who rules as well
as for those who are ruled, that it ought to excite the desire
to imitate them, which is easily done. For when men are well
governed they neither seek nor wish for any other liberty.

8. To be humane, affable, show no sign of cruelty, pride,
sensuality, nor any other vice that taints men’s lives, will
bring a prince honors, victories, and renown.

9. A wise and virtuous prince, to preserve his own character,
and not to give his sons cause for becoming bad, will never
build fortresses; so that his sons may not attempt to found
their reliance upon such fortresses, but upon the good will
and affection of his subjects.

10. A prince should receive his subjects with so much affa-
bility that no one, after having spoken to him, should go away
dissatisfied.

11. A prince should occasionally meet his citizens in their
assemblies, and give them proof of his affability and magnifi-
cence. He should, however, always preserve the majesty of
his office, which will not bear to be disregarded even in the
slightest degree.

12. In principalities that have proper institutions absolute
authority is never given to any one except in the army, for
there only is an immediate decision often necessary, requiring
absolute authority in one man. In all other matters the wise
and good prince can do nothing without his council.

18. A prince should shun flatterers as he does the pest;
and to defend himself from them he must choose wise men as
counsellors, and give them full power to tell him the truth.

14. A prince should be an extensive questioner, and a patient
listener to the truth touching the things he has asked about ;
and if he finds that any one does not tell him the truth from
fear, then he should manifest his displeasure in consequence.

15. Good counsels, no matter whence they come, should be
the result of the prudence of the prince, but the prudence of
the prince should not spring from good counsels.

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 457

16. The counsels of a head blanched with age and full of
experience are the wisest and most useful.

17. A prince will derive great glory from having been the
founder of his principality ; bestowing honor upon it, and
strengthening it by good laws, good allies, and good examples.

18. A prince should be agreeable to his allies, feared by his
enemies, just towards his subjects, and loyal in his dealings
with foreigners.

19. A prince should aim to keep his city abundantly sup-
plied, his people united, and the nobility honored.

20. In bestowing offices and honors the prince should seek
for merit wherever it is to be found, regardless of birth.

21. The practices, similar to those of the ancients, which a
good prince should introduce in his state are, to honor and
reward virtue, not to contemn poverty, to respect the regula-
tions of military discipline, to constrain the citizens to love
each other, to live without factions, to respect private interests
less than public ones, and other similar things.

22. [very one knows how laudable it is in a prince to keep
his pledges, to live with integrity, and not with craft and deceit.

23. The public faith pledged by a prince to his subjects
should be inviolably observed.

24. The good prince knows not and never will give occasion
for any subject of scandal; for he is a lover of peace and of
justice.

25. It is the duty of the prince to turn offenders from the
road of sin, and to bring them back to the right road.

26. Calumnies are detestable in every kind of government,
and to restrain them the prince should not hesitate to pass
any regulations that will effect it.

27. The good and wise prince should be a lover and pro-
tector of men of letters.

28. He should open public schools under the direction of the
most distinguished men, so that the youth may apply them-
selves to the study of letters.

- 29. He should love all those who excel in any one art.

30. The prince must take care that his people never lack
the means of subsistence.

31. He must fix honest and just prices for the provisions,
and above all he must see that the poor have their due and
are not defrauded.

458 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

CHAPTER XIV.
OF THE MINISTERS.

1. Tuere should be a great distance between the authority
of the minister and that of the prince.

2. What excites admiration for a minister is his vigilance,
prudence, magnanimity, and in fact the good regulation of the
government.

3. A minister who does not counsel useful measures to
his prince, regardless of all other considerations, fails in his
duty.

4. He who counsels princes must act in all matters with
moderation, and must not himself assume the responsibility
of anything; he must give his opinion without passion, and
defend it with modesty, so that if the prince follows his coun-
sel he may do it voluntarily, and not seem to be carried away
by importunity.

5. The minister should defend his opinion with reasons,
~and not attempt to employ either authority or force.

6. A wise minister should recognize evils from afar, so as
to prevent their growth in time; or he should take such pre-
cautions that, if these evils do grow, they shall do no harm.

7. A minister should pursue his course with courage and
vigilance, regardless of any other considerations.

8. The good minister fears no undertaking which he knows
to be for the public good.

9. The minister should never, from fear of a vain reproach,
abandon any project which he knows to be for the advantage
of the state.

10. Calumnies directed against any one employed in impor-
tant affairs of state are injuries that may do much harm.

11. The minister should do everything so as not to be obliged
to justify himself, for justification presupposes error, or the sup-
position of error.

12. It behooves the minister, in case he has to reprove any
one, not to offer the opportunity of being himself reproved.

13. The object for which ministers are sent into a city is
to rule and govern the subjects with affection and justice, and
not to dispute and contend with each other. But they should

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 459

agree together like brothers and citizens appointed by the same
prince. |

14. The minister who thinks more of himself than of the
prince and the state will never be a good minister; for he who
has the management of the state in his hands must never
think of himself, but only of the prince, and must never bring
anything to his notice that does not concern him.

15. The minister must administer his office for the public
good, and not for his own advantage.

16. Whoever is a slave to his own passions can never serve
another well. |

17. It rarely happens that private passions do not prejudice
public convenience.

18. The minister must be a stranger to public rapine, and
should labor to increase the wealth of the state.

19. In a state corrupted by parties, everything, even the
smallest, becomes a subject of contention amongst the minis-
ters. The secrets of the state are made public, the good and
the wicked are alike favored or disfavored. The good as well
as the bad are equally defamed, and no one attends to his
business.

20. A minister should beware of either cunning or audacious
parties; for although they may in the beginning seem good, yet
they soon become difficult to manage, and end by becoming
dangerous.

21. The minister should guard against those errors which,
although not known, yet prove the ruin of the state.

22. The idleness of princes and the faithlessness of minis-
ters will ruin an empire, although founded upon the blood of
ever sO many brave men.

23. A foreign minister should be acceptable to the sovereign
to whom he is sent, and should be practical, prudent, zealous,
and devoted to his sovereign and his country.

24. A minister should be able to discuss the condition of
states, the disposition of the princes and the people, and what
may be hoped for from peace and feared in war.

25. The minister must remember that titles do not make
men illustrious, but men the titles, and that neither blood nor
authority has ever any reputation without virtue.

_ 26. The minister should die richer in good fame and benevo-
lence than in treasure.

460 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

CHAPTER XV.
THE TYRANT PRINCE.

1. Iv is not less useful to observe the cunning and the de-
eeits which tyrannous princes employ to keep up a reputation
which they have not merited, than to know and observe vir-
tuous actions. For if the latter incite the liberal. spirits to
imitate them, the former will prompt the desire to avoid and
destroy them.

2. The tyrant prince, happily unknown in our age, had no
regard for anything but his personal interests.

3. To carry his evil thoughts into effect, he made pretence
of religion and humanity.

4. He broke the laws of the state, and governed it arbi-
trarily.

5. He violated the laws and the ancient rules and customs
under which the people had lived for a long time.

6. He stripped the magistrates of all the emblems of honor,
and of all authority, and appropriated them to himself.

7. The taxes which he imposed upon the people were heavy,
and his judgments were unjust.

8. The business that used to be transacted publicly to
everybody’s satisfaction, he transferred to his own palace,
incurring thereby the reproaches and the just hatred of the
people.

9. The strict justice and humanity which he feigned at the
beginning were soon changed into haughtiness and cruelty.

10. So as not to govern better without than within the city,
he appointed rectors throughout the country, who beat and
despoiled the country people.

11. He favored the populace so as the better to beat down
the great, whom he always regarded with suspicion, although
he was supported by them. For he did not believe that the
generous spirits that used to be amongst the nobility could
live contentedly under his despotism.

12. His favorite maxim, and which cannot be sufficiently
detested, was, that men must be caressed or exterminated.

13. By frequent and continuous executions he impoverished
and depopulated the cities.

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 461

14. Everybody’s hands were tied, and every mouth was
closed, and whoever found fault with the tyrant’s government
was punished with cruelty.

15. In his government he showed himself avaricious and
cruel; in granting audiences, difficult; and in his replies,
haughty.

16. He made and unmade men at his pleasure.

17. He wanted the subjection and not the good will of his
people, and for that reason he preferred to be feared rather
than beloved.

18. He changed all the institutions of the government, and
left nothing intact; and he removed the inhabitants from one
province to another, like herds of cattle.

19. As such proceedings are most cruel, and opposed, not
only to all Christian, but even humane ways of living, every
man should avoid them and prefer private life rather than the
life of a prince at the expense of so much injury to mankind.

20. It was this conduct that filled his subjects with indigna-
tion; for they saw the majesty of the state destroyed, the insti-
tutions overthrown, the laws annulled, and every honest way of
living corrupted, and all civil modesty extinct.

21. These methods and extraordinary ways rendered the
prince himself unhappy and insecure; for the more cruelty he
practised, the feebler his government became.

22. In this wise the state of the prince became an example
of all the greatest villanies; the slightest ground gave occasion
for executions and the grossest rapine, which was due to the
wickedness of the ruler, and not to the evil nature of the gov-
erned. And as the needs of the tyrant prince were endless, he
was obliged to resort to constant rapine, which he practised in
many ways.

23. Amongst other dishonest practices of the tyrant was
that of enacting laws prohibiting certain acts, which laws he
was afterwards himself the first to infringe. This caused a
general disregard of these laws; but he never punished the of-
fenders until he saw that a great number had made themselves
lable; and then he turned to punish them, not from zeal for
the law, but from cupidity, so as to have them ransom them-
selves from the penalty.

24. Thence arose many inconveniences, and, above all this,
that the people became impoverished without being improved.

462 LHOUGHTS OF. A STATESMAN.

25. And those who were thus impoverished endeavored to
take advantage of those who were less powerful than them-
selves.

26. Whence it comes that all the crimes committed by the
people who are governed by a tyrant arise necessarily from the
fact that he himself is stained by similar crimes.

CHAPTER XVI.

PRAISE AND SAFETY OF THE GOOD PRINCE, AND INFAMY AND
DANGER OF THE TYRANT.

1. As the founders of a well-constituted government deserve
praise, so those of a tyranny merit infamy.

2. Those who incline to tyranny do not perceive how much
fame, honor, security, quiet, and contentment of the soul they
lose, incurring instead so much infamy, ignominy, blame, dan-
ger, and disquietude.

3. It is impossible that those princes, if they have read his-
tory and attached any value to the memory of things of the
past, should not have wished rather to have lived like Agesi-
laus, Timoleon, and Dion, who were good princes, than like
Nabis, Phalaris, and Dionysius, who were tyrants. For they
would have seen that the latter were covered with infamy,
whilst the former were overwhelmed with praise.

4. They would also have seen how Timoleon and the others
had no less authority in their countries than what Dionysius
and Phalaris had in theirs, and that they enjoyed infinitely
more security.

©). We should consider how much more those Emperors de-
served praise who lived conformably to the laws, and as good
princes, than those whose lives were the opposite.

6. It will be seen that Titus, Nerva, Trajan, Antoninus, and
Marcus Aurelius did not need the Pretorian troops nor a mul-
tipleity of laws to defend them; for their own good habits,
the affection of the people, and the love of the Senate, pro-
tected them.

7. It will be seen how insufficient the eastern and western
armies were to protect Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, and many

THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN. 463

other wicked Emperors, against those enemies which their evil
practices and their villanous lives had created.

8. If the history of these Emperors were well considered, it
would be a good lesson to those princes who are inclined to
become tyrants; for it would teach them the way to glory or
to shame, and of security or of fear. For out of twenty-six
Emperors that reigned from Cesar to Maximin, sixteen were
assassinated, and only ten died a natural death. And if amongst
those that were killed there were some that were good, like
Galba and Pertinax, their death resulted from that corruption
which their predecessors had allowed to enter the army.

9. If we consider the times when Rome was governed by
good Emperors, we shall see a prince secure in the midst of his
secure citizens, the whole world enjoying peace and justice,
the Senate in all its authority, the magistrates with their
honors, the wealthy citizens enjoying their riches, and nobility
and virtue exalted. We shall also see all license, corruption,
and ambition extinct; in fact, we should see a return of the
golden times when everybody could fearlessly hold and defend
whatever opinion he chose to entertain. In fine, we should see
the world triumph, the prince surrounded with respect and
glory, and the people filled with love and a sense of security.

10. Whoever studies the period when Rome was governed
by tyrants, will find that she was torn by atrocious wars; full
of discord in consequence of seditions; cruel both in peace and
in war; many princes killed by the sword, and endless civil
and foreign wars; all Italy afflicted and full of fresh disas-
ters, and her cities pillaged and in ruins. He will see Rome
herself burned, her Capitol destroyed by her own citizens, the
ancient temples desolate, the religious ceremonies corrupted,
the city filled with adultery, the sea full of exiles, and the
rocky shores stained with blood. He will find endless cruelty
in Rome, and nobility, riches, honors, and, above all, virtue,
treated as capital crimes. He will see the informers rewarded,
the servants corrupted to denounce their masters, the freed-
men opposed to their patrons, and those who had no enemies
oppressed by their own friends.

11. After this, whoever is of woman born should dread
a recurrence of times when the wicked governed, and should

be moved with an intense desire to see the good prince imi-
tated.

464 THOUGHTS OF A STATESMAN.

12. He should desire to possess a corrupt city, not to waste
it entirely like Cesar, but to reform it ike Romulus. And
truly Heaven could not give men a greater opportunity for
glory, nor could men desire any greater. In short, those to
whom Heaven vouchsafes such an opportunity should regard it
as though two ways were offered them; the one leading to a
life of security, and after life a giorious memory; and the
other, to a life of perpetual anxiety, and after death eternal
infamy.

END OF VOL. II.

University Press: John Wilson & Son, Cambridge.

WING ©

ty of Toronto

Library

iversi

58
age

Un
FROM
THIS
POCKET

Acme Library Card Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN CO. LIMITED

AWAMOUAOT AO ANVN

‘ALVA

°C °A
*pTouzed *H°O Aq °14 °° *SSUTP TIM

OFzeuoTdtp pue ‘TeotytTpod ‘TeoT104ysTy sul
OTOOOTN ST TeasTyoRy

602 T7S

Bh ia
ever . ‘ath
4 > vcs Aa hols beast Pu bbni ns; oS
' : ’ tinge
” as) rks niter-mpeneaenman Pee MALS, hier: pr ree
Pen Seeks + Arte Sick Hg ton
ES ate = 3 ain BaD, _
my y a

Preps pecr IPI Pikaia de Ferlad aa

; ei eo Sees +O He ee ihe se Sir spree haus of
P we ~ e
te xt vt vs Sat eiay epee yeten te andre iets naka

Aoi my ' *

BS ty

err evenly

Ys tt aite g re ra =<
ean ret Perea

dae, KEMP ol een Re
ieerdouss iaohanceas etiadsdna meat SEEM hw nad
NM bated lab ach
sn ibeiny Me biptes Ereatriet
ad. WER An FPAE ld inhi y
es . panies mrp aioe ieeteee Te vivid
pat

P+ arise fe 3
Sheen ia ‘ a eo ‘s satin bes

restrdol vcs
4 spite rienat Senge
ort bad co

ta “t
Reese vey 2

+B ovals a

Ws op af bath dan teé ext

4 sets sihigand sg
han.

a tet
ieee Fh Assy

age sak ss

the ie

naesipny eta i sea tit
a p ‘ + Nose ebay . mst
x + Shed it Roihe ag pi bite be is
4 5 q , ree oh njielin RS

Wawa

syed 3 teks
: re sot aye | HAs
pit eet 4 Ha ay saa pate tel
ay rae Bieter cam Caatahe NECN TERY

. :
3 ae Y RETIRED RASS Aad a udy sig act
bred Fone ate 3 ae Welds = Hse hiysgahe tang el taeart sent int ;
3 : oa ra atet Hers ; esa yhttredemaden tet
peep a = Si maaan aha eee —
Te PEPRb CY ed Aates aA ety
aan

2 tates
pri: ae 7s veiad
at ner) tte a aspaate:
a r

retarnal

ee og ee

ii ats

— ia aati
ne | a =
\ entt: ce
iid as oe

saat:
ae

tale see eH

r Atty
jadit a 454 ‘ Hane 2
: shag : Rts Mite ia Rae
sh te ae K yes 5 ie cata ch Sige ue
Sata _ rit
¢ am +
shi ft ris i on

fs
ee . ce ti

ies

Sue Reese 22.

int eas teed Mae PAL Nye
ite A ae be oe
a

Sn ae:

-

hi ih
ras
ehh oo

Beers
Sawa

ee,

rat i ay

Ha eintl

it See Pad
oo ae
mM

ii ip fe ia ania
ae i

teks: rds RaWea gilt
gui Hala sii

= sues Fe res rs
= =S be

gS Sreee se 3 = er ne
i

Gusta -
ts Int hi) try An a Sel RRO

" iad
sheild Hedy sa
ee feiss i
iptieep

sacs
iy aS Ry
See oe ee
3
=

= =
aa = epee
eee ~ . ¢ BEER

ee aS
Ne a

=e
reas

Ses soree
are
Bs

i +h

J Hs J f nets iti iit i ay

i 4 we
Hah i Has : ne hs a
r "4 he at aie : ay a ih

=

ud es
~ hie no ape
See errors

Essie}
i ie i
Honan
tat

ee

Sete:

eae
=,

=

+} iye34 ti
ant “hale eats (4 e
Ht iit it

hY
Pt
nit

aetey
—

sy

me’ oor

Ss
roe Se
i—=s
=I etre
ees
Se
ra

aT
Se

cent ee =o
rine Guta Patents Sette ss
—
a

an

oe

hse
SSS se S5-

an

aSaae

a

= ababn ty ene

ee ane sini ease en it an ite 4 mask nee : ’ rit ea

cee cy vais ani vise Mdosibe sdibe b ‘ sie ‘is 4 ee
a mies ao oe ty ihe Eee int wih i eka at unt rue Saal rite
. i Sthyy Eee : 3

Eber ees Setstersiiess

wast pies
=a 3

anes, Ss et
Sarees :

spas twa werk SHere ine wale erst egecs nda)

we ie
Wee siya sha ve ust

< sa WEFi®
lege ae ae
Sd Bs een, Ps
Spacing mest TA 04 be Hh

MO be has ab oll
pace Lnntnay

pied nt y Se
rahi waptente wee

rey
pes gebsesenegerys oon wees ha Rewind Ade Satpal

ns sligped
Pus restate eee NF
ret : Ne Si Tar iedl a
? ae re aed We et ny ot aE EARN 2
Pepe a!

Frese rere ah kay
Aye

“ ‘ é WEE ARO wary.
ssguntigeunteta ba bknltee
tater e ies
=a phe ees
enes the

is visike banal ivaege
oo aanairnenant Aten: ty
by bs ee
WINE tee

ob
Pedy Yeon aes
ss nite ie eae

Sinaia st ea iy
Wielseadsinanrpobnenie »
cilaecesaet regeaeite se
Hit: saeeire
ireyeene ie! sep
poasherstt: mn RHR ani ee
binge Phi

aby
Pr seyany be,
. Mterieben
= = me a ting nis tat
“| sis ern ns vie SEP By a
atts eh "

Ef a
; ai Lie Me
det bn de A es
eiaie — Aisa
b oh seu a Hee cbse Nay
aN . 4 diets ae eel eh Ayn
Be ces a meh isla Sealy
Mails a

by ist mattis

At
a ris

li ah at ui ct oe ne tan sete Fa Peg
ee ie eit eshte tat seu ake
3 eer paw:
Elias ehea bE
aati ne a
Unsedumieleiter ty gait
MES Tis toa ; Nit by

v*

ty Bees

")

Seeseve=

Net nen Se een
Niemdoen pee eae Sahel sieeacen
ad pengee phenom oapcen ried ear

has es

=

=
S65.
~eerer

et

en ewe
Se 29

_
soe <3

——
- . >
— = sve

pam
ee

eR
Sh
ae
acate

Sakbipee teen

ind
y=

oa

See ae

as
a

Seer.

Seat Narn
ene
Sant

aig $ er ii nee :
cts Mig. vi ee de trey erry © Rosi
%,

eS ke Ieee! Ya

’
SerEe~

ie 2 at

a a nore
oi) Pd *S- >

on 5
‘1 pti pitit attain ;
ae So: B

Sores

es Tee
SSS

=

Ses
