The Science of Mechanics (Ernst Mach (Thomas J. McCormack, trans.), 1893)
==========================================================
Mach's critique of Newton shaped Einstein; operationalism's founding text. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (in.ernet.dli.2015.154174).

NIVERSAL


PROFESSOR  ERNST  MACH


ISSS  - 19  Hi


THE


SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS


A CRITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL  ACCOUNT
OF  ITS  DEVELOPMENT


BY

DR.  ERNST  MACH

PROFESSOR  OF  TI^E  HISTORY  AND  “THEORY  OF  INDUCTIVE  SCIENCE  IN
THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  VIENNA


translated  from  the  german

BY

THOMAS  J.  McCORMACK


WITH  TWO  HUNDRED  AND  FIFTY  CUTS  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS
FOURTH  EDITION


CHICAGO  LONDON

THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO.

1919



• BY

T 1 1 1%  Open  Cohut  Publishing  Company


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE  TO  THE
SECOND  ENGLISH  EDITION.

Since  the  appearance  of  the  first  edition  of  the
present  translation  of  Mach’s  Mechanics ,*  the  views
which  Professor  Mach  has  advanced  on  the  philoso-
phy of  science  have  found  wide  and  steadily  increas-
ing acceptance.  Many  fruitful  and  elucidative  con-
troversies have  sprung  from  his  discussions  of  the
historical,  logical,  and  psychological  foundations  of
physical  science,  and  in  consideration  of  the  great
ideal  success  which  his  works  have  latterly  met  with
in  Continental  Europe,  the  time  seems  ripe  for  a still
wider  dissemination  of  his  views  in  English-speaking
countries.  The  study  of  the  history  and  theory  of
science  is  finding  fuller  and  fuller  recognition  in  our
universities,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  present  ex-
emplary treatment  of  the  simplest  and  most  typical
branch' of  physics  will  stimulate  further  progress  in
this  direction,

The  text  of  the  present  edition,  which  contains
the  extensive  additions  made  by  the  author  to  the

* Die  Mechanik  in  ihrer  Eniwickelung  historisch-kritisch  dargesiellt . Von
Dr.  Ernst  Mach,  Professor  an  der  Universitat  zu  Wien.  Mit  257  Abbildungen.
First  German  edition,  1883.  Fourth  German  edition,  1901.  First  edition  of
the  English  translation,  Chicago,  The  Open  Court  Publishing  Co.,  1893.


vi


TRAN’S  LA  TONS  PREFA  CE .


latest  German  editions,  has  been  thoroughly  revised
by  the  translator.  All  errors,  either  of  substance  or
typography,  so  far  as  they  have  come  to  the  trans-
lator’s notice,  have  been  removed,  and  in  many  cases
the  phraseology  has  been  altered.  The  sub-title  of
the  work  has,  in  compliance  with  certain  criticisms,
also  been  changed,  to  accord  more  with  the  wording
of  the  original  title  and  to  bring  out  the  idea  that  the
work  treats  of  the  principles  of  mechanics  predomi-
nantly under  the  aspect  of  their  develop?nent  ( Entwicke -
lung).  To  avoid  confusion  in  the  matter  of  references,
the  main  title  stands  as  in  the  first  edition.

The  author’s  additions,  which  are  considerable,
have  been  relegated  to  the  Appendix.  This  course
has  been  deemed  preferable  to  that  of  incorporating
them  in  the  text,  first,  because  the  numerous  refer-
ences in  other  works  to  the  pages  of  the  first  edition
thus  hold  good  for  the  present  edition  also,  and  sec-
ondly, because  with  few  exceptions  the  additions  are
either  supplementary  in  character,  or  in  answer  to
criticisms.  A list  of  the  subjects  treated  in  these  ad-
ditions is  given  in  the  Table  of  Contents,  under  the
heading  “Appendix”  on  page  xix.

Special  reference,  however,  must  be  made  to  the
additions  referring  to  Hertz’s  Mechanics  (pp-  548-555),
and  to  the  history  of  the  development  of  Professor
Mach’s  own  philosophical  and  scientific  views,  notably
to  his  criticisms  of  the  concepts  of  mass,  inertia,  ab-
solute motion,  etc.,  on  pp.  542-547,  555-574,  and  579


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.


vii


-583.  The  remarks  here  made  will  be  found  highly
elucidative,  while  the  references  given  to  the  rich  lit-
erature dealing  with  the  history  and  philosophy  of
science  will  also  be  found  helpful.

As  for  the  rest,  the  text  of  the  present  edition  of
the  translation  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  first.  It  has
had  the  sanction  of  the  author  and  the  advantage
of  revision  by  Mr.  C.  S.  Peirce,  well  known  for  his
studies  both  of  analytical  mechanics  and  of  the  his-
tory and  logic  of  physics.  Mr.  Peirce  read  the  proofs
of  the  first  edition  and  rewrote  Sec.  8 in  the  chapter
on  Units  and  Measures,  where  the  original  was  in-
applicable to  the  system  commonly  taught  in  this
county.

Thomas  J.  McCormack.

La  Salle,  III.,  February,  1902.


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE  TO  THE  TRANS-
LATION.


Having  read  the  proofs  of  the  present  translation
of  my  work,  Die  Mechanik  in  ih?'er  JEntwickelung , I can
testify  that  the  publishers  have  supplied  an  excellent,
accurate,  and  faithful  rendering  of  it,  as  their  previous
translations  of  essays  of  mine  gave  me  every  reason  to
expect.  My  thanks  are  due  to  all  concerned,  and
especially  to  Mr.  McCormack,  whose  intelligent  care
in  the  conduct  of  the  translation  has  led  to  the  dis-
covery of  many  errors,  heretofore  overlooked.  I may,
thus,  confidently  hope,  that  the  rise  and  growth  of  the
ideas  of  the  great  inquirers,  which  it  was  my  task  to
portray,  will  appear  to  my  new  public  in  distinct  and
sharp  outlines.  E.  Mach.

Prague,  April  8th,  1893.


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION.


That  the  interest  in  the  foundations  of  mechanics
is  still  unimpaired,  is  shown  by  the  works  published
since  1889  by  Budde,  P.  and  J.  Friedlander,  H.  Hertz,
P.  Johannesson,  K.  Lasswitz,  MacGregor,  K.  Pearson,
J.  Petzoldt,  Rosenberger,  E.  Strauss,  Vicaire,  P.
Volkmann,  E.  Wohlwill,  and  others,  many  of  which
are  deserving  of  consideration,  even  though  briefly.

In  Prof.  Karl  Pearson  ( Grammar  of  Science , Lon-
don, .1892),  I have  become  acquainted  with  an  inquirer
with  whose  epistemological  views  I am  in  accord  at
nearly  all  essential  points,  and  who  has  always  taken
a frank  and  courageous  stand  against  all  pseudo-
scientific tendencies  in  science.  Mechanics  appears
at  present  to  be  entering  on  a new  relationship  to
physics,  as  is  noticeable  particularly  in  the  publica-
tion of  H.  Hertz.  The  nascent  transformation  in  our
conception  of  forces  acting  at  a distance  will  perhaps
be  influenced  also  by  the  interesting  investigations  of
H.  Seeliger  (“  Ueber  das  Newton’sche  Gravitations-
gesetz,  ” Sitzungsbericht  der  Miinchener  Akade?nie,  1896),
who  has  shown  the  incompatibility  of  a rigorous  inter-
pretation of  Newton’s  law  with  the  assumption  of  an
unlimited  mass  of  the  universe.

Vienna,  January,  1897.


E.  Mach.


X


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION,


ing  these  cases  must  ever  remain  the  method  at  once
the  most  effective  and  the  most  natural  for  laying  this
gist  and  kernel  bare.  Indeed,  it  is  not  too  much  to
say  that  it  is  the  only  way  in  which  a real  comprehen-
sion of  the  general  upshot  of  mechanics  is  to  be  at-
tained.

I have  framed  my  exposition  of  the  subject  agree-
ably to  these  views.  It  is  perhaps  a little  long,  but,  on
the  other  hand,  I trust  that  it  is  clear.  I have  not  in
every  case  been  able  to  avoid  the  use  of  the  abbrevi-
ated and  precise  terminology  of  mathematics.  To  do
so  would  have  been  to  sacrifice  matter  to  form  ; for  the
language  of  everyday  life  has  not  yet  grown  to  be  suf-
ficiently accurate  for  the  purposes  of  so  exact  a science
as  mechanics.

The  elucidations  which  I here  offer  are,  in  part,
substantially  contained  in  my  treatise,  Die  Geschichte
mid  die  Wurzel  des  Satzes  voji  der  Drhaltung  der  Arbeit
(Prague,  Calve,  1872).  At  a later  date  nearly  the  same
views  were  expressed  by  Kirchhoff  ( Varies  ungen  Fiber
mathematisclie  Physik : Mechanik , Leipsic,  1874)  and  by
Helmholtz  ( Die  Thatsachen  in  der  Wahrnchmung ,
Berlin,  1879),  and  have  since  become  commonplace
enough.  Still  the  matter,  as  I conceive  it,  does  not
seem  to  have  been  exhausted,  and  I cannot  deem  my
exposition  to  be  at  all  superfluous.

In  my  fundamental  conception  of  the  nature  of  sci-
ence as  Economy  of  Thought, — a view  which  I in-
dicated both  in  the  treatise  above  cited  and  in  my


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


xi


pamphlet,  Die  Gest alien  der ' Flussigkeit  (Prague,  Calve,
1872),  and  which  I somewhat  more  extensively  devel-
oped in  my  academical  memorial  address,  Die  okono-
mische  Natur  der  physikaliscJi en  Forschung  (Vienna,  Ge-
rold,  1882, — I no  longer  stand  alone.  I have  been
much  gratified  to  find  closely  allied  ideas  developed,
in  an  original  manner,  by  Dr.  R.  Avenarius  (. Philoso-
phic a/s  Denken  dei * Welt , gemass  de?n  Princip  des  klein-
sten  Kraftmaasses,  Leipsic,  Fues,  1876).  Regard  for
the  true  endeavor  of  philosophy,  that  of  guiding  into
one  common  stream  the  many  rills  of  knowledge,  will
not  be  found  wanting  in  my  work,  although  it  takes  a
determined  stand  against  the  encroachments  of  meta-
physical methods.

The  questions  here  dealt  with  have  occupied  me
since  my  earliest  youth,  when  my  interest  for  them  was
powerfully  stimulated  by  the  beautiful  introductions  of
Lagrange  to  the  chapters  of  his  Analytic  Mechanics , as
well  as  by  the  lucid  and  lively  tract  of  Jolly,  Principien
der  Mechanik  (Stuttgart,  1852).  If  Duehring’s  esti-
mable work,  Nritische  Geschichte  der  Principien  der  Me-
chanik (Berlin,  1873),  did  not  particularly  influence
me,  it  was  that  at  the  time  of  its  appearance,  my  ideas
had  been  not  only  substantially  worked  out,  but  actually
published.  Nevertheless,  the  reader  will,  at  least  on
the  destructive  side,  find  many  points  of  agreement
between  Diihring’s  criticisms  and  those  here  expressed.

The  new  apparatus  for  the  illustration  of  the  sub-
ject, here  figured  and  described,  were  designed  entirely


Xll


PREFACE  TO  THE.  FIRST  EDITIOH


by  me  and  constructed  by  Mr.  F.  Hajek,  the  mechani-
cian of  the  physical  institute  under  my  control.

In  less  immediate  connection  with  the  text  stand
the  fac-simile  reproductions  of  old  originals  in  my  pos-
session. The  quaint  and  naive  traits  of  the  great  in-
quirers, which  find  in  them  their  expression,  have  al-
ways exerted  upon  me  a refreshing  influence  in  my
studies,  and  I have  desired  that  my  readers  should
share  this  pleasure  with  me.


Prague,  May,  1883.


K.  Mach.


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.


In  consequence  of  the  kind  reception  which  this
book  has  met  with,  a very  large  edition  has  been  ex-
hausted in  less  than  five  years.  This  circumstance  and
the  treatises  that  have  since  then  appeared  of  E.  Wohl-
will,  H.  Streintz,  L.  Lange,  J.  Epstein,  F.  A.  Muller,
J.  Popper,  G.  Helm,  M.  Planck,  F.  Poske,  and  others
are  evidence  of  the  gratifying  fact  that  at  the  present
day  questions  relating  to  the  theory  of  cognition  are
pursued  with  interest,  which  twenty  years  ago  scarcely
anybody  noticed.

As  a thoroughgoing  revision  of  my  work  did  not
yet  seem  to  me  to  be  expedient,  I have  restricted  my-
self, so  far  as  the  text  is  concerned,  to  the  correction
of  typographical  errors,  and  have  referred  to  the  works
that  have  appeared  since  its  original  publication,  as
far  as  possible,  in  a few  appendices.

E.  Mach.

Prague,  June,  1888.


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


The  present  volume  is  not  a treatise  upon  the  ap-
plication of  the  principles  of  mechanics.  Its  aim  is
to  clear  up  ideas,  expose  the  real  significance  of  the
matter,  and  get  rid  of  metaphysical  obscurities.  The
little  mathematics  it  contains  is  merely  secondary  to
this  purpose.

Mechanics  will  here  be  treated,  not  as  a branch  of
mathematics,  but  as  one  of  the  physical  sciences.  If
the  reader’s  interest  is  in  that  side  of  the  subject,  if
he  is  curious  to  know  how  the  principles  of  mechanics
have  been  ascertained,  from  what  sources  they  take
their  origin,  and  how  far  they  can  be  regarded  as
permanent  acquisitions,  he  will  find,  I hope,  in  these
pages  some  enlightenment.  All  this,  the  positive  and
physical  essence  of  mechanics,  which  makes  its  chief
and  highest  interest  for  a student  of  nature,  is  in  ex-
isting treatises  completely  buried  and  concealed  be-
neath a mass  of  technical  considerations.

The  gist  and  kernel  of  mechanical  ideas  has  in  al-
most every  case  grown  up  in  the  investigation  of  very
simple  and  special  cases  of  mechanical  processes  ; and
the  analysis  of  the  history  of  the  discussions  concern-


PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION.


The  number  of  the  friends  of  this  work  appears  to
have  increased  in  the  course  of  seventeen  years,  and
the  partial  consideration  which  my  expositions  have
received  in  the  writings  of  Boltzmann,  Foppl,  Hertz,
Love,  Maggi,  Pearson,  and  Slate,  have  awakened  in
me  the  hope  that  my  work  shall  not  have  been  in
vain.  Especial  gratification  has  been  afforded  me  by
finding  in  J.  B.  Stallo  ( The  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics')
another  staunch  ally  in  my  attitude  toward  mechanics,
and  in  W.  K.  Clifford  (. Lectures  a?id  Essays  and  The
Common  Sense  of  the  Exact  Sciences ),  a thinker  of  kin-
dred aims  and  points  of  view.

New  books  and  criticisms  touching  on  my  discus-
sions have  received  attention  in  special  additions,
which  in  some  instances  have  assumed  considerable
proportions.  Of  these  strictures,  O.  Holder’s  note  on
my  criticism  of  the  Archimedean  deduction  ( Eenken
und  Anschauung  in  der  Geometrie,  p.  63,  note  62)  has
been  of  special  value,  inasmuch  as  it  afforded  me  the
opportunity  of  establishing  my  view  on  still  firmer
foundations  (see  pages  5 12-5 17).  I do  not  at  all  dis-
pute that  rigorous  demonstrations  are  as  possible  in
mechanics  as  in  mathematics.  But  with  respect  to


XVI


PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION.


the  Archimedean  and  certain  other  deductions,  I am
still  of  the  opinion  that  my  position  is  the  correct
one.

Other  slight  corrections  in  my  work  may  have
been  made  necessary  by  detailed  historical  research,
but  upon  the  whole  I am  of  the  opinion  that  I have
correctly  portrayed  the  picture  of  the  transformations
through  which  mechanics  has  passed,  and  presumably
will  pass.  The  original  text,  from  which  the  later  in-
sertions are  quite  distinct,  could  therefore  remain  as
it  first  stood  in  the  first  edition.  I also  desire  that  no
changes  shall  be  made  in  it  even  if  after  my  death  a
new  edition  should  become  necessary.

E.  Mach.

Vienna,  January,  1901.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

PAGE

Translator’s  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition v

Author’s  Preface  to  the  Translation. viii

Preface  to  the  First  Edition  ix

Preface  to  the  Second  Edition xiii

Preface  to  the  Third  Edition xiv

Preface  to  the  Fourth  Edition xv

Table  of  Contents xvii

Introduction i

CHAPTER  I.

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.

I.  The  Principle  of  the  Lever 8

II.  The  Principle  of  the  Inclined  Plane 24

III.  The  Principle  of  the  Composition  of  Forces  33

IV.  The  Principle  of  Virtual  Velocities 49

V.  Retrospect  of  the  Development  of  Statics 77

VI.  The  Principles  of  Statics  in  Their  Application  to  Fluids  86

VII.  The  Principles  of  Statics  in  Their  Application  to  Gas-
eous Bodies no

CHAPTER  II.

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.

I.  Galileo’s  Achievements 128

II.  The  Achievements  of  Huygens  . 155

III.  The  Achievements  of  Newton 187

IV.  Discussion  and  Illustration  of  the  Principle  of  Reaction  201

V.  Criticism  of  the  Principle  of  Reaction  and  of  the  Con-
cept of  Mass 216

VI.  Newton’s  Views  of  Time,  Space,  and  Motion  ....  222


xviii  THE  SCIENCE  OE  MECHANICS.

PAGE

VII.  Synoptical  Critique  of  the  Newtonian  Enunciations  . 238
VIII  Retrospect  of  the  Development  of  Dynamics  ....  245

CHAPTER  III.

THE  EXTENDED  APPLICATION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF
MECHANICS  AND  THE  DEDUCTIVE  DEVELOP-
MENT OF  THE  SCIENCE.

I.  Scope  of  the  Newtonian  Principles 256

II.  The  Formulas  and  Units  of  Mechanics 269

III.  The  Laws  of  the  Conservation  of  Momentum,  of  the

Conservation  of  the  Centre  of  Gravity,  and  of  the
Conservation  of  Areas 287

IV.  The  Laws  of  Impact 305

V.  D’Alembert’s  Principle  . 331

VI.  The  Principle  of  Vis  Viva 343

VII.  The  Principle  of  Least  Constraint 350

VIII.  The  Principle  of  Least  Action 364

IX,  Hamilton’s  Principle 380

X.  Some  Applications  of  the  Principles  of  Mechanics  to

Hydrostatic  and  Hydrodynamic  Questions  ....  384

CHAPTER  IV.

THE  FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  MECHANICS.

I.  The  Isoperimetrical  Problems  421

II.  Theological,  Animistic,  and  Mystical  Points  of  View  in

Mechanics 446

III.  Analytical  Mechanics 465

IV.  The  Economy  of  Science 481

CHAPTER  V.

THE  RELATION  OF  MECHANICS  TO  OTHER  DEPART-
MENTS OF  KNOWLEDGE.

I.  The  Relations  of  Mechanics  to  Physics 495

II.  The  Relations  of  Mechanics  to  Physiology 504


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS . xix

PAGE

Appendix 509


I.  The  Science  of  Antiquity,  509.— II.  Mechanical  Researches  of
the  Greeks,  510. — III.. and  IV.  The  Archimedean  Deduction  of  the
Law  of  the  Lever,  512,  514.— V.  Mode  of  Procedure  of  Stevinus,  515.
— VI.  Ancient  Notions  of  the  Nature  of  the  Air,  517, — VII.  Galileo’s
Predecessors,  520  — VIII.  Galileo  on  Falling  Bodies,  522.— IX.  Gali-
leo on  the  Law  of  Inertia,  523. — X.  Galileo  on  the  Motion  of  Projec-
tiles, 525. — XI.  Deduction  of  the  Expression  for  Centrifugal  Force
(Hamilton’s  Hodograph),  527. — XII.  Descartes  and  Huygens  on
Gravitation,  528. — XIII.  Physical  Achievements  of  Huygens,  530. —
XIV.  Newton's  Predecessors,  531. — XV.  The  Explanations  of  Gravi-
tation, 533  — XVI.  Mass  and  Quantity  of  Matter,  536. — XVII.  Gali-
leo on  Tides,  537. — XVIII.  Mach’s  Definition  of  Mass,  539. — XIX.
Mach  on  Physiological  Time,  541. — XX.  Recent  Discussions  of  the
Law  of  Inertia  and  Absolute  Motion,  542. — XXI.  Hertz’s  System  of
Mechanics,  548. — XXII.  History  of  Mach’s  Views  of  Physical  Sci-
ence (Mass,  Inertia,  etc.),  555. — XXIII.  Descartes’s  Achievements
in  Physics,  574. — XXIV.  Minimum  Principles,  575. — XXV.  Grass-
mann’s  Mechanics,  577. — XXVI.  Concept  of  Cause,  579. — XXVII.
Mach’s  Theory  of  the  Economy  of  Thought,  579. — XXVIII.  Descrip-
tion of  Phenomena  by  Differential  Equations,  583 — XXIX.  Mayer
and  the  Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat,  584. — XXX.  Principle  of  En-
ergy, 585.

Chronological  Table  of  a Few  Eminent  Inquirers  and  of  Their


More  Important  Mechanical  Works 589

Index 593


*


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS


INTRODUCTION.


1.  That  branch  of  physics  which  is  at  once  the  old-  The  science
est  and  the  simplest  and  which  is  therefore  treated  ics.

as  introductory  to  other  departments  of  this  science,
is  concerned  with  the  motions  and  equilibrium  of
masses.  It  bears  the  name  of  mechanics.

2.  The  history  of  the  development  of  mechanics,
is  quite  indispensable  to  a full  comprehension  of  the
science  in  its  present  condition.  It  also  affords  a sim-
ple and  instructive  example  of  the  processes  by  which
natural  science  generally  is  developed.

An  instinctive , irreflective  knowledge  of  the  processes  instinctive

. knowledge.

of  nature  will  doubtless  always  precede  the  scientific,
conscious  apprehension,  or  investigation , of  phenom-
ena. The  former  is  the  outcome  of  the  relation  in
which  the  processes  of  nature  stand  to  the  satisfac-
tion of  our  wants.  The  acquisition  of  the  most  ele-
mentary truth  does  not  devolve  upon  the  individual
alone  : it  is  pre-effected  in  the  development  of  the  race.

In  point  of  fact,  it  is  necessary  to  make  a dis-  Mechanical
tinction  between  mechanical  experience  and  mechan- expenences
ical  science,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  latter  term  is  at  •
present  employed.  Mechanical  experiences  are,  un-
questionably, very  old.  If  we  carefully  examine  the
ancient  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  monuments,  we  shall
find  there  pictorial  representations  of  many  kinds  of


2


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  me-
chanical
knowledge
of  antiquity


Have  we

underrated

it?


implements  and  mechanical  contrivances ; but  ac-
counts of  the  scientific  knowledge  of  these  peoples
are  either  totally  lacking,  or  point  conclusively  to  a
very  inferior  grade  of  attainment.  By  the  side  of

highly  ingenious  ap-
pliances, we  behold
the  crudest  and  rough-
est expedients  em-
ployed— as  the  use  of
sleds,  for  instance,  for
the  transportation  of
enormous  blocks  of
stone.  All  bears  an
instinctive,  unperfec-
ted, accidental  char-
acter.

So,  too,  prehistoric
graves  contain  imple-
ments whose  construc-
tion and  employment
imply  no  little  skill
and  much  mechanical
experience.  Thus, long
before  theory  was
dreamed  of,  imple-
ments, machines,  me-
chanical experien-
ces, and  mechanical
knowledge  were  abun-
dant.

3.  The  idea  often
suggests  itself  that
perhaps  the  incom-
plete accounts  we  pos-


INTRODUCTION .


3


sess  have  led  us  to  underrate  the  science  of  the  ancient
world.  Passages  occur  in  ancient  authors  which  seem
to  indicate  a profounder  knowledge  than  we  are  wont
to  ascribe  to  those  nations.  Take,  for  instance,  the
following  passage  from  Vitruvius,  De  Architectures ,

Lib.  V,  Cap.  Ill,  6 :

“ The  voice  is  a flowing  breath,  made  sensible  to  a passage
“the  organ  of  hearing  by  the  movements  it  produces ^us!  Vltm'
“in  the  air.  It  is  propagated  in  infinite  numbers  of
“circular  zones*  exactly  as  when  a stone  is  thrown
“into  a pool  of  standing  water  countless  circular  un-
“dulations  are  generated  therein,  which,  increasing
“as  they  recede  from  the  centre,  spread  out  over  a
“great  distance,  unless  the  narrowness  of  the  locality
“or  some  obstacle  prevent  their  reaching  their  ter-
“ mination  ; for  the  first  line  of  waves,  when  impeded
“by  obstructions,  throw  by  their  backward  swell  the
“succeeding  circular  lines  of  waves  into  confusion.

“ Conformably  to  the  very  same  law,  the  voice  also
“generates  circular  motions ; but  with  this  distinction,

“that  in  water  the  circles,  remaining  upon  the  surface,

“are  propagated  horizontally  only,  while  the  voice  is
“propagated  both  horizontally  and  vertically.”

Does  not  this  sound  like  the  imperfect  exposition  Controvert-
of  a popular  author,  drawn  from  more  accurate  disqui-  evidence.61
sitions  now  lost?  In  what  a strange  light  should  we
ourselves  appear,  centuries  hence,  if  our  popular  lit-
erature, which  by  reason  of  its  quantity  is  less  easily
destructible,  should  alone  outlive  the  productions  of
science  ? This  too  favorable  view,  however,  is  very
rudely  shaken  by  the  multitude  of  other  passages  con-
taining such  crude  and  patent  errors  as  cannot  be  con-
ceived to  exist  in  any  high  stage  of  scientific  culture.

(See  Appendix,  I.,  p.  509.)


4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  origin  4.  When,  where,  and  in  what  manner  the  develop-
o science.  men1.  q£  science  actually  began,  is  at  this  day  difficult

historically  to  determine.  It  appears  reasonable  to
assume,  however,  that  the  instinctive  gathering  of  ex-
periential facts  preceded  the  scientific  classification  of
them.  Traces  of  this  process  may  still  be  detected  in
the  science  of  to-day;  indeed,  they  are  to  be  met  with,
now  and  then,  in  ourselves.  The  experiments  that
man  heedlessly  and  instinctively  makes  in  his  strug-
gles to  satisfy  his  wants,  are  just  as  thoughtlessly  and
unconsciously  applied.  Here,  for  instance,  belong  the
primitive  experiments  concerning  the  application  of
the  lever  in  all  its  manifold  forms.  But  the  things
that  are  thus  unthinkingly  and  instinctively  discovered,
can  never  appear  as  peculiar,  can  never  strike  i|S  as
surprising,  and  as  a rule  therefore  will  never  supply  an
impetus  to  further  thought.

Thefunc-  The  transition  from  this  stage  to  the  classified,
cia?Sc°iasses  scientific  knowledge  and  apprehension  of  facts,  first  be-
veioP%ent  comes  possible  on  the  rise  of  special  classes  and  pro-
o science.  fessions  mafce  the  satisfaction  of  definite  social

wants  their  lifelong  vocation.  A class  of  this  sort  oc-
cupies itself  with  particular  kinds  of  natural  processes.
The  individuals  of  the  class  change  ; old  members
drop  out,  and  new  ones  come  in.  Thus  arises  a need
of  imparting  to  those  who  are  newly  come  in,  the
stock  of  experience  and  knowledge  already  possessed  ;
a need  of  acquainting  them  with  the  conditions  of  the
The  com-  attainment  of  a definite  end  so  that  the  result  may  be
ofknowi-  determined  beforehand.  The  communication  of  knowl-
edge is  thus  the  first  occasion  that  compels  distinct  re-
flection, as  everybody  can  still  observe  in  himself.
Further,  that  which  the  old  members  of  a guild  me-
chanically pursue,  strikes  a new  member  as  unusual


INTR  OD  UCTION.


5


and  strange,  and  thus  an  impulse  is  given  to  fresh  re-
flection and  investigation.

When  we  wish  to  bring  to  the  knowledge  of  a per-  involves

. description.

son  any  phenomena  or  processes  of  nature,  we  have
the  choice  of  two  methods  : we  may  allow  the  person  to
observe  matters  for  himself,  when  instruction  comes
to  an  end  ; or,  we  may  describe  to  him  the  phenomena
in  some  way,  so  as  to  save  him  the  trouble  of  per-
sonally making  anew  each  experiment.  Description,
however,  is  only  possible  of  events  that  constantly  re-
cur, or  of  events  that  are  made  up  of  component
parts  that  constantly  recur.  That  only  can  be  de-
scribed, and  conceptually  represented  which  is  uniform
and  conformable  to  law ; for  description  presupposes
the,.  employment  of  names  by  which  to  designate  its
elements  ; and  names  can  acquire  meanings  only  when
applied  to  elements  that  constantly  reappear.

5.  In  the  infinite  variety  of  nature  many  ordinary  a unitary

^ J J J conception

events  occur;  while  others  appear  uncommon,  per- of  nature,
plexing,  astonishing,  or  even  contradictory  to  the  or-
dinary run  of  things.  As  long  as  this  is  the  case  we
do  not  possess  a well-settled  and  unitary  conception  of
nature.  Thence  is  imposed  the  task  of  everywhere
seeking  out  in  the  natural  phenomena  those  elements
that  are  the  same,  and  that  amid  all  multiplicity  are
ever  present.  By  this  means,  on  the  one  hand,  the
most  economical  and  briefest  description  and  com-
munication are  rendered  possible  ; and  on  the  other,  The  nature

...  . of  know!*

when  once  a person  has  acquired  the  skill  of  recog-  edge,
nising  these  permanent  elements  throughout  the  great-
est range  and  variety  of  phenomena,  of  seeing  them  in
the  same,  this  ability  leads  to  a comprehensive , compact ',
consistent , and  facile  conception  of  the  facts.  When  once
we  have  reached  the  point  where  we  are  everywhere


6


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  adap-  able  to  detect  the  same  few  simple  elements,  combm-

tation  of  .

thoughts  to  mg  m the  ordinary  manner,  then  they  appear  to  us  as
things  that  are  familiar ; we  are  no  longer  surprised,
there  is  nothing  new  or  strange  to  us  in  the  phenom-
ena, we  feel  at  home  with  them,  they  no  longer  per-
plex us,  they  are  explained.  It  is  a process  of  adaptation
of  thoughts  to  facts  with  which  we  are  here  concerned.
The  econ-  6.  Economy  of  communication  and  of  apprehen-
thought.  sion  is  of  the  very  essence  of  science.  Herein  lies
its  pacificatory,  its  enlightening,  its  refining  element.
Herein,  too,  we  possess  an  unerring  guide  to  the  his-
torical origin  of  science.  In  the  beginning,  all  economy
had  in  immediate  view  the  satisfaction  simply  of  bodily
wants.  With  the  artisan,  and  still  more  so  with  the
investigator,  the  concisest  and  simplest  possible  knowl-
edge of  a given  province  of  natural  phenomena — a
knowledge  that  is  attained  with  the  least  intellectual
expenditure — naturally  becomes  in  itself  an  econom-
ical aim  ; but  though  it  was  at  first  a means  to  an  end,
when  the  mental  motives  connected  therewith  are  once
developed  and  demand  their  satisfaction,  all  thought
of  its  original  purpose,  the  personal  need,  disappears.
Further  de-  To  find,  then,  what  remains  unaltered  in  the  phe-
of theseent  nomena  of  nature,  to  discover  the  elements  thereof
and  the  mode  of  their  interconnection  and  interdepend-
ence— this  is  the  business  of  physical  science.  It  en-
deavors, by  comprehensive  and  thorough  description,
to  make  the  waiting  for  new  experiences  unnecessary ;
it  seeks  to  save  us  the  trouble  of  experimentation,  by
making  use,  for  example,  of  the  knowm  interdepend-
ence of  phenomena,  according  to  which,  if  one  kind  of
event  occurs,  we  may  be  sure  beforehand  that  a certain
other  event  will  occur.  Even  in  the  description  itself
labor  may  be  saved,  by  discovering  methods  of  de-


INTRO  D UCTION.


7


scribing  the  greatest  possible  number  of  different  ob~  Their  pres-

. . ent  discus-

jects  at  once  and  m the  concisest  manner.  All  this  will  sion  merely
be  made  clearer  by  the  examination  of  points  of  detail P eP&  ° y
than  can  be  done  by  a general  discussion.  It  is  fitting,
however,  to  prepare  the  way,  at  this  stage,  for  the
most  important  points  of  outlook  which  in  the  course
of  our  work  we  shall  have  occasion  to  occupy.

7.  We  now  propose  to  enter  more  minutely  into  the  proposed
subject  of  our  inquiries,  and,  at  the  same  time,  without  treatment,
making  the  history  of  mechanics  the  chief  topic  of
discussion,  to  consider  its  historical  development  so
far  as  this  is  requisite  to  an  understanding  of  the  pres-
ent state  of  mechanical  science,  and  so  far  as  it  does
not  conflict  with  the  unity  of  treatment  of  our  main
subject.  Apart  from  the  consideration  that  we  cannot
afford  to  neglect  the  great  incentives  that  it  is  in  our
power  to  derive  from  the  foremost  intellects  of  allTheincen-
epochs,  incentives  which  taken  as  a whole  are  more  rived  from
fruitful  than  the  greatest  men  of  the  present  day  are  with  the

. . great  intel-

able  to  offer,  there  is  no  grander,  no  more  intellectually  lects  of  the

elevating  spectacle  than  that  of  the  utterances  of  the
fundamental  investigators  in  their  gigantic  power.
Possessed  as  yet  of  no  methods,  for  these  were  first
created  by  their  labors,  and  are  only  rendered  compre-
hensible to  us  by  their  performances,  they  grapple  with
and  subjugate  the  object  of  their  inquiry,  and  imprint
upon  it  the  forms  of  conceptual  thought.  They  that
know  the  entire  course  of  the  development  of  science,
will,  as  a matter  of  course,  judge  more  freely  and  And  the  in-
more  correctly  of  the  significance  of  any  present  scien- power

. , which  such

tific  movement  than  they,  who  limited  m their  views  a contact

. . , 1 lends.

to  the  age  m which  their  own  lives  have  been  spent,
contemplate  merely  the  momentary  trend  that  the  course
of  intellectual  events  takes  at  the  present  moment.


CHAPTER  I.


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF
STATICS.

I.

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  LEVER.

The  earliest  i.  The  earliest  investigations  concerning  mechan-
researchel1  ics  of  which  we  have  any  account,  the  investigations
statics! t0  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  related  to  statics,  or  to  the  doc-
trine of  equilibrium.  Likewise,  when  after  the  taking
of  Constantinople  by  the  Turks  in  1453  a fresh  impulse
was  imparted  to  the  thought  of  the  Occident  by  the  an-
cient writings  that  the  fugitive  Greeks  brought  with
them,  it  was  investigations  in  statics,  principally  evoked
by  the  works  of  Archimedes,  that  occupied  the  fore-
most investigators  of  the  period.  (See  p.  5x0.)
Archimedes  2.  Archimedes  of  Syracuse  (287-212  B.  C.)  left
(287-y2i2CB.se  behind  him  a number  of  writings,  of  which  several
have  come  down  to  us  in  complete  form.  We  will
first  employ  ourselves  a moment  with  his  treatise  De
JEquiponder antibus,  which  contains  propositions  re-
specting the  lever  and  the  centre  of  gravity.

In  this  treatise  Archimedes  starts  from  the  follow-
ing assumptions,  which  he  regards  as  self-evident :
Axiomatic  a.  Magnitudes  of  equal  weight  acting  at  equal

assump-  . .

tions  of  Ar-  distances  (from  their  point  of  support)  are  m equi-

chimedes.  . J

librium.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


9


b.  Magnitudes  of  equal  weight  acting  at  line*  Axiomatic
qual  distances  (from  their  point  of  support")  are  tions  of  Ar-

^ - ....  . _ , . ' chimedes.

not  m equilibrium,  but  the  one  acting  at  the
greater  distance  sinks.

From  these  assumptions  he  deduces  the  following
proposition  :

c.  Commensurable  magnitudes  are  in  equilib-
rium when  they  are  inversely  proportional  to  their
distances  (from  the  point  of  support).

It  would  seem  as  if  analysis  could  hardly  go  be-
hind these  assumptions.  This  is,  however,  when  we
carefully  look  into  the  matter,  not  the  case.

Imagine  (Fig.  2)  a bar,  the  weight  of  which  is
neglected.  The  bar  rests  on  a fulcrum.  At  equal  dis-
tances from  the  fulcrum  we  ap-
pend two  equal  weights.  That
the  two  weights,  thus  circum-
stanced, are  in  equilibrium,  is
the  assumption  from  which  Archi-
medes starts.  We  might  suppose  that  this  was  self- Analysis  of
evident  entirely  apart  from  any  experience,  agreeably  to  Ledean*  as-
the  so-called  principle  of  sufficient  reason  ; that  in  view  sumptl0ns‘
of  the  symmetry  of  the  entire  arrangement  there  is  no
reason  why  rotation  should  occur  in  the  one  direction
rather  than  in  the  other.  But  we  forget,  in  this,  that
a great  multitude  of  negative  and  positive  experiences
is  implicitly  contained  in  our  assumption  ; the  negative,
for  instance,  that  dissimilar  colors  of  the  lever-arms,
the  position  of  the  spectator,  an  occurrence  in  the  vi-
cinity, and  the  like,  exercise  no  influence  ; the  positive,
on  the  other  hand,  (as  it  appears  in  the  second  as-
sumption,) that  not  only  the  weights  but  also  their  dis-
tances from  the  supporting  point  are  decisive  factors
in  the  disturbance  of  equilibrium,  that  they  also  are  cir-


□ 2 1
Fig.  2.


10


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


cumstances  determinative  of  motion.  By  the  aid  of
these  experiences  we  do  indeed  perceive  that  rest  (no
motion)  is  the  only  motion  which  can  be  uniquely*  de-
termined, or  defined,  by  the  determinative  conditions
of  the  case.f

Character  Now  we  are  entitled  to  regard  our  knowledge  of
he  Archi-  the  decisive  conditions  of  any  phenomenon  as  sufficient

ncdfiED  i*0*  '*'*

iuits.  only  in  the  event  that  such  conditions  determine  the
phenomenon  precisely  and  uniquely.  Assuming  the
fact  of  experience  referred  to,  that  the  weights  and
their  distances  alone  are  decisive,  the  first  proposition
of  Archimedes  really  possesses  a high  degree  of  evi-
dence and  is  eminently  qualified  to  be  made  the  foun-
dation of  further  investigations.  If  the  spectator  place
himself  in  the  plane  of  symmetry  of  the  arrangement
in  question,  the  first  proposition  manifests  itself,  more-
over, as  a highly  imperative  instinctive  perception, — a
result  determined  by  the  symmetry  of  our  own  body.
The  pursuit  of  propositions  of  this  character  is,  fur-
thermore, an  excellent  means  of  accustoming  ourselves
in  thought  to  the  precision  that  nature  reveals  in  her
processes.

rhe general  3.  We  will  now  reproduce  in  general  outlines  the
if  the^ever  train  of  thought  by  which  Archimedes  endeavors  to  re-
he  simple  duce  the  general  proposition  of  the  lever  to  the  par-
iiar  case.0  ticular  and  apparently  self-evident  case.  The  two
equal  weights  i suspended  at  a and  b (Fig.  3)  are,  if
the  bar  ab  be  free  to  rotate  about  its  middle  point  c , in
equilibrium.  If  the  whole  be  suspended  by  a cord  at
c,  the  cord,  leaving  out  of  account  the  weight  of  the

* So  as  to  leave  only  a single  possibility  open.

tlf,  for  example,  we  were  to  assume  that  the  weight  at  the  right  de-
scended, then  rotation  in  the  opposite  direction  also  would  be  determined  by
the  spectator,  whose  person  exerts  no  influence  on  the  phenomenon,  taking
up  his  position  on  the  opposite  side.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


ii


bar,  will  have  to  support  the  weight  2.  The  equal  The  general

. , ..  . . proposition

weights  at  the  extremities  of  the  bar  supply  accor-  of  the  lever
dingly  the  place  of  the  double  weight  at  the  centre.  the  simple

and  partic-
ular case.


Fig.  3.  Fig.  4.

On  a lever  (Fig.  4),  the  arms  of  which  are  in  the
proportion  of  1 to  2,  weights  are  suspended  in  the  pro-
portion of  2 to  1.  The  weight  2 we  imagine  replaced
by  two  weights  1,  attached  on  either  side  at  a distance
1 from  the  point  of  suspension.  Now  again  we  have
complete  symmetry  about  the  point  of  suspension,  and
consequently  equilibrium.

On  the  lever-arms  3 and  4 (Fig.  5)  are  suspended
the  weights  4 and  3..  The  lever-arm  3 is  prolonged
the  distance  4,  the  arm  4 is  prolonged  the  distance  3,
and  the  weights  4 and  3 are  replaced  respectively  by


Fig.  5

4 and  3 pairs  of  symmetrically  attached  weights
in  the  manner  indicated  in  the  figure.  Now  again  we
have  perfect  symmetry.  The  preceding  reasoning,  The  gener-
which  we  have  here  developed  with  specific  figures,  is  a lsa  1 n*
easily  generalised.

4.  It  will  be  of  interest  to  look  at  the  manner  in
which  Archimedes’s  mode  of  view,  after  the  precedent
of  Stevinus,  was  modified  by  Galileo.


12


THE  SCIENCE  OF.  MECHANICS.


Galileo’s  Galileo  imagines  (Fig.  6)  a heavy  horizontal  prism,
treatment,  homogeneous  in  material  composition,  suspended  by
its  extremities  from  a homogeneous  bar  of  the  same
length.  The  bar  is  provided  at  its  middle  point

with  a suspensory  attach-
ment. In  this  case  equi-
librium will  obtain  ; this
we  perceive  at  once.  But
in  this  case  is  contained
every  other  case, — which
Galileo  shows  in  the
following  manner.  Let
us  suppose  the  whole
length  of  the  bar  or  the  prism  to  be  2 «).  Cut
the  prism  in  two,  in  such  a manner  that  one  portion
shall  have  the  length  2 m and  the  other  the  length  2 n.
We  can  effect  this  without  disturbing  the  equilibrium
by  previously  fastening  to  the  bar  by  threads,  close  to
the  point  of  proposed  section,  the  inside  extremities  of
the  two  portions.  We  may  then  remove  all  the  threads,
if  the  two  portions  of  the  prism  be  antecedently  at-
tached to  the  bar  by  their  centres.  Since  the  whole
length  of  the  bar  is  2 (m  + n),  the  length  of  each  half
is  m -|-  n.  The  distance  of  the  point  of  suspension  of
the  right-hand  portion  of  the  prism  from  the  point  of
suspension  of  the  bar  is  therefore  m , and  that  of  the
left-hand  portion  n . The  experience  that  we  have
here  to  deal  with  the  weight,  and  not  with  the  form,
of  the  bodies,  is  easily  made.  It  is  thus  manifest,  that
equilibrium  will  still  subsist  if  any  weight  of  the  mag-
nitude 2 m be  suspended  at  the  distance  ;/  on  the  one
side  and  any  weight  of  the  magnitude  2n  be  suspended
at  the  distance  m on  the  other.  The  instinctive  elements
of  our  perception  of  this  phenomenon  are  even  more


m n m n


Fig.  6.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


*3


prominently  displayed  in  this  form  of  the  deduction
than  in  that  of  Archimedes.

We  may  discover,  moreover,  in  this  beautiful  pre-
sentation, a remnant  of  the  ponderousness  which  was
particularly  characteristic  of  the  investigators  of  an-
tiquity.

How  a modern  physicist  conceived  the  same  prob-  Lagrange’s
lem,  may  be  learned  from  the  following  presentation  of  Son.enta
Lagrange.  Lagrange  says:  Imagine  a horizontal  ho-
mogeneous prism  suspended  at  its  centre.  Let  this
prism  (Fig.  7)  be  conceived  divided  into  two  prisms
of  the  lengths  2m  and  2 n.  If  now  we  consider  the
centres  of  gravity  of  these  two  parts,  at  which  we  may
imagine  weights  to  act  proportional  to  2 m and  2 n,  the


2m

x

S'


2n

X □

s


Fig.  7.

two  centres  thus  considered  will  have  the  distances  n
and  m from  the  point  of  support.  This  concise  dis-
posal of  the  problem  is  only  possible  to  the  practised
mathematical  perception.

5.  The  object  that  Archimedes  and  his  successors  object  of
sought  to  accomplish  in  the  considerations  we  have  here  and  his  sue-
presented,  consists  in  the  endeavor  to  reduce  the  more cessors-
complicated  case  of  the  lever  to  the  simpler  and  ap-
parently self-evident  case,  to  discern  the  simpler  in  the
more  complicated,  or  vice  versa.  In  fact,  we  regard
a phenomenon  as  explained,  when  we  discover  in  it
known  simpler  phenomena.

But  surprising  as  the  achievement  of  Archimedes
and  his  successors  may  at  the  first  glance  appear  to
us,  doubts  as  to  the  correctness  of  it,  on  further  reflec-


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Critique  of  tion,  nevertheless  spring  up.  From  the  mere  assump-
ods.  tion  of  the  equilibrium  of  equal  weights  at  equal  dis-
tances is  derived  the  inverse  proportionality  of  weight
and  lever-arm  ! How  is  that  possible  ? If  we  were
unable  philosophically  and  a priori  to  excogitate  the
simple  fact  of  the  dependence  of  equilibrium  on  weight
and  distance,  but  were  obliged  to  go  for  that  result  to
experience,  in  how  much  less  a degree  shall  we  be  able,
by  speculative  methods,  to  discover  the  form  of  this
dependence,  the  proportionality  !

The  statical  As  a matter  of  fact,  the  assumption  that  the  equi-

voived  in  librium- disturbing  effect  of  a weight  P at  the  distance
all  their  de-  „ , . , . 0 . , . .

ductions.  L from  the  axis  of  rotation  is  measured  by  the  product

P.L  (the  so-called  statical  moment),  is  more  or  less
covertly  or  tacitly  introduced  by  Archimedes  and  all
his  successors.  For  when  Archimedes  substitutes  for
a large  weight  a series  of  symmetrically  arranged  pairs
of  small  weights,  which  weights  extend  beyond  the  point
of  support , he  employs  in  this  very  act  the  doctrine  of
the  centre  of  gravity  in  its  more  general  form,  which  is
itself  nothing  else  than  the  doctrine  of  the  lever  in  its
more  general  form.  (See  Appendix,  III.,  p.  512.)
without  it  Without  the  assumption  above  mentioned  of  the  im-

one  can  prove  (Fig.  8)
that  a bar,  placed  in
any  way  on  the  ful-
crum S,  is  supported,
with  the  help  of  a
string  attached  to  its
centre  of  gravity  and
carried  over  a pulley,
by  a weight  equal  to  its  own  weight.  But  this  is  con-
tained in  the  deductions  of  Archimedes,  Stevinus,
Galileo,  and  also  in  that  of  Lagrange.


tion  is  im?"  port  of  the  product  P.L , no
possible.


Fig'  8.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


I5


6.  Huygens,  indeed,  reprehends  this  method,  and  Huygens’s
gives  a different  deduction,  in  which  he  believes  he  has
avoided  the  error.  If  in
the  presentation  of  La-
grange we  imagine  the
two  portions  into  which
the  prism  is  divided
turned  ninety  degrees
about  two  vertical  axes
passing  through  the  cen-
tres of  gravity  s,s'  of  the
prism-portions  (see  Fig.
go),  and  it  be  shown
that  under  these  circum-
stances equilibrium  still  D\
continues  to  subsist,  we  Fig.  9.

shall  obtain  the  Huygenian  deduction.  Abridged
and  simplified,  it  is  as  follows.  In  a rigid  weightless


Fig.  9a.  Fig.  9a.


plane  (Fig.  9)  through  the  point  S we  draw  a straight
line,  on  which  we  cut  off  on  the  one  side  the  length  1


i6


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


His  own  de-  and  on  the  other  the  length  2,  at  A and  B respectively.

On  the  extremities,  at  right  angles  to  this  straight
line,  we  place,  with  the  centres  as  points  of  contact,  the
heavy,  thin,  homogeneous  prisms  CD  and  FF,  of  the
lengths  and  weights  4 and  2.  Drawing  the  straight
line  HSG  (where  AG  = %AC)  and,  parallel  to  it,  the
line  CP,  and  translating  the  prism-portion  CG  by  par-
allel displacement  to  FH,  everything  about  the  axis
GH  is  symmetrical  and  equilibrium  obtains.  But
equilibrium  also  obtains  for  the  axis  AB  ; obtains  con-
sequently for  every  axis  through  S,  and  therefore  also
for  that  at  right  angles  to  AB : wherewith  the  new
case  of  the  lever  is  given.

Apparently  Apparently,  nothing  else  is  assumed  here  than  that
unimpeacb-  ; . , . , .

able.  equal  weights  /,/  (Fig.  10)  m the  same  plane  and  at
equal  distances  /,/  from  an  axis  A A'  (in  this  plane)
equilibrate  one  another.  If  we  place  ourselves  in  the
plane  passing  through  A A'  perpendicularly  to  /,/,  say


Fig.  10.


Fig.  xi.


at  the  point  M}  and  look  now  towards  A and  now
towards  Ar,  we  shall  accord  to  this  proposition  the
same  evidentness  as  to  the  first  Archimedean  proposi-
tion. The  relation  of  things  is,  moreover,  not  altered  if
we  institute  with  the  weights  parallel  displacements
with  respect  to  the  axis,  as  Huygens  in  fact  does.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


17


The  error  first  arises  in  the  inference  : if  equilib-  Yet  invoiv-

• i • r r . ing  in  the

num  obtains  for  two  axes  of  the  plane,  it  also  obtains  final  infer-

r . • .......  ence  an  er

for  every  other  axis  passing  through  the  point  of  inter-  ror.
section  of  the  first  two.  This  inference  (if  it  is  not  to
be  regarded  as  a purely  instinctive  one)  can  be  drawn
only  upon  the  condition  that  disturbant  effects  are  as-
cribed to  the  weights  proportio?ial  to  their  distances
from  the  axis.  But  in  this  is  contained  the  very  kernel
of  the  doctrine  of  the  lever  and  the  centre  of  gravity.

Let  the  heavy  points  of  a plane  be  referred  to  a
system  of  rectangular  coordinates  (Fig.  11).  The  co-
ordinates of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  a system  of  masses
in  m in”  . . . having  the  coordinates  x x x”  . . . y y'  y”  . . .


are,  as  we  know,


£ =


2mx

~2m9


V-


TZmy
^ in  ’


If  we  turn  the  system  through  the  angle  a,  the  new  co-
ordinates of  the  masses  will  be

xt  = x cos  a — y sin#,  yx  —y  cos  a + x sin/r
and  consequently  the  coordinates  of  the  centre  of
gravity


Mathemat-
ical discus-
sion of
Huygens’s
inference.


2m  (x  cos  a — y sina)
2 in

= £ cos  a -


2mx


: cos  a —


7]  sma


2 my
2 111


and,  similarly,

= ?]  cosrr  -f-  £ sin#.

We  accordingly  obtain  the  coordinates  of  the  new
centre  of  gravity,  by  simply  transforming  the  coordi-
nates of  the  first  centre  to  the  new  axes.  The  centre
of  gravity  remains  therefore  the  self-same  point.  If
we  select  the  centre  of  .gravity  itself  as  origin,  then
2mx  — 2my  — 0.  On  turning  the  system  of  axes,  this
relation  continues  to  subsist.  If,  accordingly,  equi-


20


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


In  the  direction  here  indicated  the  Archimedean
view  certainly  remained  a serviceable  one  even  after
no  one  longer  entertained  any  doubt  of  the  significance
of  the  product  P.L,  and  after  opinion  on  this  point  had
been  established  historically  and  by  abundant  verifica-
tion. (See  Appendix,  IV.,  p.  514.)

•eatment  7“.  The  manner  in  which  the  laws  of  the  lever,  as
modem  handed  down  to  us  from  Archimedes  in  their  original

ygicists.

simple  form,  were  further  generalised  and  treated  by
modern  physicists,  is  very  interesting  and  instructive.
Leonardo  da  Vinci  (1452-1519),  the  famous  painter
and  investigator,  appears  to  have  been  the  first  to  rec-
ognise the  importance  of  the  general  notion  of  the  so-


onardo  called  statical  moments.  In  the  manuscripts  he  has
52-1519).  left  us,  several  passages  are  found  from  which  this
clearly  appears.  He  says,  for  example  : We  have  a
bar  AD  (Fig.  13)  free  to  rotate  about  A , and  suspended
from  the  bar  a weight  P,  and  suspended  from  a string
which  passes  over  a pulley  a second  weight  Q.  What
must  be  the  ratio  of  the  forces  that  equilibrium  may  ob-
tain? The  lever- arm  for  the  weight  P is  not  AD , but
the  “potential”  lever  AB . The  lever-arm  for  the
weight  Q is  not  AD,  but  the  “potential”  lever  AC,
The  method  by  which  Leonardo  arrived  at  this  view
is  difficult  to  discover.  But  it  is  clear  that  he  recog-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


21


nised  the  essential  circumstances  by  which  the  effect
of  the  weight  is  determined.

Considerations  similar  to  those  of  Leonardo  da  Guido

Ubald:

Vinci  are  also  found  in  the  writings  of  Guido  Ubaldi.

8.  We  will  now  endeavor  to  obtain  some  idea  of
the  way  in  which  the  notion  of  statical  moment,  by
which  as  we  know  is  understood  the  product  of  a force
into  the  perpendicular  let  fall  from  the  axis  of  rotation
upon  the  line  of  direction  of  the  force,  could  have  been
arrived  at, — although  the  way  that  really  led  to  this
idea  is  not  now  fully  ascertainable.  That  equilibrium
exists  (Fig.  14)  if  we  lay  a
cord, subjected  at  both  sides
to  equal  tensions,  over  a
pulley,  is  perceived  without
difficulty.  We  shall  always
find  a plane  of  symmetry  for
the  apparatus— the  plane
which  stands  at'right  angles  Fis-

to  the  plane  of  the  cord  and  bisects  (EE)  the  angle  made
by  its  two  parts.  The  motion  that  might  be  supposed  a method
possible  cannot  in  this  case  be  precisely  determined  or  the  notion

, ofthestat-

defined  by  any  rule  whatsoever  : no  motion  will  there-icaimo-

r 1 1 r r r 1 ment  mi

fore  take  place.  If  we  note,  now,  further,  that  the  mate-  have  been

arrived  at.

rial  of  which  the  pulley  is  made  is  essential  only  to  the
extent  of  determining  the  form  of  motion  of  the  points
of  application  of  the  strings,  we  shall  likewise  readily
perceive  that  almost  any  portion  of  the  pulley  may
be  removed  without  disturbing  the  equilibrium  of
the  machine.  The  rigid  radii  that  lead  out  to  the  tan-
gential points  of  the  string,  are  alone  essential.  We
see,  thus,  that  the  rigid  radii,  (or  the  perpendiculars  on
the  linear  directions  of  the  strings)  play  here  a part
similar  to  the  lever-arms  in  the  lever  of  Archimedes.


22


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


This  notion  Let  us  examine  a so-called  wheel  and  axle  (Fig.
from  the  15)  of  wheel-radius  2 and  axle-radius  1,  provided  re-
tionofa  ^ spectively  with  the  cord-hung  loads  1 and  2 ; an  appa-
asie.  ratus  which  corresponds  in  every  respect  to  the  lever
of  Archimedes.  If  now  we  place  about  the  axle,  in
any  manner  we  may  choose,  a second  cord,  which  we
subject  at  each  side  to  the  tension  of  a weight  2,  the
second  cord  will  not  disturb  the  equilibrium.  It  is
plain,  however,  that  we  are  also  permitted  to  regard


Fig.  15.  t Fig.  16.

the  two  pulls  marked  in  Fig.  16  as  being  in  equilib-
rium, by  leaving  the  two  others,  as  mutually  destruc-
tive, out  of  account.  But  we  arrive  in  so  doing,  dis-
missing from  consideration  all  unessential  features,  at
the  perception  that  not  only  the  pulls  exerted  by  the
weights  but  also  the  perpendiculars  let  fall  from  the
axis  on  the  lines  of  the  pulls,  are  conditions  deter-
minative of  motion.  The  decisive  factors  are,  then,
the  products  of  the  weights  into  the  respective  per-
pendiculars let  fall  from  the  axis  on  the  directions  of
the  pulls ; in  other  words,  the  so-called  statical  mo-
ments.


The  princi-  9.  What  we  have  so  far  considered,  is  the  devel-
FeverVii-6  opment  of  our  knowledge  of  the  principle  of  the  lever,
explain  the  Quite  independently  of  this  was  developed  the  knowl-
chinesma  edge'  of  the  principle  of  the  inclined  plane.  It  is  not


necessary,  however,  for  the  comprehension  of  the  ma-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


23


chines,  to  search  after  a new  principle  beyond  that  of
the  lever ; for  the  latter  is  sufficient  by  itself.  Galileo,
for  example,  explains  the  inclined  plane  from  the  lever
in  the  following  manner.

We  have  before  us  (Fig.

17)  an  inclined  plane,  on
which  rests  the  weight
Q,  held  in  equilibrium
by  the  weight  P.  Gali-  &
leo,  now,  points  out  the  Fis-  J7*

fact,  that  it  is  not  requisite  that  Q should  lie  directly
upon  the  inclined  plane,  but  that  the  essential  point
is  rather  the  form,  or  character,  of  the  motion
of  Q . We  may,  consequently,  conceive  the  weight
attached  to  the  bar  AC,  perpendicular  to  the  inclined
plane,  and  rotatable  about  C.  If  then  we  institute  a Galileo’s

. , . explanation

very  slight  rotation  about  the  point  C,  the  weight  wil[  of.the  in-
move  in  the  element  of  an  arc  coincident  with  the  in- plane  by

the  lever.

dined  plane.  That  the  path  assumes  a curve  on  the
motion  being  continued  is  of  no  consequence  here,
since  this  further  movement  does  not  in  the  case  of
equilibrium  take  place,  and  the  movement  of  the  in-
stant alone  is  decisive.  Reverting,  however,  to  the
observation  before  mentioned  of  Leonardo  da  Vinci,
we  readily  perceive  the  validity  of  the  theorem  <2*  CB
= P.CA  or  Q/P  ~ CAjCB  = ca/cb,  and  thus  reach
the  law  of  equilibrium  on  the  inclined  plane.  Once  we
have  reached  the  principle  of  the  lever,  we  may,  then,
easily  apply  that  principle  to  the  comprehension  of
the  other  machines.


?4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Stevinus
(1548-1620)
first  investi-
gates the
mechanics
of  the  in-
clined
plane.


Fig.  iS.


His  mode  of
reaching  its
law.


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  INCLINED  PLANE.

i.  Stevinus,  or  Stevin,  (1548-1620)  was  the  first
who  investigated  the  mechanical  properties  of  the  in-
clined plane ; and  he  did  so  in  an  eminently  original
manner.  If  a weight  lie  (Fig.
18)  on  a horizontal  table,  we
perceive  at  once,  since  the
pressure  is  directly  perpendic-
ular to  the  plane  of  the  table,
by  the  principle  of  symmetry,
that  equilibrium  subsists.  On  a
vertical  wall,  on  the  other  hand,  a weight  is  not  at  all
obstructed  in  its  motion  of  descent.  The  inclined  plane
accordingly  will  present  an  intermediate  case  between
these  two  limiting  suppositions.  Equilibrium  will  net
exist  of  itself,  as  it  does  on  the  horizontal  support,  but
it  will  be  maintained  by  a less  weight  than  that  neces-
sary to  preserve  it  on  the  vertical  wall.  The  ascertain-
ment of  the  statical  law  that  obtains  in  this  case,  caused
the  earlier  inquirers  considerable  difficulty.

Stevinus’s  manner  of  procedure  is  in  substance  as
follows.  .He  imagines  a triangular  prism  with  horizon-
tally placed  edges,  a cross-section  of  which  ABC  is
represented  in  Fig.  19.  For  the  sake  of  illustration
we  will  say  that  AB  = 2BC ; also  that  A C is  horizon-
tal. Over  this  prism  Stevinus  lays  an  endless  string
on  which  14  balls  of  equal  weight  are  strung  and  tied
at  equal  distances  apart.  We  can  advantageously  re-
place this  string  by  an  endless  uniform  chain  or  cord.
The  chain  will  either  be  in  equilibrium  or  it  will  not.
If  we  assume  the  latter  to  be  the  case,  the  chain,  since


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


25


the  conditions  of  the  event  are  not  altered  by  its  mo-
tion, must,  when  once  actually  in  motion,  continue  to
move  for  ever,  that  is,  it  must  present  a perpetual  mo-
tion, which  Stevinus  deems  absurd.  Consequently  only  stevinus’s
the  first  case  is  conceivable.  The  chain  remains  in  equi-  0? theVaw
librium.  The  symmetrical  portion  ADC  may,  there-  dined111'
fore,  without  disturbing  the  equilibrium,  be  removed.  plane‘
The  portion  AB  of  the  chain  consequently  balances
the  portion  BC.  Hence  : on  inclined  planes  of  equal
heights  equal  weights  act  in  the  inverse  proportion  of
the  lengths  of  the  planes.


Fig.  19.  Fig.  20.


In  the  cross-section  of  the  prism  in  Fig.  20  let  us
imagine  A C horizontal,  BC  vertical,  and  AB  = 2BC/
furthermore,  the  chain-weights  Q and  P on  AB  and
BC  proportional  to  the  lengths  ; it  will  follow  then  that


26


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  as-
sumptions
of  Stevi-
nus’s  de-
duction.


Their  in-
stinctive
character.


Their  cog-
ency.


Q/P  = A3/3C  = 2.  The  generalisation  is  self-evi-
dent.

2.  Unquestionably  in  the  assumption  from  which
Stevinus  starts,  that  the  endless  chain  does  not  move,
there  is  contained  primarily  only  a purely  instinctive
cognition.  He  feels  at  once,  and  we  with  him,  that
we  have  never  observed  anything  like  a motion  of  the
kind  referred  to,  that  a thing  of  such  a character  does
not  exist.  This  conviction  has  so  much  logical  cogency
that  we  accept  the  conclusion  drawn  from  it  respecting
the  law  of  equilibrium  on  the  inclined  plane  without  the
thought  of  an  objection,  although  the  law  if  presented
as  the  simple  result  of  experiment,  or  otherwise  put,
would  appear  dubious.  We  cannot  be  surprised  at  this
when  we  reflect  that  all  results  of  experiment  are  ob-
scured by  adventitious  circumstances  (as  friction,  etc.),
and  that  every  conjecture  as  to  the  conditions  which  are
determinative  in  a given  case  is  liable  to  error.  That
Stevinus  ascribes  to  instinctive  knowledge  of  this  sort
a higher  authority  than  to  simple,  manifest,  direct  ob-
servation might  excite  in  us  astonishment  if  we  did  not
ourselves  possess  the  same  inclination.  The  question
accordingly  forces  itself  upon  us : Whence  does  this
higher  authority  come  ? If  we  remember  that  scientific
demonstration,  and  scientific  criticism  generally  can
only  have  sprung  from  the  consciousness  of  the  individ-
ual fallibility  of  investigators,  the  explanation  is  not  far
to  seek.  We  feel  clearly,  that  we  ourselves  have  con-
tributed nothing  to  the  creation  of  instinctive  knowl-
edge, that  we  have  added  to  it  nothing  arbitrarily,  but
that  it  exists  in  absolute  independence  of  our  partici-
pation. Our  mistrust  of  our  own  subjective  interpre-
tation of  the  facts  observed,  is  thus  dissipated.

Stevinus’s  deduction  is  one  of  the  rarest  fossil  in-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


2 7


dications  that  we  possess  in  the  primitive  history  of  Highhistor-

. ical  value  of

mechanics,  and  throws  a wonderful  light  on  the  pro-  stevinus’s

. deduction.

cess  of  the  formation  of  science  generally,  on  its  rise
from  instinctive  knowledge.  We  will  recall  to  mind
that  Archimedes  pursued  exactly  the  same  tendency
as  Stevinus,  only  with  much  less  good  fortune.  In
later  times,  also,  instinctive  knowledge  is  very  fre-
quently taken  as  the  starting-point  of  investigations.

Every  experimenter  can  daily  observe  in  his  own  per-
son the  guidance  that  instinctive  knowledge  furnishes
him.  If  he  succeeds  in  abstractly  formulating  what
is  contained  in  it,  he  will  as  a rule  have  made  an  im-
portant advance  in  science.

Stevinus’s  procedure  is  no  error.  If  an  error  were  The  trust-
contained  in  it,  we  should  all  share  it.  Indeed,  it  isofinstinc-

. , . tive  knowl

perfectly  certain,  that  the  union  of  the  strongest  m-  edge,
stinct  with  the  greatest  power  of  abstract  formulation
alone  constitutes  the  great  natural  inquirer.  This  by
no  means  compels  us,  however,  to  create  a new  mysti-
cism out  of  the  instinctive  in  science  and  to  regard  this
factor  as  infallible.  That  it  is  not  infallible,  we  very
easily  discover.  Even  instinctive  knowledge  of  so
great  logical  force  as  the  principle  of  symmetry  em-
ployed by  Archimedes,  may  lead  us  astray.  Many  of
my  readers  will  recall  to  mind, perhaps,  the  intellectual
shock  they  experienced  wdien  they  heard  for  the  first
time  that  a magnetic  needle  lying  in  the  magnetic
meridian  is  deflected  in  a definite  direction  away  from
the  meridian  by  a wire  conducting  a current  being  car-
ried along  in  a parallel  direction  above  it.  The  instinc-
tive is  just  as  fallible  as  the  distinctly  conscious.  Its  only
value  is  in  provinces  with  which  we  are  very  familiar.

Let  us  rather  put  to  ourselves,  in  preference  to
pursuing  mystical  speculations  on  this  subject,  the


28


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  origin
of  instinc-
tive knowl-
edge.


Instinctive
knowledge
and  extern-
al realities
mutually
condition
each  other.


question : How  does  instinctive  knowledge  originate
and  what  are  its  contents?  Everything  which  we  ob-
serve  in  nature  imprints  itself  un comprehended  and  un-
analysed in  our  percepts  and  ideas,  which,  then,  in  their
turn,  mimic  the  processes  of  nature  in  their  most  gen-
eral and  most  striking  features.  In  these  accumulated
experiences  we  possess  a treasure-store  which  is  ever
close  at  hand  and  of  which  only  the  smallest  portion
is  embodied  in  clear  articulate  thought.  The  circum-
stance that  it  is  far  easier  to  resort  to  these  experi-
ences than  it  is  to  nature  herself,  and  that  they  are,
notwithstanding  this,  free,  in  the  sense  indicated,  from
all  subjectivity,  invests  them  with  a high  value.  It
is  a peculiar  property  of  instinctive  knowledge  that  it
is  predominantly  of  a negative  nature.  We  cannot  so
well  say  what  must  happen  as  we  can  what  cannot  hap-
pen, since  the  latter  alone  stands  in  glaring  contrast  to
the  obscure  mass  of  experience  in  us  in  which  single
characters  are  not  distinguished.

Still,  great  as  the  importance  of  instinctive  knowl-
edge may  be,  for  discovery,  we  must  not,  from  our
point  of  view,  rest  content  with  the  recognition  of  its
authority.  We  must  inquire,  on  the  contrary  : Under
what  conditions  could  the  instinctive  knowledge  in
question  have  originated?  We  then  ordinarily  find  that
the  v.ery  principle  to  establish  which  we  had  recourse
to  instinctive  knowledge,  constitutes  in  its  turn  the  fun-
damental condition  of  the  origin  of  that  knowledge.
And  this  is  quite  obvious  and  natural.  Our  instinctive
knowledge  leads  us  to  the  principle  which  explains  that
knowledge  itself,  and  which  is  in  its  turn  also  corrobo-
rated by  the  existence  of  that  knowledge,  which  is  a
separate  fact  by  itself.  This  we  will  find  on  close  ex-
amination is  the  state  of  things  in  Stevinus’s  case.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


29


3.  The  reasoning  of  Stevinus  impresses  us  as  soTheingen-

. . uity  of  Ste-

highly  ingenious  because  the  result  at  which  he  arrives  vinus’s  rea-

1 * 11  . soning.

apparently  contains  more  than  the  assumption  from
which  he  starts.  While  on  the  one  hand,  to  avoid  con-
tradictions, we  are  constrained  to  let  the  result  pass,  on
the  other  an  incentive  remains  which  impels  us  to  seek
further  insight.  If  Stevinus  had  distinctly  set  forth
the  entire  fact  in  all  its  aspects,  as  Galileo  subsequently
did,  his  reasoning  would  no  longer  strike  us  as  ingen-
ious ; but  we  should  have  obtained  a much  more  satis-
factory and  clear  insight  into  the  matter.  In  the
endless  chain  which  does  not  glide  upon  the  prism,  is
contained,  in  fact,  everything.  We  might  say,  the
chain  does  not  glide  because  no  sinking  of  heavy  bodies
takes  place  here.  This  would  not  be  accurate,  how-
ever, for  when  the  chain  moves  many  of  its  links  really
do  descend,  while  others  rise  in  their  place.  We  must
say,  therefore,  more  accurately,  the  chain  does  not
glide  because  for  every  body  that  could  possibly  de-  Cridque  ui
scend  an  equally  heavy  body  would  have  to  ascend  deduction,
equally  high,  or  a body  of  double  the  weight  half  the
height,  and  so  on.  This  fact  was  familiar  to  Stevinus,
who  presented  it,  indeed,  in  his  theory  of  pulleys ;
but  he  was  plainly  too  distrustful  of  himself  to  lay
down  the  law,  without  additional  support,  as  also  valid
for  the  inclined  plane.  But  if  such  a law  did  not  exist
universally,  our  instinctive  knowledge  respecting  the
endless  chain  could  never  have  originated.  With  this
our  minds  are  completely  enlightened. — The  fact  that
Stevinus  did  not  go  as  far  as  this  in  his  reasoning  and
rested  content  with  bringing  his  (indirectly  discovered)
ideas  into  agreement  with  his  instinctive  thought,  need
not  further  disturb  us.  (See  p.  515.)

The  service  which  Stevinus  renders  himself  and  his


30


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  merit  readers,  consists,  therefore,  in  the  contrast  and  com-
nus'sproce-  parison  of  knowledge  that  is  instinctive  with  knowledge
ame'  that  is  clear,  in  the  bringing  the  two  into  connection
and  accord  with  one  another,  and  in  the  supporting


Fig.  21.


the  one  upon  the  other.  The  strengthening  of  mental
view  which  Stevinus  acquired  by  this  procedure,  we
learn  from  the  fact  that  a picture  of  the  endless  chain
and  the  prism  graces  as  vignette,  with  the  inscription
“Wonder  en  is  gheen  wonder,”  the  title-page  of  his


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


3i


work  Hypomnemata  Mathemotica  (Leyden,  1605).*  As
a fact,  every  enlightening  progress  made  in  science  is
accompanied  with  a certain  feeling  of  disillusionment.
We  discover  that  that  which  appeared  wonderful  to
us  is  no  more  wonderful  than  other  things  which  we
know  instinctively  and  regard  as  self-evident ; nay,
that  the  contrary  would  be  much  more  wonderful ; that
everywhere  the  same  fact  expresses  itself.  Our  puzzle
turns  out  then  to  be  a puzzle  no  more  ; it  vanishes  into
nothingness,  and  takes  its  place,  among  the  shadows
of  history.

4.  After  he  had  arrived  at  the  principle  of  the  in-
clined plane,  it  was  easy  for  Stevinus  to  apply  that
principle  to  the  other  machines  and  to  explain  by  it
their  action.  He  makes,  for  example,  the  following
application.

We  have,  let  us  suppose,  an  inclined  plane  (Fig.
22)  and  on  it  a load  Q.  We  pass  a string  over  the
pulley  A at  the  summit  and  imagine  the  load  Q held  in
equilibrium  by  the  load  P.

Stevinus,  now,  proceeds  by
a method  similar  to  that
later  taken  by  Galileo.  He
remarks  that  it  is  not  ne-
cessary that  the  load  Q
should  lie  directly  on  the
inclined  plane.  Provided


Enlighten-
ment in
science  al-
ways ac-
companied
with  disillu
sionment.


Explana-
tion of  the
other  ma-
chines by
Stevinus’s
principle.


iVl

b

|\

RC

U

\F

V

Fig.  22


only  the  form  of  the  machine’s  motion  be  preserved,  the
proportion  between  force  and  load  will  in  all  cases  re-
main the  same.  We  may  therefore  equally  well  conceive
the  load  Q to  be  attached  to  a properly  weighted  string
passing  over  a pulley  D:  which  string  is  normal  to  the

*Tbe  title  given  is  that  of  Willebrord  Snell’s  Latin  translation  (1608)  of
Simon  Stevin’s  Wisconstige  Gedachtenissen , Leyden,  1605.  — Trans.


32


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  funicu- inclined  plane.  If  we  carry  out  this  alteration,  we
shall  have  a so-called  funicular  machine.  We  now
perceive  that  we  can  ascertain  very  easily  the  portion
of  weight  with  which  the  body  on  the  inclined  plane
tends  downwards.  We  have  only  to  draw  a vertical
line  and  to  cut  off  on  it  a portion  ab  corresponding  to
the  load  Q . Then  drawing  on  aA  the  perpendicular
be , we  have  P / Q = AC j AB  = ac jab.  Therefore  ac
represents  the  tension  of  the  string  aA.  Nothing  pre-
vents us,  now,  from  making  the  two  strings  change

And  the  functions  and  from  imagining  the  load  Q to  lie  on  the

special  case

oftheparai- dotted  inclined  plane  PDF.  Similarly,  here,  we  ob-

lelogram  of  .

forces.  tarn  ad  for  the  tension  of  the  second  string.  In  this
manner,  accordingly,  Stevinus  indirectly  arrives  at  a
knowledge  of  the  statical  relations  of  the  funicular
machine  and  of  the  so-called  parallelogram  of  forces  ; at
first,  of  course,  only  for  the  particular  case  of  strings
(or  forces)  ac,  ad  at  right  angles  to  one  another.

The  general  Subsequently,  indeed,  Stevinus  employs  the  prin-

iast-men-^  ciple  of  the  composition  and  resolution  of  forces  in

cipie  also11  a more  general  form  ; yet  the  method  by  which  he

employed.


Fig-  23.  Fig.  24.

reached  the  principle,  is  not  very  clear,  or  at  least  is
not  obvious.  He  remarks,  for  example,  that  if  we
have  three  strings  AB,  AC,  AD,  stretched  at  any


33


P

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.

given  angles,  and  the  weight  B is  suspended  from  the
first,  the  tensions  may  be  determined  in  the  following
manner.  We  produce  (Fig.  23)  AB  to  X and  cut  off
on  it  a portion  AE . Drawing  from  the  point  E , EE
parallel  to  AD  and  EG  paral-
lel to  AC,  the  tensions  of  AB ,

AC,  AD  are  respectively  pro-
portional to  AE,  AE,  A G.

With  the  assistance  of  this
principle  of  construction  Ste-
vinus  solves  highly  compli-
cated problems.  He  determines,  for  instance,  the  solution  of
tensions  of  a system  of  ramifying  strings  like  that  pirated111"
illustrated  in  Fig.  24;  in  doing  which  of  course  he problems-
starts  from  the  given  tension  of  the  vertical  string.

The  relations  of  the  tensions  of  a funicular  polygon
are  likewise  ascertained  by  construction,  in  the  man-
ner indicated  in  Fig.  25.

We  may  therefore,  by  means  of  the  principle  of  the  General  re-
inclined plane,  seek  to  elucidate  the  conditions  of  op-
eration of  the  other  simple  machines,  in  a manner  sim-
ilar to  that  which  we  employed  in  the  case  of  the  prin-
ciple of  the  lever.


*46


Fig-  25-


III.

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  COMPOSITION  OF  FORCES.

i.  The  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces,  atThe^rmci-
which  Stevinus  arrived  and  employed,  (yet  without  ex-  pLraiieio6-
pressly  formulating  it,)  consists,  as  we  know,  of  the  forces0
following  truth.  If  a body  A (Fig.  26)  is  acted  upon
by  two  forces  whose  directions  coincide  with  the  lines
AB  and  A C,  and  whose  magnitudes  are  proportional  to
the  lengths  AB  and  A C,  these  two  forces  produce  the


34


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


same  effect  as  a single  force,  which  acts  in  the  direction
of  the  diagonal  AD  of  the  parallelogram  A BCD  and  is
proportional  to  that  diagonal.  For  instance,  if  on  the

strings  AB , AC  weights
^ exactly  proportional  to  the

. lengths  AB , AC  be  sup-

posed  to  act,  a single
weight  acting  on  the  string
Flg‘  26‘  ^Z>exactlyproportional  to

the  length  AD  will  produce  the  same  effect  as  the  first
two.  The  forces  AB  and  AC  are  called  the  compo-
nents, the  force  AD  the  resultant.  It  is  furthermore
obvious,  that  conversely,  a single  force  is  replaceable
by  two  or  several  other  forces.

Method  by  2.  We  shall  now  endeavor,  in  connection  with  the

which  the  , . , . . .

general  no-  investigations  of  Stevinus,  to  give  ourselves  some  idea

tion  of  the  . . , .

paraiieio-  of  the  manner  m which  the

gram  of  Ng  U . . . , ,

forces  \ , general  proposition  of  the

beenar-  \ parallelogram  of  forces

" e * \ might  have  been  arrived

\ \ at.  The  relation, — dis-

\ \ V covered  by  Stevinus, —

\ f **  that  exists  between  two

mutually  perpendicular

w n 0 m v forces  and  a third  force

that  equilibrates  them,  we
shall  assume  as  (indi-
rectly) given.  We  sup-
pose  now  (Fig.  27)  that
there  act  on  three  strings
Fig'  27'  OX,  OY,  OZ,  pulls  which

balance  each  other.  Let  us  endeavor  to  determine  the


nature  of  these  pulls.  Each  pull  holds  the  two  remain-
ing ones  in  equilibrium.  The  pull  <9Fwe  will  replace


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


35


(following  Stevinus’s  principle)  by  two  new  rectangular  The  deduc-
pulls,  one  in  the  direction  Ou  (the  prolongation  of  general
OX),  and  one  at  right  angles  thereto  in  the  direction  from  the

....  special  case

Ov.  And  let  us  similarly  resolve  the  pull  OZ  in  the  of  stevinus.
directions  Ou  and  Ow.  The  sum  of  the  pulls  in  the  di-
rection Ou,  then,  must  balance  the  pull  OX,  and  the
two  pulls  in  the  directions  Ov  and  Ow  must  mutually
destroy  each  other.  Taking  the  two  latter  as  equal
and  opposite,  and  representing  them  by  0?n  and  On,
we  determine  coincidently  with  the  operation  the  com-
ponents Op  and  Oq  parallel  to  Ou,  as  well  also  as  the
pulls  Or,  Os.  Now  the  sum  Op  -|-  Oq  is  equal  and  op-
posite to  the  pull  in  the  direction  of  OX;  and  if  we
draw  st  parallel  to  OY,  or  rt  parallel  to  OZ,  either  line
will  cut  off  the  portion  Ot  = Op  + Oq : with  which  re-
sult the  general  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces
is  reached.


The  general  case  of  composition  may  be  deduced  a different
in  still  another  way  from  the  special  composition  of  same  de-
rectangular  forces.  Let  OA  and  OB  be  the  two  forces
acting  at  O.  For  OB  substitute

a force  OC  acting  parallel  to  0 ^ B

OA  and  a force  OD  acting  at  \ \

right  angles  to  OA.  There  \

then  act  for  OA  and  OB  the  D B
two  forces  OE  = OA  + OC  Fig' 28*

and  OD,  the  resultant  of  which  forces  OF  is  at  the  same
time  the  diagonal  of  the  parallelogram  OAFB  con-
structed on  OA  and  OB  as  sides.

The  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces,  The  prin-

. . . ciple  here

when  reached  by  the  method  of  Stevinus,  presents  it-  presents  it-

. . . self  as  an

self  as  an  indirect  discovery.  It  is  exhibited  as  a con-  indirect
sequence  and  as  the  condition  of  known  facts.  We
perceive,  however,  merely  that  it  does  exist,  not,  as  yet


36


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


And  is  first
clearly
enunciated
by  Newton
and  Varig-
non.


The  geo-
metrical
theorem
employed
by  Varig-


t why  it  exists ; that  is,  we  cannot  reduce  it  (as  in  dy-
i namics)  to  still  simpler  propositions.  In  statics,  in-
- deed,  the  principle  was  not  fully  admitted  until  the
time  of  Varignon,  when  dynamics,  which  leads  directly
to  the  principle,  was  already  so  far  advanced  that  its
adoption  therefrom  presented  no  difficulties.  The  prin-
ciple of  the  parallelogram  of  forces  was  first  clearly
enunciated  by  Newton  in  his  Principles  of  Natural  Phi-
losophy. In  the  same  year,  Varignon,  independently  of
Newton,  also  enunciated  the  principle,  in  a work  sub-
mitted to  the  Paris  Academy  (but  not  published  un-
til after  its  author’s  death),  and  made,  by  the  aid  of  a
geometrical  theorem,  extended  practical  application
of  it.*

The  geometrical  theorem  referred  to  is  this.  If  we
consider  (Fig.  29)  a parallelogram  the  sides  of  which
are p and  q,  and  the  diagonal  is  r,  and  from  any  point  m
yr  in  the  plane  of  the  par-

allelogram  we  drawper-
/ T\/v  / pendiculars  on  these

\ three  straight  lines,

/ / r which  perpendiculars

/ - / / /we  will  designate  as

/ r / / myM  / t

l / Ux>  v’  W 9 t^ien  /•  u +

\ / x/  / q . v = r . w.  This  is

easil}^  proved  by  draw-
Fig.  29.  Fig.  30.  ing  straight  lines  from  m

to  the  extremities  of  the  diagonal  and  of  the  sides  of
the  parallelogram,  and  considering  the  areas  of  the
triangles  thus  formed,  which  are  equal  to  the  halves
of  the  products  specified.  If  the  point  m be  taken
within  the  parallelogram  and  perpendiculars  then  be


* In  the  same  year,  1687,  Father  Bernard  Lami  published,  a little  appendix
to  his  TraitS  de  mechanique , developing  the  same  principle.—  Trans.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


37


drawn,  the  theorem  passes  into  the  form  p . u — q . v
= r . w.  Finally,  if  m be  taken  on  the  diagonal  and
perpendiculars  again  be  drawn,  we  shall  get,  since  the
perpendicular  let  fall  on  the  diagonal  is  now  zero,
p . u — q . v — 0 or  p . u = q . v.

With  the  assistance  of  the  observation  that  forces  The  deduc-
are  proportional  to  the  motions  produced  by  them  in
equal  intervals  of  time,  Varignon  easily  advances  from
the  composition  of  motions  to  the  composition  of  forces.

Forces,  which  acting  at  a point  are  represented  in
magnitude  and  direction  by  the  sides  of  a parallelo-
gram, are  replaceable  by  a single  force,  similarly  rep-
resented by  the  diagonal  of  that  parallelogram.

If  now,  in  the  parallelogram  considered,  / and  ^Moments of
represent  the  concurrent  forces  (the  components)  and  r forces*
the  force  competent  to  take  their  place  (the  resultant),
then  the  products  pu , qv , rw  are  called  the  moments
of  these  forces  with  respect  to  the  point  m.  If  the  point
m lie  in  the  direction  of  the  resultant,  the  two  moments
pu  and  qv  are  with  respect  to  it  equal  to  each  other.

4.  With  the  assistance  of  this  principle  Varignon  is  varignon’s
now  in  a position  to  treat
the  machines  in  a much
simpler  manner  than  were
his  predecessors.  Let  us
consider,  for  example,

(Fig.  31)  a rigid  body
capable  of  rotation  about
an  axis  passing  through
O.  Perpendicular  to  the
axis  we  conceive  a plane,
and  select  therein  two

points  A , B , on  which  two  forces  P and  Q in  the  plane
are  supposed  to  act.  We  recognise  with  Varignon


38


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  deduc-  that  the  effect  of  the  forces  is  not  altered  if  their  points
law  of  the  of  application  be  displaced  along  their  line  of  action,

lever  from  . rr  „ . f

the  parai-  since  all  points  m the  same  direction  are  rigidly  con-

lelogram-

principle,  nected  with  one  another  and  each  one  presses  and  pulls
the  other.  We  may,  accordingly,  suppose  P applied
at  any  point  in  the  direction  AX,  and  Q at  any  point
in  the  direction  BY,  consequently  also  at  their  point
of  intersection  M.  With  the  forces  as  displaced  to  211,
then,  we  construct  a parallelogram,  and  replace  the
forces  by  their  resultant.  We  have  now  to  do  only
with  the  effect  of  the  latter.  If  it  act  only  on  movable
points,  equilibrium  will  not  obtain.  If,  however,  the
direction  of  its  action  pass  through  the  axis,  through
the  point  O,  which  is  not  movable,  no  motion  can  take
place  and  equilibrium  will  obtain.  In  the  latter  case
O is  a point  on  the  resultant,  and  if  we  drop  the  per-
pendiculars u and  v from  O on  the  directions  of  the
forces  p,  q , we  shall  have,  in  conformity  with  the  the-
orem before  mentioned,  p • u = q • v.  With  this  we
have  deduced  the  law  of  the  lever  from  the  principle
of  the  parallelogram  of  forces.

The  statics  Varignon  explains  in  like  manner  a number  of  other
adyrfamicai  cases  of  equilibrium  by  the  equilibration  of  the  result-
statics.  ant  force  by  some  obstacle  or  restraint.  On  the  in-
clined plane,  for  example,  equilibrium  exists  if  the  re-
sultant is  found  to  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane.  In
fact,  Varignon  rests  statics  in  its  entirety  on  a dynamic
foundation ; to  his  mind,  it  is  but  a special  case  of  dy-
namics. The  more  general  dynamical  case  constantly
hovers  before  him  and  he  restricts  himself  in  his  inves-
tigation voluntarily  to  the  case  of  equilibrium.  We
are  confronted  here  with  a dynamical  statics,  such
as  was  possible  only  after  the  researches  of  Galileo.
Incidentally,  it  may  be  remarked,  that  from  Varignon


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


39


is  derived  the  majority  of  the  theorems  and  methods
of  presentation  which  make  up  the  statics  of  modern
elementary  text-books.

5.  As  we  have  already  seen,  purely  statical  consid-  special

• iii  ■ • , statical  con-

erations  also  lead  to  the  proposition  of  the  parallel-  siderations

. . ...  also  lead  to

ogram  of  forces.  In  special  cases,  m fact,  the  principle  the  pnn-
admits  of  being  very  easily  verified.  We  recognise  at
once,  for  instance,  that  any  number  whatsoever  of  equal
forces  acting  (by  pull  or  pressure)  in  the  same  plane  at
a point,  around  which  their  suc-
cessive lines  make  equal  angles,
are  in  equilibrium.  If,  for  exam-
ple, (Fig.  32)  the  three  equal
forces  OA , OB , OC  act  on  the
point  O at  angles  of  120°,  each
two  of  the  forces  holds  the  third
in  equilibrium.  We  see  imme-
diately that  the  resultant  of  OA
and  OB  is  equal  and  opposite  to  OC.  It  is  represented
by  OD  and  is  at  the  same  time  the  diagonal  of  the
parallelogram  OABB,  which  readily  follows  from  the
fact  that  the  radius  of  a circle  is  also  the  side  of  the
hexagon  included  by  it.

6.  If  the  concurrent  forces  act  in  the  same  or  in  The  case  of
resultant  is  equal  to  the  sum  forcesdent

merely  a


opposite  directions,  the
or  the  difference  of  the
components.  We  rec-
ognise both  cases  with-
out any  difficulty  as
particular  cases  of  the
principle  of  the  paral-
lelogram of  forces.  If  in  the  two  drawings  of  Fig.  33
we  imagine  the  angle  A OB  to  be  gradually  reduced
to  the  value  o°,  and  the  angle  A'  O'  B'  increased  to  the


particular
casie  of  the
general
~q  principle.


Fig.  33-


40


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  princi-
pea  propo-
sition de-
rived from
experience.


Daniel  Ber-
noulli’s at-
tempted
geometrical
demonstra-
tion of  the
truth.


value  i8o°,  we  shall  perceive  that  OC  passes  into  OA  +
AC=  OA  + OB  and  O'  O'  into  O' A' — A'  C = O'  A'
— O'  B' . The  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces
includes,  accordingly,  propositions  which  are  generally
made  to  precede  it  as  independent  theorems.

7.  The  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces,  in
the  form  in  which  it  was  set  forth  by  Newton  and
Varignon,  clearly  discloses  itself  as  a proposition  de-
rived from  experience.  A point  acted  on  by  two  forces
describes  with  accelerations  proportional  to  the  forces
two  mutually  independent  motions.  On  this  fact  the
parallelogram  construction  is  based.  Daniel  Ber-
noulli, however,  was  of  opinion  that  the  proposition  of
the  parallelogram  of  forces  was  a geometrical  truth,  in-
dependent of  physical  experience.  And  he  attempted
to  furnish  for  it  a geometrical  demonstration,  the  chief'
features  of  which  we  shall  here  take  into  consideration,
as  the  Bernoullian  view  has  not,  even  at  the  present
day,  entirely  disappeared.

If  two  equal  forces,  at  right  angles  to  each  other
(Fig.  34),  act  on  a point,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  ac-
n cording  to  Bernoulli,  that  the  line

/r  4 .V / 11  ■-  flft-

' 7\”  ' of  bisection  of  the  angle  (con-

/ q formably  to  the  principle  of  sym-

p/  If  \p  metry)  is  the  direction  of  the  re-
sultant r.  To  determine  geomet-
rically also  the  magnitude  of  the
r resultant,  each  of  the  forces  p is

Flg  34-  decomposed  into  two  equal  forces

q,  parallel  and  perpendicular  to  r.  The  relation  in
respect  of  magnitude  thus  produced  between  / and  q
is  consequently  the  same  as  that  between  r and  p.  We
have,  accordingly:

p = jx.  q and  r = . p;  whence  r = ju2q.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  ST  A TICS .


41


Since,  however,  the  forces  q acting  at  right  angles
to  r destroy  each  other,  while  those  parallel  to  r con-
stitute the  resultant,  it  further  follows  that


r = 2 q;  hence  pi  = V ■ 2,  and  r — l/2  . p.

The  resultant,  therefore,  is  represented  also  in  re-
spect of  magnitude  by  the  diagonal  of  the  square  con-
structed on  p as  side.

Similarly,  the  magnitude  may  be  determined  of  the  The  case  of

1 r 1 tt  unequal

resultant  of  unequal  rectangular  components.  Here,  rectangular

. . . . , . _ components

however,  nothing  is  known  before-  t

hand  concerning  the  direction  of
the  resultant  r.  If  we  decompose
the  components  p,  q (Fig.  35),
parallel  and  perpendicular  to  the
yet  undetermined  direction  r,  into
the  forces  u,  s and  v,  t , the  new
forces  will  form  with  the  compo-
nents p,  q the  same  angles  that  /,
q form  with  r.  From  which  fact  the  following  relations
in  respect  of  magnitude  are  determined :

r p , r q 7'  p r q

— = — and  — = — , — — - and  — = ~,

p u q v q s p t


Fig.  35-


from  which  two  latter  equations  follows  s = t =pq/r.

On  the  other  hand,  however,

Q ^

r = u + v — — — 1 or  r2  =p2  q2.

r r

The  diagonal  of  the  rectangle  constructed  on  p and
q represents  accordingly  the  magnitude  of  the  result-
ant.

Therefore,  for  all  rhombs,  the  direction  of  the  re-  General  re-
sultant is  determined  ; for  all  rectangles,  the  magni-
tude; and  for  squares  both  magnitude  and  direction.
Bernoulli  then  solves  the  problem  of  substituting  for


42


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS,


Critique  of
Bernoulli’s
method.


The  as-
sumptions
of  his  de-
duction de-
rived from
experience.


two  equal  forces  acting  at  one  given  angle,  other  equal,
equivalent  forces  acting  at  a different  angle  ; and  finally
arrives  by  circumstantial  considerations,  not  wholly
exempt  from  mathematical  objections,  but  amended
later  by  Poisson,  at  the  general  principle.

8.  Let  us  now  examine  the  physical  aspect  of  this
question.  As  a proposition  derived  from  experience,
the  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces  was  already
known  to  Bernoulli.  What  Bernoulli  really  does,  there-
fore, is  to  simulate  towards  himself  a complete  ignorance
of  the  proposition  and  then  attempt  to  philosophise
it  abstractly  out  of  the  fewest  possible  assumptions.
Such  work  is  by  no  means  devoid  of  meaning  and  pur-
pose. On  the  contrary,  we  discover  by  such  proce-
dures, how  few  and  how  imperceptible  the  experiences
are  that  suffice  to  supply  a principle.  Only  we  must
not  deceive  ourselves,  as  Bernoulli  did  \ we  must  keep
before  our  minds  all  the  assumptions,  and  should  over-
look no  experience  which  we  involuntarily  employ.
What  are  the  assumptions,  then,  contained  in  Bernoul-
li's deduction?

9.  Statics,  primarily,  is  acquainted  with  force  only
as  a pull  or  a pressure,  that  from  whatever  source  it
may  come  always  admits  of  being  replaced  by  the  pull
or  the  pressure  of  a weight.  All  forces  thus  may  be  re-
garded as  quantities  of  the  same  kind  and  be  measured
by  weights.  Experience  further  instructs  us,  that  the
particular  factor  of  a force  which  is  determinative  of
equilibrium  or  determinative  of  motion,  is  contained
not  only  in  the  magnitude  of  the  force  but  also  in  its
direction , which  is  made  known  by  the  direction  of  the
resulting  motion,  by  the  direction  of  a stretched  cord,
or  in  some  like  manner.  We  may  ascribe  magnitude
indeed  to  other  things  given  in  physical  experience,


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


43


such  as  temperature,  potential  function,  but  not  direc-
tion. The  fact  that  both  magnitude  and  direction  are
determinative  in  the  efficiency  of  a force  impressed  on
a point  is  an  important  though  it  may  be  an  unob-
trusive experience.

Granting,  then,  that  the  magnitude  and  direction  Magnitude
of  forces  impressed  on  a point  alone  are  decisive,  it  will  tion  the  sole
be  perceived  that  two  equal  and  opposite  forces,  as  they  factors,
cannot  uniquely  and  precisely  determine  any  motion,
are  in  equilibrium.  So,  also,  at
right  angles  to  its  direction,  a
force p is  unable  uniquely  to  de-
termine a motional  effect.  But
if  a force  p is  inclined  at  an  an-
gle to  another  direction  s s'  (F ig.

36),  it  is  able  to  determine  a mo-
tion in  that  direction.  Yet  ex-
perience alone  can  inform  us,
that  the  motion  is  determined  in  the  direction  of  s'  s
and  not  in  that  of  ssf ; that  is  to  say,  in  the  direction
of  the  side  of  the  acute  angle  or  in  the  direction  of  the
projection  of  / on  s's.

Now  this  latter  experience  is  made  use  of  by  Ber-Thec^of
noulli  at  the  very  start.  The  sense , namely,  of  the  re-  derivable
sultant  of  two  equal  forces  acting  at  right  angles  to  one  experience,
another  is  obtainable  only  on  the  ground  of  this  expe-
rience. From  the  principle  of  symmetry  follows  only,
that  the  resultant  falls  in  the  plane  of  the  forces  and
coincides  with  the  line  of  bisection  of  the  angle,  not
however  that  it  falls  in  the  acute  angle.  But  if  we  sur-
render this  latter  determination,  our  whole  proof  is  ex-
ploded before  it  is  begun.

10.  If,  now,  we  have  reached  the  conviction  that
our  knowledge  of  the  effect  of  the  direction  of  a force  is


44


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


So  also  solely  obtainable  from  experience,  still  less  then  shall
must  the  . . . .

form  of  the  we  believe  it  m our  power  to  ascertain  by  any  other  way

effect  be  ^

thus  de-  the  form  of  this  effect.  It  is  utterly  out  of  our  power,
to  divine,  that  a force  p acts  in  a direction  j*  that  makes
with  its  own  direction  the  angle  a , exactly  as  a force
p cos  a in  the  direction  r ; a statement  equivalent  to  the
proposition  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces.  Nor  was
it  in  Bernoulli’s  power  to  do  this.  Nevertheless,  he
makes  use,  scarcely  perceptible  it  is  true,  of  expe-
riences that  involve  by  implication  this  very  mathe-
matical fact.

The  man-  A person  already  fa?niliar  with  the  composition
which  the  and  resolution  of  forces  is  well  aware  that  several  forces

assump-  . .

tionedenter  act*n&  at  a P0111^  are>  as  regards  their  effect,  replaceable,
into  Ber-  in  every  respect  and  in  every  direction,  by  a single  force.

noulli’s  de-  . . .

duction.  This  knowledge,  m Bernoulli’s  mode  of  proof,  is  ex-
pressed in  the  fact  that  the  forces  p,  q are  regarded  as
absolutely  qualified  to  replace  in  all  respects  the  forces
s}  u and  /,  v,  as  well  in  the  direction  of  r as  in  every
other  direction.  Similarly  r is  regarded  as  the  equiv-
alent of  p and  q.  It  is  further  assumed  as  wholly  in-
different, whether  we  estimate  j-,  u,  t,  v first  in  the
directions  of  p,  q,  and  then  /,  q in  the  direction  of  r,  or
j,  u,  ij  v be  estimated  directly  and  from  the  outset  in
the  direction  of  r.  But  this  is  something  that  a person
only  can  know  who  has  antecedently  acquired  a very
extensive  experience  concerning  the  composition  and
resolution  of  forces.  We  reach  most  simply  the  knowl-
edge of  the  fact  referred  to,  by  starting  from  the  knowl-
edge of  another  fact,  namely  that  a force  p acts  in  a
direction  making  with  its  own  an  angle  a,  with  an  effect
equivalent  to  p • cos  a.  As  a fact,  this  is  the  way  the
perception  of  the  truth  was  reached.

Let  the  coplanar  forces  P,  P'}  P".  . . be  applied  to


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


45


one  and  the  same  point  at  the  angles  a.  a , a ...  with  Mathemat-

..  . ° ’ ical  analy-

a given  direction  X.  These  forces,  let  us  suppose,  are  sis  of  the

l x x results  of

replaceable  by  a single  force  77,  which  makes  with  Xthe  true  and

. necessary

an  angle  /r.  By  the  familiar  principle  we  have  then  assumption.
^Pcosa  — 77  cos  jjl.

If  77  is  still  to  remain  the  substitute  of  this  system  of
forces,  whatever  direction  X may  take  on  the  system
being  turned  through  any  angle  d,  we  shall  further
have

2P  cos  {a  4-  d)  = 77  cos  (/£  -f-  d),
or

(XPcosar— 77cos/7)  cosd— (7£.Psina:  — 77sin/7)  sind  = 0.

If  we  put

'XP  cos  a — 77  cos ju  = A,

— (J2Psma  — 77  sin/7)  = B ,

B

tanr  = z,

it  follows  that

A cosd  + B sind  = V A 2 + B2  sin  (d  -f-  r)  = 0,
which  equation  can  subsist  for  every  d only  on  the  con-
dition that

A = XPcosa  — 77  cos  jj.  = 0

and

B = (2.P  sina  — 77  sin/7)  = 0 ;
whence  results

77  cos  jj  = 'XPcosa
77  sin/*  = TSjPsinar.

From  these  equations  follow  for  77  and  jj  the  deter-
minate values

77=  i/  [(^jPsinar)2  + (T^jPcosn:)2]
sin#

tan/^  __  ygjDCQsa'


and


The  actual
results  not
deducible
on  any
other  sup-
position.


General  re-
marks.


An  addi-
tional as-
sumption of
Bernoulli.


46  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .

Granting,  therefore,  that  the  effect  of  a force  in  every
direction  can  be  measured  by  its  projection  on  that  di-
rection, then  truly  every  system  of  forces  acting  at  a
point  is  replaceable  by  a single  force,  determinate  in
magnitude  and  direction.  This  reasoning  does  not  hold,
however,  if  we  put  in  the  place  of  cos  a any  general  func-
tion of  an  angle,  cp  (a).  Yet  if  this  be  done,  and  we  still
regard  the  resultant  as  determinate,  we  shall  obtain  for
c ),  as  may  be  seen,  for  example,  from  Poisson’s
deduction,  the  form  cos  nr.  The  experience  that  several
forces  acting  at  a point  are  always,  in  every  respect,
replaceable  by  a single  force,  is  therefore  ■mathemat-
ically equivalent  to  the  principle  of  the  parallelogram
of  forces  or  to  the  principle  of  projection.  The  prin-
ciple of  the  parallelogram  or  of  projection  is,  how-
ever, much  easier  reached  by  observation  than  the
more  general  experience  above  mentioned  by  statical
observations.  And  as  a fact,  the  principle  of  the  par-
allelogram was  reached  earlier.  It  would  require  in-
deed an  almost  superhuman  power  of  perception  to
deduce  mathematically,  without  the  guidance  of  any
further  knowledge  of  the  actual  conditions  of  the  ques-
tion, the  principle  of  the  parallelogram  from  the  gen-
eral principle  of  the  equivalence  of  several  forces  to  a
single  one.  We  criticise  accordingly  in  the  deduction
of  Bernoulli  this,  that  that  which  is  easier  to  observe
is  reduced  to  that  which  is  more  difficult  to  observe.
This  is  a violation  of  the  economy  of  science.  Bernoulli
is  also  deceived  in  imagining  that  he  does  not  proceed
from  any  fact  whatever  of  observation.

We  must  further  remark  that  the  fact  that  the  forces
are  independent  of  one  another,  which  is  involved  in
the  law  of  their  composition,  is  another  experience
which  Bernoulli  throughout  tacitly  employs.  As  long


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


47


as  we  have  to  do  with  uniform  or  symmetrical  systems
of  forces,  all  equal  in  magnitude,  each  can  be  affected
by  the  others,  even  if  they  are  not  independent,  only
to  the  same  extent  and  in  the  same  way.  Given  but
three  forces,  however,  of  which  two  are  symmetrical
to  the  third,  and  even  then  the  reasoning,  provided
we  admit  that  the  forces  may  not  be  independent,  pre-
sents considerable  difficulties.

11.  Once  we  have  been  led,  directly  or  indirectly,  Discussion
to  the  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces,  once  we  acterof  the
have  perceived  it,  the  principle  is  just  as  much  an  ob- pnnciple*
servation  as  any  other.  If  the  observation  is  recent,  it

of  course  is  not  accepted  with  the  same  confidence  as
old  and  frequently  verified  observations.  We  then  seek
to  support  the  new  observation  by  the  old,  to  demon-
strate their  agreement.  By  and  by  the  new  observa-
tion acquires  equal  standing  with  the  old.  It  is  then
no  longer  necessary  constantly  to  reduce  it  to  the  lat-
ter. Deduction  of  this  character  is  expedient  only  in
cases  in  which  observations  that  are  difficult  directly
to  obtain  can  be  reduced  to  simpler  ones  more  easily
obtained,  as  is  done  with  the  principle  of  the  parallel-
ogram of  forces  in  dynamics.

12.  The  proposition  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces  Experimen-

has  also  been  illustrated  by  experiments  especially  tion  of  the

instituted  for  the  purpose.  An  apparatus  very  well acontnv-by
• ■ ance
adapted  to  this  end  was  contrived  by  Cauchy.  The  Cauchy.

centre  of  a horizontal  divided  circle  (Fig.  37)  is  marked

by  a pin.  Three  threads  /,  /',  /",  tied  together  at  a

point,  are  passed  over  grooved  wheels  r,  /,  r",  which

can  be  fixed  at  any  point  in  the  circumference  of  the

circle,  and  are  loaded  by  the  weights  If  three

equal  weights  be  attached,  for  instance,  and  the  wheels

placed  at  the  marks  of  division  o,  120,  240,  the  point  at


48


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Experimen-
tal illustra-
tion of  the
principle.


which  the  strings  are  knotted  will  assume  a position
just  above  the  centre  of  the  circle.  Three  equal  forces
acting  at  angles  of  120°,  accordingly,  are  in  equilib-
rium.


Fig-  37.

If  we  wish  to  represent  another  and  different  case,
we  may  proceed  as  follows.  We  imagine  any  two
forces/,  q acting  at  any  angle  a,  represent  (Fig.  38)
them  by  lines,  and  construct  on  them  as  sides  a paral-
lelogram. We  supply,  further,  a force
equal  and  opposite  to  the  resultant  r.
The  three  forces  /,  q,  — r hold  each
other  in  equilibrium,  at  the  angles  vis-
ible from  the  construction.  We  now
place  the  wheels  of  the  divided  circle  on
the  points  of  division  o,  a,  (Y  + fi,  and
load  the  appropriate  strings  with  the
weights  /,  q , r. . The  point  at  which  the
strings  are  knotted  will  come  to  a position  exactly
above  the  middle  point  of  the  circle.


Fig.  38.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


49


IV.

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  VIRTUAL  VELOCITIES,
i.  We  now  pass  to  the  discussion  of  the  principle  The  truth

. r r of  the  prin-

of  virtual  (possible)  displacements.*  The  truth  ofcipiefirs^t
this  principle  was  first  remarked  by  Stevinus  at  the  by  stevinus
close  of  the  sixteenth  century  in  his  investigations  on
the  equilibrium  of  pulleys  and  combinations  of  pulleys.

Stevinus  treats  combinations  of  pulleys  in  the  same
way  they  are  treated  at  the  present  day.  In  the  case

* Termed  in  English  the  principle  of  “virtual  velocities,”  this  being  the
original  phrase  [vltesse  virtiielle)  introduced  by  John  Bernoulli.  See  the
text,  page  56.  The  word  virtualis  seems  to  have  been  the  fabrication  of  Duns
Scotus  (see  the  Century  Dictionary , under  virtual) ; but  virtualiter  was  used
by  Aquinas,  and  virtue  had  been  employed  for  centuries  to  translate  dbvajutg,
and  therefore  as  a synonym  for  potentia.  Along  with  many  other  scholastic
terms,  virtual  passed  into  the  ordinary  vocabulary  of  the  English  language.

Everybody  remembers  the  passage  in  the  third  book  of  Paradise  Lost ,

" Love  not  the  heav’nly  Spirits,  and  how  thir  Love
Express  they,  by  looks  onely,  or  do  they  mix
Irradiance,  virtual  or  immediate  touch?  ” — Milton.

So,  we  all  remember  how  it  was  claimed  before  our  revolution  that  America
had  “ virtual  representation  ” in  parliament.  In  these  passages,  as  in  Latin,
virtual  means  : existing  in  effect,  but  not  actually.  In  the  same  sense,  the
word  passed  into  French  ; and  was  made  pretty  common  among  philosophers
by  Leibnitz.  Thus,  he  calls  innate  ideas  in  the  mind  of  a child,  not  yet  brought
to  consciousness,  “ des  connoissances  virtuelles."

The  principle  in  question  was  an  extension  to  the  case  of  more  than  two
forces  of  the  old  rule  that  “what  a machine  gains  in  power , it  loses  in  velocity.''

Bernoulli’s  modification  reads  that  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  forces  into
their  virtual  velocities  must  vanish  to  give  equilibrium.  He  says,  in  effect  :
give  the  system  any  possible  and  infinitesimal  motion  you  please,  and  then
the  simultaneous  displacements  of  the  points  of  application  of  the  forces,
resolved  in  the  directions  0/  those  forces,  though  they  are  not  exactly  velocities,
since  they  are  only  displacements  in  one  time,  are,  nevertheless,  virtitally
velocities,  for  the  purpose  of  applying  the  rule  that  what  a machine  gains  in
power,  it  loses  in  velocity.

Thomson  and  Tait  say  : “ If  the  point  of  application  of  a force  be  dis-
placed through  a small  space,  the  resolved  part  of  the  displacement  in  the  di-
rection of  the  force  has  been  called  its  Virtual  Velocity.  This  is  positive  or
negative  according  as  the  virtual  velocity  is  in  the  same,  or  in  the  opposite,
direction  to  that  of  the  force.”  This  agrees  with  Bernoulli’s  definition  which
may  be  found  in  Varignon’s  Nouvelle  mecanique , Vol.  II,  Chap.  ix. — Trans.


5°


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Stevinus’s  a (Fig.  30')  equilibrium  obtains,  when  an  equal  weight  P

investiga-  ' , . ...

tions jm  the  is  suspended  at  each  side,  for  reasons  already  familiar,
of  pulleys.™  In  b,  the  weight  P is  suspended  by  two  parallel  cords,


Fig.  39-


each  of  which  accordingly  supports  the  weight  P/2,
with  which  weight  in  the  case  of  equilibrium  the  free
end  of  the  cord  must  also  be  loaded.  In  c,  P is  sus-
pended by  six  cords,  and  the  weighting  of  the  free  ex-
tremity with  P/6  will  accordingly  produce  equilibrium.
In  d,  the  so-called  Archimedean  or  potential  pulley,*  P
in  the  first  instance  is  suspended  by  two  cords,  each
of  which  supports  P/ 2 ; one  of  these  two  cords  in  turn
is  suspended  by  two  others,  and  so  on  to  the  end,  so
that  the  free  extremity  will  be  held  in  equilibrium  by
the  weight  P/S.  If  we  impart  to  these  assemblages
of  pulleys  displacements  corresponding  to  a descent  of
the  weight  P through  the  distance  h , we  shall  observe
that  as  a result  of  the  arrangement  of  the  cords


the  counterweight  P
P/2

“ “ P/6

“ “ P/S  J


[ will  ascend


a distance  h in  a

“ “ 2/1  il  b

“ “ 6 h “ c

SZi  “ d


* These  terms  are  not  in  use  in  English. — Trans.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


5i


Fig.  40.


In  a system  of  pulleys  in  equilibrium,  therefore,  His  condu-
the  products  of  the  weights  into  the  displacements  germ  of  the
they  sustain  are  respectively  equal.  (££Ut  spatium prmciple#
agentis  ad  spatium  patientis,  sic  potentia  patientis  ad
potentiam  agentis.5’ — Stevini,  Hypomne?nata , T.  IV,
lib.  3,  p.  172.)  In  this  remark  is  contained  the  germ
of  the  principle  of  virtual  displacements.

2.  Galileo  recognised  the  truth  of  the  principle  in  Galileo’s
another  case,  and  that  a somewhat  more  general  one ; ofCthe  pun-
namely,  in  its  application  to  the  inclined  plane.  On  case  of  the
an  inclined  plane  (Fig.  40),  plane,

the  length  of  which  AB  is
double  the  height  BC ',  a load
Q placed  on  AB  is  held  in
equilibrium  by  the  load  P act-
ing along  the  height  BC,  if
P = Q/2.  If  the  machine  be
set  in  motion,  P = Q/2  will  descend,  say,  the  vertical
distance  h,  and  Q will  ascend  the  same  distance  h along
the  incline  AB.  Galileo,  now,  allowing  the  phenom-
enon to  exercise  its  full  effect  on  his  mind,  perceives,
that  equilibrium  is  determined  not  by  the  weights
alone  but  also  by  their  possible  approach  to  and  reces-
sion from  the  centre  of  the  earth.  Thus,  while  Q/2  de-
scends along  the  vertical  height  the  distance  h,  Q as-
cends h along  the  inclined  length,  vertically,  however,
only/^/2;  the  result  being  that  the  products  Qfi/2)
and  ( <2/2)72  come  out  equal  on  both  sides.  The  eluci-
dation that  Galileo’s  observation  affords  and  the  light  character
it  diffuses,  can  hardly  be  emphasised  strongly  enough,  observation
The  observation  is  so  natural  and  unforced,  moreover,
that  we  admit  it  at  once.  What  can  appear  simpler
than  that  no  motion  takes  place  in  a system  of  heavy


5 2


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


bodies  when  on  the  whole  no  heavy  mass  can  descend.
Such  a fact  appears  instinctively  acceptable.

Comparison  Galileo’s  conception  of  the  inclined  plane  strikes

of  it  with  . . .

thatofste-  us  as  much  less  ingenious  than  that  of  Stevinus,  but
we  recognise  it  as  more  natural  and  more  profound.  It
is  in  this  fact  that  Galileo  discloses  such  scientific  great-
ness : that  he  had  the  intellectual  audacity  to  see,  in  a
subject  long  before  investigated,  more  than  his  prede-
cessors had  seen,  and  to  trust  to  his  own  perceptions.
With  the  frankness  that  was  characteristic  of  him  he
unreservedly  places  before  the  reader  his  own  view,
together  with  the  considerations  that  led  him  to  it.

The  Torn-  3.  Torricelli,  by  the  employment  of  the  notion  of

form  of  the  “centre  of  gravity,”  has  put  Galileo’s  principle  in  a
form  in  which  it  appeals  still  more  to  our  instincts,  but
in  which  it  is  also  incidentally  applied  by  Galileo  him-
self. According  to  Torricelli  equilibrium  exists  in  a
machine  when,  on  a displacement  being  imparted  to  it,
the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  weights  attached  thereto
cannot  descend.  On  the  supposition  of  a displacement
in  the  inclined  plane  last  dealt  with,  P,  let  us  say,  de-
scends the  distance  h,  in  compensation  wherefor  Q
vertically  ascends  h . sin  a.  Assuming  that  the  centre
of  gravity  does  not  descend,  we  shall  have


If  the  weights  bear  to  one  another  some  different  pro-
portion, then  the  centre  of  gravity  can  descend  when  a
displacement  is  made,  and  equilibrium  will  not  obtain.
We  expect  the  state  of  equilibrium  instinctively,  when
the  centre  of  gravity  of  a system  of  heavy  bodies  can-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


53


not  descend.  The  Torricellian  form  of  expression,  how-
ever, contains  in  no  respect  more  than  the  Galilean.

4.  As  with  systems  of  pulleys  and  with  the  inclined  The  appii-
plane,  so  also  the  validity  of  the  principle  of  virtual  the  princi-
displacements  is  easily  demonstrable  for  the  other  ma-  other  ma-
chines : for  the  lever,  the  wheel  and  axle,  and  the  rest.  me  '

In  a wheel  and  axle,  for  instance,  with  the  radii  R,  r

and  the  respective  weights  P,  Q,  equilibrium  exists,
as  we  know,  when  PR—  Qr.  If  we  turn  the  wheel
and  axle  through  the  angle  a,  P will  descend  Ra,  and
Q will  ascend  ra.  According  to  the  conception  of
Stevinus  and  Galileo,  when  equilibrium  exists,  P.  Ra
— Q . ra,  which  equation  expresses  the  same  thing  as
the  preceding  one.

5.  When  we  compare  a system  of  heavy  bodies  inThecrite-
which  motion  is  taking  place,  with  a similar  system  state  of
which  is  in  equilibrium,  the  question  forces  itself  upon  eqmllbnum
us  : What  constitutes  the  difference  of  the  two  cases?

What  is  the  factor  operative  here  that  determines  mo-
tion, the  factor  that  disturbs  equilibrium, — the  factor

that  is  present  in  the  one  case  and  absent  in  the  other?

Having  put  this  question  to  himself,  Galileo  discovers
that  not  only  the  weights,  but  also  the  distances  of
their  vertical  descents  (the  amounts  of  their  vertical
displacements)  are  the  factors  that  determine  motion.

Let  us  call  P,  Pf,  P"  . . . the  weights  of  a system  of
heavy  bodies,  and  h , Ji , h"  . . . their  respective,  simul-
taneously possible  vertical  displacements,  where  dis-
placements downwards  are  reckoned  as  positive,  and
displacements  upwards  as  negative.  Galileo  finds
then,  that  the  criterion  or  test  of  the  state  of  equilib-
rium is  contained  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition
Ph  + Pf  h!  + P"  h”  + . . . = 0.  The  sum  Ph  -fi  P'ti
4-  jPy 7*"+  . • . is  the  factor  that  destroys  equilibrium,


54


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


the  factor  that  determines  motion.  Owing  to  its  im-
portance this  sum  has  in  recent  times  been  character-
ised by  the  special  designation  work .

There  is  no  6.  Whereas  the  earlier  investigators,  in  the  compari-
necessity  in  . ..  .

our  choice  son  of  cases  of  equilibrium  and  cases  or  motion,  directed
teria.  their  attention  to  the  weights  and  their  distances  from
the  axis  of  rotation  and  recognised  the  statical  mo-
ments as  the  decisive  factors  involved,  Galileo  fixes
his  attention  on  the  weights  and  their  distances  of  de-
scent and  discerns  work  as  the  decisive  factor  involved.
It  cannot  of  course  be  prescribed  to  the  inquirer
what  mark  or  criterion  of  the  condition  of  equilibrium
he  shall  take  account  of,  when  several  are  present  to
choose  from.  The  result  alone  can  determine  whether
his  choice  is  the  right  one.  But  if  we  cannot,  for  rea-
And  ail  are  sons  already  stated,  regard  the  significance  of  the  stat-
from  the  ical  moments  as  given  independently  of  experience,  as
source.  something  self-evident,  no  more  can  we  entertain  this
view  with  respect  to  the  import  of  work.  Pascal  errs,
and  many  modern  inquirers  share  this  error  with  him,
when  he  says,  on  the  occasion  of  applying  the  principle
of  virtual  displacements  to  fluids:  “ Etant  clair  que  c’est
la  meme  chose  de  faire  faire  un  ponce  de  chemin  a cent
livres  d’eau,  que  de  faire  faire  cent  ponces  de  chemin
a une  livre  d’eau.”  This  is  correct  only  on  the  suppo-
sition that  we  have  already  come  to  recognise  work  as
the  decisive  factor ; and  that  it  is  so  is  a fact  which
experience  alone  can  disclose.

illustration  If  we  have  an  equal- armed,  equally- weighted  lever
sedingre-  before  us,  we  recognise  the  equilibrium  of  the  lever  as
the  only  effect  that  is  uniquely  determined,  whether  we
regard  the  weights  and  the  distances  or  the  weights
and  the  vertical  displacements  as  the  conditions  that
determine  motion.  Experimental  knowledge  of  this


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


55


or  a similar  character  must,  however,  in  the  necessity  of
the  case  precede  any  judgment  of  ours  with  regard  to
the  phenomenon  in  question.  The  particular  way  in
which  the  disturbance  of  equilibrium  depends  on  the
conditions  mentioned,  that  is  to  say,  the  significance
of  the  statical  moment  (PL)  or  of  the  work  (Ph)9  is
even  less  capable  of  being  philosophically  excogitated
than  the  general  fact  of  the  dependence.

7.  When  two  equal  weights  with  equal  and  op-  Reduction
posite  possible  displacements  are  opposed  to  each  erai  case  of
other,  we  recognise  at  once  the  subsistence  of  equilib-  pie  to  the

...  . , , . , , simpler  and

rium.  We  might  now  be  tempted  to  reduce  the  more  special  case
general  case  of  the  weights  P9  P'  with  the  capacities  of
displacement  h9h*  9 where
PJi  = P'ti , to  the  sim-
pler case.  Suppose  we
have,  for  example,  (Fig.

41)  the  -weights  3 P and
4 P on  a wheel  and  axle
with  the  radii  4 and  3.

We  divide  the  weights
into  equal  portions  of  the

definite  magnitude  P9  which  we  designate  by  a,  b,  c,
d9  e,  f,  g-  We  then  transport  a , b9  c to  the  level  -f-  3,
and  d,  e,  f to  the  level  — 3.  The  weights  will,  of
themselves,  neither  enter  on  this  displacement  nor
will  they  resist  it.  We  then  take  simultaneously  the
weight  g at  the  level  0 and  the  weight  a at  the  level
-(-  3,  push  the  first  upwards  to  — 1 and  the  second
downwards  to  -f-  4,  then  again,  and  in  the  same  way,
g to  — 2 and  b to  -f-  4,  g to  — 3 and  c to  + 4.  To  all
these  displacements  the  weights  offer  no  resistance,
nor  do  they  produce  them  of  themselves.  Ultimately,
however,  a,  b,  c (or  3 P)  appear  at  the  level  + 4 and


Fig  41*


56


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  gen-  d e,  f,  g (or  4P)  at  the  level  — 3.  Consequently,
with  respect  also  to  the  last-mentioned  total  displace-
ment, the  weights  neither  produce  it  of  themselves
,nor  do  they  resist  it ; that  is  to  say,  given  the  ratio  of
displacement  here  specified,  and  the  weights  will  be
in  equilibrium.  The  equation  4 . 3 P — 3 . 4 P = 0 is,
therefore,  characteristic  of  equilibrium  in  the  case  as-
sumed. The  generalisation  (P/i — P'h' = 0)  is  ob-
vious.

The  condi-  If  we  carefully  examine  the  reasoning  of  this  case,
character  we  shall  quite  readily  perceive  that  the  inference  in-
ence.emfer"  volved  cannot  be  drawn  unless  we  take  for  granted
that  the  order  of  the  operations  performed  and  the  path
by  which  the  transferences  are  effected,  are  indifferent,
that  is  unless  we  have  previously  discerned  that  work
is  determinative.  We  should  commit,  if  we  accepted
this  inference,  the  same  error  that  Archimedes  com-
mitted in  his  deduction  of  the  law  of  the  lever ; as  has
been  set  forth  at  length  in  a preceding  section  and
need  not  in  the  present  case  be  so  exhaustively  dis-
cussed. Nevertheless,  the  reasoning  we  have  pre-
sented is  useful,  in  the  respect  that  it  brings  palpably
home  to  the  mind  the  relationship  of  the  simple  and
the  complicated  cases.

Theuniver-  8.  The  universal  applicability  of  the  principle  of
bimyPof1the  virtual  displacements  to  all  cases  of  equilibrium,  was
Prstper-e  perceived  by  John  Bernoulli  ; who  communicated  his
John  Ber-  discovery  to  Varignon  in  a letter  written  in  1717.  We
i.oaiii.  wj]|  now  enunciate  the  principle  in  its  most  general
form.  At  the  points  A,  Bt  C . . . (Fig.  42)  the  forces
P,  P',  P,r  . . . are  applied.  Impart  to  the  points  any
infinitely  small  displacements  v,  v\  v"  . . . compatible
with  the  character  of  the  connections  of  the  points  (so-
called  virtual  displacements),  and  construct  the  pro-


TIIE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


57


P'B  P'


Fig.  42.


jections  /,  ft , ft*  of  these  displacements  on  the  direc-
tions of  the  forces.  These  projections  we  consider
positive  when  they  fall  in
the  direction  of  the  force,
and  negative  when  they  fall
in  the  opposite  direction.

The  products  Pp , P’ ft ,

Pn ft',  . . . are  called  virtual
moments,  and  in  the  two
cases  just  mentioned  have
contrary  signs.  Now,  the  principle  asserts,  that  for  the
case  of  equilibrium  Pp  -f-  P* ft  + P"  ft'  0,  or

more  briefly  2Pp  = 0.

g.  Let  us  now  examine  a few  points  more  in  detail.
Previous  to  Newton  a force  was  almost  universally
conceived  simply  as  the  pull  or  the  pressure  of  a heavy
body.  The  mechanical  researches  of  this  period  dealt
almost  exclusively  with  heavy  bodies.  When,  now,
in  the  Newtonian  epoch,  the  generalisation  of  the  idea
of  force  was  effected,  all  mechanical  principles  known
to  be  applicable  to  heavy  bodies  could  be  transferred
at  once  to  any  forces  whatsoever.  It  was  possible  to
replace  every  force  by  the  pull  of  a heavy  body  on  a
string.  In  this  sense  we  may  also  apply  the  principle
of  virtual  displacements,  at  first  discovered  only  for
heavy  bodies,  to  any  forces  whatsoever.

Virtual  displacements  are  displacements  consistent
with  the  character  of  the  connections  of  a system  and
with  one  another.  If,  for  example,  the  two  points  of
a system,  A and  B,  at  which  forces  act,  are  connected
(Fig.  43,  1)  by  a rectangularly  bent  lever,  free  to  re-
volve about  C,  then,  if  CB  = 2CA,  all  virtual  dis-
placements of  B and  A are  elements  of  the  arcs  of  cir-
cles having  C as  centre ; the  displacements  of  B are


General
enunciation
of  the  prin-
ciple.


Detailed
examina-
tion of  the
principle.


Definition
of  virtual
displace-
ments.


58


THE  SCIENCE ' OF  MECHANICS.


L


always  double  the  displacements  of  A,  and  both  are  in
every  case  at  right  angles  to  each  other.  If  the  points
A,  B (Fig.  43,  2)  be  connected  by  a thread  of  the  length
n /,  adjusted  to  slip  through
\ stationary  rings  at  C and  D,
\ then  all  those  displacements
B\  2 ^ ^ and  ^ are  virtual  in

Fig.  43.  which  the  points  referred  to

move  upon  or  within  two  spherical  surfaces  described
with  the  radii  rx  and  r2  about  C and  D as  centres,
where  rx  + r2  -f-  CD  = L

The  reason  The  use  of  infinitely  small  displacements  instead  of
of  infinitely finit e displacements,  such  as  Galileo  assumed,  is  justi-
piacements.  fied  by  the  following  consideration.  If  two  weights
are  in  equilibrium  on  an  inclined  plane  (Fig.  44),  the
equilibrium  will  not  be  disturbed  if  the  inclined  plane,
at  points  at  which  it  is  not  in  immediate  contact  with
the  bodies  considered,  passes  into
a surface  of  a different  form.  The
essential  condition  is,  therefore,
the  momentary  possibility  of  dis-
Fig.  44.  placement  in  the  momentary  con-

figuration of  the  system.  To  judge  of  equilibrium  we
must  assume  displacements  vanishingly  small  and  such
only ; as  otherwise  the  system  might  be  carried  over
into  an  entirely  different  adjacent  configuration,  for
which  perhaps  equilibrium  would  not  exist.

That  the  displacements  themselves  are  not  decisive
but  only  the  extent  to  which  they  occur  in  the  direc-
tions of  the  forces,  that  is  only  their  projections  on  the
lines  of  the  forces,  was,  in  the  case  of  the  inclined  plane,
perceived  clearly  enough  by  Galileo  himself.

With  respect  to  the  expression  of  the  principle,  it
will  be  observed,  that  no  problem  whatever  is  presented


A limita-
tion.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


59


If  all  the  material  points  of  the  system  on  which  forces  General  re-
act, are  independent  of  each  other.  Each  point  thus
conditioned  can  be  in  equilibrium  only  in  the  event
that  it  is  not  movable  in  the  direction  in  which  the  force
acts.  The  virtual  moment  of  each  such  point  vanishes
separately.  If  some  of  the  points  be  independent  of
each  other,  while  others  in  their  displacements  are  de-
pendent on  each  other,  the  remark  just  made  holds
good  for  the  former ; and  for  the  latter  the  fundamental
proposition  discovered  by  Galileo  holds,  that  the  sum
of  their  virtual  moments  is  equal  to  zero.  Hence,  the
sum-total  of  the  virtual  moments  of  all  jointly  is  equal
to  zero.

10.  Let  us  now  endeavor  to  get  some  idea  of  the  Examples,
significance  of  the  principle,  by  the  consideration  of  a
few  simple  examples  that  cannot  be
dealt  with  by  the  ordinary  method
of  the  lever,  the  inclined  plane,  and
the  like.

The  differential  pulley  of  Wes-
ton (Fig.  45)  consists  of  two  coax-
ial rigidly  connected  cylinders  of
slightly  different  radii  rx  and  r2
< r1.  A cord  or  chain  is  passed
round  the  cylinders  in  the  manner
indicated  in  the  figure.  If  we  pull
in  the  direction  of  the  arrow  with
the  force  A5,  and  rotation  takes  place
through  the  angle  cp}  the  weight  Q attached  below  will
be  raised.  In  the  case  of  equilibrium  there  will  exist
between  the  two  virtual  moments  involved  the  equa-
tion

<p>  °r  •


The  differ-
ential pul-
ley of  Wes-
ton.


6o


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


A suspend-
ed wheel
and  axle.


A double
cylinder  on
a horizon-
tal surface.


Roberval’s

balance.


A wheel  and  axle  of  weight  Q (Fig.  46),  which  on
the  unrolling  of  a cord  to  which  the  weight  P is  at-
tached rolls  itself  up  on  a second  cord
wound  round  the  axle  and  rises,  gives
for  the  virtual  moments  in  the  case  of
equilibrium  the  equation

Q r


P(R  — r)  <p=  Q rep , or  P =


' R-


In  the  particular  case  R — r = 0,  we
must  also  put,  for  equilibrium,  Qr  = 0,  or,
for  finite  values  of  r,  Q = 0.  In  reality  the
string  behaves  in  this  case  like  a loop  in
which  the  weight  Q is  placed.  The  lat-
ter can,  if  it  be  different  from  zero,  continue  to  roll  itself
downwards  on  the  string  without  moving  the  weight  P.
If,  however,  when  R = r,  we  also  put  <2  = 0,  the  re-
sult will  be  P=  g,  an  indeterminate  value.  As  a mat-
ter of  fact,  every  weight  P holds  the  apparatus  in  equi-
librium, since  when  R = r none  can  possibly  descend.

A double  cylinder  (Fig.  47)  of  the  radii  r,  R lies  with
friction  on  a horizontal  surface,  and  a force  Q is  brought

to  bear  on  the  string  at-
tached to  it.  Calling  the  re-
sistance due  to  friction  P,
equilibrium  exists  when

p=(r~,:r^q.  u p>


Flg- 47#  ( R — r'R)  Q,  the  cylinder,

on  the  application  of  the  force,  will  roll  itself  up  on
the  string.

Roberval’s  Balance  (Fig.  48)  consists  of  a paral-
lelogram with  variable  angles,  two  opposite  sides  of
which,  the  upper  and  lower,  are  capable  of  rotation
about  their  middle  points  A , B.  To  the  two  remaining
sides,  which  are  always  vertical,  horizontal  rods  are


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


61


fastened.  If  from  these  rods  we  suspend  two  equal
weights  Pj  equilibrium  will  subsist  independently  of
the  position  of  the  points
of  suspension,  because  on
displacement  the  descent
of  the  one  weight  is  always
equal  to  the  ascent  of  the
other.

At  three  fixed  points  A ,

P,  C (Fig.  49)  let  pulleys  Fig.  48.

be  placed,  over  which  three  strings  are  passed  loaded
with  equal  weights  and  knotted  at  0.  In  what  posi-
tion of  the  strings  will  equilibrium  exist?  We  will  call
the  lengths  of  the  three  strings  AO=sv  BO  = s2,


Discussion
of  the  case
of  equilib-
rium of
three  knot-
ted strings


CO  = s g.  To  obtain  the  equation  of  equilibrium,  let
us  displace  the  point  0 in  the  directions  s2  and  j*3  the
infinitely  small  distances  &r2  and  Ss2,  and  note  that  by
so  doing  every  direction  of  displacement  in  the  plane
ABC  (Fig.  50)  can  be  produced.  The  sum  of  the  vir-
tual moments  is


Pds2  — PSs2  cos  a -f  PSs 2 cos  (or  -[-  /?)  [

— |—  PSsz  — PSsz  cos  f3  — |-  PSs 2 cos  (uf  — j—  fS')  j

[1  — cos  a -f  cos  ( a + /?)]  d s2  + [1  — cos  ft
+ cos  O -f  /?)]  Ss3  = 0.

But  since  each  of  the  displacements  Ss2,  Ssz  is  ar-


62


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


bitrary,  and  each  independent  of  the  other,  and  may  by
themselves  be  taken  = 0,  it  follows  that

1 — cos  a -|-  cos  (or  -f-  ft)  — 0
1 — COS  4-  cos  (a  -{-  ft)  = 0.

Therefore

cos  a = cos  ft,

and  each  of  the  two  equations  may  be  replaced  by
1 — cos  a + cos  2 a = 0;

or  cos  a = J,
wherefore  a ft  = 120°.

Remarks  on  Accordingly,  in  the  case  of  equilibrium,  each  of  the

ing  case?ed  strings  makes  with  the  others  angles  of  120°  ; which  is,
moreover,  directly  obvious,  since  three  equal  forces  can
be  in  equilibrium  only  when  such  an  arrangement  ex-
ists. This  once  known,  we  may  find  the  position  of
the  point  O with  respect  to  ABC  in  a number  of  dif-
ferent ways.  We  may  proceed  for  instance  as  follows.
We  construct  on  AB,  BC,  CA,  severally,  as  sides,
equilateral  triangles.  If  we  describe  circles  about  these
triangles,  their  common  point  of  intersection  will  be
the  point  O sought ; a result  which  easily  follows  from
the  well-known  relation  of  the  angles  at  the  centre  and
circumference  of  circles.


The  case  of
a bar  re-
vocable
about  one
of  its  ex-
tremities.


A bar  OA  (Fig.  51)  is  revolvable  about  O in  the
plane  of  the  paper  and  makes  with  a fixed  straight  line

OX  the  variable  angle
/ a'  At  A there  is  ap-

plied  a force  P which
makes  with  OX  the

QhC—ABL x an^e  Yi  an<3  at  B,  on

Fig-  51.  a ring  displaceable

along  the  length  of  the  bar,  a force  Q,  making  with
OX  the  angle  ft.  We  impart  to  the  bar  an  infinitely


THE  PR  INC/ PLE  S OP  STATICS.


63


small  rotation,  in  consequence  of  which  B and  A move  The  case  of

• 3.  bar  re-

forward  the  distances  dj  and  d^sq  at  right  angles  to  OA , voivabie
and  we  also  displace  the  ring  the  distance  dr  along  the  of  its  ex-
bar. The  variable  distance  OB  we  will  call  r,  and  we  remi
will  let  OA  — a.  For  the  case  of  equilibrium  we  have
then

Qdr  cos  (yd  — a)  -f-  Q6s  sin  (/?  — ar)  -f-
BSs1  sin  (a  — y)  = 0.

As  the  displacement  dr  has  no  effect  whatever  on
the  other  displacements,  the  virtual  moment  therein
involved  must,  by  itself,  — 0,  and  since  dr  may  be  of
any  magnitude  we  please,  the  coefficient  of  this  virtual
moment  must  also  —0.  We  have,  therefore,

Q cos  (yd  — a)  = 0,
or  when  Q is  different  from  zero,
yd  — a = 90°.

Further,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  ds1  = (a jr)  ds1  we
also  have

r<2  sin  (yd  — a)  + a P sin  (a  — y)  = 0,
or  since  sin  (yd — a)  = 1,

r<2  + aP  sin  (<3r  — y)  = 0 ;
wherewith  the  relation  of  the  two  forces  is  obtained.

11.  An  advantage,  not  to  be  overlooked,  which  Every  gen-
every  general  principle,  and  therefore  also  the  prin-  cipiein?

ciple  of  virtual  displacements,  fur-

nishes,  consists  in  the  fact  that  it
saves  us  to  a great  extent  the  ne-  m
cessity  of  considering  every  new  par-  ^ i

ticular  case  presented.  In  the  posses-

sion  of  this  principle  we  need  not,  for  Fig.  52.

example,  trouble  ourselves  about  the  details  of  a ma-
chine. If  a new  machine  say  were  so  enclosed  in  a


economy  or
thought.


64


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


box  (Fig.  52),  that  only  two  levers  projected  as  points
of  application  for  the  force  P and  the  weight  P',  and
we  should  find  the  simultaneous  displacements  of  these
levers  to  be  h and  Ji , we  should  know  immediately  that
in  the  case  of  equilibrium  Ph  — P'h whatever  the
construction  of  the  machine  might  be.  Every  principle
of  this  character  possesses  therefore  a distinct  econom-
ical value.

Further  re-  12.  We  return  to  the  general  expression  of  the  prin-
marks  on  .

the  general  ciple  of  virtual  displacements,  m order  to  add  a few

further  remarks.  If
at  the  points  A,  B ,
C ...  . the  forces
P,  P',  P"  ....  act,
and-/,  /',
are  the  projections
of  infinitely  small
mutually  compatible  displacements,  we  shall  have  for
the  case  of  equilibrium

Pp  + Pf  + P"f  + • • • ==  0.


Fig-  53-


Modifica-
tion of  the
previous
equation  of
condition.


If  we  replace  the  forces  by  strings  which  pass  over
pulleys  in  the  directions  of  the  forces  and  attach  thereto
the  appropriate  weights,  this  expression  simply  as-
serts that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  of  weights
as  a whole  cannot  descend.  If,  however,  in  certain  dis-
placements it  were  possible  for  the  centre  of  gravit}r
to  rise,  the  system  would  still  be  in  equilibrium,  as  the
heavy  bodies  would  not,  of  themselves,  enter  on  any
such  motion.  In  this  case  the  sum  above  given  would
be  negative,  or  less  than  zero.  The  general  expi'ession
of  the  condition  of  equilibrium  is,  therefore,


Pp  + P'p'  + P” p”  + . . . ” 0.


When  for  every  virtual  displacement  there  exists


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


65


another  equal  and  opposite  to  it,  as  is  the  case  for  ex-
ample in  the  simple  machines,  we  may  restrict  ourselves
to  the  upper  sign,  to  the  equation . For  if  it  were  pos-
sible for  the  centre  of  gravity  to  ascend  in  certain
displacements,  it  would  also  have  to  be  possible,  in
consequence  of  the  assumed  reversibility  of  all  the  vir-
tual displacements,  for  it  to  descend.  Consequently,
in  the  present  case,  a possible  rise  of  the  centre  of
gravity  is  incompatible  with  equilibrium.

The  question  assumes  a different  aspect,  however,  The  condi-
when  the  displacements  are  not  all  reversible.  Two  the  sum  of
bodies  connected  together  by  strings  can  approach  moments
each  other  but  cannot  recede  from  each  other  beyond  equal  to  or
the  length  of  the  strings.  A body  is  able  to  slide  or  zero,
roll  on  the  surface  of  another  body ; it  can  move  away
from  the  surface  of  the  second  body,  but  it  cannot
penetrate  it.  In  these  cases,  therefore,  there  are  dis-
placements that  cannot  be  reversed.  Consequently,
for  certain  displacements  a rise  of  the  centre  of  gravity
may  take  place,  while  the  contrary  displacements,  to
which  the  descent  of  the  centre  of  gravity  corresponds,
are  impossible.  We  must  therefore  hold  fast  to  the
more  general  condition  of  equilibrium,  and  say,  the  sum
of  the  virtual  moments  is  eqzial  to  or  less  than  zero.

13.  Lagrange  in  his  Analytical  Mechanics  attempted  The  La-

. grangian

a deduction  of  the  principle  of  virtual  displacements,  deduction

r . oftheprin-

which  we  will  now  consider.  At  the  points  A , B,  cipie.

C ....  (Fig.  54)  the  forces  P , Pr,  P”  . . . . act.  We
imagine  rings  placed  at  the  points  in  question,  and
other  rings  A\  B\  C ...  . fastened  to  points  lying  in
the  directions  of  the  forces.  We  seek  some  common
measure  Q/o,  of  the  forces  P,  P ',  P"  ...  . that  enables
us  to  put :


66


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Effected  by
means  of  a
set  of  pul-
leys and  a
single
weight.


2 n ,


Q

2


where  n,  n”  ...  . are  whole  numbers.  Further,  we
make  fast  to  the  ring  A*  a string,  carry  this  string  back
and  forth  n times  between  A'  and  A , then  through  B\


ri  times  back  and  forth  between  Bf  and  B,  then  through
C',  n"  times  back  and  forth  between  C’  and  C}  and,
finally,  let  it  drop  at  C\  attaching  to  it  there  the  weight
<2/2.  As  the  string  has,  now,  in  all  its  parts  the  ten-
sion <2/2,  we  replace  by  thes.e  ideal  pulleys  all  the
forces  present  in  the  system  by  the  single  force  <2/2.
If  then  the  virtual  (possible)  displacements  in  any  given
configuration  of  the  system  are  such  that,  these  dis-
placements occurring,  a descent  of  the  weight  Q/2  can
take  place,  the  weight  will  actually  descend  and  pro-
duce those  displacements,  and  equilibrium  therefore
will  not  obtain.  But  on  the  other  hand,  no  motion
will  ensue,  if  the  displacements  leave  the  weight  Q/2
in  its  original  position,  or  raise  it.  The  expression  of
this  condition,  reckoning  the  projections  of  the  virtual
displacements  in  the  directions  of  the  forces  positive,


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


67


and  having  regard  for  the  number  of  the  turns  of  the
string  in  each  single  pulley,  is

2 np  + 2 rip’  + 2 ri'p"  + . . . < 0.

Equivalent  to  this  condition,  however,  is  the  ex-
pression

2 n %-p  + 2 ti  | -/  + 2 *"  | + . . . < 0,

or

Pp  + P’p’  + P"p"  + . . .<0.

14.  The  deduction  of  Lagrange,  if  stripped  of  theThecon-

i j 1 r • r 11  vincing  fea

rather  odd  fiction  of  the  pulleys,  really  possesses  con-  tures  of  La
vincing  features,  due  to  the  fact  that  the  action  of  a deduction,
single  weight  is  much  more  immediate  to  our  expe-
rience and  is  more  easily  followed  than  the  action  of
several  weights.  Yet  it  is  not  proved  by  the  Lagrangian
deduction  that  work  is  the  factor  determinative  of  the
disturbance  of  equilibrium,  but  is,  by  the  employment
of  the  pulleys,  rather  assumed  by  it.  As  a matter  of
fact  every  pulley  involves  the  fact  enunciated  and  rec-
ognised by  the  principle  of  virtual  displacements.  The
replacement  of  all  the  forces  by  a single  weight  that
does  the  same  work,  presupposes  a knowledge  of  the
import  of  work,  and  can  be  proceeded  with  on  this  as-
sumption alone.  The  fact  that  some  certain  cases  are  it  is  not,
more  familiar  to  us  and  more  immediate  to  our  expe-  proof,
rience  has  as  a necessary  result  that  we  accept  them
without  analysis  and  make  them  the  foundation  of  our
deductions  without  clearly  instructing  ourselves  as  to
their  real  character.

It  often  happens  in  the  course  of  the  development
of  science  that  a new  principle  perceived  by  some  in-
quirer in  connection  with  a fact,  is  not  immediately
recognised  and  rendered  familiar  in  its  entire  generality.


68


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  expe-
dients em-
ployed to
support  all
new  prin-
ciples.


Value  of  the
Lagrangian
proof.


The  Loi  de
repos.


Then,  every  expedient  calculated  to  promote  these
ends,  is,  as  is  proper  and  natural,  called  into  service.
All  manner  of  facts,  in  which  the  principle,  although
contained  in  them,  has  not  yet  been  recognised  by  in-
quirers, but  which  from  other  points  of  view  are  more
familiar,  are  called  in  to  furnish  a support  for  the  new
conception.  It  does  not,  however,  beseem  mature
science  to  allow  itself  to  be  deceived  by  procedures  of
this  sort.  If,  throughout  all  facts,  we  clearly  see  and  dis-
cern a principle  which,  though  not  admitting  of  proof,
can  yet  be  known  to  prevail , we  have  advanced  much
farther  in  the  consistent  conception  of  nature  than  if
we  suffered  ourselves  to  be  overawed  by  a specious
demonstration.  If  we  have  reached  this  point  of  view,
we  shall,  it  is  true,  regard  the  Lagrangian  deduction
with  quite  different  eyes  ; yet  it  will  engage  neverthe-
less our  attention  and  interest,  and  excite  our  satis-
faction from  the  fact  that  it  makes  palpable  the  simi-
larity of  the  simple  and  complicated  cases.

15.  Maupertuis  discovered  an  interesting  proposi-
tion relating  to  equilibrium,  which  he  communicated
to  the  Paris  Academy  in  1740  under  the  name  of  the
“ Loi  de  repos.  ” This  principle  was  more  fully  dis-
cussed by  Euler  in  1751  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Berlin  Academy.  If  we  cause  infinitely  small  displace-
ments in  any  system,  we  produce  a sum  of  virtual  mo-
ments Pp  \ P'p’  + P"P”  + * • • •>  which  only  reduces
to  zero  in  the  case  of  equilibrium.  This  sum  is  the
work  corresponding  to  the  displacements,  or  since  for
infinitely  small  displacements  it  is  itself  infinitely  small,
the  corresponding  element  of  work.  If  the  displace-
ments are  continuously  increased  till  a finite  displace-
ment is  produced,  the  elements  of  the  work  will,  by
summation,  produce  a finite  amount  of  work.  So,  if  we


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


69


start  from  any  given  initial  configuration  of  the  system  statement
, . r . . J oftheprin-

and  pass  to  any  given  final  configuration,  a certain  cipie.
amount  of  work  will  have  to  be  done.  Now  Maupertuis
observed  that  the  work  done  when  a final  configura-
tion is  reached  which  is  a configuration  of  equilibrium,
is  generally  a maximum  or  a minimum  ; that  is,  if  we
carry  the  system  through  the  configuration  of  equilib-
rium the  work  done  is  previously  and  subsequently
less  or  previously  and  subsequently  greater  than  at  the
configuration  of  equilibrium  itself.  For  the  configura-
tion of  equilibrium

Fp  + />'/  + P"f  + . . . = 0,


that  is,  the  element  of  the  work  or  the  differential  (more
correctly  the  variation)  of  the  work  is  equal  to  zero.
If  the  differential  of  a function  can  be  put  equal  to
zero,  the  function  has  generally  a maximum  or  mini-
mum value.


16.  We  can  produce  a very  clear  representation  to  Graphical
the  eye  of  the  import  of  Maupertuis’s  principle.  oftheim-

We  imagine  the  forces  of  a system  replaced  by  principle*6
Lagrange’s  pulleys  with  the  weight  Q/2.  We  suppose
that  each  point  of  the  system  is  restricted  to  movement
on  a certain  curve  and  that  the  motion  is  such  that


when  one  point  occupies  a definite  position  on  its  curve
all  the  other  points  assume  uniquely  determined  po-
sitions on  their  respective  curves.  The  simple  ma-
chines are  as  a rule  systems  of  this  kind.  Now,  while
imparting  displacements  to  the  system,  we  may  carry
a vertical  sheet  of  white  paper  horizontally  over  the
weight  <2/2,  while  this  is  ascending  and  descending
on  a vertical  line,  so  that  a pencil  which  it  carries  shall
describe  a curve  upon  the  paper  (Fig.  55).  When  the
pencil  stands  at  the  points  a,  c,  d of  the  curve,  there  are,


7o


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


tfono^fhe'  we  see>  ac^jacent  positions  in  the  system  of  points  at
diagram,  which  the  weight  <2/2  will  stand  higher  or  lower  than  in
the  configuration  given.  The  weight  will  then,  if  the
system  be  left  to  itself,  pass  into  this  lower  position  and


Fig.  55.


displace  the  system  with  it.  Accordingly,  under  condi-
tions of  this  kind,  equilibrium  does  not  subsist.  If
the  pencil  stands  at  <?,  then  there  exist  only  adjacent
configurations  for  which  the  weight  Q/2  stands  higher.
But  of  itself  the  system  will  not  pass  into  the  last-
named  configurations.  On  the  contrary,  every  dis-
placement in  such  a direction,  will,  by  virtue  of  the
tendency  of  the  weight  to  move  downwards,  be  re-
versed. Stable  equilibrium , therefore , is  the  condition
Hbriun? qui"  corresPon^s  t°  ^ie  lowest  position  of  the  weight  or  to

a maximum  of  tvork  done  in  the  system.  If  the  pencil
stands  at  b , we  see  that  every  appreciable  displace-
ment brings  the  weight  Q/2  lower,  and  that  the  weight
therefore  will  continue  the  displacement  begun.  But,
assuming  infinitely  small  displacements,  the  pencil
moves  in  the  horizontal  tangent  at  b , in  which  event
the  weight  cannot  descend.  Therefore,  unstable  equi -
Unstable  librium  is  the  state  that  corresponds  to  the  highest  position
equ  librium  ^ ^ weqgjli  q/ 2j  or  to  a minimum  of  work  done  in  the

system.  It  will  be  noted,  however,  that  conversely


TIIE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STA  TICS.


71


every  case  of  equilibrium  is  not  the  correspondent  of
a maximum  or  a minimum  of  work  performed.  If  the
pencil  is  at  f at  a point  of  horizontal  contrary  flexure,
the  weight  in  the  case  of  infinitely  small  displace-
ments neither  rises  nor  falls.  Equilibrium  exists,  al-
though the  work  done  is  neither  a maximum  nor  a
minimum.  The  equilibrium  of  this  case  is  the  so-
called  mixed  equilibrium  * : for  some  disturbances  it  is  Mixed  equ'
stable,  for  others  unstable.  Nothing  prevents  us  from
regarding  mixed  equilibrium  as  belonging  to  the  un-
stable class.  When  the  pencil  stands  at  g>  where  the
curve  runs  along  horizontally  a finite  distance,  equi-
librium likewise  exists.  Any  small  displacement,  in
the  configuration  in  question,  is  neither  continued  nor
reversed.  This  kind  of  equilibrium,  to  which  likewise
neither  a maximum  nor  a minimum  corresponds,  is
termed*  \neutral  or]  indiffere?it . If  the  curve  described  Neutral
by  (2/2  has  a cusp  pointing  upwards,  this  indicates  a equiIlbnuB
minimum  of  work  done  but  no  equilibrium  (not  even
unstable  equilibrium).  To  a cusp  pointing  downwards
a maximum  and  stable  equilibrium  correspond.  In  the
last  named  case  of  equilibrium  the  sum  of  the  virtual
moments  is  not  equal  to  zero,  but  is  negative.

17.  In  the  reasoning  just  presented,  we  have  as-jhepreced
sumed  that  the  motion  of  a point  of  a system  on  one  tfonappiS
curve  determines  the  motion  of  all  the  other  points  of  moredif
the  system  on  their  respective  curves.  The  movability  ficult  cases
of  the  system  becomes  multiplex,  however,  when  each
point  is  displaceable  on  a surface,  in  a manner  such
that  the  position  of  one  point  on  its  surface  determines

* This  term  is  not  used  in  English,  because  our  writers  hold  that  no
equilibrium  is  conceivable  which  is  not  stable  or  neutral  for  some  possible
displacements.  Hence  what  is  called  mixed  equilibrium  in  the  text  is  called
unstable  equilibrium  by  English  writers,  who  deny  the  existence  of  equilibrium
unstable  in  every  respect.— Trans.


72


TIIE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


urther  ex-
:nsion  of
le  same
lea.


uniquely  the  position  of  all  the  other  points  on  their
surfaces.  In  this  case,  we  are  not  permitted  to  consider
the  curve  described  by  (9/2,  but  are  obliged  to  picture
to  ourselves  a surface  described  by  Q/2.  If,  to  go  a
step  further,  each  point  is  movable  throughout  a space,
we  can  no  longer  represent  to  ourselves  in  a purely  geo-
metrical manner  the  circumstances  of  the  motion,  by
means  of  the  locus  of  Q/2.  In  a correspondingly  higher
degree  is  this  the  case  when  the  position  of  one  of  the
points  of  the  system  does  not  determine  conjointly  all
the  other  positions,  but  the  character  of  the  system’s
motion  is  more  multiplex  still.  In  all  these  cases,  how-
ever, the  curve  described  by  Q/2  (Fig.  55)  can  serve
us  as  a symbol  of  the  phenomena  to  be  considered.  In
these  cases  also  we  rediscover  the  Maupertuisian  pro-
positions.

We  have  also  supposed,  in  our  considerations  up  to
this  point,  that  constant  forces,  forces  independent  of
the  position  of  the  points  of  the  system,  are  the  forces
that  act  in  the  system.  If  we  assume  that  the  forces
do  depend  on  the  position  of  the  points  of  the  system
(but  not  on  the  time),  we  are  no  longer  able  to  conduct
our  operations  with  simple  pulleys,  but
must  devise  apparatus  the  force  active  in
which,  still  exerted  by  Q/2 , varies  with  the
displacement : the  ideas  we  have  reached,
however,  still  obtain.  The  depth  of  the
descent  of  the  weight  Q/2  is  in  every  case
the  measure  of  the  work  performed,  which
is  always  the  same  in  the  same  configura-
tion of  the  system  and  is  independent  of
the  path  of  transference.  A contrivance  which  would
develop  by  means  of  a constant  weight  a force  varying
with  the  displacement,  would  be,  for  example,  a wheel


Fig.  56.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


73


and  axle  (Fig.  56)  with  a non-circular  wheel.  It  would
not  repay  the  trouble,  however,  to  enter  into  the  de-
tails of  the  reasoning  indicated  in  this  case,  since  we
perceive  at  a glance  its  feasibility.

18.  If  we  know  the  relation  that  subsists  between  The prin-
the  work  done  and  the  so-called  vis  viva-  of  a sys-  Courtivron.
tem,  a relation  established  in  dynamics,  we  arrive
easily  at  the  principle  communicated  by  Courtivron  in

1749  to  the  Paris  Academy,  which  is  this:  For  the
stable

configuration  of  unstapqe  equilibrium,  at  which  the

work  done  is  a m^x?mum  j-he  vjs  viva  Gf  the  system,
minimum  J 1

, ■ - •,  maximum  , ,

m motion,  is  also  a ■ . m its  transit  through
J minimum  &

these  configurations.

19.  A heavy,  homogeneous  triaxial  ellipsoid  resting  niustjradon
. on  a horizontal  plane  is  admirably  adapted  to  illustrate  ous  kinds  of

* equilibrium

the  various  classes  of  equilibrium.  When  the  ellip-
soid rests  on  the  extremity  of  its  smallest  axis,  it  is  in
stable  equilibrium,  for  any  displacement  it  may  suffer
elevates  its  centre  of  gravity.  If  it  rest  on  its  longest
axis,  it  is  in  unstable  equilib-
rium. If  the  ellipsoid  stand  on
its  mean  axis,  its  equilibrium  is
mixed.  A homogeneous  sphere
or  a homogeneous  right  cylin-
der on  a horizontal  plane  illus-
trates the  case  of  indifferent  equilibrium.  In  Fig,  57
we  have  represented  the  paths  of  the  centre  of  gravity
of  a cube  rolling  on  a horizontal  plane  about  one  of  its
edges.  The  position  a of  the  centre  of  gravity  is  the
position  of  stable  equilibrium,  the  position  b,  the  posi-
tion of  unstable  equilibrium.


74


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  caten-
ary.


The#princi-
ple  is  sim-
ply the  rec-
ognition of
a fact.


20.  We  will  now  consider  an  example  which  at
first  sight  appears  very  complicated  but  is  elucidated
at  once  by  the  principle  of  virtual  displacements.  John
and  James  Bernoulli,  on  the  occasion  of  a conversa-
tion on  mathematical  topics  during  a walk  in  Basel,
lighted  on  the  question  of  what  form  a chain  would
take  that  was  freely  suspended  and  fastened  at  both
ends.  They  soon  and  easily  agreed  in  the  view  that
the  chain  would  assume  that  form  of  equilibrium  at
which  its  centre  of  gravity  lay  in  the  lowest  possible
position.  As  a matter  of  fact  we  really  do  perceive
that  equilibrium  subsists  when  all  the  links  of  the  chain
have  sunk  as  low  as  possible,  when  none  can  sink  lower
without  raising  in  consequence  of  the  connections  of
the  system  an  equivalent  mass  equally  high  or  higher.
When  the  centre  of  gravity  has  sunk  as  low  as  it  pos-
sibly can  sink,  when  all  has  happened  that  can  happen,
stable  equilibrium  exists.  The  physical  part  of  the
problem  is  disposed  of  by  this  consideration.  The  de-
termination of  the  curve  that  has  the  lowest  centre  of
gravity  for  a given  length  between  the  two  points  A,
B,  is  simply  a mathematical  problem.  (See  Fig.  58.)

21.  Collecting  all  that  has  been  presented,  we  see,
that  there  is  contained  in  the  principle  of  virtual  dis-
placements simply  the  recognition  of  a fact  that  was
instinctively  familiar  to  us  long  previously,  only  that
we  had  not  apprehended  it  so  precisely  and  clearly.
This  fact  consists  in  the  circumstance  that  heavy
bodies,  of  themselves,  move  only  downwards.  If  sev-
eral such  bodies  be  joined  together  so  that  they  can
suffer  no  displacement  independently  of  each  other,
they  will  then  move  only  in  the  event  that  some  heavy
mass  is  on  the  whole  able  to  descend,  or  as  the  prin-
ciple, with  a more  perfect  adaptation  of  our  ideas  to


THE  TEIJVC7TEES  OE  STA  TICS.


75


Fig.  58.


76


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


what  this  the  facts,  more  exactly  expresses  it,  only  in  the  event
Jct  1S‘  that  work  can  be  performed.  If,  extending  the  notion
of  force,  we  transfer  the  principle  to  forces  other  than
those  due  to  gravity,  the  recognition  is  again  con-
tained therein  of  the  fact  that  the  natural  occurrences
in  question  take  place,  of  themselves,  only  in  a definite
sense  and  not  in  the  opposite  sense.  Just  as  heavy
bodies  descend  downwards,  so  differences  of  tempera-
ture and  electrical  potential  cannot  increase  of  their
own  accord  but  only  diminish,  and  so  on.  If  occur-
rences of  this  kind  be  so  connected  that  they  can  take
place  only  in  the  contrary  sense,  the  principle  then  es-
tablishes, more  precisely  than  our  instinctive  appre-
hension could  do  this,  the  factor  work  as  determinative
and  decisive  of  the  direction  of  the  occurrences.  The
equilibrium  equation  of  the  principle  may  be  reduced
in  every  case  to  the  trivial  statement,  that  when  noth-
ing can  happen  ?2othing  does  happen.

Theprin-  22.  It  is  important  to  obtain  clearly  the  perception,
fight  o? the  that  we  hav  to  deal,  in  the  case  of  all  principles,
view.s  S merely  who  the  ascertainment  and  establishment  of  a
fact.  If  we  neglect  this,  we  shall  always  be  sensible
of  some  deficiency  and  will  seek  a verification  of  the
principle,  that  is  not  to  be  found.  Jacobi  states  in  his
Lectures  on  Dynamics  that  Gauss  once  remarked  that
Lagrange’s  equations  of  motion  had  not  been  proved,
but  only  historically  enunciated.  And  this  view  really
seems  to  us  to  be  the  correct  one  in  regard  to  the  prin-
ciple of  virtual  displacements.

The  differ-  The  task  of  the  early  inquirers,  who  lay  the  foun-

ent  tasks  of  . . f , . . ...  ,

early  and  of  dations  of  any  department  of  investigation,  is  entirely
inquirers  in  different  from  that  of  those  who  follow.  It  is  the  busi-
mentdepart  ness  of  the  former  to  seek  out  and  to  establish  the
facts  of  most  cardinal  importance  only;  and,  as  history


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


77


teaches,  more  brains  are  required  for  this  than  is  gen-
erally supposed.  When  the  most  important  facts  are
once  furnished,  we  are  then  placed  in  a position  to
work  them  out  deductively  and  logically  by  the  meth-
ods of  mathematical  physics;  we  can  then  organise  the
department  of  inquiry  in  question,  and  show  that  in  the
acceptance  of  some  one  fact  a whole  series  of  others  is
included  which  were  not  to  be  immediately  discerned
in  the  first.  The  one  task  is  as  important  as  the  other.

We  should  not  however  confound  the  one  with  the
other.  We  cannot  prove  by  mathematics  that  nature
must  be  exactly  what  it  is.  But  we  can  prove,  that
one  set  of  observed  properties  determines  conjointly
another  set  which  often  are  not  directly  manifest.

Let  it  be  remarked  in  conclusion,  that  the  princi-  Every  gen;
pie  of  virtual  displacements,  like  every  general  prin-  pie  brings
ciple,  brings  with  it,  by  the  insight  which  it  furnishes,  illusion-18’
disillusionment  as  well  as  elucidation.  It  brings  with  win  asSeiu.
it  disillusionment  to  the  extent  that  we  recognise  in  it C1  a lon'
facts  which  were  long  before  known  anu^even  instinct-
ively perceived,  our  present  recognition  being  simply
more  distinct  and  more  definite ; and  elucidation,  in
that  it  enables  us  to  see  everywhere  throughout  the
most  complicated  relations  the  same  simple  facts.


v.

RETROSPECT  OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  STATICS.

i.  Having  passed  successively  in  review  the  prin- Review  of
ciples  of  statics,  we  are  now  in  a position  to  take  a whole. aS  a
brief  supplementary  survey  of  the  development  of  the
principles  of  the  science  as  a whole.  This  development,
falling  as  it  does  in  the  earliest  period  of  mechanics,

— the  period  which  begins  in  Grecian  antiquity  and


78


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  origin
of  science.


The  econo-
my of  com-
munication


The  gene-
ral charac-
ter of  prin-
ciples.


reaches  its  close  at  the  time  when  Galileo  and  his
younger  contemporaries  were  inaugurating  modern  me-
chanics,— illustrates  in  an  excellent  manner  the  pro-
cess of  the  formation  of  science  generally.  All  con-
ceptions, all  methods  are  here  found  in  their  simplest
form,  and  as  it  were  in  their  infancy.  These  beginnings
point  unmistakably  to  their  origin  in  the  experiences  of
the  manual  arts.  To  the  necessity  of  putting  these  ex-
periences into  communicable  form  and  of  disseminating
them  beyond  the  confines  of  class  and  craft,  science
owes  its  origin.  The  collector  of  experiences  of  this
kind,  who  seeks  to  preserve  them  in  written  form,  finds
before  him  many  different,  or  at  least  supposably  differ-
ent, experiences.  His  position  is  one  that  enables  him
to  review  these  experiences  more  frequently,  more  vari-
ously, and  more  impartially  than  the  individual  work-
ingman, who  is  always  limited  to  a narrow  province.
The  facts  and  their  dependent  rules  are  brought  into
closer  temporal  and  spatial  proximity  in  his  mind  and
writings,  and  thus  acquire  the  opportunity  of  revealing
their  relationship,  their  connection,  and  their  gradual
. transition  the  one  into  the  other.  The  desire  to  sim-
plify and  abridge  the  labor  of  communication  supplies
a further  impulse  in  the  same  direction.  Thus,  from
economical  reasons,  in  such  circumstances,  great  num-
bers of  facts  and  the  rules  that  spring  from  them  are
condensed  into  a system  and  comprehended  in  a single
expression.

2.  A collector  of  this  character  has,  moreover,  op-
portunity to  take  note  of  some  new  aspect  of  the  facts
before  him — of  some  aspect  which  former  observers
had  not  considered.  A rule,  reached  by  the  observation
of  facts,  cannot  possibly  embrace  the  entire  fact,  in  all
its  infinite  wealth,  in  all  its  inexhaustible  manifoldness ;


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


79


on  the  contrary,  it  can  furnish  only  a rough  ozitline  of
the  fact,  one-sidedly  emphasising  the  feature  that  is  of
importance  for  the  given  technical  (or  scientific)  aim  in
view.  What  aspects  of  a fact  are  taken  notice  of,  will
consequently  depend  upon  circumstances,  or  even  on  Their  form
the  caprice  of  the  observer.  Hence  there  is  always  op-  pects,  acci-

. r f , J P ^ dental.

portunity  for  the  discovery  of  new  aspects  of  the  fact,
which  will  lead  to  the  establishment  of  new  rules  of
equal  validity  with,  or  superior  to,  the  old.  So,  for  in-
stance, the  weights  and  the  lengths  of  the  lever-arms
were  regarded  at  first,  by  Archimedes,  as  the  conditions
that  determined  equilibrium.  Afterwards,  by  Da  Vinci
and  Ubaldi  the  weights,and  the  perpendicular  distances
from  the  axis  of  the  lines  of  force  were  recognised  as
the  determinative  conditions.  Still  later,  by  Galileo,
the  weights  and  the  amounts  of  their  displacements,
and  finally  by  Varignon  the  weights  and  the  directions
of  the  pulls  with  respect  to  the  axis  were  taken  as  the
elements  of  equilibrium,  and  -the  enunciation  of  the
rules  modified  accordingly.

3.  Whoever  makes  a new  observation  of  this  kind,  puriiabii-
and  establishes  such  a new  rule,  knows,  of  course,  our  in  themen-

......  . . ..  tal  recon-

liability  to  error  m attempting  mentally  to  represent  struction  of
the  fact,  whether  by  concrete  images  or  in  abstract  con-
ceptions, which  we  must  do  in  order  to  have  the  mental
model  we  have  constructed  always  at  hand  as  a substi-
tute for  the  fact  when  the  latter  is  partly  or  wholly  in-
accessible. The  circumstances,  indeed,  to  which  we
have  to  attend,  are  accompanied  by  so  many  other,
collateral  circumstances,  that  it  is  frequently  difficult
to  single  out  and  consider  those  that  are  essential  to  the
purpose  in  view.  Just  think  how  the  facts  of  friction,
the  rigidity  of  ropes  and  cords,  and  like  conditions  in
machines,  obscure  and  obliterate  the  pure  outlines  of


So


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Thisiiabii-  the  main  facts.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  discov-
ns toseek  erer  or  verifier  of  a new  rule,  urged  by  mistrust  of  him-
ofan newfs  self,  seeks  after  a proof  of  the  rule  whose  validity  he
believes  he  has  discerned.  The  discoverer  or  verifier
does  not  at  the  outset  fully  trust  in  the  rule ; or,  it  may
be,  he  is  confident  only  of  a part  of  it.  So,  Archimedes,
for  example,  doubted  whether  the  effect  of  the  action
of  weights  on  a lever  was  proportional  to  the  lengths  of
the  lever-arms,  but  he  accepted  without  hesitation  the
fact  of  their  influence  in  some  way.  Daniel  Bernoulli
does  not  question  the  influence  of  the  direction  of  a
force  generally,  but  only  the  form  of  its  influence.  As
a matter  of  fact,  it  is  far  easier  to  observe  that  a circum-
stance has  influence  in  a given  case,  than  to  determine
what  influence  it  has.  In  the  latter  inquiry  we  are  in
much  greater  degree  liable  to  error.  The  attitude  of  the
investigators  is  therefore  perfectly  natural  and  defens-
ible.

The  natural  The  proof  of  the  correctness  of  a new  rule  can  be
proof.  attained  by  the  repeated  application  of  it,  the  frequent
comparison  of  it  with  experience,  the  putting  of  it  to
the  test  under  the  most  diverse  circumstances.  This
process  would,  in  the  natural  course  of  events,  get  car-
ried out  in  time.  The  discoverer,  however,  hastens  to
reach  his  goal  more  quickly.  He  compares  the  results
that  flow  from  his  rule  with  all  the  experiences  with
which  he  is  familiar,  with  all  older  rules,  repeatedly
tested  in  times  gone  by,  and  watches  to  see  if  he  do
not  light  on  contradictions.  In  this  procedure,  the
greatest  credit  is,  as  it  should  be,  conceded  to  the  oldest
and  most  familiar  experiences,  the  most  thoroughly
tested  rules.  Our  instinctive  experiences,  those  gen-
eralisations that  are  made  involuntarily,  by  the  irresist-
ible force  of  the  innumerable  facts  that  press  in  upon


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


8t

us,  enjoy  a peculiar  authority;  and  this  is  perfectly
warranted  by  the  consideration  that  it  is  precisely  the
elimination  of  subjective  caprice  and  of  individual  er-
ror that  is  the  object  aimed  at.

In  this  manner  Archimedes  proves  his  law  of  the  illustration
lever,  Stevinus  his  law  of  inclined  pressure,  Daniel  cedingPre-
Bernoulli  the  parallelogram  of  forces,  Lagrange  the
principle  of  virtual  displacements.  Galileo  alone  is
perfectly  aware,  with  respect  to  the  last-mentioned
principle,  that  his  new  observation  and  perception  are
of  equal  rank  with  every  forvier  one — that  it  is  derived
from  the  same  source  of  experience.  He  attempts  no
demonstration.  Archimedes,  in  his  proof  of  the  prin-
ciple of  the  lever,  uses  facts  concerning  the  centre  of
gravity,  which  he  had  probably  proved  by  means  of  the
very  principle  now  in  question ; yet  we  may  suppose
that  these  facts  were  otherwise  so  familiar,  as  to  be  un-
questioned,— so  familiar  indeed,  that  it  may  be  doubted
whether  he  remarked  that  he  had  employed  them  in
demonstrating  the  principle  of  the  lever.  The  instinc-
tive elements  embraced  in  the  views  of  Archimedes  and
Stevinus  have  been  discussed  at  length  in  the  proper
place.

4.  It  is  quite  in  order,  on  the  making  of  a new  dis-Theposi-

...  tionthatad-

covery,  to  resort  to  all  proper  means  to  bring  the  new vanced sci-

, J , TTT1  _ r . , r ence  should

rule  to  the  test.  When,  however,  after  the  lapse  of  a occupy,
reasonable  period  of  time,  it  has  been  sufficiently  often
subjected  to  direct  testing,  it  becomes  science  to  recog-
nise that  any  other  proof  than  that  has  become  quite
needless ; that  there  is  no  sense  in  considering  a rule
as  the  better  established  for  being  founded  on  others
that  have  been  reached  by  the  very  same  method  of
observation,  only  earlier  ; that  one  well-considered  and
tested  observation  is  as  good  as  another.  To-day,  we


82


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


should  regard  the  principles  of  the  lever,  of  statical
moments,  of  the  inclined  plane,  of  virtual  displace-
ments, and  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces  as  discovered
by  equivalent  observations.  It  is  of  no  importance  now,
that  some  of  these  discoveries  were  made  directly,  while
others  were  reached  by  roundabout  ways  and  as  de-
pendent upon  other  observations.  It  is  more  in  keep-
ing, furthermore,  with  the  economy  of  thought  and  with
insight  bet-  the  aesthetics  of  science,  directly  to  recognise  a principle

ter  than  ar-  .

tificiaidem-  (say  that  of  the  statical  moments)  as  the  key  to  the  un-

onstration.  ' r i

derstandmg  of  all  the  facts  of  a department,  and  really
see  how  it  pervades  all  those  facts,  rather  than  to  hold
ourselves  obliged  first  to  make  a clumsy  and  lame  de-
duction of  it  from  unobvious  propositions  that  involve
the  same  principle  but  that  happen  to  have  become
earlier  familiar  to  us.  This  process  science  and  the  in-
dividual (in  historical  study)  may  go  through  once  for
all.  But  having  done  so  both  are  free  to  adopt  a more
convenient  point  of  view.

Themis-  5.  In  fact,  this  mania  for  demonstration  in  science
mania  for6  results  in  a rigor  that  is  false  and  mistaken.  Some  pro-
Uon°nstra"  positions  are  held  to  be  possessed  of  more  certainty
than  others  and  even  regarded  as  their  necessary  and
incontestable  foundation  ; whereas  actually  no  higher,
or  perhaps  not  even  so  high,  a degree  of  certainty  at-
taches to  them.  Even  the  rendering  clear  of  the  de-
gree of  certainty  which  exact  science  aims  at,  is  not  at-
tained here.  Examples  of  such  mistaken  rigor  are  to
be  found  in  almost  every  text-book.  The  deductions
of  Archimedes,  not  considering  their  historical  value,
are  infected  with  this  erroneous  rigor.  But  the  most
conspicuous  example  of  all  is  furnished  by  Daniel  Ber-
noulli’s deduction  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces  ( Com-
ment. Acad.  Petr  op.  T.  I.).


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


83


6.  As  already  seen,  instinctive  knowledge  enjoys  The  char-
our  exceptional  confidence.  No  longer  knowing  how  stinctive
we  have  acquired  it,  we  cannot  criticise  the  logic  by knovv]edge*
which  it  was  inferred.  We  have  personally  contributed
nothing  to  its  production.  It  confronts  us  with  a force

and  irresistibleness  foreign  to  the  products  of  volun-
tary reflective  experience.  It  appears  to  us  as  some-
thing free  from  subjectivity,  and  extraneous  to  us,  al-
though we  have  it  constantly  at  hand  so  that  it  is  more
ours  than  afe  the  individual  facts  of  nature.

All  this  has  often  led  men  to  attribute  knowledge  of  its  author-
this  kind  to  an  entirely  different  source,  namely,  to  view  imeiysub-s°'
it  as  existing  a priori  in  us  (previous  to  all  experience).  preme*
That  this  opinion  is  untenable  was  fully  explained  in
our  discussion  of  the  achievements  of  Stevinus.  Yet
even  the  authority  of  instinctive  knowledge,  however
important  it  may  be  for  actual  processes  of  develop-
ment, must  ultimately  give  place  to  that  of  a clearly  and
deliberately  observed  principle.  Instinctive  knowledge
is,  after  all,  only  experimental  knowledge,  and  as  such
is  liable,  we  have  seen,  to  prove  itself  utterly  insuffi-
cient and  powerless,  when  some  new  region  of  expe-
rience is  suddenly  opened  up.

7.  The  true  relation  and  connection  of  the  different  The  true  re-
principles is  the  historical  one.  The  one  extends  farther  principles
in  this  domain,  the  other  farther  in  that.  Notwith- cai  one?n
standing  that  some  one  principle,  say  the  principle  of
virtual  displacements,  may  control  with  facility  a
greater  number  of  cases  than  other  principles,  still

no  assurance  can  be  given  that  it  will  always  maintain
its  supremacy  and  will  not  be  outstripped  by  some  new
principle.  All  principles  single  out,  more  or  less  arbi-
trarily, now  this  aspect  now  that  aspect  of  the  same
facts,  and  contain  an  abstract  summarised  rule  for  the


84


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


refigurement  of  the  facts  in  thought.  We  can  never
assert  that  this  process  has  been  definitively  completed.
Whosoever  holds  to  this  opinion,  will  not  stand  in  the
way  of  the  advancement  of  science.

Conception  8.  Let  us,  in  conclusion,  direct  our  attention  for  a

of  force  in  . . .

statics.  moment  to  the  conception  of  force  m statics,  r orce  is
any  circumstance  of  which  the  consequence  is  motion.
Several  circumstances  of  this  kind,  however,  each  single
one  of  which  determines  motion,  may  be  so  conjoined
that  in  the  result  there  shall  be  no  motion."  Now  stat-
ics investigates  what  this  mode  of  conjunction,  in  gen-
eral terms,  is.  Statics  does  not  further  concern  itself
about  the  particular  character  of  the  motion  condi-
tioned by  the  forces.  The  circumstances  determinative
of  motion  that  are  best  known  to  us,  are  our  own  vo-
Theorigin  litional  acts — our  innervations.  In  the  motions  which
tion  of  we  ourselves  determine,  as  well  as  in  those  to  which
pressure.  are  forced  by  external  circumstances,  we  are  always
sensible  of  a pressure.  Thence  arises  our  habit  of  rep-
resenting all  circumstances  determinative  of  motion  as
something  akin  to  volitional  acts — as  pressures.  The
attempts  we  make  to  set  aside  this  conception,  as  sub-
jective, animistic,  and  unscientific,  fail  invariably.  It
cannot  profit  us,  surely,  to  do  violence  to  our  own  nat-
ural-born thoughts  and  to  doom  ourselves,  in  that  re-
gard, to  voluntary  mental  penury.  We  shall  subse-
quently have  occasion  to  observe,  that  the  conception
referred  to  also  plays  a part  in  the  foundation  of  dy-
namics.

We  are  able,  in  a great  many  cases,  to  replace  the
circumstances  determinative  of  motion,  which  occur  in
nature,  by  our  innervations,  and  thus  to  reach  the  idea
of  a gradation  of  the  intensity  of  forces.  But  in  the  esti-
mation of  this  intensity  we  are  thrown  entirely  on  the


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


35


resources  of  our  memory,  and  are  also  unable  to  com-  The  com-
municate our' sensations.  Since  it  is  possible,  how-  acterofaii

forces

ever,  to  represent  every  condition  that  determines
motion  by  a weight,  we  arrive  at  the  perception  that
all  circumstances  determinative  of  motion  (all  forces)
are  alike  in  character  and  may  be  replaced  and  meas-
ured by  quantities  that  stand  for  weight.  The  meas-
urable weight  serves  us,  as  a certain,  convenient,  and
communicable  index,  in  mechanical  researches,  just  as
the  thermometer  in  thermal  researches  is  an  exacter
substitute  for  our  perceptions  of  heat.  As  has  pre- The  idea  of
viously  been  remarked,  statics  cannot  wholly  rid  itself  ™uxiHaryn
of  all  knowledge  of  phenomena  of  motion.  This  par-  statics!4  m
ticularly  appears  in  the  determination  of  the  direction
of  a force  by  the  direction  of  the  motion  which  it  would
produce  if  it  acted  alone.  By  the  point  of  application
of  a force  we  mean  that  point  of  a body  whose  motion
is  still  determined  by  the  force  when  the  point  is  freed
from  its  connections  with  the  other  parts  of  the  body.

Force  accordingly  is  any  circumstance  that  de- The  gene-

• rs.1  attri-

termines  motion  ; and  its  attributes  may  be  stated  asbutesof
follows.  The  direction  of  the  force  is  the  direction  of
motion  which  is  determined  by  that  force,  alone.  The
point  of  application  is  that  point  whose  motion  is  de-
termined independently  of  its  connections  with  the
system.  The  magnitude  of  the  force  is  that  weight
which,  acting  (say,  on  a string)  in  the  direction  deter-
mined, and  applied  at  the  point  in  question,  determines
the  same  motion  or  maintains  the  same  equilibrium.

The  other  circumstances  that  modify  the  determination
of  a motion,  but  by  themselves  alone  are  unable  to  pro-
duce it,  such  as  virtual  displacements,  the  arms  of
levers,  and  so  forth,  may  be  termed  collateral  condi-
tions determinative  of  motion  and  equilibrium.


85


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


No  essen-
tially new
points  of
view  in-
volved in
this  subject.


Vitruvius’s
account  of
Archime-
des’s dis-
covery.


VI.

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS  IN  THEIR  APPLICATION  TO
FLUIDS.

1.  The  consideration  of  fluids  has  not  supplied  stat-
ics with  many  essentially  new  points  of  view,  yet  nu-
merous applications  and  confirmations  of  the  principles
already  known  have  resulted  therefrom,  and  physical
experience  has  been  greatly  enriched  by  the  investiga-
tions of  this  domain.  We  shall  devote,  therefore,  a few
pages  to  this  subject.

2.  To  Archimedes  also  belongs  the  honor  of  found-
ing the  domain  of  the  statics  of  liquids.  To  him  we
owe  the  well-known  proposition  concerning  the  buoy-
ancy, or  loss  of  weight,  of  bodies  immersed  in  liquids,
of  the  discovery  of  which  Vitruvius,  De  Architectura ,
Lib.  IX,  gives  the  following  account :

“Though  Archimedes  discovered  many  curious
“matters  that  evince  great  intelligence,  that  which  I am
“about  to  mention  is  the  most  extraordinary.  Hiero,
“when  he  obtained  the  regal  power  in  Syracuse,  hav-
“ing,  on  the  fortunate  turn  of  his  affairs,  decreed  a
“votive  crown  of  gold  to  be  placed  in  a certain  temple
“to  the  immortal  gods,  commanded  it  to  be  made  of
“great  value,  and  assigned  for  this  purpose  an  appro-
priate weight  of  the  metal  to  the  manufacturer.  The
“latter,  in  due  time,  presented  the  work  to  the  king,
“beautifully  wrought ; and  the  weight  appeared  to  cor-
respond with  that  of  the  gold  which  had  been  as-
signed for  it.

“But  a report  having  been  circulated,  that  some  of
“the  gold  had  been  abstracted,  and  that  the  deficiency


TIIE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


87


“thus  caused  had  been  supplied  by  silver,  Hiero  was  The  ac-
“indignant  at  the  fraud,  and,  unacquainted  with  the truvius.
“method  by  which  the  theft  might  be  detected,  re-
quested Archimedes  would  undertake  to  give  it  his
“attention.  Charged  with  this  commission,  he  by
“chance  went  to  a bath,  and  on  jumping  into  the  tub,
“perceived  that,  just  in  the  proportion  that  his  body
“became  immersed,  in  the  same  proportion  the  water
“ran  out  of  the  vessel.  Whence,  catching  at  the
“method  to  be  adopted  for  the  solution  of  the  proposi-
tion, he  immediately  followed  it  up,  leapt  out  of  the
“vessel  in  joy,  and  returning  home  naked,  cried  out
“with  a loud  voice  that  he  had  found  that  of  which  he
“was  in  search,  for  he  continued  exclaiming,  in  Greek,

“ svpijKa,  evpijKa,  (I  have  found  it,  I have  found  it !)”

3.  The  observation  which  led  Archimedes  to  his  Statement

Til-  . of  the  Ar-

proposition,  was  accordingly  this,  that  a body  im-chimedean
. . . . proposition

mersed  m water  must  raise  an  equivalent  quantity  01
water  * exactly  as  if  the  body  lay  on  one  pan  of  a balance
and  the  water  on  the  other.  This  conception,  which
at  the  present  day  is  still  the  most  natural  and  the
most  direct,  also  appears  in  Archimedes’s  treatises  On
Floating  Bodies , which  unfortunately  have  not  been
completely  preserved  but  have  in  part  been  restored
by  F.  Commandinus.

The  assumption  from  which  Archimedes  starts
reads  thus :

“It  is  assumed  as  the  essential  property  of  a liquid  The  Archi-

^ . . ..  r . medeanas*

that  m all  uniform  and  continuous  positions  of  its  parts  sumption,
the  portion  that  suffers  the  lesser  pressure  is  forced
upwards  by  that  which  suffers  the  greater  pressure.

But  each  part  of  the  liquid  suffers  pressure  from  the
portion  perpendicularly  above  it  if  the  latter  be  sinking
or  suffer  pressure  from  another  portion.”


88


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Analysis  of
the  princi-
ple.


The  state  of
the  science
in  the  six-
teenth cen-
tury.


Fig.  59-


Archimedes  now,  to  present  the  matter  briefly,
conceives  the  entire  spherical  earth  as  fluid  in  consti-
tution, and  cuts  out  of  it  pyramids  the  vertices  of
which  lie  at  the  centre  (Fig.  59).  All  these  pyramids

must,  in  the  case  of  equilib-
rium, have  the  same  weight,
and  the  similarly  situated
parts  of  the  same  must  all
suffer  the  same  pressure.
If  we  plunge  a body  a of
the  same  specific  gravity  as
water  into  one  of  the  pyra-
mids, the  body  will  com-
pletely submerge,  and,  in
the  case  of  equilibrium,  will  supply  by  its  weight  the
pressure  of  the  displaced  water.  The  body  b,  of  less
specific  gravity,  can  sink,  without  disturbance  of  equi-
librium, only  to  the  point  at  which  the  water  beneath
it  suffers  the  same  pressure  from  the  weight  of  the
body  as  it  would  if  the  body  were  taken  out  and  the
submerged  portion  replaced  by  water.  The  body  c,
of  a greater  specific  gravity,  sinks  as  deep  as  it  possibly
can.  That  its  weight  is  lessened  in  the  water  by  an
amount  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  water  displaced,
will  be  manifest  if  we  imagine  the  body  joined  to
another  of  less  specific  gravity  so  that  a third  body  is
formed  having  the  same  specific  gravity  as  water,
which  just  completely  submerges.

4.  When  in  the  sixteenth  century  the  study  of  the
works  of  Archimedes  was  again  taken  up,  scarcely  the
principles  of  his  researches  were  understood.  The
complete  comprehension  of  his  deductions  was  at  that
time  impossible.

Stevinus  rediscovered  by  a method  of  his  own  the


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


89


most  important  principles  of  hydrostatics  and  the  de-  The  discov-
ductions  therefrom.  It  was  principally  two  ideas  from  vinus.
which  Stevinus  derived  his  fruitful  conclusions.  The
one  is  quite  similar  to  that  relating  to  the  endless
chain.  The  other  consists  in  the  assumption  that  the
solidification  of  a fluid  in  equilibrium  does  not  disturb
its  equilibrium.

Stevinus  first  lays  down  this  principle.  Any  given  The  first

r , jL.  ; . . . fundamen-

mass  of  water  A (Fig.  60),  immersed  m water,  is  mtaiprind-
equilibrium  in  all  its  parts.  If  A a

were  not  supported  by  the  sur-
rounding water  but  should,  let  us
say,  descend,  then  the  portion  of
water  taking  the  place  of  A and
placed  thus  in  the  same  circum-
stances, would,  on  the  same  as-
sumption, also  have  to  descend.  Fig.  60.

This  assumption  leads,  therefore,  to  the  establishment
of  a perpetual  motion,  which  is  contrary  to  our  ex-
perience and  to  our  instinctive  knowledge  of  things.

Water  immersed  in  water  loses  accordingly  its  The  second
. ...  r _ fimdamen-

whole  weight.  If,  now,  we  imagine  the  surface  of  the  tai  princi-

submerged  wTater  solidified,  the  vessel  formed  by  this
surface,  the  vas  superficiarium  as  Stevinus  calls  it,  will
still  be  subjected  to  the  same  circumstances  of  pres-
sure. If  empty , the  vessel  so  formed  will  suffer  an
upward  pressure  in  the  liquid  equal  to  the  weight  of  the
water  displaced.  If  we  fill  the  solidified  surface  with
some  other  substance  of  any  specific  gravity  we  may
choose,  it  will  be  plain  that  the  diminution  of  the
weight  of  the  body  will  be  equal  to  the  weight  of  the
fluid  displaced  on  immersion.

In  a rectangular,  vertically  placed  parallelepipedal
vessel  filled  with  a liquid,  the  pressure  on  the  horizontal


go


THE  SCIENCE  GF  MECHANICS.


Stevinus’s  base  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  liquid.  The  pressure
* is  equal,  also,  for  all  parts  of  the  bottom  of  the  same
area.  When  now  Stevinus  imagines  portions  of  the
liquid  to  be  cut  out  and  replaced  by  rigid  immersed
bodies  of  the  same  specific  gravity,  or,  what  is  the
same  thing,  imagines  parts  of  the  liquid  to  become  so-
lidified, the  relations  of  pressure  in  the  vessel  will  not
be  altered  by  the  procedure.  But  we  easily  obtain  in
this  way  a clear  view  of  the  law  that  the  pressure  on
the  base  of  a vessel  is  independent  of  its  form,  as  well
as  of  the  laws  of  pressure  in  communicating  vessels,
and  so  forth.

Galileo,  in  5.  Galileo  treats  the  equilibrium  of  liquids  in  com-

the  treat-  'h  , , , ^ ^

mentof  this  mumcatmg  vessels  and  the  problems  connected  there-
of the  principle  of  virtual  displace-
ments. NN  (Fig.  61)  being  the
common  level  of  a liquid  in  equilib-
rium in  two  communicating  vessels,
Galileo  explains  the  equilibrium
here  presented  by  observing  that  in
the  case  of  any  disturbance  the  dis-
placements of  the  columns  are  to
each  other  in  the  inverse  proportion
of  the  areas  of  the  transverse  sec-
tions and  of  the  weights  of  the  columns — that  is,  as
with  machines  in  equilibrium.  But  this  is  not  quite  cor-
rect. The  case  does  not  exactly  correspond  to  the
cases  of  equilibrium  investigated  by  Galileo  in  ma-
chines, which  present  indifferent  equilibrium.  With
liquids  in  communicating  tubes  every  disturbance  of  the
common  level  of  the  liquids  produces  an  elevation  of
the  centre  of  gravity.  In  the  case  represented  in  Fig.
61,  the  centre  of  gravity  S of  the  liquid  displaced  from
the  shaded  space  in  A is  elevated  to  S',  and  we  may


suujeci,  em-

ploys  the  with  by  the  help
principle  of
virtual  dis-

placements  B A


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


gi


regard  the  rest  of  the  liquid  as  not  having  been  moved.
Accordingly,  in  the  case  of  equilibrium,  the  centre  of
gravity  of  the  liquid  lies  at  its  lowest  possible  point

6.  Pascal  likewise  employs  the  principle  of  virtual  The  same

t i i i - principle

displacements,  but  m a more  correct  manner,  leaving  made  use  of
the  weight  of  the  liquid  out  of  account  and  considering
only  the  pressure  at  the  surface.  If  we  imagine  two
communicating  vessels  to  be  closed  by  pistons  (Fig.

62),  and  these  pistons  loaded  with
weights  proportional  to  their  surface-
areas,  equilibrium  will  obtain,  because
in  consequence  of  the  invariability  of
the  volume  of  the  liquid  the  displace-
ments in  every  disturbance  are  in-
versely proportional  to  the  weights.  Fig.  62.

F or  Pascal,  accordingly,  it  follows , as  a necessary  con-
sequence, from  the  principle  of  virtual  displacements,
that  in  the  case  of  equilibrium  every  pressure  on  a su-
perficial portion  of  a liquid  is  propagated  with  undi-
minished effect  to  every  other  superficial  portion,  how-
ever and  in  whatever  position  it  be  placed.  No  objec-
tion is  to  be  made  to  discovering  the  principle  in  this
way.  Yet  we  shall  see  later  on  that  the  more  natural
and  satisfactory  conception  is  to  regard  the  principle  as
immediate^  given.

7.  We  shall  now,  after  this  historical  sketch,  again  Detailed

. . . ......  .....  considera-

exammethe  most  important  cases  o±  liquid  equilibrium,  tion  of  the
and  from  such  different  points  of  view  as  may  be  con-subject*
venient.

The  fundamental  property  of  liquids  given  us  by
experience  consists  in  the  flexure  of  their  parts  on  the
slightest  application  of  pressure.  Let  us  picture  to  our-
selves an  element  of  volume  of  a liquid,  the  gravity  of
which  we  disregard— say  a tiny  cube.  If  the  slightest


92


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  funda-  excess  of  pressure  be  exerted  on  one  of  the  surfaces  of
property  of  this  cube,  (which  we  now  conceive,  for  the  moment,
mobU?tyhof  as  a fixed  geometrical  locus,  containing  the  fluid  but
t eir  parts.  ^ ^s  substance)  the  liquid  (supposed  to  have  pre-
viously been  in  equilibrium  and  at  rest)  will  yield  and
pass  out  in  all  directions  through  the  other  five  surfaces
of  the  cube.  A solid  cube  can  stand  a pressure  on  its
upper  and  lower  surfaces  different  in  magnitude  from
that  on  its  lateral  surfaces  ; or  vice  versa.  A fluid  cube,
on  the  other  hand,  can  retain  its  shape  only  if  the  same
perpendicular  pressure  be  exerted  on  all  its  sides.  A
similar  train  of  reasoning  is  applicable  to  all  polyhe-
drons.  In  this  conception,  as  thus  geometrically  eluci-
dated, is  contained  nothing  but  the  crude  experience
that  the  particles  of  a liquid  yield  to  the  slightest  pres-
sure, and  that  they  retain  this  property  also  in  the  in-
terior of  the  liquid  when  under  a high  pressure  ; it
being  observable,  for  example,  that  under  the  condi-
tions cited  minute  heavy  bodies  sink  in  fluids,  and  so  on.
a second  With  the  mobility  of  their  parts  liquids  combine
PhePcom-_  still  another  property,  which  we  will  now  consider.  Li-
of tbSkvoi- quids  suffer  through  pressure  a diminution  of  volume
which  is  proportional  to  the  pressure  exerted  on  unit
of  surface.  Every  alteration  of  pressure  carries  along
with  it  a proportional  alteration  of  volume  and  density.
If  the  pressure  diminish,  the  volume  becomes  greater,
the  density  less.  The  volume  of  a liquid  continues  to
diminish  therefore  on  the  pressure  being  increased,  till
the  point  is  reached  at  which  the  elasticity  generated
within  it  equilibrates  the  increase  of  the  pressure.

8.  The  earlier  inquirers,  as  for  instance  those  of  the
Florentine  Academy,  were  of  the  opinion  that  liquids
were  incompressible.  In  1761,  however,  John  Canton
performed  an  experiment  by  which  the  compressibility


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


93


of  water  was  demonstrated.  A thermometer  glass  is
filled  with  water,  boiled,  and  then  sealed.  (Fig.  63.)
The  liquid  reaches  to  a . But  since  the  space  above  a is
airless,  the  liquid  supports  no  atmospheric  pres-
sure. If  the  sealed  end  be  broken  off,  the  liquid
will  sink  to  A Only  a portion,  however,  of  this
displacement  is  to  be  placed  to  the  credit  of  the
compression  of  the  liquid  by  atmospheric  pres-
sure. For  if  we  place  the  glass  before  breaking
off  the  top  under  an  air-pump  and  exhaust  the
chamber,  the  liquid  will  sink  to  c.  This  last  phe-  ^
nomenon  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  pressure  that
bears  down  on  the  exterior  of  the  glass  and  diminishes
its  capacity,  is  now  removed.  On  breaking  off  the  top,
this  exterior  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  is  compensated
for  by  the  interior  pressure  then  introduced,  and  an
enlargement  of  the  capacity  of  the  glass  again  sets  in.
The  portion  c 3,  therefore,  answers  to  the  actual  com-
pression of  the  liquid  by  the  pressure  of  the  atmos-
phere.

The  first  to  institute  exact  experiments  on  the  com-
pressibility of  water,  was  Oersted,  who  employed  to
this  end  a very  ingenious  method.  A
thermometer  glass  A (Fig.  64)  is  filled
with  boiled  water  and  is  inverted,  with
open  mouth,  into  a vessel  of  mercury.

Near  it  stands  a manometer  tube  B filled
with  air  and  likewise  inverted  with  open
mouth  in  the  mercury.  The  whole  ap-
paratus is  then  placed  in  a vessel  filled
with  water,  which  is  compressed  by  the
aid  of  a pump.  By  this  means  the  water
in  A is  also  compressed,  and  the  filament  of  quicksilver
which  rises  in  the  capillary  tube  of  the  thermometer-


The  first
demonstra-
tion of  the
compressi-
bility of
liquids.


The  experi-
ments of
Oersted  on
this  subject.


Fig.  64.


94


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


glass  indicates  this  compression.  The  alteration  of
capacity  which  the  glass  A suffers  in  the  present  in-
stance, is  merely  that  arising  from  the  pressing  to-
gether of  its  walls  by  forces  which  are  equal  on  all  sides.

The  experi-  The  most  delicate  experiments  on  this  subject  have

ments  of  , , , _ . 1

Grassi.  been  conducted  by  Grassi  with  an  apparatus  con-
structed by  Regnault,  and  computed  with  the  assist-
ance of  Lame’s  correction-formulae.  To  give  a tan-
gible idea  of  the  compressibility  of  water,  we  will  remark
that  Grassi  observed  for  boiled  water  at  0°  under  an


increase  of  one  atmospheric  pressure  a diminution  of
the  original  volume  amounting  to  5 in  100,000  parts.
If  we  imagine,  accordingly,  the  vessel  A to  have  the
capacity  of  one  litre  (1000  ccm.),  and  affix  to  it  a cap-
illary tube  of  1 sq.  mm.  cross-section,  the  quicksilver
filament  will  ascend  in  it  5 cm.  under  a pressure  of
one  atmosphere.

surface-  < 9.  Surface-pressure,  accordingly,  induces  a physical

ducesYn  m alteration  in  a liquid  (an  alteration  in  density),  which
alteration  can  be  detected  by  sufficiently  delicate  means — even
of  density.  0p£*ca^  we  are  ajwayS  at  liberty  to  think  that  por-
tions of  a liquid  under  a higher  pressure  are  more  dense,
though  it  may  be  very  slightly  so,  than  parts  under  a
less  pressure.

The  impii-  Let  us  imagine  now,  we  have  in  a liquid  (in  the  in-
cations of  . - . . - . .

this  fact,  tenor  of  which  no  forces  act  and  the  gravity  of  which
we  accordingly  neglect)  two  portions  subjected  to  un-
equal pressures  and  contiguous  to  one  another.  The
portion  under  the  greater  pressure,  being  denser,  will
expand,  and*  press  against  the  portion  under  the  less
pressure,  until  the  forces  of  elasticity  as  lessened  on  the
one  side  and  increased  on  the  other  establish  equilib-
rium at  the  bounding  surface  and  both  portions  are
equally  compressed.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


95


If  we  endeavor,  now,  quantitatively  to  elucidate  our  The  state-
mental  conception  of  these  two  facts,  the  easy  mobility  these impii-
and  the  compressibility  of  the  parts  of  a liquid,  so  that
they  will  fit  the  most  diverse  classes  of  experience,
we  shall  arrive  at  the  following  proposition  : When
equilibrium  subsists  in  a liquid,  in  the  interior  of  which
no  forces  act  and  the  gravity  of  which  we  neglect,  the
same  equal  pressure  is  exerted  on  each  and  every  equal
surface-element  of  that  liquid  however  and  wherever
situated.  The  pressure,  therefore,  is  the  same  at  all
points  and  is  independent  of  direction.

Special  experiments  in  demonstration  of  this  prin-
ciple have,  perhaps,  never  been  instituted  with  the  re-
quisite degree  of  exactitude.  But  the  proposition  has
by  our  experience  of  liquids  been  made  very  familiar,
and  readily  explains  it.

io.  If  a liquid  be  enclosed  in  a vessel  (Fig.  65)Preiimi-
which  is  supplied  with  a piston  ^4,  the  cross-section  nfaiseto

.....  ..  . the  discuss-

of  which  is  unit  m area,  and  with  a piston  B which  ion  of  Pas-

for  the  time  being  is  made  station-
ary, and  on  the  piston  A a load  p
be  placed,  then  the  same  pressure
p , gravity  neglected,  will  prevail
throughout  all  the  parts  of  the  vessel.

The  piston  will  penetrate  inward  and
the  walls  of  the  vessel  will  continue
to  be  deformed  till  the  point  is  reached
at  which  the  elastic  forces  of  the  rigid  and  fluid  bodies
perfectly  equilibrate  one  another.  If  then  we  imagine
the  piston  B,  which  has  the  cross-section  /,  to  be  mov-
able, a force  f.  p alone  will  keep  it  in  equilibrium.

Concerning  Pascal’s  deduction  of  the  proposition
before  discussed  from  the  principle  of  virtual  displace-
ments, it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  conditions  of  dis-


car s deduc-
tion.


9a


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Criticism  of  placement  which  he  perceived  hinge  wholly  upon  the
auction.  fact  of  the  ready  mobility  of  the  parts  and  on  the
equality  of  the  pressure  throughout  every  portion  of
the  liquid.  If  it  were  possible  for  a greater  compression
to  take  place  in  one  part  of  a liquid  than  in  another,
the  ratio  of  the  displacements  would  be  disturbed  and
Pascal’s  deduction  would  no  longer  be  admissible.
That  the  property  of  the  equality  of  the  pressure  is  a
property  given  in  experience,  is  a fact  that  cannot  be
escaped  ; as  we  shall  readily  admit  if  we  recall  to  mind
that  the  same  law  that  Pascal  deduced  for  liquids  also
holds  good  for  gases,  where  even  approximately  there
can  be  no  question  of  a constant  volume.  This  latter
fact  does  not  afford  any  difficulty  to  our  view  ; but  to
that  of  Pascal  it  does.  In  the  case  of  the  lever  also,  be
it  incidentally  remarked,  the  ratios  of  the  virtual  dis-
placements are  assured  by  the  elastic  forces  of  the
lever-body,  which  do  not  permit  of  any  great  devia-
tion from  these  relations.


Thebehav-  n.  We  shall  now  consider  the  action  of  liquids  un-
quids  under  der  the  influence  of  gravity.  The  upper  surface  of  a
of  gravity.  liquid  in  equilibrium  is  horizontal,

N " S ^JzmSN  66)*  This  fact  is  at  once

rendered  intelligible  when  we  re-
fleet  that  every  alteration  of  the  sur-
5PT  "-"ITT  face  T16^031  elevates  the  centre
- - - ~ ~ jZEZEj  of  gravity  of  the  liquid,  and  pushes
Fig.  66.  the  liquid  mass  resting  in  the  shaded

space  beneath  NN  and  having  the  cenfre  of  gravity  S
into  the  shaded  space  above  NN  having  the  centre  of
gravity  S'.  Which  alteration,  of  course,  is  at  once  re-
versed by  gravity.

Let  there  be  in  equilibrium  in  a vessel  a heavy
liquid  with  a horizontal  upper  surface.  We  consider


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


97


(Fig.  67)  a small  rectangular  parallelepipedon  in  the  The  con-
interior.  The  area  of  its  horizontal  base,  we  will  say,  is  equilibrium
a,  and  the  length  of  its  vertical  edges  dh.  The  weight  subjected
of  this  parallelepipedon  is  therefore  adhs,  where  s is  non  of  grav-
its  specific  gravity.  If  the  paral-
lelepipedon do  not  sink,  this  is
possible  only  on  the  condition  that
a greater  pressure  is  exerted  on  the
lower  surface  by  the  fluid  than  on
the  upper.  The  pressures  on  the
upper  and  lower  surfaces  we  will
respectively  designate  as  up  and  a (J>  -f  dp).  Equi-
librium obtains  when  adk.s  ==  ocdp  or  dp/dh  — s ,
where  h in  the  downward  direction  is  reckoned  as  posi-
tive. We  see  from  this  that  for  equal  increments  of  h
vertically  downwards  the  pressure  p must,  correspond-
ingly, also  receive  equal  increments.  So  that  p =
hs  - 1~  q\  and  if  q,  the  pressure  at  the  upper  surface,
which  is  usually  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  be-
comes = 0,  we  have,  more  simply,  p — hs,  that  is,  the
pressure  is  proportional  to  the  depth  beneath  the  sur-
face. If  we  imagine  the  liquid  to  be  pouring  into  a ves-
sel, and  this  condition  of  affairs  noi  vet  attained,  every
liquid  particle  will  then  sink  until  the  compressed  par-
ticle beneath  balances  by  the  elasticity  developed  in  it
the  weight  of  the  particle  above.

From  the  view  we  have  here  presented  it  will  be  fur-  Different
ther  apparent,  that  the  increase  of  pressure  in  a liquid  tions  exist

, , . , , ,.  . . . - , . only  in  the

takes  place  solely  m the  direction  m which  gravity  line  of  the
acts.  Only  at  the  lower  surface,  at  the  base,  of  the  gravity,
parallelepipedon,  is  an  excess  of  elastic  pressure  on  the
part  of  the  liquid  beneath  required  to  balance  the
weight  of  the  parallelepipedon.  Along  the  two  sides  of
thfe  vertical  containing  surfaces  of  the  parallelepipedon,


THE  SCIENCE  US  MECHANICS .


the  liquid  is  in  a state  of  equal  compression,  since  no
force  acts  in  the  vertical  containing  surfaces  that  would
determine  a greater  compression  on  the  one  side  than
on  the  other.

Level  sur-  If  we  picture  to  ourselves  the  totality  of  all  the
points  of  the  liquid  at  which  the  same  pressure  p acts,
we  shall  obtain  a surface — a so-called  level  surface.  If
we  displace  a particle  in  the  direction  of  the  action  of
gravity,  it  undergoes  a change  of  pressure.  If  we  dis-
place it  at  right  angles  to  the  direction  of  the  action  of
gravity,  no  alteration  of  pressure  takes  place.  In  the
latter  case  it  remains  on  the  same  level  surface,  and
the  element  of  the  level  surface,  accordingly,  stands  at
right  angles  to  the  direction  of  the  force  of  gravity.

Imagining  the  earth  to  be  fluid  and  spherical,  the
level  surfaces  are  concentric  spheres,  and  the  directions
of  the  forces  of  gravity  (the  radii)  stand  at  right  angles
to  the  elements  of  the  spherical  surfaces.  Similar  ob-
servations are  admissible  if  the  liquid  particles  be  acted
on  by  other  forces  than  gravity,  magnetic  forces,  for
example.

Their  fane-  The  level  surfaces  afford,  in  a certain  sense,  a dia-

thought.  gram  of  the  force-relations  to  which  a fluid  is  subjected;
a view  further  elaborated  by  analytical  hydrostatics.

12.  The  increase  of  the  pressure  with  the  depth  be-
low the  surface  of  a heavy  liquid  may  be  illustrated  by
a series  of  experiments  which  we  chiefly  owe  to  Pas-
cal. These  experiments  also  well  illustrate  the  fact,
that  the  pressure  is  independent  of  the  direction.  In
Fig.  68,  i,  is  an  empty  glass  tube  g ground  off  at  the
bottom  and  closed  by  a metal  disc  //,  to  which  a
string  is  attached,  and  the  whole  plunged  into  a vessel
of  water.  When  immersed  to  a sufficient  depth  we
may  let  the  string  go,  without  the  metal  disc,  which  is


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


99


supported  by  the  pressure  of  the  liquid,  falling.  In  2,
the  metal  disc  is  replaced  by  a tiny  column  of  mer-
cury. If  (3)  we  dip  an  open  siphon  tube  filled  with
mercury  into  the  water,  we  shall
see  the  mercury,  in  consequence
of  the  pressure  at  a,  rise  into
the  longer  arm.  In  4,  we  see  a
tube,  at  the  lower  extremity  of
which  a leather  bag  filled  with
mercury  is  tied:  continued  im-
mersion forces  the  mercury
higher  and  higher  into  the  tube.

In  5,  a piece  of  wood  h is  driven
by  the  pressure  of  the  water  into
the  small  arm  of  an  empty  siphon
tube.  In  6,  a piece  of  wood  H
immersed  in  mercury  adheres  to
the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  is
pressed  firmly  against  it  for  as
long  a time  as  the  mercury  is
kept  from  working  its  way  un-
derneath it.

13.  Once  we  have  made  quite
clear  to  ourselves  that  the  pres-
sure in  the  interior  of  a heavy
liquid  increases  proportionally  to
the  depth  below  the  surface,  the
law  that  the  pressure  at  the  base
of  a vessel  is  independent  of  its
form  will  be  readily  perceived.

The  pressure  increases  as  we  de-
scend at  an  equal  rate,  whether  the  vessel  (Fig.  69)
has  the  form  abed  or  ebef  In  both  cases  the  walls
of  the  vessel  where  they  meet  the  liquid,  go  on  def orming


Pascal’s  ex-
periments
on  the
pressure  of
liquids.  *


The  pres-
sure at  the
base  of  a
vessel  inde-
pendent of
its  form.


100


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


till  the  point  is  reached  at  which  they  equilibrate  by  the
elasticity  developed  in  them  the  pressure  exerted  by  the
fluid,  that  is,  take  the  place  as  regards  pressure  of  the

fluid  adjoining.  This  fact  is
a direct  justification  of  Ste-
vinus’s  fiction,  of  the  solidi-
fied fluid  supplying  the  place
of  the  walls  of  the  vessel.
The  pressure  on  the  base
Fis-  69-  always  remains  P = A hs,

where  A denotes  the  area  of  the  base,  h the  depth  of
the  horizontal  plane  base  below  the  level,  and  jt  the
specific  gravity  of  the  liquid.

Elucida-  The  fact  that,  the  walls  of  the  vessel  being  neg-
fact.°f  thlS  lected,  the  vessels  i,  2,  3 of  Fig.  70  of  equal  base-
area  and  equal  pressure-height  weigh  differently  in  the

j balance,  of  course

gin  no  wise  con-
tradicts  the  laws
of  pressure  men-
j 'l  | tioned.  If  we  take

Fig.  70.  into  account  the


lateral  pressure,  we  shall  see  that  in  the  case  of  1 we
have  left  an  extra  component  downwards,  and  in  the
case  of  3 an  extra  component  upwards,  so  that  on  the
whole  the  resultant  superficial  pressure  is  always  equal
to  the  weight.


The  princi-
ple of  vir-
tual dis-
placements
applied  to
the  consid-
eration of
problems  of
this  class.


14.  The  principle  of  virtual  displacements  is  ad-
mirably adapted  to  the  acquisition  of  clearness  and
comprehensiveness  in  cases  of  this  character,  and  we
shall  accordingly  make  use  of  it.  To  begin  with,  how-
ever, let  the  following  be  noted.  If  the  weight  q (Fig.


71)  descend  from  position  1 to  position  2,  and  a weight


of  exactly  the  same  size  move  at  the  same  time  from


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


ioi


2 to  3,  the  work  performed  in  this  operation  is  qhx  +
gh2  = q (Jix  + /*3),  the  same,  that  is,  as  if  the  weight  marks.
q passed  directly  from  i to  3 and  the  weight  at  2 re-
mained in  its  original  position.  The  observation  is
easily  generalised.


I


2

■E>


3

?Eh


{h


h{


\(ih

&///////I///A


I/t


Fig  71.


Fig.  72.


Let  us  consider  a heavy  homogeneous  rectangular
parallelepipedon,  with  vertical  edges  of  the  length  h ,
base  A , and  the  specific  gravity  s (Fig.  72).  Let  this
parallelepipedon  (or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  its  centre
of  gravity)  descend  a distance  dh^  The  work  done  is
then  Ahs.dh , or,  also,  A dhs.h . In  the  first  expres-
sion we  conceive  the  whole  weight  Ahs  displaced  the
vertical  distance  dJi  \ in  the  second  we  conceive  the
weight  Adhs  as  having  descended  from  the  upper
shaded  space  to  the  lower  shaded  space  the  distance  k,
and  leave  out  of  account
the  rest  of  the  body.

Both  methods  of  concep-
tion are  admissible  and
equivalent.

15.  With  the  aid  of
this  observation  we  shall
obtain  a clear  insight  into  Fis-  73-

the  paradox  of  Pascal,  which  consists  of  the  following.
The  vessel  g (Fig.  73),  fixed  to  a separate  support  and
consisting  of  a narrow  upper  and  a very  broad  lower
cylinder,  is  closed  at  the  bottom  by  a movable  piston,


Pascal's

paradox.


102


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


which,  by  means  of  a string  passing  through  the  axis
of  the  cylinders,  is  independently  suspended  from  the
extremity  of  one  arm  of  a balance.  If  g be  filled  with
water,  then,  despite  the  smallness  of  the  quantity  of
water  used,  there  will  have  to  be  placed  on  the  other
scale-pan,  to  balance  it,  several  weights  of  consider-
able size,  the  sum  of  which  will  be  A /is,  where  A is
the  piston-area,  h the  height  of  the  liquid,  and  its
specific  gravity.  But  if  the  liquid  be  frozen  and  the
mass  loosened  from  the  walls  of  the  vessel,  a very
small  weight  will  be  sufficient  to  preserve  equilibrium.
The  expia-  Let  us  look  to  the  virtual  displacements  of  the  two
the  parados  cases  (Fig.  74).  In  the  first  case,  supposing  the  pis-
ton to  be  lifted  a distance  dh,  the  virtual  moment  is

Adhs.hoxAhs.dk . It  thus
comes  to  the  same  thing,

: :dh  whether  we  consider  the  mass

~ that  the  motion  of  the  piston

rzd  t zzxi/t  displaces  to  be  lifted  to  the
Upper  surface  of  the  fluid
4'  through  the  entire  pressure-

height,  or  consider  the  entire  weight  A hs  lifted  the
distance  of  the  piston-displacement  dh.  In  the  second
case,  the  mass  that  the  piston  displaces  is  not  lifted  to
the  upper  surface  of  the  fluid,  but  suffers  a displace-
ment which  is  much  smaller— the  displacement,  namely,
of  the  piston.  If  A , a are  the  sectional  areas  respect-
ively of  the  greater  and  the  less  cylinder,  and  k and  l
their  respective  heights,  then  the  virtual  moment  of  the
present  case  is  Adhs . k -f-  adhs.  /=  (Ah  + a Is)  s.  dh ;
which  is  equivalent  to  the  lifting  of  a much  smaller
weight  {Ak  -f-  a l')  s,  the  distance  dh.

16.  The  laws  relating  to  the  lateral  pressure  of
liquids  are  but  slight  modifications  of  the  laws  of  basal


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


103


pressure.  If  we  have,  for  example,  a cubical  vessel  The  laws  of
of  1 decimetre  on  the  side,  which  is  a vessel  of  litre  pressure,
capacity,  the  pressure  on  any  one  of  the  vertical  lateral
walls  A BCD , when  the  vessel  is  filled  with  water,  is
easily  determinable.  The  deeper  the  migratory  element
considered  descends  beneath  the  surface,  the  greater
the  pressure  will  be  to  which  it  is  subjected.  We  easily
perceive,  thus,  that  the  pressure  on  a lateral  wall  is  rep-
resented by  a wedge  of  water  ABCDHI  resting  upon


the  wall  horizontally
placed,  where  ID  is  at
right  angles  to  BD  and
ID  = HC  = AC.  The
lateral  pressure  accor-
dingly is  equal  to  half
a kilogramme.

To  determine  the


Fig  75.


point  of  application  of  the  resultant  pressure,  conceive
ABCD  again  horizontal  with  the  water-wedge  resting
upon  it.  We  cut  off  AK=  BL  = C,  draw  the
straight  line  KL  and  bisect  it  at  M\  M is  the  point  of
application  sought,  for  through  this  point  the  vertical
line  cutting  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  wedge  passes.

A plane  inclined  figure  forming  the  base  of  a vessel  The  pres-
filled  with  a liquid,  is  divided  into  the  elements  a,  a',  plane  in-
a"  . . . with  the  depths  h , K , h"  . . . below  the  level  of c me
the  liquid.  The  pressure  on  the  base  is


(ah  -|-  a’  ti  -f-  a'  h"  + . . .)  s.

If  we  call  the  total  base-area  A , and  the  depth  of  its
centre  of  gravity  below  the  surface  AT,  then


ah  + oth*  + a"h"  + ah  + ah’  -

a -f  a -j-  a”  + . . . * A


whence  the  pressure  on  the  base  is  AHs.


104


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  deduc-  17.  The  principle  of  Archimedes  can  be  deduced  in
piincipie  of  various  ways.  After  the  manner  of  Stevinus,  let  us
des  maybe  conceive  in  the  interior  of  the  liquid  a portion  of  it
various  n solidified.  This  portion  now,  as  before,  will  be  sup-
ported  by  the  circumnatant  liquid.  The  resultant  of
the  forces  of  pressure  acting  on  the  surfaces  is  accor-
dingly applied  at  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  liquid  dis-
placed by  the  solidified  body,  and  is  equal  and  opposite
to  its  weight.  If  now  we  put  in  the  place  of  the  solid-
ified liquid  another  different  body  of  the  same  form,  but
of  a different  specific  gravity,  the  forces  of  pressure  at
the  surfaces  will  remain  the  same.  Accordingly,  there
now  act  on  the  body  two  forces,  the  weight  of  the  body,
applied  at  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  body,  and  the  up-
ward buoyancy,  the  resultant  of  the  surface-pressures,
applied  at  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  displaced  liquid.
The  two  centres  of  gravity  in  question  coincide  only  in
the  case  of  homogeneous  solid  bodies,
onemeth-  If  we  immerse  a rectangular  parallelepipedon  of  al-
titude h and  base  a,  with  edges  vertically  placed,  in  a
liquid  of  specific  gravity  s,  then  the  pressure  on  the
upper  basal  surface,  when  at  a depth  k below  the  level
of  the  liquid  is  cxks,  while  the  pressure  on  the  lower
surface  is  a (k  -f-  Ji)  s . As  the  lateral  pressures  destroy
each  other,  an  excess  of  pressure  ahs  upwards  re-
mains ; or,  where  v denotes  the  volume  of  the  paral-
lelepipedon, an  excess  v . s.

Another  We  shall  approach  nearest  the  fundamental  con-

method  in-  ,

voivmg  the  ception  from  which  Archimedes  started,  by  recourse  to

princiDle  of  .

virtual  dis-  the  principle  of  virtual  displacements.  Let  a paral-

placements.  . *

lelepipedon  (Fig.  76)  of  the  specific  gravity  a,  base  a,
and  height  h sink  the  distance  dh.  The  virtual  mo-
ment of  the  transference  frofn  the  upper  into  the  lower
shaded  space  of  the  figure  will  be  adh.  c h.  But  while


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS


105


this  is  done,  the  liquid  rises  from  the  lower  into  the  up-
per space,  and  its  moment  is  adhsh . The  total  vir-
tual moment  is  therefore  ah  (o'  — s)  dh  = {p  — q)  dh,
where/*  denotes  the  weight  of  the  body  and  q the  weight
of  the  displaced  liquid.


B


Fig.  76.  Fig.  77.

18.  The  question  might  occur  to  us,  whether  the  is  the  buoy-

1 ...  ancy  of  a

upward  pressure  of  a body  in  a liquid  is  affected  by  thebodym  a
immersion  of  the  latter  in  another  liquid.  As  a fact,  fectcd  by

the  limner-

this  very  question  has  been  proposed.  Let  therefore  sion  ot_  that
(Fig.  77)  a body  K be  submerged  in  a liquid  A and  the  second
liquid  with  the  containing  vessel  in  turn  submerged  in
another  liquid  B.  If  in  the  determination  of  the  loss
of  weight  in  A it  were  proper  to  take  account  of  the
loss  of  weight  of  A in  B,  then  K's  loss  of  weight  would
necessarily  vanish  when  the  fluid  B became  identical
with  A.  Therefore,  K immersed  in  A would  suffer  a
loss  of  weight  and  it  would  suffer  none.  Such  a rule
would  be  nonsensical.

With  the  aid  of  the  principle  of  virtual  displace-  The  eiuci-

x , dation  of

ments,  we  easily  comprehend  the  more  complicated  more  com-

; J r j plicated

cases  of  this  character.  If  a body  be  first  gradually  cases  of  this
immersed  in  B,  then  partly  m B and  partly  m A ,
finally  in  A wholly ; then,  in  the  second  case,  consider-
ing the  virtual  moments,  both  liquids  are  to  be  taken
into  account  in  the  proportion  of  the  volume  of  the
body  immersed  in  them.  But  as  soon  as  the  body  is
wholly  immersed  in  A,  the  level  of  A on  further  dis-


io6  THE  SCIENCE  CF  MECHANICS.

placement  no  longer  rises,  and  therefore  B is  no  longer
of  consequence.

The Archi-  1 9.  Archimedes’s  principle  maybe  illustrated  by  a
principle  ii- pretty  experiment.  From  the  one  extremity  of  a scale-
8)  we  hang  a hollow  cube  H ' and  beneath
it  a solid  cube  M,  which  exactly  fits  into
the  first  cube.  We  put  weights  into  the
opposite  pan,  until  the  scales  are  in
equilibrium.  If  now  Mbe  submerged
in  water  by  lifting  a vessel  which  stands
beneath  it,  the  equilibrium  will  be  dis-
turbed ; but  it  will  be  immediately  re-
stored if  AT,  the  hollow  cube,  be  filled
with  water.

A counter-experiment  is  the  follow-
ing. IT  is  left  suspended  alone  at  the
one  extremity  of  the  balance,  and  into
the  opposite  pan  is  placed  a vessel  of
water,  above  which  on  an  independent
support  M hangs  by  a thin  wire.  The  scales  are  brought
to  equilibrium.  If  now  M be  lowered  until  it  is  im-
mersed in  the  water,  the  equilibrium  of  the  scales  will
be  disturbed  ; but  on  filling  H with  water,  it  will  be
restored.

Remarks  on  At  first  glance  this  experiment  appears  a little  para-
theexperi-  We  fee]?  however,  instinctively,  that  M can-

not be  immersed  in  the  water  without  exerting  a pres-
sure that  affects  the  scales.  When  we  reflect,  that  the
level  of  the  water  in  the  vessel  rises,  and  that  the  solid
body  M equilibrates  the  surface-pressure  of  the  water
surrounding  it,  that  is  to  say  represents  and  takes  the
place  of  an  equal  volume  of  water,  it  will  be  found
that  the  paradoxical  character  of  the  experiment  van-
ishes.


TIIE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


107


20.  The  most  important  statical  principles  have  The  gene-
been  reached  in  the  investigation  of  solid  bodies.  This p^esPo"sCtat-
course  is  accidentally  the  historical  one,  but  it  is  by  no  hav^ifeen
means  the  only  possible  and  necessary  one.  The  dif-  thejnvesti-
ferent  methods  that  Archimedes,  Stevinus,  Galileo,  and  fluid  bodies
the  rest,  pursued,  place  this  idea  clearly  enough  before
the  mind.  As  a matter  of  fact,  general  statical  princi-
ples, might,  with  the  assistance  of  some  very  simple
propositions  from  the  statics  of  rigid  bodies,  have  been
reached  in  the  investigation  of  liquids.  Stevinus  cer-
tainly came  very  near  such  a discovery.  We  shall  stop
a moment  to  discuss  the  question.

Let  us  imagine  a liquid,  the  weight  of  which  we  neg-  The  dis-
lect.  Let  this  liquid  be  enclosed  in  a vessel  and  sub-  fnustratfon
jected  to  a definite  pressure.  A portion  of  the  liquid,  statement,
let  us  suppose,  solidifies.  On  the  closed  surface  nor-
mal forces  act  proportional  to  the  elements  of  the  area,
and  we  see  without  difficulty  that  their  resultant  will
always  be  = 0.

If  we  mark  off  by  a closed  curve  a portion  of  the
closed  surface,  we  obtain,  on  either  side  of  it,  a non-
closed  surface.  All  surfaces  which  are  bounded  by  the
same  curve  (of  double  curvature)  and  on  which  forces
act  normally  (in  the  same  sense)  pro-
portional to  the  elements  of  the  area,
have  lines  coincident  in  position  for
the  resultants  of  these  forces.

Let  us  suppose,  now,  that  a fluid
cylinder,  determined  by  any  closed
plane  curve  as  the  perimeter  of  its  Fig.  79.

base,  solidifies.  We  may  neglect  the  two  basal  sur-
faces, perpendicular  to  the  axis.  And  instead  of  the
cylindrical  surface  the  closed  curve  simply  may  be  con-
sidered. From  this  method  follow  quite  analogous


io8


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS


The  dis-  propositions  for  normal  forces  proportional  to  the  ele-

cussion  and  . .

illustration  ments  of  a plane  curve.

statement.  If  the  closed  curve  pass  into  a triangle,  the  con-
sideration will  shape  itself  thus.  The  resultant  normal
forces  applied  at  the  middle  points  of  the  sides  of  the
triangle,  we  represent  in  direction,  sense,  and  magni-
tude by  straight  lines  (Fig.  80).  The
lines  mentioned  intersect  at  a point —
the  centre  of  the  circle  described  about
the  triangle.  It  will  further  be  noted,
that  by  the  simple  parallel  displace-
ment of  the  lines  representing  the  forces  a triangle  is
constructible  which  is  similar  and  congruent  to  the
original  triangle.

Thededuc-  Thence  follows  this  proposition  :
triangle  of  Any  three  forces,  which,  acting  at  a point,  are  pro-
this  method  portional  and  parallel  in  direction  to  the  sides  of  a tri-
angle, and  which  on  meeting  by  parallel  displacement
form  a congruent  triangle,  are  in  equilibrium.  We  see
at  once  that  this  proposition  is  simply  a different  form
of  the  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces.

If  instead  of  a triangle  we  imagine  a polygon,  we
shall  arrive  at  the  familiar  proposition  of  the  polygon
of  forces.

We  conceive  now  in  a heavy  liquid  of  specific  gravity
x a portion  solidified.  On  the  element  a of  the  closed
encompassing  surface  there  acts  a normal  force  a k z,
where  0 is  the  distance  of  the  element  from  the  level  of
the  liquid.  We  know  from  the  outset  the  result,
similar de-  If  normal  forces  which  are  determined  by  ax 2,
another  im-  where  a denotes  an  element  of  area  and  z its  perpen-
poskiom10  dicular  distance  from  a given  plane  E , act  on  a closed
surface  inwards,  the  resultant  will  be  V.  ;c,  in  which  ex-
pression V represents  the  enclosed  volume.  The


r


Fig.  80.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


109


resultant  acts  at  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  volume,
is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  mentioned,  and  is  directed
towards  this  plane.

Under  the  same  conditions  let  a rigid  curved  surface  The  prapo-
be  bounded  by  a plane  curve,  which  encloses  on  the  deduced,  a
plane  the  area  A.  The  resultant  of  the  forces  acting ofGi^enT
on  the  curved  surface  is  R,  where


R 2 = (AZuy  + (JVk) 2 — AZVk 2 cos  7/,

in  which  expression  Z denotes  the  distance  of  the
centre  of  gravity  of  the  surface  A from  E , and  v the
normal  angle  of  E and  A.

In  the  proposition  of  the  last  paragraph  mathe-
matically practised  readers  will  have  recognised  a par-
ticular case  of  Green’s  Theorem,  which  consists  in  the
reduction  of  surface-integrations  to  volume-integra-
tions or  vice  versa.

We  may,  accordingly,  see  into  the  force-system  of  axheimpii-
fluid  in  equilibrium,  or,  if  you  please,  see  out  of  it,  sys- the??ewf
terns  of  forces  of  greater  or  less  complexity,  and  thus  dlscussed*
reach  by  a short  path  propositions  a posteriori.  It  is  a
mere  accident  that  Stevinus  did  not  light  on  these
propositions.  The  method  here  pursued  corresponds
exactly  to  his.  In  this  manner  new  discoveries  can
still  be  made.

21.  The  paradoxical  results  that  were  reached  in  Fruitful  re-
the  investigation  of  liquids,  supplied  a stimulus  to  fur-  mvestiga-.
ther  reflection  and  research.  It  should  also  not  be  left  domain,
unnoticed,  that  the  conception  of  a physico-mechanical
continuum  was  first  formed  on  the  occasion  of  the  in-
vestigation of  liquids.  A much  freer  and  much  more
fruitful  mathematical  mode  of  view  was  developed
thereby,  than  was  possible  through  the  study  even  of


no


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS,


systems  of  several  solid  bodies.  The  origin,  in  fact,
of  important  modern  mechanical  ideas,  as  for  instance
that  of  the  potential,  is  traceable  to  this  source.

VII.

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS  IN  THEIR  APPLICATION  TO
GASEOUS  BODIES.

Character  i.  The  same  views  that  subserve  the  ends  of  science

of  this  de-  ...

partmentofin  the  investigation  of  liquids  are  applicable  with  but

inquiry.

slight  modifications  to  the  investigation  of  gaseous
bodies.  To  this  extent,  therefore,  the  investigation  of
gases  does  not  afford  mechanics  any  very  rich  returns.
Nevertheless,  the  first  steps  that  were  taken  in  this
province  possess  considerable  significance  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  progress  of  civilisation  and  so
have  a high  import  for  science  generally.

The  eius-  Although  the  ordinary  man  has  abundant  oppor-
it^subject-  tunity,  by  his  experience  of  the  resistance  of  the  air,  by
nmtter.  action  of  the  wind,  and  the  confinement  of  air  in

bladders,  to  perceive  that  air  is  of  the  nature  of  a body,
yet  this  fact  manifests  itself  infrequently,  and  never  in
the  obvious  and  unmistakable  way  that  it  does  in  the
case  of  solid  bodies  and  fluids.  It  is  known,  to  be  sure,
but  is  not  sufficiently  familiar  to  be  prominent  in  popu-
lar thought.  In  ordinary  life  the  presence  of  the  air  is
scarcely  ever  thought  of.  (See  p.  517.)

The  effect  Although  the  ancients,  as  we  may  learn  from  the
disclosures  accounts  of  Vitruvius,  possessed  instruments  which,
ince,ispr°v  like  the  so-called  hydraulic  organs,  were  based  on  the
condensation  of  air,  although  the  invention  of  the  air-
gun  is  traced  back  to  Ctesibius,  and  this  instrument
was  also  known  to  Guericke,  the  notions  which  people
held  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  air  as  late  even


1 12


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


as  the  seventeenth  century  were  exceedingly  curious
and  loose.  We  must  not  be  surprised,  therefore,  at  the
intellectual  commotion  Which  the  first  more  important
experiments  in  this  direction  evoked.  The  enthusiastic
description  which  Pascal  gives  of  Boyle’s  air-pump  ex-
periments is  readily  comprehended,  if  we  transport  our-
selves back  into  the  epoch  of  these  discoveries.  What
indeed  could  be  more  wonderful  than  the  sudden  dis-
covery that  a thing  wdiich  we  do  not  see,  hardly  feel,
and  take  .scarcely  any  notice  of,  constantly  envelopes
us  on  all  sides,  penetrates  all  things ; that  it  is  the  most
important  condition  of  life,  of  combustion,  and  of  gi-
gantic mechanical  phenomena.  It  was  on  this  occa-
sion, perhaps,  first  made  manifest  by  a great  and  strik-
ing disclosure,  that  physical  science  is  not  restricted
to  the  investigation  of  palpable  and  grossly  sensible
processes.

The  views  2.  In  Galileo’s  time  philosophers  explained  the

entertained  , f ,*  .1  , • r j

on  this  sub-  phenomenon  of  suction,  the  action  of  syringes  and

ieo’s1  time!1" pumps  by  the  so-called  horror  vacui — nature’s  abhor-
rence of  a vacuum.  Nature  was  thought  to  possess
the  power  of  preventing  the  formation  of  a vacuum  by
laying  hold  of  the  first  adjacent  thing,  whatsoever  it
was,  and  immediately  filling  up  with  it  any  empty  space
that  arose.  Apart  from  the  ungrounded  speculative
element  which  this  view  contains,  it  must  be  conceded,
that  to  a certain  extent  it  really  represents  the  phe-
nomenon. The  person  competent  to  enunciate  it  must
actually  have  discerned  some  principle  in  the  phenom-
enon. This  principle,  however,  does  not  fit  all  cases.
Galileo  is  said  to  have  been  greatly  surprised  at  hearing
of  a newly  constructed  pump  accidentally  supplied
with  a very  long  suction-pipe  which  was  not  able  to
raise  water  to  a height  of  more  than  eighteen  Italian


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


ir3


ells.  His  first  thought  was  that  the  horror  vacui  (or  the
resistenza  del  vacuo ) possessed  a measurable  power.  The
greatest  height  to  which  water  could  be  raised  by  suc-
tion he  called  altezza  limit atissima.  He  sought,  more-
over, to  determine  directly  the  weight  able  to  draw  out
of  a closed  pump-barrel  a tightly  fitting  piston  resting
on  the  bottom.

3.  Torricelli  hit  upon  the  idea  of  measuring  the  Torricelli's

. . experiment

resistance  to  a vacuum  by  a column  of  mercury  instead
of  a column  of  water,  and  he  expected  to  obtain  a col-
umn of  about  of  the  length  of  the  water  column.

His  expectation  was  confirmed  by  the  experiment  per-
formed in  1643  by  Viviani  in  the  well-known  manner,
and  which  bears  to-day  the  name  of  the  Torricellian
experiment.  A glass  tube  somewhat  over  a metre  in
length,  sealed  at  one  end  and  filled  with  mercury,  is
stopped  at  the  open  end  with  the  finger,  inverted  in  a
dish  of  mercury,  and  placed  in  a vertical  position.  Re-
moving the  finger,  the  column  of  mercury  falls  and  re-
mains stationary  at  a height  of  about  76  cm.  By  this
experiment  it  was  rendered  quite  probable,  that  some
very  definite  pressure  forced  the  fluids  into  the  vacuum.

What  pressure  this  was,  Torricelli  very  soon  divined.

Galileo  had  endeavored,  some  time  before  this,  to  Galileo’s
determine  the  weight  of  the  air,  by  first  weighing  a we?ghPair?
glass  bottle  containing  nothing  but  air  and  then  again
weighing  the  bottle  after  the  air  had  been  partly  ex-
pelled by  heat.  It  was  known,  accordingly,  that  the
air  was  heavy.  But  to  the  majority  of  men  the  horror
vacui  and  the  weight  of  the  air  were  very  distantly
connected  notions.  It  is  possible  that  in  Torricelli’s
case  the  two  ideas  came  into  sufficient  proximity  to
lead  him  to  the  conviction  that  all  phenomena  ascribed
to  the  horror  vacui  were  explicable  in  a simple  and


Atmospher-
ic pressure
discovered
by  Torri-
celli.


Pascal’s  ex-
periments.


1x4  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

logical  manner  by  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  weight
of  a fluid  column — a column  of  air.  Torricelli  discov-
ered, therefore,  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  ; he  also
first  observed  by  means  of  his  column  of  mercury  the
variations  of  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere.

4.  The  news  of  Torricelli’s  experiment  was  circu-
lated in  France  by  Mersenne,  and  came  to  the  knowl-
edge of  Pascal  in  the  year  1644.  The  accounts  of  the
theory  of  the  experiment  were  presumably  so  imper-
feet  that  Pascal  fourfd  it  necessary  to  reflect  indepen-
dently thereon.  (. Pesanteur  de  Pair.  Paris,  1663.)

He  repeated  the  experiment  with  mercury  and  with
a tube  of  water,  or  rather  of  red  wine,  40  feet  in  length.
He  soon  convinced  himself  by  inclining  the  tube  that
the  space  above  the  column  of  fluid  was  really  empty ;
and  he  found  himself  obliged  to  defend  this  view  against
the  violent  attacks  of  his  countrymen.  Pascal  pointed
out  an  easy  way  of  producing  the  vacuum  which  they
regarded  as  impossible,  by  the  use  of  a glass  syringe,
the  nozzle  of  which  was  closed  with  the  finger  under
water  and  the  piston  then  drawn  back  without  much
difficulty.  Pascal  showed,  in  addition,  that  a curved
siphon  40  feet  high  filled  with  water  does  not  flow,  but
can  be  made  to  do  so  by  a sufficient  inclination  to  the
perpendicular.  The  same  experiment  was  made  on  a
smaller  scale  with  mercury.  The  same  siphon  flows
or  does  not  flowaccording  as  it  is  placed  in  an  inclined
or  a vertical  position.

In  a later  performance,  Pascal  refers  expressly  to
the  fact  of  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere  and  to  the
pressure  due  to  this  weight.  He  shows,  that  minute
animals,  like  flies,  are  able,  without  injury  to  them-
selves, to  stand  a high  pressure  in  fluids,  provided  only
the  pressure  is  equal  on  all  sides ; and  he  applies  this


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STA  TICS.


ii


at  once  to  the  case  of  fishes  and  of  animals  that  live  in  The  anai-
the  air.  Pascal’s  chief  merit,  indeed,  is  to  have  estab-  Hq-ud Tnd1'
lished  a complete  analogy  between  the  phenomena  con-  fc  pressure,
ditioned  by  liquid  pressure  (water-pressure)  and  those
conditioned  by  atmospheric  pressure.

5.  By  a series  of  experiments  Pascal  shows  that
mercury  in  consequence  of  atmospheric  pressure  rises
into  a space  containing  no  air  in  the  same  way  that,
in  consequence  of  water-pressure,  it  rises  into  a space
containing  no  water.  If  into  a deep  ves-
sel filled  with  water  (Fig.  81)  a tube  be
sunk  at  the  lower  end  of  which  a bag  of
mercury  is  tied,  but  so  inserted  that  the
upper  end  of  the  tube  projects  out  of  the
water  and  thus  contains  only  air,  then
the  deeper  the  tube  is  sunk  into  the  water
the  higher  will  the  mercury,  subjected  Fig.  si.
to  the  constantly  increasing  pressure  of  the  water,  as-
cend into  the  tube.  The  experiment  can  also  be  made,
with  a siphon-tube,  or  with  a tube  open  at  its  lower  end.

Undoubtedly  it  was  the  attentive  consideration  of  The  height

J m of  moun-

this  very  phenomenon  that  led  Pascal  to  the  idea  that  tains  deter-

mined  by

the  barometer-column  must  necessarily  stand  lower  at  the  barom-
eter.

the  summit  of  a mountain  than  at  its  base,  and  that
it  could  accordingly  be  employed  to  determine  the
height  of  mountains.  He  communicated  this  idea  to
his  brother-in-law,  Perier,  who  forthwith  successfully
performed  the  experiment  on  the  summit  of  the  Puy
de  Dome.  (Sept.  19,  1648.)

Pascal  referred  the  phenomena  connected  with  ad-  Adhesion

r plates.

hesion-plates  to  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  and
gave  as  an  illustration  of  the  principle  involved  the  re-
sistance experienced  when  a large  hat  lying  flat  on  a
table  is  suddenly  lifted.  The  cleaving  of  wood  to  the


n6


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


A siphon
which  acts
by  water-
pressure.


bottom  of  a vessel  of  quicksilver  is  a phenomenon  of
the  same  kind.

Pascal  imitated  the  flow  produced  in  a siphon  by
atmospheric  pressure,  by  the  use  of  water-pressure.

The  two  open  unequal  arms  a and
b of  a three-armed  tube  ab  c (Fig.
82)  are  dipped  into  the  vessels  of
mercury  e and  d.  If  the  whole
arrangement  then  be  immersed  in
a deep  vessel  of  water,  yet  so  that
the  long  open  branch  shall  always
project  above  the  upper  surface,
the  mercury  will  gradually  rise  in
Fis* 82-  the  branches  a and  b , the  columns

finally  unite,  and  a stream  begin  to  flow  from  the  vessel
d to  the  vessel  e through  the  siphon-tube  open  above
to  the  air.


Pascal’s
modifica-
tion of  the
Torricelli-
an experi-
ment.


The  Torricellian  experiment  was  modi-
fied by  Pascal  in  a very  ingenious  manner.
A tube  of  the  form  abed  (Fig.  83),  of
double  the  length  of  an  ordinary  barom-
eter-tube, is  filled  with  mercury.  The
openings  a and  b are  closed  with  the  fin-
gers and  the  tube  placed  in  a dish  of
mercury  with  the  end  a downwards.  If
now  a be  opened,  the  mercury  in  c d will
all  fall  into  the  expanded  portion  at  r,  and
the  mercury  in  ab  will  sink  to  the  height
of  the  ordinary  barometer-column.  A vac-
uum is  produced  at  b which  presses  the
finger  closing  the  hole  painfully  inwards.
Fig.  83.  If  b also  be  opened  the  column  in  a b will
sink  completely,  while  the  mercury  in  the  expanded
portion  c,  being  now  exposed  to  the  pressure  of  the


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS.


117


atmosphere,  will  rise  in  cd  to  the  height  of  the  barom-
eter-column. Without  an  air-pump  it  was  hardly  pos-
sible to  combine  the  experiment  and  the  counter-
experiment in  a simpler  and  more  ingenious  manner
than  Pascal  thus  did.

6.  With  regard  to  Pascal’s  mountain-experiment,  Suppie-
we  shall  add  the  following  brief  supplementary  remarks,  marks’cm6*
Let  be  the  height  of  the  barometer  at  the  level  of  mountain-

1 1 1 • r 11  . experiment

the  sea,  and  let  it  fall,  say,  at  an  elevation  of  m metres,
to  kb 0,  where  k is  a proper  fraction.  At  a further  eleva-
tion of  7)i  metres,  we  must  expect  to  obtain  the  barom-
eter-height k . k bQ,  since  we  here  pass  through  a stratum
of  air  the  density  of  which  bears  to  that  of  the  first  the
proportion  of  k : 1.  If  we  pass  upwards  to  the  altitude
/i=z  n . m metres,  the  barometer-height  corresponding
thereto  will  be


bh  = kn  , bD  or


m


. log  K — log  K

log  k


or


^=j-p(log^  — lo§^o)-


The  principle  of  the  method  is,  we  see,  a very  simple
one ; its  difficulty  arises  solely  from  the  multifarious
collateral  conditions  and  corrections  that  have  to  be
looked  to.

• 7.  The  most  original  and  fruitful  achievements  inTheexperi-

the  domain  of  aerostatics  we  owe  to  Otto  von  Gue-  otto^on
ricke.  His  experiments  appear  to  have  been  suggested  uenc
in  the  main  by  philosophical  speculations.  He  pro-
ceeded entirely  in  his  own  way ; for  he  first  heard  of
the  Torricellian  experiment  from  Valerianus  Magnus
at  the  Imperial  Diet  of  Ratisbon  in  1654,  where  he  dem-
onstrated the  experimental  discoveries  made  by  him
about  1650.  This  statement  is  confirmed  by  his  method


nS


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


of  constructing  a water-barometer  which  was  entirely
different  from  that  of  Torricelli.

The  histori-  Guericke’s  book  ( Experimenta  nova , ut  vocantur .

cal  value  of  . i ..

Guericke’s  Magdeburaica.  Amsterdam.  1672)  makes  us  realise

book.  * * ' /

the  narrow  views  men  took  in  his  time.  The  fact  that
he  was  able  gradually  to  abandon  these  views  and  to
acquire  broader  ones  by  his  individual  endeavor  speaks
favorably  for  his  intellectual  powers.  We  perceive
with  astonishment  how  short  a space  of  time  separates
us  from  the  era  of  scientific  barbarism,  and  can  no  lon-
ger marvel  that  the  barbarism  of  the  social  order  still
so  oppresses  us.

its  specula-  In  the  introduction  to  this  book  and  in  various  other

ter.  places,  Guericke,  in  the  midst  of  his  experimental  in-
vestigations, speaks  of  the  various  objections  to  the
Copernican  system  which  had  been  drawn  from  the
Bible,  (objections  which  he  seeks  to  invalidate,)  and
discusses  such  subjects  as  the  locality  of  heaven,  the
locality  of  hell,  and  the  day  of  judgment.  Disquisi-
tions on  empty  space  occupy  a considerable  portion
of  the  work.

Guericke’s  Guericke  regards  the  air  as  the  exhalation  or  odor

notion  of  .

the  air.  of  bodies,  which  we  do  not  perceive  because  we  have
been  accustomed  to  it  from  childhood.  Air,  to  him,
is  not  an  element.  He  knows  that  through  the  effects  of
heat  and  cold  it  changes  its  volume,  and  that  it  is
compressible  in  Hero’s  Ball,  or  Pila  Heroyiis ; on  the
basis  of  his  own  experiments  he  gives  its  pressure  at
20  ells  of  water,  and  expressly  speaks  of  its  weight,  by
which  flames  are  forced  upwards.

8.  To  produce  a vacuum,  Guericke  first  employed
a wooden  cask  filled  with  water.  The  pump  of  a fire-
engine  was  fastened  to  its  lower  end.  The  water,  it
was  thought,  in  following  the  piston  and  the  action  of


120


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


His  at-
tempts to
produce  a
vacuum.


His  final
success.


gravity,  would  fall  and  be  pumped  out.  Guericke  ex-
pected that  empty  space  would  remain.  The  fastenings
of  the  pump  repeatedly  proved  to  be  too  weak,  since  in
consequence  of  the  atmospheric  pressure  that  weighed
on  the  piston  considerable  force  had  to  be  applied  to
move  it.  On  strengthening  the  fastenings  three  power-
ful men  finally  accomplished  the  exhaustion.  But,
meantime  the  air  poured  in  through  the  joints  of  the
cask  with  a loud  blast,  and  no  vacuum  was  obtained.
In  a subsequent  experiment  the  small  cask  from  which
the  water  was  to  be  exhausted  was  immersed  in  a larger
one,  likewise  filled  with  water.  But  in  this  case,  too,  the
water  gradually  forced  its  way  into  the  smaller  cask.

Wood  having  proved  in  this  way  to  be  an  unsuit-
able material  for  the  purpose,  and  Guericke  having  re-
marked in  the  last  experiment  indications  of  success,
the  philosopher  now  took  a large  hollow  sphere  of
copper  and  ventured  to  exhaust  the  air  directly.  At
the  start  the  exhaustion  was  successfully  and  easily
conducted.  But  after  a few  strokes  of  the  piston,  the
pumping  became  so  difficult  that  four  stalwart  men
(viri  quadrati ),  putting  forth  their  utmost  efforts,  could
hardly  budge  the  piston.  And  when  the  exhaustion
had  gone  still  further,  the  sphere  suddenly  collapsed,
with  a violent  report.  Finally  by  the  aid  of  a copper
vessel  of  perfect  spherical  form,  the  production  of  the
vacuum  was  successfully  accomplished.  Guericke  de-
scribes the  great  force  with  which  the  air  rushed  in  on
the  opening  of  the  cock.

9.  After  these  experiments  Guericke  constructed
an  independent  air-pump.  A great  glass  globular  re-
ceiver was  mounted  and  closed  by  a large  detachable
tap  in  which  was  a stop-cock.  Through  this  opening
the  objects  to  be  subjected  to  experiment  were  placed


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


121


in  the  receiver.  To  secure  more  perfect  closure  theGuenck
receiver  was  made  to  stand,  with  its  stop-cock  under airpum
water,  on  a tripod,  beneath  which  the  pump  proper  was


Guericke’s  Air-pump.  [Exprim.  Mag-deb.)


placed.  Subsequently,  separate  receivers,  connected
with  the  exhausted  sphere,  were  also  employed  in  the
experiments.


122


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  curious  The  phenomena  which  Guericke  observed  with  this
observed  by  apparatus  are  manifold  and  various.  The  noise  which

means  of  . . - . . .

the  air-  water  m a vacuum  makes  on  striking  the  sides  oi  the

1 u v glass  receiver,  the  violent  rush  of  air  and  water  into

exhausted  vessels  suddenly  opened,  the  escape  on  ex-
haustion of  gases  absorbed  in  liquids,  the  liberation  of
their  fragrance,  as  Guericke  expresses  it,  were  imme-
diately remarked.  A lighted  candle  is  extinguished
on  exhaustion,  because,  as  Guericke  conjectures,  it
derives  its  nourishment  from  the  air.  Combustion,  as
his  striking  remark  is,  is  not  an  annihilation,  but  a
transformation  of  the  air.

A bell  does  not  ring  in  a vacuum.  Birds  die  in  it.
Many  fishes  swell  up,  and  finally  burst.  A grape  is  kept
fresh  in  vacuo  for  over  half  a year.

By  connecting  with  an  exhausted  cylinder  a long
tube  dipped  in  water,  a water- barometer  is  constructed.
The  column  raised  is  19-20  ells  high;  and  Von  Guericke
explained  all  the  effects  that  had  been  ascribed  to  the
hori'or  vacui  by  the  principle  of  atmospheric  pressure.

An  important  experiment  consisted  in  the  weighing
of  a receiver,  first  when  filled  with  air  and  then  when
exhausted.  The  weight  of  the  air  was  found  to-  vary
with  the  circumstances  ; namely,  with  the  temperature
and  the  height  of  the  barometer.  According  to  Gue-
ricke a definite  ratio  of  weight  between  air  and  water
does  not  exist.

The  experi-  But  the  deepest  impression  on  the  contemporary

mentsrelat-  . J

ingto  at-  world  was  made  by  the  experiments  relating  to  atmos-

mospheric  .

pressure,  pheric  pressure.  An  exhausted  sphere  formed  of  two
hemispheres  tightly  adjusted  to  one  another  was  rent
asunder  with  a violent  report  only  by  the  traction  of
sixteen  horses.  The  same  sphere  was  suspended  from


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


X23


a beam,  and  a heavily  laden  scale-pan  was  attached  to
the  lower  half.

The  cylinder  of  a large  pump  is  closed  by  a piston.

To  the  piston  a rope  is  tied  which  leads  over  a pulley
and  is  divided  into  numerous  branches  on  which  a
great  number  of  men  pull.  The  moment  the  cylinder  is
connected  with  an  exhausted  receiver,  the  men  at  the
ropes  are  thrown  to  the  ground.  In  a similar  manner
a huge  weight  is  lifted.

Guericke  mentions  the  compressed-air  gun  as  some-  Guericke’s
thing  already  known,  and  constructs  independently  an
instrument  that  might  appropriately  be  called  a rari-
fied-air  gun.  A bullet  is  driven  b}^  the  external  atmos-
pheric pressure  through  a suddenly  exhausted  tube,
forces  aside  at  the  end  of  the  tube  a leather  valve  wThich
closes  it,  and  then  continues  its  flight  with  a consider-
able velocity.

Closed  vessels  carried  to  the  summit  of  a mountain
and  opened,  blow  out  air ; carried  down  again  in  the
same  manner,  they  suck  in  air.  From  these  and  other
experiments  Guericke  discovers  that  the  air  is  elastic,

io.  The  investigations  of  Guericke  were  continued  The  investi-

# gations  of

by  an  Englishman,  Robert  Boyle.*  The  new  experi-  Robert
ments  which  Boyle  had  to  supply  wrere  few.  He  ob-
serves the  propagation  of  light  in  a vacuum  and  the
action  of  a magnet  through  it ; lights  tinder  by  means
of  a burning  glass ; brings  the  barometer  under  the  re-
ceiver of  the  air-pump,  and  was  the  first  to  construct
a balance-manometer  [‘‘the  statical  manometer’7].

The  ebullition  of  heated  fluids  and  the  freezing  of  water
on  exhaustion  were  first  observed  by  him.

Of  the  air-pump  experiments  common  at  the  present
day  may  also  be  mentioned  that  with  falling  bodies,

* And  published  by  him  in  1660,  before  the  work  of  Von  Guericke. — Trans.


124


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Quantita-
tive data.


The  fan  of  which  confirms  in  a simple  manner  the  view  of  Galileo

vacuum.  that  when  the  resistance  of  the  air  has  been  eliminated
light  and  heavy  bodies  both  fall  with  the  same  velo-
city. In  an  exhausted  glass  tube  a leaden  bullet  and  a
piece  of  paper  are  placed.  Putting  the  tube  in  a ver-
tical position  and  quickly  turning  it  about  a horizontal
axis  through  an  angle  of  i8o°,  both  bodies  will  be  seen
to  arrive  simultaneously  at  the  bottom  of  the  tube.

Of  the  quantitative  data  we  will  mention  the  fol-
lowing. The  atmospheric  pressure  that  supports  a
column  of  mercury  of  76  cm.  is  easily  calculated  from
the  specific  gravity  13*60  of  mercury  to  be  1*0336  kg.
to  1 sq.cm.  The  weight  of  1000  cu.cm,  of  pure,  dry
air  at  0°  C.  and  760  mm.  of  pressure  at  Paris  at  an  ele-
vation of  6 metres  will  be  found  to  be  1*293  grams,
and  the  corresponding  specific  gravity,  referred  to
water,  to  be  0*001293.

Thediscov-  11.  Guericke  knew  of  only  one  kind  of  air.  We

ery  of  other  .....  . . . ,

gaseous  may  imagine  therefore  the  excitement  it  created  when
‘in  1755  Black  discovered  carbonic  acid  gas  (fixed  air)
and  Cavendish  in  1766  hydrogen  (inflammable  air),
discoveries  which  were  soon  followed  by  other  similar

ones.  The  dissimilar


physical  properties  of
gases  are  very  strik-
ing. Faraday  has  il-
lustrated their  great
inequality  of  weight
by  a beautiful  lecture-
experiment.  If  from
a balance  in  equilib-
rium, we  suspend  (Fig.  84)  two  beakers  A , B , the  one
in  an  upright  position  and  the  other  with  its  opening
downwards,  we  may  pour  heavy  carbonic  acid  gas  from


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


125


above  into  the  one  and  light  hydrogen  from  beneath
into  the  other.  In  both  instances  the  balance  turns  in
the  direction  of  the  arrow.  To-day,  as  we  know,  the
decanting  of  gases  can  be  made  directly  visible  by  the
optical  method  of  Foucault  and  Toeppler.

12.  Soon  after  Torricelli’s  discovery,  attempts  were  The  mercu-
made  to  employ  practically  the  vacuum  thus  produced,  pump.
The  so-called  mercurial  air-pumps  were  tried.  But  no

such  instrument  was  successful  until  the  present  cen-
tury. The  mercurial  air-pumps  now  in  common  use
are  really  barometers  of  which  the  extremities  are  sup-
plied with  large  expansions  and  so  connected  that  their
difference  of  level  may  be  easily  varied.  The  mercury
takes  the  place  of  the  piston  of  the  ordinary  air-pump.

13.  The  expansive  force  of  the  air,  a property  ob-  Boyle’s  law.
served  by  Guericke,  was  more  accurately  investigated

by  Boyle,  and,  later,  by  Mariotte.  The  law  which
both  found  is  as  follows.  If  Vbe  called  the  volume  of
a given  quantity  of  air  and  P its  pressure  on  unit  area
of  the  containing  vessel,  then  the  product  V.  P is
always  = a constant  quantity.  If  the  volume  of  the
enclosed  air  be  reduced  one-half,  the  air  will  exert
double  the  pressure  on  unit  of  area ; if  the  volume  of
the  enclosed  quantity  be  doubled,  the  pressure  will
sink  to  one-half ; and  so  on.  It  is  quite  correct — as  a
number  of  English  writers  have  maintained  in  recent
times — that  Boyle  and  not  Mariotte  is  to  be  regarded
as  the  discoverer  of  the  law  that  usually  goes  by
Mariotte’s  name.  Not  only  is  this  true,  but  it  must
also  be  added  that  Boyle  knew  that  the  law  did  not
hold  exactly,  whereas  this  fact  appears  to  have  escaped
Mariotte.

The  method  pursued  by  Mariotte  in  the  ascertain-
ment of  the  law  was  very  simple.  He  partially  filled


126


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Mariotte’s

experi-

ments.


His  appa-
ratus.


Fig.  85.


Torricellian  tubes  with  mercury,  measured  the  volume
of  the  air  remaining,  and  then  performed  the  Torricel-
lian experiment.  The  new  volume  of
air  was  thus  obtained,  and  by  subtract-
ing the  height  of  the  column  of  mer-
cury from  the  barometer-height,  also
the  new  pressure  to  which  the  same
quantity  of  air  was  now  subjected.

To  condense  the  air  Mariotte  em-
ployed a siphon-tube  with  vertical
arms.  The  smaller  arm  in  which  the
air  was  contained  was  sealed  at  the
upper  end ; the  longer,  into  which  the
mercury  was  poured,  was  open  at  the
upper  end.  The  volume  of  the  air
was  read  off  on  the  graduated  tube,
and  to  the  difference  of  level  of  the
mercury  in  the  two  arms  the  barometer-
height  was  added.  At  the  present  day
both  sets  of  experiments  are  performed
in  the  simplest  manner  by  fastening  a
cylindrical  glass  tube  (Fig.  86)  rr,
closed  at  the  top,  to  a vertical  scale
and  connecting  it  by  a caoutchouc
tu.be/ek  with  a second  open  glass  tube
rV,  which  is  movable  up  and  down
the  scale.  If  the  tubes  be  partly  filled
with  mercury,  any  difference  of  level
whatsoever  of  the  two  surfaces  of  mer-
cury may  be  produced  by  displacing
r'  r\  and  the  corresponding  variations  of  volume  of  the
air  enclosed  in  r r observed.

It  struck  Mariotte  on  the  occasion  of  his  investiga-
tions that  any  small  quantity  of  air  cut  off  completely


Fig.  86.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STATICS .


127


from  the  rest  of  the  atmosphere  and  therefore  notTheexpan
directly  affected  by  the  latter’s  weight,  also  supported  isolated

, , , . portions  of

the  barometer- column ; as  where,  to  give  an  instance,  theatmos-
the  open  arm  of  a barometer-tube  is  closed.  The  simple  phere*
explanation  of  this  phenomenon,  which,  of  course,
Mariotte  immediately  found,  is  this,  that  the  air  before
enclosure  must  have  been  compressed  to  a point  at
which  its  tension  balanced  the  gravitational  pressure
of  the  atmosphere  ; that  is  to  say,  to  a point  at  which
it  exerted  an  equivalent  elastic  pressure.

We  shall  not  enter  here  into  the  details  of  the  ar-
rangement and  use  of  air-pumps,  which  are  readily
understood  from  the  law  of  Boyle  and  Mariotte.

14.  It  simply  remains  for  us  to  remark,  that  the  dis-
coveries of  aerostatics  furnished  so  much  that  was  new
and  wonderful  that  a valuable  intellectual  stimulus  pro-
ceeded from  the  science.


CHAPTER  II.


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF
DYNAMICS.

i.

Galileo’s  achievements.

Dynamics  i.  We  now  pass  to  the  discussion  of  the  funda-
moderT  mental  principles  of  dynamics.  This  is  entirely  a mod-
science.  ern  scjence>  The  mechanical  speculations  of  the  an-
cients, particularly  of  the  Greeks,  related  wholly  to
statics.  Dynamics  was  founded  by  Galileo.  We  shall
readily  recognise  the  correctness  of  this  assertion  if  we
but  consider  a moment  a few  propositions  held  by  the
Aristotelians  of  Galileo’s  time.  To  explain  the  descent
of  heavy  bodies  and  the  rising  of  light  bodies,  (in  li-
quids for  instance,)  it  was  assumed  that  every  thing  and
object  sought  its  place : the  place  of  heavy  bodies  was
below,  the  place  of  light  bodies  was  above.  Motions
were  divided  into  natural  motions,  as  that  of  descent,
and  violent  motions,  as,  for  example,  that  of  a pro-
jectile. From  some  few  superficial  experiments  and
observations,  philosophers  had  concluded  that  heavy
bodies  fall  more  quickly  and  lighter  bodies  more  slowly,
or,  more  precisely,  that  bodies  of  greater  weight  fall
more  quickly  and  those  of  less  weight  more  slowly.  It
is  sufficiently  obvious  from  this  that  the  dynamical
knowledge  of  the  ancients,  particularly  of  the  Greeks,
was  very  insignificant,  and  that  it  was  left  to  modern


THE  PRINCIPLES  OE  DYNAMICS.


129


times  to  lay  the  true  foundations  of  this  department  of
inquiry.  (See  Appendix,  VII. ? p.  520.)


130


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Galileo’s  dynamical  investigation  of  the  laws  of  falling  bodies,

invGstijjjci*  J ^

tionofthe  appeared  in  1638.  The  modern  spirit  that  Galileo  dis-

laws  of  fall-  . , . r .

ing  bodies,  covers  is  evidenced  here,  at  the  very  outset,  by  the  fact
that  he  does  not  ask  why  heavy  bodies  fall,  but  pro-
pounds  the  question,  How  do  heavy  bodies  fall  ? in
agreement  with  what  law  do  freely  falling  bodies  move?
The  method  he  employs  to  ascertain  this  law  is  this.
He  makes  certain  assumptions.  He  does  not,  however,
like  Aristotle,  rest  there,  but  endeavors  to  ascertain  by
trial  whether  they  are  correct  or  not.

His  first,  The  first  theory  on  which  he  lights  is  the  following.

theory.  It  seems  in  his  eyes  plausible  that  a freely  falling  body,
inasmuch  as  it  is  plain  that  its  velocity  is  constantly
on  the  increase,  so  moves  that  its  velocity  is  double
after  traversing  double  the  distance,  and  triple  after
traversing  triple  the  distance  ; in  short,  that  the  veloci-
ties acquired  in  the  descent  increase  proportionally
to  the  distances  descended  through.  Before  he  pro-
ceeds to  test  experimentally  this  hypothesis,  he  reasons
on  it  logically,  implicates  himself,  however,  in  so  doing,
in  a fallacy.  He  says,  if  a body  has  acquired  a certain
velocity  in  the  first  distance  descended  through,  double
the  velocity  in  double  such  distance  descended  through,
and  so  on ; that  is  to  say,  if  the  velocity  in  the  second
instance  is  double  what  it  is  in  the  first,  then  the  double
distance  will  be  traversed  in  the  same  time  as  the  origi-
nal simple  distance.  If,  accordingly,  in  the  case  of
the  double  distance  we  conceive  the  first  half  trav-
ersed, no  time  will,  it  would  seem,  fall  to  the  account
of  the  second  half.  The  motion  of  a falling  body  ap-
pears, therefore,  to  take  place  instantaneously ; which
not  only  contradicts  the  hypothesis  but  also  ocular  evi-
dence. We  shall  revert  to  this  peculiar  fallacy  of
Galileo’s  later  on.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


131

3.  After  Galileo  fancied  he  had  discovered  this  as-  His  second,

. correct,  as-

sumption to  be  untenable,  he  made  a second  one,  ac-  sumption.

cording  to  which  the  velocity  acquired  is  proportional
to  the  time  of  the  descent.  That  is,  if  a body  fall  once,
and  then  fall  again  during  twice  as  long  an  interval  of
time  as  it  first  fell,  it  will  attain  in  the  second  instance
double  the  velocity  it  acquired  in  the  first.  He  found
no  self-contradiction  in  this  theory,  and  he  accordingly
proceeded  to  investigate  by  experiment  whether  the
assumption  accorded  with  observed  facts.  It  was  dif-
ficult to  prove  by  any  direct  means  that  the  velocity
acquired  was  proportional  to  the  time  of  descent.  It
was  easier,  however,  to  investigate  by  what  law  the
distance  increased  with  the  time ; and  he  consequently
deduced  from  his  assumption  the  relation  that  obtained
between  the  distance  and  the  time,  and  tested  this  by
experiment.  The  deduction  r>  Discussion

. . 1 anc*  e^uc^“

is  simple,  distinct,  and  per-  A/  dationof

r r the  true
fectly  correct.  He  draws  fJy  theory.

(Fig.  87)  a straight  line,  and

on  it  cuts  off  successive  por-  [4

tions  that  represent  to  him  Fig-  87.

the  times  elapsed.  At  the  extremities  of  these  por-
tions he  erects  perpendiculars  (ordinates),  and  these
represent  the  velocities  acquired.  Any  portion  OG  of
the  line  OA  denotes,  therefore,  the  time  of  descent
elapsed,  and  the  corresponding  perpendicular  GIT  the
velocity  acquired  in  such  time.

If,  now,  we  fix  our  attention  on  the  progress  of  the
velocities,  we  shall  observe  with  Galileo  the  following
fact : namely,  that  at  the  Instant  C,  at  which  one-half
OC  of  the  time  of  descent  OA  has  elapsed,  the  velocity
CD  is  also  one-half  of  the  final  velocity  A3.

If  now  we  examine  two  instants  of  time,  E and  G,


132


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Uniformly  equally  distant  in  opposite  directions  from  the  instant

Ecc6l6rat6d

motion.  C,  we  shall  observe  that  the  velocity  HG  exceeds  the
mean  velocity  CD  by  the  same  amount  that  EF  falls
short  of  it.  For  every  instant  antecedent  to  C there
exists  a corresponding  one  equally  distant  from  it  sub-
sequent to  C.  Whatever  loss,  therefore,  as  compared
with  u?iiform  motion  with  half  the  final  velocity,  is  suf-
fered in  the  first  half  of  the  motion,  such  loss  is  made
up  in  the  second  half.  The  distance  fallen  through  we
may  consequently  regard  as  having  been  uniformly  de-
scribed with  half  the  final  velocity.  If,  accordingly,
we  make  the  final  velocity  v proportional  to  the  time
of  descent  /,  we  shall  obtain  v=gt,  where  g denotes
the  final  velocity  acquired  in  unit  of  time — the  so-called
acceleration.  The  space  s descended  through  is  there-
fore given  by  the  equation  s = (^7/2)  l or  j*  = gt2  / 2.
Motion  of  this  sort,  in  which,  agreeably  to  the  assump-
tion, equal  velocities  constantly  accrue  in  equal  inter-
vals of  time,  we  call  uniformly  accelerated  motion.


Table  of  the  If  we  collect  the  times  of  descent,  the  final  veloci-
locities.and  ties,  and  the  distances  traversed,  we  shall  obtain  the

distances  of  _ ..  . . .

descent,  following  table :

/.  V . S.

1.  1 g.

1 X 1 ■ f-

2.  2g.

2X2.|-

3.  Zg.

3X3.  |-

4.  4 g.

4 X 4 . |-

tg-

/x  t . /

THE  PRIXCIPLES  OF  DYXAMICS.


133


4.  The  relation  obtaining  between  / and  s admits
of  experimental  proof  ; and  this  Galileo  accomplished
in  the  manner  which  we  shall  now  describe.

We  must  first  remark  that  no  part  of  the  knowledge
and  ideas  on  this  subject  with  which  we  are  now  so
familiar,  existed  in  Galileo’s  time,  but  that  Galileo  had
to  create  these  ideas  and  means  for  us.  Accordingly,
it  was  impossible  for  him  to  proceed  as  we  should  do
to-day,  and  he  was  obliged,  therefore,  to  pursue  a dif-
ferent method.  He  first  sought  to  retard  the  motion
of  descent,  that  it  might  be  more  accurately  observed.

He  made  observations  on  balls,  which  he  caused  to
roll  down  inclined  planes  (grooves);  assuming  that  only
the  velocity  of  the  motion  would  be  lessened  here,  but
that  the  form  of  the  law  of  descent  would  remain  un-
modified. If,  beginning  from  the  upper  extremity,  theTheani-
distances  1,  4,  9,  16  ...  be  notched  off  on  the  groove,  ployed,
the  respective  times  of  descent  will  be  representable,
it  was  assumed,  by  the  numbers  1,  2,  3,  4 ...  ; a result
which  was,  be  it  added,  confirmed.  The  observation  of
the  times  involved,  Galileo  accomplished  in  a very  in-
genious manner.  There  were  no  clocks  of  the  modern
kind  in  his  day : such  were  first  rendered  possible  by
the  dynamical  knowledge  of  which  Galileo  laid  the
foundations.  The  mechanical  clocks  wdiich  were  used
were  very  inaccurate,  and  were  available  only  for  the
measurement  of  great  spaces  of  time.  Moreover,  it
was  chiefly  water-clocks  and  sand-glasses  that  were  in
use — in  the  form  in  which  they  had  been  handed  down
from  the  ancients.  Galileo,  now,  constructed  a very
simple  clock  of  this  kind,  which  he  especially  adjusted
to  the  measurement  of  small  spaces  of  time  ; a thing
not  customary  in  those  days.  It  consisted  of  a vessel  of
water  of  very  large  transverse  dimensions,  having  in


Ex  penmen
tal  veritica
tion  of  the
law.


I34


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Galileo's

clock.


The  rela-
tion of  mo-
tion on  an
inclined
plane  to
that  of  free
descent.


the  bottom  a minute  orifice  which  was  closed  with  the
finger.  As  soon  as  the  ball  began  to  roll  down  the  in-
clined plane  Galileo  removed  his  finger  and  allowed  the
water  to  flow  out  on  a balance ; when  the  ball  had  ar-
rived at  the  terminus  o f its  path  he  closed  the  orifice.
As  the  pressure-height  of  the  fluid  did  not,  owing  to
the  great  transverse  dimensions  of  the  vessel,  percept-
ibly change,  the  weights  of  the  water  discharged  from
the  orifice  were  proportional  to  the  times.  It  was  in
this  way  actually  shown  that  the  times  increased  simply,
while  the  spaces  fallen  through  increased  quadratically.
The  inference  from  Galileo’s  assumption  was  thus  con-
firmed by  experiment,  and  with  it  the  assumption  itself.

5.  To  form  some  notion  of  the  relation  which  sub-
sists between  motion  on  an  inclined  plane  and  that  of
free  descent,  Galileo  made  the  assumption,  that  a body
which  falls  through  the  height  of  an  inclined  plane
attains  the  same  final  velocity  as  a body  which  falls
through  its  length.  This  is  an  assumption  that  will
strike  us  as  rather  a bold  one ; but  in  the  manner  in
which  it  was  enunciated  and  employed  by  Galileo,  it  is
quite  natural.  We  shall  endeavor  to  explain  the  way  by
which  he  was  led  to  it.  He  says  : If  a body  fall  freely
downwards,  its  velocity  increases  proportionally  to  the
time.  When,  then,  the  body  has  arrived  at  a point  be-
low, let  us  imagine  its  velocity  reversed  and  directed
upwards  ; the  body  then,  it  is  clear,  will  rise.  We  make
the  observation  that  its  motion  in  this  case  is  a reflection,
50  to  speak,  of  its  motion  in  the  first  case.  As  then  its
velocity  increased  proportionally  to  the  time  of  descent,
it  will  now,  conversely,  diminish  in  that  proportion.
When  the  body  has  continued  to  rise  for  as  long  a
time  as  it  descended,  and  has  reached  the  height  from
which  it  originally  fell,  its  velocity  will  be  reduced  to


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS.


135


zero.  We  perceive,  therefore,  that  a body  will  rise,  justifica-
in  virtue  of  the  velocity  acquired  in  its  descent,  just  as  assumption
high  as  it  has  fallen.  If,  accordingly,  a body  falling  final  veioc-
down  an  inclined  plane  could  acquire  a velocity  which  motions  are
would  enable  it,  when  placed  on  a differently  inclined
plane,  to  rise  higher  than  the  point  from  which  it  had
fallen,  we  should  be  able  to  effect  the  elevation  of
bodies  by  gravity  alone.  There  is  contained,  accord-
ingly, in  this  assumption,  that  the  velocity  acquired  by
a body  in  descent  depends  solely  on  the  vertical  height
fallen  through  and  is  independent  of  the  inclination  of
the  path,  nothing  more  than  the  uncontradictory  ap-
prehension and  recognition  of  the  fact  that  heavy  bodies
do  not  possess  the  tendency  to  rise,  but  only  the  ten-
dency to  fall.  If  we  should  assume  that  a body  fall-
ing down  the  length  of  an  inclined  plane  in  some  way
or  other  attained  a greater  velocity  than  a body  that
fell  through  its  height,  we  should  only  have  to  let  the
body  pass  with  the  acquired  velocity  to  another  in-
clined or  vertical  plane  to  make  it  rise  to  a greater  ver-
tical height  than  it  had  fallen  from.  And  if  the  velo-
city attained  on  the  inclined  plane  were  less,  we  should
only  have  to  reverse  the  process  to  obtain  the  same  re-
sult. In  both  instances  a heavy  body  could,  by  an  ap-
propriate arrangement  of  inclined  planes,  be  forced
continually  upwards  solely  by  its  own  wreight — a state
of  things  which  wholly  contradicts  our  instinctive
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  heavy  bodies.  (Seep.  522.)

6.  Galileo,  in  this  case,  again,  did  not  stop  with
the  mere  philosophical  and  logical  discussion  of  his
assumption,  but  tested  it  by  comparison  with  expe-
rience.

He  took  a simple  filar  pendulum  (Fig.  88)  with  a
heavy  ball  attached.  Lifting  the  pendulum,  while


x36


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Galileo’s  elongated  its  full  length,  to  the  level  of  a given  altitude,
tafvenfiTa- and  then  letting  it  fall,  it  ascended  to  the  same  level
assumption  on  the  opposite  side.  If  it  does  not  do  so  exactly ,
Galileo  said,  the  resistance  of  the  air  must  be  .the  cause
of  the  deficit.  This  is  inferrible  from  the  fact  that  the
deficiency  is  greater  in  the  case  of  a cork  ball  than  it  is


Effected  by  in  the  case  of  a heavy  metal  one.  However,  this  neg-
Fmpeding  lected,  the  body  ascends  to  the  same  altitude  on  the
ofapendu-  opposite  side.  Nowit  is  permissible  to  regard  the  mo-
him string.  ^ a pen(^uium  in  the  arc  of  a circle  as  a motion

of  descent  along  a series  of  inclined  planes  of  different
inclinations.  This  seen,  we  can,  with  Galileo,  easily
cause  the  body  to  rise  on  a different  arc — on  a different
series  of  inclined  planes.  This  we  accomplish  by  driv-
ing in  at  one  side  of  the  thread,  as  it  vertically  hangs,
a nail  f or  g,  which  will  prevent  any  given  portion  of
the  thread  from  taking  part  in  the  second  half  of  the
motion.  The  moment  the  thread  arrives  at  the  line  of
equilibrium  and  strikes  the  nail,  the  ball,  which  has
fallen  through  ba,  will  begin  to  ascend  by  a different
series  of  inclined  planes,  and  describe  the  arc  am  or  an.
Now  if  the  inclination  of  the  planes  had  any  influence


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


137


on  the  velocity  of  descent,  the  body  could  not  rise  to
the  same  horizontal  level  from  which  it  had  fallen.

But  it  does.  By  driving  the  nail  sufficiently  low  down,
we  may  shorten  the  pendulum  for  half  of  an  oscillation
as  much  as  we  please  ; the  phenomenon,  however,  al-
ways remains  the  same.  If  the  nail  h be  driven  so  low
down  that  the  remainder  of  the  string  cannot  reach  to
the  plane  E>  the  ball  will  turn  completely  over  and
wind  the  thread  round  the  nail ; because  when  it  has
attained  the  greatest  height  it  can  reach  it  still  has  a
residual  velocity  left.

7.  If  we  assume  thus,  that  the  same  final  velocity  is  The  as-
sumption

attained  on  an  inclined  plane  whether  the  body  fall  leads  to  the
through  the  height  or  the  length  of  the  plane, — in  which  tive  accei-
assumption  nothing  more  is  contained  than  that  a body  sought,
rises  by  virtue  of  the  velocity  it  has  acquired  in  falling
just  as  high  as  it  has  fallen, — we  shall  easily  arrive,
with  Galileo,  at  the  perception  that  the  times  of  the  de-
scent along  the  height  and  the  length  of  an  inclined
plane  are  in  the  simple  proportion  of  the  height  and
the  length  ; or,  what  is  the  same,  that  the  accelerations
are  inversely  proportional  to  the  times  of  descent.

The  acceleration  along  the  height  will  consequently
bear  to  the  acceleration  along  ^
the  length  the  proportion  of  the
length  to  the  height.  Let  AB

(Fig.  89)  be  the  height  and  A C B

the  length  of  the  inclined  plane.  Fig.  89.

Both  will  be  descended  through  in  uniformly  accel-
erated motion  in  the  times  i and  i1  with  the  final  ve-
locity v.  Therefore,


1 38


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


If  the  accelerations  along  the  height  and  the  length  be
called  respectively  g and  glf  we  also  have

. . p\  t AB

v = gt  and  v = g tx,  whence  — = --  = = sm  a.

g t x AC

In  this  way  we  are  able  to  deduce  from  the  accel-
eration on  an  inclined  plane  the  acceleration  of  free
descent.

a corollary  From  this  proposition  Galileo  deduces  several  cor-

of  the  pre-

ceding  law.  ollaries,  some  of  which  have  passed  into  our  elementary
text-books.  The  accelerations  along  the  height  and
length  are  in  the  inverse  proportion  of  the  height  and
length.  If  now  we  cause  one  body  to  fall  along  the
length  of  an  inclined  plane  and  simultaneously  another
to  fall  freely  along  its  height,  and  ask  what  the  dis-
tances are  that  are  traversed  by  the  two  in  equal  inter-
vals of  time,  the  solution  of  the  problem  will  be  readily
found  (Fig.  90)  by  simply  letting  fall  from  B a perpen-
dicular on  the  length.  The  part  AD,  thus  cut  off,  will
be  the  distance  traversed  by  the  one  body  on  the  in-
clined plane,  while  the  second  body  is  freely  falling
through  the  height  of  the  plane.

A


Relative  If  we  describe  (Fig.  91)  a circle  on  AB  as  diame-
icription  of  ter,  the  circle  will  pass  through  D,  because  D is  a
uiddiame-  right  angle.  It  will  be  seen  thus,  that  we  can  imagine
les.°  °ir  any  number  of  inclined  planes,  AB,  AB',  of  any  degree
of  inclination,  passing  through  A,  and  that  in  every


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


139


case  the  chords  AG,  AH  drawn  in  this  circle  from  the
upper  extremity  of  the  diameter  will  be  traversed  in
the  same  time  by  a falling  body  as  the  vertical  diame-
ter itself.  Since,  obviously,  only  the  lengths  and  in-
clinations are  essential  here,  we  may  also  draw  the
chords  in  question  from  the  lower  extremity  of  the
diameter,  and  say  generally  : The  vertical  diameter
of  a circle  is  described  by  a falling  particle  in  the  same
time  that  any  chord  through  either  extremity  is  so
described.

We  shall  present  another  corollary,  which,  in  the  The  figure
pretty  form  in  which  Galileo  gave  it,  is  usually  no  bodies  fail
longer  incorporated  in  elementary  expositions.  We  chords  of
imagine  gutters  radiating  in  a vertical  plane  from  acircles‘
common  point  A at  a
number  of  different
degrees  of  inclination
to  the  horizon  (Fig.

92).  We  place  at  their
common  extremity  A
a like  number  of  heavy
bodies  and  cause  them
to  begin  simultaneous-
ly their  motion  of  des-
cent. The  bodies  will
always  form  at  any  one

instant  of  time  a circle.  After  the  lapse  of  a longer  time
they  will  be  found  in  a circle  of  larger  radius,  and  the
radii  increase  proportionally  to  the  squares  of  the
times.  If  we  imagine  the  gutters  to  radiate  in  a space
instead  of  a plane,  the  falling  bodies  will  always  form
a sphere,  and  the  radii  of  the  spheres  will  increase  pro-
portionally to  the  squares  of  the  times.  This  will  be


140


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Character
ot'  Galileo'
inquiries.


The  pnriT  j
ciple  of  j
continuity^


perceived  by  imagining  the  figure  revolved  about  the
vertical  A V.

8.  We  see  thus, — as  deserves  again  to  be  briefly
noticed, — that  Galileo  did  not  supply  us  with  a theory
of  the  falling  of  bodies,  but  investigated  and  estab-
lished, wholly  without  preformed  opinions,  the  actual
facts  of  falling.

Gradually  adapting , on  this  occasion,  his  thoughts
to  the  facts,  and  everywhere  logically  abiding  by  the
ideas  he  had  reached,  he  hit  on  a conception,  which  to
himself,  perhaps  less  than  to  his  successors,  appeared
in  tJtie  light  of  a new  law.  In  all  his  reasonings,  Galileo
followed,  to  the  greatest  advantage  of  science,  a prin-
| ciple  which  might  appropriately  be  called  the  principle
1 of  continuity.  Once  we  have  reached  a theory  that  ap-
plies to  a particular  case,  we  proceed  gradually  to
modify  in  thought  the  conditions  of  that  case,  as  far
as  it  is  at  all  possible,  and  endeavor  in  so  doing  to
adhere  throughout  as  closely  as  we  can  to  the  concep-
tion originally  reached.  There  is  no  method  of  pro-
cedure more  surely  calculated  to  lead  to  that  compre-
hension of  all  natural  phenomena  which  is  the  simplest
and  also  attainable  with  the  least  expenditure  of  men-
tality and  feeling.  (Compare  Appendix,  IX.,  p.  523.)

A particular  instance  will  show  more  clearly  than
any  general  remarks  what  we  mean.  Galileo  con-


A C D hi  F


Fig-  93-

siders  (Fig.  93)  a body  which  is  falling  down  the  in-
clined plane  AB,  and  which,  being  placed  with  the


THE  PRIXCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


14*

velocity  thus  acquired  on  a second  plane  BC,  for  ex- Galileo’s

discovery

ample,  ascends  this  second  plane.  On  all  planes  BC,  of  the  so-

Cctll&d  law

BD,  and  so  forth,  it  ascends  to  the  horizontal  plane  of  inertia,
that  passes  through  A.  But,  just  as  it  falls  on  BD
with  less  acceleration  than  it  does  on  BC,  so  similarly
it  will  ascend  on  BD  with  less  retardation  than  It  will
on  BC . The  nearer  the  planes  BC,  BD,  BE,  BF  ap-
proach to  the  horizontal  plane  BH,  the  less  will  the
retardation  of  the  body  on  those  planes  be,  and  the
longer  and  further  will  it  move  on  them.  On  the  hori-
zontal plane  BH  the  retardation  vanishes  entirely  (that  '
is,  of  course,  neglecting  friction  and  the  resistance  of
the  air),  and  the  body  will  continue  to  move  infinitely
long  and  infinitely  far  with  constant  velocity.  Thus  ad-
vancing to  the  limiting  case  of  the  problem  presented,

Galileo  discovers  the  so-called  law  of  inertia,  according
to  which  a body  not  under  the  influence  of  forces,  i.  e.
of  special  circumstances  that  change  motion,  will  re-
tain forever  its  velocity  (and  direction).  We  shall
presently  revert  to  this  subject.

9.  The  motion  of  falling  that  Galileo  found  actually  The  deduc-

...  . . tion  of  the

to  exist,  is,  accordingly,  a motion  of  which  the  velocity  idea  of  uni-
increases  proportionally  to  the  time — a so-called  uni-  ceierated

r . . motion.

iormly  accelerated  motion.

It  would  be  an  anachronism  and  utterly  unhistorical
to  attempt,  as  is  sometimes  done,  to  derive  the  uniformly
accelerated  motion  of  falling  bodies  from  the  constant
action  of  the  force  of  gravity.  “ Gravity  is  a constant
force  * consequently  it  generates  in  equal  elements  of
time  equal  increments  of  velocity ; thus,  the  motion
produced  is  uniformly  accelerated.”  Any  exposition
such  as  this  would  be  unhistorical,  and  would  put  the
whole  discovery  in  a false  light,  for  the  reason  that  the
notion  of  force  as  we  hold  it  to-day  was  first  created


142


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Forces  and  by  Galileo.  Before  Galileo  force  was  known  solely  as

accslera.-

tions.  pressure.  Now,  no  one  can  know,  who  has  not  learned
it  from  experience,  that  generally  pressure  produces
motion,  much  less  in  what  manner  pressure  passes  into
motion  ; that  not  position,  nor  velocity,  but  accelera-
tion, is  determined  by  it.  This  cannot  be  philosophi-
cally deduced  from  the  conception,  itself.  Conjectures
may  be  set  up  concerning  it.  But  experience  alone  can
definitively  inform  us  with  regard  to  it.

10.  It  is  not  by  any  means  self-evident,  therefore,

1 that  the  circumstances  which  determine  motion,  that

is,  forces,  immediately  produce  accelerations.  A glance
at  other  departments  of  physics  will  at  once  make  this
clear.  The  differences  of  temperature  of  bodies  also
determine  alterations.  However,  by  differences  of  tem-
perature not  compensatory  accelerations  are  deter-
mined, but  compensatory  velocities.

The  fact  That  it  is  accelerations  which  are  the  immediate  ef-

determine  fects  of  the  circumstances  that  determine  motion,  that

accGlcra.-  • *

tions  is  an  is,  of  the  forces,  is  a fact  which  Galileo  perceived  in  the

taiPfac?en  natural  phenomena.  Others  before  him  had  also  per-
ceived many  things.  The  assertion  that  everything  seeks
its  place  also  involves  a correct  observation.  The  ob-
servation, however,  does  not  hold  good  in  all  cases,
and  it  is  not  exhaustive.  If  we  cast  a stone  into  the
air,  for  example,  it  no  longer  seeks  its  place ; since  its
place  is  below.  But  the  acceleration  towards  the  earth,
the  retardation  of  the  upward  motion,  the  fact  that  Ga-
lileo perceived,  is  still  present.  His  observation  always
remains  correct;  it  holds  true  more  generally;  it  em-
braces in  one  mental  effort  much  more.

11.  We  have  already  remarked  that  Galileo  dis-
covered the  so-called  law  of  inertia  quite  incidentally.
A body  on  which,  as  we  are  wont  to  say,  no  force  acts,


THE  PR  IX  Cl  PL  E S OF  DYNAMICS.


143


preserves  its  direction  and  velocity  unaltered.  The  History  of

fortunes  of  this  law  of  inertia  have  been  strange.  It  called  law
, . . . . , . of  inertia.

appears  never  to  have  played  a prominent  part  m Gali-
leo’s thought.  But  Galileo’s  successors,  particularly
Huygens  and  Newton,  formulated  it  as  an  independent
law.  Nay,  some  have  even  made  of  inertia  a general
property  of  matter.  We  shall  readily  perceive,  how-
ever, that  the  law  of  inertia  is  not  at  all  an  indepen-
dent law,  but  is  contained  implicitly  in  Galileo’s  per-
ception that  all  circumstances  determinative  of  motion,
or  forces,  produce  accelerations.

In  fact,  if  a force  determine,  not  position,  not  velo-  The  law  a
city,  but  acceleration,  change  of  velocity,  it  stands  toference
reason  that  where  there  is  no  force  there  will  be  no  leo’s  funda.

..  . , * _ . . mental  ob*

change  of  velocity.  It  is  not  necessary  to  enunciate  servation.
this  in  independent  form.  The  embarrassment  of  the
neophyte,  which  also  overcame  the  great  investigators
in  the  face  of  the  great  mass  of  new  material  presented,
alone  could  have  led  them  to  conceive  the  same  fact  as
two  different  facts  and  to  formulate  it  twice.

In  any  event,  to  represent  inertia  as  self-evident,  or  Erroneous
to  derive  it  from  the  general  proposition  that  “the  ef- deducing  it.
feet  of  a cause  persists,”  is  totally  wrong.  Only  a
mistaken  straining  after  rigid  logic  can  lead  us  so  out
of  the  way.  Nothing  is  to  be  accomplished  in  the  pres-
ent domain  with  scholastic  propositions  like  the  one
just  cited.  We  may  easily  convince  ourselves  that  the
contrary  proposition,  “cessante  causa  cessat  effectus,  ”
is  as  well  supported  by  reason.  If  we  call  the  acquired
velocity  “the  effect,”  then  the  first  proposition  is  cor-
rect ; if  we  call  the  acceleration  “effect,”  then  the  sec-
ond proposition  holds.

12.  We  shall  now  examine  Galileo’s  researches  from
another  side.  He  began  his  investigations  with  the


I44


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS ,


Notion  of
velocity  as
it  existed  i;
Galileo’s
time.


notions  familiar  to  his  time — notions  developed  mainly
in  the  practical  arts.  One  notion  of  this  kind  was  that
of  velocity,  which  is  very  readily  obtained  from  the  con-
sideration of  a uniform  motion.  If  a body  traverse  in
every  second  of  time  the  same  distance  c,  the  distance
traversed  at  the  end  of  t seconds  will  be  s = ct.  The
distance  c traversed  in  a second  of  time  we  call  the  ve-
locity, and  obtain  it  from  the  examination  of  any  por-
tion of  the  distance  and  the  corresponding  time  by  the
help  of  the  equation  c~s/t,  that  is,  by  dividing  the
number  which  is  the  measure  of  the  distance  traversed
by  the  number  which  is  the  measure  of  the  time  elapsed.

Now,  Galileo  could  not  complete  his  investigations
without  tacitly  modifying  and  extending  the  traditional
idea  of  velocity.  Let  us  represent  for  distinctness  sake


in  i (Fig.  94)  a uniform  motion,  in  2 a variable  motion,
by  laying  off  as  abscissas  in  the  direction  OA  the  elapsed
times,  and  erecting  as  ordinates  in  the  direction  AH  the
distances  traversed.  Now,  in  1,  whatever  increment
of  the  distance  we  may  divide  by  the  corresponding  in-
crement of  the  time,  in  all  cases  we  obtain  for  the  ve-
locity c the  same  value.  But  if  we  were  thus  to  proceed
in  2,  we  should  obtain  widely  differing  values,  and
therefore  the  word  “velocity  ” as  ordinarily  understood,
ceases  in  this  case  to  be  unequivocal.  If,  however,  we
consider  the  increase  of  the  distance  in  a sufficiently


THE  PR IX Cl PL E S OF  D YXAMICS .


145


small  element  of  time,  where  the  element  of  the  curve  Galileo’s
in  2 approaches  to  a straight  line,  we  may  regard  the  tion  of  this
increase  as  uniform.  The  velocity  in  this  element  of
the  motion  we  may  then  define  as  the  quotient,  A s/A  /,
of  the  element  of  the  time  into  the  corresponding  ele-
ment of  the  distance.  Still  more  precisely,  the  velocity
at  any  instant  is  defined  as  the  limiting  value  which
the  ratio  A s/A  t assumes  as  the  elements  become  in-
finitely small — a value  designated  by  ds/dt.  This  new
notion  includes  the  old  one  as  a particular  case,  and  is,
moreover,  immediately  applicable  to  uniform  motion.
Although  the  express  formulation  of  this  idea,  as  thus
extended,  did  not  take  place  till  long  after  Galileo,  we
see  none  the  less  that  he  made  use  of  it  in  his  reason-
ings.

13.  An  entirely  new  notion  to  which  Galileo  was  The  notion

. of  accelera.

led  is  the  idea  of  acceleration.  In  uniformly  acceler-  tion.
ated  motion  the  velocities  increase  with  the  time
agreeably  to  the  same  law  as  in  uniform  motion  the
spaces  increase  with  the  times.  If  we  call  v the  velo-
city acquired  in  time  /,  then  v — gt.  Here  g denotes
the  increment  of  the  velocity  in  unit  of  time  or  the  ac-
celeration, which  we  also  obtain  from  the  equation
g = v /t.  When  the  investigation  of  variably  accel-
erated motions  was  begun,  this  notion  of  accelera-
tion had  to  experience  an  extension  similar  to  that  of
the  notion  of  velocity.  If  in  1 and  2 the  times  be  again
drawn  as  abscissae,  but  now  the  velocities  as  ordinates,
we  may  go  through  anew  the  whole  train  of  the  pre-
ceding reasoning  and  define  the  acceleration  as  dv/dt ,
where  dv  denotes  an  infinitely  small  increment  of  the
velocity  and  dt  the  corresponding  increment  of  the
time.  In  the  notation  of  the  differential  calculus  we


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


14  6

have  for  the  acceleration  of  a rectilinear  motion,  q>  —
rdv jdt  = d 2 sjdt 2.

Graphic  The  ideas  here  developed  are  susceptible,  moreover,

tionof  of  graphic  representation.  If  we  lay  off  the  times  as-

these  ideas.  ^

’ abscissae  and  the  distances  as  ordinates,  we  shall  per-
ceive, that  the  velocity  at  each  instant  is  measured  by
the  slope  of  the  curve  of  the  distance.  If  in  a similar
manner  we  put  times  and  velocities  together,  we  shall
see  that  the  acceleration  of  the  instant  is  measured  by
the  slope  of  the  curve  of  the  velocity.  The  course  of
the  latter  slope  is,  indeed,  also  capable  of  being  traced
in  the  curve  of  distances,  as  will  be  perceived  from
the  following  considerations.  Let  us  imagine,  in  the


The  curve
of  distance.


by  a straight  line  OCD . Let  us  compare  with  this  a
motion  OCE  the  velocity  of  which  in  the  second  half
of  the  time  is  greater,  and  another  motion  OCE  of
which  the  velocity  is  in  the  same  proportion  smaller.
In  the  first  case,  accordingly,  we  shall  have  to  erect  for
the  time  OB  = 2 OA,  an  ordinate  greater  than  BD  —
2 AC;  in  the  second  case,  an  ordinate  less  than  BD.
We  see  thus,  without  difficulty,  that  a curve  of  dis-
tance convex  to  the  axis  of  the  time-abscissae  corre-
sponds to  accelerated  motion,  and  a curve  concave
thereto  to  retarded  motion.  If  we  imagine  a lead-pen-
cil to  perform  a vertical  motion  of  any  kind  and  in


TIIE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


M7


front  of  it  during  its  motion  a piece  of  paper  to  be  uni-
formly drawn  along  from  right  to  left  and  the  pencil  to
thus  execute  the  drawing  in  Fig.  96,  we  shall  be  able  to
read  off  from  the  drawing  the  peculiarities  of  the  mo-
tion. At  a the  velocity  of  the  pencil  was  directed  up-
wards, at  b it  was  greater,  at  c it  w*as  = 0,  at  d it  was
directed  downwards,  at  e it  was  again  = 0.  At  a,  />,
d,  e,  the  acceleration  was  directed  upwards,  at  c down-
wards ; at  c and  e it  was  greatest.

14.  The  summary  representation  of  what  Galileo  Tabular
discovered  is  best  made  by  a table  of  times,  acquired  ment  of  Ga.

* lileo’s  dis-


t tg  /3-f-

velocities,  and  traversed  distances.  But  the  numbers  The  table
follow  so  simple  a law, — one  immediately  recognisable,  placed6 by

. ...  rules  for  its

— that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  our  replacing  theconstruc-
table  by  a rule  for  its  construction.  If  we  examine  the
relation  that  connects  the  first  and  second  columns,  we
shall  find  that  it  is  expressed  by  the  equation  v = gt,
which,  in  its  last  analysis,  is  nothing  but  an  abbrevi-
ated direction  for  constructing  the  first  two  columns
of  the  table.  The  relation  connecting  the  first  and  third
columns  is  given  by  the  equation  s =gt-/2.  The  con-
nection of  the  second  and  third  columns  is  represented
by  s = v2 /2g.


148


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


rhe  rules.  Of  the  three  relations


v = gt


strictly,  the  first  two  only  were  employed  by  Galileo.
Huygens  was  the  first  who  evinced  a higher  apprecia-
tion of  the  third,  and  laid,  in  thus  doing,  the  founda-
tions of  important  advances.

a remark  15.  We  may  add  a remark  in  connection  with

tionofthe  this  table  that  is  very  valuable.  It  has  been  stated

the  "times,  previously  that  a body,  by  virtue  of  the  velocity  it  has
acquired  in  its  fall,  is  able  to  rise  again  to  its  origi-
nal height,  in  doing  which  its  velocity  diminishes  in
the  same  way  (with  respect  to  time  and  space)  as  it
increased  in  falling.  Now  a freely  falling  body  ac-
quires in  double  time  of  descent  double  velocity,  but
falls  in  this  double  time  through  four  times  the  simple
distance.  A body,  therefore,  to  which  we  impart  a ver-
tically upward  double  velocity  will  ascend  twice  as
long  a time,  but  four  times  as  high  as  a body  to  which
the  simple  velocity  has  been  imparted.

The  dispute  It  was  remarked,  very  soon  after  Galileo,  that  there

of  the  Car-  . . , . , / f ,

tesians  and  is  inherent  m the  velocity  of  a body  a something  that

Leibnitz-  .

ians  on  the  corresponds  to  a force — a something,  that  is,  by  which

measure  of  p r .

force.  a force  can  be  overcome,  a certain  “ efficacy,  as  it  has
been  aptly  termed.  The  only  point  that  was  debated
was,  whether  this  efficacy  was  to  be  reckoned  propor-
tional to  the  velocity  or  to  the  square  of  the  velocity.
The  Cartesians  held  the  former,  the  Leibnitzians  the
latter.  But  it  will  be  perceived  that  the  question  in-
volves no  dispute  whatever.  The  body  with  the  double
velocity  overcomes  a given  force  through  double  the


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


149


time,  but  through  four  times  the  distance.  With  re-
spect to  time,  therefore,  its  efficacy  is  proportional  to
the  velocity ; with  respect  to  distance,  to  the  square  of
the  velocity.  D’Alembert  drew  attention  to  this  mis-
understanding, although  in  not  very  distinct  terms.  It
is  to  be  especially  remarked,  however,  that  Huygens’s
thoughts  on  this  question  were  perfectly  clear.

16.  The  experimental  procedure  by  which,  at  the  The  present

\ experimen-

present  day,  the  lawTs  of  falling  bodies  are  verified,  istaimeansof
J verifying

somewhat  different  from  that  of  Galileo.  Two  methods  the  laws  of

falling  bod-

may  be  employed.  Either  the  motion  of  falling,  which  ies.
from  its  rapidity  is  difficult  to  observe  directly,  is  so
retarded,  without  altering  the  law,  as  to  be  easily  ob-
served ; or  the  motion  of  falling  is  not  altered  at  all,
but  our  means  of  observation  are  improved  in  deli-
cacy. On  the  first  principle  Galileo’s  inclined
gutter  and  Atwood’s  machine  rest.  Atwood’s
machine  consists  (Fig.  97)  of  an  easily  run-
ning pulley,  over  which  is  thrown  a thread,
to  whose  extremities  two  equal  weights  P are
attached.  If  upon  one  of  the  weights  P we
lay  a third  small  weight  p,  a uniformly  accel-
erated motion  will  be  set  up  by  the  added  Fig-  97-
weight,  having  the  acceleration  (p/2  P-\-  p^  g — a result
that  will  be  readily  obtained  when  we  shall  have  dis-
cussed the  notion  of  “mass.”  Now  by  means  of  a
graduated  vertical  standard  connected  with  the  pulley
it  may  easily  be  shown  that  in  the  times  1,  2,  3,  4 ... .
the  distances  1,  4,  9,  16  ...  . are  traversed.  The  final
velocity  corresponding  to  any  given  time  of  descent  is
investigated  by  catching  the  small  additional  weight,/,
which  is  shaped  so  as  to  project  beyond  the  outline  of
P,  in  a ring  through  which  the  falling  body  passes,
after  which  the  motion  continues  without  acceleration.


150


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  appa-  The  apparatus  of  Morin  is  based  on  a different  prim

Morin,  La-  ciple.  A body  to  which  a writing  pencil  is  attached

pich,  and  describes  on  a vertical  sheet  of  paper,  which  is  drawn

Von  Babo.  . r , . . . . , . -

uniformly  across  it  by  a clock-work,  a horizontal  straight
line.  If  the  body  fall  while  the  paper  is  not  in  motion,
it  will  describe  a vertical  straight  line.  If  the  two
motions  are  combined,  a parabola  will  be  produced,
of  which  the  horizontal  abscissae  correspond  to  the
elapsed  times  and  the  vertical  ordinates  to  the  dis-
tances of  descent  described.  For  the  abscissae  i,  2,
3,  4 ...  . we  obtain  the  ordinates  1,  4,  9,  16  ...  . By
an  unessential  modification,  Morin  employed  instead  of
a plane  sheet  of  paper,  a rapidly  rotating  cylindrical
drum  with  vertical  axis,  by  the  side  of  which  the  body
fell  down  a guiding  wire.  A different  apparatus,  based
on  the  same  principle,  was  invented,  independently,  by
Laborde,  Lippich,  and  Von  Babo.  A lampblacked
sheet  of  glass  (Fig.  98^)  falls  freely,  while  a horizon-
tally vibrating  vertical  rod,  which  in  its  first  transit
through  the  position  of  equilibrium  starts  the  motion
of  descent,  traces,  by  means  of  a quill,  a curve  on  the
lampblacked  surface.  Owing  to  the  constancy  of  the
period  of  vibration  of  the  rod  combined  with  the  in-
creasing velocity  of  the  descent,  the  undulations  traced
by  the  rod  become  longer  and  longer.  Thus  (Fig.  98)
bc='$ab,  cd—^ab,  de  = "]ab^  and  so  forth.  The
law  of  falling  bodies  is  clearly  exhibited  by  this,  since
ab-^-cb  — ^ab,  ab-{-bc-\-cd  = gab,  and  so  forth.
The  law  of  the  velocity  is  confirmed  by  the  inclinations
of  the  tangents  at  the  points  a,  b,  c , d,  and  so  forth.  If
the  time  of  oscillation  of  the  rod  be  known,  the  value
of  g is  determinable  from  an  experiment  of  this  kind
with  considerable  exactness.

Wheatstone  employed  for  the  measurement  of  mi-


THE  PR IX Cl PL E S OF  DYXAMICS.


151


nute  portions  of  time  a rapidly  operating  clock-work  The  de-

, , , , 1 . . . . . vices  of

called  a chronoscope,  which  is  set  m motion  at  the  be-  wheat-
ginning  of  the  time  to  be  measured  and  stopped  at  the  Hipp,
termination  of  it.  Hipp  has  advantageously  modified


Fig.  98a.


this  method  by  simply  causing  a light  index-hand  to
be  thrown  by  means  of  a clutch  in  and  out  of  gear  with
a rapidly  moving  wheel-work  regulated  by  a vibrating
reed  of  steel  tuned  to  a high  note,  and  acting  as  an  es-


152


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Galileo’s
minor  in-
vestiga-
tions.


The  motion
of  projec-
tiles.


capement.  The  throwing  in  and  out  of  gear  is  effected
by  an  electric  current.  Now  if,  as  soon  as  the  body  be-
gins to  fall,  the  current  be  interrupted,  that  is  the  hand
thrown  into  gear,  and  as  soon  as  the  body  strikes  the
platform  below  the  current  is  closed,  that  is  the  hand
thrown  out  of  gear,  we  can  read  by  the  distance  the
index-hand  has  travelled  the  time  of  descent.

17,  Among  the  further  achievements  of  Galileo  we
have  yet  to  mention  his  ideas  concerning  the  motion
of  the  pendulum,  and  his  refutation  of  the  view  that
bodies  of  greater  weight  fall  faster  than  bodies  of  less
weight.  We  shall  revert  to  both  of  these  points  on  an-
other occasion.  It  may  be  stated  here,  however,  that
Galileo,  on  discovering  the  constancy  of  the  period  of
pendulum-oscillations,  at  once  applied  the  pendulum
to  pulse-measurements  at  the  sick-bed,  as  well  as  pro-
posed its  use  in  astronomical  observations  and  to  a cer-
tain extent  employed  it  therein  himself.

18.  Of  still  greater  importance  are  his  investiga-
tions concerning  the  motion  of  projectiles.  A free  body,
according  to  Galileo’s  view,  constantly  experiences  a
vertical  acceleration  g towards  the  earth.  If  at  the

it  is  affected  with  a vertical
velocity  c , its  velocity  at  the
end  of  the  time  t will  be  v =
An  initial  velocity  up-
wards would  have  to  be  reck-
oned negative  here.  The  dis-
tance described  at  the  end  of
time  t is  represented  by  the
equation  s = a -f-  ct  -f-  %g t2,  where  ct  and  \gt2  are  the
portions  of  the  traversed  distance  that  correspond  re-
spectively to  the  uniform  and  the  uniformly  accelerated
motion.  The  constant  a is  to  be  put  = 0 when  we  reckon


beginning  of  its  motion


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


*53


the  distance  from  the  point  that  the  body  passes  at  time
/ = 0.  When  Galileo  had  once  reached  his  fundamental
conception  of  dynamics,  he  easily  recognised  the  case
of  horizontal  projection  as  a combination  of  two  inde-
pendent motions,  a horizontal  uniform  motion,  and  a
vertical  uniformly  accelerated  motion.  He  thus  intro-
duced into  use  the  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  mo-
tions. Even  oblique  projection  no  longer  presented  the
slightest  difficulty.

If  a body  receives  a horizontal  velocity  c,  it  de-  The  curve
scribes  in  the  horizontal  direction  in  time  t the  distance  tiou  a par-
y = ci,  while  simultaneously  it  falls  in  a vertical  direc-
tion the  distance  x ~gt2/2.  Different  motion-deter-
minative circumstances  exercise  no  mutual  effect  on  one
another,  and  the  motions  determined  by  them  take
place  independently  of  each  other.  Galileo  was  led  to
this  assumption  by  the  attentive  observation  of  the
phenomena ; and  the  assumption  proved  itself  true.

For  the  curve  which  a body  describes  when  the  two
motions  in  question  are  compounded,  wTe  find,  by  em-
ploying the  two  equations  above  given,  the  expression
y — j/  (2  c 2 jg)  x.  It  is  the  parabola  of  Apollonius  hav-
ing its  parameter  equal  to  c2/g  and  its  axis  vertical,
as  Galileo  knew.

We  readily  perceive  with  Galileo,  that  oblique  pro- oblique
jection  involves  nothing  new.  The  velocity  c imparted  projectlor"
to  a body  at  the  angle  a with  the  horizon  is  resolvable
into  the  horizontal  component  c . cos  a and  the  vertical
component  c . since.  With  the  latter  velocity  the  body
ascends  during  the  same  interval  of  time  t which  it
would  take  to  acquire  this  velocity  in  falling  vertically
downwards.  Therefore,  c . sin  a =gt.  When  it  has
reached  its  greatest  height  the  vertical  component  of
its  initial  velocity  has  vanished,  and  from  the  point  S


I54


TIIE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


onward  (Fig.  ioo)  it  continues  its  motion  as  a horizon-
tal projection.  If  we  examine  any  two  epochs  equally
distant  in  time,  before  and  after  the  transit  through  S ,

we  shall  see  that  the  body  at
these  two  epochs  is  equally
distant  from  the  perpendicu-
lar through  S and  situated  the
\ same  distance  below  the  hori-
B\  zontal  line  through  The
Fig-  IO°-  curve  is  therefore  symmet-

rical with  respect  to  the  vertical  line  through  S.  It
is  a parabola  with  vertical  axis  and  the  parameter
{c  cos  a)  2 /g.

The  range  To  find  the  so-called  range  of  projection,  we  have
tion.rojec'  simply  to  consider  the  horizontal  motion  during  the
time  of  the  rising  and  falling  of  the  body.  For  the  ascent
this  time  is,  according  to  the  equations  above  given,
t = c sin  a/g,  and  the  same  for  the  descent.  With  the
horizontal  velocity  ^r.cosar,  therefore,  the  distance  is
traversed

c sin  a r3  c2  .

w = c cos  a . 2 — — 2 sm  a cos  a = — sm  2 a.

g g g


The  range  of  projection  is  greatest  accordingly
when  a =45°,  and  equally  great  for  any  two  angles
a = 450  dz  fi°.

The  mutual  1 9.  The  recognition  of  the  mutual  independence  of
indepen-  _ . ...

dence  of  the  forces,  or  motion-determinative  circumstances  oc-

forces.  . .

currmg  m nature,  which  was
reached  and  found  expression
in  the  investigations  relating  to
projection,^  important.  A body
may  move  (Fig.  ioi)  in  the  di-
rection AB,  while  the  space  in  which  this  motion  oc-
curs is  displaced  in  the  direction  A C.  The  body  then


Fig.  101.


THE  PRIXCIPL E S OF  D YX AMICE.


155


goes  from  A to  D.  Now,  this  also  happens  if  the  two
circumstances  that  simultaneously  determine  the  mo-
tions AB  and  AC,  have  no  influence  on  one  another.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  we  may  compound  by  the  paral-
lelogram not  only  displacements  that  have  taken  place
but  also  velocities  and  accelerations  that  simultane-
ously take  place.  (See  Appendix,  X.,  p.  525.)

11.

THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF  HUYGENS.

i.  The  next  in  succession  of  the  great  mechanical  in-  Huygens’s
quirers  is  Huygens,  who  in  every  respect  must  be  asSanr?n-k
ranked  as  Galileo's  peer.  If,  perhaps,  his  philosophical  qmrer‘
endowments  were  less  splendid  than  those  of  Galileo,
this  deficiency  was  compensated  for  by  the  superiority
of  his  geometrical  powers.  Huygens  not  only  continued
the  researches  which  Galileo  had  begun,  but  he  also
solved  the  first  problems  in  the  dyna?nics  of  several
niasses , whereas  Galileo  had  throughout  restricted  him-
self to  the  dynamics  of  a single  body.

The  plenitude  of  Huygens’s  achievements  is  bestEnumera-
seen  in  his  HorologiumOscillatorium , which  appeared  in  gens°sf Huy
1673.  The  most  important  subjects  there  treated  of  forments.
the  first  time,  are  : the  theory  of  the  centre  of  oscilla-
tion, the  invention  and  construction  of  the  pendulum-
clock,  the  invention  of  the  escapement,  the  determina-
tion of  the  acceleration  of  gravity,  g,  by  pendulum-
observations,  a proposition  regarding  the  employment
of  the  length  of  the  seconds  pendulum  as  the  unit  of
length,  the  theorems  respecting  centrifugal  force,  the
mechanical  and  geometrical  properties  of  cycloids,  the
doctrine  of  evolutes,  and  the  theory  of  the  circle  of
curvature.


i56  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


2.  With  respect  to  the  form  of  presentation  of  his
work,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  Huygens  shares  with


Galileo,  in  all  its  perfection,  the  latter’s  exalted  and
inimitable  candor.  He  is  frank  without  reserve  in  the
presentment  of  the  methods  that  led  him  to  his  dis-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.  157


coveries,  and  thus  always
conducts  his  reader  into  the
full  comprehension  of  his
performances.  Nor  had  he
cause  to  conceal  these
methods.  If,  a thousand
years  from  now,  it  shall  be
found  that  he  was  a man,  it
will  likewise  be  seen  what
manner  of  man  he  was.
In  our  discussion  of  the
achievements  of  Huy^gens,
however,  we  shall  have  to
proceed  in  a somewhat  dif-
ferent manner  from  that
which  we  pursued  in  the
case  of  Galileo.  Galileo’s
views,  in  their  classical  sim-
plicity, could  be  given  in  an
almost  unmodified  form.
With  Huygens  this  is  not
possible.  The  latter  deals
with  more  complicated
problems;  his  mathematical
methods  and  notations  be-
come inadequate  and  cum-
brous. F or  reasons  of  brev-
ity, therefore,  we  shall  re-
produce all  the  conceptions
of  which  we  treat,  in  mod-
ern form,  retaining,  how-
ever, Huygens’s  essential
and  characteristic  ideas.


Huygens’s  Pendulum  Clock.


Character!
sation  of
Huygens’s
perform-
ances.


158


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Centrifugal  3.  We  begin  with  the  investigations  concerning

and  centri-  .

petal  force,  centrifugal  force.  When  once  we  have  recognised  with
Galileo  that  force  determines  acceleration,  we  are  im-
pelled, unavoidably,  to  ascribe  every  change  of  velocity
and  consequently  also  every  change  in  the  direction  of
a motion  (since  the  direction  is  determined  by  three
velocity-components  perpendicular  to  one  another)  to
a force.  If,  therefore,  any  body  attached  to  a string,
say  a stone,  is  swung  uniformly  round  in  a circle,  the
curvilinear  motion  which  it  performs  is  intelligible  only
on  the  supposition  of  a constant  force  that  deflects  the
body  from  the  rectilinear  path.  The  tension  of  the
string  is  this  force ; by  it  the  body  is  constantly  deflected
from  the  rectilinear  path  and  made  to  move  towards
the  centre  of  the  circle.  This  tension,  accordingly,  rep-
resents a centripetal  force.  On  the  other  hand,  the  axis
also,  or  the  fixed  centre,  is  acted  on  by  the  tension  of
the  string,  and  in  this  aspect  the  tension  of  the  string
appears  as  a centrifugal  force.


Let  us  suppose  that  we  have  a body  to  which  a ve-
locity has  been  imparted  and  which  is  maintained  in
uniform  motion  in  a circle  by  an  acceleration  constantly
directed  towards  the  centre.  The  conditions  on  which
this  acceleration  depends,  it  is  our  purpose  to  investi-
gate. We  imagine  (Fig.  102)  two  equal  circles  uni-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


*59


formly  travelled  round  by  two  bodies  ; the  velocities  in  Uniform
the  circles  I and  II  bear  to  each  other  the  proportion  equal

— circles.

1:2.  If  in  the  two  circles  wTe  consider  any  same  arc-
element  corresponding  to  some  very  small  angle  a,  then
the  corresponding  element  s of  the  distance  that  the
bodies  in  consequence  of  the  centripetal  acceleration
have  departed  from  the  rectilinear  path  (the  tangent),
will  also  be  the  same.  If  we  call  cpx  and  <p2  the  re-
spective accelerations,  and  r and  r/ 2 the  time-elements
for  the  angle  a,  we  find  by  Galileo’s  law
2s  2s

cpx  = cp2  = 4 that  is  to  say  cp2  = ±cpx.

Therefore,  by  generalisation,  in  equal  circles 'the
centripetal  acceleration  is  proportional  to  the  square  of
the  velocity  of  the  motion.

Let  us  now  consider  the  motion  in  the  circles  I and  Uniform
II  (Fig.  103),  the  radii  of  which  are  to  each  other  as  unequal

s ^ J __  circles.

i : 2,  and  let  us  take  for  the  ratio  of  the  velocities  of
the  motions  also  1:2,  so  that  like  arc-elements  are
travelled  through  in  equal  times.  <pl9  <p29  s,  2 s denote
the  accelerations  and  the  elements  of  the  distance  trav-
ersed ; r is  the  element  of  the  time,  equal  for  both
cases.  Then

2s  4:S

9i  = ^2  = that  is  to  say  cp2  = 2 tpx.

If  now  we  reduce  the  velocity  of  the  motion  in  II
one-half,  so  that  the  velocities  in  I and  II  become
equal,  cp2  will  thereby  be  reduced  one-fourth,  that  is
to  say  to  cpx/ 2.  Generalising,  we  get  this  rule:  when
the  velocity  of  the  circular  motion  is  the  same,  the  cen-
tripetal acceleration  is  inversely  proportional  to  the
radius  of  the  circle  described.

4.  The  early  investigators,  owing  to  their  following


Deduction
of  the  gen-
eral law  of
circular
motion.


The  para-
doxical
character
of  this
problem.


160  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

the  conceptions  of  the  ancients,  generally  obtained  their
propositions  in  the  cumbersome  form  of  proportions.
We  shall  pursue  a different  method.  On  a movable
object  having  the  velocity  v let  a force  act  during  the
element  of  time  r which  imparts  to  the  object  perpen-
dicularly to  the  direction  of  its  motion  the  acceleration
cp.  The  new  velocity-component  thus  becomes  qir,
and  its  composition  with  the  first  velocity  produces  a
new  direction  of  the  motion,  making  the  angle  a with
the  original  direction.  From  this  results,  by  conceiving
the  motion  to  take  place  in  a circle  of  radius  r,  and  on
account  of  the  smallness  of  the  angular  element  putting


tan  a ==  a,  the  following,  as  the  complete  expression
for  the  centripetal  acceleration  of  a uniform  motion  in
a circle,

cpr  vr  7/ 2

= tan  a = a = — or  cp  = — .
v r r

The  idea  of  uniform  motion  in  a circle  conditioned
by  a constant  centripetal  acceleration  is  a little  para-
doxical. The  paradox  lies  in  the  assumption  of  a con-
stant acceleration  towards  the  centre  without  actual
approach  thereto  and  without  increase  of  velocity.  This
is  lessened  when  we  reflect  that  without  this  centripetal
acceleration  the  body  would  be  continually  moving
away  from  the  centre ; that  the  direction  of  the  accel-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


x6x

eration  is  constantly  changing  ; and  that  a change  of
velocity  (as  will  appear  in  the  discussion  of  the  prin-
ciple of  vis  viva')  is  connected  with  an  approach  of  the
bodies  that  accelerate  each  other,  which  does  not  take
place  here.  The  more  complex  case  of  elliptical  cen-
tral motion  is  elucidative  in  this  direction.  (See  p.527.)

5.  The  expression  for  the  centripetal  or  centrifugal  a different

. ..  . expression

acceleration,  cp  = v2  /r,  can  easily  be  put  m a somewhat  of  the  law.
different  form.  If  T denote  the  periodic  time  of  the
circular  motion,  the  time  occupied  in  describing  the
circumference,  then  vT  = 2 r tt,  and  consequently  cp  =

4/' 7 r2 IT2,  in  which  form  we  shall  employ  the  expres-
sion later  on.  If  several  bodies  moving  in  circles  have
the  same  periodic  times,  the  respective  centripetal  ac-
celerations by  which  they  are  held  in  their  paths,  as  is
apparent  from  the  last  expression,  are  proportional  to
the  radii.

6.  We  shall  take  it  for  granted  that  the  reader  is  Some  phe-
familiar  with  the  phenomena  that  illustrate  the  con-  which  the

it  law  ex-

siderations  here  presented  : as  the  rupture  of  strings  of  plains,
insufficient  strength  on  which  bodies  are  whirled  about,
the  flattening  of  soft  rotating  spheres,  and  so  on.  Huy-
gens was  able,  by  the  aid  of  his  conception,  to  explain
at  once  whole  series  of  phenomena.  When  a pendulum-
clock,  for  example,  which  had  been  taken  from  Paris
to  Cayenne  by  Richer  (1671-1673),  showed  a retarda-
tion of  its  motion,  Huygens  deduced  the  apparent
diminution  of  the  acceleration  of  gravity  g thus  estab-
lished, from  the  greater  centrifugal  acceleration  of  the
rotating  earth  at  the  equator ; an  explanation  that  at
once  rendered  the  observation  intelligible.

An  experiment  instituted  by  Huygens  may  here  be
noticed,  on  account  of  its  historical  interest.  When
Newton  brought  out  his  theory  of  universal  gravitation,


162


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


ing  experi-
ment of
Huygens.


An  interest- Huygens  belonged  to  the  great  number  of  those  who
were  unable  to  reconcile  themselves  to  the  idea  of  action
at  a distance.  He  was  of  the  opinion  that  gravitation
could  be  explained  by  a vortical  medium.  If  we  enclose
in  a vessel  filled  with  a liquid  a number  of  lighter  bod-
ies, say  wooden  balls  in  water,  and  set  the  vessel  ro-
tating about  its  axis,  the  balls  will  at  once  rapidly  move
towards  the  axis.  If  for  instance  (Fig.  106),  we  place
the  glass  cylinders  RR  containing  the  wooden  balls  KK
by  means  of  a pivot  Z on  a rotatory  apparatus,  and  ro-
tate the  latter  about  its  ver-
tical axis,  the  balls  will  im-
mediately run  up  the  cyl-
inders in  the  direction  away
from  the  axis.  But  if  the
tubes  be  filled  with  water,
each  rotation  will  force  the
balls  floating  at  the  extremities  EE  towards  the  axis.
The  phenomenon  is  easily  explicable  by  analogy  with
the  principle  of  Archimedes.  The  wooden  balls  receive
a centripetal  impulsion,  comparable  to  buoyancy,
which  is  equal  and  opposite  to  the  centrifugal  force
acting  on  the  displaced  liquid.  (See  p.  528.)

7.  Before  we  proceed  to  Huygens’s  investigations
on  the  centre  of  oscillation,  we  shall  present  to  the
reader  a few  considerations  concerning  pendulous  and
oscillatory  motion  generally,  which  will  make  up  in  ob-
viousness for  what  they  lack  in  rigor.

Many  of  the  properties  of  pendulum  motion  were
known  to  Galileo.  That  he  had  formed  the  concep-
tion which  we  shall  new  give,  or  that  at  least  he  was
on  the  verge  of  so  doing,  may  be  inferred  from  many
scattered  allusions  to  the  subject  in  his  Dialogues.  The
bob  of  a simple  pendulum  of  length  / moves  in  a circle


Oscillatory

motion.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


163

(Fig.  107)  of  radius  L If  we  give  the  pendulum  a very  Galileo's

,,  . . ...  , . ...  investiga-

small  excursion,  it  will  travel  m its  oscillations  over  a tion  of  the

very  small  arc  which  coincides  approximately  with  the  pendulum.

chord  belonging  to  it.  But  this

chord  is  described  by  a falling

particle,  moving  on  it  as  on  an

inclined  plane  (see  Sect.  1 of  this

Chapter,  § 7),  in  the  same  time

as  the  vertical  diameter  ED  =

2 /.  ' If  the  time  of  descent  be

called  /,  we  shall  have  2/  =

\gt 2,  that  is  / = 2 V l/g.  But

since  the  continued  movement

from  B up  the  line  BC'  occupies  an  equal  interval  of

time,  we  have  to  put  for  the  time  T of  an  oscillation

from  C to  C\  T—  4]/ Ijg.  It  will  be  seen  that  even  from

so  crude  a conception  as  this  the  correct  form  of  the

pendulum-laws  is  obtainable.  The  exact  expression

for  the  time  of  very  small  oscillations  is,  as  we  know,

T—n  \/JJg.

Again,  the  motion  of  a pendulum  bob  may  be  viewed  pendulum
as  a motion  of  descent  on  a succession  of  inclined  Viewed  as  a
planes.  If  the  string  of  the  pendulum  makes  the  angle  do°wn?n-
a with  the  perpendicular,  the  pendulum  bob  receives  piSfes.
in  the  direction  of  the  position  of  equilibrium  the  accel-
eration g.  sin  a.  When  a is  small,  g.  a is  the  expres-
sion of  this  acceleration  ; in  other  words,  -the  accelera-
tion is  always  proportional  and  oppositely  directed  to
the  excursion.  When  the  excursions  are  small  the
curvature  of  the  path  may  be  neglected.

8.  From  these  preliminaries,  we  may  proceed  to
the  study  of  oscillatory  motion  in  a simpler  manner.  A
body  is  free  to  move  on  a straight  line  OA  (Fig.  108),
and  constantly  receives  in  the  direction  towards  the


164


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


a simpler  point  0 an  acceleration  proportional  to  its  distance  from
view  of  os-  O.  We  will  represent  these  accelerations  by  ordinates
motion7  erected  at  the  positions  considered.  Ordinates  upwards
denote  accelerations  towards  the  left ; ordinates  down-

wards  represent  accel-
erations  towards  the
At  8 y\\  . ^5  right.  The  body,  left

eA  to  itself  at  A,  will

yf  move  towards  0 with

yl'j  II  varied  acceleration,

Nqi  B' A'  Pass  through  OtoAl}

yF  where  OA  x — OA,

yF  come  back  to  0,  and

so  again  continue  its
Fis- Io8-  motion.  It  is  in  the

The  period  first  place  easily  demonstrable  that  the  period  of  os-
tioninde-  dilation  (the  time  of  the  motion  through  AOAx)  is  in-
the  ampi?  dependent  of  the  amplitude  of  the  oscillation  (the  dis-
tance OA).  To  show  this,  let  us  imagine  in  I and
II  the  same  oscillation  performed,  with  single  and
double  amplitudes  of  oscillation.  As  the  acceleration
varies  from  point  to  point,  we  must  divide  OA  and
O' A'  = 2 OA  into  a very  large  equal  number  of  ele-
ments. Each  element  A'Bf  of  O' A'  is  then  twice  as


large  as  the  corresponding  element  AB  of  OA.  The
initial  accelerations  cp  and  cp  stand  in  the  relation
qj  = 2 cp.  Accordingly,  the  elements  AB  and  A'Br  =
2 AB  are  described  with  their  respective  accelerations
cp  and  2cp  in  the  same  time  r.  The  final  velocities  v
and  v'  in  I and  II,  for  the  first  element,  will  be  v = <pr
and  v — 2 cpr,  that  is  v*  = 2 v.  The  accelerations  and
the  initial  velocities  at  B and  B'  are  therefore  again  as
1:2.  Accordingly,  the  corresponding  elements  that
next  succeed  will  be  described  in  the  same  time.  And


THE  PR IXCfPLES  OF  DYXAMICS.


165


of  every  succeeding  pair  of  elements  the  same  asser-
tion also  holds  true.  Therefore,  generalising,  it  will
be  readily  perceived  that  the,  period  of  oscillation  is
independent  of  its  amplitude  or  breadth.

Next,  let  us  conceive  two  oscillatory  motions,  I and  The  time  of

„ GSClIldtion

II,  that  have  equal  excursions  (Fig.  xoo);  but  m II  let  inverse^

. * ' . proportiun-

a fourfold  acceleration  correspond  to  the  same  distance  alto tm*

. square  root

from  O.  We  divide  the  amplitudes  of


1


^^6


of  the  ar*
coloration.


the  oscillations  A O and  O’ A*  = OA
into  a very  large  equal  number  of
parts.  These  parts  are  then  equal  in
I and  II.  The  initial  accelerations  at
A and  A'  are  cp  and  4 cp  ; the  ele-
ments of  the  distance  described  are
AB  — A'B'  = s ; and  the  times  are
respectively  rand  r'.  We  obtain,  then,
r = V'lsjcp , r'  = 1/2  sj\  cp  = rj'i .

The  element  A'B'  is  accordingly  trav-
elled through  in  one-half  the  time  Flg* log'
the  element  AB  is.  The  final  velocities  v and  v'  at
B and  B'  are  found  by  the  equations  v = cpr  and
v'  = 4 <p(t/ 2)  ==  2 v.  Since,  therefore,  the  initial  velo-
cities at  B and  B'  are  to  one  another  as  1 : 2,  and  the
accelerations  are  again  as  1:4,  the  element  of  II  suc-
ceeding the  first  will  again  be  traversed  in  half  the
time  of  the  corresponding  one  in  I.  Generalising,  we
get : For  equal  excursions  the  time  of  oscillation  is  in-
versely proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  accelera-
tions.


9.  The  considerations  last  presented  may  be  put  in
a very  much  abbreviated  and  very  obvious  form  by  a
method  of  conception  first  employed  by  Newton.  New-
ton calls  those  material  systems  similar  that  have  geo-
metrically similar  configurations  and  whose  homolo-


i66


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  princi-  gous  masses  bear  to  one  another  the  same  ratio.  He

pleofsimil-  ri  , . , . . . 1 .

itude.  says  further  that  systems  of  this  kind  execute  similar
movements  when  the  homologous  points  describe  simi-
lar paths  in  proportional  times.  Conformably  to  the
geometrical  terminology  of  the  present  day  we  should
not  be  permitted  to  call  mechanical  structures  of  this
kind  (of  five  dimensions)  similar  unless  their  homolo-


gous linear  dimensions  as  well  as  the  times  and  the


masses  bore  to  one  another  the  same  ratio.  The  struc-


tures might  more  appropriately  be  termed  affined  to
one  another.


We  shall  retain,  however,  the  name  phoronomically
shnilar  structures,  and  in  the  consideration  that  is  to
follow  leave  entirely  out  of  account  the  masses.

In  two  such  similar  motions,  then,  let


the  homologous  paths  be  i*  and  as,

the  homologous  times  be  t and  f3 1\  whence


the  homologous  velo-
cities are

the  homologous  accel-
erations


*=7“d  ^ = /J7’

2 s , a 2s

<p=-and  e9  = —


Thededuc-  Now  all  oscillations  which  a body  performs  under
laws  of  os-  the  conditions  above  set  forth  with  any  two  different
thi^method  amplitudes  i and  a,  will  be  readily  recognised  as  sim-
ilar motions.  Noting  that  the  ratio  of  the  homologous
accelerations  in  this  case  is  €=  a,  we  have  a = a/ ft2.
Wherefore  the  ratio  of  the  homologous  times,  that  is
to  say  of  the  times  of  oscillation,  is  fi  = =b  i.  We  ob-
tain thus  the  law,  that  the  period  of  oscillation  is  inde-
pendent of  the  amplitude.

If  in  two  oscillatory  motions  we  put  for  the  ratio
between  the  amplitudes  i : a , and  for  the  ratio  between
the  accelerations  i : a ja,  we  shall  obtain  for  this  case


THE  PE IX Cl PL  E S OF  DYXAM1CS,


€=  a p = a /ft2,  and  therefore  ft  = i h=  j y u ; where-
with the  second  law  of  oscillating  motion  is  obtained.

Two  uniform  circular  motions  are  always  phoronom-
ically  similar.  Let  the  ratio  of  their  radii  be  i : a and
the  ratio  of  their  velocities  i : y.  The  ratio  of  their
accelerations  is  then  s—  ajft2,  and  since  y=afft,
also£=y2/7r;  whence  the  theorems  relative  to  cen-
tripetal acceleration  are  obtained.

It  is  a pity  that  investigations  of  this  kind  respect-
ing mechanical  and  phoronomical  affinity  are  not  more
extensively  cultivated,  since  they  promise  the  most
beautiful  and  most  elucidative  extensions  of  insight


imaginable.

10.  Between  uniform  motion  in  a circle  and  oscil-
latory motion  of  the  kind  just  discussed  an  important
relation  exists  which  we  shall  now  consider.  We  as-
sume a system  of  rectangular  co-  y

ordinates,  having  its  origin  at  the
centre,  O,  of  the  circle  of  Fig.  no,  \

about  the  circumference  of  which  — fr  J— ,

we  conceive  a body  to  move  uni-  \ j

formly.  The  centripetal  accelera-
tion  cp  which  conditions  this  mo-  [y

tion,  we  resolve  in  the  directions  Fi&- II0-

of  X and  Y;  and  observe  that  the  X-components  of  the
motion  are  affected  only  by  the  X-components  of  the
acceleration.  We  may  regard  both  the  motions  and
both  the  accelerations  as  independent  of  each  other.

Now,  the  two  components  of  the  motion  are  os-
cillatory motions  to  and  fro  about  O.  To  the  excur-
sion x the  acceleration-component  cp(x/r)  or  ( cpfr)x
in  the  direction  O , corresponds.  The  acceleration  is
proportional \ therefore,  to  the  excursion.  And  accord-
ingly the  motion  is  of  the  kind  just  investigated.  The


The  con-
nection be-
tween oscil-
latory mo-
tion of  this
kind  and
uniform
motion  in  a
circle.


The  iden-
tity of  the


i68


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  appli-
cation of
the  last  re-
sult to  pen
dulum  vi-
brations.


time  T of  a complete  to  and  fro  movement  is  also  the
periodic  time  of  the  circular  motion.  With  respect  to
the  latter,  however,  we  know  that  cp  = 4 r n*1  / T 2,  or,
what  is  the  same,  that  T=  2 n ^r/cp.  Now  cp/ris
the  acceleration  for  x=  i9  the  acceleration  that  corre-
sponds to  unit  of  excursion,  which  we  shall  briefly
designate  by  f For  the  oscillatory  motion  we  may
put,  therefore,  T = 2 7t  V 1 //*.  For  a single  movement
to,  or  a single  movement  fro, — the  common  method  of
reckoning  the  time  of  oscillation, — we  get,  then,  T=

tcV  1 If

11.  Now  this  result  is  directly  applicable  to  pen-
dulum vibrations  of  very  small  excursions,  where,  ne-
glecting the  curvature  of  the  path,  it  is  possible  to  ad-
here to  the  conception  developed.  For  the  angle  of
elongation  a we  obtain  as  the  distance  of  the  pendulum
bob  from  the  position  of  equilibrium,  l a ; and  as  the
corresponding  acceleration,  ga ; whence


/=


g*
l a


— •—  and  T = zr


This  formula  tells  us,  that  the  time  of  vibration  is
directly  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  length
of  the  pendulum,  and  inversely  proportional  to  the
square  root  of  the  acceleration  of  gravity.  A pendulum
that  is  four  times  as  long  as  the  seconds  pendulum,
therefore,  will  perform  its  oscillation  in  two  seconds.
A seconds  pendulum  removed  a distance  equal  to  the
earth’s  radius  from  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  sub-
jected therefore  to  the  acceleration  g/ 4,  will  likewise
perform  its  oscillation  in  two  seconds.

12.  The  dependence  of  the  time  of  oscillation  on
the  length  of  the  pendulum  is  very  easily  verifiable  by
experiment.  If  (Fig.  111)  the  pendulums  a , b,  c ,


THE  PR  I XL  'I PL  E S OF  DYXAMICS .


169


which  to  maintain  the  plane  of  oscillation  invariable
are  suspended  by  double  threads,  have  the  lengths  i,
4,  g,  then  a will  execute  two  oscillations  to  one  oscil-
lation of  b,  and  three  to  one  of  c.


The  verification  of  the  dependence  of  the  time  of
oscillation  on  the  acceleration  of  gravity  g is  some-
what more  difficult ; since  the  latter  cannot  be  arbi-
trarily altered.  But  the  demonstration  can  be  effected
by  allowing  one  component  only  of  g to  act  on  the
pendulum.  If  we  imagine  the  axis  of  oscillation  of


Experimen-
tal verifica-
tion of  the
laws  of  the
pendulum.


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


170


Experimen- the  pendulum  A A fixed  in  the  vertically  placed  plane

tal  verifica-  .

tion  of  the  of  the  paper,  EE  will  be  the  intersection  of  the  plane

laws  of  the  .

pendulum.  of  osculation  with  the  plane  of  the  paper

and  likewise  the  position  of  equilibrium
3 of  the  pendulum.  The  axis  makes  with
the  horizontal  plane,  and  the  plane  of  os-
cillation makes  with  the  vertical  plane,  the
angle  /?;  wherefore  the  acceleration^,  cos/?

Fig.  1 12.  is  the  acceleration  which  acts  in  this  plane.
If  the  pendulum  receive  in  the  plane  of  its  oscillation
the  small  elongation  a , the  corresponding  acceleration


Fig.  113.


will  be  (g  cos  /?)  a ; whence  the  time  of  oscillation  is
T=  7t  1/ l/g  cos  /?.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.  171

We  see  from  this  result,  that  as  ft  is  increased  the
acceleration  g cos  ft  diminishes,  and  consequently  the
time  of  oscillation  increases.  The  experiment  may  be
easily  made  with  the  apparatus  represented  in  Fig.  1 13.

The  frame  RR  is  free  to  turn  about  a hinge  at  C;  it  can
be  inclined  and  placed  on  its  side.  The  angle  of  in-
clination is  fixed  by  a graduated  arc  G held  by  a set-
screw. Every  increase  of  ft  increases  the  time  of  oscil-
lation. If  the  plane  of  oscillation  be  made  horizontal,
in  which  position  R rests  on  the  foot  F,  the  time  of
oscillation  becomes  infinitely  great.  The  pendulum
in  this  case  no  longer  returns  to  any  definite  position
but  describes  several  complete  revolutions  in  the  same
direction  until  its  entire  velocity  has  been  destroyed
by  friction.

13.  If  the  movement  of  the  pendulum  do  not  take  The  conical

. . -iij  pendulum.

place  m a plane,  but  be  performed  m space,  the  thread
of  the  pendulum  will  describe  the  surface
of  a cone.  The  motion  of  the  conical  pen-
dulum was  also  investigated  by  Huygens.

We  shall  examine  a simple  case  of  this
motion.  We  imagine  (Fig.  114)  a pen-
dulum of  length  / removed  from  the  ver-
tical by  the  angle  a,  a velocity  v imparted
to  the  bob  of  the  pendulum  at  right
angles  to  the  plane  of  elongation,  and  the  pendulum  re-
leased. The  bob  of  the  pendulum  will  move  in  a hori-
zontal circle  if  the  centrifugal  acceleration  q>  developed
exactly  equilibrates  the  acceleration  of  gravity  g;  that
is,  if  the  resultant  acceleration  falls  in  the  direction  of
the  pendulum  thread.  But  in  that  case  <p/g  — tan  nr.

If  T stands  for  the  time  taken  to  describe  one  revolu-
tion, the  periodic  time,  then  cp  = 4 r 7c2  / T2  or  T =

2 7t  V rjcp . Introducing,  now,  in  the  place  of  rjcp  the


172


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


value  / si na/g  tan  a = 1 cos a/g,  we  get  for  the  periodic
time  of  the  pendulum,  T=  2 n V l cos  a/g.  F or  the  ve-
locity v of  the  revolution  we  find  v = V rep,  and  since
cp  = ^-tan  a it  follows  that  v = \/ g l sin  a tan  a.  For
very  small  elongations  of  the  conical  pendulum  we  may
put  T —Q.TC  V l/g,  which  coincides  with  the  regular
formula  for  the  pendulum,  when  we  reflect  that  a single
revolution  of  the  conical  pendulum  corresponds  to  two
vibrations  of  the  common  pendulum.

The  deter-  1 4.  Huygens  was  the  first  to  undertake  the  exact
th^acceh0  determination  of  the  acceleration  of  gravity^ by  means
gravity  by  of  pendulum  observations.  From  the  formula  T=
iumfendu  7t  V l/g  for  a simple  pendulum  with  small  bob  we  ob-
tain directly  g==  n2  l/T2.  -For  latitude  450  we  obtain
as  the  value  of  g , in  metres  and  seconds,  9 . 806.  For
provisional  mental  calculations  it  is  sufficient  to  re-
member that  the  acceleration  of  gravity  amounts  in
round  numbers  to  10  metres  a second.
a remark  1 5.  Every  thinking  beginner  puts  to  himself  the
u?a express- question  how  it  is  that  the  duration  of  an  oscillation,
mg  the  law.  jg  a can  ]^e  founci  by  dividing  a number  that

is  the  measure  of  a length  by  a number  that  is  the
measure  of  an  acceleration  and  extracting  the  square
root  of  the  quotient.  But  the  fact  is  here  to  be  borne  in
mind  that  g—  2s/t2,  that  is  a length  divided  by  the
square  of  a time.  In  reality  therefore  the  formula  we
have  is  T = tc  V (l /2s)  t 2.  And  since  l /2  s is  the  ratio
of  two  lengths,  and  therefore  a number,  what  we  have
under  the  radical  sign  is  consequently  the  square  of  a
time.  It  stands  to  reason  that  we  shall  find  Tin  sec-
onds only  when,  in  determining  g,  we  also  take  the  sec-
ond as  unit  of  time.

In  the  formula  g—  n2  l / T2  we  see  directly  that  g is


THE  PR  I XC I PEES  OF  DYXAMICS,


a length  divided  by  the  square  of  a time,  according  to
the  nature  of  an  acceleration.

16.  The  most  important  achievement  of  Huvgens  Theprob-
is  his  solution  of  the  problem  to  determine  the  centre  centre  of

, oscillation.

of  oscillation.  So  long  as  we  have  to  deal  with  the  dy-
namics of  a single  bod}’,  the  Galilean  principles  amply
suffice.  But  in  the  problem  just  mentioned  we  have  to
determine  the  motion  of  several  bodies  that  mutually
influence  each  other.  This  cannot  be  done  without
resorting  to  a new  principle.  Such  a one  Huygens
actually  discovered.

We  know  that  long  pendulums  perform  their  oscil-  statement

, 1 1 . T of  the  prob-

ations more  slowly  than  short  ones.  JLet  us  imagine  a iem.

heavy  body,  free  to  rotate  about  an  axis,  the  centre  of
gravity  of  which  lies  outside  of  the  axis;  such  nr —
a body  will  represent  a compound  pendulum.  6
Every  material  particle  of  a pendulum  of  this  j
kind  would,  if  it  were  situated  alone  at  the
same  distance  from  the  axis,  have  its  own  pe-  °
riod  of  oscillation.  But  owing  to  the  connec-  Fig.  115.
tions  of  the  parts  the  whole  body  can  vibrate  with  only
a single,  determinate  period  of  oscillation.  If  we  pic-
ture to  ourselves  several  pendulums  of  unequal  lengths,
the  shorter  ones  will  swing  quicker,  the  longer  ones
slower.  If  all  be  joined  together  so  as  to  form  a single
pendulum,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  longer  ones
will  be  accelerated,  the  shorter  ones  retarded,  and  that
a sort  of  mean  time  of  oscillation  will  result.  There
must  exist  therefore  a simple  pendulum,  intermediate
in  length  between  the  shortest  and  the  longest,  that
has  the  same  time  of  oscillation  as  the  compound  pen-
dulum. If  we  lay  off  the  length  of  this  pendulum  on
the  compound  pendulum,  we  shall  find  a point  that  pre-
serves the  same  period  of  oscillation  in  its  connection


174


THE  SCIEXCE  OF  MECI/AXICS.


with  the  other  points  as  it  would  have  if  detached  and
left  to  itself.  This  point  is  the  centre  of  oscillation.
Mersenne  was  the  first  to  propound  the  problem  of
determining  the  centre  of  oscillation.  The  solution  of
Descartes,  who  attempted  it,  was,  however,  precipi-
tate and  insufficient.

Huygens’s  1 7.  Huvgens  was  the  first  who  gave  a general  solu-

solution.  . T ,111

tion.  Besides  Huygens  nearly  all  the  great  inquirers
of  that  time  employed  themselves  on  the  problem,  and
we  may  say  that  the  most  important  principles  of  mod-
ern mechanics  were  developed  in  connection  with  it.

The  new  idea  from  which  Huygens  set  out,  and
which  is  more  important  by  far  than  the  whole  prob-
lem, is  this.  In  whatsoever  manner  the  material  par-
ticles of  a pendulum  may  by  mutual  interaction  modify
each  other’s  motions,  in  every  case  the  velocities  ac-
quired in  the  descent  of  the  pendulum  can  be  such  only
that  by  virtue  of  them  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  par-
ticles, whether  still  in  connection  or  with  their  connec-
tions dissolved,  is  able  to  rise  just  as  high  as  the  point
The  new  from  which  it  fell.  H^^gens  found  himself  compelled,
whfcChPHuy-  by  the  doubts  of  his  contemporaries  as  to  the  correct-
Iucedntr°"  ness  of  this  principle,  to  remark,  that  the  only  assump-
tion implied  in  the  principle  is,  that  heavy  bodies  of
themselves  do  not  move  upwards.  If  it  were  possible
for  the  centre  of  gravity  of  a connected  system  of  falling
material  particles  to  rise  higher  after  the  dissolution
of  its  connections  than  the  point  from  which  it  had
fallen,  then  by  repeating  the  process  heavy  bodies
could,  by  virtue  of  their  own  weights,  be  made  to  rise
to  any  height  we  wished.  If  after  the  dissolution  of
the  connections  the  centre  of  gravity  should  rise  to  a
height  less  than  that  from  which  it  had  fallen,  we
should  only  have  to  reverse  the  motion  to  produce  the


THE  P REX  Cl  PEES  OF  DYXAMICS.


1 75


same  result.  What  Huygens  asserted,  therefore,  no
one  had  ever  really  doubted  ; on  the  contrary,  every
one  had  instinctively  perceived  it.  Huygens,  however,
gave  this  instinctive  perception  an  abstract , conceptual
form.  He  does  not  omit,  moreover,  to  point  out,  on  the
ground  of  this  view,  the  fruitlessness  of  endeavors  to
establish  a perpetual  motion.  The  principle  just  devel-
oped will  be  recognised  as  a generalisation  of  one  of  Ga-
lileo’s ideas .

1 8.  Let  us  now  see  what  the  principle  accomplishes  Huygens's

. . x principle

m the  determination  of  the  centre  of  oscillation.  Let  applied.
OA  (Fig.  116),  for  simplicity’s  sake,
be  a linear  pendulum,  made  up  of  a
large  number  of  masses  indicated  in
the  diagram  by  points.  Set  free  at
OA , it  will  swing  through  B to  OA',
where  AB  = BA * . Its  centre  of
gravity  5 will  ascend  just  as  high
on  the  second  side  as  it  fell  on  the
first.  From  this,  so  far,  nothing  would  follow.  But
also,  if  we  should  suddenly,  at  the  position  OB , re-
lease the  individual  masses  from  their  connections,  the
masses  could,  by  virtue  of  the  velocities  impressed  on
them  by  their  connections,  only  attain  the  same  height
with  respect  to  centre  of  gravity.  If  we  arrest  the  free
outward-swinging  masses  at  the  greatest  heights  they
severally  attain,  the  shorter  pendulums  will  be  found
below  the  line  OA',  the  longer  ones  will  have  passed
beyond  it,  but  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  will
be  found  on  OA'  in  its  former  position.

Now  let  us  note  that  the  enforced  velocities  are
proportional  to  the  distances  from  the  axis  ; therefore,
one  being  given,  all  are  determined,  and  the  height  of
ascent  of  the  centre  of  gravity  given.  Conversely,


1JO


THE  SCTEXCE  OF  J/ECHAXTCS.


therefore,  the  velocity  of  any  material  particle  also  is
determined  by  the  known  height  of  the  centre  of  grav-
ity. B:it  if  we  know  in  a pendulum  the  velocity  cor-
responding to  a given  distance  of  descent,  we  know  its
whole  motion.

Thede-  iq.  Premising  these  remarks,  we  proceed  to  the

iution  of  the  problem  itself.  On  a compound  linear  pendulum  (Fig.

1 1 7)  we  cut  off,  measuring  from  the  axis,  the
portion  = i.  If  the  pendulum  move  from  its
position  of  greatest  excursion  to  the  position
of  equilibrium,  the  point  at  the  distance  = i
from  the  axis  will  fall  through  the  height  k.
The  masses  m,  m"  ...  at  the  distances
/%  r',  /'  . . . will  fall  in  this  case  the  dis-
tances rkz  / k,  r"  k . . .,  and  the  distance  of
the  descent  of  the  centre  of  gravity  will  be :

mrk  -f-  m'r'k  -(-  m”r”k  -f-  . . . ; 2mr

m -f-  m*  -f-  m"  2 m

Let  the  point  at  the  distance  i from  the  axis  ac-
quire, on  passing  through  the  position  of  equilibrium,
the  velocity,  as  yet  unascertained,  v.  The  height  of
its  ascent,  after  the  dissolution  of  its  connections,  will
be  v2  / 2 g.  The  corresponding  heights  of  ascent  of
the  other  material  particles  will  then  be  ( rv)2j2g ,
(r'r)  2/2 g,  (r”v)2/2g . . . . The  height  of  ascent  of  the
centre  of  gravity  of  the  liberated  masses  will  be


THE  PR IX Cl PLE S OF  DYXAMICS,


177


From  this  a relation  is  deducible  between  the  distance  of
descent  k and  the  velocity  v.  Since,  however,  all  pen-
dulum motions  of  the  same  excursion  are  phoronomi-
cally  similar,  the  motion  here  under  consideration  is,
in  this  result,  completely  determined.

To  find  the  length  of  the  simple  pendulum  that  has  The  length

. . , c ...  . , , of  the  Sim-

the  same  period  01  oscillation  as  the  compound  pen-  pie  isoch-
dulum  considered,  be  it  noted  that  the  same  relation  pendulum,
must  obtain  between  the  distance  of  its  descent  and  its
velocity,  as  in  the  case  of  its  unimpeded  fall.  If  y is
the  length  of  this  pendulum,  ky  is  the  distance  of  its
descent,  and  vy  its  velocity ; wherefore

O y)2  7

= ky,  or


y


l!l  = k

9 or


(*)•


Multiplying  equation  ( a ) by  equation  (£>)  we  obtain

2 771  r2


2 7)i  r


Employing  the  principle  of  phoronomic  similitude,
we  may  also  proceed  in  this  way.  From  (a)  we  get


v


Solution  of
the  prob-
lem by  the
principle  of
similitude.


A simple  pendulum  of  length  1,  under  corresponding
circumstances,  has  the  velocity

i\  = 1 /'Igk.

Calling  the  time  of  oscillation  of  the  compound  pendu-
lum T,  that  of  the  simple  pendulum  of  length  1 T1  =
7tV  i/g , we  obtain,  adhering  to  the  supposition  of
equal  excursions,

T v h f 2 7/1 7~2

T±  v \g2;ur


178


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Huygens'
principle
:d<  nticai
with  the
principle
zns  viz  hz.


s 20.  We  see  without  difficulty  in  the  Huygenian
principle  the  recognition  of  work  as  the  condition  de-
of  ter  initiative  of  velocity,  or,  more  exactly,  the  condition
determinative  of  the  so-called  vis  viva.  By  the  vis
viva  or  living  force  of  a system  of  masses  m,  mf,

m, affected  with  the  velocities  v,  vn  vn  . . . we

understand  the  sum  *

- m'v'2  i m"v"2  i

2~r  2 2 "•


The  fundamental  principle  of  Huygens  is  identical  with
the  principle  of  vis  viva.  The  additions  of  later  in-
quirers were  made  not  so  much  to  the  idea  as  to  the
form  of  its  expression.

If  we  picture  to  ourselves  generally  any  system  of
weights  pjpr,  pn  . . • which  fall  connected  or  uncon-
nected through  the  heights  h , hn  hn  . . . and  attain
thereby  the  velocities  v,  v,,  vn  . . . then,  by  the  Huy-
genian conception,  a relation  of  equality  exists  between,
the  distance  of  descent  and  the  distance  of  ascent  of  the
centre  of  gravity  of  the  system,  and,  consequently,  the
equation  holds

V2  ,V'2  rfV"2

fh±lh'  _/g?  + /gF  + i>  17  +

/+/+/'+-••  /+/  + /'+••••


or  2p/i  = — 2


pv 2


If  we  have  reached  the  concept  of  “mass,”  which
Huygens  did  not  yet  possess  in  his  investigations,  we
may  substitute  for p/g  the  mass  m and  thus  obtain  the
form  2pk=  \ '2mv2,  which  is  very  easily  generalised
for  non-constant  forces.


* This  is  not  the  usual  definition  of  English  writers,  who  follow  the  older
authorities  in  making  the  vis  viva  twice  this  quantity. — Trans.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  D YXAMICS.


179


21.  With  the  aid  of  the  principle  of  living  forces  General

. • method  of

we  can  determine  the  duration  of  the  infinitely  small  determin-
oscillations  of  any  pendulum  whatso-
ever. We  let  fall  from  the  centre  of
gravity  s (Fig.  1 18)  a perpendicular  on
the  axis  ; the  length  of  the  perpendic-
ular is,  say,  a . We  lay  off  on  this,
measuring  from  the  axis,  the  length
= 1.  Let  the  distance  of  descent  of
the  point  in  question  to  the  position  of
equilibrium  be  k,  and  v the  velocity  acquired.  Since
the  work  done  in  the  descent  is  determined  by  the
motion  of  the  centre  of  gravity,  we  have

work  done  in  descent  = vis  viva  :
akgM  =^-  2 mr2.

M here  we  call  the  total  mass  of  the  pendulum  and
anticipate  the  expression  vis  viva.  By  an  inference
similar  to  that  in  the  preceding  case,  we  obtain  T =
n\/  HE  m r 2 /a  gM.

22.  We  see  that  the  duration  of  infinitely  small  The  two

deierimna-

oscillations  of  any  pendulum  is  determined  by  two  fac- tive factors,
tors — by  the  value  of  the  expression  2 m r 2 , which
Euler  called  the  moment  of  inertia  and  which  Huygens
had  employed  without  any  particular  designation,  and
by  the  value  of  agM.  The  latter  expression,  which  we
shall  briefly  term  the  statical  moment,  is  the  product
a JR  of  the  weight  of  the  pendulum  into  the  distance  of
its  centre  of  gravity  from  the  axis.  If  these  two  values
be  given,  the  length  of  the  simple  pendulum  of  the
same  period  of  oscillation  (the  isochronous  pendulum)
and  the  position  of  the  centre  of  oscillation  are  deter-
mined.


i8o


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Huygens’s  For  the  determination  of  the  lengths  of  the  pendu-
methods  of  lums  referred  to,  Huygens,  in  the  lack  of  the  analytical

solution.  , , , ’ I t , .

methods  later  discovered,  employed  a very  ingenious
geometrical  procedure,  which
we  shall  illustrate  by  one  or
two  examples.  Let  the  prob-
lem be  to  determine  the  time
of  oscillation  of  a homogene-
ous,  material,  and  heavy  rec-
tangle A BCD , which  swings
on  the  axis  AB  (Fig.  119).
Dividing  the  rectangle  into
minute  elements  of  area  f f„
having  the  distances
r,  rn  rn  ...  . from  the  axis,  the  expression  for  the
length  of  the  isochronous  simple  pendulum,  or  the  dis-
tance of  the  centre  of  oscillation  from  the  axis,  is  given
by  the  equation

fr*+f,r*+fnr,*  + . ...
fr+f,r,+f„r„  +

Let  us  erect  on  ABCD  at  C and  D the  perpendiculars
CD  = DF  = A C ==  BD  and  picture  to  ourselves  a
homogeneous  wedge  ABCDEF.  Now  find  the  distance
of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  this  wedge  from  the  plane
through  AB  parallel  to  CDEF.  We  have  to  consider,
in  so  doing,  the  tiny  columns />,/,  rnfnrn  . . . . and
their  distances  r,  rfi  rn  . . . . from  the  plane  referred
to.  Thus  proceeding,  we  obtain  for  the  required  dis-
tance of  the  centre  of  gravity  the  expression

fr  • ^ +/,  r,  . r,  +/„  r,,.r„  +

fr  +/,  r,  +/„  r„  +

that  is,  the  same  expression  as  before.  The  centre  of
oscillation  of  the  rectangle  and  the  centre  of  gravity  of


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS,


181


the  wedge  are  consequently  at  the  same  distance  from
the  axis,  f -AC.

Following  out  this  idea,  we  readily  perceive  the  Analogous
correctness  of  the  following  assertions.  For  a homo-  tions  of  the
geneous  rectangle  of  height  h swinging  about  one  of  methods g
its  sides,  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  gravity  from  the
axis  is  hj'i , the  distance  of  the  centre  of  oscillation  -J  h.

For  a homogeneous  triangle  of  height  h , the  axis  of
which  passes  through  the  vertex  parallel  to  the  base,
the  distance  of  the  centre  of  gravity  from  the  axis  is
|7z,  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  oscillation  |7z.  Call-
ing the  moments  of  inertia  of  the  rectangle  and  of  the
triangle  z/15  x 12 , and  their  respective  masses  M19  M2,
we  get


\ h :


4,


2h

3 M 2


Consequently  A x


h*Mx
3 ’


^2  =


2 '


By  this  pretty  geometrical  conception  many  prob-
lems can  be  solved  that  are  to-day  treated — more  con-
veniently it  is  true — by  routine  forms.


Fig.  120.


Fig.  I2i.


23.  We  shall  now  discuss  a proposition  relating  to
moments  of  inertia,  that  Huygens  made  use  of  in  a
somewhat  different  form.  Let  O (Fig.  121)  be  the
centre  of  gravity  of  any  given  body.  Make  this  the


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


182

The  reia-  origin  of  a system  of  rectangular  coordinates,  and  sup-
ra ents  of  in- pose  the  moment  of  inertia  with  reference  to  the  Z- axis
ferredeto  determined.  If  m is  the  element  of  mass  and  r its  dis-
axes.llel  tance  from  the  Z-axis,  then  this  moment  of  inertia  is
A — 2mr2.  We  now  displace  the  axis  of  rotation
parallel  to  itself  to  O',  the  distance  a in  the  Af-direction.
The  distance  r is  transformed,  by  this  displacement,
into  the  new  distance  p,  and  the  new  moment  of
inertia  is

Q = 2mp2  = 2 m [(#  — a)2  -f- y2~\  = 2m  (x2  -f-  J;2)  —
2a2mx-\-  a22 m,  or,  since  2 7n  (^2+j2)  =2mr 2 = A,
calling  the  total  mass  M=  2m,  and  remembering  the
property  of  the  centre  of  gravity  2 m x = 0,

@ = J + a*M.

From  the  moment  of  inertia  for  one  axis  through  the
centre  of  gravity,  therefore,  that  for  any  other  axis
parallel  to  the  first  is  easily  derivable.

An  appii-  24.  An  additional  observation  presents  itself  here.

cation  of  ‘

thispropo-  The  distance  of  the  centre  of  oscillation  is  given  by

sition.

the  equation  /=  A + a2M/aM,  where  A,  M,  and  a
have  their  previous  significance.  The  quantities  A and
M are  invariable  for  any  one  given  body.  So  long
therefore  as  a retains  the  same  value,  l will  also  remain
invariable.  For  all  parallel  axes  situated  at  the  same
distance  from  the  centre  of  gravity,  the  same  body  as
pendulum  has  the  same  period  of  oscillation.  If  we
put  A/M=  k,  then

/=  — + a.

a

Now  since  / denotes  the  distance  of  the  centre  of
oscillation,  and  a the  distance  of  the  centre  of  gravity
from  the  axis,  therefore  the  centre  of  oscillation  is
always  farther  away  from  the  axis  than  the  centre  of


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  D YNAMICS .


183


gravity  by  the  distance  uja . Therefore  xta  is  the  dis-
tance of  the  centre  of  oscillation,  from  the  centre  of


gravity.  If  through  the  centre  of  oscillation  we  place
a second  axis  parallel  to  the  original  axis,  a passes
thereby  into  uja,  and  we  obtain  the  new  pendulum
length


K


x

a


— a -f-


K

a


= /.


a

The  time  of  oscillation  remains  the  same  therefore
for  the  second  parallel  axis  through  the  centre  of  oscil-
lation, and  consequently  the  same  also  for  every  par-
allel axis  that  is  at  the  same  distance  xja  from  the
centre  of  gravity  as  the  centre  of  oscillation.

The  totality  of  all  parallel  axes  corresponding  to
the  same  period  of  oscillation  and  having  the  distances  a
and  x/a  from  the  centre  of  gravity,  is  consequently  re-
alised in  two  coaxial  cylinders.  Each  generating  line
is  interchangeable  as  axis  with  every  other  generating
line  without  affecting  the  period  of  oscillation.

25.  To  obtain  a clear  view  of  the  relations  subsist- The  axial
ing  between  the  two  axial  cylinders,  as  we  shall  briefly
call  them,  let  us  institute  the  following  considerations.

We  put  A = k2M,  and  then

k 2

/ = — 4-  a.
a

If  we  seek  the  a that  corresponds  to  a given  /,  and
therefore  to  a given  time  of  oscillation,  we  obtain


Generally  therefore  to  one  value  of  l there  correspond
two  values  of  a.  Only  where  V l2  — k2  = 0,  that  is
in  cases  in  which  /=  2^,  do  both  values  coincide  in
a—k .


184


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


If  we  designate  the  two  values  of  a that  correspond
to  every  /,  by  a and  ft,  then


7 k 2 + nr2  k 2 -f  ft*

/= = or

nr  ft

ft  (I*  + a2)  = a{k2  + /?2),
k2(ft—a)  = aft{ft  — (X),
k2  = nr . /?.


The  deter-  If,  therefore,  m any  pendulous  body  we  know  two  par-

mination  of  ’ , , J r J f ...  . ,

the  prece^allel  axes  that  have  the  same  time  of  osculation  and

jflg

by  a geo-  different  distances  nr  and  ft  from  the  centre  of  gravity,

metrical  . . .

method.  as  is  the  case  for  instance  where  we  are  able  to  give  the
centre  of  oscillation  for  any  point  of  suspension,  we
can  construct  k.  We  lay  off  (Fig.  122)  nr  and  ft  con-


p A

Fig.  123.


secutively  on  a straight  line,  describe  a semicircle  on
a -{-ft  as  diameter,  and  erect  a perpendicular  at  the
point  of  junction  of  the  two  divisions  nr  and  ft.  On  this
perpendicular  the  semicircle  cuts  off  k.  If  on  the  other
hand  we  know  k , then  for  every  value  of  a,  say  A,  a
value  p is  obtainable  that  will  give  the  same  period
of  oscillation  as  A.  We  construct  (Fig.  123)  with  A
and  k as  sides  a right  angle,  join  their  extremities  by  a
straight  line  on  which  we  erect  at  the  extremity  of  k a
perpendicular  which  cuts  off  on  A produced  the  por-
tion p.

Now  let  us  imagine  any  body  whatsoever  (Fig.  124)
with  the  centre  of  gravity  0.  We  place  it  in  the  plane


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS.


185


of  the  drawing,  and  make  it  swing  about  all  possible  An  iiiustn
parallel  axes  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  idea.

All  the  axes  that  pass  through  the  circle  a are,  we
find,  with  respect  to  period  of  oscillation,  interchange-
able with  each  other  and  also  with  those  that  pass
through  the  circle  ft.  If  instead  of  a we  take  a smaller
circle  A,  then  in  the  place  of  ft  we  shall  get  a larger


Fig.  124.


circle  jjl.  Continuing  in  this  manner,  both  circles  ul-
timately meet  in  one  with  the  radius  k .

26.  We  have  dwelt  at  such  length  on  the  foregoing  ^apitula
matters  for  good  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  they  have
served  our  purpose  of  displaying  in  a clear  light  the
splendid  results  of  the  investigations  of  Huygens.  For
all  that  we  have  given  is  virtually  contained,  though
in  somewhat  different  form,  in  the  writings  of  Huygens,


i86


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


or  is  at  least  so  approximately  presented  in  them  that
it  can  be  supplied  without  the  slightest  difficulty.  Only
a very  small  portion  of  it  has  found  its  way  into  our
modern  elementary  text-books.  One  of  the  proposi-
tions that  has  thus  been  incorporated  in  our  elemen-
tary treatises  is  that  referring  to  the  convertibility  of
the  point  of  suspension  and  the  centre  of  oscillation.
The  usual  presentation,  however,  is  not  exhaustive.
Captain  Kater,  as  we  know,  employed  this  principle
for  determining  the  exact  length  of  the  seconds  pen-
dulum.

Function  of  The  points  raised  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  have
of  inertia,  also  rendered  us  the  service  of  supplying  enlighten-
ment as  to  the  nature  of  the  conception  “ moment  of
inertia.”  This  notion  affords  us  no  insight,  in  point
of  principle,  that  we  could  not  have  obtained  without
it.  But  since  we  save  by  its  aid  the  individual  con-
sideration of  the  particles  that  make  up  a system,  or
dispose  of  them  once  for  all,  we  arrive  by  a shorter
and  easier  way  at  our  goal.  This  idea,  therefore,  has
a high  import  in  the  economy  of  mechanics.  Poinsot,
after  Euler  and  Segner  had  attempted  a similar  object
with  less  success,  further  developed  the  ideas  that  be-
long to  this  subject,  and  by  his  ellipsoid  of  inertia  and
central  ellipsoid  introduced  further  simplifications.

The  lesser  27.  The  investigations  of  Huygens  concerning  the
tions  of  geometrical  and  mechanical  properties  of  cycloids  are
Huygens.  ^ ]ess  importance.  The  cycloidal  pendulum,  a contriv-
ance in  which  Huygens  realised,  not  an  approximate,
but  an  exact  independence  of  the  time  and  amplitude
of  oscillation,  has  been  dropt  from  the  practice  of  mod-
ern horology  as  unnecessary.  We  shall  not,  therefore,
enter  into  these  investigations  here,  however  much  of
the  geometrically  beautiful  they  may  present.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


187


Great  as  the  merits  of  Huygens  are  with  respect  to  Huygens’s

. c crowning

the  most  different  physical  theories,  the  art  of  horology,  achieve-

. ~ . . ment.

practical  dioptrics,  and  mechanics  m particular,  his
chief  performance,  the  one  that  demanded  the  greatest
intellectual  courage,  and  that  was  also  accompanied
with  the  greatest  results,  remains  his  enunciation  of  the
principle  by  which  he  solved  the  problem  of  the  centre
of  oscillation.  This  very  principle,  however,  was  the
only  one  he  enunciated  that  was  not  adequately  appre-
ciated by  his  contemporaries ; nor  was  it  for  a long
period  thereafter.  We  hope  to  have  placed  this  prin-
ciple here  in  its  right  light  as  identical  with  the  prin-
ciple of  vis  viva . (See  Appendix,  XIII.,  p.  530.)

in.

THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF  NEWTON.

1.  The  merits  of  Newton  with  respect  to  our  sub- Newton’s

n , . merits.

ject  were  twofold.  First,  he  greatly  extended  the  range
of  mechanical  physics  by  his  discovery  of  universal
gravitation.  Second,  he  completed  the  formal  enunciation
of  the  mechanical  principles  now  generally  accepted . Since
his  time  no  essentially  new  principle  has  been  stated.

All  that  has  been  accomplished  in  mechanics  since  his
day,  has  been  a deductive,  formal,  and  mathematical
development  of  mechanics  on  the  basis  of  Newton’s
laws.

2.  Let  us  first  cast  a glance  at  Newton’s  achieve- His  great
ment  in  the  domain  of  physics.  Kepler  had  deduced  discovery,
from  the  observations  of  Tycho  Brahe  and  his  own,

three  empirical  laws  for  the  motion  of  the  planets
about  the  sun,  which  Newton  by  his  new  view  rendered
intelligible.  The  laws  of  Kepler  are  as  follows  :

1)  The  planets  move  about  the  sun  in  ellipses,  in
one  focus  of  which  the  sun  is  situated.


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Kepler’s  The  radius  vector  joining  each  planet  with  the

laws.  Their  J 1 . 1 -

part  in  the  sun  describes  equal  areas  m equal  times.

3)  The  cubes  of  the  mean  distances  of  the  planets
from  the  sun  are  proportional  to  the  squares  of
their  times  of  revolution.

He  who  clearly  understands  the  doctrine  of  Galileo
and  Huygens,  must  see  that  a curvilinear  motion  im-
plies deflective  acceleration.  Hence,  to  explain  the  phe-
nomena of  planetary  motion,  an  acceleration  must  be
supposed  constantly  directed  towards  the  concave  side
of  the  planetary  orbits.

Central  ac-  Now  Kepler’s  second  law,  the  law  of  areas,  is  ex-

celeration  ...  , , . r J .

explains  plained  at  once  by  the  assumption  of  a constant  plane-

Kepler’s  r J , . ’ .

second  law.  tary  acceleration  towards  the  sun;  or  rather,  this  ac-
celeration is  another  form  of  expression  for  the  same
fact.  If  a radius  vector  describes

At in  an  element  of  time  the  area

/ D/-  ABS  (Fig.  125),  then  in  the  next

/ / ss  equal  element  of  time,  assuming

J / As  no  acceleration,  the  area  BCS

j /jr  will  be  described,  where  BC  =

Spr  AB  and  lies  in  the  prolongation

Fig- 125.  of  AB.  But  if  the  central  accel-


eration during  the  first  element  of  time  produces  a
velocity  by  virtue  of  which  the  distance  BD  will  be
traversed  in  the  same  interval,  the  next-succeeding
area  swept  out  is  not  BCS \ but  BBS,  where  CE  is  par-
allel and  equal  to  BD.  But  it  is  evident  that  BBS  =
BCS=  ABS.  Consequently,  the  law  of  the  areas  con-
stitutes, in  another  aspect,  a central  acceleration.

Having  thus  ascertained  the  fact  of  a central  accel-
eration, the  third  law  leads  us  to  the  discovery  of  its
character.  Since  the  planets  move  in  ellipses  slightly
different  from  circles,  we  may  assume,  for  the  sake  of


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


simplicity,  that  their  orbits  actually  are  circles.  If  Rv  The  formal
R2,  Rz  are  the  radii  and  Tlf  T2,  Tz  the  respective  of  this  Re-
times of  revolution  of  the  planets,  Kepler’s  third  law  deduciSe
may  be  written  as  follows  : ier? third

law.

R 3 JR  3 JR  3

~i=F^  = t = 77T7-  = • • — a constant.


But  we  know  that  the  expression  for  the  central  accel-
eration of  motion  in  a circle  is  p = 4 R 7c2 / T2 , or
T2  = \ tc2  R/cp . Substituting  this  value  we  get
cpx  Rx2  = p2  R22  = cpz  R22  = constant ; or
p = constant  /R2  ;

that  is  to  say,  on  the  assumption  of  a central  accelera-
tion inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance,
we  get,  from  the  known  laws  of  central  motion,  Kep-
ler’s third  law  ; and  vice  versa .

Moreover,  though  the  demonstration  is  not  easily
put  in  an  elementary  form,  when  the  idea  of  a central
acceleration  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the
distance  has  been  reached,  the  demonstration  that  this
acceleration  is  another  expression  for  the  motion  in
conic  sections,  of  which  the  planetary  motion  in  ellipses
is  a particular  case,  is  a mere  affair  of  mathematical
analysis.

3.  But  in  addition  to  the  intellectual  perform ance  The  ques-
just  discussed,  the  way  to  which  was  fully  prepared  by  physical  f
Kepler,  Galileo,  and  Huygens,  still  another  achieve-  Ms  accei-

eration.

ment  of  Newton  remains  to  be  estimated  which  m no
respect  should  be  underrated.  This  is  an  achievement
of  the  imagination.  We  have,  indeed,  no  hesitation
in  saying  that  this  last  is  the  most  important  of  all.

Of  what  nature  is  the  acceleration  that  conditions  the
curvilinear  motion  of  the  planets  about  the  sun,  and^
of  the  satellites  about  the  planets


igo


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  steps  Newton  perceived,  with  great  audacity  of  thought,
inaiiy iedS  and  first  in  the  instance  of  the  moon,  that  this  accel-
the  idea  of  eration  differed  in  no  substantial  respect  from  the  ac-
gravitation.  celeration  of  gravity  so  familiar  to  us.  It  was  prob-
ably the  principle  of  continuity,  which  accomplished
so  much  in  Galileo’s  case,  that  led  him  to  his  dis-
covery. He  was  wont — and  this  habit  appears  to  be
common  to  all  truly  great  investigators — to  adhere  as
closely  as  possible,  even  in  cases  presenting  altered
conditions,  to  a conception  once  formed,  to  preserve
the  same  uniformity  in  his  conceptions  that  nature
teaches  us  to  see  in  her  processes.  That  which  is  a
property  of  nature  at  any  one  time  and  in  any  one
place,  constantly  and  everywhere  recurs,  though  it
may  not  be  with  the  same  prominence.  If  the  attrac-
tion of  gravity  is  observed  to  prevail,  not  only  on  the
surface  of  the  earth,  but  also  on  high  mountains  and  in
deep  mines,  the  physical  inquirer,  accustomed  to  con-
tinuity in  his  beliefs,  conceives  this  attraction  as  also
operative  at  greater  heights  and  depths  than  those  ac-
cessible to  us.  He  asks  himself,  Where  lies  the  limit
of  this  action  of  terrestrial  gravity  ? Should  its  action
not  extend  to  the  moon  ? With  this  question  the  great
flight  of  fancy  was  taken,  of  which,  with  Newton’s  in-
tellectual genius,  the  great  scientific  achievement  was
but  a necessary  consequence.  (See  p.  531.)

The  appii-’  Newton  discovered  first  in  the  case  of  the  moon  that
this  idea  to  the  same  acceleration  that  controls  the  descent  of  a
of  the  moon,  stone  also  prevented  this  heavenly  body  from  moving
away  in  a rectilinear  path  from  the  earth,  and  that,  on
the  other  hand,  its  tangential  velocity  prevented  it  from
falling  towards  the  earth.  The  motion  of  the  moon
thus  suddenly  appeared  to  him  in  an  entirely  new  light,
but  withal  under  quite  familiar  points  of  view.  The


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  D YNAMICS.


191


new  conception  was  attractive  in  that  it  embraced  ob-
jects that  previously  were  very  remote,  and  it  was  con-
vincing in  that  it  involved  the  most  familiar  elements.

This  explains  its  prompt  application  in  other  fields  and
the  sweeping  character  of  its  results.

Newton  not  only  solved  by  his  new  conception  the  its  univer-
thousand  years’  puzzle  of  the  - planetary  system,  buttiontoaii
also  furnished  by  it  the  key  to  the  explanation  of  a
number  of  other  important  phenomena.  In  the  same
way  that  the  acceleration  due  to  terrestrial  gravity  ex-
tends to  the  moon  and  to  all  other  parts  of  space,  so  do
the  accelerations  that  are  due  to  the  other  heavenly
bodies,  to  which  we  must,  by  the  principle  of  contin-
uity, ascribe  the  same  properties,  extend  to  all  parts
of  space,  including  also  the  earth.  But  if  gravitation  is
not  peculiar  to  the  earth,  its  seat  is  not  exclusively  in  the
centre  of  the  earth.  Every  portion  of  the  earth,  how-
ever small,  shares  it.  Every  part  of  the  earth  attracts,
or  determines  an  acceleration  of,  every  other  part.

Thus  an  amplitude  and  freedom  of  physical  view  were
reached  of  which  men  had  no  conception  previously  to
Newton’s  time.

A long  series  of  propositions  respecting  the  action  The  sweep
of  spheres  on  other  bodies  situated  beyond,  upon,  or  ter  of  ftsre-
within  the  spheres  ; inquiries  as  to  the  shape  of  the
earth,  especially  concerning  its  flattening  by  rotation,
sprang,  as  it  were,  spQntaneously  from  this  view.  The
riddle  of  the  tides,  the  connection  of  which  with  the
moon  had  long  before  been  guessed,  was  suddenly  ex-
plained as  due  to  the  acceleration  of  the  mobile  masses
of  terrestrial  water  by  the  moon.  (See  p.  533.)

4.  The  reaction  of  thenew  ideas  on  mechanics  was
a result  which  speedily  followed.  The  greatly  varying
accelerations  which  by  the  new  view  the  same  body  be-


192


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


the  effect  came  affected  with  according  to  its  position  in  space,
ideas  on  suggested  at  once  the  idea  of  variable  weight,  yet  also
mec  antes.  p0«ntecj  tQ  on£  characteristic  property  of  bodies  which

was  constant.  The  notions  of  mass  and  weight  were
thus  first  clearly  distinguished.  The  recognised  vari-
ability of  acceleration  led  Newton  to  determine  by  spe-
cial experiments  the  fact  that  the  acceleration  of  gravity
is  independent  of  the  chemical  constitution  of  bodies ;
whereby  new  positions  of  vantage  were  gained  for  the
elucidation  of  the  relation  of  mass  and  weight,  as  will
presently  be  shown  more  in  detail.  Finally,  the  uni-
versal applicability  of  Galileo’s  idea  of  force  was  more
palpably  impressed  on  the  mind  by  Newton’s  perform-
ances than  it  ever  had  been  before.  People  could  no
longer  believe  that  this  idea  was  alone  applicable  to  the
phenomenon  of  falling  bodies  and  the  processes  most
immediately  connected  therewith.  The  generalisation
was  effected  as  of  itself,  and  without  attracting  partic-
ular attention.

Newton’s  5,  Let  us  now  discuss,  more  in  detail,  the  achieve-
ments in  _ ments  of  Newton  as  they  bear  upon  the  principles  of
of  mechan-  mecha?iics.  In  so  doing,  we  shall  first  devote  ourselves
exclusively  to  Newton’s  ideas,  seek  to  bring  them  for-
cibly home  to  the  reader’s  mind,  and  restrict  our  criti-
cisms wholly  to  preparatory  remarks,  reserving  the
criticism  of  details  for  a subsequent  section.  On  pe-
rusing Newton’s  work  {Philos op fyice  Naturalis  Principia
Mathematica.  London,  1687),  the  following  things
strike  us  at  once  as  the  chief  advances  beyond  Galileo
and  Huygens  :

1)  The  generalisation  of  the  idea  of  force.  .

2)  The  introduction  of  the  concept  of  mass.

3)  The  distinct  and  general  formulation  of  the  prin-
ciple of  the  parallelogram  of  forces.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  D YNAMICSl


193


4)  The  statement  of  the  law  of  action  and  reaction.

6.  With  respect  to  the  first  point  little  is  to  be  His  attitude
added  to  what  has  already  been  said.  Newton  -con-  ^therfleld
ceives  all  circumstances  determinative  of  motion,
whether  terrestrial  gravity  or  attractions  of  planets,  or
the  action  of  magnets,  and  so  forth,  as  circumstances
determinative  of  acceleration.  He  expressly  remarks
on  this  point  that  by  the  words  attraction  and  the  like
he  does  not  mean  to  put  forward  any  theory  concern-
ing the  cause  or  character  of  the  mutual  action  referred
to,  but  simply  wishes  to  express  (as  modern'  writers
say,  in  a differential  form)  what  is  otherwise  expressed
(that  is,  in  an  inte^rated_form)  in  the  description  of  the
motion.  ^Ne"wton?s  reiterated  and  emphatic  protesta-
tions that  he  is  not  concerned  with  hypotheses  as  to  the
causes  of  phenomena,  but  has  simply  to  do  with  the
investigation  and  transformed  statement  of  actual facts ,

— a direction  of  thought  that  is  distinctly  and  tersely
uttered  in  his  words  hypotheses  non  fingo,”  “I  do
not  frame  hypotheses,  ” — stamps  him  as  a philosopher
of  the  highest  rank.  He  is  not  desirous  to  astound  andTbeRegu-

_ . . . . . lae  Philoso-

startle,  or  to  impress  the  imagination  by  the  originality  phandi.
of  his  ideas  : his  aim  is  to  know  Nature .*

* This  is  conspicuously  shown  in  the  rules  that  Newton  formed  for  the
conduct  of  natural  inquiry  (the  Regulce  Philosolkandi)  :

“ Rule  I.  No  more  causes  of  natural  things  are  to  be  admitted  than  such
as  truly  exist  and  are  sufficient  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  these  things.

“ Rule  II.  Therefore,  to  natural  effects  of  the  same  kind  we  must,  as  far
as  possible,  assign  the  same  causes ; e.  g.,  to  respiration  in  man  and  animals ;
to  the  descent  of  stones  in  Europe  and  in  America ; to  the  light  of  our  kitchen
fire  and  of  the  sun ; to  the  reflection  of  light  on  the  earth  and  on  the  planets.

“Rule  III.  Those  qualities  of  bodies  that  can  be  neither  increased  nor
diminished,  and  which  are  found  to  belong  to  all  bodies  within  the  reach  of
our  experiments,  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  universal  qualities  of  all  bodies.

[Here  follows  the  enumeration  of  the  properties  of  bodies  which  has  been  in-
corporated in  all  text-books.]

“ If  it  universally  appear,  by  experiments  and  astronomical  observations,
that  all  bodies  in  the  vicinity  of  the  earth  are  heavy  with  respect  to  the  earth,
and  this  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  matter  which  they  severally  contain ;


194


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  New-  7.  With  regard  to  the  concept  of  “ mass/’  it  is  to
ceptaofCOn’  be  observed  that  the  formulation  of  Newton,  which  de-
fines mass  to  be  the  quantity  of  matter  of  a body  as
measured  by  the  product  of  its  volume  and  density,  is
unfortunate.  As  we  can  only  define  density  as  the  mass
of  unit  of  volume,  the  circle  is  manifest.  Newton  felt
distinctly  that  in  every  body  there  was  inherent  a prop-
erty whereby  the  amount  of  its  motion  was  determined
and  perceived  that  this  must  be  different  from  weight.
He  called  it,  as  we  still  do,  mass  ; but  he  did  not  suc-
ceed in  correctly  stating  this  perception.  We  shall  re-
vert later  on  to  this  point,  and  shall  stop  here  only  to
make  the  following  preliminary  remarks.

The  expe-  8.  Numerous  experiences,  of  which  a sufficient  num-
which  point  ber  stood  at  Newton’s  disposal,  point  clearly  to  the  ex-

to  the  exist-  . . . , ,

ence  of  such  istence  of  a property  distinct  from  weight,  whereby  the

y/M  quantity  of  motion  of  the
body  to  which  it  belongs  is
determined.  If  (Fig.  126)
we  tie  a fly-wheel  to  a rope
and  attempt  to  lift  it  by
means  of  a pulley,  we  feel
□ the  weight  of  the  fly-wheel.
If  the  wheel  be  placed
on  a perfectly  cylindrical  axle  and  well  balanced,  it
will  no  longer  assume  by  virtue  of  its  weight  any  de-
terminate position.  Nevertheless,  we  are  sensible  of

that  the  moon  is  heavy  with  respect  to  the  earth  in  the  proportion  of  its  mass,
and  our  seas  with  respect  to  the  moon  ; and  all  the  planets  with  respect  to  one
another,  and  the  comets  also  with  respect  to  the  sun ; we  must,  in  conformity
with  this  rule,  declare,  that  all  bodies  are  heavy  with  respect  to  one  another.

“ Rule  IV.  In  experimental  physics  propositions  collected  by  induction
from  phenomena  are  to  be  regarded  either  as  accurately  true  or  very  nearly
true,  notwithstanding  any  contrary  hypotheses,  till  other  phenomena  occur,  by
which  they  are  made  more  accurate,  or  are  rendered  subject  to  exceptions.

“This  rule  must  be  adhered  to,  that  the  results  of  induction  may  not  be
annulled  by  hypotheses.”


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


195


a powerful  resistance  the  moment  we  endeavor  to  set  Mass  dis-
the  wheel  in  motion  or  attempt  to  stop  it  when  in  mo-  weight.003
tion.  This  is  the  phenomenon  that  led  to  the  enuncia-
tion of  a distinct  property  of  matter  termed  inertia,  or
“ force  ” of  inertia — a step  which,  as  we  have  already
seen,  and  shall  further  explain  below  is  unnecessary.

Two  equal  loads  simultaneously  raised,  offer  resistance
by  their  weight.  Tied  to  the  extremities  of  a cord  that
passes  over  a pulley,  they  offer  resistance  to  any  mo-
tion, or  rather  to  any  change  of  velocity  of  the  pulley,
by  their  mass.  . A large  weight  hung  as  a pendulum
on  a very  long  string  can  be  held  at  an  angle  of  slight
deviation  from  the  line  of  equilibrium  with  very  little
effort.  The  weight-component  that  forces  the  pendu-
lum into  the  position  of  equilibrium,  is  very  small.

Yet  notwithstanding  this  we  shall  experience  a con-
siderable resistance  if  we  suddenly  attempt  to  move  or
stop  the  weight.  A weight  that  is  just  supported  by  a
balloon,  although  we  have  no  longer  to  overcome  its
gravity,  opposes  a perceptible  resistance  to  motion.

Add  to  this  the  fact  that  the  same  body  experiences  in
different  geographical  latitudes  and  in  different  parts
of  space  very  unequal  gravitational  accelerations  and
we  shall  clearly  recognise  that  mass  exists  as  a property
wholly  distinct  from  weight  determining  the  amount  of
acceleration  which  a given  force  communicates  to  the
body  to  which  it  belongs.  (See  p.  536.)

0.  Important  is  Newton’s  demonstration  that  the  Mass  meas

• . urable  by

mass  of  a body  may,  nevertheless,  under  certain  con- weight,
ditions,  be  measured  by  its  weight.  Let  us  suppose  a
body  to  rest  on  a support,  on  which  it  exerts  by  its  weight
a pressure.  The  obvious  inference  is  that  2 or  3 such
bodies,  or  one-half  or  one-third  of  such  a body,  will  pro-
duce a corresponding  pressure  2,  3,  or  -J-  times  as


195


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  prere-  great.  If  we  imagine  the  acceleration  of  descent  in-
?bemeas°-  creased,  diminished,  or  wholly  removed,  we  shall  ex-
mass by  ° pect  that  the  pressure  also  will  be  increased,  dimin-
Welght‘  ished,  or  wholly  removed.  We  thus  see,  that  the  pres-
sure attributable  to  weight  increases,  decreases,  and
vanishes  along  with  the  “quan-
tity of  matter  ” and  the  magni-
tude of  the  acceleration  of  de-
scent. In  the  simplest  manner
imaginable  we  conceive  the  pres-
sure p as  quantitatively  representable  by  the  product  of
the  quantity  of  matter  m into  the  acceleration  of  descent
g — by  p — mg.  Suppose  now  we  have  two  bodies  that
exert  respectively  the  weight- pressures  p,  p' , to  which
we  ascribe  the  “ quantities  of  matter  ’ ’ m,  mr,  and  which
are  subjected  to  the  accelerations  of  descent  g,  g';  then
p = mg  and  f = m g’.  If,  now,  we  were  able  to  prove,
that,  independently  of  the  material  (chemical)  compo-
sition of  bodies,  g=g'  at  every  same  point  on  the
earth’s  surface,  we  should  obtain  m t?n  = p/p';  that  is
to  say,  on  the  same  spot  of  the  earth’s  surface,  it  would
be  possible  to  measure  mass  by  weight .

Newton’s  Now  Newton  established  this  fact,  that  g is  inde-

establish-  . ..  . ..

ment  of  pendent  of  the  chemical  composition  of  bodies,  by
requisites,  experiments  with  pendulums  of  equal  lengths  but  dif-
ferent material,  which  exhibited  equal  times  of  oscilla-
tion. He  carefully  allowed,  in  these  experiments,  for
the  disturbances  due  to  the  resistance  of  the  air ; this
last  factor  being  eliminated  by  constructing  from  differ-
ent materials  spherical  pendulum-bobs  of  exactly  the
same  size,  the  weights  of  which  were  equalised  by  ap-
propriately hollowing  the  spheres.  Accordingly,  all
bodies  maybe  regarded  as  affected  with  the  same  g,  and


\ a \a  \ u \

mkdmmm.

Fig.  127.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS .


197


their  quantity  of  matter  or  mass  can,  as  Newton  pointed
out,  be  measured  by  their  weight.

If  we  imagine  a rigid  partition  placed  between  an  Suppie-
assemblage  of  bodies  and  a magnet,  the  bodies,  if  the  con?idera-
magnet  be  powerful  enough,  or  at  least  the  majority
of  the  bodies,  will  exert  a pressure  on  the  partition.

But  it  would  occur  to  no  one  to  employ  this  magnetic
pressure,  in  the  manner  we  employed  pressure  due  to
weight,  as  a measure  of  mass.  The  strikingly  notice-
able inequality  of  the  accelerations  produced  in  the
different  bodies  by  the  magnet  excludes  any  such  idea.

The  reader  will  furthermore  remark  that  this  whole
argument  possesses  an  additional  dubious  feature,  in
that  the  concept  of  mass  which  up  to  this  point  has
simply  been  named  and  felt  as  a necessity,  but  not  de-
fined, is  assumed  by  it.

io.  To  Newton  we  owe  the  distinct  formulation  of  The  doc-

......  ..  _ . trine  of  the

the  principle  of  the  composition  of  forces.*  If  a bodycomposi-
is  simultaneously  acted  on  by  two  forces  (Fig.  128),  forces,
of  which  one  would  produce  the
motion  AB  and  the  other  the
motion  AC  in  the  same  interval
of  time,  the  body,  since  the  two
forces  and  the  motions  produced

by  them  are  independent  of  each  other , will  move  in  that
interval  of  time  to  AD . This  conception  is  in  every
respect  natural,  and  distinctly  characterises  the  essen-
tial point  involved.  It  contains  none  of  the  artificial
and  forced  characters  that  were  afterwards  imported
into  the  doctrine  of  the  composition  of  forces.

We  may  express  the  proposition  in  a somewhat


* Roberval’s  (1668)  achievements  with  respect  to  the  doctrine  of  the  com-
position of  forces  are  also  to  be  mentioned  here.  Varignon  and  Lami  have  al-
ready been  referred  to.  (See  the  text,  page  36.)


i98  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

discussion  different  manner,  and  thus  bring  it  nearer  its  modern
rine  of  the  form.  The  accelerations  that  different  forces  impart

;omposi-  , , , . . .

ion  of  to  the  same  body  are  at  the  same  time  the  measure  of
these  forces.  But  the  paths  described  in  equal  times
are  proportional  to  the  accelerations.  Therefore  the
latter  also  may  serve  as  the  measure  of  the  forces.  We
may  say  accordingly  : If  two  forces,  which  are  propor-
tional to  the  lines  AB  and  AC,  act  on  a body  A in  the
directions  AB  and  AC,  a motion  will  result  that  could
also  be  produced  by  a third  force  acting  alone  in  the
direction  of  the  diagonal  of  the  parallelogram  con-
structed on  AB  and  AC  and  proportional  to  that  di-
agonal. The  latter  force,  therefore,  may  be  substituted
for  the  other  two.  Thus,  if  cp  and  i]i  are  the  two  ac-
celerations set  up  in  the  directions  AB  and  A C,  then
for  any  definite  interval  of  time  t,  AB  — (pi2 /2,  A C =
ip  t2  / 2.  If,  now,  we  imagine  AD  produced  in  the  same
interval  of  time  by  a single  force  determining  the  accel-
eration X,  we  get

AD=x*2/2>  and  AB  : AC  : AD  = cp  : ?/;  : X-
As  soon  as  we  have  perceived  the  fact  that  the  forces  are
independent  of  each  other,  the  principle  of  the  paral-
lelogram of  forces  is  easily  reached  from  Galileo’s  no-
/tion  of  force.  Without  the  assumption  of  this  inde-
pendence any  effort  to  arrive  abstractly  and  philosoph-
ically at  the  principle,  is  in  vain.

'he  law  of  ii.  Perhaps  the  most  important  achievement  cf
-action.  Newton  with  respect  to  the  principles  is  the  distinct
and  general  formulation  of  the  law  of  the  eqicalify  of
action  and  reaction,  of  pressure  and  counter-pressure.
Questions  respecting  the  motions  of  bodies  that  exert
a reciprocal  influence  on  each  other,  cannot  be  solved
by  Galileo’s  principles  alone.  A new  principle  is  ne-
cessary that  will  define  this  mutual  action.  Such  a


THE  'PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS .


199


principle  was  that  resorted  to  by  Huygens  in  his  inves-
tigation of  the  centre  of  oscillation.  Such  a principle
also  is  Newton’s  law  of  action  and  reaction.

A body  that  presses  or  pulls  another  body  is,  ac-  Newton’s
cording  to  Newton,  pressed  or  pulled  in  exactly  the  of  the  law
same  degree  by  that  other  body.  Pressure  and  counter-  and  reac-
pressure,  force  and  counter-force,  are  always  equal  to
each  other.  As  the  measure  of  force  is  defined  by
Newton  to  be  the  quantity  of  motion  or  momentum
(mass  X velocity)  generated  in  a unit  of  time,  it  conse-
quently follows  that  bodies  that  act  on  each  other  com-
municate to  each  other  in  equal  intervals  of  time  equal
and  opposite  quantities  of  motion  (momenta),  or  re-
ceive contrary  velocities  reciprocally  proportional  to
their  masses.

Now,  although  Newton’s  law,  in  the  form  here  ex-Thereia-

. ...  tive  imme-

.pressed,  appears  much  more  simple,  more  immediate,  diacyof(

and  at  first  glance  more  admissible  than  that  of  Huy-  and  Huy-
gens’s prin-

gens,  it  will  be  found  that  it  by  no  means  contains  less  cipies.
unanalysed  experience  or  fewer  instinctive  elements.
Unquestionably  the  original  incitation  that  prompted
the  enunciation  of  the  principle  was  of  a purely  instinc-
tive nature.  We  know  that  we  do  not  experience  any
resistance  from  a body  until  we  seek  to  set  it  in  motion.

The  more  swiftly  we  endeavor  to  hurl  a heavy  stone
from  us,  the  more  our  body  is  forced  back  by  it.  Pres-
sure and  counter-pressure  go  hand  in  hand.  The  as-
sumption of  the  equality  of  pressure  and  counter-pres-
sure is  quite  immediate  if,  using  Newton’s  own  illus-
tration, we  imagine  a rope  stretched  between  two  bod-
ies, or  a distended  or  compressed  spiral  spring  between
them.

There  exist  in  the  domain  of  statics  very  many  in-
stinctive perceptions  that  involve  the  equality  of  pres-


200


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Statical  ex- sure  and  counter-pressure.  The  trivial  experience  that

which  point  one  cannot  lift  one’s  self  by  pulling  on  one’s  chair  is

ence6of  the’ of  this  character.  In  a scholium  in  which  he  cites  the
physicists  Wren,  Huygens,  and  Wallis  as  his  prede-
cessors in  the  employment  of  the  principle,  Newton
puts  forward  similar  reflections.  He  imagines  the
earth,  the  single  parts  of  which  gravitate  towards  one
another,  divided  by  a plane.  If  the  pressure  of  the
one  portion  on  the  other  were  not  equal  to  the  counter-
pressure, the  earth  would  be  compelled  to  move  in  the
direction  of  the  greater  pressure.  But  the  motion  of
a body  can,  so  far  as  our  experience  goes,  only  be  de-
termined by  other  bodies  external  to  it.  Moreover,
we  might  place  the  plane  of  division  referred  to  at  any
point  we  chose,  and  the  direction  of  the  resulting  mo-
■ tion,  therefore,  could  not  be  exactly  determined.

The  con-  12.  The  indistinctness  of  the  concept  of  mass  takes

ceptofmass

in  its  con-  a very  palpable  form  when  we  attempt  to  employ  the

nection  J j r . ..  r . - _ J

with  this  principle  of  the  equality  of  action  and  reaction  dynam-
ically. Pressure  and  counter-pressure  may  be  equal.
But  whence  do  we  know  that  equal  pressures  generate
velocities  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  masses  ? Newton,
indeed,  actually  felt  the  necessity  of  an  experimental
corroboration  of  this  principle.  He  cites  in  a scholium,
in  support  of  his  proposition,  Wren’s  experiments  on
impact,  and  made  independent  experiments  himself.
He  enclosed  in  one  sealed  vessel  a magnet  and  in  an-
other a piece  of  iron,  placed  both  in  a tub  of  water,
and  left  them  to  their  mutual  action.  The  vessels  ap-
proached each  other,  collided,  clung  together,  and  af-
terwards remained  at  rest.  This  result  is  proof  of  the
equality  of  pressure  and  counter-pressure  and  of  equal
and  opposite  momenta  (as  we  shall  learn  later  on,
when  we  come  to  discuss  the  laws  of  impact).


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS.


201


The  reader  has  already  felt  that  the  various  eminci-  The  merits
ations  of  Newton  with  respect  to  mass  and  the  prin- of  Newton’s
ciple  of  reaction,  hang  consistently  together,  and  that  °c
they  support  one  another.  The  experiences  that  lie  at
their  foundation  are  : the  instinctive  perception  of  the
connection  of  pressure  and  counter-pressure ; the  dis-
cernment that  bodies  offer  resistance  to  change  of  ve-
locity independently  of  their  weight,  but  proportion:
ately  thereto  ; and  the  observation  that  bodies  of  greater
weight  receive  under  equal  pressure  smaller  velocities.
Newton’s  sense  of  fundamental  concepts  and  prin-
ciples were  required  in  mechanics  was  admirable.  The
form  of  his  enunciations,  however,  as  we  shall  later  in-
dicate in  detail,  leaves  much  to  be  desired.  But  we  have
no  right  to  underrate  on  this  account  the  magnitude  of
his  achievements ; for  the  difficulties  he  had  to  conquer
were  of  a formidable  kind,  and  he  shunned  them  less
than  any  other  investigator.


iv.

DISCUSSION  AND  ILLUSTRATION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF
REACTION.


i.  We  shall  now  devote  ourselves  a moment  ex- The  princi-


clusively  to  the  Newtonian  ideas,  and  seek  to  bring  the  t?on?f  reac
principle  of  reaction  more  clearly  home  to  our  mind


Fig.  129.  Fig.  130.


and  feeling.  If  two  masses  (Fig.  129)  M and  m act  on
one  another,  they  impart  to  each  other,  according
to  Newton,  contrary  velocities  V and  z>,  which  are  in-
versely proportional  to  their  masses,  so  that
MV-f  mv  = 0.


202


THE  SCIENCE  OP  MECHANICS.


General  The  appearance  of  greater  evidence  may  be  im-

of  the  prin- parted  to  this  principle  by  the  following  consideration,
action.  We  imagine  first  (Fig.  1 30)  two  absolutely  equal  bodies
a , also  absolutely  alike  in  chemical  constitution.  We
set  these  bodies  opposite  each  other  and  put  them  in
mutual  action ; then,  on  the  supposition  that  the  in-
fluences of  any  third  body  and  of  the  spectator  are  ex-
cluded, the  communication  of  equal  and  contrary  velo-
cities in  the  direction  of  the  line  joining  the  bodies  is
the  sole  uniquely  determined  interaction.

Now  let  us  group  together  in  A (Fig.  131)  m such
bodies  a,  and  put  at  B over  against  them  ?ri  such
bodies  a.  We  have  then  before  us  bodies  whose  quan-


la

IH'Cl

a

a

a

a

I]

a

A B


Fig.  131.


Fig.  132.


tides  of  matter  or  masses  bear  to  each  other  the  pro-
portion m : m\  The  distance  between  the  groups  we
assume  to  be  so  great  that  we  may  neglect  the  exten-
sion of  the  bodies.  Let  us  regard  now  the  accelera-
tions a,  that  every  two  bodies  a impart  to  each  other,
as  independent  of  each  other.  Every  part  of  A , then,
will  receive  in  consequence  of  the  action  of  B the  ac-
celeration 7nf a,  and  every  part  of  B in  consequence  of
the  action  of  A the  acceleration  ?n  a — accelerations
which  will  therefore  be  inversely  proportional  to  the
masses.

2.  Let  us  picture  to  ourselves  now  a mass  M (Fig.
132)  joined  by  some  elastic  connection  with  a mass  m,
both  masses  made  up  of  bodies  a equal  in  all  respects.
Let  the  mass  m receive  from  some  external  source  an
acceleration  cp.  At  once  a distortion  of  the  connection
is  produced,  by  which  on  the  one  hand  m is  retarded


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


203


and  on  the  other  M accelerated.  When  both  masses  The  deduc-
have  begun  to  move  with  the  same  acceleration,  all  notion  of
further  distortion  of  the  connection  ceases.  If  we  call  forceT’,ng
a the  acceleration  of  M and  j3  the  diminution  of  the
acceleration  of  m,  then  a=  cp  — /?,  where  agreeably
to  what  precedes  aM=  fim.  From  this  follows


a -f-  ft  = a -f-


ocM

m


or  a —


m cp
M- f-  m


If  we  were  to  enter  more  exhaustively  into  the  de-
tails of  this  last  occurrence,  we  should  discover  that
the  two  masses,  in  addition  to  their  motion  of  progres-
sion, also  generally  perform  with  respect  to  each  other
motions  of  oscillation.  If  the  connection  on  slight  dis-
tortion develop  a powerful  tension,  it  will  be  impos-
sible for  any  great  amplitude  of  vibration  to  be  reached,
and  we  may  entirely  neglect  the  oscillatory  motions,
as  we  actually  have  done.

If  the  expression  a — m cp/M  m,  which  deter-
mines the  acceleration  of  the  entire  system,  be  ex-
amined, it  will  be  seen  that  the  product  m cp  plays  a
decisive  part  in  its  determination.  Newton  therefore
invested  this  product  of  the  mass  into  the  acceleration
imparted  to  it,  with  the  name  of  “moving  force.”
M m,  on  the  other  hand,  represents  the  entire  mass
of  the  rigid  system.  We  obtain,  accordingly,  the  accel-
eration of  any  mass  m on  which  the
moving  force  p acts,  from  the  expres-
sion plm! .

3.  To  reach  this  result,  it  is  not  at
all  necessary  that  the  two  connected
masses  should  act  directly  on  each  other  in  all  their
parts.  We  have,  connected  together,  let  us  say,  the
three  masses  m13  m 2,  mz , where  is  supposed  to  act


M3

mx

Fig.  133-


204


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


a condition  only  on  m2,  and  mz  only  on  ?n2.  Let  the  mass  m1  re-
not  affect  ceive  from  some  external  source  the  acceleration  cp.
viousrre-  In  the  distortion  that  follows,  the

suit.

masses  - mB  m2  mx

receive  the  accelerations  -f-  d + P + <p

— y — a.

Here  all  accelerations  to  the  right  are  reckoned  as
positive,  those  to  the  left  as  negative,  and  it  is  obvious
that  the  distortion  ceases  to  increase

when  <5  = /3  — y,  d = g>  — a,
where  d mB  = y m2 , amx  = (3  m2.

The  resolution  of  these  equations  yields  the  com-
mon acceleration  that  all  the  masses  receive  ; namely,

# = 1?  7

mx  + m2  + Ms

— a result  of  exactly  the  same  form  as  before.  When
therefore  a magnet  acts  on  a piece  of  iron  which  is
joined  to  a piece  of  wood,  we  need  not  trouble  our-
selves about  ascertaining  what  particles  of  the  wood
are  distorted  directly  or  indirectly  (through  other  par-
ticles of  the  wood)  by  the  motion  of  the  piece  of  iron.

The  considerations  advanced  will,  in  some  meas-
ure, perhaps,  have  contributed  towards  clearly  impress-
ing on  us  the  great  importance  for  mechanics  of  the
Newtonian  enunciations.  They  will  also  serve,  in  a

subsequent  place,  to  ren-
der more  readily  obvious
the  defects  of  these  enun-
ciations.

4.  Let  us  now  turn  to
Fig.  134.  a few  illustrative  physical

examples  of  the  principle  of  reaction.  We  consider,
say,  a load  L on  a table  T,  The  table  is  pressed  by


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


205


the  load  just  so  much , and  so  much  only,  as  it  in  return  Some  phys-
presses  the  load,  that  is  prevents  the  same  from  falling,  pies  oTthe
If  p is  the  weight,  m the  mass,  and  g the  acceleration  oFreactfon.
of  gravity,  then  by  Newton’s  conception/  mg.  If
the  table  be  let  fall  vertically  downwards  with  the  ac-
celeration of  free  descent  g,  all  pressure  on  it  ceases.

We  discover  thus,  that  the  pressure  on  the  table  is  de-
termined by  the  relative  acceleration  of  the  load  with
respect  to  the  table.  If  the  table  fall  or  rise  with  the
acceleration  y,  the  pressure  on  it  is  respectively  m (g  —
y)  and  m (g  + Y)m  Be  ^ noted,  however,  that  no
change,  of  the  relation  is  produced  by  a constant  velocity
of  ascent  or  descent.  The  relative  acceleration  is  de-
terminative.

Galileo  knew  this  relation  of  things  very  well.  TheThepres-
doctrine  of  the  Aristotelians,  that  bodies  of  greater  parts  of  fail-
weight  fall  faster  than  bodies  of  less  weight,  he  not  only  *ng
refuted  by  experiments,  but  cornered  his  adversaries
by  logical  arguments.  Heavy  bodies  fall  faster  than
light  bodies,  the  Aristotelians  said,  because  the  upper
parts  weigh  down  on  the  under  parts  and  accelerate
their  descent.  In  that  case,  returned  Galileo,  a small
body  tied  to  a larger  body  must,  if  it  possesses  in  se  the
property  of  less  rapid  descent,  retard  the  larger.  There-
fore, a larger  body  falls  more  slowly  than  a smaller
body.  The  entire  fundamental  assumption  is  wrong,

Galileo  says,  because  one  portion  of  a falling  body  can-
not by  its  weight  under  any  circumstances  press  an-
other portion.

A pendulum  with  the  time  of  oscillation  T-=.nV  Ljg,  a failing
would  acquire,  if  its  axis  received  the  downward  accel- pendulum*
eration  y,  the  time  of  oscillation  T=  tcV  l/g — y~
and  if  let  fall  freely  would  acquire  an  infinite  time  of
oscillation,  that  is,  would  cease  to  oscillate.


206


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Thesensa-  We  ourselves,  when  we  jump  or  fall  from  an  eleva-
tion of  fall-  . . ..  . ...  .

i^g.  tion,  experience  a peculiar  sensation,  which  must  be

due  to  the  discontinuance  of  the  gravitational  pressure
of  the  parts  of  our  body  on  one  another — the  blood,  and
so  forth.  A similar  sensation,  as  if  the  ground  were
sinking  beneath  us,  we  should  have  on  a smaller  planet,
to  which  we  were  suddenly  transported.  The  sensation
of  constant  ascent,  like  that  felt  in  an  earthquake,
would  be  produced  on  a larger  planet.

Poggen-  5.  The  conditions  referred  to  are  very  beautifully

paratus.  illustrated  by  an  apparatus  (Fig.  135^)  constructed
by  Poggendorff.  A string  loaded  at  both  extremities


Cl


Fig.  135a.  Fig.  135b.

by  a weight  P (Fig.  1350)  is  passed  over  a pulley  c,
attached  to  the  end  of  a scale-beam.  A weight  p is
laid  on  one  of  the  weights  first  mentioned  and  tied  by
a fine  thread  to  the  axis  of  the  pulley.  The  pulley
now  supports  the  weight  2 P p%  Burning  away  the
thread  that  holds  the  over-weight,  a uniformly  accel-
erated motion  begins  with  the  acceleration  y , with
which  P -f-  p descends  and  P rises.  The  load  on  the
pulley  is  thus  lessened,  as  the  turning  of  the  scales  in-
dicates. The  descending  weight  jPis  counterbalanced
by  the  rising  weight  P,  while  the  added  over- weight,
instead  of  weighing  p , now  weighs  (p/g)(g — y).  And
since  y=  (p/zP  + /)  g,  we  have  now  to  regard  the
load  on  the  pulley,  not  as  p9  but  as/(2  P/2P-\-py  The


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS.


20  7


descending  weight,  only  partially  impeded  in  its  motion
of  descent,  exerts  only  a partial  pressure  on  the  pulley.

We  may  vary  the  experiment.  We  pass  a thread  A variation
loaded  at  one  extremity  with  the  weight  P over  the  experiment
pulleys  a , b , d,  of  the  apparatus  as  indicated  in  Fig.


Fig.  135c.


1353.,  tie  the  unloaded  extremity  at  m,  and  equilibrate
the  balance.  If  we  pull  on  the  string  at  m , this  can-
not directly  affect  the  balance  since  the  direction  of  the
string  passes  exactly  through  its  axis.  But  the  side  a
immediately  falls.  The  slackening  of  the  string  causes
a to  rise.  An  unaccelerated  motion  of  the  weights  would


208


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


not  disturb  the  equilibrium.  But  we  cannot  pass  from

rest  to  motion  without  acceleration.

Thesuspen-  6.  A phenomenon  that  strikes  us  at  first  glance  is,
sion  of  mi-  . .

nute  bodies  that  minute  bodies  of  greater  or  less  specific  gravity

in  liquids  of  , , , rg

different  than  the  liquid  m which  they  are  immersed,  if  sufn-

gravity.  ciently  small,  remain  suspended  a very  long  time  in  the

liquid.  We  perceive  at  once  that
particles  of  this  kind  have  to  over-
come the  friction  of  the  liquid.  If  the
cube  of  Fig.  136  be  divided  into  8
parts  by  the  3 sections  indicated,
and  the  parts  be  placed  in  a row,
their  mass  and  over-weight  will  re-
main the  same,  but  their  cross-sec-
tion and  superficial  area,  with  which  the  friction  goes
hand  in  hand,  will  be  doubled.

Do  such  Now,  the  opinion  has  at  times  been  advanced  with
particles  af- respect  to  this  phenomenon  that  suspended  particles

specific  of  the  kind  described  have  no  influence  on  the  specific
gravities  of  ......  . ...

the  support- gravity  indicated  by  an  areometer  immersed  m the
ing  liquids?,.  . , , , J

liquid,  because  these  particles  are  themselves  areo-
meters. But  it  will  readily  be  seen  that  if  the  sus-
pended particles  rise  or  fall  with  constant  velocity,  as
in  the  case  of  very  small  particles  immediately  occurs,
the  effect  on  the  balance  and  the  areometer  must  be
the  same.  If  we  imagine  the  areometer  to  oscillate
about  its  position  of  equilibrium,  it  will  be  evident
that  the  liquid  with  all  its  contents  will  be  moved  with
it.  Applying  the  principle  of  virtual  displacements,
therefore,  we  can  be  no  longer  in  doubt  that  the  areo-
meter must  indicate  the  mean  specific  gravity.  We
may  convince  ourselves  of  the  untenability  of  the  rule
by  which  the  areometer  is  supposed  to  indicate  only
the  specific  gravity  of  the  liquid  and  not, that  of  the  sus-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


209


p Ended  particles,  by  the  following  consideration.  In  a
liquid  A a smaller  quantity  of  a heavier  liquid  B is  in-
troduced and  distributed  in  fine  drops.  The  areometer,
let  us  assume,  indicates  only  the  specific  gravity  of
A.  Now,  take  more  and  more  of  the  liquid  B , finally
just  as  much  of  it  as  we  have  of  A:  we  can,  then,  no
longer  say  which  liquid  is  suspended  in  the  other,  and
which  specific  gravity,  therefore,  the  areometer  must
indicate.

7.  A phenomenon  of  an  imposing  kind,  in  which  The  phe-
the  relative  acceleration  of  the  bodies  concerned  is  the  tides,
seen  to  be  determinative  of  their  mutual  pressure,  is
that  of  the  tides.  We  will  enter  into  this  subject  here
only  in  so  far  as  it  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  point  we
are  considering.  The  connection  of  the  phenomenon
of  the  tides  with  the  motion  of  the  moon  asserts  itself
in  the  coincidence  of  the  tidal  and  lunar  periods,  in
the  augmentation  of  the  tides  at  the  full  and  new
moons,  in  the  daily  retardation  of  the  tides  (by  about
50  minutes),  corresponding  to  the  retardation  of  the
culmination  of  the  moon,  and  so  forth.  As  a matter
of  fact,  the  connection  of  the  two  occurrences  was  very
early  thought  of.  In  Newton’s  time  people  imagined
to  themselves  a kind  of  wave  of  atmospheric  pressure,
by  means  of  which  the  moon  in  its  motion  was  sup-
posed to  create  the  tidal  wave.

The  phenomenon  of  the  tides  makes,  on  every  oneitsimpos-
that  sees  it  for  the  first  time  in  its  full  proportions,  an  ter.  ° arac
overpowering  impression.  We  must  not  be  surprised,
therefore,  that  it  is  a subject  that  has  actively  engaged
the  investigators  of  all  times.  The  warriors  of  Alex-
ander the  Great  had,  from  their  Mediterranean  homes,
scarcely  the  faintest  idea  of  the  phenomenon  of  the
tides,  and  they  were,  therefore,  not  a little  taken  aback


210


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


by  the  sight  of  the  powerful  ebb  and  flow  at  the  mouth
of  the  Indus ; as  we  learn  from  the  account  of  Curtius
Rufus  (De  Rebus  Gestis  Alexandri  Magni ),  whose
words  we  here  literally  quote  :

Extract  “ 34.  Proceeding,  now,  somewhat  more  slowly  in

from  Cur-  . . / f . . . .

tius  Rufus.  “ their  course,  owing  to  the  current  of  the  river  being
“ slackened  by  its  meeting  the  waters  of  the  sea,  they
“ at  last  reached  a second  island  in  the  middle  of  the
^ river.  Here  they  brought  the  vessels  to  the  shore,
“and,  landing,  dispersed  to  seek  provisions,  wholly
“unconscious  of  the  great  misfortune  that  awaited
“them.

Describing  “35.  It  was  about  the  third  hour,  when  the  ocean,

the  effect  . ini

on  the  army  “m  its  constant  tidal  flux  and  reflux,  began  to  turn

of  Alexan-  .

derthe^th  “ and  press  back  upon  the  river.  The  latter,  at  first

tides  at  the  “merely  checked,  but  then  more  vehemently  repelled,

mouth  of  J 9 . ...  . . . r r

the  Indus.  “ at  last  set  back  m the  opposite  direction  with  a force
“greater  than  that  of  a rushing  mountain  torrent.
“The  nature  of  the  ocean  was  unknown  to  the  multi  -
“tude,  and  grave  portents  and  evidences  of  the  wrath
“of  the  Gods  were  seen  in  what  happened.  With
“ever-increasing  vehemence  the  sea  poured  in,  com-
“pletely  covering  the  fields  which  shortly  before  were
“ dry.  The  vessels  were  lifted  and  the  entire  fleet  dis-
“persed  before  those  who  had  been  set  on  shore,  ter-
rified and  dismayed  at  this  unexpected  calamity,
“could  return.  But  the  more  haste,  in  times  of  great
“disturbance,  the  less  speed.  Some  pushed  the  ships
“ to  the  shore  with  poles  ; others,  not  waiting  to  adjust
“their  oars,  ran  aground.  Many,  in  their  great  haste
“to  get  away,  had  not  waited  for  their  companions,
“and  were  barely  able  to  set  in  motion  the  huge,  un-
“ manageable  barks;  while  some  of  the  ships  were  too
“crowded  to  receive  the  multitudes  that  struggled  to


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS.


211


‘ get  aboard.  The  unequal  division  impeded  all.  TheThedisas-
£ cries  of  some  clamoring  to  be  taken  aboard,  of  others  ander’s

fleet.

‘ crying  to  put  off,  and  the  conflicting  commands  of
‘ men,  all  desirous  of  different  ends,  deprived  every  one
‘ of  the  possibility  of  seeing  or  hearing.  Even  the
‘ steersmen  were  powerless ; for  neither  could  their
‘ cries  be  heard  by  the  struggling  masses  nor  were  their
‘orders  noticed  by  the  terrified  and  distracted  crews.

‘ The  vessels  collided,  they  broke  off  each  other's  oars,

‘ they  plunged  against  one  another.  One  would  think
‘ it  was  not  the  fleet  of  one  and  the  same  army  that
‘ was  here  in  motion,  but  two  hostile  fleets  in  combat.

‘ Provr  struck  stern ; those  that  had  thrown  the  fore-
most in  confusion  were  themselves  thrown  into  con-
‘ fusion  by  those  that  followed ; and  the  desperation
‘ of  the  struggling  mass  sometimes  culminated  in
‘ hand-to-hand  combats.

“ 36.  Already  the  tide  had  overflown  the  fields  sur-
rounding the  banks  of  the  river,  till  only  the  hillocks
‘jutted  forth  from  -above  the  water,  like  islands.

‘ These  were  the  point  towards  which  all  that  had  given
‘ up  hope  of  being  taken  on  the  ships,  swam.  The
‘scattered  vessels  rested  in  part  in  deep  water,  where
‘ there  were  depressions  in  the  land,  and  in  part  lay
‘ aground  in  shallows,  according  as  the  waves  had
‘ covered  the  unequal  surface  of  the  country.  Then,

‘ suddenly,  a new  and  greater  terror  took  possession
‘ of  them.  The  sea  began  to  retreat,  and  its  waters
‘ flowed  back  in  great  long  swells,  leaving  the  land
‘ which  shortly  before  had  been  immersed  by  the  salt
‘waves,  uncovered  and  clear.  The  ships,  thus  for-
‘ saken  by  the  water,  fell,  some  on  their  prows,  some
‘ on  their  sides.  The  fields  were  strewn  with  luggage,

‘ arms,  and  pieces  of  broken  planks  and  oars.  The


2X2


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  dismay
of  the  army.


The  efforts
of  the  king
and  the  re-
turn of  the
tide.


“soldiers  dared  neither  to  venture  on  the  land  nor  to
“remain  in  the  ships,  for  every  moment  they  expected
“something  new  and  worse  than  had  yet  befallen
“them.  They  could  scarcely  believe  that  that  which
“they  saw  had  really  happened — a shipwreck  on  dry
“land,  an  ocean  in  a river.  And  of  their  misfortune
“there  seemed  no  end.  For  wholly  ignorant  that  the
“tide  would  shortly  bring  back  the  sea  and  again  set
“their  vessels  afloat,  they  prophesied  hunger  and  dir-
“est  distress.  On  the  fields  horrible  animals  crept
“about,  which  the  subsiding  floods  had  left  behind.

“37.  The  night  fell,  and  even  the  king  was  sore
“distressed  at  the  slight  hope  of  rescue.  But  his  so-
‘ ‘ licitude  could  not  move  his  unconquerable  spirit.  He
“remained  during  the  whole  night  on  the  watch,  and
“ despatched  horsemen  to  the  mouth  of  the  river,  that,
“ as  soon  as  they  saw  the  sea  turn  and  flow  back,  they
“might  return  and  announce  its  coming.  He  also
“commanded  that  the  damaged  vessels  should  be  re-
paired and  that  those  that  had  been  overturned  by
“the  tide  should  be  set  upright,  and  ordered  all  to  be
“near  at  hand  when  the  sea  should  again  inundate  the
“land.  After  he  had  thus  passed  the  entire  night  in
“watching  and  in  exhortation,  the  horsemen  came
“back  at  full  speed  and  the  tide  as  quickly  followed.
“At  first,  the  approaching  waters,  creeping  in  light
“swells  beneath  the  ships,  gently  raised  them,  and,
“inundating  the  fields,  soon  set  the  entire  fleet  in  mo-
tion. The  shores  resounded  with  the  cheers  and
‘ clappings  of  the  soldiers  and  sailors,  who  celebrated
“ with  immoderate  joy  their  unexpected  rescue.  ‘But
‘whence/ they  asked,  in  wonderment,  ‘had  the  sea
‘ so  suddenly  given  back  these  great  masses  of  water?
‘Whither  had  they,  on  the  day  previous,  retreated?


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


213


“ And  what  was  the  nature  of  this  element,  which  now
“opposed  and  now  obeyed  the  dominion  of  the  hours?  ’

“As  the  king  concluded  from  what  had  happened  that
“the  fixed  time  for  the  return  of  the  tide  was  after
“sunrise,  he  set  out,  in  order  to  anticipate  it,  at  mid-
“ night,  and  proceeding  down  the  river  with  a few
“ships  he  passed  the  mouth  and,  finding  himself  at
“last  at  the  goal  of  his  wishes,  sailed  out  400  stadia
“into  the  ocean.  He  then  offered  a sacrifice  to  the
“divinities  of  the  sea,  and  returned  to  his  fleet. ”

8.  The  essential  point  to  be  noted  in  the  explana- The  expia-
. . . ration  of

tion  of  the  tides  is,  that  the  earth  as  a rigid  body  canthephe-

. _ . -.1  nomena  of

receive  but  one  determinate  acceleration  towards  the  the  tides,
moon,  while  the  mobile  particles  of  water  on  the  sides
nearest  to  and  remotest  from  the  moon  can  acquire
various  accelerations.


Fig.  137-


Let  us  consider  (Fig.  137)  on  the  earth  is,  opposite
which  stands  the  moon  M,  three  points  A,  JB,  C.  The
accelerations  of  the  three  points  in  the  direction  of  the
moon,  if  we  regard  them  as  free  points,  are  respect-
ively cp  + A cp,  cp,  cp  — • A (p.  The  earth  as  a whole,
however,  has,  as  a rigid  body,  the  acceleration  cp.  The
acceleration  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth  we  will
call  g.  Designating  now  all  accelerations  to  the  left
as  negative,  and  all  to  the  right  as  positive,  we  get  the
following  table  :


214


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


ABC

— (9+A<p),  — <p,  —(cp  — Acp)

+ g —g-

— 9>  --  9>  — 9

g—Acp,  0,  — ( g—Acp ),

where  the  symbols  of  the  first  and  second  lines  repre-
sent the  accelerations  which  the  free  points  that  head
the  columns  receive,  those  of  the  third  line  the  accel-
eration of  corresponding  rigid  points  of  the  earth,  and
those  of  the  fourth  line,  the  difference,  or  the  resultant
accelerations  of  the  free  points  towards  the  earth.  It
will  be  seen  from  this  result  that  the  weight  of  the  water
at  A and  C is  diminished  by  exactly  the  same  amount.
The  water  will  rise  at  A and  C (Fig.  137).  A tidal
wave  will  be  produced  at  these  points  twice  every
day.

a variation  It  is  a fact  not  always  sufficiently  emphasised,  that
nomenon.  the  phenomenon  would  be  an  essentially  different  one
if  the  moon  and  the  earth  were  not  affected  with  ac-
celerated motion  towards  each  other  but  were  relatively
fixed  and  at  rest.  If  we  modify  the  considerations
presented  to  comprehend  this  case,  we  must  put  for  the
rigid  earth  in  the  foregoing  computation,  cp  = 0 simply.
We  then  obtain  for


the  free  points ....  A C

the  accelerations . . — (tp  + A cp),  — (cp  — A cp),

+ g —g

or • • - O — A <p)  — (p, —O  — Acp)  — cp

or g'—9>  —lg'+9)>


where  gr  = g — A cp.  In  such  case,  therefore,  the
weight  of  the  water  at  A would  be  diminished,  and  the
weight  at  C increased ; the  height  of  the  water  at  A


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


215


would  be  increased;  and  the  height  at  C diminished.
The  water  would  be  elevated  only  on  the  side  facing
the  moon.  (Fig.  138.)


Fig.  138.

9.  It  would  hardly  be  worth  while  to  illustrate  An  iiiustra-
propositions  best  reached  deductively,  by  experiments  ment.  ^
that  can  only  be  performed  with  difficulty.  But  such
experiments  are  not  beyond  the  limits  of  possibility.

If  we  imagine  a small  iron  sphere  K to  swing  as  a
conical  pendulum  about  the  pole  of  a
magnet  N (Fig.  139),  and  cover  the
sphere  with  a solution  of  magnetic  sul-
phate of  iron,  the  fluid  drop  should,  if
the  magnet  is  sufficiently  powerful,  rep-
resent the  phenomenon  of  the  tides.  But
if  we  imagine  the  sphere  to  be  fixed  and
at  rest  with  respect  to  the  pole  of  the
magnet,  the  fluid  drop  will  certainly  not
be  found  tapering  to  a point  both  on
the  side  facing  and  the  side  opposite  to
the  pole  of  the  magnet,  but  will  remain  suspended  only
on  the  side  of  the  sphere  towards  the  pole  of  the
magnet.

10.  We  must  not,  of  course,  imagine,  that  the  Some  fur-

. .-11  ■ . . • , , . ther  con-

entire  tidal  wave  is  produced  at  once  by  the  action  siderations
of  the  moon.  We  have  rather  to  conceive  the  tide
as  an  oscillatory  movement  maintained  by  the  moon.

If,  for  example,  we  should  sweep  a fan  uniformly  and


2l6


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


continuously  along  over  the  surface  of  the  water  of  a
circular  canal,  a wave  of  considerable  magnitude  fol-
lowing in  the  wake  of  the  fan  would  by  this  gentle  and
constantly  continued  impulsion  soon  be  produced.  In
like  manner  the  tide  is  produced.  But  in  tfie  latter
case  the  occurrence  is  greatly  complicated  by  the  irreg-
ular formation  of  the  continents,  by  the  periodical
variation  of  the  disturbance,  and  so  forth.  (See  Ap-
pendix, XVII.,  p.  537.)


CRITICISM  OF  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  REACTION  AND  OF  THE
CONCEPT  OF  MASS.

The  con-  i.  Now  that  the  preceding  discussions  have  made
mass0f  us  familiar  with  Newton’s  ideas,  we  are  sufficiently
prepared  to  enter  on, a critical  examination  of  them.
We  shall  restrict  ourselves  primarily  in  this,  to  the
consideration  of  the  concept  of  mass  and  the  principle
of  reaction.  The  two  cannot,  in 'such  an  examination,
be  separated  ; in  them  is  contained  the  gist  of  New-
ton’s achievement.

Theexpres-  2.  In  the  first  place  we  do  not  find  the  expression
titynof  mat-  “ quantity  of  matter”  adapted  to  explain  and  elucidate
the  concept  of  mass,  since  that  expression  itself  is  not
possessed  of  the  requisite  clearness.  And  this  is  so,
though  we  go  back,  as  many  authors  have  done,  to  an
enumeration  of  the  hypothetical  atoms.  We  only  com-
plicate, in  so  doing,  indefensible  conceptions.  If  we
place  together  a number  of  equal,  chemically  homo-
geneous bodies,  we  can,  it  may  be  granted,  connect
some  clear  idea  with  “quantity  of  matter,”  and  we  per-
ceive, also,  that  the  resistance  the  bodies  offer  to  mo-
tion increases  with  this  quantity.  But  the  moment  we
suppose  chemical  heterogeneity,  the  assumption  that


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


217


there  is  still  something  that  is  measurable  by  the  same  Newton’s
standard,  which  something  we  call  quantity  of  matter,  of  the  con-
may  be  suggested  by  mechanical  experiences,  but  is  an Cept’
assumption  nevertheless  that  needs  to  be  justified.

When  therefore,  with  Newton,  we  make  the  assump-
tions, respecting  pressure  due  to  weight,  that  / = mg,
p*  =m'g,  and  put  in  conformity  with  such  assumptions
p/p'  = m/m* , we  have  made  actual  use  in  the  operation
thus  performed  of  the  sitpposition , yet  to  be  justified,
that  different  bodies  are  measurable  by  the  same  stand-
ard.

We  might,  indeed,  arbitrarily  posit,  that  m jm'  — p/f  ]
that  is,  might  define  the  ratio  of  mass  to  be  the  ratio
of  pressure  due  to  weight  when  g was  the  same.  But
we  should  then  have  to  sicbstantiate  the  use  that  is  made
of  this  notion  of  mass  in  the  principle  of  reaction  and
in  other  relations.


Fig,  140  a.


Fig.  140  b.


B— >
+?’


3.  When  two  bodies  (Fig.  140  a),  perfectly  equal  A^new form-
in  all  respects,  are  placed  opposite  each  other,  we  ex-  the  con-
pect,  agreeably  to  the  principle  of  symmetry,  that  they
will  produce  in  each  other  in  the  direction  of  their  line
of  junction  equal  and  opposite  accelerations.  But  if
these  bodies  exhibit  any  difference,  however  slight,  of
form,  of  chemical  constitution,  or  are  in  any  other  re-
spects different,  the  principle  of  symmetry  forsakes  us,
unless  we  assume  or  know  beforehand  that  sameness  of
form  or  sameness  of  chemical  constitution,  or  whatever
else  the  thing  in  question  may  be,  is  not  determina-
tive. If,  however,  mechanical  experiences  clearly  and
indubitably  point  to  the  existence  in  bodies  of  a special
and  distinct  property  determinative  of  accelerations,


2lS


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Definition
of  equal
masses.


Character
of  the  defi-
nition.


nothing  stands  in  the  way  of  our  arbitrarily  establish-
ing the  following  definition :

All  those  bodies  are  bodies  of  equal  mass , which , ??iu-
tually  acting  on  each  other , produce  in  each  other  equal
and  opposite  accelerations.

We  have,  in  this,  simply  designated,  or  named , an
actual  relation  of  things.  In  the  general  case  we  pro-
ceed similarly.  The  bodies  A and  B receive  respec-
tively as  the  result  of  their  mutual  action  (Fig.  140  b)
the  accelerations  — cp  and  -|-  where  the  senses  of
the  accelerations  are  indicated  by  the  signs.  We  say
then,  B has  p/pl  times  the  mass  of  A.  If  we  take  A
as  our  unit , we  assign  to  that  body  the  mass  m which  im-
parts to  A m times  the  acceleration  that  A in  the  reaction
imparts  to  it.  The  ratio  of  the  masses  is  the  negative
inverse  ratio  of  the  counter-accelerations.  That  these
accelerations  always  have  opposite  signs,  that . there
are  therefore,  by  our  definition,  only  positive  masses,
is  a point  that  experience  teaches,  and  experience  alone
can  teach.  In  our  concept  of.  mass  no  theory  is  in-
volved ; “.quantity  of  matter  ” is  wholly  unnecessary  in
it ; all  it  contains  is  the  exact  establishment,  designa-
tion, and  denomination  of  a fact.  (Compare  Appendix,
XVIII.,  p.  539.)

4.  One  difficulty  should  not  remain  unmentioned  in
this  connection,  inasmuch  as  its  removal  is  absolutely
necessary  to  the  formation  of  a perfectly  clear  concept
of  mass.  We  consider  a set  of  bodies,  A,  B,  C,  JD . . .,
and  compare  them  all  with  A as  unit.

A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F.

1,  m,  m'9  m" ,

We  find  thus  the  respective  mass- values,  1,  m,  mf,
m".  . . .,  and  so  forth.  The  question  now  arises,  If  we


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


219


select  B as  our  standard  of  comparison  (as  our  unit),  Discussion
shall  we  obtain  for  C the  mass-value  m* fm,  and  for  D cuity  in-
the  value  m” ]m>  or  will  perhaps  wholly  different  values  the  preced-
result?  More  simply,  the  question  maybe  put  thus : iafion^mu
Will  two  bodies  B , C,  which  in  mutual  action  with  A
have  acted  as  equal  masses,  also  act  as  equal  masses
in  mutual  action  with  each  other?  No  logical  necessity
exists  whatsoever,  that  two  masses  that  are  equal  to  a
third  mass  should  also  be  equal  to  each  other.  For
we  are  concerned  here,  not  with  a mathematical,  but
with  a physical  question.  This  will  be  rendered  quite
clear  by  recourse  to  an  analogous  relation.  We  place
by  the  side  of  each  other  the  bodies  A , B,  C in  the
proportions  of  weight  a , b,  c in  which  they  enter  into
the  chemical  combinations  AB  and  AC . There  exists,
now,  no  logical  necessity  at  all  for  assuming  that  the
same  proportions  of  weight  b,  c of  the  bodies  B , C will
also  enter  into  the  chemical  combination  BC.  Expe-
rience, however,  informs  us  that  they  do.  If  we  place
by  the  side  of  each  other  any  set  of  bodies  in  the  pro-
portions of  weight  in  which  they  combine  with  the
body  A , they  will  also  unite  with  each  other  in  the
same  proportions  of  weight.  But  no  one  can  know
this  who  has  not  tried  it.  And  this  is  precisely  the  case
with  the  mass-values  of  bodies.

If  we  were  to  assume  that  the  order  of  combination  The  order
of  the  bodies,  by  which  their  mass-values  are  deter-  nation  not
mined,  exerted  any  influence  on  the  mass-values,  the
consequences  of  such  an  assumption  would,  we  should
find,  lead  to  conflict  with  experience.  Let  us  suppose,
for  instance  (Fig.  141),  that  we  have  three  elastic
bodies,  A , B,  C,  movable  on  an  absolutely  smooth  and
rigid  ring..  We  presuppose  that  A and  B in  their
mutual  relations  comport  themselves  like  equal  masses


220


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


and  that  B and  C do  the  same.  We  are  then  also
obliged  to  assume,  if  we  wish  to  avoid  conflicts  with
experience,  that  C and  A in  their  mutual  relations  act
like  equal  masses.  If  we  impart  to  A a.  velocity,  A
will  transmit  this  velocity  by  impact  to  B,  and  B to  C.
But  if  C were  to  act  towards  A , say,  as  a greater  mass,
A on  impact  would  acquire  a greater
velocity  than  it  originally  had  while
C would  still  retain  a residue  of
what  it  had.  With  every  revolution
in  the  direction  of  the  hands  of  a
watch  the  vis  viva  of  the  system
would  be  increased.  If  C were  the
smaller  mass  as  compared  with  A ,
reversing  the  motion  would  produce  the  same  result.
But  a constant  increase  of  vis  viva  of  this  kind  is  at
decided  variance  with  our  experience.

The  new  5.  The  concept  of  mass  when  reached  in  the  man-
massem-°f  ner  just  developed  renders  unnecessary  the  special
pf/dtfydhe  enunciation  of  the  principle  of  reaction.  In  the  con-
reaction6  °f  cept  of  mass  and  the  principle  of  reaction,  as  we  have
stated  in  a preceding  page,  the  same  fact  is  twice  ioxxsx-
ulated;  which  is  redundant.  If  two  masses  i and  2
act  on  each  other,  our  very  definition  of  mass  asserts
that  they  impart  to  each  other  contrary  accelerations
which  are  to  each  other  respectively  as  2 : 1.

6.  The  fact  that  mass  can  be  measured  by  weight ,
where  the  acceleration  of  gravity  is  invariable,  can  also
be  deduced  from  our  definition  of  mass.  We  are
sensible  at  once  of  any  increase  or  diminution  of  a pres-
sure, but  this  feeling  affords  us  only  a very  inexact  and
indefinite  measure  of  magnitudes  of  pressure.  An
exact,  serviceable  measure  of  pressure  springs  from
the  observation  that  every  pressure  is  replaceable  by


Fig.  141.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


221


the  pressure  of  a number  of  like  and  commensurable  it  also  in-

volves  the

weights.  Every  pressure  can  be  counterbalanced  by  fact  that

. . _ _ . # mass  can  be

the  pressure  of  weights  of  this  kind.  Let  two  bodies  measured
m and  m ' be  respectively  affected  in  opposite  directions
with  the  accelerations  p and  p' , determined  by  exter-
nal circumstances.  And  let  the  bodies  be  joined  by  a
string.  If  equilibrium  prevails,  the  acceleration  p in
m and  the  acceleration  p’  in  iri  are  exactly  balanced
by  interaction.  For  this  case,  ac-
cordingly, m cp  — m' cp'.  . When,  < — j m | m — >

therefore,  p = p\  as  is  the  case  ^

when  the  bodies  are  abandoned

to  the  acceleration  of  gravity,  we  have,  in  the  case
of  equilibrium,  also  m = m\  It  is  obviously  imma-
terial whether  we  make  the  bodies  act  on  each  other
directly  by  means  of  a string,  or  by  means  of  a string
passed  over  a pulley,  or  by  placing  them  on  the  two
pans  of  a balance.  The  fact  that  mass  can  be  meas-
ured by  weight  is  evident  from  our  definition  without
recourse  or  reference  to  “quantity  of  matter. 19

J.  As  soon  therefore  as  we,  our  attention  being  The  general
drawn  to  the  fact  by  experience,  have  perceived  in  bod-  this  view,
ies  the  existence  of  a special  property  determinative  of
accelerations,  our  task  with  .egard  to  it  ends  with  the
recognition  and  unequivocal  designation  of  this  fact .

Beyond  the  recognition  of  this  fact  we  shall  not  get,
and  every  venture  beyond  it  will  only  be  productive  of
obscurity.  All  uneasiness  will’  vanish  when  once  we
have  made  clear  to  ourselves  that  in  the  concept  of
mass  no  theory  of  any  kind  whatever  is  contained,  but
simply  a fact  of  experience.  The  concept  has  hitherto
held  good.  It  is  very  improbable',  but  not  impossible,
that  it  will  be  shaken  in  the  future,  just  as  the  concep-


222


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Newton’s
views  of
time,  space,
and  motion.


Absolute
and  relative
time,


tion  of  a constant  quantity  of  heat,  which  also  rested
on  experience,  was  modified  by  new  experiences.

VI.

newton's  views  of  time,  space,  and  motion.

i.  In  a scholium  which  he  appends  immediately  to
his  definitions,  Newton  presents  his  views  regarding
time  and  space — views  which  we  shall  now  proceed  to
examine  more  in  detail.  We  shall  literally  cite,  to  this
end,  only  the  passages  that  are  absolutely  necessary
to  the  characterisation  of  Newton's  views.

“So  far,  my  object  has  been  to  explain  the  senses
“in which  certain  words  little  known  are  to  be  used  in
“the  sequel.  Time,  space,  place,  and  motion,  being
“words  well  known  to  everybody,  I do  not  define.  Yet1
“it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  vulgar  conceive  these
“quantities  only  in  their  relation  to  sensible  objects.
“And  hence  certain  prejudices  with  respect  to  them
“have  arisen,  to  remove  which  it  will  be  convenient  to
“ distinguish  them  into  absolute  and  relative,  true  and
“apparent,  mathematical  and  common,  respectively.

“I.  Absolute,  true,  and  mathematical  time,  of  it-
“ self,  and  by  its  own  nature,  flows  uniformly  on,  with-
“out  regard  to  anything  external.  It  is  also  called
‘ c (Iteration .

“Relative,  apparent,  and  common  time,  is  some
“ sensible  and  external  measure  of  absolute  time  (dura-
tion), estimated  by  the  motions  of  bodies,  whether
“accurate  or  inequable,  and  is  commonly  employed
“in  place  of  true  time;  as  an  hour,  a day,,a  month,
“ a year.  . .

“The  natural  days,  which,  commonly,  for  the  pur-
“pose  of  the  measurement  of  time,  are  held  as  equal.
“ are  in  reality  unequal.  Astronomers  correct  this  in-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


223


“equality,  in  order  that  they  may  measure  by  a truer
“time  the  celestial  motions.  It  may  be  that  there  is
“no  equable  motion,  by  which  time  can  accurately  be
“measured.  All  motions  can  be  accelerated  and  re-
garded. But  the  flow  of  absolute  time  cannot  be
“changed.  Duration,  or  the  persistent  existence  of
“things,  is  always  the  same,  whether  motions  be  swift
“ or  slow  or  null.”

2.  It  would  appear  as  though  Newton  in  the  re- Discussion
. - . _ of  Newton’s

marks  here  cited  still  stood  under  the  influence  of  the  view  of
mediaeval  philosophy,  as  though  he  had  grown  unfaith-
ful to  his  resolve  to  investigate  only  actual  facts.  When
we  say  a thing  A changes  with  the  time,  we  mean  sim-
ply that  the  conditions  that  determine  a thing  A depend
on  the  conditions  that  determine  another  thing  JE> . The
vibrations  of  a pendulum  take  place  in  time  when  its
excursion  depends  on  the  position  of  the  earth.  Since,
however,  in  the  observation  of  the  pendulum,  we  are
not  under  the  necessity  of  taking  into  account  its  de-
pendence on  the  position  of  the  earth,  but  may  com-
pare it  with  any  other  thing  (the  conditions  of  which
of  course  also  depend  on  the  position  of  the  earth),  the
illusory  notion  easily  arises  that  all  the  things  with
which  we  compare  it  are  unessential.  Nay,  we  may,
in  attending  to  the  motion  of  a pendulum,  neglect  en-
tirely other  external  things,  and  And  that  for  every  po-
sition of  it  our  thoughts  and  sensations  are  different.

Time,  accordingly,  appears  to  be  some  particular  and
independent  thing,  on  the  progress  of  which  the  posi-
tion of  the  pendulum  depends,  while  the  things  that
we  resort  to  for  comparison  and  choose  at  random  ap-
pear to  play  a wholly  collateral  part.  But  we  must
not  forget  that  all  things  in  the  world  are  connected
with  one  another  and  depend  on  one  another,  and  that


224


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


General
discussion
of  the  con-
cept of
time.


Further  elu-
cidation of
the  idea.


we  ourselves  and  all  our  thoughts  are  also  a part  of
nature.  It  is  utterly  beyond  our  power  to  measure  the
changes  of  things  by  time.  Quite  the  contrary,  time
is  an  abstraction,  at  which  we  arrive  by  means  of  the
changes  of  things  ; made  because  we  are  not  restricted
to  any  one  definite  measure,  all  being  interconnected.
A motion  is  termed  uniform  in  which  equal  increments
of  space  described  correspond  to  equal  increments  of
space  described  by  some  motion  with  which  we  form  a
comparison,  as  the  rotation  of  the  earth.  A motion
may,  with  respect  to  another  motion,  be  uniform.  But
the  question  whether  a motion  is  in  itself  uniform,  is
senseless.  , With  just  as  little  justice,  also,  may  we
speak  of  an  “absolute  time” — of  a time  independent  of
change.  This  absolute  time  can  be  measured  by  com-
parison with  no  motion ; it  has  therefore  neither  a
practical  nor  a scientific  value ; and  no  one  is  justified
in  saying  that  he  knows  aught  about  it.  It  is  an  idle
metaphysical  conception.

It  would  not  be  difficult  to  show  from  the  points  of
view  of  psychology,  history,  and  the  science  of  lan-
guage (by  the  names  of  the  chronological  divisions),
that  we  reach  our  ideas  of  time  in  and  through  the  in-
terdependence of  things  on  one  another.  In  these  ideas
the  profoundest  and  most  universal  connection  of  things
is  expressed.  When  a motion  takes  place  in  time,  it
depends  on  the  motion  of  the  earth.  This  is  not  refuted
by  the  fact  that  mechanical  motions  can  be  reversed.
A number  of  variable  quantities  may  be  so  related  that
one  set  can  suffer  a change  without  the  others  being
affected  by  it.  Nature  behaves  like  a machine.  The
individual  parts  reciprocally  determine  one  another.
But  while  in  a machine  the  position  of  one  part  de-
termines the  position  of  all  the  other  parts,  in  nature


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


225


more  complicated  relations  obtain.  These  relations  are
best  represented  under  the  conception  of  a number,
n,  of  quantities  that  satisfy  a lesser  number,  ri , of  equa-
tions. Were  n = ?i , nature  would  be  invariable.  Were
ri  = n — 1,  then  with  one  quantity  all  the  rest  would
be  controlled.  If  this  latter  relation  obtained  in  na-
ture, time  could  be  reversed  the  moment  this  had  been
accomplished  with  any  one  single  motion.  But  the
true  state  of  things  is  represented  by  a different  rela-
tion between  n and  22'.  The  quantities  in  question  are
partially  determined  by  one  another ; but  they  retain
a greater  indeterminateness,  or  freedom,  than  in  the
case  last  cited.  We  ourselves  feel  that  we  are  such  a
partially  determined,  partially  undetermined  element
of  nature.  In  so  far  as  a portion  only  of  the  changes
of  nature  depends  on  us  and  can  be  reversed  by  us,
does  time  appear  to  us  irreversible,  and  the  time  that
is  past  as  irrevocably  gone.

We  arrive  at  the  idea  of  time, — to  express  it  briefly  somepsy-
and  popularly, — by  the  connection  of  that  which  isconsidera-
contained  in  the  province  of  our  memory  with  that
which  is  contained  in  the  province  of  our  sense-percep-
tion. When  we  say  that  time  flows  on  in  a definite  di-
rection or  sense,  we  mean  that  physical  events  gene-
rally (and  therefore  also  physiological  events)  take
place  only  in  a definite  sense.*  Differences  of  tem-
perature, electrical  differences,  differences  of  level  gen-
erally, if  left  to  themselves,  all  grow  less  and  not
greater.  If  we  contemplate  two  bodies  of  different
temperatures,  put  in  contact  and  left  wholly  to  them-
selves, we  shall  find  that  it  is  possible  only  for  greater
differences  of  temperature  in  the  field  of  memory  to

* Investigations  concerning  the  physiological  nature  of  the  sensations  of
time  and  space  are  here  excluded  from  consideration.


Newton’s
views  of
space  and
motion.


Passages
from  his
works.


226  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

exist  with  lesser  ones  in  the  field  of  sense-perception,
and  not  the  reverse.  In  all  this  there  is  simply  ex-
pressed a peculiar  and  profound  connection  of  things.
To  demand  at  the  present  time  a full  elucidation  of  this
matter,  is  to  anticipate,  in  the  manner  of  speculative
philosophy,  the  results  of  all  future  special  investiga-
tion, that  is  a perfect  physical  science.  (Compare  Ap-
pendix, XIX.,  p.  541.)

3.  Views  similar  to  those  concerning  time,  are  de-
veloped by  Newton  with  respect  to  space  and  motion.
We  extract  here  a few  passages  which  characterise  his
position.

“II.  Absolute  space,  in  its  own  nature  and  with-
“out  regard  to  anything  external,  always  remains  sim-
“ilar  and  immovable.

“Relative  space  is  some  movable  dimension  or
“measure  of  absolute  space,  which  our  senses  deter-
“ mine  by  its  position  with  respect  to  other  bodies,
“ and  which  is  commonly  taken  for  immovable  [abso-
lute] space ....

“ IV.  Absolute  motion  is  the  translation  of  a body
“from  one  absolute  place*  to  another  absolute  place  ;
“ and  relative  motion,  the  translation  from  one  relative
“ place  to  another  relative  place.  . . .

“ . . . . And  thus  we  use,  in  common  affairs,  instead
“of  absolute  places  and  motions,  relative  ones;  and
“that  without  any  inconvenience.  But  in  physical
“disquisitions,  we  should  abstract  from  the  senses.
“For  it  may  be  that  there  is  no  body  really  at  rest,  to
“which  the  places  and  motions  of  others  can  be  re-
ferred. . . .

“ The  effects  by  which  absolute  and  relative  motions


*The  place,  or  locus  of  a body,  according  to  Newton,  is  not  its  position,
but  the  part  0/ space  which  it  occupies.  It  is  either  absolute  or  relative. — Trans


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.  227

“ are  distinguished  from  one  another,  are  centrifugal
“forces,  or  those  forces  in  circular  motion  which  pro-
“ duce  a tendency  of  recession  from  the  axis.  For  in
“a  circular  motion  which  is  purely  relative  no  such
“forces  exist;  but  in  a true  and  absolute  circular  mo-
“tion  they  do  exist,  and  are  greater  or  less  according
“to  the  quantity  of  the  [absolute]  motion.

“For  instance.  If  a bucket,  suspended  by  a long  The  rota-
“cord,  is  so  often  turned  about  that  finally  the  cord  is
“strongly  twisted,  then  is  filled  with  water,  and  held
“at  rest  together  with  the  water ; and  afterwards  by
“the  action  of  a second  force,  it  is  suddenly  set  whirl-
ing about  the  contrary  way,  and  continues,  while  the
“cord  is  untwisting  itself,  for  some  time  in  this  mo-
“tion  ; the  surface  of  the  water  will  at  first  be  level,

“just  as  it  was  before  the  vessel  began  to  move ; but,
“subsequently,  the  vessel,  by  gradually  communicat-
ing its  motion  to  the  water,  will  make  it  begin  sens-
ibly to  rotate,  and  the  water  will  recede  little  by  little
“ from  the  middle  and  rise  up  at  the  sides  of  the  ves-
“sel,  its  surface  assuming  a concave  form.  (This  ex-
“ periment  I have  made  myself.)

“ ....  At  first,  when  the  relative  motion  of  the  wa-  Relative
“ter  in  the  vessel  was  greatest , that  motion  produced  motion,
“no  tendency  whatever  of  recession  from  the  axis  ; the
“water  made  no  endeavor  to  move  towards  the  cir-
“cumference,  by  rising  at  the  sides  of  the  vessel,  but
“remained  level,  and  for  that  reason  its  true  circular
“motion  had  not  yet  begun.  But  afterwards,  when
“the  relative  motion  of  the  water  had  decreased,  the
“rising  of  the  water  at  the  sides  of  the  vessel  indicated
“an  endeavor  to  recede  from  the  axis;  and  this  en-
“ deavor  revealed  the  real  circular  motion  of  the  water,

“ continually  increasing,  till  it  had  reached  its  greatest


228


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Newton’s
criteria  for
distinguish-
ing absolute
from  rela-
tive motion.


“ point,  when  relatively  the  water  was  at  rest  in  the
“ vessel ....

“ It  is  indeed  a matter  of  great  difficulty  to  discover
“and  effectually  to  distinguish  the  true  from  the  ap-
parent motions  of  particular  bodies  ; for  the  parts  of
“ that  immovable  space  in  which  bodies  actually  move,
“ do  not  come  under  the  observation  of  our  senses.

“Yet  the  case  is  not  altogether  desperate  ; for  there
“exist  to  guide  us  certain  marks,  abstracted  partly
“from  the  apparent  motions,  which  are  the  differences
“of  the  true  motions,  and  partly  from  the  forces  that
“are  the  causes  and  effects  of  the  true  motions.  If,
“for  instance,  two  globes,  kept  at  a fixed  distance
“from  one  another  by  means  of  a cord  that  connects
“them,  be  revolved  about  their  common  centre  of
“gravity,  one  might,  from  the  simple  tension  of  the
“cord,  discover  the  tendency  of  the  globes  to  recede
“from  the  axis  of  their  motion,  and  on  this  basis  the
“ quantity  of  their  circular  motion  might  be  computed.
‘And  if  any  equal  forces  should  be  simultaneously
‘impressed  on  alternate  faces  of  the  globes  to  augment
‘ or  diminish  their  circular  motion,  we  might,  from
‘the  increase  or  decrease  of  the  tension  of  the  cord,
‘deduce  the  increment  or  decrement  of  their  motion;
‘and  it  might  also  be  found  thence  on  what  faces
‘ forces  would  have  to  be  impressed,  in  order  that  the
‘ motion  of  the  globes  should  be  most  augmented ;

‘ that  is,  their  rear  faces,  or  those  which,  in  the  cir-
‘ cular  motion,  follow.  But  as  soon  as  we  knew  which
‘ faces  followed,  and  consequently  which  preceded,  we
‘ should  likewise  know  the  direction  of  the  motion.

‘ In  this  way  we  might  find  both  the  quantity  and  the
‘ direction  of  the  circular  motion,  considered  even  in
‘ an  immense  vacuum,  where  there  was  nothing  ex-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


229


“ternal  or  sensible  with  which  the  globes  could  be
“ compared  . . . .”

4.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remark  that  in  the  re-  The  predi-
flections  here  presented  Newton  has  again  acted  con-  Newton

1 . . . . , . .are  not  the

trary  to  his  expressed  intention  only  to  investigate  actual  expression

. __  ....  " of  actual

facts.  No  one  is  competent  to  predicate  things  about  facts,
absolute  space  and  absolute  motion ; they  are  pure
things  of  thought,  pure  mental  constructs,  that  cannot
be  produced  in  experience.  All  our  principles  of  me-
chanics are,  as  we  have  shown  in  detail,  experimental
knowledge  concerning  the  relative  positions  and  mo-
tions of  bodies.  Even  in  the  provinces  in  which  they
are  now  recognised  as  valid,  they  could  not,  and  were
not,  admitted  without  previously  being  subjected  to
experimental  tests.  No  one  is  warranted  in  extending
these  principles  beyond  the  boundaries  of  experience.

In  fact,  such  an  extension  is  meaningless,  as  no  one
possesses  the  requisite  knowledge  to  make  use  of  it.

Let  us  look  at  the  matter  in  detail.  When  we  say  that  Detailed
a body  K alters  its  direction  and  velocity  solely  through  matter,
the  influence  of  another  body  we  have  asserted
a conception  that  it  is  impossible  to  come  at  unless
other  bodies  A,  B,  C ...  . are  present  with  reference
to  which  the  motion  of  the  body  K has  been  estimated.

In  reality,  therefore,  we  are  simply  cognisant  of  a re-
lation of  the  body  K to  A,  B,  C . . . . If  now  we  sud-
denly neglects,  B,  C.  . . . and  attempt  to  speak  of
the  deportment  of  the  body  K in  absolute  space,  we
implicate  ourselves  in  a twofold  error.  In  the  first
place,  we  cannot  know  how  K would  act  in  the  ab-
sence of  A,  B,  C . . . .;  and  in  the  second  place,  every
means  would  be  wanting  of  forming  a judgment  of  the
behaviour  of  K and  of  putting  to  the  test  what  we  had


230


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


predicated, — which  latter  therefore  would  be  bereft  of
all  scientific  significance.

The  part  Two  bodies  K and  K\  which  gravitate  toward  each

bodies  of  other,  impart  to  each  other  in  the  direction  of  their

fn the  de^  line  of  junction  accelerations  inversely  proportional  to

termination  . ...  - i

of  motion,  their  masses  ;//,  m.  In  this  proposition  is  contained,
not  only  a relation  of  the  bodies  K and  K ' to  one  an-
other, but  also  a relation  of  them  to  other  bodies.  For
the  proposition  asserts,  not  only  that  K and  Kf  suffer
with  respect  to  one  another  the  acceleration  designated
by  k {in  + ;;//r2),  but  also  that  K experiences  the  ac-
celeration — nvi /r2  and  K'  the  acceleration  + nmjr 2
in  the  direction  of  the  line  of  junction  ; facts  which  can
be  ascertained  only  by  the  presence  of  other  bodies.

The  motion  of  a body  K can  only  be  estimated  by
reference  to  other  bodies  A,  B,  C . . . . But  since  we
always  have  * at  our  disposal  a sufficient  number  of
bodies,  that  are  as  respects  each  other  relatively  fixed,
or  only  slowly  change  their  positions,  we  are,  in  such
reference,  restricted  to  no  one  definite  body  and  can
alternately  leave  out  of  account  now  this  one  and  now
that  one.  In  this  way  the  conviction  arose  that  these
bodies  are  indifferent  generally.

The  hy-  It  might  be,  indeed,  that  the  isolated  bodies  A , B,

a medium  C ...  . play  merely  a collateral  role  in  the  determina-

m space  de-  .

terminative  tion  of  the  motion  of  the  body  K \ and  that  this  motion

of  motion.  . J

is  determined  by  a medium  in  which  K exists.  In  such
a case  we  should  have  to  substitute  this  medium  for
Newton’s  absolute  space.  Newton  certainly  did  not
entertain  this  idea.  Moreover,  it  is  easily  demonstrable
that  the  atmosphere  is  not  this  motion-determinative
medium.  We  should,  therefore,  have  to  picture  to
ourselves  some  other  medium,  filling,  say,  all  space,
with  respect  to  the  constitution  of  which  and  its  kinetic


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS .


231


relations  to  the  bodies  placed  in  it  we  have  at  present
no  adequate  knowledge.  In  itself  such  a state  of  things
would  not  belong  to  the  impossibilities.  It  is  known,
from  recent  hydrodynamical  investigations,  that  a rigid
body  experiences  resistance  in  a frictionless  fluid  only
when  its  velocity  changes.  True,  this  result  is  derived
theoretically  from  the  notion  of  inertia ; but  it  might,
conversely,  also  be  regarded  as  the  primitive  fact  from
which  we  have  to  start.  Although,  practically,  and  at
present,  nothing  is  to  be  accomplished  with  this  con-
ception, we  might  still  hope  to  learn  more  in  the  future
concerning  this  hypothetical  medium ; and  from  the
point  of  view  of  science  it  would  be  in  every  respect
a more  valuable  acquisition  than  the  forlorn  idea  of
absolute  space.  When  we  reflect  that  we  cannot  abol-
ish the  isolated  bodies  A,  B,  C . . . that  is,  cannot
determine  by  experiment  whether  the  part  they  play  is
fundamental  or  collateral,  that  hitherto  they  have  been
the  sole  and  only  competent  means  of  the  orientation
of  motions  and  of  the  description  of  mechanical  facts,
it  will  be  found  expedient  provisionally  to  regard  all
motions  as  determined  by  these  bodies.

5.  Let  us  now  examine  the  point  on  which  New-  Critical

...  _ .....  examina-

ton,  apparently  with  sound  reasons,  rests  his  distmc-  tion  of  ?
tion  of  absolute  and  relative  motion.  If  the  earth  is  distinction
affected  with  an  absolute  rotation  about  its  axis,  cen- from  reia-

....  . . tive  motion,

tnfugal  forces  are  set  up  m the  earth  : it  assumes  an
oblate  form,  the  acceleration  of  gravity  is  diminished
at  the  equator,  the  plane  of  Foucault’s  pendulum  ro-
tates, and  so  on.  All  these  phenomena  disappear  if
the  earth  is  at  rest  and  the  other  heavenly  bodies  are
affected  with  absolute  motion  round  it,  such  that  the
same  relative  rotation  is  produced.  This  is,  indeed,  the
case,  if  we  start  ab  initio  from  the  idea  of  absolute  space.


232


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


But  if  we  take  our  stand  on  the  basis  of  facts,  we  shall
find  we  have  knowledge  only  of  relative  spaces  and  mo-
tions. Relatively , not  considering  the  unknown  and
neglected  medium  of  space,  the  motions  of  the  uni-
verse are  the  same  whether  we  adopt  the  Ptolemaic  or
the  Copernican  mode  of  view.  Both  views  are,  indeed,
equally  correct ; only  the  latter  is  more  simple  and  more
practical.  The  universe  is  not  twice  given,  with  an
earth  at  rest  and  an  earth  in  motion ; but  only  once,
with  its  relative  motions,  alone  determinable.  It  is,
accordingly,  not  permitted  us  to  say  how  things  would
be  if  the  earth  did  not  rotate.  We  may  interpret  the
one  case  that  is  given  us,  in  different  ways.  If,  how-
ever, we  so  interpret  it  that  we  come  into  conflict  with
experience,  our  interpretation  is  simply  wrong.  The
principles  of  mechanics  can,  indeed,  be  so  conceived,
that  even  for  relative  rotations  centrifugal  forces  arise,
interpreta-  Newton’s  experiment  with  the  rotating  vessel  of
experiment  water  simply  informs  us,  that  the  relative  rotation  of
rotating  the  water  with  respect  to  the  sides  of  the  vessel  pro-
water. duces  no  noticeable  centrifugal  forces,  but  that  such
forces  are  produced  by  its  relative  rotation  with  respect
to  the  mass  of  the  earth  and  the  other  celestial  bodies.
No  one  is  competent  to  say  how  the  experiment  would
turn  out  if  the  sides  of  the  vessel  increased  in  thickness
and  mass  till  they  were  ultimately  several  leagues  thick.
The  one  experiment  only  lies  before  us,  and  our  busi-
ness is,  to  bring  it  into  accord  with  the  other  facts
known  to  us,  and  not  with  the  arbitrary  fictions  of  our
imagination.

6.  We  can  have  no  doubts  concerning  the  signifi-
cance of  the  law  of  inertia  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  man-
ner in  which  it  was  reached.  To  begin  with,  Galileo
discovered  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  and  direction


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS .


233


of  a body  referred  to  terrestrial  objects.  Most  terres-  The  law  oi

. . - , . , . , inertia  in

trial  motions  are  of  such  brief  duration  and  extent,  that  the  light  oi

. . in  . , , „ this  view.

it  is  wholly  unnecessary  to  take  into  account  the  earth  s
rotation  and  the  changes  of  its  progressive  velocity  with
respect  to  the  celestial  bodies.  This  consideration  is
found  necessary  only  in  the  case  of  projectiles  cast
great  distances,  in  the  case  of  the  vibrations  of  Fou-
cault’s pendulum,  and  in  similar  instances.  When  now
Newton  sought  to  apply  the  mechanical  principles  dis-
covered since  Galileo’s  time  to  the  planetary  system,
he  found  that,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  to  form  any  es-
timate at  all  thereof,  the  planets,  irrespectively  of  dy-
namic effects,  appear  to  preserve  their  direction  and
velocity  with  respect  to  bodies  of  the  universe  that  are
very  remote  and  as  regards  each  other  apparently  fixed,
the  same  as  bodies  moving  on  the  earth  do  with  re-
spect to  the  fixed  objects  of  the  earth.  The  comport-
ment of  terrestrial  bodies  with  respect  to  the  earth  is
reducible  to  the  comportment  of  the  earth  with  respect
to  the  remote  heavenly  bodies.  If  we  were  to  assert
that  we  knew  more  of  moving  objects  than  this  their
last -mentioned,  experimentally -given  comportment
with  respect  to  the  celestial  bodies,  we  should  render
ourselves  culpable  of  a falsity . When,  accordingly,  we
say,  that  a body  preserves  unchanged  its  direction  and
velocity  in  space,  our  assertion  is  nothing  more  or  less
than-  an  abbreviated  reference  to  the  entire  universe.

The  use  of  such  an  abbreviated  expression  is  permit-
ted the  original  author  of  the  principle,  because  he
knows,  that  as  things  are  no  difficulties  stand  in  the
way  of  carrying  out  its  implied  directions.  But  no
remedy  lies  in  his  power,  if  difficulties  of  the  kind  men-
tioned present  themselves  ; if,  for  example,  the  re-
quisite, relatively  fixed  bodies  are  wanting.


234


TIIE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  reia-  7.  Instead,  now,  of  referring  a moving  body  K to
bodies  of  space,  that  is  to  say  to  a s}'stem  of  coordinates,  let  us
verse  to^  view  directly  its  relation  to  the  bodies  of  the  universe,
’by  which  alone  such  a system  of  coordinates  can  be
determined.  Bodies  very  remote  from  each  other,  mov-
ing with  constant  direction  and  velocity  with  respect
to  other  distant  fixed  bodies,  change  their  mutual  dis-
tances proportionately  to  the  time.  We  may  also  say,
All  very  remote  bodies — all  mutual  or  other  forces  ne-
glected— alter  their  mutual  distances  proportionately
to  those  distances.  Two  bodies,  which,  situated  at  a
short  distance  from  one  another,  move  with  constant
direction  and  velocity  with  respect  to  other  fixed  bod-
ies, exhibit  more  complicated  relations.  If  we  should
regard  the  two  bodies  as  dependent  on  one  another,
and  call  r the  distance,  t the  time,  and  a a constant
dependent  on  the  directions  and  velocities,  the  formula
would  be  obtained:  d2r/dt2  = (1/r)  [ a 2 — ( 'dr/df )2].
It  is  manifestly  much  simpler  and  clearer  to  regard  the
two  bodies  as  independent  of  each  other  and  to  con-
sider the  constancy  of  their  direction  and  velocity  with
respect  to  other  bodies.

Instead  of  saying,  the  direction  and  velocity  of  a
mass  pi  in  space  remain  constant,  we  may  also  employ
the  expression,  the  mean  acceleration  of  the  mass  jx
with  respect  to  the  masses  m,  ///',  m" . ...  at  the  dis-
tances r,  /,  r".  ...  is  = 0,  or  d2  (2 m rj 2 m) jd t2  = 0.
The  latter  expression  is  equivalent  to  the  former,  as
soon  as  we  take  into  consideration  a sufficient  number
of  sufficiently  distant  and  sufficiently  large  masses.
The  mutual  influence  of  more  proximate  small  masses,
which  are  apparently  not  concerned  about  each  other,
is  eliminated  of  itself.  That  the  constancy  of  direction
and  velocity  is  given  by  the  condition  adduced,  will  be


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


235


seen  at  once  if  we  construct  through  p as  vertex  cones  The  expres-

1 rrf  f . . sion  of  the

that  cut  out  dinerent  portions  of  space,  and  set  up  the  law  of  iner-
condition  with  respect  to  the  masses  of  these  separate  of  this1?™
portions.  We  may  put,  indeed,  for  the  e?itire  space latlon'
encompassing  p,  d2  (JE;  7ur/i2m) /dt2  = 0.  But  the
equation  in  this  case  asserts  nothing  with  respect  to  the
motion  of  p,  since  it  holds  good  for  all  species  of  mo-
tion where  p is  uniformly  surrounded  by  an  infinite
number  of  masses.  If  two  masses  p19  p2  exert  on  each
other  a force  which  is  dependent  on  their  distance  r,
then  d2rjdt2  = (jll1  -f-  p2)f(d)-  But,  at  the  same  time,
the  acceleration  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  two
masses  or  the  mean  acceleration  of  the  mass-system
with  respect  to  the  masses  of  the  universe  (by  the  prin-
ciple of  reaction)  remains  ==  0 > that  is  to  say,


d 2 '2mr1
d ~t 2 ^ 1 7dm


2 7Jir<>

M 2 2m


= 0.


When  we  reflect  that  the  time-factor  that  enters  The  neces-

. . . . . . . . . sity  in  sci-

mto  the  acceleration  is  nothing  more  than  a quantity  ence  of  a

that  is  the  measure  of  the  distances  (or  angles  of  rota-  tion  of  the

. All.

tion)  of  the  bodies  of  the  universe,  we  see  that  even  in
the  simplest  case,  in  which  apparently  we  deal  with
the  mutual  action  of  only  two  masses,  the  neglecting
of  the  rest  of  the  world  is  impossible . Nature  does  not

begin  with  elements,  as  we  are  obliged  to  begin  with
them.  It  is  certainly  fortunate  for  us,  that  we  can,
from  time  to  time,  turn  aside  our  eyes  from  the  over-
powering unity  of  the  All,  and  allow  them  to  rest  on
individual  details.  But  we  should  not  omit,  ultimately
to  complete  and  correct  our  views  by  a thorough  con-
sideration of  the  things  which  for  the  time  being  we  j
left  out  of  account.

8.  The  considerations  just  presented  show,  that  it


236


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  law  of  is  not  necessary  to  refer  the  law  of  inertia  to  a special
not  involve  absolute  space.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  perceived  that
space!*  6 the  masses  that  in  the  common  phraseology  exert  forces
on  each  other  as  well  as  those  that  exert  none,  stand
with  respect  to  acceleration  in  quite  similar  relations.
We  may,  indeed,  regard  all  masses  as  related  to  each
other.  That  accelerations  play  a prominent  part  in  the
relations  of  the  masses,  must  be  accepted  as  a fact  of
experience  ; which  does  not,  however,  exclude  attempts
to  elucidate  this  fact  by  a comparison  of  it  with  other
facts,  involving  the  discovery  of  new  points  of  view.
In  all  the  processes  of  nature  the  differences  of  certain

j quantities  u play  a de-

/ terminative  role.  Differ-

2 ences  of  temperature,  of

— potential  function,  and  so
f r forth,  induce  the  natural

— processes,  which  consist
*43-  in  the  equalisation  of


Natural  these  differences.  The  familiar  expressions  d2u/dx 2,

processes  *

consist  in  d2u/dy 2 d2u/dz2,  which  are  determinative  of  the

the  equali-  ‘ r J ..

sationof  character  of  the  equalisation,  may  be  regarded  as  the

the  differ-  .

ences  of  measure  of  the  departure  of  the  condition  of  any  point

quantities.  .

from  the  mean  of  the  conditions  of  its  environment —


to  which  mean  the  point  tends.  The  accelerations  of
masses  may  be  analogously  conceived.  The  great  dis-
tances between  masses  that  stand  in  no  especial  force-
relation  to  one  another,  change  proportionately  to  each
other.  If  we  lay  off,  therefore,  a certain  distance  p as
abscissa,  and  another  r as  ordinate,  we  obtain  a straight
line.  (Fig.  143.)  Every  r-ordinate  corresponding  to
a definite  p-value  represents,  accordingly,  the  mean  of
the  adjacent  ordinates.  If  a force-relation  exists  be-
tween the  bodies,  some  value  d2r/dt2  is  determined


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


237


by  it  which  conformably  to  the  remarks  above  we  may
replace  by  an  expression  of  the  form  d^ijd p 2.  By  the
force-relation,  therefore,  a departure  of  the  r- ordinate
from  the  mean  of  the  adjacent  ordinates  is  produced,
which  would  not  exist  if  the  supposed  force-relation
did  not  obtain.  This  intimation  will  suffice  here.

9.  We  have  attempted  in  the  foregoing  to  give  the  character
law  of  inertia  a different  expression  from  that  in  ordi-  expression
nary  use.  This  expression  will,  so  long  as  a sufH-  of  inertia,
cient  number  of  bodies  are  apparently  fixed  in  space,
accomplish  the  same  as  the  ordinary  one.  It  is  as
easily  applied,  and  it  encounters  the  same  difficulties.

In  the  one  case  we  are  unable  to  come  at  an  absolute


space,  in  the  other  a limited  number  of  masses  only  is
within  the  reach  of  our  knowledge,  and  the  summation
indicated  can  consequently  not  be  fully  carried  out.  It
is  impossible  to  say  whether  the  new  expression  would
still  represent  the  true  condition  of  things  if  the  stars
were  to  perform  rapid  movements  among  one  another.
The  general  experience  cannot  be  constructed  from  the
particular  case  given  us.  We  must,  on  the  contrary,
wait  until  such  an  experience  presents  itself.  Perhaps
when  our  physico-astronomical  knowledge  has  been
extended,  it  will  be  offered  somewhere  in  celestial
space,  where  more  violent  and  complicated  motions


take  place  than  in  our  environment.  The  most  impor-  The  sim-

tant  result  of  our  reflexions  is,  however,  that  precisely  cipiesPofn

the  apparently  simplest  mechanical  principles  are  of  a very  are  of  a

complicated  character , that  these  principles  are  founded  on  plicated  na-
r 7 . • . 7 / ture  anc* are

uncompleted  experiences , nay  on  experiences  that  never  can  ail  derived

he  fully  completed \ that  practically , indeed , they  are  suf-  rience,Xpe


ficiently  secured , in  view  of  the  tolerable  stability  of  our


environment , to  serve  as  the  foundation  {of  mathematical


deduction , but  that  they  can  by  no  means  themselves  be  re -


233


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


garded  as  mathematically  established  truths  but  only  as
principles  that  not  only  admit  of  constant  control  by  expe-
rience but  actually  require  it.  This  perception  is  valu-
able in  that  it  is  propitious  to  the  advancement  of
science.  (Compare  Appendix,  XX.,  p.  542.)

VII.

SYNOPTICAL  CRITIQUE  OF  THE  NEWTONIAN  ENUNCIATIONS.

Newton’s  i.  Now  that  we  have  discussed  the  details  with
* sufficient  particularity,  we  may  pass  again  under  re-
view the  form  and  the  disposition  of  the  Newtonian
enunciations.  Newton  premises  to  his  work  several
definitions,  following  which  he  gives  the  laws  of  mo-
tion. We  shall  take  up  the  former  first.

Mass.  “ Definition  I '.  The  quantity  of  any  matter  is  the

“ measure  of  it  by  its  density  and  volume  conjointly.
“ . . . This  quantity  is  what  I shall  understand  by  the
“ term  mass  or  body  in  the  discussions  to  follow.  It  is
“ ascertainable  from  the  weight  of  the  bpdy  in  ques-
tion. Fori  have  found,  by  pendulum -experiments
“of  high  precision,  that  the  mass  of  a body  is  propor-
“ tional  to  its  weight ; as  will  hereafter  be  shown.

Quantity  of  “ Definition  II.  Quantity  of  motion  is  the  measure

motion,  . . . .

inertia,  “of  it  by  the  velocity  and  quantity  of  matter  con-

force,  and  ...

accelera-  “ jointly.

“ Definition  III.  The  resident  force  [yds  ins  it  a,  i.  e.
“the  inertia]  of  matter  is  a power  of  resisting,  by
. “which  every  body,  so  far  as  in  it  lies,  perseveres  in
“its  state  of  rest  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a straight
“line.

“ Definition  IV.  An  impressed  force  is  any  action
“upon  a body  which  changes,  or  tends  to  change,  its
“state  of  rest,  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a straight  line.


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS .


239


“ Definition  V.  A centripetal  force  is  any  force  by
‘ which  bodies  are  drawn  or  impelled  towards,  or  tend
* in  any  way  to  reach,  some  point  as  centre.

“Definition  VI.  The  absolute  quantity  of  a centri-  Forces  cias-
‘ petal  force  is  a measure  of  it  increasing  and  dimin-  solute,  ac-

ceigpative

' ishing  with  the  efficacy  of  the  cause  that  propagates  and  mov-  ’

' it  from  the  centre  through  the  space  round  about.  mg'

" Definition  VII.  The  accelerative  quantity  of  a
' centripetal  force  is  the  measure  of  it  proportional  to
' the  velocity  which  it  generates  in  a given  time.

“Definition  VIII.  The  moving  quantity  of  a cen-
' tripetal  force  is  the  measure  of  it  proportional  to  the
'motion  [See  Def.  11.]  which  it  generates  in  a given
' time.

"The  three  quantities  or  measures  of  force  thus  dis-  The  reia-^
'tinguished,  may,  for  brevity’s  sake,  be  called  abso-  forces  thus
' lute,  accelerative,  and  moving  forces,  being,  for  dis-  guished.

' tinction’s  sake,  respectively  referred  to  the  centre  of
' force,  to  the  places  of  the  bodies,  and  to  the  bodies
' that  tend  to  the  centre  : that  is  to  say,  I refer  moving
' force  to  the  body,  as  being  an  endeavor  of  the  whole
'towards  the  centre,  arising  from  the  collective  en-
' deavors  of  the  several  parts  ; accelerative  force  to  the
' place  of  the  body,  as  being  a sort  of  efficacy  originat-
' ing  in  the  centre  and  diffused  throughout  all  the  sev-
' eral  places  round  about,  in  moving  the  bodies  that
' are  at  these  places  ; and  absolute  force  to  the  centre,

' as  invested  with  some  cause,  without  which  moving
' forces  would  not  be  propagated  through  the  space
' round  about ; whether  this  latter  cause  be  some  cen-
' tral  body,  (such  as  is  a loadstone  in  a centre  of  mag-
' netic  force,  or  the  earth  in  the  centre  of  the  force  of
'gravity,)  or  anything  else  not  visible.  This,  at  least,

' is  the  mathematical  conception  of  forces ; for  their


240


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


“physical  causes  and  seats  I do  not  in  this  place  con-
“ sider.

Thedis-  “Accelerating  force,  therefore,  is  to  moving  force,

tinction  . . _

mathemat-  “ as  velocity  is  to  quantity  oi  motion,  ror  quantity

ical  and  not  . . - . , ,

physical.  “of  motion  arises  from  the  velocity  and  the  quantity
“of  matter;  and  moving  force  arises  from  the  accel-
erating force  and  the  same  quantity  of  matter ; the
“sum  of  the  effects  of  the  accelerative  force  on  the  sev-
eral particles  of  the  body  being  the  motive  force  of
“the  whole.  Hence,  near  the  surface  of  the  earth,
“where  the  accelerative  gravity  or  gravitating  force  is
“in  all  bodies  the  same,  the  motive  force  of  gravity  or
“ the  weight  is  as  the  body  [mass].  But  if  we  ascend
“to  higher  regions,  where  the  accelerative  force  of
“gravity  is  less,  the  weight  will  be  equally  diminished,
“always  remaining  proportional  conjointly  to  the  mass
“and  the  accelerative  force  of  gravity.  Thus,  in  those
“regions  where  the  accelerative  force  of  gravity  is  half
“ as  great,  the  weight  of  a body  will  be  diminished  by
“ one- half.  Further,  I apply  the  terms  accelerative  and
“motive  in  one  and  the  same  sense  to  attractions  and
“to  impulses.  I employ  the  expressions  attraction,  im-
“pulse,  or  propensity  of  any  kind  towards  a centre,
“promiscuously  and  indifferently,  the  one  for  the  other;
“considering  those  forces  not  in  a physical  sense,  but
“mathematically.  The  reader,  therefore,  must  not
“infer  from  any  expressions  of  this  kind  that  I may
“use,  that  I take  upon  me  to  explain  the  kind  or  the
“mode  of  an  action,  or  the  causes  or  the  physical rea-
“son  thereof,  or  that  I attribute  forces  in  a true  or
“physical  sense,  to  centres  (which  are  only  mathemat-
ical points),  when  at  any  time  I happen  to  say  that
“centres  attract  or  that  central  forces  are  in  action. ”


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS.


241


2.  Definition  1 is,  as  has  already  been  set  forth,  a Criticism  o
pseudo-definition.  The  concept  of  mass  is  not  made  Definitions
clearer  by  describing  mass  as  the  product  of  the  volume

into  the  density,  as  density  itself  denotes  simply  the
mass  of  unit  of  volume.  The  true  definition  of  mass
can  be  deduced  only  from  the  dynamical  relations  of
bodies.

To  Definition  11,  which  simply  enunciates  a mode
of  computation,  no  objection  is  to  be  made.  Defini-
tion hi  (inertia),  however,  is  rendered  superfluous  by
Definitions  iv-viii  of  force,  inertia  being  included  and
given  in  the  fact  that  forces  are  accelerative.

Definition  iv  defines  force  as  the  cause  of  the  accel-
eration, or  tendency  to  acceleration,  of  a body.  The
latter  part  of  this  is  justified  by  the  fact  that  in  the
cases  also  in  which  accelerations  cannot  take  place,
other  attractions  that  answer  thereto,  as  the  compres-
sion and  distension  etc.  of  bodies  occur.  The  cause
of  an  acceleration  towards  a definite  centre  is  defined
in  Definition  v as  centripetal  force,  and  is  distinguished
in  vi,  vii,  and  vm  as  absolute,  accelerative,  and  mo-
tive. It  is,  we  may  say,  a matter  of  taste  and  of  form
whether  we  shall  embody  the  explication  of  the  idea
of  force  in  one  or  in  several  definitions.  In  point  of
principle  the  Newtonian  definitions  are  open  to  no  ob-
jections.

3.  The  Axioms  or  Laws  of  Motion  then  follow,  of  Newton’s

. T . , Laws  of

which  Newton  enunciates  three  : Motion.

Z(  Law  I.  Every  body  perseveres  in  its  state  of  rest
“or  of  uniform  motion  in  a straight  line,  except  in  so
“far  as  it  is  compelled  to  change  that  state  by  im-
pressed forces.  ”

“ Law  II.  Change  of  motion  [i.  e.  of  momentum]  is
proportional  to  the  moving  force  impressed,  and  takes


242


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


“ place  in  the  direction  of  the  straight  line  in  which
“such  force  is  impressed. ”

“ Law  III.  Reaction  is  always  equal  and  opposite
“to  action;  that  is  to  say,  the  actions  of  two  bodies
“ upon  each  other  are  always  equal  and  directly  op-
“ posite.  ”

Newton  appends  to  these  three  laws  a number  of
Corollaries.  The  first  and  second  relate  to  the  prin-
ciple of  the  parallelogram  of  forces  ; the  third  to  the
quantity  of  motion  generated  in  the  mutual  action  of
bodies  ; the  fourth  to  the  fact  that  the  motion  of  the
centre  of  gravity  is  not  changed  by  the  mutual  action
of  bodies  ; the  fifth  and  sixth  to  relative  motion,
criticism  of  4.  We  readily  perceive  that  Laws  i and  n are  con-

laws  of1  s tained  in  the  definitions  of  force  that  precede.  Ac-
motion.  cor(p[ng-  t0  the  latter,  without  force  there  is  no  accel-
eration, consequently  only  rest  or  uniform  motion  in  a
straight  line.  Furthermore,  it  is  wholly  unnecessary
tautology,  after  having  established  acceleration  as  the
measure  of  force,  to  say  again  that  change  of  motion  is
proportional  to  the  force.  It  would  have  been  enough
to  say  that  the  definitions  premised  were  not  arbitrary
mathematical  ones,  but  correspond  to  properties  of
bodies  experimentally  given.  The  third  law  apparently
contains  something  new.  But  we  have  seen  that  it  is
unintelligible  without  the  correct  idea  of  mass,  which
idea,  being  itself  obtained  only  from  dynamical  expe-
rience, renders  the  law  unnecessary.

The  coroi-  The  first  corollary  really  does  contain  something
these  Jaws.  new.  But  it  regards  the  accelerations  determined  in
a body  K by  different  bodies  M,  N,  P as  self- evidently
independent  of  each  other,  whereas  this  is  precisely
what  should  have  been  explicitly  recognised  as  a fact
of  expeilence.  Corollary  Second  is  a simple  applica-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


243


tion  of  the  law  enunciated  in  corollary  First.  The  re-
maining corollaries,  likewise,  are  simple  deductions,
that  is,  mathematical  consequences,  from  the  concep-
tions and  laws  that  precede.

5.  Even  if  we  adhere  absolutely  to  the  Newtonian
points  of  view,  and  disregard  the  complications  and  in-
definite features  mentioned,  which  are  not  removed
but  merely  concealed  by  the  abbreviated  designations
“Time”  and  “Space,”  it  is  possible  to  replace  New-
ton’s enunciations  by  much  more  simple,  methodically
better  arranged,  and  more  satisfactory  propositions.

Such,  in  our  estimation,  would  be  the  following  :

a.  Experimental  Proposition.  Bodies  set  opposite  Proposed

...  . . substitu-

each  other  induce  m each  other,  under  certain  circum-  tions  for

stances  to  be  specified  by  experimental  physics,  con-  tonian  laws
7 . , I.  . r , . ;.  anddefini-

trary  accelerations  m the  direction  of  their  line  of  June-  tions.

tion.  (The  principle  of  inertia  is  included  in  this.)

b.  Definition.  The  mass-ratio  of  any  two  bodies  is
the  negative  inverse  ratio  of  the  mutually  induced  ac-
celerations of  those  bodies.

c.  Experimental  Proposition . The  mass-ratios  of
bodies  are  independent  of  the  character  of  the  physical
states  (of  the  bodies)  that  condition  the  mutual  accel-
erations produced,  be  those  states  electrical,  magnetic,
or  what  not ; and  they  remain,  moreover,  the  same,
whether  they  are  mediately  or  immediately  arrived  at.

d.  Experimental  Proposition.  The  accelerations
which  any  number  of  bodies  A,  B,  C ...  . induce  in  a
body  K,  are  independent  of  each  other.  (The  principle
of  the  parallelogram  of  forces  follows  immediately  from
this.)

e.  Definition.  Moving  force  is  the  product  of  the
mass-value  of  a body  into  the  acceleration  induced  in
that  body.


244


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Extent  and
character
of  the  pro-
posed sub-
stitutions.


The

achieve-
ments of
Newton
from  the
point  of
view  of  his
time.


Then  the  remaining  arbitrary  definitions  of  the  al-
gebraical expressions  “ momentum,”  “vis  viva/’  and
the  like,  might  follow.  But  these  are  by  no  means  in-
dispensable. The  propositions  above  set  forth  satisfy
the  requirements  of  simplicity  , and  parsimony  which,
on  economico-scientific  grounds,  must  be  exacted  of
them.  They  are,  moreover,  obvious  and  clear  ; for  no
doubt  can  exist  with  respect  to  any  one  of  them  either
concerning  its  meaning  or  its  source ; and  we  always
know  whether  it  asserts  an  experience  or  an  arbitrary
convention.

6.  Upon  the  whole,  we  may  say,  that  Newton  dis-
cerned in  an  admirable  manner  the  concepts  and  princi-
ples that  were  sufficiently  assured  to  allow  of  being  fur-
ther built  upon.  It  is  possible  that  to  some  extent  he
was  forced  by  the  difficulty  and  novelty  of  his  subject,
in  the  minds  of  the  contemporary  world,  to  great  am-
plitude, and,  therefore,  to  a certain  disconnectedness
of  presentation,  in  consequence  of  which  one  and  the
same  property  of  mechanical  processes  appears  several
times  formulated.  To  some  extent,  however,  he  was,
as  it  is  possible  to  prove,  not  perfectly  clear  himself
concerning  the  import  and  especially  concerning  the
source  of  his  principles*  This  cannot,  however,  ob-
scure in  the  slightest  his  intellectual  greatness.  He
that  has  to  acquire  a new  point  of  view  naturally  can-
not possess  it  so  securely  from  the  beginning  as  they
that  receive  it  unlaboriously  from  him.  He  has  done
enough  if  he  has  discovered  truths  on  which  future
generations  can  further  build.  For  every  new  infer-
ence therefrom  affords  at  once  a new  insight,  a new
control,  an  extension  of  our  prospect,  and  a clarifica-
tion of  our  field  of  view.  Like  the  commander  of  an
army,  a great  discoverer  cannot  stop  to  institute  petty


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


24  5


inquiries  regarding  the  right  by  which  he  holds  each  The
post  of  vantage  he  has  won.  The  magnitude  of  the  ments^f
problem  to  be  solved  leaves  no  time  for  this.  But  at  the  light  of
a later  period*  the  case  is  different.  Newton  might  re?eSarchent
well  have  expected  of  the  two  centuries  to  follow  that
they  should  further  examine  and  confirm  the  founda-
tions of  his  work*  and  that,  when  times  of  greater  scien-
tific tranquillity  should  come,  the  principles  of  the  sub-
ject might  acquire  an  even  higher  philosophical  in-
terest than  all  that  is  deducible  from  them.  Then  prob-
lems arise  like  those  just  treated  of,  to  the  solution  of
which,  perhaps,  a small  contribution  has  here  been
made.  We  join  with  the  eminent  physicists  Thomson
and  Tait,  in  our  reverence  and  admiration  of  Newton.

But  we  can  only  comprehend  with  difficulty  their  opin-
ion that  the  Newtonian  doctrines  still  remain  the  best
and  most  philosophical  foundation  of  the  science  that
can  be  given.


VIII.

RETROSPECT  OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  DYNAMICS.

i.  If  we  pass  in  review  the  period  in  which  the  de-  The  chief

, f 1 r 11  . - . ..  result,  the

velopment  of  dynamics  fell, — a period  inaugurated  by  discovery

of  one  grej

Galileo,  continued  by  Huygens,  and  brought  to  a close  fact,
by  Newton, — its  main  result  will  be  found  to  be  the
perception,  that  bodies  mutually  determine  in  each
other  accelerations  dependent  on  definite  spatial  and
material  circumstances,  and  that  there  are  masses . The
reason  the  perception  of  these  facts  wTas  embodied  in
so  great  a number  of  principles  is  wholly  an  historical
one  ; the  perception  was  not  reached  at  once,  but  slowly
and  by  degrees.  In  reality  only  one  great  fact  was  es-
tablished. Different  pairs  of  bodies  determine,  inde-
pendently of  each  other,  and  mutually,  in  themselves,


This  fact
even  the
greatest  in-
quirers
could  per-
ceive only
in  frag-
ments.


The  results
reached
have  noth-
ing to  do
with  the  so-
called
“ causes”
of  phenom-
ena.


246  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

pairs  of  accelerations,  whose  terms  exhibit  a constant
ratio,  the  criterion  and  characteristic  of  each  pair.

Not  even  men  of  the  calibre  of  Galileo,  Huygens,
and  Newton  were  able  to  perceive  this  fact  at  once.
Even  they  could  only  discover  it  piece  by  piece,  as  it
■is  expressed  in  the  law  of  falling  bodies,  an  the  special
law  of  inertia,  in  the  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of
forces,  in  the  concept  of  mass,  and  so  forth.  To-day,
no  difficulty  any  longer  exists  in  apprehending  the  unity
of  the  whole  fact.  The  practical  demands  of  communi-
cation alone  can  justify  its  piecemeal  presentation  in
several  distinct  principles,  the  number  of  which  is  really
only  determined  by  scientific  taste.  What  is  more,  a
reference  to  the  reflections  above  set  forth  respecting
the  ideas  of  time,  inertia,  and  the  like,  will  surely  con-
vince us  that,  accurately  viewed,  the  entire  fact  has,
in  all  its  aspects,  not  yet  been  perfectly  apprehended.

The  point  of  view  reached  has,  as  Newton  expressly
states,  nothing  to  do  with  the  “ unknown  causes  ” of
natural  phenomena.  That  which  in  the  mechanics  of
the  present  day  is  called  fo?mce  is  not  a something  that
lies  latent  in  the  natural  processes,  but  a measurable,
actual  circumstance  of  motion,  the  product  of  the  mass
into  the  acceleration.  Also  when  we  speak  of  the  at-
tractions or  repulsions  of  bodies,  it  is  not  necessary  to
think  of  any  hidden  causes  of  the  motions  produced.
We  signalise  by  the  term  attraction  merely  an  actually
existing  resembla?ice  between  events  determined  by  con-
ditions of  motion  and  the  results  of  our  volitional  im-
pulses. In  both  cases  either  actual  motion  occurs  or,
when  the  motion  is  counteracted  by  some  other  circum-
stance of  motion,  distortion,  compression  of  bodies,
and  so  forth,  are  produced.

2.  The  work  which  devolved  on  genius  here,  was


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS.


247


the  noting  of  the  connection  of  certain  determinative  The  form  of
elements  of  the  mechanical  processes.  The  precise  es-  chaScai
tablishment'of  the  form  of  this  connection  was  rather  a in  'the^main
task  for  plodding  research,  which  created  the  different  ?cai  origin,
concepts  and  principles  of  mechanics.  We  can  de-
termine the  true  value  and  significance  of  these  prin-
ciples and  concepts  only  by  the  investigation  of  their
historical  origin.  In  this  it  appears  unmistakable  at
times,  that  accidental  circumstances  have  given  to  the
course  of  their  development  a peculiar  direction,  which
under  other  conditions  might  have  been  very  different.

Of  this  an  example  shall  be  given.

Before  Galileo  assumed  the  familiar  fact  of  the  de-Forexam-


pendence  of  the  final  velocity  on  the  time,  and  put  it  to  leo’s  laws

, f J , of  falling

the  test  of  experiment,  he  essayed,  as  we  have  already  bodies
seen,  a different  hypothesis,  and  made  the  final  velocity  taken* a dif-
proportional  to  the  space  described.  He  imagined,  by  a
course  of  fallacious  reasoning,  likewise  already  referred
to,  that  this  assumption  involved  a self-contradiction.

His  reasoning  was,  that  twice  any  given  distance  of  de-
scent must,  by  virtue  of  the  double  final  velocity  ac-
quired, necessarily  be  traversed  in  the  same  time  as  the
simple  distance  of  descent.  But  since  the  first  half  is
necessarily  traversed  first,  the  remaining  half  will  have
to  be  traversed  instantaneously,  that  is  in  an  interval
of  time  not  measurable.  Whence,  it  readily  follows,
that  the  descent  of  bodies  generally  is  instantaneous.

The  fallacies  involved  in  this  reasoning  are  manifest.  Galileo’s


Galileo  was,  of  course,  not  versed  in  mental  Integra-  and  its
tions,  and  having  at  his  command  no  adequate  methods
for  the  solution  of  problems  whose  facts  were  in  any
degree  complicated,  he  could  not  but  fall  into  mistakes
whenever  such  cases  were  presented.  If  we  call  s the
distance  and  t the  time,  the  Galilean  assumption  reads


248


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


in  the  language  of  to-day  dsjdt  = as,  from  which  fol-
lows s — A £at,  where  a is  a constant  of  experience  and
A a constant  of  integration.  This  is  an  entirely  different
conclusion  from  that  drawn  by  Galileo.  It  does  not
conform,  it  is  true,  to  experience,  and  Galileo  would
probably  have  taken  exception  to  a result  that,  as  a
condition  of  motion  generally,  made  s different  from  0
when  t equalled  0.  But  in  itself  the  assumption  is  by
no  means  ^//-contradictory.

The  suppo-  Let  us  suppose  that  Kepler  had  put  to  himself  the
Kepler  had  same  question.  Whereas  Galileo  always  sought  after
leo’s  re-  the  very  simplest  solutions  of  things,  and  at  once  re-

searches.  •

jected  hypotheses  that  did  not  fit,  Kepler’s  mode  of  pro-
cedure was  entirely  different.  He  did  not  quail  before
the  most  complicated  assumptions,  but  worked  his  way,
by  the  constant  gradual  modification  of  his  original
hypothesis,  successfully  to  his  goal,  as  the  history  of
his  discovery  of  the  laws  of  planetary  motion  fully
shows.  Most  likely,  Kepler,  on  finding  the*assumption
dsjdt  = as  would  not  work,  would  have  tried  a num-
ber of  others,  and  among  them  probably  the  correct  one
dsjdt  = aV ’ s.  But  from  this  would  have  resulted  an
essentially  different  course  of  development  for  the  sci-
ence of  dynamics.

in  such  a It  was  only  gradually  and  with  great  difficulty  that

C&S6  the  mm  mm

concept  the  concept  of  “work”  attained  its  present  position
might  have  of  importance  ; and  in  our  judgment  it  is  to  the  above-
original  mentioned  trifling  historical  circumstance  that  the  diffi-
mechanics.  culties  and  obstacles  it  had  to  encounter  are  to  be  as-
cribed. As  the  interdependence  of  the  velocity  and  the
time  was,  as  it  chanced,  first  ascertained,  it  could  not
be  otherwise  than  that  the  relation  v = gt  should  appear
as  the  original  one,  the  equation  s=zgt2/2  as  the  next
immediate,  and  gs  = v2  j 2 as  a remoter  inference.  In-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


249


troducing  the  concepts  mass  (///)  and  force  (/),  where
p = mg,  we  obtain,  by  multiplying  the  three  equations
by  m,  the  expressions  mv—pt,  ms  = pi2 jo,,  ps  =
mv2 / 2 — the  fundamental  equations  of  mechanics.  Of
necessity,  therefore,  the  concepts  force  and  momentum
(in  v)  appear  more  primitive  than  the  concepts  work  (ps)
and  vis  viva  ( mv 2).  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  accord-
ingly, that,  wherever  the  idea  of  work  made  its  appear-
ance, it  was  always  sought  to  replace  it  by  the  histor-
ically older  concepts.  The  entire  dispute  of  the  Leib-
nitzians  and  Cartesians,  which  was  first  composed  in
a manner  by  D’Alembert,  finds  its  complete  explana-
tion in  this  fact.

From  an  unbiassed  point  of  view,  we  have  exactly  justifica-

J tion  of  this

the  same  right  to  inquire  after  the  interdependence  of  view,
the  final  velocity  and  the  time  as  after  the  interde-
pendence of  the  final  velocity  and  the  distance,  and  to
answer  the  question  by  experiment.  The  first  inquiry
leads  us  to  the  experiential  truth,  that  given  bodies  in
contraposition  impart  to  each  other  in  given  times  defi-
nite increments  of  velocity.  The  second  informs  us,
that  given  bodies  in  contraposition  impart  to  each  other
for  given  mutual  displacements  definite  increments  of
velocities.  Both  propositions  are  equally  justified,  and
both  may  be  regarded  as  equally  original.

The  correctness  of  this  view  has  been  substantiated  Exempiifi:

_ cation  of  it

in  our  own  day  by  the  example  or  J . R.  Mayer.  Mayer,  in  modern
a modern  mind  of  the  Galilean  stamp,  a mind  wholly
free  from  the  influences  of  the  schools,  of  his  own  in-
dependent accord  actually  pursued  the  last-named
method,  and  produced  by  it  an  extension  of  science
which  the  schools  did  not  accomplish  until  later  in  a
much  less  complete  and  less  simple  form.  For  Mayer,
work  was  the  original  concept.  That  which  is  called


250


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


work  in  the  mechanics  of  the  schools,  he  calls  force.
Mayer’s  error  was,  that  he  regarded  his  method  as  the
only  correct  one.

The  results  3.  We  may,  therefore,  as  it  suits  us,  regard  the  time
from  it.  of  descent  or  the  distance  of  descent  as  the  factor  de-
terminative of  velocity.  If  we  fix  our  attention  on
the  first  circumstance,  the  concept  of  force  appears  as
the  original  notion,  the  concept  of  work  as  the  derived
one.  If  we  investigate  the  influence  of  the  second  fact
first,  the  concept  of  work  is  the  original  notion.  In
the  transference  of  the  ideas  reached  in  the  observation
of  the  motion  of  descent  to  more  complicated  relations,
force  is  recognised  as  dependent  on  the  distance  be-
tween the  bodies — that  is,  as  a function  of  the  distance,
/(;-).  The  work  done  through  the  element  of  distance  dr
is  then  f{f)  dr . By  the  second  method  of  investiga-
tion work  is  also  obtained  as  a function  of  the  distance,
F (f)  ; but  in  this  case  we  know  force  only  in  the  form
d.  F (f)/dr- — that  is  to  say,  as  the  limiting  value  of  the
ratio  : (increment  of  work) /(increment  of  distance.)
The  prefer-  Galileo  cultivated  by  preference  the  first  of  these
different  in-  two  methods.  Newton  likewise  preferred  it.  Huygens
qmrers.  pursuec[  the  second  method,  without  at  all  restricting
• himself  to  it.  Descartes  elaborated  Galileo’s  ideas  after
a fashion  of  his  own.  But  his  performances  are  in-
significant compared  with  those  of  Newton  and  Huy-
gens, and  their  influence  was  soon  totally  effaced.  After
Huygens  and  Newton,  the  mingling  of  the  two  spheres
of  thought,  the  independence  and  equivalence  of  which
are  not  always  noticed,  led  to  various  blunders  and
confusions,  especially  in  the  dispute  between  the  Car-
tesians and  Leibnitzians,  already  referred  to,  concern-
ing the  measure  of  force.  In  recent  times,  however,  in-
quirers turn  by  preference  now  to  the  one  and  now  to


THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DYNAMICS.


251


the  other.  Thus  the  Galileo- Newtonian  ideas  are  culti-
vated with  preference  by  the  school  of  Poinsot,  the
Galileo-Huygenian  by  the  school  of  Poncelet.

4.  Newton  operates  almost  exclusively  with  the  no-  Theimpor-

r r 1 x-r*  . tance  and

tions  of  force,  mass,  and  momentum.  His  sense  of  the  history  of
value  of  the  concept  of  mass  places  him  above  his  prede-  tonian  con-

1 . _ cept  of

cessors  and  contemporaries.  It  did  not  occur  to  Galileo  mass,
that  mass  and  weight  were  different  things.  Huygens,
too,  in  all  his  considerations,  puts  weights  for  masses ;
as  for  example  in  his  investigations  concerning  the
centre  of  oscillation.  Even  in  the  treatise  De  Percus -
sione  (On  Impact),  Huygens  always  says  “ corpus  ma-
jus,”  the  larger  body,  and  “ corpus  minus,”  the  smaller
body,  when  he  means  the  larger  or  the  smaller  mass.
Physicists  were  not  led  to  form  the  concept  mass  till
they  made  the  discovery  that  the  same  body  can  by  the
action  of  gravity  receive  different  accelerations.  The
first  occasion  of  this  discovery  was  the  pendulum-ob-
servations of  Richer  (1671-1673), — from  which  Huy-
gens at  once  drew  the  proper  inferences, — and  the
second  was  the  extension  of  the  dynamical  laws  to  the
heavenly  bodies.  The  importance  of  the  first  point  may
be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  Newton,  to  prove  the  pro-
portionality of  mass  and  weight  on  the  same  spot  of  the
earth,  personally  instituted  accurate  observations  on
pendulums  of  different  materials  ( Principia . Lib.  II,

Sect.  VI,  De  Motu  et  Resistentia  Corporum  Funependu -
lorum).  In  the  case  of  John  Bernoulli,  also,  the  first
distinction  between  mass  and  weight  (in  the  Meditatio
de  Natura  Centri  Oscillationis . Opera  Omnia , Lausanne
and  Geneva,  Vol.  II,  p.  168)  was  made  on  the  ground
of  the  fact  that  the  same  body  can  receive  different
gravitational  accelerations.  Newton,  accordingly,  dis-
poses of  all  dynamical  questions  involving  the  relations


252


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


of  several  bodies  to  each  other,  by  the  help  of  the  ideas
of  force,  mass,  and  momentum.

Themeth-  5.  Huygens  pursued  a different  method  for  the  so-
gens°f  Huy  lution  of  these  problems.  Galileo  had  previously  dis-
covered that  a body  rises  by  virtue  of  the  velocity  ac-
quired in  its  descent  to  exactly  the  same  height  as  that
from  which  it  fell.  Huygens,  generalising  the  principle
(in  his  Horologium  Oscillatoriuni)  to  the  effect  that  the
centre  of  gravity  of  any  system  of  bodies  will  rise  by
virtue  of  the  velocities  acquired  in  its  descent  to.  ex-
actly the  same  height  as  that  from  which  it  fell,  reached
the  principle  of  the  equivalence  of  work  and  vis  viva.
The  names  of  the  formulae  which  he  obtained,  were,
of  course,  not  supplied  until  long  afterwards.

The  Huygenian  principle  of  work  was  received  by
the  contemporary  world  with  almost  universal  distrust.
People  contented  themselves  with  making  use  of  its
brilliant  consequences.  It  was  always  their  endeavor,
to  replace  its  deductions  by  others.  Even  after  John
and  Daniel  Bernoulli  had  extended  the  principle,  it
was  its  fruitfulness  rather  than  its  evidency  that  was
valued.

Themeth-  We  observe,  that  the  Galileo-Newtonian  principles
ton  and  ew  were,  on  account  of  their  greater  simplicity  and  ap-
compared.  parently  greater  evidency,  invariably  preferred  to  the
Galileo-Huygenian.  The  employment  of  the  latter  is
exacted  only  by  necessity  in  cases  in  which  the  em-
ployment of  the  former,  owing  to  the  laborious  atten-
tion to  details  demanded,  is  impossible  ; as  in  the  case
of  John  and  Daniel  Bernoulli’s  investigations  of  the
motion  of  fluids.

If  we  look  at  the  matter  closely,  however,  the  same
simplicity  and  evidency  will  be  found  to  belong  to^  the
Huygenian  principles  as  to  the  Newtonian  proposi-


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


253


tions.  That  the  velocity  of  a body  is  determined  by
the  time  of  descent  or  determined  by  the  distance  of
descent,  are  assumptions  equally  natural  and  equally
simple.  The  form  of  the  law  must  in  both  cases  be
supplied  by  experience.  As  a starting-point,  therefore,
fit  — mv  and  fis  = ?uv2 /2  are  equally  well  fitted.

6.  When  we  pass  to  the  investigation  of  the  motion  The  neces^
of  several  bodies,  we  are  again  compelled,  in  both  cases,  universai-

i i r it  r ity  of  the

to  take  a second  step  of  an  equal  degree  of  certainty,  two  meth-
The  Newtonian  idea  of  mass  is  justified  by  the  fact,
that,  if  relinquished,  all  rules  of  action  for  events  would
have  an  end  ; that  we  should  forthwith  have  to  expect
contradictions  of  our  commonest  and  crudest  experi-
ences ; and  that  the  physiognomy  of  our  mechanical
environment  would  become  unintelligible.  The  same
thing  'must  be  said  of  the  Huygenian  principle  of  work.

If  we  surrender  the  theorem  2 fis  = / 2,  heavy

bodies  will,  by  virtue  of  their  own  weights,  be  able  to
ascend  higher  ; all  known  rules  of  mechanical  occur-
rences will  have  an  end.  The  instinctive  factors  which
entered  alike  into  the  discovery  of  the  one  view  and  of
the  other  have  been  already  discussed.

The  two  spheres  of  ideas  could,  of  course,  have  The  points
grown  up  much  more  independently  of  each  other.  But  of  the  two
in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  two  were  constantly  in  con-
tact, it  is  no  wonder  that  they  have  become  partially
merged  in  each  other,  and  that  the  Huygenian  appears
the  less  complete.  Newton  is  all-sufficient  with  his
forces,  masses,  and  momenta.  Huygens  would  like-
wise suffice  with  work,  mass,  and  vis  viva . But  since
he  did  not  in  his  time  completely  possess  the  idea  of
mass,  that  idea  had  in  subsequent  applications  to  be
borrowed  from  the  other  sphere.  Yet  this  also  could
have  been  avoided.  If  with  Newton  the  mass-ratio  of


254


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


two  bodies  can  be  defined  as  the  inverse  ratio  of  the
velocities  generated  by  the  same  force,  with  Huygens
it  would  be  logically  and  consistently  definable  as  the
inverse  ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  velocities  generated
by  the  same  work.

The  respec-  The  two  spheres  of  ideas  consider  the  mutual  de-

tive  merits  . .

of  each.  pendence  on  each  other  of  entirely  different  factors  of
the  same  phenomenon.  The  Newtonian  view  is  in  so
far  more  complete  as  it  gives  us  information  regarding
the  motion  of  each  mass.  But  to  do  this  it  is  obliged
to  descend  greatly  into  details.  The  Huygenian  view
furnishes  a rule  for  the  whole  system.  It  is  only  a con-
venience, but  it  is  then  a mighty  convenience,  when
the  relative  velocities  of  the  masses  are  previously  and
independently  known.

The  gen-  7.  Thus  we  are  led  to  see,  that  in  the  develop-

opment  of  ment  of  dynamics,  just  as  m the  development  of  statics,

in  the  light  the  connection  of  widely  different  features  of  mechanical

of  the  pre-  .....  . .

ceding  re-  phenomena  engrossed  at  different  times  the  attention

metrics*

of  inquirers.  We  may  regard  the  momentum  of  a sys-
tem as  determined  by  the  forces  ; or,  on  the  other
hand,  we  may  regard  its  vis  viva  as  determined  by  the
work.  In  the  selection  of  the  criteria  in  question  the
individuality  of  the  inquirers  has  great  scope.  It  will
be  conceived  possible,  from  the  arguments  above  pre-
sented, that  our  system  of  mechanical  ideas  might,
perhaps,  have  been  different,  had  Kepler  instituted
the  first  investigations  concerning  the  motions  of  fall-
ing bodies,  or  had  Galileo  not  committed  an  error  in
his  first  speculations.  We  shall  recognise  also  that  not
only  a knowledge  of  the  ideas  that  have  been  accepted
and  cultivated  by  subsequent  teachers  is  necessary  for
the  historical  understanding  of  a science,  but  also  that
the  rejected  and  transient  thoughts  of  the  inquirers,


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMICS.


255


nay  even  apparently  erroneous  notions,  may  be  very
important  and  very  instructive.  The  historical  investi-
gation of  the  development  of  a science  is  most  needful,
lest  the  principles  treasured  up  in  it  become  a system
of  half-understood  prescripts,  or  worse,  a system  of
prejudices.  Historical  investigation  not  only  promotes
the  understanding  of  that  which  now  is,  but  also  brings
new  possibilities  before  us,  by  showing  that  which  ex-
ists to  be  in  great  measure  conventional  and  accidental.

From  the  higher  point  of  view  at  which  different  paths
of  thought  converge  we  may  look  about  us  with  freer
powers  of  vision  and  discover  routes  before  unknown.  J

In  all  the  dynamical  propositions  that  we  have  dis-  The  substi-

• ai  tution  of

cussed,  velocity  plays  a prominent  role.  The  reason  “integral”
of  this,  in  our  view,  is,  that,  accurately  considered,  entiai”

. , , , p . . _ . , ’ laws  may

every  single  body  of  the  universe  stands  m some  den- some  day

ind-icc  the

nite  relation  with  every  other  body  in  the  universe  ; concept  of
that  any  one  body,  and  consequently  also  any  several  fluous.  P
bodies,  cannot  be  regarded  as  wholly  isolated.  Our
inability  to  take  in  all  things  at  a glance  alone  compels
us  to  consider  a few  bodies  and  for  the  time  being  to
neglect  in  certain  aspects  the  others ; a step  accom-
plished by  the  introduction  of  velocity,  and  therefore
of  time.  We  cannot  regard  it  as  impossible  that  inte-
gral laws,  to  use  an  expression  of  C.  Neumann,  will
some  day  take  the  place  of  the  laws  of  mathematical
elements,  or  differential  laws,  that  now  make  up  the
science  of  mechanics,  and  that  we  shall  have  direct
knowledge  of  the  dependence  on  one  another  of  the
positions  of  bodies.  In  such  an  event,  the  concept  of
force  will  have  become  superfluous.  (See  Appendix,

XXI. ,  p.  548,  on  Hertz's  Mechanics ; also  Appendix

XXII. ,  p.  555,  in  answer  to  criticisms  of  the  views  ex-
pressed by  the  author  in  Chapters  I.  and  II.)


CHAPTER  III.


THE  EXTENDED  APPLICATION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES
OF  MECHANICS  AND  THE  DEDUCTIVE  DE-
VELOPMENT OF  THE  SCIENCE.

i.


SCOPE  OF  THE  NEWTONIAN  PRINCIPLES.


Newton’s
principles
are  uni-
versal in
scope  and
power.


i.  The  principles  of  Newton  suffice  by  themselves,
without  the  introduction  of  any  new  laws,  to  explore
thoroughly  every  mechanical  phenomenon  practically
occurring,  whether  it  belongs  to  statics  or'to  dynamics.
If  difficulties  arise  in  any  such  consideration,  they  are


invariably  of  a mathematical,  or
formal,  character,  and  in  no  re-
spect concerned  with  questions
of  principle.  We  have  given,
let  us  suppose,  a number  of  mas-
ses mv  m 2,  mz.  ...  in  space,  with
definite  initial  velocities  vv  v2,
vz. . . . We  imagine,  further,  lines
of  junction  drawn  between  every


Fig.  144-


two  masses.  In  the  directions  of


these  lines  of  junction  are  set  up  the  accelerations  and
counter-accelerations,  the  dependence  of  which  on  the
distance  it  is  the  business  of  physics  to  determine.  In
a small  element  of  time  r the  mass  w5,  for  example,
will  traverse  in  the  direction  of  its  initial  velocity  the
distance  ?>5r,  and  in  the  directions  of  the  lines  joining


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


2 57


it  with  the  masses  m13  m2,  m2.  . . .,  being  affected  in  Schematic
such  directions  with  the  accelerations  cp\,  cp\ , cp |.  . . .,  of  thepre-
the  distances  ((pf/2)r2,  (cp\/ 2)r2,  (<p|/2)r2.  . . . If sStement.
we  imagine  all  these  motions  to  be  performed  indepen-
dently of  each  other,  we  shall  obtain  the  new  position
of  the  mass  m5  after  lapse  of  time  r.  The  composition
of  the  velocities  vh  and  cp\ r,  cp\r,  cp\r . . . . gives  the
new  initial  velocity  at  the  end  of  time  r.  We  then
allow  a second  small  interval  of  time  r to  elapse,  and,
making  allowance  for  the  new  spatial  relations  of  the
masses,  continue  in  the  same  way  the  investigation  of
the  motion.  In  like  manner  we  may  proceed  with
every  other  mass.  It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that,  in
point  of  principle,  no  embarrassment  can  arise ; the
difficulties  which  occur  are  solely  of  a mathematical
character,  where  an  exact  solution  in  concise  symbols,
and  not  a clear  insight  into  the  momentary  workings
of  the  phenomenon,  is  demanded.  If  the  accelerations
of  the  mass  ?n5 , or  of  several  masses,  collectively  neu-
tralise each  other,  the  mass  or  the  other  masses
mentioned  are  in  equilibrium  and  will  move  uniformly
onwards  with  their  initial  velocities.  If,  in  addition,
the  initial  velocities  in  question  are  = 0,  both  equilib-
rium and  rest  subsist  for  these  masses.

Nor,  where  a number  of  the  masses  m19  7n0  ....  The  same

x t'  idea  ap-

have  considerable  extension,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  plied  to  ag-

gregates  of

speak  of  a single  line  joining  every  two  masses,  is  the  dif-  material
ficulty,  in  poin.t  of  principle,  any  greater.  We  divide
the  masses  into  portions  sufficiently  small  for  our  pur-
pose, and  draw  the  lines  of  junction  mentioned  between
every  two  such  portions.  We,  furthermore,  take  into
account  the  reciprocal  relation  of  the  parts  of  the
same  large  mass ; which  relation,  in  the  case  of  rigid
masses  for  instance,  consists  in  the  parts  resisting


25S


THE  SCIENCE  ' OF  MECHANICS .


every  alteration  of  their  distances  from  one  another.
On  the  alteration  of  the  distance  between  any  two  parts
of  such  a mass  an  acceleration  is  observed  proportional
to  that  alteration.  Increased  distances  diminish,  and
diminished  distances  increase  in  consequence  of  this
acceleration.  By  the  displacement  of  the  parts  with
respect  to  one  another,  the  familiar  forces  of  elasticity
are  aroused.  When  masses  meet  in  impact,  their
forces  of  elasticity  do  not  come  into  play  until  contact
and  an  incipient  alteration  of  form  take  place.
a practical  2.  If  we  imagine  a heavy  perpendicular  column
ottbersco0pne  resting  on  the  earth,  any  particle  m in  the  interior  of
principles.3  the  column  which  we  may  choose  to  isolate  in  thought,
is  in  equilibrium  and  at  rest.  A vertical  downward  ac-
celeration g is  produced  by  the  earth  in  the  particle,
which  acceleration  the  particle  obeys.  But  in  so  doing
it  approaches  nearer  to  the  particles  lying  beneath  it,
and  the  elastic  forces  thus  awakened  generate  in  m a
vertical  acceleration  upwards,  which  ultimately,  when
the  particle  has  approached  near  enough,  becomes
equal  to  g.  The  particles  lying  above  m likewise
approach  m with  the  acceleration  g.  Here,  again,
acceleration  and  counter-acceleration  are  produced,
whereby  the  particles  situated  above  are  brought  to
rest,  but  whereby  m continues  to  be  forced  nearer  and
nearer  to  the  particles  beneath  it  until  the  acceleration
downwards,  which  it  receives  from  the  particles  above
it,  increased  by  g,  is  equal  to  the  acceleration  it  re-
ceives in  the  upward  direction  from  the  particles  be-
neath it.  We  may  apply  the  same  reasoning  to  every"
portion  of  the  column  and  the  earth  beneath  it,  readily
perceiving  that  the  lower  portions  lie  nearer  each  other
and  are  more  violently  pressed  together  than  the  parts
above.  Every  portion  lies  between  a less  closely  pressed


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


259


upper  portion  and  a more  closely  pressed  lower  por- Rest  in  the
tion  ; its  downward  acceleration  g is  neutralised  by  atheseprin-
surplus  of  acceleration  upwards,  which  it  experiences  pear?  asa
from  the  parts  beneath.  We  comprehend  the  equilib-  of  motion,
rium  and  rest  of  the  parts  of  the  column  by  imagining
all  the  accelerated  motions  which  the  reciprocal  rela-
tion of  the  earth  and  the  parts  of  the  column  determine,
as  in  fact  simultaneously  performed.  The  apparent
mathematical  sterility  of  this  conception  vanishes,  and
it  assumes  at  once  an  animate  form,  when  we  reflect
that  in  reality  no  body  is  completely  at  rest,  but  that
in  all,  slight  tremors  and  disturbances  are  constantly
taking  place  which  now  give  to  the  accelerations  of  de-
scent and  now  to  the  accelerations  of  elasticity  a slight
preponderance.  Rest,  therefore,  is  a case  of  motion,
very  infrequent,  and,  indeed,  never  completely  realised.

The  tremors  mentioned  are  by  no  means  an  unfamiliar
phenomenon.  When,  however,  we  occupy  ourselves
with  cases  of  equilibrium,  we  are  concerned  simply  with
a schematic  reproduction  in  thought  of  the  mechanical
facts.  We  then  purposely  neglect  these  disturbances,
displacements,  bendings,  and  tremors,  as  here  they
have  no  interest  for  us.  All  cases  of  this  class,  wrhich
have  a scientific  or  practical  importance,  fall  within  the
province  of  the  so-called  theory  of  elasticity.  The  whole  The  unity

. and  homo-

outcome  of  Newton’s  achievements  is  that  we  every-  geneityh  ^
where  reach  our  goal  with  one  and  the  same  idea,  and  principles

1 r - 1 1 1 1 i introduce

by  means  of  it  are  able  to  reproduce  and  construct  be-  into  the

J ...  . science.

forehand  all  cases  of  equilibrium  and  motion.  All
phenomena  of  a mechanical  kind  now  appear  to  us
as  uniform  throughout  and  as  made  up  of  the  same
elements.

3.  Let  us  consider  another  example.  Two  mas-
ses m , in  are  situated  at  a distance  a from  each


z6o


TIIE  SCIEXCE  OF  MECHANICS.


A general  other.  (Fig.  145.)  When  displaced  with  respect  to
cation  of  each  other,  elastic  forces  proportional  to  the  change
ofetheprin-  x2  of  distance  are  supposed  to  be

up!'>'  0 g — g awakened.  Let  the  masses  be

* movable  in  the  X-direction  par-

Fis-  ^5-  allel  to  a , and  their  coordinates

be  x13  x2.  If  a force  /is  applied  at  the  point  x23  the
following  equations  obtain :

m 1 =/[(a-2  — *1)  — al ( 1 )

M ~IT*?  = ~ ~ -*i)  ~ ^ + * ^


where  p stands  for  the  force  that  one  mass  exerts  on
the  other  when  their  mutual  distance  is  altered  by  the
value  1.  All  the  quantitative  properties  of  the  me-
chanical process  are  determined  by  these  equations.
But  we  obtain  these  properties  in  a more  comprehensi-
ble form  by  the  integration  of  the  equations.  The  ordi-
nary procedure  is,  to  find  by  the  repeated  differentia-
tion of  the  equations  before  us  new  equations  in  suffi-
cient number  to  obtain  by  elimination  equations  in  x1
alone  or  x2  alone,  which  are  afterwards  integrated.  We
shall  here  pursue  a different  method.  By  subtracting
the  first  equation  from  the  second,  we  get


The  devel-
opment of
the  equa-
tions ob-
tained in
this  exam-
ple.


m = — 2/[(*2  — xj  — d]  +/,  or

putting  x2  — xx  — u3

*7^=— 2/[»— «]+/


(3)


and  by  the  addition  of  the  first  and  the  second  equa-
tions

d2  (x0  4-

m — -1-  =f  or,  putting  x2  + xr  = v,


THE  EX7EXS/OX  OE  THE  PRJXCIFLES .


261


d^v

m~dT*=f


(*)


The  integrals  of  (3)  and  (4)  are  respectively


. t -(-  B cos


\lp

Xu'


a - 4-  —•  and
2 p


t = A sin^l*^

f /2

n = ---  . --  Ct  4-  D\  whence
m 2

A . I Tp  B 1 2}  f t*

c — smd- - . / cos*  -x  . t + . --

1 2 y m 2 y m im  2


. A . \'lp  B 1 2
c2=  s,nyl~./+  .,-cos^J-


~ ->W  2


+ Ct  + 2'  + 4/  + Y'

To  take  a particular  case,  we  will  assume  that  the
action  of  the  force  /'begins  at  /=  0,  and  that  at  this
time

- »■  iff = °


x2  = a,


d cx  2
dt~


: 0*


that  is,  the  initial  positions  are  given  and  the  initial
velocities  are  = 0.  The  constants  A,  B , C,  D being
eliminated  by  these  conditions,  we  get

15.,  +

m 2 m 2 4/’


(5)


/


cos


(6)


(7)  *2


iCOS


■-J—  • * + / and

\ in  2 m 2 1


4/


/


•r  = — cos


2/


J^.f+a  + f.
y m ' ‘ 2 p


The  integ-
rals of  these
develop-
ments.


A particu-
lar case  of
the  exam-
ple.


262


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Theinform- AVe  see  from  (z)  and  (6)  that  the  two  masses,  in  addi-

ation  which  . J J . ......

the  result-  tion  to  a uniformly  accelerated  motion  with  half  the

tions  give  acceleration  that  the  force  / would  impart  to  one  of

concerning  ...

this  exam-  these  masses  alone,  execute  an  oscillatory  motion  sym-
metrical with  respect  to  their  centre  of  gravity.  The
duration  of  this  oscillatory  motion,  T = 2 tt]/ 'ml ip,  is
smaller  in  proportion  as  the  force  that  is  awakened  in
the  same  mass-displacement  is  greater  (if  our  attention
is  directed  to  two  particles  of  the  same  body,  in  pro-
portion as  the  body  is  harder).  The  amplitude  of  os-
cillation of  the  oscillatory  motion  f/^p  likewise  de-
creases with  the  magnitude  p of  the  force  of  displace-
ment generated.  Equation  (7)  exhibits  the  periodic
change  of  distance  of  the  two  masses  during  their  pro-
gressive motion.  The  motion  of  an  elastic  body  might
in  such  case  be  characterised  as  vermicular.  With  hard
bodies,  however,  the  number  of  the  oscillations  is  so
great  and  their  excursions  so  small  that  they  remain
unnoticed,  and  may  be  left  out  of  account.  The  oscil-
latory motion,  furthermore,  vanishes,  either  gradually
through  the  effect  of  some  resistance,  or  when  the  two
masses,  at  the  moment  the  force  / begins  to  act,  are  a
distance  a -f-  ffi p apart  and  have  equal  initial  veloci-
ties. The  distance  a -f-  fj'ip  that  the  masses  are  apart
after  the  vanishing  of  their  vibratory  motion,  is f( 2 p
greater  than  the  distance  of  equilibrium  a.  A tension
y,  namely,  is  set  up  by  the  action  of  /,  by  which  the
acceleration  of  the  foremost  mass  is  reduced  to  one-
half  whilst  that  of  the  mass  following  is  increased  by
the  same  amount.  In  this,  then,  agreeably  to  our  as-

This  in-  sumption,  py/m  — . f /2  ?n  or  y == f / 2 p.  As  we  see,  it  is

formation  . , . . . ' . . ..  ,

is  exhaus-  m our  power  to  determine  the  minutest  details  of  a
phenomenon  of  this  character  by  the  Newtonian  prin-
ciples. The  investigation  becomes  (mathematically,


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.  2 63


yet  not  in  point  of  principle)  more  complicated  when
we  conceive  a body  divided  up  into  a great  number  of
small  parts  that  cohere  by  elasticity.  Here  also  in  the
case  of  sufficient  hardness  the  vibrations  may  be  neg-
lected. Bodies  in  which  we  purposely  regard  the  mu-
tual displacement  of  the  parts  as  evanescent,  are  called
rigid  bodies.

4.  We  will  now  consider  a case  that  exhibits  theThededuc-

. __  tion  of  the

schema  of  a lever.  We  imagine  the  masses  M,  m1J  m2  laws  of  the
arranged  in  a triangle  and  joined  by  elastic  connec-  Newton’s

-r-^  . principles.

tions.  Every  alteration  of  the  sides,  and  consequently
also  every  alteration  of  the  angles,  gives  rise  to  accel-
erations, as  the  result  of  which  the  triangle  endeavors  to
assume  its  previous  form  and  size.  By  the  aid  of  the
Newtonian  principles  we  can  deduce  from  such  a
schema  the  laws  of  the  lever,  and  at  the  same  time  feel
that  the  form  of  the  deduction,  although  it  may  be
more  complicated,  still
remains  admissible  when
we  pass  from  a schematic
lever  composed  of  three
masses  to  the  case  of  a
real  lever.  The  mass  M
we  assume  either  to  be  in  itself  very  large  or  conceive
it  joined  by  powerful  elastic  forces  to  other  very  large
masses  (the  earth  for  instance).  M then  represents
an  immovable  fulcrum.

Let  m1}  now,  receive  from  the  action  of  some  ex- The  meth-
ternal  force  an  acceleration  f perpendicular  to  the  line  deduction
of  junction  Mm2  = c f d.  Immediately  a stretching
of  the  lines  mx  m2  = b and  — a is  produced,  and

in  the  directions  in  question  there  are  respectively  set
up  the  accelerations,  as  yet  undetermined,  s and  o',  of
which  the  components  s(e/b ) and  6 (e/d)  are  directed


THE  SCIEXCE  OF  MFC /I  IX  ICS.


*^4


oppositely  to  the  acceleration  f.  Here  e is  the  altitude
of  the  triangle  The  mass  m2  receives  the

acceleration  s',  which  resolves  itself  into  the  two  com-
ponents s\d/F)  in  the  direction  of  M and  s\e/b)  par-
allel to  f The  former  of  these  determines  a slight  ap-
proach of  m2  to  M.  The  accelerations  produced  in  M
by  the  reactions  of  m1  and  m2,  owing  to  its  great  mass,
are  imperceptible.  We  purposely  neglect,  therefore,
the  motion  of  M.

The  deduc-  The  mass  m19  accordingly,  receives  the  accelera-
taLedby  tion  f — s(e/b) — &{e/d),  whilst  the  mass  m2  suffers
eration  of  the  parallel  acceleration  s\e/b).  Between  and  o'  a
lions.  simple  relation  obtains.  If,  by  supposition,  we  have  a
very  rigid  connection,  the  triangle  is  only  impercept-
ibly distorted.  The  components  of  and  a perpendicular
to  f destroy  each  other.  For  if  this  were  at  any  one
moment  not  the  case,  the  greater  component  would
produce  a further  distortion,  which  would  immediately
counteract  its  excess.  The  resultant  of  s and  o’  is
therefore  directly  contrary  to  /,  and  consequently,  as  is
readily  obvious,  <d  {c/a)  = s (d/b).  Between  s and  /,
further,  subsists  the  familiar  relation  mxs  = or
s=zs\m2fm1).  Altogether  m2  and  m1  receive  re-
spectively the  accelerations  s’(c/b)  and  f — ^(e/b)
(c  + d/c),  or,  introducing  in  the  place  of  the
variable  value  sf(e/b)  the  designation  cp , the  accelera-
tions cp  and  f — cp{ni 2/mx)  (c  + d/c).

On  the  pre-  At  the  commencement  of  the  distortion,  the  accel-

ceding  sup-  . . . .

positions  eration  of  owing  to  the  increase  of  cp,  diminishes,

the  laws  for  . , % . Tr  - ^ ’

the  rotation  whilst  that  of  m2  increases.  If  we  make  the  altitude  e

are  easily  of  the  triangle  very  small,  our  reasoning  still  remains

applicable.  In  this  case,  however,  a becomes  = c = rx,

and  a-\-b  = c-\-d=r2.  We  see,  moreover,  that  the

distortion  must  continue,  cp  increase,  and  the  accelera-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 265


tion  of  mL  diminish  until  the  stage  is  reached  at  which
the  accelerations  of  mx  and  m2  bear  to  each  other  the
proportion  of  r1  to  r2.  This  is  equivalent  to  a rotation
of  the  whole  triangle  (without  further  distortion)  about
M,  which  mass  by  reason  of  the  vanishing  accelera-
tions is  at  rest.  As  soon  as  rotation  sets  in,  the  rea-
son for  further  alterations  of  cp  ceases.  In  such  a case;
consequently,


9:


or  cp  = r2  -


T mif


1 rx2  -f-  ?n2  r2  2 *


For  the  angular  acceleration  ip  of  the  lever  we  get
,,,  _ 9 _ rimif

f r2  7/ilh2  + m2  r22


Nothing  prevents  us  from  entering  still  more  into  Discussion

0 r & , of  the  char-

the  details  of  this  case  and  determining  the  distortions  acter  of  the

preceding

and  vibrations  of  the  parts  with  respect  to  each  other,  result.
With  sufficiently  rigid  connections,  however,  these  de-
tails may  be  neglected.  It  will  be  perceived  that  we
have  arrived,  by  the  employment  of  the  Newtonian  prin-
ciples, at  the  same  result  to  which  the  Huygenian  view
also  would  have  led  us.  This  will  not  appear  strange  to
us  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  two  views  are  in  every  re-
spect equivalent , and  merely  start  from  different  aspects
of  the  same  subject-matter.  If  we  had  pursued  the
Huygenian  method,  we  should  have  arrived  more
speedily  at  our  goal  but  with  less  insight  into  the  de-
tails of  the  phenomenon.  We  should  have  employed
the  work  done  in  some  displacement  of  mx  to  deter-
mine the  vires  vivce  of  mx  and  m21  wherein  we  should
have  assumed  that  the  velocities  in  question  vx,  v2
maintained  the  ratio  vx/v2  =r1/r2.  The  .example
here  treated  is  very  well  adapted  to  illustrate  what
such  an  equation  of  condition  means.  The  equation


2 66


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


A simple
case  of  the
same  exam-
ple.


The  equi-
librium of
the  lever
deduced
from  the
same  con-
siderations.


simply  asserts,  that  on  the  slightest  deviations  of  vx/v2
from  rx/V2  powerful  forces  are  set  in  action  which  in
point  of  fact  prevent  all  further  deviation.  The  bodies
obey  of  course,  not  the  equations , but  the  forces.

5.  We  obtain  a very  obvious  case  if  we  put  in  the
■ example  just  treated  and  a = b(¥ig.

147).  The  dynamical  state  of  the  system  ceases  to
change  when  cp  = 2 (/ — 2 cp),  that  is,  when  the  accel-
erations of  the  masses
at  the  base  and  the  ver-
tex are  given  by  2 f/$
and  f/$.  At  the  com-
mencement of  the  dis-
tortion cp  increases,  and  simultaneously  the  accelera-
tion of  the  mass  at  the  vertex  is  decreased  by  double
that  amount,  until  the  proportion  subsists  between  the
two  of  2 : 1.

We  have  yet  to  consider  the  case  of  equilibrium  of
a schematic  lever,  consisting  (Fig.  148)  of  three  masses
m19  ;;/2,  and  My  of  which  the  last  is  again  supposed


Fig.  147.


to  be  very  large  or  to  be  elastically  connected  with
very  large  masses.  We  imagine  two  equal  and  oppo-
site forces  j,  — i*  applied  to  m1  and  m%  in  the  direction
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  accelerations  im-
pressed inversely  proportional  to  the  masses  mlt  m2 .
The  stretching  of  the  connection  m±  m2  also  generates


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 267


accelerations  inversely  proportional  to  the  masses  m v
m2,  which  neutralise  the  first  ones  and  produce  equi-
librium. Similarly,  along  m1M  imagine  the  equal  and
contrary  forces  t,  — / operative  ; and  along  ni2  M the
forces  it , — u.  In  this  case  also  equilibrium  obtains.

If  M be  elastically  connected  with  masses  sufficiently
large,  — u and  — t need  not  be  applied,  inasmuch
as  the  last-named  forces  are  spontaneously  evoked  the
moment  the  distortion  begins,  and  always  balance  the
forces  opposed  to  them.  Equilibrium  subsists,  accord-
ingly, for  the  two  equal  and  opposite  forces  s,  — j as
well  as  for  the  wholly  arbitrary  forces  t,  n.  As  a matter
of  fact  s,  — destroy  each  other  and  t,  a pass  through
the  fixed  mass  M,  that  is,  are  destroyed  on  distortion
setting  in.

The  condition  of  equilibrium  readily  reduces  itself  The  reduc-

nil  tion  of  the

to  the  common  form  when  we  reflect  that  the  mo- preceding

. case  to  the

ments  of  t and  u , forces  passing  through  M,  are  with  common
respect  to  M zero,  while  the  moments  of  s and  — s are
equal  and  opposite.  If  we  compound  t and  s to  p,  and
it  and  — s to  q,  then,  by  Varignon’s  geometrical  principle
of  the  parallelogram,  the  moment  of  p is  equal  to  the
sum  of  the  moments  of  and  t,  and  the  moment  of  q
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  moments  of  u and  — The
moments  of  / and  q are  therefore  equal  and  opposite.
Consequently,  any  two  forces  p and  q will  be  in  equi-
librium if  they  produce  in  the  direction  m±  m2  equal
and  opposite  components,  by  which  condition  the  equal-
ity of  the  moments  with  respect  to  M is  posited.  That
then  the  resultant  of  p and  q also  passes  through  M,  is
likewise  obvious,  for  s and  — destroy  each  other  and
t and  u pass  through  M.

6.  The  Newtonian  point  of  view,  as  the  example
just  developed  shows  us,  includes  that  of  Varignon.


2 68


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Newton’s  We  were  right,  therefore,  when  we  characterised  the

point  of  .

view  in-  statics  of  Yangnon  as  a dynamical  statics,  which,  start-
varignon’s.  ing  from  the  fundamental  ideas  of  modern  dynamics,
voluntarily  restricts  itself  to  the  investigation  of  cases
of  equilibrium.  Only  in  the  statics  of  Varignon,  owing
to  its  abstract  form,  the  significance  of  many  opera-
tions, as  for  example  that  of  the  translation  of  the
forces  in  their  own  directions,  is  not  so  distinctly  ex-
hibited as  in  the  instance  just  treated.

Theecon-  The  considerations  here  developed  will  convince,
wealth  of  us  that  we  can  dispose  by  the  Newtonian  principles
ian  ideas,  of  every  phenomenon  of  a mechanical  kind  which  may
arise,  provided  we  only  take  the  pains  to  enter  far
enough  into  details.  We  literally  see  through  the  cases
of  equilibrium  and  motion  which  here  occur,  and  be-
hold the  masses  actually  impressed  with  the  accelera-
tions they  determine  in  one  another.  It  is  the  same
grand  fact,  which  we  recognise  in  the  most  various
phenomena,  or  at  least  can  recognise  there  if  we  make
a point  of  so  doing.  Thus  a unity,  homogeneity,  and
economy  of  thought  were  produced,  and  a new  and
wide  domain  of  physical  conception  opened  which
before  Newton’s  time  was  unattainable..

The  New-  Mechanics,  however,  is  not  altogether  an  end  in  it-
the modern,  self ; it  has  also  problems  to  solve  that  touch  the  needs
methods,  of  practical  life  and  affect  the  furtherance  of  other  sci-
ences. Those  problems  are  now  for  the  most  part  ad-
vantageously solved  by  other  methods  than  the  New-
tonian,— methods  whose  equivalence  to  that  has  already
been  demonstrated.  It  would,  therefore,  be  mere  im-
practical pedantry  to  contemn  all  other  advantages  and
insist  upon  always  going  back  to  the  elementary  New-
tonian ideas.  It  is  sufficient  to  have  once  convinced
ourselves  that  this  is  always  possible.  Yet  the  New-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 269


tonian  conceptions  are  certainly  the  most  satisfactory
and  the  most  lucid  ; ^and  Poinsot  shows  a noble  sense
of  scientific  clearness  and  simplicity  in  making  these
conceptions  the  sole  foundation  of  the  science.


THE  FORMULAE  AND  UNITS  OF  MECHANICS.


1.  All  the  important  formulae  of  modern  mechanics  History  of

. the  formu-

were- discovered  and  employed  in  the  period  of  Galileo  1*  and

A J _ units  of

- and  Newton.  The  particular  designations,  which,  mechanics,
owing  to  the  frequency  of  their  use,  it  was  found  con-
venient to  give  them,  were  for  the  most  part  not  fixed
upon  until  long  afterwards.  The  systematical  mechan-
ical units  were  not  introduced  until  later  still.  Indeed,
the  last  named  improvement,  cannot  be  regarded  as
having  yet  reached  its  completion.

2.  Let  denote  the  distance,  / the  time,  v the  in-  The  orig-
stantaneous  velocity,  and  <p  the  acceleration  of  a uni-  tionsof a
formly  accelerated  motion.  From  the  researches  of  Huygens.
Galileo  and  Huygens,  we  derive  the  following  equa-
tions :


v = cpt


CpS  :


(1)


Multiplying  throughout  by  the  mass  m,  these  equa-  The  intro-

. . . . ...  . duction

tions  give  the  following  : of  “mas

and  “mov-

VI  v = ; VI  Cp  t *nS  force.”


2JO


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS


Final  form  and,  denoting  the  moving  force  m cp  by  the  letter  p,  we

of  the  fun-  . w

damental  obtain
equations.

m v —pi

pt 2
ms  = ~2T

mv 2

Ps  = ~r

Equations  (i)  all  contain  the  quantity  cp  ; and  each
contains  in  addition  two  of  the  quantities  ,r,  /,  v,  as
exhibited  in  the  following  table  :

f v,t

9 \s>*
l ^ v

Equations  (2)  contain  the  quantities  m,  p,  s,  t,  v \
each  containing  m,  p and  in  addition  to  m,  p two  of  the
three  quantities  .r,  v,  according  to  the  following  table  :

f v,  t
m,p  j j,  /
l j,  v

The  scope  Questions  concerning  motions  due  to  constant  forces
catio^of1"  are  answered  by  equations  (2)  in  great  variety.  If,  for
tions.  equa  example,  we  want  to  know  the  velocity  v that  a mass
m acquires  in  the  time  / through  the  action  of  a force
p , the  first  equation  gives  v = ptjm.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  the  time  be  sought  during  which  a mass  m with
the  velocity  v can  move  in  opposition  to  a force  p,  the
same  equation  gives  us  t — mv jp.  Again,  if  we  in-
quire after  the  distance  through  which  m will  move  with
velocity  v in  opposition  to  the  force  p,  the  third  equa-
tion gives  j*  = mv2  fop.  The  two  last  questions  illus-
trate, also,  the  futility  of  the  Descartes-Leibnitzian  dis-
pute concerning  the  measure  of  force  of  a body  in  mo-
tion. The  use  of  these  equations  greatly  contributes


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


271


to  confidence  in  dealing  with  mechanical  ideas.  Sup-
pose, for  instance,  we  put  to  ourselves,  the  question,
what  force  p will  impart  to  a given  mass  m the  velocity
v ; we  readily  see  that  between  m,  /,  and  v alone , no
equation  exists,  so  that  either  s ox  i must  be  supplied,
and  consequently  the  question  is  an  indeterminate  one.

We  soon  learn  to  recognise  and  avoid  indeterminate
cases  of  this  kind.  The  distance  that  a mass  711  acted
on  by  the  force  p describes  in  the  time  t,  if  moving
with  the  initial  velocity  0,  is  found  by  the  second  equa-
tion s =pt%  I'lm.

3.  Several  of  the  formulae  in  the  above-discussed  The  names
equations  have  received  particular  names.  The  force  formula?  of
of  a moving  body  wras  spoken  of  by  Galileo,  who  al-  tionshave

1 it  * ,,  t 1 received.

ternately calls  it  “momentum,  “impulse/  and  “en-
ergy.” He  regards  this  momentum  as  proportional  to
the  product  of  the  mass  (or  rather  the  weight,  for  Gali-
leo had  no  clear  idea  of  mass , and  for  that  matter  no
more  had  Descartes,  nor  even  Leibnitz)  into  the  velo-
city of  the  body.  Descartes  accepted  this  view.  He  put
the  force  of  a moving  body  = mv,  called  it  quantity  of
motion , and  maintained  that  the  sum-total  of  the  quan-
tity of  motion  in  the  universe  remained  constant,  so  that
when  one  body  lost  momentum  the  loss  was  compen-
sated for  by  an  increase  of  momentum  in  other  bodies.

Newton  also  employed  the  designation  “quantity  of
motion  ” for  m v,  and  this  name  has  been  retained  to  the  Momen-

_ 1-1  tum  and

present  day.  [But  momentwn  is  the  more  usual  term.]  impulse.
For  the  second  member  of  the  first  equation,  viz.  ft,
Belanger,  proposed,  as  late  as  1847,  the  name  impulse .*

The  expressions  of  the  second  equation  have  received

* See,  also,  Maxwell,  Matter  and  Motion , American  edition,  page  72.  But
this  word  is  commonly  used  in  a different  sense,  namely,  as  “ the  limit  of  a
force  which  is  infinitely  great  but  acts  only  during  an  infinitely  short  time.”

See  Routh,  Rigid  Dynamics,  Part  I,  pages  65-66. — Trans .


272


THE  SCIEXCE  OF  MECHANICS.


rfs viva  no  particular  designations.  Leibnitz  (1695)  called  the

and  work.  . r-i-i-i  • ••  7 . .

expression  mv 2 of  the  third  equation  vis  viva  or  living
force , and  he  regarded  it,  in  opposition  to  Descartes,
as  the  true  measure  of  the  force  of  a body  in  motion,
calling  the  pressure  of  a body  at  rest  vis  mortua , or
dead  force.  Coriolis  found  it  more  appropriate  to  give
the  term  \mv*  the  name  vis  viva . To  avoid  confusion,
Belanger  proposed  to  call  mv2  living  force  and  \mv 2
living  power  [now  commonly  called  in  English  kinetic
energp] . For  ps  Coriolis  employed  the  name  work.
Poncelet  confirmed  this  usage,  and  adopted  the  kilo-
gramme-metre  (that  is,  a force  equal  to  the  weight  of  a
kilogramme  acting  through  the  distance  of  a metre)  as
the  unit  of  work.

The  history  4.  Concerning  the  historical  details  of  the  origin  of

quantity  of  these  notions  “ quantity  of  motion”  and  “vis  viva,”

motion  and

vis  viva,  a glance  may  now  be  cast  at  the  ideas  which  led  Des-
cartes and  Leibnitz  to  their  opinions.  In  his  Principia
Philosophic , published  in  1644,  II,  36,  Descartes  ex-
pressed himself  as  follows  :

“ Now  that  the  nature  of  motion  has  been  examined,
“we  must  consider  its  cause,  which  maybe  conceived
“in  two  senses  : first,  as  a universal,  original  cause —
“the  general  cause  of  all  the  motion  in  the  world  ; and
“second,  as  a special  cause,  from  which  the  individual
“ parts  of  matter  receive  motion  which  before  they  did
“not  have.  As  to  the  universal  cause,  it  can  mani-
festly be  none  other  than  God,  who  in  the  beginning
“ created  matter  with  its  motion  and  rest,  and  who  now
“ preserves,  by  his  simple  ordinary  concurrence,  on  the
“whole,  the  same  amount  of  motion  and  rest  as  he
“originally  created.  For  though  motion  is  only  a con-
dition of  moving  matter,  there  yet  exists  in  matter
“a  definite  quantity  of  it,  which  in  the  world  at  large


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


273


“ never  increases  or  diminishes,  although  in  single  por-  Passage
“tions  it  changes;  namely,  in  this  way,  that  we  must  cartes’s63’
“ assume,  in  the  case  of  the  motion  of  apiece  of  matter  Principm
“ which  is  moving  twice  as  fast  as  another  piece,  but  in
“ quantity  is  only  one  half  of  it,  that  there  is  the  same
“ amount  of  motion  in  both,  and  that  in  the  proportion
“ as  the  motion  of  one  part  grows  less,  in  the  same  pro-
portion must  the  motion  of  another,  equally  large
“part  grow  greater.  We  recognise  it,  moreover,  as
“a  perfection  of  God,  that  He  is  not  only  in  Himself
“unchangeable,  but  that  also  his  modes  of  operation
“ are  most  rigorous  and  constant ; so  that,  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  changes  which  indubitable  experience
“ or  divine  revelation  offer,  and  which  happen,  as  our
“faith  or  judgment  show,  without  any  change  in  the
“Creator,  we  are  not  permitted  to  assume  any  others
“in  his  works — lest  inconstancy  be  in  anyway  pre-
dicated of  Him.  Therefore,  it  is  wholly  rational  to
“assume  that  God,  since  in  the  creation  of  matter  he-
“imparted  different  motions  to  its  parts,  and  preserves
“all  matter  in  the  same  way  and  conditions  in  which
“he  created  it,  so  he  similarly  preserves  in  it  the  same
“ quantity  of  motion.”  (See  Appendix,  XXIII.,  p.  574.)

The  merit  of  having  first  sotight  after  a more  uni-  The  merits^
versal  and  more  fruitful  point  of  view  in  mechanics,  Descar-

tes’s  phvs-

cannot  be  denied  Descartes.  This  is  the  peculiar  task  inquir-

ies.

of  the  philosopher,  and  it  is  an  activity  which  con-
stantly exerts  a fruitful  and  stimulating  influence  on
physical  science.

Descartes,  however,  was  infected  with  all  the  usual
errors  of  the  philosopher.  He  places  absolute  confi-
dence in  his  own  ideas.  He  never  troubles  himself  to
put  them  to  experiential  test.  On  the  contrary,  a min-
imum of  experience  always  suffices  him  for  a maximum


274


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


of  inference.  Added  to  this,  is  the  indistinctness  of
his  conceptions.  Descartes  did  not  possess  a clear
idea  of  mass.  It  is  hardly  allowable  to  say  that  Des-
cartes defined  mv  as  momentum,  although  Descartes’s
scientific  successors,  feeling  the  need  of  more  definite
notions,  adopted  this  conception.  Descartes’s  greatest
error,  however, — and  the  one  that  vitiates  all  his  phys-
ical inquiries, — is  this,  that  many  propositions  appear
to  him  self-evident  a priori  concerning  the  truth  of
which  experience  alone  can  decide.  Thus,  in  the  two
paragraphs  following  that  cited  above  (§§37~ 39)  it  is
asserted  as  a self-evident  proposition  that  a body  pre-
serves unchanged  its  velocity  and  direction.  The  ex-
periences cited  in  §38  should  have  been  employed,  not
as  a confirmation  of  an  a priori  law  of  inertia,  but  as  a
foundation  on  which  this  law  in  an  empirical  sense
should  be  based.

Leibnitz  > Descartes’s  view  was  attacked  by  Leibnitz  (1686)

on  quantity  . , '

of  motion,  in  the  A eta  Eruditorum , in  a little  treatise  bearing  the
title  : “A  short  Demonstration  of  a Remarkable  Error
of  Descartes  and  Others,  Concerning  the  Natural  Law
by  which  they  think  that  the  Creator  always  preserves
the  same  Quantity  of  Motion ; by  which,  however,  the
Science  of  Mechanics  is  totally  perverted.”

In  machines  in  equilibrium,  Leibnitz  remarks,  the
loads  are  inversely  proportional  to  the  velocities  of  dis-
placement ; and  in  this  way  the  idea  arose  that  the
product  of  a body  (“  corpus,”  “ moles  ”)  into  its  velocity
is  the  measure  of  force.  This  product  Descartes  re-
garded as  a constant  quantity.  Leibnitz’s  opinion,
however,  is,  that  this  measure  of  force  is  only  acci-
dentally the  correct  measure,  in  the  case  of  the  ma-
chines. The  true  measure  of  force  is  different,  and
must  be  determined  by  the  method  which  Galileo  and


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


2 75


Huygens  pursued.  Every  body  rises  by  virtue  of  the  Leibnitz  on
velocity  acquired  in  its  descent  to  a height  exactly  ure  of  force
equal  to  that  from  which  it  fell.  If,  therefore,  we  as-
sume, that  the  same  “ force  ” is  requisite  to  raise  a
body  vi  a height  4 h as  to  raise  a body  4 m a height  Ji,
we  must,  since  we  know  that  in  the  first  case  the  ve-
locity acquired  in  descent  is  but  twice  as  great  as  in
the  second,  regard  the  product  of  a “body”  into  the
square  of  its  velocity  as  the  measure  offeree .

In  a subsequent  treatise  (1695),  Leibnitz  reverts  to
this  subject.  He  here  makes  a distinction  between
simple  pressure  (vis  mortuci)  and  the  force  of  a moving
body  ( vis  viva ),  which  latter  is  made  up  of  the  sum  of
the  pressure-impulses.  These  impulses  produce,  in-
deed, an  “impetus”  (mv),  but  the  impetus  produced
is  not  the  true  measure  of  force ; this,  since  the  cause
must  be  equivalent  to  the  effect,  is  (in  conformity  with
the  preceding  considerations)  determined  by  mv2.

Leibnitz  remarks  ■ further  that  the  possibility  of  per-
petual motion  is  excluded  only  by  the  acceptance  of  his
measure  of  force.

Leibnitz,  no  more  than  Descartes,  possessed  a gen- The  idea  of

. mass  in

ume  concept  of  mass.  Where  the  necessity  of  such  Leibnitz’s
an  idea  occurs,  he  speaks  of  a body  ( corpus ),  of  a load
( moles ),  of  different-sized  bodies  of  the  same  specific
gravity,  and  so  forth.  Only  in  the  second  treatise,  and
there  only  once,  does  the  expression  “massa”  occur,
in  all  probability  borrowed  from  Newton.  Still,  to  de-
rive any  definite  results  from  Leibnitz’s  theory,  we  must
associate  with  his  expressions  the  notion  of  mass,  as
his  successors  actually  did.  As  to  the  rest,  Leibnitz’s
procedure  is  much  more  in  accordance  with  the  meth-
ods of  science  than  Descartes’s.  Two  things,  however,
are  confounded  : the  question  of  the  measure  of  force


276


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


In  a sense,
Descartes
and  Leib-
nitz were
each  right.


The  dis-
pute, there'
suit  of  mis-
under-
standings.


The  appli-
cation of
the  funda-
mental
equations
to  variable
forces.


and  the  question  of  the  constancy  of  the  sums  2 m v and
J/;/?'2.  The  two  have  in  reality  nothing  to  do  with
each  other.  With  regard  to  the  first  question,  we  now
know  that  both  the  Cartesian  and  the  Leibnitzian  meas-
ure of  force,  or,  rather,  the  measure  of  the  effective-
ness of  a body  in  motion,  have,  each  in  a different
sense,  their  justification.  Neither  measure,  however,
as  Leibnitz  himself  correctly  remarked,  is  to  be  con-
founded with  the  common,  Newtonian,  measure  of
force.

With  regard  to  the  second  question,  the  later  in-
' vestigations  of  Newton  really  proved  that  for  free  ma-
terial systems  not  acted  on  by  external  forces  the  Car-
tesian sum  2mv  is  a constant;  and  the  investigations
of  Huygens  showed  that  also  the  sum  12  in  v 2 is  a con-
stant, provided  wo7*k  performed  by  forces  does  not  alter
it.  The  dispute  raised  by  Leibnitz  rested,  therefore,
on  various  misunderstandings.  It  lasted  fifty-seven
years,  till  the  appearance  of  D’Alembert’s  Traite  de
dynamiquc , in  1743.  To  the  theological  ideas  of  Des-
cartes and  Leibnitz,  we  shall  revert  in  another  place.

5.  The  three  equations  above  discussed,  though
they  are  only  applicable  to  rectilinear  motions  produced
by  co?istant  forces,  may  yet  be  considered  the  funda-
mental equatio7is  of  mechanics.  If  the  motion  be  recti-
linear but  the  force  variable,  these  equations  pass  by  a
slight,  almost  self-evident,  modification  into  others,
which  we  shall  here  only  briefly  indicate,  since  mathe-
matical developments  in  the  present  treatise  are  wholly
subsidiary.

From  the  first  equation  we  get  for  variable  forces


mv  z=zjfdt  + C,  where  p is  the  variable  force,  dt  the
time-element  of  the  action,  J 'p  dt  the  sum  of  all  the


THE  EXTENSION  OE  THE  PRINCIPLES.


2 77


products  p . dt  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the
action,  and  C a constant  quantity  denoting  the  value
of  m v before  the  force  begins  to  act.  The  .cecond  equa-


tion passes  in  like  manner  into  the  forms  $—^dt^—dt

-\-Ct~\-D,  with  two  so-called  constants  of  integration.
The  third  equation  must  be  replaced  by


; m v2

_


a


Curvilinear  motion  may  always  be  conceived  as  the
product  of  the  simultaneous  combination  of  three  rec-
tilinear motions,  best  taken  in  three  mutually  perpen-
dicular directions.  Also  for  the  components  of  the  mo-
tion of  this  very  general  case,  the  above-given  equa-
tions retain  their  significance.

6.  The  mathematical  processes  of  addition,  sub- The  units  of
traction,  and  equating  possess  intelligible  meaning  only
when  applied  to  quantities  of  the  same  kind.  We  can-
not add  or  equate  masses  and  times,  or  masses  and
velocities,  but  only  masses  and  masses,  and  so  on.

When,  therefore,  we  have  a mechanical  equation,  the
question  immediately  presents  itself  whether  the  mem-
bers of  the  equation  are  quantities  of  the  same  kind,
that  is,  whether  they  can  be  measured  by  the  same  unit,
or  whether,  as  we  usually  say,  the  equation  is  homo -
gencoits.  The  units  of  the  quantities  of  mechanics  will
form,  therefore,  the  next  subject  of  our  investigations.

The  choice  of  units,  -which  are,  as  we  know,  quan-
tities of  the  same  kind  as  those  they  serve  to  measure,
is  in  many  cases  arbitrary.  Thus,  an  arbitrary  mass  is
employed  as  the  unit  of  mass,  an  arbitrary  length  is
employed  as  the  unit  of  length,  an  arbitrary  time  as  the
unit  of  time.  The  mass  and  the  length  employed  as
units  can  be  preserved  ; the  time  can  be  reproduced


27S


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


A i bitrary
units,  and
derived  or
absolute
units.


The  de-
rived units
of  velocity,
accelera-
tion, and
force.


by  pendulum-experiments  and  astronomical  observa-
tions. But  units  like  a unit  of  velocity,  or  a unit  of
acceleration,  cannot  be  preserved,  and  are  much  more
difficult  to  reproduce.  These  quantities  are  conse-
quently so  connected  with  the  arbitrary  fundamental
units,  mass,  length,  and  time,  that  they  can  be  easily
and  at  once  derived  from  them.  Units  of  this  class
are  called  derived  or  absolute  units.  This  latter  desig-
nation is  due  to  Gauss,  who  first  derived  the  magnetic
units  from  the  mechanical,  and  thus  created  the  possi-
bility of  a universal  comparison  of  magnetic  measure-
ments. The  name,  therefore,  is  of  historical  origin.

As  unit  of  velocity  we  might  choose  the  velocity
with  which,  say,  q units  of  length  are  travelled  over  in
unit  of  time.  But  if  we  did  this,  we  could  not  express
the  relation  between  the  time  /,  the  distance  j*,  and  the
velocity  v by  the  usual  simple  formula  s = vt}  but
should  have  to  substitute  for  it  s = q.vt.  If,  however,
we  define  the  unit  of  velocity  as'  the  velocity  with
which  the  unit  of  length  is  travelled  over  in  unit  of
time,  we  may  retain  the  form  $ = vt.  Among  the  de-
rived units  the  simplest  possible  relations  are  made
to  obtain.  Thus,  as  the  unit  of  area  and  the  unit  of  vol-
ume, the  square  and  cube  of  the  unit  of  length  are  al-
ways employed.

According  to  this,  we  assume  then,  that  by  unit  ve-
locity unit  length  is  described  in  unit  time,  that  by  unit
acceleration  unit  velocity  is  gained  in  unit  time,  that
by  unit  force  unit  acceleration  is  imparted  to  unit  mass,
and  so  on.

The  derived  units  depend  on  the  arbitrary  funda-
mental units  ; they  are  functions  of  them.  The  func-
tion which  corresponds  to  a given  derived  unit  is  called
its  dwiensions . The  theory  of  dimensions  was  laid  down


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


279


by  Fourier,  in  1822,  in  his  Theory  of  Heat.  Thus,  if  /The  theory
denote  a length,  t a time,  and  m a mass,  the  dimen-  sions.
sions  of  a velocity,  for  instance,  are  ///  or  lt~x.  After
this  explanation,  the  following  table  will  be  readily  un-
derstood :


NAMES

SYMBOLS

DIMENSIONS

Velocity .

...  V

It"'

Acceleration

...  cp

It ”2

Force

...  p

mlt~2

Momentum

...  m v

mlt ”‘1

Impulse

. . . pt

mlt~1

Work

. . . ps

ml2t~2

Vis  viva

?nv2

. . . -g—

ml2t~~ 2

Moment  of  inertia  . . .

...  ©

ml2

Statical  moment . . . .

...  D

VI  l2 1 2

This  table  shows  at  once  that  the  above-discussed  equa-
tions are  homogeneous , that  is,  contain  only  members  of
the  sa?ne  kind.  Every  new  expression  in  mechanics
might  be  investigated  in  the  same  manner.

7.  The  knowledge  of  the  dimensions  of  a quantity  The  usefui-
is  also  important  for  another  reason.  Namely,  if  the  thloxyfo?e
value  of  a quantity  is  known  for  one  set  of  fundamental  sions”"
units  and  we  wish  to  pass  to  another  set,  the  value  of
the  quantity  in  the  new  units  can  be  easily  found  from
the  dimensions.  The  dimensions  of  an  acceleration,
which  has,  say,  the  numerical  value  cp,  are  lt~ 2.  If
we  pass  to  a unit  of  length  X times  greater  and  to  a
unit  of  time  r times  greater,  then  a number  X times
smaller  must  take  the  place  of  / in  the  expression  lt~2,
and  a number  r times  smaller  the  place  of  t.  The
numerical  value  of  the  same  acceleration  referred  to
the  new  units  will  consequently  be  (r2  /A)  cp.  If  we


The  Inter-
national
Bureau  of
Weights
and  Meas-
ures.


The  inter-
national
unit  of
length.


2S0  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

take  the  metre  as  our  unit  of  length,  and  the  second  as
our  unit  of  time,  the  acceleration  of  a falling  body  for
example  is  9*81,  or  as  it  is  customary  to  write  it,  in-
dicating at  once  the  dimensions  and  the  fundamental
measures:  9*81  (metre/second2).  If  we  pass  now  to
the  kilometre  as  our  unit  of  length  (1  = 1000),  and  to
the  minute  as  our  unit  of  time  (r  = 60),  the  value  of  the
same  acceleration  of  descent  is  (60  X 60/1000)9-81,
or  35*316  (kilometre/minute2).

[8.  The  following  statement  of  the  mechanical  units
at  present  in  use  in  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain
is  substituted  for  the  statement  by  Professor  Mach  of
the  units  formerly  in  use  on  the  continent  of  Europe.
All  the  civilised  governments  have  united  in  establish-
ing an  International  Bureau  of  Weights  and  Measures
in  the  Pavilion  de  Breteuil,  in  the  Parc  of  St.  Cloud,
at  Sevres,  near  Paris.  In  some  countries,  the  stan-
dards emanating  from  this  office  are  exclusively  legal ;
in  others,  as  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  they
are  optional  in  contracts,  and  are  usual  with  physi-
cists. These  standards  are  a standard  of  length  and  a
standard  of  mass  (not  weight)

The  unit  of  length  is  the  International  Metre,  which
is  defined  as  the  distance  at  the  melting  point  of  ice
between  the  centres  of  two  lines  engraved  upon  the
polished  surface  of  a platiniridium  bar,  of  a nearly
X-shaped  section,  called  the  International  Prototype
Metre.  Copies  of  this,  called  National  Prototype  Me-
tres, are  distributed  to  the  different  governments.  The
international  metre  is  authoritatively  declared  to  be
identical  with  the  former  French  metre,  used  until  the
adoption  of  the  international  standard ; and  it  is  im-
possible to  ascertain  any  error  in  this  statement,  be-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 2S1

cause  of  doubt  as  to  the  length  of  the  old  metre,
owing  partly  to  the  imperfections  of  the  standard,  and
partly  to  obstacles  now  intentionally  put  in  the  way  of
such  ascertainment.  The  French  metre  was  defined
as  the  distance,  at  the  melting-point  of  ice,  between
the  ends  of  a platinum  bar,  called  the  metre  des  archives .

It  was  against  the  law  to  touch  the  ends,  which  made
it  difficult  to  ascertain  the  distance  between  them.
Nevertheless,  there  was  a strong  suspicion  they  had
been  dented.  The  i?ietre  des  archives  was  intended  to
be  one  ten-millionth  of  a quadrant  of  a terrestrial
meridian.  In  point  of  fact  such  a quadrant  is,  ac-
cording to  Clarke,  32814820  feet,  which  is  10002015
metres.

The  international  unit  of  mass  is  the  kilogramme,  Theinter-

...  national

which  is  the  mass  of  a certain  cylinder  of  platmiridium  unit  of

mass.

called  the  International  Prototype  Kilogramme.  Each
government  has  copies  of  it  called  National  Prototype
Kilogrammes.  This  mass  was'  intended  to  be  identical
with  the  former  French  kilogramme,  which  was  defined
as  the  mass  of  a certain  platinum  cylinder  called  the
kilogra7nme  des  archives.  The  platinum  being  somewhat
spongy  contained  a variable  amount  of  occluded  gases,
and  had  perhaps  suffered  some  abrasion.  The  kilo-
gramme is  1 000  grammes  ; and  a gramme  was  intended
to  be  the  mass  of  a cubic  centimetre  of  water  at  its
temperature  of  maximum  density,  about  3*93°  C.  It
is  not  known  with  a high  degree  of  precision  how  nearly
this  is  so,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  the  determination.

The  regular  British  unit  of  length  is  the  Imperial  The  British
Yard  which  is  the  distance  at  62°  F.  between  the  cen-  length,
tres  of  two  lines  engraved  on  gold  plugs  inserted  in  a
bronze  bar  usually  kept  walled  up  in  the  Houses  of
Parliament  in  Westminster.  These  lines  are  cut  rela-


THE  SCIEXCE  OF  MECHANICS .


ivm.iit.w  lively  deep,  and  the  burr  is  rubbed  off  and  the  surface
lUctthir  rendered  mat,  by  rubbing  with  charcoal.  The  centre
Va?d  with  of  such  a line  can  easily  be  displaced  by  rubbing  ; which
other  mea-  ^ probab]y  not  true  of  the  lines  on  the  Prototype  me-
tres. The  temperature  is,  by  law,  ascertained  by  a
mercurial  thermometer ; but  it  was  not  known,  at  the
time  of  the  construction  of  the  standard,  that  such
thermometers  may  give  quite  different  readings,  ac-
cording to  the  mode  of  their  manufacture.  The  quality
of  glass  makes  considerable  difference,  and  the  mode
of  determining  the  fixed  points  makes  still  more.  The
best  way  of  marking  these  points  is  first  to  expose  the
thermometer  for  several  hours  to  wet  aqueous  vapor  at
a known  pressure,  and  mark  on  its  stem  the  height  of
the  column  of  mercury.  The  thermometer  is  then
brought  down  to  the  temperature  of  melting  ice,  as
rapidly  as  possible,  and  is  immersed  in  pounded  ice
which  is  melting  and  from  which  the  water  is  not
allowed  to  drain  off.  The  mercury  being  watched
with  a magnifying  glass  is  seen  to  fall,  to  come  to
rest,  and  to  commence  to  rise,  owing  to  the  lagging
contraction  of  the  glass.  Its  lowest  point  is  marked
on  the  stem.  The  interval  between  the  two  marks  is
then  divided  into  equal  degrees.  When  such  a ther-
mometer is  used,  it  is  kept  at  the  temperature  to  be
determined  for  as  long  a time  as  possible,  and  imme-
diately after  is  cooled  as  rapidly  as  it  is  safe  to  cool  it,
and  its  zero  is  redetermined.  Thermometers,  so  made
and  treated,  will  give  very  constant  indications.  But
the  thermometers  made  at  the  Kew  observatory,  which
are  used  for  determining  the  temperature  of  the  yard,
are  otherwise  constructed.  Namely  the  melting-point
is  determined  first  and  the  boiling-point  afterwards ;
and  the  thermometers  are  exposed  to  both  tempera-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.  2S3

tures  for  many  hours.  The  point  which  upon  such  a Relative
thermometer  will  appear  as  62°  -will  really  be  consider-  theatre
ably  hotter  (perhaps  a third  of  a centigrade  degree)
than  if  its  melting-point  were  marked  in  the  other  way.

If  this  circumstance  is  not  attended  to  in  making  com-
parisons, there  is  danger  of  getting  the  yard  too  short-
by  perhaps  one  two-hundred-thousandth  part.  General
Comstock  finds  the  metre  equal  to  39*36985  inches.

Several  less  trustworthy  determinations  give  nearly  the
same  value.  This  makes  the  inch  2 * 540014  centimetres.

At  the  time  the  United  States  separated  from  Eng- The  Ameri-

A can  unit  of

land,  no  precise  standard  of  length  was  legal*;  and  length,
none  has  ever  been  established.  We  are,  therefore,
without  any  precise  legal  yard  ; but  the  United  States
office  of  weights  and  measures,  in  the  absence  of  any
legal  authorisation,  refers  standards  to  the  British  Im-
perial Yard.

The  regular  British  unit  of  mass  is  the  Pound,  de-  The  British
fined  as  the  mass  of  a certain  platinum  weight,  called  mass?
the  Imperial  Pound.  This  was  intended  to  be  so  con-
structed as  to  be  equal  to  7000  grains,  each  the  5760th
part  of  a former  Imperial  Troy  pound.  This  would  be
within  3 grains,  perhaps  closer,  of  the  old  avoirdupois
pound.  The  British  pound  has  been  determined  by
Miller  to  be  0*4535926525  kilogramme  ; that  is  the  kilo-
gramme is  2*204621249  pounds.

At  the  time  the  United  States  separated  from  Great
Britain,  there  were  two  incommensurable  units  of
weight,  the  avoirdupois  pound  and  the  Troy  pound.  Con-
gress has  since  established  a standard  Troy  pound,
which  is  kept  in  the  Mint  in  Philadelphia.  It  was  a
copy  of  the  old  Imperial  Troy  pound  which  had  been
adopted  in  England  after  American  independence.  It


* The  so-called  standard  of  1758  had  not  been  legalised.


2S4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  Ameri-
can unit  < f


The  unit  of
time.


- Is  a hollow  brass  weight  of  unknown  volume  ; and  no
accurate  comparisons  of  it  with  modern  standards  have
ever  been  published.  Its  mass  is,  therefore,  unknown.
The  mint  ought  by  law  to  use  this  as  the  standard  of
gold  and  silver.  In  fact,  they  use  weights  furnished
by  the  office  of  weights  and  measures,  and  no  doubt
derived  from  the  British  unit ; though  the  mint  officers
profess  to  compare  these  with  the  Troy  pound  of  the
United  States,  as  well  as  they  are  able  to  do.  The  old
avoirdupois  pound,  which  is  legal  for  most  purposes,
differed  without  much  doubt  quite  appreciably  from
the  British  Imperial  pound  ; but  as  the  Office  of  Weights
and  Measures  has  long  been,  without  warrant  of  law,
standardising  pounds  according  to  this  latter,  the  legal
avoirdupois  pound  has  nearly  disappeared  from  use  of
late  years.  The  makers  of  weights  could  easily  detect
the  change  of  practice  of  the  Washington  Office.

Measures  of  capacity  are  not  spoken  of  here,  be-
cause they  are  not  used  in  mechanics.  It  may,  how-
ever, be  well  to  mention  that  they  are  defined  by  the
weight  of  water  at  a given  temperature  which  they
measure.

The  universal  unit  of  time  is  the  mean  solar  day  or
its  one  86400th  part,  which  is  called  a second.  Side-
real time  is  only  employed  by  astronomers  for  special
purposes.

Whether  the  International  or  the  British  units  are
employed,  there  are  two  methods  of  measurement  of
mechanical  quantities,  the  absolute  and  the  gravitational.
The  absolute  is  so  called  because  it  is  not  relative  to
the  acceleration  of  gravity  at  any  station.  This  method
was  Introduced  by  Gauss.

The  special  absolute  system,  widely  used  by  physi-
cists in  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  is  called


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


285


the  Centimetre-Gramm e-Second  system.  In  this  sys- The  abso-

. . . lute  system

tern,  writing  C for  centimetre,  G for  gramme  mass,  of  the^
and  S for  second,  states  and

Great  Brit-


the  unit  of  length  is C ;

the  unit  of  mass  is G ;

the  unit  of  time  is S ;

the  unit  of  velocity  is C/S  ■

the  unit  of  acceleration  (which  might
be  called  a “galileo,”  because  Gali-
leo Galilei  first  measured  an  accele-


ration) is  C/S2;

the  unit  of  density  is G/C  3 ;

the  unit  of  momentum  is GC/S;

the  unit  of  force  (called  a dyne)  is  . . .GC/S2;
the  unit  of  pressure  (called  one  mil-
lionth of  an  absolute  atmosphere)  is . . G/CS2;
the  unit  of  energy  (vis  viva , or  work,

called  an  erg)  is ^GC2/S2;

etc.


The  gravitational  system  of  measurement  of  me-  The  Gravi-
chanical  quantities,  takes  the  kilogramme  or  pound,  or  system!
rather  the  attraction  of  these  towards  the  earth,  com-
pounded with  the  centrifugal  force, — which  is  the  ac-
celeration called  gravity,  and  denoted  by  g,  and  is  dif-
ferent at  different  places, — as  the  Unit  of  force,  and
the  foot-pound  or  kilogramme-metre,  being  the  amount
of  gravitational  energy  transformed  in  the  descent  of  a
pound  through  a foot  or  of  a kilogramme  through  a
metre,  as  the  unit  of  energy.  Two  ways  of  reconciling
these  convenient  units  with  the  adherence  to  the  usual
standard  of  length  naturally  suggest  themselves,  namely,
first,  to  use  the  pound  weight  or  the  kilogramme  weight
divided  by  g as  the  unit  of  mass,  and,  second,  to  adopt


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


such  a unit  of  time  as  will  make  the  acceleration  of  g,
at  an  initial  station,  unity.  Thus,  at  Washington,  the
acceleration  of  gravity  is  980  • 05  galileos.  If,  then,
we  take  the  centimetre  as  the  unit  of  length,  and  the
0-031943  second  as  the  unit  of  time,  the  acceleration
of  gravity  will  be  1 centimetre  for  such  unit  of  time
squared.  The  latter  system  would  be  for  most  pur-
poses the  more  convenient ; but  the  former  is  the  more
familiar.

Cciupari-  In  either  s}Tstem,  the  formula  p = mg  is  retained  ;

absolute  but  in  the  former  g retains  its  absolute  value,  wjiile  in

and  gra\i-  .......

tationni  the  latter  it  becomes  unity  for  the  initial  station.  In
Paris,  g is  980-96  galileos ; in  Washington  it  is  980*05
galileos.  Adopting  the  more  familiar  system,  and
taking  Paris  for  the  initial  station,  if  the  unit  of  force
is  a kilogramme’s  weight,  the  unit  of  length  a centi-
metre, and  the  unit  of  time  a second,  then  the  unit  of
mass  will  be  1/981-0  kilogramme,  and  the  unit  of
energy  will  be  a kilogramme-centimetre,  or  (1  /2)-
(1000/981  *0)  G C 2/S  2 . Then,  at  Washington  the

gravity  of  a kilogramme  will  be,  not  1,  as  at  Paris,
but  980*1/981*0  = 0-99907  units  or  Paris  kilogramme-
weights.  Consequently,  to  produce  a force  of  one  Paris
kilogramme-weight  we  must  allow  Washington  gravity
to  act  upon  981*0/980-1  = 1-00092  kilogrammes.]*

In  mechanics/as  in  some  other  branches  of  physics
closely  allied  to  it,  our  calculations  involve  but  three
fundamental  quantities,  quantities  of  space,  quantities
of  time,  and  quantities  of  mass.  This  circumstance  is
a source  of  simplification  and  power  in  the  science
which  should  not  be  underestimated.

♦For some  critical  remarks  on  the  preceding  method  of  exposition,  see
Nature , in  the  issue  for  November  15,  1894.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 287


nr.

THE  LAWS  OF  THE  CONSERVATION  OF  MOMENTUM,  OF  THE
CONSERVATION  OF  THE  CENTRE  OF  GRAVITY,  AND
OF  THE  CONSERVATION  OF  AREAS.

1.  Although  Newton’s  principles  are  fully  adequate  Speciaiisa-
to  deal  with  any  mechanical  problem  that  may  arise,  mechanical

. . . . P . laws.

it  is  yet  convenient  to  contrive  for  cases  more  frequently
occurring,  particular  rules,  which  will  enable  us  to  treat
problems  of  this  kind  by  routine  forms  and  to  dis-
pense with  the  minute  discussion  of  them.  Newton
and  his  successors  developed  several  such  principles.

Our  first  subject  will  be  Newton’s  doctrines  concern-
ing freely  movable  material  systems.

2.  If  two  free  masses  m and  m'  are  subjected  in  Mutual  ac-
the  direction  of  their  line  of  junction  to  the  action  of  masses,
forces  that  proceed  from  other  masses,  then,  in  the  in-
terval of  time  /,  the  velocities  v,  v*  will  be  generated,

and  the  equation  (/  -\-  p")  t = ?n  v -f-  mrvf  will  subsist.

This  follows  from  the  equations pt  = mv  and  pff  =
m’vf . The  sum  mv  -f-  mfv*  is  called  the  momentum  of
the  system,  and  in  its  computation  oppositely  directed
forces  and  velocities  are  regarded  as  having  opposite
signs.  If,  now,  the  masses  m , m'  in  addition  to  being
subjected  to  the  action  of  the  external  forces  /,  p'  are
also  acted  upon  by  mternal  forces,  that  is  by  such  as
are  mutually  exerted  by  the  masses  on  one  another , these
forces  will,  by  Newton’s  third  law,  be  equal  and  op-
posite, q , — q.  The  sum  of  the  impressed  impulses
is,  then,  (p  p'  + q — q)  t = (P  + /')  l,  the  same  as
before  ; and,  consequently,  also,  the  total  momentum
of  the  system  will  be  the  same.  The  momentum  of  a


THE  SC/EXCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Law  of  the
Conserva-
tion at  Mo
mcntuni.


Law  of  the
Conserva-
tion of  the
Centre  of
Gravity.


2SS


system  Is  thus  determined  exclusively  by  external forces,
that  is,  by  forces  which  masses  outside  of  the  system
exert  on  its  parts.

Imagine  a number  of  free  masses  in,  in',  m" . . . .
distributed  in  any  manner  in  space  and  acted  on  by
external  forces  /,  . . . whose  lines  have  any  di-

rections. These  forces  produce  in  the  masses  in  the
interval  of  time  / the  velocities  v,  vr , v".  . . . Resolve
all  the  forces  in  three  directions  x,  y,  z at  right  angles
to  each  other,  and  do  the  same  with  the  velocities.
The  sum  of  the  impulses  in  the  .v-direction  will  be  equal
to  the  momentum  generated  in  the  ^-direction  ; and
so  with  the  rest.  If  we  imagine  additionally  in  action
between  the  masses  m,  m* , m".  . . .,  pairs  of  equal  and
opposite  internal  forces^,  — q,  r,  — r,  s,  — s , etc.,
these  forces,  resolved,  will  also  give  in  every  direction
pairs  of  equal  and  opposite  components,  and  will  con-
sequently have  on  the  sum-total  of  the  impulses  no  in-
fluence. Once  more  the  momentum  is  exclusively  de-
termined by  external  forces.  The  law  which  states
this  fact  is  called  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  momen-
tum.


2 m

DAS


m

~B~


3.  Another  form  of  the  same  principle,  which  New-
ton likewise  discovered,  is  called  the  law  of  the  conser-
vation of  the  centre  of  grav-
■£  tty.  Imagine  in  A and  B
(Fig.  149)  two  masses,  2 m
Flg' 149'  and  tn,  in  mutual  action,

say  that  of  electrical  repulsion  ; their  centre  of  gravity
is  situated  at  S,  where  BS  — 2 AS.  The  accelerations
they  impart  to  each  other  are  oppositely  directed  and
in  the  inverse  proportion  of  the  masses.  If,  then,  in
consequence  of  the  mutual  action,  2 m describes  a dis-
tance AD,  m will  necessarily  describe  a distance  BC  =


THE  EX  TEH SIOH  OF  THE  PRIXCJPLES.


289


'lAD.  The  point  S will  still  remain  the  position  of  the
centre  of  gravity,  as  CS  = 2 JDS.  Therefore,  two  masses
cannot,  by  mutual  action,  displace  their  common  centre
of  gravity.

If  our  considerations  involve  several  masses,  dis-  This  law
tributed  in  any  way  in  space,  the  same  .result  will  also  systems  of

, r 1111  1 . masses.

be  found  to  hold  good  for  this  case.  For  as  no  two  of
the  masses  can  displace  their  centre  of  gravity  by  mu-
tual action,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  as  a
whole  cannot  be  displaced  by  the  mutual  action  of  its
parts.

Imagine  freely  placed  in  space  a system  of  masses
;//,  in’ , vi ".  . . . acted  on  by  external  forces  of  any  kind.

We  refer  the  forces  to  a system  of  rectangular  coordi-
nates and  call  the  coordinates  respectively  x,  v,  s,  xr,

/,  s',  and  so  forth.  The  coordinates  of  the  centre  of
gravity  are  then


2 2m  x

& — . = ,
2 in


2 my  p

• v ? O, :

2;  m


2 ms
~2vT’


in  which  expressions  x,  y,  z may  change  either  by  uni-
form motion  or  by  uniform  acceleration  or  by  any  other
law,  according  as  the  mass  in  question  is  acted  on  by
no  external  force,  by  a constant  external  force,  or  by  a
variable  external  force.  The  centre  of  gravity  will  have
in  all  these  cases  a different  motion,  and  in  the  first
may  even  be  at  rest.  If  now  internal  forces,  acting  be-
tween every  two  masses,  iri  and  m" , come  into  play  in
the  system,  opposite  displacements  w',  w"  will  thereby
be  produced  in  the  direction  of  the  lines  of  junction
of  the  masses,  such  that,  allowing  for  signs,  iriwf  -j-
mr'w"  = 0.  Also  with  respect  to  the  components  x±
and  x2  of  these  displacements  the  equation  mrx1  -f-
m"x2  — 0 will  hold.  The  internal  forces  consequently


290


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Accelera-
tion of  the
centre  ct
t»ra\  ity  of  ;
system.


Mox*ement
of  an  ani-
mal free  in
space.


produce  in  the  expressions  5,  rj,  5 only  such  additions
as  mutually  destroy  each  other.  Consequently,  the
motion  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  a system  is  determined
by  external  forces  only.

If  we  wish  to  know  the  acceleration  of  the  centre  of
gravity  of  the  system,  the  accelerations  of  the  system's
1 farts  must  be  similarly  treated.  If  cp>  <pr , <p" . . , de-
note the  accelerations  of  m,  m\  m” . ...  in  any  direc-
tion, and  ep  the  acceleration  of  the  centre  of  gravity  in
the  same  direction,  cp  = 2m  cp/2m,  or  putting  the
total  mass  2 m = M,  cp  = 2m  cp/M.  Accordingly,  we
obtain  the  acceleration  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  a
system  in  any  direction  by  taking  the  sum  of  all  the
forces  in  that  direction  and  dividing  the  result  by  the
total  mass.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  a system  moves
exactly  as  if  all  the  masses  and  all  the  forces  of  the
system  were  concentrated  at  that  centre.  Just  as  a
single  mass  can  acquire  no  acceleration  without  the
action  of  some  external  force,  so  the  centre  of  gravity
of  a system  can  acquire  no  acceleration  without  the
action  of  external  forces.

4.  A few  examples  may  now  be  given  in  illustra-
tion of  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  the  centre
of  gravity.

Imagine  an  animal  free  in  space.  If  the  animal
move  in  one  direction  a portion  m of  its  mass,  the  re-
mainder of  it  Jlf  will  be  moved  in  the  opposite  direction,
always  so  that  its  centre  of  gravity  retains  its  original
position.  If  the  animal  draw  back  the  mass  ;/z,  the
motion  of  M also  will  be  reversed.  The  animal  is  un-
able, without  external  supports  or  forces,  to  move  itself
from  the  spot  which  it  occupies,  or  to  alter  motions  im-
pressed upon  it  from  without.

A lightly  running  vehicle  A is  placed  on  rails  and


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


291


loaded  with  stones.  A man  stationed  m the  vehicle  of  a ve-

. . . . hide,  from

casts  out  the  stones  one  after  another,  m the  same  di-  which

. i*i  • . stones  are

rection.  The  vehicle,  supposing  the  friction  to  be  sub  cast,
ficiently  slight,  will  at  once  be  set  in  motion  in  the  op-
posite direction.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system
as  a whole  (of  the  vehicle  + the  stones)  will,  so  far  as
its  motion  is  not  destroyed  by  external  obstacles,  con-
tinue to  remain  in  its  original  spot.  If  the  same  man
were  to  pick  up  the  stones  from  without  and  place
them  in  the  vehicle,  the  vehicle  in  this  case  would  also
be  set  in  motion  ; but  not  to  the  same  extent  as  before,
as  the  following  example  will  render  evident.

A projectile  of  mass  m is  thrown  with  a velocity  v Motion  of  a

cannon  and

from  a cannon  of  mass  M.  In  the  reaction,  M also  re-  itsprojec-
ceives  a velocity,  V9  such  that,  making  allowance  for
the  signs,  MV  + mv  = 0.  This  explains  the  so-called
recoil.  The  relation  here  is  V—  — ( [m/M)v  ; or,  for
equal  velocities  of  flight,  the  recoil  is  less  according  as
the  mass  of  the  cannon  is  greater  than  the  mass  of  the
proj ectile.  If  the  work  done  by  the  powder  be  expressed
by  A,  the  vires  viva  will  be  determined  by  the  equation
MV 2 / 2 + #iv2  /2  — A ; and,  the  sum  of  the  momenta
being  by  the  first-cited  equation  = 0,  we  readily  obtain
V =V 2 A m / M (M ni).  Consequently,  neglecting
the  mass  of  the  exploded  powder,  the  recoil  vanishes
when  the  mass  of  the  projectile  vanishes.  If  the  mass
m were  not  expelled  from  the  cannon  but  sucked  into
it,  the  recoil  would  take  place  in  the  opposite  direc-
tion. But  it  would  have  no  time  to  make  itself  visible
since  before  any  perceptible  distance  had  been  trav-
ersed, m would  have  reached  the  bottom  of  the  bore.

As  soon,  however,  as  M and  m are  in  rigid  connection
with  each  other,  as  soon,  that  is,  as  they  are  relatively
at  rest  to  each  other,  they  must  be  absolutely  at  rest,


TIIE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


292

for  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  as  a whole  has
no  motion.  For  the  same  reason  no  considerable  mo-
tion can  take  place  when  the  stones  in  the  preceding
example  are  taken  into  the  vehicle,  because  on  the
establishment  of  rigid  connections  between  the  vehicle
and  the  stones  the  opposite  momenta  generated  are
destroyed.  A cannon  sucking  in  a projectile  would
experience  a perceptible  recoil  only  if  the  sucked  in
projectile  could  fly  through  it.

Osciiia-  Imagine  a locomotive  freely  suspended  in  the  air,

body  of  a e or,  what  will  subserve  the  same  purpose,  at  rest  with
ue,  insufficient  friction  on  the  rails.  By  the  law  of  the
conservation  of  the  centre  of  gravity,  as  soon  as  the
heavy  masses  of  iron  in  connection  with  the  piston-
rods  begin  to  oscillate,  the  body  of  the  locomotive  will
be  set  in  oscillation  in  a contrary  direction — a motion
which  may  greatly  disturb  its  uniform  progress.  To
eliminate  this  oscillation,  the  motion  of  the  masses  of
iron  -worked  by  the  piston-rods  must  be  so  compensated
for  by  the  contrary  motion  of  other  masses  that  the
centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  as  a whole  will  remain
in  one  position.  In  this  way  no  motion  of  the  body  of
the  locomotive  will  take  place.  This  is  done  by  affix-
ing masses  of  iron  to  the  driving-wheels,
illustration  The  facts  of  this  case  may  be  very  prettily  shown
case.  by  Page’s  electromotor  (Fig.  150).  When  the  iron
core  in  the  bobbin  AB  is  projected  by  the  internal  forces
acting  between  bobbin  and  core  to  the  right,  the  body
of  the  motor,  supposing  it  to  rest  on  lightly  movable
wheels  rr , will  move  to  the  left.  But  if  to  a spoke  of
the  fly-wheel  R we  affix  an  appropriate  balance-weight
a,  which  always  moves  in  the  contrary  direction  to  the
iron  core,  the  sideward  movement  of  the  body  of  the
motor  may  be  made  totally  to  vanish.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


293


Of  the  motion  of  the  fragments  of  a bursting  bomb  a bursting
we  know  nothing.  But  it  is  plain,  by  the  law  of  the
conservation  of  the  centre  of  gravity,  that,  making  al-
lowance for  the  resistance  of  the  air  and  the  obstacles
the  individual  parts  may  meet,  the  centre  of  gravity  of
the  system  will  continue  after  the  bursting  to  describe
the  parabolic  path  of  its  original  projection.

5.  A law  closely  allied  to  the  law  of  the  centre  of  Law  of  the
gravity,  and  similarly  applicable  to  free  systems,  is  the  tion  of
principle  of  the  co?iservation  of  areas.  Although  Newton


n


Fig.  150.


had,  so  to  say,  this  principle  within  his  very  grasp,  it
was  nevertheless  not  enunciated  until  a long  time  after-
wards by  Euler,  D’Arcy,  and  Daniel  Bernoulli.
Euler  and  Daniel  Bernoulli  discovered  the  law  almost
simultaneously  (1746),  on  the  occasion  of  treating  a
problem  proposed  by  Euler  concerning  the  motion  of
balls  in  rotatable  tubes,  being  led  to  it  by  the  consider-
ation of  the  action  and  reaction  of  the  balls  and  the
tubes.  D’Arcy  (1747)  started  from  Newton’s  investiga-
tions, and  generalised  the  law  of  sectors  which  the
latter  had  employed  to  explain  Kepler’s  laws.


294


the  science  of  mechanics .


Deduction
of  the  law.


Two  masses  m,  vi  (Fig.  151)  are  in  mutual  action.
By  virtue  of  this  action  the  masses  describe  the  dis-
tances A3,  CD  in  the  direction  of  their  line  of  junction.
Allowing  for  the  signs,  then,  m . AB  -f  vi . CD  = 0.
Drawing  radii  vectores  to  the  moving  masses  from  any

point  O , and  regarding
the  areas  described  in
opposite  senses  by  the
radii  as  having  opposite
signs,  we  further  obtain
vi.  OAB  -f-  vi . OCD  — 0.
Which  is  to  say,  if  two
masses  mutually  act  on
each  other,  and  radii  vec-
tores be  drawn  to  these
masses  from  any  point,
the  sum  of  the  areas
described  by  the  radii
multiplied  by  the  respec-
tive  masses  is  = 0.  If  the  masses  are  also  acted  on
by  external  forces  and  as  the  effect  of  these  the  areas
OAE  and  OCF  are  described,  the  joint  action  of  the
internal  and  external  forces,  during  any  very  small
period  of  time,  will  produce  the  areas  OAG  and  OCJT.
But  it  follows  from  Varignon’s  theorem  that


mOA  G -f-  vi OCH  — m OAE  -f-  vi  OCE -f-
m OAB  vi  OCD  = viOAE  -f-  vi  OCF ;

in  other  words,  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  areas  so  de-
scribed into  the  respective  masses  which  co?npose  a sy stein
is  unaltered  by  the  action  of  internal  forces .

If  we  have  several  masses,  the  same  thing  may  be
asserted,  for  every  two  masses,  of  the  projection  on  any
given  plane  of  the  motion.  If  we  draw  radii  from


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  FRIXCIPLES.


295


any  point  to  the  several  masses,  and  project  on  any
plane  the  areas  the  radii  describe,  the  sum  of  the
products  of  these  areas  into  the  respective  masses  will
be  independent  of  the  action  of  internal  forces.  This
is  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  areas.

If  a single  mass  not  acted  on  by  forces  is  moving  interpretn-

1 ? . . . _ _ _ 0 tion  of  the

uniformly  forward  m a straight  line  and  we  draw  a law.
radius  vector  to  the  mass  from  any  point  O , the  area
described  by  the  radius  increases  proportionally  to  the
time.  The  same  law  holds  for  2m f in  cases  in  which
several  masses  not  acted  on  by  forces  are  moving,
where  we  signify  by  the  summation  the  algebraic  sum
of  all  the  products  of  the  areas  (/)  into  the  moving
masses — a sum  which  we  shall  hereafter  briefly  refer
to  as  the  sum  of  the  mass-areas.  If  internal  forces
come  into  play  between  the  masses  of  the  system,  this
relation  will  remain  unaltered.  It  will  still  subsist,
also,  if  external  forces  be  applied  whose  lines  of  action
pass  through  the  fixed  point  O,  as  we  know  from  the
researches  of  Newton.

If  the  mass  be  acted  on  by  an  external  force,  the
area  f described  by  its  radius  vector  will  increase  in
time  by  the  law  f—  at2 ja  -}-  bt  + <r,  where  a depends
on  the  accelerative  force,  b on  the  initial  velocity,  and
c on  the  initial  position.  The  sum  2mf  increases  by
the  same  law,  where  several  masses  are  acted  upon  by
external  accelerative  forces,  provided  these  may  be  re-
garded as  constant,  which  for  sufficiently  small  inter-
vals of  time  is  always  the  case.  The  law  of  areas  in
this  case  states  that  the  inter?ial  forces  of  the  system
have  no  influence  on  the  increase  of  the  sum  of  the  mass-
areas.

A free  rigid  body  may  be  regarded  as  a system
whose  parts  are  maintained  in  their  relative  positions


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


296

Uniform  ro-  by  internal  forces.  The  law  of  areas  is  applicable  there-
iree°ri«ida  fore  to  this  case  also.  A simple  instance  is  afforded
by  the  uniform  rotation  of  a rigid  body  about  an  axis
passing  through  its  centre  of  gravity.  If  we  call  m a
portion  of  its  mass,  r the  distance  of  the  portion  from
the  axis,  and  a its  angular  velocity,  the  sum  of  the
mass-areas  produced  in  unit  of  time  will  be  2 m
(rj 2)  ra  = (a/2)  ^ mr2,  or,  the  product  of  the  moment
of  inertia  of  the  system  into  half  its  angular  velocity.
This  product  can  be  altered  only  by  external  forces,
illustrative  6.  A few  examples  may  now  be  cited  in  illustration

examples.  of  tfae  kw>

If  two  rigid  bodies  K and  K'  are  connected,  and  K
is  brought  by  the  action  of  internal  forces  into  rotation
relatively  to  AT',  immediately  K ' also  will  be  set  in  ro-
tation, in  the  opposite  direction.  The  rotation  of  K
generates  a sum  of  mass-areas  which,  by  the  lawr,  must
be  compensated  for  by  the  production  of  an  equal,  but
opposite,  sum  by  K\

Opposite  This  is  very  prettily  exhibited  by  the  electromotor
the^wheei  of  Fig.  1 52.  The  fly-wheel  of  the  motor  is  placed  in
a free  elec-  a horizon  tab  plane,  and  the  motor  thus  attached  to  a
tro  motor.  verf.£caj  axjs?  on  which  it  can  freely  turn.  The  wires

conducting  the  current  dip,  in  order  to  prevent  their
interference  with  the  rotation,  into  two  conaxial  gutters
of  mercury  fixed  on  the  axis.  The  body  of  the  motor
(. K ')  is  tied  by  a thread  to  the  stand  supporting  the
axis  and  the  current  is  turned  on.  As  soon  as  the  fly-
wheel (AT),  viewed  from  above,  begins  to  rotate  in  the
direction  of  the  hands  of  a watch,  the  string  is  drawn
taut  and  the  body  of  the  motor  exhibits  the  tendency
to  rotate  in  the  opposite  direction — a rotation  which  im-
mediately takes  place  when  the  thread  is  burnt  away.

The  motor  is,  with  respect  to  rotation  about  its


THE  EXTEXSIOX  OF  THE  PRIXC1PLES.


297


axis,  a free  system.  The  sum  of  the  mass-areas  gen-  itsexpiana-
erated,  for  the  case  of  rest,  is  — 0.  But  the  whet'/  of  law! b)  the
the  motor  being  set  in  rotation  by  the  action  of  the  in-
ternal electro-magnetic  forces,  a sum  of  mass-areas  is


produced  which,  as  the  total  sum  must  remain  ==  0,  is
compensated  for  by  the  rotation  in  the  opposite  direc-
tion of  the  body  of  the  motor.  If  an  index  be  attached
to  the  body  of  the  motor  and  kept  in  a fixed  position


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


29S

by  an  elastic  spring,  the  rotation  of  the  body  of  the
motor  cannot  take  place.  Yet  every  acceleration  of
the  wheel  in  the  direction  of  the  hands  of  a watch  (pro-
duced by  a deeper  immersion  of  the  battery)  causes
the  index  to  swerve  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  every
retardation  produces  the  contrary  effect,
a variation  A beautiful  but  curious  phenomenon  presents  itself
phenome™6  when  the  current  to  the  motor  is  interrupted.  Wheel
non*  and  motor  continue  at  first  their  movements  in  oppo-
site directions.  But  the  effect  of  the  friction  of  the
axes  soon  becomes  apparent  and  the  parts  gradually
assume  with  respect  to  each  other  relative  rest.  The
motion  of  the  body  of  the  motor  is  seen  to  diminish  ;
for  a moment  it  ceases  ; and,  finally,  when  the  state  of
relative  rest  is  reached,  it  is  reversed  and  assumes  the
direction  of  the  original  motion  of  the  wheel.  The
whole  motor  now  rotates  in  the  direction  the  wheel  did
at  the  start.  The  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  is
obvious.  The  motor  is  not  a perfectly  free  system.  It
is  impeded  by  the  friction  of  the  axes.  In  a perfectly
free  system  the  sum  of  the  mass-areas,  the  moment
the  parts  re-entered  the  state  of  relative  rest,  would
again  necessarily  be  = 0.  Butin  the  present  instance,
an  external  force  is  introduced — the  friction  of  the
axes.  The  friction  on  the  axis  of  the  wheel  diminishes
the  mass-areas  generated  by  the  wheel  and  body  of
the  motor  alike.  But  the  friction  on  the  axis  of  the
body  of  the  motor  only  diminishes  the  sum  of  the  mass-
areas  generated  by  the  body.  The  wheel  retains,  thus,
an  excess  of  mass-area,  which  when  the  parts  are  rela-
tively at  rest  is  rendered  apparent  in  the  motion  of  the
entire  motor.  The  phenomenon  subsequent  to  the  in-
terruption of  the  current  supplies  us  with  a model  of
what"  according  to  the  hypothesis  of  astronomers  has


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


299


taken  place  on  the  moon.  The  tidal  wave  created  by  its  niustra-
the  earth  has  reduced  to  such  an  extent  by  friction  the  case  of  the
velocity  of  rotation  of  the  moon  that  the  lunar  day  has
grown  to  a month.  The  fly-wheel  represents  the  fluid
mass  moved  by  the  tide.

Another  example  of  this  law  is  furnished  by  reac - Reaction-

J wheels.

tion-wheels.  If  air  or  gas  be  emitted  from  the  wheel
(Fig.  1530)  in  the  direction  of  the  short  arrows,  the
whole  wheel  will  be  set  in  rotation  in  the  direction  of
the  large  arrow.  In  Fig.  153^,  another  simple  reac-
tion-wheel is  represented.  A brass  tube  rr  plugged  at
both  ends  and  appropriately  perforated,  is  placed  on  a
second  brass  tube  X,  supplied  with  a thin  steel  pivot
through  which  air  can  be  blown  ,*  the  air  escapes  at
the  apertures  O,  O'.

It  might  be  supposed  that  sucking  on  the  reaction-  ^nation
wheels  would  produce  the  opposite  motion  to 'that  re-nomenaof

x reaction-

suiting  from  blowing.  Yet  this  does  not  usually  take  wheels,
place,  and  the  reason  is  obvious.  The  air  that  is
sucked  into  the  spokes  of  the  wheel  must  take  part
immediately  in  the  motion  of  the  wheel,  must  enter
the  condition  of  relative  rest  with  respect  to  the  wheel;
and  when  the  system  is  completely  at  rest,  the  sum  of
its  mass-areas  must  be  = 0.  Generally,  no  perceptible
rotation  takes  place  on  the  sucking  in  of  the  air.  The
circumstances  are  similar  to  those  of  the  recoil  of  a
cannon  which  sucks  in  a projectile.  If,  therefore,  an
elastic  ball,  which  has  but  one  escape-tube,  be  attached
to  the  reaction-wheel,  in  the  manner  represented  in
Fig.  1530,  and  be  alternately  squeezed  so  that  the
same  quantity  of  air  is  by  turns  blown  out  and  sucked
in,,  the  wheel  will  continue  rapidly  to  revolve  in  the
same  direction  as  it  did  in  the  case  in  which  we  blew
into  it.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  air


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRIXCIPLES.


301


sucked  into  the  spokes  must  participate  in  the  motion  Explain
of  the  latter  and  therefore  can  produce  no  reactional  variations,
rotation,  but  it  also  partly  results  from  the  difference
of  the  motion  which  the  air  outside  the  tube  assumes
in  the  two  cases.  In  blowing,  the  air  flows  out  in  jets,
and  performs  rotations.  In  sucking,  the  air  comes  in
from  all  sides,  and  has  no  distinct  rotation.

The  correctness  of  this  view  is  easily  demonstrated.

If  we  perforate  the  bottom  of  a hollow  cylinder,  a closed
band-box  for  instance,  and
place  the  cylinder  on  the  steel
pivot  of  the  tube  R , after  the
side  has. been  slit  and  bent  in
the  manner  indicated  in  Fig.

1 54,  the  box  will  turn  in  the
direction  of  the  long  arrow
when  blown  into  and  in  the
direction  of  the  short  arrow  when  sucked  on.  The  air,
here,  on  entering  the  cylinder,  can  continue  its  rotation
unimpeded \ and  this  motion  is  accordingly  compensated
for  by  a rotation  in  the  opposite  direction.

7.  The  following  case  also  exhibits  similar  condi-  Reaction-
tions.  Imagine  a tube  (Fig.  1550)  which,  running
straight  from  a to  b,  turns  at  right  angles
to  itself  at  the  latter  point,  passes  to  e,
describes  the  circle  cdef  whose  plane
is  at  right  angles  to  ab,  and  whose  cen-
tre is  at  b , then  proceeds  from  f to  g,
and,  finally,  continuing  the  straight  line
ab,  runs  from  g to  h.  The  entire  tube
is  free  to  turn  on  an  axis  ah.  If  we
pour  into  this  tube,  in  the  manner  in-
dicated in  Fig.  1 55  b,  a liquid,  which  flows  in  the  di-
rection cdef,  the  tube  will  immediately  begin  to  turn


\h

Fig.  155  a.


Fig.  154.


302


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Additional

illustra-

tions.


in  the  direction  fedc . This  impulse,  however,  ceases,
the  moment  the  liquid  reaches  the  point  f,  and  flowing
out  into  the  radius  fg  is  obliged  to  join  in  the  motion
of  the  latter.  By  the  use  of  a constant  stream  of  liquid,

therefore,  the  rotation
of  the  tube  may  soon
be  stopped.  But  if  the
stream  be  interrupted,
the  fluid,  in  flowing  off
through  the  radius  fg,
will  impart  to  the  tube
a motional  impulse  in
the  direction  of  its  own
motion,  cdef  and  the
tube  will  turn  in  this  di-
rection. All  these  phe-
nomena are  easily  ex-
plained by  the  law  of
areas.

The  trade-winds,  the
deviation  of  the  oceanic
currents  and  of  rivers,
Foucault’s  pendulum
experiment,  and  the
like,  may  also  be  treated
as  examples  of  the  law
of  areas.  Another  pretty  illustration  is  afforded  by
bodies  with  variable  moments  of  inertia.  Let  a body
with  the  moment  of  inertia  © rotate  with  the  angular
velocity  a and,  during  the  motion,  let  its  moment
of  inertia  be  transformed  by  internal  forces,  say  by
springs,  into  ©',  a will  then  pass  into  a ',  where  a&  =
arQr,  that  is  a'  = a (©/©').  On  any  considerable  dimi-
nution of  the  moment  of  inertia,  a great  increase  of


THE  EXTEXSIOX  OF  THE  PRIXCIPLES .


3C3


angular  velocity  ensues.  The  principle  might  con-
ceivably be  employed,  instead  of  Foucault’s  method,
to  demonstrate  the  rotation  of  the  earth,  [in  fact,  some
attempts  at  this  have  been  made,  with  no  very  marked
success].

A phenomenon  which  substantially  embodies  the  Rotating
conditions  last  suggested  is  the  following.  A glass  funnel,
funnel,  with  its  axis  placed  in  a vertical  position,  is
rapidly  filled  with  a liquid  in  such  a manner  that  the
stream  does  not  enter  in  the  direction  of  the  axis  but
strikes  the  sides.  A slow  rotatory  motion  is  thereby
set  up  in  the  liquid  which  as  long  as  the  funnel  is  full,  is
not  noticed.  But  when  the  fluid  retreats  into  the  neck
of  the  funnel.  Its  moment  of  inertia  Is  so  diminished
and  its  angular  velocity  so  Increased  that  a violent
eddy  with  considerable  axial  depression  is  created.
Frequently  the  entire  effluent  jet  Is  penetrated  by  an
axial  thread  of  air.


8.  If  we  carefully  examine  the  principles  of  the  Both  prin-
ciples are

centre  of  gravity  and  of  the  areas,  we  shall  discover  in  simply  spe-

. cialcasesof

both  simply  convenient  ^ the  law  of

. X J . r XF-  action  and

modes  of  expression,  for  p __  2w.  reaction,

practical  purposes,  of
a well-known  property
of  mechanical  phenom-
ena. To  the  accelera-
tion cp  of  one  mass  m Flg* I56*

there  always  corresponds  a contrary  acceleration  cpf  of
a second  mass  /;/,  where  allowing  for  the  signs  m cp  +
mf  cp'  = 0.  To  the  force  m cp  corresponds  the  equal
and  opposite  force  m*  cp\  When  any  masses  m and
2 m describe  with  the  contrary  accelerations  2 cp  and  q>
the  distances  2 w and  w (Fig.  156),  the  position  of
their  centre  of  gravity  S remains  unchanged,  and  the


3°4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


sum  of  their  mass-areas  with  respect  to  any  point  0
is,  allowing  for  the  signs,  2 /// ./+  m . 2/=  0.  This
simple  exposition  shows  us,  that  the  principle  of  the
centre  of  gravity  expresses  the  same  thing  with  respect
to  parallel  coordinates  that  the  principle  of  areas  ex-
presses with  respect  to  polar  coordinates.  Both  contain
simply  the  fact  of  reaction.

But  they  The  principles  in  question  admit  of  still  another
construed56  simple  construction.  Just  as  a single  body  cannot,
sations  of  ' without  the  influence  of  external  forces,  that  is,  without
inertia!  °f  the  aid  of  a second  body,  alter  its  uniform  motion  of
progression  or  rotation,  so  also  a system  of  bodies  can-
not, without  the  aid  of  a second  system,  on  which  it
can,  so  to  speak,  brace  and  support  itself,  alter  what
may  properly  and  briefly  be  called  its  mean  velocity  of
progression  or  rotation.  Both  principles  contain,  thus,
a generalised  state?nent  of  the  law  of  inertia,  the  correct-
ness of  which  in  the  present  form  we  not  only  see  but
feel.

importance  This  feeling  is  not  unscientific;  much  less  is  it
stxnctive  detrimental.  Where  it  does  not  replace  conceptual  in-
mechanical  sight  but  exists  by  the  side  of  it,  it  is  really  the  funda-
mental requisite  and  sole  evidence  of  a complete  mastery
of  mechanical  facts.  We  are  ourselves  a fragment  of
mechanics,  and  this  fact  profoundly  modifies  our  mental
life.*  No  one  will  convince  us  that  the  consideration
of  mechanico-physiological  processes,  and  of  the  feel-
ings and  instincts  here  involved,  must  be  excluded  from
scientific  mechanics.  If  we  know  principles  like  those  -
of  the  centre  of  gravity  and  of  areas  only  in  their  ab-
stract mathematical  form,  without  having  dealt  with  the
palpable  simple  facts,  which  are  at  once  their  applica-

* For  the  development  of  this  view,  see  E.  Mach,  Grundlinien  der  Lehre
von  den  Bewegungsempfindungen . (Leipsic  : Engelmann,  1875.)


THE  EX  T EH  SI  OX  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


305


tion  and  their  source,  we  only  half  comprehend  them,
and  shall  scarcely  recognise  actual  phenomena  as  ex-
amples of  the  theory.  We  are  in  a position  like  that
of  a person  who  is  suddenly  placed  on  a high  tower
but  has  not  previously  travelled  in  the  district  round
about,  and  who  therefore  does  not  know  how  to  inter-
pret the  objects  he  sees.

IV.

THE  LAWS  OF  IMPACT.

i.  The  laws  of  impact  were  the  occasion  of  the  Historical

. . . . position  of

enunciation  of  the  most  important  principles  of  me-  the  Laws  of
chanics,  and  furnished  also  the  first  examples  of  the
application  of  such  principles.  As  early  as  1639,  a
contemporary  of  Galileo,  the  Prague  professor,  Marcus
Marci  (born  in  1595),  published  in  his  treatise  De  Pro-
portions Motus  (Prague)  a few  results  of  his  investiga-
tions on  impact.  He  knew  that  a body  striking  in
elastic  percussion  another  of  the  same  size  at  rest,  loses
its  own  motion  and  communicates  an  equal  quantity
to  the  other.  He  also  enunciates,  though  not  always
with  the  requisite  precision,  and  frequently  mingled
with  what  is  false,  other  propositions  which  still  hold
good.  Marcus  Marci  was  a remarkable  man.  He  pos-
sessed for  his  time  very  creditable  conceptions  regard-
ing the  composition  of  motions  and  “impulses.”  In
the  formation  of  these  ideas  he  pursued  a method  sim-
ilar to  that  which  Roberval  later  employed.  He  speaks
of  partially  equal  and  opposite  motions,  and  of  wholly .
opposite  motions,  gives  parallelogram  constructions,
and  the  like,  but  is  unable,  although  he  speaks  of  an
accelerated  motion  of  descent,  to  reach  perfect  clear-
ness with  regard  to  the  idea  of  force  and  consequently
also  with  regard  to  the  composition  of  forces.  In  spite


306


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  re-
searches
Marcus
March


of  this,  however,  he  discovers  Galileo's  theorem  re-
garding the  descent  of  bodies  in  the  chords  of  circles,


also  a few  propositions  relating  to  the  motion  of  the
pendulum,  and  has  knowledge  of  centrifugal  force  and
so  on.  Although  Galileo’s  Discourses  had  appeared  a


THE  EXTEXSIOX  OF  THE  PRIXCIPLES .


3°7

year  previously,  we  cannot,  in  view  of  the  condition  of
things  produced  in  Central  Europe  by  the  Thirty  Years’


War,  assume  that  Marci  was  acquainted  with  them.
Not  only  would  the  many  errors  in  Marci’s  book  thus
be  rendered  unintelligible,  but  it  would  also  have  to


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


30S

The  sources  be  explained  how  Marci,  as  late  as  1648,  in  a continu-

k now  ledge,  ation  of  his  treatise,  could  have  found  it  necessary  to
defend  the  theorem  of  the  chords  of  circles  against  the
Jesuit  Balthasar  Conradus.  An  imperfect  oral  com-
munication of  Galileo’s  researches  is  the  more  reason-
able conjecture.*  When  we  add  to  all  this  that  Marci
was  on  the  very  verge  of  anticipating  Newton  in  the
discovery  of  the  composition  of  light,  we  shall  recog-
nise in  him  a man  of  very  considerable  parts.  His
writings  are  a worthy  and  as  yet  but  slightly  noticed
object  of  research  for  the  historian  of  physics.  Though
Galileo,  as  the  clearest-minded  and  most  able  of  his
contemporaries,  boie  away  in  this  province  the  palm,
we  nevertheless  see  from  writings  of  this  class  that  he
was  not  by  any  means  alone  in  his  thought  and  ways
of  thinking.

There-  2.  Galileo  himself  made  several  experimental  at-

searches  of

Galileo.  tempts  to  ascertain  the  laws  of  impact ; but  he  was  not
in  these  endeavors  wholly  successful.  He  principally
busied  himself  with  the  force  of  a body  in  motion,  or
with  the  “force  of  percussion,”  as  he  expressed  it,
and  endeavored  to  compare  this  force  with  the  pressure
of  a weight  at  rest,  hoping  thus  to  measure  it.  To  this
end  he  instituted  an  extremely  ingenious  experiment,
which  we  shall  now  describe.

A vessel  I (Fig.  157)  in  whose  base  is  a plugged
orifice,  is  filled  with  water,  and  a second  vessel  II  is
hung  beneath  It  by  strings  ; the  whole  is  fastened  to
the  beam  of  an  equilibrated  balance.  If  the  plug  is
removed  from  the  orifice  of  vessel  I,  the  fluid  will  fall

* I have  been  convinced,  since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this
work,  (see  E.  Wohlwill’s  researches,  Die  Entdeckung  des  Beharrungsgesetzec,
in  the  Zeitsch riftfli * Volkerpsychologie,  1884,  XV,  page  387,)  that  Marcus  Marci
derived  his  information  concerning  the  motion  of  falling  bodies,  from  Galileo’s
earlier  Dialogues.  He  may  also  have  known  the  works  of  Benedetti.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


309


in  a jet  into  vessel  II.  A portion  of  the  pressure  due  Galileo’s
to  the  resting  weight  of  the  water  in  I is  lost  and  re-  men t!
placed  by  an  action  of  impact  on  vessel  II.  Galileo
expected  a depression  of  the  whole  scale,  by  which  he
hoped  with  the  assistance  of  a counter-weight  to  de-
termine the  effect  of  the  impact.  He  was  to  some  ex-
tent surprised  to  obtain  no  depression,  and  he  was  un-
able, it  appears,  perfectly  to  clear  up  the  matter  in  his
mind.

3.  To-day,  of  course,  the  explanation  is  not  diffi-
cult. By  the  removal  of  the  plug  there  is  produced,


Fig.  157.


first,  a diminution  of  the  pressure.  This  consists  of  Expiana-
two  factors  : (1)  The  weight  of  the  jet  suspended  inexperi-
the  air  is  lost ; and  (2)  A reaction -pressure  upwards  is
exerted  by  the  effluent  jet  on  vessel  I (which  acts  like
a Segner’s  wTheel).  Then  there  is  an  increase  of  pres-
sure (Factor  3)  produced  by  the  action  of  the  jet  on  the
bottom  of  vessel  II.  Before  the  first  drop  has  reached
the  bottom  of  II,  we  have  only  to  deal  with  a diminu-
tion of  pressure,  which,  when  the  apparatus  is  in  full
operation,  is  immediately  compensated  for.  This  initial


3io


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Detcnuiiin
tson  ot  the
mechanic:
factors  in-
volved.


i-  depression  was,  in  fact,  all  that  Galileo  could  observe,
ii  Let  us  imagine  the  apparatus  in  operation,  and  denote
the  height  the  fluid  reaches  in  vessel  I by  h,  the  corre-
sponding velocity  of  efflux  by  v , the  distance  of  the
bottom  of  I from  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  II  by  k , the
velocity  of  the  jet  at  this  surface  by  w,  the  area  of  the
basal  orifice  by  a , the  acceleration  of  gravity  by  g,  and
the  specific  gravity  of  the  fluid  by  s.  To  determine
Factor  (i)  we  may  observe  that  v is  the  velocity  ac-
quired in  descent  through  the  distance  h . We  have,
then,  simply  to  picture  to  ourselves  this  motion  of  de-
scent continued  through  k . The  time  of  descent  of
the  jet  from  I to  II  is  therefore  the  time  of  descent
through  h -f-  k less  the  time  of  descent  through  h.
During  this  time  a cylinder  of  base  a is  discharged
with  the  velocity  v.  Factor  (x),  or  the  weight  of  the
jet  suspended  in  the  air,  accordingly  amounts  to


l/2  gh


1 205+*)

.>1  —r~


as .


To  determine  Factor  (2)  we  employ  the  familiar
equation  ?nv  =pt . If  we  put  t — 1,  then  m v = p , that
is  the  pressure  of  reaction  upwards  on  I is  equal  to  the
momentum  imparted  to  the  fluid  jet  in  unit  of  time.
We  will  select  here  the  unit  of  weight  as  our  unit  of
force,  that  is,  use  gravitation  measure.  We  obtain  for
Factor  (2)  the  expression  [av(s/g)"\v  = p,  (where  the
expression  in  brackets  denotes  the  mass  which  flows
out  in  unit  of  time,)  or

a\/2g/i  . ~ . l/2 gh  = 2ahs .

6

Similarly  we  find  the  pressure  on  II  to  be


w = #,  or  factor  3 :


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PFIXCIPLES.


3ii


a ~y2 gh  V 2.  g(Ji  + k).

The  total  variation  of  the  pressure  is  accordingly


— V'2gh


2(A  + *)
&

— 2 ahs


Mathemat-
ical devel-
opment of
the  result.


+ — V^gh  V'2g(fi  -1-  k)

or,  abridged,

— 2as\y/  h (h  -f-  k)  - — It]  — 2 ahs
+ 2 a si/ h (Ji  -f-  k),

— which  three  factors  completely  destroy  each  other.  In
the  very  necessity  of  the  case,  therefore,  Galileo  could
only  have  obtained  a negative  result.

We  must  supply  a brief  comment  respecting  Fac-  a comment

suggested

tor  (2).  It  might  be  supposed  that  the  pressure  on  the  by  theex-

y periment*.

basal  orifice  which  is  lost,  is  ahs  and  not  2 ahs.  But
this  statical  conception  would  be  totally  inadmissible
in  the  present,  dynamical  case.  The  velocity  v is  not
generated  by  gravity  instantaneously  in  the  effluent
particles,  but  is  the  outcome  of  the  mutual  pressure
between  the  particles  flowing  out  and  the  particles  left
behind  ; and  pressure  can  only  be  determined  by  the
momentum  generated.  The  erroneous  introduction  of
the  value  a hs  would  at  once  betray  itself  by  self-con-
tradictions.

If  Galileo’s  mode  of  experimentation  had  been  less
elegant,  he  would  have  determined  without  much  diffi-
culty the  pressure  which  a continuous  fluid  jet  exerts.

But  he  could  never,  as  he  soon  became  convinced,
have  counteracted  by  a pressure  the  effect  of  an  instan-
taneous impact.  Take — and  this  is  the  supposition  of


312


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Galileo's

reasoning.


Compari-
son of  the
ideas  im-
pact and
pressure.


Galileo — a freely  falling,  heavy  body.  Its  final  veloc-
ity, we  know,  increases  proportionately  to  the  time.
The  very  smallest  velocity  requires  a definite  portion
of  time  to  be  produced  in  (a  principle  which  even  Mari-
otte  contested).  If  we  picture  to  ourselves  a body
moving  vertically  upwards  with  a definite  velocity,  the
body  will,  according  to  the  amount  of  this  velocity,
ascend  a definite  time,  and  consequently  also  a definite
distance.  The  heaviest  imaginable  body  impressed
in  the  vertical  upward  direction  with  the  smallest  im-
aginable velocity  will  ascend,  be  it  only  a little,  in
opposition  to  the  force  of  gravity.  If,  therefore,  a
heavy  body,  be  it  ever  so  heavy,  receive  an  instan-
taneous upward  impact  from  a body  in  motion,  be  the
mass  and  velocity  of  that  body  ever  so  small,  and  such
impact  impart  to  the  heavier  body  the  smallest  imagin-
able velocity,  that  body  will,  nevertheless,  yield  and
move  somewhat  in  the  upward  direction.  The  slightest
impact,  therefore,  is  able  to  overcome  the  greatest  pres-
sure ; or,  as  Galileo  says,  the  force  of  percussion  com-
pared with  the  force  of  pressure  is  infinitely  great.  This
result,  which  is  sometimes  attributed  to  intellectual  ob-
scurity on  Galileo’s  part,  is,  on  the  contrary,  a bril-
liant proof  of  his  intellectual  acumen. . We  should  say
to-day,  that  the  force  of  percussion,  the  momentum,
the  impulse,  the  quantity  of  motion  m v,  is  a quantity
of  different  dimensions  from  the  pressure  p.  The  dimen-
sions of  the  former  aiemlt ~1,  those  of  the  latter;?///"2.
In  reality,  therefore,  pressure  is  related  to  momentum
of  impact  as  a line  is  to  a surface.  Pressure  is  p,  the
momentum  of  impact  is  p /.  Without  employing  mathe-
matical terminology  it  is  hardly  possible  to  express  the
fact  better  than  Galileo  did.  We  now  also  see  why  it
is  possible  to  measure  the  impact  of  a continuous  fluid


THE  EX T EX SIOH  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


3*3


jet  by  a pressure.  We  compare  the  momentum  de-
stroyed per  second  of  time  with  the  pressure  acting
per  second  of  time,  that  is,  homogeneous  quantities  of
the  form  pt.

4.  The  first  systematic  treatment  of  the  laws  ofThesyste-

• . matic  treat-

impact  was  evoked  m the  year  1668  by  a request  of  the  mentof  the

___  . . . . laws  of  irn-

Royal  Society  of  London.  Three  eminent  physicists  pact.
Wallis  (Nov.  26,  1668),  Wren  (Dec.  17,  1668),  and
Huygens  (Jan.  4,  1669)  complied  with  the  invitation  of
the  society,  and  communicated  to  it  papers  in  which,
independently  of  each  other,  they  stated,  without  de-
ductions, the  laws  of  impact.  Wallis  treated  only  of
the  impact  of  inelastic  bodies,  Wren  and  Huygens  only
of  the  impact  of  elastic  bodies.  Wren,  previously  to
publication,  had  tested  by  experiments  his  theorems,
which,  in  the  main,  agreed  with  those  of  Huygens.

These  are  the  experiments  to  which  Newton  refers  in
the  Principia . The  same  experiments  were,  soon  after
this,  also  described,  in  a more  developed  form,  by  Ma-
riotte,  in  a special  treatise,  Sur  le  Choc  des  Corps.  Ma-
riotte  also  gave  the  apparatus  now  known  in  physical
collections  as  the  percussion-machine.

According  to  Wallis,  the  decisive  factor  in  impact  Wallis’s  re-

\ , , . suits.

is  momentum , or  the  product  of  the  mass  ( pondus ) into
the  velocity  ( ccleritas ).  By  this  momentum  the  force
of  percussion  is  determined.  If  two  inelastic  bodies
which  have  equal  momenta  strike  each  other,  rest  will
ensue  after  impact.  If  their  momenta  are  unequal,
the  difference  of  the  momenta  will  be  the  momentum
after  impact.  If  we  divide  this  momentum  by  the  sum
of  the  masses,  we  shall  obtain  the  velocity  of  the  mo-
tion after  the  impact.  Wallis  subsequently  presented
his  theory  of  impact  in  another  treatise,  Mechant ca  sive
de  Motu , London,  1671.  All  his  theorems  may  be


3M


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS,


brought  together  in  the  formula  now  in  common  use,
u = (mv  + m'v')/(m  -f-  ;//),  in  which  in , w!  denote  the
masses,  r,  v the  velocities  before  impact,  and  u the
velocity  after  impact.

Huygens’s  5.  The  ideas  which  led  Huygens  to  his  results,  are
and  results,  to  be  found  in  a posthumous  treatise  of  his,  De  Motu
Corporum  ex  Percussione , 1703.  We  shall  examine  these
in  some  detail.  The  assumptions  from  which  Huygens


An  Illustration  from  De  Percussione  (Huygens).


proceeds  are:  (i)  the  law  of  inertia;  (2)  that  elastic
bodies  of  equal  mass,  colliding  with  equal  and  oppo-
site velocities,  separate  after  impact  with  the  same  ve-
locities ; (3)  that  all  velocities  are  relatively  estimated  ;
(4)  that  a larger  body  striking  a smaller  one  at  rest
imparts  to  the  latter  velocity,  and  loses  a part  of  its
own  ; and  finally  (5)  that  when  one  of  the  colliding
bodies  preserves  its  velocity,  this  also  is  the  case  with
the  other .


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


3i5


Huygens,  now,  imagines  two  equal  elastic  masses,  First,  equal
which  meet  with  equal  and  opposite  velocities  v.  After  masses  ex-
the  impact  they  rebound  from  each  other  with  exactly  locitiec
the  same  velocities.  Huygens  is  right  in  assuming  and
not  deducing  this.  That  elastic  bodies  exist  which  re-
cover their  form  after  impact,  that  in  such  a transac-
tion no  perceptible  vis  viva  is  lost,  are  facts  which  ex-
perience alone  can  teach  us.  Huygens,  now,  conceives
the  occurrence  just  described,  to  take  place  on  a boat
which  is  moving  with  the  velocity  v.  For  the  specta-
tor in  the  boat  the  previous  case  still  subsists  ; but  for
the  spectator  on  the  shore  the  velocities  of  the  spheres
before  impact  are  respectively  2 v and  0,  and  after  im-
pact 0 and  2 v.  An  elastic  body,  therefore,  impinging
on  another  of  equal  mass  at  rest,  communicates  to  the
latter  its  entire  velocity  and  remains  after  the  impact
itself  at  rest.  If  we  suppose  the  boat  affected  with  any
imaginable  velocity,  u,  then  for  the  spectator  on  the
shore  the  velocities  before  impact  will  be  respectively
u + v and  u — v,  and  after  impact  u — v and  u -j-  v.

But  since  u -f-  v and  u — v may  have  any  values  what-
soever, it  may  be  asserted  as  a principle  that  equal
elastic  masses  exchange  in  impact  their  velocities.

A body  at  rest,  however  great,  is  set  in  motion  Second,  the

relative  ve-
as  Ga-  locity  of  ap-
proach and
recession  is


m

o


6


by  a body  which  strikes  it,  however  small
lileo  pointed  out.  Huygens,  now,
shows,  that  the  approach  of  the
bodies  before  impact  and  their
recession  after  impact  take  place
with  the  same  relative  velocity.  A
body  m impinges  on  a body  of  mass  M at  rest,  to  which
it  imparts  in  impact  the  velocity,  as  yet  undetermined,
w.  Huygens,  in  the  demonstration  of  this  proposition,
supposes  that  the  event  takes  place  on  a boat  moving


the  same.


Fig.  160.


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


316


from  M towards  m with  the  velocity  wj 2.  The  initial
velocities  are,  then,  v — 7^/2  and  — wj 2 ; and  the  final
velocities,  a'  and  -f-  ®//2.  But  as  ^ ^as  not  a^ered
the  value,  but  only  the  sign,  of  its  velocity,  so  if  a
loss  of  vis  viva  is  not  to  be  sustained  in  elastic  impact,
can  only  alter  the  sign  of  its  velocity.  Hence,  the  final
velocities  are  — (v  — wj 2)  and  -{-w/ 2.  As  a fact,
then,  the  relative  velocity  of  approach  before  impact
is  equal  to  the  relative  velocity  of  separation  after  im-
pact Whatever  change  of  velocity  a body  may  suffer,
in  every  case,  we  can,  by  the  fiction  of  a boat  in  mo-
tion, and  apart  from  the  algebraical  signs,  keep  the
value  of  the  velocity  the  same  before  and  after  impact.
The  proposition  holds,  therefore,  generally.

Third,if  the  If  two  masses  M and  m collide,  with  velocities  V
of  approach  and  v inversely  proportional  to  the  masses,  M after  im-
fy  propor-6"  pact  will  rebound  with  the  velocity  V and  m with  the
rnasses°s0e  velocity  v»  Let  us  suppose  that  the  velocities  after
ferities  of  impact  are  Vx  and  vt  ; then  by  the  preceding  proposi-

recession.  muS£  have  y v — y^  _|_  v ^ and  foy  ^he  prin-

ciple of  vis  viva

MV2  mv2 MVr2  mvx2

2 ' 2~~=  2 ‘ 2 *


Let  us  assume,  now,  that  vt  ~v  w ; then,  neces-
sarily, Vt  = V — w ; but  on  this  supposition


MVX2  mv2_MV2

2 ' 2 2 ‘


mv2

~T~


+ (Af  + m)


w2

TT


And  this  equality  can,  in  the  conditions  of  the  case,
only  subsist  if  w = 0 ; wherewith  the  proposition  above
stated  is  established.

Huygens  demonstrates  this  by  a comparison,  con-
structively reached,  of  the  possible  heights  of  ascent
of  the  bodies  prior  and  subsequently  to  impact.  If


THE  EX  TEX SIOH  OF  THE  PRIXCIPLES .


3i7


the  velocities  of  the  impinging  bodies  are  not  inversely  This  propo-
proportional  to  the  masses,  they  may  be  made  such  by  the  fiction
the  fiction  of  a boat  in  motion.  The  proposition  thus  boa^madlf
includes  all  imaginable  cases.  an  cases*"

The  conservation  of  vis  viva  in  impact  is  asserted
by  Huygens  in  one  of  his  last  theorems  (11),  which  he
subsequently  also  handed  in  to  the  London  Society.

But  the  principle  is  unmistakably  at  the  foundation  of
the  previous  theorems.

6.  In  taking  up  the  study  of  any  event  or  phenom-  Typical  ^
enon  A , we  may  acquire  a knowledge  of  its  component  natural  in-
elements by  approaching  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  aqui°*
different  phenomenon  B,  which  we  already  know ; in
which  case  our  investigation  of  A will  appear  as  the
application  of  principles  before  familiar  to  us.  Or,  wTe
may  begin  our  investigation  with  A itself,  and,  as  na-
ture is  throughout  uniform,  reach  the  same  principles
originally  in  the  contemplation  of  A.  The  investiga-
tion of  the  phenomena  of  impact  was  pursued  simul-
taneously with  that  of  various  other  mechanical  pro-
cesses, and  both  modes  of  analysis  were  really  pre-
sented to  the  inquirer.

To  begin  with,  we  may  convince  ourselves  that  the  impact  in
problems  of  impact  can  be  disposed  of  by  the  New-  tonian^
tonian  principles,  with  the  help  of  only  a minimum  of  view.
new  experiences.  The  investigation  of  the  laws  of  im-
pact contributed,  it  is  true,  to  the  discovery  of  New-
ton's laws,  but  the  latter  do  not  rest  solely  on  this  foun-
dation. The  requisite  new  experiences,  not  contained
in  the  Newtonian  principles,  are  simply  the  informa-
tion that  there  are  elastic  and  melastic  bodies.  Inelastic
bodies  subjected  to  pressure  alter  their  form  without
recovering  it ; elastic  bodies  possess  for  all  their  forms
definite  systems  of  pressures,  so  that  every  alteration


3i8


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


First,  in-
elastic
masses.


Impact  in
an  equiva-
lentpoint
of  view.


of  form  is  associated  with  an  alteration  of  pressure,  and
vice  versa.  Elastic  bodies  recover  their  form  ; and  the
forces  that  induce  the  form-alterations  of  bodies  do  not
come  into  play  until  the  bodies  are  in  contact.

Let  us  consider  two  inelastic  masses  M and  m mov-
ing respectively  with  the  velocities  V and  v . If  these
masses  come  in  contact  while  possessed  of  these  un-
equal velocities,  internal  form-altering  forces  will  be
set  up  in  the  system  M>  in.  These  forces  do  not  alter
the  quantity  of  motion  of  the  system,  neither  do  they
displace  its  centre  of  gravity.  With  the  restitution  of
equal  velocities,  the  form-alterations  cease  and  in  in-
elastic bodies  the  forces  which  produce  the  alterations
vanish.  Calling  the  common  velocity  of  motion  after
impact  ?/,  it  follows  that  Mu  -)-  m u = MV  -|-  Mv,  or
u = (MV -j-  in  v) /{M  -f-  m),  the  rule  of  Wallis.

Now  let  us  assume  that  we  are  investigating  the
phenomena  of  impact  without  a previous  knowledge  of
Newton’s  principles.  We  very  soon  discover,  when
we  so  proceed,  that  velocity  is  not  the  sole  determina-
tive factor  of  impact;  still  another  physical  quality  is
decisive — weight,  load,  mass,  pondus , moles , massa.  The
moment  we  have  noted  this  fact,  the  simplest  case  is
easily  dealt  with.  If  two  bodies  of  equal  weight  or
equal  mass  collide  with  equal  and
opposite  velocities  ; if,  further,  the
bodies  do  not  separate  after  impact
but  retain  some  common  velocity,
plainly  the  sole  uniquely  deter-
mined velocity  after  the  collision  is  the  velocity  0.  If,
further,  we  make  the  observation  that  only  the  dif-
ference of  the  velocities,  that  is  only  relative  velocity,
determines  the  phenomenon  of  impact,  we  shall,  by
imagining  the  environment  to  move,  (which  experience


2U

O


HE

o


Fig.  161.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


3i9


tells  us  has  no  influence  on  the  occurrence,)  also  readily
perceive  additional  cases.  For  equal  inelastic  masses
with  velocities  v and  0 or  v and  v'  the  velocity  after
impact  is  v /2  or  (v  + v’)/2.  It  stands  to  reason  that
we  can  pursue  such  a line  of  reflection  only  after  ex-
perience has  informed  us  what  the  essential  and  de-
cisive features  of  the  phenomena  are.

If  we  pass  to  unequal  masses,  we  must  not  only  The  expe-
know  from  experience  that  mass  generally  is  of  conse-  conditions
quence,  but  also  in  what  manlier  its  influence  is  effec-  method,
tive.  If,  for  example,  two  bodies  of  masses  1 and  3
with  the  velocities  v and  V collide,  we  might  reason


thus.  We  cut  out  of  the  mass  3 the  mass  1 (Fig.  162),
and  first  make  the  masses  1 and  1 collide : the  result-
ant velocity  is  (v-\-V)/2.  There  are  now  left,  to
equalise  the  velocities  (v  + V)/^  and  V9  the  masses
1 _[_  1 — 2 and  2,  which  applying  the  same  principle
gives

+ V

2 ^ __v+  3V_v  + 3V

2 “ 4 — T4T3~*


Let  us  now  consider,  more  generally,  the  masses
m and  mr , which  we  represent  in  Fig.  163  as  suitably
proportioned  horizontal  lines.  These  masses  are  af-
fected with  the  velocities  v and  v , which  we  represent
by  ordinates  erected  on  the  mass-lines.  Assuming  that


320


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Its  points  of  m < m,  we  cut  off  from  m'  a portion  m . The  offsetting
SSfhlhe  of  m and  m gives  the  mass  2 m with  the  velocity  (v  +
Newtonian.  ^ ^ dotted  line  indicates  this  relation.  We

proceed  similarly  with  the  remainder  m — m.  We  cut
off  from  2 m a portion  m' — in,  and  obtain  the  mass
2 m — (;//' — m)  with  the  velocity  and  the

mass  2 (/;/  — m)  with  the  velocity  [fv  + v')/2  -f  v~\/2.
In  this  manner  we  may  proceed  till  we  have  obtained
for  the  whole  mass  m + m ' the  sa7ne  velocity  u.  The
constructive  method  indicated  in  the  figure  shows  very
plainly  that  here  the  surface  equation  ini  + m’)  u =
77i  v -f  mv  subsists.  We  readily  perceive,  however,
that  we  cannot  pursue  this  line  of  reasoning  except  the
sum  771  v + ?n'v’ , that  is  the  form  of  the  influence  of  m
and  v,  has  through  some  experience  or  other  been  pre-
viously suggested  to  us  as  the  determinative  and  de-
cisive factor.  If  we  renpunce  the  use  of  the  Newtonian
principles,  then  some  other  specific  experiences  con-
cerning the  import  of  771  v which  are  equivalent  to  those
principles,  are  indispensable.

Second,  the  j.  The  impact  of  elastic  masses  may  also  be  treated
eiastk  °m  by  the  Newtonian  principles.  The  sole  observation
Newton’s  here  required  is,  that  a deformation  of  elastic  bodies
calls  into  play  forces  of  restitictioTi , which  directly  de-
pend on  the  deformation.  Furthermore,  bodies  pos-
sess impenetrability ; that  is  to  say,  when  bodies  af-
fected with  unequal  velocities  meet  in  impact,  forces
which  equalise  these  velocities  are  produced.  If  two
elastic  masses  M,  771  with  the  velocities  C,  c collide,  a
deformation  will  be  effected,  and  this  deformation  will
not  cease  until  the  velocities  of  the  two  bodies  are
equalised.  At  this  instant,  inasmuch  as  only  internal
forces  are  involved  and  therefore  the  momentum  and


THE  EXTEXS10X  OF  THE  PR/XCIPLES.


321


the  motion  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  re-
main unchanged,  the  common  equalised  velocity  will  be
MC  + me

U =

Consequently,  up  to  this  time,  M’s  velocity  has  suf-
fered a diminution  C — u \ and  m’s  an  increase  u — c.

But  elastic  bodies  being  bodies  that  recover  their
forms,  in  perfectly  elastic  bodies  the  very  same  forces
that  produced  the  deformation,  will,  only  in  the  in-
verse order,  again  be  brought  into  play,  through  the
very  same  elements  of  time  and  space.  Consequently,
on  the  supposition  that  m is  overtaken  by  M,  M will  a
second  time  sustain  a diminution  of  velocity  C — u,  and
7ii  will  a second  time  receive  an  increase  of  velocity
u — c.  Hence,  we  obtain  for  the  velocities  V \ v after
impact  the  expressions  V—  '2u  — C and  v = 2 u — r,  or

y MC  + 7H (2c  — C)  ^ 7H c -j-  M (2C  — c)

M -j-  771  7 M -j-  771

If  in  these  formulas  we  put  M=m , it  will  follow  Tbe  ded“?-

r . . tion  by  this

that  V=c  and  v = C ; or,  if  the  impinging  masses  are  jj^a^sa11
equal,  the  velocities  which  they  have  will  be  inter-
changed. Again,  since  in  the  particular  case  M/m  =

— cjC  or  MCf-mc  — 0 also  u — 0,  it  follows  that

V —2u  — C=  — C and  v ==  2 u — c — — c ; that  is,
the  masses  recede  from  each  other  in  this  case  with  the
same  velocities  (only  oppositely  directed)  with  which
they  approached.  The  approach  of  any  two  masses
My  771  affected  with  the  velocities  C,  c,  estimated  as
positive  when  in  the  same  direction,  takes  place  with
the  velocity  C — c;  their  separation  with  the  velocity

V — v.  But  it  follows  at  once  from  V—  2 u — C,
v = 2 u — c , that  V — v = — ( C — c);  that  is,  the  rela-
tive velocity  of  approach  and  recession  is  the  same.


322


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


By  the  use  of  the  expressions  V=2u  — C and  v =
2u  — c,  we  also  very  readily  find  the  two  theorems

MV  -J-  m v = MC  -fi  m c and

MV 2 + mv2  ==  MC 2 + me 2,

which  assert  that  the  quantity  of  motion  before  and
after  impact,  estimated  in  the  same  direction,  is  the
same,  and  that  also  the  vis  viva  of  the  system  before
and  after  impact  is  the  same.  We  have  reached,  thus,
by  the  use  of  the  Newtonian  principles,  all  of  Huy-
gens’s results.

The  impli-  8.  If  we  consider  the  laws  of  impact  from  Huygens’s

Hau}°gens’s  point  of  view,  the  following  reflections  immediately
claim  our  attention.  The  height  of  ascent  which  the
centre  of  gravity  of  any  system  of  masses  can  reach  is
given  by  its  vis  viva , ^2?nv2.  In  every  case  in  which
work  is  done  by  forces,  and  in  such  cases  ihe  masses
follow  the  forces,  this  sum  is  increased  by  an  amount
equal  to  the  work  done.  On  the  other  hand,  in  every
case  in  which  the  system  moves  in  opposition  to  forces,
that  is,  when  work,  as  we  may  say,  is  done  upon  the
system,  this  sum  is  diminished  by  the  amount  of  work
done.  As  long,  therefore,  as  the  algebraical  sum  of
the  work  done  on  the  system  and  the  work  done  by  the
system  is  not  changed,  whatever  other  alterations  may
take  place,  the  sum  %~2mv2  also  remains  unchanged.
Huygens  now,  observing  that  this  first  property  of  ma-
terial systems,  discovered  by  him  in  his  investigations
on  the  pendulum,  also  obtained  in  the  case  of  impact,
could  not  help  remarking  that  also  the  sum  of  the
vires  vivee  must  be  the  same  before  and  after  im-
pact. For  in  the  mutually  effected  alteration  of  the
forms  of  the  colliding  bodies  the  material  system  con-
sidered has  the  same  amount  of  work  done  on  it  as,  on


THE  EX T EX S 10 X OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


323


the  reversal  of  the  alteration,  is  done  by  it,  provided  al-
ways the  bodies  develop  forces  wholly  determined  by
the  shapes  they  assume,  and  that  they  regain  their
original  form  by  means  of  the  same  forces  employed  to
effect  its  alteration.  That  the  latter  process  takes
place,  definite  experience  alone  can  inform  us.  This  law
obtains,  furthermore,  only  in  the  case  of  so-called  per-
fectly elastic  bodies.

Contemplated  from  this  point  of  view,  the  majority  The  deduc-

r 1 TT  - C-  e f tion  of  the

of  the  Huygeman  laws  of  impact  follow  at  once.  Equal  laws  of  im-
pact bv  the

masses,  which  strike  each  other  with  equal  but  oppo-  notion  of

...  , ...  nszvva  and

site  velocities,  rebound  with  the  same  velocities.  The  work,
velocities  are  uniquely  determined  only  when  they  are
equal , and  they  conform  to  the  principle  of  vis  viva
only  by  being  the  same  before  and  after  impact.  Fur-
ther it  is  evident,  that  if  one  of  the  unequal  masses  in
impact  change  only  the  sign  and  not  the  magnitude  of
its  velocity,  this  must  also  be  the  case  with  the  other.

On  this  supposition,  however,  the  relative  velocity  of
separation  after  impact  is  the  same  as  the  velocity  of
approach  before  impact.  Every  imaginable  case  can
be  reduced  to  this  one.  Let  c and  c be  the  velocities
of  the  mass  ;//  before  and  after  impact,  and  let  them  be
of  any  value  and  have  any  sign.  We  imagine  the  whole
system  to  receive  a velocity  u of  such  magnitude  that
u -f-  c = — (11  -f-  e)  or  u = (c  — F)/2.  It  will  be  seen
thus  that  it  is  always  possible  to  discover  a velocity  of
transportation  for  the  system  such  that  the  velocity  of
one  of  the  masses  will  only  change  its  sign.  And  so
the  proposition  concerning  the  velocities  of  approach
and  recession  holds  generally  good.

As  Huygens’s  peculiar  group  of  ideas  was  not  fully
perfected,  he  was  compelled,  in  cases  in  which  the  ve-
locity-ratios of  the  impinging  masses  were  not  origin-


3-4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Huygens’s
tack  appro-
priation of
the  idea  of
mass.


Construc-
tive com-
parison of
the  special
and  general
case  of  im-
pact.


ally  known,  to  draw  on  the  Galileo-Newtonian  system
for  certain  conceptions,  as  was  pointed  out  above.
Such  an  appropriation  of  the  concepts  mass  and  mo-
mentum, is  contained,  although  not  explicitly  ex-
pressed, in  the  proposition  according  to  which  the  ve-
locity of  each  impinging  mass  simply  changes  its  sign
when  before  impact  M/m  = — c/C.  If  Huygens  had
wholly  restricted  himself  to  his  own  point  of  view,  he
would  scarcely  have  discovered  this  proposition,  al-
though, once  discovered,  he  was  able,  after  his  own
fashion,  to  supply  its  deduction.  Here,  owing  to  the
fact  that  the  momenta  produced  are  equal  and  oppo-
site, the  equalised  velocity  of  the  masses  on  the  com-
pletion of  the  change  of  form  will  be  u = 0.  When  the
alteration  of  form  is  reversed,  and  the  same  amount  of
work  is  performed  that  the  system  originally  suffered,
the  same  velocities  with  opposite  signs  will  be  restored.

If  we  imagine  the  entire  system  affected  with  a ve-
locity of  translation. , this  particular  case  will  simulta-
neously present  th  e general  case.
Let  the  impinging  masses  be
represented  in  the  figure  by
M = BC  and  m = AC  (Fig.
164),  and  their  respective  velo-
cities by  C=  AD  and  c = BE.
On  AB  erect  the  perpendicular
Fig.  164.  and  through  F draw  IK

parallel  to  AB.  Then  ID  = ( m . C — c)  j(M  -f-  ni)  and
KE  — (M . C — c ) /{M- f-  m).  On  the  supposition  now
that  we  make  the  masses  M and  m collide  with  the
velocities  ID  and  KE , while  we  simultaneously  impart
to  the  system  as  a whole  the  velocity

u = AI=  KB  = C—  (in  . C— F?) /(M+  m)  =
c + (M . C — c) f{M  -f-  ni)  — (MC  -f-  ni  c)  4-  m ),


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


325


the  spectator  who  is  moving  forwards  with  the  velocity
it  will  see  the  particular  case  presented,  and  the  spec-
tator  who  is  at  rest  will  see  the  general  case,  be  the
velocities  what  they  may.  The  general  formulae  of  im-
pact, above  deduced,  follow  at  once  from  this  concep-
tion. We  obtain  :

v_  AG=  C— 2 m('C — ^ = MC-\-m(2c—  C ')

M - f-  7ti  J I ?n

V = BH=C  , 2 M(C—c)  = mcJr  -VC2C—  f)

1 M -f-  m M 4-  m

Huygen’s  successful  employment  of  the  fictitious  signifi-

. . c J . canceofthe

motions  is  the  outcome  of  the  simple  perception  that  fictitious

motions.

bodies  not  affected  with  differences  of  velocities  do  not
act  on  one  another  in  impact.  All  forces  of  impact  are
determined  by  differences  of  velocity  (as  all  thermal
effects  are  determined  by  differences  of  temperature).

And  since  forces  generally  determine,  not  velocities,
but  only  changes  of  velocities,  or,  again,  differences  of
velocities,  consequently,  in  every  aspect  of  impact  the
sole  decisive  factor  is  differences  of  velocity.  With  re-
spect to  which  bodies  the  velocities  are  estimated,  is
indifferent.  In  fact,  many  cases  of  impact  which  from
lack  of  practice  appear  to  us  as  different  cases,  turn
out  on  close  examination  to  be  one  and  the  same.

Similarly,  the  capacity  of  a moving  body  for  work,  velocity,  a
whether  we  measure  it  with  respect  to  the  time  of  its  level,
action  by  its  momentum  or  with  respect  to  the  distance
through  which  it  acts  by  its  vis  viva , has  no  signifi-
cance referred  to'  a single  body.  It  is  invested  with
such,  only  when  a second  body  is  introduced,  and,  in
the  first  case,  then,  it  is  the  difference  of  the  veloci-
ties, and  in  the  second  the  square  of  the  difference  that
is  decisive.  Velocity  is  a physical  ■ level. \ like  tempera-
ture, potential  function,  and  the  like.


326


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS,


Possible
different
origin  of
Huygens’s
ideas.


Conserva-
tion of  mo-
mentum in
terpreted.


It  remains  to  be  remarked,  that  Huygens  could
have  reached,  originally,  in  the  investigation  of  the
phenomena  of  impact,  the  same  results  that  he  pre-
viously reached  by  his  investigations  of  the  pendulum.
In  every  case  there  is  one  thing  and  one  thing  only  to
be  done,  and  that  is,  to  discover  in  all  the  facts  the  same
elements , or,  if  we  will,  to  rediscover  in  one  fact  the
elements  of  another  which  we  already  know.  From
which  facts  the  investigation  starts,  is,  however,  a
matter  of  historical  accident.

9.  Let  us  close  our  examination  of  this  part  of  the
i-subject  with  a few  general  remarks.  The  sum  of  the
momenta  of  a system  of  moving  bodies  is  preserved  in
impact,  both  in  the  case  of  inelastic  and  elastic  bodies.
But  this  preservation  does  not  take  place  precisely  in
the  sense  of  Descartes.  The  momentum  of  a body  is
not  diminished  in  proportion  as  that  of  another  is  in-
creased ; a fact  which  Huygens  was  the  first  to  note.
If,  for  example,  two  equal  inelastic  masses,  possessed
of  equal  and  opposite  velocities,  meet  in  impact,  the
two  bodies  lose  in  the  Cartesian  sense  their  entire  mo-
mentum. If,  however,  we  reckon  all  velocities  in  a
given  direction  as  positive,  and  all  in  the  opposite  as
negative,  the  sum  of  the  momenta  is  preserved.  Quan-
tity of  motion,  conceived  in  this  sense,  is  always  pre-
served.

The  vis  viva  of  a system  of  inelastic  masses  is  al-
tered in  impact;  that  of  a system  of  perfectly  elastic
masses  is  preserved.  The  diminution  of  vis  viva  pro-
duced in  the  impact  of  inelastic  masses,  or  produced
generally  when  the  impinging  bodies  move  with  a com-
mon velocity,  after  impact,  is  easily  determined.  Let
M,  m be  the  masses,  C,  c their  respective  velocities  be-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRIXCIPLES.


fore  Impact,  and  u their  common  velocity  after  impact ;
then  the  loss  of  vis  viva  is

^MC2  + \m  c2  — i ( M -f  ms  u 2, (1 )

which  in  view  of  the  fact  that  u = ( J/C-f-  m c )/(M  + //:)
may  be  expressed  In  the  form  \(Mm/M -j-  ///)  (C — <r)2.
Carnot  has  put  this  loss  in  the  form

i M{C—uy  + yn(u-cy (2)

If  we  select  the  latter  form,  the  expressions  \M(  C — // f
and  — r)2  will  be  recognised  as  the  vis  viva  gen-

erated by  the  work  of  the  internal  forces.  The  loss  of
vis  viva  in  impact  is  equivalent,  therefore,  to  the  work
done  by  the  internal  or  so-called  molecular  forces.  If
we  equate  the  two  expressions  (i)  and  (2),  remember-
ing that  {M vi)  u me,  we  shall  obtain  an

identical  equation.  Carnot's  expression  is  important
for  the  estimation  of  losses  due  to  the  Impact  of  parts
of  machines.

In  all  the  preceding  expositions  we  have  treated
the  impinging  masses  as  points  which  moved  only  in  the
direction  of  the  lines  joining  them.  This  simplifica-
tion is  admissible  when  the  centres  of  gravity  and  the
point  of  contact  of  the  impinging  masses  lie  in  one
straight  line,  that  is,  in  the  case  of  so-called  direct  im-
pact. The  investigation  of  what  is  called  oblique  im-
pact is  somewhat  more  complicated,  but  presents  no
especial  interest  in  point  of  principle.

A question  of  a different  character  was  treated  by
Wallis.  If  a body  rotate  about  an  axis  and  its  motion
be  suddenly  checked  by  the  retention  of  one  of  its
points,  the  force  of  the  percussion  will  vary  with  the
position  (the  distance* from  the  axis)  of  the  point  ar-
rested. The  point  at  which  the  intensity  of  the  impact
is  greatest  is  called  by  Wallis  the  centre  of  percussion .


Conserva-
tion of  vis
viva  in  im
pact  inter-
preted.


Oblique

impact.


The  centre
of  percus-
sion.


328


TIIE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


If  this  point  be  checked,  the  axis  will  sustain  no  pres-
sure. We  have  no  occasion  here  to  enter  in  detail
into  these  investigations  ; they  were  extended  and  de-
veloped by  Wallis’s  contemporaries  and  successors  in


many  ways.

Thebaiiis-  io.  We  will  now  briefly  examine,  before  concluding
ticpenciu-  sect-on^  an  interesting  application  of  the  laws  of

impact  ; namely,  the  determination  of  the  velocities  of
projectiles  by  the  ballistic  pendulum.  A mass  M is  sus-


M,  V —
Fig.  165.


pended  by  a weightless  and  massless
string  (Fig.  165),  so  as  to  oscillate  as  a
pendulum.  While  in  the  position  of
equilibrium  it  suddenly  receives  the  hori-
zontal velocity  V.  It  ascends  by  virtue
of  this  velocity  to  an  altitude  h = (/)
(1  — cos  a)  = V2/2g,  where  / denotes  the
length  of  the  pendulum,  a the  angle  of
elongation,  and  g the  acceleration  of


gravity.  As  the  relation  T = 7tV l jg  subsists  between


the  time  of  oscillation  T and  the  quantities  /,  g,  we
easily  obtain  V=  (gT/7C)  l/2  (1  — cos  a:),  and  by  the


use  of  a familiar  trigonometrical  formula,  also


2 . a

HgTsixyr


its  formula.  If  now  the  velocity  Fis  produced  by  a projectile  of
the  mass  m which  being  hurled  with  a velocity  v and
sinking  in  M is  arrested  in  its  progress,  so  that  whether
the  impact  is  elastic  or  inelastic,  in  any  case  the  two
masses  acquire  after  impact  the  common  velocity  V}  it
follows  that  inn  — (M -f-  in)  V ; or,  if  m be  sufficiently
small  compared  with  M,  also  v = (M jiri)V ; whence


finally


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


329


If  it  Is  not  permissible  to  regard  the  ballistic  pen- a different

j - . . . deduction.

dulum  as  a simple  pendulum,  our  reasoning,  m con-
formity with  principles  before  employed,  will  take  the
following  shape.  The  projectile  m with  the  velocity  v
has  the  momentum  mv,  which  is  diminished  by  the
pressure  p due  to  impact  in  a very  short  interval  of
time  r to  mV.  Here,  then,  m (v  — V)  =/r,  or,  if  V
compared  with  v is  very  small,  mv  — fit.  With  Fen-
celet, we  reject  the  assumption  of  anything  like  in-
stantaneous forces,  which  generate  instant er  velocities.

There  are  no  instantaneous  forces.  What  has  been
called  such  are  very  great  forces  that  produce  per-
ceptible velocities  in  very  short  intervals  of  time,  but
which  in  other  respects  do  not  differ  from  forces  that
act  continuously.  If  the  force  active  in  impact  cannot
be  regarded  as  constant  during  its  entire  period  of  ac-
tion, we  have  only  to  put  in  the  place  of  the  expression
fit  the  expression J p dt.  In  other  respects  the  reason-
ing is  the  same.

A force  equal  to  that  which  destroys  the  momentum  The  vis

...  . . . r wwa  and

of  the  projectile,  acts  m reaction  on  the  pendulum.  If  work  of  the

pendulum.

we  take  the  line  of  projection  of  the  shot,  and  conse-
quently also  the  line  of  the  force,  perpendicular  to  the
axis  of  the  pendulum  and  at  the  distance  b from  it,  the
moment  of  this  force  will  be  bp , the  angular  accelera-
tion generated  bfi/iEmr and  the  angular  velocity  pro-
duced in  time  r

b . fir  bmv

^ m r2  i2mr2'

The  vis  viva  which  the  pendulum  has  at  the  end  of
time  r is  therefore


b2m2v2


330


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  result,  By  virtue  of  this  vis  viva  the  pendulum  performs
the  excursion  a,  and  its  weight  Mg,  (a  being  the  dis-
tance of  the  centre  of  gravity  from  the  axis,)  is  lifted
the  distance  a (1  — cos  a).  The  work  performed  here
is  Mg  a (l — cos  a),  which  is  equal  to  the  above-men-
tioned vis  viva.  Equating  the  two  expressions  we
readily  obtain

]/  2M?a2mr2Cl — cos  a)

v == j ,

mb

and  remembering  that  the  time  of  oscillation  is


T=


7t


s


2mr2
Alga  J


and  employing  the  trigonometrical  reduction  which
was  resorted  to  immediately  above,  also


2 M a
n ?n  b 6 '


a
2 ’


interprets-  This  formula  is  m every  respect  similar  to  that  ob-

tion  of  the  . .

result.  tamed  for  the  simple  case.  The  observations  requisite
for  the  determination  of  v,  are  the  mass  of  the  pendu-
lum and  the  mass  of  the  projectile,  the  distances  of
the  centre  of  gravity  and  point  of  percussion  from  the
axis,  and  the  time  and  extent  of  oscillation.  The  form-
ula also  clearly  exhibits  the  dimensions  of  a velocity.
The  expressions  2/?r  and  sin(ar/2)  are  simple  num-
bers, as  are  also  M j?n  and  a/b,  where  both  numerators
and  denominators  are  expressed  in  units  of  the  same
kind.  But  the  factor  gT  has  the  dimensions  //-1,  and
is  consequently  a velocity.  The  ballistic  pendulum
was  invented  by  Robins  and  described  by  him  at  length
in  a treatise  entitled  New  Principles  of  Gunnery , pub-
lished in  1742.


TUE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


33i


v.

d’alembert’s  principle.

1.  One  of  the  most  important  principles  for  the  History  of
rapid  and  convenient  solution  of  the  problems  of  me-  cipie.
chanics  is  the  pidnciple  of  D’ Alembert.  The  researches
concerning  the  centre  of  oscillation  on  which  almost  all
prominent  contemporaries  and  successors  of  Huygens

had  employed  themselves,  led  directly  to  a series  of
simple  observations  which  D’Alembert  ultimately  gen-
eralised and  embodied  in  the  principle  which  goes  by
his  name.  We  will  first  cast  a glance  at  these  prelim-
inary performances.  They  were  almost  without  excep-
tion evoked  by  the  - desire  to  replace  the  deduction  of
Huygens,  which  did  not  appear  sufficiently  obvious,  by
one  that  was  more  convincing.  Although  this  desire  was
founded,  as  we  have  already  seen,  on  a miscompre-
hension due  to  historical  circumstances,  we  have,  of
course,  no  occasion  to  regret  the  new  points  of  view
which  were  thus  reached.

2.  The  first  in  importance  of  the  founders  of  the  James  Ber-
theory  of  the  centre  of  oscillation,  after  Huygens,  iscontribu-

^ tionstothe

Tames  Bernoulli,  who  sought  as  early  as  1686  to  ex- theory  of

**  the  centre

plain  the  compound  pendulum  by  the  lever.  He  ar- of  osciiia-
rived,  however,  at  results  which  not  only  were  obscure
but  also  were  at  variance  with  the  conceptions  of  Huy-
gens. The  errors  of  Bernoulli  were  animadverted  on
by  the  Marquis  de  L’Hopital  in  the  Journal  de  Rotter-
dam, in  1690.  The  consideration  of  velocities  acquired
in  infinitely  small  intervals  of  time  in  place  of  velocities
acquired  in  finite  times — a consideration  which  the  last-
named  mathematician  suggested — led  to  the  removal


332


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


of  the  main  difficulties  that  beset  this  problem  ; and  in
1691,  in  the  Acta  Eruditorum,  and,  later,  in  1703,  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  Paris  Academy  James  Bernoulli  cor-
rected his  error  and  presented  his  results  in  a final  and
complete  form.  We  shall  here  reproduce  the  essential
points  of  his  final  deduction.

James  Ber-  A horizontal,  massless  bar  AB  (Fig.  166)  is  free  to

noulli’sde-  1

duction  of  rotate  about  A;  and  at  the  distances  r,  r from  A the

the  com-  masses m,  in'  are  attached.  The  accelerations  with  which

pound  pen-
dulum, from  these  masses  as  thus  connected

pie of  the  f — will  fall  must  be  different  from

the  accelerations  which  they

T,.  ^ would  assume  if  their  connec-

tions  were  severed  and  they  fell
freely.  There  will  be  one  point  and  one  only,  at  the
distance  as  yet  unknown,  from  A which  will  fall
with  the  same  acceleration  as  it  would  have  if  it  were
free,  that  is,  with  the  acceleration  g.  This  point  is
termed  the  centre  of  oscillation.

If  m and  in'  were  to  be  attracted  to  the  earth,  not
proportionally  to  their  masses,  but  m so  as  to  fall  when
free  with  the  acceleration  cp  = grjx  and  in'  with  the
acceleration  cp'  = gr' fx,  that  is  to  say,  if  the  natural
accelerations  of  the  masses  were  proportional  to  their
distances  from  A,  these  masses  would  not  interfere  with
one  another  when  connected.  In  reality,  however,  m
sustains,  in  consequence  of  the  connection,  an  upward
component  acceleration  — cp,  and  in'  receives  in  virtue
of  the  same  fact  a downward  component  acceleration
cp'  — g;  that  is  to  say,  the  former  suffers  an  upward
force  of  m (g — cp ) = g{x  — r/x)  in  and  the  latter  a
downward  force  of  m’  [yp'  — g)  = g (r'  — x/x ) in' .

Since,  however,  the  masses  exert  what  influence
they  have  on  each  other  solely  through  the  medium  of


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


333


the  lever  by  which  they  are  joined,  the  upward  force
upon  the  one  and  the  downward  force  upon  the  other
must  satisfy  the  law  of  the  lever.  If  m in  conse-
quence of  its  being  connected  with  the  lever  is  held
back  by  a force  f from  the  motion  which  it  would  take,
if  free,  it  will  also  exert  the  same  force  f on  the  lever-
arm  r by  reaction.  It  is  this  reaction  pull  alone  that
can  be  transferred  to  iri  and  be  balanced  there  by  a
pressure  f'=  (r/?',')f  and  is  therefore  equivalent  to  the
latter  pressure.  There  subsists,  therefore,  agreeably
to  what  has  been  above  said,  the  relation  g (V  — x jx)
in ' = r jiJ  . g (x  — rjx ) in  or,  ( x — r)  mr  = (/  — x)  in’ r’9
from  which  we  obtain  jc  = ( nir 2 -f-  wV2)/(»^  + m'r'f
exactly  as  Huygens  found  it.  The  generalisation  of
this  reasoning,  for  any  number  of  masses,  which  need
not  lie  in  a single  straight  line,  is  obvious.

3.  John  Bernoulli  (in  1712)  attacked  in  a different
manner  the  problem  of  the  centre  of  oscillation.  His
performances  are  easiest  consulted  in  his  Collected
Works  {Opera,  Lausanne  and  Geneva,  1762,  Vols.  II
and  IV).  We  shall  examine  in  detail  here  the  main
ideas  of  this  physicist.  Bernoulli  reaches  his  goal  by
conceiving  the  masses  and  forces  separated.

First , let  us  consider  two  simple  pendulums  of  dif-
ferent lengths  /,  r whose  bobs  are  affected  with  gravi-
tational accelerations  proportional  to  the  lengths  of  the
pendulums,  that  is,  let  us  put  ///'  = g/g'.  As  the  time
of  oscillation  of  a pendulum  is  T=  nV  l/g,  it  follows
that  the  times  of  oscillation  of  these  pendulums  will  be
the  same.  Doubling  the  length  of  a pendulum,  ac-
cordingly, while  at  the  same  time  doubling  the  accel-
eration of  gravity  does  not  alter  the  period  of  oscilla-
tion.

Second , though  we  cannot  directly  alter  the  accel-


The  law  of
the  distri-
bution of
the  effects
of  the  im-
pressed
forces, in
James  Ber-
noulli’s ex-
ample.


The  prin-
ciple of
John  Ber-
noulli’s so-
lution of
theproblem
of  the  cen-
tre of  oscil-
lation.


The  first
step  in  John
Bernoulli’s
deduction.


334


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  second  eration  of  gravity  at  any  one  spot  on  the  earth,  we
BernoidirT  can  do  what  amounts  virtually  to  this.  Thus,  imagine
e uc  ion.  ^ massless  bar  of  length  2 a,  free  to  rotate  about

its  middle  point ; and  attach  to  the  one  ex-
; m'  tremity  of  it  the  mass  in  and  to  the  other  the
a mass  in  . Then  the  total  mass  is  in  -f-  in'  at

the  distance  a from  the  axis.  But  the  force
a which  acts  on  it  is  (in  — in')  g,  and  the  ac-
m celeration,  consequently,  (in  — in'  jin  -f-  in')  g.

Fig.  167.  Hence,  to  find  the  length  of  the  simple  pen-
dulum, having  the  ordinary  acceleration  of
gravity  g,  which  is  isochronous  with  the  present  pen-
dulum of  the  length  a,  we  put,  employing  the  preced-
ing theorem,


/

a


, m 4-  in

— - or  / = a !

• in  in  — in


in  in'  *


The  third  Third , we  imagine  a simple  pendulum  of  length  1

determina-  with  the  mass  in  at  its  extremity.  The  weight  of  in
centre  of  produces,  by  the  principle  of  the  lever,  the  same  ac-
gj ration.  cejeratjon  as  half  this  force  at  a distance  2 from  the


point  of  suspension.  Half  the  mass  in  placed  at  the
distance  2,  therefore,  would  suffer  by  the  action  of  the
force  impressed  at  1 the  same  acceleration,  and  a fourth
of  the  mass  in  would  suffer  double  the  acceleration  ; so
that  a simple  pendulum  of  the  length  2 having  the  orig-
inal force  at  distance  1 from  the  point  of  suspension
and  one-fourth  the  original  mass  at  its  extremity  would
be  isochronous  with  the  original  one.  Generalising
this  reasoning,  it  is  evident  that  we  may  transfer  any
force  / acting  on  a compound  pendulum  at  any  dis-
tance r,  to  the  distance  1 by  making  its  value  r/,  and
any  and  every  mass  placed  at  the  distance  r to  the
distance  1 by  making  its  value  r2m , without  changing


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


335


OE


V


Fig.  168.


the  time  of  oscillation  of  the  pendulum.  If  a force  /
act  on  a lever- arm  a (Fig.  168)  while  at  the  distance  r
from  the  axis  a mass  m is  attached,  f will  be  equiva-
lent to  a force  af/r  impressed  on
m and  will  impart  to  it  the  linear
acceleration  af/mr  and  the  angu-
lar acceleration  af/mr*.  Hence,
to  find  the  angular  acceleration
of  a compound  pendulum,  we
divide  the  sum  of  the  statical  moments  by  the  sum  of
the  moments  of  inertia.

Brook  Taylor,  an  Englishman,*  also  developed  There-
this  idea,  on  substantially  the  same  principles,  but  Brook  Tay-
quite  independently  of  John  Bernoulli.  His  solution,
however,  was  not  published  until  some  time  later,  in
1715,  in  his  work,  Methodus  Increment  or  uni.

The  above  are  the  most  important  attempts  to  solve
the  problem  of  the  centre  of  oscillation.  We  shall  see
that  they  contain  the  very  same  ideas  that  D’Alembert
enunciated  in  a generalised  form.

4.  On  a system  of  points  M,  M',  M" . . . . connected  Motion  of  a
with  one  another  in  any  way,f  the  forces  P,  P\ , P".  . . . polSs sub-
are  impressed.  (Fig.  169.)  These  forces  would  im-  straints.°n
part  to  the  free  points  of  the  system  certain  determinate
motions.  To  the  connected  points,  however,  different
motions  are  usually  imparted — motions  which  could
be  produced  by  the  forces  W,  W W".  . . . These
last  are  the  motions  which  we  shall  study.

Conceive  the  force  P resolved  into  W and  V \ the
force  P*  into  W’  and  V,  and  the  force  P”  into  W'f


* Author  of  Taylor’s  theorem,  and  also  of  a remarkable  work  on  perspec-
tive.— Trans .

t In  precise  technical  language,  they  are  subject  to  constraints , that  is,
forces  regarded  as  infinite,  which  compel  a certain  relation  between  their
motions. — Trans.


330


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Statement
of  D’Alem-
bert’s. prin-
ciple.


Various
forms  in
which  the
principle
may  be  ex-
pressed.


and  V ",  and  so  on.  Since,  owing  to  the  connections,
only  the  components  TV,  TV',  TV".  . . . are  effective,
therefore,  the  forces  V,  V',  V".  . . . must  be  equilib-
rated by  the  connections.  We  will  call  the  forces  P,  P‘,

P"  the  impressed  forces,

the  forces  TV,  W',  TV" ,

which  produce  the  ac-
tual motions,  the  effective
forces,  and  the  forces  V,
V',  V" ...  . the  forces
gained  and  lost,  or  the
equilibrated  forces.  We
perceive,  thus,  that  if  we
resolve  the  impressed  forces  into  the  effective  forces
and  the  equilibrated  forces,  the  latter  form  a system
balanced  by  the  connections.  This  is  the  principle  of
D’Alembert.  We  have  allowed  ourselves,  in  its  expo-
sition, only  the  unessential  modification  of  putting
forces  for  the  momenta  generated  by  the  forces.  In  this
form  the  principle  was  stated  by  D’Alembert  in  his
Traite  de  dynamique , published  in  1743.

As  the  system  V,  V',  V".  ...  is  in  equilibriitm,  the
principle  of  virttial  displacements  is  applicable  thereto.
This  gives  a second  form  of  D’Alembert’s  principle.
A third  form  is  obtained  as  follows  : The  forces  P,  P'.  . . .
are  the  resultants  of  the  components  W,  W'.  . . . and

V,  V.  . . . If,  therefore,  we  combine  with  the  forces

W,  W\  . . . and  V,  V' ...  . the  forces  — P,  — P' . . . .,
equilibrium  will  obtain.  The  force-system — P,  W,  V
is  in  equilibrium.  But  the  system  V is  independently
in  equilibrium.  Therefore,  also  the  system  — P,  TV  is
in  equilibrium,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  system
P,  — TV  is  in  equilibrium.  Accordingly,  if  the  effective
forces  with  opposite  signs  be  joined  to  the  impressed


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


33  7


VP.


Fig.  170.


forces,  the  two,  owing  to  the  connections,  will  balance.
The  principle  of  virtual  displacements  may  also  be  ap-
plied to  the  system  F,  — TV  This  Lagrange  did  in  his
Mccanique  analytique , 1 788.

The  fact  that  equilibrium  subsists  between  the  sys-
tem P and  the  system  — TV,  may  be  expressed  in  still
another  way.  We  may  say  that
the  system  TV  is  equivalent  to  the
system  P . In  this  form  Her-
mann ( Phoro?iomia , 1716)  and
Euler  (Comment.  Acad.  Petr  op.,

Old  Series,  Vol.  VII,  1740)  employed  the  principle.
It  is  substantially  not  different  from  that  of  D’Alembert.

5.  We  will  now  illustrate  D’Alembert’ s principle  by
one  or  two  examples.

On  a massless  wheel  and  axle  with  the  radii  R,  r the
loads  P and  Q are  hung,  which  are  not  in  equilibrium.
We  resolve  the  force  P into  (1)  W
(the  force  which  would  produce  the
actual  motion  of  the  mass  if  this  were
freej  and  (2)  V,  that  is,  we  put
P = W+  V and  also  Q = W'+  V
it  being  evident  that  we  may  here
disregard  all  motions  that  are  not
in  the  vertical.  We  have,  accord-
ingly, V=P—  W and  V '=  Q — W’,
and,  since  the  forces  V,  V are  in  equilibrium,  also
V.  R=  V.  r.  Substituting  for  V,  V in  the  last  equa-
tion their  values  in  the  former,  we  get


An  equiva-
lent princi-
ple em-
ployed by
Hermann
and  Euler.


Illustration
of  D’Alem-
bert’s prin-
ciple by  the
motion  of  a
wheel  and
axle.


Fig.  171.


(P—  W)R  = (Q—  W')r (1)

which  may  also  be  directly  obtained  by  the  employ-
ment of  the  second  form  of  D’Alembert’s  principle.
From  the  conditions  of  the  problem  we  readily  perceive


33§


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


that  we  have  here  to  deal  with  a uniformly  accelerated
motion,  and  that  all  that  is  therefore  necessary  is  to
ascertain  the  acceleration.  Adopting  gravitation  meas-
ure, we  have  the  forces  W and  W',  which  produce  in
the  masses  P/g  and  Q/g  the  accelerations  y and  y';
wherefore,  W — (P/g)  y and  Wr—  (Q/g)  yr.  But  we
also  know  that  y*=  — y(r/P).  Accordingly,  equation
(i)  passes  into  the  form


(r-cyN+i  is ®

whence  the  values  of  the  two  accelerations  are  ob-
tained


r


PR — Qr
~PP*-+Qr*


Pg,  and  y'  = —


RR-.  Qr
PR*  + Qf*  rg-


These  last  determine  the  motion.

Employ-^  It  will  be  seen  at  a glance  that  the  same  result  can
ideas  stat-  be  obtained  by  the  employment  of  the  ideas  of  statical

ical  mo-  .

ment  and  moment  and  moment  of  inertia.  We  get  by  this  method

moment  of  . '

inertia,  to  for  the  angular  acceleration

obtain  this

result-  _ PR—Qr  _ PR—  Qr


and  as  y = Rcp  and  y '=  — r cp  we  re-obtain  the  pre-
ceding expressions.

When  the  masses  and  forces  are  given,  the  problem
of  finding  the  motion  of  a system  is  determinate.  Sup-
pose, however,  only  the  acceleration  y is  given  with
which  P moves,  and  that  the  problem  is  to  find  the  loads
P and  Q that  produce  this  acceleration.  We  obtain
easily  from  equation  (2)  the  result  P==  Q (Pg+  ry)
r/(g — y)P2,  that  is,  a relation  between  P and  Q .
One  of  the  two  loads  therefore  is  arbitrary.  The  prob-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


339


lem  in  this  form  is  an  indeter?ninate  one,  and  may  be
solved  in  an  infinite  number  of  different  ways.

The  following  may  serve  as  a second  example.

A weight  P (Fig.  172)  free  to  move  on  a vertical  a second  it
straight  line  AB , is  attached  to  a cord
passing  over  a pulley  and  carrying  a
weight  Q at  the  other  end.  The  cord
makes  with  the  line  AB  the  variable
angle  a.  The  motion  of  the  present
case  cannot  be  uniformly  accelerated.

But  if  we  consider  only  vertical  mo-
tions we  can  easily  give  for  every
value  of  a the  momentary  accelera-
tion (y  and  yf)  of  P and  Q.  Proceeding  exactly  as
we  did  in  the  last  case,  we  obtain

p = w+  vs ;

Q = W'  + V

also

V*  cos  oc  z=z  Vj  or,  since  y’  — — y cos  a,


Q \ P

Q + - cos  a y J cos  a = P y\  whence

<b  / <0

_ P — <2  cos  a
y Q cos  2 a P ^

. P — Qcosa


Again  the  same  result  may  be  easily  reached  by  the  solution  of
employment  of  the  ideas  of  statical  moment  and  mo-  also  bythe
* ment  of  inertia  in  a more  generalised  form.  The  fol-  statlcafmo-
lowing  reflexion  will  render  this  clear.  The  force,  or  moment^
statical  moment,  that  acts  on  P is  P — Q cos  a.  But  eraiSed^en"
the  weight  Q moves  cos  a:  times  as  fast  as  P;  conse-
quently its  mass  is  to  be  taken  cos  2 a times.  The  ac-
celeration which  P receives,  accordingly  is,


34°


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


P — Qcosa  P — Q cos  oc


cos  2 cx  -f-


P Qcos  2 a -j-  P


In  like  manner  the  corresponding  expression  for  y’  may
be  found.


The  foregoing  procedure  rests  on  the  simple  re-
mark, that  not  the  circular  path  of  the  motion  of  the
masses  is  of  consequence,  but  only  the  relative  veloci-
ties or  relative  displacements.  This  extension  of  the
concept  moment  of  inertia  may  often  be  employed  to
advantage.

import  and  6.  Now  that  the  application  of  D’Alembert’s  prin-

character  x

of  D'Aiem-  ciple  has  been  sufficiently  illustrated,  it  will  not  be  diffi-

bert’s  prin-  ■L  . ‘

cipie.  cult  to  obtain  a clear  idea  of  its  significance.  Problems
relating  to  the  motion  of  connected  points  are  here  dis-
posed of  by  recourse  to  experiences  concerning  the
mutual  actions  of  connected  bodies  reached  in  the  in-


vestigation of  problems  of  equilibrium . Where  the  last
mentioned  experiences  do  not  suffice,  D’Alembert’s
principle  also  can  accomplish  nothing,  as  the  examples
adduced  will  amply  indicate.  We  should,  therefore,
carefully  avoid  the  notion  that  D’Alembert’s  principle
is  a general  one  which  renders  special  experiences  su-
perfluous. Its  conciseness  and  apparent  simplicity  are
wholly  due  to  the  fact  that  it  refers  us  to  experiences
already  in  our  possession.  Detailed  knowledge  of  the
subject  under  consideration  founded  on  exact  and  mi-
nute experience,  cannot  be  dispensed  with.  This  knowl-
edge we  must  obtain  either  from  the  case  presented,
by  a direct  investigation,  or  we  must  previously  have
obtained  it,  in  the  investigation  of  some  other  subject,
and  carry  it  with  us  to  the  problem  in  hand.  We  learn,
in  fact,  from  D’Alembert’s  principle,  as  our  examples
show,  nothing  that  we  could  not  also  have  learned  by


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


34i


other  methods.  The  principle  fulfils  in  the  solution
of  problems,  the  office  of  a routine-form  which,  to  a
certain  extent,  spares  us  the  trouble  of  thinking  out
each  new  case,  by  supplying  directions  for  the  employ-
ment of  experiences  before  known  and  familiar  to  us.

The  principle  does  not  so  much  promote  our  insight
into  the  processes  as  it  secures  us  a practical  ?na$tery  of
them.  The  value  of  the  principle  is  of  an  economical
character.

When  we  have  solved  a problem  by  D’Alembert’s  The  reia-
principle,  we  may  rest  satisfied  with  the  experiences  rvAiem-^
previously  made  concerning  equilibrium,  the  applica-  ejgie  to^th*
tion  of  which  the  principle  implies.  But  if  we  wish  cipies of

c mechanics.

clearly  and  thoroughly  to  apprehend  the  phenomenon,
that  is,  to  rediscover  in  it  the  simplest  mechanical  ele-
ments with  which  we  are  familiar,  we  are  obliged  to
push  our  researches  further,  and  to  replace  our  expe-
riences concerning  equilibrium  either  by  the  Newtonian
or  by  the  Huygenian  conceptions,  in  some  way  similar
to  that  pursued  on  page  266.  If  we  adopt  the  former
alternative,  we  shall  mentally  see  the  accelerated  mo-
tions enacted  which  the  mutual  action  of  bodies  on  one
another  produces  ; if  we  adopt  the  second,  we  shall  di-
rectly contemplate  the  work  done,  on  which,  in  the
Huygenian  conception,  the  vis  viva  depends.  The  latter
point  of  view  is  particularly  convenient  if  we  employ
the  principle  of  virtual  displacements  to  express  the
conditions  of  equilibrium  of  the  system  V or  P — IV.
D’Alembert’s  principle  then  asserts,  that  the  sum  of
the  virtual  moments  of  the  system  Vi  or  of  the  system
P — W,  is  equal  to  zero.  The  elementary  work  c,r  the
equilibrated  forces,  if  we  leave  out  of  account  the  strain-
ing of  the  connections,  is  equal  to  zero.  The  total
work  done,  then,  is  performed  solely  by  the  system  P,


342


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


and  the  work  performed  by  the  system  W must,  accord-
ingly, be  equal  to  the  work  done  by  the  system  P.  All
the  work  that  can  possibly  be  done  is  due,  neglecting
the  strains  of  the  connections,  ‘to  the  impressed  forces.
As  will  be  seen,  D’Alembert’s  principle  in  this  form  is
not  essentially  different  from  the  principle  of  vis  viva.
Form  of  ap-  7.  In  practical  applications  of  the  principle  of

D’Aiem^  °f  D’Alembert  it  is  convenient  to  resolve  every  force  P
cfpie!  m/d  impressed  on  a mass  m of  the  system  into  the  mutually
ing  equa-  perpendicular  components  X,  Y,  Z parallel  to  the  axes
tion.  of  a system  of  rectangular  coordinates  ; every  effective
force  W into  corresponding  components  ^277,
where  <?,  77,  2,  denote  accelerations  in  the  directions  of
the  coordinates ; and  every  displacement,  in  a similar
manner,  into  three  displacements  8x,  Sy,  Sz.  As  the
work  done  by  each  component  force  is  effective  only  in
displacements  parallel  to  the  directions  in  which  the
components  act,  the  equilibrium  of  the  system  (P, — W )
is  given  by  the  equation

2\{X — m <?)  8x  -f-  (Y — 7?irf)  8y  -j~  (Z — 7n%)dz\  = 0 (1)
or

2 (X6x  + YSy  4-  ZSz)  = 'Sin  (%8x- 1-  rjdy  -f-  2,8 z)  . . (2)

These  two  equations  are  the  direct  expression  of  the
proposition  above  enunciated  respecting  the  possible
work  of  the  impressed  forces.  If  this  work  be  = 0,  the
particular  case  of  equilibrium  results.  The  principle
of  virtual  displacements  flows  as  a.  special  case  from
this  expression  of  D’Alembert’s  principle ; and  this  is
quite  in  conformity  with  reason*  since  in  the  general
as  well  as  in  the  particular  case  the  experimental  per-
ception of  the  import  of  work  is  the  sole  thing  of  con-
sequence.

Equation  (1)  gives  the  requisite  equations  of  mo-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


343


tion ; we  have  simply  to  express  as  many  as  possible
of  the  displacements  Sx,  3y,  ds  by  the  others  in  terms
of  their  relations  to  the  latter,  and  put  the  coefficients
of  the  remaining  arbitrary  displacements  = 0,  as  was
illustrated  in  our  applications  of  the  principle  of  vir-
tual displacements.

The  solution  of  a very  few  problems  by  D’Alem-  Conve-
bert’s  principle  will  suffice  to  impress  us  with  a full  utility  of

r.  . _ f . D’Alem-

sense  of  its  convenience.  It  will  also  give  us  the  con- bert’s  prin-
viction  that  it  is  possible,  in  every  case  in  which  it  may
be  found  necessary,  to  solve  directly  and  with  perfect
insight  the  very  same  problem  by  a consideration  of
elementary  mechanical  processes,  and  to  arrive  thereby
at  exactly  the  same  results.  Our  conviction  of  the
feasibility  of  this  operation  renders  the  performance  of
it,  in  cases  in  which  purely  practical  ends  are  in  view,
unnecessary.


VI.

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  VIS  VIVA.

t.  The  principle  of  vis  viva , as  we  know,  was  first  The  orig-
employed  by  Huygens.  John  and  Daniel  Bernoulli  Sai ‘form 5
had  simply  to  provide  for  a greater  generality  of  ex-  cipie.nn
pression ; they  added  little.  If  p,  p',  . . . are  weights,

m,  m”.  . . . their  respective  masses,  h,  Zi,  h” . . . . the
distances  of  descent  of  the  free  or  connected  masses,
and  v,  v',  v".  . . . the  velocities  acquired,  the  relation
obtains

2ph  —

If  the  initial  velocities  are  not  = 0,  but  are  vQ,  vf
vf.  . . .,  the  theorem  will  refer  to  the  increment  of  the
vis  viva  by  the  work  and  read

"Sph  — m (v2  — vQ2 ).


344


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Theprinci-  The  principle  still  remains  applicable  when  p . . . .

pie  applied  r . f

tc  forces  of  are,  not  weights,  but  any  constant  forces,  and  h . . .

an>  m ' not  the  vertical  spaces  fallen  through,  but  any  paths  in
the  lines  of  the  forces.  If  the  forces  considered  are
variable,  the  expressions  ph,  pli.  . , . must  be  replaced
by  the  expressions  J'p d s,  Jp' dsr , . . in  which  p de-
notes the  variable  forces  and  ds  the  elements  of  dis-
tance described  in  the  lines  of  the  forced.  Then


fpds+Jp’ds'  + . . • = %2m(v2  — zij)
or

2 Jpds  = }2-2  m 02  — v2) (1)

Theprinci-  2.  In  illustration  of  the  principle  of  vis  viva  we
trated  by  shall  first  consider  the  simple  problem  which  we  treated

by  the  principle  of  D’Alembert.  On
a wheel  and  axle  with  the  radii  R,  r
hang  the  weights  P , Q.  When  this
machine  is  set  in  motion,  work  is  per-
formed by  which  the  acquired  vis  viva
is  fully  determined.  For  a rotation  of
the  machine  through  the  angle  a , the
work  is

P . R a — Q.  r a = a (. PR  — Q r).
Calling  the  angular  velocity  which
corresponds  to  this  angle  of  rotation,  cp,  the  vis  viva
generated  will  be


me  mouon
of  a wheel
and  axle.


p_  W , C ( ><?)2

g * + g 2


(Pi?2  + Qr2).


Consequently,  the  equation  obtains


a{PR—Qr)  = ^-(RR2  + Qr2) (1)

Now  the  motion  of  this  case  is  a uniformly  accelerated
motion ; consequently,  the  same  relation  obtains  here
between  the  angle  a,  the  angular  velocity  cp,  and  the


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


345


angular  acceleration  as  obtains  in  free  descent  be-
tween .s*,  v,  g.  If  in  free  descent  s = v2  J2 g,  then  here
a = <p2  /2?p.

Introducing  this  value  of  a in  equation  (i),  we  get
for  the  angular  acceleration  of  P,  ip  = (PR — Qr/

PR 2 -f-  Qr2)g,  and,  consequently,  forjts  absolute  ac-
celeration y—  (PR — * Qr/PR 2 -f-  <2;'3)  exactly  as
in  the  previous  treatment  of  the  problem.

As  a second  example  let  us  consider  the  case  of  a a roiling

. cylinder  on

massless  cylinder  of  radius  r,  m the  surface  of  which,  an  inclined

plane.

diametrically  opposite  each  other,  are  fixed  two  equal
masses  m,  and  which  in  consequence  of  the  weight  of


these  masses  rolls  without  sliding  down  an  inclined
plane  of  the  elevation  a.  First,  we  must  convince  our-
selves, that  in  order  to  represent  the  total  vis  viva  of
the  system  we  have  simply  to  sum  up  the  vis  viva  of
the  motions  of  rotation  and  progression.  The  axis  of
the  cylinder  has  acquired,  we  will  say,  the  velocity  u
' in  the  direction  of  the  length  of  the  inclined  plane,  and
we  will  denote  by  v the  absolute  velocity  of  rotation  of
the  surface  of  the  cylinder.  The  velocities  of  rotation  v
of  the  two  masses  m make  with  the  velocity  of  progres-
sion u the  angles  0 and  6'  (Fig.  1 75),  where  6 + 6*
= 180°.  The  compound  velocities  w and  z satisfy
therefore  the  equations

w2  = u2  -f-  v2  — 2 uv  cos  6
z2  = u2  -(-  v2  — 2uv  cos  6'.


34<3


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Tlie  law  c:
motion  of
such  a
cylinder.


A modifica-
tion of  the
preceding
case.


’ But  since  cos  6 = — cos#',  it  follows  that
w'2  + z1  = 2u 3 + 2v2}  or,

\m  vu2  -j-  \mz-  — \m'lu 2 + \m  2v2  — mu2  -|-  m v 2 .

If  the  cylinder  moves  through  the  angle  q>,  in  describes
in  consequence  of  the  rotation  the  space  r q),  and  the
axis  of  the  cylinder  is  likewise  displaced  a distance  rep .
As  the  spaces  traversed  are  to  each  other,  so  also
are  the  velocities  v and  //,  which  therefore  are  equal.
The  total  vis  viva  may  accordingly  be  expressed  by
2 mu2.  If  l is  the  distance  the  cylinder  travels  along
the  length  of  the  inclined  plane,  the  work  done  is
2m  g.  I sin  a = 2 mu2;  whence  u — V gl*  sin  a.  If  we
compare  with  this  result  the  velocity  acquired  by  a body
in  sliding  down  an  inclined  plane,  namely,  the  velocity
V 2gl  sinar,  it  will  be  observed  that  the  contrivance  we
are  here  considering  moves  with  only  one-half  the  ac-
celeration of  descent  that  (friction  neglected)  a sliding
body  would  under  the  same  circumstances.  The  rea-
soning of  this  case  is  not  altered  if  the  mass  be  uni-
formly distributed  over  the  entire  surface  of  the  cylin-
der. Similar  considerations  are  applicable  to  the  case
of  a sphere  rolling  down  an  inclined  plane.  It  will  be
seen,  therefore,  that  Galileo’s  experiment  on  falling
bodies  is  in  need  of  a quantitative  correction.

Next,  let  us  distribute  the  mass  in  uniformly  over
the  surface  of  a cylinder  of  radius  1 ?,  which  is  coaxal
with  and  rigidly  joined  to  a massless  cylinder  of  radius
r,  and  let  the  latter  roll  down  the  inclined  plane.  Since
here  v ju  = N/r,  the  principle  of  vis  viva  gives  mgl
sinar  = ^mu2(l  + R2 /r 2),  whence


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


347


Fori?/r=i  the  acceleration  of  descent  assumes  its
previous  value  g/ 2.  For  very  large  values  of  Rjr  the
acceleration  of  descent  is  very  small.  When  R/r  — 00
it  will  be  impossible  for  the  machine  to  roll  down  the
inclined  plane  at  all.

As  a third  example,  we  will  consider  the  case  of  a The  motion
chain,  whose  total  length  is  /,  and  which  lies  partly  on  on  ainn-
a horizontal  plane  and  partly  on  a plane  having  the  plane,
angle  of  elevation  a.  If  we  imagine  the  surface  on
which  the  chain
rests  to  be  very
smooth,  any  very
small  portion  of
the  chain  lefthang-

. . Fig.  176.

mg  over  on  the  in-
clined plane  will  draw  the  remainder  after  it.  If  jx  is
the  mass  of  unit  of  length  of  the  chain  and  a portion  x
is  hanging  over,  the  principle  of  vis  viva  will  give  for
the  velocity  v acquired  the  equation

ixlv 2 x . x2  .

—2~  = M*g  2'  sm  a = MX  y sm  a,

or  v — x]/ g s'ma/E  In  the  present  case,  therefore,
the  velocity  acquired  is  proportional  to  the  space  de-
scribed. The  very  law  holds  that  Galileo  first  con-
jectured was  the  law  of  freely  falling  bodies.  The
same  reflexions,  accordingly,  are  admissible  here  as  at
page  248.

3.  Equation  (1),  the  equation  of  vis  viva , can  always  Extension
be  employed,  to  solve  problems  of  moving  bodies,  cip^o^^S
when  the  total  distance  traversed  and  the  force  that2^*
acts  in  each  element  of  the  distance  are  known.  It  was
disclosed,  however,  by  the  labors  of  Euler,  Daniel  Ber-
noulli, and  Lagrange,  that  cases  occur  in  which  the


34&


TIIE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


principle  of  vis  viva  can  be  employed  without  a knowl-
edge of  the  actual  path  of  the  motion.  We  shall  see
later  on  that  Clairaut  also  rendered  important  services
in  this  field.

There-  Galileo,  even,  knew  that  the  velocity  of  a heavy

EuieCrheS0  falling  body  depended  solely  on  the  vertical  height  de-
scended through,  and  not  on  the  length  or  form  of  the
path  traversed.  Similarly,  Huygens  finds  that  the  vis
viva  of  a heavy  material  system  is  dependent  on  the
vertical  heights  of  the  masses  of
the  system.  Euler  was  able  to
make  a further  step  in  advance.
If  a body  K (Fig.  1 77).  is  at-
tracted towards  a fixed  centre
C in  obedience  to  some  given
law,  the  increase  of  the  vis  viva
in  the  case  of  rectilinear  ap-
proach is  calculable  from  the
initial  and  terminal  distances
( >0 , r,).  But  the  increase  is  the
same,  if  K passes  at  all  from  the
position  rQ  to  the  position  r„  independently  of  the
form  of  its  path , KB.  For  the  elements  of  the  work
done  must  be  calculated  from  the  projections  on  the
radius  of  the  actual  displacements,  and  are  thus  ulti-
mately the  same  as  before.

The  re-  If  K is  attracted  towards  several  fixed  centres  C,

searches  of

Daniel  Ber-  Cr , C".  . . .,  the  increase  of  its  vis  viva  depends  on  the

noulli  and

Lagrange,  initial  distances  rQ,  rQ',  rf . . . . and  on  the  terminal
distances  rn  rf  rt".  . . .,  that  is  on  the  initial  and  ter-
minal positions  of  K.  Daniel  Bernoulli  extended  this
idea,  and  showed  further  that  where  movable  bodies
are  in  a state  of  7nutual  attraction  the  change  of  vis  viva
is  determined  solely  by  their  initial  and  terminal  dis-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


349


tances  from  one  another.  The  a?ialytical  treatment  of
these  problems  was  perfected  by  Lagrange.  If  we  join
a point  having  the  coordinates  a , b , c with  a point  hav-
ing the  coordinates  x,  y,  z,  and  denote  by  r the  length
of  the  line  of  junction  and  by  a , ft , y the  angles  that
line  makes  with  the  axes  of  x,  y , z,  then,  according  to
Lagrange,  because

r2  =0  — a)2  + O'— £)2  + 0 — 02»


jr  — a dr

cos  a = = — , cos


y-


r

cos  y


dx  ' r

_z  — c dr

r dz


dr

:dy’


. * E JE  CP)

Accordingly,  if  f{f)  ==  — -~d  is  the  repulsive  force,  or  The  force

the  negative  of  the  attractive  force  acting  between  the  Sal  differ-
two  points,  the  components  will  be


v /■  /■  \ dF(r)dr  dF(f)

X = fCr)  cos  a = —EH  — —

v y dr


Y = f(r)  cos  ft  -


dx
dF{f)  dr


dx

dF(f)


dr  dy  dy


dF(f)  dr  dF(r)
Z = fir)  cos  y = -- -EH  — EH .

w / dr  dz  dz


ficients  of
the  same
function  of
coSrdi-
nates.


The  force-components,  therefore,  are  the  partial
differential  coefficients  of  one  and  the  same  function  of
r,  or  of  the  coordinates  of  the  repelling  or  attracting
points.  Similarly,  if  several  points  are  in  mutual  ac-
tion, the  result  will  be


dU


350


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  force-
function.


where  U is  a function  of  the  coordinates  of  the  points.
This  function  was  subsequently  called  by  Hamilton*
the  force-function .

Transforming,  by  means  of  the  conceptions  here
reached,  and  under  the  suppositions  given,  equation
(i)  into  a form  applicable  to  rectangular  coordinates,
we  obtain


*2  j(Xdx  -f  Ydy  -f  Zdz ) = {v2  — vf)  or,

since  the  expression  to  the  left  is  a complete  differen-
tial,


dU  <dU  .
-dJdy  + ~dVdz]  =


2JdU=  2 (<7,  — U0)  = Sim  (v2  — ^02),
wdiere  Ux  is  a function  of  the  terminal  values  and  UQ
the  same  function  of  the  initial  values  of  the  coordi-
nates. This  equation  has  received  extensive  applica-
tions, but  it  simply  expresses  the  knowledge  that  under
the  conditions  designated  the  work  done  and  therefore
also  the  vis  viva  of  a system  is  dependent  on  the  posi-
tions, or  the  coordinates,  of  the  bodies  constituting  it.

If  we  imagine  all  masses  fixed  and  only  a single
one  in  motion,  the  work  changes  only  as  U changes.
The  equation  U = constant  defines  a so-called  level
surface,  or  surface  of  equal  work.  Movement  upon
such  a surface  produces  no  work.  U increases  in  the
direction  in  which  the  forces  tend  to  move  the  bodies.


VII.

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  LEAST  CONSTRAINT.

i.  Gauss  enunciated  (in  Crelle’s  Journal fiir  Mathe-
matik , Vol.  IV,  1829,  p.  233)  a new  law  of  mechanics,
the  principle  of  least  constraint . He  observes,  that,  in

* On  a General  Method  in  Dynamics , Phil.  Trans . for  1834.  See  also  C.  G.
J.  Jacobi,  Vorlesungen  iiher  Dynamite,  edited  by  Clebscli,  1866.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


35i


the  form  which  mechanics  has  historically  assumed,  dy-  History  of

t the  princi-

namics  is  founded  upon  statics,  (for  example,  D Alem-  pie  of  least

. constraint.

bert’s  principle  on  the  principle  of  virtual  displace-
ments,) whereas  one  naturally  would  expect  that  in
the  highest  stage  of  the  science  statics  would  appear  '
as  a particular  case  of  dynamics.  Now,  the  principle
which  Gauss  supplied,  and  which  we  shall  discuss  in
this  section,  includes  both  dynamical  and  statical  cases.

It  meets,  therefore,  the  requirements  of  scientific  and
logical  aesthetics.  We  have  already  pointed  out  that  this
is  also  true  of  D’Alembert’s  principle  in  its  Lagrangian
form  and  the  mode  of  expression  above  adopted.

No  essentially  new  principle , Gauss  remarks,  can  now  be
established  in  mechanics  ,*  but  this  does  not  exclude
the  discovery  of  new  points  of  view,  from  which  mechan-
ical phenomena  may  be  fruitfully  contemplated.  Such
a new  point  of  view  is  afforded  by  the  principle  of
Gauss.

2.  Let  m , m, ....  be  masses,  connected  in  any  man-  statement

r™  « c . , / . Of  the  Prin‘

ner  with  one  another.  These  masses,  it  free,  would,  under  cipie.
the  action  of  the  forces  im-
pressed on  them,  describe  in  a
very  short  element  of  time  the
spaces  a b,  a,  bf . . . . ,*  but  in
consequence  of  their  connec-
tions they  describe  in  the  same
element  of  time  the  spaces  a c,

at  ct  ...  . Now,  Gauss’s  principle  asserts,  that  the  mo-
tion of  the  connected  points  is  such  that,  for  the  motion
actually  taken,  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  mass  of
each  material  particle  into  the  square  of  the  distance  of
its  deviation  from  the  position  it  would  have  reached  if
free,  namely  7?i(bc)2  4-  (J>Nr')2  + --*•  = m(bc)2,  is
a minimum , that  is,  is  smaller  for  the  actual  motion


352


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Definition
of  “con-
straint.”


than  for  any  other  conceivable  motion  in  the  same  con-
junctions. If  this  sum,  2m(hc)2,  is  less  for  rest  than
for  any  motion,  equilibrium  will  obtain.  The  principle
includes,  thus,  both  statical  and  dynamical  cases.

The  sum  2 m(hc)2  is  called  the  “constraint.”*  In
forming  this  sum  it  is  plain  that  the  velocities  present
in  the  system  may  be  neglected,  as  the  relative  posi-
tions of  a , 6,  c are  not  altered  by  them.

3.  The  new  principle  is  equivalent  to  that  of
D’Alembert ; it  may  be  used  in  place  of  the  latter ; and,
as  Gauss  has  shown,  can  also  be  deduced  from  it.  The
impressed  forces  carry  the  free  mass  m in  an  element  of
time  through  the  space  ah,  the  effective  forces  carry  the
same  mass  in  the  same  time  in  consequence  of  the  con-
nections through  the  space  ac.  We  resolve  ah  into  ac
and  ch\  and  do  the  same  for  all  the
masses.  It  is  thus  evident'  that
forces  corresponding  to  the  dis-
tances c h}  c,  h,  . . . . and  propor-
tional to  me  by  m,c,hr..,  do  not,
owing  to  the  connections,  become
effective,  but  form  with  the  connections  an  equilibrat-
ing system.  If,  therefore,  we  erect  at  the  terminal  posi-
tions c,  cn  en — the  virtual  displacements  c,  /,....,
forming  with  ch,  c,  hr...  the  angles  6 , #,....  we  may
apply,  since  by  D’Alembert’s  principle  forces  propor-
tional to  mch,  m,  c,  hr...  are  here  in  equilibrium,  the
principle  of  virtual  velocities.  Doing  so,  we  shall  have

* Professor  Mach’s  term  is  Ab'weichungssumme.  The  Abweichung  is  the
declination  or  departure  from  free  motion,  called  by  Gauss  the  Ablenkung .
(See  Duhring,  Principien  der  Mechanik , §§  168,  169 ; Routh,  Rigid  Dynamics ,
Part  I,  §§  390-394.)  The  quantity  2w(^)2  is  called  by  Gauss  the  Zwang\  and
German  mathematicians  usually  follow  this  practice.  In  English,  the  term
constraint  is  established  in  this  sense,  although  it  is  also  used  with  another*
hardly  quantitative  meaning,  for  the  force  which  restricts  a body  absolutely
to  moving  in  a certain  way. — Trans,


y


Fig.  179-


THE  EXT EH SIOH  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


353


2 m eb  .ey  cos

But

(by)2  = (be)2  + (c y) 2 — 2 b c . c y cos 6,
(by)2  — (be)2  = (ey)2  — 2b  e . eye  os  6,  and


(1)  The  deduc-
' tion  of  the
principle
of  least
constraint.


2 in  (b y) 2 — 2m  (b e) 2 =2 m (ey) 2 — 22 mb c.cy cos  0 (2)


Accordingly,  since  by  (i)  the  second  member  of
the  right-hand  side  of  (2)  can  only  be  = 0 or  negative ,
that  is  to  say,  as  the  sum  2 m(c  y)2  can  never  be  dimin-
ished by  the  subtraction,  but  only  increased,  therefore
the  left-hand  side  of  (2)  must  also  always  be  positive
and  consequently  2m(by)2  always  greater  than  2 in
(be)2,  which  is  to  say,  every  conceivable  constraint
from  unhindered  motion  is  greater  than  the  constraint
for  the  actual  motion.

4.  The  declination,  be,  for  the  very  small  element  various

r 7 P . . , forms  in

of  time  r,  may,  for  purposes  of  practical  treatment,  be  which  the
designated  by  j*,  and  following  Scheffler  (Schlomilch’s  may  be  ex-
Zeitschrift  fur  Mathematik  und  Physik,  1858,  Vol.  Ill,
p.  197),  we  may  remark  that  s = yr2 /2,  where  y de-
notes acceleration.  Consequently,  2ms2  may  also  be
expressed  in  the  forms

T2  T2  T4

2m  . s . s = 2 my . s = 2 p . s = — 2 my2 ,


where/  denotes  the  force  that  produces  the  declination
from  free  motion.  As  the  consent  factor  in  no  wise
affects  the  minimum  condition,  we  may  say,  the  actual
motion  is  always  such  that


2 ms2 (1)

or

- (2)

or

2 my2 (3)


is  a minimum.


354


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  motion
of  a wheel
and  axle.


5.  We  will  first  employ,  in  our  illustrations,  the
third  form.  Here  again,  as  our  first  example,  we  se-
lect the  motion  of  a wheel  and  axle  by
the  overweight  of  one  of  its  parts
and  shall  use  the  designations  above
frequently  employed.  Our  problem
is,  to  so  determine  the  actual  accel-
erations y °f  P and  y,  of  Q , that

( P/g)  U - yy  + (,Q/g)  (g  - r,Y

shall  be  a minimum,  or,  since  yt  —
— y (r/R),  so  that  P (g  — y) 2 -f
(2Gr+  y.r  jR)2  — N shall  assume  its  smallest  value.
Putting,  to  this  end,


Up  □<?

Fig.  1S0.


'^  = -J’(g-r-)+Q(g+v^)^  = o,

we  get  y = (. PR  — Qr/ PR2  -j-  Qr2)Rg , exactly  as  in
the  previous  treatments  of  the  problem.

Descent  on  As  our  second  example,  the  motion  of  descent  on
pikie^1*16  art  inclined  plane  may  be  taken.  In  this  case  we  shall

employ  the  first  form,  2 m s 2 .
Since  we  have  here  only  to
deal  with  one  mass,  our  in-
quiry will  be  directed  to  find-
ing that  acceleration  of  de*
scent  y for  the  plane  by
which  the  square  of  the  de-
clination (i*2)  is  made  a minimum.  By  Fig.  181  we
have


J2


T2  \2


+ [r


r2\2


2


f T2  T2  \ .

y Yy  )sm*>


and  putting  d(s2)/dy  = 0,  we  obtain,  omitting  all
constant  factors,  2 y — 2 g sin  a = 0 or  y = g.  sin#,  the
familiar  result  of  Galileo’s  researches.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


355


The  following  example  will  show  that  Gauss's  prin-  a case  of
ciple  also  embraces  cases  of  equilibrium.  On  the  arms  rimn.
a,  a ' of  a lever  (Fig.  182)  are  hung  the  heavy  masses
m,  m\  The  principle  requires  that  m(g — ^)2-j-
m'(g — y')2  shall  be  a minimum.  But  y*  = — y{a  /a).

Further,  if  the  masses  are  in-
versely  proportional  to  the
lengths  of  the  lever-arms,  that
is  to  say,  if  m/mr  = a* /a,  then
yf  = — y (m/m'').  Conse-
quently, m (g  — y)  2 -|-  m\g  -f-  y . mfm')2  = N must
be  made  a minimum.  Putting  dNjdy  = 0,  we  get
m (x  -f-  m/m’^y  = 0 or  y~  0.  Accordingly,  in  this  case
equilibrium  presents  the  least  constraint  from  free  mo-
tion.

Every  new  cause  of  constraint,  or  restriction  upon  New  causes

the  freedom  of  motion,  increases  the  quantity  of  con-  straint  in-
crease the

straint,  but  the  increase  is  always  the  least  possible,  departure 1

. from  free

If  two  or  more  systems  be  connected,  the  motion  of  motion,
least  constraint  from  the  motions  of  the  unconnected
systems  is  the  actual  motion.

If,  for  example,  we  join  together  several  simple
pendulums  so  as  to  form  a compound  linear  pendulum,
the  latter  will  oscillate  with  the  motion
of  least  constraint  from  the  motion  of  the
single  pendulums.  The  simple  pendulum,
for  any  excursion  a,  receives,  in  the  di-
rection of  its  path,  the  acceleration  g
sin  a.  Denoting,  therefore,  by  y sin  a the
acceleration  corresponding  to  this  excur-
sion at  the  axial  distance  1 on  the  com-
pound pendulum,  2m  (g  sin  a — r y sin  a )2  or  2m  (g —
ry)2  will  be  the  quantity  to  be  made  a minimum.  Conse-
quently, 2m(Kg  — ry)r=  0,  and  y = g{2 mr /2 mr2).


Fig.  183.


356


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  problem  is  thus  disposed  of  in  the  simplest  man-
ner. But  this  simple  solution  is  possible  only  because
the  experiences  that  Huygens,  the  Bernoullis,  and  oth-
ers long  before  collected,  are  implicitly  contained  in
Gauss’s  principle.

niustra-  6.  The  increase  of  the  quantity  of  constraint,  or

tions  of  the  . . ..  .

preceding  decimation,  from  free  motion  by  new  causes  ot  con-
straint may  be  exhibited  by  the  following  examples.

Over  two  stationary  pulleys  A,  B , and  beneath  a
movable  pulley  C (Fig.  184),  a cord  is  passed,  each


extremity  of  which  is  weighted  with  a load  P;  and  on
C a load  2 P -f-  / is  placed.  The  movable  pulley  will
now  descend  with  the  acceleration  (p/^-P  + p)  g.  But
if  we  make  the  pulley  A fast,  we  impose  upon  the
system  a new  cause  of  constraint,  and  the  quantity  of
constraint,  or  declination,  from  free  motion  will  be  in-
creased. The  load  suspended  from  B,  since  it  now
moves  with  double  the  velocity,  must  be  reckoned  as
possessing  four  times  its  original  mass.  The  mova-
ble pulley  accordingly  sinks  with  the  acceleration
(p/£>P  + p)  g.  A simple  calculation  will  show  that  the
constraint  in  the  latter  case  is  greater  than  in  the  former.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


357


A number,  tz,  of  equal  weights,  /,  lying  on  a smooth
horizontal  surface,  are  attached  to  n small  movable
pulleys  through  which  a cord  is  drawn  in  the  manner
indicated  in  the  figure  and  loaded  at  its  free  extremity
with  p.  According  as  all  the  pulleys  are  movable  or  all
except  one  are  fixed , we  obtain  for  the  motive  weight  p,
allowing  for  the  relative  velocities  of  the  masses  as  re-
ferred to  fi}  respectively,  the  accelerations  (4  72/1  -f-4^)^
and  (4/5)  g-  If  all  the  n -f-  1 masses  are  movable,  the
deviation  assumes  the  value pg/ 4 n 1,  which  increases
as  zz,  the  number  of  the  movable  masses,  is  decreased.


7.  Imagine  a body  of  weight  Q,  movable  on  rollers  Treatment

of  a me-

on  a horizontal  surface,  and  having  an  inclined  plane  chanicai

. problem  by

face.  On  this,  inclined  face  a body  of  weight  P is  different

...  mechanical

placed.  We  now  perceive  instifichvely  that  P will  de-  principles,
scend  with  quicker  acceleration  when  Q is  movable
and  can  give  way,  than  it  will  when  Q is  fixed  and  P’s
descent  more  hindered.  To  any  distance  of  descent  h
of  P a horizontal  velocity  v and  a vertical  velocity  u of
P and  a horizontal  velocity  w of  Q correspond.  Owing
to  the  conservation  of  the  quantity  of  horizontal  mo-
tion, (for  here  only  internal  forces  act,)  we  have  Pv  =

Qw , and  for  obvious  geometrical  reasons  (Fig.  186)
also

u = (7;  -f-  w)  tan  a

The  velocities,  consequently,  are


u = u


358


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


First,  by  the
principles
of  the  con-
servation of
momentum
and  of  vis
viva .


Q

v^jr-^cota.u,

P

W — -=j— — — COt  (X . u.

P ~T  Q


For  the  work  Ph  performed,  the  principle  of  vis
viva  gives


Ph


P u 2


Q

P+  Q


cotar


ti2

T


+


Qf  p
g\ p+  Q


cot  a


tt2

T*


cr

Multiplying  by-^,  we  obtain


gh  =


Q cos2ar^
P~+  Q sin2” a )


u2

Y*


To  find  the  vertical  acceleration  y with  which  the
space  h is  described,  be  it  noted  that  h = u 2 /2  y.  In-
troducing this  value  in  the  last  equation,  we  get

(P  4-  Q)  sin  2 a

Y —~2  2 ! p*

y Psm2a-\-Q  6


For  <2  = oo,  y = g sin  2 a,  the  same  as  on  a sta-
tionary inclined  plane.  For  <2  = 0,  y = g,  as  in  free
descent.  For  finite  values  of  Q = mP , we  get,


1 -|-  m

since  :

sm2«  -f-  m

(1  — f-  ;;/)  sin2  a

m -f-  sin2  a


> i,


g > £*sin2#.


The  making  of  Q stationary,  being  a newly  imposed
cause  of  constraint,  accordingly  increases  the  quantity
of  constraint,  or  declination,  from  free  motion.

To  obtain  y,  in  this  case,  we  have  employed  the
principle  of  the  conservation  of  momentum  and  the


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


359


principle  of  vis  viva.  Employing  Gauss’s  principle,  Second,  by
we  should  proceed  as  follows.  To  the  velocities  de-cipieof

. Gauss.

noted  as  u,  v,  w the  accelerations  y,  d,  £ correspond.
Remarking  that  in  the  free  state  the  only  acceleration
is  the  vertical  acceleration  of  P,  the  others  vanishing,
the  procedure  required  is,  to  make
p p o

ry  + -p>  + p°=*

o <5  o

a minimum.  As  the  problem  possesses  significance
only  when  the  bodies  P and  Q touch,  that  is  only  when
y = (d  -j-  £)  tan  a,  therefore,  also

N=?~  + £)tanar]2  + ^ d2  -f  ^«2.

Forming  the  differential  coefficients  of  this  expression
with  respect  to  the  two  remaining  independent  vari-
ables d and  €,  and  putting  each  equal  to  zero,  we  ob-
tain

— [g — (d  -j-  £)  tan  a]  Pt an  a -f-  Pd  = 0 and

— [g — (d  -f-  e)  tan  or]  i^tan a- j-  (?£  = 0.

From  these  two  equations  follows  immediately
PC  — <2^=0,  and,  ultimately,  the  same  value  for  y
that  we  obtained  before.

We  will  now  look  at  this  problem  from  another
point  of  view.  The  body  P describes  at  an  angle  ft
with  the  horizon  the  space  of  which  the  horizontal
and  vertical  components  are  v and  //,  while  simulta-
neously Q describes  the  horizontal  distance  w . The
force-component  that  acts  in  the  direction  of  j*  is  i^sin  /?,
consequently  the  acceleration  in  this  direction,  allow-
ing for  the  relative  velocities  of  P and  Q , is


P . sin  ft


2*


360


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Third,  by  Employing  the  following  equations  which  are  di-

tended  con-  rectly  deducible,

cept  of  mo-

inent  of  in-  (y  W = P V

ertia.  a

V = J COS  p

u — v tan  J3.

the  acceleration  in  the  direction  of  s becomes
Q sin  fi

Q + Pcos2pg

and  the  vertical  acceleration  corresponding  thereto  is
Q sin2 f 3


Y-


Q -f-  H cos2 p


an  expression,  which  as  soon  as  we  introduce  by  means
of  the  equation  u ==  (v  + w)  tan  a , the  angle-func-
tions of  a for  those  of  fi,  again  assumes  the  form  above
given.  By  means  of  our  extended  conception  of  mo-
ment of  inertia  we  reach,  accordingly,  the  same  result
as  before.

Fourth,  by  Finally  we  will  deal  with  this  problem  in  a direct
cipfes. pnn  manner.  The  body  F doesjiot  descend  on  the  mova-
ble inclined  plane  with  the  vertical  acceleration  g,  with
which  it  would  fall  if  free,  but  with  a different  vertical
acceleration,  y.  It  sustains,  therefore,  a vertical  coun-
terforce (P/g)  {g — y)*  But  as  P and  Q,  friction
neglected,  can  only  act  on  each  other  by  means  of  a
pressure  S,  normal  to  the  inclined  plane,  therefore
P

— (jg  — Y)=S  cos  a and
g

O P

S sin  a = N $ =
g g

From  this  is  obtained


P

g


Cr— r);


€ cot  a,


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.  361


and  by  means  of  the  equation  y = (3  -j-  s)  tan  a,  ulti-
mately, as  before,


(PA-  Q)sm2a

y — — — sr

' Psin2a  -\-Q

Q sin  a cos  a

Psm2a  -j-  Q*

P sin  a cos  a

Psm2a  -f-  Q*  *


(1)


(2)


(3)


If  we  put  P = O and  a = 450,  we  obtain  for  this  Discussion
particular  case  y = -§£■,  3 = %g,  £ = For  P/g  = suits.
Q/gz=  1 we  find  the  “constraint,”  or  declination  from
free  motion,  to  be  g 2/3.  If  we  make  the  inclined  plane
stationary,  the  constraint  will  be  g2/ 2.  If  Amoved  on
a stationary  inclined  plane  of  elevation  /?,  where
tan  ft  — y/3,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  same  path  in  which
it  moves  on  the  movable  inclined  plane,  the  constraint
would  only  be  g2/$.  And,  in  that  case  it  would,  in
reality,  be  less  impeded  than  if  it  attained  the  same
acceleration  by  the  displacement  of  Q.

8.  The  examples  treated  will  have  convinced  us  that  Gauss’s

principle

no  substantially  new  insight  or  perception  is  afforded  by  affords  no
. . . new  insight

Gauss’s  principle.  Employing  form  (3)  of  the  prin-
ciple and  resolving  all  the  forces  and  accelerations  in
the  mutually  perpendicular  coordinate-directions,  giv-
ing here  the  letters  the  same  significations  as  in  equa-
tion (1)  on  page  342,  we  get  in  place  of  the  declination,
or  constraint,  lEmy2,  the  expression


21=  12  m


+ +


(4)


and  by  virtue  of  the  minimum  condition


dN  = 2 Him


X

m


■S)dS  + [ -—V)d V +


362


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


-2)dZ


or  2 [(X  — m g)dg+(  V—  m rf)  dr]  + (Z—  m <?  )d  <?]  = 0.


Gauss’s  and  If  no  connections  exist,  the  coefficients  of  the  (in
bert’sprin-  that  case  arbitrary)  d£9  d? d£,  severally  made  — 0,

ciples  com-  . . r , ...  . .

mutable,  give  the  equations  of  motion.  But  if  connections  do
exist,  we  have  the  same  relations  between  d£,  drj , d8,
as  above  in  equation  (i),  at  page  342,  between  8 x9  8y,
8z . The  equations  of  motion  come  out  the  same  ; as
the  treatment  of  the  same  example  by  D’Alem berths
principle  and  by  Gauss’s  principle  fully  demonstrates.
The  first  principle,  however,  gives  the  equations  of
motion  directly,  the  second  only  after  differentiation.
If  we  seek  an  expression  that  shall  give  by  differentia-
tion D'Alembert’s  equations,  we  are  led  perforce  to  the
principle  of  Gauss.  The  principle,  therefore,  is  new
only  in  fo?'m  and  not  in  matter . Nor  does  it,  further,
possess  any  advantage  over  the  Lagrangian  form  of
D’Alembert’s  principle  in  respect  of  competency  to  com-
prehend both  statical  and  dynamical  problems,  as  has
been  before  pointed  out  (page  342).

The  phys-  There  is  no  need  of  seeking  a mystical  or  metaphys -
of  the  prin-  ical reason  for  Gauss’s  principle.  The  expression  f 4 least

ciple.

constraint”  may  seem  to  promise  something  of  the
sort ; but  the  name  proves  nothing.  The  answer  to  the
question,  ilIn  what  does  this  constraint  consist  ? ” can-
not be  derived  from  metaphysics,  but  must  be  sought
in  the  facts.  The  expression  (2)  of  page  353,  or  (4)  of
page  361,  which  is  made  a minimum,  represents  the
work  done  in  an  element  of  time  by  the  deviation  of  the
constrained  motion  from  the  free  motion.  This  work,
the  work  due  to  the  constraint , is  less  for  the  motion
actually  performed  than  for  any  other  possible  motion.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.  363


Once  we  have  recognised  work  as  the  factor  deter-  Role  of  the

. factor  work.

minative  of  motion,  once  we  have  grasped  the  mean-
ing of  the  principle  of  virtual  displacements  to  be,  that
motion  can  never  take  place  except  where  work  can  be
performed,  the  following  converse  truth  also  will  in-
volve no  difficulty,  namely,  that  all  the  work  that  can
be  performed  in  an  element  of  time  actually  is  per-
formed. Consequently,  the  total  diminution  of  work
due  in  an  element  of  time  to  the  connections  of  the
system’s  parts  is  restricted  to  the  portion  annulled  by
the  counter -work  of  those  parts.  It  is  again  merely  a
new  aspect  of  a familiar  fact  with  which  we  have  here
to  deal.

This  relation  is  displayed  in  the  very  simplest  cases.  The  foun-

. dations  of

Let  there  be  two  masses  ?n  and  ///  at  A , the  one  im-  the  princi-
pressed  with  a force  p , the  other  with
the  force  q.  If  we  connect  the  two,  we
shall  have  the  mass  2 m acted  on  by  a
resultant  force  r.  Supposing  the  spaces
described  in  an  element  of  time  by  the
free  masses  to  be  represented  by  A C,

AH , the  space  described  by  the  con-
joint, or  double,  mass  will  be  AO  =

% AD . The  deviation,  or  constraint,
is  ?n{0  B2  -|-  OC2).  It  is  less  than
it  would  be  if  the  mass  arrived  at  the  end  of  the  ele-
ment of  time  in  M or  indeed  in  any  point  lying  out-
side of  B C,  say  FT,  as  the  simplest  geometrical  con-
siderations will  show.  The  deviation  is  proportional
to  the  expression  p2  -f  q2  + 2pq  cos  d/2,  which  in  the
case  of  equal  and  opposite  forces  becomes  2 p2,  and  in
the  case  of  equal  and  like-directed  forces  zero.

Two  forces  p and  q act  on  the  same  mass.  The
force  q we  resolve  parallel  and  at  right  angles  to  the


3^4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Even  in  the  direction  of  p in  r and  .r.  The  work  done  in  an  element
the  compo-  of  time  is  proportional  to  the  squares  of  the  forces,  and

sition  of  . ..  . ,

forces  its  if  there  be  no  connections  is  expressible  by  p2  q2  =

properties  . . .

are  found,  p2  -|-  r 2 + s2 . If  now  r act  directly  counter  to  the
force  p}  a diminution  of  work  will  be  effected  and  the
sum  mentioned  becomes  (/  — r)2  -f-  s2.  Even  in  the
principle  of  the  composition  of  forces,  or  of  the  mutual
independence  of  forces,  the  properties  are  contained
which  Gauss’s  principle  makes  use  of.  This  will  best
be  perceived  by  imagining  all  the  accelerations  simul-
taneously performed.  If  we  discard  the  obscure  verbal
form  in  which  the  principle  is  clothed,  the  metaphysical
impression  which  it  gives  also  vanishes.  We  see  the
simple  fact ; we  are  disillusioned,  but  also  enlightened.

The  elucidations  of  Gauss’s  principle  here  presented
are  in  great  part  derived  from  the  paper  of  Scheffler
cited  above.  Some  of  his  opinions  which  I have  been
unable  to  share  I have  modified..  We  cannot,  for  ex-
ample, accept  as  new  the  principle  which  he  himself
propounds,  for  both  in  form  and  in  import  it  is  identical
with  the  D’Alembert-Lagrangian.

VIII.

THE  PRINCIPLE’  OF  LEAST  ACTION.

Theorig-  i.  Maupertuis  enunciated,  in  1747,  a principle
scureform  which  he  called  “/<?  principe  de  la  moindre  quantite  d'ac-
cipieof nn  tion”  the  principle  of  least  action . He  declared  this
'principle  to  be  one  which  eminently  accorded  with  the
wisdom  of  the  Creator.  He  took  as  the  measure  of
the  “action”  the  product  of  the  mass,  the  velocity,
and  the  space  described,  or  mvs.  Why,  it  must  be
confessed,  is  not  clear.  By  mass  and  velocity  definite
quantities  may  be  understood ; not  so,  however,  by


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 365


space,  when  the  time  is  not  stated  in  which  the  space
is  described.  If,  however,  unit  of  time  be  meant,  the
distinction  of  space  and  velocity  in  the  examples  treated
by  Maupertuis  is,  to  say  the  least,  peculiar.  It  appears
that  Maupertuis  reached  this  obscure  expression  by  an
unclear  mingling  of  his  ideas  of  vis  viva  and  the  prin-
ciple of  virtual  velocities.  Its  indistinctness  will  be
more  saliently  displayed  by  the  details.

2.  Let  us  see  how  Maupertuis  applies  his  principle.  Determina-
If  M , in  be  two  inelastic  masses,  C and  c their  velocities  laws  of  im-

. . . . . pact  by  this

before  impact,  and  u their  common  velocity  after  1m-  principle,
pact,  Maupertuis  requires,  (putting  here  velocities  for
spaces,)  that  the  “action”  expended  in  the  change  of
the  velocities  in  impact  shall  be  a minimum.  Hence,

M^C  — zi)  2 m(c — zi)  2 is  a minimum  ; that  is,

M (6*  — zi)  + in  (c  — zi)  = 0 ; or

MC  + m c
u = ! .

M -f-  in

For  the  impact  of  elastic  masses,  retaining  the  same
designations,  only  substituting  V and  v for  the  two  ve-
locities after  impact,  the  expression  M(C — V)2  -f-
m(c  — v)2  is  a minimum  ; that  is  to  say,

M(C — V)dF+  m(c  — v)Ev  = 0 (1)

In  consideration  of  the  fact  that  the  velocity  of  ap-
proach before  impact  is  equal  to  the  velocity  of  reces-
sion after  impact,  we  have

C — c — — ( V — v)  or


C+  r—(c  + v)  = o, (2)

and

d V—  dv  = 0 (3)


The  combination  of  equations  (1),  (2),  and  (3)
readily  gives  the  familiar  expressions  for  V and  v.
These  two  cases  may,  as  we  see,  be  viewed  as  pro-


36  6


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


cesses  in  which  the  least  change  of  vis  viva  by  reaction
takes  place,  that  is,  in  which  the  least  counter-work  is
done.  They  fall,  therefore,  under  the  principle  of
Gauss.

Mau per-  3.  Peculiar  is  Maupertuis’s  deduction  of  the  law  of

auction  of  the  lever . Two  masses  M and  m (Fig.  188)  rest  on  a

the  law  of  n . .

the  lever  by  bar  a , which  the  fulcrum  divides  into  the  portions

this  prin-  . . n .

cipie.  x and  a — x.  If  the  bar  be  set  in  rotation , the  veloci-
ties and  the  spaces  described  will  be  proportional  to
the  lengths  of  the  lever-arms,  and  Mx 2 + m (a  — x)2
is  the  quantity  to  be  made  a minimum,  that  is  Mx  —
in  {a  — x)  — 0;  whence  x = ma/M -f  pi, — a condition

that  in  the  case  of  equilib-
rium is  actually  fulfilled.  In
criticism  of  this,  it  is  to  be
remarked,  first,  that  masses
not  subject  to  gravity  or
other  forces,  as  Maupertuis
here  tacitly  assumes,  are  always  in  equilibrium,  and,
secondly,  that  the  inference  from  Maupertuis’s  deduc-
tion is  that  the  principle  of  least  action  is  fulfilled
only  in  the  case  of  equilibrium,  a conclusion  which  it
was  certainly  not  the  author’s  intention  to  demonstrate.

The  correc-  If  it  were  sought  to  bring  this  treatment  into  ap-

pertuis’s  proximate  accord  with  the  preceding,  we  should  have
to  assume  that  the  heavy  masses  M and  in  constantly
produced  in  each  other  during  the  process  the  least
possible  change  of  vis  viva.  On  that  supposition,  we
should  get,  designating  the  arms  of  the  lever  briefly  by
a , b,  the  velocities  acquired  in  unit  of  time  by  v,  and
the  acceleration  of  gravity  by  g,  as  our  minimum  ex-
pression, M(g — u)2  -f"  m(g — v )2;  whence  M(g — ■ u)
du  - f-  m(g — v)dv  = 0.  But  in  view  of  the  connection
of  the  masses  as  lever,


x a—x

Fig.  188.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.  367


u

a


v

~b'


and


whence  these  equations  correctly  follow

M a — mb  M a — mb

U~aJTa 2 + mb*g’  71  ~~~b M a2  + mb*  g’

and  for  the  case  of  equilibrium,  where  u = v = 0,

M a — mb  — 0.

Thus,  this  deduction  also,  when  we  come  to  rectify
it,  leads  to  Gauss’s  principle.

4.  Following  the  precedent  of  Fermat  and  Leib-
nitz, Maupertuis  also  treats  by  his  method  the  motion
of  light . Here  again,  however,
he  employs  the  notion  “least  ac-
tion ” in  a totally  different  sense.

The  expression  which  for  the
case  of  refraction  shall  be  a min-
imum, is  m . A R -f-  n . RB ,
where  AR  and  RB  denote  the
paths  described  by  the  light  in
the  first  and  second  media  re-
spectively, and  m and  n the  corresponding  velo-
cities. True,  we  really  do  obtain  here,  if  R be  de-
termined in  conformity  with  the  minimum  condition,
the  result  sin  ar /sin  fi  = njm  — const . But  before,  the
‘ ‘ action  ” consisted  in  the  change  of  the  expressions
mass  X velocity  X distance  ; now,  however,  it  is  con-
stituted of  the  su?n  of  these  expressions.  Before,  the
spaces  described  in  unit  of  time  were  considered  ; in
the  present  case  the  total  spaces  traversed  are  taken.
Should  not  m . AR  — n . RB  or  pm  — n)(AR  — RB')
be  taken  as  a minimum,  and  if  not,  why  not?  But


Treatment
of  the  mo-
tion of  ligh
by  the  prin
ciple  of
least  ac-
tion.


368


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Characteri-
sation of
Mauper-
tuis’s  prin-
ciple.


Euler’s  con-
tributions
to  this  sub-
ject.


even  if  we  accept  Maupertuis’s  conception,  the  recip-
rocal values  of  the  velocities  of  the  light  are  obtained,
and  not  the  actual  values.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  Maupertuis  really  had  no
principle,  properly  speaking,  but  only  a vague  form-
ula, which  was  forced  to  do  duty  as  the  expression  of
different  familiar  phenomena  not  really  brought  under
one  conception.  I have  found  it  necessary  to  enter
into  some  detail  in  this  matter,  since  Maupertuis’s  per-
formance, though  it  has  been  unfavorably  criticised  by
all  mathematicians,  is,  nevertheless,  still  invested  with
a sort  of  historical  halo.  It  would  seem  almost  as  if
something  of  the  pious  faith  of  the  church  had  crept
into  mechanics.  However,  the  mere  endeavor  to  gain
a more  extensive  view,  although  beyond  the  powers  of
the  author,  was  not  altogether  without  results.  Euler,
at  least,  if  not  also  Gauss,  was  stimulated  by  the  at-
tempt of  Maupertuis.

5.  Euler’s  view  is,  that  the  purposes  of  the  phe-
nomena of  nature*  afford  as  good  a basis  of  explana-
tion as  their  causes.  If  this  position  be  taken,  it  will
be  presumed  a priori  that  all  natural  phenomena  pre-
sent a maximum  or  minimum.  Of  what  character  this
maximum  or  minimum  is,  can  hardly  be  ascertained
by  metaphysical  speculations.  But  in  the  solution  of
mechanical  problems  by  the  ordinary  methods,  it  is
possible,  if  the  requisite  attention  be  bestowed  on  the
matter,  to  find  the  expression  which  in  all  cases  is
made  a maximum  or  a minimum.  Euler  is  thus  not
led  astray  by  any  metaphysical  propensities,  and  pro-
ceeds much  more  scientifically  than  Maupertuis.  He
seeks  an  expression  whose  variation  put  = 0 gives  the
ordinary  equations  of  mechanics.

For  a single  body  moving  under  the  action  of  forces


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 369


Euler  finds  the  requisite  expression  in  the  formula  The  form
f v ds,  where  ds  denotes  the  element  of  the  path  and  principle

O 1 - . . assumed  in

v the  corresponding  velocity.  This  expression  is  smaller  Euler’s
for  the  path  actitally  taken  than  for  any  other  infinitely
adjacent  neighboring  path  between  the  same  initial
and  terminal  points,  which  the  body  may  be  constrained
to  take.  Conversely,  therefore,  by  seeking  the  path  that
makes  J' v ds  a minimum,  we  can  also  determine  the
path.  The  problem  of  minimising  Jv  ds  is,  of  course,
as  Euler  assumed,  a permissible  one,  only  when  v de-
pends on  the  position  of  the  elements  ds,  that  is  to
say,  when  the  principle  of  vis  viva  holds  for  the  forces,
or  a force-function  exists,  or  what  is  the  same  thing,
when  v is  a simple  function  of  coordinates.  For  a mo-
tion in  a plane  the  expression  would  accordingly  as-
sume the  form

J9(X,y)yjl  + (Nj\dX

In  the  simplest  cases  Euler's  principle  is  easily  veri-
fied. If  no  forces  act,  v is  constant,  and  the  curve  of
motion  becomes  a straight  line,  for  which  J'v  ds  =s
vj'  ds  is  unquestionably  shorter  than  for  any  other
curve  between  the  same  terminal  points.

Also,  a body  moving  on  a curved  surface
without  the  action  of  forces  or  friction,
preserves  its  velocity,  and  describes  on
the  surface  a shortest  line.

The  consideration  of  the  motion  of  a
projectile  in  a parabola  ABC  (Fig.  190)
will  also  show  that  the  quantity  J * v ds
is  smaller  for  the  parabola  than  for  any
other  neighboring  curve ; smaller,  even,
than  for  the  straight  line  ABC  between  the  same  ter-
minal points.  The  velocity,  here,  depends  solely  on  the


370


THE  SCIENCE  OE  MECHANICS .


Mathemat-
ical devel-
opment of
this  case.


vertical  space  described  by  the  body,  and  is  therefore
the  same  for  all  curves  whose  altitude  above  OC  is  the
same.  If  we  divide  the  curves  by  a system  of  horizontal
straight  lines  into  elements  which  severally  correspond,
the  elements  to  be  multiplied  by  the  same  Ns,  though
in  the  upper  portions  smaller  for  the  straight  line  AD
than  for  A B , are  in  the  lower  portions  just  the  reverse  ;
and  as  it  is  here  that  the  larger  Ns  come  into  play,  the
sum  upon  the  whole  is  smaller  for  A B C than  for  the
straight  line.

Putting  the  origin  of  the  coordinates  at  A,  reckon-
ing the  abscissas  x vertically  downwards  as  positive,
and  calling  the  ordinates  perpendicular  thereto  y,  we
obtain  for  the  expression  to  be  minimised

fV*Ka  + 1 + dx,

0

where  g denotes  the  acceleration  of  gravity  and  a the
distance  of  descent  corresponding  to  the  initial  velocity.
As  the  condition  of  minimum  the  calculus  of  variations
gives


dy

c

dx

l/2  g(a  + x)  — C2

J,==J

r Cdx

V%g  {a  -j-  x)  — C2

and,  ultimately,

C

y=~  l/2  g(a  + x)  — C*  + C’>


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


37i


where  C and  Cf  denote  constants  of  integration  that
pass  into  C=V  2ga  and  C—  0,  if  iovx  = 0,  dx/dy  = 0
and  jr  — 0 be  taken.  Therefore,  y — 21/ By  this
method,  accordingly,  the  path  of  a projectile  is  shown
to  be  of  parabolic  form.

6.  Subsequently,  Lagrange  drew  express  attention  The^addi-^
to  the  fact  that  Euler’s  principle  is  applicable  only  in  grange  and
cases  in  which  the  principle  of  vis  viva  holds.  Jacobi
pointed  out  that  we  cannot  assert  that  J' v ds  for  the  ac-
tual motion  is  a minimum,  but  simply  that  the  variation  of
this  expression,  in  its  passage  to  an  infinitely  adjacent
neighboring  path,  is  = 0.  Generally,  indeed,  this  con-
dition coincides  with  a maximum  or  minimum,  but  it
is  possible  that  it  should  occur  without  such;  and  the
minimum  property  in  particular  is  subject  to  certain
limitations.  For  example,  if  a body,  constrained  to
move  on  a spherical  surface,  is  set  in  motion  by  some
impulse,  it  will  describe  a great  circle,  generally  a
shortest  line.  But  if  the  length  of  the  arc  described
exceeds  180°,  it  is  easily  demonstrated  that  there  exist
shorter  infinitely  adjacent  neighboring  paths  between
the  terminal  points.

7..  So  far,  then,  this  fact  only  has  been  pointed  out,  Euler’s

. . 1 . . . . i expression

that  the  ordinary  equations  of  motion  are  obtained  by  but  one  of

t . . r „ . _ . _ many  which

equating  the  variation  of  j v ds  to  zero.  But  since  the  give  the
properties  of  the  motion  of  bodies  or  of  their  paths  may  of  motion,
always  be  defined  by  differential  expressions  equated
to  zero,  and  since  furthermore  the  condition  that  the
variation  of  an  integral  expression  shall  be  equal  to
zero  is  likewise  given  by  differential  expressions  equated
to  zero,  unquestionably  various  other  integral  expres-
sions may  be  devised  that  give  by  variation  the  ordi-
nary equations  of  motion,  without  its  following  that  the


372


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Yet  the  ex-
pression
must  pos-
sess a phys-
ical import.


Elucidation
ot  this  im-
port by  the
motion  of  a
mass,  the
motion  of  a
ray  of  light,
and  the
equilibrium
ot  a string.


integral  expressions  in  question  must  possess  on  that
account  any  particular  physical  significance.

8.  The  striking  fact  remains,  however,  that  so  simple
an  expression  as  j' v ds  does  possess  the  property  men-
tioned, and  we  will  now  endeavor  to  ascertain  its  phys-
ical import.  To  this  end  the  analogies  that  exist  be-
tween the  motion  of  masses  and  the  motion  of  light,  as
well  as  between  the  motion  of  masses  and  the  equilib-
rium of  strings — analogies  noted  by  John  Bernoulli
and  by  Mobius — will  stand  us  in  stead.

A body  on  which  no  forces  act,  and  which  there-
fore preserves  its  velocity  and  direction  constant,  de-
scribes a straight  line.  A ray  of  light  passing  through
a homogeneous  medium  (one  having  everywhere  the
same  index  of  refraction)  describes  a straight  line.  A
string,  acted  on  by  forces  at  its  extremities  only,  as-
sumes the  shape  of  a straight  line.

A body  that  moves  in  a curved  path  from  a point
A to  a point  B and  whose  velocity  v = cp(x , y,  z)  is  a
function  of  coordinates,  describes  between  A and  B a
curve  for  which  generally  Jv  ds  is  a minimum.  A ray
of  light  passing  from  A to  B describes  the  same  curve,
if  the  refractive  index  of  its  medium,  n=  cp  {x,  y,  z),
is  the  same  function  of  coordinates ; and  in  this  case
J * nds  is  a minimum.  Finally,  a string  passing  from
A to  B will  assume  this  curve,  if  its  tension  ,5  =
<p  {x,  y,  z)  is  the  same  above-mentioned  function  of  co-
ordinates ; and  for  this  case,  also,  J'Sds  is  a minimum.

The  motion  of  a mass  may  be  readily  deduced  from
the  equilibrium  of  a string,  as  follows.  On  an  element
ds  of  a string,  at  its  two  extremities,  the  tensions  S,  S'
act,  and  supposing  the  force  on  unit  of  length  to  be  P,
in  addition  a force  P . ds.  These  three  forces,  which
we  shall  represent  in  magnitude  and  direction  by  BA,


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


373


BC,  BD  (Fig.  191),  are  in  equilibrium.  If  now,  a body,
with  a velocity  v represented  in  magnitude  and  direc-
tion by  AB,  enter  the  element  of  the  path  ds,  and  re-
ceive within  the  same  the  velocity  component  BF  =
— BD,  the  body  will  proceed  on-
ward with  the  velocity  vr  = BC.

Let  Q be  an  accelerating  force
whose  action  is  directly  opposite
to  that  of  P;  then  for  unit  of  time
the  acceleration  of  this  force  will
be  Q,  for  unit  of  length  of  the
string  Q/v,  and  for  the  element
of  the  string  ( Q/v)ds . The  body  will  move,  therefore,
in  the  curve  of  the  string,  if  we  establish  between  the
forces  F and  the  tensions  S,  in  the  case  of  the  string,
and  the  accelerating  forces  Q and  the  velocity  v in  the
case  of  the  mass,  the  relation

P:  — Q = S-.v.

V

The  minus  sign  indicates  that  the  directions  of  P and
Q are  opposite.

A closed  circular  string  is  in  equilibrium  when  be-
tween the  tension  S of  the  string,  everywhere  constant,
and  the  force  P falling  radially  outwards  on  unit  of
length,  the  relation  P = Sfr  obtains,  where  r is  the
radius  of  the  circle.  A body  will  move  with  the  con-
stant velocity  v in  a circle,  when  between  the  velocity
and  the  accelerating  force  Q acting  radially  inwards
the  relation

Q V V2

~ = — or  <2  = — obtains.
v r r

A body  will  move  with  constant  velocity  v in  any  curve
when  an  accelerating  force  Q = v2/r  constantly  acts


The  motion
of  a mass
deduced
from  the
equilibrium
of  a string.


The  equi-
librium of
closed
strings.


3/4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


on  it  in  the  direction  of  the  centre  of  curvature  of  each
element.  A string  will  lie  under  a constant  tension  A
in  any  curve  if  a force  P = S/r  acting  outwardly  from
the  centre  of  curvature  of  the  element  is  impressed  on
unit  of  length  of  the  string.

The  deduc-  No  concept  analogous  to  that  of  force  is  applicable
motion  of  to  the  motion  of  light.  Consequently,  the  deduction  of
th^moTions  the  motion  of  light  from  the  equilibrium  of  a string  or
and  the.  the  motion  of  a mass  must  be  differently  effected.  A

equilibrium  . . . , . .

of  strings,  mass,  let  us  say,  is  moving  with  the  velocity  AB  = v.

(Fig.  192.)  A force  in  the  direction
BD  is  impressed  on  the  mass  which
produces  an  increase  of  velocity  BE ,
so  that  by  the  composition  of  the  ve-
locities BC  = AB  and  BE  the  new
velocity  BE  — v'  is  produced.  If  we
resolve  the  velocities  v , vf  into  com-
ponents parallel  and  perpendicular  to
the  force  in  question,  we  shall  per-
ceive that  the  parallel  componeizts  alone
are  changed  by  the  action  of  the  force.
This  being  the  case,  we  get,  denoting
by  k the  perpendicular  component,  and  by  a and  a'
the  angles  v and  vr  make  with  the  direction  of  the
force,

k = v sin  a
k = v ' sin  a'  or

sin  a vf
sin  or'  v *

If,  now,  we  picture  to  ourselves  a ray  of  light  that
penetrates  in  the  direction  of  v a refracting  plane  at
right  angles  to  the  direction  of  action  of  the  force,  and
thus  passes  from  a medium  having  the  index  of  refrac-


TIIE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


375


tion  n into  a medium  having  the  index  of  refraction  n' , Develop-

0 _ . mentofthr

where  n/n’  = v/v'9  this  ray  of  light  will  describe  the  illustration
f ame  path  as  the  body  in  the  case  above.  If,  there-
fore, we  wish  to  imitate  the  motion  of  a mass  by  the
motion  of  a ray  of  light  (in  the  same  curve),  we  must
everywhere  put  the  indices  of  refraction,  n,  proportional
to  the  velocities.  To  deduce  the  indices  of  refraction
from  the  forces,  we  obtain  for  the  velocity


z>2\

a = Pdq,  and

for  the  index  of  refraction,  by  analogy,


where  P denotes  the  force  and  dq  a distance-element
in  the  direction  of  the  force.  If  ds  is  the  element  of
’“the  path*  and  a the  angle  made  by  it  with  the  direction
of  the  force,  wre  have  then


d


= P cos  a . ds


d


= Pcosa . ds.


For  the  path  of  a projectile,  under  the  conditions  above
assumed,  we  obtained  the  expression y = 2 V ax.  This
same  parabolic  path  will  be  described  by  a ray  of  light,
if  the  law  n = j/2g(a  -f*  x)  be  taken  as  the  index  of
refraction  of  the  medium  in  which  it  travels.

9.  We  will  now  more  accurately  investigate  the  Relation  of

. .......  ...  the  mini-

manner m which  this  minimum  property  is  related  to  mum  prop-

the  form  of  the  curve.  Let  us  take,  first,  (Fig.  193)  aformof  e

broken  straight  line  ABC,  which  intersects  the  straight curves'

line  MN,  put  AB  = s,  B C = sf , and  seek  the. condition

that  makes  vs  4*  vs’  a minimum  for  the  line  that  passes


376


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


First,  de-
duction of
the  mini  -
muni  condi-
tion.


Second,  the
application
ot  this  con-
dition to  the
equilibrium
of  a string.


through  the  fixed  points  A and  B,  where  v and  v'  are
supposed  to  have  different,  though  constant,  values
above  and  below  MN.  If  we  displace  the  point  B an
infinitely  small  distance  to  B,  the  new  line  through  A
and  C will  remain  parallel  to  the  original  one,  as  the
drawing  symbolically  shows.  The  expression  vs  -fi-  v’s’
is  increased  hereby  by  an  amount

— v m sin  a + v ms\n  a ,

where  m=.DB.  The  alteration  is  accordingly  propor-
tional to  — ?>sin  a-\-  v'  sin  a',  and  the  condition  of
minimum  is  that

, . , sin  nr  v*

— psin  a 4-  v sin  a = U,  or  — . — 7 = — .

sin  a v


If  the  expression  s/v  + s' /v'  is  to  be  made  a minimum,
we  have,  in  a similar  way,

sin  a v
sin  a!  vr

If,  next,  we  consider  the  case  of  a string  stretched
in  the  direction  ABC,  the  tensions  of  which  S and  S'
are  different  above  and  below  MN,  in  this  case  it  is
the  minimum  of  Ss  -f-  S's'  that  is  to  be  dealt  with.  To
obtain  a distinct  idea  of  this  case,  we  may  imagine  the


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


377


string  stretched  once  between  A and  B and  thrice  be-
tween B and  C,  and  finally  a weight  P attached.  Then
S — P and  S'  = 3 P.  If  we  displace  the  point  B a dis-
tance m,  any  diminution  of  the  expression  Ss  -f-  S' s'
thus  effected,  will  express  the  increase  of  work  which
the  attached  weight  P performs.  If  — sin  o' -}-
S'm  sin  a'  = 0,  no  work  is  performed.  Hence,  the  mini-
mum of  Ss  -f-  S's'  corresponds  to  a maximum  of  work.

In  the  present  case  the  principle  of  least  action  is  sim-
ply a different  form  of  the  principle  of  virtual  displace-
ments.

Now  suppose  that  ABC  is  a ray  of  light,  whose  ve-  Third,  the

„ . application

locities  v and  v ' above  and  below  MN  are  to  each  other  of  this  con-
as  3 to  1.  The  motion  of  light  be-
tween two  points  A and  B is  such
that  the  light  reaches  B in  a mini-
mum of  time.  The  physical  reason
of  this  is  simple.  The  light  travels
from  A to  B , in  the  form  of  ele-
mentary waves,  by  different  routes.

Owing  to  the  periodicity  of  the  light,
the  waves  generally  destroy  each
other,  and  only  those  that  reach  the
designated  point  in  equal  times,  that  is,  in  equal  phases,
produce  a result.  But  this  is  true  only  of  the  waves
that  arrive  by  the  minimum  path  and  its  adjacent  neigh-
boring paths.  Hence,  for  the  path  actually  taken  by
the  light  s/v  + $’ /v  is  a minimum.  And  since  the  in-
dices of  refraction  n are  inversely  proportional  to  the
velocities  v of  the  light,  therefore  also  ns n’s’  is  a
minimum.

In  the  consideration  of  the  motion  of  a mass  the  con-
dition that  vs  - f-  v's'  shall  be  a minimum,  strikes  us  as
something  novel.  (Fig.  195.)  If  a mass,  in  its  passage


dition  tothe
motion  of  a
ray  of  light.


Fig.  195.


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


37^


Fourth,  ita  through  a plane  MN,  receive,  as  the  result  of  the  action
totkino°-n  of  a force  impressed  in  the  direction  DB , an  increase  of
mabs°  a velocity,  by  which  v,  its  original  velocity,  is  made  v',  we
have  for  the  path  actually  taken  by  the  mass  the  equa-
tion v sin  a = 7/  sin  a’  ~ k.  This  equation , which  is  also
the  condition  of  minimum , simply  states  that  only  the  ve-
locity-component parallel  to  the  direction  of  the  force  is
altered,  hut  that  the  component  k at  right  angles  thereto  re-
mains unchanged.  Thus,  here  also,  Euler’s  principle
simply  states  a familiar  fact  in  a new  form.  (See  p.575.)
Form  of  the  io.  The  minimum  condition  — v sin  a + v'  sin  a'=  0
condjtion  may  also  be  written,  if  we  pass  from  a finite  broken
to  curved.6  straight  line  to  the  elements  of  curves,  in  the  form
— v sin  a -|-  (v  + d v)  sin(ar  + da)  = 0


or


or,  finally,


d(v  sin  a)  = 0


v sin  a = const.


In  agreement  with  this,  we  obtain  for  the  motion
of  light

d ( n sin  a)  = 0,  n sin  a = const,


sm  a \ sm  a

v / 9 v


■ const,


and  for  the  equilibrium  of  a string

d {S  sin  a)  = 0,  S sin  a = const.


To  illustrate  the  preceding  remarks  by  an  ex-
ample, let  us  take  the  parabolic  path  of  a projectile,
where  a always  denotes  the  angle  that  the  element  of
the  path  makes  with  the  perpendicular.  Let  the  ve-
locity be  v — V 2 g(a  x),  and  let  the  axis  of  they-or-
dinates  be  horizontal.  The  condition  v.  sin  a = const ,
or  V 2 g{a  ~h  x)  . dy/ds  — const,  is  identical  with  that
which  the  calculus  of  variation  gives,  and  we  now  know


THE  EX  TEX SIOH  OE  THE  PPIXCIPLES.


379


Fig.  196.


its  simple  physical  significance.  If  we  picture  to  ourselves
a string  whose  tension  is  S — V 2g(a  + x),  an  arrange-
ment which  might  be  effected  by  fixing  frictionless
pulleys  on  horizontal  parallel  rods  placed  in  a vertical
plane,  then  passing  the  string  through  these  a sufficient
number  of  times,  and  finally  attaching
a weight  to  the  extremity  of  the  string,
we  shall  obtain  again,  for  equilibrium,
the  preceding  condition,  the  phys-
ical significance  of  which  is  now  ob-
vious. When  the  distances  between
the  rods  are  made  infinitely  small  the
string  assumes  the  parabolic  form.

In  a medium,  the  refractive  index  of
which  varies  in  the  vertical  direction
by  the  law  n — V 2 g{a  -f-  x),  or  the  velocity  of  light  in
which  similarly  varies  by  the  law  v = 1 /V  2g(a  -j~  x),
a ray  of  light  will  describe  a path  which  is  a parabola.
If  we  should  make  the  velocity  in  such  a medium
v = V 2g(aJrx')}  the  ray  would  describe  a cycloidal  path,
for  which,  not  J'  1/ 2 g(a  -|-  x) . ds,  but  the  expression
J' ds/y/2g(a-\-  x')  -would  be  a minimum.

11.  In  comparing  the  equilibrium  of  a string  with
the  motion  of  a mass,  we  may  employ  in  place  of  a
string  wound  round  pulleys,
a simple  homogeneous  cord,
provided  we  subject  the  cord
to  an  appropriate  system  of
forces.  We  readily  observe
that  the  systems  of  forces
that  make  the  tension,  or,
as  the  case  may  be,  the  ve-
locity, the  same  function  of  coordinates,  are  differ-
ent. If  we  consider,  for  example,  the  force  of  gravity,


Illustration
of  the  three
tjpical
cases  by
curvilinear
motions.


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


?he  condi-
tions and
conse-
quences of
the  pieced-
ing  analo-
gies.


jSo

v ==  V'Zgia  + x)~  A string,  however,  subjected  to  the
action  of  gravity,  forms  a catenary,  the  tension  of
which  is  given  by  the  formula  S~m  — nx,  where  m
and  n are  constants.  The  analogy  subsisting  between
the  equilibrium  of  a string  and  the  motion  of  a mass  is
substantially  conditioned  by  the  fact  that  for  a string
subjected  to  the  action  of  forces  possessing  a force-
function  U,  there  obtains  in  the  case  of  equilibrium
the  easily  demonstrable  equation  U + S = const.  This
physical  interpretation  of  the  principle  of  least  action
is  here  illustrated  only  for  simple  cases  ; but  it  may
also  be  applied  to  cases  of  greater  complexity,  by
imagining  groups  of  surfaces  of  equal  tension,  of  equal
velocity,  of  equally  refractive  indices  constructed  which
divide  the  string,  the  path  of  the  motion,  or  the  path
of  the  light  into  elements,  and  by  making  a in  such  a
case  represent  the  angle  which  these  elements  make
with  the  respective  surface-normals.  The  principle  of
least  action  was  extended  to  systems  of  masses  by  La-
grange, who  presented  it  in  the  form
d 12  m J'  vds  — 0.

If  we  reflect  that  the  principle  of  vis  viva , which  is  the
real  foundation  of  the  principle  of  least  action,  is  not
annulled  by  the  connection  of  the  masses,  we  shall
comprehend  that  the  latter  principle  is  in  this  case  also
valid  and  physically  intelligible.


IX.

Hamilton’s  principle.

i.  It  was  above  remarked  that  various  expressions
can  be  devised  whose  variations  equated  to  zero  give
the  ordinary  equations  of  motion.  An  expression  of
this  kind  is  contained  in  Hamilton’s  principle


THE  EXTEXSIOX  OF  TIIE  PRIXCIPLES.


381


SJXU+  T)dt  = Q,  or

j\dU+  6T)dl  = 0,

where  6 U and  d T denote  the  variations  of  the  work
and  the  vis  viva , vanishing  for  the  initial  and  terminal
epochs.  Hamilton’s  principle  is  easily  deduced  from
D’Alembert’s,  and,  conversely,  D’Alembert’s  from
Hamilton’s ; the  two  are  in  fact  identical,  their  differ-
ence being  merely  that  of  form.*

2.  We  shall  not  enter  here  into  any  extended  in- Hamilton’s

. . . principle

vestigation  of  this  subject,  but  simply  exhibit  the  iden-  applied^
tity  of  the  two  principles  by  an  example —
the  same  that  served  to  illustrate  the  prin-
ciple of  D’Alembert:  the  motion  of  awheel
and  axle  by  the  over-weight  of  one  of  its
parts.  In  place  of  the  actual  motion,  we
may  imagine,  performed  in  the  same  inter-
val of  time,  a differe?it  motion,  varying  in-
finitely little  from  the  actual  motion,  but
coinciding  exactly  with  it  at  the  beginning
and  end.  There  are  thus  produced  in  every  element
of  time  dt , variations  of  the  work  (6  U')  and  of  the  vis
viva  (6T);  variations,  that  is,  of  the  values  U and  T
realised  in  the  actual  motion.  But  for  the  actual  mo-
tion, the  integral  expression,  above  stated,  is  = 0,  and
may  be  employed,  therefore,  to  determine  the  actual
motion.  If  the  angle  of  rotation  performed  varies  in
the  element  of  time  dt  an  amount  a from  the  angle  of
the  actual  motion,  the  variation  of  the  work  corre-
sponding to  such  an  alteration  will  be

6 U—  ( PI Z * — Qr)  a = Ma.

* Compare,  for  example,  Kirchhoff,  Vorlesungen  fiber  mathematische  Phy-
sik,  Mechanik , p.  25  et  seqq. , and  Jacobi,  VorUsungen  fiber  Dynamik,  p,  58.


of  a wheel
and  axle.


Fig.  198.


The  points
of  identity
of  Hamil-
ton’s and
D’Alem-
bert’s prin-
ciples.


3§2


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Mathemat-
ical devel-
opment of
this  case.


The  vis  viva , for  any  given  angular  velocity  go,  is

T=  \ + Qr*)

S ^

and  for  a variation  $gq  of  this  velocity  the  variation  of
the  vis  viva  is

6r=--(PA2  + Qr*)Godco.

But  if  the  angle  of  rotation  varies  in  the  element  dt  an
amount  a,

($&==  and
dt

6T-  — \ (PR*  + Qr*)  co^=Ar-  a


dt‘


The  form  of  the  integral  expression,  accordingly,  is


*■  i

/


, ,rda
M«  + N-


dt  = 0.


But  as


therefore,


d . N dN  , *Tda
(N  a)  = ^ f a + N


dt


dt’


M-**\a.dt+  {Na)l  = 0.
dt  j t0

The  second  term  of  the  left-hand  member,  though,
drops  out,  because,  by  hypothesis,  at  the  beginning
and  end  of  the  motion  a = 0.  Accordingly,  we  have


dt  J

‘0

an  expression  which,  since  a in  every  element  of  time
is  arbitrary,  cannot  subsist  unless  generally

dN


dt


= 0.


M-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 383


Substituting  for  the  symbols  the  values  they  represent,
we  obtain  the  familiar  equation

d go  PR  — Qr

Tt  = PR*~~+  QN-g'

D’Alembert’s  principle  gives  the  equation

which  holds  for  every  possible  displacement.  We  might,
in  the  converse  order,  have  started  from  this  equation,
have  thence  passed  to  the  expression


The  same
results  ob-
tained by
the  use  of
D’Alem-
bert’s prin-
ciple.


adt  = 0,


and,  finally,  from  the  latter  proceeded  to  the  same  re-
sult

*1

C[Ma  + N~  ) dt—  (JVa)1  =

,0  V dt)


3.  As  a second  and  more  simple  example  let  us
consider  the  motion  of  vertical  descent.  For  every
infinitely  small  displacement  s the  equation  subsists
Sjn g — ?n{dv jdty^s  = 0,  in  which  the  letters  retain
their  conventional  significance.  Consequently,  this
equation  obtains


Illustration
of  this  point
by  the  mo-
tion of  ver-
tical de-
scent.


s . dt  = 0,


which,  as  the- result  of  the  relations

j(mvs)  dv  ds  -

d — ==  m — s + m v — and
dt  dt  dt


3S4


TIIE  SCIENCE  OF  .MECHANICS.


f dt  — (m  vs)  = 0,

J Et  ta

*0

provided  s vanishes  at  both  limits,  passes  into  the  form


that  is,  into  the  form  of  Hamilton's  principle.

Thus,  through  all  the  apparent  differences  of  the
mechanical  principles  a common  fundamental  same-
ness is  seen.  These  principles  are  not  the  expression
of  different  facts,  but,  in  a measure,  are  simply  views
of  different  aspects  of  the  same  fact.


x.

SOME  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  MECHANICS  TO
HYDROSTATIC  AND  HYDRODYNAMIC  QUESTIONS.

Method  of  ' i.  We  will  now  supplement  the  examples  which
fheaaton8 we  have  given  of  the  application  of  the  principles
onliquid7  of  mechanics,  as  they  applied  to  rigid  bodies,  by  a
masses*  few  hydrostatic  and  hydrodynamic  illustrations.  We
shall  first  discuss  the  laws  of  equilibrium  of  a weightless
liquid  subjected  exclusively  to  the  action  of  so-called
molecular  forces.  The  forces  of  gravity  we  neglect  in
our  considerations.  A liquid  may,  in  fact,  be  placed
in  circumstances  in  which  it  will  behave  as  if  no  forces
of  gravity  acted.  The  method  of  this  is  due  to  Pla-
teau.* It  is  effected  by  immersing  olive  oil  in  a mix-
ture of  water  and  alcohol  of  the  same  density  as  the
oil.  By  the  principle  of  Archimedes  the  gravity  of  the
masses  of  oil  in  such  a mixture  is  exactly  counterbal-
anced, and  the  liquid  really  acts  as  if  it  were  devoid  of
weight.


Statique  exfierimentale  et  theorzque  des  li guides,  1873.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


3S5


2.  First,  let  us  imagine  a weightless  liquid  mass  The  work  ot

molecular

free  in  space.  Its  molecular  forces,  we  know,  act  only  forces  de-

. pendent  on

at  very  small  distances.  Taking  as  our  radius  the  dis-  a change  in

the  liquid's

tance  at  which  the  molecular  forces  cease  to  exert  a superficial
measurable  influence,  let  us  describe  about  a particle
a , I,  c in  the  interior  of  the  mass  a sphere — the  so-
called  sphere  of  action.  This  sphere  of  action  is  regu-
larly and  uniformly  filled  with  other  particles.  The
resultant  force  on  the  central  particles  a , b,  c is  there-
fore zero.  Those  parts  only  that  lie  at  a distance  from
the  bounding  surface  less  than  the  radius  of  the  sphere
of  action  are  in  different  dynamic  conditions  from  the
particles  in  the  interior.  If  the  radii  of  curvature  of


Fig.  199.  Fig.  200.

the  surface-elements  of  the  liquid  mass  be  all  regarded
as  very  great  compared  with  the  radius  of  the  sphere
of  action,  we  may  cut  off  from  the  mass  a superficial
stratum  of  the  thickness  of  the  radius  of  the  sphere  of
action  in  which  the  particles  are  in  different  physical
conditions  from  those  in  the  interior.  If  we  convey
a particle  a in  the  interior  of  the  liquid  from  the  posi-
tion a to  the  position  b or  c,  the  physical  condition
of  this  particle,  as  well  as  that  of  the  particles  which
take  its  place,  will  remain  unchanged.  No  work  can
be  done  in  this  way.  Work  can  be  done  only  when  a
particle  is  conveyed  from  the  superficial  stratum  into
the  interior,  or/  from  the  interior  into  the  superficial
stratum.  That  is  to  say,  work  can  be  done  only  by  a


3S6


the  science  of  mechanics.


change  of  size  of  the  surface.  The  consideration  whether
the  density  of  the  superficial  stratum  is  the  same  as
that  of  the  interior,  or  whether  it  is  constant  through-
out the  entire  thickness  of  the  stratum,  is  not  primarily
essential.  As  will  readily  be  seen,  the  variation  of  the
surface-area  is  equally  the  condition  of  the  perform-
ance of  work  when  the  liquid  mass  is  immersed  in  a
second  liquid,  as  in  Plateau’s  experiments.

Diminution  We  now  inquire  whether  the  work  which  by  the
ficfaiParea#  transportation  of  particles  into  the  interior  effects  a
dvl  wo^k!1"  diminution  of  the  surface-area  is  positive  or  negative,
that  is,  whether  work  is  performed  or  work  is  ex-
pended. If  we  put  two  fluid  drops  in  contact,  they
will  coalesce  of  their  own  accord ;
and  as  by  this  action  the  area
of  the  surface  is  diminished,  it
follows  that  the  work  that  pro-
duces a diminution  of  superfi-
cial area  in  a liquid  mass  is  posi-
tive. Van  der  Mensbrugghe  has
demonstrated  this  by  a very  pretty  experiment.  A
square  wire  frame  is  dipped  into  a solution  of  soap  and
water,  and  on  the  soap-film  formed  a loop  of  moistened
thread  is  placed.  If  the  film  within  the  loop  be  punc-
tured, the  film  outside  the  loop  will  contract  till  the
thread  bounds  a circle  in  the  middle  of  the  liquid  sur-
face. But  the  circle,  of  all  plane  figures  of  the  same
circumference,  has  the  greatest  area ; consequently,
the  liquid  film  has  contracted  to  a minimum.

Consequent  The  following  will  now  be  clear.  A weightless
of  liquid  liquid,  the  forces  acting  on  which  are  molecular  forces,
will  be  in  equilibrium  in  all  forms  in  which  a system  of
virtual  displacements  produces  no  alteration  of  the
liquid’s  superficial  area.  But  all  infinitely  small  changes


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  38 7


of  form  may  be  regarded  as  virtual  which  the  liquid
admits  without  alteration  of  its  volume . Consequently,
equilibrium  subsists  for  all  liquid  forms  for  which  an
infinitely  small  deformation  produces  a superficial  va-
riation = 0.  For  a given  volume  a minimum  of  super-
ficial area  gives  stable  equilibrium ; a maximum  un-
stable equilibrium.

Among  all  solids  of  the  same  volume,  the  sphere
has  the  least  superficial  area.  Hence,  the  form  which
a free  liquid  mass  will  assume,  the  form  of  stable  equi-
librium, is  the  sphere.  For  this  form  a maximum  of
work  is  done  ; for  it,  no  more  can  be  done  If  the
„ liquid  adheres  to  rigid  bodies,  the  form  assumed  is  de-
pendent on  various  collateral  conditions,  which  render
the  problem  more  complicated.

3.  The  connection  between  the  size  and  the  form  of  Mode  of  de-

the  liquid  surface  may  be  investigated  as  follows.  We  the  connec-
....  tion  of  the

imagine  the  closed  outer  sur-
face of  the  liquid  to  receive
without  alteration  of  the  li-
quid’s volume  an  infinitely
small  variation.  By  two  sets  of
mutually  perpendicular  lines
of  curvature,  we  cut  up  the

original  surface  into  infinitely  small  rectangular  ele-
ments. At  the  angles  of  these  elements,  on  the  original
surface,  we  erect  normals  to  the  surface,  and  determine
thus  the  angles  of  the  corresponding  elements  of  the
varied  surface.  To  every  element  dO  of  the  original
surface  there  now  corresponds  an  element  dO*  of  the
varied  surface ; by  an  infinitely  small  displacement,  8n,
along  the  normal,  outwards  or  inwards,  dO  passes  into
dOf  and  into  a corresponding  variation  of  magnitude.

Let  dp , dq  be  the  sides  of  the  element  dO.  For  the


Fig.  202.


3SS


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  mathe-
matical de-
velopment
of  this
method.


sides  dfi\  dq  of  the  element  dO\  then,  these  relations
obtain


*1'  = ^ 1 + ~pr  j ,

where  r and  r are  the  radii  of  curvature  of  the  princi-
pal sections  touching  the  elements  of  the  lines  of  cur-
vature p,  q , or  the  so-called  principal  radii  of  curva-
ture.* The  radius  of  curvature  of  an  outwardly  convex
element  is  reckoned  as  positive,  that  of  an  outwardly
concave  element  as  negative,  in  the  usual  manner.  For
the  variation  of  the  element  we  obtain,  accordingly,

6 . dO  = dO'  — dO  = dpdq{\  + ~ )f  1 + — dp  dq.


Fig.  203.


Neglecting  the  higher  powers  of  dn  we
get

d . dO  = (Ip  + -'j  dn.  dO.

The  variation  of  the  whole  surface,
then,  is  expressed  by

^0=f(1-  + -r,)sn.d° (1)

Furthermore,  the  normal  displacements
must  be  so  chosen  that
Jdn.dO=  0 (2)


that  is,  they  must  be  such  that  the  sum  of  the  spaces
produced  by  the  outward  and  inward  displacements  of


* The  normal  at  any  point  of  a surface  is  cut  by  normals  at  infinitely  neigh-
boring points  that  lie  in  two  directions  on  the  surface  from  the  original  point,
these  two  directions  being  at  right  angles  to  each  other ; and  the  distances
from  the  surface  at  which  these  normals  cut  are  the  two  principal,  or  extreme,
radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface. — Trans.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 389


the  superficial  elements  (in  the  latter  case  reckoned  as
negative)  shall  be  equal  to  zero , or  the  volume  remain
constant.

Accordingly,  expressions  (1)  and  (2)  can  be  putAconditi<
simultaneously  = 0 only  if  1 ]r  + 1 jr  has  the  same  value  thegenen
for  all  points  of  the  surface.  This  will  be  readily  seen  pressions

obtained,

from  the  following  consideration.  Let  the  elements  depends.
dO  of  the  original  surface  be  symbolically  represented
by  the  elements  of  the  line  AX  (Fig.  204)  and  let  the
normal  displacements  Sn  be  erected  as  ordinates
thereon  in  the  plane  E,  the  outward  displacements  up-
wards as  positive  and  the  inward  displacements  down-
wards as  negative.

Join  the  extremities
of  these  ordinates  so
as  to  form  a curve,
and  take  the  quadra-  ^
ture  of  the  curve,

Fig.  204.

reckoning  the  sur-
face above  AX  as  positive  and  that  below  it  as  nega-
tive. For  all  systems  of  dn  for  which  this  quadra-
ture = 0,  the  expression  (2)  also  = 0,  and  all  such
systems  of  displacements  are  admissible,  that  is,  are
virtual  displacements.

Now  let  us  erect  as  ordinates,  In  the  plane  the
values  of  i/r  -f-  1 jr  that  belong  to  the  elements  dO.  A
case  may  be  easily  imagined  in  which  the  expressions
(1)  and  (2)  assume  coincidently  the  value  zero.  Should,
however,  ijr  4-  1 /F  have  different  values  for  different
elements,  it  will  always  be  possible  without  altering
the  zero-value  of  the  expression  (2),  so  to  distribute
the  displacements  d n that  the  expression  (1)  shall  be
different  from  zero.  Only  on  the  condition  that  1 jr  -f-
1 jr*  has  the  same  value  for  all  the  elements,  is  expres-


390


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


sion  (i)  necessarily  and  universally  equated  to  zero
with  expression  (2).

The  sum  Accordingly,  from  the  two  conditions  (1)  and  (2)  it

eqiifiibrium  follows  that  1 jr  + 1 /r'=  const  ; that  is  to  say,  the  sum
constant  for  of  the  reciprocal  values  of  the  principal  radii  of  curva-
surfa'ce?16  ture,  or  of  the  radii  of  curvature  of  the  principal  nor-
mal sections,  is,  in  the  case  of  equilibrium,  constant
for  the  whole  surface.  By  this  theorem  the  dependence
of  the  area  of  a liquid  surface  on  its  superficial  form  is
defined.  The  train  of  reasoning  here  pursued  was
first  developed  by  Gauss,*  in  a much  fuller  and  more
special  form.  It  is  not  difficult,  however,  to  present
its  essential  points  in  the  foregoing  simple  manner.
Application  4.  A liquid  mass,  left  wholly  to  itself,  assumes,  as
eraUondi-  we  have  seen,  the  spherical  form,  and  presents  an  ab-
interrupted  solute  minimum  of  superficial  area.  The  equation
liquid  mas-  ^ ___  CQnst  js  here  visibly  fulfilled  in  the  form

2/jR  = const , R being  the  radius  of  the  sphere.  If  the
free  surface  of  the  liquid  mass  be  bounded  by  two  solid
circular  rings,  the  planes  of  which  are  parallel  to  each
other  and  perpendicular  to  the  line  joining  their  mid-
dle points,  the  surface  of  the  liquid  mass  will  assume
the  form  of  a surface  of  revolution.  The  nature  of  the
meridian  curve  and  the  volume  of  the  enclosed  mass
are  determined  by  the  radius  of  the  rings  R , by  the
distance  between  the  circular  planes,  and  by  the  value
of  the  expression  1/r  -f-  1/r'  for  the  surface  of  revolu-
tion. When

r r r oo  it

the  surface  of  revolution  becomes  a cylindrical  surface.
For  1/r  + l/r'=  0,  where  one  normal  section  is'con-

* Princifiict  Generalia  Theories  Figures  Fluidorum  in  Statu  SEquilibrii
Gottingen,  1830;  Werke , Vol.  V,  29,  GQttingen,  1867.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


39i


vex  and  the  other  concave,  the  meridian  curve  assumes
the  form  of  the  catenary.  Plateau  visibly  demonstrated
these  cases  by  pouring  oil  on  two  circular  rings  of  wire
fixed  in  the  mixture  of  alcohol  and  water  above  men-
tioned.

Now  let  us  picture  to  ourselves  a liquid  mass  Liquidmas

. ses  whose

bounded  by  surface-parts  for  which  the  expression  surfaces  are

partly  con-

1/r  + l/>' has  a positive  value,  and  by  other  parts  cave  and
for  which  the  same  expression  has  a negative  value,  vex
or,  more  briefly  expressed,  by  convex  and  concave  sur-
faces. It  will  be  readily  seen  that  any  displacement
of  the  superficial  elements  outwards  along  the  normal
will  produce  in  the  concave  parts  a diminution  of  the
superficial  area  and  in  the  convex  parts  an  increase.
Consequently,  work  is  performed  when  concave  surfaces
move  outwards  and  convex  surfaces  inwards . Work
also  is  performed  when  a superficial  portion  moves
outwards  for  which  1/r  + l/r'=  -|-  a , while  simulta-
neously an  equal  superficial  portion  for  which  1 !r  -f-
1/r'  > a moves  inwards.

Hence,  when  differently  curved  surfaces  bound  a
liquid  mass,  the  convex  parts  are  forced  inwards  and
the  concave  outwards  till  the  condition  l/r-f-  1 jr'  —
const  is  fulfilled  for  the  entire  surface.  Similarly,  when
a connected  liquid  mass  has  several  isolated  surface-
parts,  bounded  by  rigid  bodies,  the  value  of  the  ex-
pression 1/r  -f-  l/rf  must,  for  the  state  of  equilibrium
be  the  same  for  all  free  portions  of  the  surface.

For  example,  if  the  space  between  the  two  circular  Experi-
rings  in  the  mixture  of  alcohol  and  water  above  re-  illustration

of  these

ferred  to,  be  filled  with  oil,  it  is  possible,  by  the  use  conditions,
of  a sufficient  quantity  of  oil,  to  obtain  a cylindrical
surface  whose  two  bases  are  spherical  segments.  The
curvatures  of  the  lateral  and  basal  surfaces  will  accord-


392


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


ingly  fulfil  the  condition  1/R  + 1/co  — 1/p  + 1/p,  or
p = 2 R,  where  p is  the  radius  of  the  sphere  and  R that
of  the  circular  rings.  Plateau  verified  this  conclusion

by  experiment.  .

Liquidmas-  5.  Let  us  now  study  a weightless  liquid  mass  which
ITIE'oV  encloses  a hollow  space.  The  condition  that  1/r  + 1/r'
low  space.  ^ave  the  same  value  for  the  interior  and  exterior

surfaces,  is  here  not  realisable.  On  the  contrary,  as
this  sum  has  always  a greater  positive  value  for  the
closed  exterior  surface  than  for  the  closed  interior  sur-
face, the  liquid  will  perform  work,  and,  flowing  from
the  outer  to  the  inner  surface,  cause  the  hollow  space
to  disappear.  If,  however,  the  hollow  space  be  occu-
pied by  a fluid  or  gaseous  substance  subjected  to  a de-
terminate pressure,  the  work  done  in  the  last-men-
tioned process  can  be  counteracted  by  the  work  ex-
pended to  produce  the  compression,  and  thus  equilib-
rium may  be  produced.

Theme-  Let  us  picture  to  ourselves  a liquid  mass  confined

",1s  between  two  'similar  and  similarly  situated  surfaces
of  bubbles.  ^epy  near  each  other.  A bubble  is  such

a system.  Its  primary  condition  of  equi-
f librium  is  the  exertion  of  an  excess  of

/y'  pressure  by  the  inclosed  gaseous  con-
\ H tents.  If  the  sum  1/r  + 1/r'  has  the
value  -f  a for  the  exterior  surface,  it  will
Fig‘  2°5'  have  for  the  interior  surface  very  nearly


the  value  —a.  A bubble,  left  wholly  to  itself,  will  al-
ways assume  the  spherical  form.  If  we  conceive  such
a spherical  bubble,  the  thickness  of  which  we  neglect,
the  total  diminution  of  its  superficial  area,  on  the
shortening  of  the  radius  r by  dr,  will  be  i6rndr.  If,
therefore,  in  the  diminution  of  the  surface  by  unit
of  area  the  work  A is  performed,  then  A . i6r  n dr  will


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


393


be  the  total  amount  of  work  to  be  compensated  for
by  the  work  of  compression  p.\r 2 ndr  expended  by
the  pressure  p on  the  inclosed  contents.  From  this
follows  4 A/r=p\  from  which  A may  be  easily  calcu-
lated if  the  measure  of  r is  obtained  and  p is  found  by
means  of  a manometer  introduced  in  the  bubble.

An  open  spherical  bubble  cannot  subsist.  If  an  Open

. bubbles.

open  -bubble  is  to  become  a figure  of  equilibrium,  the
sum  1 /r  + l/r’  must  not  only  be  constant  for  each  of
the  two  bounding  surfaces,  but  must  also  be  equal  for
both.  Owing  to  the  opposite  curvatures  of  the  sur-
faces, then,  l/r  -j-  l/r’  = 0.  Consequently,  r = — rr
for  all  points.  Such  a surface  is  called  a minimal  sur-
face ; that  is,  it  has  the  smallest  area  consistent  with
its  containing  certain  closed  contours.  It  is  also  a sur-
face of  zero-sum  of  principal  curvatures ; and  its  ele-
ments, as  we  readily  see,  are  saddle-shaped.  Surfaces
of  this  kind  are  obtained  by  constructing  closed  space-
curves  of  wire  and  dipping  the  wire  into  a solution  of
soap  and  water.*  The  soap-film  assumes  of  its  own
accord  the  form  of  the  curve  mentioned.

6.  Liquid  figures  of  equilibrium,  made  up  of  thin  Plateau’s
films,  possess  a peculiar  property.  The  work  of  the  uresofequi-
forces  of  gravity  affects  the  entire  mass  of  a liquid  ;
that  of  the  molecular  forces  is  restricted  to  its  super-
ficial film.  Generally,  the  work  of  the  forces  of  grav-
ity preponderates.  But  in  thin  films  the  molecular
forces  come  into  very  favorable  conditions,  and  it  is
possible  to  produce  the  figures  in  question  without
difficulty  in  the  open  air.  Plateau  obtained  them  by
dipping  wire  polyhedrons  into  solutions  of  soap  and
water.  Plane  liquid  films  are  thus  formed,  which  meet

* The  mathematical  problem  of  determining  such  a surface,  when  the
forms  of  the  wires  are  given,  is  called  Plateau's  Problem. — Trans.


394


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


one  another  at  the  edges  of  the  framework.  When
thin  plane  films  are  so  joined  that  they  meet  at  a hol-
low edge,  the  law  l/r  + l/r'  = const  no  longer  holds
for  the  liquid  surface,  as  this  sum  has  the  value  zero
for  plane  surfaces  and  for  the  hollow  edge  a very  large
negative  value.  Conformably,  therefore,  to  the  views
above  reached,  the  liquid  should  run  out  of  the  films,
the  thickness  of  which  would  constantly  decrease,  and
escape  at  the  edges.  This  is,  in  fact,  what  happens.
But  when  the  thickness  of  the  films  has  decreased  to  a
certain  point,  then,  for  physical  reasons,  which  are,  as
it  appears,  not  yet  perfectly  known,  a state  of  equilib-
rium is  effected.

Yet,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  fundamental
equation  1 /r+1  /r'  = const  is  not  fulfilled  in  these  fig-
ures, because  very  thin  liquid  films,  especially  films  of
viscous  liquids,  present  physical  conditions  somewhat
different  from  those  on  which  our  original  suppositions
were  based,  these  figures  present,  nevertheless,  in  all
cases  a minimum  of  superficial  area.  The  liquid  films,
connected  with  the  wire  edges  and  with  one  another,
always  meet  at  the  edges  by  threes  at  approximately
equal  angles  of  120°,  and  by  fours  in  corners  at  approxi-
mately equal  angles.  And  it  is  geometrically  demon-
strable that  these  relations  correspond  to  a minimum
of  superficial  area.  In  the  great  diversity  of  phenom-
ena here  discussed  but  one  fact  is  expressed,  namely
that  the  molecular  forces  do  work,  positive  work,  when
the  superficial  area  is  diminished.

The  reason  7-  The  figures  of  equilibrium  which  Plateau  ob-
equifibrium  tained  by  dipping  wire  polyhedrons  in  solutions  of
metrical,  soap,  form  systems  of  liquid  films  presenting  a re-
markable symmetry . The  question  accordingly  forces
itself  upon  us,  What  has  equilibrium  to  do  with  sym-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


395


metry  and  regularity  ? The  explanation  is  obvious.

In  every  symmetrical  system  every  deformation  that
tends  to  destroy  the  symmetry  is  complemented  by  an
equal  and  opposite  deformation  that  tends  to  restore  it.

In  each  deformation  positive  or  negative  work  is  done.

One  condition,  therefore,  though  not  an  absolutely
sufficient  one,  that  a maximum  or  minimum  of  work
corresponds  to  the  form  of  equilibrium,  is  thus  sup-
plied by  symmetry.  Regularity  is  successive  symme-
try. There  is  no  reason,  therefore,  to  be  astonished
that  the  forms  of  equilibrium  are  often  symmetrical
and  regular.

8.  The  science  of  mathematical  hydrostatics  arose  The  figure

. . . . . . . . . - _ _ oftheearth

in  connection  with  a special  problem — that  of  the  figure


Fig.  206.


of  the  earth . Physical  and  astronomical  data  had  led
Newton  and  Huygens  to  the  view  that  the  earth  is  an
oblate  ellipsoid  of  revolution.  Newton  attempted  to
calculate  this  oblateness  by  conceiving  the  rotating
earth  as  a fluid  mass,  and  assuming  that  all  fluid  fila-
ments drawn  from  the  surface  to  the  centre  exert  the
same  pressure  on  the  centre.  Huygens’s  assumption
was  that  the  directions  of  the  forces  are  perpendicular
to  the  superficial  elements.  Bouguer  combined  both
assumptions.  Clairaut,  finally  ( Theorie  de  la  figure
de  la  terre , Paris,  1743),  pointed  out  that  the  fulfilment
of  both  conditions  does  not  assure  the  subsistence  of
equilibrium.


30


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Clairaut’s
point  of
view.


Conditions
of  equilib-
rium of
Clairaut’s
canals.


•Clairaut’s  starting-point  is  this.  If  the  fluid  earth
is  in  equilibrium,  we  may,  without  disturbing  its  equi-
librium, imagine  any  portion  of  it  solidified.  Accord-
ingly, let  all  of  it  be  solidified  but  a canal  AB,  of  any
form.  The  liquid  in  this  canal  must  also  be  in  equilib-
rium. But  now  the  conditions  which  control  equilib-
rium are  more  easily  investigated.  If  equilibrium  exists
in  every  imaginable  canal  of  this  kind,  then  the  entv  e
mass  will  be  m equilibrium.  Incidentally  Clairaut  re-
marks, that  the  Newtonian  assumption  is  realised  when
the  canal  passes  through  the  centre  (illustrated  in  Big.
206,  cut  2),  and  the  Huygenian  when  the  canal  passes
along  the  surface  (Fig.  206,  cut  3).

But  the  kernel  of  the  problem,  according  to  Clai-
raut, lies  in  a different  view.  In  all  imaginable  canals,


Fig.  207-  Fis- 2oS-

even  in  one  which  returns  into  itself,  the  fluid  must  be
in  equilibrium.  Hence,  if  cross-sections  be  made  at
any  two  points  M and  A7”  of  the  canal  of  Fig.  207,  the
two  fluid  columns  MPN  and  MQN  must  exert  on  the
surfaces  of  section  at  M and  N equal  pressures.  The
terminal  pressure  of  a fluid  column  of  any  such  canal
cannot,  therefore,  depend  on  the  length  and  the  form
of  the  fluid  column,  but  must  depend  solely  on  the.  po-


sition of  its  terminal  points.

Imagine  in  the  fluid  in  question  a canal  MN  of  any
form  (Fig.  208)  referred  to  a system  of  rectangular  co-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


397


ordinates.  Let  the  fluid  have  the  consta?it  density  p
and  let  the  force-components  X,  1",  Z acting  on  unit  of
mass  of  the  fluid  in  the  coordinate  directions,  be  func-
tions of  the  coordinates  y,  z of  this  mass.  Let  the
element  of  length  of  the  canal  be  called  ds , and  let  its
projections  on  the  axes  be  dx,  dy,  dz.  The  force-com-
ponents acting  on  unit  of  mass  in  the  direction  of  the
canal  are  then  Xidx/ds ),  Y(dy/ds),  Z(dzjds ).  Let
q be  the  cross-section ; then,  the  total  force  impelling
the  element  of  mass  pqds  in  the  direction  ds,  is


pqds


Xdx  ydy  Zdz

ds  ds  ds


This  force  must  be  balanced  by  the  increment  of  pres-
sure through  the  element  of  length,  and  consequently
must  be  put  equal  to  q . dp.  We  obtain,  accordingly,
dp  — p ( Xdx  -f-  Ydy  + Zdz).  The  difference  of  pres-
sure (/)  between  the  two  extremities  M and  N is  found-
by  integrating  this  expression  from  Mto  N.  But  as  this
difference  is  not  dependent  on  the  form  of  the  canal
but  solely  on  the  position  of  the  extremities  M and  N;
it  follows  that  p (Xdx  -f-  Ydy  + Zdz),  or,  the  density
being  constant,  Xdx- f-  Ydy  + Zdz,  must  be  a com-
plete differential.  For  this  it  is  necessary  that


dU  y_dU

dZc’  ~~dy9


Z=


dU

71’


where  U is  a function  of  coordinates.  Hence,  according
to  Clairaut,  the  general  condition  of  liquid  equilibrium  is,
that  the  liquid  be  controlled  by  forces  which  can  be  ex-
pressed as  the  partial  differential  coefficients  of  one  and
the  sa?ne  fimction  of  coordinates.

9.  The  Newtonian  forces  of  gravity,  and  in  fact  all
central  forces, — forces  that  masses  exert  in  the  direc-
tions of  their  lines  of  junction  and  which  are  functions


Mathemat-
ical expres-
sion of
these  con-
ditions, and
the  conse-
quent gen-
eral condi-
tion of
liquid  equi-
librium.


398


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Character  of  the  distances  between  these  masses, — possess  this
forces  property.  Under  the  action  of  forces  of  this  character
produce  t0  the  equilibrium  of  fluids  is  possible.  If  we  know  U,
equilibrium^  may  repiace  the  first  equation  by


tdU.  ,dU  .dll,
<lp  = p[dxdX  + Tydy  + Tzdz


or


dp  = pdU  and  p = pU const.


The  totality  of  all  the  points  for  which  U = const
is  a surface,  a so-called  level  sicrface.  For  this  surface
also  p = const . As  all  the  force- relations,  and,  as  we
now  see,  all  the  pressure-relations,  are  determined  by
the  nature  of  the  function  U,  the  pressure-relations,
accordingly,  supply  a diagram  of  the  force-relations,
as  was  before  remarked  in  page  98.
ciairaut’s  In  the  theory  of  Clairaut,  here  presented,  is  con-
germnof  the  tained,  beyond  all  doubt,  the  idea  that  underlies  the
potential,  doctrine  of  force-function  or  potential \ which  was  after-
wards developed  with  such  splendid  results  by  La-
place, Poisson,  Green,  Gauss,  and  others.  As  soon
as  our  attention  has  been  directed  to  this  property  of
certain  forces,  namely,  that  they  can  be  expressed  as
derivatives  of  the  same  function  U,  it  is  at  once  recog-
nised as  a highly  convenient  and  economical  course  to
investigate  in  the  place  of  the  forces  themselves  the
function  U.

If  the  equation

dp  — p (Xdx  + Ydy  Zdz)  = pdU


be  examined,  it  will  be  seen  that  Xdx-\~  Ydy  -|-  Zdz
is  the  element  of  the  work  performed  by  the  forces  on
unit  of  mass  of  the  fluid  in  the  displacement  ds , whose
projections  are  dx , dy , dz.  Consequently,  if  we  trans-
port unit  mass  from  a point  for  which  U=  Cx  to  an-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


399


other  point,  indifferently  chosen,  for  which  U = C0,  character-
„ r , , - isticsofthe

or,  more  generally,  from  the  surface  U=  Ct  to  the  force-func-

surface  U = C2,  we  perform,  no  matter  by  what  path

the  conveyance  has  been  effected,  the  same  amount  of

work.  All  the  points  of  the  first  surface  present,  with

respect  to  those  of  the  second,  the  same  difference  of

pressure  ; the  relation  always  being  such,  that

A 2 p \ :==p{.^2  ^l)J

where  the  quantities  designated  by  the  same  indices
belong  to  the  same  surface.

xo.  Let  us  picture  to  ourselves  a group  of  such  Character-
very  closely  adjacent  surfaces,  of  which  every  two  sue-  level,  or
cessive  ones  differ  from  each  other  by  the  same,  very  tiai!  sur-n
small,  amount  of  work  required  to  transfer  a mass  from
one  to  the  other  ; in  other  w^ords,  imagine  the  surfaces
U = C,  U=  C+dC,  U = C+2dC,  and  so  forth.

A mass  moving  on  a level  surface  evidently  per-
forms no  work.  Hence,  every  component  force  in  a
direction  tangential  to  the
surface  is  = 0 ; and  the  di-
rection of  the  resultant
force  is  everywhere  normal
to  the  surface.  If  we  call  dn
the  element  of  the  normal
intercepted  between  two
consecutive  surfaces,  and f
the  force  requisite  to  con-
vey unit  mass  from  the
one  surface  to  the  other
through  this  element,  the

• work  done  is/,  dn  = d C.  As  d C is  by  hypothesis  every-
where constant,  the  force  f=  dCjdn  is  inversely  pro-
portional to  the  distance  between  the  surfaces  consid-


400


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


ered.  If,  therefore,  the  surfaces  U are  known,  the
directions  of  the  forces  are  given  by  the  elements  of  a
system  of  curves  everywhere  at  right  angles  to  these
surfaces,  and  the  inverse  distances  between  the  sur-
faces measure  the  magnitude  of  the  forces.*  These  sur-
faces and  curves  also  confront  us  in  the  other  depart-
ments of  physics.  We  meet  them  as  equipotential
surfaces  and  lines  of  force  in  electrostatics  and  mag-
netism, as  isothermal  surfaces  and  lines  of  flow  m the
theory  of  the  conduction  of  heat,  and  as  equipotential
surfaces  and  lines  of  flow  in  the  treatment  of  electrical
and  liquid  currents.

Illustration  ii.  We  will  now  illustrate  the  fundamental  idea  of
°lHEc-  Clairaut’s  doctrine  by  another,  very  simple  example,
simple^  a Imagine  two  mutually  perpendicular  planes  to  cut  the
example.  paper  at  right  angles  in  the  straight  lines  OX  and  OY

(Fig.  210).  We  assume  that  a force-function  exists

jj— xy,  where  x and  y are  the  distances  from  the

two  planes.  The  force-components  parallel  to  OX  and
0 Fare  then  respectively


X =


dU

dx


and


dU

dy


* The  same  conclusion  may  he  reached  as  follows.  Imagine  a water  pipe
laid  from  New  York  to  Key  West,  with  its  ends  turning  up  vertically,  and  of
glass  Let  a quantity  of  water  be  poured  into  it,  and  when  equilibrium  is
attained,  let  its  height  be  marked  on  the  glass  at  both  ends.  These  two  marks
will  be  on  one  level  surface.  Now  pour  in  a little  more  water  and  again  mark
the  heights  at  both  ends.  The  additional  water  in  New  York  balances  the-
additional  water  in  Key  West.  The  gravities  of  the  two  are  equal.  But  their
quantities  are  proportional  to  the  vertical  distances  between  the  marks.
Hence  the  force  of  gravity  on  a fixed  quantity  of  water  is  inversely  as  those
vertical  distances,  that  is,  inversely  as  the  distances  between  consecutive
level  surfaces. — Trans.


THE  EXTENSION*  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


401


The  level  surfaces  are  cylindrical  surfaces,  whose
generating  lines  are  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the
paper,  and  whose  directrices,  xy  = const,  are  equi-
lateral hyperbolas.  The  lines  of  force  are  obtained  by
turning  the  first  mentioned  system  of  curves  through
an  angle  of  450  in  the  plane  of  the  paper  about  0.  If
a unit  of  mass  pass
from  the  point  rtoO
by  the  route  rpO,  or
rqO,  or  by  any  other
route,  the  work  done
is  always  Op  X Oq.

If  we  imagine  a
closed  canal  OprqO
filled  with  a liquid,
the  liquid  in  the  ca-
nal will  be  in  equi-
librium. If  transverse
sections  be  made  at

. Fig.  210.

any  two  points,  each

section  will  sustain  at  both  its  surfaces  the  same
pressure.

We  will  now  modify  the  example  slightly.  Let  the  Amodifica-

r . Tr  11  tion  of  this

forces  be  X = — y,  Y— — a , where  a has  a constant  example,
value.  There  exists  now  no  function  U so  constituted
that  X — dUjdx  and  Y = dU/dy  ; for  in  such  a case  it
would  be  necessary  that  dX/dy  — d Y/dx , which  is  ob-
viously not  true.  There  is  therefore  no  force-function,
and  consequently  no  level  surfaces.  If  unit  of  mass
be  transported  from  r to  O by  the  way  of  p,  the  work
done  is  a X Oq.  If  the  transportation  be  effected  by
the  route  rqO,  the  work  done  is  a X O q + Op  X O q.

If  the  canal  OprqO  were  filled  with  a liquid,  the  liquid
could  not  be  in  equilibrium,  but  would  be  forced  to


402


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


rotate  constantly  in  the  direction  OprqO.  Currents  of
this  character,  which  revert  into  themselves  but  con-
tinue their  motion  indefinitely,  strike  us  as  something
quite  foreign  to  our  experience.  Our  attention,  how-
ever, is  directed  by  this  to  an  important  property  of
the  forces  of  nature,  to  the  property,  namely,  that  the
work  of  such  forces  may  be  expressed  as  a function  of
coordinates.  Whenever  exceptions  to  this  principle
are  observed,  we  are  disposed  to  regard  them  as  appa-
rent, and  seek  to  clear  up  the  difficulties  involved.
Torricelli’s  i2.  We  shall  now  examine  a few  problems  of  liquid
on  thfvefo -motion.  The  founder  of  the  theory  of  hydrodynamics  is
“fdlfflu,.  Torricelli.  Torricelli,*  by  observations  on  liquids  dis-
charged through  orifices  in  the  bottom  of  vessels,  dis-
covered the  following  law.  If  the  time  occupied  in  the
complete  discharge  of  a vessel  be  divided  into  n equal
intervals,  and  the  quantity  discharged  in  the  last,  the
«th ; interval  be  taken  as  the  unit,  there  will  be  dis-
charged in  the  (»  — l)th , the  (n - a)* , the  («—  3)th  ■ • • •
interval,  respectively,  the  quantities  3,  5.  7 • • • • and
so  forth.  An  analogy  between  the  motion  of  falling
bodies  and  the  motion  of  liquids  is  thus  clearly  sug-
gested. Further,  the  perception  is  an  immediate  one,
that  the  most  curious  consequences  would  ensue  if  the
liquid,  by  its  reversed  velocity  of  efflux,  could  rise
higher  than  its  original  level.  Torricelli  remarked,
in  fact,  that  it  can  rise  at  the  utmost  to  this  height,
and  assumed  that  it  would  rise  exactly  as  high  if  all
resistances  could  be  removed.  Hence,  neglecting  all
resistances,  the  velocity  of  efflux,  v,  of  a liquid  dis-
charged through  an  orifice  in  the  bottom  of  a vessel  is
connected  with  the  height  h of  the  surface  of  the  liquid
by  the  equation  v —V ^ gh\  that  is  to  say,  the  velocity

* De  Motu  Cravium  Projectorum , 1643.


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


403


of  efflux  is  the  final  velocity  of  a body  freely  falling
through  the  height  h , or  liquid-head  ; for  only  with
this  velocity  can  the  liquid  just  rise  again  to  the  sur-
face. *

Torricelli's  theorem  consorts  excellently  with  the  Varignon’s

r 1 1 -T  r 1 -I  deduction

rest  of  our  knowledge  of  natural  processes  ; but  we  of  thereto-
feel,  nevertheless,  the  need  of  a more  exact  insight,  efflux.
Varignon  attempted  to  deduce  the  principle  from  the
relation  between  force  and  the  momentum  generated  by
force.  The  familiar  equation  fii  = viv  gives,  if  by  a
we  designate  the  area  of  the  basal  orifice,  by  h the
pressure-head  of  the  liquid,  by  ^ its  specific  gravity,
by  g the  acceleration  of  a freely  falling  body,  by  v the
velocity  of  efflux,  and  by  r a small  interval  of  time,
this  result

7 avrs

ahs  . r — . v or  v2  = gh.

g

Here  ahs  represents  the  pressure  acting  during  the
time  r on  the  liquid  mass  avrs/g.  Remembering  that
v is  a final  velocity,  we  get,  more  exactly,

v

, a — . rs

ahs  . r = I . v9

<§>

and  thence  the  correct  formula

z/2  —2  gh.

13.  Daniel  Bernoulli  investigated  the  motions  of
fluids  by  the  principle  of  vis  viva.  We  will  now  treat
the  preceding  case  from  this  point  of  view,  only  ren-
dering the  idea  more  modern.  The  equation  which  we
employ  is  fis  — mv2 /2.  In  a vessel  of  transverse  sec-
tion q (Fig.  21 1),  into  which  a liquid  of  the  specific

* The  early  inquirers  deduce  cheir  propositions  in  the  incomplete  form  of
proportions,  and  therefore  usually  put  v proportional  to  or  V h.


404


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Daniel  Ber-  gravity  s is  poured  till  the  head  h is  reached,  the  surface
treatment  sinks,  say,  the  small  distance  dh , and  the  liquid  mass
problem,  q . dh  . s/g  is  discharged  with  the  velocity  v.  The  work
done  is  the  same  as  though  the  weight  q . dh,  s had
descended  the  distance  h . The  path  of  the  motion  in
the  vessel  is  not  of  consequence  here.  It  makes  no
difference  whether  the  stratum  q . dh
is  discharged  directly  through  the
basal  orifice,  or  passes,  say,  to  a
position  a , while  the  liquid  at  a is
displaced  to  b,  that  at  b displaced  to
c,  and  that  at  c discharged.  The  work
done  is  in  each  case  q . dh  . s . h.
Equating  this  work  to  the  vis  viva  of  the  discharged
liquid,  we  get


Fig.  211.


q . dh  . s . h


q . dh  . s v2


or


v = I / 2 gh.

The  sole  assumption  of  this  argument  is  that  abb

the  work  done  in  the  vessel  appears  as  vis  viva  in  the
liquid  discharged,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  velocities
within  the  vessel  and  the  work  spent  in  overcoming
friction  therein  may  be  negbected.  This  assumption  is
not  very  far  from  the  truth  if  vessels  of  sufficient  width

are  employed,  and  no  violent  rotatory  ^motion  is  set  up.
The  law  of  Let  us  neglect  the  gravity  of  the  liquid  in  the  ves-
whendpro^v * * * * x  sel,  and  imagine  it  loaded  by  a movable  piston,  on
?heCpres^  whose  surface-unit  the  pressure  p falls.  If  the  piston
pistons.  be  displaced  a distance  dh , the  liquid  volume  q,dh
will  be  discharged.  Denoting  the  density  of  the  liquid
by  p and  its  velocity  by  v,  we  then  shall  have

D 2

q . p . dh  = q . dh  . p— , or  v —


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


405


Wherefore,  under  the  same  pressure,  different  liquids
are  discharged  with  velocities  inversely  proportional  to
the  square  root  of  their  density.  It  is  generally  sup-
posed that  this  theorem  is  directly  applicable  to  gases.

Its  form , indeed,  is  correct ; but  the  deduction  fre-
quently employed  involves  an  error,  which  we  shall
now  expose.

14.  Two  vessels  (Fig.  212)  of  equal  cross-sections  The  aPPii-
are  placed  side  by  side  and  connected  with  each  other thSlastre
by  a small  aperture  in  the  base  of  their  dividing  walls.  towofthe
For  the  velocity  of  flow  through  this  aperture  we  ob- gases‘
tain,  under  the  same  suppositions  as  before,

7*7  /■  7 7 N dh.s  v 2 — 77

q.dh.s  < h 2 — ka)  = q——  —,oxv  — V


If  we  neglect  the  gravity  of  the  liquid  and  imagine
the  pressures  p1  and  p2  produced  by  pistons,  we  shall
similarly  have  v = \/4z(pt — /2)/p.  For  example,  if  the
pistons  employed  be  loaded  with  the  weights  P and
-P/2,  the  weight  P will  sink  the  distance  h and  PP
will  rise  the  distance  h.  The  work  (P/2)h  is  thus  left,
to  generate  the  vis  viva  of  the  effluent  fluid.

A gas  under  such  circumstances  would  behave  dif-  The  behav-
ferently.  Supposing  the  gas  to  flow  from  the  vessel  gaTunder
containing  the  load  -Pinto  that  contain-
ing the  load  Pj 2,  the  first  weight  will
fall  a distance  h,  the  second,  however,
since  under  half  the  pressure  a gas  dou-
bles its  volume,  will  rise  a distance  2 h,
so  that  the  work  Ph  — (-P/2)  2/^  = 0
would  be  performed.  In  the  case  of
gases,  accordingly,  some  additional
work,  competent  to  produce  the  flow  between  the  vessels
must  be  performed.  This  work  the  gas  itself  performs,
by  expanding,  and  by  overcoming  by  its  force  of  expan-


the  as-
sumed con-


406


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  result  sion  a pressure.  The  expansive  force  p and  the  volume
formbut1  w of  a gas  stand  to  each  other  in  the  familiar  relation
tiiagnftude! p w = k,  where  k,  so  long  as  the  temperature  of  the
gas  remains  unchanged,  is  a constant.  Supposing  the
volume  of  the  gas  to  expand  under  the  pressure  p by
an  amount  dw , the  work  done  is


For  an  expansion  from  wQ  to  w , or  for  an  increase  of
pressure  from  /0  to  /,  we  get  for  the  work


Conceiving  by  this  work  a volume  of  gas  wQ  of
density  p,  moved  with  the  velocity  v,  we  obtain

/ 2A  los

V = * /


The  velocity  of  efflux  is,  accordingly,  in  this  case  also
inversely  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  density ;
Its  magnitude,  however,  is  not  the  same  as  in  the  case
of  a liquid.

incom-  But  even  this  last  view  is  very  defective.  Rapid

pleteness  of  - - . , .

this  view,  changes  of  the  volumes  of  gases  are  always  accom-
panied with  changes  of  temperature,  and,  consequently
also  with  changes  of  expansive  force.  For  this  reason,
questions  concerning  the  motion  of  gases  cannot  be
dealt  with  as  questions  of  pure  mechanics,  but  always
involve  questions  of  heat.  [Nor  can  even  a thermo-
dynamical treatment  always  suffice  : it  is  sometimes
necessary  to  go  back  to  the  consideration  of  molecular
motions.]

15.  The  knowledge  that  a compressed  gas  contains
stored- up  work,  naturally  suggests  the  inquiry,  whether


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.  407

this  is  not  also  true  of  compressed  liquids.  As  a mat-
ter of  fact,  every  liquid  under  pressure  is  compressed.
To  effect  compression  work  is  requisite,  which  reap-
pears the  moment  the  liquid  expands.  But  this  work,
in  the  case  of  the  mobile  liquids,  is  very  small.  Imag-
ine, in  Fig.  213,  a gas  and  a mobile  liquid  of  the  same
volume,  measured  by  OA , subjected  to  the  same  pres-
sure, a pressure  of  one  atmosphere,  designated  b}r  AB.
If  the  pressure  be  reduced  to  one-half  an  atmosphere,
the  volume  of  the  gas  will  be  doubled,  while  that  of
the  liquid  will  be  increased  by  only  about  25  millionths.
The  expansive  work  of  the  gas  is  represented  by  the
surface  ABDC,  that  of  the  liquid  by  ABLK,  where


AKz=  o-oooo2 5 OA.  If  the  pressure  decrease  till  it
become  zero,  the  total  work  of  the  liquid  is  represented
by  the  surface  ABI,  where  AT  = 0*00005  OA,  and  the
total  work  of  the  gas  by  the  surface  contained  between
AB,  the  infinite  straight  line  ACEG  . . . .,  and  the
infinite  hyperbola  branch  BDFH . . . . Ordinarily ,
therefore,  the  work  of  expansion  of  liquids  may  be
neglected.  There  are  however  phenomena,  for  ex-
ample, the  soniferous  vibrations  of  liquids,  in  which
work  of  this  very*  order  plays  a principal  part.  In  such
cases,  the  changes  of  temperature  the  liquids  undergo
must  also  be  considered.  We  thus  see  that  it  is  only
by  a fortunate  concatenation  of  circumstances  that  we
are  at  liberty  to  consider  a phenomenon  with  any  close


Relative
volumes  of
compressed
gases  and
liquids.


408


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  hydro-
dynamic
principle
of  Daniel
Bernoulli.


approximation  to  the  truth  as  a mere  matter  of  molar
mechanics.

1 6.  We  now  come  to  the  idea  which  Daniel  Ber-
noulli sought  to  apply  in  his  work  Hydrodyna?nica , sive
de  Viribus  et  Motibus  Fluidorum  Co7nmentarii  (1738).
When  a liquid  sinks,  the  space  through  which  its  cen-
tre of  gravity  actually  descends  ( descensus  actualis ) is
equal  to  the  space  through  which  the  centre  of  gravity
of  the  separated  parts  affected  with  the  velocities  ac-
quired in  the  fall  can  ascend  (ascensits  potentialis ).  This
idea,  we  see  at  once,  is  identical  with  that  employed
by  Huygens.  Imagine  a vessel  filled  with  a liquid
(Fig.  214);  and  let  its  horizontal  cross-
£W_  section  at  the  distance  ^ from  the  plane

•dx  of  the  basal  orifice,  be  called  f(x).  Let
the  liquid  move  and  its  surface  descend
\ a distance  dx.  The  centre  of  gravity,
f then,  descends  the  distance  # /(x)  . dx/M,

where  M—J'ftjx)  dx.  If  k is  the  space  of
potential  ascent  of  the  liquid  in  a cross-
Flg* 2I4*  section  equal  to  unity,  the  space  of  po-
tential ascent  in  the  cross-section  fix)  will  be  k/f(x')2,
and  the  space  of  potential  ascent  of  the  centre  of
gravity  will  be


where


For  the  displacement  of  the  liquid’s  surface  through  a
distance  dx , we  get,  by  the  principle  assumed,  both
N and  k changing,  the  equation

— x f (yx)  dx  = Ndk  -f-  kdJN.


-kE

M

/*  dx

N =

)/lF

THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.  409
This  equation  was  employed  by  Bernoulli  in  the  solu- The  parai-

• 1 - lelism  of

tion  of  various  problems.  It  will  be  easily  seen,  that  strata.
Bernoulli's  principle  can  be  employed  with  success
only  when  the  relatwe  velocities  of  the  single  parts  of
the  liquid  are  known.  Bernoulli  assumes, — an  assump-
tion apparent  in  the  formulas, — that  all  particles  once
situated  in  a horizontal  plane,  continue  their  motion
in  a horizontal  plane,  and  that  the  velocities  in  the
different  horizontal  planes  are  to  each  other  in  the  in-
verse ratio  of  the  sections  of  the  planes.  This  is  the
assumption  of  the  parallelism  of  strata.  It  does  not,  in
many  cases,  agree  with  the  facts,  and  in  others  its
agreement  is  incidental.  When  the  vessel  as  compared
with  the  orifice  of  efflux  is  very  wide,  no  assumption
concerning  the  motions  within  the  vessel  is  necessary,
as  we  saw  in  the  development  of  Torricelli's  theorem.

1 7.  A few  isolated  cases  of  liquid  motion  were  The  water-
treated  by  Newton  and  John  Bernoulli.  We  shall  of  Newton,
consider  here  one  to  which  a
familiar  law  is  directly  applic-
able. A cylindrical  U-tube  with
vertical  branches  is  filled  with
a liquid  (Fig.  215).  The  length
of  the  entire  liquid  column  is  L
If  in  one  of  the  branches  the
column  be  forced  a distance  x
below  the  level,  the  column  in

the  other  branch  will  rise  the  distance  x,  and  the
difference  of  level  corresponding  to  the  excursion  x
will  be  2x.  If  a is  the  transverse  section  of  the  tube
and  the  liquid's  specific  gravity,  the  force  brought
into  play  when  the  excursion  # is  made,  will  be  2 asx,
which,  since  it  must  move  a mass  #/.?/£•  will  determine
the  acceleration  (2  asx^/^als/g)  = (zg/l)  x,  or,  for  unit


410


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


excursion,  the  acceleration  'igjL  We  perceive  that
pendulum  vibrations  of  the  duration


The  liquid
pendulum
of  John
Bernoulli.


will  take  place.  The  liquid  column,  accordingly,  vi-
brates the  same  as  a simple  pendulum  of  half  the  length
of  the  column.

A similar,  but  somewhat  more  general,  problem  was
treated  by  John  Bernoulli.  The  two  branches  of  a
cylindrical  tube  (Fig.  216),  curved  in  any  manner,  make

with  the  horizon,  at  the
/X  points  at  which  the

\\  v * * * *  xff\ surfaces  of  the  liquid

[yy*  Bfi  move,  the  angles  a

' B and  ft.  Displacing  one

of  the  surfaces  the  dis-
’ „ tan ce  x,  the  other  sur-

face  suffers  an  equal
displacement.  A difference  of  level  is  thus  produced
x (sin  a -f  sin  and  we  obtain,  by  a course  of  reason-
ing similar  to  that  of  the  preceding  case,  employing
the  same  symbols,  the  formula


-A;


v g (sin  a -j- sin  fi)  ‘

The  laws  of  the  pendulum  hold  true  exactly  for  the

liquid  pendulum  of  Fig.  215  (viscosity  neglected),  even

for  vibrations  of  great  amplitude  ; while  for  the  filar
pendulum  the  law  holds  only  approximately  true  for

small  excursions.


18.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  a liquid  as  a whole  can
rise  only  as  high  as  it  would  have  to  fall  to  produce  its
velocities.  In  every  case  in  which  this  principle  appears
to  present  an  exception,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  excep-


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


tion  is  only  apparent.  One  example  is  Hero’s  fountain.  Hero’s^

This  apparatus,  as  we  know,  consists  of  three  vessels,

which  may  be  designated  in  the  descending  order  as

A,  B,  C.  The  water  in  the  open  vessel  A

falls  through  a tube  into  the  closed  vessel  n

C ; the  air  displaced  in  C exerts  a pressure

on  the  water  in  the  closed  vessel  B,  and  ^

this  pressure  forces  the  water  in  B in  a

jet  above  A whence  it  falls  back  to  its

original  level.  The  water  in  B rises,  it  is

true,  considerably  above  the  level  of  B , i

but  in  actuality  it  merely  flows  by  the

circuitous  route  of  the  fountain  and  the  I

vessel  A to  the  much  lower  level  of  C.  I

Another  ap-  el  Montgoi-

o " fier’shy-

parent  exception  (I I |MM|  j drmUlic

that  of  Montgol-  jj  | iBfl  S

tier’s  hydraulic  I I 1 up  K jlj  ^

ram,  in  which  the  j ssfi  ESESESgr

liquid  by  its  own  I b I ! jlll

work  appears  to  1 Jgs,  I | TTi

rise  considerably  , If  I

above  its  original  I j|  I

level*.  The  liquid  I I

flows  (Fig.  217)  L#  1 ^

from  a cistern  A

through  a long  g 7

pipe  RR  and  a valve  V,  which  opens  inwards,  into  a
vessel  B.  When  the  current  becomes  rapid  enough,  the
valve  V is  forced  shut,  and  a liquid  mass  711  affected  with
the  velocity  v is  suddenly  arrested  in  RR,  which  must


412


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


be  deprived  of  its  momentum.  If  this  be  done  in  the
time  /,  the  liquid  can  exert  during  this  time  a pressure
q = mvjt , to  which  must  be  added  its  hydrostatical
pressure  p.  The  liquid,  therefore,  will  be  able,  during
this  interval  of  time,  to  penetrate  with  a pressure  p -f-  q
through  a second  valve  into  a pila  Heronis , U,  and  in
consequence  of  the  circumstances  there  existing  will
rise  to  a higher  level  in  the  ascension-tube  SS  than
that  corresponding  to  its  simple  pressure  p . It  is
to  be  observed  here,  that  a considerable  portion  of  the
liquid  must  first  flow  off  into  B,  before  a velocity  requi-
site to  close  V is  produced  by  the  liquid’s  work  in  HR.
A small  portion  only  rises  above  the  original  level ;
the  greater  portion  flows  from  A into  B.  If  the  liquid
discharged  from  SS  were  collected,  it  could  be  easily
proved  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  quantity  thus
discharged  and  of  that  received  in  B lay,  as  the  result
of  various  losses,  actually  below  the  level  of  A .

The  principle  of  the  hydraulic  ram,  that  of  the


An  iiiustra-  The  principle  ot  the  hydraulic  ram,  that  of  the
elucidates  transference  of  work  done  by  a large  liquid  mass  to  a

the  action  . . .

of  the  hy-  smaller  one,  which

draulic  ram  , — , .

□ O thus  acquires  a great


smaller  one,  which
flO  thus  acquires  a great

vis  viva , may  be  illus-

Z^.  j . L - - trated  in  the  following

$ very  simple  manner.

\ Close  the  narrow

„ # opening  O of  a funnel

$ \ and  plunge  it,  with  its

“;I8;  wide  opening  down-

wards, deep  into  a
large  vessel  of  water.  If  the  finger  closing  the  upper
opening  be  quickly  removed,  the  space  inside  the
funnel  will  rapidly  fill  with  water,  and  the  surface  of  the
water  outside  the  funnel  will  sink.  The  work  performed


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES .


4i3


is  equivalent  to  the  descent  of  the  contents  of  the  funnel
from  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  superficial  stratum
to  the  centre  of  gravity  S'  of  the  contents  of  the  fun-
nel. If  the  vessel  is  sufficiently  wide  the  velocities  in
it  are  all  very  small,  and  almost  the  entire  vis  viva  is
concentrated  in  the  contents  of  the  funnel.  If  all  the
parts  of  the  contents  had  the  same  velocities,  they
could  all  rise  to  the  original  level,  or  the  mass  as  a
whole  could  rise  to  the  height  at  which  its  centre  of
gravity  was  coincident  with  S.  But  in  the  narrower
sections  of  the  funnel  the  velocity  of  the  parts  is
greater  than  in  the  wider  sections,  and  the  former
therefore  contain  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  vis
viva.  Consequently,  the  liquid  parts  above  are  vio-
lently separated  from  the  parts  below  and  thrown
out  through  the  neck  of  the  funnel  high  above  the
original  surface.  The  remainder,  however,  are  left
considerably  below  that  point,  and  the  centre  of  grav-
ity of  the  whole  never  as  much  as  reaches  the  original
level  of

19.  One  of  the  most  important  achievements  of  Hydrostatic
Daniel  Bernoulli  is  his  distinction  of  hydrostatic  and  dynamic
hydrodynamic  pressure.  The  pressure
which  liquids  exert  is  altered  by  motion  ;
and  the  pressure  of  a liquid  i?i  motion
may,  according  to  the  circumstances,  be
greater  or  less  than  that  of  the  liquid  at  rest
with  the  same  arrangement  of  parts.  We
will  illustrate  this  by  a simple  example.

The  vessels,  which  has  the  form  of  a body
of  revolution  with  vertical  axis,  is  kept
constantly  filled  with  a frictionless  liquid,  so  that  its
surface  at  mn  does  not  change  during  the  discharge
at  kl.  We  will  reckon  the  vertical  distance  of  a particle


414


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Determina- from  the  surface  mn  downwards  as  positive  and  call
pressures  it  z.  Let  us  follow  the  course  of  a prismatic  element  of
acting  in  ii- volume,  whose  horizontal  base-area  is  a and  height  ft ,
motion.  in  its  downward  motion,  neglecting,  on  the  assump-
tion of  the  parallelism  of  strata,  all  velocities  at  right
angles  to  z.  Let  the  density  of  the  liquid  be  p,  the
velocity  of  the  element  v,  and  the  pressure,  which  is
dependent  on  z,  p.  If  the  particle  descend  the  dis-
tance dz,  we  have  by  the  principle  of  vis  viva

a ft  pd(^j  = a ft  pgdz — a~^ftdz (1)

that  is,  the  increase  of  the  vis  viva  of  the  element  is
equal  to  the  work  of  gravity  for  the  displacement  in
question,  less  the  work  of  the  forces  of  pressure  of  the
liquid.  The  pressure  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  element
is  ap,  that  on  the  lower  surface  is  a [p  + {d 'p/dz)ft'] .
The  element  sustains,  therefore,  if  the  pressure  in-
crease downwards,  an  upward  pressure  a(dp/dz)ft;
and  for  any  displacement  dz  of  the  element,  the  work
a (dp /dz) ft  dz  must  be  deducted.  Reduced,  equation
(i)  assumes  the  form

f>.d[ftft  = pgdz-dP-ds

and,  integrated,  gives

v2  ,

P-  Y = Pgz~~P+  const (2)

If  we  express  the  velocities  in  two  different  hori-
zontal cross-sections  at  and  a2  at  the  depths  z1  and  s2
below  the  surface,  by  v±J  v2,  and  the  corresponding
pressures  by  pv  p2,  we  may  write  equation  (2)  in  the
form

-f-'  O?  — ®i)  = P^(*i  — *2)  + C/a—  /1)  • (3)


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES.


415


Taking  for  our  cross-section  at  the  surface,  zx  = 0,
px~ — 0 ; and  as  the  same  quantity  of  liquid  flows  through  pressure^h
all  cross-sections  in  the  same  interval  of  time,  a.  vi  =thecircum-
a2  ZV  Whence,  finally,  the  motion.


P2  =PgZ 2 + Y


The  pressure  p2  of  the  liquid  in  motion  (the  hydro  -
dynamic  pressure)  consists  of  the  pressure  pgz2  of  the
liquid  at  rest  (the  hydrostatic  pressure)  and  of  a pres-
sure (p/ 2)v\  [(#|  — a\) /a\~\  dependent  on  the  density,
the  velocity  of  flow,  and  the  cross-sectional  areas.  In
cross-sections  larger  than  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  the
hydrodynamic  pressure  is  greater  than  the  hydrostatic,
and  vice  versa.

A clearer  idea  of  the  significance  of  Bernoulli's  illustration

. . . . of  these  re-

principle  may  be  obtained  by  imagining  the  liquid  insuits^byhe

the  vessel  A unacted  on  by  gravity,  and  its  outflow  quids  under

produced  by  a constant  pressure  on  the  surface,  produced

* 1 by  pistons.

Equation  (3)  then  takes  the  form


A=A  + y(


If  we  follow  the  course  of  a particle  thus  moving,  it
will  be  found  that  to  every  increase  of  the  velocity  of
flow  (in  the  narrower  cross-sections)  a decrease  of
pressure  corresponds,  and  to  every  decrease  of  the  ve-
locity of  flow  (in  the  wider  cross-sections)  an  increase
of  pressure.  This,  indeed,  is  evident,  wholly  aside
from  mathematical  considerations.  In  the  present  case
every  change  of  the  velocity  of  a liquid  element  must  be
exclusively  produced  by  the  work  of  the  liquid' s forces
of  pressure . When,  therefore,  an  element  enters  into
a narrower  cross-section,  in  which  a greater  velocity
of  flow  prevails,  it  can  acquire  this  higher  velocity  only


4x6


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


on  the  condition  that  a greater  pressure  acts  on  its  rear
surface  than  on.  its  front  surface,  that  is  to  say,  only
when  it  moves  from  points  of  higher  to  points  of  lower
pressure,  or  when  the  pressure  decreases  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  motion.  If  we  imagine  the  pressures  in
a wide  section  and  in  a succeeding  narrower  section
to  be  for  a moment  equal,  the  acceleration  of  the  ele-
ments in  the  narrower  section  will  not  take  place  • the
elements  will  not  escape  fast  enough  ; they  will  accumu-
late before  the  narrower  section  ; and  at  the  entrance


to  it  the  requisite  augmentation  of  pressure  will  be  im-


mediately produced.  The  converse  case  is  obvious.


Treatment
of  a liquid
problem  in
which  vis-
cosity and
friction  are
considered.


20.  In  dealing  with  more  complicated  cases,  the
problems  of  liquid  motion,  even  though  viscosity  be


neglected,  present  great  difficulties ; and  when  the
enormous  effects  of  viscosity  are  taken  into  account,
anything  like  a dynamical  solution  of  almost  every
problem  is  out  of  the  question.  So  much  so,  that  al-
though these  investigations  were  begun  by  Newton,
we  have,  up  to  the  present  time,  only  been  able  to
master  a very  few  of  the  simplest  problems  of  this  class,
and  that  but  imperfectly.  We  shall  content  ourselves
with  a simple  example.  If  we  cause  a liquid  contained
in  a vessel  of  the  pressure-head  h to  flow,  not  through
an  orifice  in  its  base,  but  through  a long  cylindrical
tube  fixed  in  its  side  (Fig.  220),  the  velocity  of  efflux


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 417

v will  be  less  than  that  deducible  from  Torricelli’s  law,
as  a portion  of  the  work  is  consumed  by  resistances
due  to  viscosity  and  perhaps  to  friction.  We  find,  in
fact,  that  v = 1/2 ghx,  where  ht  h.  Expressing  by  h t
the  velocity- head,  and  by  h2  the  resistance- head,  we  may
put  h = ht  -j-  h2.  If  to  the  main  cylindrical  tube  we
affix  vertical  lateral  tubes,  the  liquid  will  rise  in  the
latter  tubes  to  the  heights  at  which  it  equilibrates  the
pressures  in  the  main  tube,  and  will  thus  indicate  at  all
points  the  pressures  of  the  main  tube.  The  noticeable
fact  here  is,  that  the  liquid-height  at  the  point  of  influx
of  the  tube  is  = h2 , and  that  it  diminishes  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  point  of  outflow,  by  the  law  of  a straight
line,  to  zero.  The  elucidation  of  this  phenomenon  is
the  question  now  presented.

Gravity  here  does  not  act  directly  on  the  liquid  in  The  condh

the  horizontal  tube,  but  all  effects  are  transmitted  to  it  perform-
11  ' r 1 Tr  ance  of

by  the  pressure  of  the  surrounding  parts.  If  we  imag-work  in
ine  a prismatic  liquid  element  of  basal  area  a and
length  fi  to  be  displaced  in  the  direction  of  its  length
a distance  dz,  the  work  done,  as  in  the  previous  case,  is

— fidz  = — a fi^~dz,
dz  7 dz

For  a finite  displacement  we  have
h

— a^J^dz  = — <x^^^—PC) (!)

H

Work  is  done  when  the  element  of  volume  is  displaced
from  a place  of  higher  to  a place  of  lower  pressure.

The  amount  of  the  work  done  depends  on  the  size  of
the  element  of  volume  and  on  the  difference  of  pressure
at  the  initial  and  terminal  points  of  the  motion,  and
not  on  the  length  and  the  form  of  the  path  traversed.


418


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  conse-
quences of
these  con-
ditions.


If  the  diminution  ot  pressure  were  twice  as  rapid  in
one  case  as  in  another,  the  difference  of  the  pressures
on  the  front  and  rear  surfaces,  or  the  force  of  the  work,
would  be  doubled,  but  the  space  through  which  the
work  was  done  would  be  halved.  The  work  done  would
remain  the  same,  whether  done  through  the  space  ab
or  ac  of  Fig.  221.

Through  every  cross-section  q of  the  horizontal  tube
the  liquid*  flows  with  the  same  velocity  v,  If,  neglect-
ing the  differences  of  velocity  in  the  same  cross-section,
we  consider  a liquid  element  which  exactly  fills  the
section  q and  has  the  length  ft,  the  vis  viva  q ft p(z>2 /2)
of  such  an  element  will  persist  unchanged  throughout
its  entire  course  in  the  tube.
This  is  possible  only  provided
the  vis  viva  consumed  by  friction
is  replaced  by  the  work  of  the
liquid's  forces  of  pressure.  Hence,
in  the  direction  of  the  motion
of  the  element  the  pressure
must  diminish,  and  for  equal  distances,  to  which  the
same  work  of  friction  corresponds,  by  equal  amounts.
The  total  work  of  gravity  on  a liquid  element  q /3 p
issuing  from  the  vessel,  is  qfipgh.  Of  this  the  portion
q ftp  (z>2  /a)  is  the  vis  viva  of  the  element  discharged
with  the  velocity  v into  the  mouth  of  the  tube,  or,  as
v = V/2gh19  the  portion  qfipgh^  The  remainder  of
the  work,  therefore,  q /3  pgh2 , is  consumed  in  the  tube,
if  owing  to  the  slowness  of  the  motion  we  neglect  the
losses  within  the  vessel.

If  the  pressure-heads  respectively  obtaining  in  the
vessel,  at  the  mouth,  and  at  the  extremity  of  the  tube,
are  h , h2,  0,  or  the  pressures  are p = hgp,  p2  — k2gp , 0,
then  by  equation  (1)  of  page  417  the  work  requisite  to


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  PRINCIPLES . 419

generate  the  vis  viva  of  the  element  discharged  into
the  mouth  of  the  tube  is
v ^

ql3p-^  — q/3(j—J>2)=ql3gpQi  — h2)  = qftgpk1,

and  the  work  transmitted  by  the  pressure  of  the  liquid
to  the  element  traversing  the  length  of  the  tube,  is

qPPi  — qPsph  2-

or  the  exact  amount  consumed  in  the  tube.

Let  us  assume,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  the  indirect

demonstra-

pressure  does  not  decrease  from  p0  at  the  mouth  to  tion  of

....  - r - . . - these  con-

zero  at  the  extremity  of  the  tube  by  the  law  of  a straight  sequences,
line,  but  that  the  distribution  of  the  pressure  is  differ-
ent, say,  constant  throughout  the  entire  tube.  The
parts  in  advance  then  will  at  once  suffer  a loss  of  ve-
locity from  the  friction,  the  parts  which  follow  will
crowd  upon  them,  and  there  will  thus  be  produced  at
the  mouth  of  the  tube  an  augmentation  of  pressure
conditioning  a constant  velocity  throughout  its  entire
length.  The  pressure  at  the  end  of  the  tube  can  only
be  = 0 because  the  liquid  at  that  point  is  not  prevented
from  yielding  to  any  pressure  impressed  upon  it.

If  we  imagine  the  liquid  to  be  a mass  of  smooth  a simile
elastic  balls,  the  balls  will  be  most  compressed  at  the  which  these
bottom  of  the  vessel,  they  will  enter  the  tube  in  a state  maynb™cna
of  compression,  and  will  gradually  lose  that  state  in  ceived.
the  course  of  their  motion.  We  leave  the  further  de-
velopment of  this  simile  to  the  reader.

It  is  evident,  from  a previous  remark,  that  the  work
stored  up  in  the  compression  of  the  liquid  itself,  is  very
small.  The  motion  of  the  liquid  is  due  to  the  work  of
gravity  in  the  vessel,  which  by  means  of  the  pressure
of  the  compressed  liquid  is  transmitted  to  the  parts  in
the  tube.


420


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


A partial
exemplifi-
cation of
the  results
discussed.


An  interesting  modification  of  the  case  just  dis-
cussed is  obtained  by  causing  the  liquid  to  flow  through
a tube  composed  of  a number  of  shorter  cylindrical
tubes  of  varying  widths.  The  pressure  in  the  direction
of  outflow  then  diminishes  (Fig.  222)  more  rapidly  in
the  narrower  tubes,  in  which  a greater  consumption  of
work  by  friction  takes  place,  than  in  the  wider  ones.
We  further  note,  in  every  passage  of  the  liquid  into  a


wider  tube,  that  is  to  a smaller  velocity  of  flow,  an  in-
crease of  pressure  (a  positive  congestion)  ; in  every
passage  into  a narrower  tube,  that  is  to  a greater  velo-
city of  flow,  an  abrupt  di77iinution  of  pressure  (a  nega-
tive congestion).  The  velocity  of  a liquid  element  on
which  no  direct  forces  act  can  be  diminished  or  in-
creased only  by  its  passing  to  points  of  higher  or  lower
pressure.


CHAPTER  IV.


THE  FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  MECHANICS.

I.

THE  ISOPERIMETRICAL  PROBLEMS,
i.  When  the  chief  facts  of  a physical  science  have  The  formal

. . . as  distin-

once  been  fixed  by  observation,  a new  period  of  its  guished

. from  the  de

development  begins — the  deductive , which  we  treatedductive.de

, . velopment

m the  previous  chapter.  In  this  period,  the  facts  are  of  physical

* . . . science.

reproducible  in  the  mind  without  constant  recourse  to
observation.  Facts  of  a more  general  and  complex
character  are  mimicked  in  thought  on  the  theory  that
they  are  made  up  of  simpler  and  more  familiar  obser-
vational elements.  But  even  after  we  have  deduced
from  our  expressions  for  the  most  elementary  facts
(the  principles)  expressions  for  more  common  and  more
complex  facts  (the  theorems)  and  have  discovered  in
all  phenomena  the  same  elements,  the  developmental
process  of  the  science  is  not  yet  completed.  The  de-
ductive development  of  the  science  is  followed  by  its
formal  development.  Here  it  is  sought  to  put  in  a clear
compendious  form,  or  system , the  facts  to  be  repro-
duced, so  that  each  can  be  reached  and  mentally  pic-
tured with  the  least  intellectual  effort . Into  our  rules
for  the  mental  reconstruction  of  facts  we  strive  to  in-
corporate the  greatest  possible  uniformity , so  that  these
rules  shall  be  easy  of  acquisition.  It  is  to  be  remarked,
that  the  three  periods  distinguished  are  not  sharply


422


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


separated  from  one  another,  but  that  the  processes  of
development  referred  to  frequently  go  hand  in  hand,
although  on  the  whole  the  order  designated  is  unmis-
takable.

The  isoperl-  2.  A powerful  influence  was  exerted  on  the  formal
problems,  development  of  mechanics  by  a particular  class  of
donsqofS  mathematical  problems,  which,  at  the  close  of  the
and  minima  seventeenth  and  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
turies, engaged  the  deepest  attention  of  inquirers.
These  problems,  the  so-called  isofierimetrical  problems ,
will  now  form  the  subject  of  our  remarks.  Certain
questions  of  the  greatest  and  least  values  of  quanti-
ties, questions  of  maxima  and  minima,  were  treated  by

the  Greek  mathemati-
cians. Pythagoras  is
said  to  have  taught  that
the  circle,  of  all  plane
figures  of  a given  peri-
meter, has  the  greatest
area.  The  idea,  too,  of  a
certain  economy  in  the  processes  of  nature  was  not
foreign  to  the  ancients.  Hero  deduced  the  law  of  the
reflection  of  light  from  the  theory  that  light  emitted
from  a point  A (Fig.  223)  and  reflected  at  M will  travel
to  B by  the  shortest  route.  Making  the  plane  of  the
paper  the  plane  of  reflection,  SS  the  intersection  of
the  reflecting  surface,  A the  point  of  departure,  B the
point  of  arrival,  and  M the  point  of  reflection  of  the
ray  of  light,  it  will  be  seen  at  once  that  the  line  AMB' ,
where  B'  is  the  reflection  of  B , is  a straight  line.  The
line  AMB ' is  shorter  than  the  line  ANB ',  and  there-
fore also  AMB  is  shorter  than  ANB . Pappus  held
similar  notions  concerning  organic  nature;  he  ex-


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


423


plained,  for  example,  the  form  of  the  cells  of  the  honey-
comb by  the  bees’  efforts  to  economise  in  materials.

These  ideas  fell,  at  the  time  of  the  revival  of  the  The  re-

searches  of

sciences,  on  not  unfruitful  soil.  They  were  first  taken  Kepler,  Fer-
up  by  Fermat  and  Roberval,  who  developed  a method  Robervai.
applicable  to  such  problems.  These  inquirers  ob-
served,— as  Kepler  had  already  done, — that  a magni-
tude y which  depends  on  another  magnitude  x}  gen-
erally possesses  in  the  vicinity  of  its  greatest  and  least
values  a peculiar  property.  Let  x (Fig.  224)  denote
abscissas  andy  ordinates.  If,  while  x increases,  y pass
through  a maximum  value,  its  increase,  or  rise,  will
be  changed  into  a decrease,  or
fall ; and  if  it  pass  through  a
minimum  value  its  fall  will  be
changed  into  a rise.  The  neigh-
boring values  of  the  maximum
or  minimum  value,  consequently,  j?ig<  224.

will  lie  very  near  each  other,  and

the  tangents  to  the  curve  at  the  points  in  question  will
generally  be  parallel  to  the  axis  of  abscissas.  Hence,
to  find  the  maximum  or  minimum  values  of  a quan-
tity, we  seek  the  parallel  tangents  of  its  curve.

The  method  of  tangents  may  be  put  in  analytical  The
form.  For  example,  it  is  required  to  cut  off  from  a tangents,
given  line  a a portion  x such  that  the  product  of  the
two  segments  x and  a — x shall  be  as  great  as  possible.

Here,  the  product  x(a  — x)  must  be  regarded  as  the
quantity  y dependent  on  x.  At  the  maximum  value  of
y any  infinitely  small  variation  of  x,  say  a variation  £,
will  produce  no  change  in  y.  Accordingly,  the  required
value  of  x will  be  found,  by  putting

x (a  — x)  — (x  -(-  S)  (a  — x — <?)


or


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


424

ax  — x2  — ax  a B — x2  — x£  — xB  — B2
or

0 = a — 2 x — B-

As  B may  be  made  as  small  as  we  please,  we  also  get
0 — a — 2x  ;

whence  x = a/2.

In  this  way,  the  concrete  idea  of  the  method  of
tangents  may  be  translated  into  the  language  of  alge-
bra ; the  procedure  also  contains,  as  we  see,  the  germ
of  the  differential  calculus.

The  refrac-  Fermat  sought  to  find  for  the  law  of  the  refraction
as  a minE  of  light  an  expression  analogous  to  that  of  Hero  for

law  of  reflection.  He  remarked
that  light,  proceeding  from  a
point  Ay  and  refracted  at  a
point  My  travels  to  jB,  not  by
the  shortest  route,  but  in  the
shortest  time.  If  the  path  A MB
is  performed  in  the  shortest
time,  then  a neighboring  path
ANBy  infinitely  near  the  real
path,  will  be  described  in  the
same  time.  If  we  draw  from  N on  AM  and  from  M on
NB  the  perpendiculars  NP  and  MQ}  then  the  second
route,  before  refraction,  is  less  than  the  first  route  by  a
distance  MP  = NM  sin  a,  but  is  larger  than  it  after
refraction  by  the  distance  NQ  = NM  sin  / 3 . On  the
supposition,  therefore,  that  the  velocities  in  the  first
and  second  media  are  respectively  vt  and  v2,  the  time
required  for  the  path  AMB  will  be  a minimum  when

NM  sin  a NM  sin  /3


Fig.  225.


or


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT '.


425


sin  a

v2  sin  p ’

where  n stands  for  the  index  of  refraction.  Hero's  law
of  reflection,  remarks  Leibnitz,  is  thus  a special  case
of  the  law  of  refraction.  For  equal  velocities  (vt  = v2),
the  condition  of  a minimum  of  time  is  identical  with
the  condition  of  a minimum  of  space.

Huygens,  in  his  optical  investigations,  applied  and  Huygens’s

, . completion

further  perfected  the  ideas  of  Fermat,  considering,  not  of  Fermat’s
only  rectilinear,  but  also  curvilinear  motions  of  light,
in  media  in  which  the  velocity  of  the  light  varied  con-
tinuously from  place  to  place.  For  these,  also,  he
found  that  Fermat’s  law  obtained.  Accordingly,  in  all
motions  of  light,  an  endeavor,  so  to  speak,  to  produce
results  in  a minimum  of  time  appeared  to  be  the  funda-
mental tendency.

3.  Similar  maximal  or  minimal  properties  were  The  Prob-
brought  out  in  the  study  of  mechanical  phenomena,  brachisto-
As  we  have  already  noticed,  John  Bernoulli  knew  that
a freely  suspended  chain  assumes  the  form  for  which
its  centre  of  gravity  lies  lowest . This  idea  was,  of
course,  a simple  one  for  the  investigator  who  first  rec-
ognised the  general  import  of  the  principle  of  virtual
velocities.  Stimulated  by  these  observations,  inquir-
ers now  began  generally  to  investigate,  maximal  and
minimal  characters.  The  movement  received  its  most
powerful  impulse  from  a problem  propounded  by  John
Bernoulli,  in  June,  1696* — the  problem  of  the  brachis-
tochrone. In  a vertical  plane  two  points  are  situated,

A and  B.  It  is  required  to  assign  in  this  plane  the
curve  by  which  a falling  body  will  travel  from  A to  B
in  the  shortest  time.  The  problem  was  very  ingeniously


* Acta  Erudztorum,  Leipsic.


426


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


John  Ber-
noulli’s in*


solved  by  John  Bernoulli  himself ; and  solutions  were
also  supplied  by  Leibnitz,  L’Hopital,  Newton,  and
James  Bernoulli.

The  most  remarkable  solution  was  John  Ber-
geniousso-  noulli’s  own.  This  inquirer  remarks  that  problems
problem  of  of  this  class  have  already  been  solved,  not  for  the  mo-
tochrone.  tion  of  falling  bodies,  but  for  the  motion  of  light.  He
accordingly  imagines  the  motion  of  a falling  body  re-
placed by  the  motion  of


A K


B

Fig.  226.


a ray  of  light.  (Comp,
p.  379-)  The  two  points
A and  B are  supposed
to  be  fixed  in  a medium
in  which  the  velocity  of
light  increases  in  the


vertical  downward  direction  by  the  same  law  as  the
velocity  of  a falling  body.  The  medium  is  supposed
to  be  constructed  of  horizontal  layers  of  downwardly
decreasing  density,  such  that  v = 1/ 2gh  denotes  the
velocity  of  the  light  in  any  layer  at  the  distance  h be-
low A.  A ray  of  light  which  travels  from  A to  B un-
der such  conditions  will  describe  this  distance  in  the
shortest  time,  and  simultaneously  trace  out  the  curve
of  quickest  descent.

Calling  the  angles  made  by  the  element  of  the
curve  with  the  perpendicular,  or  the  normal  of  the
layers,  a,  a".  . . .,  and  the  respective  velocities


v,  v 9 v


we  have


sm  a sm  a


sma


v


v


: const .


or,  designating  the  perpendicular  distances  below  A
by  x,  the  horizontal  distances  from  A by  y,  and  the  arc
of  the  curve  by  s ,


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


427


The  bra-
chisto-
chrone a
cycloid.

V

whence  follows

dy2  = k 2 ?>2  ds 2 = k2  v2  (dx2  + dy2)
and  because  v = V 2 gx  also

l~x~  1

dy  = dx^i  — — , where  ^ .

This  is  the  differential  equation  of  a cycloid,  or  curve
described  by  a point  in  the  circumference  of  a circle  of
radius  r = ^/2  = 1/4 gk2,  rolling  on  a straight  line.

To  find  the  cycloid  that  passes  through  A and  B,
it  is  to  be  noted  that  all  cycloids,  inasmuch  as  they  are  J^yckud
produced  by  similar  con-  ™°ntiTen

structions,  are  similar ,
and  that  if  generated  by
the  rolling  of  circles  on
AD  from  the  point  A as
origin,  are  also  similarly
situated  with  respect  to

the  point  A.  Accordingly,  we  draw  through  AB  a
straight  line,  and  construct  any  cycloid,  cutting  the
straight  line  in  Br.  The  radius  of  the  generating
circle  is,  say,  r'.  Then  the  radius  of  the  generating
circle  of  the  cycloid  sought  is  r=z  r\AB /AB').

This  solution  of  John  Bernoulli’s,  achieved  entirely
without  a method,  the  outcome  of  pure  geometrical
fancy  and  a skilful  use  of  such  knowledge  as  happened
to  be  at  his  command,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable
and  beautiful  performances  in  the  history  of  physical
science.  John  Bernoulli  was  an  aesthetic  genius  in  this
field.  His  brother  J ames’s  character  was  entirely  differ-
ent. James  was  the  superior  of  John  in  critical  power,


428


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Compari-  but  m originality  and  imagination  was  surpassed  by  the
scientific  latter.  James  Bernoulli  likewise  solved  this  problem,
of  John  and  though  in  less  felicitous  form.  But,  on  the  other  hand,.
iouTii.  er  he  did  not  fail  to  develop,  with  great  thoroughness,  a
general  method  applicable  to  such  problems.  Thus,
in  these  two  brothers  we  find  the  two  fundamental
traits  of  high  scientific  talent  separated  from  one
another, — traits,  which  in  the  very  greatest  natural
inquirers,  in  Newton,  for  example,  are  combined  to-
gether. We  shall  soon  see  those  two  tendencies,  which
within  one  bosom  might  have  fought  their  battles  un-
noticed, clashing  in  open  conflict,  in  the  persons  of
these  two  brothers.


Vignette  to  Leibnitzii  et  Johannis  Bernoullii  comercium  elistolicum.
Lausanne  and  Geneva,  Bousquet,  1745.


James  Ber-  4.  James  Bernoulli  finds  that  the  chief  object  of
marks  on  ^ research  hitherto  had  been  to  find  the  values  of  a vari-
natureof  able  quantity,  for  which  a second  variable  quantity.

the  new  ...  . J

problem,  which  is  a function  of  the  first,  assumes  its  greatest  or
its  least  value.  The  present  problem,  however,  is  to  find


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT .


429


from  among  an  infinite  number  of  curves  one  which  pos-
sesses a certain  maximal  or  minimal  property.  This,  as
he  correctly  remarks,  is  a problem  of  an  entirely  dif-
ferent character  from  the  other  and  demands  a new
method.

The  principles  that  Tames  Bernoulli  employed  inTheprinci-

r.  r . J pies  em-

the  solution  of  this  problem  (. Acta  Eruditorum , May,  ployed  in

James  Ber-

1697')*  are  as  follows:  nouiirsso-

y y . . lution.

(1)  If  a curve  has  a certain  property  of  maximum
or  minimum,  every  portion  or  element  of  the  curve  has
the  same  property.

(2)  Just  as  the  infinitely  adjacent  values  of  the
maxima  or  minima  of  a quantity  in  the  ordinary  prob-
lems, for  infinitely  small  changes  of  the  independent
variables,  are  constant,  so  also  is  the  quantity  here  to
be  made  a maximum  or  minimum  for  the  curve  sought,
for  infinitely  contiguous  curves , constant.

(3)  It  is  finally  assumed,  for  the  case  of  the  brachis-
tochrone, that  the  velocity  is  v =.  V 2gh,  where  h de-
notes the  height  fallen  through.

If  we  picture  to  ourselves  a very  small  portion  ABC  The  essen-
of  the  curve  (Fig.  228),  and,  imagining  a horizontal  tures  of
line  drawn  through  B,  cause
the  portion  taken  to  pass  into
the  infinitely  contiguous  por-
tion ABC \ we  shall  obtain,  by
considerations  exactly  similar
to  those  employed  in  the  treat-
ment of  Fermat’s  law,  the  well-
known  relation  between  the

sines  of  the  angles  made  by  the  curve-elements  with
the  perpendicular  and  the  velocities  of  descent.  In
this  deduction  the  following  assumptions  are  made,

* See  also  his  works,  Vol.  II,  p.  768.


43=>


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


(i),  that  the  part , or  element,  ABC  is  brachistochro-
nous,  and  (2),  that  ADC  is  described  in  the  same  time
as  ABC.  Bernoulli’s  calculation  is  very  prolix  ; but
its  essential  features  are  obvious,  and  the  problem  is
solved  * by  the  above-stated  principles.

The  Pro-  With  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  the  brachisto-

gramma  of  .

James  Ber-  chrone,  Tames  Bernoulli,  m accordance  with  the  prac-

the proposi-tice  then  prevailing  among  mathematicians,  proposed

tionofthe  , „ „ K ® f . . . ’ , ,

general  iso- the  following  more  general  “lsoperimetrical  problem

perimetri-  . . .

caiprob-  <<  Of  all  isoperimetrical  curves  (that  is,  curves  of  equal
“perimeters  or  equal  lengths)  between  the  same  two
“fixed  points,  to  find  the  curve  such  that  the  space
“included  (1)  by  a second  curve,  each  of  whose  ordi-
“ nates  is  a given  function  of  the  corresponding  ordi-
“nate  or  the  corresponding  arc  of  the  one  sought,  (2)
“by  the  ordinates  of  its  extreme  points,  and  (3)  by  the
“part  of  the  axis  of  abscissas  lying  between  those  ordi-
“ nates,  shall  be  a maximum  or  minimum.”

For  example.  It  is  required  to  find  the  curve  BFN \
described  on  the  base  BN  such,  that  of  all  curves  of

the  same  length  on  BN \
this  particular  one  shall  make
the  area  BZN  a minimum,
where  PZ  = {PF)n,  LM  =
(LKy\  and  so  on.  Let  the
relation  between  the  ordi-
nates of  BZN  and  the  cor-
responding ordinates  oiBFN
be  given  by  the  curve  BIT.  To  obtain  PZ  from  PF,
draw  FGH  at  right  angles  to  BG,  where  BG  is  at  right
angles  to  BN.  By  hypothesis,  then,  PZ=  GH \ and

* For  the  details  of  this  solution  and  for  information  generally  on  the  his-
tory of  this  subject,  see  Woodhouse’s  Treatise  on  Isoperimetrical  Problems
and  the  Calculus  of  Variations , Cambridge,  1810. — Trans.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT \


431


~ o for  the  other  ordinates.  Further,  we  put  BP  = y,


PF=  X,  PZ  =r  X".

• John  Bernoulli  gave,  forthwith,  a solution  of  this  John  _Ber-^


problem,  in  the  form

y


/xn  dx

V a 2n — x


lution  of
this  prob-
lem.


where  a is  an  arbitrary  constant.  For  n = l.


]/  a2 — x2,


that  is,  BFN  is  a semicircle  on  BN  as  diameter,  and
the  area  BZN  is  equal  to  the  area  BFN.  For  this  par-
ticular case,  the  solution,  in  fact,  is  correct.  But  the
general  formula  is  not  universally  valid.

On  the  publication  of  John  Bernoulli’s  solution,

James  Bernoulli  openly  engaged  to  do  three  things  :
first,  to  discover  his  brother’s  method ; second,  to  point
out  its  contradictions  and  errors  ; and,  third,  to  give  the
true  solution.  The  jealousy  and  animosity  of  the  two
brothers  culminated,  on  this  occasion,  in  a violent  and
acrimonious  controversy,  which  lasted  till  James’s
death.  After  James’s  death,  John  virtually  confessed
his  error  and  adopted  the  correct  method  of  his  brother.

James  Bernoulli  surmised,  and  in  all  probability  James  Ber-
correctly,  that  John,  misled  by  the  results  of  his  re- criticism  of
searches  on  the  catenary  and  the  curve  of  a sail  filled  nouiii’s  so-
with  wind,  had  again  attempted  an  indirect  solution,
imagining  BFN  filled  with  a liquid  of  variable  density
and  taking  the  lowest  position  of  the  centre  of  gravity
as  determinative  of  the  curve  required.  Making  the
ordinate  PZ=p,  the  specific  gravity  of  the  liquid  in
the  ordinate  PF  = x must  be  fjx9  and  similarly  in
every  other  ordinate.  The  weight  of  a vertical  fila-


432


the  science  of  mechanics .


The  funda-
mental
principle  o:
James  Ber-
noulli’s
general  so-
lution.


ment  is  then  p . dy/x , and  its  moment  with  respect  to
BlV  is


1

I


Jjty

X


1_

T


p dy-


Hence,  for  the  lowest  position  of  the  centre  of  gravity,
ij' P dy>  or  J'p  dy  = FZN,  is  a maximum.  But  the
fact  is  here  overlooked,  remarks  James  Bernoulli,  that
with  the  variation  of  the  curve  BFN  the  weight  of  the
liquid  also  is  varied.  Consequently,  in  this  simple
form  the  deduction  is  not  admissible.

In  the  solution  which  he  himself  gives,  James  Ber-
noulli once  more  assumes  that  the  small  portion  F Fnt
of  the  curve  possesses  the  prop-
erty which  the  whole  curve  pos-
sesses. And  then  taking  the  four
successive  points  F Ft  Fn  Fn/,
of  which  the  two  extreme  ones
are  fixed,  he  so  varies  Ft  and
Fn  that  the  length  of  the  arc  F
F,  Fn  Fnt  remains  zmchanged)
which  is  possible,  of  course,  only  by  a displacement
of  two  points.  We  shall  not  follow  his  involved  and
unwieldy  calculations.  The  principle  of  the  process  is
clearly  indicated  in  our  remarks.  Retaining  the  des-
ignations above  employed,  James  Bernoulli,  in  sub-
stance, states  that  when

_ p dx

dy  = — =r,

V a2  — p2

is  a maximum,  and  when

_ (a  — ft)  dx

dy  = -yr-rV ^

l/2  ap—p 2

is  a minimum.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


433


The  dissensions  between  the  two  brothers  were,  we
may  admit,  greatly  to  be  deplored.  Yet  the  genius  of
the  one  and  the  profundity  of  the  other  have  borne,  in
the  stimulus  which  Euler  and  Lagrange  received  from
their  several  investigations,  splendid  fruits.

5.  Euler  (Problematis  Iso fierimetrici  Solutio  Generalise  Euler’s

u K * general

Com.  Acad.  Petr.  T.  VI,  for  1733,  published  in  1738)*  fioTor  the
was  the  first  to  give  a more  general  method  of  treating  isoperimet-

....  rical  prob-

these  questions  of  maxima  and  minima,  or  isopenmetri-  lems.
cal  problems.  But  even  his  results  were  based  on
prolix  geometrical  considerations,  and  not  possessed  of
analytical  generality.  Euler  divides  problems  of  this
category,  with  a clear  perception  and  grasp  of  their
differences,  into  the  following  classes  :

(1)  Required,  of  all  curves,  that  for  which  a prop-
erty A is  a maximum  or  minimum.

(2)  Required,  of  all  curves,  equally  possessing  a
property  A,  that  for  which  B is  a maximum  or  mini-
mum.

(3)  Required,  of  all  curves,  equally  possessing  two
properties,  A and  B,  that  for  which  C is  a maximum
or  minimum.  And  so  on.

A problem  of  the  first  class  is  (Fig.  231)  the  finding  Example#
of  the  shortest  curve  through  M and  N.  A problem  of
the  second  class  is  the  finding  of  a curve  through  M
and  N,  which,  having  the  given  length  A , makes  the
area  MPN  a maximum.  A problem  of  the  third  class
would  be  : of  all  curves  of  the  given  length  A,  which
pass  through  M,  LI  and  contain  the  same  area
MPN  = B,  to  find  one  which  describes  when  rotated
about  MN  the  least  surface  of  revolution.  And  so  on.

* Euler’s  principal  contributions  to  this  subject  are  contained  in  three
memoirs,  published  in  the  Commentaries  of  Petersburg"  far  the  years  1733,  17361
and  1766,  and  in  the  tract  Methodus  inveniendi  Lineas  Cur v as  Proprietate
Maximi  Minimive  gaudentes,  Lausanne  and  Geneva,  1744. — Trans .


434


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  com-
mutability
of  the  iso-
perimetri-
cal  proper-
ties, with
Ruler’s  in-
ferences.


We  in  ay  observe  here,  that  the  finding  of  an  abso-
lute maximum  or  minimum,  without  collateral  condi-
tions, is  meaningless.  Thus,  all  the  curves  of  which  in
the  first  example  the  shortest  is  sought
possess  the  common  property  of  pas-
sing through  the  points  M and  N.

The  solution  of  problems  of  the
first  class  requires  the  variation  of  two
elements  of  the  curve  or  of  one  point.
This  is  also  sufficient.  In  problems
of  the  second  class  three  elements  or
two  points  must  be  varied ; the  reason
being,  that  the  varied  portion  must
possess  in  common  with  the  unvaried  portion  the  prop-
erty A,  and,  as  B is  to  be  made  a maximum  or  mini-
mum, also  the  property..#,  that  is,  must  satisfy  two  con-
ditions. Similarly,  the  solution  of  problems  of  the  third
class,  requires  the  variation  of  four  elements.  And
so  on.

The  solution  of  a problem  of  a higher  class  involves,
by  implication,  the  solution  of  its  converse,  in  all  its
forms.  Thus,  in  the  third  class,  we  vary  four  elements
of  the  curve,  so,  that  the  varied  portion  of  the  curve
shall  share  equally  with  the  original  portion  the  values
A and  B and,  as  C is  to  be  made  a maximum  or  a
minimum,  also  the  value  C.  But  the  same  conditions
must  be  satisfied,  if  of  all  curves  possessing  equally  B
and  C that  for  which  A is  a.  maximum  or  minimum  is
sought,  or  of  all  curves  possessing  A and  C that  for
which  B is  a maximum  or  minimum  is  sought.  Thus
a circle,  to  take  an  example  from  the  second  class,  con-
tains, of  all  lines  of  the  same  length  A , the  greatest
area  B , and  the  circle,  also,  of  all  curves  containing
the  same  area  B,  has  the  shortest  length  A.  As  the


P


Fig.  231.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


435


condition  that  the  property  A shall  be  possessed  in
common  or  shall  be  a maximum,  is  expressed  in  the
same  manner,  Euler  saw  the  possibility  of  reducing  the
problems  of  the  higher  classes  to  problems  of  the  first
class.  If,  for  example,  it  is  required  to  find,  of  all
curves  having  the  common  property  A , that  which
makes  B a maximum,  the  curve  is  sought  for  which
A -f-  7/1B  is  a maximum,  where  m is  an  arbitrary  con-
stant. If  on  any  change  of  the  curve,  A + mB , for  any
value  of  ;//,  does  not  change,  this  is  generally  possible
only  provided  the  change  of  A , considered  by  itself,
and  that  of  B , considered  by  itself,  are  = 0.

6.  Euler  was  the  originator  of  still  another  impor- The  funda-
tant  advance.  In  treating  the  problem  of  finding  the  principle  of

i , . , . ' . . , . James  Ber-

brachistochrone  m a resisting  medium,  which  was  m-  nouiii’s
vestigated  by  Herrmann  and  him,  the  existing  meth-  shown  not
ods  proved  incompetent.  For  the  brachistochrone  m versaiiy
a vacuum,  the  velocity  depends  solely  on  the  vertical
height  fallen  through.  The  velocity  in  one  portion  of
the  curve  is  in  no  wise  dependent  on  the  other  por-
tions. In  this  case,  then,  we  can  indeed  say,  that  if
the  whole  curve  is  brachistochronous,  every  element
of  it  is  also  brachistochronous.  But  in  a resisting
medium  the  case  is  different.  The  entire  length  and
form  of  the  preceding  path  enters  into  the  determina-
tion of  the  velocity  in  the  element.  The  whole  curve
can  be  brachistochronous  without  the  separate  ele-
ments necessarily  exhibiting  this  property.  By  con-
siderations of  this  character,  Euler  perceived,  that  the
principle  introduced  by  James  Bernoulli  did  not  hold
universally  good,  but  that  in  cases  of  the  kind  referred
to,  a more  detailed  treatment  was  required.

7.  The  methodical  arrangement  and  the  great  num-
ber of  the  problems  solved,  gradually  led  Euler  to  sub-


436


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Lagrange’s  stantially  the  same  methods  that  Lagrange  afterwards
historynofhe  developed  in  a somewhat  different  form,  and  which
ins  ofVari-  now  go  by  the  name  of  the  Calculus  of  Variations.  First,
John  Bernoulli  lighted  on  an  accidental  solution  of  a
problem,  by  analogy.  James  Bernoulli  developed,  for
the  solution  of  such  problems,  a geometrical  method.
Euler  generalised  the  problems  and  the  geometrical
method.  And  finally,  Lagrange,  entirely  emancipating
himself  from  the  consideration  of  geometrical  figures,
gave  an  analytical  method.  Lagrange  remarked,  that
the  increments  which  functions  receive  in  consequence
of  a change  in  their  form  are  quite  analogous  to  the  in-
crements they  receive  in  consequence  of  a change  of
their  independent  variables.  To  distinguish  the  two
species  of  increments,  Lagrange  denoted  the  former
by  d,  the  latter  by  d.  By  the  observation  of  this  anal-
ogy Lagrange  was  enabled  to  write  down  at  once  the
equations  which  solve  problems  of  maxima  and  minima.
Of  this  idea,  which  has  proved  itself  a very  fertile  one,
Lagrange  never  gave  a verification  ; in  fact,  did  not
even  attempt  it.  His  achievement  is  in  every  respect
a peculiar  one.  He  saw,  with  great  economical  in-
sight, the  foundations  which  in  his  judgment  were  suf-
ficiently secure  and  serviceable  to  build  upon.  But
the  acceptance  of  these  fundamental  principles  them-
selves was  vindicated  only  by  its  results.  Instead  of
employing  himself  on  the  demonstration  of  these  prin-
ciples, he  showed  with  what  success  they  could  be  em-
ployed. ( ’ Essai  d'une  nouvelle  methods  pour  determiner
les  maxima  et  minima  des  formules  integrates  inde fifties.
Misc.  Taur . 1762.)

The  difficulty  which  Lagrange’s  contemporaries  and
successors  experienced  in  clearly  grasping  his  idea,  is
quite  intelligible.  Euler  sought  in  vain  to  clear  up  the


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT, ’.


437


difference  between  a variation  and  a differential  byThemis-
imagining  constants  contained  in  the  function,  with  tions  of  La-

00  . granges

the  change  of  which  the  form  of  the  function  changed,  idea.

The  increments  of  the  value  of  the  function  arising
from  the  increments  of  these  constants  were  regarded
by  him  as  the  variations,  while  the  increments  of  the
function  springing  from  the  increments  of  the  indepen-
dent variables  were  the  differentials.  The  conception
of  the  Calculus  of  Variations  that  springs  from  such  a
view  is  singularly  timid,  narrow,  and  illogical,  and  does
not  compare  with  that  of  Lagrange.  Even  Lindelof’s
modern  work,  so  excellent  in  other  respects,  is  marred
by  this  defect.  The  first  really  competent  presenta-
tion of  Lagrange’s  idea  is,  in  our  opinion,  that  of  Jel-
lett.* Jellett  appears  to  have  said  what  Lagrange  per-
haps was  unable  fully  to  say,  perhaps  did  not  deem  it
necessary  to  say.

8.  Tellett’s  view  is,  in  substance,  this.  Quantities  T°llett’s  ex-

........  . . . _ position  of

generally  are  divisible  into  constant  and  variable  quan-  theprinci-

. . . _ . , pies  of  the

titles;  the  latter  being  subdivided  into  independent  Calculus  of

t Variations.

and  dependent  variables,  or  such  as  may  be  arbitrarily
changed,  and  such  whose  change  depends  on  the
change  of  other,  independent,  variables,  in  some  way  •
connected  with  them.  The  latter  are  called  functions
of  the  former,  and  the  nature  of  the  relation  that  con-
nects them  is  termed  the  form  of  the  function.  Now,
quite  analogous  to  this  division  of  quantities  into  con-
stant and  variable,  is  the  division  of  the  forms  of  func-
tions into  determinate  (constant)  and  indeterminate  (vari-
able). If  the  form  of  a function,  y = cp(x),  is  inde-
terminate, or  variable;  the  value  of  the  function  y can
change  in  two  ways  : (1)  by  an  increment  dx  of  the

* An  Elementary  Treatise  on  the  Calculus  of  Variations , By  the  Rev.

John  Hewitt  Jellett.  Dublin,  1850.


438


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


independent  variable  x,  or  (2)  by  a change  of  form , by
a passage  from  cp  to  <pt.  The  first  change  is  the  dif-
ferential dy,  the  second,  the  variation  dy,  Accord-
ingly,

dy  = cp  (x  -(-  dx)  — cp  (x),  and

$y=  9i  00  — <p(.x)-


The  object  The  change  of  value  of  an  indeterminate  function
cuius  of  ya- due  to  a mere  change  of  form  involves  no  problem,
lustrated,  just  as  the  change  of  value  of  an  independent  variable
involves  none.  We  may  assume  any  change  of  form
we  please,  and  so  produce  any  change  of  value  we
please.  A problem  is  not  presented  till  the  change  in
value  of  a determinate  function  (A1)  of  an  indetermi-
nate function  cp , due  to  a change  of  form  of  the  included
indeterminate  function,  is  required.  For  example,  if
we  have  a plane  curve  of  the  indeterminate  form  y=
cp  (V),  the  length  of  its  arc  between  the  abscissae  xQ
and  xt  is

*0  * 0


a determinate  function  of  an  indeterminate  function.
The  moment  a definite  form  of  curve  is  fixed  upon,  the
value  of  £ can  be  given.  For  any  change  of  form  of
the  curve,  the  change  in  value  of  the  length  of  the  arc,
6 T,  is  determinable.  In  the  example  given,  the  func-
tion S does  not  contain  the  function  y directly,  but
through  its  first  differential  coefficient  dy/dx , which  is
itself  dependent  on  y.  Let  u = F(jy)  be  a determinate
function  of  an  indeterminate  function  y — cp  (x) ; then

= F{y  + <5»  - F(y)  = fjp  Sy.

Again,  let  u=F(y,  dy/dx ) be  a determinate  function


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


439


of  an  indeterminate  function,  y = <p(x).  For  a change
of  form  of  <£>,  the  value  of  y changes  by  8y  and  the
value  of  dy jdx  by  8{dy /dx').  The  corresponding  change
in  the  value  of  u is


dit-


Ns)

dy

■ dy-.r


dF\y,


*y+-


d


yd_§dj-.

dy  dx
dx


The  expression  d ~ is  obtained  by  our  definition  from  Expres-

r “7  Sions  for

the  varia-

s dy  = -*y)  _ dy  =

dx  dx  dx  dx


coefficients,


Similarly,  the  following  results  are  found  :

~d2y  d2  8y  ^ dz  y d3  Sy

dx 2 dx2  9 d x3  dx3’


and  so  forth.

We  now  proceed  to  a problem,  namely,  the  de-  a problem,
termination  of  the  form  of  the  fu notion  y=  <p(x)  that
will  render

U=J1Vdx

Xq

where


V=F[x,y,


dy  d2y
dx ’ dx2’


a maximum  or  minimum  ; cp  denoting  an  indetermi-
nate, and  F a determinate  function.  The  value  of  U
may  be  varied  (i)  by  a change  of  the  limits,  xQ,  x1.
Outside  of  the  limits,  the  change  of  the  independent
variables  x,  as  such,  does  not  affect  U ; accordingly,
if  we  regard  the  limits  as  fixed,  this  is  the  only  respect
in  which  we  need  attend  to  x.  The  only  other  way
(2)  in  which  the  value  of  U is  susceptible  of  variation


440


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


is  by  a change  of  the  form  of  y = cp(x).  This  produces
a change  of  value  in

dy  d2  y

y,Ti’d^’


amounting  to


f ¥ dy  d2  y

6y’  dTx’  8


and  so  forth.  The  total  change  in  U,  which  we  shall
call  DU,  and  to  express  the  maximum-minimum  con-
dition put  =0,  consists  of  the  differential  dU  and  the
variation  SU.  Accordingly,

DU=  dU+  6U=  0.


Expression  Denoting  by  Ftdxt  and  — VQ dxQ  the  increments  of
variation  of  U due  to  the  change  of  the  limits,  we  then  have

the  func-
tion in  -l'i

question.  DU=V1dx1 — VQ  d X Q -)-  <5  C V d X =

■*"o

Vt  dxy  — v0  dx0  +JXd  V . dx  = 0.

But  by  the  principles  stated  on  page  439  we  further  get


dVz


dV.  dV  dy

d dx


+


rd2y  dx 2 '

dJf2


dV  , dV  ddy  , dV  d2dy
dy  ^ '7dy  dx  ' 7d2  y dx 2

dTx  ddx2


For, the  sake  of  brevity  we  put

Z-NZ-P  Z-p

dy  ~ ’ dy  ~ X'dd^y_  ~ 2’

dx  dx 2


6 f Vdx  =


Then


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


44- 1


f


u*,+r&


d2dy
dx 2


+ P 3 yrif  + )dx'  Tht*in

3 dx3  ) gratioj

/ the  thi
term  o

One  difficulty  here  is,  that  not  only  dy,  but  also  the|^P[®®
terms  ddy/dx , d 2 dy/dx 2 ....  occur  in  this  equation,  variati
— terms  which  are  dependent  on  one  another,  but  not
in  a directly  obvious  manner.  This  drawback  can  be
removed  by  successive  integration  by  parts,  by  means
of  the  formula

J ' udv  = ttv  — J'  v d u.

By  this  method

d dy  , _ ^ PdP,


S*'


SP'-dd*=P'*y-S-

f


dydx ,


d 2 dy


dx 2


dx  — P


d dy


d dy
d x


dP2

dx


2 dx
'd2  P,


dx
>dP2  ddy
dx  dx


dx  =


/d2  P

— 22  dydx , and  so  on.


Performing  all  these  integrations  between  the  limits,
we  obtain  for  the  condition  DU  — 0 the  expression


0 = Vxdx1  — VQdx0


which  now  contains  only  dy  under  the  integral  sign.

The  terms  in  the  first  line  of  this  expression  are
independent  of  any  change  in  the  form  of  the  function
and  depend  solely  upon  the  variation  of  the  limits.


442


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  inter-
pretation oi
the  results.


The  equa-
tion which
solves  the
problem,  or
makes  the
function  in
question  a
maximum
or  mini-
mum.


The  terms  of  the  two  following  lines  depend  on  the
change  in  the  form  of  the  function,  for  the  limiting
values  of  x only ; and  the  indices  i and  2 state  that
the  actual  limiting  values  are  to  be  put  in  the  place  of
the  general  expressions.  The  terms  of  the  last  line,
finally,  depend  on  the  general  change  in  the  form  of
the  function.  Collecting  all  the  terms,  except  those  in
the  last  line,  under  one  designation  at — aQ,  and  calling
the  expression  in  parentheses  in  the  last  line  /?,  we
have

0 = ax  — a0  J f3 . dy . dx.

^0


But  this  equation  can  be  satisfied  only  if


a,  — a o = 0 (1)

and

J'/3$ydx  = Q (2)

•*0


For  if  each  of  the  members  were  not  equal  to  zero,
each  would  be  determined  by  the  other.  But  the  in-
tegral of  an  indeterminate  function  cannot  be  expressed
in  terms  of  its  limiting  values  only.  Assuming,  there-
fore, that  the  equation


J'  f 3 dydx  — 0,
*0


holds  generally  good,  its  conditions  can  be  satisfied,
since  Sy  is  throughout  arbitrary  and  its  generality  of
form  cannot  be  restricted,  only  by  making  fl  = 0.  By
the  equation


dj\

dx  dx2  dxz


= 0.  .


(3),


therefore,  the  form  of  the  function  y — cp(x)  that  makes
the  expression  U a maximum  or  minimum  is  defined.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT, .


443


Equation  (3)  was  found  by  Euler.  But  Lagrange  first
showed  the  application  of  equation  (1),  for  the  deter-
mination of  a function  by  the  conditions  at  its  limits.

By  equation  (3),  which  it  must  satisfy,  the  form  of  the
function  y = <p(x)  is  generally  determined ; but  this
equation  contains  a number  of  arbitrary  constants,
whose  values  are  determined  solely  by  the  conditions
at  the  limits.  With  respect  to  notation,  Jellett  rightly
remarks,  that  the  employment  of  the  symbol  d in  the
first  two  terms  V1dx1  = V0$xQ  of  equation  (1),  (the
form  used  by  Lagrange,)  is  illogical,  and  he  correctly
puts  for  the  increments  of  the  independent  variables
the  usual  symbols  dxx,  dxQ.

q.  To  illustrate  the  use  to  which  these  equations  a practical

• ...  . . illustration

may  be  put,  let  us  seek  the  form  of  the  function  that  of  the  use

; r of  these

makes  equations.


a minimum — the  shortest  line.  Here


vanish  in  equation  (3)^  and  that  equation  becomes
dPx/dx  = 0 ; which  means  that  Pt,  and  consequently
its  only  variable,  dy/dx , is  independent  of  x.  Hence,
dy/dx  = a , and  y — ax  -fi-  b,  where  a and  b are  con-
stants.

The  constants  a,  b are  determined  by  the  values  of


444


Develop-
ment of  th;
illustration


THE  SCIEXCE  OF  MECHANICS.


the  limits.  If  the  straight  line  passes  through  the
i points  xQ,  v0  and  xt,yt,  then
r0  =ax0  + b


=«•*!  + b


O)


and  as  dx0  = dxt  = 0,  dy0  = $yt  = 0,  equation  (i)
vanishes.  The  coefficients  6 ( dy/dx ),  d ( d2y/dx2)>  ....
independently  vanish.  Hence,  the  values  of  a and  b
are  determined  by  the  equations  (??i)  alone.

If  the  limits  only  are  given,  but  y0,yt  are


o?

indeterminate,  we  have  dxQ
(i)  takes  the  form


: dxx  = 0,  and  equation


.(^i_^o)  = 0,


l/l  + a 2

which,  since  dy0  and  dy1  are  arbitrary,  can  only  be
satisfied  if  a = 0.  The  straight  line  is  in  this  case
y = 3,  parallel  to  the  axis  of  abscissae,  and  as  b is  inde-
terminate, at  any  distance  from  it.

It  will  be  noticed,  that  equation  (i)  and  the  sub-
sidiary conditions  expressed  in  equation  (ni),  with  re-
spect to  the  determination  of  the  constants,  generally
complement  each  other.

If


Z:


-sA


1 +


dy

dx


d x


i to  be  made  a minimum,  the  integration  of  the  appro-
riate  form  of  (3)  will  give


+ *


If  Z is  a minimum,  then  Q.nZ  also  is  a minimum,  and
the  curve  found  will  give,  by  rotation  about  the  axis
of  abscissae,  the  least  surface  of  revolution.  Further,


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


445


to  a minimum  of  Z the  lowest  position  of  the  centre  of
gravity  of  a homogeneously  heavy  curve  of  this  kind
corresponds  ; the  curve  is  therefore  a catenary.  The
determination  of  the  constants  c , c’  is  effected  by  means
of  the  limiting  conditions,  as  above.

In  the  treatment  of  mechanical  problems,  a dis-  andv/rtuai

tinction  is  made  between  the  increments  of  coordinates  displace-
ments dis-

that  actually  take  place  in  time,  namely,  dx,  dy,  dz,  tinguished.
and  the  possible  displacements  dx,  dy,  dz,  considered,
for  instance,  in  the  application  of  the  principle  of  vir-
tual velocities.  The  latter,  as  a rule,  are  not  varia-
tions ; that  is,  are  not  changes  of  value  that  spring
from  changes  in  the  form  of  a function.  Only  when
we  consider  a mechanical  system  that  is  a continuum,
as  for  example  a string,  a flexible  surface,  an  elastic
body,  or  a liquid,  are  we  at  liberty  to  regard  d x,  dy,
dz  as  indeterminate  functions  of  the  coordinates  y,
z,  and  are  we  concerned  with  variations.

It  is  not  our  purpose  in  this  work,  to  develop  math-  ^g°ertcaaI}ce
ematical  theories,  but  simply  to  treat  the  purely  phys-  cuius  of  va-

- r . . _r  J . , . : - : . nations  for

ical  part  of  mechanics.  But  the  history  of  the  isopen-  mechanics,
metrical  problems  and  of  the  calculus  of  variations  had
to  be  touched  upon,  because  these  researches  have  ex-
ercised a very  considerable  influence  on  the  develop-
ment of  mechanics.  Our  sense  of  the  general  prop-
erties of  systems,  and  of  properties  of  maxima  and
minima  in  particular,  was  much  sharpened  by  these
investigations,  and  properties  of  the  kind  referred  to
were  subsequently  discovered  in  mechanical  systems
with  great  facility.  As  a fact,  physicists,  since  La-
grange’s time,  usually  express  mechanical  principles
in  a maximal  or  minimal  form.  This  predilection
would  be  unintelligible  without  a knowledge  of  the
historical  development.


The  con-
flict of  sci-
ence and
the  church.


446  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


II.

THEOLOGICAL.  ANIMISTIC,  AND  MYSTICAL  POINTS  OF  VIEW
IN  MECHANICS.

1.  If,  in  entering  a parlor  in  Germany,  we  happen
to  hear  something  said  about  some  man  being  very
pious,  without  having  caught  the  name,  we  may  fancy
that  Privy  Counsellor  X was  spoken  of, — or  Herr  von
Y ; we  should  hardly  think  of  a scientific  man  of  our
acquaintance.  It  would,  however,  be  a mistake  to  sup-
pose that  the  want  of  cordiality,  occasionally  rising  to
embittered  controversy,  which  has  existed  in  our  day
between  the  scientific  and  the  theological  faculties,
always  separated  them.  A glance  at  the  history  of
science  suffices  to  prove  the  contrary.

People  talk  of  the  ce  conflict  ” of  science  and  the-
ology, or  better  of  science  and  the  church.  It  is  in
truth  a prolific  theme.  On  the  one  hand,  we  have  the
long  catalogue  of  the  sins  of  the  church  against  pro-
gress, on  the  other  side  a “ noble  army  of  martyrs,”
among  them  no  less  distinguished  figures  than  Galileo
and  Giordano  Bruno.  It  was  only  by  good  luck  that
Descartes,  pious  as  he  was,  escaped  the  same  fate.
These  things  are  the  commonplaces  of  history ; but  it
would  be  a great  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  phrase
“warfare  of  science”  is  a correct  description  of  its
general  historic  attitude  toward  religion,  that  the  only
repression  of  intellectual  development  has  come  from
priests,  and  that  if  their  hands  had  been  held  off,  grow-
ing science  would  have  shot  up  with  stupendous  velo-
city. No  doubt,  external  opposition  did  have  to  be
fought ; and  the  battle  with  it  was  no  child’s  play.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT


44  7


Nor  was  any  engine  too  base  for  the  church  to  handle  The  strue-
in  this  struggle.  She  considered  nothing  but  how  to  tists  with
conquer  ; and  no  temporal  policy  ever  was  conducted  precon-
so  selfishly,  so  unscrupulously,  or  so  cruelly.  But  in-  ideas,
vestigators  have  had  another  struggle  on  their  hands,
and  by  no  means  an  easy  one,  the  struggle  with  their
own  preconceived  ideas,  and  especially  with  the  notion
that  philosophy  and  science  must  be  founded  on  the-
ology. It  was  but  slowly  that  this  prejudice  little  by
little  was  erased.

2.  But  let  the  facts  speak  for  themselves,  while  we  Historical

examples.

introduce  the  reader  to  a few  historical  personages.

Napier,  the  inventor  of  logarithms,  an  austere  Puri-
tan, who  lived  in  the  sixteenth  century,  was,  in  addi-
tion to  his  scientific  avocations,  a zealous  theologian.

Napier  applied  himself  to  some  extremely  curious
speculations.  He  wrote  an  exegetical  commentary  on
the  Book  of  Revelation,  with  propositions  and  mathe-
matical demonstrations.  Proposition  XXVI,  for  ex-
ample, maintains  that  the  pope  is  the  Antichrist ; propo-
sition XXXVI  declares  that  the  locusts  are  the  Turks
and  Mohammedans  ; and  so  forth.

Blaise  Pascal  (1623-1662),  one  of  the  most  rounded
geniuses  to  be  found  among  mathematicians  and  phys-
icists, was  extremely  orthodox  and  ascetical.  So  deep
were  the  convictions  of  his  heart,  that  despite  the  gen-
tleness of  his  character,  he  once  openly  denounced  at
Rouen  an  instructor  in  philosophy  as  a heretic.  The
healing  of  his  sister  by  contact  with  a relic  most  seri-
ously impressed  him,  and  he  regarded  her  cure  as  a
miracle.  On  these  facts  taken  by  themselves  it  might
be  wrong  to  lay  great  stress  ; for  his  whole  family  were
much  inclined  to  religious  fanaticism.  But  there  are
plenty  of  other  instances  of  his  religiosity.  Such  was


Pascal.


Otto  von
Guericke.


448  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .

his  resolve, — which  was  carried  out,  too, — to  abandon
altogether  the  pursuits  of  science  and  to  devote  his  life
solely  to  the  cause  of  Christianity.  Consolation,  he
used  to  say,  he  could  find  nowhere  but  in  the  teachings
of  Christianity  ; and  all  the  wisdom  of  the  world  availed
him  not  a whit.  The  sincerity  of  his  desire  for  the
conversion  of  heretics  is  shown  in  his  Lettres  provin-
ciates, where  he  vigorously  declaims  against  the  dread
ful  subtleties  that  the  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne  had
devised,  expressly  to  persecute  the  Jansenists.  Very
remarkable  is  Pascal’s  correspondence  with  the  theo-
logians of  his  time  ; and  a modern  reader  is  not  a little
surprised  at  finding  this  great  “scientist”  seriously
discussing  in  one  of  his  letters  whether  or  not  the  Devil
was  able  to  work  miracles.

Otto  von  Guericke,  the  inventor  of  the  air-pump,
occupies  himself,  at  the  beginning  of  his  book,  now
little  over  two  hundred  years  old,  with  the  miracle  of
Joshua,  which  he  seeks  to  harmonise  with  the  ideas
of  Copernicus.  In  like  manner,  we  find  his  researches
on  the  vacuum  and  the  nature  of  the  atmosphere  in-
troduced by  disquisitions  concerning  the  location  of
heaven,  the  location  of  hell,  and  so  forth.  Although
Guericke  really  strives  to  answer  these  questions  as  ra-
tionally as  he  can,  still  we  notice  that  they  give  him
considerable  trouble, — questions,  be  it  remembered,
that  to-day  the  theologians  themselves  would  consider
absurd.  Yet  Guericke  was  a man  who  lived  after  the
Reformation  !

The  giant  mind  of  Newton  did  not  disdain  to  employ
itself  on  the  interpretation  of  the  Apocalypse.  On  such
subjects  it  was  difficult  for  a sceptic  to  converse  with
him.  When  Halley  once  indulged  in  a jest  concerning
theological  questions,  he  is  said  to  have  curtly  repulsed


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


443


him  with  the  remark  : “ I have  studied  these  things  ;
you  have  not  ! 99

We  need  not  tarry  by  Leibnitz,  the  inventor  of  the
be'st  of  all  possible  worlds  and  of  pre-established  har-
mony— inventions  which  Voltaire  disposed  of  in  Can -
dide , a humorous  novel  with  a deeply  philosophical  pur-
pose. But  everybody  knows  that  Leibnitz  was  almost
if  not  quite  as  much  a theologian,  as  a man  of  science.

Let  us  turn,  however,  to  the  last  century.  Euler,  in
his  Letters  to  a German  Princess,  deals  with  theologico-
philosophical  problems  in  the  midst  of  scientific  ques-
tions. He  speaks  of  the  difficulty  involved  in  explaining
the  interaction  of  body  and  mind,  due  to  the  total
diversity  of  these  two  phenomena, — a diversity  to  his
mind  undoubted.  The  system  of  occasionalism,  devel-
oped by  Descartes  and  his  followers,  agreeably  to  which
God  executes  for  every  purpose  of  the  soul,  (the  soul  it-
self not  being  able  to  do  so,)  a corresponding  movement
of  the  body,  does  not  quite  satisfy  him.  He  derides,
also,  and  not  without  humor,  the  doctrine  of  pre-
established  harmony,  according  to  which  perfect  agree-
ment was  established  from  the  beginning  between  the
movements  of  the  body  and  the  volitions  of  the  soul, —
although  neither  is  in  any  way  connected  with  the
other, — just  as  there  is  harmony  between  two  different
but  like-constructed  clocks.  He  remarks,  that  in  this
view  his  own  body  is  as  foreign  to  him  as  that  of  a
rhinoceros  in  the  midst  of  Africa,  which  might  just  as
well  be  in  pre-established  harmony  with  his  soul  as
its  own.  Let  us  hear  his  own  words.  In  his  day,  Latin
was  almost  universally  written.  When  a German
scholar  wished  to  be  especially  condescending,  he
wrote  in  French  : “Si  dans  le  cas  d’un  ddreglement
“de  mon  corps  Dieu  ajustait  celui  d’un  rhinoceros,


Newton  and
Leibnitz.


Euler.


45°


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Euler’s

theological

proclivities


Character
of  the  theo-
logical
leanings  of
the  great  in-
quirers.


“ en  sorte  que  ses  mouvements  fussent  tellement  d’ac
“ cord  avec  les  ordres  de  mon  ame,  qu’il  levat  la  patte
“ au  moment  que  je  voudrais  lever  la  main,  et  ains
“ des  autres  operations,  ce  serait  alors  mon  corps.  Je
ume  trouverais  subitement  dans  la  forme  d’un  rhino-
“ ceros  au  milieu  de  l’Afrique,  mais  non  obstant  cels
“mon  ame  continuerait  les  meme  operations.  J’aurais
“dgalement  l’honneur  d’dcrire  a V.  A.,  mais  je  ne  sais
“pas  comment  elle  recevrait  mes  lettres. ”

One  would  almost  imagine  that  Euler,  here,  had  beer
tempted  to  play  Voltaire.  And  yet,  apposite  as  was
his  criticism  in  this  vital  point,  the  mutual  action  oi
body  and  soul  remained  a miracle  to  him,  still.  But  he
extricates  himself,  however,  from  the  question  of  the
freedom  of  the  will,  very  sophistically.  To  give  some
idea  of  the  kind  of  questions  which  a scientist  was  per-
mitted to  treat  in  those  days,  it  may  be  remarked  that
Euler  institutes  in  his  physical  “ Letters  ” investiga-
tions concerning  the  nature  of  spirits,  the  connection
between  body  and  soul,  the  freedom  of  the  will,  the
influence  of  that  freedom  on  physical  occurrences,
prayer,  physical  and  moral  evils,  the  conversion  of  sin-
ners, and  such  like  topics ; — and  this  in  a treatise  full
of  clear  physical  ideas  and  not  devoid  of  philosophical
ones,  where  the  well-known  circle-diagrams  of  logic
have  their  birth-place.

3.  Let  these  examples  of  religious  physicists  suffice.
We  have  selected  them  intentionally  from  among  the
foremost  of  scientific  discoverers.  The  theological  pro-
clivities which  these  men  followed,  belong  wholly  to
their  innermost  private  life.  They  tell  us  openly  things
which  they  are  not  compelled  to  tell  us,  things  about
which  they  might  have  remained  silent.  What  they
utter  are  not  opinions  forced  upon  them  from  without ;


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.  45*

they  are  their  own  sincere  views.  They  were  not  con-
scious of  any  theological  constraint.  In  a court  which
harbored  a Lamettrie  and  a Voltaire,  Euler  had  no  rea-
son to  conceal  his  real  convictions.

According  to  the  modern  notion,  these  men  should  Character
at  least  have  seen  that  the  questions  they  discussed
did  not  belong  under  the  heads  where  they  put  them,
that  they  were  not  questions  of  science.  Still,  odd  as
this  contradiction  between  inherited  theological  beliefs
and  independently  created  scientific  convictions  seems
to  us,  it  is  no  reason  for  a diminished  admiration  of
those  leaders  of  scientific  thought.  Nay,  this  very  fact
is  a proof  of  their  stupendous  mental  power  : they  were
able,  in  spite  of  the  contracted  horizon  of  their  age,  to
which  even  their  own  aper$us  were  chiefly  limited,  to
point  out  the  path  to  an  elevation,  where  our  genera-
tion has  attained  a freer  point  of  view.

Every  unbiassed  mind  must  admit  that  the  age  in
which  the  chief  development  of  the.science  of  mechan-
ics took  place,  was  an  age  of  predominantly  theological
cast.  Theological  questions  were  excited  by  everything,
and  modified  everything.  No  wonder,  then,  that  me-
chanics took  the  contagion.  But  the  thoroughness  with
which  theological  thought  thus  permeated  scientific
inquiry,  will  best  be  seen  by  an  examination  of  details.

4.  The  impulse  imparted  in  antiquity  to  this  direc-  Galileo’s

J rcscifirchos

tion  of  thought  by  Hero  and  Pappus  has  been  alluded  on  the

..  , A , , . . r , strength  of

to  m the  preceding  chapter.  At  the  beginning  of  the  materials,
seventeenth  century  we  find  Galileo  occupied  with  prob-
lems concerning  the  strength  of  materials.  He  shows
that  hollow  tubes  offer  a greater  resistance  to  flexure
than  solid  rods  of  the  same  length  and  the  same  quantity
of  material,  and  at  once  applies  this  discovery  to  the
explanation  of  the  forms  of  the  bones  of  animals,  which


452


I HE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Evidences
of  design
in  nature.


are  usually  hollow  and  cylindrical  in  shape.  The  phe-
nomenon is  easily  illustrated  by  the  comparison  of  a
flatly  folded  and  a rolled  sheet  of  paper.  A horizontal
beam  fastened  at  one  extremity-and  loaded  at  the  other
may  be  remodelled  so  as  to  be  thinner  at  the  loaded
end  without  any  loss  of  stiffness  and  with  a consider-
able saving  of  material.  Galileo  determined  the  form  of
a beam  of  equal  resistance  at  each  cross-section.  He
also  remarked  that  animals  of  similar  geometrical  con-
struction but  of  considerable  difference  of  size  would
comply  in  very  unequal  proportions  with  the  laws  of
resistance.

The  forms  of  bones,  feathers,  stalks,  and  other  or-
ganic structures,  adapted,  as  they  are,  in  their  minut-
est details  to  the  purposes  they  serve,  are  highly  cal-
culated to  make  a profound  impression  on  the  thinking
beholder,  and  this  fact  has  again  and  again  been  ad-
duced in  proof  of  a supreme  wisdom  ruling  in  nature.
Let  us  examine,  for  instance,  the  pinion-feather  of  a
bird.  The  quill  is  a hollow  tube  diminishing  in  thick-
ness as  we  go  towards  the  end,  that  is,  is  a body  of
equal  resistance.  Each  little  blade  of  the  vane  re-
peats in  miniature  the  same  construction.  It  would
require  considerable  technical  knowledge  even  to  imi-
tate a feather  of  this  kind,  let  alone  invent  it.  We
should  not  forget,  however,  that  investigation,  and
not  mere  admiration,  is  the  office  of  science.  We
know  how  Darwin  sought  to  solve  these  problems/  by
the  theory  of  natural  selection.  That  Darwin’s  solution
is  a complete  one,  may  fairly  be  doubted  ; Darwin  him-
self questioned  it.  All  external  conditions  would  be
powerless  if  something  were  not’ present  that  admitted
of  variation.  But  there  can  be  no  question  that  his
theory  is  the  first  serious  attempt  to  replace  mere  ad-


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT,


453


miration  of  the  adaptations  of  organic  nature  by  seri-
ous inquiry  into  the  mode  of  their  origin.

Pappus’s  ideas  concerning  the  cells  of  honeycombs  J^ehcoe^esyr'
were  the  subject  of  animated  discussion  as  late  as  the  comb,
eighteenth  century.  In  a treatise,  published  in  1865,
entitled  Homes  Without  Hands  (p.  428),  Wood  substan-
tially relates  the  following  : ec  Maraldi  had  been  struck
with  the  great  regularity  of  the  cells  of  the  honey-
comb. He  measured  the  angles  of  the  lozenge-shaped
plates,  or  rhombs,  that  form  the  terminal  walls  of  the
cells,  and  found  them  to  be  respectively  io9°28'  and
70°  32'.  Rdaumur,  convinced  that  these  angles  were  in
some  way  connected  with  the  economy  of  the  cells,
requested  the  mathematician  Konig  to  calculate  the
form  of  a hexagonal  prism  terminated  by  a pyramid
composed  of  three  equal  and  similar  rhombs,  which
would  give  the  greatest  amount  of  space  with  a given
amount  of  material.  The  answer  was,  that  the  angles
should  be  iog°26'  and  7o°34'.  The  difference,  accord-
ingly, was  two  minutes.  Maclaurin,*  dissatisfied  with
this  agreement, repeated  Maraldi’s  measurements, found
them  correct,  and  discovered,  in  going  over  the  calcu-
lation, an  error  in  the  logarithmic  table  employed  by
Konig.  Not  the  bees,  but  the  mathematicians  were
wrong,  and  the  bees  had  helped  to  detect  the  error  ! ”

Any  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  methods  of  meas-
uring crystals  and  has  seen  the  cell  of  a honeycomb,
with  its  rough  and  non-reflective  surfaces,  will  question
whether  the  measurement  of  such  cells  can  be  executed
with  a probable  error  of  only  two  minutes. f So,  we
must  take  this  story  as  a sort  of  pious  mathematical

* Philosophical  Transactions  for  1743. — Trans.

t But  see  G.  F.  Maraldi  in  the  Mtmoires  de  V academic  for  1712.  It  is,  how-
ever, now  well  known  the  cells  vary  considerably.  See  Chauncey  Wright,
Philosophical  Discussions,  1877,  p.  311. — Trans.


454


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


fairy-tale,  quite  apart  from  the  consideration  that  noth-
ing would  follow  from  it  even  were  it  true.  Besides,
from  a mathematical  point  of  view,  the  problem  is  too
imperfectly  formulated  to  enable  us  to  decide  the  ex-
tent to  which  the  bees  have  solved  it.
other  The  ideas  of  Hero  and  Fermat,  referred  to  in  the

previous  chapter,  concerning  the  motion  of  light,  at
once  received  from  the  hands  of  Leibnitz  a theolog-
ical coloring,  and  played,  as  has  been  before  mentioned,
a predominant  role  in  the  development  of  the  calculus
of  variations.  In  Leibnitz’s  correspondence  with  John
Bernoulli,  theological  questions  are  repeatedly  dis-
cussed in  the  very  midst  of  mathematical  disquisitions.
Their  language  is  not  unfrequently  couched  in  biblical
pictures.  Leibnitz,  for  example,  says  that  the  problem
of  the  brachistochrone  lured  him  as  the  apple  had  lured
Eve.

The  theo-  Maupertuis,  the  famous  president  of  the  Berlin
neiofthe  Academy,  and  a friend  of  Frederick  the  Great,  gave
least  ac-  a new  impulse  to  the  theologising  bent  of  physics  by
the  enunciation  of  his  principle  of  least  action.  In  the
treatise  which  formulated  this  obscure  principle,  and
which  betrayed  in  Maupertuis  a woeful  lack  of  mathe-
matical accuracy,  the  author  declared  his  principle  to  be
the  one  which  best  accorded  with  the  wisdom  of  the


Creator.  Maupertuis  was  an  ingenious  man,  but  not  a
man  of  strong,  practical  sense.  This  is  evidenced  by
the  schemes  he  was  incessantly  devising : his  bold  prop-
ositions to  found  a city  in  which  only  Latin  should  be
spoken,  to  dig  a deep  hole  in  the  earth  to  find  new
substances,  to  institute  psychological  investigations  by
means  of  opium  and  by  the  dissection  of  monkeys,  to
explain  the  formation  of  the  embryo  by  gravitation,  and
so  forth.  He  was  sharply  satirised  by  Voltaire  in  the


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT .


455


Histoire  du  docteur  Akakia , a work  which  led,  as  we
know,  to  the  rupture  between  Frederick  and  Voltaire.

Maupertuis’s  principle  would  in  all  probability  soon
have  been  forgotten,  had  Euler  not  taken  up  the  sug-
gestion. Euler  magnanimously  left  the  principle  its
name,  Maupertuis  the  glory  of  the  invention,  and  con-
verted it  into  something  new  and  really  serviceable.
What  Maupertuis  meant  to  convey  is  very  difficult  to
ascertain.  What  Euler  meant  may  be  easily  shown  by
simple  examples.  If  a body  is  constrained  to  move  on  a
rigid  surface,  for  instance,  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  it
will  describe  when  an  impulse  is  imparted  to  it,  the
shortest  path  between  its  initial  and  terminal  positions.
Any  other  path  that  might  be  prescribed  it,  would  be
longer  or  would  require  a greater  time.  This  principle
finds  an  application  in  the  theory  of  atmospheric  and
oceanic  currents.  The  theological  point  of  view,  Euler
retained.  He  claims  it  is  possible  to  explain  phenomena,
not  only  from  their  physical  causes , but  also  from  their
purposes.  “ As  the  construction  of  the  universe  is  the
“most  perfect  possible,  being  the  handiwork  of  an
“ all-wise  Maker,  nothing  can  be  met  with  in  the  world
“in  which  some  maximal  or  minimal  property  is  not
“displayed.  There  is,  consequently,  no  doubt  but
“that  all  the  effects  of  the  world  can  be  derived  by
“the  method  of  maxima  and  minima  from  their  final
“causes  as  well  as  from  their  efficient  ones.”*

5.  Similarly,  the  notions  of  the  constancy  of  the
quantity  of  matter,  of  the  constancy  of  the  quantity  of

* “ Quum  enim  mundi  nniversi  fabrica  sit  perfectissima,  atque  a creatore
sapientissimo  absoluta,  nihil  omnino  in  mundo  contingit,  in  quo  non  niaximi
minimive  ratio  quaepiam  eluceat;  quarn  ob  rein  dubium  prorsus  est  nullum,
quin  omnes  mundi  effectus  ex  causis  finalibus,  ope  methodi  maximorum  et
minimorum,  aeque  feliciter  determinari  quaeant,  atque  ex  ipsis  causis  efficien-
tibus,”  ( Methodus  inveniendi  lineas  curvas  maximi  minimive  proprietate
gcmdentes.  Lausanne,  1744.)


Euler’s  re-
tention of
the  theolog-
ical basis  of
this  prin-
ciple.


45^


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  central  motion,  of  the  indestructibility  of  work  or  energy,  con-
modern0  ceptions  which  completely  dominate  modern  physics,
niainiyS of  all  arose  under  the  influence  of  theological  ideas.  The
orfgin.glcal  notions  in  question  had  their  origin  in  an  utterance  of
Descartes,  before  mentioned,  in  the  Principles  of  Philos-
ophy , agreeably  to  which  the  quantity  of  matter  and  mo-
tion originally  created  in  the  world, — such  being  the
only  course  compatible  with  the  constancy  of  the  Crea-
tor,— is  always  preserved  unchanged.  The  conception
of  the  manner  in  which  this  quantity  of  motion  should
be  calculated  was  very  considerably  modified  in  the
progress  of  the  idea  from  Descartes  to  Leibnitz,  and  to
their  successors,  and  as  the  outcome  of  these  modifi-
cations the  doctrine  gradually  and  slowly  arose  which
is  now  called  the  “law  of  the  conservation  of  energy.”
But  the  theological  background  of  these  ideas  only
slowly  vanished.  In  fact,  at  the  present  day,  we  still
meet  with  scientists  who  indulge  in  self-created  mys-
ticisms concerning  this  law.

Gradual  During  the  entire  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centm

transition  . r

from  the  nes,  down  to  the  close  of  the  eighteenth,  the  prevail-

theological  . \ ..  . , . . \ ~ , . ..  .

point  of  mg  inclination  of  inquirers  was,  to  find  m all  physical

laws  some  particular  disposition  of  the  Creator.  But
a gradual  transformation  of  these  views  must  strike
the  attentive  observer.  Whereas  with  Descartes  and
Leibnitz  physics  and  theology  were  still  greatly  inter-
mingled, in  the  subsequent  period  a distinct  endeavor
is  noticeable,  not  indeed  wholly  to  discard  theology,
yet  to  separate  it  from  purely  physical  questions.  Theo-
logical disquisitions  were  put  at  the  beginning  or  rele-
gated to  the  end  of  physical  treatises.  Theological
speculations  were  restricted,  as  much  as  possible,  to
the  question  of  creation,  that,  from  this  point  onward,
the  way  might  be  cleared  for  physics.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


4 57


Towards  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  a re-  ultimate
markable  change  took  place, — a change  which  was  emancipa-
apparently  an  abrupt  departure  from  the  current  trend  physics^
of  thought,  but  in  reality  was  the  logical  outcome  of  ogy.
the  development  indicated.  After  an  attempt  in  a
youthful  work  to  found  mechanics  on  Euler’ s principle
of  least  action,  Lagrange,  in  a subsequent  treatment
of  the  subject,  declared  his  intention  of  utterly  disre-
garding theological  and  metaphysical  speculations,  as
in  their  nature  precarious  and  foreign  to  science.  He
erected  a new  mechanical  system  on  entirely  different
foundations,  and  no  one  conversant  with  the  subject
will  dispute  its  excellencies.  All  subsequent  scientists
of  eminence  accepted  Lagrange’s  view,  and  the  pres-
ent attitude  of  physics  to  theology  was  thus  substan-
tially determined.

6.  The  idea  that  theology  and  physics  are  two  dis-  The^mod-
tinct  branches  of  knowledge,  thus  took,  from  its  first  ^lways^the
germination  in  Copernicus  till  its  final  promulgation  the  greatest
by  Lagrange,  almost  two  centuries  to  attain  clearness
in  the  minds  of  investigators.  At  the  same  time  it
cannot  be  denied  that  this  truth  was  always  clear  to
the  greatest  minds,  like  Newton.  Newton  never,  de-
spite his  profound  religiosity,  mingled  theology  with
the  questions  of  science.  True,  even  he  concludes  his
Optics , whilst  on  its  last  pages  his  clear  and  luminous
intellect  still  shines,  with  an  exclamation  of  humble
contrition  at  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  things.  But  his
optical  researches  proper,  in  contrast  to  those  of  Leib-
nitz, contain  not  a trace  of  theology.  The  same  may
be  said  of  Galileo  and  Huygens.  Their  writings  con-
form almost  absolutely  to  the  point  of  view  of  La-
grange, and  may  be  accepted  in  this  respect  as  class-
ical. But  the  general  views  and  tendencies  of  an  age


45§


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


must  not  be  judged  by  its  greatest,  but  by  its  average,
minds.

The  theo-  To  comprehend  the  process  here  portrayed,  the  gen-

ception  of  eral  condition  of  affairs  in  these  times  must  be  consid-

the  world  . ......

natural  and  ered.  It  stands  to  reason  that  m a stage  of  civilisation

able.  in  which  religion  is  almost  the  sole  education,  and  the
only  theory  of  the  world,  people  would  naturally  look
at  things  in  a theological  point  of  view,  and  that  they
would  believe  that  this  view  was  possessed  of  compe-
tency in  all  fields  of  research.  If  we  transport  ourselves
back  to  the  time  when  people  played  the  organ  with
their  fists,  when  they  had  tohave»the  multiplication  table
visibly  before  them  to  calculate,  when  they  did  so  much
with  their  hands  that  people  now-a-days  do  with  their
heads,  we  shall  not  demand  of  such  a time  that  it
should  critically  put  to  the  test  its  own  views  and  the-
ories. With  the  widening  of  the  intellectual  horizon
through  the  great  geographical,  technical,  and  scien-
tific discoveries  and  inventions  of  the  fifteenth  and  six-
teenth centuries,  with  the  opening  up  of  provinces  in
which  it  was  impossible  to  make  any  progress  with  the
old  conception  of  things,  simply  because  it  had  been
formed  prior  to  the  knowledge  of  these  provinces,  this
bias  of  the  mind  gradually  and  slowly  vanished.  The
great  freedom  of  thought  which  appears  in  isolated
cases  in  the  early  middle  ages,  first  in  poets  and  then
in  scientists,  will  always  be  hard  to  understand.  The  en-
lightenment of  those  days  must  have  been  the  work  of  a
few  very  extraordinary  minds,  and  can  have  been  bound
to  the  views  of  the  people  at  large  by  but  very  slender
threads,  more  fitted  to  disturb  those  views  than  to  re-
form them.  Rationalism  does  not  seem  to  have  gained
a broad  theatre  of  action  till  the  literature  of  the  eigh-
teenth century.  Humanistic,  philosophical,  historical,


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


459


and  physical  science  here  met  and  gave  each  other
mutual  encouragement.  All  who  have  experienced,  in
part,  in  its  literature,  this  wonderful  emancipation  of
the  human  intellect,  will  feel  during  their  whole  lives  a
deep,  elegiacal  regret  for  the  eighteenth  century.

7.  The  old  point  of  view,  then,  is  abandoned.  Its  The  en~

1 r lighten-

history  is  now  detectible  only  in  the  form  of  the  me- ment  of  the
chanical  principles.  And  this  form  will  remain  strange
to  us  as  long  as  we  neglect  its  origin.  The  theological
conception  of  things  gradually  gave  way  to  a more
rigid  conception  ; and  this  was  accompanied  with  a
considerable  gain  in  enlightenment,  as  we  shall  now
briefly  indicate.

When  we  say  light  travels  by  the  paths  of  shortest
time,  we  grasp  by  such  an  expression  many  things.

But  we  do  not  know  as  yet  why  light  prefers  paths  of
shortest  time.  We  forego  all  further  knowledge  of  the
phenomenon,  if  we  find  the  reason  in  the  Creator’s  wis-
dom. We  of  to-day  know,  that  light  travels  by  all
paths,  but  that  only  on  the  paths  of  shortest  time  do
the  waves  of  light  so  intensify  each  other  that  a per-
ceptible result  is  produced.  Light,  accordingly,  only
appears  to  travel  by  the  paths  of  shortest  time.  After  Extrava-
the  prejudice  which  prevailed  on  these  questions  had  weUCasas  _
been  removed,  cases  were  immediately  discovered  in  nature?7  m
which  by  the  side  of  the  supposed  economy  of  nature
the  most  striking  extravagance  was  displayed.  Cases
of  this  kind  have,  for  example,  been  pointed  out  by
Jacobi  in  connection  with  Euler’s  principle  of  least  ac-
tion. A great  many  natural  phenomena  accordingly
produce  the  impression  of  economy,  simply  because
they  visibly  appear  only  when  by  accident  an  econom-
ical accumulation  of  effects  take  place.  This  is  the
same  idea  in  the  province  of  inorganic  nature  that  Dar-


460


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


win  worked  out  in  the  domain  of  organic  nature.  We
facilitate  instinctively  our  comprehension  of  nature  by
applying  to  it  the  economical  ideas  with  which  we  are
familiar.

Expiana-  Often  the  phenomena  of  nature  exhibit  maximal
imaiand  ’ or  minimal  properties  because  when  these  greatest  or
ettects.  least  properties  have  been  established  the  causes  of  all
further  alteration  are  removed.  The  catenary  gives
the  lowest  point  of  the  centre  of  gravity  for  the  simple
reason  that  when  that  point  has  been  reached  all  fur-
ther descent  of  the  system’s  parts  is  impossible.  Li-
quids exclusively  subjected  to  the  action  of  molecular
forces  exhibit  a minimum  of  superficial  area,  because
stable  equilibrium  can  only  subsist  when  the  molecular
forces  are  able  to  effect  no  further  diminution  of  super-
ficial area.  The  important  thing,  therefore,  is  not  the
maximum  or  minimum,  but  the  removal  of  work  ; work
being  the  factor  determinative  of  the  alteration.  It
sounds  much  less  imposing  but  is  much  more  elucida-
tory, much  more  correct  and  comprehensive,  instead
of  speaking  of  the  economical  tendencies  of  nature,  to
say  : “So  much  and  so  much  only  occurs  as  in  virtue
of  the  forces  and  circumstances  involved  can  occur.  ”
Points  of  The  question  may  now  justly  be  asked,  If  the  point
the  theoiog-  of  view  of  theology  which  led  to  the  enunciation  of  the
scientific  principles  of  mechanics  was  utterly  wrong,  how  comes
tionsep  it  that  the  principles  themselves  are  in  all  substantial
points  correct  ? The  answer  is  easy.  In  the  first  place,
the  theological  view  did  not  supply  the  contejits  of  the
principles,  but  simply  determined  their  guise  \ their  matr
ter  was  derived  from  experience.  A similar  influence
would  have  been  exercised  by  any  other  dominant  type
of  thought,  by  a commercial  attitude,  for  instance,  such
as  presumably  had  its  effect  on  Stevinus’s  thinking.  In


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


461


the  second 'place,  the  theological  conception  of  nature
itself  owes  its  origin  to  an  endeavor  to  obtain  a more
comprehensive  view  of  the  world  ; — the  very  same  en-
deavor that  is  at  the  bottom  of  physical  science.  Hence,
even  admitting  that  the  physical  philosophy  of  theology
is  a fruitless  achievement,  a reversion  to  a lower  state  of
scientific  culture,  we  still  need  not  repudiate  the  sound
root  from  which  it  has  sprung  and  which  is  not  differ-
ent from  that  of  true  physical  inquiry.

In  fact,  science  can  accomplish  nothing  by  the  con-  Necessity

sideration  of  individual  facts  : from  time  to  time  it  must  stant  con-
sideration

cast  its  glance  at  the  world  as  a whole . Galileo’s  of  the  ah.

‘ in  researcl

laws  of  falling  bodies,  Huygens’s  principle  of  vis  viva ,
the  principle  of  virtual  velocities,  nay,  even  the  con-
cept of  mass,  could  not,  as  we  saw,  be  obtained,  ex-
cept by  the  alternate  consideration  of  individual  facts
and  of  nature  as  a totality.  We  may,  in  our  men-
tal reconstruction  of  mechanical  processes,  start  from
the  properties  of  isolated  masses  (from  the  elementary
or  differential  laws),  and  so  compose  our  pictures  of
the  processes  ; or,  we  may  hold  fast  to  the  properties
of  the  system  as  a whole  (abide  by  the  integral  laws).

Since,  however,  the  properties  of  one  mass  always  in-
clude relations  to  other  masses,  (for  instance,  in  ve-
locity and  acceleration  a relation  of  time  is  involved,
that  is,  a connection  with  the  whole  world,)  it  is  mani-
fest that  purely  differential,  or  elementary,  laws  do  not
exist.  It  would  be  illogical,  accordingly,  to  exclude
as  less  certain  this  necessary  view  of  the  All,  or  of  the
more  general  properties  of  nature,  from  our  studies.

The  more  general  a new  principle  is  and  the  wider  its
scope,  the  more  perfect  tests  will,  in  view  of  the  possi-
bility of  error,  be  demanded  of  it.

The  conception  of  a will  and  intelligence  active  in


462


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Pagan  ideas  nature  is  by  no  means  the  exclusive  property  of  Chris-
dcesPrife  in  tian  monotheism.  On  the  contrary,  this  idea  is  a quite
world,  familiar  one  to  paganism  and  fetishism.  Paganism,
however,  finds  this  will  and  intelligence  entirely  in  in-
dividual phenomena,  while  monotheism  seeks  it  in  the
All.  Moreover,  a pure  monotheism  does  not  exist.
The  Jewish  monotheism  of  the  Bible  is  by  no  means
free  from  belief  in  demons,  sorcerers,  and  witches  ;
and  the  Christian  monotheism  of  mediaeval  times  is
even  richer  in  these  pagan  conceptions.  We  shall  not
speak  of  the  brutal  amusement  in  which  church  and
state  indulged  in  the  torture  and  burning  of  witches,
and  which  was  undoubtedly  provoked,  in  the  majority
of  cases,  not  by  avarice  but  by  the  prevalence  of  the
ideas  mentioned.  In  his  instructive  work  on  Pri?nitive
Culture  Tylor  has  studied  the  sorcery,  superstitions,
and  miracle-belief  of  savage  peoples,  and  compared
them  with  the  opinions  current  in  mediaeval  times  con-
cerning witchcraft.  The  similarity  is  indeed  striking.
The  burning  of  witches,  which  was  so  frequent  in
Europe  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  is
to-day  vigorously  conducted  in  Central  Africa.  Even
now  and  in  civilised  countries  and  among  cultivated
people  traces  of  these  conditions,  as  Tylor  shows,  still
exist  in  a multitude  of  usages,  the  sense  of  which,  with
our  altered  point  of  view,  has  been  forever  lost.

8.  Physical  sqience  rid  itself  only  very  slowly  of
these  conceptions.  The  celebrated  work  of  Giambatista
della  Porta,  Magia  naturalis , which  appeared  in  1 558,
though  it  announces  important  physical  discoveries,  is
yet  filled  with  stuff  about  magic  practices  and  demono-
logical arts  of  all  kinds  little  better  than  those  of  a red-
skin medicine-man.  Not  till  the  appearance  of  Gil-
bert’s work,  De  magnete  (in  1600),  was  any  kind  of  re-


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


463


striction  placed  on  this  tendency  of  thought.  When  we
reflect  that  even  Luther  is  said  to  have  had  personal
encounters  with  the  Devil,  that  Kepler,  whose  aunt  had
been  burned  as  a witch  and  whose  mother  came  near
meeting  the  same  fate,  said  that  witchcraft  could  not
be  denied,  and  dreaded  to  express  his  real  opinion  of
astrology,  we  can  vividly  picture  to  ourselves  the
thought  of  less  enlightened  minds  of  those  ages.

Modern  physical  science  also  shows  traces  of  fetish-
ism, as  Tylor  well  remarks,  in  its  “ forces.”  And  the
hobgoblin  practices  of  modern  spiritualism  are  ample
evidence  that  the  conceptions  of  paganism  have  not
been  overcome  even  by  the  cultured  society  of  to-day.

It  is  natural  that  these  ideas  so  obstinately  assert
themselves.  Of  the  many  impulses  that  rule  man
with  demoniacal  power,  that  nourish,  preserve,  and
propagate  him,  without  his  knowledge  or  supervision,
of  these  impulses  of  which  the  middle  ages  present
such  great  pathological  excesses,  only  the  smallest
part  is  accessible  to  scientific  analysis  and  conceptual
knowledge.  The  fundamental  character  of  all  these
instincts  is  the  feeling  of  our  oneness  and  sameness
with  nature  ; a feeling  that  at  times  can  be  silenced
but  never  eradicated  by  absorbing  intellectual  occupa-
tions, and  which  certainly  has  a sound  basis,  no  matter
to  what  religious  absurdities  it  may  have  given  rise.

9.  The  French  encyclopaedists  of  the  eighteenth
century  imagined  they  were  not  far  from  a final  ex-
planation of  the  world  by  physical  and  mechanical  prin-
ciples ; Laplace  even  conceived  a mind  competent  to
foretell  the  progress  of  nature  for  all  eternity,  if  but  the
masses,  their  positions,  and  initial  velocities  were  given.
In  the  eighteenth  century,  this  joyful  overestimation  of
the  scope  of  the  new  physico-mechanical  ideas  is  par-


Animistic
notions  in.
science.


464


THE  SCIENCE  OP  MECHANICS.


ove-esti-  donable.  Indeed,  it  is  a refreshing,  noble,  and  ele-
theme-°  vating  spectacle  ; and  we  can  deeply  sympathise  with
view.  this  expression  of  intellectual  joy,  so  unique  in  history.

But  now,  after  a century  has  elapsed,  after  our  judg-
ment has  grown  more  sober,  the  world-conception  of  the
encyclopaedists  appears  to  us  as  a mechanical  mythology
in  contrast  to  the  ani?nistic  of  the  old  religions.  Both
views  contain  undue  and  fantastical  exaggerations  of
an  incomplete  perception.  Careful  physical  research
will  lead,  however,  to  an  analysis  of  our  sensations.
We  shall  then  discover  that  our  hunger  is  not  so  essen-
tially different  from  the  tendency  of  sulphuric  acid  for
zinc,  and  our  will  not  so  greatly  different  from  the
pressure  of  a stone,  as  now  appears.  We  shall  again
feel  ourselves  nearer  nature,  without  its  being  neces-
sary that  we  should  resolve  ourselves  into  a nebulous
and  mystical  mass  of  molecules,  or  make  nature  a
haunt  of  hobgoblins.  The  direction  in  which  this  en-
lightenment is  to  be  looked  for,  as  the  result  of  long
and  painstaking  research,  can  of  course  only  be  sur-
mised. To  anticipate  the  result,  or  even  to  attempt  to
introduce  it  into  any  scientific  investigation  of  to-day,
would  be  mythology,  not  science.

Pretensions  Physical  science  does  not  pretend  to  be  a complete
tude  of  view  of  the  world  ; it  simply  claims  that  it  is  working
science.  toward  such  a complete  view  in  the  future.  The  high-
est philosophy  of  the  scientific  investigator  is  precisely
this  toleration  of  an  incomplete  conception  of  the  world
and  the  preference  for  it  rather  than  an  apparently  per-
_ feet,  but  inadequate  conception.  Our  religious  opin-
ions are  always  our  own  private  affair,  as  long  as  we  do
not  obtrude  them  upon  others  and  do  not  apply  them
to  things  which  come  under  the  jurisdiction  of  a differ-
ent tribunal.  Physical  inquirers  themselves  entertain


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


465


the  most  diverse  opinions  on  this  subject,  according  to
the  range  of  their  intellects  and  their  estimation  of  the
consequences.

Physical  science  makes  no  investigation  at  all  into
things  that  are  absolutely  inaccessible  to  exact  investi-
gation, or  as  yet  inaccessible  to  it.  But  should  prov-
inces ever  be  thrown  open  to  exact  research  which  are
now  closed  to  it,  no  well-organised  man,  no  one  who
cherishes  honest  intentions  towards  himself  and  others,
will  any  longer  then  hesitate  to  countenance  inquiry
with  a view  to  exchanging  his  opinion  regarding  such
provinces  for  positive  k?iowledge  of  them.

When,  to-day,  we  see  society  waver,  see  it  change  Results  of
its  views  on  the  same  question  according  to  its  mood  and  pieteness  of

ii'ii  • r our  view  of

the  events  of  the  week,  like  the  register  of  an  organ,  when  the  world,
we  behold  the  profound  mental  anguish  which  is  thus
prpduced,  we  should  know  that  this  is  the  natural  and
necessary  outcome  of  the  incompleteness  and  transi-
tional character  of  our  philosophy.  A competent  view
of  the  world  can  never  be  got  as  a gift ; we  must  ac-
quire it  by  hard  work.  And  only  by  granting  free  sway
to  reason  and  experience  in  the  provinces  in  which  they
alone  are  determinative,  shall  we,  to  the  weal  of  man-
kind, approach,  slowly,  gradually,  but  surely,  to  that
ideal  of  a monistic  view  of  the  world  which  is  alone
compatible  with  the  economy  of  a sound  mind.

hi.

ANALYTICAL  MECHANICS.

i . The  mechanics  of  N ewton  are  purely  geometrical.  The  geo-
He  deduces  his  theorems  from  his  initial  assumptions  mechanics

. . r . . of  Newton.

entirely  by  means  of  geometrical  constructions.  His
procedure  is  frequently  so  artificial  that,  as  Laplace


466


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Analytic

mechanics,


Euler  and
Maclau-
rin’s  con-
tributions.


Lagrange’s
perfection
of  the
science.


remarked,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  propositions  were  dis-
covered in  that  way.  We  notice,  moreover,  that  the
expositions  of  Newton  are  not  as  candid  as  those  of
Galileo  and  Huygens.  Newton’s  is  the  so-called  syn-
thetic method  of  the  ancient  geometers.

When  we  deduce  results  from  given  suppositions,
the  procedure  is  called  synthetic.  When  we  seek  the
conditions  of  a proposition  or  of  the  properties  of  a fig-
ure, the  procedure  is  analytic.  The  practice  of  the  latter
method  became  usual  largely  in  consequence  of  the
application  of  algebra  to  geometry.  It  has  become
customary,  therefore,  to  call  the  algebraical  method
generally,  the  analytical.  The  term  “ analytical  me-
chanics,” which  is  contrasted  with  the  synthetical,  or
geometrical,  mechanics  of  Newton,  is  the  exact  equiva-
lent of  the  phrase  “algebraical  mechanics.”

2.  The  foundations  of  analytical  mechanics  were
laid  by  Euler  ( Mecha7iica , sive  Motus  Scientia  Analytice
Exposita , St.  Petersburg,  1736).  But  while  Euler’s
method,  in  its  resolution  of  curvilinear  forces  into  tan-
gential and  normal  components,  still  bears  a trace  of
the  old  geometrical  modes,  the  procedure  of  Maclaurin
(A  Complete  System  of  Fluxions,  Edinburgh,  1742)  marks
a very  important  advance.  This  author  resolves  all
forces  in  three  fixed  directions,  and  thus  invests  the
computations  of  this  subject  with  a high  degree  of
symmetry  and  perspicuity.

3.  Analytical  mechanics,  however,  was  brought  to
its  highest  degree  of  perfection  by  Lagrange.  La-
grange’s aim  is  ( Mecanique  analytique , Paris,  1788)  to
dispose  once  for  all  of  the  reasoning  necessary  to  resolve
mechanical  problems,  by  embodying  as  much  as  pos-
sible of  it  in  a single  formula.  This  he  did.  Every  case
that  presents  itself  can  now  be  dealt  with  by  a very


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


467


simple,  highly  symmetrical  and  perspicuous  schema ;
and  whatever  reasoning  is  left  is  performed  by  purely
mechanical  methods.  The  mechanics  of  Lagrange
is  a stupendous  contribution  to  the  economy  of
thought.

In  statics,  Lagrange  starts  from  the  principle  of  static^  ^

virtual  velocities.  On  a number  of  material  points  the  princi-
ples of  vir-

;nx,  m2 j m 3.  . . definitely  connected  with  one  another,  tuai  veioci-

are  impressed  the  forces  Pv  P2,  P2.  . . - If  these
points  receive  any  infinitely  small  displacements j>x,
j>23  p2  . . . . compatible  with  the  connections  of  the  sys-
tem, then  for  equilibrium  2 Pp  = 0 ; where  the  well-
known  exception  in  which  the  equality  passes  into  an
inequality  is  left  out  of  account.

Now  refer  the  whole  system  to  a set  of  rectangular
coordinates.  Let  the  coordinates  of  the  material  points
be  xt,  yv  zx,  x2,  y2,  z2  . . . . Resolve  the  forces  into
the  components  Xx,  Yli  Zx,  X2,  Y2,  Z2  . . . . parallel
to  the  axes  of  coordinates,  and  the  displacements  into
the  displacements  dxx,  6yx,  dzx,  dx2i  dy2>  dz2.  . . .,
also  parallel  to  the  axes.  In  the  determination  of  the
work  done  only  the  displacements  of  the  point  of  appli-
cation in  the  direction  of  each  force-component  need
be  considered  for  that  component,  and  the  expression
of  the  principle  accordingly  is

2(X6x  + Y6y  + Zdz)  = 0 (1)

where  the  appropriate  indices  are  to  be  inserted  for
the  points,  and  the  final  expressions  summed.

The  fundamental  formula  of  dynamics  is  derived  Dynamics

...  ...  on  the  prin-

from  D Alembert’s  principle.  On  the  material  points  cipie  of

. . , r D’Alem-

m±3  m2 , m2  . . . .,  having  the  coordinates  xx,yx,  zx,  x2,  bert.
y2J  z2  . . . . the  force-components  Xx,  Yx,  Zx , X2 , Y2,

Z2 . . . . act.  But,  owing  to  the  connections  of  the


468


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


Discussion
of  La-
grange’s
method.


system’s  parts,  the  masses  undergo  accelerations,  which
are  those  of  the  forces.


d2x,

*'Tt2


m ^ —r  f,

/2  } 1


d2y  i
dt 2


1_^


These  are  called  the  effective  forces.  But  the  impressed
forces , that  is,  the  forces  which  exist  by  virtue  of  the
laws  of  physics,  X,  Y,  Z.  . . . and  the  negative  of  these
effective  forces  are,  owing  to  the  connections  of  the
system,  in  equilibrium.  Applying,  accordingly,  the
principle  of  virtual  velocities,  we  get

iX~ ?^)'5x+  (F_  m7^)Sy  +

M=° w


4.  Thus,  Lagrange  conforms  to  tradition  in  making
statics  precede  dynamics.  He  was  by  no  means  com-
pelled to  do  so.  On  the  contrary,  he  might,  with  equal
propriety,  have  started  from  the  proposition  that  the
connections,  neglecting  their  straining,  perform  no
work,  or  that  all  the  possible  work  of  the  system  is  due
to  the  impressed  forces.  In  the  latter  case  he  would
have  begun  with  equation  (2),  which  expresses  this
fact,  and  which,  for  equilibrium  (or  non-accelerated
motion)  reduces  itself  to  (1)  as  a particular  case.  This
would  have  made  analytical  mechanics,  as  a system,
even  more  logical.

Equation  (1),  which  for  the  case  of  equilibrium
makes  the  element  of  the  work  corresponding  to  the
assumed  displacement  ~ 0,  gives  readily  the  results
discussed  in  page  69.  If


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


469


that  is  to  say,  if  X,  Y,  Z are  the  partial  differential  co-
efficients of  one  and  the  same  function  of  the  coordi-
nates of  position,  the  whole  expression  under  the  sign
of  summation  is  the  total  variation,  d V,  of  V.  If  the
latter  is  = 0,  V is  in  general  a maximum  or  a minimum.

5.  We  will  now  illustrate  the  use  of  equation  (1)  by  indicjiticm
a simple  example.  If  all  the  points  of  application  of  the  erai^steps^
forces  are  independent  of  each  other,  no  problem  is  ^ of^stac-
presented.  Each  point  is  then  in  equilibrium  only  lems.
when  the  forces  impressed  on  it,  and  consequently
their  components,  are  = 0.  All  the  displacements  d x,
dy,  d z . . . . are  then  wholly  arbitrary,  and  equation
(1)  can  subsist  only  provided  the  coefficients  of  all  the
displacements  dx,  dy,  dz . . . . are  equal  to  zero.

But  if  equations  obtain  between  the  coordinates  of
the  several  points,  that  is  to  say,  if  the  points  are  sub-
ject to  mutual  constraints,  the  equations  so  obtaining
will  be  of  the  form  F(x13  ylf  zv  x2,  y2,  z2.  . . .)  = 0,
or,  more  briefly,  of  the  form  F = 0.  Then  equations
also  obtain  between  the  displacements,  of  the  form


which  we  shall  briefly  designate  asZ)F=0.  If  the
system  consist  of  n points,  we  shall  have  3 n coordi-
nates, and  equation  (1)  will  contain  3 n magnitudes
dx,  dy,  dz.  . . . If,  further,  between  the  coordinates
m equations  of  the  form  F~  0 subsist,  then  m equa-
tions of  the  form  DF  = 0 will  be  simultaneously  given
between  the  variations  d x,  dy,  dz.  . . . By  these
equations  m variations  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the
remainder,  and  so  inserted  in  equation  (1).  In  (1),
therefore,  there  are  left  3 n — m arbitrary  displace-
ments, whose  coefficients  are  put  = 0.  There  are  thus


470


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


A statical
example.


obtained  between  the  forces  and  the  coordinates  3 n — m
equations,  to  which  the  m equations  (F  = 0)  must  be
added.  We  have,  accordingly,  in  all,  3 n equations,
which  are  sufficient  to  determine  the  3 n coordinates  of
the  position  of  equilibrium,  provided  the  forces  are
given  and  only  the  form  of  the  system’s  equilibrium  is
sought.

But  if  the  form  of  the  system  .is  given  and  the  forces
are  sought  that  maintain  equilibrium,  the  question  is
indeterminate.  We  have  then,  to  determine  3 n force-
components,  only  3 — m equa-
tions ; the  m equations  (F  = 0)
not  containing  the  force-compo-
nents.

As  an  example  of  this  man-
ner of  treatment  we  shall  select
a lever  OM  = a , free  to  rotate
about  the  origin  of  coordinates
in  the  plane  XY,  and  having  at  its  end  a second,  simi-
lar lever  MN  = b.  At  M and  JV}  the  coordinates  of
which  we  shall  call  x,  y and  xx,  yx,  the  forces  X,  Y and
Xx,  Y1  are  applied.  Equation  (1),  then,  has  the  form

Xdx  + X1dx1  + Ydy  + Y1dy1  = 0 ...  (3)
Of  the  form  F=0  two  equations  here  exist  ; namely,


x2  -\-y2  — • a2  = 0 )

(•*1  — XY  + 0>i—  y)2  — 1,2  = ° j
The  equations  DF  = 0,  accordingly,  are
a?  d x -f  y dy  = 0

(xx  — x')  — (x1  — x)  fix  4-  (y1  — y)  Syx  —

Oi  — y)  sy  — 0


• (5)


Here,  two  of  the  variations  in  (5)  can  be  expressed
in  terms  of  the  others  and  introduced  in  (3).  Also  for


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


471


purposes  of  elimination  Lagrange  employed  a per-  ^etermf S
fectly  uniform  and  systematic  procedure,  which  may  naje^coeffi-
be  pursued  quite  mechanically,  without  reflection.  We
shall  use  it  here.  It  consists  in  multiplying  each  of  the
equations  (5)  by  an  indeterminate  coefficient  A,  pi,  and
adding  each,  in  this  form  to  (3).  So  doing,  we  obtain

[A'+Lr—  pi(xx  — xj]dx  + +pi(x1— *)] $xt  )

+ [^ 1+ m(j* — y)~\$y-L  )

The  coefficients  of  the  four  displacements  may  now
be  put  directly  = 0.  For  two  displacements  are  ar-
bitrary, and  the  two  remaining  coefficients  may  be
made  equal  to  zero  by  the  appropriate  choice  of  A and
fj — which  is  tantamount  to  an  elimination  of  the  two
remaining  displacements.

We  have,  therefore,  the  four  equations

X f\x  — pi  (jtq  — x')  = 0

X!  + M (*1  — X)  = 0

Y fky  — pi  (jq  — y)  = 0

j0  = °

We  shall  first  assume  that  the  coordinates  are  given,
and  seek  the  forces  that  maintain  equilibrium.  The
values  of  A and  ji  are  each  determined  by  equating  to
zero  two  coefficients.  We  get  from  the  second  and
fourth  equations,


whence


and  pi  =


zzJE

j'i  — /


Xt x l — x

yi  ~JP—y


(?)


that  is  to  say,  the  total  component  force  impressed  at
JV  has  the  direction  MN.  From  the  first  and  third
equations  we  get


472


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


i —X+V(x,—  X)  —

Their  em-  A = - — — , A =

ployment  in  X

the  deter-

th^finaf  °f  an<^  ^rom  ^hese  by  simple  reduction

equation.  Y t Y *


v+  fKju  —y)
y


x+x,_x

y+yt  y ( }

that  is  to  say,  the  resultant  of  the  forces  applied  at  M
and  N acts  in  the  direction  OM.  *


The  four  force-components  are  accordingly  subject
to  only  two  conditions,  (7)  and  (8).  The  problem,  con-
sequently, is  an  indeterminate  one  ; as  it  must  be  from
the  nature  of  the  case  ; for  equilibrium  does  not  depend
upon  the  absolute  magnitudes  of  the  forces,  but  upon
their  directions  and  relations.

If  we  assume  that  the  forces  are  given  and  seek  the
four  coordinates , we  treat  equations  (6)  in  exactly  the
same  manner.  Only,  we  can  now  make  use,  in  addi-
tion, of  equations  (4).  Accordingly,  we  have,  upon  the
elimination  of  A.  and  jx,  equations  (7)  and  (8)  and  two
equations  (4).  From  these  the  following,  which  fully
solve  the  problem,  are  readily  deduced  *


a(X+Xf)

1/(X+Fy+ JyTyN
*(Y+Yi)  ,
VW+  ^)2  + (Y+  Yj~2


* The  mechanical  interpretation  of  the  indeterminate  coefficients  A,  ft  may
be  shown  as  follows.  Equations  (6)  express  the  equilibrium  of  two  free  points
on  which  in  addition  to  X,  V,  Xlt  pq  other  forces  act  which  answer  to  the  re-
maining expressions  and  just  destroy  X,  Y,X Y1.  The  point  W,  for  example,
is  in  equilibrium  if  X1  is  destroyed  by  a force  ftOr± — ■*),  undetermined  as  yet
in  magnitude,  and  pq  by  a force  ft[y±  — y).  This  supplementary  force  is  due
to  the  constraints.  Its  direction  is  determined ; though  its  magnitude  is  not.
If  we  call  the  angle  which  it  makes  with  the  axis  of  abscissas  a,  we  shall  have

ta

that  is  to  say,  the  force  due  to  the  connections  acts  in  the  direction  of  i.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


473


atf+XJ


bX1


y i


i /(x+xly  + (v+  r,y

«{¥+¥,)


vxi  + n

bYx

VX\  + Y\


Character
of  the  pres-
ent prob-
lem.


l/(X+'Xl)*+\Y+  Y L)2

Simple  as  this  example  is,  it  is  yet  sufficient  to  give
us  a distinct  idea  of  the  character  and  significance  of
Lagrange’s  method.  The  mechanism  of  this  method  is
excogitated  once  for  all,  and  in  its  application  to  par-
ticular cases  scarcely  any  additional  thinking  is  re-
quired. The  simplicity  of  the  example  here  selected
being  such  that  it  can  be  solved  by  a mere  glance  at
the  figure,  we  have,  in  our  study  of  the  method,  the
advantage  of  a ready  verification  at  every  step.

6.  We  will  now  illustrate  the  application  of  equa-  General
tion  (2),  which  is  Lagrange’s  form  of  statement  of  thePsoiution
D’Alembert’s  principle.  There  is  no  problem  when  icaiprob-
the  masses  move  quite  independently  of  one  another.

Each  mass  yields  to  the  forces  applied  to  it ; the  va-
riations 8x,  8y,  8z  ...  . are  wholly  arbitrary,  and  each
coefficient  may  be  singly  put  =0.  For  the  motion  of
n masses  we  thus  obtain  3 n simul-
taneous differential  equations.

But  if  equations  of  condition
(F  = 0)  obtain  between  the  coordi-
nates, these  equations  will  lead  to
others  {DF  = 0)  between  the  dis-
placements or  variations.  With  the
latter  we  proceed  exactly  as  in  the
application  of  equation  (1).  Only  it  must  be  noted
here  that  the  equations  F=  0 must  eventually  be  em-
ployed in  their  undifferentiated  as  well  as  in  their  dif-
ferentiated form,  as  will  best  be  seen  from  the  follow-
ing example.


474


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


a dynam-  A heavy  material  point  m , lying  in  a vertical  plane
pie.  J7,  is  free  to  move  on  a straight  line,  j/  = ax,  inclined
at  an  angle  to  the  horizon.  (Fig.  233.)  Here  equa-
tion (2)  becomes

ix~  m S )Sx  + [Y-mjjs)6y= °>

and,  since  X=  0,  and  Y=  — mg,  also


i^6x  + I+iflSy=0


• (9)
(10)


The  place  of  F — 0 is  taken  by

y = ax

and  for  DF  = 0 we  have

Sy  = a 3 x.

Equation  (9),  accordingly,  since  6y  drops  out  and
dx  is  arbitrary,  passes  into  the  form
d2x  f d2y\

^+U  + ^)a  = 0-


dt2


By  the  differentiation  of  (10),  or  (F  — 0),  we  have
d2y  d2x


dt*  a dt 2’


and,  consequently,


d2x


d2x

I!2


= 0


(ii)


Then,  by  the  integration  of  (11),  we  obtain

*=r^*j+**  + ‘

and

a2  /2

y = T+Y*gJ+ait  + ac’

where  b and  c are  constants  of  integration,  determined
by  the  initial  position  and  velocity  of  m.  This  result
can  also  be  easily  found  by  the  direct  method.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


475


Some  care  is  necessary  in  the  application  of  equa-
tion (i)  if  F = 0 contains  the  time.  The  procedure  in
such  cases  maybe  illustrated  by  the  following  example.
Imagine  in  the  preceding  case  the  straight  line  on
which  in  descends  to  move  vertically  upwards  with  the
acceleration  y.  We  start  again  frorh  equation  (9)


d2x

7t2


fix  +


■ + £?W  = o-


F=  0 is  here  replaced  by
y = ax  + y T . .


(12)


To  form  DF=  0,  we  vary  (12)  only  with  respect  to  ^
andy,  for  we  are  concerned  here  only  with  the  possible
displacement  of  the  system  in  its  position  at  any  given
instant , and  not  with  the  displacement  that  actually
takes  place  in  time.  We  put,  therefore,  as  in  the  pre-
vious case,

dy  ==  a d x,

and  obtain,  as  before,


d2  x
Tf2


(13)


But  to  get  an  equation  in  x alone,  we  have,  since  x
and  y are  connected  in  (13)  by  the  actual  motion,  to
differentiate  (12)  with  respect  to  t and  employ  the  re-
sulting equation

d2y  d2  x ,
jtT  = “w-  + r


for  substitution  in  (13).  In  this  way  the  equation


d 2 x


dt 2


d2  x\

g + r + a^)a  = 0


is  obtained,  which,  integrated,  gives


A modifica-
tion of  this
example.


476


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Discussion
of  the  mod-
ified exam-
ple.


• a


1 + a2

7%


(<?•+  r)  *•  + bi  + £


Y—


a2


<g+Y)


+ a b t -f-  a c.


1 + a2

If  a weightless  body  ?n  lie  on  the  moving  straight
line,  we  obtain  these  equations

t 2


y:


— a

:T~+a

r


_yT+bt+C


t2


~ -f-  abt-\-  a c,


'1  + a2  2

— results  which  are  readily  understood,  when  we  re-
flect that,  on  a straight  line  moving  upwards  with  the
acceleration  y , m behaves  as  if  it  were  affected  with  a
downward  acceleration  y on  the  straight  line  at  rest.

7.  The  procedure  with  equation  (12)  in  the  preced-
ing example  may  be  rendered  somewhat  clearer  by  the
following  consideration.  Equation  (2),  D’Alembert’s
principle,  asserts,  that  all  the  work
that  can  be  done  in  the  displacement
of  a system  is  done  by  the  impressed
forces  and  not  by  the  connections.  This
is  evident,  since  the  rigidity  of  the  con-
nections allows  no  changes  in  the  rela-
tive positions  which  would  be  neces-
sary for  any  alteration  in  the  potentials  of  the  elastic
forces.  But  this  ceases  to  be  true  when  the  connec-
tions undergo  changes  in  time . In  this  case,  the  changes
of  the  connections  perform  work,  and  we  can  then  ap-
ply equation  (2)  to  the  displacements  that  actically  take
place  only  provided  we  add  to  the  impressed  forces  the
forces  that  produce  the  changes  of  the  connections.

A heavy  mass  m is  free  to  move  on  a straight  line
parallel  to  OY  (Fig.  234.)  Let  this  line  be  subject  to


Y

1

1

m

1

\!

1

1

1

X

Fig.  234.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


477


a forced  acceleration  in  the  direction  of  x,  such  that  illustration

oi  the  mod-

the  equation  J?  = 0 becomes  ified  exam-


v2


x = r ’


(14)


D’Alembert’s  principle  again  gives  equation  (9).
But  since  from  DF=  0 it  follows  here  that  dx  = 0,
this  equation  reduces  itself  to


.+^:W=o

‘ dt2  )

in  which  dy  is  wholly  arbitrary.  Wherefore,

d2  v

*+7*=°


(15)


and


- 0* /2

y — — % — I- a t + b9


to  which  must  be  supplied  (14)  or

t2

x = y r

It  is  patent  that  (1 5)  does  not  assign  the  total  work
of  the  displacement  that  actually  takes  place,  but  only
that  of  some  possible  displacement  on  the  straight  line
conceived,  for  the  moment,  as  fixed.

If  we  imagine  the  straight  line  massless,  and  cause
it  to  travel  parallel  to  itself  in  some  guiding  mechan-
ism moved  by  a force  my,  equation  (2)  will  be  re-
placed by

[rn y — in  Af $ x + mg  — in  D- , — 0,

and  since  dx,  dy  are  wholly  arbitrary  here,  we  obtain
the  two  equations


d2  x


47®


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Deduction
of  the  prin
ciple  of  vi.
viva  from
Lagrange’s
fundamen-
tal dynam-
ical equa-
tion.


g +


which  give  the  same  results  as  before.  The  apparently
different  mode  of  treatment  of  these  cases  is  simply  the
result  of  a slight  inconsistency,  springing  from  the  fact
that  all  the  forces  involved  are,  for  reasons  facilitating
calculation,  not  included  in  the  consideration  at  the
outset,  but  a portion  is  left  to  be  dealt  with  subse-
quently.

8.  As  the  different  mechanical  principles  only  ex-
press different  aspects  of  the  same  fact,  any  one  of
them  is  easily  deducible  from  any  other  ; as  we  shall
now  illustrate  by  developing  the  principle  of  vis  viva
from  equation  (2)  of  page  468.  Equation  (2)  refers  to
instantaneously  possible  displacements,  that  is,  to  “ vir-
tual” displacements.  But  when  the  connections  of  a
system  are  independent  of  the  time,  the  motions  that
actually  take  place  are  “ virtual  ” displacements.  Conse-
quently the  principle  may  be  applied  to  actual  motions.
For  Sx,  6 y,  dz,  we  may,  accordingly,  write  dx,  dy,
dz,  the  displacements  which  take  place  in  time,  and
put

IS  ( Xdx  -|-  Ydy  + Zdz)  =


2 m


d2  x d2y  d2  z

~dWdx  + 7t*dy  + Indz


The  expression  to  the  right  may,  by  introducing  for
dx,  ( dx/df)dt  and  so  forth,  and  by  denoting  the  velo-
city by  v,  also  be  written


2 m


fd2  x dx
\di 2 dtdt


d2y  dy  _ d2  z dz
^ dt2  dt  ^ dt2  dt


^d  2 m


+


(dy

\di,


+


(dz


^d2mv2.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


479


Also  in  the  expression  to  the  left,  (dx/df)dt  may  be  Force-
written  for  dx.  Bat  this  gives


J2  {Xdx  + Ydy  + Zdz)  = (v2  — v20),


where  v0  denotes  the  velocity  at  the  beginning  and  v
the  velocity  at  the  end  of  the  motion.  The  integral  to  the
left  can  always  be  found  if  we  can  reduce  it  to  a single
variable,  that  is  to  say,  if  we  know  the  course  of  the
motion  in  time  or  the  paths  which  the  movable  points
describe.  If,  however,  X , Y,  Z are  the  partial  differ-
ential coefficients  of  the  same  function  U of  coordinates,
if,  that  is  to  say,


X=


dU

dx*


as  is  always  the  case  when  only  central  forces  are  in-
volved, this  reduction  is  unnecessary.  The  entire  ex-
pression to  the  left  is  then  a complete  differential.  And
we  have

2{U-U0')  = 2im(v*-v !),

which  is  to  say,  the  difference  of  the  force-functions
(or  work)  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  motion
is  equal  to  the  difference  of  the  vires  viva  at  the  be-
ginning and  the  end  of  the  motion.  The  vires  viva  are
in  such  case  also  functions  of  the  coordinates.

In  the  case  of  a body  movable  in  the  plane  of  X
and  Y suppose,  for  example,  X = — y9  Y = — x ; we
then  have


J ' ( — ydx  — .v  dy)  = — J d {pcy)  —

xodo  — xy=  im  O2  — vl)'


But  if  X = — a,  Y=  — x,  the  integral  to  the  left  is
— £ (a  dx  + # dy).  This  integral  can  be  assigned  the
moment  we  know  the  path  the  body  has  traversed,  that


Essential
character
of  analyt-
ical me-
chanics.


480  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

is,  if  y is  determined  a function  of  x.  If,  for  example,
y — fix2,  the  integral  would  become

— J ( a + 2 px2)  dx  = a O0  — x)  + llHo

The  difference  of  these  two  cases  is,  that  in  the  first
the  work  is  simply  a function  of  coordinates,  that  a
force-function  exists,  that  the  element  of  the  work  is  a
complete  differential,  and  the  work  consequently  is  de-
termined by  the  initial  and  final  values  of  the  coordi-
nates, while  in  the  second  case  it  is  dependent  on  the
entire  path  described.

9.  These  simple  examples,  in  themselves  present-
ing no  difficulties,  will  doubtless  suffice  to  illustrate  the
general  nature  of  the  operations  of  analytical  mechan-
ics. No  fundamental  light  can  be  expected  from  this
branch  of  mechanics.  On  the  contrary,  the  discovery
of  matters  of  principle  must  be  substantially  completed
before  we  can  think  of  framing  analytical  mechanics  ;
the  sole  aim  of  which  is  a perfect  practical  mastery  of
problems.  Whosoever  mistakes  this  situation,  will
never  comprehend  Lagrange’s  great  performance,  which
here  too  is  essentially  of  an  economical  character.  Poin-
sot  did  not  altogether  escape  this  error.

It  remains  to  be  mentioned  that  as  the  result  of  the
labors  of  Mobius,  Hamilton,  Grassmann,  and  others,  a
new  transformation  of  mechanics  is  preparing.  These
inquirers  have  developed  mathematical  conceptions
that  conform  more  exactly  and  directly  to  our  geomet-
rical ideas  than  do  the  conceptions  of  common  analyt-
ical geometry  ; and  the  advantages  of  analytical  gene-
rality and  direct  geometrical  insight  are  thus  united.
But  this  transformation,  of  course,  lies,  as  yet,  beyond
the  limits  of  an  historical  exposition.  (See  p.  577.)


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


481


IV.


THE  ECONOMY  OF  SCIENCE.

1.  It  is  the  object  of  science  to  replace,  or  save,  ex-The^ba^s
periences,  by  the  reproduction  and  anticipation  of  facts  economy  o*
in  thought.  Memory  is  handier  than  experience,  and
often  answers  the  same  purpose.  This  economical
office  of  science,  which  fills  its  whole  life,  is  apparent
at  first  glance  ; and  with  its  full  recognition  all  mys-
ticism in  science  disappears.

Science  is  communicated  by  instruction,  in  order
that  one  man  may  profit  by  the  experience  of  another
and  be  spared  the  trouble  of  accumulating  it  for  him-
self ; and  thus,  to  spare  posterity,  the  experiences  of
whole  generations  are  stored  up  in  libraries.

Language,  the  instrument  of  this  communication,  Theeco-
is  itself  an  economical  contrivance.  Experiences  are  charade
analysed,  or  broken  up,  into  simpler  and  more  familiar  gaage.
experiences,  and  then  symbolised  at  some  sacrifice  of
precision.  The  symbols  of  speech  are  as  yet  restricted
in  their  use  within  national  boundaries,  and  doubtless
will  long  remain  so.  But  written  language  is  gradually
being  metamorphosed  into  an  ideal  universal  character.

It  is  certainly  no  longer  a mere  transcript  of  speech.
Numerals,  algebraic  signs,  chemical  symbols,  musical
notes,  phonetic  alphabets,  may  be  regarded  as  parts
already  formed  of  this  universal  character  of  the  fu-
ture ; they  are,  to  some  extent,  decidedly  conceptual,
and  of  almost  general  international  use.  The  analysis
of  colors,  physical  and  physiological,  is  already  far
enough  advanced  to  render  an  international  system  of
color-signs  perfectly  practical.  In  Chinese  writing,


482


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Possibility
of  a univer-
sal lan-
guage.


Econom-
ical charac-
ter of  all
our  repre-
sentations
of  the
wor1,


we  have  an  actual  example  of  a true  ideographic  lan
guage,  pronounced  diversely  m different  provinces,  yet
everywhere  carrying  the  same  meaning.  Were  the
system  and  its  signs  only  of  a simpler  character,  the
use  of  Chinese  writing  might  become  universal.  The
dropping  of  unmeaning  and  needless  accidents  of  gram-
mar, as  English  mostly  drops  them,  would  be  quite
requisite  to  the  adoption  of  such  a system.  But  uni-
versality would  not  be  the  sole  merit  of  such  a char-
acter ; since  to  read  it  would  be  to  understand  it.  Our
children  often  read  what  they  do  not  understand  ; but
that  which  a Chinaman  cannot  understand,  he  is  pre-
cluded from  reading.

2.  In  the  reproduction  of  facts  in  thought,  we
never  reproduce  the  facts  in  full,  but  .only  that  side  of
them  which  is  important  to  us,  moved  to  this  directly
or  indirectly  by  a practical  interest.  Our  reproductions
are  invariably  abstractions.  Here  again  is  an  econom-
ical tendency.

Nature  is  composed  of  sensations  as  its  elements.
Primitive  man,  however,  first  picks  out  certain  com-
pounds of  these  elements — those  namely  that  are  re-
latively permanent  and  of  greater  importance  to  him.
The  first  and  oldest  words  are  names  of  “ things.  ”
Even  here,  there  is  an  abstractive  process,  an  abstrac-
tion from  the  surroundings  of  the  things,  and  from  the
continual  small  changes  which  these  compound  sensa-
tions undergo,  which  being  practically  unimportant  are
not  noticed.  No  inalterable  thing  exists.  The  thing
is  an  abstraction,  the  name  a symbol,  for  a compound
of  elements  from  whose  changes  we  abstract.  The
reason  we  assign  a single  word  to  a whole  compound  is
that  we  need  to  suggest  all  the  constituent  sensations
at  once.  When,  later,  we  come  to  remark  the  change-


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT,


483


ableness,  we  cannot  at  the  same  time  hold  fast  to  the
idea  of  the  thing’s  permanence,  unless  we  have  recourse
to  the  conception  of  a thing-iri-itself,  or  other  such  like
absurdity.  Sensations  are  not  signs  of  things  ; but,  on
the  contrary,  a thing  is  a thought-symbol  for  a com-
pound sensation  of  relative  fixedness.  Properly  speak-
ing the  world  is  not  composed  of  4 ‘things”  as  its  ele-
ments, but  of  colors,  tones,  pressures,  spaces,  times,
in  short  what  we  ordinarily  call  individual  sensations.

The  whole  operation  is  a mere  affair  of  economy.

In  the  reproduction  of  facts,  we  begin  with  the  more
durable  and  familiar  compounds,  and  supplement  these
later  with  the  unusual  by  way  of  corrections.  Thus,
we  speak  of  a perforated  cylinder,  of  a cube  with  bev-
eled edges,  expressions  involving  contradictions,  un-
less we  accept  the  view  here  taken.  All  judgments  are
such  amplifications  and  corrections  of  ideas  already
admitted.

3.  In  speaking  of  cause  and  effect  we  arbitrarily  The  ideas
give  relief  to  those  elements  to  whose  connection  we  effect an
have  to  attend  in  the  reproduction  of  a fact  in  the  re-
spect in  which  it  is  important  to  us.  There  is  no  cause
nor  effect  in  nature  ; nature  has  but  an  individual  exis-
tence ; nature  simply  is.  Recurrences  of  like  cases  in
which  A is  always  connected  with  B , that  is,  like  results
under  like  circumstances,  that  is  again,  the  essence  of  the
connection  of  cause  and  effect,  exist  but  in  the  abstrac-
tion which  we  perform  for  the  purpose  of  mentally  re-
producing the  facts.  Let  a fact  become  familiar,  and
we  no  longer  require  this  putting  into  relief  of  its  con-
necting marks,  oux*  attention  is  no  longer  attracted  to
the  new  and  surprising,  and  we  cease  to  speak  of  cause
and  effect.  Heat  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  the  tension
of  steam  ; but  when  the  phenomenon  becomes  familiar .


484


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


we  think  of  the  steam  at  once  with  the  tension  proper
to  its  temperature.  Acid  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  the
reddening  of  tincture  of  litmus  ; but  later  we  think  of
the  reddening  as  a property  of  the  acid.

Hume,  Hume  first  propounded  the  question,  How  can  a

Kant,  and  .

Schopen-  thing  A act  on  another  thing  B ? Hume,  m fact,  re-

hauer’s  ex-  . '

pianations  jects  causality  and  recognises  only  a wonted  succes-

of  cause  ...  __  , 1 i 1

and  effect,  sion  m time.  Kant  correctly  remarked  that  a necessary
connection  between  A and  B could  not  be  disclosed  by
simple  observation.  He  assumes  an  innate  idea  or
category  of  the  mind,  a Verstandesbegriff \ under  which
the  cases  of  experience  are  subsumed.  Schopenhauer’
who  adopts  substantially  the  same  position,  distin-
guishes four  forms  of  the  “principle  of  sufficient  rea-
son ” — the  logical,  physical,  and  mathematical  form,
and  the  law  of  motivation.  But  these  forms  differ  only
as  regards  the  matter  to  which  they  are  applied,  which
may  belong  either  to  outward  or  inward  experience.

Cause  and  The  natural  and  common-sense  explanation  is  ap-

economfcai  parently  this.  The  ideas  of  c^use  and  effect  originally

ofthought.s  sprang  from  an  endeavor  to  reproduce  facts  in  thought.

At  first,  the  connection  of  A and  B,  of  C and  D,  of  E
and  Fj  and  so  forth,  is  regarded  as  familiar.  But  after
a greater  range  of  experience  is  acquired  and  a con-
nection between  M and  N is  observed,  it  often  turns
out  that  we  recognise  M as  made  ap  of  A,  C,  E,  and  N
of  B , D,  F \ the  connection  of  which  was  before  a fa-
miliar fact  and  accordingly  possesses  with  us  a higher
authority.  This  explains  why  a person  of  experience
regards  a new  event  with  different  eyes  than  the  ftov-
ice.  The  new  experience  is  illuminated  by  the  mass
of  old  experience.  As  a fact,  then,  there  really  does
exist  in  the  mind  an  “idea”  under  which  fresh  experi-
ences are  subsumed  ; but  that  idea  has  itself  been  de-


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


485


veloped  from  experience.  The  notion  of  the  necessity
of  the  causal  connection  is  probably  created  by  our
voluntary  movements  in  the  world  and  by  the  changes
which  these  indirectly  produce,  as  Hume  supposed  but
Schopenhauer  contested.  Much  of  the  authority  of
the  ideas  of  cause  and  effect  is  due  to  the  fact  that  they
are  developed  instinctively  and  involuntarily,  and  that
we  are  distinctly  sensible  of  having  personally  con-
tributed nothing  to  their  formation.  We  may,  indeed,
say,  that  our  sense  of  causality  is  not  acquired  by  the
individual,  but  has  been  perfected  in  the  develop-
ment of  the  race.  Cause  and  effect,  therefore,  are
things  of  thought,  having  an  economical  office.  It  can-
not be  said  why  they  arise.  For  it  is  precisely  by  the
abstraction  of  uniformities  that  we  know  the  question
“why. ” (See  Appendix,  XXVI,  p.  57 9.)

4.  In  the  details  of  science,  its  economical  character  Econom-

' # ical  fea-

is  still  more  apparent.  The  so-called  descriptive  sci-  tures  of

. . * all  laws  of

ences  must  chiefly  remain  content  with  reconstructing  nature,
individual  facts.  Where  it  is  possible,  the  common  fea-
tures of  many  facts  are  once  for  all  placed  in  relief.  But
in  sciences  that  are  more  highly  developed,  rules  for  the
reconstruction  of  great  numbers  of  facts  maybe  embod-
ied in  a single  expression.  Thus,  instead  of  noting  indi-
vidual cases  of  light-refraction,  we  can  mentally  recon-
struct all  present  and  future  cases,  if  we  know  that  the
incident  ray,  the  refracted  ray,  and  the  perpendicular
lie  in  the  same  plane  and  that  sin  a/ sin  fi  = n.  Here,
instead  of  the  numberless  cases  of  refraction  in  different
combinations  of  matter  and  under  all  different  angles
of  incidence,  we  have  simply  to  note  the  rule  above
stated  and  the  values  of  n, — which  is  much  easier.  The
economical  purpose  is  here  unmistakable.  In  nature
there  is  no  law  of  refraction,  only  different  cases  of  re-


486


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


The  econ-
omy of  the
mathemat-
ical sci-
ences.


Arithmetic
and  alge-
bra.


fraction.  The  law  of  refraction  is  a concise  compem
dious  rule,  devised  by  us  for  the  mental  reconstruction
of  a fact,  and  only  for  its  reconstruction  in  part,  that
is,  on  its  geometrical  side.

5.  The  sciences  most  highly  developed  economically
are  those  whose  facts  are  reducible  to  a few  numerable
elements  of  like  nature.  Such  is  the  science  of  mechan-
ics, in  which  we  deal  exclusively  with  spaces,  times,
and  masses.  The  whole  previously  established  econ-
omy of  mathematics  stands  these  sciences  in  stead.
Mathematics  may  be  defined  as  the  economy  of  count-
ing. Numbers  are  arrangement-signs  which,  for  the
sake  of  perspicuity  and  economy,  are  themselves  ar-
ranged in  a simple  system.  Numerical  operations,  it
is  found,  are  independent  of  the  kind  of  objects  operated
on,  and  are  consequently  mastered  once  for  all.  When,
for  the  first  time,  I have  occasion  to  add  five  objects  to
seven  others,  I count  the  whole  collection  through,  at
once  ; but  when  I afterwards  discover  that  I can  start
counting  from  5,  I save  myself  part  of  the  trouble ;
and  still  later,  remembering  that  5 and  7 always  count
up  to  12,  I dispense  with  the  numeration  entirely.

The  object  of  all  arithmetical  operations  is  to  save
direct  numeration,  by  utilising  the  results  of  our  old
operations  of  counting.  Our  endeavor  is,  having  done
a sum  once,  to  preserve  the  answer  for  future  use.  The
first  four  rules  of  arithmetic  well  illustrate  this  view.
Such,  too,  is  the  purpose  of  algebra,  which,  substitut-
ing ‘relations  for  values,  symbolises  and  definitively
fixes  all  numerical  operations  that  follow  the  same  rule.
.For  example,  we  learn  from  the  equation


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


487


that  the  more  complicated  numerical  operation  at  the  '
left  may  always  be  replaced  by  the  simpler  one  at  the
right,  whatever  numbers  and  y stand  for.  We  thus
save  ourselves  the  labor  of  performing  in  future  cases
the  more  complicated  operation.  Mathematics  is  the
method  of  replacing  in  the  most  comprehensive  and
economical  manner  possible,  new  numerical  operations
by  old  ones  done  already  with  known  results.  It  may
happen  in  this  procedure  that  the  results  of  operations
are  employed  which  were  originally  performed  centu-
ries ago.

Often  operations  involving  intense  mental  effort  The  theory

. . of  deter-

may  be  replaced  by  the  action  of  semi-mechanical  minants.
routine,  with  great  saving  of  time  and  avoidance  of
fatigue.  For  example,  the  theory  of  determinants
owes  its  origin  to  the  remark,  that  it  is  not  necessary
to  solve  each  time  anew  equations  of  the  form
a ^ x — f—  l)  ^ y — j—  c ^ = 0
a2  x+  &2y+  t2  — 0,
from  which  result


__  P

a\  b2  ~a2  bl

~~  * N

y==-

a ^ c 2 a ^ c . j

_ <2

ai  b2  a2  hl

' N*

but  that  the  solution  may  be  effected  by  means  of  the
coefficients,  by  writing  down  the  coefficients  according
to  a prescribed  scheme  and  operating  with  them  me-
chanically. Thus,


i «i  hi

I a2  ^2


= «!  l>%~  a2  —N


and  similarly


U,  bx\

I <-2  h !


— P,  and


ai  1

it  ty  L r)  J


Q-


488


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Calculating

machines.


Other  ab-
breviated
methods  of
attaining
results.


Even  a total  disburdening  of  the  mind  can  be  ef-
fected in  mathematical  operations.  This  happens  where
operations  of  counting  hitherto  performed  are  symbol-
ised by  mechanical  operations  with  signs,  and  our  brain
energy,  instead  of  being  wasted  on  the  repetition  of
old  operations,  is  spared  for  more  important  tasks.
The  merchant  pursues  a like  economy,  when,  instead
of  directly  handling  his  bales  of  goods,  he  operates
with  bills  of  lading  or  assignments  of  them.  The
drudgery  of  computation  may  even  be  relegated  to  a
machine.  Several  different  types  of  calculating  ma-
chines are  actually  in  practical  use.  The  earliest  of
these  (of  any  complexity)  was  the  difference-engine  of
Babbage,  who  was  familiar  with  the  ideas  here  pre-
sented.

A numerical  result  is  not  always  reached  by  the
actual  solution  of  the  problem ; it  may  also  be  reached
indirectly.  It  is  easy  to  ascertain,  for  example,  that  a
curve  whose  quadrature  for  the  abscissa  x has  the  value
xm,  gives  an  increment  mxm~'xdx  of  the  quadrature  for
the  increment  dx  of  the  abscissa.  But  we  then  also  know
that  J mxm~l dx  =xm;  that  is,  we  recognise  the  quan-
tity xm  from  the  increment  mxm~~ldx  as  unmistakably
as  we  recognise  a fruit  by  its  rind.  Results  of  this
kind,  accidentally  found  by  simple  inversion,  or  by
processes  more  or  less  analogous,  are  very  extensively
employed  in  mathematics.

That  scientific  work  should  be  more  useful  the  more
it  has  been  used,  while  mechanical  work  is  expended  in
use,  may  seem  strange  to  us.  When  a person  who
daily  takes  the  same  walk  accidentally  finds  a shorter
cut,  and  thereafter,  remembering  that  it  is  shorter,  al-
ways goes  that  way,  he  undoubtedly  saves  himself  the
difference  of  the  work.  But  memory  is  really  not  work.


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT,


4S9


It  only  places  at  our  disposal  energy  within  our  present
or  future  possession,  which  the  circumstance  of  igno-
rance prevented  us  from  availing  ourselves  of.  This
is  precisely  the  case  with  the  application  of  scientific
ideas.

The  mathematician  who  pursues  his  studies  with- Necessity

A of  clear

out  clear  views  of  this  matter,  must  often  have  the  views  on

this  sub-

uncomfortable  feeling  that  his  paper  and  pencil  sur-  ject.
pass  him  in  intelligence.  Mathematics,  thus  pursued
as  an  object  of  instruction,  is  scarcely  of  more  educa-
tional value  than  busying  oneself  with  the  Cabala.  On
the  contrary,  it  induces  a tendency  toward  mystery,
which  is  pretty  sure  to  bear  its  fruits.

6.  The  science  of  physics  also  furnishes  examples  Examples
of  this  economy  of  thought,  altogether  similar  to  those  omy  ?fec_°n
we  have  just  examined.  A brief  reference  here  will  suf-  physics/11
fice.  The  moment  of  inertia  saves  us  the  separate  con-
sideration of  the  individual  particles  of  masses.  By
the  force-function  we  dispense  with  the  separate  in-
vestigation of  individual  force-components.  The  sim-
plicity of  reasonings  involving  force-functions  springs
from  the  fact  that  a great  amount  of  mental  work  had
to  be  performed  before  the  discovery  of  the  properties
of  the  force-functions  was  possible.  Gauss’s  dioptrics
dispenses  us  from  the  separate  consideration  of  the
single  refracting  surfaces  of  a dioptrical  system  and
substitutes  for  it  the  principal  and  nodal  points.  But
a careful  consideration  of  the  single  surfaces  had  to
precede  the  discovery  of  the  principal  and  nodal  points.

Gauss’s  dioptrics  simply  saves  us  the  necessity  of  often
repeating  this  consideration.

We  must  admit,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  result  of
science  which  in  point  of  principle  could  not  have  been
arrived  at  wholly  without  methods.  But,  as  a matter


490


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Science  a

minimal

problem.


The  princi
pie  of  con-
tinuity, the
norm  of  sci
entific
method.


of  fact,  within  the  short  span  of  a human  life  and  with
man’s  limited  powers  of  memory,  any  stock  of  knowl-
edge worthy  of  the  name  is  unattainable  except  by  the
gj'eatest  mental  economy.  Science  itself,  therefore,
may  be  regarded  as  a minimal  problem,  consisting  of
the  completest  possible  presentment  of  facts  with  the
least  possible  expe?iditure  of  thought .

7.  The  function  of  science,  as  we  take  it,  is  to  re-
place experience.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  science
must  remain  in  the  province  of  experience,  but,  on  the
other,  must  hasten  beyond  it,  constantly  expecting  con-
firmation, constantly  expecting  the  reverse.  Where
neither  confirmation  nor  refutation  is  possible,  science
is  not  concerned.  Science  acts  and  only  acts  in  the
domain  of  uncompleted  experience.  Exemplars  of  such
branches  of  science  are  the  theories  of  elasticity  and
of  the  conduction  of  heat,  both  of  which  ascrifie  to  the
smallest  particles  of  matter  only  such  properties  as  ob-
servation supplies  in  the  study  of  the  larger  portions.
The  comparison  of  theory  and  experience  may  be  far-
ther and  farther  extended,  as  our  means  of  observation
increase' in  refinement.

Experience  alone,  without  the  ideas  that  are  asso-
ciated with  it,  would  forever  remain  strange  to  us.
Those  ideas  that  hold  good  throughout  the  widest  do-
mains of  research  and  that  supplement  the  greatest
amount  of  experience,  are  the  most  scientific.  The  prin-
ciple of  continuity,  the  use  of  which  everywhere  per-
vades modern  inquiry,  simply  prescribes  a mode  of
conception  which  conduces  in  the  highest  degree  to  the
economy  of  thought.

8.  If  a long  elastic  rod  be  fastened  in  a vise,  the
rod  may  be  made  to  execute  slow  vibrations.  These
are  directly  observable,  can  be  seen,  touched,  and


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


49i


graphically  recorded.  If  the  rod  be  shortened,  the
vibrations  will  increase  in  rapidity  and  cannot  be  di-
rectly seen ; the  rod  will  present  to  the  sight  a blurred
image.  This  is  a new  phenomenon.  But  the  sensa-
tion of  touch  is  still  like  that  of  the  previous  case ; we
can  still  make  the  rod  record  its  movements ; and  if
we  mentally  retain  the  conception  of  vibrations,  we  can
still  anticipate  the  results  of  experiments.  On  further
shortening  the  rod  the  sensation  of  touch  is  altered  ;
the  rod  begins  to  sound ; again  a new  phenomenon  is
presented.  But  the  phenomena  do  not  all  change  at
once  ; only  this  or  that  phenomenon  changes ; conse-
quently the  accompanying  notion  of  vibration,  which
is  not  confined  to  any  single  one,  is  still  serviceable,
still  economical.  Even  when  the  sound  has  reached
so  high  a pitch  and  the  vibrations  have  become  so
small  that  the  previous  means  of  observation  are  not
of  avail,  we  still  advantageously  imagine  the  sounding
rod  to  perform  vibrations,  and  can  predict  the  vibra-
tions of  the  dark  lines  in  the  spectrum  of  the  polarised
light  of  a rod  of  glass.  If  on  the  rod  being  further
shortened  all  the  phenomena  suddenly  passed  into  view
phenomena,  the  conception  of  vibration  would  no
longer  be  serviceable  because  it  would  no  longer  afford
us  a means  of  supplementing  the  new  experiences  by
the  previous  ones.

When  we  mentally  add  to  those  actions  of  a human
being  which  we  can  perceive,  sensations  and  ideas  like
our  own  which  we  cannot  perceive,  the  object  of  the
idea  we  so  form  is  economical.  The  idea  makes  ex-
perience intelligible  to  us ; it  supplements  and  sup-
plants experience.  This  idea  is  not  regarded  as  a great
scientific  discovery,  only  because  its  formation  is  so
natural  that  every  child  conceives  it.  Now,  this  is


Example  il-
lustrative
of  the
method  of
science.


492


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS


exactly  what  we  do  when  we  imagine  a moving  body
which  has  just  disappeared  behind  a pillar,  or  a comet
at  the  moment  invisible,  as  continuing  its  motion  and
retaining  its  previously  observed  properties.  We  do
this  that  we  may  not  be  surprised  by  its  reappearance.
We  fill  out  the  gaps  in  experience  by  the  ideas  that
experience  suggests.

aii  scien-  9-  Yet  not  all  the  prevalent  scientific  theories  origi-
ories'not  nated  so  naturally  and  artlessly.  Thus,  chemical,  elec-
tee p1lnci-n  trical,  and  optical  phenomena  are  explained  by  atoms.
5miity?on*  But  the  mental  artifice  atom  was  not  formed  by  the
principle  of  continuity ; on  the  contrary,  it  is  a pro-
duct especially  devised  for  the  purpose  in  view.  Atoms
cannot  be  perceived  by  the  senses  ; like  all  substances,
they  are  things  of  thought.  Furthermore,  the  atoms
are  invested  with  properties  that  absolutely  contradict
the  attributes  hitherto  observed  in  bodies.  However
well  fitted  atomic  theories  may  be  to  reproduce  certain
groups  of  facts,  the  physical  inquirer  who  has  laid  to
heart  Newton’s  rules  will  only  admit  those  theories  as
provisional  helps,  and  will  strive  to  attain,  in  some  more
natural  way,  a satisfactory  substitute.

Atoms  and  The  atomic  theory  plays  a part  in  physics  similar
tai  artifices,  to  that  of  certain  auxiliary  concepts  in  mathematics;

it  is  a mathematical  model  for  facilitating  the  mental
reproduction  of  facts.  Although  we  represent  vibra-
tions by  the  harmonic  formula,  the  phenomena  of  cool-
ing by  exponentials,  falls  by  squares  of  times,  etc.,  no
one  will  fancy  that  vibrations  in  themselves  have  any-
thing to  do  with  the  circular  functions,  or  the  motion
of  falling  bodies  with  squares.  It  has  simply  been  ob-
served that  the  relations  between  the  quantities  inves-
tigated were  similar  to  certain  relations  obtaining  be-
tween familiar  mathematical  functions,  and  these  more


FORMAL  DEVELOPMENT.


493


familiar  ideas  are  employed  as  an  easy  means  of  sup-
plementing experience.  Natural  phenomena  whose  re-
lations are  not  similar  to  those  of  functions  with  which
we  are  familiar,  are  at  present  very  difficult  to  recon-
struct. But  the  progress  of  mathematics  may  facilitate
the  matter.

As  mathematical  helps  of  this  kind,  spaces  of  more
than  three  dimensions  may  be  used,  as  I have  else-
where shown.  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  regard  these,
on  this  account,  as  anything  more  than  mental  arti-
fices. *

*As  the  outcome  of  the  labors  of  Lobatchevski,  Bolyai,  Gauss,  and  Rie-
mann,  the  view  has  gradually  obtained  currency  in  the  mathematical  world,
that  that  which  we  call  space  is  a particular , actual  case  of  a more  general ,
conceivable  case  of  multiple  quantitative  manifoldness.  The  space  of  sight
and  touch  is  a threefold  manifoldness;  it  possesses  three  dimensions ; and
every  point  in  it  can  be  defined  by  three  distinct  and  independent  data.  But
it  is  possible  to  conceive  of  a quadruple  or  even  multiple  space-like  manifold-
ness. And  the  character  of  the  manifoldness  may  also  be  differently  conceived
from  the  manifoldness  of  actual  space.  We  regard  this  discovery,  which  is
chiefly  due  to  the  labors  of  Riemann,  as  a very  important  one.  The  properties
of  actual  space  are  here  directly  exhibited  as  objects  of  experience , and  the
pseudo-theories  of  geometry  that  seek  to  excogitate  these  properties  by  meta-
physical arguments  are  overthrown.

A thinking  being  is  supposed  to  live  in  the  surface  of  a sphere,  with  no
other  kind  of  space  to  institute  comparisons  with.  His  space  will  appear  to
him  similarly  constituted  throughout.  He  might  regard  _it  as  infinite,  and
could  only  be  convinced  of  the  contrary  by  experience.  Starting  from  any  two
points  of  a great  circle  of  the  sphere  and  proceeding  at  right  angles  thereto  on
other  great  circles,  he  could  hardly  expect  that  the  circles  last  mentioned
would  intersect.  So,  also,  with  respect  to  the  space  in  which  we  live,  only  ex-
perience can  decide  whether  it  is  finite,  whether  parallel  lines  intersect  in  it,
or  the  like.  The  significance  of  this  elucidation  can  scarcely  be  overrated.
An  enlightenment  similar  to  that  which  Riemann  inaugurated  in  science  was
produced  in  the  mind  of  humanity  at  large,  as  regards  the  surface  of  the  earth,
by  the  discoveries  of  the  first  circumnavigators.

The  theoretical  investigation  of  the  mathematical  possibilities  above  re-
ferred to,  has,  primarily,  nothing  to  do  with  the  question  whether  things  really
exist  which  correspond  to  these  possibilities ; and  we  must  not  hold  mathe-
maticians responsible  for  the  popular  absurdities  which  their  investigations
have  given  rise  to.  The  space  of  sight  and  touch  is  tf/zr<?<?-dimensional  ; that,
no  one  ever  yet  doubted.  If,  now,  it  should  be  found  that  bodies  vanish  from
this  space,  or  new  bodies  get  into  it,  the  question  might  scientifically  be  dis-
cussed whether  it  would  facilitate  and  promote  our  insight  into  things  to  con-
ceive experiential  space  as  part  of  a four-dimensional  or  multi-dimensional


Multi-

dimen-

sioned

spaces


494


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


This  is  the  case,  too,  with  all  hypothesis  formed
for  the  explanation  of  new  phenomena.  Our  concep-
tions of  electricity  fit  in  at  once  with  the  electrical  phe-
nomena, and  take  almost  spontaneously  the  familiar
course,  the  moment  we  note  that  things  take  place  as
if  attracting  and  repelling  fluids  moved  on  the  surface
of  the  conductors.  But  these  mental  expedients  have
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  phenomenon  itself.
(See  Appendix,  XXVII,  p.  579.)

space.  Yet  in  such  a case,  this  fourth  dimension  would,  none  the  less,  remain
a pure  thing  of  thought  a mental  fiction.

But  this  is  not  the  way  matters  stand.  The  phenomena  mentioned  were
not  forthcoming  until  after  the  new  views  were  published,  and  were  then  ex-
hibited in  the  presence  of  certain  persons  at  spiritualistic  seances.  The  fourth
dimension  was  a very  opportune  discover'1’  for  the  spiritualists  and  for  theo-
logians who  were  in  a quandary  about  the  location  of  hell.  The  use  the  spiri-
tualist makes  of  the  fourth  dimension  is  this.  *It  is  possible  to  move  out  of  a
finite  straight  line,  without  passing  the  extremities,  through  the  second  dimen-
sion ; out  of  a finite  closed  surface  through  the  third ; and,  analogously,  out
of  a finite  closed  space,  without  passing  through  the  enclosing  boundaries,
through  the  fourth  dimension.  Even  the  tricks  that  prestidigitateurs,  in  the
old  days,  harmlessly  executed  in  three  dimensions,  are  now  invested  with  a
new  halo  by  the  fourth.  But  the  tricks  of  the  spiritualists,  the  tying  or  untying
of  knots  in  endless  strings,  the  removing  of  bodies  from  closed  spaces,  are  all
performed  in  cases  where  there  is  absolutely  nothing  at  stake.  All  is  purpose-
less jugglery.  We  have  not  yet  found  an  accoucheur  who  has  accomplished,
parturition  through  the  fourth  dimension.  If  we  should,  the  question  would
at  once  become  a serious  one.  Professor  Simony’s  beautiful  tricks  in  rope-
tying,  which,  as  the  performance  of  a prestidigitateur,  are  very  admirable,
speak  against,  not  for,  the  spiritualists.

Everyone  is  free  to  set  up  an  opinion  and  to  adduce  proofs  in  support  of
it.  Whether,  though,  a scientist  shall  find  it  worth  his  while  to  enter  into
serious  investigations  of  opinions  so  advanced,  is  a question  which  his  reason
and  instinct  alone  can  decide.  If  these  things,  in  the  end,  should  turn  out  to
be  true,  I shall  not  be  ashamed  of  being  the  last  to  believe  them.  What  I have
seen  of  them  was  not  calculated  to  make  me  less  sceptical.

I myself  regarded  multi-dimensioned  spa^e  as  a mathematico-physical
help  even  prior  to  the  appearance  of  Riemann’s  memoir.  But  1 trust  that
no  one  will  employ  what  I have  thought,  said,  and  written  on  this  subject  as  a
basis  for  the  fabrication  of  ghost  stories.  (Compare  Mach,  Die  Geschit.hte  und
die  Wurzel  des  Satzes  von.  der  ErkaLtung  der  Arbeit .}


CHAPTER  V.


THE  RELATIONS  OF  MECHANICS  TO  OTHER  DE-
PARTMENTS OF  KNOWLEDGE.

i.

THE  RELATIONS  OF  MECHANICS  TO  PHYSICS.

1.  Purely  mechanical  phenomena  do  not  exist.  The
production  of  mutual  accelerations  in  masses  is,  to  all  ^not^ex-
appearances,  a purely  dynamical  phenomenon.  -^ut  any°sci-t0
with  these  dynamical  results  are  always  associated ence-
thermal,  magnetic,  electrical,  and  chemical  phenom-
ena, and  the  former  are  always  modified  in  proportion

as  the  latter  are  asserted.  On  the  other  hand,  thermal,
magnetic,  electrical,  and  chemical  conditions  also  can
produce  motions.  Purely  mechanical  phenomena,  ac-
cordingly, are  abstractions,  made,  either  intentionally
or  from  necessity,  for  facilitating  our  comprehension  of
things.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  other  classes  of
physical  phenomena.  Every  event  belongs,  in  a strict
sense,  to  all  the  departments  of  physics,  the  latter  be-
ing separated  only  by  an  artificial  classification,  which
is  partly  conventional,  partly  physiological,  and  partly
historical.

2.  The  view  that  makes  mechanics  the  basis  of  the
remaining  branches  of  physics,  and  explains  all  physical
phenomena  by  mechanical  ideas,  is  in  our  judgment  a
prejudice.  Knowledge  which  is  historically  first,  is
not  necessarily  the  foundation  of  all  that  is  subsequently


496


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  me-  gained.  As  more  and  more  facts  are  discovered  and
aspects  of  classified,  entirely  new  ideas  of  general  scope  can  be
necessarily  formed.  We  have  no  means  of  knowing,  as  yet,  which
mental  of  the  physical  phenomena  go  deepest,  whether  the
aspects.  mechanical  phenomena  are  perhaps  not  the  most  super-
ficial of  all,  or  whether  all  do  not  go  equally  deep.  Even
in  mechanics  wTe  no  longer  regard  the  oldest  law,  the
law  of  the  lever,  as  the  foundation  of  all  the  ether
principles.

Artificiality  The  mechanical  theory  of  nature,  is,  undoubtedly,

of  the  me-  . 1 . . , . . _ .

chanicai  m an  historical  view,  both  intelligible  and  pardonable  :

conception  . , .

of  the  and  it  may  also,  for  a time,  have  been  of  much  value.

world,  , .

But,  upon  the  whole,  it  is  an  artificial  conception.
Faithful  adherence  to  the  method  that  led  the  greatest
investigators  of  nature,  Galileo,  Newton,  Sadi  Carnot,
Faraday,  and  J.  R.  Mayer,  to  their  great  results,  re-
stricts physics  to  the  expression  of  actual  facts , and
forbids  the  construction  of  hypotheses  behind  the  facts,
where  nothing  tangible  and  verifiable  is  found.  If  this
is  done,  only  the  simple  connection  of  the  motions  of
masses,  of  changes  of  temperature,  of  changes  in  the
values  of  the  potential  function,  of  chemical  changes,
and  so  forth  is  to  be  ascertained,  and  nothing  is  to  be
imagined  along  with  these  elements  except  the  physical
attributes  or  characteristics  directly  or  indirectly  given
by  observation.

This  idea  was  elsewhere  * developed  by  the  author
with  respect  to  the  phenomena  of  heat,  and  indicated,
in  the  same  place,  with  respect  to  electricity.  All  hy-
potheses of  fluids  or  media  are  eliminated  from  the
theory  of  electricity  as  entirely  superfluous,  when  we
reflect  that  electrical  conditions  are  all  given  by  the

* Mach,  Die  Geschichte  und  die  Wurzel  des  Satzes  von  der  Erhaltung  der
Arbeit.


ITS  RELATIONS  TO  OTHER  SCIENCES.


497


values  of.  the  potential  function  V and  the  dielectric
constants.  If  we  assume  the  differences  of  the  values
of  V to  be  measured  (on  the  electrometer)  by  the  forces,
and  regard  V and  not  the  quantity  of  electricity  Q as
the  primary  notion,  or  measurable  physical  attribute,
we  shall  have,  for  any  simple  insulator,  for  our  quan-
tity of  electricity


(where  x,  y,  z denote  the  coordinates  and  dv  the  ele-
ment of  volume,)  and  for  our  potential*


W--


— 1
8 7T  ,


d*  V

d*V\

; K{  dx* H

' dy*

" Tz T )

dv.


Here  Q and  W appear  as  derived  notions,  in  which  no
conception  of  fluid  or  medium  is  contained.  If  we
work  over  in  a similar  manner  the  entire  domain  of
physics,  we  shall  restrict  ourselves  wholly  to  the  quan-
titative conceptual  expression  of  actual  facts.  All  su-
perfluous and  futile  notions  are  eliminated,  and  the
imaginary  problems  to  which  they  have  given  rise  fore-
stalled. (See  Appendix  XXVIII,  p.  583.)

The  removal  of  notions  whose  foundations  are  his-
torical, conventional,  or  accidental,  can  best  be  fur-
thered by  a comparison  of  the  conceptions  obtaining
in  the  different  departments,  and  by  finding  for  the
conceptions  of  every  department  the  corresponding
conceptions  of  others.  We  discover,  thus,  that  tem-
peratures and  potential  functions  correspond  to  the
velocities  of  mass-motions.  A single  velocity-value,  a
single  temperature-value,  or  a single  value  of  potential
function,  never  changes  alone.  But  whilst  in  the  case
of  velocities  and  potential  functions,  so  far  as  we  yet


Science
should  be
based  on
facts,  not
on  hypoth*
eses.


* Using  the  terminology  of  Clausius.


498


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Desirabil-
ity of  a
compara-
tive phys-
ics.


Circum-
stances
which  fa-
vored the
develop-
ment of  the
mechanical
view.


know,  only  differences  come  into  consideration,  the
significance  of  temperature  is  not  only  contained  in  its
difference  with  respect  to  other  temperatures.  Thermal
capacities  correspond  to  masses,  the  potential  of  an
electric  charge  to  quantity  of  heat,  quantity  of  elec-
tricity to  entropy,  and  so  on.  The  pursuit  of  such  re-
semblances and  differences  lays  the  foundation  of  a
comparative  physics , which  shall  ultimately  render  pos-
sible the  concise  expression  of  extensive  groups  of  facts,
without  arbitrary  additions.  We  shall  then  possess  a
homogeneous  physics,  unmingled  with  artificial  atomic
theories.

It  will  also  be  perceived,  that  a real  economy  of
scientific  thought  cannot  be  attained  by  mechanical
hypotheses.  Even  if  an  hypothesis  were  fully  com-
petent to  reproduce  a given  department  of  natural  phe-
nomena, say,  the  phenomena  of  heat,  we  should,  by
accepting  it,  only  substitute  for  the  actual  relations  be-
tween the  mechanical  and  thermal  processes,  the  hy-
pothesis. The  real  fundamental  facts  are  replaced  by
an  equally  large  number  of  hypotheses,  which  is  cer-
tainly no  gain.  Once  an  hypothesis  has  facilitated,
as  best  it  can,  our  view  of  new  facts,  by  the  substitu-
tion of  more  familiar  ideas,  its  powers  are  exhausted.
We  err  when  we  expect  more  enlightenment  from  an
hypothesis  than  from  the  facts  themselves.

3.  The  development  of  the  mechanical  view  was
favored  by  many  circumstances.  In  the  first  place,  a
connection  of  all  natural  events  with  mechanical  pro-
cesses is  unmistakable,  and  it  is  natural,  therefore,  that
we  should  be.  led  to  explain  less  known  phenomena  by
better  known  mechanical  events.  Then  again,  it  was
first  in  the  department  of  mechanics  that  laws  of  gen-
eral and  extensive  scope  were  discovered.  A law  of


ITS  RELATIONS  TO  OTHER  SCIENCES.


499


this  kind  is  the  principle  of  vis  viva  2 (J7i  — 170)  =

2\m  (v2  — vl),  which  states  that  the  increase  of  the
vis  viva  of  a system  in  its  passage  from  one  position  to
another  is  equal  to  the  increment  of  the  force-function,
or  work,  which  is  expressed  as  a function  of  the  final
and  initial  positions.  If  we  fix  our  attention  on  the
work  a system  can  perform  and  call  it  with  Helmholtz
the  Spannkraft,  S,*  then  the  work  actually  performed,

U , will  appear  as  a diminution  of  the  Spannkraft,  X,
initially  present;  accordingly,  S=X — U,  and  the
principle  of  vis  viva  takes  the  form

US S -(-  i 2m.  v2  — const,

that  is  to  say,  every  diminution  of  the  Spannkraft,  is  The  Con- ^
compensated  for  by  an  increase  of  the  vis  viva.  In  this  Energy,
form  the  principle  is  also  called  the  law  of  the  Conser-
vation of  Energy,  in  that  the  sum  of  the  Spannkraft  (the
potential  energy)  and  the  vis  viva  (the  kinetic  energy)
remains  constant  in  the  system.  But  since,  in  nature,
it  is  possible  that  not  only  vis  viva  should  appear  as  the
consequence  of  work  performed,  but  also  quantities  of
heat,  or  the  potential  of  an  electric  charge,  and  so  forth,
scientists  saw  in  this  law  the  expression  of  a mechanical
action  as  the  basis  of  all  natural  actions.  However,
nothing  is  contained  in  the  expression  but  the  fact  of
an  invariable  quantitative  connection  between  mechani-
cal and  other  kinds  of  phenomena.

4.  It  would  be  a mistake  to  suppose  that  a wide
and  extensive  view  of  things  was  first  introduced  into
physical  science  by  mechanics.  On  the  contrary,  this

* Helmholtz  used  this  term  in  JR47;  but  it  is  not  found  in  his  subsequent
papers;  and  in  1882  ( WissensckaftUche  Abhandl ungen,  II,  965)  he  expressly
discards  it  in  favor  of  the  English  “potential  energy.”  He  even  (p.  <)68)  pre-
fers Clausius's  word  Ergal  to  Spannkraft , which  is  quite  out  of  agreement
with  modern  terminology.—  Trans.


5°°


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Compre-  insight  was  possessed  at  all  times  by  the  foremost

hensive-  . 1 . . .

ness  of  inquirers  and  even  entered  into  the  construction  of
condition,  mechanics  itself,  and  was,  accordingly,  not  first  created
suit,  of  me-  by  the  latter.  Galileo  and  Huygens  constantly  alter-

chanics.  J . .

nated  the  consideration  of  particular  details  with  the
consideration  of  universal  aspects,  and  reached  their
results  only  by  a persistent  effort  after  a simple  and
consistent  view.  The  fact  that  the  velocities  of  indi-
vidual bodies  and  systems  are  dependent  on  the  spaces
descended  through,  was  perceived  by  Galileo  and
Huygens  only  by  a very  detailed  investigation  of  the
motion  of  descent  in  particular  cases,  combined  with
the  consideration  of  the  circumstance  that  bodies  gen-
erally, of  their  own  accord,  only  sink.  Huygens
especially  speaks,  on  the  occasion  of  this  inquiry,  of
the  impossibility  of  a mechanical  perpetual  motion  ;
he  possessed,  therefore,  the  modern  point  of  view.  He
felt  the  incompatibility  of  the  idea  of  a perpetual  motion
with  the  notions  of  the  natural  mechanical  processes
with  which  he  was  familiar.

Exempiifi-  Take  the  fictions  of  Stevinus — say,  that  of  the  end-
this  in  ste- less  chain  on  the  prism.  Here,  too,  a deep,  broad
searches?  insight  is  displayed.  We  have  here  a mind,  disciplined
by  a multitude  of  experiences,  brought  to  bear  on  an
individual  case.  The  moving  endless  chain  is  to  Ste-
vinus a motion  of  descent  that  is  not  a descent,  a mo-
tion without  a purpose,  an  intentional  act  that  does
not  answer  to  the  intention,  an  endeavor  for  a change
which  does  not  produce  the  change.  If  motion,  gener-
ally, is  the  result  of  descent,  then  in  the  particular  case
descent  is  the  result  of  motion.  It  is  a sense  of  the
mutual  interdependence  of  v and  h in  the  equation
v = 1/ 2 gh  that  is  here  displayed,  though  of  course  in
not  so  definite  a form.  A contradiction  exists  in  this


ITS  RELATIONS  TO  OTHER  SCIENCES.


501


fiction  for  Stevinus’s  exquisite  investigative  sense  that
would  escape  less  profound  thinkers.

This  same  breadth  of  view,  which  alternates  the  Also,  in  the
individual  with  the  universal,  is  also  displayed,  only  in  of  cainot
this  instance  not  restricted  to  mechanics,  in  the  per-  Mayer,
formances  of  Sadi  Carnot.  When  Carnot  finds  that
the  quantity  of  heat  Q which,  for  a given  amount  of
work  Z,  has  flowed  from  a higher  temperature  / to  a
lower  temperature  /,  can  only  depend  on  the  tempera-
tures and  not  on  the  material  constitution  of  the  bodies,
he  reasons  in  exact  conformity  with  the  method  of
Galileo.  Similarly  does  J.  R.  Mayer  proceed  in  the
enunciation  of  the  principle  of  the  equivalence  of  heat
and  work.  In  this  achievement  the  mechanical  view
was  quite  remote  from  Mayer’s  mind  ; nor  had  he  need
of  it.  They  who  require  the  crutch  of  the  mechanical
philosophy  to  understand  the  doctrine  of  the  equiva-
lence of  heat  and  work,  have  only  half  comprehended
the  progress  which  it  signalises.  Yet,  high  as  we  may
place  Mayer’s  original  achievement,  it  is  not  on  that
account  necessary  to  depreciate  the  merits  of  the  pro-
fessional physicists  Joule,  Helmholtz,  Clausius,  and
Thomson,  who  have  done  very  much,  perhaps  all,  to-
wards the  detailed  establishment  and  perfection  of  the
new  view.  The  assumption  of  a plagiarism  of  Mayer’s
ideas  is  in  our  opinion  gratuitous.  They  who  advance
it,  are  under  the  obligation  to  prove  it.  The  repeated
appearance  of  the  same  idea  is  not  new  in  history.  We
shall  not  take  up  here  the  discussion  of  purely  personal
questions,  which  thirty  years  from  now  will  no  longer
interest  students.  Rut  it  is  unfair,  from  a pretense  of
justice,  to  insult  men,  who  if  they  had  accomplished
but  a third  of  their  actual  services,  would  have  lived
highly  honored  and  unmolested  lives.  (See  p.  584.)


502


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  inter-
depend-
ence of  the
facts  of  na-
ture.


5.  We  shall  now  attempt  to  show  that  the  broad
view  expressed  in  the  principle  of  the  conservation
of  energy,  is  not  peculiar  to  mechanics,  but  is  a condi-
tion of  logical  and  sound  scientific  thought  generally.
The  business  of  physical  science  is  the  reconstruction
of  facts  in  thought,  or  the  abstract  quantitative  expres-
sion of  facts.  The  rules  which  we  form  for  these  recon-
structions are  the  laws  of  nature.  In  the  conviction  that
such  rules  are  possible  lies  the  law  of  causality.  The
law  of  causality  simply  asserts  that  the  phenomena  of
nature  are  dependent  on  one  another.  The  special  em-
phasis put  on  space  and  time  in  the  expression  of  the
law  of  causality  is  unnecessary,  since  the  relations  of
space  and  time  themselves  implicitly  express  that  phe-
nomena are  dependent  on  one  another.

The  laws  of  nature  are  equations  between  the  meas-
urable elements  a /3yd . . . . c»of  phenomena.  As  na-
ture is  variable,  the  number  of  these  equations  is  al-
ways less  than  the  number  of  the  elements.

If  we  know  all  the  values  of  a/3yd.  . .,  by  which,
for  example,  the  values  of  Xjxv . . . are  given,  we  may
call  the  group  a /3yd  . . . the  cause  and  the  group
Xjjly  . ...  the  effect.  In  this  sense  we  may  say  that  the
effect  is  uniquely  determined  by  the  cause.  The  prin-
ciple of  sufficient  reason,  in  the  form,  for  instance,  in
which  Archimedes  employed  it  in  the  development  of
the  laws  of  the  lever,  consequently  asserts  nothing
more  than  that  the  effect  cannot  by  any  given  set  of
circumstances  be  at  once  determined  and  undetermined.

If  two  circumstances  a and  A are  connected,  then,
supposing  all  others  are  constant,  a change  of  X will
be  accompanied  by  a change  of  a,  and  as  a general
rule  a change  of  a by  a change  of  A.  The  constant
observance  of  this  mutual  interdependence  is  met  with


ITS  RELATIONS  TO  OTHER  SCIENCES.  5°3

in  Stevinus,  Galileo,  Huygens,  'and  other  great  inquir-
ers.  The  idea  is  also  at  the  basis  of  the  discovery  of  cU-pcnd-

c*nrt‘  at  the

r£v////(?/'-phenomena.  Thus,  a change  in  the  volume  of^^jjJ’^11
a gas  due  to  a change  of  temperature  is  supplemented  emeries,
b}'  the  counter-phenomenon  of  a change  of  tempera-
ture on  an  alteration  of  volume  ; Seebeck’s  phenome-
non by  Peltier's  effect,  and  so  forth.

Care  must,  of  course,  be  exercised,  in
such  inversions,  respecting  the  form
of  the  dependence.  Figure  235  will
render  clear  how  a perceptible  altera-
tion of  a may  always  be  produced  by
an  alteration  of  A,  but  a change  of  X
not  necessarily  by  a change  of  a.  The  relations  be-
tween electromagnetic  and  induction  phenomena,  dis-
covered by  Faraday,  are  a good  instance  of  this  truth.

If  a set  of  circumstances  a By  ft . . by  which  ayarim,«

' ' 5 J iormsof<‘X-

second  set  Xliv  . . . is  determined,  be  made  to  pass
from  its  initial  values  to  the  terminal  values  or'fi’y
ft'.  . then  Xjjly  . . . also  will  pass  into  Xft'v'.  . .

If  the  first  set  be  brought  back  to  its  initial  state,  also
the  second  set  will  be  brought  back  to  its  initial  state.

This  is  the  meaning  of  the  “equivalence  of  cause  and
effect,”  which  Mayer  again  and  again  emphasizes.

If  the  first  group  suffer  only  periodical  changes,  the
second  group  also  can  suffer  only  periodical  changes,
not  continuous  permanent  ones.  The  fertile  methods
of  thought  of  Galileo,  Huygens,  S.  Carnot,  Mayer,
and  their  peers,  are  all  reducible  to  the  simple  but  sig-
nificant perception,  that  purely  periodical  alterations  of
one  set  of  circumstances  can  only  constitute  the  source  of
similarly  periodical  alterations  of  a second  set  of  circum-
stances , not  of  continuous  and  permanent  alterations.  Such
maxims,  as  “the  effect  is  equivalent  to  the  cause,”


Fitf-  235-


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Purpose  of
the  ideas  o
conserva-
tion.


Conditions
of  the  true
develop-
ment of
science.


504

“work  cannot  be  created  out  of  nothing,”  “a  per-
petual motion  is  impossible,”  are  particular,  less  defi-
nite, and  less  evident  forms  of  this  perception,  which
in  itself  is  not  especially  concerned  with  mechanics,  but
is  a constituent  of  scientific  thought  generally.  With
the  perception  of  this  truth,  any  metaphysical  mystic-
ism that  may  still  adhere  to  the  principle  of  the  con-
servation of  energy*  is  dissipated.  (See  p.  585.)

All  ideas  of  conservation,  like  the  notion  of  sub-

f

stance,  have  a solid  foundation  in  the  economy  of
thought.  A mere  unrelated  change,  without  fixed  point
of  support,  or  reference,  is  not  comprehensible,  not
mentally  reconstructible.  We  always  inquire,  accord-
ingly, what  idea  can  be  retained  amid  all  variations  as
permanent , what  law  prevails,  what  equation  remains
fulfilled,  what  quantitative  values  remain  constant  ?
When  we  say  the  refractive  index  remains  constant  in
all  cases  of  refraction,  remains  =9-810;;/  in  all  cases
of  the  motion  of  heavy  bodies,  the  energy  remains  con-
stant in  every  isolated  system,  all  our  assertions  have
one  and  the  same  economical  function,  namely  that  of
facilitating  our  mental  reconstruction  of  facts.

11.

THE  RELATIONS  OF  MECHANICS  TO  PHYSIOLOGY.

i.  All  science  has  its  origin  in  the  needs  of  life.
However  minutely  it  may  be  subdivided  by  particular
vocations  or  by  the  restricted  tempers  and  capacities  of
those  who  foster  it,  each  branch  can  attain  its  full  and
best  development  only  by  a living  connection  with  the
whole . Through  such  a union  alone  can  it  approach

* When  we  reflect  that  the  principles  of  science  are  all  abstractions  that
presuppose  repetitions  of  similar  cases,  the  absurd  applications  of  the  law  of
the  conservation  of  forces  to  the  universe  as  a whole  fall  to  the  ground.


ITS  RELATIONS  TO  OTHER  SCIENCES .


505


its  true  maturity,  and  be  insured  against  lop-sided  and
monstrous  growths.

The  division  of  labor,  the  restriction  of  individual  Confusion

....  of  the

inquirers  to  limited  provinces,  the  investigation  of  means  and
those  provinces  as  a life-work,  are  the  fundamental  science,
conditions  of  a fruitful  development  of  science.  Only
by  such  specialisation  and  restriction  of  work  can  the
economical  instruments  of  thought  requisite  for  the
mastery  of  a special  field  be  perfected.  But  just  here
lies  a danger — the  danger  of  our  overestimating  the  in-
struments, with  which  we  are  so  constantly  employed,
or  even  of  regarding  them  as  the  objective  point  of
science.

2.  Now,  such  a state  of  affairs  has,  in  our  opinion,  physics
actually  been  produced  by  the  disproportionate  formal  Jnu<afthe
development  of  physics.  The  majority  of  natural  in- phylhiio^y.
quirers  ascribe  to  the  intellectual  implements  of  physics,

to  the  concepts  mass,  force,  atom,  and  so  forth,  whose
sole  office  is  to  revive  economically  arranged  expe-
riences, a reality  beyond  and  independent  of  thought.

Not  only  so,  but  it  has  even  been  held  that  these  forces
and  masses  are  the  real  objects  of  inquiry,  and,  if  once
they  were  fully  explored,  all  the  rest  would  follow  from
the  equilibrium  and  motion  of  these  masses.  A person
who  knew  the  world  only  through  the  theatre,  if  brought
behind  the  scenes  and  permitted  to  view  the  mechan-
ism of  the  stage’s  action,  might  possibly  believe  that
the  real  world  also  was  in  need  of  a machine-room,  and
that  if  this  were  once  thoroughly  explored,  we  should
know  all.  Similarly,  we,  too,  should  beware  lest  the
intellectual  machinery,  employed  in  the  representation
of  the  world  on  the  stage  of  thought,  be  regarded  as  the
basis  of  the  real  world.

3.  A philosophy  is  involved  in  any  correct  view  of


506


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  at-  the  relations  of  special  knowledge  to  the  great  body  of
piamVeef-*’ knowledge  at  large, — a philosophy  that  must  be  de-
motions. manded  of  every  special  investigator.  The  lack  of  it
is  asserted  in  the  formulation  of  imaginary  problems,
in  the  very  enunciation  of  which,  whether  regarded  as
soluble  or  insoluble,  flagrant  absurdity  is  involved.
Such  an  overestimation  of  physics,  in  contrast  to  physi-
ology, such  a mistaken  conception  of  the  true  relations
of  the  two  sciences,  is  displayed  in  the  inquiry  whether
it  is  possible  to  explain  feelings  by  the  motions  of
atoms?

Explication  Let  us  seek  the  conditions  that  could  have  impelled

of  this  . .

anomaly,  the  mind  to  formulate  so  curious  a question.  We  find
in  the  first  place  that  greater  coiifidcnce  is  placed  in  our
experiences  concerning  relations  of  time  and  space ;
that  we  attribute  to  them  a more  objective,  a move  real
character  than  to  our  experiences  of  colors,  sounds,
temperatures,  and  so  forth.  Yet,  if  we  investigate  the
matter  accurately,  we  must  surely  admit  that  our  sen-
sations of  time  and  space  are  just  as  much  sensations
as  are  our  sensations  of  colors,  sounds,  and  odors,  only
that  in  our  knowledge  of  the  former  we  are  surer  and
clearer  than  in  that  of  the  latter.  Space  and  time  are
well-ordered  systems  of  sets  of  sensations.  The  quan-
tities stated  in  mechanical  equations  are  simply  ordinal
symbols,  representing  those  members  of  these  sets
that  are  to  be  mentally  isolated  and  emphasised.  The
equations  express  the  form  of  interdependence  of  these
ordinal  symbols.

A body  is  a relatively  constant  sum  of  touch  and
sight  sensations  associated  with  the  same  space  and
time  sensations.  Mechanical  principles,  like  that,  for
instance,  of  the  mutually  induced  accelerations  of  two
masses,  give,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  only  some


ITS  RELATIONS  TO  OTHER  SCIENCES.


507


combination  of  touch,  sight,  light,  and  time  sensations.

They  possess  intelligible  meaning  only  by  virtue  of
the  sensations  they  involve,  the  contents  of  which  may
of  course  be  very  complicated.

It  would  be  equivalent,  accordingly,  to  explaining  Modoof
the  more  simple  and  immediate  by  the  more  com  pi  i-  such  cr-
eated and  remote,  if  we  were  to  attempt  to  derive  sen-
sations from  the  motions  of  masses,  wholly  aside  from
the  consideration  that  the  notions  of  mechanics  are
economical  implements  or  expedients  perfected  to
represent  mechanical  and  not  physiological  or  psycho-
logical facts.  If  the  means  and  aims  of  research  were
properly  distinguished,  and  our  expositions  were  re-
stricted to  the  presentation  of  actual  facts , false  prob-
lems of  this  kind  could  not  arise.

4.  All  physical  knowledge  can  only  mentally  repre-  The  prind-
sent  and  anticipate  compounds  of  those  elements  we  chanicJ  m»t
call  sensations.  It  is  concerned  with  the  connection  of  tiun  hut
these  elements.  Such  an  element,  say  the  heat  of  a body  aspeVt  IP
A,  is  connected,  not  only  with  other  elements,  say  with
such  whose  aggregate  makes  up  the  flame  £,  but  also
with  the  aggregate  of  certain  elements  of  our  body,  say
with  the  aggregate  of  the  elements  of  a nerve  N.  As
simple  object  and  element  JVis  not  essentially,  but  only
conventionally,  different  from  A and  B.  The  connection
of  A and  B is  a problem  of  physics , that  of  A and  A'  a
problem  of  physiology.  Neither  is  alone  existent;  both
exist  at  once.  Only  provisionally  can  we  neglect
either.  Processes,  thus,  that  in  appearance  are  purely
mechanical,  are,  in  addition  to  their  evident  mechani-
cal features,  always  physiological,  and,  consequently,
also  electrical,  chemical,  and  so  forth.  The  science  of
mechanics  does  not  comprise  the  foundations,  no,  nor
even  a part  of  the  world,  but  only  an  aspect  of  it.


APPENDIX.


i.

(See  page  3.)

Recent  research  has  contributed  greatly  to  our
knowledge  of  the  scientific  literature  of  antiquity,  and
our  opinion  of  the  achievements  of  the  ancient  world
in  science  has  been  correspondingly  increased.  Schia-
parelli has  done  much  to  place  the  work  of  the
Greeks  in  astronomy  in  its  right  light,  and  Govi  has
disclosed  many  precious  treasures  in  his  edition  of
the  Optics  of  Ptolemy.  The  view  that  the  Greeks
were  especially  neglectful  of  experiment  can  no  longer
be  maintained  unqualifiedly.  The  most  ancient  ex-
periments are  doubtless  those  of  the  Pythagoreans,
who  employed  a monochord  with  moveable  bridge  for
determining  the  lengths  of  strings  emitting  harmonic
notes.  Anaxagoras’s  demonstration  of  the  corporeal-
ity of  the  air  by  means  of  closed  inflated  tubes,  and
that  of  Empedocles  by  means  of  a vessel  having  its
orifice  inverted  in  water  (Aristotle,  Physics)  are  both
primitive  experiments.  Ptolemy  instituted  systematic
experiments  on  the  refraction  of  light,  while  his  ob-
servations in  physiological  optics  are  still  full  of  in-
terest to-day.  Aristotle  ( Meteorology ) describes  phe-
nomena that  go  to  explain  the  rainbow.  The  absurd
stories  which  tend  to  arouse  our  mistrust,  like  that  of
Pythagoras  and  the  anvil  which  emitted  harmonic


5io


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


notes  when  struck  by  hammers  of  different  weights,
probably  sprang  from  the  fanciful  brains  of  ignorant
reporters.  Pliny  abounds  in  such  vagaries.  But  they
are  not,  as  a matter  of  fact,  a whit  more  incorrect  or
nonsensical  than  the  stories  of  Newton’s  falling  apple
and  of  Watts’s  tea-kettle.  The  situation  is,  more-
over, rendered  quite  intelligible  when  we  consider  the
difficulties  and  the  expense  attending  the  production
of  ancient  books  and  their  consequent  limited  circula-
tion. The  conditions  here  involved  are  concisely  dis-
cussed by  J.  Mueller  in  his  paper,  “Ueber  das  Ex-
periment in  den  physikalischen  Studieu  der  Grie-
chen,”  Naturwiss.  Verein  zu  Innsbruck,  XXIII. , 1896—
1897.

31.

(See  page  8.1

Researches  in  mechanics  were  not  begun  by  the
Greeks  until  a late  date,  and  in  no  wise  keep  pace
with  the  rapid  advancement  of  the  race  in  the  domain
of  mathematics,  and  notably  in  geometry.  Reports
of  mechanical  inventions,  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the
early  inquirers,  are  extremely  meager.  Archytas,  a
distinguished  citizen  of  Tarentum  {circa  400  B.  C.),
famed  as  a geometer  and  for  his  employment  with  the
problem  of  the  duplication  of  the  cube,  devised  me-
chanical instruments  for  the  description  of  various
curves.  As  an  astronomer  he  taught  that  the  earth
was  spherical  and  that  it  rotated  upon  its  axis  once  a
day.  As  a mechanician  he  founded  the  theory  of  pul-
leys. He  is  also  said  to  have  applied  geometry  to
mechanics  in  a treatise  on  this  latter  science,  but  all
information  as  to  details  is  lacking.  We  are  told,
though,  by  Aulus  Gellius  (X.  12)  that  Archytas  con*


APPENDIX.


5ii

structed  an  automaton  consisting  of  a flying  dove  of
wood  and  presumably  operated  by  compressed  air,
which  created  a great  sensation.  It  is,  in  fact,  char-
acteristic of  the  early  history  of  mechanics  that  atten-
tion should  have  been  first  directed  to  its  practical
advantages  and  to  the  construction  of  automata  de-
signed to  excite  wonder  in  ignorant  people.

Even  in  the  days  of  Ctesibius  (285-247  B.  C.)  and
Hero  (first  century  A.  D.)  the  situation  had  not  ma-
terially changed.  So,  too,  during  the  decadence  of
civilisation  in  the  Middle  Ages,  the  same  tendency  as-
serts itself.  The  artificial  automata  and  clocks  of  this
period,  the  construction  of  which  popular  fancy  as-
cribed to  the  machinations  of  the  Devil,  are  well
known.  It  was  hoped,  by  imitating  life  outward!}',  to
apprehend  it  from  its  inward  side  also.  In  intimate
connexion  with  the  resultant  misconception  of  life
stands  also  the  singular  belief  in  the  possibility  of  a
perpetual  motion.  Only  gradually  and  slowly,  and  in
indistinct  forms,  did  the  genuine  problems  of  mechan-
ics loom  up  before  the  minds  of  inquirers.  Aristotlq’s
tract,  Mechanical  Problems  (German  trans.  by  Poselger,
Hannover,  1881)  is  characteristic  in  this  regard.  Aris-
totle is  quite  adept  in  detecting  and  in  formulating
problems ; he  perceived  the  principle  of  the  parallel-
ogram of  motions,  and  was  on  the  verge  of  discover-
ing centrifugal  force;  but  in  the  actual  solution  of
problems  he  was  infelicitous.  The  entire  tract  par-
takes more  of  the  character  of  a dialectic  than  of  a
scientific  treatise,  and  rests  content  with  enunciating
the  “apories,”  or  contradictions,  involved  in  the  prob-
lems. But  the  tract  upon  the  whole  very  well  illus-
trates the  intellectual  situation  that  is  characteristic
of  the  beginnings  of  scientific  investigation.


512


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


“Ii  a thing  take  place  whereof  the  cause  be  not
apparent,  even  though  it  be  in  accordance  with  na-
ture, it  appears  wonderful,  . . . Such  are  the  instances
in  which  small  things  overcome  great  things,  small
weights  heavy  weights,  and  incidentally  all  the  prob-
lems that  go  by  the  name  of  ‘ mechanical.’  . . . To
the  apories  (contradictions)  of  this  character  belong
those  that  appertain  to  the  lever.  For  it  appears  con-
trary to  reason  that  a large  weight  should  be  set  in
motion  by  a small  force,  particularly  when  that  weight
is  in  addition  combined  with  a larger  weight.  A weight
that  cannot  be  moved  without  the  aid  of  a lever  can  be
moved  easily  with  that  of  a lever  added.  The  pri-
mordial cause  of  all  this  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of
the  circle, — which  is  as  one  should  naturally  expect :
for  it-  is  not  contrary  to  reason  that  something  won-
derful should  proceed  out  *of  something  else  that  is
wonderful.  The  combination  of  contradictory  prop-
erties, however,  into  a single  unitary  product  is  the
most  wonderful  of  all  things.  Now,  the  circle  is  ac-
tually composed  of  just  such  contradictory  properties.
For  it  is  generated  by  a thing  that  is  in  motion  and
by  a thing  that  is  stationary  at  a fixed  point.”

In  a subsequent  passage  of  the  same  treatise  there
is  a very  dim  presentiment  of  the  principle  of  virtual
velocities.

Considerations  of  the  kind  here  adduced  give  evi-
dence of  a capacity  for  detecting  and  enunciating  prob-
lems, but  are  far  from  conducting  the  investigator  to
their  solution.

in.

(See  page  14.)

It  may  be  remarked  in  further  substantiation  of
the  criticisms  advanced  at  pages  13-14,  that  it  is  very


APPENDIX.


5i3


obvious  that  if  the  arrangement  is  absolutely  sym-
metrical in  every  respect,  equilibrium  obtains  on  the
assumption  of  any  form  of  dependence  whatever  of
the  disturbing  factor  on  L,  or,  generally,  on  the  as-
sumption ; and  that  consequently  the  particular

form  of  dependence  PL  cannot  possibly  be  inferred
from  the  equilibrium.  The  fallacy  of  the  deduction
must  accordingly  be  sought  in  the  transformation  to
which  the  arrangement  is  subjected.  Archimedes
makes  the  action  of  two  equal  weights  to  be  the  same
under  all  circumstances  as  that  of  the  combined
weights  acting  at  the  middle  point  of  their  line  of
junction.  But,  seeing  that  he  both  knows  and  as-
sumes that  distance  from  the  fulcrum  is  determina-
tive, this  procedure  is  by  the  premises  impermissible,
if  the  two  weights  are  situated  at  unequal  distances
from  the  fulcrum.  If  a weight  situated  at  a distance
from  the  fulcrum  is  divided  into  two  equal  parts,  and
these  parts  are  moved  in  contrary  directions  symmet-
rically to  their  original  point  of  support  ; one  of  the
equal  weights  will  be  carried  as  near  to  the  fulcrum
as  the  other  weight  is  carried  from  it.  If  it  is  assumed
that  the  action  remains  constant  during  such  proce-
dure, then,  the  particular  form  of  dependence  of  the
moment  on  L is  implicitly  determined  by  what  has
been  done,  inasmuch  as  the  result  is  only  possible
provided  the  form  be  PL,  or  be  proportional  to  X.  But
in  such  an  event  all  further  deduction  is  superfluous.
The  entire  deduction  contains  the  proposition  to  be
demonstrated,  by  assumption  if  not  explicitly.


5 r4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


IV.

(See  page  20.)

Experiments  are  never  absolutely  exact,  but  they
at  least  may  lead  the  inquiring  mind  to  conjectu?'e  that
the  key  which  will  clear  up  the  connexion  of  all  the
facts  is  contained  in  the  exact  metrical  expression
PL.  On  no  other  hypothesis  are  the  deductions  of
Archimedes,  Galileo,  and  the  rest  intelligible.  The
required  transformations,  extensions,  and  compres-
sions of  the  prisms  may  now  be  carried  out  with  per-
fect certainty.

A knife  edge  may  be  introduced  at  any  point  un-
der a prism  suspended  from  its  center  without  dis-
turbing the  equilib-
rium (see  Fig.  236),
and  several  such  ar-
rangements may  be
rigidly  combined  to-
gether so  as  to  form
Fig.  236.  apparently  new  cases

of  equilibrium.  The
conversion  and  disintegration  of  the  case  of  equi-
librium into  several  other  cases  (Galileo)*  is  possible
only  by  taking  into  account  the  value  of  PL.  I can-
not agree  with  O.  Holder  who  upholds  the  correct-
ness of  the  Archimedean  deductions  against  my  criti-
cisms in  his  essay  Denken  und  Anschauung  in  der  Geo-
metrie , although  I am  greatly  pleased  with  the  extent
of  our  agreement  as  to  the  nature  of  the  exact  sci-
ences and  their  foundations.  It  would  seem  as  if
Archimedes  (JDe  cequiponder antibus')  regarded  it  as  a
general  experience  that  two  equal  weights  may  under
all  circumstances  be  replaced  by  one  equal  to  their


APPENDIX ;


5i5


combined  weight  at  the  center  (Theorem  5,  Corrol-
ary  2).  In  such  an  event,  his  long  deduction  (Theo-
rem 6)  would  be  necessary,  for  the  reason  sought  fol-
lows immediately  (see  pp.  14,  513).  Archimedes's
mode  of  expression  is  not  in  favor  of  this  view.
Nevertheless,  a theorem  of  this  kind  cannot  be  re-
garded as  a priori  evident ; and  the  views  advanced
on  pp.  14,  513  appear  to  me  to  be  still  uncontro-
verted.


v.

(See  page  29.)

Stevinus’s  procedure  may  be  looked  at  from  still
another  point  of  view.  If  it  is  a fact,  for  our  mechan-
ical instinct,  that  a heavy  endless  chain  will  not  ro-
tate, then  the  individual  simple  cases  of  equilibrium
on  an  inclined  plane  which  Stevinus  devised  and
which  are  readily  controlled  quantitatively,  may  be
regarded  as  so  many  special  experiences.  For  it  is
not  essential  that  the  experiments  should  have  been
actually  carried  out,  if  the  result  is  beyond  question
of  doubt.  As  a matter  of  fact,  Stevinus  experiments
in  thought.  Stevinus’s  result  could  actually  have
been  deduced  from  the  corresponding  physical  exper-
iments, with  friction  reduced  to  a minimum.  In  an
analogous  manner,  Archimedes’s  considerations  with
respect  to  the  lever  might  be  conceived  after  the
fashion  of  Galileo’s  procedure.  If  the  various  mental
experiments  had  been  executed  physically,  the  linear
dependence  of  the  static  moment  on  the  distance  of
the  weight  from  the  axis  could  be  deduced  with  per-
fect rigor.  We  shall  have  still  many  instances  to  ad
duce,  among  the  foremost  inquirers  in  the  domain  of
mechanics,  of  tins  tentative  adaptation  of  special


5i6


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


quantitative  conceptions  to  general  instinctive  im-
pressions. The  same  phenomena  are  presented  in
other  domains  also.  I may  be  permitted  to  refer  in
this  connexion  to  the  expositions  which  I have  given
in  my  Principles  of  Heat,  page  151.  It  may  be  said
that  the  most  significant  and  most  important  advances
in  science  have  been  made  in  this  manner.  The  habit
which  great  inquirers  have  of  bringing  their  single
conceptions  into  agreement  with  the  general  concep-
tion or  ideal  of  an  entire  province  of  phenomena,,  their
constant  consideration  of  the  whole  in  their  treatment
of  parts,  may  be  characterised  as  a genuinely  philo-
sophical procedure.  A truly  philosophical  treatment
of  any  special  science  will  always  consist  in  bringing
the  results  into  relationship  and  harmony  with  the
established  knowledge  of  the  whole.  The  fanciful
extravagances  of  philosophy,  as  well  as  infelicitous
and  abortive  special  theories,  will  be  eliminated  in
this  manner.

It  will  be  worth  while  to  review  again  the  points
of  agreement  and  difference  in  the  mental  procedures
of  Stevinus  and  Archimedes.  Stevinus  reached  the
very  general  view  that  a mobile,  heavy,  endless  chain
of  any  form  stays  at  rest.  He  is  able  to  deduce  from
this  general  view,  without  difficulty,  special  cases,
which  are  quantitatively  easily  controlled.  The  case
from  which  Archimedes  starts,  on  the  other  hand,  is
the  most  special  conceivable.  He  cannot  possibly
deduce  from  his  special  case  in  an  unassailable  man-
ner the  behavior  which  may  be  expected  under  more
general  conditions.  If  he  apparently  succeeds  in  so
doing,  the  reason  is  that  he  already  knows  the  result
which  he  is  seeking,  whilst  Stevinus,  although  he  too
doubtless  knows,  approximately  at  least,  what  he  is


APPENDIX 1


517


in  search  of,  nevertheless  could  have  found  it  directly
by  his  manner  of  procedure,  even  if  he  had  not  known
it.  When  the  static  relationship  is  rediscovered  in
such  a manner  it  has  a higher  value  than  the  result  of
a metrical  experiment  would  have,  which  always  de-
viates somewhat  from  the  theoretical  truth.  The  de-
viation increases  with  the  disturbing  circumstances,
as  with  friction,  and  decreases  with  the  diminution  of
these  difficulties.  The  exact  static  relationship  is
reached  by  idealisation  and  disregard  of  these  dis-
turbing elements.  It  appears  in  the  Archimedean  and
Stevinian  procedures  as  an  hypothesis  without  which
the  individual  facts  of  experience  would  at  once  be-
come involved  in  logical  contradictions.  Not  until
we  have  possessed  this  hypothesis  can  we  by  operat-
ing with  the  exact  concepts  reconstruct  the  facts  and
acquire  a scientific  and  logical  mastery  of  them.  The
lever  and  the  inclined  plane  are  self-created  ideal  ob-
jects of  mechanics.  These  objects  alone  completely
satisfy  the  logical  demands  which  we  make  of  them  ;
the  physical  lever  satisfies  these  conditions  only  in
measure  in  which  it  approaches  the  ideal  lever.  The
natural  inquirer  strives  to  adapt  his  ideals  to  reality.


vi.


(See  page  120 )

Our  modern  notions  with  regard  to  the  nature  of
air  are  a direct  continuation  of  the  ancient  ideas.  An-
axagoras proves  the  corporeality  of  air  from  its  resist-
ance to  compression  in  closed  bags  of  skin,  and  from
the  gathering  up  of  the  expelled  air  (in  the  form  of
bubbles?)  by  water  (Aristotle,  Physics,  IV.,  9).  Ac-
cording to  Empedocles,  the  air  prevents  the  water


5 1 8 THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

from  penetrating  into  the  interior  of  a vessel  immersed
with  its  aperture  downwards  (Gomperz,  Griechische
Denker , I.,  p.  191).  Philo  of  Byzantium  employs  for
the  same  purpose  an  inverted  vessel  having  in  Its  bot-
tom an  orifice  closed  with  wax.  The  water  will  not
penetrate  into  the  submerged  vessel  until  the  wax
cork  is  removed,  wherupon  the  air  escapes  in  bubbles.
An  entire  series  of  experiments  of  this  kind  is  per-
formed, in  almost  the  precise  form  customary  in  the
schools  to-day  ( Philonis  lib . de  ingeniis  spiritualibus , in
V.  Rose’s  Anecdota  grceca  et  latino).  Hero  describes
in  his  Pneumatics  many  of  the  experiments  of  his
predecessors,  with  additions  of  his  own ; in  theory  he
is  an  adherent  of  Strato,  who  occupied  an  intermedi-
ate position  between  Aristotle  and  Democritus.  An
absolute  and  continuous  vacuum,  he  says,  can  be
produced  only  artificially,  although  numberless  tiny
vacua  exist  between  the  particles  of  bodies,  including
air,  just  as  air  does  among  grains  of  sand.  This  Is
proved',  in  quite  the  same  ingenuous  fashion  as  in  our
present  elementary  books,  from  the  possibility  of  rare-
fying and  compressing  bodies,  including  air  (inrush-
ing  and  outrushing  of  the  air  in  Hero’s  ball).  An  ar-
gument of  Hero’s  for  the  existence  of  vacua  (pores)
between  corporeal  particles  rests  on  the  fact  that  rays
of  light  penetrate  water.  The  result  of  artificial^  in-
creasing a vacuum,  according  to  Hero  and  his  prede-
cessors, is  always  the  attraction  and  solicitation  of
adjacent  bodies.  A light  vessel  with  a narrow  aper-
ture remains  hanging  to  the  lips  after  the  air  has  been
exhausted.  The  orifice  may  be  closed  with  the  finger
and  the  vessel  submerged  in  water.  “If  the  finger
be  released,  the  water  will  rise  in  the  vacuum  created,
although  the  movement  of  the  liquid  upward  is  not


APPENDIX.


5i9


according  to  nature.  The  phenomenon  of  the  cup-
ping-glass is  the  same ; these  glasses,  when  placed
on  the  body,  not  only  do  not  fall  off,  although  they
are  heavy  enough,  but  they  also  draw  out  adjacent
particles  through  the  pores  of  the  body. ’ ’ The  bent
siphon  is  also  treated  at  length.  “The  filling  of  the
siphon  on  exhaustion  of  the  air  is  accomplished  by
the  liquid's  closely  following  the  exhausted  air,  for
the  reason  that  a continuous  vacuum  is  inconceiv-
able.” If  the  two  arms  of  the  siphon  are  of  the  same
length,  nothing  flows  out.  “The  water  is  held  in
equilibrium  as  in  a balance.”  Hero  accordingly  con-
ceives of  the  flow  of  water  as  analogous  to  the  move-
ment of  a chain  hanging  with  unequal  lengths  over  a
pulley.  The  union  of  the  two  columns,  which  for  us
is  preserved  by  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  is
cared  for  in  his  case  by  the  “inconceivability  of  a
continuous  vacuum.”  It  is  shown  at  length,  not  that
the  smaller  mass  of  water  is  attracted  and  drawn
along  by  the  greater  mass,  and  that  conformably  to
this  principle  water  cannot  flow  upwards,  blit  rather
that  the  phenomenon  is  in  harmony  with  the  principle
of  communicating  vessels.  The  many  pretty  and  in-
genious tricks  which  Hero  describes  in  his  Pneumatics
and  in  his  Automata , and  which  were  designed  partly
to  entertain  and  partly  to  excite  wonder,  offer  a
charming  picture  of  the  material  civilisation  of  the  day
rather  than  excite  our  scientific  interest.  The  auto-
matic sounding  of  trumpets  and  the  opening  of  tem-
ple doors,  with  the  thunder  simultaneously  produced,
are  not  matters  which  interest  science  properly  so
called.  Yet  Hero’s  writings  and  notions  contributed
much  toward  the  diffusion  of  physical  knowledge
(compare  W.  Schmidt,  ID  mis  Werke , Leipsic,  1899,


520


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


and  Diels,  System  des  Strato,  Sitzungsberichte  der  Ber-
liner Akademie,  1893).


VII.

(See  page  129.)

It  has  often  been  asserted  that  Galileo  had  prede-
cessors of  great  prominence  in  his  method  of  think-
ing, and  while  it  is  far  from  our  purpose  to  gainsay
this,  we  have  still  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  Galileo
overtowered  them  all.  The  greatest  predecessor  of
Galileo,  to  whom  we  have  already  referred  in  another
place,  was  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  1452-1519;  now,  it
was  impossible  for  Leonardo’s  achievements  to  have
influenced  the  development  of  science  at  the  time,  for
the  reason  that  they  were  not  made  known  in  their
entirety  until  the  publication  of  Venturi  in  1797.  Leo-
nardo knew  the  ratio  of  the  times  of  descent  down
the  slope  and  the  height  of  an  inclined  plane.  Fre-
quently also  a knowledge  of  the  law  of  inertia  is  at-
tributed to  him.  Indeed,  some  sort  of  instinctive
knowledge  of  the  persistence  of  motion  once  begun
will  not  be  gainsaid  to  any  normal  man.  But  Leo-
nardo seems  to  have  gone  much  farther  than  this.
He  knows  that  from  a column  of  checkers  one  of  the
pieces  may  be  knocked  out  without  disturbing  the
others;  he  knows  that  a body  in  motion  will  move
longer  according  as  the  resistance  is  less,  but  he  be-,
lieves  that  the  body  will  move  a distance  proportional
to  the  impulse,  and  nowhere  expressly  speaks  of  the
persistence  of  the  motion  when  the  resistance  is  alto-
gether removed.  (Compare  W oh  1 will,  Bibliotheca  Ma-
thematical Stockholm,  1888,  p.  19).  Benedetti  (1530—
1590)  knows  that  falling  bodies  are  accelerated,  and
explains  the  acceleration  as  due  to  the  summation


APPENDIX.


521


of  the  impulses  of  gravity  ( Divers . speculat.  math,  et
physic,  liber , Taurini,  1585).  He  ascribes  the  progres-
sive motion  of  a projectile,  not  as  the  Peripatetics
did,  to  the  agency  of  the  medium,  but  to  the  virtue
impressa , though  without  attaining  perfect  clearness
with  regard  to  these  problems.  Galileo  seems  actu-
ally to  have  proceeded  from  Benedetti’s  point  of  view,
for  his  youthful  productions  are  allied  to  those  of
Benedetti.  Galileo  also  assumes  a virius  zmpressa,
which  he  conceives  to  decrease  in  efficiency,  and  ac-
cording to  Wohlwill  it  appears  that  it  was  not  until
1604  that  he  came  into  full  possession  of  the  laws  of
falling  bodies.

G.  Vailati,  who  has  devoted  much  attention  to  Be-
nedetti’s  investigations  (Alti  della  JR..  Acad,  di  Torino,
Vol.  XXXIII.,  1898),  finds  the  chief  merit  of  Bene-
detti to  be  that  he  subjected  the  Aristotelian  views  to
mathematical  and  critical  scrutiny  and  correction,  and
endeavored  to  lay  bare  their  inherent  contradictions,
thus  preparing  the  way  for  further  progress.  He
knows  that  the  assumption  of  the  Aristotelians,  that
the  velocity  of  falling  bodies  is  inversely  proportional
to  the  density  of  the  surrounding  medium,  is  un-
tenable and  possible  only  in  special  cases.  Let  the
velocity  of  descent  be  proportional  to  p — q , where/
is  the  weight  of  the  body  and  q the  upward  impulsion
due  to  the  medium.  If  only  half  the  velocity  of  de-
scent is  set  up  in  a medium  of  double  the  density,
the  equation / — q — 2(p — 2 q)  must  exist,— a relation
which  is  possible  only  in  case  p — %.  Light  bodies
per  se  do  not  exist  for  Benedetti;  he  ascribes  weight
and  upward  impulsion  even  to  air.  Different-sized
bodies  of  the  same  material  fall,  in  his  opinion,  with
the  same  velocity.  Benedetti  reaches  this  result  by


522


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS


conceiving  equal  bodies  falling  alongside  each  other
first  disconnected  and  then  connected,  where  the  con-
nexion cannot  alter  the  motion.  In  this  he  approaches
to  the  conception  of  Galileo,  with  the  exception  that
the  latter  takes  a profounder  view  of  the  matter.
Nevertheless,  Benedetti  also  falls  into  many  errors;
he  believes,  for  example,  that  the  velocity  of  descent
of  bodies  of  the  same  size  and  of  the  same  shape  is
proportional  to  their  weight,  that  is,  to  their  density.
His  reflexions  on  catapults,  no  less  than  his  views  on
the' oscillation  of  a body  about  the  center  of  the  earth
in  a canal  bored  through  the  earth,  are  interesting,
and  contain  little  to  be  criticised.  Bodies  projected
horizontally  appear  to  approach  the  earth  more  slowly.
Benedetti  is  accordingly  of  the  opinion  that  the  force
of  gravity  is  diminished  also  in  the  case  of  a top  rotat-
ing with  its  axis  in  a vertical  position.  He  thus  does
not  solve  the  riddle  fully,  but  prepares  the  wray  for
the  solution.


VIII.

(See  page  134.)

If  we  are  to  understand  Galileo’s  train  of  thought,
we  must  bear  in  mind  that  he  was  already  in  posses-
sion of  instinctive  experiences  prior  to  his  resorting
to  experiment.

Freely  falling  bodies  are  followed  with  more  diffi-
culty by  the  eye  the  longer  and  the  farther  they  have
fallen ; their  impact  on  the  hand  receiving  them  is  in
like  measure  sharper ; the  sound  of  their  striking
louder.  The  velocity  accordingly  increases  with  the
time  elapsed  and  the  space  traversed.  But  for  scien-
tific purposes  our  mental  representations  of  the  facts
of  sensual  experience  must  be  submitted  to  conceptual


APPENDIX.


523


formulation.  Only  thus  may  they  be  used  for  discov-
ering by  abstract  mathematical  rules  unknown  prop-
erties conceived  to  be  dependent  on  certain  initial
properties  having  definite  and  assignable  arithmetic
values;  or,  for  completing  what  has  been  onl}'  parti}'
given.  This  formulation  is  effected  by  isolating  and
emphasising  what  is  deemed  of  importance,  by  neg-
lecting what  is  subsidiary,  by  abstracting , by  idealis-
ing. The  experiment  determines  whether  the  form
chosen  is  adequate  to  the  facts.  Without  some  pre-
conceived opinion  the  experiment  is  impossible,  be-
cause its  form  is  determined  by  the  opinion.  For
how  and  on  what  could  we  experiment  if  we  did  not
previously  have  some  suspicion  of  what  we  were
about?  The  complemental  function  which  the  experi-
ment is  to  fulfil  is  determined  entirely  by  our  prior
experience.  The  experiment  confirms,  modifies,  or
overthrows  our  suspicion.  The  modern  inquirer  would
ask  in  a similar  predicament : Of  what  is  v a function?
What  function  of  / is  v?  Galileo  asks,  in  his  ingenu-
ous and  primitive  way  : is  v proportional  to  s7  is  v
proportional  to  t?  Galileo,  thus,  grapes  his  way  along
synthetically,  but  reaches  his  goal  nevertheless.  Sys-
tematic, routine  methods  are  the  final  outcome  of  re-
search, and  do  not  stand  perfectly  developed  at  the
disposal  of  genius  in  the  first  steps  it  takes.  (Com-
pare the  article  Ueber  Gedankenexperimente,  ” Zeit-
schrift  fur  den phys.  und  chem.  (Inter  richt , 1897,  I.)


IX.


(See  page  140.)

In  an  exhaustive  study  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volker-
psychologie,  1884,  Vcrl.  XIV.,  pp.  365-410,  and  Vol.


524


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


XV.,  pp.  70-135,  337-387,  entitled  “ Die  Entdeckung
des  Beharrungsgesetzes,”  E.  Wohlwill  has  shown  that
the  predecessors  and  contemporaries  of  Galileo,  nay,
even  Galileo  himself,  only  very  gradually  abandoned
the  Aristotelian  conceptions  for  the  acceptance  of  the
law  of  inertia.  Even  in  Galileo’s  mind  uniform  cir-
cular motion  and  uniform  horizontal  motion  occupy
distinct  places.  Wohlwill’s  researches  are  very  ac-
ceptable and  show  that  Galileo  had  not  attained  per-
fect clearness  in  his  own  new  ideas  and  was  liable  to
frequent  reversion  to  the  old  views,  as  might  have
been  expected.

Indeed,  from  my  own  exposition  the  reader  will
have  inferred  that  the  law  of  inertia  did  not  possess
in  Galileo’s  mind  the  degree  of  clearness  and  univer-
sality that  it  subsequently  acquired.  (See  pp.  140  and
143.)  With  regard  to  my  exposition  at  pages  140—
141,  however,  I still  believe,  in  spite  of  the  opinions
of  Wohlwill  and  Poske,  that  I have  indicated  the
point  which  both  for  Galileo  and  his  successors  must
have  placed  in  the  most  favorable  light  the  transition
from  the  old  conception  to  the  new.  How  much  wras
wanting  to  absolute  comprehension,  may  be  gathered
from  the  fact  that  Baliani  was  able  without  difficulty
to  infer  from  Galileo’s  statement  that  acquired  velo-
city could  not  be  destroyed, — a fact  which  Wohlwill
himself  points  out  (p.  112).  It  is  not  at  all  surpris-
ing that  in  treating  of  the  motion  of  heazy  bodies,
Galileo  applies  his  law  of  inertia  almost  exclusively
to  horizontal  movements.  Yet  he  knows  that  a mus-
ket-ball possessing  no  weight  would  continue  rectiline-
arly  on  its  path  in  the  direction  of  the  barrel.  ( Dia-
logues on  the  two  World  Systems,  German  translation,
Leipsic,  1891,  p.  184.)  His  hesitation  in  enunciating


APPENDIX.


525


in  its  most  general  terms  a law  that  at  first  blush  ap-
pears so  startling,  is  not  surprising.


x.

(See  page  155.)

We  cannot  adequately  appreciate  the  extent  of
Galileo’s  achievement  in  the  analysis  of  the  motion  of
projectiles  until  we  examine  his  predecessors’  endeav-
ors in  this  field.  Santbach  (1561)  is  of  opinion,  that  a
cannon-ball  speeds  onward  in  a straight  line  until  its
velocity  is  exhausted  and  then  drops  to  the  ground  in
a vertical  direction.  Tartaglia  (1537)  compounds  the
path  of  a projectile  out  of  a straight  line,  the  arc  of  a
circle,  and  lastly  the  vertical  tangent  to  the  arc.  He
is  perfectly  aware,  as  Rivius  later  (1582)  more  dis-
tinctly states,  that  accurately  viewed  the  path  is
curved  at  all  points,  since  the  deflective  action  of
gravity  never  ceases;  but  he  is  yet  unable  to  arrive
at  a complete  analysis.  The  initial  portion  of  the
path  is  well  calculated  to  arouse  the  illusive  impres-
sion that  the  action  of  gravity  has  been  annulled  by
the  velocity  of  the  projection, — an  illusion  to  which
even  Benedetti  fell  a victim.  (See  Appendix,  vn.,  p.
129.)  We  fail  to  observe  any  descent  in  the  initial
part  of  the  curve,  and  forget  to  take  into  account  the
shortness  of  the  corresponding  time  of  the  descent.
By  a similar  oversight  a jet  of  water  may  assume  the
appearance  of  a solid  body  suspended  in  the  air,  if
one  is  unmindful  of  the  fact  that  it  is  made  up  of  a
mass  of  rapidly  alternating  minute  particles.  The
same  illusion  is  met  with  in  the  centrifugal  pendulum,
in  the  top,  in  Aitken’s  flexible  chain  rendered  rigid
by  rapid  rotation  (. Philosophical  Magazine,  1878),  in
the  locomotive  which  rushes  safely  across  a defectives


526  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

bridge,  through  which  it  would  have  crashed  if  at
rest,  but  which,  owing  to  the  insufficient  time  of  des-
cent and  of  the  period  in  which  it  can  do  work,  leaves
the  ’bridge  intact.  On  thorough  analysis  none  of
these  phenomena  are  more  surprising  than  the  most
ordinary  events.  As  Vailati  remarks,  the  rapid  spread
of  firearms  in  the  fourteenth  century  gave  a distinct
impulse  to  the  study  of  the  motion  of  projectiles,  and
indirectly  to  that  of  mechanics  generally.  Essentially
the  same  conditions  occur  in  the  case  of  the  ancient
catapults  and  in  the  hurling  of  missiles  by  the  hand,
but  the  new  and  imposing  form  of  the  phenomenon
doubtless  exercised  a great  fascination  on  the  curios-
ity of  people.

So  much  for  history.  And  now  a word  as  to  the
notion  of  “ composition.  ” Galileo's  conception  of  the
motion  of  a projectile  as  a process  compounded  of
two  distinct  and  independent  motions,  is  suggestive
of  an  entire  group  of  similar  important  epistemologi-
cal processes.  We  may  say  that  it  is  as  important  to
perceive  the  non  dependence  of  two  circumstances  A
and  B on  each  other,  as  it  is  to  perceive  the  dependence
of  two  circumstances  A and  C on  each  other.  For
the  first  perception  alone  enables  us  to  pursue  the
second  relation  with  composure.  Think  only  of  how
serious  an  obstacle  the  assumption  of  non-existing
causal  relations  constituted  to  the  research  of  the
Middle  Ages.  Similar  to  Galileo’s  discovery  is  that
of  the  parallelogram  of  forces  by  Newton,  the  compo-
sition of  the  vibrations  of  strings  by  Sauveur,  the  com-
position of  thermal  disturbances  by  Fourier.  Through
this  latter  inquirer  the  method  of  compounding  a phe-
nomenon out  of  mutually  independent  partial  phe-
nomena by  means  of  representing  a general  integral


APPENDIX.


527

as  the  sum  of  particular  integrals  has  penetrated  into
every  nook  and  corner  of  physics.  The  decomposi-
tion of  phenomena  into  mutually  independent  parts
has  been  aptly  characterised  by  P.  Volkmann  as  iso-
lation, and  the  composition  of  a phenomenon  out  of
such  parts,  superposition . The  two  processes  combined
enable  us  to  comprehend,  or  ^reconstruct  in  thought,
piecemeal,  what,  as  a whole , it  would  be  impossible
for  us  to  grasp.

* 4 Nature  with  its  myriad  phenomena  assumes  a
unified  aspect  only  in  the  rarest  cases ; in  the  major-
ity of  instances  it  exhibits  a thoroughly  composite
character  . . . ; it  is  accordingly  one  of  the  duties  of
science  to  conceive  phenomena  as  made  up  of  sets  of
partial  phenomena,  and  at  first  to  study  these  partial
phenomena  in  their  purity.  Not  until  we  know  to
what  extent  each  circumstance  shares  in  the  phenom-
enon as  an  entirety  do  we  acquire  a command  over
the  whole.  ...”  (Cf.  P.  Volkmann,  Erkenntnisstheo -
retische  Grundziige  der  JVaturwissens shaft,  1896,  p.  70.
Cf.  also  my  Principles  of  Heat , German  edition,  pp*
123,  151,  452).


XX.

(See  page  i6x.)

The  perspicuous  deduction  of  the  expression  for
centrifugal  force  based  on  the  principle  of  Hamilton's
hodograph  may  also  be  mentioned.  If  a body  move
uniformly  in  a circle  of  radius  r (Fig.  237),  the  velo-
city 7/  at  the  point  A of  the  path  is  transformed  by
the  traction  of  the  string  into  the  velocity  v of  like
magnitude  but  different  direction  at  the  point  B.  If
from  O as  centre  (Fig.  238)  we  lay  off  as  to  magni-
tude and  direction  all  the  velocities  the  body  succes-


528


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


sively  acquires,  these  lines  will  represent  the  sum
of  the  radii  v of  the  circle.  For  OM  to  be  trans-
formed into  ON~,  the  perpendicular  component  to  it,
MJST,  must  be  added.  During  the  period  of  revolu-
tion T the  velocity  is  uniformly  increased  in  the  direc-
tions of  the  radii  r by  an  amount  2>7tv.  The  numeri-


w


Fig.  23?.


cal  measure  of  the  radial  acceleration  is  therefore

c p = ^- and  since  v T=2nr,  therefore  also  cp  = — .

I r

If  to  OM=v  the  very  small  component  w is  added

(Fig.  239),  the  resultant  will  strictly  be  a greater


velocity  V v2  -f-  w*  = , as  the  approximate  ex-

traction of  the  square  root  will  show.  But  on  contin -
uous  deflection  ^ vanishes  with  respect  to  v ; hence,

only  the  direction,  but  not  the  magnitude,  of  the
velocity  changes.


XII.

(See  page  162.)

Even  Descartes  thought  of  explaining  the  centri-
petal impulsion  of  floating  bodies  in  a vortical  me-
dium, after  this  manner.  But  Huygens  correctly  re-


APPENDIX .


529


marked  that  on  this  hypothesis  we  should  have  to
assume  that  the  lightest  bodies  received  the  greatest
centripetal  impulsion,  and  that  all  heavy  bodies  would
without  exception  have  to  be  lighter  than  the  vortical
medium.  Huygens  observes  further  that  like  phe-
nomena are  also  necessarily  presented  in  the  case  of
bodies,  be  they  what  they  may,  that  do  not  participate
in  the  whirling  movement,  that  is  to  say,  such  as
might  exist  without  centrifugal  force  in  a vortical
medium  affected  with  centrifugal  force.  For  exam-
ple, a sphere  composed  of  any  material  whatsoever
but  moveable  only  along  a stationary  axis,  say  a wire,
is  impelled  toward  the  axis  of  rotation  in  a whirling
medium.

In  a closed  vessel  containing  water  Huygens
placed  small  particles  of  sealing  wax  which  are
slightly  heavier  than  water  and  hence  touch  the  bot-
tom of  the  vessel.  If  the  vessel  be  rotated,  the  par-
ticles of  sealing  wax  will  flock  toward  the  outer  rim
of  the  vessel.  If  the  vessel  be  then  suddenly  brought
to  rest,  the  water  wall  continue  to  rotate  while  the
particles  of  sealing  wax  which  touch  the  bottom  and
are  therefore  more  rapidly  arrested  in  their  move-
ment, will  now  be  impelled  toward  the  axis  of  the
vessel.  In  this  process  Huygens  saw  an  exact  replica
of  gravity.  An  ether  whirling  in  one  direction  only,
did  not  appear  to  fulfil  his  requirements.  Ultimately,
he  thought,  it  would  sweep  everything  with  it.  He
accordingly  assumed  ether-particles  that  sped  rapidly
about  in  all  directions,  it  being  his  theory  that  in  a
closed  space,  circular,  as  contrasted  with  radial,  mo-
tions would  of  themselves  preponderate.  This  ether
appeared  to  him  adequate  to  explain  gravity.  The
detailed  exposition  of  this  kinetic  theory  of  gravity  is


530


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


found  in  Huygens's  tract  On  the  Cause  of  Grazntation
(German  trans.  by  Mewes,  Berlin,  1893).  See  aiso
Lasswitz,  Geschichte  der  Atomzstik , 1890,  Vol.  II.,  p.

344-

XIII.

(See  page  187  )

It  has  been  impossible  for  us  to  enter  upon  the
signal  achievements  of  Huygens  in  physics  proper.
But  a few  points  may  be  briefly  indicated.  He  is  the
creator  of  the  wave-theory  of  light,  which  ultimately
overthrew  the  emission  theory  of  Newton.  His  at-
tention was  drawn,  in  fact,  to  precisely  those  features
of  luminous  phenomena  that  had  escaped  Newton.
With  respect  to  physics  hb  took  up  with  great  enthu-
siasm the  idea  of  Descartes  that  all  things  were  to  be
explained  mechanically,  though  without  being  blind
to  its  errors,  which  he  acutely  and  correctly  criticised.
His  predilection  for  mechanical  explanations  rendered
him  also  an  opponent  of  Newton's  action  at  a distance,
which  he  wished  to  replace  by  pressures  and  impacts,
that  is,  by  action  due  to  contact.  In  his  endeavor  to
do  so  he  lighted  upon  some  peculiar  conceptions,  like
that  of  magnetic  currents,  which  at  first  could  not
compete  with  the  influential  theory  of  Newton,  but
has  recently  been  reinstated  in  its  full  rights  in  the
unbiassed  efforts  of  Faraday  and  Maxwell.  As  a
geometer  and  mathematician  also  Huygens  is  to  be
ranked  high,  and  in  this  connexion  reference  need  be
made  only  to  his  theory  of  games  of  chance.  His
astronomical  observations,  his  achievements  in  theo-
retical and  practical  dioptrics  advanced  these  depart-
ments very  considerably.  As  a technicist  he  is  the
inventor  of  the  powder-machine,  the  idea  of  which


APPENDIX,


S3*


has  found  actualisation  In  the  modern  gas-machine.
As  a physiologist  he  surmised  the  accommodation  of
the  eye  by  deformation  of  the  lens.  All  these  things
can  scarcely  be  mentioned  here.  Our  opinion  of  Huy-
gens grows  as  his  labors  are  made  better  known  by  the
complete  edition  of  his  works.  A brief  and  reveren-
tial sketch  of  his  scientific  career  in  all  its  phases  is
given  by  J.  Bosscha  in  a pamphlet  entitled  Christian
Huyghens,  Rede  am  200.  Geddchtnisstage  seines  Lehens-
endes , German  trans.  by  Engelmann,  Leipsic,  1895.

XIV.

(See  page  190.)

Rosenberger  is  correct  in  his  statement  (New  ton
u?id  seine  physikalischen  Rrhicipien,  1895)  that  the  idea
of  universal  gravitation  did  not  originate  with  New-
ton, but  that  Newton  had  many  highly  deserving  pred-
ecessors. But  it  may  be  safely  asserted  that  it  was,
with  all  of  them,  a question  of  conjecture,  of  a groping
and  imperfect  grasp  of  the  problem,  and  that  no  one
before  Newton  grappled  with  the  notion  so  compre-
hensively and  energetically;  so  that  above  and  beyond
the  great  mathematical  problem,  which  Rosenberger
concedes,  there  still  remains  to  Newton  the  credit  of
a colossal  feat  of  the  imagination.

Among  Newton’s  forerunners  may  first  be  men-
tioned Copernicus,  who  (in  1543)  says:  “I  am  at
least  of  opinion  that  gravity  is  nothing  more  than  a
natural  tendency  implanted  in  particles  by  the  divine
providence  of  the  Master  of  the  Universe,  by  virtue  of
which,  they,  collecting  together  in  the  shape  of  a
sphere,  do  form  their  own  proper  unity  and  integrity.
And  it  is  to  be  assumed  that  this  propensity  is  In-
herent also  in  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  other  plan-


532


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


ets.”  Similarly,  Kepler  (1609),  like  Gilbert  before
him  (1600),  conceives  of  gravity  as  the  analogue  of
magnetic  attraction.  By  this  analogy,  Hooke,  it  seems,
is  led  to  the  notion  of  a diminution  of  gravity  with  the
distance  ; and  in  picturing  its  action  as  due  to  a kind
of  radiation,  he  even  hits  upon  the  idea  of  its  acting
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance.  He  even
sought  to  determine  the  diminution  of  its  effect  (1686)
by  weighing  bodies  hung  at  different  heights  from  the
top  of  Westminster  Abbey  (precisely  after  the  more
modern  method  of  Jolly),  by  means  of  spring-balances
and  pendulum  clocks,  but  of  course -without  results.
The  conical  pendulum  appeared  to  him  admirably
adapted  for  illustrating  the  motion  of  the  planets.
Thus  Hooke  really  approached  nearest  to  Newton's
conception,  though  he  never  completely  reached  the
latter's  altitude  of  view.

In  two  instructive  writings  (Kepler's  Lehre  von  der
Gravitation , Halle,  1896:  Die  Gravitation  bei  Galileo
u.  Borelli , Berlin,  1897)  E.  Gold  beck  investigates  the
early  history  of  the  doctrine  of  gravitation  with  Kepler
on  the  one  hand  and  Galileo  and  Borelli  on  the  other.
Despite  his  adherence  to  scholastic,  Aristotelian  no-
tions, Kepler  has  sufficient  insight  to  see  that  there  is
a real  physical  problem  presented  by  the  phenomena
of  the  planetary  system;  the  moon,  in  his  view,  is
swept  along  with  the  earth  in  its  motion  rouhd  the
sun,  and  in  its  turn  drags  the  tidal  wave  along  with
it,  just  as  the  earth  attracts  heavy  bodies.  Also,  for
the  planets  the  source  of  motion  is  sought  in  the  sun,
from  which  immaterial  levers  extend  that  rotate  with
the  sun  and  carry  the  distant  planets  around  more
slowly  than  the  near  ones.  By  this  view,  Kepler  was
enabled  to  guess  that  the  period  of  rotation  of  the  sun


APPENDIX .


533


was  less  than  eighty-eight  days,  the  period  of  revolu-
tion of  Mercury.  At  times,  the  sun  is  also  conceived
as  a revolving  magnet,  over  against  which  are  placed
the  magnetic  planets.  In  Galileo’s  conception  of  the
universe,  the  formal,  mathematical,  and  esthetical
point  of  view  predominates.  He  rejects  each  and
every  assumption  of  attraction,  and  even  scouted  the
idea  as  childish  in  Kepler.  The  planetary  system  had
not  yet  taken  the  shape  of  a genuine  physical  problem
for  him.  Yet  he  assumed  with  Gilbert  that  an  imma-
terial geometric  point  can  exercise  no  physical  action,
and  he  did  very  much  toward  demonstrating  the  ter-
restrial nature  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Borelli  (in  his'
work  on  the  satellites  of  the  Jupiter)  conceives  the
planets  as  floating  between  layers  of  ether  of  differing
densities.  They  have  a natural  tendency  to  approach
their  central  body,  (the  term  attraction  is  avoided,)
which  is  offset  by  the  centrifugal  force  set  up  by  the
revolution.  Borelli  illustrates  his  theory  by  an  experi-
ment very  similar  to  that  described  by  us  in  Fig.  106,
p.  162.  As  will  be  seen,  he  approaches  very  closely
to  Newton.  His  theory  is,  though,  a combination  of
Descartes’s  and  Newton’s.

xv.

(See  page  191.)

Newton  illustrated  the  identity  of  terrestrial  grav-
ity with  the  universal  gravitation  that  determined  the
motions  of  the  celestial  bodies,  as  follows.  He  con-
ceived a stone  to  be  hurled  with  successive  increases
of  horizontal  velocity  from  the  top  of  a high  moun-
tain. . Neglecting  the  resistance  of  the  air,  the  para-
bolas successively  described  by  the  stone  will  increase
in  length  until  finally  they  will  fall  clear  of  the  earth


534


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


altogether,  and  the  stone  will  be  converted  into  a
satellite  circling  round  the  earth.  Newton  begins  with
the  fact  of  universal  gravity.  An  explanation  of  the
phenomenon  was  not  forthcoming,  and  it  was  not  his
wont,  he  says,  to  frame  hypotheses.  Nevertheless  he
could  not  set  his  thoughts  at  rest  so  easily,  as  is  ap-
parent from  his  well-known  letter  to  Bentley.  That
gravity  was  immanent  and  innate  in  matter,  so  that
one  body  could  act  on  another  directly  through  empty
space,  appeared  to  him  absurd.  But  he  is  unable  to
decide  whether  the  intermediary  agency  is  material  or
immaterial  (spiritual?).  Like  all  his  predecessors  and
successors,  Newton  felt  the  need  of  explaining  gravi-
tation, by  some  such  means  as  actions  of  contact.  Yet
the  great  success  which  Newton  achieved  in  astron-
omy with  forces  acting  at  a distance  as  the  basis  of
deduction,  soon  changed  the  situation  very  consider-
ably. Inquirers  accustomed  themselves  to  these  forces
as  points  of  departure  for  their  explanations  and  the
impulse  to  inquire  after  their  origin  soon  disappeared
almost  completely.  The  attempt  was  now  made  to
introduce  these  forces  into  all  the  departments  of
physics,  by  conceiving  bodies  to  be  composed  of  par-
ticles separated  by  vacuous  interstices  and  thus  acting
on  one  another  at  a distance.  Finally  even,  the  re-
sistance of  bodies  to  pressure  and  impact,  this  is  to
say,  even  forces  of  contact,  were  explained  by  forces
acting  at  a distance  between  particles.  As  a fact,  the
functions  representing  the  former  are  more  compli-
cated than  those  representing  the  latter.

The  doctrine  of  forces  acting  at  a distance  doubt-
less stood  in  highest  esteem  with  Laplace  and  his
contemporaries.  Faraday’s  unbiassed  and  ingenious
conceptions  and  Maxwell’s  mathematical  formulation


APPENDIX.


535


of  them  again  turned  the  tide  in  favor  of  the  forces
of  contact.  Divers  difficulties  had  raised  doubts  in
the  minds  of  astronomers  as  to  the  exactitude  of  New-
ton’s law,  and  slight  quantitative  variations  of  it  were
looked  for.  After  it  had  been  demonstrated,  however,
that  electricity  travelled  with  finite  velocity,  the  ques-
tion of  a like  state  of  affairs  in  connexion  with  the
analogous  action  of  gravitation  again  naturally  arose.
As  a fact,  gravitation  bears  a close  resemblance  to
electrical  forces  acting  at  a distance,  save  in  the  single
respect  that  so  far  as  we  know,  attraction  only  and
not  repulsion  takes  place  in  the  case  of  gravitation.
Foppl  (“Ueber  eine  Erweiterung  des  Gravitations-
gesetzes,”  Sitzungsber.  d.  Munch . Akad.,  1897,  p.  6 et
seq.)  is  of  opinion,  that  we  may,  without  becoming
involved  in  contradictions,  assume  also  with  respect
to  gravitation  negative  masses,  which  attract  one  an-
other but  repel  positive  masses,  and  assume  therefore
also  finite  fields  of  gravitation,  similar  to  the  electric
fields.  Drude  (in  his  report  on  actions  at  a distance
made  for  the  German  Naturforscherversammlung  of
1897)  enumerates  many  experiments  for  establishing
a velocity  of  propagation  for  gravitation,  which  go
back  as  far  as  Laplace.  The  result  is  to  be  regarded
as  a negative  one,  for  the  velocities  which  it  is  at  all
possible  to  consider  as  such,  do  not  accord  with  one
another,  though  they  are  all  very  large  multiples  of
the  velocity  of  light.  Paul  Gerber  alone  (“  Ueber  die*
raumliche  u.  zeitliche  Ausbreitung  der  Gravitation/’
Zeitschrift  f.  Math . u.  Phys. , 1898,  II.),  from  the  peri-
helial  motion  of  Mercury,  forty- one  seconds  in  a cen-
tury, finds  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  gravitation
to  be  the  same  as  that  of  light.  This  would  speak  in
favor  of  the  ether  as  the  medium  of  gravitation.  (Com-


536


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


pareW.  Wien,  6t  Ueber  die  Moglichkeit  einer  elektro-
magnetischen  Begriindung  der  Mechanik,”  Archives
JNierla nda ises,  The  Hague,  1900,  V.,  p.  96.)

XVI.

(See  page  195.)

It  should  be  observed  that  the  notion  of  mass  as
quantity  of  matter  was  psychologically  a very  natural
conception  for  Newton,  with  his  peculiar  develop-
ment. Critical  inquiries  as  to  the  origin  of  the  con-
cept of  matter  could  not  possibly  be  expected  of  a
scientist  in  Newton’s  day.  The  concept  developed
quite  instinctively ; it  is  discovered  as  a datum  per-
fectly complete,  and  is  adopted  with  absolute  ingenu-
ousness. The  same  is  the  case  with  the  concept  of
force.  But  force  appears  conjoined  with  matter.  And,
inasmuch  as  Newton  invested  all  material  particles
with  precisely  identical  gravitational  forces,  inasmuch
as  he  regarded  the  forces  exerted  by  the  heavenly
bodies  on  one  another  as  the  sum  of  the  forces  of  the
individual  particles  composing  them,  naturally  these
forces  appear  to  be  inseparably  conjoined  with  the
quantity  of  matter.  Rosenberger  has  called  attention
to  this  fact  in  his  book,  JVewtoii  und seine physikalischen
Principien  (Leipzig,  1895,  especially  page  192).

I have  endeavored  to  show  elsewhere  (. Analysis  of
ihe  Sensations,  Chicago,  1897)  how  starting  from  the
constancy  of  the  connexion  between  different  sensa-
tions we  have  been  led  to  the  assumption  of  an  abso-
lute constanc}^,  which  we  call  substaiice,  the  most  ob-
vious and  prominent  example  being  that  of  a moveable
body  distinguishable  from  its  environment.  And  see-
ing that  such  bodies  are  divisible  into  homogeneous
parts,  of  which  each  presents  a constant  complexus


APPENDIX.


537


of  properties,  we  are  induced  to  form  the  notion  of  a
substantial  something  that  is  quantitatively  variable,
which  we  call  matter.  But  that  which  we  take  away
from  one  body,  makes  its  appearance  again  at  some
other  place.  The  quantity  of  matter  in  its  entirety,
thus,  proves  to  be  constant.  Strictly  viewed,  how-
ever, we  are  concerned  with  precisely  as  many  sub-
stantial quantities  as  bodies  have  properties,  and
there  is  no  other  function  left  for  matter  save  that  of
representing  the  constancy  of  connexion  of  the  several
properties  of  bodies,  of  which  man  is  one  only.  (Com-
pare my  Principles  of  Heat , German  edition,  1896,
page  425.)

XVII.

(See  page  216.)

Of  the  theories  of  the  tides  enunciated  before
Newton,  that  of  Galileo  alone  may  be  briefly  men-
tioned. Galileo  explains  the  tides  as  due  to  the  rela-
tive motion  of  the  solid  and  liquid  parts  of  the  earth,
and  regards  this  fact  as  direct  evidence  of  the  motion
of  the  earth  and  as  a cardinal
argument  in  favor  of  the  Co-
pernican  system.  If  the  earth
(Fig.  240)  rotates  from  the
west  to  the  east,  and  is  affected
at  the  same  time  with  a pro-
gressional  motion,  the  parts  of
the  earth  at  a will  move  with  the  sum,  and  the  parts
at  b with  the  difference,  of  the  two  velocities.  The
water  in  the  bed  of  the  ocean,  which  is  unable  to  fol-
low this  change  in  velocity  quickly  enough,  behaves
like  the  water  in  a plate  swung  rapidly  back  and  forth,
or  like  that  in  the  bottom  of  a skiff  which  is  rowed


a


h

Fig.  240.


538


the  science  oe  mechanics .


with  rapid  alterations  of  speed:  it  piles  up  now  in
the  front  and  now  at  the  back.  This  is  substantially
the  view  that  Galileo  set  forth  in  the  Dialogue  on  the
Two  World  Systems.  Kepler’s  view,  which  supposes
attraction  by  the  moon,  appears  to  him  mystical  and
childish.  He  is  of  the  opinion  that  it  should  be  rele-
gated to  the  category  of  explanations  by  “ sympathy  ”
and  “antipathy,”  and  that  it  admits  as  easily  of  refu-
tation as  the  doctrine  according  to  which  the  tides
are  created  by  radiation  and  the  consequent  expansion
of  the  water.  That  on  his  theory  the  tides  rise  only
once  a day,  did  not,  of  course,  escape  Galileo’s  atten-
tion. But  he  deceived  himself  with  regard  to  the
difficulties  involved,  believing  himself  able  to  explain
the  daily,  monthly,  and  yearly  periods  by  considering
the  natural  oscillations  of  the  water  and  the  altera-
tions to  which  its  motions  are  subject.  The  principle
of  relative  motion  is  a correct  feature  of  this  theory,
but  it  is  so  infelicitously  applied  that  only  an  ex-
tremely illusive  theory  could  result.  We  will  first
convince  ourselves  that  the  conditions  supposed  to
be  involved  would  not  have  the  effect  ascribed  to
them.  Conceive  a homogeneous  sphere  of  water;
any  other  effect  due  to  rotation  than  that  of  a corres-
ponding oblateness  we  should  not  expect.  Now,  sup-
pose the  ball  to  acquire  in  addition  a uniform  motion
of  progression.  Its  various  parts  will  now  as  before
remain  at  relative  rest  with  respect  to  one  another.
For  the  case  in  question  does  not  differ,  according  to
our  view,  in  any  essential  respect  from  the  preceding,
inasmuch  as  the  progressive  motion  of  the  sphere
may  be  conceived  to  be  replaced  by  a motion  in  the
opposite  direction  of  all  surrounding  bodies.  Even
for  the  person  who  is  inclined  to  regard  the  motion


APPENDIX .


539


as  an  “absolute”  motion,  no  change  is  produced  in
the  relation  of  the  parts  to  one  another  by  uniform
motion  of  progression.  Now,  let  us  cause  the  sphere,
the  parts  of  which  have  no  tendency  to  move  with  re-
spect to  one  another,  to  congeal  at  certain  points,  so
that  sea-beds  with  liquid  water  in  them  are  produced.
The  undisturbed  uniform  rotation  will  continue,  and
consequently  Galileo’s  theory  is  erroneous.

But  Galileo’s  idea  appears  at  first  blush  to  be  ex-
tremely plausible;  how  is  the  paradox  explained?  It
is  due  entirely  to  a negative  conception  of  the  law  of
inertia.  If  we  ask  what  acceleration  the  water  expe-
riences, everything  is  clear.  Water  having  no  weight
would  be  hurled  off  at  the  beginning  of  rotation ;
water  having  weight,  on  the  other  hand,  would  de
scribe  a central  motion  around  the  center  of  the  earth
With  its  slight  velocity  of  rotation  it  would  be  forced
more  and  more  toward  the  center  of  the  earth,  with
just  enough  of  its  centripetal  acceleration  counter-
acted by  the  resistance  of  the  mass  lying  beneath,
as  to  make  the  remainder,  conjointly  with  the  given
tangential  velocity,  sufficient  for  motion  in  a circle.
Looking  at  it  from  this  point  of  view,  all  doubt  and
obscurity  vanishes.  But  it  must  in  justice  be  added
that  it  was  almost  impossible  for  Galileo,  unless  his
genius  were  supernatural,  to  have  gone  to  the  bottom
of  the  matter.  He  would  have  been  obliged  to  antici-
pate the  great  intellectual  achievements  of  Huygens
and  Newton.


XVIII.

(See  pa^e  218.)

H.  Streintz’s  objection  (Die  physikalischen  Grand*
lagen  dcr  Mechanik , Leipsic,  1883,  p,  1 17),  that  a com-


54°


THE  SCIENCE  OE  MECHANICS ,


parison  of  masses  satisfying  my  definition  can  be  ef-
fected only  by  astronomical  means,  I am  unable  to
admit.  The  expositions  on  pages  202,  218-221  amply
refute  this.  Masses  produce  in  each  other  accelera-
tions in  impact,  as  well  as  when  subject  to  electric
and  magnetic  forces,  and  when  connected  by  a string
on  Atwood’s  machine.  In  my  Elements  of  Physics
(second  German  edition,  1891,  page  27)  I have  shown
how  mass-ratios  can  be  experimentally  determined  on
a centrifugal  machine,  in  a very  elementary  and  pop-
ular manner.  The  criticism  in  question,  therefore,
may  be  regarded  as  refuted.

My  definition  is  the  outcome  of  an  endeavor  to
establish  the  interdependence  of  phenomena  and  to  re-
move all  metaphysical  obscurity,  without  accomplish-
ing on  this  account  less  than  other  definitions  have
done.  I have  pursued  exactly  the  same  course  with
respect  to  the  ideas,  <c  quantity  of  electricity  ” (“ On
the  Fundamental  Concepts  of  Electrostatics,”  1883,
Popular  Scientific  Lectures,  Open  Court  Pub.  Co.,  Chi-
cago, 1898),  tc temperature,”  “quantity  of  heat”  ( Zcit -
schrift  fur  den  phvsikalischen  und  chemischen  Unterricht ,
Berlin,  1888,  No.  1),  and  so  forth.  With  the  view
here  taken  of  the  concept  of  mass  is  associated,  how-
ever, another  difficulty,  which  must  also  be  carefully
noted,  if  we  would  be  rigorously  critical  in  our  analy-
sis of  other  concepts  of  physics,  as  for  example  the
concepts  of  the  theory  of  heat.  Maxwell  made  refer-
ence to  this  point  in  his  investigations  of  the  concept
of  temperature,  about  the  same  time  as  I did  with  re-
spect to  the  concept  of  heat.  I would  refer  here  to
the  discussions  on  this  subject  in  my  Principles  of
Heat  (German  edition,  Leipsic,  1896),  particularly
page  41  and  page  190.


APPENDIX .


54i


XIX.

(See  page  226.)

My  views  concerning  physiological  time,  the  sen-
sation of  time,  and  partly  also  concerning  physical
time,  I have  expressed  elsewhere  (see  Analysis  of  the
Sensations,  1886,  Chicago,  Open  Court  Pub.  Co.,  1897,
pp.  109-118,  179-181).  As  in  the  study  of  thermal
phenomena  we  take  as  our  measure  of  temperature  an
arbitrarily  chosen  indicator  of  volu?ne , which  varies  in
almost  parallel  correspondence  with  our  sensation  of
heat,  and  which  is  not  liable  to  the  uncontrollable
disturbances  of  our  organs  of  sensation,  so,  for  simi-
lar reasons,  we  select  as  our  measure  of  time  an  arbi-
trarily chosen  motion,  (the  angle  of  the  earth’s  rotation,
or  path  of  a free  body,)  which  proceeds  in  almost
parallel  correspondence  with  our  sensation  of  time.
If  we  have  once  made  clear  to  ourselves  that  we  are
concerned  only  with  the  ascertainment  of  the  inter-
dependence of  phenomena,  as  I pointed  out  as  early  as
1865  ( Uebcr  den  Zeitsinn  des  Ohres , Sit  zungsb  eric  h te  der
Wiener  Akademie')  and  1866  (Fichte’s  Zeitschrift  fiir
JPhilosophie'),  all  metaphysical  obscurities  disappear.
(Compare  J Epstein,  Die  logischen  Principien  der  Zeit -
messung,  Berlin,  1887.)

I have  endeavored  also  ( Principles  of  Heat,  German
edition,  page  51)  to  point  out  the  reason  for  the  natu-
ral tendency  of  man  to  hypostatise  the  concepts  which
have  great  value  for  him,  particularly  those  at  which
he  arrives  instinctively,  without  a knowledge  of  their
development.  The  considerations  which  I there  ad-
duced for  the  concept  of  temperature  may  be  easily
applied  to  the  concept  of  time,  and  render  the  origin


542


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


of  Newton’s  concept  of  “absolute”  time  intelligible.
Mention  is  also  made  there  (page  338)  of  the  connex-
ion obtaining  between  the  concept  of  energy  and  the
irreversibility  of  time,  and  the  view  is  advanced  that
the  entropy  of  the  universe,  if  it  could  ever  possibly
be  determined,  would  actually  represent  a species  of
absolute  measure  of  time.  I have  finally  to  refer  here
also  to  the  discussions  of  Petzoldt  (“Das  Gesetz  der
Eindeutigkeit,”  VierteljaJirsschriJt  fur  wissenschaftliche
Philosophic,  1894,  page  146),  to  which  I shall  reply  in
another  place.

/ xx.

(See  page  238.)

Of  the  treatises  which  have  appeared  since  1883
on  the  law  of  inertia,  all  of  which  furnish  welcome
evidence  of  a heightened  interest  in  this  question,  I
can  here  only  briefly  mention  that  of  Streintz  ( Physi -
kalis che  Grundlagen  der  Mechanik , Leipsic,  1883)  and
that  of  L.  Lange  ( Pie  geschichiliche  lint  wick  lung  des
Bewegungsbegriffes , Leipsic,  1886).

The  expression  “absolute  motion  of  translation ”
Streintz  correctly  pronounces  as  devoid  of  meaning
and  consequently  declares  certain  analytical  deduc-
tions, to  which  he  refers,  superfluous.  On  the  other
hand,  with  respect  to  rotation , Streintz  accepts  New-
ton’s position,  that  absolute  rotation  can  be  distin-
guished from  relative  rotation.  In  this  point  of  view,
therefore,  one  can  select  every  body  not  affected  with
absolute  rotation  as  a body  of  reference  for  the  ex-
pression of  the  law  of  inertia.

I cannot  share  this  view.  For  me,  only  relative
motions  exist  (. ErJialtung  der  Arbeit,  p.  48  ; Science  of
Mechanics , p.  229),  and  I can  see,  in  this  regard,  no


APPENDIX.


543


distinction  between  rotation  and  translation.  When  a
body  moves  relatively  to  the  fixed  stars,  centrifugal
forces  are  produced ; when  it  moves  relatively  to  some
different  body,  and  not  relatively  to  the  fixed  stars,
no  centrifugal  forces  are  produced.  I have  no  objec-
tion to  calling  the  first  rotation  “ absolute”  rotation,
if  it  be  remembered  that  nothing  is  meant  by  such  a
designation  except  relative  rotation  with  respect  to  the
fixed  stars . Can  we  fix  Newton’s  bucket  of  water,
rotate  the  fixed  stars,  and  then  prove  the  absence  of
centrifugal  forces?

The  experiment  is  impossible,  the  idea  is  mean-
ingless, for  the  two  cases  are  not,  in  sense-perception,
distinguishable  from  each  other.  I accordingly  re-
gard these  two  cases  as  the  same  case  and  Newton’s
distinction  as  an  illusion  (Science  of  Mechanics , page
232).

But  the  statement  is  correct  that  it  is  possible  to
find  one’s  bearings  in  a balloon  shrouded  in  fog,  by
means  of  a body  which  does  not  rotate  with  respect
to  the  fixed  stars.  But  this  is  nothing  more  than  an
indirect  orientation  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars ; it
is  a mechanical,  substituted  for  an  optical,  orienta-
tion.

I wish  to  add  the  following  remarks  in  answer  to
Streintz’s  criticism  of  my  view.  My  opinion  is  not  to
be  confounded  with  that  of  Euler  (Streintz,  pp.  7,  50),
who,  as  Lange  has  clearly  shown,  never  arrived  at
any  settled  and  intelligible  opinion  on  the  subject.
Again,  I never  assumed  that  remote  masses  only,  and
not  near  ones,  determine  the  velocity  of  a body
(Streintz,  p.  7);  I simply  spoke  of  an  influence  inde-
pendent of  distance.  In  the  light  of  my  expositions
at  pages  222-245,  the  unprejudiced  and  careful  reader


544


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


will  scarcely  maintain  with  Streintz  (p.  50),  that  after
so  long  a period  of  time,  without  a knowledge  of
Newton  and  Euler,  I have  only  been  led  to  views
which  these  inquirers  so  long  ago  held,  but  were
afterwards,  partly  by  them  and  partly  by  others,  re-
jected. Even  my  remarks  of  1872,  which  were  all
that  Streintz  knew,  cannot  justify  this  criticism.  These
were,  for  good  reasons,  concisely  stated,  but  they  are
by  no  means  so  meagre  as  they  must  appear  to  one
who  knows  them  only  from  Streintz’s  criticism.  The
point  of  view  which  Streintz  occupies,  I at  that  time
expressly  rejected.

Lange’s  treatise  is,  in  my  opinion,  one  of  the  best
that  have  been  written  on  this  subject.  Its  methodi-
cal movement  wins  at  once  the  reader’s  sympathy.  Its
careful  analysis  and  study,  from  historical  and  criti-
cal points  of  view,  of  the  concept  of  motion,  have
produced,  it  seems  to  me,  results  of  permanent  value.

I also  regard  its  clear  emphasis  and  apt  designation
of  the  principle  of  “particular  determination”  as  a
point  of  much  merit,  although  the  principle  itself,  as
well  as  its  application,  is  not  new.  The  principle  is
really  at  the  basis  of  all  measurement.  The  choice  of
the  unit  of  measurement  is  convention  ; the  number
of  measurement  is  a result  of  inquiry.  Every  natural
inquirer  who  is  clearly  conscious  that  his  business  is
simply  the  investigation  of  the  interdependence  of
phenomena,  as  I formulated  the  point  at  issue  a long
time  ago  (1865-1866),  employs  this  principle.  When,
for  example  (. Mechanics , p.  218  et  seq.),  the  negative
inverse  ratio  of  the  mutually  induced  accelerations  of
two  bodies  is  called  the  mass-ratio  of  these  bodies,
this  is  a convention , expressly  acknowledged  as  arbi-
trary; but  that  these  ratios  are  independent  of  the


APPENDIX.


545


kind  and  of  the  order  of  combination  of  the  bodies  is
a result  of  inquiry.  I might  adduce  numerous  similar
nstances  from  the  theories  of  heat  and  electricity  as
well  as  from  other  provinces.  Compare  Appendix  II.

Taking  it  in  its  simplest  and  most  perspicuous
form,  the  law  of  inertia,  in  Lange’s  view,  would  read
as  follows  :

Three  material  points,  Pi,  P%,  Ps,  are  simultane-
ously hurled  from  the  same  point  in  space  and  then
left  to  themselves.  The  moment  we  are  certain  that
the  points  are  not  situated  in  the  same  straight  line,
we  join  each  separately  with  any  fourth  point  in  space,
Q.  These  lines  of  junction,  which  we  may  respec-
tively call  G\ , G<2,  Gz,  form,  at  their  point  of  meeting,
a three-faced  solid  angle.  If  now  we  make  this  solid
angle  preserve,  with  unaltered  rigidity,  its  form,  and
constantly  determine  in  such  a manner  its  position,
that  Pi  shall  alwa}'s  move  on  the  line  Gi,  P$  on  the
line  G<2,  Ps  on  the  line  Gz,  these  lines  may  be  regarded
as  the  axis  of  a coordinate  or  inertial  system,  with
respect  to  which  every  other  material  point,  left  to  it-
self, will  move  in  a straight  line.  The  spaces  de-
scribed by  the  free  points  in  the  paths  so  determined
will  be  proportional  to  one  another.

A system  of  coordinates  with  respect  to  which
three  material  points  move  in  a straight  line  is,  ac-
cording to  Lange,  under  the  assumed  limitations,  a
simple  convention.  That  with  respect  to  such  a system
also  a fourth  or  other  free  material  point  will  move  in
a straight  line,  and  that  the  paths  of  the  different
points  will  all  be  proportional  to  one  another,  are  re-
suits  of  inquiry.

In  the  first  place,  we  shall  not  dispute  the  fact
that  the  law  of  inertia  can  be  referred  to  such  a system


546


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


of  time  and  space  coordinates  and  expressed  in  this
form.  Such  an  expression  is  less  fit  than  Streintz’s
for  practical  purposes,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  is,  for
its  methodical  advantages,  more  attractive.  It  espe-
cially appeals  to  my  mind,  as  a number  of  years  ago  I
was  engaged  with  similar  attempts,  of  which  not  the
beginnings  but  only  a few  remnants  ( Mechanics , pp.
234—235)  are  left.  I abandoned  these  attempts,  be-
cause I was  convinced  that  we  only  apparently  evade
by  such  expressions  references  to  the  fixed  stars  and
the  angular  rotation  of  the  earth.  This,  in  my  opin-
ion, is  also  true  of  the  forms  in  which  Streintz  and
Lange  express  the  law.

In  point  of  fact,  it  was  precisely  by  the  considera-
tion of  the  fixed  stars  and  the  rotation  of  the  earth
that  we  arrived  at  a knowledge  of  the  law  of  inertia
as  it  at  present  stands,  and  without  these  foundations
we  should  never  have  thought  of  the  explanations
here  discussed  (. Mechanics , 232-233).  The  considera-
tion of  a small  number  of  isolated  points,  to  the  ex-
clusion of  the  rest  of  the  world,  is  in  my  judgment  in-
admissible QAfechanics,  pp.  229-235).

It  is  quite  questionable,  whether  a fourth  material
point,  left  to  itself,  would,  with  respect  to  Lange’s
“ inertial  system,”  uniformly  describe  a straight  line,
if  the  fixed  stars  were  absent,  or  not  invariable,  or
could  not  be  regarded  with  sufficient  approximation
as  invariable.

The  most  natural  point  of  view  for  the  candid  in-
quirer must  still  be,  to  regard  the  law  of  inertia  pri-
marily as  a tolerably  accurate  approximation,  to  refer
it,  with  respect  to  space,  to  the  fixed  stars,  and,  with
respect  to  time,  to  the  rotation  of  the  earth,  and  to
await  the  correction,  or  more  precise  definition,  of


APPENDIX.


54  7


our  knowledge  from  future  experience,  as  I have  ex-
plained on  page  237  of  this  book.

I have  still  to  mention  the  discussions  of  the  law
of  inertia  which  have  appeared  since  1889.  Reference
may  first  be  made  to  the  expositions  of  Karl  Pearson
{Grammar  of  Science,  1892,  page  477),  which  agree
with  my  own,  save  in  terminology.  P.  and  J.  Fried-
lander  {Absolute  und  relative  Bewegung , Berlin,  1896)
have  endeavored  to  determine  the  question  by  means
of  an  experiment  based  on  the  suggestions  made  by
me  at  pages  217-218;  I have  grave  doubts,  however,
whether  the  experiment  will  be  successful  from  the
quantitative  side.  I can  quite  freely  give  my  assent
to  the  discussions  of  Johannesson  {Das  Beharrungs -
gesetz,  Berlin,  1896),  although  the  question  remains
unsettled  as  to  the  means  by  which  the  motion  of  A
body  not  perceptibly  accelerated  by  other  bodies  is  to
be  determined.  For  the  sake  of  completeness,  the
predominantly  dialectic  treatment  b}'  M.  E.  Vxcairo,
Soci/tJ  scientifique  de  Bruxelles , 1895,  as  well  as  the  in-
vestigations of  J.  G.  MacGregor,  Royal  Society  of  Can-
ada, Jr8<ps>  which  are  only  remotely  connected  with
the  question  at  issues  remain  to  be  mentioned.  I have
no  objections  to  Budde’s  conception  of  space  as  a sort
of  medium  (compare  page  230),  although  I think  that
the  properties  of  this  medium  should  be  demonstrable
physically  in  some  other  manner,  and  that  they  should
not  be  assumed  ad  hoc . If  all  apparent  actions  at  a
distance,  all  accelerations,  turned  out  to  be  effected
through  the  agency  of  a medium,  then  the  question
would  appear  in  a different  light,  and  the  solution  is
to  be  sought  perhaps  in  the  view  set  forth  on  page
230.


548


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


XXI.

(See  page  255.)

Section  VIII.,  “ Retrospect  of  the  Development
of  Dynamics,  ” was  written  in  the  year  1883.  It  con-
tains, especially  in  paragraph  7,  on  pages  254  and
255,  an  extremely  general  programme  of  a future  sys-
tem of  mechanics,  and  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the
Mechanics  .of  Hertz,  which  appeared  in  the  year  1894,*
marks  a distinct  advance  in  the  direction  indicated.
It  is  impossible  in  the  limited  space  at  our  disposal
to  give  any  adequate  conception  of  the  copious  ma-
terial contained  in  this  book,  and  besides  it  is  not  our
purpose  to  expound  new  systems  of  mechanics,  but
merely  to  trace  the  development  of  ideas  relating  to
mechanics.  Hertz’s  book  must,  in  fact,  be  read  by
every  one  interested  in  mechanical  problems.

Hertz’s  criticisms  of  prior  systems  of  mechanics,
with  which  he  opens  his  work,  contains  some  very
noteworthy  epistemological  considerations,  which  from
our  point  of  view  (not  to  be  confounded  either  with
the  Kantian  or  with  the  atomistic  mechanical  concepts
of  the  majority  of  physicists),  stand  in  need  of  certain
modifications.  The  constructive  images f (or  better,
perhaps,  the  concepts),  which  we  consciously  and
purposely  form  of  objects,  are  to  be  so  chosen  that
the  “ consequences  which  necessarily  follow  from  them
in  thought  ” agree  with  the  <c  consequences  which  nec-
essarily follow  from  them  in  nature.”  It  is  demanded
of  these  images  or  concepts  that  they  shall  be  logically

* H.  Hertz,  Die  Princifiien  der  Meckanik  in  nett  cm  Zusammenhange  dar~
g-estellt.  Leipzig,  2894.

t Hertz  uses  the  term  Bild  (image  or  picture)  in  the  sense  of  the  old  Eng-
lish philosophical  use  of  idea , and  applies  it  to  systems  of  ideas  or  concepts
relating  to  any  province.


APPENDIX.


549


admissible,  that  is  to  say,  free  from  all  self-contradic-
tions ; that  they  shall  be  correct,  that  is,  shall  con-
form to  the  relations  obtaining  between  objects;  and
finally  that  they  shall  be  appropriate,  and  contain  the
least  possible  superfluous  features.  Our  concepts,  it
is  true,  are  formed  consciously  and  purposely  by  us,
but  they  are  nevertheless  not  formed  altogether  arbi-
trarily, but  are  the  outcome  of  an  endeavor  on  our
part  to  adapt  our  ideas  to  our  sensuous  environment.
The  agreement  of  the  concepts  with  one  another  is  a
requirement  which  is  logically  necessary,  and  this
logical  necessity,  furthermore,  is  the  only  necessity
that  we  have  knowledge  of.  The  belief  in  a necessity
obtaining  in  nature  arises  only  in  cases  where  our
concepts  are  closely  enough  adapted  to  nature  to
ensure  a correspondence  between  the  logical  infer-
ence and  the  fact.  But  the  assumption  of  an  adequate
adaptation  of  our  ideas  can  be  refuted  at  any  moment
by  experience.  Hertz's  criterion  of  appropriateness
coincides  with  our  criterion  of  economy.

Hertz’s  criticism  that  the  Galileo-Newtonian  sys-
tem of  mechanics,  particularly  the  notion  of  force,  lacks
clearness  (pages  7,  14,  15)  appears  to  us  justified  only
in  the  case  of  logically  defective  expositions,  such  as
Hertz  doubtless  had  in  mind  from  his  student  days.
He  himself  partly  retracts  his  criticism  in  another
place  (pages  9,  47) ; or  at  any  rate,  he  qualifies  it.  But
the  logical  defects  of  some  individtial  interpretation
cannot  be  imputed  to  systems  as  such.  To  be  sure,
it  is  not  permissible  to-day  (page  7)  “to  speak  of  a
force  acting  in  one  aspect  only,  or,  in  the  case  of  cen-
tripetal force,  to  take  account  of  the  action  ol  inertia
twice,  once  as  a mass  and  again  as  a force. 99  But
neither  is  this  necessary,  since  Huygens  and  Newton


550


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


were  perfectly  clear  on  this  point.  To  characterise
forces  as  being  frequently  “empty- running  wheels,”
as  being  frequently  not  demonstrable  to  the  senses,
can  scarcely  be  permissible.  In  any  event,  “forces”
are  decidedly  in  the  advantage  on  this  score  as  com-
pared with  “hidden  masses”  and  “hidden  motions.”
In  the  case  of  a piece  of  iron  lying  at  rest  on  a table,
both  the  forces  in  equilibrium,  the  weight  of  the  iron
and  the  elasticity  of  the  table,  are  very  easily  demon-
strable.

Neither  is  the  case  with  energic  mechanics  so  bad
as  Hertz  would  have  it,  and  as  to  his  criticism  against
the  employment  of  minimum  principles,  that  it  in-
volves the  assumption  of  purpose  and  presupposes
tendencies  directed  to  the  future,  the  present  work
shows  in  another  passage  quite  distinctly  that  the
simple  import  of  minimum  principles  is  contained  in
an  entirely  different  property  from  that  of  purpose.
Every  system  of  mechanics  contains  references  to  the
future,  since  all  must  employ  the  concepts  of  time,
velocity,  etc.

Nevertheless,  though  Hertz’s  criticism  of  existing
systems  of  mechanics  cannot  be  accepted  in  all  their
severity,  his  own  novel  views  must  be  regarded  as  a
great  step  in  advance.  Hertz,  after  eliminating  the
concept  of  force,  starts  from  the  concepts  of  time,
space,  and  mass  alone,  with  the  idea  in  view  of  giv-
ing expression  only  to  that  which  can  actually  be  ob-
served. The  sole  principle  which  he  employs  may
be  conceived  as  a combination  of  the  law  of  inertia
and  Gauss’s  principle  of  least  constraint.  Free  masses
move  uniformly  in  straight  lines.  If  they  are  put  in
connexion  in  any  manner  they  deviate,  in  accordance
with  Gauss’s  principle,  as  little  as  possible  from  this


APPENDIX.


55i


motion;  their  actual  motion  is  more  nearly  that  of
free  motion  than  any  other  conceivable  motion.  Hertz
says  the  masses  move  as  a result  of  their  connexion
in  a straightcst  path.  Every  deviation  of  the  motion
of  a mass  from  uniformity  and  rectilinearity  is  due,  in
his  system,  not  to  a force  but  to  rigid  connexion  with
other  masses.  And  where  such  matters  are  not  vis-
ible, he  conceives  hidden  masses  with  hidden  motions.
All  physical  forces  are  conceived  as  the  effect  of  such
actions.  Force,  force-function,  energy,  in  his  system,
are  secondary  and  auxiliary  concepts  only.  Let  us
now  look  at  the  most  important  points  singly,  and
ask  to  what  extent  was  the  way  prepared  for  them.
The  notion  of  eliminating  force  may  be  reached  in
the  following  manner.  It  is  part  of  the  general  idea
of  the  Galileo-Newtonian  system  of  mechanics  to
conceive  of  all  connexions  as  replaced  by  forces  which
determine  the  motions  required  by  the  connexions  ;
conversely,  everything  that  appears  as  force  may  be
conceived  to  be  due  to  a connexion.  If  the  first  idea
frequently  appears  in  the  older  systems,  as  being  his-
torically simpler  and  more  immediate,  in  the  case  of
Hertz  the  latter  is  the  more  prominent.  If  we  reflect
that  in  both  cases,  whether  forces  or  connexions  be
presupposed,  the  actual  dependence  of  the  motions
of  the  masses  on  one  another  is  given  for  every  in-
stantaneous conformation  of  the  system  by  linear  dif-
ferential equations  between  the  co  ordinates  of  the
masses,  then  the  existence  of  these  equations  may  be
considered  the  essential  thing, — The  thing  established
by  experience.  Physics  indeed  gradually  accustoms
itself  to  look  upon  the  description  of  the  facts  by  dif-
ferential equations  as  its  proper  aim,— a point  of  view
which  was  taken  also  in  Chapter  V.  of  the  present


552


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


work  (1883).  But  with  these  the  general  applicabil-
ity of  Hertz’s  mathematical  formulations  is  recognised
without  our  being  obliged  to  enter  upon  any  further
interpretation  of  the  forces  or  connexions.

Hertz’s  fundamental  law  may  be  described  as  a
sort  of  generalised  law  of  inertia,  modified  by  connex-
ions of  the  masses.  For  the  simpler  cases,  this  view
was  a natural  one,  and  doubtless  often  forced  itself
upon  the  attention.  In  fact,  the  principle  of  the  con-
servation of  the  center  of  gravity  and  of  the  conserva-
tion of  areas  was  actually  described  in  the  present
work  (Chapter  III.)  as  a generalised  law  of  inertia.
If  we  reflect  that  by  Gauss’s  principle  the  connexion
of  the  masses  determines  a minimum  of  deviation  from
those  motions  which  it  would  describe  for  itself,  we
shall  arrive  at  Hertz’s  fundamental  law  the  moment  we
consider  all  the  forces  as  due  to  the  connexions.  For
on  severing  all  connexions,  only  isolated  masses  mov-
ing by  the  law  of  inertia  are  left  as  ultimate  elements.

Gauss  very  distinctly  asserted  that  no  substantially
new  principle  of  mechanics  could  ever  be  discovered.
And  Hertz’s  principle  also  is  only  new  in  form,  for  it
is  identical  with  Lagrange’s  equations.  The  minimum
condition  which  the  principle  involves  does  not  refer
to  any  enigmatic  purpose,  but  its  import  is  the  same
as  that  of  all  minimum  laws.  That  alone  takes  place
which  is  dynamically  determined  (Chapter  III.).  The
deviation  from  the  actual  motion  is  dynamically  not
determined  ; this  deviation  is  not  present ; the  actual
motion  is  therefore  unique.*

*See  Petzoldt's  excellent  article  “Das  Gesetz  der  Eindentigkelt *’  {Vier-
teljahrsschrift  filr  vuissenschciftLiche  Philosophic , XIX.,  page  146,  especially
page  186).  R.  Henke  is  also  mentioned  in  this  article  as  having  approached
Hertz’s  view  in  his  tract  Ueber  die  Methods  dcr  kleinsten  Quadrate  (Leipsic,
1894).


APPENDIX.


553


It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark  that  the  physical
side  of  mechanical  problems  is  not  only  not  disposed
of,  but  is  not  even  so  much  as  touched,  by  the  elabo-
ration of  such  a formal  mathematical  system  of  me-
chanics. Free  masses  move  uniformly  in  straight
lines.  Masses  having  different  velocities  and  direc-
tions if  connected  mutually  affect  each  other  as  to
velocit}^  that  is,  determine  in  each  other  accelera-
tions. These  physical  experiences  enter  along  with
purely  geometrical  and  arithmetical  theorems  into  the
formulation,  for  which  the  latter  alone  would  in  no
wise  be  adequate;  for  that  which  is  uniquely  deter-
mined mathematically  and  geometrically  only,  is  for
that  reason  not  also  uniquely  determined  mechani-
cally. But  we  discussed  at  considerable  length  in
Chapter  II.,  that  the  physical  principles  in  question
were  not  at  all  self-evident,  and  that  even  their  exact
significance  was  by  no  means  easy  to  establish.

In  the  beautiful  ideal  form  which  Hertz  has  given
to  mechanics,  its  physical  contents  have  shrunk  to
an  apparently  almost  imperceptible  residue.  It  is
scarcely  to  be  doubted  that  Descartes  if  he  lived  to-
day would  have  seen  in  Hertz’s  mechanics,  far  more
than  in  Lagrange’s  “ analytic  geometry  of  four  dimen-
sions,” his  own  ideal.  For  Descartes,  who  in  his  op-
position to  the  occult  qualities  of  Scholasticism  would
grant  no  other  properties  to  matter  than  extension
and  motion,  sought  to  reduce  all  mechanics  and  phys-
ics to  a geometry  of  motions,  on  the  assumption  of  a
motion  indestructible  at  the  start.

It  is  not  difficult  to  analyse  the  psychological  cir-
cumstances which  led  Hertz  to  his  system.  After  in-
quirers had  succeeded  in  representing  electric  and
magnetic  forces  that  act  at  a distance  as  the  results


554


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


of  motions  in  a medium,  the  desire  must  again  have
awakened  to  accomplish  the  same  result  with  respect
to  the  forces  of  gravitation,  and  if  possible  for  all
forces  whatsoever.  The  idea  was  therefore  very  nat-
ural to  discover  whether  the  concept  of  force  generally
could  not  be  eliminated.  It  cannot  be  denied  that
when  we  can  command  all  the  phenomena  taking
place  in  a medium,  together  with  the  large  masses
contained  in  it,  by  means  of  a single  complete  pic-
ture, our  concepts  are  on  an  entirely  different  plane
from  what  they  are  when  only  the  relations  of  these
isolated  masses  as  regards  acceleration  are  known.
This  will  be  willingly  granted  even  by  those  who  are
convinced  that  the  interaction  of  parts  in  contact  is
not  more  intelligible  than  action  at  a distance.  The
present  tendencies  in  the  development  of  physics  are
entirely  in  this  direction.

If  we  are  not  content  to  leave  the  assumption  of
occult  masses  and  motions  in  its  general  form,  but
should  endeavor  to  investigate  them  singly  and  in  de-
tail, we  should  be  obliged,  at  least  in  the  present  state
of  our  physical  knowledge,  to  resort,  even  in  the  sim-
plest cases,  to  fantastic  and  even  frequently  question-
able fictions,  to  which  the  given  accelerations  would
be  far  preferable.  For  example,  if  a mass  in  is  mov-
ing uniformly  in  a circle  of  radius  r,  with  a velocity
v,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  refer  to  a centripetal

force  — — proceeding  from  the  center  of  the  circle,

we  might  instead  of  this  conceive  the  mass  to  be
rigidly  connected  at  the  distance  2 r with  one  of  the
same  size  having  a contrary  velocity.  Huygens's  cen-
tripetal impulsion  would  be  another . example  of  a
force  replaced  by  a connexion.  As  an  ideal  program


APPENDIX.


Hertz's  mechanics  is  simpler  and  more  beautiful,  but
for  practical  purposes  our  present  S37stem  of  mechan-
ics is  preferable,  as  Hertz  himself  (page  47),  with  his
characteristic  candor,  admits.*

XXII.

(See  page  255.)

The  views  put  forward  in  the  first  two  chapters  of
this  book  were  worked  out  by  me  a long  time  ago.
At  the  start  they  were  almost  without  exception  coolly
rejected,  and  only  gradually  gained  friends.  All  the
essential  features  of  my  Mechanics  I stated  originally
in  a brief  communication  of  five  octavo  pages  entitled
On  the  Definition  of  Mass.  These  were  the  theorems
now  given  at  page  243  of  the  present  book.  The
communication  was  rejected  by  Poggendorf’s  Anna-
ten , and  it  did  not  appear  until  a year  later  (1868),  in
Carl’s  Rcpertorium.  In  a lecture  delivered  in  1871,  I
outlined  my  epistemological  point  of  view  in  natural
science  generally,  and  with  special  exactness  for  phys-
ics. The  concept  of  cause  is  replaced  there  by  the
concept  of  function;  the  determining  of  the  depend*
ence  of  phenomena  on  one  another,  the  economic  ex-
position of  actual  facts,  is  proclaimed  as  the  object,
and  physical  concepts  as  a means  to  an  end  solely.

I did  not  care  now  to  impose  upon  any  editor  the  re-
sponsibility for  the  publication  of  the  contents  of  this
lecture,  and  the  same  was  published  as  a separate
tract  in  1872. f In  1874,  when  Kirchhoff  in  his  Me-
chanics came  out  with  his  theory  of  “description  ” and

* Compare  J.  Classen,  “ Die  Principien  tier  Mechanik  be*  Hertz  timl
Boltzmann  ” {Jahrlnich  tier  Hamburgischen  ivissenschaft lichen  Anstalt^n ,
XV.»  p.  x,  Hamburg,  1898).

i Er halt  ung  tier  Arbeit > Prague,  1872.


556  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

other  doctrines,  which  were  analogous  in  part  only  to
my  views,  and  still  aroused  the  “universal  astonish-
ment ” of  his  colleagues,  I became  resigned  to  my
fate.  But  the  great  authority  of  Kirchhoff  gradually
made  itself  felt,  and  the  consequence  of  this  also
doubtless  was  that  on  its  appearance  in  1883  my  Me-
chanics did  not  evoke  so  much  surprise.  In  view  of
the  great  assistance  afforded  by  Kirchhoff,  it  is  alto-
gether a matter  of  indifference  with  me  that  the  pub-
lic should  have  regarded,  and  partly  does  so  still,  my
interpretation  of  the  principles  of  physics  as  a contin-
uation and  elaboration  of  Kirchhoff’s  views  ; whilst  in
fact  mine  were  not  only  older  as  to  date  of  publica-
tion, but  also  more  radical.*

The  agreement  with  my  point  of  view  appears
upon  the  whole  to  be  increasing,  and  gradually  to  ex-
tend over  more  extensive  portions  of  my  work.  It
would  be  more  in  accord  with  my  aversion  for  polem-
ical discussions  to  wait  quietly  and  merely  observe
what  part  of  the  ideas  enunciated  may  be  found  ac-
ceptable. But  I cannot  suffer  my  readers  to  remain
in  obscurity  with  regard  to  the  existing  disagreements,
and  I have  also  to  point  out  to  them  thewTayin  which
they  can  find  their  intellectual  bearings  outside  of
this  book,  quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  esteem  for
my  opponents  also  demands  a consideration  of  their
criticisms.  These  opponents  are  numerous  and  of  all
kinds:  historians,  philosophers,  metaphysicians,  logi-
cians , educators,  mathematicians,  and  physicists.  I
can  make  no  pretence  to  any  of  these  qualifications  in
any  superior  degree.  I can  only  select  here  the  most
important  criticisms,  and  answer  them  in  the  capacity
of  a man  who  has  the  liveliest  and  most  ingenuous  in-

*See  the  preface  to  the  first  edition.


APPENDIX.


557


terest  in  understanding  the  growth  of  physical  ideas.
I hope  that  this  will  also  make  it  easy  for  others  to
find  their  way  in  this  field  and  to  form  their  own  judg-
ment.

P.  Volkmann  in  his  writings  on  the  epistemology*
of  physics  appears  as  my  opponent  only  in  certain
criticisms  on  individual  points,  and  particularly  by
his  adherence  to  the  old  systems  and  by  his  predilec-
tion for  them.  It  is  the  latter  trait,  in  fact,  that  sepa-
rates us  ; for  otherwise  Volkmann’s  views  have  much
affinity  with  my  own.  He  accepts  my  adaptation  of
ideas,  the  principle  of  economy  and  of  comparison,
even  though  his  expositions  differ  from  mine  in  indi-
vidual features  and  vary  in  terminology.  I,  for  my
part,  find  in  his  writings  the  important  principle  of
isolation  and  superposition,  appropriately  emphasised
and  admirably  described,  and  I willingly  accept  them.
I am  also  willing  to  admit  that  concepts  which  at  the
start  are  not  very  definite  must  acquire  their  “ retro-
active consolidation ” by  a “circulation  of  knowl-
edge,” by  an  “oscillation”  of  attention.  I also  agree
with  Volkmann  that  from  this  last  point  of  view  New-
ton accomplished  in  his  day  nearly  the  best  that  it
was  possible  to  do;  but  I cannot  agree  with  Volk-
mann when  he  shares  the  opinion  of  Thomson  and
Tait,  that  even  in  the  face  of  the  substantially  differ-
ent epistemological  needs  of  the  present  day,  New-
ton’s achievement  is  definitive  and  exemplary.  On
the  contrary,  it  appears  to  me  that  if  Volkmann’s  pro-
cess of  “consolidation”  be  allowed  complete  sway,  it
must  necessarily  lead  to  enunciations  not  differing  in

* Erkenntnisstheoretiscke  Gruttdzilge  dcr  Naiurtvfssansthaft , Leipzig.  1896,
— Ueber  Newton's  Philosofthia  Natur ah's,  Ktinigsbcrg,  x 898 . — Eht/iih ng  in
das  Studium  der  theoretischen  Physik , Leipsic,  igen.  Our  references  a re  to
the  last-named  work.


553


THE  science  of  mechanics .


any  essential  point  from  my  own.  I follow  with  gen-
uine pleasure  the  clear  and  objective  discussions  of
G.  Heymans.*  The  differences  which  I have  with
Hoflerf  and  PoskeJ  relate  in  the  main  to  individual
points.  So  far  as  principles  are  concerned,  I take
precisely  the  same  point  of  view  as  Petzoldt,  § and  we
differ  only  on  questions  of  minor  importance.  The
numerous  criticisms  of  others,  which  either  refer  to
the  arguments  of  the  writers  just  mentioned,  or  are
supported  by  analogous  grounds,  cannot  out  of  regard
for  the  reader  be  treated  at  length.  It  will  be  suffi-
cient to  describe  the  character  of  these  differences  by
selecting  a few  individual,  but  important,  points.

A special  difficulty  seems  to  be  still  found  in  ac-
cepting my  definition  of  mass.  Streintz  (compare  p.
540)  has  remarked  in  criticism  of  it  that  it  is  based
solely.upon  gravity,  although  this  was  expressly  ex-
cluded in  my  first  formulation  of  the  definition  (1868).
Nevertheless,  this  criticism  is  again  and  again  put
forward,  and  quite  recently  even  by  Volkmann  (Joe.
cii .,  p.  18).  My  definition  simply  takes  note  of  the
fact  that  bodies  in  mutual  relationship,  whether  it  be
that  of  action  at  a distance,  so  called,  or  whether  rigid
or  elastic  connexions  be  considered,  determine  in  one
another  changes  of  velocity  (accelerations).  More  than
this,  one  does  not  need  to  know  in  order  to  be  able  to
form  a definition  with  perfect  assurance  and  without
the  fear  of  building  on  sand.  It  is  not  correct  as

* Die  Geseize  tend  Element  e des  wisscnschaftlichcn  Denkcns , II, , Leipzig
1S94.

t Studien  zur  g-egenvulirtigett  Philosophic  der  mathemaiischen  Media  nil,
Leipzig,  1900.

J Vierteljahrsschrift  fur"  ‘wissenschaftliche  Philosophic,  Leipzig,  1884,  pag  1

385.

§ “ Das  Gesetz  der  Eindeutigkeit  ( Vierteljahrsschrift fir  vvissen  sdi  aft  tick  e
Philosophic , XIX.,  page  146).


APPENDIX .


5 59


Hofler  asserts  (Joe.  cit.,  p.  77),  that  this  definition
tacitly  assumes  one  and  the  same  force  acting  on  both
masses.  It  does  not  assume  even  the  notion  of  force,
since  the  latter  is  built  up  subsequently  upon  the  no-
tion of  mass,  and  gives  then  the  principle  of  action
and  reaction  quite  independently  and  without  falling
into  Newton’s  logical  error.  In  this  arrangement -one
concept  is  not  misplaced  and  made  to  rest  on  another
which  threatens  to  give  way  under  it.  This  is,  as  I
take  it,  the  only  really  serviceable  aim  of  Volkmann’s
“circulation”  and  “oscillation.”  After  we  have  de-
fined mass  by  means  of  accelerations,  it  is  not  difficult
to  obtain  from  our  definition  apparently  new  variant
concepts  like  “capacity  for  acceleration,”  “capacity
for  energy  of  motion”  (Hofler,  loc.  cit.,  page  70).  To
accomplish  anything  dynamically  with  the  concept  of
mass,  the  concept  in  question  must,  as  I most  em-
phatically insist,  be  a dynamical  concept.  Dynamics
cannot  be  constructed  with  quantity  of  matter  by  it-
self, but  the  same  can  at  most  be  artificially  and  arbi-
trarily attached  to  it  (Joe.  oil.,  pages  71,  72).  Quantity
of  matter  by  itself  is  never  mass,  neither  is  it  thermal
capacity,  nor  heat  of  combustion,  nor  nutritive  value,
nor  anything  of  the  kind.  Neither  does  “mass”
play  a thermal,  but  only  a dynamical  role  (compare
Hofler,  loc.  cit .,  pages  71,  72).  On  the  other  hand,
the  different  physical  quantities  are  proportional  to
one  another,  and  two  or  three  bodies  of  unit  mass
form,  by  virtue  of  the  dynamic  definition,  a body  of
twice  or  three  times  the  mass,  as  is  analogously  the
case  also  with  thermal  capacity  by  virtue  of  the  ther-
mal definition.  Our  instinctive  craving  for  concepts
involving  quantities  of  things,  to  which  Hofler  Joe.
cit  , page  72)  is  doubtless  seeking  to  give  expression,


560


THE  SCIENCE  OF  AIECJ/AMCS.


and  which  amply  suffices  for  every-day  purposes,  is
something  that  no  one  will  think  of  denying.  But
a scientific  concept  of  “quantity  of  matter”  should
properly  be  deduced  from  the  proportionality  of  the
single  physical  quantities  mentioned,  instead  of,  con-
trariwise, building  up  the  concept  of  mass  upon
“quantity  of  matter.”  The  measurement  of  mass  by
means  of  weight  results  from  my  definition  quite  nat-
urally, whereas  in  the  ordinary  conception  the  meas-
urability of  quantity  of  matter  by  one  and  the  same
dynamic  measure  is  either  taken  for  granted  outright,
or  proof  must  be  given  beforehand  by  special  experi-
ments, that  equal  weights  act  under  all  circumstances
as  equal  masses.  In  my  opinion,  the  concept  of  mass
has  here  been  subjected  to  thorough  analysis  for  the
first  time  since  Newton.  For  historians,  mathema-
ticians, and  physicists  appear  to  have  all  treated  the
question  as  an  easy  and  almost  self-evident  one.  It
is,  on  the  contrary,  of  fundamental  significance  and
is  deserving  of  the  attention  of  my  opponents.

Many  criticisms  have  been  made  of  my  treatment
of  the  law  of  inertia.  I believe  I have  shown  (1868),
somewhat  as  Poske  has  done  (1884),  that  any  deduc-
tion of  this  law  from  a general  principle,  like  the  law
of  causality,  is  inadmissible,  and  this  view  has  now
won  some  support  (compare  Heymans,  loc,  czL7  page
432).  Certainly,  a principle  that  has  been  universally
recognised  for  so  short  a time  only  cannot  be  regarded
as  a priori  self-evident.  Heymans  ( loc . cit. , p.  427)  cor-
rectly remarks  that  axiomatic  certainty  wTas  ascribed
a few  centuries  ago  to  a diametrically  opposite  form
of  the  law.  Heymans  sees  a supra-empirical  element
only  in  the  fact  that  the  law  of  inertia  is  referred  to
absolute  space,  and  in  the  further  fact  that  both  in


APPENDIX, ;


56i


the  law  of  inertia  and  in  its  ancient  diametrically  op-
posite form  something  constant  is  assumed  in  the  con-
dition of  the  body  that  is  left  to  itself  (Joe.  cit . , page
433)*  We  shall  have  something  to  say  further  on  re-
garding the  first  point,  and  as  for  the  latter  it  is  psy-
chologically intelligible  without  the  aid  of  metaphys-
ics, because  constant  features  alone  have  the  power
to  satisfy  us  either  intellectually  or  practically, —
which  is  the  reason  that  we  are  constantly  seeking  for
them.  Now,  looking  at  the  matter  from  an  entirely
unprejudiced  point  of  view,  the  case  of  these  axio-
matic certainties  will  be  found  to  be  a very  peculiar
one.  One  will  strive  in  vain  with  Aristotle  to  con-
vince the  common  man  that  a stone  hurled  from  the
hand  would  be  necessarily  brought  to  rest  at  once  after
its  release,  were  it  not  for  the  air  which  rushed  in  be-
hind and  forced  it  forwards.  But  he  would  put  just
as  little  credence  in  Galileo’s  theory  of  infinite  uni-
form motion.  On  the  other  hand,  Benedetti’s  theory
of  the  gradual  diminution  of  the  vis  impress  a,  which
belongs  to  the  period  of  unprejudiced  thought  and  of
liberation  from  ancient  preconceptions,  will  be  ac-
cepted by  the  common  man  without  contradiction.
This  theory,  in  fact,  is  an  immediate  reflexion  of  ex-
perience, while  the  first-mentioned  theories,  which
idealise  experience  in  contrary  directions,  are  a pro-
duct of  technical  professional  reasoning.  The}?  exer-
cise the  illusion  of  axiomatic  certainty  only  upon  the
mind  of  the  scholar  whose  entire  customary  train  of
thought  would  be  thrown  out  of  gear  by  a disturbance
of  these  elements  of  his  thinking.  The  behavior  of
inquirers  toward  the  law  of  inertia  seems  to  me  from
a psychological  point  of  view  to  be  adequately  ex-
plained by  this  circumstance,  and  I am  inclined  to


562


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


allow  the  question  of  whether  the  principle  is  to  be
called  an  axiom,  a postulate,  or  a maxim,  to  rest  in
abeyance  for  the  time  being.  Heymans,  Poske,  and
Petzoldt  concur  in  finding  an  empirical  and  a supra-
empirical  element  in  the  law  of  inertia.  According  to
Heymans  ( loc . cit .,  p.  438)  experience  simply  afforded
the  opportunity  for  applying  an  a priori  valid  prin-
ciple. Poske  thinks  that  the  empirical  origin  of  the
principle  does  not  exclude  its  a priori  validity  (Joe.
cit.,  pp.  401  and  402).  Petzoldt  also  deduces  the  law
of  inertia  in  part  only  from  experience,  and  regards  it
in  its  remaining  part  as  given  by  the  law  of  unique
determination.  I believe  I am  not  at  variance  with
Petzoldt  in  formulating  the  issue  here  at  stake  as  fol-
lows : It  first  devolves  on  experience  to  inform  us
what  particular  dependence  of  phenomena  on  one  an-
other actually  exists,  what  the  thing  to  be  determined
is, — and  experience  alone  can  instruct  us  on  this
point.  If  we  are  convinced  that  we  have  been  suffi-
ciently instructed  in  this  regard,  then  when  adequate
data  are  at  hand  we  regard  it  as  unnecessary  to  keep
on  waiting  for  further  experiences  ; the  phenomenon
is  determined  for  us,  and  since  this  alone  is  determi-
nation, it  is  uniquely  determined.  In  other  words,  if
I have  discovered  by  experience  that  bodies  determine
accelerations  in  one  another,  then  in  all  circumstances
where  such  determinative  bodies  are  lacking  I shall
expect  with  unique  determination  uniform  motion  in
a straight  line.  The  law  of  inertia  thus  results  imme-
diately in  all  its  generality,  without  our  being  obliged
to  specialise  with  Petzoldt;  for  every  deviation  from
uniformity  and  rectilinearity  takes  acceleration  for
granted.  I believe  I am  right  in  saying  that  the  same
fact  is  twice  formulated  in  the  law  of  inertia  and  in


APPENDIX .


563


the  statement  that  forces  determine  accelerations  (p.
143).  If  this  be  granted,  then  an  end  is  also  put  to
the  discussion  as  to  whether  a vicious  circle  is  or  is
not  contained  in  the  application  of  the  law  of  inertia
(Poske,  Hofler).

My  inference  as  to  the  probable  manner  in  which
Galileo  reached  clearness  regarding  the  law  of  inertia
was  drawn  from  a passage  in  his  third  Dialogue,*
which  was  literally  transcribed  from  the  Paduan  edi-
tion of  1744,  Vol.  III.,  page  124,  in  my  tract  on  The
Conservation  of  Energy  (Eng.  Trans.,  in  part,  in  my
Topular  Scientific  Lectures , third  edition,  Chicago,
The  Open  Court  Publishing  Co.).  Conceiving  a body
which  is  rolling  down  an  inclined  plane  to  be  con-
ducted upon  rising  inclined  planes  of  varying  slopes,
the  slight  retardation  which  it  suffers  on  absolutely
smooth  rising  planes  of  small  inclination,  and  the  re-
tardation zero,  or  unending  uniform  motion  on  a hori-
zontal plane,  must  have  occurred  to  him.  Wohlwill
was  the  first  to  object  to  this  -way  of  looking  at  the
matter  (see  page  524),  and  others  have  since  joined

Constat  jam,  quod  mobile  ex  quiete  in  A deseendens  per  AB,  gradna
acquirit  velocitatis  juxta  temporis  ipsius  incrementum  : grad  uni  vero  In  B
esse  maximum  acquisitornm,  et  suapte  natura  immntabil  tor  improssum,
sublatis  scilicet  causis  accelerationis  novae,  aut  retardationis  : accelerations


Fig.  241.

inquam,  si  adhuc  super  extenso  piano  ulterms  progrederetur  ; retardation^
vero,  dum  super  planum  acclive  BC  fit  rellexio  : in  horizontal!  autem  <;//
nequabilis  motus  juxta  gradual  velocitatis  ex  A in  B acquis  itac  in  infinitum
extenderetur/’

*’  It  is  plain  now  that  a movable  body,  starting  from  rest  at  A and  do-


5^4


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


him.  He  asserts  that  uniform  motion  in  a circle  and
horizontal  motion  still  occupied  distinct  places  in  Ga-
lileo’s thought,  and  that  Galileo  started  from  the  an-
cient concepts  and  freed  himself  only  very  gradual^
from  them.  It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  different
phases  in  the  intellectual  development  of  the  great  in-
quirers have  much  interest  for  the  historian,  and  sotnc
one  phase  may,  in  its  importance  in  this  respect,  be
relegated  into  the  background  by  the  others.  One
must  needs  be  a poor  psychologist  and  have  little
knowledge  of  oneself  not  to  know  how  difficult  it  is
to  liberate  oneself  from  traditional  views,  and  how
even  after  that  is  done  the  remnants  of  the  old  ideas
still  hover  in  consciousness  and  are  the  cause  of  occa-
sional backslidings  even  after  the  victory  has  been
practically  won.  Galileo’s  experience  cannot  have
been  different.  But  with  the  physicist  it  is  the  in-
stant in  which  a new  view  flashes  forth  that  is  of
greatest  interest,  and  it  is  this  instant  for  which  he
will  always  seek.  I have  sought  for  it,  I believe  I
have  found  it ; and  I am  of  the  opinion  that  it  left  its
unmistakable  traces  in  the  passage  in  question.  Poske
{loc.  cit . , page  393)  and  Hofler  (Joc~  cit.y  pages  in,

1 1 2)  are  unable  to  give  their  assent  to  my  interpreta-
tion of  this  passage,  for  the  reason  that  Galileo  does
not  expressly  refer  to  the  limiting  case  of  transition
from  the  inclined  to  the  horizontal  plane  ; although


scending  down  the  inclined  plane  AB,  acquires  a velocity  proportional  to
the  increment  of  its  time  : the  velocity  possessed  at  B is  the  greatest  of  the
velocities  acquired,  and  by  its  nature  immutably  impressed,  provided  all
causes  of  new  acceleration  or  retardation  are  taken  away : I say  accelera-
tion, having  in  view  its  possible  further  progress  along  the  plane  extended  ;
retardation,  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  its  being  reversed  and  made  to
mount  the  ascending  plane  BC . But  in  the  horizontal  plane  GH  its  uniform
motion,  with  the  'lelocity  acquired  in  the  descent  from  A to  Bt  will  be  con-
tinued ad  infi »*  4 urn  ‘


APPENDIX .


5^5


Poske  grants  that  the  consideration  of  limiting  cases
was  frequently  employed  by  Galileo,  and  although
Hofler  admits  having  actually  tested  the  educational
efficacy  of  this  device  with  students.  It  would  indeed
be  a matter  of  surprise  if  Galileo,  who  may  be  re-
garded as  the  inventor  of  the  principle  of  continuity,
should  not  in  his  long  intellectual  career  have  applied
the  principle  to  this  most  important  case  of  all  for
him.  It  is  also  to  be  considered  that  the  passage
does  not  form  part  of  the  broad  and  general  discus-
sions of  the  Italian  dialogue,  but  is  tersely  couched,  in
the  dogmatic  form  of  a result,  in  Latin.  And  in  this
way  also  the  “velocity  immutably  impressed  ” may
have  crept  in.  *

♦Even  granting  that  Galileo  reached  his  knowledge  of  the  law  of  inertia
only  gradually,  and  that  it  was  presented  to  him  merely  as  an  accidental  dis-
covery, nevertheless  the  following  passages  which  arc  taken  from  the  Paduan
edition  of  1744  will  show  that  his  limitation  of  the  law  to  horizontal  mothm
was  justified  by  the  inherent  nature  of  the  subject  treated  ; and  the  assump-
tion that  Galileo  toward  the  end  of  liis  scientific  career  did  not  possess  a full
knowledge  of  the  law,  can  hardly  he  maintained.

“ Sagr.  Ma  quaudo  1 ’artigjieria  si  piamasse  non  a perpendicolo,  mil  in-
clinata  verso  qualche  parte,  qual  dovrebbe  esser’  il  mote  della  pa'la  ? and-
rebbe  ella  forse,  come  nel  1'altro  tiro,  x>er  la  linea  porpendicoliire,  e ritor-
nando  anco  poi  per  l’istessa  ? ”

“Simpl.  Questo  non  farebbe  ella,  ma  uscita  del  pezzo  segmtorehbe  il
suo  moto  per  la  linea  retta,  rhe  eontinua  la  dirittnra  della  cimmi,  se  non  in
quanto  il  propria  peso  la  farebbe  declinar  da  tal  dirittnra  verso  ten  a,’*

“Sagr.  Talche  la  dirittura  della  canna  ft  la  regolatrico  del  nmto  della
palla:  nb  fuori  di  tal  linea  si  jnuove,  o muoverebbe,  so  ’1  peso  proprin  non
la  facesse  delinare  in  gift.  . . — Dialogs  sojfrra  £ duo  t)tuss£ut£  si'stomi  dot

man  do,

“ Sagr.  But  if  the  gun  were  not  placed  in  the  perpendicular,  but  were  in-
clined in  some  direction;  what  then  would  he  the  motion  of  tin*  hall  ? Would
it  follow,  perhaps,  as  in  the  other  case,  the  perpendicular,  and  in  returning
fall  also  by  the  same  lire,  ? “

“ Simpl.  This  it  will  not  do,  but  having  left  the  cannon  it  will  follow  its
own  motion  in  the  straight  line  which  is  a continuation  of  tlm  axis  of  the
barrel,  save  in  so  far  as  its  own  weight  shall  cause  it  to  deviate  from  that
direction  toward  the  earth.”

“ Sagr.  So  that  the  axis  of  the  barrel  is  the  regulator  of  the  motion  of  the
hall:  and  it  neither  does  nor  will  move  outside  of  that  line  unless,  its  own
weight  causes  it  to  drop  downwards,  . . A


566


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


The  physical  instruction  which  I enjoyed  was  in
all  probability  just  as  bad  and  just  as  dogmatic  as  it
was  the  fortune  of  my  older  critics  and  colleagues  to
enjoy.  The  principle  of  inertia  was  then  enunciated
as  a dogma  which  accorded  perfectly  with  the  system.
I could  understand  very  well  that  disregard  of  all  ob-
stacles to  motion  led  to  the  principle,  or  that  it  must
be  discovered,  as  Appelt  says,  by  abstraction  ; never-
theless, it  always  remained  remote  and  within  the
comprehension  of  supernatural  genius  only.  And
where  was  the  guarantee  that  with  the  removal  of  all
obstacles  the  diminution  of  the  velocity  also  ceased?
Poske  ( loc . cit p.  395)  is  of  the  opinion  that  Galileo,
to  use  a phrase  which  I have  repeatedly  employed,
“ disc erned”  or  “perceived”  the  principle  immediately.
But  what  is  this  discerning?  Enquiring  man  looks
here  and  looks  there,  and  suddenly  catches  a glimpse
of  something  he  has  been  seeking  or  even  of  some-
thing quite  unexpected,  that  rivets  his  attention.
Now,  I have  shown  how  this  “ discerning  ” came
about  and  in  what  it  consisted.  Galileo  runs  his  eye
over  several  different  uniformly  retarded  motions,  and
suddenly  picks  out  from  among  them  a uniform,  in-


“Attendere  insuper  licet,  quod  velocitatis  gradus,  quicunque  in  mobili
reperiatur,  est  in  illo  suapte  natura  indelebiliter  irnpressus,  dam  externae
causae  acceleration^,  aut  retardationis  tollantur,  quod  in  solo  horizontal!
piano  contingit : nam  in  planis  declivibus  adest  jam  causa  accelerationis
majoris,  in  acclivibus  vero  retardationis.  Ex  quo  pariter  sequitur,  motum  in
horizontali  esse  quoque  aeternum : si  enim  est  aequabilis,  non  debiliatur,
aut  remittitur,  et  multo  minus  tollitur.” — Discorsi  e dimastrazioni  matcma-
tiche.  Dictlogo  terzo.

“ Moreover,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  degree  of  velocity  a body  has  is
indestructibly  impressed  in  it  by  its  own  nature,  provided  external  causes  of
acceleration  or  retardation  are  wanting,— which  happens  only  on  horizontal
planes:  for  on  descending  planes  there  is  greater  acceleration,  and  on  as-
cending planes  retardation.  Whence  it  follows  that  motion  in  a horizontal
plane  is  perpetual : for  if  it  remains  the  same,  it  is  not  diminished,  or
abated,  much  less  abolished.”


APPENDIX :


567


finitely  continued  motion,  of  so  peculiar  a character
that  if  it  occurred  by  itself  alone  it  would  certainly
be  regarded  as  something  altogether  different  in  kind.
But  a very  minute  variation  of  the  inclination  trans-
forms this  motion  into  a finite  retarded  motion,  such
as  we  have  frequently  met  with  in  our  lives.  And
now,  no  more  difficulty  is  experienced  in  recognising
the  identity  between  all  obstacles  to  motion  and  re-
tardation by  gravity, — wherewith  the  ideal  type  of  un-
influenced, infinite,  uniform  motion  is  gained.  As  I
read  this  passage  of  Galileo’s  while  still  a young  man,
a new  light  concerning  the  necessity  of  this  ideal  link
in  our  mechanics,  entirely  different  from  that  of  the
dogmatic  exposition,  flashed  upon  me.  I believe  that
every  one  will  have  the  same  experience  who  will  ap-
proach this  passage  without  prior  bias.  I have  not
the  least  doubt  that  Galileo  above  all  others  experi-
enced that  light.  May  my  critics  see  to  it  how  their
assent  also  is  to  be  avoided.

I have  now  another  important  point  to  discuss  in
opposition  to  C.  Neumann,*  whose  well-known  publi-
cation on  this  topic  preceded  minef  shortly.  I con-
tended that  the  direction  and  velocity  which  is  taken
into  account  in  the  law  of  inertia  had  no  comprehen-
sible meaning  if  the  law  was  referred  to  “absolute
space.”  As  a matter  of  fact,  we  can  metrically  deter-
mine direction  and  velocity  only  in  a space  of  which
the  points  are  marked  directly  or  indirectly  by  given
bodies.  Neumann's  treatise  and  my  own  were  suc-
cessful in  directing  attention  anew  to  this  point,  which


*D£e  Principle  n der  Galilvi-Ne'wtoti 'schen  Thcorie,  Leipzig,  1870.

* Erhaltung  der  Arbeit,  Prague,  187a.  (Translated  m part  in  the  article
on  “The  Conservation  of  Energy,”  Popular  Scientific  Lectures,  third  edition,
Chicago,  1898.


568


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


had  already  caused  Newton  and  Euler  much  intellec-
tual discomfort;  yet  nothing  more  than  partial  at-
tempts at  solution,  like  that  of  Streintz,  have  resulted.
I have  remained  to  the  present  day  the  only  one  who
insists  upon -referring  the  law  of  inertia  to  the  earth,
and  in  the  case  of  motions  of  great  spatial  and  tempo-
ral extent,  to  the  fixed  stars.  Any  prospect  of  com-
ing to  an  understanding  with  the  great  number  of  my
critics  is,  in  consideration  of  the  profound  differences
of  our  points  of  view,  very  slight.  Hut  so  far  as  I
have  been  able  to  understand  the  criticisms  to  which
my  view  has  been  subjected,  I shall  endeavor  to  an-
swer them.

Hofler  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  existence  of  “ab-
solute motion”  is  denied,  because  it  is  held  to  be
“inconceivable.”  But  it  is  a fact  of  “more  painstak-
ing self-observation”  that  conceptions  of  absolute
motion  do  exist.  Conceivability  and  knowledge  of
absolute  motion  are  not  to  be  confounded.  Only  the
latter  is  wanting  here  (Joe.  cit . , pages  120,  164).  . . .
Now,  it  is  precisely  with  knowledge  that  the  natural
inquirer  is  concerned.  A thing  that  is  beyond  the
ken  of  knowledge,  a thing  that  cannot  be  exhibited  to
the  senses,  has  no  meaning  in  natural  science.  I have
not  the  remotest  desire  of  setting  limits  to  the  imagi-
nation of  men,  but  I have  a faint  suspicion  that  the
persons  who  imagine  they  have  conceptions  of  “ab-
solute motions,”  in  the  majority  of  cases  have  in  mind
the  memory  pictures  of  some  actually  experienced
relative  motion;  but  let  that  be  as  it  may,  for  it  is  in
any  event  of  no  consequence.  I maintain  even  more
than  Hofler,  viz.,  that  there  exist  sensory  illusions  of
absolute  motions,  which  can  subsequently  be  repro-
duced at  any  time.  Every  one  that  has  repeated  my


.U'l'EXU/X*


5&9


experiments  on  the  sensations  of  movement  has  ex-
perience d the  full  sensory  power  of  such  illusions.
One  imagines  one  is  flying  off  with  one’s  entire  en-
vironment, which  remains  at  relative  rest  with  respect
to  the  body;  or  that  one  is  rotating  in  a space  that  is
distinguished  by  nothing  that  is  tangible.  But  no
measure  can  be  applied  to  this  space  of  illusion  ; its
existence  cannot  be  proved  to  another  person,  and  it
cannot  be  employed  for  the  metrical  and  conceptual
description  of  the  facts  of  mechanics;  it  has  nothing
to  do  with  the  space  of  geometr}^*  Finally,  when
Hofler  ( loc . cit p.  133)  brings  forward  the  argument
that  4 4 in  every  relative  motion  one  at  least  of  the
bodies  moving  with  reference  to  each  other  must  be
affected  with  absolute  motion,” — lean  only  say  that
for  the  person  who  considers  absolute  motion  as  mean-
ingless in  physics,  this  argument  has  no  force  what-
ever. But  I have  no  further  concern  here  with  philo-
sophical questions.  To  go  into  details  as  Hofler  has
in  some  places  {loc.  cit.,  pp.  124-126)  would  serve
no  purpose  before  an  understanding  had  been  reached
on  the  main  question.

Hey  mans  {loc.  cit.,  pp.  412,  448)  remarks  that  an
inductive,  empirical  mechanics  could  have  arisen,  but
that  as  a matter  of  fact  a different  mechanics,  based
on  the  non-empirical  concept  of  absolute  motion,  has
arisen.  The  fact  that  the  principle  of  inertia  has
always  been  suffered  to  hold  for  absolute  motion
which  is  nowhere  demonstrable,  instead  of  being  re-


*1  flatter  myself  on  being  able  to  resist  the  temptation  to  infuse  lightness
into  a serious  discussion  by  showing  its  ridiculous  side,  but  in  reflecting  on
these  problems  I was  involuntarily  forced  to  think  of  the  question  which  a
very  estimable  but  eccentric  man  once  debated  with  me  as  to  whether  a yard
of  cloth  in  one’s  dreams  is  as  long  as  a real  yard  of  cloth.  - Is  the  dream- yard
to  be  really  introduced  into  mechanics  as  a standard  of  measurement  ?


57°


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


garded  as  holding  good  for  motion  with  respect  to
some  actually  demonstrable  system  of  co-ordinates,  is
a problem  which  is  almost  beyond  power  of  solution
by  the  empirical  theory.  Heymans  regards  this  as  a
problem  that  can  have  a metaphysical  solution  only.
In  this  I cannot  agree  with  Heymans.  He  admits
that  relative  motions  only  are  given  in  experience.
With  this  admission,  as  with  that  of  the  possibility  of
an  empirical  mechanics,  I am  perfectly  content.  The
rest,  I believe,  can  be  explained  simply  and  without
the  aid  of  metaphysics.  The  first  dynamic  principles
were  unquestionably  built  up  on  empirical  founda-
tions. The  earth  was  the  body  of  reference ; the  tran-
sition to  the  other  co-ordinate  systems  took  place
very  gradually.  Huygens  saw  that  he  could  refer  the
motion  of  impinging  bodies  just  as  easily  to  a boat  on
which  they  were  placed,  as  to  the  earth.  The  devel-
opment of  astronomy  preceded  that  of  mechanics  con-
siderably. When  motions  were  observed  that  were
at  variance  with  known  mechanical  laws  when  re-
ferred to  the  earth,  it  was  not  necessary  immediately
to  abandon  these  laws  again.  The  fixed  stars  were
present  and  ready  to  restore  harmony  as  a new  sys-
tem of  reference  with  the  least  amount  of  changes  in
the  concepts.  Think  only  of  the  oddities  and  difficul-
ties which  would  have  resulted  if  in  a period  of  great
mechanical  and  physical  advancement  the  Ptolemaic
system  had  been  still  in  vogue, — a thing  not  at  all  in-
conceivable.

But  Newton  referred  all  of  mechanics  to  absolute
space!  Newton  is  indeed  a gigantic  personality;  little
worship  of  authority  is  needed  to  succumb  to  his  in-
fluence. Yet  even  his  achievements  are  not  exempt
from  criticism.  It  appears  to  be  pretty  much  one  and


APPENDIX.


57*


the  same  thing  whether  we  refer  the  laws  of  motion  to
absolute  space,  or  enunciate  them  in  a perfectly  ab-
stract form  j.that  is  to  say,  without  specific  mention
of  any  system  of  reference.  The  latter  course  is  un
precarious  and  even  practical;  for  in  treating  special
cases  every  student  of  mechanics  looks  for  some  ser
viceable  system  of  reference.  But  owing  to  the  fact
that  the  first  course,  wherever  there  was  any  real
issue  at  stake,  was  nearly  always  interpreted  as  having
the  same  meaning  as  the  latter,  Newton’s  error  was
fraught  with  much  less  danger  than  it  would  other-
wise have  been,  and  has  for  that  reason  maintained
itself  so  long.  It  is  psychologically  and  historically
intelligible  that  in  an  age  deficient  in  epistemological
critique  empirical  laws  should  at  times  have  been
elaborated  to  a point  where  they  had  no  meaning.  It
cannot  therefore  be  deemed  advisable  to  make  meta-
physical problems  out  of  the  errors  and  oversights  of
our  scientific  forefathers,  but  it  is  rather  our  duty  to
correct  them,  be  they  small  people  or  great.  I would
not  be  understood  as  saying  that  this  has  never  hap-
pened.

Petzoldt  ( loc . cit .,  pp.  192  et  seq. ),  who  is  in  ac-
cord with  me  in  my  rejection  of  absolute  motion,  ap-
peals to  a principle  of  Avenarius,*  by  a consideration
of  which  he  proposes  to  remove  the  difficulties  in-
volved in  the  problem  of  relative  motion.  I am  per-
fectly familiar  with  the  principle  of  Avenarius,  but  I
cannot  understand  how  all  the  physical  difficulties  in-
volved in  the  present  problem  can  be  avoided  by  re-
ferring motions  to  one’s  own  body.  On  the  contrary,
in  considering  physical  dependencies  abstraction  must


*Dcr  menschliche  Wvltbrgr?JI,  Leipzig,  1891,  p.  130.


572


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


be  made  from  one’s  own  body,  so  far  as  it  exercises
any  influence.*

The  most  captivating  reasons  for  the  assumption
of  absolute  motion  were  given  thirty  years  ago  by  C.
Neumann  ( loc . cit p.  27).  If  a heavenly  body  be
conceived  rotating  about  its  axis  and  consequently
subject  to  centrifugal  forces  and  therefore  oblate,
nothing,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  can  possibly  be
altered  in  its  condition  by  the  removal  of  all  the  re-
maining heavenly  bodies.  The  body  in  question  will
continue  to  rotate  and  will  continue  to  remain  oblate.
But  if  the  motion  be  relative  only,  then  the  case  of
rotation  will  not  be  distinguishable  from  that  of  rest.
All  the  parts  of  the  heavenly  body  are  at  rest  with  re-
spect to  one  another,  and  the  oblateness  would  neces-
sarily also  disappear  with  the  disappearance  of  the
rest  of  the  universe.  I have  two  objections  to  make
here.  Nothing  appears  to  me  to  be  gained  by  making
a meaningless  assumption  for  the  purpose  of  eliminat-
ing a contradiction.  Secondly,  the  celebrated  mathe-
matician appears  to  me  to  have  made  here  too  free  a
use  of  intellectual  experiment,  the  fruitfulness  and
value  of  which  cannot  be  denied.  When  experiment-
r.g  in  thought,  it  is  permissible  to  modify  unimportant
circumstances  in  order  to  bring  out  new  features  in  a
given  case ; but  it  is  not  to  be  antecedently  assumed
that  the  universe  is  without  influence  on  the  phenom-
enon here  in  question.  If  it  is  eliminated  and  contra-
dictions still  result,  certainly  this  speaks  in  favor  of
the  importance  of  relative  motion,  which;  if  it  involves
difficulties,  is  at  least  free  from  contradictions.


* Analyse  der  Ent£/indjtng-en , zweite  Auflage,  Jena,  igoo,  pp,  xr,  12  33,  38,
208;  English  translation,  Chicago,  The  Open  Court  Pub.  Co.,  1897,  pp.  13  et
seq.


APPENDIX.


573


Volkmann  (loc.  cit . , p.  53)  advocates  an  absolute
orientation  by  means  of  the  ether.  I have  already
spoken  on  this  point  (comp.  pp.  230,  547),  but  I am
extremely  curious  to  know  how  one  ether  particle  is  to
be  distinguished  from  another.  Until  some  means  of
distinguishing  these  particles  is  found,  it  will  be  pref-
erable to  abide  by  the  fixed  stars,  and  where  these
forsake  us  to  confess  that  the  true  means  of  orienta-
tion is  still  to  be  found.

Taking  everything  together,  I can  only  say  that  I
cannot  well  see  what  is  to  be  altered  in  my  exposi-
tions The  various  points  stand  in  necessary  connex-
ion. After  it  has  been  discovered  that  the  behavior
of  bodies  toward  one  another  is  one  in  which  acceler-
ations are  determined, — a discovery  which  was  twice
formulated  by  Galileo  and  Newton,  once  in  a general
and  again  in  a special  form  as  a law  of  inertia, — it  is
possible  to  give  only  one  rational  definition  of  mass,
and  that  a purely  dynamical  definition.  It  is  not  at
all,  in  my  judgment,  a matter  of  taste.*  The  concept
of  force  and  the  principle  of  action  and  reaction  fol-
low of  themselves.  And  the  elimination  of  absolute
motion  is  equivalent  to  the  elimination  of  what  is
physically  meaningless.

It  would  be  not  only  taking  a very  subjective  and
short-sighted  view  of  science,  but  it  would  also  be
foolhardy  in  the  extreme,  were  I to  expect  that  my
views  in  their  precise  individual  form  should  be  in-
corporated without  opposition  into  the  intellectual
systems  of  my  contemporaries.  The  history  of  sci-
ence teaches  that  the  subjective,  scientific  philoso-


*My  definition  of  mass  takes  a more  organic  and  more  natural  place  i 1
Hertz’s  mechanics  than  his  own,  for  it  contains  implicitly  the  germ  of  his
“fundamental  law.”


574


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


phies  of  individuals  are  constantly  being  corrected
and  obscured,  and  in  the  philosophy  or  constructive
image  of  the  universe  which  humanity  gradually
adopts,  only  the  very  strongest  features  of  the
thoughts  of  the  greatest  men  are,  after  some  lapse  of
time,  recognisable.  It  is  merely  incumbent  on  the  in-
dividual to  outline  as  distinctly  as  possible  the  main
features  of  his  own  view  of  the  world.

XXIII.

(See  page  273.)

Although  signal  individual  performances  in  sci-
ence cannot  be  gainsaid  to  Descartes,  as  his  studies
on  the  rainbow  and  his  enunciation  of  the  law  of  re-
fraction show,  his  importance  nevertheless  is  con-
tained rather  In  the  great  general  and  revolutionary
ideas  which  he  promulgated  in  philosophy,  mathe-
matics, and  the  natural  sciences.  The  maxim  of
doubting  everything  that  has  hitherto  passed  ior  es-
tablished truth  cannot  be  rated  too  high  ; although  it
was  more  observed  and  exploited  by  his  followers
than  by  himself.  Analytical  geometry  with  Its  mod-
ern methods  is  the  outcome  of  his  idea  to  dispense
with  the  consideration  of  all  the  details  of  geometrical
figures  by  the  application  of  algebra,  and  to  reduce
everything  to  the  consideration  of  distances.  He  was
a pronounced  enemy  of  occult  qualities  in  physics,
and  strove  to  base  all  physics  on  mechanics,  which
he  conceived  as  a pure  geometry  of  motion.  He  has
shown  by  his  experiments  that  he  regarded  no  physi-
cal problem  as  insoluble  by  this  method.  He  took
too  little  note  of  the  fact  that  mechanics  Is  possible
only  on  the  condition  that  the  positions  of  the  bodies
are  determined  In  their  dependence  on  one  another  by


APPENDIX ;


575


a relation  of  force,  by  a function  of  time;  and  Leibnitz
frequently  referred  to  this  deficiency.  The  mechani-
cal concepts  which  Descartes  developed  with  scanty
and  vague  materials  could  not  possibly  pass  as  copies
of  nature,  and  were  pronounced  to  be  phantasies  even
by  Pascal,  Huygens,  and  Leibnitz.  It  has  been  re-
marked, however,  in  a former  place,  how  strongly
Descartes’s  ideas,  in  spite  of  these  facts,  have  per-
sisted to  the  present  day.  He  also  exercises  a power-
ful influence  upon  physiology  by  his  theory  of  vision,
and  by  his  contention  that  animals  were  machines, —
a theory  which  he  naturally  had  not  the  courage  to
extend  to  human  beings,  but  by  which  he  anticipated
the  idea  of  reflex  motion  (compare  Duhem,  L'  Evolution
des  theories  physiques , Louvain,  1896).

XXIV.

(See  page  378.)

To  the  exposition  given  on  pages  377  and  378,  in
the  year  1883,  I have  the  following  remarks  to  add.
It  will  be  seen  that  the  principle  of  least  action,  like
all  other  minimum  principles  in  mechanics,  is  a sim-
ple expression  of  the  fact  that  in  the  instances  in
question  precisely  so  much  happens  as  possibly  can
happen  under  the  circumstances,  or  as  is  determined,
viz.,  uniquely  determined,  by  them.  The  deduction
of  cases  of  equilibrium  from  unique  determination  has
already  been  discussed,  and  the  same  question  will  be
considered  in  a later  place.  With  respect  to  dynamic
questions,  the  import  of  the  principle  of  unique  de-
termination has  been  better  and  more  perspicuously
elucidated  than  in  my  case  by  J.  Petzoldt  in  a work
entitled  Maxima , Minima  und  Oekonomie  (Altenburg,
1891).  He  says  (loc.  cit .,  page  u):  “In  the  case  of


576  7 HE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

all  motions,  the  paths  actually  traversed  admit  of  be-
ing interpreted  as  signal  instances  chosen  from  an  in-
finite number  of  conceivable  instances.  Analytically,
this  has  no  other  meaning  than  that  expressions  may
always  be  found  which  yield  the  differential  equations
of  the  motion  when  their  variation  is  equated  to  zero,
—for  the  variation  vanishes  only  when  the  integral
assumes  a unique  value. ”

As  a fact,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  the  instances
treated  at  pages  377  and  378  an  increment  of  velocity
is  uniquely  determined  only  in  the  direction  of  the
force,  while  an  infinite  number  of  equally  legitimate
incremental  components  of  velocity  at  right  angles  to
the  force  are  conceivable,  which  are,  however,  for  the
reason  given,  excluded  by  the  principle  of  unique  de-
termination. I am  in  entire  accord  with  Petzoldt
when  he  says  : “ The  theorems  of  Euler  and  Hamilton,
and  not  less  that  of  Gauss,  are  thus  nothing  more
than  analytic  expressions  for  the  fact  of  experience
that  the  phenomena  of  nature  are  uniquely  deter-
mined.” The  uniqueness  of  the  minimum  is  determi-
native.

I should  like  to  quote  here,  from  a note  which  I
published  in  the  November  number  of  the  Prague
Lotos  for  1873,  the  following  passage:  “The  static
and  dynamical  principles  of  mechanics  may  be  ex-
pressed as  isoperimetrical  laws.  The  anthropomor-
phic conception  is,  however,  by  no  means  essential,
as  may  be  seen,  for  example,  in  the  principle  of  vir-
tual velocities.  If  we  have  once  perceived  that  the
work  A determines  velocity,  it  will  readily  be  seen
that  where  work  is  not  done  when  the  system  passes
into  all  adjacent  positions,  no  velocity  can  be  ac-
quired, and  consequently  that  equilibrium  obtains.


APPENDIX.


577


The  condition  of  equilibrium  will  therefore  be  8A  — 0;
where  A need  not  necessarily  be  exactly  a maximum
or  minimum-  These  laws  are  not  absolutely  restricted
to  mechanics;  they  may  be  of  very  general  scope.
If  the  change  in  the  form  of  a phenomenon  B be  de-
pendent on  a phenomenon  A , the  condition  that  JB
shall  pass  over  into  a certain  form  will  be  SA  = 0.  ”

As  will  be  seen,  I grant  in  the  foregoing  passage
that  it  is  possible  to  discover  analogies  for  the  prin-
ciple of  least  action  in  the  most  various  departments
of  physics  without  reaching  them  through  the  circuit-
ous course  of  mechanics.  I look  upon  mechanics,  not
as  the  ultimate  explanatory  foundation  of  all  the  other
provinces,  but  rather,  owing  to  its  superior  formal
development,  as  an  admirable  prototype  of  such  an
explanation.  In  this  respect,  my  view  differs  appar-
ently little  from  that  of  the  majority  of  physicists,  but
the  difference  is  an  essential  one  after  all.  In  further
elucidation  of  my  meaning,  I should  like  to  refer  to
the  discussions  which  I have  given  in  my  Principles
of  Meat  (particularly  pages  192,  318,  and  356,  German
edition),  and  also  to  my  article  “ On  Comparison  in
Physics”  (. Popular  Scientific  Lectures , English  trans-
lation, page  236).  Noteworthy  articles  touching  on
this  point  are:  C.  Neumann,  “Das  Ostwald*sche
Axiom  des  Energieumsatzes  ” ( Berickte  dcr  k.  sacks .
Gese/lsckaft,  1892,  p.  184),  and  Ostwald,  “Ueber  das
Princip  des  ausgezeichneten  Fades”  foe.  cit 1893,
p.  600).


XXV.

(See  page  480.)

The  A usdehnungs Ichre  of  1 844,  in  which  Grassmann
expounded  his  ideas  for  the  first  time,  is  in  many  re-


578  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .

spects  remarkable.  The  introduction  to  it  contains
epistemological  remarks  of  value.  The  theory  of  spa-
tial extension  is  here  developed  as  a general  science,
of  which  geometry  is  a special  tri-dimensional  case  ;
and  the  opportunity  is  taken  on  this  occasion  of  sub-
mitting the  foundations  of  geometry  to  a rigorous  cri-
tique. The  new  and  fruitful  concepts  of  the  addition
of  line-segments,  multiplication  of  line-segments,  etc.,
have  also  proved  to  be  applicable  in  mechanics.
Grassmann  likewise  submits  the  Newtonian  principles
to  criticism,  and  believes  he  is  able  to  enunciate  them
in  a single  expression  as  follows:  “The  total  force
(or  total  motion)  which  is  inherent  in  an  aggregate  of
material  particles  at  any  one  time  is  the  sum  of  the
total  force  (or  total  motion)  which  has  inhered  in  it
at  any  former  time,  and  all  the  forces  that  have  been
imparted  to  it  from  without  in  the  intervening  time;
provided  all  forces  be  conceived  as  line-segments
constant  in  direction  and  in  length,  and  be  referred
to  points  which  have  equal  masses.”  By  force  Grass-
mann understands  here  the  indestructibly  impressed
velocity.  The  entire  conception  is  much  akin  to  that
of  Hertz.  The  forces  (velocities)  are  represented  as
line-segments,  the  moments  as  surfaces  enumerated
in  definite  directions,  etc., — a device  by  means  of
which  every  development  takes  a very  concise  and
perspicuous  form.  But  Grassmann  finds  the  main
advantage  of  his  procedure  in  the  fact  that  every  step
in  the  calculation  is  at  the  same  time  the  clear  ex-
pression of  every  step  taken  in  the  thought;  whereas,
in  the  common  method,  the  latter  is  forced  entirely
into  the  background  by  the  introduction  of  three  arbi-
trary co-ordinates.  The  difference  between  the  ana-
lytic and  the  synthetic  method  is  again  done  away


APPENDIX.


579


with,  and  the  advantages  of  the  two  are  combined.
The  kindred  procedure  of  Hamilton,  which  has  been
illustrated  by  an  example  on  page  528,  will  give  some
idea  of  these  advantages.

xxvi.

(See  page  485.)

In  the  text  I have  employed  the  term  “ cause”  in
the  sense  in  which  it  is  ordinarily  used.  I may  add
that  with  Dr.  Carus,*  following  the  practice  of  the
German  philosophers,  I distingtiish  “ cause,  ” or  Jdeal-
grand,  from  JErkenntnissgrund . I also  agree  with  Dr.
Carus  in  the  statement  that  “the  signification  of  cause
and  effect  is  to  a great  extent  arbitrary  and  depends
rriuch  upon  the  proper  tact  of  the  observer. ” f

The  notion  of  cause  possesses  significance  only  as
a means  of  provisional  knowledge  or  orientation.  In
any  exact  and  profound  investigation  of  an  event  the
inquirer  must  regard  the  phenomena  as  dependent  on
one  another  in  the  same  way  that  the  geometer  regards
the  sides  and  angles  of  a triangle  as  dependent  on  one
another.  He  will  constantly  keep  before  his  mind,  in
this  way,  all  the  conditions  of  fact.

XXVII.

(See  page  494.)

My  conception  of  economy  of  thought  was  devel-
oped out  of  my  experience  as  a teacher,  out  of  the
work  of  practical  instruction.  I possessed  this  con-
ception as  early  as  1861,  when  I began  my  lectures
as  Privat-Docent,  and  at  the  time  believed  that  I was

* See  his  Grundy  Ursache  und  Zvueck,  R.  v.  Grnmbkow,  Dresden,  18H1,
and  his  Fundamental  Problems , pp.  79-91,  Chicago  : The  Open  Court  Publish-
ing Co.,  1891.

t Fundamental  Problems,  p.  84.


58o  THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.

in  exclusive  possession  of  the  principle, — a conviction
which  will,  I think,  be  found  pardonable.  I am  now,
on  the  contrary,  convinced  that  at  least  some  presenti-
ment of  this  idea  has  always,  and  necessarily  must
have,  been  a common  possession  of  all  inquirers  who
have  ever  made  the  nature  of  scientific  investigation
the  subject  of  their  thoughts.  The  expression  of  this
opinion  may  assume  the  most  diverse  forms;  for  ex-
ample, I should  most  certainly  characterise  the  guid-
ing theme  of  simplicity  and  beauty  which  so  distinctly
marks  the  work  of  Copernicus  and  Galileo,  not  only
as  aesthetical,  but  also  as  economical.  So,  too,  New-
ton’s Regulce  philo so phandi  are  substantially  influenced
by  economical  considerations,  although  the  economi-
cal principle  as  such  is  not  explicitly  mentioned.  In
an  interesting  article,  “An  Episode  in  the  History  of
Philosophy,”  published  in  The  Open  Cozirt  for  April
4,  1895,  Mr.  Thomas  J.  McCormack  has  shown  that
the  idea  of  the  economy  of  science  was  very  near  to
the  thought  of  Adam  Smith  {Essays').  In  recent  times
the  view  in  question  has  been  repeatedly  though  di-
versely expressed,  first  by  myself  in  my  lecture  Ueber
die  Rrhaltung  der  Arbeit  (1875),  then  by  Clifford  in
his  Lectures  and  Rssays  (1872),  by  Kirchhoff  in  his
Mechanics  (1874),  and  by  Avenarius  (1876).  To  an
oral  utterance  of  the  political  economist  A.  Herrmann
I have  already  made  reference  in  my  JSr ha  Hung  der
Arbeit  (p.  55,  note  5);  but  no  work  by  this  author
treating  especially  of  this  subject  is  known  to  me.

I should  also  like  to  make  reference  here  to  the
supplementary  expositions  given  in  my  Popular  Scien-
tific Lectures  (English  edition,  pages  186  et  seq.)  and
in  my  Principles  of  Heat  (German  edition,  page  294).
In  the  latter  work,  the  criticisms  of  Petzoldt  ( Viertel -


APPENDIX .


58i


jahrsschrift  fur  wissenschaftliche  Ph ilosoph ie,  1891)  are
considered.  Husserl,  in  the  first  part  of  his  work,
JLogische  Untersuchungen  (1900),  has  recently  made
some  new  animadversions  on  my  theory  of  mental
economy;  these  are  in  part  answered  in  my  reply  to
Petzoldt.  I believe  that  the  best  course  is  to  post-
pone an  exhaustive  reply  until  the  work  of  Husserl  is
completed,  and  then  see  whether  some  understanding
cannot  be  reached.  For  the  present,  however,  I
should  like  to  premise  certain  remarks.  As  a natural
inquirer,  I am  accustomed  to  begin  with  some  special
and  definite  inquiry,  and  allow  the  same  to  act  upon
me  in  all  its  phases,  and  to  ascend  from  the  special
aspects  to  more  general  points  of  view.  I followed
this  custom  also  in  the  investigation  of  the  develop-
ment of  physical  knowledge.  I was  obliged  to  pro-
ceed in  this  manner  for  the  reason  that  a theory  of
theory  was  too  difficult  a task  for  me,  being  doubly
difficult  in  a province  in  which  a minimum  of  indis-
putable, general,  and  independent  truths  from  which
everything  can  be  deduced  is  not  furnished  at  the
start,  but  must  first  be  sought  for.  An  undertaking
of  this  character  would  doubtless  have  more  prospect
of  being  successful  if  one  took  mathematics  as  one's
subject-matter.  I accordingly  directed  my  attention
to  individual  phenomena  : the  adaptation  of  ideas  to
facts,  the  adaptation  of  ideas  to  one  another,*  mental

* Popular  Scientific  Lectures , English  edition,  pp.  244  ct  seq.,  where  the
adaptation  of  thoughts  to  one  another  is  described  as  th©  object  of  theory
proper.  Grasstnann  appears  to  me  to  say  pretty  much  the  same  in  the  intro-
duction to  his  A usd  eh  n u ngsleh  re  of  1844,  page  xix:  “The  first  division  of  all
the  sciences  is  that  into  real  and  formal,  of  which  the  real  sciences  depict
reality  in  thought  as  something  independent  of  thought,  and  find  their  truth
in  the  agreement  of  thought  with  that  reality ; the  formal  sciences,  on  the
other  hand,  have  as  their  object  that  which  has  been  posited  by  thought
and  itself,  find  their  truth  in  the  agreement  of  the  mental  processes  with  one
another.  ”


582


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


economy,  comparison,  intellectual  experiment,  the
constancy  and  continuity  of  thought,  etc.  In  this  In-
quiry, I found  it  helpful  and  restraining  to  look  upon
every-day  thinking  and  science  In  general,  as  a bio-
logical and  organic  phenomenon,  in  which  logical
thinking  assumed  the  position  of  an  ideal  limiting
case.  I do  not  doubt  for  a moment  that  the  investi-
gation can  be  begun  at  both  ends.  I have  also  de-
scribed my  efforts  as  epistemological  sketches.*  It
may  be  seen  from  this  that  I am  perfectly  able  to  dis-
tinguish between  psychological  and  logical  questions,
as  I believe  every  one  else  is  who  has  ever  felt  the
necessity  of  examining  logical  processes  from  the
psychological  side.  But  it  is  doubtful  if  anyone  who
has  carefully  read  even  so  much  as  the  logical  analysis
of  Newton’s  enunciations  in  my  Mechanics , will  have
the  temerity  to  say  that  I have  endeavored  to  erase
all  distinctions  between  the  “blind”  natural  thinking
of  every-day  life  and  logical  thinking.  Even  if  the
logical  analysis  of  all  the  sciences  were  complete,  the
biologico-psychological  investigation  of  their  develop-
ment would  continue  to  remain  a necessity  for  me, —
which  would  not  exclude  our  making  a new  logical
analysis  of  this  last  investigation.  If  my  theory  of
mental  economy  be  conceived  merely  as  a teleological
and  provisional  theme  for  guidance,  such  a concep-
tion does  not  exclude  its  being  based  on  deeper  foun-
dations, but  goes  toward  making  it  so.  Mental  econ-
omy is,  however,  quite  apart  from  this,  a very  clear
logical  ideal  which  retains  its  value  even  after  Its  logi-
cal analysis  has  been  completed.  The  systematic
form  of  a science  can  be  deduced  from  the  same  prin-

* Principles  of  Heat,  Preface  to  the  first  German  edition.

t Analysis  of  the  Sensations , second  German  edition,  pages  64-65.


APPENDIX .


583


ciples  in  many  different  manners,  but  some  one  of
these  deductions  will  answer  to  the  principle  of  econ-
omy better  than  the  rest,  as  I have  shown  in  the  case
of  Gauss’s  dioptrics.*  So  far  as  I can  now  see,  I do
not  think  that  the  investigations  of  Husserl  have
.affected  the  results  of  my  inquiries.  As  for  the  rest,
I must  wait  until  the  remainder  of  his  work  is  pub-
lished, for  which  I sincerely  wish  him  the  best  suc-
cess.

When  I discovered  that  the  idea  of  mental  econ-
omy had  been  so  frequently  emphasised  before  and
after  my  enunciation  of  it,  my  estimation  of  my  per-
sonal achievement  was  necessarily  lowered,  but  the
idea  itself  appeared  to  me  rather  to  gain  in  value  on
this  account;  and  what  appears  to  Husserl  as  a de-
gradation of  scientific  thought,  the  association  of  it
with  vulgar  or  “blind”  (?)  thinking,  seemed  to  me  to
be  precisely  an  exaltation  of  it.  It  has  outgrown  the
scholar’s  study,  being  deeply  rooted  in  the  life  of  hu-
manity and  reacting  powerfully  upon  it.

xxvin.

(See  page  497-)

The  paragraph  on  page  497,  which  was  written  in
1883,  met  with  little  response  from  the  majority  of
physicists,  but  it  will  be  noticed  that  physical  exposi-
tions have  since  then  closely  approached  to  the  ideal
there  indicated.  Hertz’s  “Investigations  on  the  Prop-
agation of  Electric  Force”  (1892)  affords  a good  in-
stance of  this  description  of  phenomena  by  simple
differential  equations.


Principles  of  Heat^  German  edition,  page  394,


5^4


THE  SCIENCE  OE  MECHANICS.


XXIX.

(See  page  501.)

In  Germany,  Mayer’s  works  at  first  met  with  a very
cool,  and  in  part  hostile,  reception  ; even  difficulties
of  publication  were  encountered;  but  in  England
they  found  more  speedy  recognition.  After  they  had
been  almost  forgotten  there,  amid  the  wealth  of  new
facts  being  brought  to  light,  attention  was  again
called  to  them  by  the  lavish  praise  of  Tyndall  in  his
book  Heat  a Mode  of  Motion  (1863).  The  consequence
of  this  was  a pronounced  reaction  in  Germany,  which
reached  its  culminating  point  in  Diihring’s  work  Robert
Mayer , the  Galileo  of  the  nineteenth  Century  (1878).  It
almost  appeared  as  if  the  injustice  that  had  been
done  to  Mayer  was  now  to  be  atoned  for  by  injustice
towards  others.  But  as  in  criminal  law,  so  here,  the
sum  of  the  injustice  is  only  increased  in  this  way,  for
no  algebraic  cancelation  takes  place.  An  enthusiastic
and  thoroughly  satisfactory  estimate  of  Mayer’s  per-
formances was  given  by  Popper  in  an  article  in  Aus-
land  (1876,  No.  35),  which  is  also  very  readable  from
the  many  interesting  epistemological  apergus  that  it
contains.  I have  endeavored  ( Principles  of  Heat}  to
give  a thoroughly  just  and  sober  presentation  of  the
achievements  of  the  different  inquirers  in  the  domain
of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat.  It  appears  from
this  that  each  one  of  the  inquirers  concerned  made
some  distinctive  contribution  which  expressed  their
respective  intellectual  peculiarities.  Mayer  may  be
regarded  as  the  philosopher  of  the  theory  of  heat  and
energy;  Joule,  who  was  also  conducted  to  the  prin-
ciple of  energy  by  philosophical  considerations,  fur-


APPENDIX.


585


nishes  the  experimental  foundation;  and  Helmholtz
gave  to  it  its  theoretical  physical  form.  Helmholtz,
Clausius,  and  Thomson  form  a transition  to  the  views
of  Carnot,  who  stands  alone  in  his  ideas.  Each  one
of  the  first-mentioned  inquirers  could  be  eliminated.
The  progress  of  the  development  would  have  been
retarded  thereby,  but  it  would  not  have  been  checked
(compare  the  edition  of  Mayer’s  works  by  Weyrauch,
Stuttgart,  1893).


xxx.

(See  page  504.)

The  principle  of  energy  is  only  briefly  treated  in
the  text,  and  I should  like  to  add  here  a few  remarks
on  the  following  four  treatises,  discussing  this  subject,
which  have  appeared  since  1883  : Die  physikalischen
Grundsatze  der  elektrischen  Kraftiibcrtragung , by  J.
Popper,  Vienna,  1883  ; Die  Lehre  von  der  Energie , by
G.  Helm,  Leipsic,  1887;  Das  Princifi  der  Erhaitung
der  Energie , by  M.  Planck,  Leipsic,  1887  ; and  Das
Problem  der  Continuitdt  in  der  Mathe?natik  und  Media -
nik,  by  F.  A.  Muller,  Marburg,  1886.

The  independent  works  of  Popper  and  Helm  are,
in  the  aim  they  pursue,  in  perfect  accord,  and  they
quite  agree  in  this  respect  with  my  own  researches,
so  much  so  in  fact  that  I have  seldom  read  anything
that,  without  the  obliteration  of  individual  differences,
appealed  in  an  equal  degree  to  my  mind.  These  two
authors  especially  meet  in  their  attempt  to  enunciate
a general  science  of  energetics ; and  a suggestion  of
this  kind  is  also  found  in  a note  to  my  treatise  Ueber
die  Erhaitung  der  Arbeit,  page  54.  Since  then  “ener-
getics has  been  exhaustively  treated  by  Helm,  Ost-
wald,  and  others.


586


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS .


In  1872,  in  this  same  treatise  (pp.  42  et  seqq.),  I
showed  that  our  belief  in  the  principle  of  excluded
perpetual  motion  is  founded  on  a more  general  belief
in  the  unique  determination  of  one  group  of  (mechani-
cal) elements,  afi y . . by  a group  of  different  ele-
ments, xyz  . . . Planck’s  remarks  at  pages  gg,  133,
and  I3g  of  his  treatise  essentially  agree  with  this;
they  are  different  only  in  form.  Again,  I have  re-
peatedly remarked  that  all  forms  of  the  law  of  causal-
ity spring  from  subjective  impulses,  which  nature  is
by  no  means  compelled  to  satisfy.  In  this  respect
my  conception  is  allied  to  that  of  Popper  and  Helm.

Planck  (pp.  21  et  seqq.,  135)  and  Helm  (p.  25  et
seqq.)  mention  the  “metaphysical”  points  of  view
by  which  Mayer  was  controlled,  and  both  remark
(Planck,  p.  25  et  seqq.,  and  Helm,  p.  28)  that  also
Joule,  though  there  are  no  direct  expressions  to  justify
the  conclusion,  must  have  been  guided  by  similar
ideas.  To  this  last  I fully  assent.

With  respect  to  the  so-called  “ metaphysical  ”
points  of  view  of  Mayer,  which,  according  to  Helm-
holtz, are  extolled  by  the  devotees  of  metaphysical
speculation  as  Mayer’s  highest  achievement,  but  which
appear  to  Helmholtz  as  the  weakest  feature  of  his
expositions,  I have  the  following  remarks  to  make.
With  maxims,  such  as,  “Out  of  nothing,  nothing
comes,”  “The  effect  is  equivalent  to  the  cause,”  and
so  forth,  one  can  never  convince  another  of  anything.
How  little  such  empty  maxims,  which  until  recently
were  admitted  in  science,  can  accomplish,  I have
illustrated  by  examples  in  my  treatise  Die  Erhaltung
der  Arbeit.  But  in  Mayer’s  case  these  maxims  are,  in
my  judgment,  not  weaknesses.  On  the  contrary,  they
are  with  him  the  expression  of  a powerful  instinctive


APPENDIX .


587


yearning,  as  yet  unsettled  and  unclarified,  after  a
sound,  substantial  conception  of  what  is  now  called
energy.  This  desire  I should  not  exactly  call  meta-
physical. We  now  know  that  Mayer  was  not  wanting
in  the  conceptual  power  to  give  to  this  desire  clear-
ness. Mayer's  attitude  in  this  point  was  in  no  respect
different  from  that  of  Galileo,  Black,  Faraday,  and
other  great  inquirers,  although  perhaps  many  were
more  taciturn  and  cautious  than  he.

I have  touched  upon  this  point  before  in  my  Analy-
sis of  the  Sensations , Jena,  1886,  English  translation,
Chicago,  1897,  p.  174  et  seqq.  Aside  from  the  fact
That  I do  not  share  the  Kantian  point  of  view,  in  fact,
occupy  no  metaphysical  point  of  view,  not  even  that
of  Berkeley,  as  hasty  readers  of  my  last-mentioned
treatise  have  assumed,  I agree  with  F.  A.  Muller's
remarks  on  this  question  (p.  104  et  seqq.).  For  a
more  exhaustive  discussion  of  the  principle  of  energy
see  my  Principles  of  PTe at.


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE


OF  A FEW

EMINENT  INQUIRERS

AND  OF

THEIR  MORE  IMPORTANT  MECHANICAL  WORKS.

Archimedes  (287-212  B.  C.).  A complete  edition  of  his  works  was
published,  with  the  commentaries  of  Eutocius,  at  Oxford,  in
1792;  a French  translation  by  F.  Peyrard  (Paris,  1S08);  a Ger-
man translation  by  Ernst  Nizze  (Stralsund,  1824).

Leonardo  da  Vinci  (1452-1519).  Leonardo’s  scientific  manuscripts
are  substantially  embodied  in  H.  Grothe’s  work,  “Leonardo
da  Vinci  als  Ingenieur  und  Philosoph  ” (Berlin,  1874).

Guido  Ubaldi(o)  e Marchionibus  Montis  (1545-1607).  ATechani-
corum  Liber  (Pesaro,  1577).

S.  Stevinus  (1548-1620’).  Beghinselen  der  Weegkonst  (Leyden,
1585);  I ly p oj)i n etna  l a Mathematica  (Leyden,  1C08).

Galileo  (1564-1642).  Discorsi  e dimostrazioni  matematiche  (Ley-
den, 1638).  The  first  complete  edition  of  Galileo’s  writings
was  published  at  Florence  (1842-1856),  in  fifteen  volumes  8vo.

Kepler  (1571-1630).  Astronomia  Nova  (Prague,  1609)  ; I far?)  io-
nic e Mundi  (Linz,  1619);  Stereometria  Doliorum  (Linz,  1615).
Complete  edition  by  Frisch  (Frankfort,  1858).

Marcus  Marci  (1595-1667).  De  Proportions  Mot  us  (Prague,  1639).

Descartes  (1596-1650).  Principia  Philosophic?  (Amsterdam,  1644).

Roberval  (1602-1675).  Sur  la  composition  des  mouvcments . A tic.
A/dm.  de  l' Acad,  de  Paris . T.  VI.

Guericke  (1602-1686).  Experimenta  Nova , ut  Vocantur  A/agde-
burgica  (Amsterdam,  1672).


590


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Fermat  (1601-1665).  Varia  Opera  (Toulouse,  1679).

Torricelli  (1608-1647).  Opera  Geometrica  (Florence,  1644).

Wallis  (1616-1703).  Mechanica  Sive  de  Motu  (London,  1670).

Mariotte  (1620-1684).  CEuvres  (Leyden,  1717).

Pascal  (1623-1662).  RScit  de  la  grande  experience  de  l'  equilibre
des  liqueurs  (Paris,  1648);  Traite  de  l' equilibre  des  liqueurs  et
de  la  pes ant eur  de  la  masse  de  l' air . (Paris,  1662).

Boyle  (1627-1691).  Experimenta  Phvsico  Mechanica  (London,
1660).

Huygens  (1629-1695).  A Summary  Account  of  the  Lazos  of  Mo-
tion. Philos.  Trans.  1669  ; Horologhtm  Oscillaiorium  (Paris,
1673);  Opuscula  Posthuma  (Leyden,  1703).

Wren  (1632-1723).  Lex  Naturae  de  Collisione  Corporum.  Philos.
Trans.  1669.

Lami  (1640-1715).  Notivelle  maniere  de  ddmontrer  les  principaux
theor  ernes  des  Siemens  des  mecaniques  (Paris,  1687).

Newton  (1642-1726).  Philosophies  Naturalis  Principia  Mathema-
tica  (London,  1686).

Leibnitz  (1646-1716).  Acta  Eruditorum , 1686,  1695  ; Leibnitzii
et  Joh.  Pernoullii  Comer ciunt  Epistolicum  (Lausanne  and  Ge-
neva, 1745).

James  Bernoulli  (1654-1705).  Opera  Omnia  (Geneva,  1744).

Varignon  (1654-1722).  Projet  d'une  nouvelle  mecanique  (Paris,
1687).

John  Bernoulli  (1667-1748).  Acta  Erudit . 1693;  Opera  Omnia
(Lausanne,  1742).

Maupertuis  (1698-1759).  Mem.  de  I Acad,  de  Paris „ 1740  ; Mem.
de  P Acad.  de  Berlin,  1745,  1747;  CEuvres  (Paris,  1752).

Maclaurin  (1698-1746).  A Complete  System  of  Fluxions  (Edin-
burgh, 1742).

Dan  tel  Bernoulli  (1700-1782).  Comment . Acad.  Petr  op.,  T.  I \
Hydrodyjtamica  (Strassburg,  1738).

Euler  (1707-1783).  Mechanica  sive  Motus  Scientia  (Petersburg,
1736)  ; Methodus  Inveniendi  Lineas  Curvas  (Lausanne,  1744).


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE,


59i


Numerous  articles  in  the  volumes  of  the  Berlin  and  St.  Peters-
burg academies.

Clairaut  (1713-1765).  Theorie  de  la  figure  de  la  terre  (Paris,
1743)-

D’Alembert  (1717-1783).  Traite  de  dynamique  (Paris,  1743).

Lagrange  (1736-1813).  Essai  d'une  nouvelle  methode  pour  deter-
miner les  maxima  et  minima.  Misc.  Taurin.  1762  ; Mecanique
analytique  (Paris,  1788).

Laplace  (1749-1827).  Mecanique  celeste  (Paris,  1799).

Fourier  (1768-1830).  Theorie  analytique  de  la  chaleur  (Paris,
1822).

Gauss  (1777-1855).  De  Fignra  Fluidorum  in  Statu  FEqiti  'ibrii.
Comment.  Societ . Got  tin* .,  1828  ; Neues  Princip  der  Mechanik
(Crelle’s  Journal,  IV,  1829);  Intensitas  Vis  Magneticce  Torres  Iris
ad  Mensuram  Absolutam  Revocata  (1833).  Complete  works
(Gottingen,  1863).

Poinsot  (1777-1859).  Elements  de  statique  (Paris,  1804).

Poncelet  (1788-1867).  Cours  de  jfiecanique  (Metz,  1826).

Belanger  (1790-1874). ' Cours  de  mdcanique  (Paris,  1847).

Mobius  (1790-  1867).  Statik  (Leipsic,  1837).

CoRrOLis  (1792-  1843).  TraiH  de  mecanique  (Paris,  1829).

C.  G.  J.  Jacobi  (1804-1851).  Vorlesungen  uber  Dynamite,  heraus-
gegeben  von  Clebsch  (Berlin,  1866).

W.  R.  Hamilton  (1805-1865).  Lectures  on  Quaternions , 1853. —
Essays.

Grassmann  (1809-1877).  Ausdehnungslehre  (Leipsic,  1844).

H.  Hertz  (1^57-1894).  Princifien  der  Mechanik  (LeipM<\  1804)


INDEX,


Absolute,  space,  time,  etc.  (See  the
nouns.)

Absolute  units,  278,  284.

Abstractions,  482.

Acceleration,  Galileo  on,  131  et  seq.;
Newton  on,  238;  also  218,  230,  236,
243,  245,

Action  and  reaction,  198-201,  242.

Action,  least,  principle  of,  364-380,
454  ; sphere  of,  385.

Adaptation, in  nature,  452;  of  thoughts
to  facts,  6,  515  et  seq.,  581  et  seq.

Adhesion  plates,  515

Aerometer,  effect  of  suspended  par-
ticles on,  208.

Aerostatics.  See  Air.

Affined,  166.

Air,  expansive  force  of,  127;  quanti-
tative data  of,  124;  weight  of,  113;
pressure  of,  114  et  seq.;  nature  of,
517  et  seq.

Air-pump,  122  et  seq.

Aitken,  525.

Alcohol  and  water,  mixture  of,  384  et
seq.

Algebra,  economy  of,  486.

Algebraical  mechanics,  466.

All,  The,  necessity  of  its  considera-
tion in  research,  235,  461,  516.

Analytical  mechanics,  465-480.

Analytic  method,  4G6.

Anaxagoras,  509,  517.

Animal  free  in  space,  290.

Animistic  points  of  view  in  mechan-
ics, 461  et  seq.

Appelt,  566.

Archimedes,  on  the  lever  and  the
centre  of  gravity,  8-xx;  critique  of
bis  deduction,  13-14,  513  et  seq,;


illustration  of  its  value,  ro  ; on  hy-
drostatics, 86-88;  various  modes  of
deduction  of  his  hydrostatic  prin-
ciple, 104  ; illustration  of  his  prin-
ciple, 106.

Arcliytas,  510.

Areas,  law  of  the  conservation  of,
293-305*

Aristotle,  509,  511,  517,  518.

Artifices,  mental,  492  et  seq.

Assyrian  monuments,  1.

Atmosphere.  See  Air.

Atoms,  mental  artifices,  492.

Attraction,  246.

Atwood’s  machine,  149.

Automata,  511.

Avenarius,  R.,  x,  571,  580.

Axiomatic  certainties,  561.

Babbage,  on  calculating  machines,
488.

Babo,  Von,  150.

Baliani,  524.

Ballistic  pendulum,  328.

Balls,  elastic,  symbolising  pressures
in  liquid,  419.

Bandbox,  rotation  of,  301.

Barometer,  height  of  mountains  de-
termined by,  xx  5,  X17.

Base,  pressure  of  liquids  on,  90,  99,

Belanger,  on  impulse,  271.

Benedetti,  520  et  seq,,  561,

Berkeley,  587.

Bernoulli,  Daniel,  his  geometrical
demoi  stration  of  the  parallelo-
gram of  forces,  40-43;  criticism  of
Bernoulli  s demonstration,  42-46;
on  the  law  of  areas,  293 ; on  the
principle  of  vis  viva,  343,  348;  on


594


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


the  velocity  of  liquid  efflux,  403 ;
his  hydrodynamic  principle,  408;
on  the  parallelism  of  strata,  409;
his  distinction  of  hydrostatic  and
hydrodynamic  pressure,  413.

Bernoulli,  James,  on  the  catenary,
74  ; on  the  centre  of  oscillation,  311
et  seq  ; on  the  brachistochrone,
426;  on  the  isoperimetrical  prob-
lems, 428  et  seq.;  his  character,  428;
his  quarrel  with  John,  431  ; his  Pro-
gramma,  430.

Bernoulli,  John,  his  generalisation  of
the  principle  of  virtual  velocities,
56;  on  the  catenary,  74;  on  centre
of  oscillation,  333,  335  ; on  the  prin
ciple  of  vis  viva,  343  ; on  the  anal-
ogies between  motions  of  masses
and  light,  372;  his  liquid  pendulum-
410  ; on  the  brachistochrone,  425  et
seq.;  his  character,  427;  his  quar-
rel with  James,  431 ; his  solution  of
the  isoperimetrical  problem,  43T.

Black,  124,  587.

Boat  in  motion,  Huygen’s  fiction  of
a,  3X5.  325.  570-

Body,  definition  of,  506.

Bolyai,  493.

Bomb,  a.  bursting,  293.

Borelli,  533-

Bosscha,  J.,  531.

Bouguer,  on  the  figure  of  the  earth,
395-

Boyle,  his  law,  r25  et  seq.;  his  inves-
tigations in  aerostatics,  123.

Brachistochrone,  problem  of  the,  425
et  seq.

Brahe,  Tycho,  on  planetary  motion,
1 87.

Bruno,  Giordano,  his  martyrdom,
446.

Bubbles,  392.

Bucket  of  water,  Newton’s  rotating,

227,  232,  543.

Budde,  547.


Cabala,  489.

Calculating  machines,  488.

Calculus,  differential,  424 ; of  varia-
tions, 436  et  seq."


Canal,  fluid,  equilibrium  of,  396  et
seq.

Cannon  and  projectile,  motion  of,
291.

Canton,  on  compressibility  of  liquids,
92.

Carnot,  his  performances,  501,  585;
his  formula,  327.

Carus,  P.,  on  cause,  516.

Catenary,  The,  74,  379,  425.

Cauchy,  47.

Causality,  483  et  seq.,  502.

Cause  and  effect,  economical  charac-
ter of  the  ideas,  485  ; equivalence
of,  502,  503  ; Mach  on,  555 ; Carus
on,  579.

Causes,  efficient  and  final,  368.

Cavendish,  124.

Cells  of  the  honeycomb,  453.

Centimetre  gramme-second  system,
285.

Central,  centrifugal,  and  centripetal
force,  See  Force.

Centre  of  gravity,  14  et  seq.*  descent
of,  52 ; descent  and  ascent  of,  174
et  seq.,  408  ; the  law  of  the  conser-
vation of  the,  287-305.

Centre  of  gyration,  334.

Centre  of  oscillation,  173  et  seq.,  331-
335;  Mersenne,  Descartes,  and
Huygens  on,  174  et  seq.;  relations
of,  to  centre  of  gravity,  180-185;
convertibility  of,  with  point  of  sus-
pension, 186.

Centre  of  percussion,  327.

Centripetal  impulsion,  528  et  seq.

Chain,  Stevinus’s  endless,  25  et  seq.,
500;  motion  of,  on  inclined  plane,
347-

Change,  unrelated,  504.

Character,  an  ideal  universal,  481.

Chinese  language,  482.

Church,  conflict  of  science  and,  446.

Circular  motion,  law  of,  160,  ifix.

Clairaut,  on  vis  viva,  work,  etc.,  348;
on  the  figure  of  the  earth,  395 ; on
liquid  equilibrium,  396  et  seq.;  on
level  surfaces,  etc.,  398,

Classen,  J,,  555.

Classes  and  trades,  the  function  of,
in  the  development  of  science,  4.


INDEX.


595


Clausius,  497,  499,  501,  585.

Clifford,  580.

Coefficients,  indeterminate,  La-
grange’s, 471  et  seq.

Collision  of  bodies.  See  Impact.

Colors,  analysis  of,  481.

Column,  a heavy,  at  rest,  258.

Commandinus,  87.

Communication,  the  economy  of,  78.

Comparative  physics,  necessity  of,
498.

Component  of  force,  34.

Composition,  of  forces,  see  Forces;
Gauss’s  principle  and  the,  364  ; no-
tion of,  526.

Compression  of  liquids  and  gases,
407.

Conradus,  Balthazar,  308.

Conservation,  of  energy,  499  et  seq.
585  et  seq.;  of  quantity  of  motion,
Descartes  and  Leibnitz  on.  272,  274,
purpose  of  the  ideas  of,  504.

Conservation  of  momentum,  oE  the
centre  of  gravity,  and  of  areas,
laws  of,  287-305 ; these  laws,  the
expression  of  the  laws  of  action
and  reaction  and  inertia,  303.

Conservation  of  momentum  and  vis
viva  interpreted,  326  et  seq.

Constancy  of  quantity  of  matter,  mo-
tion, and  energy,  theological  basis
of,  456.

Constraint, ,335,  352  ; least,  principle
of,  350-364,  550,  5/6.

Continuity,  the  principle  of,  140,  490
et  seq  , 565.

Continuum,  physico-mechanical,  109,

Coordinates,  forces  a function  of,
397.  See  Force-Junction,

Copernicus,  232,  457,  531,  580.

Coriolis,  on  vis  viva  and  work,  272.

Counter-phenomena,  503.

Counter-work,  363,  366,

Counting,  economy  of,  486.

Courtivron,  his  law  of  equilibrium,
73-

Ctesibius,  his  air-gun,  no,  511.

Currents,  oceanic,  302.

Curtius  Rufus,  210.

Curve-elements,  variation  of,  432.

Curves,  maxima  and  minima  of,  429.


Cycloids,  143,  186,  379,  427.

Cylinder,  double,  on  a horizontal
surface,  60;  rolling  on  an  inclined
plane,  345*

Cylinders,  axal,  symbolising  the  re-
lations of  the  centres  of  gravity  and
oscillation,  183.

D’Alembert,  his  settlement  of  the
dispute  concerning  the  measure  of
force,  149,  276;  his  principle,  331-
343-

D’Arcy,  on  the  law  of  areas,  293.

Darwin,  his  theories,  452,  459.

Declination  from  free  motion,  352-
356.

Deductive  development  of  science,
421.

Democritus,  518.

Demonstration,  the  mania  for,  18,82;
artificial,  82.

Departure  from  free  motion,  355.

Derived  units,  278.

Descartes,  on  the  measure  of  force,
148,  250,  270,  272-276  ; on  quantity  of
motion,  conservation  of  momen-
tum, etc.,  272  et  seq.;  character  of
his  physical  inquiries,  273,  528,  553,
574;  his  mechanical  ideas,  250.

Descent,  cn  inclined  planes,  134  et
seq.;  law  of,  137;  in  chords  of  cir-
cles, 138 ; vertical,  motion  of,
treated  by  Hamilton's  principle,
383;  quickest,  curve  of,  426;  of
centre  of  gravity,  52,  174  et  seq.,
408.

Description,  a fundamental  feature
of  science,  5,  555.

Design,  evidences  of,  in  nature,  452.

Determinants,  economy  of,  487.

Determination,  particular,  544,

Determinative  factors  of  physical
processes,  76.

Diels,  520.

Differences,  of  quantities,  their  rftle
in  nature,  236;  of  velocities,  325,

Differential  calculus,  424,

Differential  laws,  255,  461.

Dimensions,  theory  of,  279,

Dioptrics,  Gauss’s  economy  of,  489.

Disillusionment,  due  to  insight,  77


596


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Dream-yard,  569.

Duhem,  575.

Diihring,  x,  352,  584.

Dynamics,  the  development  of  the
principles  of,  128-255 ; retrospect
of  the  development  of,  245-255;
founded  by  Galileo,  128  ; proposed
new  foundations  for,  243  ; chief  re-
sults of  the  development  of,  245,
246;  analytical,  founded  by  La-
grange on  the  principle  of  virtual
velocities,  467.

Earth,  figure  of,  395  et  seq.

Economical  character  of  analytical
mechanics,  480.

Economy  in  nature,  459.

Economy  of  description,  5.

Economy  of  science,  481-494.

Economy  of  thought,  the  basis  and
essence  of  science,  ix,  6,  481 ; of
language,  481 ; of  all  ideas,  482  ; of
the  ideas  cause  and  effect,  484 ; of
the  laws  of  nature,  485  ; of  the  law
of  refraction,  485  ; of  mathematics,
486;  of  determinants,  487;  of  cal-
culating machines,  488;  of  Gauss’s
dioptrics,  moment  of  inertia,  force-
function,  489;  history  of  Mach’s
conception  of,  579.

Efflux,  velocity  of  liquid,  402  et  seq.

Egyptian  monuments,  1.

Eighteenth  century,  character  of,  458.

Elastic  bodies,  315,  317,  320.

Elastic  rod,  vibrations  of,  490.

Elasticity,  revision  of  the  theory  of,
496.

Electromotbr,  Page’s,  262 ; motion  of
a free,  296,  et  seq.

Elementary  laws,  see  Differential
laws.

Ellipsoid,  triaxal,  73  ; of  inertia,  186;
central,  186.

Empedocles,  509,  517,

Encyclopaedists,  French,  463.

Energetics,  the  science  of,  585.

Energy,  Galileo's  use  of  the  word,
271;  conservation  of,  499  et  seq.;
potential  and  kinetic,  272,  499 ;
principle  of,  585  et  seq.  See  Vis
viva.


Enlightenment,  the  age  of,  45S.

Epstein,  541.

Equations,  of  motion,  342;  of  me-
chanics, fundamental,  270.

Equilibrium,  the  decisive  conditions
of,  53;  dependence  of:  on  a maxi-
mum or  minimum  of  work,  69  ; sta-
ble, unstable,  mixed,  and  neutral
equilibrium,  70-71 ; treated  by
Gauss’s  principle,  355  ; figures  of,
393;  liquid,  conditions  of,  386  et
seq.

Equipotential  surfaces.  See  Level
Surfaces.

Ei gal,  499.

Error,  our  liability  to,  in  the  recon-
struction of  facts,  79.

Ether,  orientation  by  means  of  the,
573-

Euler,  on  the  loi  de  repos,  68;  on
moment  of  inertia,  179,  182,  186;  on
the  law  of  areas,  293  ; his  form  of
D’Alembert’s  principle,  337 ; on  vis
viva , 348;  on  the  principle  of  least
action,  368,  543,  576;  on  the  isoperi-
metrical  problems  and  the  calculus
of  variations,  433  et  seq  ; his  theo-
logical proclivities,  449,  455;  his
contributions  to  analytical  me-
chanics, 466  ; on  absolute  motion,
543.  568.

Exchange  of  velocities  in  impact,  315.

Experience,  1 et  seq.,  481,  490.

Experimenting  in  thought,  523,  582,

Experiments,  509,  514.

Explanation,  6.

Extravagance  in  nature,  459.

Facts  and  hypotheses,  494,  496,  498.

Falling  bodies,  early  views  of,  128;
investigation  of  the  laws  of,  130  et
seq.,  520  et  seq. ; laws  of,  accident
of  their  form,  247  et  seq.;  see  Des-
cent.

Falling,  sensation  of,  206,

Faraday,  124,  503,  530,  534.  587-

Feelings,  the  attempt  to  explain  them
by  motion,  506.

Fermat,  on  the  method  of  tangents,
423

Fetishism,  In  modern  ideas,  463,


INDEX.


597


Fiction  of  a boat  in  motion,  Huy-
gens’s, 315,  325.

Figure  of  the  earth,  395  et  seq.

Films,  liquid,  386,  392  et  seq.

Fixed  stars,  543  et  seq.,  568.

Flow,  lines  of,  400 ; of  liquids,  416  et
seq.

Fluids,  the  principles  of  statics  ap-
plied to,  86-110.  See  Liqttids.

Fluid  hypotheses,  496.

Foppl.  535-

Force,  moment  of,  37;  the  experien-
tial nature  of,  42-44  ; conception  of;
in  statics,  84 ; general  attributes
of,  85;  the  Galilean  notion  of,  142,
dispute  concerning  the  measure  of
148,  250,  270,  274-276;  centrifugal
and  centripetal,  158  et  seq.;  New-
ton on,  192,  197,  238,239;  moving,
203,  243;  resident,  impressed,  cen-
tripetal, accelerative,  moving,  238^
239;  the  Newtonian  measure  of,
203,  239,  276 ; lines  of.  400-

Force-function,  398  et  seq.,  479,  489  ;
Hamilton  on,  350.

Force-relations,  character  of,  237.

Forces,  the  parallelogram  of,  32,  33-
48,  243  ; principle  of  the  composi-
tion and  resolution  of,  33-48,  igy  et
seq.;  triangle  of,  108;  mutual  inde-
pendence of,  154;  living,  see  Vis
viva;  Newton  on  the  parallelogram
of,  I92r  197;  impressed,  equili-
brated, effective,  gained  and  lost,
336;  molecular,  384  et  seq.;  func-
tions of  cobrdinates,  397,  402;  cen-
tral, 397;  at  a distance,  534  et  seq.

Formal  development  of  science,  421.

Formulae,  mechanical,  269-286.

Foucault  and  Toepler,  optical  method
of,  125.

Foucault’s  pendulum,  302.

Fourier,  270,  526.

Free  rigid  body,  rotation  of,  295.

Free  systems,  mutual  action  of,  287.

Friction,  of  minute  bodies  in  liquids,
208 ; motion  of  liquids  under,  416
et  seq.

Friedlander,  F.  fiCnd  J.,  547.

Functions,  mathematical,  their  office
in  science,  492.


Fundamental  equations  of  mechan-
ics, 270.

Funicular  machine,  32.

Funnel,  plunged  in  water,  412;  rotat-
ing liquid  in,  303.

“ Galileo,”  name  for  unit  of  acceler-
ation, 285.

Galileo, his  dynamical  achievements,
128-155  ; his  deduction  of  the  law
of  the  lever,  12,514;  his  explana-
tion of  the  inclined  plane  by  the
lever,  23 ; his  recognition  of  the
principle  of  virtual  velocities,  51;
his  researches  in  hydrostatics,  90;
his  theory  of  the  vacuum,  112  et
seq  ; his  discovery  of  the  laws  of
falling  bodies,  130  et  seq  , 522;  his
clock,  133 ; character  of  his  in-
quiries, 140;  his  foundation  of  the
law  of  inertia,  143,  524  et  seq.,  5C3
et  seq  ; on  the  notion  of  accelera-
tion, 145;  tabular  presentment  of
his  discoveries,  147;  on  the  pendu-
lum and  the  motion  of  projectiles,
152  et  seq.,  525  et  seq.;  founds  dy-
namics, 128;  his  pendulum,  362;
his  reasoning  on  the  laws  of  falling
bodies,  130,  131,  247;  his  favorite
concepts,  250;  on  impact,  308-312;
his  struggle  with  the  Church,  446;
on  the  strength  of  materials,  451;
does  not  mingle  science  with  the-
ology, 457;  on  inertia,  509;  his
predecessors,  520  et  seq.;  on  gravi-
tation, 533;  on  the  tides,  537  et
seq.,  580,  587.

Gaseous  bodies,  the  principles  of
statics  applied  to,  ito-127.

Gases,  flow  of,  405 ; compression  of,
407.

Gauss,  his  view  of  the  principle  of
virtual  velocities,  76;  on  absolute
units,  278 ; his  principle  of  least
constraint,  350-364,  550  et  seq.,  576;
on  the  statics  of  liquids,  390;  his
dioptrics,  489,

Gerber,  Paul,  535.

Gilbert,  462,  532,  533.

Goldbeck,  K.,  532,

Goinperz,  518,


598


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Grassi,  94.

Grassmann,  480,  577  et  seq.,  581.

Gravitation,  universal,  190,  531  et

seq.,  533-

Gravitational  system  of  measures,
284-286.

Gravity,  centre  of.  See  Centre  of
gravity.

Greeks,  science  of,  509  et  seq.

Green’s  Theorem,  109.

Guericke,  his  theological  specula-
tions, 448  ; his  experiments  in  aero-
statics, 117  et  seq.;  his  notion  of
air,  118  ; his  air-pump,  120:  his  air-
gun,  123.

Gyration,  centre  of,  334.

Halley,  448.

Hamilton,  on  force-function,  350;  his
hodograph,  527;  his  principle,  380-
384,  480,  576-

Heat,  revision  of  the  theory  of,  496.

Helm,  585  et  seq.

Helmholtz,  ix ; on  the  conservation
of  energy,  499,  501.  585.

Hemispheres,  the  Magdeburg,  122.

Henke,  R.(  552.

Hermann,  employs  a form  of  D’Alem-
bert’s principle,  337;  on  motion  in
a resisting  medium,  435.

Hero,  his  fountain,  41 1;  on  the  mo-
tion of  light,  422  ; on  maxima  and
minima,  451,  511,  518  et  seq.

Herrmann,  A.,  580.

Hertz’s  system  of  Mechanics,  548  et
seq.,  583.

Heymans,  558  et  seq.,  569  et  seq.

Hiero,  86.

Hipp,  chronoscope  of,  151.

Hodograph,  Hamilton’s,  527.

Hbfler,  558  et  seq.,  568.

Holder,  O.,  514.

Hollow  space,  liquids  enclosing,  392.

Homogeneous,  279.

Hooke,  532.

Hopital,  L’»  on  the  centre  of  oscilla-
tion, 331 ; on  the  brachistochrone,
426.

Horror  vatcui,  112.

Hume,  on  causality,  484.

Husserl,  581  et  seq.


Huygens,  dynamical  achievements
of,  155-187;  his  deduction  of  the
law  of  the  lever,  15-16;  criticism
of  his  deduction,  17-18  ; his  rank  as
an  inquirer,  155  ; character  of  his
researches,  156  et  seq.;  on  centri-
fugal and  centripetal  force,  158  et
seq  ; his  experiment  with  light
balls  in  rotating  fluids  and  his  ex-
planation of  gravity,  162,  528  et
seq.;  on  the  pendulum  and  oscilla-
tory motion,  162  et  seq.;  on  the
centre  of  oscillation,  173  et  seq.;
his  principle  of  the  descent  and
rise  of  the  centre  of  gravity,  174;
his  achievements  in  physics,  1S6,
18 7,  530;  his  favorite  concepts,  251;
on  impact,  313-327,  570;  on  the
principle  of  vis  viva,  343,  348 ; on
the  figure  of  the  earth,  395  ; his  op-
tical researches,  425;  does  not  min-
gle science  and  theology,  457,  575.

Hydraulic  ram,  Montgolfier’s,  411.

Hydrodynamic  pressure,  413.

Hydrodynamics,  402-420.

Hydrostatic  pressure,  413-

Hydrostatics,  384-402.

Hypotheses  and  facts,  494.

Images,  constructive,  548  et  seq.

Inclined  plane,  the  principle  of  the,
24-33,  5*5  et  seq.;  Galileo’s  deduc-
tion of  its  laws,  151;  descent  on,
354  ; movable  on  rollers,  357  et  seq.

Indeterminate  coefficients,  La-
grange’s, 471  et  seq.

Inelastic  bodies,  317,  318.

Inertia,  history  and  criticism  of  the
law  of,  141,  143,  232,  238,  520,  524  et
seq.,  542  et  seq.,  560  et  seq  , 563  et
seq.,  567  et  seq.;  moment  of,  179,
182,186,489;  bodies  with  variable
moments  of,  302;  Newton  on,  238,
243.

Inertial  system,  515.

Impact,  the  laws  of,  305-330;  force
of,  compared  with  pressure,  312;
in  the  Newtonian  view,  317  et  seq.;
oblique,  327;  Maupertuis’s  treat-
ment of,  365.

Impetus,  275,


INDEX.


599


Impulse,  271.

Inquirers,  the  great,  character  and
value  of  their  performances,  7 ;
their  different  tasks,  76  ; their  atti-
tude towards  religion,  457 ; their
philosophy,  516.

Inquiry,  typical  modes  of,  317.

Instinct,  mechanical,  importance  of,
304.

Instinctive  knowledge,  its  cogency,
origin,  and  character,  1,  26-28,  83.

Instincts,  our  animal,  463.

Instruction,  various  methods  of,  5.

Integral  laws,  255,  461.

Intelligence,  conception  of,  in  na-
ture, 461.

Interdependence  of  the  facts  of  na-
ture, 502  et  fiassim.

Internal  forces,  action  of,  on  free
systems,  289,  295.

International  language,  481.

Isolation,  527.

Isoperimetrical  problems,  421-446 ;
Euler’s  classification  of,  433.

Isothermal  surfaces,  400.

Jacobi,  76,  381,459;  on  principle  of
least  action,  371.

Jellett,  on  the  calculus  of  variations,
437  et  seq.

Johannesson,  547.

Jolly,  x,  532.

Joule,  501,  584.

Judgments,  economical  character  of
all,  483.

Kant,  on  causality,  484.

Kater,  186.

Kepler,  his  laws  of  planetary  motion,
187;  possibility  of  his  discovery  of
the  laws  of  falling  bodies,  248;  on
maxima  and  minima,  423 ; on  as-
trology, 463;  on  gravity,  532;  on
tides,  538,

Kilogramme,  281.

Kilogramme-metre,  272.

Kinetic  energy,  272,  499.

Kirchhoff,  ix,  381,  555  et  seq.,  580.

Knowledge,  instinctive,  1,  26-28,  83  ;
the  communication  of,  the  founda-
tion of  science,  4 ; the  nature  of,  5;


the  necessary  and  sufficient  condi-
tions of,  10.

Konig,  on  the  cells  of  the  honey-
comb, 453.

Laborde,  apparatus  of,  150.

Lagrange,  his  deduction  of  the  law  of
the  lever,  13  ; his  deduction  of  the
principle  of  virtual  velocities,  65-
67;  criticism  of  this  last  deduction,
67-68;  his  form  of  D’Alembert’s
principle,  337;  on  vis  viva,  349  ; on
the  principle  of  least  action,  371 ;
on  the  calculus  of  variations,  436  et
seq.;  emancipates  physics  from  the-
ology, 457;  his  analytical  mechan-
ics, x,  466,  553 ; his  indeterminate
coefficients,  471  et  seq.

Lami,  on  the  composition  of  forces.

36.

Lange,  542  et  seq.

Language,  economical  character  of,
481  ; possibility  of  a universal,  482;
the  Chinese,  482.

Laplace,  463  534.

Lasswitz,  530.

Lateral  pressure,  103.

Laws  of  nature,  502.

Laws,  rules  for  the  mental  recon-
struction of  facts,  83-84,  485.

Least  action,  principle  of,  364-380;
its  theological  kernel,  454 ; anal-
ogies of,  577-

Least  constraint,  principle  of,  350-
3*4.

Leibnitz,  on  the  measure  of  force,
148,  250,  270,  274  276,  575;  on  quan-
tity of  motion,  274;  on  the  motion
of  light,  425,  454;  on  the  brachisto-
chrone, 426;  as  a theologian,  449.

Level  surfaces,  98,  398  et  seq.

Lever,  the  principle  of  the,  8-25,  512
et  seq.;  “potential,”  20;  applica-
tion of  its  principles  to  the  expla-
nation of  the  other  machines,  22;
its  laws  deduced  by  Newton's  prin-
ciples, 263-267;  conditions  of  its
rigidity,  96 ; Maupertuis’s  treat-
ment of,  366.

Libraries,  stored  up  experience,  481.

Light,  motion  of,  422,  424,  426;  Man*


6oo


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


pertuis  on  motion  of,  367  ; motion
of,  in  refracting  media,  374“376>  377~
379  ; its  minimal  action  explained,
459-

Limiting  cases,  565.

Lindeloff,  437.

Lippich,  apparatus  of,  150.

Liquid  efflux,  velocity  of,  402.

Liquid-head,  403,  416.

Liquid,  rotating  in  a funnel,  303.

Liquids,  the  statics  of,  86-110;  the
dynamics  of,  402-420;  fundamental
properties  of,  91 ; compressibility
of,  92;  equilibrium  of,  subjected  to
gravity,  96  ; immersed  in  liquids,
pressure  of,  105;  lateral  pressure  of,
103  ; weightless,  384  et  seq  ; com-
pression of,  407  ; soniferous,  vibra-
tions of,  407 ; mobile,  407  ; motion
of  viscous,  416.

Living  forces.  See  Vis  viva.

Living  power,  272.

Lobatchevski,  493.

Locomotive,  oscillations  of  the  body
of,  292.

Luther,  463.

MacGregor,  J.  G.,  547.

Mach,  history  of  his  views,  555  et
seq.;  his  definition  of  mass,  558  et
seq.;  his  theory  of  the  development
of  physical  knowledge,  581  et  seq.;
his  treatment  of  the  law  of  inertia,
560  et  seq.

Machines,  the  simple,  8 et  seq.

Maclaurin  on  the  cells  of  the  honey-
comb, 453;  his  contributions  to  ana-
lytical mechanics,  466.

Magnus,  Valerianus,  117.

Manometer,  statical,  123.

Maraldi,  on  the  honeycomb,  453.

Marci,  Marcus,  305-308.

Mariotte,  his  law,  125  ; his  apparatus
and  experiments,  126  etseq.;  on  im-
pact, 313.

Mass-areas,  295.

Mass,  criticism  of  the  concept  of,  216
-222;  Newton  on,  and  as  quantity
of  matter,  192,  194,  217,  238,  251,  536
et  seq.;  John  Bernoulli  on,  251  ; as
a physical  property,  194 ; distin-


guished from  weight,  195  ; measur-
able by  weight,  195,  220;  scientific
definition  of,  2x8  et  seq.,  243,  540  et
seq.,  558  et  seq.,  573;  involves  prin-
ciple of  reaction,  220.

Mass,  motion  of  a,  in  principle  of
least  action,  372.

Mathematics,  function  of,  77.

Matter,  quantity  of,  216,  238,  536  et
seq.,  559  et  seq.

Maupertuis,  his  Zoi  de  -rejias,  68  et
seq  ; on  the  principle  of  least  ac-
tion, 364,  368;  his  theological  pro-
clivities, 454.

Maxima  and  minima,  36S  et  seq.;
problems  of,  422  et  seq.

Maximal  and  minimal  effects,  ex-
planation of,  460.

Maxims,  scholastic,  143.

Maxwell,  271,  530,  534,  540.

Mayer,  J.  R.,  249,  503,  584,  586.

McCormack,  Thomas  J.,  580.

Measures.  See  Units.

Mechanical,  experiences,  1 ; knowl-
edge of  antiquity,  x-3  ; phenomena,
purely,  495  et  seq.;  theory  of  na-
ture, its  untenability,  495  et  seq.;
phenomena  not  fundamental,  496;
conception  of  the  world,  artificial-
ity of,  496.

Mechanics,  the  science  of,  r;  earliest
researches  in,  8;  extended  applica-
tion of  the  principles  of,  and  deduc-
tive development  of  the  science,
256-420  ; the  formulae  and  units  of,
269-286;  character  of  the  principles
of,  237  ; form  of  its  principles
mainly  of  historical  and  accidental
origin,  247  et  seq  ; theological,  ani-
mistic, and  mystical  points  of  view
in,  446-465;  fundamental  equations
of,  270-276 ; new  transformation  of,
480 ; relations  of,  to  other  depart-
ments of  knowledge,  495-507;  rela-
tions of,  to  physics,  495-504;  rela-
tions of,  to  physiology,  504-507 ; an
aspect,  not  the  foundation  of  the
world,  496,  507;  analytical,  465-480;
Newton’ s geometrical,  465;  Herts’s,
548  et  seq.

Medium,  motion-determinative,  hy-


INDEX.


601


pothesis  of,  in  space,  230,  547 ; re-
sisting, motion  in,  435.

Memory,  481,  488.

Mensbrugghe,  Van  der,  on  liquid
films,  386.

Mental  artifices,  492  et  seq.

Mercurial  air-pump,  125.

Mersenne,  114,  174.

Metaphysical  point  of  view,  586.

Method  of  tangents,  423.

Metre,  280.

Mimicking,  of  facts  in  thought.  See
Reproduction.

Minima.  See  Maxima.

Minimum  of  superficial  area,  387.

Minimum  principles,  550,  575  et  seq.

Mixed  equilibrium,  70-71.

Mobile  liquids,  407.

Mbbius,  372,  480.

Models,  mental,  492.

Molecular  forces,  384  et  seq.

Moment,  statical,  14;  of  force,  37;  of
inertia,  179,  182,  186.

Moments,  virtual,  57.

Momentum,  241,  244,  271 ; law  of  the
conservation  of,  288 ; conservation
of,  interpreted,  326.

Monistic  philosophy,  the,  465.

Montgolfier’s  hydraulic  ram,  4x1.

Moon,  its  acceleration  towards  the
earth,  190;  length  of  its  day  in-
creased to  a month,  299.

Morin,  apparatus  of,  150.

Motion,  Newton’s  laws  of,  227,241;
quantity  of,  238,  271  et  seq.;  equa-
tions of,  342,  371 ; circular,  laws  of,
158  etseq.;  uniformly  accelerated,
132,  relative  and  absolute,  227  et
seq.,  542  et  seq.,  568.

Motivation,  law  of,  484,

Mueller,  J.,  510,

Muller,  F.  A.,  585  et  seq.

Mystical  points  of  view  in  mechan-
ics, 456.

Mysticism  in  science,  481.

Mythology,  mechanical,  464.

Napier,  his  theological  inclinations,
447*

Nature,  laws  of,  502.

Necessity,  484,  485.


Neumann,  C.,  255,  567  et  seq.,  57**
577-

Neutral  equilibrium,  70-71.

Newton, his  dynamical  achievements,
187-201;  his  views  of  absolute  time,
space,  and  motion,  222-238,  543,  56S,
570  et  seq.;  synoptical  critique  of
his  enunciations,  238-245,  557,  578 ;
scope  of  his  principles,  256-269;
enunciates  the  principle  of  the  par-
allelogram of  forces,  36  ; his  prin-
ciple of  similitude,  165  et  seq  ; his
discovery  of  universal  gravitation,
its  character,  and  its  law,  x88  et
seq.,  533  et  seq.;  effect  of  this  dis-
covery on  mechanics,  igi  ; his  me-
chanical discoveries,  192;  his  regu-
l<e philo  sop  handi^  193,  580;  his  idea
of  force,  193  ; his  concept  of  mass,
194  et  seq.,  536  et  seq.;  on  the  com-
position of  forces,  197;  on  action
and  reaction,  198;  defects  and  mer-
its of  his  doctrines,  201,  244;  on  the
tides,  209  et  seq.;  his  definitions,
laws,  and  corollaries,  238-242 ; his
water-pendulum,  409  ; his  theologi-
cal speculations,  448  ; the  economy
and  wealth  of  his  ideas,  269  ; his
laws  and  definitions,  proposed  sub-
stitutes for,  243  ; his  favorite  con-
cepts, 25X ; on  the  figure  of  the
earth,  395  ; does  not  mingle  theol-
ogy with  science,  457  ; on  the  bra-
chistochrone, 426 ; his  theory  of
light,  530;  his  forerunners,  531.

Numbers,  486.

Observation,  82.

Occasionalism,  the  doctrine  of,  449.

Oersted,  93.

Oil,  use  of,  in  Plateau’s  experiments,
384  et  seq.

Oscillation,  centre  of,  331  335.

Oscillatory  motion,  1G2  et  seq.

OstwaUl,  577,  585.

Pagan  ideas  in  modern  life,  462,

Page’s  electromotor,  292,

Pappus,  422 ; on  maxima  and  min-
ima, 45  r.

Parallelism  of  strata,  409.


602


THE  SCIENCE  OF  MECHANICS.


Parallelogram  of  forces.  See  Forces.

Particular  determination,  principle
of,  544-

Pascal,  his  application  of  the  prin-
ciple of  virtual  velocities  to  the
statics  of  liquids,  54,  91, ,96;  his  ex-
periments in  liquid  pressure,  99;
his  paradox,  101-102 ; his  great  pi-
ety, 447;  criticism  of  his  deduction
of  the  hydrostatic  principle,  95-96;
his  experiments  in  atmospheric
pressure,  114  et  seq.,  575*

Pearson,  Karl,  547.

Peltier’s  effect,  503.

Pendulum,  motion  of,  152,  163,  168;
law  of  motion  of,  168  ; experiments
illustrative  of  motion  of,  168  et  seq.;
conical,  171;  determination  of^by,
172;  simple  and  compound,  173,  177;
cycloidal,  186  ; a falling,  205  ; bal-
listic, 328  ; liquid,  409.

Percussion,  centre  of,  327.  See  Im-
pact.

Percussion-machine,  313.

Perier,  115.

Perpetual  motion,  25,  89,  500.

Petzoldt,  542,  552,  558  et  seq.,  562,  571
et  seq.,  575  et  seq.,  580.

Philo,  518.

Philosophy  of  the  specialist,  the,  506.

Phoronomic  similarity,  166.

Physics  and  theology,  separation  of,
456-

Physics,  artificial  division  of,  495;
necessity  of  a comparative,  498;  re-
lations of  mechanics  to,  495-504;
disproportionate  formal  develop-
ment of,  505.

Physiology,  relations  of  mechanics
to,  504-507 ; distinguished  from
physics,  507.

Pila  Heronis,  118,  412.

Place,  222,  226.

Planck,  585  et  seq.

Planets,  motion  of,  187  et  seq.

Plateau,  on  the  statics  of  liquids,  384
-394  ; Plateau’s  problem,  393.

Pliny,  5ro.

Poggendorf’s  apparatus,  206  et  seq.

Poinsot,  186,  251,  269,  480.

Poisson,  42,  46.


Polar  and  parallel  coordinates,  304.

Ponce!  et,  251,  272,

Popper,  J.,  584  et  seq.

Porta,  462.

Poske,  on  the  law  of  inertia,  524,  558.

Potential,  no,  398  et  seq.;  potential
function,  497;  potential  energy,  499.

Pound,  Imperial,  Troy,  Avoirdupois,
283.

Pre-established  harmony,  449.

Pressure,  origin  of  the  notion  of,  84;
liquid,  90,  99,  et  seq.;  of  falling  bod-
ies, 205  ; hydrodynamic  and  hydro-
static, 413;  of  liquids  in  motion,  414.

Pressure-head,  403,  416.

Principles,  their  general  character
and  accidental  form,  79,  83,  421.  See
Laws.

Projectiles,  motion  of,  152  et  seq.,
525  et  seq.;  treated  by  the  principle
of  least  action,  369.

Projection,  oblique,  153;  range  of,  154.

Proof,  the  natural  methods  of,  80.

Ptolemy,  232,  509.

Pulleys,  ax,  49-51.

Pump,  1 12.

Pythagoras,  422,  509.

Quantity,  of  matter,  2x6,  238,  536  et
seq.,  539  et  seq,;  of  motion,  238,  271
et  seq.

Quickest  descent,  curve  of,  426.

Radii  vectores^  294.

Rationalism,  458.

Reaction,  discussion  and  illustration
of  the  principle  of,  201-216;  criti-
cism of  the  principle  of,  216-222;
Newton  on,  198,  201,  242.

Reaction-tubes,  301,

Reaction-wheels,  299  et  seq.

Reaumur,  453.

Reason,  sufficient,  principle  of,  9,484,
502-

Reconstruction  of  facts,  mental.  See
Re  prod  action .

Refiguring  of  facts  in  thought.  See
Reprod action .

Refraction,  economical  character  of
law  of  485.


INDEX.


603


Reg-ttlez  philasophandi,  Newton’s,  193,
5 So.

Regularity,  395.

Religions  opinions,  Our,  464.

Repos,  loz  de,  68.

Representation.  See  Reproduction.

Reproduction  of  facts  in  thought,  5,
84,  421,  481-494-

Research,  means  and  aims  of,  distin-
guished, 507-

Resistance  head,  417.

Rest,  Maupertuis’s  law  of,  68,  259.

Resultant  of  force,  34.

Richer,  i6x,  251.

Riemann,  493.

Roberval,  his  balance,  60;  his  method
of  maxima  and  minima,  423 ; on
momenta,  305  ; on  the  composition
of  forces,  197-

Robins.  330.

Rose,  V.,  518.

Rosenberger,  531,  536.

Routh,  352.

Routine  methods,  181,  268,  287,  341.

Rules,  83,  485  ; the  testing  of,  81.

Sail  filled  with  wind,  curve  of,  431.

Santbach,  525.

Sauveur,  526.

Scheffler,  353,  364.

Schiaparelli,  509.

Schmidt,  W.,  5rg.

Schopenhauer,  on  causality,  484.

Science,  the  nature  and  development
of,  i~7 ; the  origin  of,  4,  8,  78  ; de-
ductive and  formal  development  of,
421 ; physical,  its  pretensions  and
attitude,  464  et  seq.*,  the  economy
of,  481-494;  & minimal  problem,
490;  the  object  of,  496,  497,  502,  507;
means  and  aims  of,  should  be  dis-
tinguished, 504,  505;  condition  of
the  true  development  of,  504  ; divi-
sion of  labor  in,  505 ; tools  and  in-
struments of,  505.

Science  and  theology,  conflict  of,  446 ;
their  points  of  identity,  460.

Scientists,  struggle  of,  with  their  own
preconceived  ideas,  447.

Seebeck's  phenomenon,  503.

Segner,  x86;  Scgner’s  wheel,  309.


Sensations,  analysis  of,  464;  the  ele-
ments of  nature,  482;  their  relative
realness,  506.

Shortest  line,  369,  371.

Similarity,  phoronomic,  166.

Similitude,  the  principle  of,  166,  177.

Siphon,  114  et  seq.

Smith,  Adam,  580.

Space,  Newton  on,  226;  absolute  and
relative,  226,  232,  543,  568,  570  et
seq.;  a set  of  sensations,  506;  inulti-
dimensioned,an  artifice  of  thought,
493  ; a sort  of  medium,  547.

Spann/crapt , 499.

Specific  gravity,  87-88.

Sphere,  rolling  on  inclined  plane,
346-

Spiritism,  or  spiritualism,  49.

Stable  equilibrium,  70-71.

Stage  of  thought,  the,  505.

Statical  manometer,  123.

Statical  moment,  14  ; possible  origin
of  the  idea,  21,

Statics,  deduction  of  its  principles
from  hydrostatics,  107  et  seq.;  the
development  of  the  principles  of,
8-127 ; retrospect  of  the  develop-
ment of,  77-85  ; the  principles  of,
applied  to  fluids,  86-110  ; the  prin-
ciples of,  applied  to  gaseous  bod-
ies, 110-127;  Varignon’s  dynamical,
38,  268  ,*  analytical,  founded  by  La-
grange on  the  principle  of  virtual
velocities,  467,

Stevinus,  his  deduction  of  the  law  of
the  inclined  plane,  24-31,  5x5  et
seq.;  his  explanation  of  the  other
machines  by  the  inclined  plane,  31-
33  ; the  parallelogram  of  forces  de-
rived from  his  principle,  32-35  ; his
discovery  of  the  germ  of  the  prin-
ciple of  virtual  velocities,  49-5  r ;
his  researches  in  hydrostatics,  88-
90;  his  broad  view  of  nature,  500,

Strata,  parallelism  of,  409.

Strato,  5x8.

Streintz,  542  et  seq.

String,  equilibrium  of  a,  372  et  seq.

See  Catenary,

Strings,  equilibrium  of  three-knotted,

61 ; equilibrium  of  ramifying,  33,


604


THE  SCIENCE  OE  MECHANICS.


Substance,  536.

Suction,  11 2.

Sufficient  reason,  the  principle  of,  9,
484,  502.

Superposition,  527.

Surface  of  liquids,  connection  of,
with  equilibrium,  386-390.

Surfaces,  isothermal,  400  ; level,  98,
398  et  seq.

Symmetry  of  liquid  films  explained,
394-

Synoptical  critique  of  the  Newtonian
enunciations,  238-245.

Synthetic  method,  466.

Tangents,  method  of,  423.

Taylor,  Brook,  on  the  centre  of  os-
cillation, 335.

Teleology,  or  evidence?  of  design  in
nature,  452.

Theological  points  of  view  in  me-
chanics, 446  et  seq.;  inclinations  of
great  physicists,  450.

Theology  and  science,  conflict  of,  446;
their  points  of  identity,  460.

Theorems,  421.

Theories,  491  et  seq.

Thermometers,  their  construction,
282.

Things,  their  nature,  482  ; things  of
thought,  492  et  seq.

Thomson  and  Tait,  their  opinion  of
Newton’s  laws,  245,  557,  585.

Thought,  instruments  of,  505  ; things
of,  492  et  seq.;  experimenting  in,
523;  economy  of.  See  Economy.

Tides,  Newton  on.  209  et  seq.;  their
effect  on  the  army  of  Alexander  the
Great,  209;  explanation  of,  213  et
seq  ; their  action  illustrated  by  an
experiment  215;  Kepler  on,  532,  538;
early  theories  of,  537  et  seq.;  Gali-
leo on,  537  et  seq.

Time,  sensations  of,  506,541;  New-
ton’s view  of,  222-238;  absolute  and
relative,  223-,  542 ; nature  of,  223-
226,  234.

Toeppler  and  Foucault,  optical
method  of,  125.

Torricelli,  his  modification  of  Gali-
leo’s deduction  of  the  law  of  the


inclined  plane,  52 ; his  measure-
ment of  the  weight  of  the  atmos-
phere, 113  ; founds  dynamics,  402;
his  vacuum  experiment,  113;  founds
hydrodynamics,  402  ; on  the  velo-
city of  liquid  efflux,  402.

Trades  and  classes, function  of,  in  the
development  of  science,  4.

Trade  winds,  302.

Tubes,  motion  of  liquids  in,  416  et
seq.

Tylor,  462,  463.

Tyndall,  584.

Ubaldi,  Guido,  his  statical  re-
searches, 21.

Uniquely  determined,  10,  502,  575  et
seq.

Unitary  conception  of  nature,  5.

Units,  269-286.

Unstable  equilibrium,  70-71.

Vacuum,  112  et  seq.

Vailati.  521.  526.

Variation,  of  curve-elements,  432  et
seq.

Variations,  calculus  of,  436  et  seq.

Varxgnon,  enunciates  the  principle  of
the  parallelogram  of  forces,  36;  on
the  simple  machines,  37;  his  statics
a dynamical  statics,  38  ; on  velocity
of  liquid  efflux,  403.

lras  sitfierjiciarium  of  Stevinus,  89.

Vehicle  on  wheels,  291.

Velocity,  144;  angular,  296;  a phys-
ical level,  325.

Velocity-head,  417.

Venturi,  520.

Vibration.  See  Oscillation.

Vicaire,  547.

View,  breadth  of,  possessed  by  all
great  inquirers,  500  et  seq.

Vinci,  Leonardo  Da,  on  the  law  of
the  lever,  20,  520.

Virtual  displacements,  definition  of,
57.  See  also  l "irtual  velocities.

Virtual  moments,  57.

Virtual  velocities,  origin  and  mean-
ing of  the  term,  49 ; the  principle
of,  49-77-

Viscosity  of  liquids,  416.


INDEX,


605


Uis  7>ioriua , 272,  275.

/'Yj  zYz/# , 272  et  seq.,  315 ; conserva-
tion of,  317;  interpreted,  326;  in  im-
pact, 322  et  seq.;  principle  of,  343-
350;  connection  of  Huygens's  prin-
ciple with,  178 ; principle  of,  de-
duced from  Lagrange’s  fundamen-
tal equations,  478,  499,

Vitruvius,  on  the  nature  of  sound,  3;
his  account  of  Archimedes’s  dis-
covery, 86;  on  ancient  air-instru-
ments, no.

Viviani,  113.

Volkmann,  P.,  527,  557  et  seq.,  573.

Voltaire,  449,  454.

Volume  of  liquids,  connection  of
with  equilibrium,  387-390.

Wallis,  on  impact,  313;  on  the  centre
of  percussion,  327.

Water,  compressibility  of,  93.

Weightless  liquids,  384  et  seq.

Weights  and  measures.  See  Units,

Weston,  differential  pulley  of,  59.

Weyrauch,  585,

Wheatstone,  chronoscope  of,  151.

Wheel  and  axle,  with  non-circular


wheel,  72 ; motion  of,  22  et  seq.,  60,

337.  344.  354.  381.

Wien,  W.,  536.

Will,  conception  of,  in  nature,  461.

Wire  frames,  Plateau’s,  393.

Wohlwill,  on  the  law  of  inertia,  308,
520,  524  et  seq.

Woodhouse,  on  isoperimetrical  prob-
lems, 430.

Wood,  on  the  cells  of  the  honeycomb,
453.

Work,  54,  67  et  seq  , 248  et  seq.,  363;
definition  of,  272 ; determinative  of
vis  viva,  178  ; accidentally  not  the
original  concept  of  mechanics,  548;
J.  R.  Mayer's  views  of,  249;  Huy-
gens’s appreciation  of,  252,  272  ; in
impact,  322  et  seq.;  of  molecular
forces  in  liquids,  385  et  seq.;  posi-
tive and  negative,  386;  of  liquid
forces  of  pressure,  415 ; of  com-
pression, 407,

Wren,  on  impact,  313.

Wright,  Chauncey,  453.

Yard,  Imperial,  281;  American,  283


#


