The Historical, Political, and Diplomatic Writings of Niccolò Machiavelli, Vol. 4 (Niccolò Machiavelli (Christian E. Detmold, trans.), 1513)
==========================================================
Machiavelli's complete works in Detmold's translation (1882-91, 4 vols.) - Discourses, Florentine Histories, Art of War, the comedies, letters and diplomatic writings; the founder of modern political science entire. Vol. 4 of 4.

HISTORICAL, POLITICAL, AND DIPLOMATIC

Wall NGS

OF

NICCOLO MACHA it iat

TRANSLATED FROM THE ITALIAN

BY

CHRISTIAN £. DETMOLED

IN FOUR VOLUMES

VOL. LV:

BOSTON
JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY
1882

Copyright, 1882,
By CHRISTIAN E. DETMOLD.

All rights reserved.

UNIVERSITY PrREss?
Joun Witson AND Son, CAMBRIDGE.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME IV.

MISSIONS.

(Continued.)

Missions TO VARIOUS PARTS OF THE FLORENTINE DOMINION,
JANUARY 3; 100G <2 2 8c. a

Srconp MISSION TO THE CouRT OF RomeE, AUGUST 25, 1506.
Turrp MISssION TO SIENNA, AuGusT 10, 1507 ...... .
MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY, DECEMBER, 1507.

Seconp MISSION INTO THE INTERIOR OF THE STATE, AUGUST 16,
1508 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e

TurrRpD COMMISSION TO THE ARMY BEFORE PISA, FEBRUARY, 1509

Mission TO MANTUA ON BUSINESS WITH THE EMPEROR OF GER-
MANY, NOVEMBER 10,:1509 ... . . 1 44,

THIRD MISSION TO THE COURT OF FRANCE, JUNE 2, 1510. . .
COMMISSION TO THE INTERIOR OF THE STATE, NOVEMBER 12, 1510
COMMISSION TO SIENNA, DECEMBER 2, 1510

MIissION TO THE LoRD oF Monaco, MAy 12, 15]1 .....
FourtH MIssIon TO THE CouRT OF FRANCE, SEPTEMBER 10, 1511

CoMMISSION TO PISA AT THE TIME OF THE CouNCcIL, NOVEMBER,
Tort . . . . . . . . e . . . . . . . . . . .

CoMMISSION FOR RAIsiING Troops, DeEcEMBER 2,1511 . .. .

COMMISSIONS TO PISA AND OTHER PLACES WITHIN AND WITHOUT
THE FLORENTINE Dominion, May ro Aveust, 1512... .

MISSION TO THE CHAPTER OF THE MINORITE BROTHERS AT CARPI,
May it, 1521 . ° . . . . . . . e . . . . e . e .

MISSION TO. VENICn, AUGUST 10, IGN 2.3 3s ee

MISSION TO THE ARMY OF THE LEAGURE ENGAGED IN THE SIEGE
OF CREMONA, AvGUSY, 1G 2). 2

MISSION TO FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI, NOVEMBER 30, 1526 . .
SEconp Mission TO FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI, FEBRUARY 3, 1527

PAGE

3
10
76
83

155
156

195
220
277
278
279
281

297
303

304

317
325

330
333
339

1V CONTENTS.

MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.

DESCRIPTION OF THE MANNER IN WHICH THE DUKE VALENTINO
' PROCEEDED TO KILL VITELLOZZO VITELLI, OLIVEROTTO DA
FERMO, AND THE SIGNOR PAGOLO AND THE DUKE GRAVINA
ORSINI ee
REPORT ON THE AFFAIRS OF GERMANY ....... -~
SECOND REPORT ON THE AFFAIRS OF GERMANY ... .
DISCOURSE ON THE AFFAIRS OF GERMANY AND ON THE EMPEROR
AN ACCOUNT OF THE AFFAIRS OF FRANCE... . . .
OF THE NATURE OF THE FRENCH .. .
CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS TO RAFFAELLO GIROLAMI ON HIS
DEPARTURE AS AMBASSADOR TO THE EMPEROR CHARLES V.,
Peer OCOD ca, loge. 0 oo ee

“CAO OS TDL BS 8B OD eases) eg me eer eer ce)

PaGE

377
384
391
402
404
419

421

427

U

N

(CONTI

~

tart,

MISSIONS TO VARIOUS PARTS OF THE
FLORENTINE DOMINION.*

1:

FROM THE MAGISTRACY OF THE TEN TO NICCOLO MACHI-
AVELLI, SECRETARY, IN MUGELLO.

3 January, 1506.

WE have received your letters of yesterday, which you sent
by express, and have paid the messenger for his trouble. We
are well satisfied with what you have done up to the present,
and commend you for the same. We exhort you to continue
your efforts to the end with the same zeal which you have dis-
played thus far, so that we may be able to commend you again.

* At the recommendation of Machiavelli, the Signoria of Florence resolved
to enroll its own subjects, so as to have an armed force of their own when occa-
sion should arise. The recommendation of the Secretary was begun to be put
into practical operation by enrolling throughout the dominion all men capable
of bearing arms, and Machiavelli himself was commissioned to carry into effect
the greater part of this enrolment. His mission lasted from December, 1505, till
April, 1506. According to his different tours he was furnished by the Magistracy
of the Ten with letters of credence to the respective Rectors or governors of the
places where he went. These credentials were as follows : —

To THE VICE-GOVERNOR OF THE MuGeEtio, Mariorro pi PIERO RUCELLAI.
13 January, 1506.

You know the object of our having lately sent our Secretary, Niccolo Machia-
velli, to Borgo a San Lorenzo, and the reason of his present return to Borgo to
complete his business. Should he need any assistance, you will furnish him two
of your cavaliers, ordering them to report themselves to the said Machiavelli at
Borgo on Thursday morning next, so as to be with him before sunrise. The
said Machiavelli will be found either at the Castello of Borgo, or at the house
of Antonio del Rabatta, near by. Fail not to have our orders carried into exe-
cution.

To THE PopEstTAa OF DICOMANI AND OF PONTE-A-SIEVE, AT SIEVE.
28 January, 1506.

The bearer of this is our Secretary, Niccolo Machiavelli, whom we send to

Sieve to attend to certain business with which we have charged him. We desire
.

4 MISSIONS TO VARIOUS PARTS OF

TE

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLustRIous SIGNORI, ETC. : —

So that your Lordships may know how I am _ progressing
with the business of enrolling, and may not be surprised at not
having received any news from me, I beg now to inform you
that I arrived at Ponte-a-Sieve a week ago yesterday evening.
But as this Podesteria is large and disorganized, and ill supplied
with messengers, I could not complete the enrolment of the
men here until Sunday. On Monday following I moved to
Dicomano, where, by way of saving time,I had ordered the
men of that Podesteria to meet me; this measure, however, did
not succeed, for I found only those of the commune of Dico-
mano, whilst none from the commune of San Gaudenzio had
come. On Tuesday, therefore, I went over to San Gaudenzio,
where, thanks to God, a great part of the men of that commune
made their appearance; so that in these two communes, that
is to say in the entire Podesteria of Dicomano, I have enrolled
two hundred men, which I count, however, upon having to
reduce to one hundred and fifty. Two causes have contrib-
uted to give me the greatest trouble in this matter; the one is
the inveterate habit of disobedience of these people, and the
other is the enmity existing between the population of Petrogna-
no and of Campana, who occupy the two sides of the moun-

you will comply with all his requests, and render him all assistance and favor
as though we asked it for ourselves personally.

It would seem that the last region to which Machiavelli went for the above
purpose was the Casentino, as is seen from the following documents : —

26 Fepruary, 1506.

We Ten, etc. make known to all who may see these presents, the bearer of
which is the citizen Niccolo Machiavelli, our Secretary, that we have sent him
into the valley of Casentino and its dependencies to enroll and arm under the
banners of our militia all such men as may to him seem fit. And therefore we
command all our Rectors and officials to render him all favor and assistance, and
all our subjects to show him all obedience, if they value our good will, and fear
our displeasure.

To Lorenzo Creccuri DE’ Capponi, VicAR OF CASENTINO.
26 Fesruary, 1506.

We send our Secretary, Niccolo Machiavelli, to your place for the purpose of
enrolling the male inhabitants, as he will more fully make known to you. And
we therefore charge you to render him all aid and support, and order our sub-
jects to show him all obedience.

THE FLORENTINE DOMINION. D

tain. Of these latter I have enrolled such as I deemed suitable ;
but of the men of Petrognano and Castagneto, who make com-
mon cause against those of Campana, none were willing to be
enrolled, although some forty of them appeared before me, with
the son of Andreaso, who is their leader; and after much con-
sultation amongst themselves this son of Andreaso told me
that they had resolved not to go anywhere where their chiefs
could not also go; if, however, it could be arranged that their
chiefs should be secure, every one of them would gladly come.
These several chiefs and this son of Andreaso are under a ban,
and they seemed to think that a good way of getting this ban
revoked would be to make themselves greatly desired. I re-
plied to them, that I believed it was in no way your Lordships’
wish to force any one into their military service, but that it was
a thing rather to be asked for as a favor, seeing the advantages
that would accrue to those who were enrolled. They went
away without coming to any other conclusion, and I am rather
glad of it than otherwise; for thus this company will be, so to
say, all of one color, whilst it would have been divided if these
men here had been enrolled.

I returned here yesterday and expect to arrange matters so
as to have the first review of the enrolled of this Podesteria on
Sunday next; but although I have enrolled all together three
hundred and thirty men in this Podesteria, yet I count upon
having to reduce this number to two hundred, or even less.
After completing matters here next Sunday, I shall go to Dico-
mano, and hope to finish there in three or four days, after
which I shall return to Florence. It is impossible to give arms
to the men of these two Podesterias at the same time, owing to
their being a considerable distance apart. I have not been able
to complete this business with greater despatch ; and if any one
thinks differently, let him try, and he will find out what it is to
bring together a lot of peasants, and of this sort.

I recommend myself to your Lordships. Valete!

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
PonteE-a-SiEvE, 5 February, 1506. Secretary.

6 MISSIONS TO VARIOUS PARTS OF

gee
TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

By your letter of yesterday we learn what you have done in
regard to the enrolment of those two Podesterias; and we are
much pleased with the diligence displayed by you in that matter.
We are sure that you have lost no time, and that the labor of
getting all those men together is more difficult than what it
seemed at first; but he who does well acts quickly, and it is
thus that we suppose you have acted in this business, respect-
ing which we have nothing more to say except that you con-
tinue in the same way. Bene vale !

Ex Patatio FLorEentrno, die 6 Februarii 1506.

IV.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

I arrived here in Poppi on Saturday evening, and on Sunday I
enrolled the men of this Podesteria, yesterday those of Pratovec-
chio, and to-day those of Castel San Niccolo; and to-morrow I
shall make the enrolment of Bibbiena, which will complete the
Vicariate. I shall unite San Niccolo and Poppi under one con-
stable, and Bibbiena and Pratovecchio under another. These
four Podesterias will furnish about seven hundred choice men.
Unless the constables come and the arms are sent me, I shall
not be able to do anything more. I write to Francesco Quara-
tesi for such arms as I desire, and beg your Lordships to urge
the departure of the constables; and during the delay of their
arrival and the receipt of the arms I shall enroll the Podesteria
of Chiusi and that of Focognano, which may be equipped and
drilled under the same constable. Your Lordships must de-
cide whether you will arm these two Podesterias, and in case
you do, then you must inform me and find another constable ;
and it might be well, if your Lordships approve of it, to appoint
either Dietajuti of Prato or Martinuzzo Corso.

‘THE FLORENTINE DOMINION. 7

I beg your Lordships will favor me with a reply, and instruct
Francesco to send me the arms I have asked for.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Porri, 3 March, 1506. Secretary.

Ve

TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.
5 Marcu, 1506.

SprcTaBILIs Vir CarissimE Noster : —

Yours of the 3d of March reached us only yesterday evening,
and to-day we have attended to nothing else but to send off
lances, which will arrive to-morrow evening at the place di-
rected by you; and yesterday morning before the breakfast
hour Malgante and the priest of Citerna left here, and should
have arrived to-day.

We approve of your plan and encourage your efforts to enroll
the men of the two Podesterias of Chiusi and Castel Focognano.
Some action will be taken to-morrow respecting the two consta-
bles you ask for; and we shall send them promptly, although
we do not know whether they are here.

We have also sent to-day arms and banners to Giovanni
Folchi; but have not succeeded in finding Piero d@ Anghiari,
although he has been sought for at Cascina and at home,
as well as in several other places; for this reason Filippo da
Casavecchia is still here, as he did not wish to leave without
the certainty that the constable would follow immediately
after him. Everything is being urged forward with all pos-
sible diligence.

8 MISSIONS TO VARIOUS PARTS OF

ae

MaeniFicent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 3d instant, informing you
that, in addition to the four Podesterias of this Vicariate, I
would to-day enroll the men of Castel Focognano, and _to-
morrow those of Chiusi; and that I should await your answer
whether you wished to arm these two Podesterias; in which
case, | asked that you would send me one more constable be-
sides the two already designated. I have since then come
over to Castel Focognano, but have changed my plans, for I
find that this Podesteria is divided into two districts, namely,
Castel Focognano and Subbiano, each of which is sufficiently
large to furnish one hundred and fifty men. I therefore con-
template uniting Castel Focognano with Poppi and Castel San
Niccolo; and Subbiano with Bibbiena and Pratovecchio. Thus
two constables will suffice me, and therefore you need not send
any more. But I should be glad if your Lordships would urge
Quaratesi to send me the arms which I have asked of him, for
I can do nothing more here unless these arms come, and I
waste my time. For the present, I shall leave Chiusi aside;
it might hereafter be united with other places of the Vicariate
of Anghiari, or I may leave it by itself, for it is one of the
largest Podesterias; but we must wait until the snows are
over before attempting to do anything with it.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Poppi, 5 March, 1506. Secretary.

VII.
TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, AT POPPI.
7 Marcu, 1506.

Your letter of the 5th was received yesterday evening; and
as we rely wholly upon you in the business you have in hand
down there, and upon whatever you may judge for the best in

THE FLORENTINE DOMINION. 9

relation to it, therefore we approve whatever you may decide
in the matter; and in compliance with your suggestion we
shall not for the present send any other constable.

We have never been able to find either Piero @ Anghiari or
Martinello Corso; but as it seems to us that any further search
for them would delay the organization of the levies of Firen-
zuola too long, we have this morning transferred this charge
to Giovanni del Mare, who will at latest leave for that place
together with Filippo da Casavecchia.

On arrival of this you will have received the arms you have
asked for, as the Proveditore tells us that he has sent them
all to the place ordered by you, namely, Castel San Niccolo.

SECOND MISSION TO THE COURT
OF ROME.

INSTRUCTIONS
GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, SENT TO ROME.

25 Aucust, 1506.*

NiccoLo, — You will proceed by post to Rome, there to see
his Holiness the Pope, or wherever else you may learn that he
is to be found, and reply to the demands which the Protono-
tary Merino has addressed to us in his behalf, respecting the

* The peace concluded at Blois between the kings of France and Spain re-
lieved Pope Julius II. of the fear of having to cope with a powerful enemy when
he should take up arms for the purpose, as he called it, of purging the states of
the Church of the tyrants, and bringing them back to their obedience to him, so that
he thought the opportune moment had come for carrying his design into effect.
Assured of the French alliance, at ease with regard to the Venetians, whom he
allowed, so long as he deemed it convenient, to hold Faenza and Rimini; having
already recovered Imola, Cesena, and Furli from them, he resolved to begin the
war by attacking the most feeble; namely, Gianpaolo Baglioni and Giovanni
Bentivogli, with the intention of driving the one out of Perugia and the other
out of Bologna. To make his success the more sure, he asked for help from the
king of France, from the Duke of Ferrara, from Pandolfo Petrucci, from the
Venetians, and from the Florentines. To the latter he sent his Protonotario
Merino with the request to send him one hundred men-at-arms under command
of Mare Antonio Colonna, who was at the time in the service of the Florentine
republic. At the Council held for the purpose of deciding upon the reply to be
made to the Pope’s request, all present were not of the same mind; but the opin-
ion of Piero Soderini prevailed, supported as it was by Giovanbattista Ridolfi
and Piero de Guicciardini, namely, that they should consent to furnish the de-
sired help, delaying it however as long as possible. Niccolo Machiavelli was
charged to carry this reply to the Pope, and to accompany him in his expedition
until he should be replaced by an ambassador. Having left Florence on the 25th
of August, Machiavelli found Julius II. already on the way at Nepi; and from
there he followed him until the 1st of November, when he returned to Florence
by way of Imola, having yielded his place to the new Ambassador, Messer Fran-
cesco Pepi. The following letters contain the history of Machiavelli’s mission,
and of the events that occurred during that period.

SECOND MISSION TO THE COURT OF ROME. bE

enterprise against Bologna, and the desire of his Holiness that
we should yield to him the services of Mare Antonio Colonna,
our Condottiere. Our determination in this matter and the
sense in which you are to reply to him are as follows. In
the first instance, if time and place permit, you will praise the
good and holy resolve of his Holiness, by showing how agreea-
ble it is to us, and how much good we anticipate from it. And
then, if you think proper, you will excuse with such reasons as
are known to you the few days’ delay that has occurred in
making this reply. And lastly, as to the request of his Holi-
ness for our Condottiere and his company, you will say that
such a request was so new and unexpected that it kept us for
some time in suspense, because we have since last March dis-
missed our other Condottieri with about two hundred men-at-
arms; having kept only what was necessary for our own wants ;
and having to keep the field for two months longer, we do not
see how we can with safety deprive ourselves of any more
troops. We say this, because, if we had known the wishes of
his Holiness sooner, we should either not have dismissed those
we did, or we should have engaged others in their place, so as
to have been able to comply with the request of his Holiness,
although it would have been very onerous for us, and we should
with difficulty have borne the expense.

We do not mean to say by this, however, that we intend to
withhold our assistance, or decline to lend our hand to so holy
an enterprise; but are resolved to do most willingly all that is
in our power to please his Holiness; not only to be personally
agreeable to him, but also because of the great good which we
hope will flow from this beginning. And being firmly resolved
to concede to his Holiness the troops he asks for, we pray his
Holiness that, until the actual execution of his enterprise, and
until all other things are provided according to the statement
submitted to us by the said Protonotary, he will allow us to
make use ourselves of these troops; especially as the Signor
Mare Antonio is at this moment the general-in-chief of our
troops, and if he should leave the confines of Pisa that country
and the troops that remain there would find themselves without
a competent commander, and with an insufficient guard. But
whilst the other supplies are being prepared, the winter season
will be approaching, and we shall also have been able to pro-
vide some additional troops for that guard. And in fact you

1 SECOND MISSION TO THE

can explain to and assure his Holiness that, when once his
enterprise is fairly under way, and his troops and those of his
allies begin to assemble and to march, and have received all
the other support which the Protonotary has told us of, he may
depend upon it that our troops will not be the last, and more
especially so as they are in the neighborhood. You will add,
that we have sent you to be near his Holiness throughout this
whole expedition, and until we can replace you by our Ambas-
sador, which will be soon; so that his Holiness may have some
one whom he can direct to advise us at what time and where
he may wish us to send our troops, or of anything else that
may occur. And whilst following the court you will keep us
constantly and carefully informed of everything that takes
place, and that may seem to you to be noteworthy.
J. MARCELLUS, ETC., ETC.

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUsTRIOUS SIGNORI: —

I arrived yesterday at Nepi, and the Pope with the court
came the same day; as his Holiness had left Rome the day
before, he declined to attend to any business yesterday evening,
and thus I did not see him. But this morning I presented
myself before him immediately after his breakfast; and before
rising from table he gave me an audience in presence of their
Eminences of Volterra and Pavia,* and of Messer Gabriello,
who has lately come from Florence; and so that your Lord-
ships may know at the same time what I said and the replies
made to me, I shall report both, word for word, as follows : —

“Most Holy Father, your Holiness knows how devoted my
“illustrious Signoria have ever been to the Holy See, and how
“they have always fearlessly and unhesitatingly exposed them-
“selves to every danger for the purpose of sustaining and
“increasing its dignity. This ancient devotion is increased
“twofold with regard to the person of your Holiness, because,
“even before attaining your present elevated position, they
“found in you a father and protector of our republic. It is

* This was Messer Francesco da Castel del Rio, Bishop of Pavia, and Cardi-
nal, ete.

COURT OF ROME. 18

“proper, therefore, that they should desire the increase of the
“dignity and power of your Holiness; for such increase will
“also strengthen their hope of obtaining from your Holiness
“whatever they need for the welfare of their country. Nor
“could they give higher praise or show greater satisfaction
“with the enterprise, of which your Holiness has caused them
“to be informed by your envoy, than to pronounce it good and
“holy, and truly worthy of the sanctity and goodness of your
“ Holiness. Itis true that many circumstances and considera-
“tions of importance, both general and particular, kept them
“for a time in suspense and made them tardy in their decis-
“ion, for they had learned that King Ferdinand was going to
“Naples, which, considering that some would not be satisfied
“with this, might give rise to some disturbances. They under-
“stand that the Emperor is with his army on the confines of
“ Venetia, the government of which has sent its troops into the
“Friuli, and has appointed two Proveditori, and given them
“oreat power and authority.” (I said this because I had
heard yesterday from a person worthy of all confidence that
this news was true.) ‘Now this invasion of the Emperor,”
continued I, “if he advances any further, is of the greatest
“importance, for it may cause great trouble in Italy, and there-
“fore deserves to be taken into serious consideration. <As to
“their own affairs, my Signoria have the war with Pisa on
‘hand, which is as onerous as ever, if not even more so; for the
“Pisans show constantly an increased audacity. My Signoria
“have moreover dismissed this year some two hundred men-at-
“arms, and have kept barely enough for their defence, with no
“other commander for their troops but Mare Antonio, and to
“deprive themselves of his services might cause them serious
“harm. They hear that the Venetians are greatly dissatisfied
“with this enterprise, and that their Ambassador at Rome has
“given proof of it. Another point which my Signoria have
“noticed, and which your Holiness must pardon me for men-
“tioning, is that it seems to them that the affairs of the Church
‘are not managed in conformity with those of other princes,
“for they see the towns of the Church left by one door and re-
“entered by another; as has just been done by the Morattini
“in Furli, whence they have expelled those who were placed
“there by your Holiness. Moreover, we see no indications of
“any movement on the part of France, which destroys all faith

14 SECOND MISSION TO THE

“in what your Holiness has publicly promised himself from
“there. Nevertheless, and notwithstanding these considera-
“tions, the importance of which is fully appreciated by your
“ Holiness, my Signoria is resolved not to deviate from, nor
“fail in, its purpose of giving their aid to this holy enterprise,
“and are resolved to do whatever may be agreeable to your
“Holiness, whenever they see that the aid of which we were
“told by your envoy has become a reality. And as I believe
“that I cannot better express the wishes and intentions of my
“Sionoria, nor lay bare the truth more effectually than by
“reading to your Holiness the instructions given me by my
“Sionoria, 1 ask permission to read the same.” And having
said this, I drew the instructions from my pocket and read
them word for word.

His Holiness listened attentively and cheerfully, first to
my discourse and then to the instructions; and after a few
kind words replied, that, “ Upon carefully considering what
“T had said and read, it seemed to him that your Lord-
“ships feared three things: the first, that the king of France
“would not furnish any assistance; the second, that he was
‘himself lukewarm in the matter; and the third, lest he
‘“‘should make terms with Messer Giovanni Bentivogli and
“allow him to remain in Bologna, or perhaps, after having
“expelled him, permit him to return. To the first of these
“three,” his Holiness said, “I reply, that I cannot more ef-
“fectually prove to you the good will of the king of France
“than by showing it to you under his own hand; and for this
“his signature will suffice without looking for any other proof.”
And thereupon he called Monseigneur d’Aix, formerly Bishop of
Sisteron, and made him produce the instructions which he had
brought back with him from France, showing me the king’s
signature in his own hand, and read to me himself two para-
graphs which treated of Bolognese matters. The first of these
encouraged the Pope in this enterprise against Bologna, offering
him four hundred to five hundred lances under Monseigneur
d’Allegri or the Marquis of Mantua, or both of them, just as
he might please. And in the second he said that the agree-
ment which he had with Messer Giovanni had no importance
for him, as it obliged him to protect Messer Giovanni only in
his own states, but not in those of the Church, and advised the
Pope to act “quickly, quickly,’ using these very words, at the

COURT OF ROME. 15

same time suggesting to him by all means to avoid exciting
the jealousy of the Venetians who are at Faenza. After that
his Holiness read me the other letters from the king, and
signed with his own hand; the one dated in the month of
May, which Sisteron had brought with him, and the other of
this month and directed to the Grand Master at Milan, order-
ing him to furnish four hundred to five hundred lances when-
ever called for either by Monseigneur d’Aix in person, or by
any one else authorized for the purpose by the Pope. After
haying read these paragraphs and letters from the king, his
Holiness said that he did not know what more he could show
me to prove the good will of the king, and that this ought to
suffice your Lordships. As to his own lukewarmness in this
matter, he said that he was on the road, going in his own per-
son, and that he did not believe that he could act with more
zeal or earnestness than thus to go in his own person to direct
the enterprise.’ And as to the third point, the leaving Messer
Giovanni in Bologna, or permitting him to return after having
once driven him out, he said that he would on no account
leave him there, and that it would be folly for Messer Gio-
vanni to attempt to remain as a private citizen, as he certainly
would not permit him to remain in any other capacity. And
once having got rid of Messer Giovanni, it was his intention
to settle matters in Bologna in such a way that in his time
Messer Giovanni would never return there; but as to what
any subsequent Pope might do in the matter, he said he did
not know. His Holiness concluded by saying that it would be
agreeable to him to have me accompany him, and that he
thanked your Lordships for what you had promised him thus
far, and that he felt assured that you would not fail in the rest,
seeing the good faith of the king of France, upon which point
you had had doubts; and that within a few days he would let
me know something, ete. |

I do not write what I said in reply, not wishing to weary
your Lordships; but will only assure you that I conformed
in all respects strictly to your instructions. Nor will I omit
to mention that in the course of the interview his Holi-
ness whispered something into the ear of Monseigneurs the
Cardinals Volterra and Pavia, and then turned and said to
me: “I have told you that I desire to bestow a signal benefit
“upon your Signoria, but will not promise to do it now, as

16 SECOND MISSION TO THE

“ T could not perform it. Whenever I shall be able to do it, I
“ will promise, and shall not fail in the performance; I will do
“it anyhow.” Thereupon I rose from before the feet of his
Holiness, and having withdrawn with Monseigneur d’Aix, who,
as already stated, was present at my interview, the said Mon-
seigneur d’Aix told me that all the difficulties he experienced
in France in inducing his Majesty the king to consent to this
enterprise had arisen from the fact that his Majesty did not
believe that it would ever be carried out; but seeing now that
it was really under way, the king’s desire to serve the Pope had
been doubled. I replied to him, that great astonishment had.
been created in Florence by the arrival there a few days since
of an agent from Milan, sent by the Grand Master to Messer
Giovanni to encourage him by assurances that the king would
not fail him, etc. He answered that I ought not to be aston-
ished at this, for that either the Grand Master had sent this
agent proprie motu to render some one a service according
to French custom, or if he had been sent with the consent
of the king, it was that he saw that the affairs of Rome did
not progress, and that really nothing had been begun. And
that he himself was the less surprised at it, for being at court
in presence of the king, after the treaty with the Pope had
actually been made, his Majesty aloud in his presence bade
an agent from Bologna to be of good cheer and fear nothing,
for the Pope had asked his support only against Perugia, and
that if he claimed it for any other purpose he would not serve
him.

Having gone at about the twenty-second hour in the suite of
the Pope to view the fortress of this place, which is very re-
markable, his Holiness, seeing me, called aN aside, and reiter-
ated to me the same assurances that he had made in reply to my
address in the morning, saying that he had arranged and settled
most satisfactorily all questions that could keep your Lordships
in doubt, and then repeated verbum ad verbo what he had said
to me in the morning. And when I replied in the words of my
instructions, that “ your troops would not be the last,” his Holi-
ness said that he had three kinds of troops in his service, namely,
his own, those of France, and yours. Of his own he had four
hundred men-at-arms, well paid, which he would send in advance,
and that he expected moreover one hundred Stradiotes, who were
coming from the kingdom of Naples and whom he had supplied

COURT OF ROME. 17

with money ; and that he would also have the troops of Gianpaolo
Baglioni, either under his own command, or that of some one
else, as might seem best to him; and that he had his purse full
of infantry ; so that when all these troops were assembled yours
might also come to take their place, as you did not want them
to be the last; that he wished me to write all this to your Lord-
ships, and that he would keep me informed from day to day of
whatever might occur. He added, that he did not expect, nor
did he ask, favors from the Venetians, whose sole aim was, and
had been, to place themselves at the head of this enterprise by
giving him their support. But that he had refused them, as he
did not wish to concede to them what they had taken from the
Church to his own great detriment and to your prejudice ;
and if he should not be able to do more than to persist in re-
fusing to make such concessions to the Venetians, this of itself
ought to induce your Lordships to hasten to co-operate with
him, regardless of all other considerations ; and the more so, as
it was not to be presumed that he would stop there if his first
efforts proved successful.

I replied in a becoming manner, confining myself, however,
entirely to general terms; and cannot report on this first day
more to your Lordships than what I have heard his Holiness
say. But I presume from his last remarks that many days will
not pass before he will ask you to start your troops, although
those of the king of France may not yet have stirred ; for it
has been intimated to him to avail himself of these only in
case of necessity, and not otherwise, because of the heavy ex-
pense which they would involve, and also to avoid incurring
the hostility of this country, which seems so well disposed
towards him.

Ramazotto, one of the captains of his Holiness, is here, and
promises to raise two thirds of the mountain population here in
favor of the Pope, who caresses him much. This Pontiff has
constantly in his suite some six or seven cardinals, whose pres-
ence seems to be agreeable to him, either for the purpose of
counselling with them or for other reasons. The other cardi-
nals are dispersed at large through the surrounding places;
but at the Pope’s entrance into Viterbo, they are all to be with
him.

The route of his Holiness, according to what I hear, is to be
the following: to-morrow he will remain here, on Sunday he

VOL. Iv. 2g

18 SECOND MISSION TO THE

goes to Viterbo, where he will remain three days; from there
he goes to Orvieto, thence to Piegaio, and thence to Perugia,
where he may remain a greater or lesstime. But his intentions
are not known as to the way of settling the affairs of that place,
or what arrangements he may make with Gianpaolo. It is
said that the latter will come to meet the Pope, perhaps even
before the latter leaves Viterbo. From Perugia the Pope will
go to Urbino, where he proposes to levy four thousand infantry ;
and it is stated by persons in authority that before reaching
Cesena the Duke of Ferrara will come to meet him, and the
Marquis of Mantua likewise.

Nothing else occurs to me worth writing. JI recommend my-
self to your Lordships, gue felices valeant.

Servus

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Crvita CasTELLANA, 28 August, 1506. Secretary.

P. 8.—I have forgotten to tell your Lordships that the Pope
has said, even in full consistory, that Ferdinand, king of Naples
and of Aragon, had some time ago given orders to his ambas-
sador at Rome not to leave that city, as he wanted him to meet
him at one of the neighboring ports, where he expected to be in
a few days. But that he has since then written to the said
ambassador to follow the court and find his Holiness; and thus
the ambassador has come with a commission from that king to
proceed to Bologna, according as the Pope might wish, and to
make known to Messer Giovanni and to the government that,
if they did not yield to the Church, they must look upon him
as their enemy,and as their severest persecutor; and that he
was prepared to come in person for the purpose of reducing
them to submission. If on the contrary, however, they were
disposed to make terms with the Pope, then he wished to be
the mediator and conservator of such an accord, and would
promise that neither the person of Messer Giovanni nor that of
his children, nor their patrimonial estates, should in any way be
molested. terwm valete.

Die qua in literis.
Idem NicoLavs.

COURT OF ROME. 19

LETTER II.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 8th from Civita Castellana,
which letter is enclosed with this. I did not send it sooner, as
I did not want to trust to chance, it being an important letter
and not written in cipher, as I did not bring any with me.
Deeming it necessary to have it go this evening, I concluded to
send it by an express, who is to leave at two o’clock in the night
and promises to bein Florence to-morrow at the twenty-fourth
hour. I have paid this express eighty carlini, and beg your Lord-
ships will reimburse that sum to the Chancellor Biagio.

The Pope made his entrance into Viterbo to-day pontifically,
and will continue his progress in the same manner. From
Naples we learn that the Neapolitans are preparing to receive
the king with all possible honors, and that Gonsalvo will go to
meet him and do himhomage. We also hear that the Venctians
are raising a thousand infantry in the Romagna ; some say that
these are intended for the Friuli, and others say that they are
intended to keep Faenza in check, lest its inhabitants should
- commit some folly during the passage of the Pope.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.
Servus

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
VitERBO, 30 August, 1506. Secretary.

LETTER III.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC.: —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and sent it by express,
together with my despatch of the 28th, in which I gave a full ac-
count of the conversation I had with the Pope immediately after
my arrival here. Since then his Holiness has made no further
communication to me, nor have I made any attempt to see him ;
and have no other news to write except that the Venetian am-
bassador has explained to his Holiness the levy of infantry
which his Signoria are making in the Romagna, saying that it
is their custom always to arm themselves whenever their

20 SECOND MISSION TO THE

neighbors do so. The report respecting the Emperor’s having
advanced to the confines of the Friuli had been started by the
Venetians, but letters have been received here from Ferrara
saying that there is no truth in it. It is believed, if this be so,
that the ambassador has set the story afloat by order of his
Signoria for the purpose of embarrassing the Pope, and to chill
his ardor by this news at the very outset of this enterprise.

An agent of the Marquis of Mantua arrived here to-day by
post. The object of his coming is not yet fully known, unless
it be, as is said, that the Marquis has sent him to present his
excuses for not being able to come and see his Holiness as he
had promised. If this be true, then some will be apt to infer
from it that perhaps the king of France retracts ; others believe
that it is mere levity and fickleness on the part of the Marquis.
So soon as I know the truth of the matter, I will communicate
it to your Lordships. I have called upon Monseigneur Ghimel,
the ambassador here of the king of France, and presented my
respects to him as your Lordships’ servant, in such terms as
suggested themselves to me. He replied in the most becoming
manner, and in the course of our conversation assured me that
his Majesty had offered to the Pope five hundred lances under
command of Monseigneur d’Allegri whenever he might want
them, and that they were ready at his disposal.

Of the merits of this enterprise, I can say nothing more than
what I have already written ; namely, that the Pope has taken
the field in person, and moves on in the appointed manner and
by the route which I have stated. He has not yet taken the
infantry into pay, and does not intend to have any other troops
than what I have mentioned to your Lordships. His own four
hundred lances, with two crossbowmen for each lance, are under
the Duke of Urbino, and commanded by Giovanni da Gonzaga ;
two hundred of them are under the immediate command of the
Prefect, and one hundred under that of Messer Ambrogio da
Landriano. These are all together on the frontier of Perugia.
Giovan da Sassatello commands the seventy-five that are in the
Romagna, but has received orders to advance. The Pope has
here with him a guard of fifty mounted crossbowmen, equiva-
lent to twenty-five men-at-arms ; and this makes up the number
of four hundred. These are the present forces of the Pope, and
his own; then he has the troops of Gianpaolo Baglioni, and ex-
pects those Stradiotes from Naples. We hear of no other prep-

COURT OF ROME. 91

arations for this enterprise, nor of any infantry or of anything
else that is required. It is said the Pope will enlist the infantry
at Urbino, as I have already written, and will there organize all
other matters.

Some of the banished from Furli are here, and are very dis-
contented ; they seem to think that they are sent from Herod
to Pilate, without any visible result ; they hope much, however,
from this enterprise of the Pope’s.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
VitERBO, this last day of August, 1506. Secretary.
—$_$_g@—___———
LETTER IV.

Maeniricent Sienort, ETC. : —

By the enclosed your Lordships will have been informed of
all that has occurred up to yesterday. Amongst other things
I told your Lordships that the Marquis of Mantua had com-
municated through his envoy to the Pope that he would not
be able to meet him, in consequence of orders received from
the king of France not to leave, etc., which has since then
been confirmed; and moreover that the Marquis has sent an
agent to Milan to ask Chaumont for leave of absence, with
instructions, if he cannot obtain it there, then to proceed to
France. Although this is regarded by many to be mere levity
on the part of the Marquis, yet it has caused the Pope much
displeasure, and has decided him to proceed in this enterprise
with more solid foundations and greater regularity than hith-
erto. He has consequently sent Messer Antonio de Montibus,
Auditor of the Chamber, to Bologna. to inform the government
of that city that his Holiness intends coming there, and that
they must give proper orders for his reception, and must also
have quarters provided within the Bolognese territory for five
hundred French lances. His Holiness has furthermore ordered
Messer Antonio to proceed afterwards to Milan to claim those
troops ; but the Pope will not go beyond Perugia, or at farthest
Urbino, unless he hears that those French troops have started ;
and thus he will remain here some days longer than he intended,

22 SECOND MISSION TO THE

and will not leave to-morrow as originally contemplated. The
reason why the Pope has changed his first purpose, not to avail
himself of these French troops except in case of necessity, as I
had reported, is the above-mentioned proceeding of the Marquis
of Mantua; and also his wish, by thus starting the French
troops, to check the Venetians, who are raising troops in the
hope that by alarming the Pope he may allow them to take part
in this enterprise and abandon France, and that thus he may
be induced to cede to them Faenza and Rimini. Another rea-
son is, that he wants to make sure of the French by fairly
engaging them in this enterprise; and therefore he resolved
yesterday to take this course. He tries with all the ingenuity
at his command to reassure the Venetians, but that does not
suffice them. They want to be sure not to be disturbed, and
therefore they attempt in every possible manner to bar him the
way, and to embarrass this enterprise with difficulties. I shall
watch the result of all this, and keep your Lordships advised.

Messer Antonio will pass through your Lordships’ dominion
on his way to Bologna; he will go either through the city of
Florence or some other place. As it may be desirable for you
to communicate with him, so as to have more particular infor-
mation about these matters, I have thought it well most re-
_ spectfully to mention this to your Lordships, to whom I beg to
recommend myself.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
VitERBO, 1 September, 1506. Secretary.

LETTER V.

MaGNnIFIceNntT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and sent the letter, to-
gether with another despatch of the day previous, under cover of
one from his Eminence of Volterra, by a courier who was going
to France. I have informed you of the Pope’s intention of send-
ing the Auditor of the Chamber to Bologna, and thence to Milan
‘for the French troops. His Holiness has since then decided
that the Auditor shall stop at Bologna, and to send Monseigneur
d’Aix, formerly Bishop of Sisteron, to Milan to start the troops,

COURT OF ROME. 23

hoping that he may succeed more easily in doing it, as he him-
self had negotiated this matter with the king. He is to go by
diligence and will leave to-morrow morning. The Auditor was
to have left to-day, but it is evening now and as yet he has not
- started. I shall see what will take place to-morrow, and will
advise your Lordships, who must not be surprised at all these
changes; for with all these intrigues many changes have al-
ready been made, and many more will occur. Those who know
the Pope say that with him one cannot place a thing over
night and find it there the next day. The Pontiff will tem-
porize, as I have said, between here and Urbino until he shall
have received an answer from Milan; and it is generally
believed that he will not begin to take fresh troops into his
pay, or incur any other expenses, until after he shall have this
answer, and until he knows that those French troops have
started. The agent of ‘Messer Giovanni Bentivogli here is
greatly encouraged by seeing matters thus protracted, and
affirms that he has promises from a certain king that he will
not violate his pledge of protection. The Venetian Ambassa-
dor tries on the one hand to frighten the Pope with the coming
of the Emperor, and on the other hand promises him certain
success at Bologna provided he will cede Faenza and Rimini to
the Venetians ; but the Pope laughs at this, and does not listen.
to these propositions. It may however well happen, that, were
the French to play him false, the Pope might possibly adopt
that course. There would be no doubt as to the French, seeing
the positive agreement which Monseigneur d’Aix brought with
him, were it not that this backing out of the Marquis of Man-
tua keeps every one in suspense. I hear of nothing else, and
recommend myself to your Lordships.
Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Viterso, 2 September, 1506. Secretary.

P. S.— The Pope may perhaps go with the court to Monte-
fiascone and Orvieto; that is to say, he would in person go to
Montefiascone with a portion of the court; the remainder would
go to Orvieto.

I say perhaps, so as to run less risk of being mistaken.

24 SECOND MISSION TO THE

LETTER VI.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and enclose that letter
with this. Monseigneur d’Aix left to-day for Milan. I called
upon him before his departure, and asked him whether there
was anything that he wished me to say to your Lordships in re-
lation to his voyage. He replied that nothing occurred to him,
except that I might write to your Lordships that he was going
by post to Milan, being sent by the Pope to demand those men-
at-arms which according to agreement the king of France is
to furnish the Pope; that he would pass through Florence, and
if his time permitted he would call upon your Lordships.

The Pope, as I have said in my letter of yesterday, will do
nothing until he receives the answer from Monseigneur d’ Aix,
and will pass his time with the court wherever he may find it
’ most convenient.

The ambassadors from Perugia to the Pope arrived here yes-
terday. Amongst them is Messer Vincenzio,* formerly judge
of the district and Podesta there. I have not yet seen him,
and do not know the object of this mission; I can only guess
that they want to settle the business of Gianpaolo. We shall
see from day to day whether they succeed or not, and I will
advise your Lordships, to whom I recommend myself, que
bene valeant.

Servus

a NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
VitTERBO, 3 September, 1506. Secretary.

LETTER VII.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC: —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 2d and 8d what was going
on here, and sent the letters by Monseigneur d’Aix, who was
going by diligence to Milan, for the purpose mentioned in my

* In the Archives of Monte Comune, amongst the Acts of the Podesta, Vol. 345,
Ann. 1502, we read, “ Vincentius de Nobilibus, Miles et Comes de Monte Vibbiano
de Perusio.”

COURT OF ROME. 25

previous letters. The Pope left Viterbo yesterday morning, and
lodged at Montefiascone ; and to-day he has come here to Orvieto,
where he will probably remain until the affairs of Perugia are
settled. After that he will await the answer from Monseigneur
d’Aix either at Perugia or Urbino, according to which he will
decide with regard to this enterprise, either to move forward or
return to Rome, unless he should look elsewhere for support
and assistance, but which I do not believe.

Negotiations for the settlement between Perugia, or rather
Gianpaolo, and the Pope, are going on incessantly, and those
ambassadors whom I have mentioned, and amongst whom is
Messer Vincenzio, have come on here; they had an audience
of the Pope at Viterbo the day before yesterday. In their ad-
dress they congratulated his Holiness upon his contemplated
visit, and encouraged him to come and see his city of Perugia.
They then offered their service to him, and recommended them-
selves and the inhabitants of the city to his protection.

It is said that, after a good deal of talk, the Pope told them
that he wanted possession of the forts held by Gianpaolo,
also of the towers of the city gates, and that the ambassadors
freely conceded them to him on behalf of their Signoria.
Since then they are secretly occupied with the negotiation of
this agreement, and they say that it is for this purpose that the
Duke of Urbino and the Legate of Perugia have come here;
they arrived this evening at dusk. We ought to see ina day
or two what course this matter will take; at present, it is
impossible to form a judgment as to what agreement may be
arrived at; for until now the Pope has insisted that Gianpaolo
should leave the city, or remain there merely as a private citi-
zen and without any men-at-arms. He may however change
his mind, partly from necessity, and partly through the persua-
sion of Gianpaolo’s abetters, of which there are a goodly number
at this court. The necessity would be the fact that Gianpaolo
has a force of mounted men and infantry, which renders his
expulsion difficult, and when this difficulty is shown to the
Pope he will easily be persuaded that it would be more advan-
tageous for him to avail himself of the services of Gianpaolo in
his enterprise against Bologna than to attempt to drive him
from Perugia, which, in case the Pope should not succeed in
doing it, would impede his main enterprise; but that Bologna
once taken, there would be no lack of means for conciliating

26 SECOND MISSION TO THE

Perugia afterwards; and that it is always best to carry on one
enterprise at a time, rather than two, as the one may interfere
with the success of the other. These arguments give ground
for believing that Gianpaolo could easily escape his doom for
the present; and to gain time is everything for him.

I shall watch carefully to get at the real truth, and shall keep
your Lordships fully informed, although, having left the regular
road, I hardly know how to send you my letters. As for my-
self, I have not yet received any from your Lordships, and
suppose they have gone to Rome.

Of the Emperor we have no news; but from Naples we hear
that King Ferdinand is expected from hour to hour, and that
Gonsalvo seems to be more pleased at it than the others. I
recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Orvieto, 5 September, 1506. Secret. apud Papam.

LETTER VIII.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

To-day is the 6th, and my letter of the 5th herewith enclosed
informs your Lordships of the state of things here, and espe-
cially as to the affair of Gianpaolo, and what is generally
thought of it. I hear since then that the Duke of Urbino and
the Legate of Perugia, who arrived here yesterday, are shaping
things in the way it was hoped for, namely, to save Gianpaolo ;
and that they have brought the Pope to be satisfied with avail-
ing himself of the services of Gianpaolo and his troops in this
expedition against Bologna. Not that he takes him regularly
as his Condottiere, or that he otherwise engages him; but he
will give him a subvention for himself and his troops so long
as they serve in this enterprise. Gianpaolo is to come here
himself to render homage to the Pope, and he may arrive at
any moment, so soon as an agreement upon this basis is defi-
nitely concluded. It is believed that the Pope will not change
from this, as he will have men around him who will hold his
hands behind his back, and will not permit him to change in
matters that are for their advantage. It is said that Gianpaolo

COURT OF ROME. 27

has one hundred and fifty light-horse and one hundred men-at-
arms in fine condition.

Seeing the course which the affairs of Gianpaolo are taking,
it is believed, if they go on as I have indicated above, that
those of Messer Giovanni Bentivogli are likely to go the same
way; and that the composition with Gianpaolo, made for the
purpose of facilitating the enterprise against Messer Giovanni,
may also lead to an arrangement with the latter; for the sup-
porters of the former will be equally those of Messer Giovanni,
as they anticipate no less advantages from it. And Messer
Giovanni knows well that the Condottieri of the Pope will be
no less serviceable to him than those of Bologna. Messer Gio-
vanni has made the offer of four of his sons to the Pope; and
there seems to be no doubt that, if he were to agree to come
himself, the affair would be settled, at once; nor will there
be lacking persons here who will support him.

I know that it is somewhat presumptuous to judge of
matters in advance, particularly of such as vary every hour ;
nevertheless, it seems to me that I can never be wrong in
communicating to your Lordships the opinions of those who
are experienced in these affairs, so that with your wonted
wisdom you may yourselves form a better judgment.

We have no news from Naples; but there are letters here
this morning from Venice of the 31st ultimo, written by Las-
cari to one of the prelates here, by which he informs him that
four ambassadors from the Emperor have arrived there, who
came all armed to the shore and demanded of the Senate
free passage and provisions for. the army of their master, and
for himself, to Rome; and that they reported the army of
their sovereign on the frontiers, but that the Emperor him-
self is still some six days’ journey from Venice. Your Lord-
ships will be able to learn the truth of all this by way of
Ferrara.

His Holiness is to leave here within the present week, but I
do not know the precise day; he will make one or two stops
between here and Perugia, and will stay some days at the latter
place to await the answer of D’Aix from Milan, and of Messer
Antonio de Montibus from Bologna.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Orvirto, 6 September, 1506.

28 SECOND MISSION TO THE

I had forgotten to inform your Lordships that the Bolognese
Ambassador told me this morning that the Venetian Ambassa-
dor continued to urge the offer upon the Pope, in behalf of his
Signoria, that, if he would cede to them Faenza and Rimini,
they would, without the aid of any one, place Bologna and
Messer Giovanni in his hands. I cannot say whether this be
true, and how they can on the one hand be willing to attempt
such an undertaking, whilst on the other hand they have the
Emperor upon their frontiers.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secretary.

P. S.— As I have the opportunity of sending you a copy of
this letter which came from Venice on the 81st of August, I
transcribe it below.

[ Copy. ]

The King of the Romans intends doubtless to come into
Italy, and takes all measures for that purpose with energy and
diligence ; for he has already started his artillery in the direc-
tion of Italy, and a part of his forces have reached Villach, and
some detachments of infantry are even nearer to the confines
of this republic. But these forces are insufficient to enable
him to remodel Italy, which this prince boasts of intending to
do; for they hardly number nine thousand men. And although
they are, so to say, upon the very confines of the country, yet
he says himself that he wants the Imperial army to enter Italy
first under another commander, after which he will enter with
the troops referred to above, which he will himself command
in person. We have not heard yet whether the Imperial army
has really started, nor even whether it is fully assembled, and
yet he can do nothing without this army, and cannot control
it at his pleasure, as he does that which he has collected and
put on foot so promptly in Hungary. It is no wonder, there-
fore, that here they should regard with doubts what there they
look upon as most certain. With all this they do not cease
here to make preparations, and to a greater extent even than
they are willing to divulge.

According to news received here by post, the King of the
Romans was four or five days ago at Gratz, a place about two

COURT OF ROME. } 29

hundred miles distant from the frontiers of the republic. On
Saturday evening there arrived here three ambassadors of the
aforesaid king; the fourth has remained sick in the Friuli.
They had an audience to-day, and according to what we hear
they ask for free passage and provisions for their army; we
shall know more after they shall have received their answer, in
the course of three days. They and their servants came fully
armed to the very shore, seemingly wishing to say, If the am-
bassadors are so valiant, what will you think of their troops ?
Valete.
Ventcz, 31 August, 1506.

LETTER IX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote my last letters to your Lordships on the 5th and 6th
instant, and sent them yesterday morning by one of my own
servants to the captain of Cortona, with orders to forward them
promptly by special messenger to your Lordships. I wrote
very fully, and, presuming these letters to have reached you
safely, 1 do not now repeat what I wrote. I have nothing of
special interest to say; but as Piero del Bene is about to start
for Florence, I did not wish to let him go without a letter from
me. Gianpaolo has not yet arrived, but is expected to-day,
without fail ; and a number of his adherents have gone out on
horseback to meet him, for they know that he has left Perugia
to come here. We shall see what his coming will bring forth,
of which your Lordships shall be duly informed.

Affairs here continue in the same state as when I last wrote,
and, as opinions of them have not changed, I shall say nothing
further on the subject. The Pope leaves to-morrow and goes
to Castel della Pieve, and will thence proceed to Perugia, unless
some new incident should make him change his plans.

At this moment, it being the twentieth hour, Gianpaolo Ba-
glioni has arrived with about fifty horse. Valete.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Orvieto, 8 September, 1506. Secretary.

30 SECOND MISSION TO THE

LETTER X.

MaGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

The enclosed I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, thinking
to send it by Piero del Bene, who however did not take it, as he
started at the very time when I had gone to the lodgings of the
Cardinal of Pavia; I therefore send it with this, although it
contains nothing important. Gianpaolo Baglioni came to Orvi-
eto yesterday at about the twentieth hour, as mentioned in the
enclosed ; he presented himself immediately at the feet of his
Holiness, and had a formal audience. The Pope left Orvieto
this morning and has come here to Castel della Pieve; whilst
Gianpaolo with his suite, accompanied by the Duke of Urbino,
has gone back by the direct road to Perugia. His Holiness
leaves here to-morrow morning to go to Castiglione del Lago ;
and before going to Perugia he will probably pass two or three
days on the lake for pleasure, and may then make his entrance
into Perugia about Sunday.

The arrangement with Gianpaolo is said to be as follows:
Gianpaolo gives up to the Pope all the fortresses of the state of
Perugia, as also the gates of the city, which is already done;
he places one or two of his sons as hostages in the hands of
the Duke of Urbino as guaranty for the faithful observance on
his part of the terms of the convention with the Pope; and
submits asa good son to the authority of the holy Church.
The Pope places a garrison of five hundred infantry in the
city of Perugia, and at each of the city gates fifty men, or more
if required. Gianpaolo is bound to serve the Pope with all his
men-at-arms in the enterprise against Bologna, and the Pope is
to give him a certain subvention for the raising of these men,
the precise amount of which is not known. All these meas-
ures are now being put into execution, and everything is to be
finally completed before the Pope leaves Perugia. Some of the
Perugine banished are with the Pope: amongst them is a son
of Grifonetto Baglioni, and one of Pompejo delli Oddi; Carlo
Baglioni is not amongst them. All these proscribed count on
returning to Perugia with the Pope, who has not sent them
away, notwithstanding the arrangement with Gianpaolo.

To-day we have the news that the Marquis of Mantua is
coming to see his Holiness the Pope, and that at this very hour

COURT OF ROME. 31

he may already be on the way; this news is regarded as posi-
tively true. This movement of the Marquis has caused a
change of opinion here respecting this enterprise against Bo-
logna; and it is supposed that an arrangement with the Pope
will become more difficult for Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, as
the enterprise against Bologna becomes easier for the Pope;
for it is assumed that the French will hold for the Pope,
although there is as yet no reply from D’Aix. But it is con-
jectured, because the Marquis has given them to understand
here, as I have already written, that he has sent an agent to
Chaumont for permission to serve the Pope; with instructions,
in case of refusal, to proceed to France and ask it direct of the
king. And having now informed them here of his coming, it
is naturally inferred, from the brief time elapsed between the
one resolution and the other, that the permission came from
Milan and not from France, and that thus they adhere to the
old agreement which was brought here by D’Aix. And there
can be no doubt that, if France does not play him false, the
enterprise against Bologna will be carried through without fail,
despite the attempts to prevent it by agreements. We must
now see what time may bring, and make up our minds accord-
ingly.

I must not omit to tell your Lordships that, on meeting the
Cardinal of Pavia this morning on the road, he called me to
him and said: “Secretary, Messer Filiberto has written to me
“that, whilst passing through. Florence, some citizens had told
“him that the Pope deceived himself if he believed that Flor-
‘ence would aid him, even to the extent of one horse, in his
“enterprise against Bologna; and that the republic would at no
*‘ price consent to it.” I answered him that I did not believe
it; that such things were said by idle persons who did not
understand the merits of these matters; and that our republic
was accustomed to go forward and never to turn back; and
that if the Pope did not recede from his projects and his
promises, our republic would not fall short one iota from her
engagements. He replied, that he believed me, and that he
had not been willing to say anything to the Pope about it, so
as not to irritate him or make him indignant. Bene valete!

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
CasTEL DELLA Preve, 9 September, 1506. Secret. apud Papam.

32 SECOND MISSION TO THE

P. S.—The Pope will remain Friday and Saturday at Cas-
tiglione del Lago, and on Sunday will go to Perugia; but he
imay possibly stay longer on the lake and on your frontier. I
give you this information, so that if you should deem it well
to present to his Holiness some wine or other choice product of
your country, your Lordships may know his whereabouts. I am
sure that it would prove most acceptable to him.

LETTER XI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC.: —

My last letters were of the 8th and 9th, written from Castel
della Pieve, and were sent by way of Cortona. On the 10th, the
Pope came to Castiglione del Lago; and although he had said
that he would remain there all this day, yet he went yesterday
to Passignano, a castle about five miles from Perugia, into
which city he will to-morrow make his pontifical entrance.
Since my last, I have received your Lordships’ letters of the 7th
and 9th, and, deeming it well to communicate the advices con-
tained in yours of the 9th to the Pope, [ called upon his Holi-
ness and made them known to him. He told me that he had
the same information as to the king of Aragon, but that he did —
not believe that Gonsalvo would march against him, but rather
that he would take to flight. And so he said that he did not
believe the news about the Emperor, as he knew for certain
that the Emperor was not in a situation to make a descent into
Italy ; and that all these reports were mere inventions of the
Venetians to suit their own purposes. As to what your Lord-
ships say in your letter of the 7th, that his Holiness should be
informed, ete., I can assure you that he is reminded of it every
day. But if Frauce should play him false, and if this rumored
descent of the Emperor should not be true or speedy, then it
might well be that there would be no remedy, and that in that
case the Pope should think less of the injuries to the Church,
or of the dangers to others, than of his own shame, which
would be great indeed if he were to return to Rome without
having attempted anything after having gone so far. But
those who know the Pope’s nature, as your Lordships do, will
not doubt this; there is no remedy for it, however, except for

COURT OF ROME. 33

ourselves to do that which it would be judged pernicious to
allow others to do.

A great many prudent people think, as I have already
written, that these stories about the Emperor are exaggerated
by Venetians in France and here, either for the purpose of em-
barrassing the projects of the Pope by restraining him, and by
troubling the waters in France; or for the purpose of seeing
whether they cannot induce the king to make some new treaty,
by which they would gain in Italy and out of it, if nothing
else, at least such credit as would facilitate the execution of
their schemes. The Pope himself is of this opinion, for when
I communicated those letters to him he said to me, “These
“Venetians make the Emperor move at their pleasure.” But
all will be settled if the Marquis of Mantua comes, and if the
king of France moves willingly, of which they had some hopes
when I last wrote to your Lordships, since when I have heard
nothing further. |

By my other letter I informed your Lordships that, despite
all the conventions made with Gianpaolo, the Pope will take
with him all the banished, excepting Carlo Baglioni and Giro-
Jamo della Penne. Yesterday evening at Passignano, where
we stopped over night, the Pope had them called to him, and
said to them, that for good reasons he did not wish them to
enter into Perugia with him; that he would leave them there,
but would send for them after he should himself have been
two or three days in the city. He advised them to be of good
cheer, for their affairs would be readily arranged; that he
wanted anyhow to put down Gianpaolo, and settle things so
that they could remain secure within Perugia. That it was
for this reason that he had ordered the fortresses to be given
up to him, and a garrison placed in Perugia to suit himself,
and that the sons of Gianpaolo should remain at Urbino.
That he intended to withdraw the men-at-arms of Gianpaolo
from the Perugine territory, and take them with him, but not
under the command of Gianpaolo, whom he’wanted always to
remain in person near the Duke. But that he had no inten-
tion of taking his life on account of the old troubles; but that
if he committed the least venial sin, he would punish him for
all put together. .

These proscribed complain that they are not allowed to en-
ter Perugia with the Pope; and see in it a trick of those who

VOL. IV. 3

34 | SECOND MISSION TO THE

wish to save Gianpaolo, and who, unable to make the Pope

by a single step desist from his enterprise, endeavor by this —

means to make him withdraw from it little by little. And
they believe that the disturbance which their return to Peru-
gia might create has been used as a scarecrow to frighten
the Pope. These proscribed fear lest those who have caused
the Pope not to allow them to enter with him into Peru-
gia should succeed in persuading him to let them remain a
few years longer in exile. All their hopes of being able to
return to Perugia were based upon their going in with the
Pope, as their own friends could then sustain their cause.
Another ground of anxiety for them is, that they see all these
matters placed in the hands of the Duke of Urbino, who is to
hold the hostages as well as the person of Gianpaolo himself,
according to what the Pope told them. It seems to them
that everything is thus placed in the hands of the adverse
party ; but above all things they fear lest the garrison which
is to be placed in Perugia should be some of the Duke’s in-
fantry ; they are resolved therefore to do all in their power to
dissuade the Pope from this, and to induce him to raise this
garrison either in your Val di Chiana, or from other places that
can be depended upon. Your Lordships will therefore think
of what you wish done in case the request should be made to
permit the constables of the Church to raise troops in the
Val di Chiana. |

In the same way as these banished have spoken to me of
their affairs, so have Messer Vincenzio and other agents of
Gianpaolo spoken to me. I listen to them all, but do not
commit myself, and say to each that they are right. I do this
because I do not know which will be best for our republic; nor
do I know your Lordships’ views on the subject.

It is said that the Legate of Perugia, who went with Gian-
paolo from Orvieto to Perugia, is to return here to-day to settle
this affair of the banished with the Pope, as well as other
matters relating to that city. Valete.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Corcrano, 12 September, 1506. Secretary.

Se eS NSE, eee Cane a, en ee ee Ee ee ae ee ‘

COURT OF ROME. 35

LETTER XII.

MaGnIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and enclose the letter
herewith. To-day the Pope made his solemn entrance into
Perugia, leaving the banished, who accompanied him, at the
place indicated in my letter of yesterday, and with such hopes
as I therein stated.

Monseigneur de Narbonne did not have an audience of the
Pope until yesterday, having gone from here to Corciano, where
the Pope had stopped. Up to the present, it is not known what
Monseigneur de Narbonne communicated to his Holiness, but
evidently it was not agreeable to him. Since then we learn
that he dissuaded the Pope in the name of the king from the
enterprise against Bologna, alleging as one of the reasons the
proposed incursion of the Emperor, and pointing out to him
that, inasmuch as the allegiance of the state of Milan to the
king of France was but feeble and uncertain, his Majesty could
not risk stripping himself for the purpose of serving his Holi-
ness. The Pope is very much irritated by this, but has never-
theless decided to carry out this enterprise by himself, even if
all other help fails him. He has to-day expedited Ramazotto
with money for the troops already raised, and has written briefs
to your Lordships and to the Duke of Ferrara, asking of each
permission that Ramazotto as his constable may levy troops
for his account in your respective dominions. And he says
that before reaching Urbino he wants to have six to eight
thousand infantry together, with which he intends marching
towards Bologna. It is believed that the Marquis of Mantua
may perhaps reach Urbino this evening, and that he will serve
the Pope in person. These several reports differ, as your Lord-
ships will observe; but when one has to write every day, one
must follow them, and that must serve as my excuse.

Touching the affairs of Gianpaolo, I must refer to my en-
closed ; and will only add, that since the Pope is here with all
these reverend prelates, and notwithstanding the fact that the
troops of the Church are quartered all around these gates,
whilst those of Gianpaolo are at a somewhat greater distance,
yet the Pope and the Sacred College are more at the discre-
tion of Gianpaolo than he is at theirs. And if Gianpaolo

36 SECOND MISSION TO THE

does no harm to him who came to deprive him of his state,
it must be attributed to his good nature and humanity. How
these matters will end, I do not pretend to know; but we
shall see within the six or eight days that the Pope remains
here. Once Gianpaolo said that there had been two ways for
him to save his state; the one by force, and the other by hu-
mility and by trusting the friends who counselled him to it.
That he had not been willing to employ the first, but had
adopted the second, and for that reason had put everything
into the hands of the Duke of Urbino. It was this Duke who
had induced him to come to Orvieto to see the Pope, and to
do all the other things that have happened. The troops that
are to guard the public square and the gates, and which, as
I advised you, were to have been in Perugia before the en-
trance of the Pope, are not yet there, although the Pope is;
this was one of the things confided to the Duke of Urbino; it
is said, however, that they will be here within a couple of days.
I have nothing else to communicate, but to recommend myself
to your Lordships.
Servus

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Pervata, 13 September, 1506. Secretary.

—_——_@———

LETTER XIII.

MacGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and sent the letter
together with another of mine of the 12th by a courier of Cor-
tona, and the captain of that place will have forwarded them
to your Lordships. Amongst other things I mentioned that
Ramazotto had been sent by the Pope to levy troops; and I
believed that he had already started for that purpose yesterday.
Meeting him, however, at court this morning, he told me that
he would receive his final instructions to-day, and would start
to-morrow morning. If he comes to see me before then, as he
has promised, I will charge him to deliver this to your Lord-
ships. He has orders to raise at least one thousand men, and,
if he can, as many as fifteen hundred.

As I wrote your Lordships yesterday, notwithstanding the

COURT OF ROME. | 37

embassy of Monseigneur de Narbonne, the Pope is more eager
than ever for this enterprise against Bologna. Nor does he
seem to despair entirely of France; for the first advices of
D’Aix keep him in doubt. And although contradictory de-
cisions have come from there, yet the Pope is bent upon going
forward; and if he really sends Ramazotto off to-day, it will
be a significant proof. Every one looks upon it as a very bold
undertaking for the Pope to go forward if France fails him,
and all await the result with anxiety. Many apprehend that,
as a last desperate act, he will throw himself into the arms of
the Venetians; they find it difficult, on the other hand, to un-
derstand how the Venetians can openly declare in favor of this
enterprise, if the king of France refuses so to declare himself;
and they say that his Majesty either cannot or will not aid the
Pope. If he will not, then it is not reasonable that he would
like the Venetians to gain that favor with the Pope which he
is not willing to secure for himself, and that the Pope, in his
dissatisfaction with the king of France, should ally himself
intimately with the Venetians. But if he cannot, and the rea-
son be the apprehended incursion of the Emperor into Italy,
then surely the same considerations that keep the king from
going forward would equally restrain them. Many others say
that the French do not consider the matter so closely, and that
they are indifferent about others doing what they themselves
have declined to do; and that they estimate and judge these
matters quite differently. Time, the father of events, will
show us the result of all this; but it seems to me that I am
not wrong if, in informing you of what is taking place here,
I write you also what is said here about these matters: by-the
courtiers, and by wise and practical men.

It is not known whether any other decision has been come
to as regards the Perugine proscribed. Gianpaolo says that
they may return at their pleasure, but if they are cut to pieces
he will not be held responsible for it. From what I hear, it
seems to me that the subvention which it was intended to give
to Gianpaolo is likely to be converted into a regular engage-
ment (Condotta). But it is said that the Pope does not wish
to have it exceed one hundred men-at-arms, whilst Gianpaolo
is not willing to reduce the number he now has, which is
over one hundred and fifty; but this matter will anyhow be
settled in some satisfactory way. Your Lordships need have

38 SECOND MISSION TO THE

no apprehensions upon this point, for, according to what we
see, the relations between Gianpaolo and the Pope are steadily
improving.

Nothing positive is said as yet as to the time when the Pope
will leave here; it is supposed, however, that he may go about
Sunday next. Valete.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Pervera, 14 September, 1506. Secretary.
—
LETTER XIV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote yesterday to your Lordships, and sent my letter by
the Ferrara post under cover of letters from his Eminence of
Volterra; believing them to have arrived safely, I do not now
repeat the same. Since then I received last night your Lord-
ships’ letter of the 11th, and at once called upon the Pope and
read to him the information it contained. He seemed to be
aware of the death of the king of Poland, but does not believe
in that of the son of the king of Hungary, and affirms that, if
it were true, the Emperor could not attempt to come into Italy,
and that in fact he will not come anyhow.

I communicated furthermore to his Eminence of Pavia the
paragraph which replies to the letter which Messer Filiberto
had written him. He was much pleased at it, and renewed
his assurances to me that he had not spoken of it to any one
beyond his Eminence of Volterra and myself. I thanked him
again for this, in the name of your Lordships.

This morning some of the troops from the duchy of Urbino
began to arrive; they are probably those that are to constitute
the garrison of this place, in accordance with the stipulations of
the agreement. The proscribed have not yet arrived, nor has
anything further been heard of them.

It is reported that the Pope will leave day after to-morrow,
and move towards Urbino, and that he will make his first halt
at Agobbio, or perhaps at Fratta. I believe in his departure,
for he has settled everything here in good shape, and has noth-
ing more to do here.

COURT OF ROME. 39

Respecting the enterprise against Bologna the opinion con-
tinues the same, that the Pope is most eager for it. Ramazotto
has received his orders, and leaves this morning. I shall send
this letter by a person who goes to Florence by post. Speaking
this morning with the agent of Messer Giovanni, he told me
that the Pope was beginning to listen to the Venetians, and
that it might easily be that he arranged with them to unite in
this enterprise. He seemed to regard this as very favorable,
because he could not believe but what the king of France
would lend his aid to Messer Giovanni in case the Venetians
should join the Pope and openly declare against him, as the
king would not permit others to do that which he had refused
to do himself.

Of Monseigneur d’Aix there is no further news that I
know of.

Yesterday I had a long conversation with Messer Ercole
Bentivogli, who has come here with the Duke of Urbino. His
opinions with regard to the Pope are confused; and he says
that there is but one way in which the Pope can succeed in
driving Messer Giovanni from Bologna; and that is by subject-
ing him to a constant expenditure of money; as, for instance,
by going to Imola, and from there to spread through the sur-
rounding places some six or seven hundred men-at-arms and
five or six thousand infantry, and scour the neighborhood dur-
ing the winter; and then in the spring raise a large force, and
threaten the country with devastation. He seems convinced
that Messer Giovanni would not support such a campaign,
being unwilling to spend what little money he has without be-
ing sure of his safety, lest he should find himself afterwards
homeless and poor. He seems to have no doubt that the
Pope will adopt this plan; and speaking on this subject with
one of the gentlemen here, he told me that this is really the
plan which the Pope has decided upon.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Pervuer, 15 September, 1506. Secretary.

40 SECOND MISSION TO THE

LETTER XV.

MaGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships this morning of what was going on
here, and sent the letter by Zitolo, who was returning by post
to Florence. As another person is about to leave now, I will
not lose the opportunity of sending your Lordships a line about
what I have learnt since.

The Perugian exiles have returned this morning, but only the
old ones; the more recent ones, such as Carlo Baglioni and
those who were concerned with him in the homicide, remain in
exile. I believe that, if the Pope were to give the order, they
would also be allowed to return, which would be a great harm
to Gianpaolo, as it would deprive him of the large possessions
which he would have to restore to these exiles, who have still
many old friends; and the minds of men who have been accus-
tomed to look only to one man begin to be diverted from him.
On the other hand, seeing the many supporters of Gianpaolo,
and that his credit and reputation have increased rather than
diminished by all these changes, it is more generally believed
that these exiles would be cut to pieces if they are not wise
enough to withdraw of their own accord.

The Pope has this morning declared in full consistory that the
help promised him by France was ready ; this, however, amounts
to no more than what I have indicated in previous letters. He
said, furthermore, that the Venetians had given him to under-
stand that, since the projects of the Emperor have been aban-
doned, and the apprehensions on that account in great measure
dispelled, they were not only well pleased with this enterprise
against Bologna, but offered him whatever assistance he might
himself desire. This is all I have for the moment to communi-
cate to your Lordships, except to recommend myself.

Some say that the Pope will leave on Monday; others name
Friday. The Marquis has not yet come, and it is now the
twentieth hour.
| Servus

Niccolo MACHIAVELLI,
Prrveta, 16 September, 1506. Secretary.

COURT OF ROME. 41

LETTER XVI.

MaGnirIcent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last was of the 16th; I have not written since for want
of the convenience of sending my letters, and nothing of suff-
cient importance has occurred to warrant the sending of an
express.

The Marquis of Mantua arrived here on the 17th, and was
met by the whole court. Yesterday he had a long audience of
the Pope, but the result is not known as yet. I have talked
with some of his suite, with whom I had a previous friendly ac-
quaintance; and on asking them as to what the Marquis said
of this enterprise, they replied, that the Marquis, being a soldier,
naturally liked war, but that he did not like it near his own
house or against his friends; and they hinted to me that he
would do all he could to bring about an agreement.

Six ambassadors from Bologna are expected here; they may
arrive at any hour, and we shall then see whether an agree-
ment is likely to be effected; and so soon as I know I will in-
form your Lordships.

I called upon the Marquis to pay my respects on your behalf ;
he thanks you, and offers his services in return, etc., etc.

As already mentioned to your Lordships in my previous
letters, the exiles from here, with exception of Carlo Baglioni
and those who were concerned with him in the last murder,
have returned, and are making unceasing efforts to settle their
matters with Gianpaolo. There are difficulties as to who will
answer for each of them. Gianpaolo says that he will be re-
sponsible for himself and his house, but that he cannot guaran-
tee them against strangers or the whole country ; that, however,
does not satisfy the exiles. On the other hand, they cannot find
any one who will answer for ‘them, as no one here is willing
openly to declare against Gianpaolo, who has been very cunning
in this matter, having asked all the friends of the exiles to be
security for him, so that, having promised it to him, they cannot
be asked or compelled to answer for the others. Owing to this
difficulty of finding security, there has been some talk of restor-
ing to these exiles their possessions, provided they will not re-
main in Perugia. I do not know how they will settle it, but I
do know that Gianpaolo and his friends are doing all they can

42 SECOND MISSION TO THE

to prevent any arrangement. Gianpaolo opposes all sorts of
difficulties to the return of these exiles, and above all to the
restitution of their possessions, which ea a revenue of about
four thousand florins.

Whilst I had gone out yesterday to ae the Marquis of
Mantua, the Popa sent two of his grooms to my house to
ask me to come to him. After my return I showed myself
at court, and remained there all of yesterday; but not a word
was said to me. I surmise that the Pope wanted that your
troops should advance, but that he has since then concluded
to defer it.

All idea of the Emperor’s coming into Italy has been given
up here by the court, and it is said that this is in consequence
of certain fresh letters received from Venice, which show that
the project is entirely abandoned. It is reported that the Pope
will leave here on Monday or Tuesday next, and follow the route
which I have mentioned in a former letter.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Prrveia, 19 September, 1506.

I have omitted to tell your Lordships that the one hundred
Stradiotes, which the Pope had told me he expected from Na-
ples, have arrived, and that they are fine-looking men and well
mounted.

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secretary.

P. S. — To-day is the 20th, and it is understood that the Pope
has changed his plans and will not send San Pietro in Vincola*
into the Romagna, and perhaps will not even send his troops
there; and that, if he does send them there in advance of
himself, they will be accompanied: by Bishop Pazzi,} or by some
other prelate of similar rank. Notwithstanding what I wrote
you yesterday, we hear from Venice that the king of France will
act openly with the Venetians if the Emperor should after all

* This is Galeotto Franciotto della Rovere, Cardinal with the title of S. Pietro
in Vincola, which title had been borne by Giuliano della Rovere before his elec-
tion as Pope under the name of Julius II.

t This was the Bishop of Arezzo, who afterwards, in 1508, became the Arch-
bishop of Florence.

COURT OF ROME. 43

determine to come into Italy; and that they have replied to
the ambassadors of the Emperor that he must come unarmed ;
and as these demanded on behalf of their master the sum of
sixteen thousand ducats, in virtue of the obligation subscribed
by them when he came to Livorno, the Venetians replied that
it was not sixteen thousand, but about four or five thousand,
which they would send him at their convenience; whereupon
the ambassadors left dissatisfied.

The Pope will leave here on Tuesday and go to Fratta, and
Bishop Pazzi goes into the Romagna.

LETTER XVII.

MaGniFIcent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

This morning I wrote to your Lordships the events of the day,
and sent my letter to the commandant of Cortona by a person
who was returning there. Since then we have the news that
the exiles of Furli have tried to return within the walls of that
place, but being discovered they withdrew shouting, “ Marco!
“Marco!” and that they had both infantry and mounted men
with them, which they had drawn from the Venetian dominions.
Your Lordships ought to have more full and reliable information
about this at Florence. The Pope has been greatly irritated
by this occurrence, and has resolved to send all his troops
in that direction, it seeming to him also very convenient with
regard to his enterprise against Bologna, and having no further
need of his troops near him until he reaches Furli. The Pope
imagines, moreover, that the sending of his troops ahead on that
road will add reputation to his enterprise, and at the same time
keep things quiet at Furli. And so as to have some one with
these troops who is competent to settle matters and regulate
that place, he has sent with them the Cardinal San Pietro
in Vincola, Legate of the Romagna; and I hear that Bishop
Pazzi is to accompany him.

The men-at-arms are being reviewed to-day, and on Monday
the Cardinal leaves, unless he should go to-morrow morning;
the Pope, however, may remain here a few days longer, as
he can do so without losing time, having sent his men-at-arms

44 SECOND MISSION TO THE

ahead. I will keep your Lordships promptly informed of what-
ever occurs, and recommend myself most humbly.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Pervuets, 19 September, 1506. Secretary.

LETTER XVIII.

MaGnIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your ete on the 19th, and sent te letter

by way of Cortona; I afterwards wrote again on the same day,

“but kept the letter a the 20th, and sent it by Andrea Carne-
secchi, who was returning to Florence.

It is now the morning of the 21st, and to-day the Pope, after
having dined, will go to Fratta on his route, unless he should
change his mind; he is still awaiting the decision of the king
as to the French troops. I wrote to your Lordships, that, in
the pacification and settlement of matters here between the
proscribed and Gianpaolo, amongst other difficulties one had
arisen as to the guaranties and sureties for the peace which
had to be given by each to the other. These sureties have
since been given, and this morning, after a solemn mass, at
which the Pope assisted, this peace was formally declared.
The returned exiles will have their properties restored to them,
which, as I have already written, yield a revenue of four thou-
sand florins of the country. Gianpaolo goes with the Pope,
and his troops march with the others. I wrote that it had
been decided to send San Pietro in Vincola with the troops in
advance to Furli, on account of the disturbances that have
broken out there, and that Bishop Pazzi was to accompany
him. This decision has since then been changed, and the
Bishop alone is to go there, and I believe that this will be
carried out, although he has not yet started. This is all that
.1 have to communicate in relation to the affairs of the Pope,
and I beg your Lordships not to be surprised at being two or
three days without letters from me, but to accept my not writ-
ing as proof that there is nothing worth writing about.

From what your Lordships say in yours of the 19th, the
affairs of the Emperor, according to the news from Venice,

COURT OF ROME, 45

are cooling off, whilst, according to information from other
quarters, they are growing warmer; and but a few days since
the news from Venice represented them as becoming warmer,
and from other quarters we heard they were growing cooler. I
am unable to judge of the cause or the truth of these changes.

We have no news either from Naples or from King Ferdi-
nand. I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
PeErueia, 21 September, 1506. Secretary.
——_»—__—_—_
LETTER XIX.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 21st from Perugia, and
sent the letter by Giuliano Lapi. The Pope left Perugia on
the same day and went to Fratta; yesterday he came here to
Agobbio; to-day he goes to Santiano, ten miles from here, and
to-morrow he will go to a castle about ten miles farther, but
the name of which I do not know. The day after, he will go
to Urbino; how long he may remain there, however, I cannot
tell. From Urbino he intends going to Cesena by the moun-
tain road, so as to avoid passing through Rimini. He will
endeavor to settle matters in Cesena and then proceed to Furli,
where all his troops, who went there with Gianpaolo and the
other captains through La Marca, will probably make a halt.
Bishop Pazzi left Perugia yesterday morning, and went by the
direct route to Furli to keep things quiet there until the arrival
of the Pope, who hopes to restore peace and order there, and
will then decide finally with regard to his enterprise against
Bologna; for by this time the Bolognese ambassadors must
have arrived there. The answer from France whether their
troops are to advance beyond Parma must also have arrived,
and we shall then know, if not sooner, whether we are to have
peace or war. The whole court is of opinion that some ar-
rangement will be brought about, and yet all depends upon
‘the French troops, although, as | have several times written,
the Pope has declared that he will carry out this enterprise
anyhow, even without the aid of the French troops.

46 SECOND MISSION TO THE

I cannot say how long the Pope may remain at Urbino, and
how many days he will take to go there, but your Lordships
can form as good a judgment of it as I can here. | have
nothing else to write, as there is really nothing new.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
AGosBio, 23 September, 1506. Secretary.
—_——@——_—_
LETTER XX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 23d from Agobbio, and gave
you the order of march which the Pope would take to reach
Furli, and to which he has thus far conformed; for to-day he
made his entrance into Urbino, where it is said he intends re-
maining until Monday, and then proceeding on his journey. I
have written that the affairs of Perugia were settled in the
manner mentioned in several of my letters, so that we have
only Bologna to think of; but that this enterprise remains in
suspense until the arrival of the Bolognese ambassadors, and
until the receipt of the reply from France, whether their troops
are to pass Parma or not; and that we shall then see whether
we are to have peace or war. I have nothing new to say upon
this point, as no further intelligence has been received from
France, nor have the Bolognese ambassadors arrived yet. I
can only assure your Lordships again, that the Pope is hotter
than ever for this enterprise, and that within the last two days,
speaking confidentially of this affair, he said, that by his leay-
ing Rome he had shown to the whole world his determination
to reduce all the cities belonging to the Church to proper obe-
dience and to deliver them from their tyrants, and that so far
as in him lay he would show again that such was his intention ;
but that if those who had promised him their aid failed him,
he would, etc., etc. Those who best know the temper of the
Pope believe, that, if he is to throw himself headlong into
any affair, this would be the least perilous into which he could
precipitate himself. And they have come to this conclusion
because the Pope has gone so far with his will and his demon-

COURT OF ROME. AT

strations, that he must either carry out his first intention, or
hastily adopt such other course as may seem best to him; or
that he deludes himself with the thought of some honest ar-
rangement, if not in reality yet in appearance. But such an
honest arrangement seems difficult to find. That he will suc-
ceed according to his original design is not believed, owing to
the conduct of the French; but it is generally feared lest he
throw himself headlong into some worse danger.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Ursino, 25 September, 1506.

I stated in my previous letter that the Pope’s troops, and
Gianpaolo with his men-at-arms, had gone by La Marea. to-
wards Furli; this has proved to be a fact, although we have
not yet heard whether Gianpaolo in person has already left
Perugia.

The infantry of the Duke of Urbino, that had come to Peru-
gia as garrison of the gates and of the public square of Perugia,
did not remain there, but have gone with the troops towards
La Marca.

The Marquis of Mantua accompanies the Pope regularly with
one hundred mounted crossbowmen, which he brought with him
from Mantua. terum valete.

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secretary.

LETTER XXI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and enclose the letter
with this. I have now to inform your Lordships that Messer
Antonio de Montibus has returned from Bologna, and reports
its citizens ready to give every proof of being well disposed
towards the Holy Church, provided the Pope respects existing
treaties; but if he attempts to change them, they are prepared
to defend themselves. Messer Antonio makes great report of
the preparations made by Messer Giovanni; it is said, however,
that these preparations are calculated rather to make enemies
than to gain friends, because they oblige the citizens to arm

48 SECOND MISSION TO THE

themselves at their own expense; and there are many other
measures of similar character that will provoke hostility rather
than friendly support.

I conversed this morning with the representative of Messer
Giovanni here, and asked him whether the ambassadors would
come; he said that they had started to come, but, owing
to certain declarations made by Messer Antonio de Montibus,
they had become doubtful as to their safety, and had therefore
written for a safe-conduct from the Pope, which he had offered
orally, but declined to give in writing; and that, relying upon
these assurances of the Pope, they had been written to, and
that he believed they were now on the way.

Yesterday letters were received from France, which seem to
have given great pleasure to the Pope, for he expressed the
opinion, within hearing of every one, that he would have the
French troops anyhow, and actually held in his hands a list of
the officers and troops that are to come. More than this he
has not communicated, and I am not able, therefore, to give
any further particulars.

It is said that the Pope will leave on Tuesday and go in the
direction of Cesena.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
Niccolo MACHIAVELLI,
Ursino, September 26, 1506. Secretary.

LETTER XXII.

MaentFicent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote yesterday to your Lordships, and enclosed my letter
of the 25th at the same time, and sent both by way of the Borgo.
I have nothing of interest to communicate in this; but as the
courier leaves for Florence and may possibly arrive there before
my above-mentioned letters, I would not let him go without a
line from me.

Yesterday evening, after having despatched my letters by
way of the Borgo, I received your Lordships’ letters of the 22d
and 24th, with the news from France and other parts. I shall
use the information as I may judge opportune, although the

COURT OF ROME. 49

Pope must have received the same intelligence direct from
France, for he had letters from there the day before yesterday,
and is very hopeful of receiving troops from there, although,
according to what I hear, no formal resolution to that effect
has been received from there. I have written in my last about
the Bolognese ambassadors, and the cause of the delay in their
coming.

The Pope leaves here on Tuesday and goes to Santa Fiore, a
borough of some hundred houses, so that I believe that one
half the court or more will go towards Cesena to await the
Pope there, and I shall probably be one of these, as it is impos-
sible to follow him in such little villages; and as, moreover,
it is not likely that anything of moment will occur during the
two days required to go to Cesena. I have nothing else to say
in this letter, unless it be that the Pope becomes daily more
determined to go ahead, and to carry this enterprise into effect.
Valete !

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Ursino, 27 September, 1506. Cancel,

LETTER XXIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI: —

My last to your Lordships was of yesterday, when I wrote
you such unimportant matters as had occurred here, and which
were mainly an account of the Pope’s journey, and that he was
to leave to-morrow for Cesena, which he will do unless he
changes his mind. He will take three days to reach Cesena, and
will not go by Montefiore,* but will go to-morrow to Macerata,
and so move on from castle to castle until he reaches Cesena,
where he may remain some days and come to a definite con-
clusion respecting this enterprise; for by that time he must
have received the final resolve of the king of France. Yester-
day the Pope held a long conference, at which were present the
Duke of Urbino, the Venetian ambassador, and Monsignore di
Pavia. It has not transpired what subjects were discussed,

* In the previous letter Machiavelli called this place Santa Fiore, which shows
how uncertain and variable proper names then were.

VOL IV. 4

50 SECOND MISSION TO THE

but it is supposed that it related mainly to this enterprise, and
to the guaranty of security which the Venetians ask of the
Pope through the king of France. His Holiness promises not
to attack them, which corresponds with the information which
your Lordships have received from France, according to which
the king advises the Pope to satisfy the Venetians in some way
upon this point, as your Lordships state in your letter before
the last, of the 24th instant. It is said that the Pope is willing
to give his verbal promise to the effect that during his lhfetime
he will in no way disturb them. But it seems that this does
not satisfy the Venetians, who desire to have a formal and
authentic obligation ; and thus they are working at this matter.
The more the Pope advances, the deeper he becomes involved
in this enterprise; and they, that is to say the Venetians and
the king of France, are watching for him to get into some
strait, so as to bring him to bow to their will; and if the king
holds firm to the Venetians, they may possibly succeed. But
I have been told by one who is quite familiar with these in-
trigues, that, although the king hopes to humble the Pope in
this way, yet the Pope will most assuredly humble the king,
and will drive the spurs into his flank, if this resolution as to
the troops does not come at the Pope’s convenience. What
spurs the Holy Father may be able to apply for this object I
know not, but your Lordships can form your own judgment of
the matter.

From your Lordships’ last letters, of the 24th and 26th, I
have learned the agreement between Gonsalvo and the king
of Naples, which was already known here through some other
source. Nevertheless I have communicated all the informa-
tion contained in your letters to his Holiness, who was glad to
reccive it, and thanks your Lordships; he wishes me to make
known to him whatever news I may receive from Florence, as
he has much faith in whatever your Lordships write.

I have heard the agreement between Gonsalvo and the king
much discussed, and every one wonders that Gonsalvo has faith
in it; and the more liberal the king shows himself towards
him, the more every one suspects the agreement, thinking
that the king does it only for the purpose of reassuring Gon-
salvo, so that under the guise of this security he may be the
better able to dispose of him. Many other reasons are alleged
which I do not mention, as the whole subject has no great in-

COURT OF ROME. oF

terest for your Lordships, and because matters of this sort are
difficult to be judged of, as are all other things that depend
upon the arbitrary will and pleasure of men.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.
Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Unsino, 28 September, 1506. Secretary.

LETTER XXIV.

MaGniricEent SigNori, ETC. : —

I have already written to your Lordships this morning, and
sent my letter by the sculptor Sansovino, who was returning
post haste to Florence. Since then the Pope had me called to
him, and said to me, in presence of his Eminence of Volterra,
that the only object he had in leaving Rome and subjecting
himself to so many discomforts was to deliver the cities of the
Church from their tyrants, and to render them secure against
external as well as internal foes. That it was for no other
reason that he had stopped at Perugia, and on his departure
from there had made Gianpaolo leave also, and had taken him
with him; and therefore he was most desirous that others
should not disturb the peace and quiet which he had estab-
lished. He was greatly displeased, consequently, to learn that
Niccolo Savello, being on the confines of Perugia, indulged in
conduct that caused apprehensions to the citizens of that town,
lest at the instigation of Carlo Baglioni, or others of that
stamp, he should commit some outrage upon them. His Holi-
ness therefore entreated your Lordships, in the name of that
affection which you had always manifested towards the Church
and himself personally, to take such measures as would pre-
vent any subject of the Church from being molested either by
any of your people, or at the instigation of any one. I replied
to his Holiness in a becoming manner, assuring him that it
was unnecessary to write to you, yet to satisfy him I would
do so.

His Holiness added, furthermore, that inasmuch as_ his
nephew, the Prefect, was to succeed to the state of Urbino, he
regarded that state as already his, although the Duke was still

52 SECOND MISSION TO THE

in possession; and therefore he felt constrained to ask your
Lordships to modify certain duties upon merchandise, and
more especially those upon leather, as these duties were most
prejudicial to that state. True, the Duke might by way of re-
prisal increase the duties upon all merchandise passing through
his state; but that he did not wish to do so without first advis-
ing your Lordships of it, as he had done on former occasions,
although it had resulted in nothing but fair words. And al-
though the respect due to that state, and the merits of him
who was lord of the same, ought of themselves to have in-
fluenced your Lordships, nevertheless his Holiness desired to
add his request that you would lay him under a fresh obliga-
tion, as it was his particular wish that the Prefect should
always continue to live in harmony and in good relations with
your Lordships. I pray your Lordships to reply upon these
two points in such manner as in your wisdom you may Judge
best.

For the purpose of more promptly solving the question with
France, the Pope has this day sent his chamberlain Messer
Menchier to Milan. And by way of doing honor to the king
of Spain he has sent Messer Gabriello Merino to Rome, with
orders to go on board of one of the galleys at Ostia, and go out
to sea as far as possible to meet the king. His Holiness leaves
to-morrow morning for Cesena, as mentioned in my letter of
this morning.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Ursino, 28 September, 1506. Secretary.
a ce)
LETTER XXV.

MaGNIFIcENnT SiGNoRI, ETC. : —

On the 28th, I wrote two letters to your Lordships from
Urbino, the last of which you will find enclosed herewith.
On the following day the Pope left here according to previous
arrangements, and went to Macerata, whilst myself with seven
eighths of the court went to San Marino, and leaving there yes-
terday morning I arrived last night, at the twenty-second hour,

COURT OF ROME. 53

at Cesena. The Pope lodged last night at San Marino, and will
stay to-night at Santo Arcangiolo, and to-morrow evening he
will make his entry here.

Yesterday evening I found the six Bolognese ambassadors
here, who are going again to the Pope, and are eagerly looked
for by the court. They left here to meet the Pope, and lodged
last night at Santo Arcangiolo, where the Pope is to arrive to-
day, and where they will find the old Bolognese ambassadors
and Messer Giovanni’s secretary, who were to await them there.
These ambassadors had scarcely alighted from their horses
and gone to their lodgings when a mounted messenger came
to them from Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, who informed them
that the father of Messer Giovanni Gonzadini, a Bolognese and
Datary to the Pope, had been assassinated by some of his par-
ticular enemies; and that he had been sent to inform them
of this occurrence, so that, on account of the son and the rank
which he holds in the Pope’s service, they might promptly look
to their safety. So soon, therefore, as the old ambassadors and
the new ones heard this news, they hastily remounted, and, leav-
ing all their effects behind, went off, taking the road to Rimini.
When their flight became known, they were pursued by the
men of Santo Arcangiolo, and three of them were captured,
namely, the two old ambassadors and one of the new, but the
other five escaped and are now at Rimini. The three that
were taken are confined in the castle of Santo Arcangiolo, and
the effects of all of them have been sequestered. It is said
that the Pope has sent to recall these ambassadors, assuring
them of their safety, that is to say those who are at Rimini;
but the three who are shut up in the castle have not been set
free, nor have their effects been released. So bad a beginning
is likely to give rise to other similar troubles.

On the 28th there arrived at Urbino a certain Messer Agos-
tino Semenza,* a native of Cremona, and brother of that Paolo
Semenza who was formerly secretary of the Duke of Milan whilst
at Florence. It is said that this individual is secretary to the
Emperor, and that he has now been sent by him to the Pope, and
that he has many letters of credence for some of the cardinals
and others. He reports the coming of the Emperor as posi-
tively certain. I do not know any particulars of what he says,

* Respecting this Messer Agostino, the Annals of Cremona, by L. Cavitelli,
may be consulted. He is there spoken of as “ Augustinus Somentius,” etc.

54 SECOND MISSION TO THE

not having as yet conversed with him; but I will endeavor to
have a talk with him, and will then inform your Lordships of
what I learn from him. I understand that he says that the
Emperor sends two ambassadors to the Pope, namely, the Car-
dinal of Brixen,* and Casimir, Marquis of Brandenburg, who
have no other commission than to announce the Emperor’s
coming, and have nothing to ask of the Pope. Nor have I any-
thing else to write to your Lordships except to recommend my-
self to you, gue felices valeant.
Servus
Nicco.o MACHIAVELLI,
CrsEena, 1 October, 1506. Secret. apud Papam.

LETTER XXVI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 1st instant, and sent the
letter by way of Castrocaro, enclosing at the same time one of
the 28th ultimo. Yesterday evening I received your Lordships’
letter also of the Ist, in which you mention one of the 29th
ultimo, but which has never been received. Yours of the 1st
instant communicates the resolution taken by France in relation
to the troops claimed by the Pope, and which the king cheer-
fully places at his service. This news had already been received
here, and has encouraged the Pope to that degree that he looks
upon Bologna as already conquered, and begins to think of
other and vaster enterprises. It is said that this resolution
of France is drawn up in terms most honorable for the Pope ;
and that the king has publicly discouraged both the Bolognese
and the Venetian ambassadors, who supplicated him in favor
of Bologna. I refrain from writing any particulars of this to
your Lordships, for if true your ambassador will have informed
you of it, and if false it is not necessary to write about it. |

In my last I mentioned the murder in Bologna of the father
of the Pope’s Datary, and the disturbances to which this event

* This was Melchior Cops, or Copis, a German who, being Bishop of Brixen,
or Bressanone, was made Cardinal by Alexander VI. in the year 1503. Having
been sent to Rome as ambassador of the Emperor Maximilian, he died there in
the month of May, 1509, and was buried in the church of Ara Ceeli.

COURT OF ROME. 5455

has given rise here, and that the Bolognese ambassadors had
fled from Santo Arcangiolo to Rimini, and that the Pope had
sent to call them back, promising them perfect security. And
so it turned out, for the said ambassadors returned here yester-
day before the Pope had made his entry. So soon as he had
reached his lodgings they were admitted, but they merely
kissed his feet without saying a word. This morning they
presented themselves again before his Holiness, and in a
lengthy address expressed the respect and devotion of the
people of Bologna to the Church, referring to the treaties
made with several of the Popes, and which had been con-
firmed by the present one. They concluded by explaining
the political conduct of their city and asseverating their re-
ligious devotion to the laws.

His Holiness replied, that, if the people of Bologna were de-
voted to the Church, it was no more than their duty, for they
were under obligations to the Church, which was as good a
mistress to them as they were good servants to her; that he
had come in person to liberate the city from her tyrants; and
that as to the treaties he cared neither for those made by other
Popes, nor for that made by himself, for neither his predeces-
sors nor himself could have done otherwise, and that it was
necessity and not his free will that had made him confirm
the treaty ; but that the time had now arrived for correcting
these things, and it seemed to him that if he did not do so he
would have no excuse to offer to the Almighty; and that it
was for that reason that he had started from Rome, his object
being to make Bologna govern herself properly, and for that
reason he intended to come there in person; and if her gov-
ernment pleased him he would confirm it, and if not then he
would change it; and to be able to do so by force of arms, in
case all other modes did not suffice, he had provided himself
with an army that would make all Italy tremble, let alone
Bologna.

The ambassadors remained confounded, and after a few
words of reply they took their leave. To-morrow there will
be another review here of the men-at-arms, who are quartered
in the vicinity of Santo Arcangiolo. I think orders have been
given for the raising of infantry, and, according to what I hear,
the Pope will go on Tuesday next to Furli, where his presence
is much desired; for it is understood that that place, notwith-

56 SECOND MISSION TO THE

standing the proximity of the Pope, is constantly under arms,
of which your Lordships can be more particularly informed by —
Pier Francesco Tosinghi.*

Since the Pontiff has been informed of the resolution of
France, he has brought forward again the question of Marc
Antonio and the hundred men-at-arms, which he asks of your
Lordships. He has said repeatedly that he had not claimed
them before, because he wished to satisfy your Lordships, who
had importuned him to defer this demand as long as possible,
and also for some other good reasons. But that he now desires
most earnestly that these men-at-arms should be held in readi-
ness to march promptly whenever he should require it. I for
my part expect every moment that the Pope will have me
called, and will charge me to write to your Lordships to start
these troops. 1 recommend myself to your Lordships, gue
bene valeant.

Crspna, 3 October, 1506.

P. S.— Magnificent Signori,—It is now some days since I
find myself greatly in want of money. I have not asked for
any before now, because | counted every day upon returning
to Florence; but seeing that this is delayed, I implore your
Lordships for charity’s sake to supply me with means, and
recommend myself anew.

Servitor
NIccoLO MACHIAVELLI,
Secret, Flor, apud Papam.

LETTER XXVII.

MaeniFicent SIGNoRI, ETC. : —

I wrote yesterday to your Lordships, and sent the letter by
the Commissary of the Romagna; nothing new has occurred
since then, and I should not have written but for the oppor-
tunity which offered for sending it.

It is still believed that the Pope will leave on Tuesday for

* This Tosinghi was Commissary-General in Castrocaro in 1506; and it was
through him that Machiavelli generally sent his letters to Florence, and vice versa
the Florentine government sent their letters through him to Machiavelli.

COURT OF ROME. 57

Furli, notwithstanding that all who follow the court are dis-
pleased on account of the difficulty of finding suitable lodgings
as compared with those here. Several of the cardinals have
gone to the Pope to induce him to change his purpose ; namely,
to remain here in person with the whole court, and to send the
remainder of his troops forward, so as to distribute the whole
army between Furli and Imola. They did not succeed, how-
ever, for the Pope seems to think that it would detract from
the lustre of this enterprise if he were to stop so far away
from the main object. To-morrow his Holiness will hold a
consistory, after which some definite resolution will probably
be taken with regard to the way in which this enterprise is to
be carried on. Whatever I may learn on the subject shall im-
mediately be communicated to your Lordships.

The review of the men-at-arms did not take place to-day, as
I had written in my letter of yesterday. It is now said that it
will be held to-morrow. Gianpaolo Baglioni arrived here to-
day,and the Duke of Urbino is expected to-morrow. The Mar-
quis of Mantua is here as usual, and accompanies the Pope on
all his journeys.

Ramazotto has sent a messenger to inform his Holiness that
he has completed the raising of the infantry, and calls for the
rest of the pay. There are no indications of their raising any
other infantry, and some captains who have come here in the
hope of being employed begin to despair. It is doubted, in
fact, whether the Pope may not content himself with the two
thousand Italians, counting, on the other hand, upon the three
thousand Swiss whom the French want to have with them.
I understand that he has sent thirty thousand ducats to Milan
for three months’ pay of these Swiss, which they are in the
habit of requiring before they march, as is well known to
your Lordships.

The Legate of Perugia continues to write to the Pope that
the state of things in that place is constantly improving, and
that the mass of the people are thoroughly content, and cannot
thank God and his Holiness enough for having taken the trou-
ble to save them from slavery; and that they pray to God
every day for the welfare of his Holiness. He writes also that
he has caused the Magistracy of the Ten to resign their office,
and has not allowed others to be elected, and that he has in
this way abolished a magistracy that always sustained the

58 SECOND MISSION TO THE

tyranny; and that it has cost him a great deal of trouble to
carry this matter through, but that having done so had given
him great reputation; so that according to him the Church
pushes every day a fresh root into that city, whilst those of her
opponents are daily drying up.

These are matters which we must leave to time to develop
and confirm. I recommend myself to your Lordships, que
Felices valeant.

Servus
NiIccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
CusEena, 4 October, 1506. Secret. apud Papam.

LETTER XXVIII.

MaGNniFIcENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and amongst other
things mentioned that the Pope was to leave here to-morrow
for Furli; from what I learn to-day, however, it seems that he
will not do so, but will postpone his departure until the day
after. His object in staying over is to adjust matters here a
little better, and to restore tranquillity amongst these people
of Cesena. But if to establish peace here is difficult, to main-
tain it is still more so; for these people have indulged in
murder, robbery, arson, and every other act of violence and
hostility against one another. Yet the Pope has patched up
matters between them, and it is supposed that, if he is sue-
cessful in this enterprise against Bologna, he may afterwards
consolidate this peace here if he is so inclined.

The review of the men-at-arms has been held; there were
six hundred men, counting two light-horse for each man-at-
arms. The one thousand infantry of the Duke of Urbino were
also reviewed; also sixteen hundred other infantry, which the
Pope had empioyed Nanni Morattini of Furli* to raise, and in
addition to these three hundred Swiss of the Pope’s guard.
The troops raised by Ramazotto have not yet made their ap-
pearance ; but he came here in person, and stated that he had
organized four thousand in case the Pope should want them.

* This Nanni Morattini was Captain-General of Antonio Ordelaffi of Furli.
See History of the Marquis of Furli.

COURT OF ROME. 89

He bestows great praise upon your Lordships for having per-
mitted him to engage even some of those that had been en-
rolled for your service. I cannot refrain from telling your
Lordships that, if you were to see the troops of the Duke
of Urbino and those of Morattini, your Lordships would not
feel ashamed of your own troops, nor esteem them lightly.

This morning the Pope held a consistory, and the only thing
discussed was the resolve to employ ecclesiastical censure
against Bologna in addition to the force of arms that has
been prepared. It seems to me that Messer Giovanni Benti-
vogli is beginning to give way somewhat, and to come down
a little from the high ground which he has assumed till now.

It is understood that the French are coming by day’s marches,
and that Chaumont is coming with them, and that their force
consists of six hundred lances, three thousand infantry, and
twenty-four pieces of artillery.

This morning after the review the Marquis of Mantua and
the Duke of Urbino remained closeted with the Pope for over
three hours. It is supposed that the subject under discussion
was this enterprise, but no particulars are known; I learn,
however, from a person who has conversed with the Marquis,
that he makes a thousand difficulties.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Consul. apud Papam.

LETTER XXIX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and inter cetera stated
that the departure of the Pope from here had been fixed for
to-morrow. It seems, however, that he has again changed his
mind; and there will be a consistory to-morrow, at which the
only question to be examined is the manner in which the ec-
clesiastical censure is to be launched against the Bolognese.

At this moment, it being about the twenty-second hour, the
ambassador of the king of Castile has notified the Pope that
his Majesty has died, at Burgos, of a malady called in Italy

60 SECOND MISSION TO THE

the “ Mazzuceco”;* and as this death may cause the return of
King Ferdinand to Spain, or some other movement, I write
to your Lordships in all haste by way of Castrocaro, fearing
that your Lordships will not get this news so promptly in any
other way. The Pope has to-day engaged Ramazotto with six
hundred infantry, and Nanni Morattini with three hundred men,
and has taken measures to have some five to six thousand at
his option, of which the one thousand men from Feltro con-
stitute a part, as I have before mentioned to your Lordships.
The French will bring with them four to five thousand men.
The Bolognese have opened negotiations, and ask that two
cardinals be sent there to see and make reforms; but his
Holiness persists in his resolution to march upon Bologna.
It is said now that he will start to-morrow after dinner, which
seems to me difficult; but we shall certainly start the day after
for Furli. Valete.
Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Cesena, 6 October, 1506. Secret. apud Papam.

* This event was announced to Machiavelli by Cardinal Soderini, in a letter
still extant, and dated at Cesena, 6 October, in precisely the same terms which
Machiavelli uses, in writing to the Florentine Signoria, about the nature of the
malady of which the Archduke Philip died. Muratoriin the Annals of Italy in
1528, speaks of the “ Mazzucco” as a pestilential fever which attacks the inhab-
itants of Padua, rendering them mad and desirous to throw themselves out of
the window, or into wells and rivers, and for which medical men have found no
remedy as yet. He reports also that in the same year the imperial army was
attacked by this epidemic, which caused much suffering and great mortality
amongst the troops. It recurred in the years 1414, 1510, 1558, and 1580, in which
last year Anne of Austria, wife of King Philip I1., died of it. The historian Mari-
ana, Vol. II. p. 225, in speaking of the death of the Archduke Philip, expresses
himself as follows: “The King Don Philip was seized with a pestilential fever
“that carried him off in a few days. Some persons suspected that he had been
“ poisoned, but his own physicians, amongst whom was Louis Marliano, a Milanese,
“‘who afterwards became Bishop of Tuy, proved that the real cause of his illness
“had been too violent exercise.” He adds, that he died on the 25th of September,
1506, at ten o’clock, Pp. M., at the age of twenty-eight years. In fine, this sickness
is a species of catarrh, generally accompanied by high fever, and always with
great pain and heaviness in the head, giddiness, etc., etc., also running at the
nose, which afterwards goes down into the throat and chest, causing incessant
‘hard coughing and difficulty of respiration, nausea, weakness, and a painful feel-
ing of lassitude of the whole body. This malady is always epidemic, and has
several times infected all Europe, passing with great rapidity from province to
province. In Italy it has been called, according to the locality, Galantino or Cor-
tesina sickness, or the Mazzucco, or the Mattone or Montone sickness. In France
it is called Coqueluche. These notes have been furnished by the celebrated Doctor
Giovanni Torgione Tozelli.

COURT OF ROME. 61

LETTER XXX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 6th, informing you amongst
other things of the death of the king of Castile, which event
is here construed favorably to the plans of the Pope. For it is
believed that the king of France, on whom the Pope mainly
relies, will be more at liberty to favor the Church and to
protect Italy against those who would devour her. All that is
needed now is that the Almighty should allow both of them to |
live, and then matters might very soon assume a different
color. May the Almighty shape things for the best!

At the last consistory, which was held at Cesena on the 7th
instant, it was resolved that the Interdict should be launched
against that city and its government. Since then the Pope has
come here and made a solemn entrance into this place. And
if in the beginning his Holiness was hot for this enterprise, he
is now all on fire for it, and has sent the Bishop of Concordia*
to Rome, accompanied by another prelate, to fetch a large sum
of money from there, as the Pope is not willing to trust to
letters of exchange. All the men-at-arms have gone from here
to Imola, where they will await the Pope, who it is believed will
leave here on Monday, or at furthest on Tuesday.

The French are reported to be advancing, and are supposed
to have reached the territory of Modane ; but we do not hear that
the Bolognese have taken any further steps than what I stated
in my last. Two days ago the people of Castel Bolognese, a
place belonging to Bologna, and lying between Faenza and
Imola, sent ambassadors to the Pope, and offered to place them-
selves in his hands. The Pope’s men-at-arms were quartered
there on their march to Imola.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Furi, 9 October, 1506. Secret.

* This was Francesco Argentino of Venice, who was made Bishop of Con-
cordia in 1494, being the successor of Niccolo Donati. Julius II. made him
Cardinal in the month of March, 1511, and in August of the same year he died
at Rome, and was buried in the church of Santa Maria in Trastevere.

62 SECOND MISSION TO THE

LETTER XXXII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and amongst other mat-
ters gave you notice of the Pope’s arrival here. This morning
a consistory was held, and in presence of the assembled college
the draft of a treaty was read which had been prepared by the
Bolognese ambassadors, one of the clauses of which stipulated
that, in case the Pope should want to come in person to Bo-
logna, he should not be allowed to enter the city accompanied
by more than his ordinary guard of infantry, that is to say,
from two hundred and fifty to three hundred Swiss; and that he
should give notice beforehand of the length of time he intend-
ed to remain in the city. There were other similar provisions
that were far from being honorable for the Pope, and which
excited the indignation of the entire college, who immediately
ordered a Bull to be prepared against Messer Giovanni and his
adherents, much more stringent than the one which had been
passed by the previous consistory at Cesena on the 7th. This
new Bull declares Messer Giovanni and his adherents rebels
against the Holy Church; all their goods and possessions are
given to whoever chooses to take them; the men are aban-
doned as prisoners to whoever captures them, and plenary
indulgence is accorded to whoever injures or kills them.

After this had been concluded and resolved, the Pope sent
for a certain Messer Jacopo, secretary of Messer Giovanni
Bentivogli, and who had, ever since I have been with the Pope,
been constantly at court with the old Bolognese ambassador,
and in the presence of the assembled college the Pope told him
that his bad conduct during his mission had merited serious
punishment; for he had done all in his power to encourage
Messer Giovanni and the people of Bologna in their obstinate
and refractory conduct towards the Holy Church. And that,
were it not that he wanted to be consistent with his character,
and did not want to violate the privileges of a public man, he
would make him an object of pity to all the world. But to be
consistent with his habitual character he would merely order
him immediately to quit the states of the Church, and be care-
ful never to fall into his hands again. The secretary asked
permission to reply and justify himself, but was not allowed;
whereupon he speedily left for Bologna.

COURT OF ROME. 63

After the consistory to-day the Pope wanted to go from the
palace of the Priors, where he is lodged, to dine at the castle,
and in coming out of his chamber followed by all the cardinals
he found the hall full of people, and amongst them the Bo-
lognese ambassadors. He immediately went up to them and
blamed them for the tyranny of Messer Giovanni and their own,
and for their not being ashamed to have come here to defend it,
and said all this with great animosity and bitterness.

At the consistory this morning, the Marquis of Mantua was
appointed Lieutenant of the Holy Church in this enterprise
against Bologna. Cardinal Este lodged last night at Luco, and
will thence come here with a numerous suite to do homage to
the Pope. The Duke of Ferrara, according to what I hear from
some of his own people, will visit his Holiness at Imola. The
impression still prevails that the Pope will leave here on Mon-
day next for Imola; but as he does not wish to pass through
Faenza, it is not known whether he will take the road to the
right towards the sea, or that to the left towards the hills.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Furut, 10 October, 1506.

LETTER XXXII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My letter of the 10th informed your Lordships of what was
passing here. This morning after the signing of the documents
the Pope had me called to him and said: “TI believe that your
“ Signoria, seeing the progress I have made in this enterprise
“acainst Messer Giovanni Bentivogli, must wonder that, having
“so long ago asked them for Messer Mare Antonio and his
“men-at-arms, which they had offered me in the manner you
“know, I have not ere this required them to send them to me.
“ Know then, and you may write this to your Signoria, that I
“have delayed to make the demand because I wished to satisfy —
“ad plenum their desire as made known to me by you on their
“behalf, and did not want to make the demand until your Sig-
“noria should know, and be able to see, the certainty of my

64. SECOND MISSION TO THE

‘“ success in this enterprise, and that the assistance which I had
“ counted upon was quite sure. For the French are on the way
‘here, as many as I had asked for and even more, and I have
“ satisfied their demands for money and for everything else. Be-
‘sides my own four hundred men-at-arms I have those of Gian-
“paolo to the extent of one hundred and fifty men-at-arms, and
“the one hundred Stradiotes which I told you I was expecting
“from the kingdom of Naples, and which you must have seen.
“The Marquis of Mantua has joined me with one hundred light-
“horse, and has given orders for one hundred more. You will
“see the Duke of Ferrara join me at Imola with more than one
“hundred men-at-arms, and all his other troops are likewise at
“my command. I have paid the money for the infantry that is
“coming with the French, and for that which has been raised
“here for my account; and finally, so that every one may know
“that I will make no terms with Messer Giovanni, I have, as it
“ were, published a crusade against him. Now if your Signoria
“do not wish to be the last, as they have promised me, they will
“have to hasten their troops forward ; and for that reason I de-
“sire you to send at once an express to signify to them on my
“behalf my wish that they will be pleased to send the Signor
“Mare Antonio Colonna toward Imola with the one hundred
‘ men-at-arms which he commands. And say to your Signoria,
“that, although they can themselves see that I am able to do
“without those troops, yet I desire them, not for the value of
“their services nor for the honor which it would be for me,
“but for the sake of having just grounds for benefiting your
“Signoria, and to favor them in whatever they may desire
“most, when the occasion shall occur, which will always be
“so long as the Church shall enjoy that high reputation and
“credit to which I hope to elevate her.”

I replied to his Holiness, that I would immediately communi-
cate his wishes to your Lordships; and when he asked me how
long it would take these troops to reach Imola, I said that my
messenger could not reach Florence in less than two days,
that it would require two days more to transmit the orders to
Cascina, and that then the troops would need at least seven
days to march from Cascina to Imola. This seemed to him
too long, and he solicited me again to write at once and to let
him know immediately when I received a reply.

Cardinal Este arrived here yesterday evening, and the Duke

COURT OF ROME. 65

is momentarily expected at Imola, as the Pope had told me.
The Marquis is marching with all the troops towards Imola,
and the Pope will start in that direction to-morrow or the
day following. Yesterday a brief was expedited from the con-
sistory in virtue of which the Pope concedes to the king of
France the right to dispose of all the benefices of the duchy of
Milan, the same as the Count Francesco had enjoyed ; this is
the last request which the king of France has made of the
Pope in connection with this affair. It is said that the Bo-
lognese have abandoned Castel San Piero, but purpose defend-
ing the two smaller castles nearer to the city.

Since Messer Jacopo, the Chancellor of Messer Giovanni, has
been dismissed by the Pope in full consistory, as I have already
written, the ambassadors have notified his Holiness that they
have been recalled, and asked for leave to go; to which the
Holy Father replied, that he neither gave nor withheld that
leave to them, but that he advised them to be careful not to
go to Bologna, as they would be cut to pieces there because
of the sad accounts which Messer Jacopo, the Chancellor of
Messer Giovanni, had given of them. The ambassadors under-
stood this to mean that they are not to leave, and so they have
remained ; and the Pope has commissioned Bishop Pazzi, who
is governor of this place, to watch them carefully and not to
let them go.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Furi, 12 October, 1506. Secret.

LETTER XXXIITI.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and informed you of all
that the Pope had charged me to say to you in relation to the
men-at-arms which he desires your Lordships to send him,
according to his first demand. Having disposed of all other
business, he now wants to bring yours forward. Since then I
have received your Lordships’ letter of the 11th, but must
inform you that I have not received the package of letters for

VOL. IV. 5 |

66 SECOND MISSION TO THE

France, which you tell me you have sent; I am not able, there-
fore, either to forward them to France, or return them to your
Lordships, as you charge me to do. Your Lordships further-
more desire to know whereabouts the French troops are at
present, as you have no news of them. It is said here that
more than two thirds of them are at Parma, and that the re-
mainder are coming with Chaumont, who was waiting to start
until he should have received the brief of which I made men-
tion in my last letter to your Lordships.

Yesterday evening news came here from the army that the
Marquis had taken Castel San Piero and disarmed fifty light-
horse of Messer Giovanni. We can hear nothing of what is
going on in Bologna, as we get no more news from there since
the opening of hostilities. At first it was said that Messer
Giovanni was lukewarm in his preparations, and did not spend
what was necessary to defend himself against an attack of
this nature. The Pope did not leave here this morning, as
he had intended, owing to a touch of gout in one of his knees,
which kept him in bed all the forenoon; but this is an old
trouble, and not at all dangerous. They say that there will be
a consistory held to-morrow morning, and that his Holiness
will remain here to-morrow on account of the party feuds here,
after which he will go to Imola.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Furut, 13 October, 1506.

LETTER XXXIV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, giving an account of
the events of the day. This morning a consistory was held at
which the Pope communicated to the Cardinals that Castel
San Piero and Castel Guelfo had been taken, and forty of the
enemy’s light-horse disarmed and stripped. He stated that,
although Messer Giovanni had made demonstrations of intend-
ing to maintain himself in this direction in Butriano, and in
the opposite direction in Castel Franco, yet he believed that

COURT OF ROME. 67

so soon as his troops should show themselves before these
places neither the one nor the other would make any serious
resistance. The Pope furthermore stated that he had received
a verbal message, through a man who had come from Bologna,
that Messer Giovanni had disbanded all his foreign infantry,
and was resolved to defend himself exclusively with his own
people. This seems difficult to believe, as we do not know
what reason he could have for this; and perhaps it is not true.
As to the departure of the Pope from here, he says that he
will remain here to-day and to-morrow, and that then he will
take counsel upon the question; so that it is believed that he
will not go from here unless he hears that the French are
nearer to Bologna, and upon this point nothing is known but
what I have already written you.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Furut, 14 October, 1506.

Whilst writing I receive your Lordships’ letter of the 12th,
and with it the package for France, which I will make it a
point to forward or return to you.

Servus

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

P. S.—I have heard to-night that letters have been received
from Monseigneur d’Aix, dated 11th instant, in which he in-
forms the Pope that Chaumont is willing to send five hundred
lances to Parma, with orders not to leave there without fresh
instructions. I have not yet verified this report, but shall
endeavor in my next to give you further particulars.

LETTER XXXV.

Macniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

After a long consultation as to what route he should take to
go from Furli to Imola without laying himself under obliga-
tions to the Venetians, and seeing that by going to the right
towards the sea he would be shut in between the rivers and
Faenza, and if he went to the left towards the mountains he

68 SECOND MISSION TO THE

would be wedged in between Berzighella and Faenza, either of
which routes seemed to him insecure, his Holiness the Pope
has decided to take neither of these two, but to go more
towards the mountains, and keep altogether upon Florentine
territory. Thus he would dine to-morrow at Castrocaro, and
pass the night at Modigliana, the next day through Marradi
and Palazzuolo, the day following to Tosignano, a castle be-
longing to the Church, and then the next day to Imola.

Just as this decision had been taken I received your Lord-
ships’ letters of the 14th, informing me of the order given to
Signor Mare Antonio to march. I hastened to read the letter
to the Pope, who, so soon as he had heard it, called in the most
joyful manner the Datary and Messer Carlo degli Ingrati, say-
ing: “I want you to hear now what friends Messer Giovanni
“has, and which of us is most beloved by his neighbors, the
“ Holy Church or he.” In addition to these two he called all
who were near and who were still at table, and wanted them
also to hear the letter; and then he spoke in the most honor-
able and affectionate manner of your Lordships. Thereupon
I said to his Holiness, that, as he had decided to take the route
through the Florentine dominions, I would immediately mount
and see to making such preparations for his reception as were
possible in the poor places where he would have to stop, and
where suitable accommodations were very scarce; and that
he must look upon it as though he were in camp, or in even
worse places. I expressed my regret that this matter had not
been known some five or six days sooner, so that your Lord-
ships could have taken proper measures to do him honor, but
that he would not lack evidences of the most affectionate devo-
tion, which all the places within your Lordships’ dominions
would show him; for they all knew that such was your Lord-
ships’ will and pleasure. His Holiness replied that he had no
apprehensions whatever upon that score, and that he would in
any event be entirely satisfied ; and thereupon I took my leave.
It is now the twentieth hour, and I am here in Castrocaro,
and shall be to-morrow evening at Modigliana, ut parem viam
Domino.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Castrocaro, 16 October, 1506. Secret. apud Papam.

COURT OF ROME. 69

LETTER XXXVI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Since informing your Lordships of the Pope’s determination
to go to Imola through your Lordships’ dominions, he has
followed the precise route which I had indicated. To-day is
the 19th of the month, and at the fifteenth hour we arrived
here at Palazzuolo, where we shall dine and go on this evening
to Tosignano, a place belonging to the Church. Yesterday at
Marradi your messenger arrived from Mugello with six barrels
of wine in casks and two in bottles, and a load of pears; he
presented them to the Pope in a very proper manner, suitable
to the nature of the present. His Holiness accepted it all
very graciously, and expressed his thanks.

This morning Pier Francesco Tosinghi, Commissary-General,
concluded not to accompany the Pope any farther, and accord-
ingly took his leave of his Holiness. I cannot tell your Lord-
ships with how much kindness the Pope spoke to him, and with
what demonstrations of affection for your Lordships, and how
he held him in his embrace for half an hour in presence of the
whole court. I shall not report to your Lordships the particu-
lar words of his Holiness, for I am sure Pier Francesco will
have written it all to you at length.

Everybody here is of the opinion that, if the Pope succeeds
in his attempt upon Bologna, he will lose no time in engaging
in more important enterprises, and it is thought that now
or never will Italy be relieved of those who have plotted to
devour her.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Patazzvoxo, 19 October, 1506. Secret.
Qe

LETTER XXXVII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last to your Lordships was from Palazzuolo. Yesterday
the Pope arrived here, and, as already mentioned in a previous
letter, he was entirely satisfied with his journey across your

70 SECOND MISSION TO THE

Lordships’ dominions; in truth, I had sent everywhere ample
supplies of bread and wine and meats of every description, as
well as forage for the horses. Upon his arrival here there
came to him a person just from the French camp, who reported
that they must by this time be at Modena; and that the force
consisted of eight hundred and ten lances, five thousand infan-
try, two thousand Swiss, and the rest are Gascons and other
detached troops. It is said that Messer Giovanni has asked
for terms through the intervention of Chaumont, and that the
Marquis of Mantua favors it; the latter came this morning
from the camp, and was for a considerable space of time in
private conference with the Pope. When his Holiness after-
wards came out of his chamber, he said to about twenty car-
dinals who were waiting for him, that Messer Giovanni had
proposed an arrangement with much more reasonable condi-
tions than what he had offered at Furli; that, however, the
only terms upon which he would treat with him were, either
that he should leave Bologna with his movables, and that his
immovables should be preserved for him, or that he should
come and place himself unconditionally in his hands, and that
he would not treat with him upon any other terms.

Those with whom I have talked upon these matters believe
that, whenever Messer Giovanni shall come to despair of being
able to defend himself by force, he will throw himself with his
children into the arms of the Pope, under the guaranty of
Chaumont or some other great personage, hoping that, after
the example of Gianpaolo Baglioni, he may be able personally
to effect some arrangement that would permit him to remain
in Bologna, and thus not lose the chance of resuming at the
first opportunity his original position.

Whilst at the palace this morning and conversing with the
Bolognese ambassadors, who are still here, they complained
with moderation of your Lordships having sent troops here;
to which I answered, laughingly as it were, that Messer Gio-
vanni and your other neighbors had taught you, at your own
expense, to follow the general; and that therefore it was not
of your conduct that they ought to complain, but of that which
you had learned from them.

This morning, when Bernardo da Bibbieno asked Messer
Carlo Ingrati how matters were going on, the Paes replied,
“ Very well, in spite of those who wish the entrees! Where-

COURT OF ROME. 71

upon Bernardo said, “ Am I one of those that wish that mat-
“ters should not go on well?” To which Messer Carlo, with
an embarrassed expression of countenance, replied, “I know
“nothing about it”; and then turned his back upon him.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.
Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Iuoxa, 21 October, 1506. Secret.

LETTER XXXVIII.

MaGnirIcent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Yesterday I reported to your Lordships the events of the
day. This morning we learn that the French will be in the
course of to-morrow in the neighborhood of Castel Franco, on
Bolognese territory ; and to-morrow also Monseigneur d’Alle-
gri is expected here, who comes to confer with his Holiness
and the commanders of the Italian troops as to the manner in
which this enterprise is to be carried on. In speaking this
morning of the coming of Monseigneur d’Allegri, his Holiness
manifested a desire that on his arrival there should also be an
ambassador here from your Lordships; for as matters relating
to the welfare of Italy are to be discussed, his Holiness wishes
that Florence should be represented on the occasion. It would
be well, therefore, if Messer Francesco * were to start from
Florence to-day, as has been spoken of. .

* Messer Francesco Pepi was the ambassador that was sent to the Pope.
One of his autograph letters, dated 25 October, 1506, informs us of his departure
from Florence and his arrival at Firenzuola, and of his intention to proceed im-
mediately to Imola on his mission to the Pope. The following is the letter: —

VERY DEAR NICCOLO :—
I received your letter yesterday whilst I was still on the other side of the
_Giogo; for although I left Florence on Thursday, I have been delayed by an
unfortunate accident that happened to me on the road, and prevented my being
with you yesterday evening, as I had intended. I am now about to start from
Firenzuola, and send this to you by my courier. I beg you will recommend me
to his Eminence the Cardinal Volterra, and make my excuses to him for not
answering his letter, thank him most warmly for his letter and the information
it contains, and assure him that it is only the absolute want of time that prevents
my writing to him; please read this letter to his Eminence.
I wish to avoid all pomp and ceremony on my arrival, if the locality will serve
as an excuse for it, and if it comports with the dignity of our republic; for I

12 SECOND MISSION TO THE

The troops of the Pope here scoured the country yesterday
almost up to the very walls of Bologna, and captured some
cattle. They came, however, very near being surprised by
some of the Bolognese cavalry, who issued from the city to
pursue them, but did not come far enough to overtake the
Pope’s troops. It is said that Messer Giovanni has sacked
several monasteries which had commenced to obey the bull of
excommunication.

The quarters for the Duke of Ferrara are ready, and a quan-
tity of his baggage has arrived, and it is said that he will be
here himself very shortly. The Venetian ambassador, who
has followed the court as far as Cesena, has stopped there, and
has not yet been seen cither here or at Furl.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Imoua, 22 October, 1506. Secret.

should rejoice more at one good service rendered to our most illustrious Signoria
than at a thousand demonstrations. And I believe that it would suffice if it
were publicly understood at Florence that the omission of ceremonies was at my
own particular request. I am entirely ready, however, to accommodate myself
altogether to whatever his Eminence may deem proper, for in minimis et in
maximis, | desire to conform to his judgment and advice, for it was with that
determination that I started from Florence.

If it be not deemed improper that I should enter the city this evening alone
and accompanied by only one servant, I will do so; and I would mount at once,
leaying all my other servants behind, unless it be deemed better that I should
stay over at Tosignano with’all my servants, for if I were to arrive alone it
might be regarded as though I were not there. I have with me eight mounted
servants, my son and my son-in-law, a steward Ser Agostino, and two grooms
and my courier, all in good order and well mounted. I have also four other
cavaliers with me, one of whom is of the family of the Peruzzi and one of the
Venturi, who have some business here at court. We started together, and they
have kept me company all the way, and intend to lodge in the same place with
me. I mention all this to you so that you may know the extent of accommoda-
tion I require. After having written from Florence to his Eminence and to
yourself, I learned that Messer Neroni is charged with the matter of lodgings,
and so I wrote to him to procure me good lodgings, for there is some relationship
between us. I shall dine to-day at Pian Caldoli, but send my courier all the
way through, and beg you will send him back to me, as I shall remain at To-
signano until you inform me as to the order of proceeding which I shall have to
follow, upon which point you will consult with his Eminence. Say to the Arch-
deacon that I do not reply to his letter, there being no occasion for it, as I shall
do so in person. Recommend me to him, et bene valete.

FrRANCEsCO DE Peri, Doctor and Ambassador.
FLORENCE, 25 October, 1506, 13th hour.

The letter is addressed on the back :—
“ SPECTABILI Viro Nicc. DE MACLAVELLIS
‘*Mandatorio Flor. apud summum Pontificum, Imola.’

COURT OF ROME. 1633

LETTER XXXIX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last to your Lordships was of the 22d; by the present I
have to inform you that a courier named Quattrino arrived
to-night from Lombardy, and reports the advance guard of the
French to have left Modena, and that the remainder of the
army under Monseigneur de Chaumont is at Parma. It is
supposed that in the course of the week upon which we have
just entered they will be in the vicinity of Bologna.

This evening the Pope’s troops captured a Bolognese by the
name of Carlo di Bianchi, son of one of the Magistracy of the
Ten. This individual was going with despatches to certain
small castles that have remained in the hands of the Bolognese.
Your Lordships must know that the Italian troops in the ser-
vice of the Pope are stationed at Castel San Piero and the
neighboring villas, and that all these places surrendered as
soon as the troops showed themselves before them. <A very
reliable person reported to me to-day that he had talked with a
priest who had left Bologna two days before, and who had told
him that Messer Giovanni had published the bull of excommu-
nication, and has since then notified all the religious orders
that they may either remain in Bologna or go away, as they
please, and that many of them are going. This priest also
reported that Messer Giovanni is throwing up bastions and
earthworks, and is otherwise strengthening the weak points;
and that he has ordered three thousand infantry to be levied,
and that Tarlatino, Riniero della Sassetto, and Messer Piero
Gambacorte were expected in Bologna. I give this informa-
tion to your Lordships, not as well authenticated facts, but as
things that are reported, and which may be true.

Monseigneur d’Allegri has not yet arrived, but is looked for
to-morrow, as also the Duke of Ferrara. Recent letters from
Venice state that, so soon as the news of the death of the Arch-
duke became known in the Emperor’s camp, his whole army
disbanded, and that thus all his projects have ended in smoke.

Benedetto Pepi wrote me yesterday from Pietramala, under
date of the 23d, that Signor Mare Antonio would be on the
following day with his troops at Pian Caldoli, and wished me
to let him know what was to be done. I communicated the

74 SECOND MISSION TO THE

information immediately to the Pope, who at once sent a com-
missary and one of his mace-bearers to Pian Caldoli to receive
and conduct him to the camp of the other troops, where he
ought to be this evening.

“Messer Francesco Pepi writes me that he will be here to-
morrow, and requests me to find lodgings for him, which has
been very difficult; still, with the authority of the Pope and by
putting others to inconvenience, I have succeeded in finding
such as are convenient and reasonable; but it is now Sunday,
and I have not yet heard further from him. I mention this
to your Lordships, so that, in case he should not yet have left,
you may urge him to hasten his departure, as an ambassador
from Florence is greatly desired here, for the reasons which I
have stated in a former letter to your Lordships.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Imota, 25 October, 1506. Secret. apud Papam.
LETTER XL.

MaGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

After having written the enclosed to your Lordships yester-
day, the courier of his Magnificence the Ambassador arrived,
and notified me that he would be this evening at Tosignano,
and that, the locality serving as an excuse, he would wish
all ceremonies and formalities on his arrival to be dispensed
with, for being indisposed he desired to avoid that fatigue ;
and he requested me to inform him of what I had done in
the matter.

I called at once upon his Eminence of Pavia, and informed
him of the near arrival of our ambassador; his Eminence im-
mediately sent for the master of cerémonies to arrange that
all the cardinals with their suites and the other prelates
should go out to meet the Ambassador according to custom.
- Whereupon I told his Eminence that, as the Ambassador was
indisposed, he wished to avoid the fatigue of a ceremonious
reception, provided the locality would excuse it. This request
was promptly conceded, to the satisfaction of everybody, for
the cardinals have but scanty retinues, and matters are done

COURT OF ROME. T5

here in military fashion and not with all the formalities of
Rome. His Magnificence the Ambassador has arrived here
this morning, and his Holiness has appointed an audience for
him for to-morrow at the fifteenth hour.

The news here is that the government of Bologna have
written a letter to their ambassadors here, under date of yes-
terday, enclosing a copy of the summons which Monseigneur
de Chaumont has addressed in the name of the king to that
city ; by which he informs them that if within two days they
have not returned to their obedience to his Holiness, and sub-
mitted to all his commands, he will hold them as enemies, and
will consider himself absolved from all obligations of protec-
tion under which he was to the state and person of Messer
Giovanni and the city of Bologna. The government charge
their ambassadors to throw themselves at the feet of his Holi-
ness, and to recommend to him their city, and to inform him
that they are ready to obey all his commands; and that they
entreat him to spare the person and effects of Messer Giovanni
and of his children. To which the Pope has replied that he
has nothing to say to them except that they obey his Bull, to
which sentence he adheres. We learn also, from a courier sent
here express, that the French will be here to-day before Castel
Franco.

His Magnificence the Ambassador, as I have said above, will
have an audience of the Pope to-morrow, and will report to
your Lordships from day to day the progress of events here;
_and, God willing, I shall, with the gracious permission of your
Lordships, return to-morrow or next day to Florence.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servus

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Imoxa, 26 October, 1506. Secret. apud Papam.

THIRD MIssiON LO stlNNAct

LETTER I.

MaGNIFICENT AND ILLUsTRIOUS SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here this evening, and in trying to find out the
whereabouts of the Legate, I learn from different sources that
his Lordship will be this evening at Acquapendente, and will
vo to-morrow to Paglia; the day after he may go to Buoncon-
vento, and if he follows this itinerary he will be here on
Friday; but how long he may remain here is not known.
Whether he will remain over Sunday to see the festivities
here, or whether he will leave before, I shall have to find out
after his arrival, when your Lordships shall be promptly in-
formed. Now as to his retinue, and the honors which it is
intended to show him here, I have talked with the landlords
and others of that class with whom persons under similar
circumstances are wont to lodge, and they report that the
municipality has deputed six persons to receive and do honor
to the Legate, and that the following arrangements have been
made. The Legate himself, with forty or fifty of his more im-
mediate suite, will be lodged either in the house of Pandolfo

* When Pope Julius II. heard that the Emperor Maximilian was coming
down into Italy to assume the imperial crown, he resolved to send a Legate
to him in Germany, and appointed for this purpose the Spaniard Bernardino
Caravajal, “Cardinal of Santa Croce in Jerusalemme.” As this Legate had to
traverse Tuscany in going to Germany, the Signoria of Florence, uncertain as
to what they ought to do, and uninformed as to the number of persons in the
| Legate’s suite, and at the same time not wishing either to go too far in showing
‘him too much honor, or to fall short of doing their duty to so illustrious a
stranger, resolved to send their Secretary to Sienna, where they knew that the
Cardinal would stop a few days, so as to find out and report to them all they
wished to know about him. Machiavelli’s letters treat the matter according to
his instructions ; but it seems that the Ten did not write to him during this mis-
sion, as no letters from them on the subject have been found in the archives. —
Edition of Machiavelli’s Works by Passerini and Milanesi.

THIRD MISSION TO SIENNA. “er

or in the episcopal palace, and their expenses honorably paid.
The remainder of the retinue, with their horses, will lodge at
the hostelries, and the landlords have already been notified to
make the necessary provisions. It is not known yet whether
the municipality will pay their expenses also, or whether they
will be left to pay for themselves, as nothing has been said upon
that point to the landlords; but seeing the importance they
attach to this Legate, and their desire that he should also pro-
tect their interests in Germany, makes these landlords believe
that the municipality will pay all. But they know nothing posi-
tive about it, nor do they know what is done in this respect
in other parts of the dominion, and therefore I can write noth-
ing about it. But I shall be in the same place with the Legate
to-morrow, and when I shall have obtained full information
upon all these points, I will send you an express. Neither
am I able to inform you as to the number of mounted men in
the Legate’s retinue, for some say that it is not over one hun-
dred, whilst others put it at two hundred; but the most trust-
worthy adhere to the smaller number. In short, as I have said
above, within forty hours your Lordships shall know exactly
the number, the manner in which they will be treated here,
and the time when they will arrive on your territory. I shall
not ask the Legate’s master of the household for a list of his
retinue, for I would not like to incur your Lordships’ displeas-
ure, if you should find yourselves embarrassed by their being
in reality more than what the list might have indicated, and
therefore I leave this question entirely to your Lordships.

There was a very excited meeting of the Balia here to-day
owing to the news from Lusignano, that that borough had
determined to keep its gates closed from fear of the men of
Val di Chiana. From what I hear, the people of this city will
make a great holiday of the Emperor’s arrival, which is desired
by all. I mention this to your Lordships, as in matters of this
kind the will of the people generally differs from that of its
chiefs. Valete /

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Sienna, 10 August, 1507. Secret,

78 THIRD MISSION TO SIENNA.

LETTER II.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC.: —

Immediately on my arrival here at Sienna, on the day before
yesterday, I wrote to your Lordships all I had learned respect-
ing the Legate, and how they had decided here to do him
honor. Hoping that my letter reached you safely, I shall not
repeat what I then wrote. As mentioned to your Lordships,
the Legate lodged last night at Paglia, but instead of going
there I went to San Quirico, thinking that I should see the
Legate’s retinue better when they arrive in the evening than
when they start in the morning. I passed the night at San
Quirico, where the Cardinal’s retinue would have to pass if
they were to go to Buonconvento according to the original in-
tention, or in case they were to stop here. But the Cardinal
had changed the order of things, going himself with a portion
of his suite from Pagha to Pienza, where he was entertained
by the Piccolomini, and sending the remainder on to San
Quirico. As I wished to know exactly the number of cavaliers
which the Legate has with him, and seeing this division arrive
here, I sent my courier at daybreak to Pienza to count the
number of cavaliers that had gone with the Legate, whilst I
remained at San Quirico to count the rest. In fine, my cou-
rier returned and reported thirty-nine horse, and that he had
remained there ten hours after the arrival of the Cardinal and
suite. At San Quirico there arrived fifty-seven, and some ten
had passed on towards Sienna, so that putting them all to-
gether there may be in all one hundred and ten cavaliers in
his suite. I remained at San Quirico until the twenty-second
hour to make sure that all had passed, and unless others should
have come from Rome, he has no more than the above-stated
number of one hundred and ten; although his chamberlains
and master of the household say that he has one hundred and
fifty, which they do, thinking the greater number more hon-
orable. Besides the above-mentioned number of horse, there
are thirty-two sumpter mules which I have counted myself,
although the Cardinal’s own people say there are forty ; but so
far from there being so many, the number is rather less, as
I have said. He has about fifty grooms and valets, and as to
his courtiers, the most of them look as if they had just come

THIRD MISSION TO SIENNA. 79

from the Stinche prisons.* These are all the facts I have been
able to learn about the Cardinal’s domestic establishment; and
believing that I have fulfilled my mission in this respect, I took
the post at the twenty-second hour, and came from San Quirico
here to Sienna, so as to be able to inform your Lordships of
the honors shown to the Cardinal, and of the time when he will
leave here.

Finding himself still twenty-three miles from here, the Car-
dinal will not come to-morrow to Sienna, but defers his entry
here until Saturday. The authorities have ordered him to be
received with all the ceremony due to a Legate. He will be
lodged at the episcopal palace, and all his gentlemen, to the
number of about fifty, will be distributed amongst the citizens
in such manner as the six deputies may deem best; whilst
the whole crowd of menials will go to the hostelries, where
their expenses will be paid; although nothing has as yet been
said to the landlords upon this point, showing either that but
a few will go to the hostelries, or that it will only be persons
of low quality. Throughout the entire dominion the Cardinal
has paid all expenses, except at Pienza, where he was the guest
of the Piccolomini; but he paid the expenses of all who went
to Paglia and San Quirico, and will do the same to-morrow,
unless he should go with a select few to some private place,
of which I am not aware. I shall remain all Sunday here at
Sienna to witness their holiday-making. On Monday, or at the
latest on Tuesday, the Cardinal goes to Poggibonsi; and if I
knew exactly when he leaves here I should have returned and
made my report to your Lordships in person; but as I have
not been able to find out, I shall remain here until I can give
you positive information on that point. And should anything
else occur to your Lordships to charge me with, you can still
do so. I can only report what I have already said, namely,
that at the earliest on Monday, and at latest on Tuesday, the
Cardinal will be at Poggibonsi.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

Stenna, 12 August, 1507.

* The prisons at Florence were familiarly called “ Stinche.” after a castle by
that name in the Val di Greve in Tuscany, the inhabitants of which had rebelled.
The Florentines surrounded this castle with a line of palisades, thus converting it
into a prison in which all the inhabitants were shut up. By assimilation the new
prisons in Florence were afterwards called the Stinche.

80 THIRD MISSION TO SIENNA.

I have deferred sending off my express this morning, this
being the 13th, to see whether I could forward it without
expense; but unable to do so, I have now determined to send
him. He will leave at the eleventh hour, and promises to be in
Florence at the seventeenth hour.

Servus
NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

DETTE LE.

MaGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 12th, and sent it yesterday
morning in haste by an express. In that letter I informed you
that the Legate would make his entry here to-day, and that
throughout the Siennese dominions he had paid his own ex-
penses, and that his retinue consisted of one hundred and ten
cavaliers or less, and between thirty and forty sumpter mules,
and about forty persons on foot; that he personally would
lodge in the episcopal palace with forty or fifty of his cava-
liers, and that the remainder would be accommodated in the
different hostelries, and their expenses paid by the munici-
pality ; and that so far as I could learn he would leave here on
Monday or Tuesday. Since then the Legate has arrived, and
is lodged as I had written you; instead of paying his expenses,
however, they have presented to him in the name of the Sig-
noria all sorts of eatables, as is customary with ambassadors,
but in such profusion that it is said they have cost more than
one hundred ducats. Beyond this, however, they do not trou-
ble themselves about them, but let them shift for themselves.
The said Legate will leave here on Monday morning, and will —
go to Poggibonsi; on Tuesday he will proceed to San Cas-
ciano, and ‘according to what he says himself he expects to
reach Florence on SMicuhueneee Having heard from several
persons that the Legate said this at table, I have no reason
to doubt it; and as it seems to me now that I have nothing
further to do here, I shall leave to-morrow morning, and shall
come leisurely but direct to Florence. Should your Lordships
think of any other commission to charge me with on the way,
you can let me know.

THIRD MISSION TO SIENNA. 81

Whilst here, and amongst these Spaniards, I have learned
something which I think it would be well your Lordships
should know also. It is this. About one month ago two let-
ters were received here from the Emperor of Germany, both
to the same effect; namely, one to the Balia, and the other to
Pandolfo, informing them of his coming into Italy, and ex-
pressing his confidence in the good faith of this city, and advis-
ing them to make no further payments to France under their
agreement, showing them that, having been made against him,
it is no longer valid. The letter to Pandolfo contains, besides
the above, many particulars for his instruction, which he has
shown to the Balia and others, and of which he is very proud.

I understand that the proposed coming of the Emperor does
not please him at all, like one who is well off and sees no ad-
vantage in further labors; and speaking the other day with a
friend he said to him, “If this Emperor comes, it will benefit
“no one but the Pisans.” But Pandolfo does not believe in
the Emperor’s coming, and relies upon the Swiss and the Vene-
tians, who he thinks will not adhere firmly to him. Neverthe-
less he goes on making preparations: first, by making every
one here believe that the Emperor is his particular friend, so
as to deprive the malcontents of the hope of support; and
secondly, by doing all he can really to make him so, although
up to yesterday morning he had not received any letter from
his envoy to the Emperor. I say this because I am told this
morning that he received such letters last night, and if I can
learn anything of their contents I will inform your Lordships.

In conversing with some of the Legate’s people, and with
some persons of intelligence, I learn that the object of his
mission is to do all in his power to prevent the Emperor’s
_ coming; and by way of removing the necessity of his coming
to Italy to be crowned, the Legate is authorized, jointly with
another German cardinal whose name has escaped me, to
crown the Emperor at home. But if he sees that the Emperor
is resolved anyhow to come down into Italy, then he is to per-
suade him to come unaccompanied by any armed force; assur-
ing him of the friendship of France, and all the guaranties of
security he can ask for. And if all this does not produce the
desired effect, and he sees that the Emperor is bent upon com-
ing with an armed force, then he is carefully to find out the
Emperor’s resources, and whether they are sufficient to over-

VOL. IV. oe

82 THIRD MISSION TO SIENNA.

come all the obstacles he may encounter, and to report the
same; and in such case he is to amuse the Emperor with
assurances of the high opinion which his Holiness the Pope
entertains of his Majesty.

I mention these things to your Lordships, not as being true,
but simply as having heard them from men of serious charac-
ter; and mainly because I know that it will do no harm that
you should know these things, as I said in the beginning.

Whilst writing, the brother of the Cardinal Ceserino arrived
at this hostelry, with fifteen horse; he is on his way from
Rome to Bologna on some business, and will remain here to-
morrow, and then go on to Florence with the Legate. It is
thus that the stream is constantly swelling.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Sienna, 14 August, 1507, 21st hour. Secret.

List of Presents sent by the Siennese to the Legate.

2 skinned and dressed calves.
6 skinned and dressed sheep.
13 sacks of grain, 4 bushels per sack.
9 baskets of bread.
2 barrels of mulberries.
2 barrels of melons.
12 barrels of wine, of 12 flasks each.
9 barrels of fowls, 6 pairs each.
4 barrels of young geese, 6 pairs each.
3 baskets of large pigeons, 5 pairs each.
14 dishes of seafish.
12 pairs of white wax torches.
12 lumps of wax, 5 pounds each.
16 boxes ?
24 marchpanes (fruit-cakes).

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.*

4

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : -—

I wrote to your Lordships from Gabella on the 22d instant,
and to-day, being the 25th, I am at Geneva, and shall leave to-
morrow for Constanz, which is seven days’ journey from here,
according to what I am told by Piero da Fossan, who is engaged
here in commerce with Florence, and has advised me as to
the route, which I shall follow, and recommend myself to your
Lordships.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
25 December, 1507.

LETTER II.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here on the 11th, having been retarded since my
departure from Florence by the great distances, the bad con-
dition of the roads, and the horrible season of the year; and
having moreover to contend with worn-out horses, and being
very short of money. With all this I could not, even at any

* The two Reports “On the Affairs of Germany,” and the “ Discourse on the
Affairs of Germany and on the Emperor,” printed in this volume, are the result
of the observations made by Machiavelli during this mission.

Upon the report of the Emperor’s coming into Italy to have himself crowned,
and upon his demand for money of the Florentine government, they had sent
Francesco Vettori as ambassador to the Emperor, with instructions to agree to
the payment of the amount asked for, or not, according as he should find what
truth there was in the Emperor’s contemplated coming into Italy, which had

84 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

other season of the year, have saved more than three days in
the journey here from Gabella, where I left the diligence, to
this place, a distance of over six hundred miles. I wrote from
Gabella and from Geneva to inform you of my whereabouts,
which letters, if received, will have saved your Lordships all
anxiety on my account.

On my arrival here I found Francesco Vettori enjoying the
favor and highest esteem of the whole court. I communicated
to him your Lordships’ instructions, and, as you have been
already informed of all that has taken place here since my
arrival, I shall say nothing further on that subject, but confine
myself entirely to such matters as Vettori has not written
about; and by this despatch will inform you merely of what I
have seen and heard during my journey from Geneva here
that may be worthy of your Lordships’ notice, so that you may
be able to form a more correct judgment of the state of things
here. And to begin with what I have heard, I beg to say that
I made four halts on Swiss territory between Geneva and Con-
stanz, and have gathered with greatest care all I could respect-
ing the condition and manners of these people, and upon the
point as to what either of the sovereigns of France or Germany
might hope for from them. I have learned from various per-
sons, but mainly from a gentleman at Fribourg, a very accurate
man, who has commanded one of their companies, and is also
familiar with Italian affairs, that the main body of this coun-
try consists of twelve communities leagued together, and called
Cantons, the names of which are Fribourg, Berne, Zurich, Lu-
cerne, Basle, Soleure, Uri, Unterwalden, Zug, Glarus, Schwytz,
and Schaffhausen. These are united in such manner that
whatever is resolved upon in their Diet is always observed by
all of them, and none of the Cantons will oppose it. It is an
error, therefore, on the part of those who say that four of the
Cantons will go with France, and eight with the Emperor, as
this cannot be unless it had been first resolved upon by their

caused alarm to the Florentines lest it should in some way prove prejudicial to
their interests. Machiavelli was sent with an ultimatum agreement, in case it
should be necessary to conclude one with the Emperor, and for the purpose of
gathering precise information respecting this threatened visit ; it seeming to the
Gonfalonier Soderini that Vettori was not very consistent in his reports. The
Emperor, however, did not come, owing to the obstacles interposed by the
Venetians.

Respecting this intended visit of the Emperor’s, see also Guicciardini, Lib. VII.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 85

Diet; but were it so decided by the Diet, then the one would
be served badly, and the other worse. But what has given
rise to this supposition is, that the king of France has for the
past eight months kept two agents here, and still keeps two of
his confidential men here, Rochalbert and Pierre Louis, and,
for the purpose of receiving prompt reports from them, has
established a regular mail service from Gabella, or whatever
other place his representatives may go to. ‘These men have
of late endeavored to unite all the Cantons, and by means of
money have both privately and publicly poisoned the whole
country. In this way they have prevented and still impede all
action of the Diet in favor of the Emperor, so that up to the
time of my passing numerous meetings of the Diet have been
held, but no resolutions passed. True, there was to have been
another Diet held on the day of the Epiphany at Lucerne, where
the two French emissaries have gone; but it is not known yet
what this Diet may have brought forth. The person at Fribourg,
however, whom I have already referred to, told me that the king
of France had too much money for the Diet to resolve anything
adverse to him; but when the King of the Romans also had
money, they would not be able to refuse to serve him, but in
that case they would manage to serve him without at the same
time being hostile to France. And thus everybody is of the
opinion that, when the Emperor is not lacking money, he will
also not lack Swiss to serve him; for they fear that, if he paid
them without getting their services in return, they would draw
upon themselves the hostility of the Empire, and they do not
wish to oppose the decision of all Germany ; that is the reason
why they do not openly declare for France. But the objections
they make to the wishes of the Emperor are, that they do not
want to be opposed to France, but will serve him everywhere
else. The Emperor, on the other hand, demands that they shall
either remain neutral, or furnish him a small number of men,
of whom he shall be able to dispose as he pleases. The Swiss,
however, will not remain neutral, and want to be employed in
large numbers, and yet they do not want to fight against France
unless the king should give them special cause. These are the
difficulties that have been the cause of so many meetings of
the Diet and such few conclusions ; and it is supposed that the
present, like all the previous ones, will bring forth nothing but
useless talk.

86 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

Besides the above-named twelve Cantons there are two other
Swiss communities ; viz. the league of the Grisons and that of
the Valdenses, both bordering on Italy ; and a few days before
my passing through Fribourg an ambassador from the Emperor
had gone through on his way to the Valdenses to dispose them
adversely to France and favorably to himself. These two
communities, however, are not so united to the other twelve
Cantons but what they can take separate action in opposition
to the others ; it being, however, fully understood between them
that for the defence of their liberties they are always to be well
united. Thus, whoever fails to secure the services of the one
league may yet secure those of the other. For the common
defence each of the twelve Cantons furnishes four thousand good
troops; but for any service out of the country they are bound
to supply only from one thousand to fifteen hundred. This dif-
ference arises from the fact, that for the defence of the country
every man who votes for the magistrates is bound to render
military service, whilst in the other case the service is purely
voluntary ; thus, in the one case they are bound by law, and in
the other case they are attracted only by the pay. At Schaff-
hausen I met two gentlemen from Genoa, who were returning
to Italy by the same route that I had just come over, and when
I asked them about the Emperor and his projected visit to
Italy, they said to me, “ By this time the Emperor has left
“ Augsburg for Italy, but we don’t believe you will find him
* until you reach Trent.” They told me further, that the dif-
ferent provinces of the Empire furnished him, besides the
troops, a sum of one hundred and fifty thousand scudi; and
that he had made a loan of the Fuggers of one hundred thou-
sand scudi, for which he has assigned them some sort of secu-
rity; and that he was about making an agreement with the
Swiss, according to which they were to serve him, but not
against France. Since then I tarried half a day at Constanz
to gather information; and at church there I conversed with
two Milanese, and with Arrigo the composer, whose wife is at
Florence. I also talked with an ambassador of the Duke of
Savoy, called Monsignore Disviri, to whom I paid a long visit,
and afterwards dined with him. From the former I obtained
only general information and much exaggerated; but Mon-
signore Disviri, when I pressed him with questions about the
Emperor’s project and the steps which he had taken, etc., said

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 87

to me in a formal manner: “ You want to know in two hours
“what I have not been able to learn in many months; and the
‘reason is, that one must either know the conclusions resolved
“upon, or judge of the result by the preparations. The first is
“very difficult, because this nation is very discreet, and the
“Emperor observes the greatest secrecy in everything he does ;
“if he but changes his lodgings, he sends his cook only after
‘he has himself been for an hour on the way, so that no one
‘may know where he is going. As for his preparations, they
“seem very formidable: troops come from various quarters,
‘and are scattered over a great extent of country; but to
“know the exact truth, one must have a spy in every place.
“For my part, desirous to err as little as possible, I can only
“tell you that the Emperor will establish three gathering- |
“places, one at Trent towards Verona, another at Besangon
“in the direction of Burgundy, and the third at Carabassa in
“the Friuli. A great many troops were also collected here at
“Constanz by order of the Diet, and have been promptly dis-
“tributed through the neighborhood. I assure you the move-
“ment is most extensive, and likely to lead to some important
“result, either of peace or war, between the two sovereigns.”
This is what I heard at Constanz from a man who is sixty
years of age, and generally esteemed as a prudent man. [
have learned nothing further since my arrival here, unless it
be that at Trent and thereabouts there must be some four
thousand infantry and a thousand horse fit for service. As
to money, I do not hear of the Emperor’s having more than
the hundred and twenty thousand scudi promised by the
Empire in addition to the troops granted by the Diet at Con-
stanz; and to this must be added the amounts paid by those
who are bound to furnish him troops, but who have com-
pounded for it by paying him money; and it is said that
where the Empire is bound to furnish three men, they actually
send only two, and pay for the third in money. As to the
loan which the Emperor has made of the Fuggers, as well as
other loans from merchants on pledges of land, neither the
amounts nor the conditions are clearly known; nor is any-
thing known as to the sums which he claims from Italy. But
the Venetians expect to gain great credit by their show of
extensive preparations, and have circulated reports of having
to furnish altogether about fifteen thousand mounted men.

88 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

Since his visit here, this sovereign has summoned a diet of all
the communes of Tyrol, and has demanded their aid in his
enterprise. I understand that they have resolved to furnish
him five hundred infantry, which are to be paid by them for a
certain length of time; and if this resolution is carried out, then
these troops may be regarded as though they were already at
Trent. News came here on Saturday that a contingent of one
thousand horse from the king of Bohemia, and paid by him, is
within five days’ march from here. With all this, time passes,
and where on the one hand there is a gain, there is a loss on
the other; for although the fine season is coming, yet the
money destined for the troops, and which according to the
Diet the Empire is to pay, is being uselessly consumed. This
is all I have heard; but what I have seen is, that from Geneva
to Memmingen, throughout the many miles I have traversed, I
have not seen a single mounted man or foot-soldier. True, in
the neighborhood of Constanz, in some of the places off the
road I heard some drumming, and was told by some that it
came from some remnants of infantry that had stopped there,
but others said that it was peasants merrymaking. At Mem-
mingen I found the troops of the Duke of Wirtemberg were
beginning to arrive; they were said to consist of four hundred
horse. It was reported that the Duke wanted his troops to
stop here whilst he went to court to learn from the Emperor
where he wished him to go. After that I met on the way
from Innspruck here all together about one hundred horse be-
longing to men-at-arms. Last Friday there was a review here
of one hundred and twenty infantry, being the contingent sent
here by some of the communes. The Emperor is here, but it is
not known when he will leave. It is said that he has not been
so near to Italy as now since Cardinal d’Amboise was here; and
it is supposed that he will soon go to Trent to look after his
enterprise.

This is all that occurs to me to write, unless it be to recom-
mend myself to your Lordships, and beg you will instruct me
what to do now; for having made known your views and inten-
tions to Francesco Vettori, there remains nothing for me to
do, and therefore I hope your Lordships will give me leave to
return home. Valete!

Borzen, 17 January, 1508.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 89

Should your Lordships, for some reason or other, desire me
to stay here, — which I hardly believe, however, — then I beg
you will either send me some money, or write to Francesco to
supply me with some on your Lordships’ account, although
Francesco has never refused me anything, but this was always
on my own account.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

LETTER III.*

MacGniricent SIGNORI, ETC.: —

My last of the 16th ultimo was sent by my courier Simone
from Memmingen; since then I have made in one stretch about
five hundred miles, sometimes in the suite of the Emperor
and sometimes in that of the Cardinal, so that on the 9th I
reached Botzen, where the Emperor had already arrived; and
two days after Machiavelli also came, who had travelled by
way of Savoy and Switzerland, and who, fearing that he might
not be safe in Lombardy, where he had been subjected to a
very harsh examination, had destroyed all his letters. But he
gave me your instructions verbally, which were to this effect:
that you were willing to offer to the king ¢ as high a sum as
fifty thousand ducats, beginning with thirty thousand and going
finally up to fifty thousand,— endeavoring to make the best
terms possible for our republic. Payment to be made in at
least three instalments: the first, when the Emperor shall be
with his army in a city that is entirely Italian; the second,
upon his entering on Tuscan territory ; and the third, in three
months after, or, better still, on his arrival at Rome, as can
best be arranged. In return, you demand of the Emperor the
restitution of all your possessions, and the conservation of all
your present state and dominion; but if restitution cannot be
made, you will yield that point. But you desire to have the

* These despatches of Francesco Vettori are given here, because they were
in great part written by Machiavelli, and serve to explain this mission.

t “The king” here means the King of the Romans, a title borne by the
Emperor Maximilian and other German Emperors.

90 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

Emperor understand that you regard fifty thousand ducats as
no small matter, and will not abate one tittle of the other
matters. On the contrary, you want that in the drawing up
of the treaty it shall be stated in the most ample manner, in
words and terms, that you shall be secure against having to
pay anything more than the stipulated amount, either to his
Majesty directly or indirectly, or to any of his princes or gen-
erals, or any one else for his account; and that you are not to
be vexed by any further demands, either by him or any of his
people who may follow him into Italy, or who may come after-
wards; and to the effect that the present state of our re-
public shall remain unharmed and intact, and that you shall
continue to exercise the jurisdiction and full possession of your
city, and of all castles, villages, and places, the same as you
exercise and possess at the present time; and that your dig-
nity, authority, and pre-eminence shall in no wise be dimin-
ished, either by himself or any of his people. Machiavelli
said a good deal more upon this point, but all to the same
effect. I asked immediately an audience of the king, and the
evening after Machiavelli’s arrival I was received by his Ma-
jesty, and exposed to him in as few words as possible your
Lordships’ views and intentions. At first I offered thirty
thousand ducats in three payments, demanding that the Em-
peror should in return promise restitution and conservation,
as communicated to me by Machiavelli. Thereupon Collaun
answered, in presence of the Emperor, that this was a less offer
than what you had made in 1502, and that our demands were
at the same time greater; and that as to restitution, it was
not worth while to speak of it. Seeing that the negotiation
was likely to be broken off, if I did not give up the question
of restitution, and that I should not be listened to any further
if I did not increase the sum, I thought it well to go as far as
forty thousand ducats, and to make the first payment more
considerable, so that the king, in view of the greater imme-
diate payment, to which he attaches great value, might con-
descend to accept that offer, and that thus your Lordships
would save ten thousand ducats. And therefore I said that,
knowing how well you were disposed towards his Majesty, I
would venture in your Lordships’ name to promise forty thou-
sand ducats, of which sixteen thousand should be paid upon
his entrance into the first town wholly Italian, and the re-

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. H

mainder in two subsequent payments, according as might be
agreed on the conclusion of this arrangement. I added, that
although you attached the highest importance to Pisan affairs,
and that your rights there were well founded, yet to show to
his Majesty that you would leave nothing undone to prove to
him your filial devotion, your Lordships would be content
to say nothing about Pisa, but asked merely for the conserva-
tion and security of your present dominions. His Majesty
listened with evident pleasure to what I said, and it seemed
to me, so far as I could judge from external indications, that
he was inclined to accept this proposition; but at the same
time he made Collaun reply to me that he was pleased to have
this offer, and would give me an answer the following day.

Before I took my leave he called Pigello* aside and asked
him who this Secretary was that had just arrived, and by what
route he had come; adding that it seemed to him the Floren-
tines were making a good beginning. It was Wednesday
evening, the 12th, when I had this audience, and should have
had the answer on the 13th; but it has been put off from day
to day, and has not been received up to the present, and for
that reason I decided upon writing, so that your Lordships
might not remain in uncertainty as to Machiavelli’s mission.
This delay may be caused by the absence of Langot from
court, he having gone to Augsburg to obtain money ; but he is
expected back very shortly, for I have been told that the Em-
peror was pleased with the offer which 1 have made, and that
his hesitation results from his apprehension that it may prove
nothing but words by which you would not hold yourselves
bound ; and that, even if an actual agreement were made upon
that basis, the first payment would have to be raised to twenty
thousand ducats. I have been furthermore told, that it was
Messer Paolo de Lichtenstein and Serentano, two of the most
important men here, as I have written you before, who cause
this delay in the answer, for the sake of obtaining better terms ;
and that it will be necessary to secure their good will and
friendship. As I have neither instructions nor orders upon
this point, I could do nothing in the matter except with words,

* Pigello Portinari, a Florentine.

+ Matthew Lang was secretary, minister, and favorite of the Emperor Maxi-
milian. He afterwards became successively Bishop of Gurck (a city in Carinthia

between Villach and Gratz), and Cardinal. He played an important part in all
the affairs of the Emperor.

a2 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

which I employed with great warmth, but know not whether
that has sufficed them. I wanted to write you this, so that
you may understand the whole matter as well as I do myself,
and that, in case nothing should be concluded, you may deliber-
ate as to what is to be done, and inform me of your resolve.

Your Lordships see now the course I have taken in this
negotiation, and the reasons that have been given me for the
Emperor’s not having replied; so that, considering the gra-
cious manner in which I was listened to by his Majesty and his
remarks to Pigello, I have reason to believe that what I have
been told is true to a great degree. According to your instruc-
tions, it remains for me still to offer the fifty thousand ducats ;
but I do not believe that the difficulty consists in the greater
or less sum, but rather in the amount of the first payment,
which they would like me to raise as much as possible. For
my part, whatever answer may be made, I am not for going
as high as fifty thousand ducats, nor for promising twenty
thousand as the first payment, without first having your reply,
for I judge that the state of things here will afford me time
to await your instructions. But should I see the contrary,
and that things come to a certain point, which they may reach
at any moment, then I shall not hesitate to yield both the
one and the other. And as you charge me to make the first
payment only when the Emperor with his army shall have
arrived at a city wholly upon Italian soil, I am discreetly en-
deavoring to ascertain the exact position of Trent; and the
people of the country tell me that the boundary line between
Italy and Germany runs more than a mile this side of Trent.
I mention this so that you may be fully informed upon every
point; although I do not think that you can withdraw from
the offer which I have made under your instructions without
incurring obloquy, and exciting great indignation on the part
of the Emperor.

I have little to add to what I have before written about
affairs here. The Emperor is now within seven leagues of
Trent; he has convoked a diet of his own subjects here, to
induce them to aid him with some money in this enterprise.
They have not yet decided upon anything, but will most proba-
bly accord him some men and money. There are but few
troops here in the place where we are now, but between here
and Trent troops are quartered in every village, and are said

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 93

to amount altogether to one thousand horse and about four
thousand infantry; and within a few days they confidently
expect some fifteen hundred horse that have remained behind,
also a large force of infantry, although if the Emperor has
money he can raise in this country as many infantry as he
may want.

As I have written several times before, it is thought that, if
his Majesty will pay the Swiss, the majority of them will come
to serve him; but he would prefer their remaining neutral,
which they refuse, saying that they cannot live without pay
from some one; and in the end it will result in the Emperor’s
taking them into his pay, provided he has money.

As regards the subject of money I am still of the opinion
that his Majesty will have difficulty in providing it, and for
that reason it may still be that he will make an arrangement
either with France or with the Venetians. But anyhow, to
whatever arrangement he may have to resort to enable him to
come into Italy, he will do it gladly, if he cannot get the money
together in any other way; although he is making every effort
to be able to move without any such arrangement or help from
Italy. Notwithstanding that there were rumors that the dif-
ferent princes and cities of the Empire had resolved in the
Diet to pay the troops furnished to the Emperor for six months
only, yet it is now reported that they have extended it for six
months more.

The Venetians seem to occupy themselves with providing
for the defence of their frontiers. Nevertheless they permit
letters and everything else to pass without hindrance; and
you have probably heard that, after disarming the infantry as
they were leaving the Mantuan territory, upon which they had
come, they have nevertheless restored these arms by sending
them back.

A marriage is said to have been arranged between the son
of the Archduke and a daughter of the king of England, and
every one looks upon it as positively fixed. Nothing else occurs
to me to write except to recommend myself to your Lordships,
que bene valeant.

FRANCESCO VETTORI.

Borzen 17 January, 1508.

94 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

LETTER IV.

Maceniricent SIGNoRI, ETC. —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 17th instant, and sent the
letter by Rafaello Rucellai, who was returning in haste to
Florence. In that letter I advised you of Machiavelli’s ar-
rival here, and of my having exposed to the Emperor the com-
mission which he brought me from your Lordships; and that,
to judge from his Majesty’s manner, I believed that he was
pleased with the proposition I had made him. I also men-
tioned that he had told me that he would give me an answer
the next day, that is on the 18th, but that he had not replied
up to the date of my writing, and gave you also what I sup-
posed to be the cause of this delay. Of that letter I enclose
a copy with the present one. I kept Diavolaccio here for no
other reason than to have some one ready to send whenever
the Emperor’s answer should be received by me. Since then
it has been deferred from day to day; but I did not ask for it
lest I should seem too anxious for it, nor did I show myself
entirely indifferent about it, so that it might not seem as
though you would like me to forget about it.* But, thank
God, I was sent for this morning; and in the presence of the
Emperor, both Lang and Serentano being there, Lang said to
me that his Majesty, having heard the offer which I had made
in your name, had carefully examined it, but had come to the
conclusion that, considering your demand for the conservation
and guaranty of your state and dominion, and in view of the
importance of your city, the amount of money offered was en-
tirely too small ; and therefore he was not satisfied, and declined
its acceptance. But that he had concluded to make a demand
of you which you could certainly not refuse; and that was,
that you should lend him the sum of twenty-five thousand
ducats, to be paid at once in cash; and that upon its receipt
his Majesty would address you a letter, written in his own
vhand, and sealed with his seal, and with all customary formali-
ties, by which he would obligate himself to the conservation
and guaranty of your state and dominion. This letter, how-
ever, was not to be given to you at once, but would be de-
posited in the hands of the Fuggers for the purpose hereinafter

* From here on to page 97 the letter is in cipher.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 95

explained. After having made this payment of twenty-five
thousand ducats, you are to appoint ambassadors for the sole
purpose of coming to meet him whenever you shall hear of his
arrival on the banks of the Po; but these ambassadors to be
empowered also to conclude a treaty with him, and after the
conclusion of such treaty the Fuggers are to hand over to
you the above specified letter. But if no treaty is concluded,
then the said letter is to be returned by the Fuggers to the
Emperor, who will obligate himself to return you the twenty-
five thousand ducats within the year. If, however, a treaty is
concluded, then the twenty-five thousand ducats are to be
treated as a payment on account of whatever sum shall be
provided for by the treaty. Lang endeavored in a long argu-
ment to demonstrate to me the honest purpose and reason-
ableness of this proposition; saying that, if you desired to be
esteemed by the Emperor, you ought to give him this proof of
your affection, and that on his part his Majesty would pledge
you his royal word to treat you as friends. In view of the
occasion and the persons in whose presence I was, I answered
briefly, that the offer which I had made really exceeded your
ability, but that I had made it to show that you were not
willing to fall short of your ancestors in recognizing his Ma-
jesty as your father and protector; but that as to the proposi-
tion made in reply, I could not see how it could be accepted
by you, seeing that, whilst the payment was certain, the security
was most uncertain; but that in accordance with my duty I
would communicate it to your Lordships; and for the purpose
of more thoroughly understanding it, I would come and dine
with Lang. I did this so as to have an opportunity of telling
him more frankly what I thought of the matter, not being able
to do so at the moment without risk of wearying the Emperor.
In explaining the reply, Lang said, whilst his Majesty was still
present, that it would be well for me to write by several routes,
and that I should give him a copy of my letter to you, so that
he might send it; for as the Emperor was going to Trent, the
Venetians might destroy the roads in that direction, and there-
fore I ought to write you to send your reply to Bologna to an
agent of his called Doctor Rabelar, who would always, even in
times of greatest difficulty, have the means of forwarding it
safely ; but your Lordships must not on that account fail to
write me by your own couriers. I shall furnish Lang with the

96 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

desired copy of my letter to you, in which I shall however only
write the proposition made by him, without touching upon the
other circumstances.

A little while after my leaving the Emperor I had a long
conversation with Lang, and told him that I was sure you would
not accept his proposition, which required you to pay, and gave
nothing in return; that in fact the Florentine people would
never consent to such a thing. And as Lang said to me that
the Emperor had charged him again to assure me that he would
treat your Lordships most graciously, I answered that I did
not doubt it, and that every other person that ever had any
particular dealings with his Majesty would believe it equally ;
but that a republic and a people acted very differently from
a private person, and that the general belief in Florence would
be that they would lose the money without gaining the friend-
ship of the Emperor, and that your Lordships knew as well as
he did how sovereigns borrow money, and how they pay it back.
And therefore it would be much better, and save time, if the
Emperor should accept our proposition, which was in every way
proper, and even beyond your ability ; but if withal his Majesty
thought differently, then let him say what he wanted, so that
the maticer might at once be arranged. Lang replied in general
terms, but finally asked’ me what your Lordships were willing
to do to settle this matter at once; to which I answered that I
had already stated it, and that it was now for him to speak.
I said this to see whether I could in any way find out what the
Emperor really wanted of us; but in the end we reached no
other conclusion than that I should communicate to your Lord-
ships the answer made, which I have already done above, and
that meantime we should both think the matter over, and discuss
it further at another meeting. Lang had stated to me from the
first that he was glad he was not the only one interested in
your affairs, and assured me again of the same at our last in-
terview, saying that he needed help; which refers to Serentano
and Messer Paolo Lichtenstein, as I wrote youin my last. Your
Lordships will reflect upon this point, and let me know your
decision. I did not deem it advisable to make the offer of fifty
thousand ducats, for I apprehend that, were I to do so without
any result, it might prejudice any other proposition which you
might decide to make through your ambassadors.

In thinking over the reasons that make the Emperor so desir-

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 97

ous to adhere to the plan of borrowing, and so unwilling to
conclude any definite convention, I can imagine nothing but
what I have already written several times; namely, that accord-
ing to the decision of the Diet he cannot enter into any obliga-
tions with any Italian power; and therefore, whilst on the one
hand he is very needy, and on the other unable to give any
security, he tries the middle course of borrowing. He at-
tempted to act in the same way with Ferrara, but did not suc-
ceed; and it was thus he acted with Sienna, where Pandolfo in
return for his money received nothing but fair promises. For
truly if it were not for this reason, seeing how his Majesty first
received your offer, he would either have accepted it, or made a
counter proposition not varying very much from yours. It will
be necessary, therefore, in your decision of this matter, to keep
in mind this plan of borrowing, and, should you conclude to
put faith in the promises of this sovereign, a less sum than
twenty-five thousand ducats ought to be sufficient for him; but
should you determine to decline this proposal, then you must
decide what you will do, and inform me accordingly. Nor do I
think that it would be amiss if you were to send the ambassa-
dors at once, for, as I have already said above, the Emperor has
spoken of it; and it would be well even if they were to come
farther north to mect his Majesty than he suggested. It was
only to-day that Lang said to me that you had tried to be too
prudent, and had never been willing to believe in the Emperor’s
coming into Italy; for if you had believed it, the appointed am-
bassadors would have endeavored to come here. Although I
duly met all these remarks, yet it may well be that their coming
would greatly facilitate matters; for otherwise I do not think
the Emperor will change his mind. It may also be that the
Diet has not tied his hands, and that he does not wish to con-
clude an arrangement, because he has the intention of asking
such a sum, which, although you refused it now, yet when you
had once begun to pay, and the Emperor should be victorious,
you would not allow yourselves to be asked for more than once.*

The preparations for the Emperor’s enterprise are more active
than they were at the time of my last writing, 17th instant ;
infantry and men-at-arms continue to arrive here daily on their
way to Trent, and others may be going there by different routes,
which we do not see. Three days ago there was a review here

* Here ends the cipher.
VOL. IV. i

98 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

of five hundred infantry and some forty gunners; and from the
19th to the 22d of this month some thirty mounted guns, large
and small, have passed through the Grisons into the Valtel-
line, whence they may be taken to Trent; and it is said that
an arrangement has been concluded with the league of the
Grisons according to which they are to furnish the Emperor
eighteen hundred infantry at his cost, and that money has
been sent there to prevent any one’s accepting pay from France.
Yesterday one hundred mounted men arrived here, being sent
by the cities of Augsburg and Ulm, and sixty more are ex-
pected to-day from Nuremberg. Another review was held here
yesterday of about six hundred infantry; and a proclamation
has been published, that all who have no engagement and want
money can have both. Every day some three or four men-at-
arms pass through here at a time, and likewise large quantities of
munitions of war and provisions. The Venetians have sent all
the men-at-arms and infantry which they had in the Veronese
this side of Chiusi to the forts around Roverdo. Thus matters
cannot remain long in their present condition. As I have writ-
ten before, we may at any moment witness an unexpected move-
ment; and if this conflagration is once lighted and some other
arrangement be not made, your Lordships will see how difficult
it will be for me to receive news from you, or for me to com-
municate with you from here. This is confirmed by what Lang
said this morning in the Emperor’s presence, and which shows
that he has no relations with the Venetians. Perhaps he may
not wish it, or it may be that he has no hope of it, notwith-
standing that the General of the Order of the Umiliati went a
few days ago to Venice; it is not known, however, whether the
Emperor sent him there proprio motu, or whether the Venetians
have requested his coming, or whether he has gone with the
view of ingratiating himself with the Venetians, as this priest
derives his revenues from their dominions. I will see what I
can learn about this affair, and will inform your Lordships.

It is not known when his Majesty will leave, nor do I believe
that it is known by any one but himself; and therefore no one
can tell when hostilities will actually begin, or the precise spot
where they will break out; the general opinion is that it will
not be beyond February, at furthest.

I have heard that the Emperor, unable to conclude anything
with the Duke of Ferrara, wanted to dismiss the ambassador of

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 99

that prince, but that he has been dissuaded from doing so by
his ministers, and therefore he is still here.

Borzen, 24 February, 1508.

I have given Diavolaccio three Rhenish florins for his ex-
penses.

P. S.—TI have to observe to your Lordships that the Emperor
seems to me very obstinate in his opinions, and that he con-
siders himself so strong that I do not believe any arrangement
can be made with him without ready money; and that twenty
thousand ducats cash down will do more than the promise of

fifty thousand hereafter.*
FRANCESCO VETTORI.

LETTER V.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Since Machiavelli’s arrival here I have written four letters to
your Lordships, three of which, however, were very much of —
the same tenor. The first, of the 17th instant, was sent by the
hands of Rafaelle Rucellai, and contained an account of the
manner in which I communicated to his Majesty my instruc-
tions from your Lordships, to which he listened with pleasure
and promised to give a reply on the following day, but which he
has deferred from day to day since the 18th until now, without
my knowing the cause of this delay; although I did not fail
adroitly to solicit an answer. In the same letter I gave you
some account of the state of things here, and have since then
sent you a duplicate of it by Diavolaccio on the 25th, together
with my letter of the 24th with his Majesty’s reply, to the effect
“that he was not willing to accept the offer of forty thousand
‘‘ducats, but wanted an immediate loan of twenty-five thousand
“ducats, in consideration of which he would give a guaranty
“for the conservation of your possessions, which was to be de-
“posited in the hands of the Fuggers, with the condition that,
“when he should have arrived on the banks of the Po, you
“should send ambassadors to him with power to conclude a
“definite agreement with him upon all points. And upon the
“conclusion of such an agreement the Fuggers were to give up

* This P. S. is written in cipher.

100 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

“to your Lordships the letter of guaranty, and the twenty-five
‘thousand ducats loaned by you are to be credited to you on
“account of whatever sum might then have been agreed upon.
“ But in case no agreement should be arrived at, then the Em-
“ neror is to repay you within one year the amount loaned, and
“is to receive back from the Fuggers the letter of guaranty.

“T wrote you at the same time what reply I had made to
“this proposition, and the long conversation which I had had
“on the subject, and that I had been unable to obtain any
“other terms. I also mentioned that his Majesty’s project
“was being pushed with increased vigor; but as I assume
“that that letter reached you safely, I shall not now repeat
‘Call I said therein, and shall confine myself merely to touch-
“ing upon the main points. Nevertheless, I sent you, out of
“respect to his Majesty’s wishes, a copy of the same through
“the Emperor’s hands, as he had so commanded me. And as
“TI was told that, in view of the danger of my not receiving
“vour letters in future, because of the destruction of the roads,
“1 should advise you to send your letters to Bologna to the
“care of Doctor Rabelar, a confidential agent of the Emperor’s
“who had facilities for forwarding them, I would request you
“at the same time to send duplicates of them also by your own
“couriers. In another letter I wrote you that I had learned
“from a great personage at this court that he believed he would
“be able to induce his Majesty to give you the guaranty upon
“your paying him the sum of twenty thousand ducats at once,
“with a promise of another like sum in four months; but as
“this personage is not always near the Emperor, it is quite
“possible that he may deceive himself. I mentioned further-
“more, that Lang had said to Pigello that he would take no
‘“nart in the matter unless at least one hundred thousand
“ducats were offered. I sent a copy of that letter also by
“way of Ferrara on the 26th, so that at least one would reach
“you anyhow, and I added, that the reason why I thought the
‘Emperor would be more difficult in his demands than at first
“was the return of Lang from Augsburg, where he had collected
“considerable sums of money. I had understood, moreover,
“that the twelve Cantons were resolved to remain neutral, so
“that he would have but little or nothing to spend there.” *

* All within the quotation marks was written in cipher in this, as well as in
the subsequent letters.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY, 101

Afterwards, on the 28th, your Lordships’ courier Baccino
arrived with letters of the 19th, in which you inform me of
your having sent Mancino to me on the 28d ultimo; but he
has never made his appearance here. So much time having
elapsed since then makes me fear that he has met with some
mishap; and you must know that, with the exception of Machi-
avelli, the last letter or messenger from your Lordships was a
letter sent by Simone, dated November 4. Your last by Bac-
cino does not require a reply, for it seems to me that he was
sent to me by your Lordships more for the purpose of having
some one by whom I could write in return than for any other
reason.

There have been rumors here of disturbances in Bologna, but
we have heard since that they amounted to nothing.

From your Lordships’ letter it would seem that, according
to the reports from Rome and Mantua, the preparations of the
Emperor are slacking off; but from my own observations I can
tell you that they are being pushed with rather increased en-
ergy. | wrote you from Augsburg why the troops that had
entered the Mantuan territory had turned back; and that the
Venetians had disarmed them on their return, but have since
then restored their arms to them. I also wrote about the Diet
which the Emperor was to hold here, which was, however, not
a general Diet of Germany, but was confined only to the in-
habitants of the Tyrol, for the purpose of obtaining money
from them; and that this Diet had resolved to furnish now
one thousand infantry to be paid by them for three months.
But that hereafter, when hostilities had actually commenced,
and in case the Emperor should have need of more, they would
send him five thousand additional, and organize ten thousand
for the protection of the country.

Infantry and cavalry continue to arrive here daily, and since
I have been here some six hundred or more horse must have
passed. The troops of the Duke of Kénigsberg, amounting to
four hundred, are but a short distance from here. More than
two thousand infantry have passed since my arrival here; but
the country is so large that it is impossible to see or hear of
all; so that a large army might suddenly issue from here,
which previously would not have seemed possible. At one
time matters had advanced to that point that the Emperor
came as far as here; but he left again this morning to visit

102 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

certain castles in the vicinity, and it is believed that he will
proceed to Trent within eight days, where he will find infan-
try, cavalry, and artillery. Every one can judge of the conse-
quences, and one of three things must necessarily result; either
the Emperor will only reap shame and lose his credit even in
Austria, or he must attack Italy, or conclude an honorable
peace. Certainly he will in no way want to incur shame, and
therefore we must suppose that, if he is not able to effect an
agreement according to his own views, he will have to decide
upon war, and that very promptly.

I cannot judge how the Emperor stands with the Venetians.
“Generale da Landriano returned from Venice on the 28th,
“after having been there for three days. I am ignorant as to
“what he brings from there; and on asking the Chancellor he
“told me that he did not know, adding that the General had
“ been to see him, but told him nothing. I do not augur favor-
“ably from this, particularly as I learn from your letter that
“matters are cooling off in the direction of Rome. I appre-
“hend that the Emperor, seeing that he cannot get any money
“from Rome, of which he is constantly in need, may conclude
“some arrangement with the Venetians; but I have nothing
“positive on the subject. It is possible that I may learn some-
“thing more about it before closing this letter.”

I heard to-day that a herald had returned from Verona,
whom his Majesty had sent there to inform the authorities of
that city of his intended passage, and to demand quarters for
twenty-five thousand men. It is said that the Proveditori of
Verona replied to the herald, that if his orders were to engage
quarters for that number of unarmed persons he might do so;
but in the contrary case he must let it alone, and must inform
his Majesty that, if he intended to pass through as his father
had done, he would be received with due honors, but if other-
wise, he would not be received at all.

‘Whether the Pope has furnished any money to the Em-
“neror or not, I cannot say; and although some of the prin-
“cipal personages of the court aver that he has, yet I have
“not believed it, and presume that they said so merely to
“induce you to move, etc. I have, indeed, learned that cer-
“tain moneys recently collected have been deposited with the
“Fuggers, but it may well be that this was also done with the
“idea of producing the same effect. But your Lordships have

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 103

“means of learning the truth about this at Rome, which I have
“not here. I have not heard of his Majesty’s having made any
‘new convention with the king of Aragon, but I learn that
“the marriage project with England is definitely decided upon.
“No money has been received from Italy, unless it be from
“Sienna, which, however, I cannot say for certain, although I
“have seen such indications that I believe it. According to
‘what I hear, his Majesty has gathered troops in three places:
‘in the Friuli he has the troops of the country ; in Burgundy
‘he has many of the nobles and a considerable army ; but ac-
“cording to my own observations his best troops are in the
“direction of Trent. He might make a movement by way of
“the Valtelline, for the league of the Grisons and the Valdenses,
“which form no part of the twelve Cantons, furnish three thou-
“sand infantry paid by the Emperor.

“Respecting our own matters I have nothing new to say,
“for I must await your reply; and, as I have always said, the
“Hmperor has marked you for a very high amount, and I do
“not believe that he can be beaten down unless an immediate
“payment should make him lower his demands. I have made
“every effort to find out his Majesty’s intentions as regards
“giving you the guaranty; but Lang has always avoided the
“question, saying that it was for us to make an offer; and he
‘added, ‘When I asked you, you had no powers to conclude
“anything, and that it would be proper for your Lordships to
“send a mandate to enable the arrangement to be concluded.
“YT beg your Lordships to think well of all these points, and
“above all to send the ambassadors whilst the passes are still
“open; for the farther they come this way, the more reason
“shall we have to believe that they will prove of advantage to
“our city. And to tell you what I think, I do not believe that
“the Emperor will give you the guaranty of protection unless
“you pay him cash down unconditionally ; for he seems to
“think more of ten thousand ducats cash than of twenty
“thousand on time.”

Not a word has been said to me of the letter presented by
the Pisans to your commissioner, and which he declined to
receive; nor has anything been said to me by the Emperor,
or by any one else for him, about Genoese affairs. True, there
was a Genoese here who complained to me that your Lordships
had caused one of his compatriots to be arrested at San Pietro

104 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

a Sieve, but that he did not know the cause; adding, that he
had obtained letters from the Emperor in the manner which
your Lordships write that you have been informed ; and that
his Majesty would send me some word on the subject, which,
however, has not been done, or I should have made it duly
known to your Lordships, as I have invariably done with
regard to everything else that has been communicated to me
by his orders.

The ambassador from Ferrara is informed that the Emperor
has at last made known his conclusion, as follows: “If the
“ Duke will give me money in Germany, then we will discuss
“the subject of the investiture there; but if he delays it until I
“ vet into Italy, then we will wait until then to talk on the sub-
“ject.” And thus the matter remains in suspense.

Servitor
FRANCESCO VETTORI.
Borzen, February 1, 1508.

LETTER VI,

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last letters to your Lordships were of the 1st instant,
and were sent to you by the courier Baccino. By way of pre-
caution I repeated in those letters the substance of all I had
written from the 24th ultimo up to the Ist instant, touching
the Emperor’s reply, and all that I had been able to learn
respecting his intentions. I shall not repeat it again now,
deeming it unnecessary, but I await your answer with impa-
tience. Your Lordships’ courier Coriolano has since then
brought me a letter from your Lordships, but having carried
it concealed in his shoe, it had become quite illegible ; which,
however, I regretted the less, as at the time of his being de-
spatched from Florence Rafaelle Rucellai had not yet arrived
there with mine of the 17th of January; I therefore conjec-
tured that letter to be only a copy of your previous one. Two
days after, another courier arrived bringing me yours of the
29th in reply to mine of the 17th; and upon carefully reading
and examining it, I note two points that cause me great regret.
The first is, that, “under the impression probably that matters

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 105

“here were cooling off, you seem to think that I have gone too
“far with my offers; and the other, that you should instruct
“me at the same time to go even much further, whenever I
‘should perceive that matters here are pushed so earnestly as
“to leave no doubt as to the Emperor’s intentions anyhow, and
“very soon, to descend into Italy. As to the first, it seems to
‘me that I have acted with all prudence, and in conformity
“with my instructions, whether in consequence of my offer we
“should have come to terms or not, or whether, in fixing the
“place for making the payment, it should have been decided
“to be in a city of Italy subject to some power other than the
‘Emperor; for thus, so far as you are concerned, the terms
“of the agreement would have been left to the judgment of
“vour own wisdom. Both one and the other of these event-
“ualities were fully discussed between Machiavelli and myself.
“As to the second point, namely, the enlarging of my instruc-
“tions by your Lordships, coupled with three conditions which
“seem to me so difficult, I will not say merely for the wisest
“and most resolute citizen of all Florence, but for a whole
“senate, if it were here on the spot, and could see from day
“to day as I do, and as every one else could sec, how things
“are going on. And although up to my last letter I have
“always written to your Lordships in such manner that you
“could form as good a judgment of matters here as I could
“myself, yet I will discuss them a little more fully even, so
“that you may see yourselves how matters can be appreciated,
“and what good luck a man must have to conjecture rightly.
“] shall not attempt to recall the events previous to my ar-
“ rival in this country, nor how often and in what manner things
“have given rise to hopes that were as promptly dispelled ; but
“shall confine myself to what has taken place from the time of
“the Emperor’s coming to Botzen until now. His Majesty ar-
“rived here about the 6th of the past month; but whilst it was
“ supposed that his coming here would stimulate matters, it had
“rather the opposite effect, when it was seen that he began by
“assembling a Diet of his subjects, and that he was going around
“begging for money, and that, moreover, he had but few troops
“at Trent; so that seeing on the one hand that the Emperor
“had gone so far that he could not turn back without discred-
“iting his enterprise, and that, on the other hand, he had not
“troops enough to advance any farther, every one became luke-

106 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

“warm. And thence it was that I said in my letter of the 17th,
“that I believed there was time to await your reply. I added,
“ however, that, owing to the wide extent of the country and the
“secrecy with which the Emperor manages his affairs, an un-
“expected movement might suddenly be made. Since then we
“have seen that from the 20th ultimo until yesterday matters
“have resumed a fresh vigor; that new levies of infantry have
“been made which are constantly arriving here, that a large
“ quantity of artillery is being sent forward, and that a great num-
“ber of horse are daily arriving. And although the infantry
“which we have seen pass here did not amount to more than
“three thousand, and the horse to one thousand, and that, so
“far as I knew, there were not here and at Trent and vicinity
“more troops than what I had written you in previous letters,
“ nevertheless it was believed for certain that a body of infantry
“ and cavalry proportionate to what we saw pass here was coming
“by another route, so that the most sceptical had no longer
“any doubt as to the enterprise being carried through. And
“ that is the reason why, in all my letters since the 24th ultimo
“to the Ist instant, I wrote that the enterprise was being pushed
“ ahead, and that the Emperor would attack Italy anyhow, unless
‘he desired to remain covered with shame, or should conclude
“some honorable arrangement.” Subsequently, the Emperor
left Botzen, and, passing through the different places between
here and Trent, he entered that town at about the twenty-third
hour on Thursday last. The following day there was a solemn
procession, in which the Emperor personally took part. Being
preceded by his Imperial heralds, and bearing a naked sword in
his hands, he proceeded to church, where Lang addressed the
people and informed them as regards the Emperor’s enterprise
against Italy, etc., etc. The whole of Friday guards were sta-
tioned at the city gates, who let every one come in, but permitted
no one to go out. All men in the city that were used to han-
dling an axe were employed to hew stakes fit for palisades, and
in making gabions in their fashion. The authorities, moreover,
caused such quantities of bread to be made as would suffice to
feed ten thousand persons for four days. A number of rafts
charged with every variety of munitions of war were sent down
the Adige. In the evening all the men-at-arms received orders
to hold themselves in readiness to mount at the first sound of
the trumpet; and at about nine o’clock they all started in ad-
mirable silence.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY, 107

The Marquis of Brandenburg with about five hundred horse
and two thousand infantry went towards Rovere, and the Em-
peror with about fifteen hundred horse and some four thousand
infantry took the road leading to Vicenza. It was said, more-
over, and reason seemed to demand it, that orders had been
given on the same day that simultaneously with the two attacks
the forces assembled in the Friuli should also move and join
those led by the Emperor when the occasion and the success
of the movements should warrant it. It was also reported that
orders had been given for the three thousand infantry of the
league of the Grisons and the Valais should move towards the
Valtelline. And thus with these dispositions, that were partly
seen and partly heard, great hopes of complete success were
excited.

On Saturday evening the Marquis returned with his cavalry
to Trent, whereupon it was said that, having presented himself
before Rovere, and surrounded the place and demanded admis-
sion within, the commander of the place had asked for six days’
time to give areply, but that only three were accorded him; and
that thereupon the Marquis had returned with his cavalry, leay-
ing his infantry at Petra, a place about two miles from Rovere.
The Emperor, on the other hand, took possession of a mountain
called the Siaga mountain, the spurs of which extend within
twelve miles of Vicenza, where between the hills and the plain
there is a castle belonging to the Venetians, and called Ma-
rostico, which holds a garrison of two thousand men, and can
serve the possessor as a point of support for a good army, and
from which Vicenza may conveniently be assailed. On the
summit of this mountain there are several villages called the
“Seven Communes,” on account of their number being seven.
These belong to the Venetians, by whom they are well treated ;
this position isan important one, and is strengthened by some
trenches. The Emperor seized this position, and filled the
trenches so that artillery could pass, and some pieces have
already gone there. Yesterday morning it was reported that he
had taken the castle of Marostico, ‘“‘ which gave rise to the ex-
“pectation that there would be some tumults in Vicenza, as
“there is with the Emperor a certain Messer Lionardo Trissino,
“a Vicentine,a man of some influence, who being dissatisfied
“with the Venetians had withdrawn for a while from his coun-
“try. In the midst of these hopes it became known yesterday

108 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

“evening that the Emperor, passing under the walls of Trent,
“had gone to lodge in San Michele, ten miles from here on the
“way to Botzen, so that every one became discouraged and re-
“mained in suspense. This sudden movement of the Emperor’s
“is variously commented upon; some apprehend that it may
“have been caused by the Venetians under promise from them
‘“‘to be his friends, but really with the view of observing him,
“either to discredit or to entrap him. Others believe that it
“was the result of his fatal facility of being influenced by
“others, who had held out to him the expectation of a rising
“in Vicenza, which however came to nothing. And there are
“ not wanting some who, holding to their first opinion, believe
“in all the dispositions made by the Emperor, and who say
“‘ that, if he has turned back, it is for some measure of prudence
“which, according to his habit, he wants to carry through in
“ person, although he might have intrusted it to some one else.
“This is the state of things at present; and I would ask the
“wisest man in the world what he would do if he were charged
“with such a commission as your Lordships have devolved
“upon me. But I confess frankly, that, if I had received your
“letter three days sooner, | would have promised to make the
“‘ payment not only at Trent, but even at Innspruck. And if I
‘‘had done so, and matters had afterwards been pushed with
“Jess vigor, or had been deferred, I would like to know what
“would then have been said at Florence; but I can guess with-
“out being told. I do not say this because I lack either faith or
“ courage to execute the commission with which your Lordships
“have honored me; but to show the difficulties of that com-
“ mission, in the execution of which no man, unless he be a
“‘ prophet, can divine the right thing except by chance. For
‘“‘ whether it be attempted to judge in detail, according to what
“is seen from day to day, or on general principles, one cannot
‘arrive at any more definite knowledge than what I have writ-
“ten above. But I do know that, if any one desires to judge
“according to the rules of reason whether a.man will be vic-
.“ torious in such an enterprise, he must take into consideration
“the number and quality of the troops which such individual
“has, and his means of keeping them together, and how he
“ ooverns himself as well as his forces. No one doubts but
“ what the Emperor has plenty of soldiers, and of good qual-
“ity; but how he will keep them together, there is the doubt.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 109

“For he can only hold them by means of money; and being
“onthe one hand short of ready cash himself, he can never
“be sure that it will be supplied by others; and on the other
“hand, being extremely liberal, he piles difficulty upon diffi-
“culty ; and although liberality is a virtue in princes, yet it is
“not enough to satisfy one thousand when there are twenty
“thousand more who are in need of it; and liberality does not
“ profit except those to whom it is extended. As to the per-
* sonal conduct of the Emperor, I will only say that it cannot be
“ denied that he is an active and careful man, most skilful in the
“art of war, laborious, and of great experience ; and more re-
“ puted than any of his predecessors for the past hundred years.
“ But he is so good and humane a gentleman that he has become
“too easy and too credulous, whence it comes that some per-
“sons have great doubts as to the success of his enterprise, as
“ T have stated above; so that, considering all things, there are
“rounds for hopes as well as for fears respecting the result.
“The grounds for hope are mainly two circumstances con-
“ nected with Italy herself, and which until now have been the
“cause of the success and renown of all who have assailed her;
“and these are that she is constantly subject to revolutions and
* changes, and that she has wretched armies; this accounts for
“her marvellous conquests and equally marvellous losses. And
“although the French of the present day have good armies, yet
“not having the Swiss with them, by whose co-operation they
“have been accustomed to achieve victory, and moreover not
“feeling the ground safe under their feet, there is reason for
“ doubts as to their success. All these considerations cause
“me to remain in doubt, and make me hesitate to take a reso-
“lution ; for to give effect to your commission, it is necessary
“that the Emperor should make the attack and be victorious.
“J find myself here at Trent, and know not whether the Em-
“peror will leave San Michele to-day or to-morrow, and am
“therefore kept in doubt as to what course to take. For the
“‘Kmperor had ordered me not to leave Botzen ; but having re-
“ceived your Lordships’ letter, and learning that the Emperor
“had already started, I left immediately to come here and
“make him your offer, fearing I might no longer be in time.
“But finding, whilst on the way, that his Majesty had turned
“back, my zeal has abated; and, unless I should hear some-
“thing that would change my purpose, I am resolved to await

110 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

“your reply. And even if I were to make your new offer
“to the Emperer I should stipulate that the first payment
“should be made in an Italian city subject to some other power,
“provided, as I have said before, that nothing new_ occurs
“that would prevent me. For just as everything seems lost
“at this moment, so to-morrow things may resume a much
“brighter aspect. And as we have seen that the feeble expedi-
“tion of one thousand men into the Mantuan territory was
“followed by a much more vigorous effort, so may the present
“one be succeeded by another and more energetic one. Nor
“do I believe, as I have written before, that twenty thousand
“ducats down and fifty thousand in all, will induce the Em-
“neror to give way, although he might perhaps yield if the
“payment were made here and now; but for this it would be
“necessary for him to have the documents in his hands, which,
‘“as I have written several times, might influence him more
“than anything else to give way. But be this as it may, if I
“should have to decide and be obliged to resolve upon what
“in a doubtful case might have a seeming certitude, I should
“certainly take the course which presents least appearance of
“danger. And in all these manceuvres I believe it to be
“better, if we have to err, to assume that the Emperor will
“oo down into Italy, rather than believe the contrary. For
“in the first case the error would not be irremediable, whilst
“in the other I can see no remedy ; or if there be one, it would
“be very hazardous. But he who wants to gain the greatest
“advantage must also risk more, and this would not be in
“accordance with your Lordships’ instructions.

“T have endeavored in this letter to show what conjectures
“can be formed of the state of things here, and how I should
“be disposed to act, so that your Lordships, in case you do not
“approve it, may direct me otherwise. But should you not
“direct me differently, then you must not be surprised if, after
“all, events should not justify my decision.

“J have received the letter of exchange, with the accompany-
“ing instructions, and shall make use of it when I can do so
“for the advantage of our republic, according as I may deem
“necessary. But this will be difficult, as it is three hundred
“miles from here to Augsburg, and I see no way of making
“any considerable payment here except through the Fuggers.
“T believe you will have to address yourselves to them, that is

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. al Eat

“to say, arrange with the Fuggers of Rome to instruct their
“correspondents here to pay whatever sum may be required.
“And although I have said that the great distance may cause
“ difficulties, yet the Emperor, if the sum be considerable, will
“doubtless find means for overcoming the dilficulty through
“the agency of the Fuggers.”

Machiavelli is very short of money, although I have thus far
not failed to supply him; but on no account in the world
would it do to recall him, and I entreat your Lordships to
approve his remaining here until all matters are settled;
his presence here is necessary. Nevertheless, if it should
happen that the affair of five hundred and fifty-nine florins
require his presence in Florence, and the roads be not danger-
ous, I am sure his love of country would make him brave all
possible danger and fatigue.

Servitor
: FRANCESCO VETTORI.
TRENT, 8 February, 1508.

LETTER VII.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

The above is a copy of a letter I sent you on the 8th by the
courier Ortolano. On the same day the Emperor, having
heard that I had come to Trent and had received letters, sent
for me, he being about two leagues from Trent. Lang, on his
part, asked me whether I had anything to communicate, as I
had received a courier. Having carefully examined your letter,
I was not willing to make any other offer; for to promise fifty
thousand ducats, the first payment on which to be made in a
place in Italy not subject to the Emperor, would have been
an offer that would not have been accepted; and to prom-
ise the first payment to be made in Trent did not seem to me
advisable, seeing that the enterprise was being pushed with
diminished rather than increased vigor. To enable your Lord-
ships to understand the matter fully, I wrote on the 17th
ultimo, that I had been informed that Trent was in Italy,
and that to promise the first payment to be made in a place
entirely in Italy might cause the Emperor to cavil and to

112. MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

demand the payment to be made in Trent itself; and therefore
I wanted your Lordships to take this matter well into consid-
eration. But I spoke only for myself, as neither the Emperor
nor any one else had intimated to me anything on the subject.
Now your Lordships instruct me, in case I should see matters
were being pushed vigorously ahead, and could not do other-
wise, to promise the first payment to be made at Trent. But
seeing that their efforts were being rather relaxed, I was not
willing to make that offer, and excused my coming to Trent
the best way I could; I cannot say, however, whether Lang
was satisfied with my explanation. He ordered me on the part
of the Emperor to return to Botzen, where his Majesty arrived
himself two days after, and directed the Cardinal as well as
myself and all the other ambassadors to transfer our residence
to Meran, a place about three leagues from here; because, as
he said, he wanted Botzen evacuated to receive the men-at-arms
that were expected to arrive. The Emperor left here to-day,
according to some for Innspruck, according to others for Bru-
neck towards the Friuli, so as to start a movement from there.

As I stated in my last despatch, of which the above is a
copy, | am embarrassed by your letter of the 29th, and would
certainly be glad to escape the heavy charge I have on my
shoulders, which is enough to frighten any man, no matter
what his quality. If I am told that I am on the spot, I reply
that I cannot judge of this business any better than your Lord-
ships ; for I have written you all I have seen and heard, and
you can therefore decide best what course would be the most
advantageous for our republic. My last despatch informed
you fully as to the state of things here, and since then nothing
new has occurred, unless it be that there are continually men-
at-arms going on to Trent, notwithstanding that those who
went on towards the frontier and towards Rovere have all
returned to the vicinity of Trent. It is said, moreover, that
there are many troops in the Friuli and in the Emperor’s own
territory, and that, so far as one can judge from appearances,
the Emperor has need of nothing but money. But it is quite
possible that this may be promptly and secretly supplied, and
in such manner as to make it impossible to find it out. There
is more than one community in Germany sufficiently rich to
provide more money than what the Emperor needs. He might
also obtain money from the Pope, or the Venetians, or from his

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 113

Most Christian Majesty of France, or from some other power,
by means of special and secret treaties, so that it would not be
possible to discover it.

I did not want to promise to make the first payment at
Trent, for I did not see things as clearly as you had written
me that I ought to see them before making such a prom-
ise. On the other hand, I should regret if, whilst I have
moved to Meran and am thus separated from the court, the
Emperor were to make a sudden movement forward, and that
thus I should be no longer in time to make the offer which
I am at liberty to make, and that you should then blame me
and charge me with being the cause of ruin to the republic
by not having made the offer to the Emperor in time. Never-
theless, 1 am resolved to take that course which reason sug-
gests, believing that, whatever happens, I cannot justly be
blamed. I wish very much that your Lordships would reply
promptly, especially as I have no answer yet to the despatch
I sent by Diavolaccio, and that you would indicate to me dis-
tinctly how I am to govern myself in this affair. |

And upon this point it is my opinion that to come to terms
with the Emperor and obtain from him the desired guaranty,
your Lordships will have to adopt one of the two following
methods. The first, and in my judgment the safest, would
be to authorize the offer to be raised to one hundred thousand
ducats, or even more, and to divide the payments in the best
way possible; and to stipulate that the first payment shall be
made when the Emperor is in Italy, and in a city not subject to
him. The magnitude of the sum might possibly influence his
acceptance of it. The second plan would be to offer a less
amount, but an immediate and unconditional payment. Forty
thousand ducats may possibly suffice for this; or say fifty
thousand, in two equal payments. This latter offer I believe
should be made before the Emperor enters Italy successfully,
for after that it would be too late; and by making such offer
beforehand it is quite possible that it may not be objected to
by others, and that the Emperor, influenced by the immediate
advantage, would accept it. In either the one or the other
case the guaranty of the Emperor would be obtained; and
having thus concluded an arrangement with him upon that
point, your Lordships might agree upon another point, namely,
to lend to the Emperor ten or fifteen thousand ducats, for which

VOL. Iv. 8

114. MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

he has asked; and thus secure his good will, leaving the repay-
ment of such loan to his discretion after he shall have been
successful, hoping that, like Pandolfo Petrucci, you would be
fairly used by his Imperial Majesty.

All these suggestions which I present to your Lordships are
not based upon any certainty in the matter, but are mere con-
jectures of mine, in which I may be entirely mistaken. Your
Lordships may have already gathered these views from my
preceding despatches. In the present one I wanted to confine
myself to these particulars, so that your Lordships might re-
consider the subject again, and give me your instructions how
to act in this matter. Nor do I write this because I think
that you should decide either according to the one or the other
suggestion, but so that you may be fully informed upon all
points, and not impute any presumption to me; and that you
may take it as proof of my earnest efforts to serve your Lord-
ships. I must entreat you again to give me definite instruc-
tions, for I cannot think differently of the state of things here
from what I have already written you. Were I the only one
that is embarrassed I should blame myself, but I see the wisest
as well as the most imprudent in the same state of uncertainty ;
and if when at court one can only form such an unsatisfactory
judgment of things, it will be still worse now, being obliged to
reside at a distance from the court.

Although your letter of the 29th authorizes me to offer the
payment at Trent, I see that I may still have difficulty in
making use of this authority, for I should avail myself of it
only in the way in which it was given me, and the Emperor
might decide upon entering Italy either by the Friuli or the
Valtelline, or by way of Burgundy, in which case he might
regard the offer of the payment at Trent as a mere mockery.
And therefore your Lordships should not hold to the instruc-
tions heretofore given me, but send me fresh ones, and as
promptly and precisely as possible, and without any conditions
whatsoever ; which you can well do, having had full reports
from me as to the state of things here, and knowing all that
I know myself. I regret very much to learn that the passes
are closed, and that consequently your communications cannot
reach me with that promptness which the present occasion
demands. I beg your Lordships therefore to send me your
instructions in duplicate by different routes, and both by mes-

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 115

sengers on foot as well as mounted, so that at least one of
them may reach me. I should have sent Machiavelli back to
the court, the same as I sent him the other day from here to
Trent; but it would give umbrage to the court, and it would not
do to disobey the Emperor’s orders, as perhaps neither of us
would afterwards be permitted to remain in Germany, and
therefore I conform to the customs of the country.

As I leave to-day for Meran I must not omit to tell your
Lordships that, in conversing with some of the principal per-
sonages of the court, they, no doubt wishing to present the
Emperor’s enterprise in a favorable light, assured me that a
month would not pass without seeing that the Emperor had
acted with consummate prudence and with great advantage to
himself. Some others, however, not of the same high position,
say that the Emperor has made this move to show to the peo-
ple of the Empire that he needs larger means for his enter-
prise, and that it was a matter of honor for them to supply
these means. Others, again, who reason upon these matters,
say that the Emperor will have much difficulty in succeeding,
or that he may be forced, if the Pope will not aid him with
money, to make terms with his Most Christian Majesty of
France, or with the Venetians; and that he has acted as he
has done for the purpose of having an excuse with the Empire
for having made terms with either the one or the other of
those powers. And, finally, there are some who attribute his
conduct to the reasons which I have exposed in the above
copy of my previous despatch. Now whichever one of these
Opinions may be correct, your Lordships will examine them with
your habitual prudence, and will form a more correct judgment
thereupon than any one else. But you will reflect whether it
be well to find yourselves without any arrangement with the
Kimperor in case he should succeed in one way or another satis-
fying his desire of making a descent into Italy. For it might
well happen that his Most Christian Majesty of France, per-
haps dissatisfied with everybody, would leave every one at the
Kmperor’s discretion.

All these things your Lordships can in your wisdom judge
of better than any one else, and then form your determination
and give your orders accordingly.

1 recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant /

Borzen, 14 February, 1508.

116 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

P. S.—I must not omit to remind your Lordships, with the
utmost respect, that, in case some arrangement has to be con-
cluded, the court here would desire that I should be commis-
sioned to do it.

Whilst I believed that Simone had already passed Bologna,
he arrived here yesterday evening, and said that he had turned
back because at Pietra the Germans would not allow him to
pass, as the Emperor had given strict orders not to permit any
one to pass into Italy without a letter from him, so that no one
should be able to give any verbal account of his preparations.
As I had not been informed of these orders at the time when I
despatched Simone, it did not occur to me to provide him with
such a permit. However, I will endeavor to obtain an order
for him to pass, and will send him back again, and will at the
same time write you by him all that has occurred here since
the 14th instant.

To-day is the 19th, and nothing of interest worth being
reported has occurred during the past five days; particularly
as we are here at Meran, away from the main road, and where
we neither see nor hear anything. Still, I learn from persons
that come from Botzen or Trent, that infantry and cavalry are
continually passing through Trent, and that within the last five
days more than three thousand infantry have passed Botzen,
and more are constantly expected; and from here also some
five hundred have gone. It is reported that at Landrech, a
place about two days’ journey from here, there are some three
thousand men who are to come this way, so that matters are
evidently being pushed with increased energy rather than other-
wise. The Emperor is still at Brixen, and it is not known
whether he will come this way or go by way of the Friuli. On
the other hand, I find myself still in the same embarrassment
which I have mentioned before, and which is felt by everybody
here, for no one can reasonably conjecture, not alone what the
end, but what even the beginning, of this enterprise is likely to
be; and therefore I could have wished that this despatch could
have been sent to you on wings, so as to have your reply the
sooner; and that, having thus your definite instructions, I
might carry them into execution with the more certainty. But
the very reverse has occurred, and what grieves me most is
that I have just learned that the courier Diavolaccio, who
ought to have brought me your Lordships’ reply to mine of the

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. daly

29th, has been plundered on the way and is coming back here.
Thus difficulty is heaped upon difficulty. And although I am
authorized without any further instructions to offer in all fifty
thousand ducats, of which twenty thousand to be paid at Trent,
as before stated ; yet I do not see my way clear for deciding
upon this, inasmuch as you had written that I should not make
this offer unless I saw that the Emperor’s descent into Italy was
certain.

And therefore I wrote to your Lordships not to rely upon
your previous instructions, but to send me positive orders, and
I now repeat this request. On the other hand, I shall continue
to watch things here as carefully as possible whilst awaiting
your Lordships’ reply to my despatch of the 24th, or of the 8th,
or the present one. But I observe that matters are being
pressed, and if this enterprise should be pushed with the usual
impetuousness of these Ultramontane movements, we should
no longer be in time for any arrangement. Nor do I know
whether our offer would now be accepted, and whether it may
not prove to our disadvantage to have made it. In short, in the
present state of things I have no hope of being able to do any-
thing under the instructions I have from you; and for that
reason I am so desirous, before taking another step, to have a
reply at least to my despatch of the 24th, if not to the others.
And if I do not receive it I shall act as God may inspire me,
and as I shall believe to be for the best interests of our country ;
and in doing so I hope to be justified in the eyes of God and
men.

Meray, 19 February, 1508.

It is only to-day, the 23d of February, that I have obtained
permission from Messer Paolo to despatch a courier, which I had
hoped to do much sooner. He will leave to-morrow, but I do
not know even now whether he will be allowed to pass Rovere.
Not to miss any opportunity, however, I hazarded two days
ago sending another letter by two vagrants who are going to
Italy, in which I gave a brief summary of the state of things
here, and solicited a reply to my despatch sent by Diavolaccio,
reminding your Lordships, as I do again now, that without
fresh instructions I shall not be able to execute the commission
you sent me by Simone on the 29th, even if it should seem to
me that the time for doing so had arrived ; for an offer to make

118 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

a payment at Trent whilst the Emperor is going through the
Friuli would seem to him derogatory. And then as the Em-
peror evidently intends to obtain a large sum of money from
you for his guaranty, it is not likely that he would accept your
present offer, unless he should feel that he is weak; and in
that case it would not be for your interest to make him any
offer. But for the reasons given above it 1s impossible to judge
whether he is weak or strong. It might well be, however, that
he came down to accept such a sum as you offer, if for a part
of it letters of exchange were in hand and the remainder could
be offered him as a certainty ; as I have already written that,
notwithstanding his being above accepting such a sum, he might
yet, on finding himself short of money, yield suddenly on seeing
the ready money before him; and therefore I say, by every con-
sideration, I ought to have fresh instructions covering every
point and every possible contingency, and so drawn up that one
communication may suffice, for as the roads are no longer open
there can be no multiplicity of communications.

The Emperor has remained until within the past two days at
Brixen, a place about two days’ journey from Trent. Thence
he went to Bruneck on the road to the Friuli. Here at Meran,
where we now are, a thousand infantry have passed, and it is
said that three thousand more are to come, who are to move on
to Trent, where it is reported that ten thousand infantry and
four thousand horse are to assemble; and the opinion prevails
that the Emperor will make his attack upon Italy with a large
foree by way of the Friuli. As to the number of his troops, and
where they are, and how they are to unite, it is as impossible
for me to say as it would be for your Lordships to know what
is going on at Naples, unless you had some one there to inform
you. You must not suppose, therefore, that I can form a correct
judgment of matters here; all we can do is to recommend our-
selves to God in all the resolves we may form.

But what disturbs me very much is to be, as it were, in a lost
island, whence I cannot get away myself, nor send any one with-
out permission.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

MeEray, 23 February, 1508.

P. S.—TI have ordered the courier Simone to take the post at
Bologna, so as to get the sooner to Florence, and for this pur-

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 119

pose have given him five ducats gold, which your Lordships will
please refund to my brother Paolo.
Your servant,
FRANCESCO VETTORI.

LETTER VIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

If I believed that Simone had arrived at Florence with my
despatches of the 24th, 19th, and 14th February, I should not
take the trouble to answer you; but having reason to doubt it,
I will repeat suecinctly what has occurred here during the past
month up to to-day, and also the opinions which, according
to the reports and conjectures one hears, may be formed as to
the results of the enterprise in question. After that I will tell
you how your matters stand with the Emperor, and what con-
clusions we may reasonably form from his proceedings. I shall
not repeat what I have written before on the 24th, 25th, and 26th
of January, and the Ist of February, because I believe that those
letters reached you safely, although I am still without any an-
swer to them. I also believe that my despatch of the 8th of
February sent by Ortolano has safely arrived, in which I pointed
out the difficulty of watching and judging affairs here, and in
which I reported how the Emperor caused Rovere to be as-
saulted on the 5th ultimo by the Marquis of Brandenburg with
about two thousand troops, who retreated the same evening to
Trent; and how the Emperor in person, with about five thou-
sand men, went on the same day to seize the Communes on
Mount Sioch in the direction of Vicenza; and how finally, whilst
this was generally regarded as a most energetic movement
forward, his Majesty withdrew on the 7th to Botzen, to the
astonishment of everybody. After that the Emperor went to
Brixen, a place about two days’ journey from Trent in the
direction of Innspruck, whence he afterwards moved to Bru-
neck, and from there took the road to the Friuli, where with
about six thousand troops of the country he scoured certain
valleys within the Venetian dominions for a distance of more
than twenty miles. Letters were received on the 26th of
February from Bruneck, of which the following is a verbatim

120 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

copy. ‘The Emperor has taken the valley of Cadauro, through
‘“‘ which the road leads to Venice by the Trevisan territory ; the
“castle of Bustauro, which formerly belonged to the church of
** Aquileja, he has left behind him; but has taken the castle of
“San Martino, and some other places in the vicinity; also the
‘“‘castle of Pieve, which was guarded by a gentleman who took
“to flight so soon as he heard of the approach of the enemy.
“He has also taken another valley, called Comoligon, which
“was guarded by the Counts Saviniani. And after that he
“ordered the army to advance towards the Trevisan territory,”
&c. Beyond this, nothing certain is known of his progress ;
but I have heard some persons say that the Emperor was to be
at Serezino to-day, this being the Ist of March; this would be
within two days of Innspruck, where it is supposed he goes to
raise money on pledge of certain of his jewels.

From the direction of Trent we have no news since the Em-
peror’s departure from there, except that some two thousand
infantry and two hundred mounted men have gone from there
and from Botzen. Your Lordships will see from all this what
the condition of the enterprise is at the present, and how it
is conducted; but no man can guess what the end of it will
be, for we cannot learn clearly whether the Emperor will meet
with any support in Italy. All we hear is, that the Venetians
have difficulties about money, and that they are considerably
alarmed; and as his Majesty two days ago despatched one of
his counsellors, who was formerly his ambassador at Naples,
in an unknown direction, it is surmised that he was sent on a
mission to the Venetian government, at their request, for the
purpose of initiating some negotiations. And it is appre-
hended that, if the Emperor should find means to come to
terms with either the Venetians or the French, he will con-
clude an arrangement with them, notwithstanding that the
Cardinal has received information that France has been hold-
ing back for some time. It is not known what the Pope’s dis-
position towards the Emperor may be, but it is believed that
he is somewhat irritated against him because the Cardinal has
complained, that ever since leaving Memmingen up to the
present the Emperor has never communicated anything to him,
and that at the departure from Memmingen his Majesty had
said to him in an angry manner that he would show to the
whole world that he was able to make war without the help of

“ee

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 121

either the Pope or the king of France. In a word, no one here
ventures to express a definite opinion; for on the one hand it
seems to everybody that it will be very difficult for the Em-
peror, without the aid of the Pope, to make head against the
Venetians and France, more especially since he has begun to
make war upon them in a manner so slow as to have given
them courage to resist, and time for making the necessary pro-
visions; and on the other hand the power of Germany is so
great that, if she wants to do so, she is able to resuscitate an
enterprise that is dead, and can more easily yet infuse energy
into one that is still alive. And those who venture to guess
say that the Emperor has made this movement for no other
purpose than to make the Dict of the Empire furnish him
fresh subsidies; for the Diet had granted him supplies for a
term of six months, and had authorized five princes of the Em-
pire to make him a further allowance for six months more in
case the first should not suffice. Now it was preciscly for the
purpose of proving the insufficiency of the first that the Em-
peror made this attack.

The Cardinal had a courier from Rome yesterday, and there-
upon immediately wrote a great deal, and sent the courier to
the court, and on being asked by a person in authority, Quid
novi? he replied, that he had a variety of good news which
would be made known in good time; and this was all the
answer that could be obtained from him.

As regards the relations of the Emperor with the powers
outside of Italy, I can tell you what I have learned, having
had the opportunity to hear, for we are all at leisure here.
According to the ambassador from Aragon, the Emperor has
not done well not to come to an understanding with his sover-
eign, who would have been satisfied merely to have the govern-
ment of Castile assured to him, and, in case he should die
without heirs, to leave all his states to his nephew, to which
the Emperor would not consent; and in this the ambassador
says that the Emperor did not act wisely, as his sovereign
would have aided the Emperor in war and in peace. The am-
bassador from England has had advices since he has been here,
that although the marriage with the son of the Archduke has
been agreed upon, yet nothing will come of it unless his king
obtains the hand of Donna Marguerita, and that the Emperor
seems to put it off, showing thereby his unwillingness to con-

122 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

sent, although the ambassador has given him to understand,
that if the oue is not done, the other will not take place; and
that his sovereign will not make the same demonstrations
which he would do if he obtained Donna Marguerita. And
finally, as to the twelve Cantons, matters remain in the same
condition as I have written before, and it is some time since
anything has been said in relation to them. It is for your
Lordships now to form your own judgment of these matters, for
no one here can venture to do so; but you can do it, inasmuch
as you can find out whether France is making preparations for
war, or whether she is disposed to peace; and upon this point
nothing can be learned here. For this reason I have written
and now write again to ask your Lordships to be pleased to give
me positive instructions, and to decide what course you intend
to take. Your affairs here are in precisely the same condition
as stated in my despatch which I sent by Diavolaccio, and to
which I still await a reply. According to the indications
which I notice here, I think it necessary, if you desire the
guaranty and to conclude once for all with the Emperor, that
you adopt one of two courses. The first is to raise the amount
to be offered to one hundred thonsand ducats, or even more,
with the premise of making the first payment in the first
Italian city not subject to the Emperor; this seems to me the
most certain way. The other is for you to obligate yourselves
to pay forty or fifty thousand ducats, and to pay one half cash
down, for which the letters of exchange must be in hand, and
to promise the other half unconditionally in three or four
months. The first proposition the Emperor may be induced to
accept, because of the largeness of the amount; and _ his neces-
sities together with the advantage of an immediate payment
may make him accept the second; but this latter would be less
certain, and would involve greater risk. Your Lordships might
also adopt a third plan, which would be more in accordance
with the Emperor’s demands; namely, to lend him a certain
sum without any security, and depending solely upon his good
will and discretion; for this ten or fifteen thousand ducats
should suffice, although he asks for twenty thousand. One of
these three plans your Lordships must adopt, according to my
judgment, for the purpose of arriving at a conclusion. I say
this, not because I know anything positive about it, but merely
by way of conjecture; but it may well be that I deceive myself,

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 123

and therefore I write you everything, so that, being fully in-
formed, you may come to some definite determination.

I have not made the offer of a payment of twenty thousand
ducats at Trent, for if no other consideration had kept me
from doing so, it would have been the conviction that the pay-
ment of the twenty thousand ducats would be the only thing
certain about it; for inasmuch as the Kmperor counts upon
obtaining a very large sum of money from your Lordships, he
certainly would not accept twenty thousand ducats unless he felt
himself extremely weak, and in that case there would be no
occasion to pay him anything. Moreover, to offer the payment
to be made at Trent whilst the Emperor is not there, and has
probably no intention of going there, but will go by an entirely
different route, would naturally cause him to look upon that
offer as a mere mockery. And therefore I repeat to your
Lordships that I must have fresh instructions, carefully pre-
pared so as to cover every point and contingency, so that I
may not have to ask again for further orders; for, the roads
being closed, our correspondence is necessarily restricted ; and
meanwhile time passes and a month’s delay may be of great
importance, for the Emperor must now promptly satisfy his
desire to go into Italy, either by means of some agreement, or
by a war carried on differently from what has been done hith-
erto, or he will become the laughing-stock of the whole world.

The whole of this letter, with slight exception, is little more
in substance than what I have written you by Simone. I will
endeavor to send it off if possible; for amongst my other
annoyances there are two that nearly kill me, namely, to be
away from the court, and the impossibility of either sending
to or receiving letters from your Lordships.

I wonder much that I have no reply to my despatch sent by
Diavolaccio, although I heard that he had been plundered on his
return ; still, as letters have been received here since then from
Sienna, and even from Rome, I cannot understand why I have
none from your Lordships. And as you have always said that
it was the Venetians who wished to usurp the liberties of Italy,
and as the Emperor has now made open war upon them, he
will think that you intended to pay him with promises when he
sees that you are delaying your answer. I therefore repeat
again that it is essential you should write and send me fresh
powers, with definite instructions as to what I ought to do.

124 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

And if you still entertain the idea of paying him money, then
you must send me letters of exchange, which, as I have written _
before, can be had through the Fuggers in Rome. Your Lord-
ships must not think that your instructions of the 29th of
January can be of the least use; for, as | have written before,
they are applicable only at Trent, and in case I should see
clearly that the Emperor’s enterprise is being pushed success-
fully. But in that case the Emperor would certainly not
accept that proposition, particularly as it is not accompanied
with ready money. And even if I were to offer to pay him at
Trent in cash, yet the money would not really be there, and I
could only give him bills of exchange, which would require at
least a month’s time before the money would be paid on them,
and therefore nothing can be done upon the basis of your
instructions of the 29th of January.

To-day is the 7th of March, and the Emperor is at Inns-
pruck. Three days ago the Legate received news from the
court that the deputies of the Empire had very readily extended
the subsidies to the Emperor for another term of six months,
at which his Majesty has shown himself much pleased, and
was preparing to send off letters to that effect. This is all we
hear of him; but it is supposed that he will be here within six
or eight days, and then go wherever it may seem good to him.
The troops that were at Trent, some nine thousand infantry
and cavalry, went two days ago in camp at Castel Barco, a
place opposite Rovere, on the other side of the Adige, and on
the right in going from here into Italy, Roveredo being on the
left. The place surrendered at discretion in three days, whilst
the imperial forces were waiting for artillery; the garrison,
consisting of forty men, are still prisoners. Nothing has been
heard since as to whether the army has moved forward; some
say that it will march upon Castel Brettonico, on the same side
of the river; others say that it will march upon Roveredo,
the garrison of which place is said to consist of fifteen hun-
dred Spaniards. This is all we have heard from that direc-
\tion, nor have we any news from the army in the Trevisan
territory ; or from any other direction whatever, except that
within the month eighty artillery wagons have gone from
Trent in the direction of Roveredo, and two wagons loaded
with chains for the construction of bridges. Of the Emperor’s
negotiations we hear nothing; I have been told, however, that

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 125

the Cantons furnish twenty-five hundred men to France, and
the individual who told me this said that Lang had not de-
nied it, but had said that the Emperor would also have Swiss
troops. Upon these points your Lordships can obtain much
more reliable information by way of Lombardy, as also in rela-
tion to all other negotiations which the Emperor may be carry-
ing on either with France or the Pope. And thus you will be
able to form a better judgment upon all these points than what
can be done from here.

Servitor
FRANCISCUS VICTORIUS,
Meran, 7 March, 1508. Ambassador.
———_—_—_—_—__—.
LETITER IX.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Your Lordships will find annexed to this a report of all that
has taken place here from the 24th of February until the 7th of
March; and although there are some things in that statement
which I might now have passed over in silence, or curtailed,
yet I send it as it was written, so that your Lordships may
know step by step how matters have been regarded here, and
thus form a better judgment of them. You will also know the
changes they have passed through, and will therefore have
compassion with those who have had to express an opinion
about them. I had written that report on the morning of the
7th, in the expectation of sending it to you by a person from
Rome, who afterwards declined to take it. Later on the same
day, at the twenty-second hour, the Governor of the Tyrol
made known to all the ambassadors that he desired to confer
with them, on behalf of the Emperor, at the house of the Ara-
gonese ambassador. Having met him there as appointed, he
presented a letter of credence from the Emperor, and then
said that the Emperor, having heard that the Swiss had de-
clared in favor of France and had sent some six thousand
troops there already, had therefore resolved to declare war
against them. But wishing first to confer with the Legate and
the other ambassadors upon certain points, he desired that the
Legate and ourselves should come to meet him for that purpose

126 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

at Innspruck by wav of Brixen. We replied, that we were dis-
posed to obey the Emperor’s request, and would consult with
the Legate about it. We went after that to see the Legate,
who was quite perplexed and disinclined to make this trip, and
finally begged us to postpone the matter until the next Monday,
saying that he would in the mean time send a confidential agent
to the Emperor to notify him of the time when he would start
with us, and at the same time make our excuses to him. But
I behteve that he did all this merely to see whether he could not
ect off from going to Innspruck.

We conformed to the Legate’s request, and on Monday,
which was the 13th, we started from Meran. On the road, we
heard that that portion of the Emperor’s army which had gone
towards Roveredo had made no progress, but had stopped at
Petra; whilst the other part, which had gone towards the Tre-
visan territory, had even done less, and that some thirteen hun-
dred of the infantry, under command of a reckless captain,
had been betrayed by some of the people of the country to
enter into a certain valley in hopes of plunder, where they
were assailed with stones from above, and surrounded by about
six thousand Venetian horse and foot; and that only about
three hundred had eseaped with their lives, but afterwards sur-
rendered, whilst all the rest were killed. This disaster has
caused great irritation throughout all Germany against Italy,
and more especially against the Venetians. The priest Lucas,
whom I have mentioned as having gone to Venice, has re-
turned, having been ordered away from there on the receipt of
the news of that victory. It is reported that the only remark
the Emperor made when he heard of this loss was, that “ it
“served them right to be killed for going where they ought
“not to have gone.’ But to prevent any further disasters to
that portion of his army, he immediately sent the Duke of
Brunswick there, who is highly reputed as.a military man.

Before our departure from Meran the Legate received a
letter informing him that the Emperor had left Innspruek for
Suabia, for the purpose of convoking a Diet, and to stir up the
Suabians against the Swiss, and that the coadjutor of Brixen
would communicate to the Legate the commands of the Em-
peror. And so we arrived here yesterday together with the Le-
gate; but nothing was communicated to him by the coadjutor,
who said that he had received no orders of any kind. On the

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. aK

road, we learned by letters to the Legate, not from the Emperor,
but from a Lombard exile, that the report of the Swiss haying
declared against the Emperor was not true, and that only a few
thousand, without authority from the Cantons, had taken ser-
vice in France; in consequence of which the government of the
Cantons had seized the French ambassador, and would not re-
lease him until all the Swiss who had taken service in France
were first returned to them. This Lombard exile mentioned
furthermore, that the Grisons had beheaded certain agents
who had distributed money on the part of France amongst the
people of the country; and that the Emperor had c.voked
the Diet in Suabia, not for the purpose of having them declare
against the Swiss, but against the Venetians, and to have them
vote, besides the regular supplies to the Emperor, certain ex-
traordinary subsidies.

Your Lordships must now form your own judement as to
which of these statements are true. The Legate had a letter
this morning from Messer Mariano, Auditor of the Rota, whom
he had sent from Meran to the Emperor, informing him that
the Emperor was at Cospain, and had called the Diet to mect
at Ulm, one of the chief cities of Suabia, four days’ journey
from here; that the Diet was to open on Sunday next, and that
there would be present ambassadors from the Suabian League,
also from Switzerland, and a number of princes, and particularly
those who had been charged by the Diet of Constanz to extend
the supplies to the Emperor for an additional six months; and
that the Emperor desired that the Legate and the other ambas-
sadors should also go there, if it were not too much trouble for
them. The Legate has not yet decided what to do, but will do
so to-day, and | will inform you of his decision before closing
this letter. We hear, as I have already mentioned above, that
the disaster inflicted by the Venetians upon the German troops
has caused a general irritation in Germany, and that they will
promptly decide upon sending help, and that in consequence
the demands of the Emperor have been considerably increased.
On the road from Botzen here we met several hundred men-at-
arms and six hundred infantry, and a number of wagons
loaded with lances, swords, provisions, and munitions of war.
This is all the information I can give you as to the state of
things here up to this day, the 19th; and thus your Lordships
know as.much about it as I do myself.

128 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

The Courier Baccino arrived here on the Tth at two o’clock at
night, and brought mea short letter from your Lordships of the
19th ultimo, which however contains no answer to my despatch
sent by Diavolaccio, but refers me upon all points to yours of the
29th January, adding merely that I may at my discretion offer
to raise the first payment to twenty-five thousand ducats; but
that I am to do so only if in my judgment the chances of the
Emperor’s descent into Italy are three out of four. I cannot do
otherwise in this business than to conform to your Lordships’
will and pleasure, and to bear the burden imposed upon me the
best way I can. But as your Lordships say that I shall make
the offer only if I believe that the Emperor will carry his project
into execution, I say now that I believe the chances are more
than ever that he will attempt the passage again, and with a
larger force than before; but whether he will be successful or
not, remains to be seen ; and whether he abandons the attempt
or fails in it, that will really be the same to your Lordships
after you have once shown your hand. Now to form a judg-
ment as to whether the Emperor will succeed or not is the
more difficult for me, as I know nothing of the strength of the
Venetians, nor of the preparations of the French, of which your
Lordships give me no information in any of your letters.
Having to judge of this at a distance, I can but conclude that
the Venetians are very strong, for I see that of the Emperor’s
two armies, each of which was composed of from six to seven
thousand men, the one has been defeated and the other held in
check. Thus what force must we suppose the Emperor would
need to enable him to beat the Venctians and the French to-
gether? Still, if I knew what is being done in the Milanese,
and what preparations have been made there; and on which
side the French are going to place themselves, what troops
the Venetians have, and whether they are able to bear the
expense ; and finally, if I knew whether the French and Vene-
tians will unite their forces for the defence of Italy, — then I
might boldly form an opinion, and with less fear of making a
mistake. But as it is, l can only recommend myself to God,
and hope that your Lordships will believe that whatever I may
do is done with the best intentions, and in the hope that it may
prove to be for the best.

It might also be, as I have said in a previous despatch, that
without any apparent preparations a peaceable arrangement

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 129

might suddenly be concluded, of which no one had any previous
knowledge. Indeed, I have heard within the past two days
that the Emperor, moved by his hatred against the Venetians,
shows himself inclined to treat with France, in which he is
encouraged both by the Legate and the Aragonese ambassador.
And it is even said that the Legate, at the request of the Em-
peror, has already written to France on the subject, and that
there is but one serious difficulty, namely, that France does not
know with what sort of a conscience she can abandon the
Venetians; and to enable her to do so with some color of pre-
text, the Legate has suggested that the king of France should
call a council at Lyons, at which he should declare to the Vene-
tians that, if they will furnish him an extraordinary subsidy of
six hundred thousand ducats, he will not only defend the Milan-
ese, but make war upon and beat all Germany with honor and
advantage to his crown. Butif they will not furnish him that
sum, then he would be obliged to abandon the Venetians and
make peace for himself. It is supposed that the two sovereigns
would prefer peace at the expense of others, to war at their own
cost, even with the hope of some gain; and therefore it seems
likely that France will in some way be obliged to abandon the
Venetians, and leave them to clamor against her. Your Lord-
ships will learn by way of Lyons whether all this is true or a
mere invention ; I have written it just as it was told me, and
as a secret. Those who pretend to judge of these matters be-
lieve that the Emperor would rather satisfy his desire of going
to Rome being at peace with France than at war. Should your
Lordships hear anything more in relation to these matters, you
will know what course to take under the circumstances; as for
myself, | must repeat that I shall know nothing certain about
it until after the event.

To return now to the offer which your Lordships have au-
thorized me to make, ete., I repeat that I still see the same diff-
culties which I have explained in the annexed despatch ; and
which are, first, to have to confer with the Emperor at Trent,
where he may not be willing to return, preferring probably
some other route ; and secondly, because [ could not make the
first payment promptly, having no bills of exchange in hand,
nor even the power definitely to conclude an arrangement ;
and finally because I can give no certain assurances as to the
payment of the remainder. Moreover,asI have already written,

VOL. IV. 9

130 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

I regard this offer as altogether to the Emperor’s advantage,
and not at all to yours; for if he feels himself strong he will
decline it, for he expects a great deal more from you; and
should he feel that he is feeble, then he will accept, to your
prejudice. And if you should wait until he is strong, then you
will be no longer in time with your offer. But it is impossible
correctly to anticipate all this.

The Diet will certainly convene, and I shall take counsel from
its conclusions and from what I shall hear and see from day
to day. Ifthe Cardinal goes to the Diet, I shall send Machi-
avelli along with him, as I am prevented from going myself,
having been seized with so acute a pain in one of my arms
that it prevents my riding on horseback. And therefore I beg
your Lordships to grant me leave to return to Florence, so that
I may subject myself to a lengthy and regular cure, should it
be necessary. If, however, I find myself able to ride in a few
days, I shall not fail to go to the court. Ihave given Machia-
velli orders to go, and closely to watch the proceedings of the
Diet and to report to me fully, so that I may direct him what
to do, and afterwards inform your Lordships of everything. It
is understood that the Emperor has three objects in view in
convoking this Diet; first, to settle matters once for all with
the Swiss if possible ; secondly, to have the Empire accord to
him the additional six months’ supphes, unless perchance this
should already have been done; and finally to obtain from the
Suabian League something more than ordinary; all of which
we shall know better as we hear from day to day how things
are going.

I have kept this letter back until to-day, for I wanted to see
what the Cardinal would decide about going to the court, as he
had written there the other day to ascertain whether he could
be excused from the trouble of going. But as he has not yet
received a reply to that letter, I have thought it best no longer
to delay despatching Baccino, to whom I have given eleven
ducats gold, ten of which are for his return, and one for having
sent him from Meran here to find out from Giovanni Rustichi
the whereabouts of the Emperor. I have given this money to
Baccino because he seems to me to deserve it better than any
other of your couriers ; for during the past six weeks he is the
only one that has come from Italy. Your Lordships will please
reimburse this amount to my brother Paolo.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 131

We have news here of the death of the Count Palatine, who
leaves four sons. Yesterday evening the Legate told me that
three of the Swiss Cantons had accepted a sum of eight thou-
sand ducats as earnest money from the Emperor for eight thou-
sand infantry; and that the Diet will under any circumstances
arrange to have the other Cantons recall such of their infantry
as have taken service in France. These reports about the
Swiss seem to me confused, and no doubt they will appear the
same to your Lordships; for I cannot understand how three of
the Cantons can send eight thousand infantry out of the coun-
try, or how three Cantons can decide one thing, whilst the
others want something quite different. Nor can I see how six
thousand men could have been raised without permission of the
Communes, and that the Communes should not have heard of
it in time to have prevented it.

With the exception of my arm, I am well, thank God.

The Marquis of Brandenburg passed through here two days
ago on his way to be present at the Diet; he came from Trent,
where he commanded the army, and has left his son Casimir to
take his place for the time.

Servitor

FRANCESCO VETTORI.
Innspruck, 22 March, 1508.

LETTER X.

Maeniricent S:GNnort, ETC. : —

On the 22d I wrote very fully to your Lordships upon va-
rious matters, and sent the letter by Baccini. Amongst other
things I mentioned our departure from Meran to Innspruck by
order of the Emperor, in consequence, it was said, of the Swiss
having declared in favor of France; and that before our ar-
rival at Innspruck the Emperor had gone to Suabia to hold a
Diet for the purpose of stirring up the Suabian League against
the Swiss; but that afterwards it was said to be against the
Venetians, because the Swiss had resolved to support the Em-
peror. I mentioned also several other things in that despatch,
of which I send full duplicate to-day by the same German cou-
rier by whom your Lordships sent me your last letters of the

BW MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

4th instant. I write now briefly, and annex another copy of
my previous despatch, and send it by Messer Paolo Lichtenstein,
who has so requested me. This Messer Paolo is one of the
three persons nearest to the Emperor; he sent for me at Inns-
pruck and came to see me here at Botzen, and told me that the
Emperor, being occupied with the Diet, had commissioned him
to bring matters to a point with you ; that he desired not only
to satisfy his sovereign, but also to be agreeable to your Lord-
ships; and knowing the position in which you are, namely, that
you feared the Emperor, the king of France, and the Venetians,
because you were not able alone to defend yourselves against
either of these three powers, you could not do better than to
make terms with the Emperor, who could defend you with arms
in case of war, and in case of peace could secure you by treaties ;
and therefore he requested me to tell him what it was that you
had asked of the Emperor when you made him your late offer.

Having replied to this, he said: “I believe it would be well
“that the Emperor should accord to you his guaranty, and
“that in return you should pay him sixty thousand ducats in
“three payments ; the first, cash down upon the conclusion of
“the agreement; the second, in Italy, in two months after the
“first; and the third payment also in Italy, in two months after
“the second. That this seemed to him a reasonable arrange-
“ment, to which his sovereign and your Lordships ought to
“accede; that he would so write to the Emperor, whilst I
“ should write to your Lordships.” I replied that this propo-
sition involved three serious objections; the first, that the sum
hamed was too large; the second, that the payments were too
near together; and the third, that no place was fixed for the
first cash payment, an objection which I have already explained
in previous despatches. Messer Paolo made no further reply,
but only asked me to write to you by three or four different
routes, and said that he would aid me in sending the letters, the
expense of which I was to bear. I insisted nevertheless in ob-
jecting to the payments being so near together, as well as to
the other points, but could not obtain any modification of the
terms except an extension of one month on the last payment.
To enable him to report more precisely to the Emperor, as well
as to avoid all misunderstandings, Messer Paolo asked me for a
written memorandum of what I wanted, which I prepared for
him; and I now enclose a copy of the same, in which our re-

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 133

spective demands are stated, and to which I added, besides
what my instructions called for, that, in case of the Emperor’s
concluding a peace with any other power, he was to provide for
the safety of our Republic.

In coming back here from Innspruck I met the German cou-
rier with your Lordships’ letter of 4th March, from which I
see that you enlarge my powers. But although the demands
made by Messer Paolo on behalf of the Emperor are perhaps
less onerous than what you authorize me to concede, yet as
there was a difference as regards the time of making the pay-
ments, and as I could not induce him to yield that point, I
could not conclude an arrangement with him. Your Lordships
will please now to examine the whole subject, and reply to me
definitely, for you know the state of things here now as fully as
Ido. I must also briefly inform you that in the direction of
Roveredo there are not less than eight thousand, and not more
than ten thousand troops, of which some two thousand are
mounted men; and in the direction of Treviso there are not
less than four thousand nor more than six thousand. What
other troops may yet be expected there I cannot say for certain.
A little while ago it was said that a considerable number of
horse were expected from Austria, and two thousand infan-
try from Bohemia, but as yet nothing has been scen of them.
Respecting the Swiss, the reports are confused ; some say that
those who went to Milan to serve the king of France have re-
turned, others deny this report.

Nothing can be known yet as to what will be done by the
Diet, which was to open on Sunday last. True, it is reported to
have been convoked particularly for three objects: the first,
to come to some definite terms with the Swiss, ambassadors
from three of the Cantons having already arrived; secondly, to
extend the supplies of the Empire for another six months; and
thirdly, to induce the Suabian League to concur in this war by
extraordinary contributions. I do not think it will be possi-
ble to know what the Swiss will do; as to the supplies to the
Empire, I do not believe there will be any difficulty ; and as to
the support of Suabia against the Swiss, that was already had
during the eight months of the last war, and for this purpose
they keep seven thousand men constantly under arms. What
they will now do, and whether they will have more considera-
tion for the Venetians than for the Swiss, on account of their

134 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

commercial interests, that is not known; and even after the
conclusion of the Diet it will be difficult to know the truth about
this. As already mentioned, the Count Palatine is dead, and
so is the Duke Albert of Bavaria, which is regarded as rather
favorable to the Emperor’s enterprise than otherwise.

This much as regards the war. Now as to peace, especially
with his Most Christian Majesty of France, that is favored by
the kings of both Spain and of England, and perhaps also by the
Pope; and the Legate says he has already written about it to
the king of France. <A few days since there arrived from Lom-
bardy, or perhaps from France, a certain Messer Niccolo Frigio,
whom the Legate had sent there for that purpose by order of the
Emperor, but it is not known what he brings. It may also well
be that some negotiations have been opened with the Venetians ;
for a certain priest Lucas has been several times in that direc-
tion. As to the relations of the other Italian powers with the
Emperor, we only know that up to the present the Pope has
confined himself merely to good words, and it is not likely that
he will do more unless he should see somewhat more progress
made by the Emperor. Nor has Ferrara given anything thus
far, and for a long time the Duke did not even reply to his am-
bassador ; I suppose that, inasmuch as he has plenty of money,
he would rather wait and see a little more progress made, even
at the risk of its costing him somewhat more later to make
terms with the Emperor, so as to be relieved of apprehensions
as to the king of France and the Venetians. I learn from a
good source, that the Marquis of Mantua will declare for the
Emperor whenever he can do so with safety to himself. So
far as is known, the Lucchese have never sent any ambassa-
dor to the Emperor. The Siennese alone have given him any
money, and the term of the second payment is running on.

Your Lordships can now take all these different specula-
tions as to peace and war into consideration, and then deter-
mine what course to adopt, particularly as you are informed
with regard to the preparations made by France and Venice,
respecting which I am entirely in the dark; for ever since
Machiavelli’s arrival here I have heard nothing on the subject,
either by letters from your Lordships, or in any other way.
You can also ascertain whether it is true that the Swiss who
went to Lombardy to serve the king of France have returned
from there, as has been reported, which in the event of war

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 135

would insure the Emperor’s success. You will also bear in
mind how easily his Most Christian Majesty and the Venetians
may be disposed to peace rather than to war, seeing the unfa-
vorable conditions to which a war with the Emperor would
expose them, being constantly obliged to think of defending
themselves at the expense of much treasure, without being able
in turn to attack him because of the nature of the country and
the Emperor’s adherents; so that, even if the Emperor’s af-
fairs were very low, he might still be able to obtain honora-
ble terms of peace from them. After having well weighed all
these points, your Lordships will, I trust, reply, and instruct
me what to do, whether matters remain in the same condition
as at present, or whether they have changed either for better or
worse. I beg you will also instruct me whether I am to act in
the same way, if I learn that peace is to be made, as when I see
them resolved upon war; or whether I am to act differently in
either one or the other of these supposed cases. And if your
Lordships are decided upon making terms, then I beg that you
will not fail to send me promptly and at length the points to
be stipulated, and especially those that are for your advantage.
This you might communicate to me in cipher, underlining all
those words which on no consideration you would have changed.
In fact you might send the whole in cipher, with a blank signed
by the notary before whom the ciphered communication has
been written; and the deciphered despatch could afterwards be
written on the blank. Your Lordships will please also think
of promptly expediting the money for the first payment, with-
out which nothing can be concluded; in fact, one day’s delay
might spoil everything. By adopting the above plan I could
easily conceal the cash payment under the agreement, as your
Lordships charge me to do in your last letter. No other way
of making the payments will be as acceptable to them here as
to have them made through the Fuggers, and for this purpose
you will have to arrange yourselves with the Fuggers in such
manner aS may seem best to you.

I must furthermore beg that in your answer to this you will
instruct me, in case you deem it best not to conclude an
arrangement with the Emperor, what I am to say to keep him
satisfied and gain time ; for it will not be possible to conceal
from him the arrival of your messenger; and as it will be ne-
cessary to tell him something, I would like to have your orders

136 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

upon that point. Please also inform me what you understand
by the words “in Italy,’ in connection with the proposed terms
above mentioned.

Your Lordships will please note that the demands made by
Messer Paolo were not made by order of the Emperor, but ema-
nated solely from him, inasmuch as he has power only to nego-
tiate, but not to conclude anything definitely. This results
probably from the fact that they imagine here that by gaining
time they can shape matters to their own advantage; and that
is also your Lordships’ position in the matter.

Your servant,
FRANCESCO VETTORI.
Borzen, 29 March.

LEVTER XI:

MaGniricEnt SIGNorI, ETC. :—

On the 22d of March I wrote to your Lordships by Baccino,
reporting at length all that had taken place since the 24th of
February up to the day of my writing. I sent a partial copy of
it by the German courier Iocoso, who brought me your letter
of the 4th of March. By the same despatch I informed you of
the demands made by Messer Paolo de Lichtenstein, and sent
three copies of it by way of Venice, Milan, and Trieste. Since
then, on the 1st instant, I received a despatch from Mirandola
by the hands of Simone, together with a copy of your letter
of the 4th and your plenary powers. Your Lordships have
reason to be well satisfied with this Simone, who has really
served you well. I did not give this messenger any letters in
return, as he was on his way to the court, whence he has not
yet returned. Although I sent copies of my despatch of the
29th ultimo by four different routes, yet I send you still an-
other by way of extra precaution. Yesterday Piero Borgo
arrived with your letter of the 17th ultimo, in which you ask to
be informed upon two principal points, namely, what progress
the Emperor has made with his preparations for war, and what
is the state of his peace negotiations. Upon both these points
you will have been entirely satisfied if you have received my let-
ter; and in case it should not have reached you, the annexed
copy will give you in great part the desired information.

—————— ee st—‘OS

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 137

Respecting events here since then I have to report, that the
army, which is at Caliano in the direction of Roveredo, attacked
a body of some three thousand Venetian infantry who were
guarding a mountain called Brettonico, under command of
Jacopo Corso, Dionisio di Naldo, and Vitello Vitelli. They
had fortified themselves well in their position ; still, on arrival
of the Germans they fled precipitately to their intrenchments,
and after burning a number of houses on the mountain they
withdrew the same evening to their camp. After this the
Bishop of Trent conceived the idea of attacking Riva, a castle
belonging to the Venetians, and situated on the Lago di Garda.
He sat down before the place first with about two thousand
men under his command, and then so urged the council that
they consented to send him artillery and one half of the troops
from Caliano. They had been about five days before Riva, and
just as orders had been given to establish batteries, two thou-
sand Grisons, who formed a part of this force, began to say
that, although they had been promised four and a half... . per
month, they had not received more than four; and they con-
ducted themselves so badly about the provisions that the siege
had to be raised with but little credit. A portion of the troops
returned to Caliano, and a portion is here; of the Grisons only
about five hundred have remained, the rest have gone home.
The army has been greatly enfeebled by this affair, so that I
believe there are but little over seven thousand men left.

After the camp before Riva was broken up, the Venetians
burnt some villas in the neighborhood; and whilst a body of
some three thousand of them were about to attack and burn a
villa belonging to the Comte di Agresto on the 18th instant,
about three hundred of the country people fell upon the Vene-
tians and put them to flight, having captured and killed more
than a hundred of them; being altogether a most discreditable
affair for the Venetians. It is reported also that the Duke of
Brunswick has killed some three hundred Venetians in the
valley of the Cadore towards the Trevisan territory; but the
scene of action being at so great a distance I cannot vouch for
the truth of this. Moreover, it is said that a large force of
Venetians, having gone to attack Fiume, a place on the sea-
coast belonging to the Emperor, were repulsed by the people of
the country and some mounted men who happened to be there,
and that over a thousand of the Venetians were slain. Thus

138 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

much as regards the way in which the war is being carried on;
in the annexed copy of my preceding despatch you will find
an account of the number of troops engaged. Respecting the
negotiations I cannot yet report anything more than what I
have already said in my previous letter; for the Diet has not
yet closed its labors, and the Emperor is at Ulm. As the
course of the Swiss is of great importance in this enterprise, I
would observe that you can obtain more reliable information
upon that point than I can furnish from here; for you can
ascertain whether those who went to Lombardy continue in the
service of the king of France, or whether they are leaving
there. It is said here that the Communes were greatly dis-
satisficd on account of this, and that, if these men do not
immediately leave the French service, it might happen to his
Most Christian Majesty as it did to the Duke of Milan, namely,
that they will abandon him at the moment of going into action.
But we must wait and see the end, for it is also reported, as I
have already written, that three of the Cantons have furnished
eight thousand men to the Emperor; and so it might well hap-
pen that there are Swiss on both sides, and that both parties
may suffer in consequence.

Nothing has as yet been heard as to the league of which
your Lordships speak; but I repeat that England, Aragon, and
the Legate greatly desire peace with the king of France, but
that the Emperor is not much disposed that way, but is in-
clined rather to make terms with the Venetians. About the
beginning of March he sent the priest Lucas to them, who
returned on the 12th, and the Emperor then sent him back to
Trent with orders to wait there for further instructions, and
about a week ago he went again to Venice. It is not known
what negotiations are being carried on, but, on leaving, Lucas
told me that we should hear some important news within twenty
days. Some persons think that, if the Venetians really desire
to come to terms with the Emperor, they will find no difficulty in
doing so. But it is not known whether the princes who desire
peace with the king of France would be satisfied in such event,
and whether the Emperor may not find himself weaker after
coming to an agreement with the Venetians than before;
which has perhaps kept the Venetians back until now, a point
which your Lordships will not fail to consider. Nor can any-
thing positive be known respecting the negotiations until the

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 139

close of the Diet; and even then, to know the truth, it may
be necessary to see some beginning of the execution of the
resolves of the Diet.

It is said that the Duke of Brunswick, brother to the one
who is with the army in the Trevisan territory, is coming here
with one thousand horse; and the German courier who brought
me yours of the 17th says that he had met about two hundred
of them on the road; but everything is magnified here accord-
ing to people’s opinions and hopes. After all, what we sce
here is just what I have written, and now repeat to your Lord-
ships; and no one can gainsay the opinion that in reality Ger-
many can do a great deal, and only needs the will to do it, and
that will she may exercise at any hour, and therefore no one
can safely form an opinion as to what will be done. On the
other hand, we see that a considerable time has passed without
Germany’s displaying her will, and for that reason no one can
say whether she ever will do it; and yet it is evident that her
honor demands more than ever that she should. And thus
none but the Almighty knows how it will all terminate.

I am here at the request of Messer Paolo de Lichtenstein,
and will endeavor if possible to go to the court in a few days.
Meantime, I beg your Lordships to be pleased to reply promptly
to the demands of Messer Paolo, bearing in mind that these
matters cannot be weighed exactly as in a balance, and without
a reply from you I cannot act; I also beg to remind you once
more, that without the money in hand nothing will ever be con-
cluded here.

Luca da Monte Varchi, who has been commander in your ser-
vice, has come here from the camp of the Venetians, and reports
their infantry as most wretched, and that it will surely prove
so if ever put into the field; as in fact we have already seen,
for in every encounter they have come off losers. It is re-
ported here to-day, and the news comes direct from the council,
that Genoa has revolted, and that the French are shut up in
the fortresses. If this be true, it will render the Emperor’s
success still more easy and assured, and your republic may
possibly find that his views will be materially changed from
the propositions of Messer Paolo. But your Lordships ought
to know the exact truth of the matter. Valete!

Your servant,
FRANCESCO DE VETTORI.
Trent, 16 April, 1508. |

140 MISSION:TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

LETTER XII.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC: —

My last of the 16th of April, which I sent by Piero, the son
of the German Giovanni, will have informed you of all that has
occurred here since the 19th of March to the date of that letter.
I shall not reiterate it now, as it really amounted to nothing
of importance. Since then the Germans have raised the siege
of Riva, about which I wrote you in my last; their infantry are
pretty much disbanded, and their cavalry, numbering about
twelve hundred, and which really never amounted to more
although their number had been greatly exaggerated, have re-
turned here. Thereupon the Venetians attempted on Easter
morning to sieze Pietra, a place about six miles from here,
thinking they could take it by assault, and having perhaps an
understanding with persons within the place. But the Ger-
mans came to the rescue with some mounted men and about
twenty-five hundred infantry that had remained, and obliged
the Venetians to withdraw. The Germans have endeavored
to raise fresh infantry since then, and on the 10th instant
they had already some six thousand together.

Subsequently the Venetians attacked the castle of Cresta,
which commands a most important pass. The Germans went
to the assistance of the place, but arrived too late, the lord of
the place having already surrendered it. The Germans there-
upon moved their camp to Caliano, a burgh about a bow-
shot’s distance from Pietra; their force consisting of about six
to seven thousand infantry, and about one thousand horse ;
the troops of the Duke of Wirtemberg, numbering about two
hundred effective horse, having returned home at the begin-
ning of the month. The Venetians, anxious to have Pietra,
established their army, consisting of about four thousand
effective horse and over sixteen thousand infantry, about a
quarter of a mile from the place, and began a siege of the
place by planting batteries of sixteen pieces of artillery. This
fortress of Pietra is situated at the foot of a mountain on the
right in coming from Roveredo here. <A very strong wall
runs out from the fortress to the length of about a bowshot, to
the river Adige; half-way down there is a gate in this wall,
through which persons may pass. It is alike difficult and dan-

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 141

gerous to attack Trent without having first secured this pass ;
and therefore the Venetians employed their entire force in the
attempt. The armies were about a mile distant from each
other, each having the fortress and the wall in front of them,
with the Adige on the one hand and the mountain on the
other, and in the rear their respective places of retreat. But
as the Germans were masters of the fortress, as well as of the
wall, the Venetians found themselves in a position where they
could not avoid an engagement, if the Germans were disposed
to give them battle ; which nothing prevented them from doing
except their lack of sufficient cavalry ; for of the infantry they
made but little account. The Venetians opened a heavy fire of
artillery upon the Germans, killing a good many ; but finally
the Germans attacked the guard that was protecting the Ve-
netian artillery, routed them, and captured two of their guns
and disabled the others, whereupon the Venctians broke up
their camp, and retired to Roveredo, where they are still on
this 20th of May.

So soon as the German infantry perceived that the Venctians
had retreated, they began themselves to disband, so that per-
sons coming from there report that not more than three thou-
sand infantry were left at Caliano; and that besides the Duke
of Brunswick’s cavalry, which had already gone home, that of
Saxony, Nuremberg, Ulm, and that of a number of smaller
lords having from eight to ten horses each, all went home, so
that the Germans have to-day full six hundred mounted men
less than what they had before. Such is the result of military
operations here; but your Lordships must know that in the
Friuli the Venetians have taken Goritz, Pardanonc, Trieste, —
in a word, all the places in that district belonging to the Em-
peror, who really never had sufficient troops there to offer
any serious resistance to an enemy. In truth, he never had
there more than four hundred horse, and some four to five
thousand infantry, that had been sent there by Austria and
Carinthia, and who after remaining a couple of days went away
again for want of money. It is in this wise and with such
forces that the war is being carried on here.

Now as to the negotiations, and more particularly the pro-
ceedings of the Suabian Diet. The Emperor assembled the
chiefs at Ulm on the third or fourth Sunday of Lent, and laid
his necessities before them, as already written. These chiefs

142 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

were to return home and submit the matter to their constitu-
ents, and then to come back here and report their decisions on
the eighth day after Easter. This day is now past, but it is
not known what has been done, nor where the Emperor is at
this time; some say that he has gone to Cologne to attend the
creation of a new bishop, the old one having died, but I can-
not aver this positively. Others say that he has gone to May-
ence to settle some differences that have arisen between the
Archbishop there and the Landgrave of Hesse respecting their
boundaries. Others again say that he has gone to the duchy
of Guelders to compose matters there, and some maintain that
he has gone to Calais to meet the king of England in relation
to the marriage of Madame Marguerite, and to borrow money
from that sovereign on a pledge of certain jewels.

I came here at the request of Messer Paolo de Lichtenstein,
after he had made the proposition which I communicated to
you. Not receiving any answer thereto from your Lordships,
I wanted to leave here, or at any rate send Machiavelli home,
but was not permitted to do either. This, however, did not
prevent my using every effort to find out what was going on at
Ulm, and I therefore sent Baccino there. I had previously
sent another messenger to a friend of mine at the place where
the Cardinal is, and which friend is in the habit of writing to
me all that I could learn if I were on the spot myself. J am in
hourly expectation of a reply from him, and should it come in
time I will communicate it to you. As things are, and being
obliged to be either here at Trent or at Ulm, I do not deem it
at all unfortunate that I should happen to be here rather than
there; for being here I have not been obliged to depend upon
others for information respecting certain important matters,
having witnessed them myself, whilst, if I had not been here,
I should never have heard the truth upon certain points, and
upon others I should have heard a thousand lies. I think that
I fully understand the resolutions of the Diet, for, seeing the
Imperial troops all returning home at the expiration of their
six months’ term of service, the natural inference is that the
Diet has refused the Emperor an extension of supplies for
another six months; a matter which I should have supposed
could easily have been obtained, and which nevertheless has
not been accomplished. Thus, according to what we see, the
burden of this war falls mainly upon the shoulders of the

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 148

county of Tyrol; for with the exception of the cavalry, all the
troops have been raised and supplied by the localities that
have sent them. And as the Friuli has not such rich and
amiable neighbors, it has remained undefended, for it is said
that Austria has never been willing to send a single man there.
It is in this feeble way that matters here are conducted thus
far; and should any one from inclination or from want of
faith in my statements think differently, then let him come
himself, or send some one in whom he has faith, and if what
he sees seems to him wise and good, then I will take back all I
have written too strongly.

The chiefs of the Tyrol assembled about ten days since at —
Botzen, for the purpose of extending for three months more
the supplies for ten thousand infantry for the defence of their
country, as was decided in January last, when the Emperor was
there. These chiefs are still together. The Swiss also sent
an envoy to this council, about ten days ago, to ask for money,
saying that they were ready to put eight or ten thousand men
into the field, wherever the Emperor might require them. This
envoy was sent to Botzen to this Diet, which he was told would
not only provide the money for the ten thousand men, but
would also pay the Swiss for three months’ service. It was
said that the Diet was disposed to do everything that was
asked and that the country was able to do; but that before
taking any resolutions about it they wanted to know whether
the negotiations for a truce with Venice were progressing.
You must know, also, that four days ago a secretary from
Venice came here to the councillors, and left again the next
morning with the Bishop in the direction of Riva, there to con-
fer with a Venetian Proveditore in relation to this truce; and
yesterday evening it was reported here that the Venetians
asked that the truce should hold for five years, whilst the Em-
peror wanted it only for four months. The former have taken
until next Thursday to make their definite answer. Should I
learn anything more about it before sending this off, I will not
fail to inform you of it.

On the last day of the past month I received through the
hands of Messer Paolo your letter of the 15th, informing me of
the receipt of mine of the 29th of March. Seeing that Messer
Paolo was displeased because you had not resolved upon any-
thing definite, 1 made full excuse for your Lordships’ delay.

144 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

Since then Baccino arrived, on the 6th, bringing me yours of
the 12th ultimo, which needs no particular reply, as it contains
nothing but information, for which I am much obliged to your
Lordships. Yesterday I received at the same moment, through
Ortolano and Giovanni della Spada, both your letters of the 19th,
but retained until the 26th ; and with them the plenary powers,
of which a copy had already been forwarded to me by Simone
from Mirandola. I have carefully read all you write in reply
to Messer Paolo’s proposition, and note that your Lordships
desire me to conclude the matter in conformity with the de-
mand, provided I should not be able to obtain better terms,
and that in my judgment the Emperor would carry out his
intended descent into Italy despite of the will of either of his
opponents. As this matter seems now to be left to my judg-
ment, I have thought best not to conclude it; and this decision
is based, not so much upon my own opinion as upon that of
your Lordships. For when I communicated in my letter of the
29th the demands made by Messer Paolo, I explained to you
at the same time fully and in detail the actual condition of
things here; and therefore I believe that, if it had seemed to
you that under these circumstances an arrangement should be
concluded on the basis of those demands, your Lordships would
have so instructed me distinctly. And if it did not seem to
you then that matters were in a better condition, it certainly
does not appear to me so now, since the aspect of things has
become rather worse ; and J am sure your Lordships will think
the same after reading what I have written above of the state of
things here. Nor do I think that the Tyrol, which until now has
mainly borne the brunt of this war, will be strong enough to
carry the Emperor into Italy in opposition to the will of France
and Venice ; or that Germany will furnish him fresh support,
when at this very time she withdraws that which she has fur-
nished hitherto. Should it be observed that Germany is power-
ful and capable of great things at any time, then I reply that
your Lordships know the power of Germany fully as well as I
do; and if you had intended to stop at this consideration, you
would have given me positive instructions to conclude the ar-
rangement with Messer Paolo. But as you want me in this
matter to be governed by things as they are, and not as they
possibly might be, I have not been able to come to any other
decision than the above.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 1465

As to the Emperor’s penetrating into Italy when opposed by
the two above-named powers, I say that, to reduce this oppo-
sition to only one of these powers, he will have to make peace
with the other, and to do this would require negotiations and
time. But even if it could be done without loss of time, I could
not count with certainty upon anything until the arrangements
were actually concluded. And all that has been said about a
truce cannot make me think that a peace could be so promptly
concluded with the Venetians, for they have wounded the Em-
peror too deeply to be so easily forgiven by him; nor is it
likely that the Venetians will at once disregard the considera-
tions that have influenced them hitherto, namely, that France
will not be disposed to ally herself with the Emperor at the
very time when she sces that he feels discouraged. And the
Emperor, on his part, will also be inclined to hold back, and
wait to see what time may develop, of which at this moment
nothing is known. As to his making peace with both of these
powers, that is still less to be thought of; for as your Lordships
say, and according to my judgment say most wisely, that would
require a good deal of time.

And here I would observe, with all due respect, that in my
opinion the same considerations as to the Emperor’s increase
of strength would hold good in the event of his making peace
with one of these powers as if he made peace with both. For
if Germany were disposed to do her duty towards the Emperor,
he would not need to make peace with either power; but were
he to make peace with one of them, it would be the interest of
Germany not to do her duty to him, so as to keep him feeble
and obliged to lean upon her for support. And if Germany
abandons the Emperor at a time when he has so many enemies
against whom her support would have been most honorable to
herself, and most welcome to the Emperor, she would have the
more reason for abandoning him when he is supported by a
stranger. For to see him become powerful by the aid of a
third would arouse the mistrust of Germany, whilst it would
have been a small matter for herself to. have rendered this aid
in a greater or less degree. Thus whichever of the two powers
makes peace with him will have to assume the charge of
raising and sustaining him; and thus, it may well happen that
you will have greater need of other protection than that of the
Emperor. I shall therefore keep quiet and abide the develop-

VOL. IV. 10

146 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

ments of time ; and if Messer Paolo, who is at Botzen, does not
come here within the next five or six days I shall go to see him ;
and I really hardly know what to do to avoid a rupture, for, be
it said with the utmost respect, your Lordships have spun this
thread so fine that it is impossible to weave it. For the Em-
peror is always needy, and sometimes even necessitous, and
unless you take him when he is in that condition, he will de-
mand much more of you than what he would be willing to
accept now. And when in such a state of necessity the chances
will be three out of four, as suggested in your instructions, that
he will not carry out his descent into Italy. Still it might
well be that, whilst on the one hand he finds himself in a state
of necessity for the maintenance of his troops until everything
is thoroughly prepared, he might very soon afterwards become
quite strong ; but for the reasons explained before, the prepa-
rations for such sudden increase of strength cannot be foreseen
from afar. And that is the reason why I have said in previous
letters that no one can tell positively beforehand that he will not
pass into Italy ; for Germany can and has only to exercise her
will to enable him to do so. Whilst on the other hand no one
can say positively that he will do so, because in reality Germany
never was in favor of this enterprise, and up to the present
there is no evidence that she has changed her views. Nor is
it to be supposed, as I have already said, that the Tyrol alone
could do it. And therefore I venture to say, with the utmost
respect, that your Lordships must adopt one of two ways;
either to settle the matter with the Emperor on the terms
which he demands, or in the best way that it can be done, in
the expectation that, if he lives, he will come into Italy any-
how, if not this year, then the next, and if not alone, then
accompanied by some ally ; or you must wait until he is actu-
ally in Italy,in the hope that, inasmuch as he is always and
under all circumstances in need of money, you will always be
in time to make terms with him, even at the risk in such case
of its costing you a little more. Thus your Lordships must
judge which of these two courses presents the least danger, and
then adopt it resolutely, with reliance on the Almighty ; for
when men attempt in great matters of this kind to measure
every step as with a pair of compasses, they are very apt to
deceive themselves.

If in speaking thus I transcend my official duty, it is because

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 147

T feel that I have a burden on my shoulders which any man,
even of the highest quality, would find very heavy. At the time
when I conferred with Messer Paolo, and he made his demand,
there were about eight thousand infantry and twelve hundred
cavalry here; and had I then offered him, as I might have
done, a sum in cash, and had he accepted it, you would be
obliged to pay it now; but seeing now that the state of things
here, so far from improving, has rather grown worse, your
Lordships would doubtless have deemed my action as very
strange. If, on the other hand, the Emperor’s troops had at-
tacked, as they might easily have done, and routed their adver-
saries, the Emperor would have felt so encouraged thereby that,
instead of demanding sixty thousand ducats, he would not have
been satisfied except with a very much larger sum. And then
I should have been blamed for the ruin of our city, not by your
Lordships, but by the mass of the people; and I should have
been exposed to much danger without any fault of mine. But
I repeat again, that although matters are not pushed here as
energetically as before, and the army is as good as disbanded,
nevertheless they may at any time recover their former vigor.
The army may be reorganized, if only indifferently ; still it may
attack and even be victorious, and all may turn out so that your
Lordships may no longer be in time to effect an arrangement ;
and this difficulty will be increased by the fact that you will not
be able to send letters of exchange in time, so as to have the
money ready to be offered on the spot. This would cause a
delay of at least twenty days, whilst the Emperor does not
need even two days to change his mind. And you may take it
for certain, as I have said before, that if the Emperor is once
in the position to be able to avail himself of your money, it will
encourage him to that degree that he will imagine that he has
already in great part achieved the conquest of Italy. Your
Lordships must know, furthermore, that my having to make a
reply now without concluding a definite arrangement will very
likely bring about a rupture of the whole negotiation, and may
give rise to the idea that your Lordships have no intention of
paying except with good words; and if such an impression
once gains ground here, my stay will become entirely super-
fluous, and perhaps I may not even be permitted to write. As
all letters pass through the hands of the Emperor’s agents
here, they know that I have received the plenary powers from
you; and I shall not be able to persuade them that I am still

148 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

without definite instructions respecting the demands made by
Messer Paolo. They will think that I am not willing to conclude
an arrangement, andI apprehend that I may be ordered from
here to some out-of-the-way place, where I shall not be able to
hear anything of what is going on, and where | may not even
be permitted to write. And therefore I beg your Lordships,
when you want to send any messenger here to me, to try and
find a German familiar with the country, and experienced, who
will bring your despatches with greater secrecy and safety ; for
1 do not believe that those whom you have sent until now will
be allowed to return.

Your Lordships remark that I have not written anything
respecting my offer of forty thousand ducats with sixteen thou-
sand down for the first payment. True I have not written
about it, but your Lordships must know that, when Messer Paolo
made his demands, he asked me whether I had ever received
a reply to the Emperor’s demand for a loan of twenty-five
thousand ducats. As I could not deny my not having received
a reply upon that point, and matters being in that state that I
was anxious to avoid exasperating Messer Paolo, I told him that
your Lordships were not disposed to lend any money ; but that
you might possibly raise your offer to a total of fifty thousand
ducats, with twenty thousand cash as the first payment, when-
ever the Emperor should be in an Italian town belonging at the
time to some other power. This 1 thought was better than
what your instructions had authorized me to offer, and I did
not write to you about it because the demands of Messer Paolo
were so much greater than my offer, both as regards amount
of the first payment and the shortness of the terms for the
subsequent payments, that I did not think it worth while to
mention my offer; and I speak of it now only so that your
Lordships may be fully informed of everything.

Machiavelli has met with an accident that may prove serious.
He has great difficulty in passing his water, and the physicians
here do not know whether it is caused by a stone in the bladder,
or whether it is owing to an accumulation of gross humors in
the blood. If the roads were open, he would have returned to
Florence to subject himself to medical treatment there.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servitor
FRANCISCUS DE VECTORIO,
TRENT, 30 May, 1508. Ambassador.

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 149

LETTER XIII

MaGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

To-day, being the 7th of June, we have news that the Vene-
tians have taken possession of Fiume, although this intelli-
gence is not fully confirmed. Only some two hundred horse
remain here; all those furnished by the Communes and other
parties have returned home, their six months’ service having
expired; twenty horse of the Duke of Brandenburg left this
morning. Of infantry there remain here about two thousand.
The truce is not yet concluded, the discussion of it not being
closed, and the final decision postponed from last Thursday to
next Sunday. Neither Baccino nor any other messenger has
returned from the court, at which I wonder. The priest Lucas
arrived here yesterday from the court, and remained over night ;
he has now gone to Arco to see the parties engaged in the nego-
tiations of the truce. He says that he left the Emperor at
Cologne carrying on war against the people of Guelders, and
that he is besieging Croy, the Duke of which has sent him a
carte blanche. Lucas also stated that the Emperor is indig-
nant against the princes, and refuses to be present at the Diet,
but has sent Lang there, which the princes regard as an out-
rage to which they will not submit ; and that they have sent to
request the Emperor to come back himself, offering to furnish
him all the troops he may want, but the Emperor pretends to
be indifferent about it, hoping thus to dispose the princes still
more to furnish him aid; and that the Emperor is even dis-
pleased that the Venetians have not taken Trent, as that would
have stirred up the resentment of all Germany. This priest
Lucas says that he has really left no troops at all behind, but
that at any moment some might be raised, and that he was now
on his way to Arco to see whether a truce could not be con-
cluded for three or four months, and that if this were done the
Emperor would during that time make such preparations as
would cause all Italy to tremble ; and if a truce were not con-
cluded, he would return with all Germany at his back.

Messer Paolo has not come here, and I have not gone to
Botzen to see him, for before meeting him I wanted to see the
end of these truce negotiations, which I am waiting for, so as
to have a better excuse for putting off the conclusion of an

150 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

arrangement with him; for I believe that, having nothing
agreeable to communicate to him, I can only gain by silence.
Yesterday Piero arrived with your letter of the 17th, which,
being written on parchment and concealed by Piero in a bread,
where it had first become wet and then dry, it could only be got
out in pieces; and consequently I could not read more than
one fourth of it, and that in disconnected sentences. But from
the little I have been able to read, I gather that you have again
left matters here to my judgment, and that you have been. in-
formed that the troops have gone from here merely for a change,
and are to be replaced by others, and that from information
obtained you apprehend that the Emperor will make terms
with the Venetians in conformity with some suggestions of the
Pope. In answer to all this, and to begin with this reported
arrangement with-the Venetians, I can only say that nothing
whatever is known of it here; and I really know not what more
to say on this matter. As to the troops that have left here to
be replaced by others, the priest Lucas reports that he has left
none behind him; and it is so long since the troops began to
leave here that, if they were intended to be replaced by others,
some of these new ones would ere this have arrived here. I
believe, however, that all things are possible, and that Ger-
many is able to send both troops and money ; but I regard it as
a bad sign to see the troops leaving from the time when they
were encamped at Pietra, and when they were daily expected
here; and that only so few should be remaining here at the
time when negotiations are going on for a truce or peace, and
when it would have been much more honorable to have had a
large force here. In fact, their going home at this time seems
to me proof of their having little affection, and still less respect,
for the Emperor.

Now, as to forming a judgment upon this state of things, I
have in nearly all my previous letters pointed out the difficulty
of my doing so, and I have again done so above; and I repcat,
that these matters. cannot be measured with minute accuracy.
I should have gone to the court myself, or should have sent
Machiavelli there if I had been free to do so; butif I had gone,
I should probably have seen less than what I have been able to
observe here. And had I gone and left Machiavelli here, the
distance from here to the court being six hundred miles, it
would have taken a month to have got a despatch, so that

MISSION: TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 151

during the interval a thousand changes in the state of things
might have occurred. So that, as 1 have said above, I cannot
regard it as a misfortune that I have been obliged to remain
here; for a man who, under such circumstances, has to take a
definite resolution, can base it with safety only upon what he
sees himself; and I shall not act differently, because it is
according to the dictates of reason. For even were I| told by
the most trustworthy persons that at the Diet held at Ulm it
had been positively resolved to carry out this enterprise of a
descent into Italy with one hundred thousand men, I should
nevertheless not have believed it, unless I were to see it actu-
ally carried into execution; for I have seen that everybody
was deceived last year by the resolution adopted with so much
solemnity and general approbation at the Diet of Constanz,
and which resulted in there never being as many as four hun-
dred troops got together. For all those that were assembled
in Codarno and here were supplied by the adjoining country ;
whilst the few that had been furnished by the Empire went off
and abandoned the Emperor at the very moment of his greatest
need; and according to what I see, things at present are likely
to take the same course as then. And therefore I reiterate
to your Lordships that I shall judge matters here only accord-
ing to what I see with my own eyes, and shall take counsel
only from what I shall have observed personally ; for if matters
are to be judged of. from a distance and at random, then it were
better that your Lordships should do it than myself. Never-
theless, I will say that, if matters here were to resume their
former vigor, you would no longer be in time to conclude an
arrangement with the Emperor at the same price and on the
same conditions as now; for you may assume that the Emperor
is at this moment very much down, with the water up to his
throat, and nearly swamped, and has consequently lowered his
pretensions very much, and he has actually forwarded my letters
at his own expense ; whilst formerly, when he imagined himself
very strong, he tried to get tens of thousands out of you without
obligating himself to anything. And were he now to get strong
again, or imagine himself so, he would quickly resume his
former pretensions, and to what height these reached was shown
by the demands made by the Cardinal of Brixen, from which he
came down step by step as he felt himself becoming weaker.
And therefore I say that you ought without further hesitation to

152 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

adopt one of the two courses which I pointed out in my pre-
vious despatch, the original of which I sent you eight days ago
by Giovanni della Spada, who has returned to Florence by the
same route by which he came.

I have delayed sending off this despatch for a day, to see
whether any definite resolution had been arrived at in the
truce negotiations; for yesterday it was reported that a truce
had been concluded for three years between the Emperor and
the Venetians, comprising the respective allies of the contract-
ing parties however only in Italy, and which are to be named
within three months; and that the restriction of the allies to
Italy was adopted solely for the purpose of excluding the Duke
of Guelders. The publication of this was made yesterday in
the German camp, but in this publication it was said that the
truce was between the Emperor and the Venetians and their
respective allics or adherents, without naming France, and
without fixing any time for the naming of the ali It
is said that it will be published here and in Verona on Sunday
next.

Thus the truce is at last concluded. I may not be correctly
informed as to the details, but these we shall soon know fully,
and I will then immediately communicate them to your Lord-
ships; and as the roads and passes will now be open, you will
be able to decide conveniently and at your leisure what course
to take ; or you may send your ambassadors, or do whatever
may seem best to you. Machiavelli will return to Florence in
two or three days to undergo medical treatment there. I can-
not with propriety retain him here. As for myself, I shall join
the Emperor and there await my recall, which I crave as a favor
at your hands, for I am quite unwell, and my remaining here
would not be of the least advantage to your Toran For
if you really wish to conclude an arrangement with the Em-
peror, you will be able to effect it with more honor and advan-
tage through the ambassadors you have already selected. And
on the other hand, if you do not intend to conclude anything,
then the longer I remain here and the more the matter is dis-
cussed, the greater will be the loss. And as I could not remain
at court unless subject to the control of others, your Lordships
would not be able to rely upon the news you would receive from
here. Thus, all things considered, I deem my remaining here
as entirely superfluous; and so I recommend myself to your

MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 1538

Lordships. I have paid the bearer of this six ducats gold and —
sixteen kreutzers, so as to enable him to take horse and travel
with greater speed; and I have assured him that this shall be
considered merely as a payment on account, according as he
shall have performed this service.
Idem Franciscus VECTORI,
TRENT, 8 June, 1508. Ambassador.

LETTER XIV.

MaGnIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Francesco Vettori wrote to your Lordships from Trent on
the 8th of June and sent the letter by Pietro, the son of the
German Giovanni, who promised to be in Florence yesterday.
That despatch will have informed you of the conclusion of the
truce, and of various other things that have occurred here up to
the date of the despatch. By way of precaution Francesco in-
trusted a full copy of it to Ortolano, the bearer of the present,
whom I send from here to-day, so that your Lordships may
learn the sooner what Francesco has chargod me to communi-
cate to you orally, being myself detained here by my malady.

I left Trent on Saturday last, the 10th instant; but the even-
ing previous I went to see Serentano to ask him for a passport,
and he told me that he wished the ambassador to call on him
the next morning. Accordingly I accompanied Francesco the
following morning to see Serentano, who informed Francesco
that the truce had been concluded, each party to name their
respective adherents within three months, and that he wished
to know whether your Lordships desired to be named by the
Emperor. Francesco replied, that he could not speak for your
Lordships upon that point, but would write to you at once and
inform him of your reply; and that he thought that your Lord-
ships would feel grateful for all the honors which the Emperor
was disposed to show you. In answer to which Serentano said,
that he ought to write promptly and obtain a reply as quickly
as possible, for he had received information that the Pisans had
appealed to France for aid in consequence of the attack upon
them by the Florentines; and that in his judgment he thought
it would not be well that the French should have begun to send

154 MISSION TO THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.

troops to them before your Lordships had decided whether or
not you wished to be named as adherents of the Emperor.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Since writing the above, I have learned the following in rela-
tion to the truce; namely, that it has been concluded for three
years between the Emperor and the Venetians nominatively ;
that it comprises the allies and confederates of the contract-
ing parties respectively, named or to be named within three
months. Hach party to continue to hold what they possess
actually at the time of signing the truce, with the right to build
thereon whatever they may deem fit, and to trade in perfect
security. And that it is understood that the truce extends
to all the imperial towns and places, and to the allies of the
Kmpire, but only to those in Italy, and not elsewhere. Bene
valete.

Botoena, 14 June, 1508.

According to the conditions of this truce the Emperor named
immediately the Pope and the king of Aragon; and the Vene-
tians on their part named the kings of France and of Aragon.

Servus

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secretary.

SECOND MISSION INTO THE INTERIOR
OF THE STATE*

LETTERS PATENT.

We, the Ten of Liberty and the Balia of the republic of
Florence, signify to all who may see these letters patent, that
the bearer of them is the excellent and discreet Niccolo, son of
Messer Bernardo Machiavelli, our Secretary, whom we send to
levy a certain number of infantry and to conduct them into the
Pisan territory. And therefore we command all who are in-
scribed on the rolls of the military ordinance of our republic to
render the same obedience to the said Niccolo as you would to
our magistracy. And to you, rectors, officers, and subjects, we
command to render him all the assistance he may need, or which
he may require of you in the execution of this commission.

Mandantes, etc.

Datum in Palatio Florentino, die 16 Augusti 1508.
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI, Secretary.+

* The Florentine republic never had anything more at heart than to be able
to put an end once for all to the protracted and costly war with Pisa; and in the
spring of 1508, whilst Machiavelli was in Germany, the first trial was made of
the militia of the country, which were employed by Niccolo Capponi to lay
waste the Pisan territory, where everything was destroyed up to the very walls
of the town of Pisa. In adopting so barbarous a way of making war it was evi-
dently the aim of the Florentines to constrain the people of the country to seek
refuge within the walls of the city, where, by thus increasing the number of
mouths and at the same time the want of provisions, the horrors of famine
would soon be produced, with their usual consequences of disturbances and riots,
which are the most powerful auxiliaries of a besieging army. In the following
month of August the Florentines wanted to repeat this experiment of devasta-
tion by destroying all the standing corn and what little had escaped the first
attempt; and accordingly Machiavelli was charged with the operation, giving
him thus the opportunity of seeing the working of that militia system for the
establishment of which he had labored so hard.

t No letters fron Machiavelli relating to this mission have been found; but
there are in the National Library (Florence) three letters from the Ten, one from
Niccolo Capponi, Commissary-General, and one from Pietro Soderini to Machi-
avelli, in relation to this mission.

THIRD COMMISSION TO THE ARMY
BEFORE PISA.*

LETTER I.
TO NICCOLO CAPPONI, COMMISSARY-GENERAL, ETC.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORE : —

I send you the enclosed, which please forward at once with
your usual promptness to Florence. I have nothing else to
communicate to your Magnificence except that we are here at
the mill of Quosi, to watch whether any new convoy of boats is
attempting to come in, and to prevent it as we have done the
others. I will only remind you to continue to send us bread
every day, as you have done hitherto, as we rely entirely upon
you for this supply.

Nothing else occurs to me to say except to recommend my-
self to your Magnificence, and may God guard you.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,

From our Camp, 20 February, 1509. Secretary.

LETTER IL.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

With the exception of Paolo Paranno and two hundred in-
fantry, who were left to guard the camp, we moved on Monday
_Morning with all the rest of the troops to the Figuretta, and

* The devastation of the Pisan territory by the Florentines had greatly ex-
cited the displeasure of the king of France, who disliked this mode of making
war; although he subsequently found it to his advantage, after the republic had
replied rather bluntly to his threats, and still more so after their having satis-
fied his avarice by the present of one hundred thousand francs. Thereupon the
siege of Pisa was pressed with great activity, and in February, 1509, “the Ten”
sent their Secretary to the camp to watch the progress of the siege, provide all

COMMISSION TO THE ARMY BEFORE PISA. 107

began to work immediately with three small barges, which the
Signor Francesco, supported by about one hundred infantry,
had taken the night before from the Pisans under their very
gates. Subsequently, at about noon, Antonio da Certaldo ar-
rived; but as it was already late and the piles and other neces-
saries were still on the beach, we could do nothing that day
towards making the palisade, and therefore put it off until
yesterday morning, when we returned there with the same
men, and during the day we succeeded, with the help of God,
in completing the stockade and placing the obstructions below
the Figuretta, about one mile towards the mouth of the river.
We have driven three rows of piles, fifteen in each row,
binding them together with bands of iron, so that the Pisans
can neither cut nor undo them. The bands of iron are all
below the surface of the water, so that we think the Pisans
will hardly attempt to destroy this stockade, for they could not
remain there at their ease. True, they might transport some
boats over land, but that would take so long that any one
knowing it could easily prevent it. The obstructions are so
placed that the Signor Jacopo passed twice quite easily from
one side to the other, with eight of his mounted men; and
whenever it is necessary to pass them the troops will need only
to take fifty fascines with them, and then the army of King
Xerxes himself would be able to pass. The Pisans might dam-
age our works by cutting them, but that would require time,
which they cannot safely afford, with two hostile armies after
them. We shall see what course they will take.

We have met with nothing in the mountains here, although
we have used our best efforts to search them thoroughly, and

necessaries, and to direct the efforts made for preventing succor from reaching
the besieged by vessels coming up from the mouth of the Arno.

How admirably Machiavelli fulfilled his duties and how well he deserved of
his country in carrying out the objects of his mission, is attested by the letters
addressed to him by the Ten, the Commissary-General Capponi, and others in
authority, which are on file in the National Library at Florence. So that one of
his recent biographers said of him, very justly, that “he was the very soul of the
“siege of Pisa, whilst the militia which he had organized were the instruments
“of a victory which was followed by a surrender of Pisa in the month of
“June.”

Whilst with the army before Pisa, Machiavelli was sent on a special mission to
Piombino, and afterwards to Pistoja, but in both instances he returned to the
camp after a few days’ absence. The instructions to Machiavelli by Marcellus
Virgilius, etc., and his reports upon these missions, are inserted amongst the de-
spatches relating to the siege of Pisa.

158 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

shall continue to do so. I do not remind your Lordships of
Giovanni Battista, being persuaded that he is already on the
way ; and in truth we need him very much. As to the infan-
try, I can say that the companies are really splendid, and as to
their willingness to remain, neither Antonio’s nor Morgante’s
have given me the slightest trouble. From the Pescia company
only there are frequent applications for some of the men to
visit their families, which I believe is in consequence of their
being so near their homes. I have granted such leave to a few
of the men, and these have in every instance returned on the
day promised. I have reduced the companies from five hun-
dred to three hundred, and shall be able to keep them so for
two pay-days longer, as but few men are obliged to return home
sooner; but after that I shall be obliged to reduce them to
eighty or one hundred men, as it will then be the time for at-
tending to the silkworms (il tempo det bigattrc), and the men
cannot remain. I should propose then to disband them alto-
gether, were it not that it would be a wrong to their colonel,
who is a worthy man, as well as to the men themselves, if, in
this enterprise against Pisa, in which they count upon gaining
some reputation, neither he nor his banners were permitted to
be seen. When that time comes, we may keep those who wish
to remain, as they would then have no ground for complaining
that they were either forced to remain or be disbanded; al-
though it would be desirable if we could keep all the men, for
it is a good and handsome company. These men have already
earned eight days’ pay, and on the 11th of this month, which
comes on Sunday next, they will be entitled to full pay, so
that we must give them their money on Monday. I beg your
Lordships, therefore, to arrange to have the money here, for the
reasons explained in my previous letter, and now renew the re-
quest most earnestly. a

A certain Bastiano, son of Ser Jacopo Orlandi, corporal of
the Pescia company, asked for his discharge at the end of his
term, on the ground of ill health. I gave him his discharge,
as I had anyhow to dismiss two hundred men; and thereupon
he went off to Pescia, and enlisted some ten or twelve men, with
whom he entered the service of the Venetians, in contravention
of your orders and proclamations. I have learned since then
that he came near stirring up the whole company, and at-
tempted to seduce four or six officers, promising them each

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 159

four ducats here and four more at Faenza. I mention this to
your Lordships so that you may manifest your displeasure by
retaining him as prisoner, and take such other proceedings as
will keep your troops here in proper obedience; otherwise your
orders will be derided by everybody; and ev sane here will
end in confusion.

Messer Bandino has returned the cattle some days ago.

As previously reported to your Lordships, there was remitted
to Tommaso Baldovini three hundred ducats to pay the first
troops from Pescia, of which sum one hundred and eighty-three
ducats were lost. The daily supply of straw has been regularly
paid, amounting to more than forty ducats; the pioneers from
Pistoja have been paid, with exception of their first three days.
Picks and shovels have been bought: the iron bands had to be
made and paid for. More than ten ducats have been expended
in having the wounded gunners cared for, and to send them
home. <A portion of the bread purchased at Lucca has been
lost; and thus we are without money, and yet we have to live.
It is absolutely necessary, therefore, that your Lordships send
at least two hundred ducats to the said Tommaso; for, besides
the extraordinary expenses that occur daily, we have to pay
every day four ducats gold, of which three are for straw for
the men, and one for the twenty pioneers which we have kept
out of the one hundred that came from Pistoja.

To-day there came to see me Messer Agostino Bernardi, a
citizen of Lucca, sent by the Signoria of that city to represent
to me that your Lordships had written them a rather severe
letter, founded upon statements made by me; and therefore
they wished to assure me that they would in future take all
proper measures to prevent the Pisans from obtaining provis-
ions; and that, if they had not done so hitherto, it was due to
the fact that they supposed that your Lordships had taken all
necessary precautions yourselves, and had so guarded every
point as to prevent the Pisans from coming and going; and
that in future they wished me to write to your Lordships in
such manner as would tend to maintain the good understanding
between the two republics, instead of destroying it. I replied,
that your Lordships in coming to an agreement with Lucca
had two objects in view; the first, to facilitate the conquest of
Pisa, and secondly, to live in security and peace with your
neighbors ; and if, after concluding that agreement, it became

160 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

necessary for your Lordships alone to see to it that the Pisans
did not avail themselves of the resources of the dominion of
Lucca, then the first object of the treaty was done away with,
and the agreement might as well not have been made, for that
then it would have sufficed merely to don a cuirass to settle
any trouble that might arise; and that therefore your Lord-
ships would not be satisfied unless the Signoria of Lucca took
the matter earnestly in hand,— that is to say, to prevent the
Pisans from making their city an asylum, and to punish those
who received them in the country, or who furnished them help
or sold them any supplies, — all which things it was impossible
for your Lordships to do; that this was the only way to put a
stop to it, for as their subjects had nothing to apprehend from
our troops in consequence of the existing treaty, and at the
same time had no fear of being punished by their own magis-
trates, all other means were uncertain and useless, owing to
the great extent of country which we would have to guard.
And therefore it was absolutely necessary that they should
send their commissaries to the frontiers and drive the Pisans
off their territory, and chastise those who gave them asylum.
If they would do this, your Lordships would be satisfied; and
that then whoever might be there could only make good report
of them, for the good or the bad that was written about them
depended entirely on their own conduct. Messer Bernardi
promised that his Signoria would do wonders, and that what-
ever inconvenience we had suffered in the past was caused by
some indiscrect or evil-disposed official; that magistrates could
bestow office upon individuals, but could not endow them with
goodness or discretion, and that they had already appointed
commissaries to correct the difficulty; and finally he begged
me, in case of any complaints coming to my ears, to write to
his Signoria before reporting it to your Lordships, so as to
prevent any unfavorable impressions, and to afford them the
opportunity of remedying the evil more promptly, and without
causing any ill feeling. I promised to do so, and thereupon he
left me.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.
Servus

NiccoLo MAcHIAVELLI,
Secret.
From the Camp at Quost, 7 March, 1509.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 161

COMMISSION TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI,

RESOLVED UPON BY THE MAGISTRACY OF THE TEN ON THE
10rh OF MARCH, 1509.*

NiccoLo,— We desire you on receipt of this to leave the camp
and to proceed to Piombino ; we have written at the same timé
to the commissaries to provide some one in your place with the
army, either by selecting one of their own number, or in such
other way as they may think best. Our object in sending you
to Piombino is as follows. You have probably heard that the
lord of Piombino sent to us a certain Giovanni Cola, one of his
officers of the court, to inform us that the Pisans had mani-
fested to him a disposition to settle their difficulties with us;
and therefore he wished us to grant to some of them a safe-
conduct that would enable them to come there for the purpose
of negotiating, etc., and that we should send some one there
with power to negotiate and conclude an arrangement with
them. We have granted the desired safe-conduct, with which
three of their citizens left Pisa, whose names we append hereto.
The said Giovanni Cola returned here yesterday, and as his
safe-conduct was nearly expired he urgently requested us to
prolong it for the whole month, and we have reluctantly ex-
tended it until the 20th instant. He moreover urged us with
great earnestness to send some confidential man, alleging that
the Pisans would not explain themselves, nor come to any par-
ticulars upon any point unless some confidential person were
present on our part. Now, as all these demonstrations seemed
to us mere pretexts for gaining time, we have decided, for the
purpose of finding out once for all the real truth of this matter,
to send some discreet person there, who will manage to do it

* Whilst Machiavelli was in camp with the besieging army, the Pisans ap-
plied to the lord of Piombino to act as mediator in bringing about a peace with
the Florentines; either because they really wished to negotiate a peace, or, as
seemed most likely, because they hoped in this way to gain time and a relaxa-
tion of the rigors of the war. Jacopo d’ Appiano sent a confidential agent (Gio-
vanni Cola) to Florence to make this known to the Signoria, and to beg them to
send ambassadors to Piombino. But suspecting some fraud, the Ten, before
engaging in any negotiations, wished Machiavelli to go there and find out what
foundation there really was for the proposed negotiations. Machiavelli accord-
ingly went to Piombino, and very quickly ascertained the real state of things, of
which he gives full account to the Ten in his letter of the 15th of March, from
Piombino. ;

VOL. IV. 11

162 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

with the least possible display ; and therefore we desire you
to go there with all possible despatch, and when you have ar-
rived near the lord of Piombino with our letters of credence,
which you will receive herewith, you will state to him that you
have been sent there in accordance with his own request, and
to learn whether the Pisans who are there have orders and
sufficient authority to enable them to conclude an arrange-
ment. You will ask his Lordship whether he has seen these
powers, and request him to show them to you, and if there are
none, then you are instructed to return immediately ; and in
that case, you will leave without entering upon any discussion
respecting this negotiation. But if his Lordship of Piombino
should be of the opinion that the Pisans are really in earnest
about this negotiation, and you come to the same conclusion,
then you may open yourself further to his Lordship and inquire
most particularly of him what it is that the Pisans want; and
you will endeavor to learn all the particulars that you possibly
ean. Also point out to his Lordship that it is only necessary
for him to hear the Pisans, as on our part we demand but one
thing, and that is Pisa free, with all its territory and jurisdic-
tion, the same as before the rebellion. According as you may
find things, you will advance step by step, giving us immediate
advice of all that occurs. In short, our intention is to try this
expedient, so as not to miss any occasion that might prove of
advantage to us. On the other hand, however, we are not will-
ing to compromise our dignity or honor, nor encourage the
Pisans by showing ourselves too anxious; for in truth we ap-
prehend that this whole affair is nothing but an artifice on the
part of the Pisans to gain time, and to employ this delay in
some way to their own advantage.

Apart from the list which we send you, you will endeavor to
find out whether all the Pisans who have left their city with a
safe-conduct are at Piombino; for if they are not, it would be
a sign that they wanted to leave for the purpose of going else-
where; and you may make this observation to his Lordship, as
an indication that the Pisans have really no intention to come
to terms. Should you be asked for a further extension of the
safe-conduct, you will make them understand clearly that they
will not obtain any extension, not even for two hours.

DECEMVIRI LIBERTATIS ET Batre Repusy. For.

Ego MARCELLUS VIRGILIUS.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 163

LETTER III.

MaGniFIcent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I left the camp on Monday, and arrived here at Piombino
yesterday at the twentieth hour ; and half an hour later I called
upon his Lordship, and communicated to him what your Lord-
ships had commissioned me by your instructions. He replied,
that he had had negotiations for some time past with the Pisans
to induce them to make terms with your Lordships ; that his
great desire was the tranquillity of Tuscany, and most particu-
larly the good of your Lordships, whose servant he professes to
be; that it was for the purpose of urging this negotiation that
he had advised the Pisans through his confidential agent, Gio-
vanni Cola, to send ambassadors here to confer with your envoys
so as to arrive at some satisfactory arrangement; that he had
made it a point to advise them to give their ambassadors power
to treat of the sovereignty of their state, as without such power
he knew it would be useless to enter into any negotiations.
And after that he had advised your Lordships to grant a safe-
conduct to these Pisan ambassadors, and to send some one
here to treat with them; that your Lordships had consequently
given the safe-conduct, but for so short a time and on such
ambiguous terms as would make it better to break off the ne-
gotiations rather than endeavor to conclude an arrangement ;
that as your envoy had not arrived, and the safe-conduct was
about to expire, he had, in his desire not to see the negotiation
broken off, again applied for a prolongation of the safe-conduct,
and had urged your sending an envoy here, but that the prolon-
gation which you had accorded was for so short a time as to
preclude the possibility of coming to any conclusion. From all
these remarks, it was evident to me that the Signor of Piombino
was under the impression that your Lordships mistrusted him ;
but he concluded by saying that he did not know whether the
Pisan ambassadors had full powers or not, although the only
thing they had communicated to him was that they had ample
authority to treat and to conclude an arrangement; and that
he inferred from this expression that they could treat with you
in relation to the sovereignty of Pisa, as well as about any
other matter that might come up between them and your Lord-
ships; but that they had never been willing to tell him the

164 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

exact object for which they had come to negotiate, nor to com-
municate to him any details. All this his Lordship confirmed
with his oath, adding that he had been so angry with them in
consequence that he had been on the point of sending them
back. But finally he wanted to persuade me that it would be
as well for me to hear what they had to say, as that would in-
volve neither loss of time nor anything else. I replied that, as
I wanted to conform strictly to your Lordship’s orders, there
was nothing left for me but to remount and return; and I
should have done so, but that, according to your Lordships’
instructions, I was to find out as far as possible what the Pisan
ambassadors really wanted, provided that in my judgment they
were serious in their desire to treat. But I could form no
opinion on this point, as the Signor of Piombino had told me
that he knew nothing of their intentions; unless, therefore, I
heard them myself, I could not possibly find out their particu-
lar object, nor whether they really intended to treat with us.

I was moreover persuaded of the truth of the remark of the
Signor of Piombino, that the mere hearing of what they had
to say would neither give them courage nor time. For their
safe-conduct held good anyhow until the 20th, and to listen to
them would deprive them of all pretext for complaining to
their people and the world at large that so solemn an embassy
as theirs had been refused a hearing by your Lordships, which
they would have held up as an evidence of your unfriendly dis-
position towards them, which is their only means of keeping
up the excitement of the Pisans. Having consented, therefore,
to see the ambassadors, with the understanding that I had
done so merely to gratify the lord of Piombino, they came, and
after a long preamble they complained that it had been prom-
ised to them that they should meet two or three of your citi-
zens to treat with them, instead of which a mere secretary had
come, and even he did not come direct from Florence. And
finally, coming to the point, they said that the people of Pisa
were disposed to do all that your Lordships wanted, for the
sake of peace and union, provided they were assured of their
lives, their property, and their honor. That they had no fur-
ther instructions for this purpose; but even if they had a thou-
sand others, the subject was one of such supreme importance
that they could not venture to conclude anything without fresh
instructions from their superiors. To the first part of their

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 165

remarks, I replied as seemed to me proper; but as to the sec-
ond part, I turned towards the lord of Piombino, saying that
I made no reply, inasmuch as the ambassadors had really said
nothing, and if they wanted a reply from me they would have
to make some definite proposition. To this they answered
that they had said enough in asking security for their lives,
their honor, and their property. Whereupon I said that I
could make no reply unless they stated what kind of security
they required, and if their demand for security was reasonable
and honorable it would not be wanting, inasmuch as your Lord-
ships asked nothing more of them than obedience, and cared
nothing about their lives, nor their property, nor their honor.
After discussing this question of security for some time,
they finally came to this point, namely, that they had thought
of various ways of having this security, but had found none
other than this: namely, that your Lordships should leave
them all within the walls of Pisa, and take for yourselves all
the remainder of their dominion; and that they considered it
a great gift for you to obtain a just title to so much that you
had never possessed before. Thereupon I turned to the lord
of Piombino and said: “It must be evident to your Lordship
“now that these gentlemen are not in earnest, but are merely
“laughing at you; for I believe that if they had said this at
‘‘ first, and you had supposed them to be in earnest, you would
“have declined the trouble of intervening in a matter that
“would have resulted in this. But since matters have come
“to this point, and so that your Lordship and the people of
“ Pisa may fully know our intentions, and that you and they
‘““may know how this negotiation will have to be managed, I
“tell you that if you do not intend to put into our hands Pisa
“unrestricted, with all her territory and jurisdiction, the same
“Cas before the rebellion, it will be useless for you to come here
“or elsewhere for the purpose of negotiating an arrangement,
“or to give so much trouble to the lord of Piombino, or any one
“else. And the same as regards the demand for security for
“your lives, your fortunes, and your honor; if you are not dis-
“posed to rely upon the good faith of my Signoria, it will be
‘equally useless for you to weary any one to bring about an
“agreement, for the good faith of my Signoria has never yet
“required a bondsman; and should it ever need one, none
“could be found that would be sufficient. But your most cer-

166 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

“tain and real security will ever depend upon the loyalty with
“which you throw yourselves into the arms of my Signoria.”
And then I enlarged upon this in such terms as I thought
would be most effective in moving them; after which I turned
towards the deputies of the country people, and said that I felt
sorry for their simplicity ; that they were playing a game at
which they could not win, for if the Pisans should carry off
the prize in this contest they would not want the country peo-
ple any longer as their companions, but as slaves, and would
send them back to their ploughs. But if, on the other hand,
Pisa were taken, which they might expect at any hour, then
they would lose their properties, their lives, and everything
else. At this Messer Federigo del Virajo began to cry out
that I was trying to create a division amongst them, and that
what I had said was not proper language for me to hold. The
country deputics never said a word, but seemed to relish my
remarks, and particularly what J had said in the course of
the interview, “that if the Pisans did not want peace, they
“would have war, and more of it than they cared to have.”
Giovanni da Vico said twice, in a loud and resolute manner,
“ We want peace, we want peace, ambassador!” And the
lord of Piombino spoke to the Pisan ambassadors in a loud
and angry voice, saying that they had deceived him, etc.

And thereupon I left, saying to his Lordship that I would
return to the camp promptly the next morning, and that, if
night had not come on during our discussion, I should have
left that very evening. His Lordship remained with the Pisan
ambassadors for at least two hours later, and at three o’clock
of the night he sent me word that he wished to speak with me
in the morning before my departure. At two o’clock this
- morning he sent for me, and told me that, after my leaving the
ambassadors in the evening, he had washed their heads for
them as they deserved; so that they told him that they would
reflect: during the night whether there was not some way for
them to obtain the desired security, and that they hoped yet to
arrive at some satisfactory conclusion. And that they had
come this morning to tell him that they had thought of a
middle course which they thought would please your Lord-
ships, and which might also prove acceptable to their own —
people; but that they could not mention it to him until after
having first submitted it to the authorities of Pisa, and there-

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 167

fore they intended to return there, either all of them, or half
their number, as he thought best, so that they might come back
with some definite proposition.

His Lordship added that he had advised them to send only a
part of their number back to Pisa, because he thought it best
not to break the thread of this negotiation, but that after all
he had advised them to do in this matter whatever I thought
best. I replied to his Lordship, that I was of the contrary
opinion, and that it seemed to me they ought all to go, for
possibly your Lordships might not be willing to extend the
safe-conduct, in which event the remaining here of a part
would lead to a more complete rupture than if they had all re-
turned to Pisa. ‘ Let them go back, then,’ said I, “and let
“them dispose their people to do what I told them yesterday.
“ Let them get full power, and send it to your Lordship with
“such propositions as they may determine upon, and then we
“shall not fail to believe them, and they may thus effect some
“good.” His Lordship, however, adhered to his opinion, as
though he had conceived a great jealousy lest your Lordships
should not be willing that this negotiation should be carried on
here, so that he said to me: “See now, and undeceive your
“Signori, and make them understand that this negotiation
‘“¢ will either come to no conclusion, or that it will have to be
“concluded here ; I understand very well why you advise the
“return of all the ambassadors to Pisa, so as to remove the
“ negotiations from here.” I did my best to undeceive him
upon this point, and did not leave him until he had positively
decided to send them all back.

I then returned to my lodgings, and was on the point of
mounting my horse, when Messer Giovanni Cola came and told
me that his Lordship had informed the Pisans that it was best
for them all to leave ; to which, however, they did not agree, as
they wanted that at least two of their number should remain,
namely, Messer Federigo dal Vivajo, and Filippo di Puciarello ;
whereupon I told him, “ You see now that my Signoria judged
“rightly that these ambassadors first deceived his Lordship of
“ Piombino, and then wanted to carry on these negotiations in
“Pisa; and it was only for the purpose of discovering their
“real intentions that I advised his Lordship to send them all
“back.” He replied that his master was very angry about it,
and had protested to them that they need not expect another

168 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

safe-conduct from you, as he would not ask for it, and that the
ambassadors had replied to him that they would take such meas-
ures as they were able to; and thereupon I left. I shall stop
to-night at Allumiera, and on Sunday or Monday I hope to be
with your Lordships. I have written this despatch so that you
may know as promptly as possible all that has taken place here.
The courier has promised to deliver this in Florence on Saturday
at dinner-time, and if he does so your Lordships will please pay
him one florin, which I have promised him.

I have not been able to verify the list of all the Pisans that
came here with the ambassadors, owing to the shortness of the
time. But I have talked with Rubertino about it, and he told
me that they were all here ; and my servants who waited with
them at the door of the audience-chamber told me that there
was a crowd of one hundred and sixty or more.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
PiomBino, 15 March, 1509. Secret.
——__>__—_-
LETTER IV.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and reported all that
had taken place here till then. This morning there arrived
from Pisa Finichietto di Casentino, one of those who were
made prisoners with Canaccio; he came here on behalf of all
these to recommend themselves, and to inform me that they had
heard in Pisa the resolution which your Lordships had taken
with regard to the brother of Alfonso,* and that they had been
assured that, if Rafaello were hung, they would all be put to
death. They begged me, moreover, to send them some money
to enable them to live, as they were utterly without any re-

* This Alfonso dei Mutulo was a Pisan, and being made prisoner by the
Florentines he agreed fraudulently with them to deliver Pisa into their hands if
they would liberate him. He was consequently exchanged for a Florentine
prisoner. And having returned to Pisa he caused at a given signal a company
of Florentine soldiers to approach the walls, and began to introduce them one by
one into the city by hoisting them up on to the walls by means of a rope. The
twentieth man had hardly been drawn up when, casting his eyes into the city as

eee eS eee

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 169

sources. I sent him back to Pisa, and gave him money enough
to support him and his companions for some days; and as to
their apprehensions I reassured him the best way I knew how.
Since then the priest who has officiated in Pisa during Lent
left that city, accompanied by a number of monks. On arriving
at the barriers I made them all return to Pisa, excepting the
priest, whom I kept for good reasons. I have gathered from
him a full account of everything that has occurred there from
the time of his going to preach there, which in substance
amounts to this: that the Pisans cannot hold out any longer,
that their sufferings are much greater than what they avow,
and that they are far from being united in coming to any good
resolution, for the reason that the government is in the hands
of the bad; whilst the better-disposed portion of the inhabit-
ants are very desirous of coming to terms with the Florentines.
This priest furthermore states, that at his departure from Pisa
four of the citizens, whose names will be given below, have
charged him to see whether it be not possible to arrive at some
arrangement; and that they claim the following as the main
conditions, viz.: 1st, full amnesty for the past ; 2d, security for
the observance of the same; and 3d, the assurance that, if they
deliver the city and all its territory freely into our hands, and
swear perpetual fealty, which they say was never done by their
ancestors, they want to have the same privileges as some other
cities in your Lordships’ dominions ; and that if any hopes of
this were held out to them, they would within a few days send
envoys to present themselves at your Lordships’ feet. He said
that he would like to be able to write to the Pisans what I
thought of their project ; but this I refused him, because the
Pisans had refused to accept your Lordships’ grace at the time
when you were willing to accord it to them, and by their
wicked proceedings had added evil to evil, and that therefore
they must not think of anything except that your Lordships
are resolved to have Pisa either by consent or by force, and
that they would very soon see the proof of this.

he reached the top of the wall, he saw that of his comrades who had been hoisted
over before him some had been killed and others bound. On perceiving this he
uttered a cry, and made known the treason of Alfonso. The Pisans at once
opened a general fire of artillery, by which Paolo da Paranno, who is mentioned
in this letter, was mortally wounded. They attempted at the same time a

sortie and an attack upon the remainder of the Florentine troops, but were
repulsed.

170 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

After hearing my reply, the priest said: “ Since your Signori
** have decided upon this course, let them at least act so that the
‘¢ Pisans may soon see the beginning of it ; for they are reduced
“to that point that their endurance can go no further. Only
“ vesterday, a body of over three hundred went to the Palace of
“the Ancients, crying aloud, ‘ We are dying of hunger; the
“help which you told us you were expecting has not come, and
‘‘we cannot have patience any longer!’ They were dismissed
“with fine words, and promises that within four days some
“ definite action should be taken, and that they must content
“themselves until then; and that orders would be issued this
“morning that there should be bread and grain in the market-
“place ; but there was none yesterday, and the price of corn
“rose to twelve lire per bushel.”

I wanted to make this state of things known to your Lord-
ships; and so far as I have been able to learn from others, the
Pisans can hold out no longer. If we continue to press them
as we have begun, and they begin to see that we can reach
them with our artillery, then there will be no occasion to re-
sort to any other means, and your Lordships will have brought
this long war to an end in a manner most honorable to our
Republic. If I hear nothing more from the Pisans, I shall cut
short all further parleying, unless your Lordships instruct me
otherwise. I have learned that no grain has come into Pisa
for four days; it is this that drives them to desperation,
whilst we, on our part, shall continue, with the aid of our
infantry and cavalry, to do everything to prevent any pro-
visions from entering the city.

To-day we have heard of the death of Paolo da Paranno ; *
may God receive his soul! for he gave his body to your Lord-
ships. JI recommend his children to your Lordships, which I
promised him I would do in case the Almighty should dispose
of him; his goodness and loyalty make this whole camp deplore
his loss.

Niccolo Machiavelli left here to-day, and has gone to inspect
the infantry at the other camps. J have charged him to come
back here afterwards, in accordance with your Lordships’ in-
structions ; indeed, nothing could be more agreeable to me than
to have him here with me.

* Paolo da Paranno was mortally wounded on the occasion of the treason of
Alfonso del Mutulo.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 171

I have nothing more to communicate to your Lordships
to-day, but to recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene

valeant.
ANTONIUS DE FILicasa,*
Generalis Commiss.
From the Camp near Sr. Jacosus, 14 April, 1509.

LETTER V.

MaGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I will answer first your Lordships’ letter of the 12th, in which
you desire to know the number of troops in each camp, and
how many of the regular troops, infantry and other service,
ought in my judgment to be changed; also, that I should fully
advise you upon every point. In reply I have to say, that since
leaving Florence I have not yet been able to visit the camp at
San Piero in Grado, and can therefore give you no account of
that; but as to the other two camps, I will now report the con-
dition in which I found them. In the camp of the Val di Ser-
chio, where Antonio di Filicajo is the commissary, there are
the following troops, viz.: 1st, the priest of Citerna, with 250
men from Fivizzano; 2d, Giovanni Agnolo da Monterchi, with
the contingent from Castiglione del Terzieri, numbering 150
men; 8d, Giannesino da Serezzana, with the men of Casen-
tino, being 180; of the original number of 150 twenty were
lost by the treason of Alfonso del Mutulo; 4th, Morgante
dal Borgo, with 100 men from the Val di Cechina; 5th, Anto-
nio da Castello, with the 100 men from Firenzuola ; — making
a total of 730 men. Then there are Giannone da Librafatta
and Gianotto da Cardo, with 60 men; the Signori Francesco
and Giulio del Caccia, with 100 men; and finally, Bernardo
da Carrara, who guards the fortress; so that, leaving out
Bernardino, there remain to Antonio fit for service 890 men.

* Machiavelli, having been called to Florence by the Ten to receive special
and important instructions, was sent by them to inspect and report upon the
condition of the several camps of the forces engaged in the siege of Pisa. He
returned within a couple of days to his post. During his absence this letter
was written by Antonio de Filicaja; and in the following letter Machiavelli
makes his report to the Ten on the strength and condition of the forces at the
different camps.

alee THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

The said Antonio had, moreover, Dietajuti, with 100 men from
Valdinievole, which brought his command up to 1,000 men.
But Niccolo Capponi, imagining himself to be too isolated and
feeble, asked Antonio for the loan of a constable until he
could be supplied from Florence; and so he sent him Dietajuti,
who was here; and I believe that Niccolo will rather send
him in return one of the constables that are again reported
to be on the way here, than to give him back Dietajuti, who,
as well as his company, is familiar with the country, whilst any
newly arrived men are unacquainted with the localities. The
other troops under command of Antonio have also a good
knowledge of the country, from having been schooled in it for
two months. In truth, the whole of Antonio’s infantry is as
good and handsome, in my judgment, as any other in all Italy
at the present day.

Besides Dietajuti, who is not yet quite sure of remaining, we
have here the company of Anghiari, without any captain; the
men have declared that they will not leave here; on the other
hand, Alamanno refuses to send Ronzino here. We will see
how we can scttle this in the best way, so soon as the troops
that are destined for this camp shall have arrived at Cascina.
This company of Anghiari counts about 110 men; 2d, there
are here the infantry of Pieve, numbering about 180 men;
dd, the infantry of Bibbiena, 186 in number; 4th, the men of
Pontessieve, under command of Agnolona, being 112 strong;
and finally there are 80 fusileers here, who, added to the others,
and not counting Dietajuti’s men, make 668 enlisted regular
troops. Of inexperienced troops we have, Ist, Carlo da Cre-
mona with 100 men; 2d, Daino and Gattamelata with 60 men ;
od, Morello with 40, and the son of Sannicia Corso with 40;
which makes a total of 908 without Dietajuti; so that if you
send 200 infantry here, as I understand is to be done, we shall
have in all over 1,100 men, not counting Dietajuti; and if he
remains with Antonio, or another be sent in his place, then
Antonio will also have his full 1,000 men.

The way to prevent the number of our regular troops from
diminishing is, whenever eight or ten per cent of them are
absent, either from sickness or any other cause, to send the
constable and his chancellor into his circumscription, there
promptly, and by the use of his and your Lordships’ authority
and that of the rectors, to raise and send here the number of

ARMY BEFORE PISA. Lis

men that are wanting. And then to make it a rule that the
commissaries shall not grant leave of absence to any except
such as are really sick; and to punish those who absent them-
selves without leave, or who disobey, either here or at Florence,
or at their own homes, or wherever it can be done. In this
way the companies will be kept full and complete without any
further trouble. I do not see what troops I could disband, or
which to call to replace them, unless in a case of necessity,
and then in the manner indicated. And if your Lordships send
the money for the pay of the troops in time, I will do my best
to save all trouble on that account.

Your Lordships have written me another letter on the 14th,
in which you direct me to fix my residence at Cascina, and to
order that there be always some eight or ten men under a chief
kept in garrison there, with provisions for at least two weeks ;
and to collect there all the ammunition of lead and balls that
has been provided. This letter of yours was found at Cascina
by Francesco Serragli, who after reading it sent it to me here
yesterday. But as I was here, and not at Cascina, your Lord-
ships will see that I could not have complied with your instruc-
tions. I read the letter to Niccolo Capponi, who promised me
to answer it to your Lordships. It seems from that Ictter that
your Lordships intend I should fix myself at Cascina; but I do
not think this would answer a good purpose, as that post can
be filled by any man, no matter of what qualifications; whilst
if I remained there, I could be no longer of any service to the
army here, nor be in any other way of use here. I am aware
that that post would expose me to less danger and fatigue, but
if I wanted to avoid danger and fatigue I should not have left
Florence; and therefore I entreat your Lordships to allow me
to remain in the camps to co-operate with the commissaries in
all the measures that have to be taken. For here I can make
myself useful, but at Cascina I should not be good for any-
thing, and should die of sheer desperation. I beg your Lord-
ships, therefore, to think of some one else for that post, if
Serragli is not willing to remain there, although I think him
the most suitable man for the place.

Allow me to remind your Lordships of the pay of Paolo An-
tonio and his men, who are guarding the forts of Cascina and
of the Verruca.

I shall finish the pay of all the regular infantry now at this

ep THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

camp, and will then immediately send you the accounts. I
have nothing else to communicate to your Lordships at this
time, for their Magnificences the Lords Commissaries will have
written to you in relation to the more important matters, and
to that I must refer for the present; nevertheless, the moment
I have the time, I shall not fail to make a full report on that
subject to your Lordships. Valete!
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,

Secret.
From the Camp at Mxzzana, 16 April, 1509.

LETTER VI.

MaGniriIcent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Three days ago I left the camp at Mezzana for that of the
Val di Serchio in company with Arcangiolo da Castiglione,
who serves in Antonio’s camp in place of Dietajuti. Your
Lordships will therefore erase the name of Dietajuti from the
roll of Antonio’s camp and transfer it to that of Niccolo’s, and
place the name of Arcangiolo upon the roll of Antonio’s camp.
In this way the latter will be complete, and Niccolo will re-
quire nothing except that Cerchio shall come here to serve
under him with the companies which he has here, and to retain
the remainder of the company of Anghiari. On the arrival
here this morning of the lord commissary with the 190 men
from the Val di Chiana, I spoke to him about the troops that
are here, and he replied that he could not do with less than
750 regulars, and that therefore he could not see how Cer-
chio could be detached and sent to Mezzana, as the required
number would with Cerchio’s men be exceeded by but a very
few. For Agnolo da Citerna with the lately arrived has 189
men; Sana has 45, the rest of his company being at Livorno;
Cerchio has 94; Captain Piero, 70; Bastiano the fat, 80; and
Bastiano the lean, 300; all of which together make up the num-
ber of 778; but taking away Cerchio with his 94 men would
leave him less than 700. On thinking now how this matter
can be arranged so that Cerchio can be sent to Niccolo with-
out breaking up the companies, and at the same time to guard

ARMY BEFORE PISA. igs

Livorno, his Lordship has concluded that it could be effected
in the following way, viz.:— To bring Sana’s entire company
here, which is 80 strong, to send 40 of the fat Bastiano’s com-
pany to Livorno, and to discharge the rest, as a large number
of them wish to return home; and then to add 70 men to
Sana’s company, which he will send one of his captains to levy
in the Mugello, and which thus gives him 150 men. To add
also enough to Captain Piero’s fusileers to bring the present
number up to 100, which he will send his chancellor to levy.
Agnolo da Citerna to remain here with his 189 men, and Bas-
tiano the lean with his 300; and then Cerchio could be sent to
Niccolo Capponi. There would then be at this camp 739 ord-
nance troops, after the arrival of the 70 new men for Sana
and the 30 for Captain Piero, not counting Cerchio’s company.
And if your Lordships, on the arrival of Sana’s and Captain
Piero’s agents, will expedite them promptly, then this whole
affair will be quickly arranged. The infantry of these camps
will then be complete, and everybody will be satisfied. On next
pay-day the commissary will discharge 40 of the fat Bastiano’s
company, and send the other 40 to Livorno, where this com-
pany without a captain will be better placed, whilst the others
will remain with their constables. I do not believe that any
better way will be found to satisfy these commissaries. Ala-
manno will therefore despatch these agents with letters to your
magistracy, and your Lordships will please give them prompt
despatch.

I shall remain here two days and then return to Antonio’s
camp, after which I shall proceed to Niccolo’s camp, so as to
be present at the next pay, the funds for which, according to
the memorandum left by me with Niccolo, ought to be here
by the 27th of this month, as all the companies have to be
paid from the 28th to the 80th instant. I will then send your
Lordships the accounts as soon as I can, say within four days,
and which want of time has prevented me from doing sooner.

I recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servitor

NiccoLO MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

From the Florentine Camp at San Prero in Grapo, 21 April, 1509.

176 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

LETTER VII.

Maeniricent SIGNoRI, ETC. : —

This is merely to inform your Lordships that the pay of the
lately arrived ninety-three men from Fojano runs from the 14th
to the 25th, and that the money for it ought to be here by the
25th, as also the money for the pay of the artillerists and of
the troops that are not counted as regulars by the constables.
For all this three hundred ducats are required; and if your
Lordships desire to make the third payment also, then it will
be necessary to send the entire amount due to the consta-
bles, and I will give it to them in time. But sending only
one third of a pay at atime causes confusion; for so soon as
the time for the pay has come, and you are not ready at every
moment with pen in hand to remind each of his account,
they will be constantly after you, and yet will not find their
money ready for them. I beg your Lordships, therefore, to
send the money due to the supplementary force from the Val
di Chiana; also for an entire pay of all the constables, so as to
avoid the confusion above referred to. I shall also need the
money for the pioneers to-morrow; and will send you by the
first courier the accounts of the money I have had until now.
It was intended to employ two hundred pioneers to devastate
the country around the camp; but it seems now that it will be
better to employ four hundred, so as to be able to do the work
in two evenings, and thus get through the sooner with this
business, which is very important, as we have to leave the
camp almost entirely unprotected; and the more rapidly one
proceeds in this sort of things the more securely it is done,
for the men have to go up to the very walls of the town, where
they are exposed to the fire of the artillery. JI recommend my-
self to your Lordships.

ALAMANNO SALVIATI,
Commissary-General.
From the Camp at San Prmro, 23 April, 1509.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. i Ef

LETTER VIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here yesterday evening, and have conferred with
his Magnificence the Captain respecting the supply of bread.
He made me talk with the deputies of the Priors charged with
the supervision of the government shops for the sale of bread,
etc., and with a certain Betto Baroni with whom these deputies
have made a contract. The deputies told me that they had
paid Betto thirty ducats this month, in consideration of which
he had obligated himself to supply the camp at his risk of profit
or loss; and that they did not know what could have given rise
to the disorders, saying that Betto had done his duty. The
latter, who was present at the interview, said that under his
contract with Antonio he was obliged to send daily thirty to
forty measures of bread to the camp, and that he had regularly
done so; and that the deficiency was owing to the people of
the Val di Nievole, on whom the commissaries had counted ;
but if the commissary wished, he would supply the camp daily
with one hundred measures, which was about the quantity daily
consumed, at a suitable price and weight. But in that case
the commissary must give orders, either that no bread shall
come from elsewhere, or, if it does come, shall not be sold until
his is disposed of, as he does not want to be obliged to throw
his bread away. I for my part believe that if not more than
thirty or forty measures of bread are sent from here every day,
and that they have to depend for the rest upon what may be
supplied by the people of the Val di Nievole, the camp will fre-
quently be exposed to scarcity ; for I have myself experienced
the way in which these communes act, sending large supplies
one day and nothing the next. In fact, they cannot well do
differently, having no grain in store at home, but being obliged
to buy their supply of grain here. I imagine that Antonio has
not allowed these to supply all, because perhaps the bread
seemed to him not to have full weight; but the deputies have
promised me to remedy this by establishing proper means for
weighing the bread, etc. at the sutler’s shop. Another point in
connection with this matter is that the Quartermaster-General
has no profit from the bread supplied by the contractor, whilst
from the other he has six quattrini per load, and therefore he

VOL. IV. 12

178 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

has always persuaded Antonio to get his supplies by way of
Pescia rather than by way of Pistoja. I shall see Antonio
to-morrow, and have a talk with him about this business.

I have written these details to your Lordships so that you
may see that this commune has done and continues to do its
duty ; and that, if irregularities have occurred, you may know
whence they have come. The contractor tells me that his cor-
respondent has written him that there is abundance of every-
thing in the camp. But that system cannot be regarded as a
good one which gives abundance one day and scarcity the next.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

Servitor :
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Pistosa, 18 May, 1509. Secret.

ee od

LETTER IX.

MaGnriricent SIGNORI, ETC.: —

All three of us having met here to-day, partly to see each
other once face to face, and partly to talk over what ought to
be done now after the devastation of the country, which may be
said to have been carried out most effectually. The news of
our meeting having reached Pisa, Tarlatino addressed a letter
to us, saying that, if we would consent to it, four of their citi-
zens would come to confer with us, namely, Francesco del
Torto, Matteo di Gaddo, Antonio dell’ Oste, and Carlo Bandella.
Deeming it well to hear what they had to say, they came, and
we received them with a courteous welcome. After resting a
little while, Francesco del Torto spoke in the name of all, and
said that their Signoria and people had appointed twelve depu-
ties to proceed to Florence and throw themselves at the feet of
our illustrious Signoria for the purpose of composing the dif-
ferences between the commune of Pisa and the republic of Flor-
ence; that they had come to make this determination known
to us, and to ask of us a safe-conduct for this deputation. We
began our reply in the most friendly terms possible, so as to
impress them thoroughly with the kindly disposition which our
city entertained towards them; and then we went on to say that
what had done them most harm hitherto was their attempt to
gain time, whilst if they had not done so, but had rather antici-

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 179

pated time, their harvest would have remained safe, and would
not have been taken from them; and that these delays, on
which they perhaps still counted, might prove as injurious to
them in the future as they had been in the past. And if they
wished to hasten matters, it would be well for them to settle
the outlines of an arrangement with us, even if they could not
conclude anything definitely; that this might be done in one
day, as they could at any moment communicate with Pisa; and
that it would not be so easy at Florence to settle the difficulties
that might arise during the negotiations. Nevertheless, the
safe-conduct was at their disposal, and they might adopt either
course that seemed to them best; but that in our judgment the
first was the best, being the shortest. They replied, that they
liked our suggestions, but, having no power to negotiate with us,
they could do no more than to ask for the safe-conduct. ‘They
would, however, return to Pisa and talk the matter over with
the authorities, and then take one course or the other, and would
make known to us what had been decided upon; and then they
would ask for the safe-conduct, or would endeavor to negotiate
with us; and thus the matter was left.

Our discussion was pretty long, and touched upon various
subjects, and from their language and their actions they seemed
to us really well disposed; and it may well be that, whether
they come here or proceed to Florence to settle the details, a
satisfactory result will be reached. They said that we must
not be surprised if during to-morrow, or even the next day, we
were not to hear anything more from them, but that such delay
would only serve more certainly to reach a satisfactory conclu-
sion. ‘To this we have urged them, and in all our arguments
we have endeavored to inspire them with confidence that they
may expect from our city more clemency, more security, and
more advantages than they themselves could ask for. They
expressed themselves satisfied of this, and disposed to persuade
those of their fellow-citizens who remained obstinate, or who
held different opinions. Thus matters stand, and your Lord-
ships can now form as good a judgment of the matter as we
can ourselves. We must wait now to see what they will decide
upon, of which your Lordships shall be promptly advised. We
do not send the names of the deputies appointed by the Pisans,
as Niccolo has communicated them in a note to your Lord-.
ships this morning. All these negotiations do not cause us to

180. THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

relax in the least our efforts in this enterprise, which we shall
continue to press until we have the proof in hand that they are
really in earnest, which we are disposed to believe from what
they have said to us in public, and since then to each one of us
in particular, unless, indeed, they are otherwise interfered with,
from which Heaven preserve us! We recommend ourselves to
your Lordships, que bene valeant.

ANTONIO DE FILicasa,

ALAMANNO DE SALVIATI,

NiccoLo CaAPPont,

Commissaries-
General.

From the Camp in the Vat Szrcuio, 20 May, 1509.

——__@—_—_——

LETTER X.

MaGnirFicEnt SIGNORI, ETC. : —

In another letter which I wrote to your Lordships to-day, I
reported all that had taken place here up to that time. Since
then I received, at about the twentieth hour, a letter from Tarla-
tino, in which he informs me that the Pisans have decided to
reduce the number of deputies from the country from eight to
five; and that the country deputies have agreed to it, for they
were made to see that so large a number of deputies from the
country would not be to the honor of those from the city. It has
been definitely decided that the deputation to Florence shall con-
sist of five from the country and four from the city of Pisa; they
are to send here to-morrow for the safe-conduct; and we shall
see now what will come of it. Simone da Pontremoli is here, as
your Lordships know, for the purpose of soliciting Tarlatino,
who has already rid himself of his effects, and as a last de-
mand has asked to take away his bed and other heavy furni-
ture. This desire to take away his bed shows that he intends
going elsewhere to sleep; but it would not be at all astonishing
if he were to delay it for some days; for as these peace nego-
tiations are in progress, he would like to see them concluded or
likely to be concluded, so that your Lordships would be under
some obligation to him in that matter; or to make himself use-
ful to your Lordships in some other way. And if his conduct
is well examined, it will be seen to be natural and reasonable.
I have never considered it otherwise, and do not think so now;

ARMY BEFORE PISA. : 181

but if any one is deceived by it, the error will be natural and
justifiable. Nor would Simone da Pontremoli have come but
for the purpose of having Tarlatino leave Pisa, considering
who sends him, and has given him money and letters; and
considering also how earnestly he intrigues and solicits, as well
as by every letter I receive from Tarlatino, which are all in his
handwriting; and how, whilst near me, he protests that he can
pledge his word but once, and that rather than forfeit that he
would lose his life. These kind of people seem to make great
account of their pledges, and the higher their grade the more
they value their word. But let happen what will, Tarlatino’s
being sent out of Pisa can only be of advantage to you and inju-
rious to the Pisans. And no other means than these could have
been employed to get him out of Pisa; for he will have to get
away by stealth, which he could not do if he were to take all
his effects with him.

The names of the five country deputies that have been finally
appointed are as follows: Ser Tommeo da Calci, Matteo di
Gaddo, Antonio dell’ Oste, or del Zanna, which is the same,
Carlo Bandella, and Tommaso del Malasoma. Of the city depu-
ties a list has already been sent you by Niccolo Capponi. I
have nothing else to communicate to your Lordships.

ANTONIO FILIcAJA,
General. Commiss.
From the Camp near San Jacopo, 21 May, 1509,

LETTER XI.

MaGcniricent SiGNORI, ETC. : —

At this eighteenth hour I receive a letter from your Lord-
ships. Having written you at length only four hours ago, I
have nothing to say in reply to your present letter. The en-
closed I have received from Tarlatino from Pisa. Your Lord-
ships will note what he writes. It seems to me that matters
are progressing; I judge so particularly from what the said
Tarlatino writes to the Signor Muzio, namely, that the ambas-
sadors are to leave Pisa this evening or to-morrow morning.
May it please God that it prove of advantage to our city! When
I come to Florence I shall leave here in my place Rafaello

182 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

Fedini, who is in every way capable of acting as my substitute,
the same as though I were personally present, particularly see-
ing the excellent disposition and good will of the gentlemen
Condottieri; so that your Lordships can safely rely upon him
and have your minds easy. Valete!
Servitor
ALAMANNUS SALVIATUS,
Generalis Commiss.

From the Florentine Camp at San Prero In Grapo,
23 May, 1509.

LETTER XII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

To-day at about the nineteenth hour I was in our intrench-
ments with the nine Pisan ambassadors, and now at this twenty-
fourth hour Il am with them here at San Miniato. I shall leave
here to-morrow morning, and will endeavor to be to-morrow
evening at about the twenty-second hour at Legnaja a Capponi,
according to the instructions in your Lordships’ last letter; and
shall there await your further orders as to the course I am to
pursue. I beg to remind your Lordships to give orders to have
the money for the pay of the regular troops at San Piero by
the 26th, without fail, so as to prevent the occurrence of any
disorders. Valete/ Servitor

ALAMANNUS SALVIATUS,
San Mintato, 24 May, 1509. Generalis Commiss.

LETTER XIII.

Maeniricent SiGNort, ETC. : —

To-night at the fifth hour I received your Lordships’ letter
directing me to be at Florence at dinner-time, and to enter the
city with the Pisan ambassadors, and to conduct them directly
to the lodgings that have been prepared for them. I must ob-
serve to your Lordships, however, that it will not be possible to
take these deputies all the way to Florence without giving them
a meal on the way, for some of them are aged, and some unwell.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 183

And therefore I count upon stopping for refreshments at the
country-seat of Francesco Antinori, and from there to proceed
and make our entry into Florence at about the twentieth hour,
and to take them by the nearest route to San Piero Scherrajo,
where you inform me that their lodgings have been prepared.
Valete !
ALAMANNUS SALVIATUS,
San Minzato, 25 May, 1509. Generalis Commiss.

LETTER XIV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, 10M Oi bom

Having left Florence yesterday together with the six Pisan
ambassadors, we reached here in the evening, too late to proceed
any farther. As this deputation did not seem to me altogether
to the purpose, it was not without some reluctance that I re-
mained with them. Nevertheless, I conversed at length during
the journey with each of them separately, and found them all
well disposed to that degree that some of them declared to me
that they would be willing to leave their own children as hosta-
ges with any one who still mistrusted them; so that, if the facts
correspond to their words, we may say that we are as good as
in Pisa. These six ambassadors have just left for Pisa, it being
now the eleventh hour; and all of them were still in the same
frame of mind. I shall wait now to see what success they will
have, of which your Lordships shall be duly informed; and to
enable me to continue this negotiation more conveniently and
to communicate more freely with your Lordships, I shall estab-
lish myself at Mezzana with Niccolo Capponi, provided my
other colleagues approve of it. I have therefore written to
Capponi to come here to-day, if he thinks well of it, so that we
may all three confer about what has taken place, and come to
an understanding as to the course we are to pursue hereafter
in this negotiation. |

I have nothing more to communicate, and recommend my-
self to your Lordships.

Servus
ALAMANNUS SALVIATUS,
Cascina, 31 May, 1509. Generalis Commiss.

184 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

LETTER XY.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, 1 UU Ora hacen

We have not written to your Lordships since our last of yes-
terday evening, as nothing of interest has transpired since then,
and we were most desirous to be able to report some progress in
this negotiation. This evening an individual came here from
Pisa, and informed us that the country people and the citizens
had been in consultation all day in relation to their respective
interests, and that the former were altogether resolved to con-
clude an arrangement with Florence; and that, to avoid further
sufferings from the effects of the war, they were anxious that
the citizens of Pisa should be of the same mind; but that the
latter, after much debate, wanted to wait until to-morrow before
taking any definite resolution. The country people, thinking
that the citizens merely wanted to delay the matter, told them
that they would not leave until some decision had been arrived
at, and that they had caused the palace gates to be closed until
the matter had been decided, as they would not at any rate
remain any longer in the present situation. In fact, we learn
that they really cannot hold out any longer, and if the hope of
peace were extinguished, one half of the inhabitants of Pisa
would die of hunger, for in that case every one would lock up
what provision yet remained to him. We hope to be able to
communicate something definite to your Lordships to-morrow,
and will see that you are promptly informed.

Tarlatino notified us to-day, in two of his letters, that he
would like to have his accounts settled. The last time, he sent
his accounts to a brother of his, who arrived here to-day. We
have replied, in general terms, that your Lordships were
well disposed towards him; but owing to Antonio’s absence
from here at this time, and not knowing what the end of the
Pisan business would be, we could not make any particular
reply at this moment. We believe that he is thus pressing be-
cause he thinks that the Pisan business is about to be settled ;
and on the other hand being solicited by Simonetto, he would
like before leaving Pisa to have his business disposed of, hop-
ing to have it done on better terms. We could wish that he
were out of Pisa, so that we should not have to pay him any-
thing; and being away from Pisa, he could not interfere with

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 185

our negotiations; as he would be apt to do if he were there,
and perceived that we were putting him off with fine words,
without concluding anything definite. We have written to An-
tonio da Filicaja to have Simonetto continue his solicitations,
and will see now what effect that will produce.

Every day almost the entire population of Pisa would like to
come here, some because they think that peace is already con-
cluded, and others to show that they are our friends. If by
to-morrow the Pisans do not come to some definite determi-
nation, we shall make it known that we shall treat all who come
into our camp as enemies; this will have the effect of spurring
them on to a decision. Meantime, there has been no harm in
having intercourse with some of these wild fellows, as it will
tame them down a little, and soothe their spirits somewhat ;
for we understand that the difficulty lies altogether with but a
few of the citizens, not exceeding twenty-five in number, who
up to the present have prevented the conclusion of peace.

This evening the courier despatched by your Lordships brings
us your letter, from which we note the news of the one hun-
dred and fifty Pisan infantry who have left Lombardy to come
to Pisa. We have given afresh all possible orders to prevent
their coming; and as to Tarlatino and Simonetto, we have
stated above all that has occurred. True, we have at this mo-
ment, it being about the third hour, received letters from An-
tonio saying that Tarlatino had applied to him for a safe-
conduct for himself and such Pisans as he may take with him,
and that they intend to leave to-morrow, and he asks our ad-
vice upon this matter. We have answered him to give the safe-
conduct to Tarlatino and the Pisans whom he may take with
him, provided they are able-bodied soldiers; and that, should
Tarlatino ask for any compensation, to say to him that he will
have to confer with us upon that point.

I, Niccolo, beg to remind your Lordships of the pay of Dac-
cio and Gattamelata, it being thirty-six days since they have
received any money. Valete /

ALAMANNO SALVIATI, ) Commis.
NIccOLO CAPPONI, General.

From the Camp at Mezzana, 1 June, fourth hour of night, 1509.

186 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

LETTER XVI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last letter to your Lordships was of yesterday, and I
therein said all that had occurred up to that moment. <A very
little while after that, I received letters from Alamanno Salviati
dated at Cascina, in which he informs me that he had sent a
portion of the ambassadors back to Pisa to examine and _ per-
fect the articles of agreement that had been sketched out at
Florence; and that he intended afterwards to go to Mezzana
and remain there, it being a convenient place for the Pisans in
case they should wish to communicate with us upon any point;
and equally convenient for us three commissaries, if there
should be any occasion for our meeting together. Accordingly
I went to Mezzana, and was there informed by Alamanno of all
that had been done at Florence with the Pisan ambassadors, in
relation to which I have nothing to observe. We must now
await the issue of this business. I learn that, on the return
of these ambassadors to Pisa, they were received by the multi-
tude with great demonstrations of joy; after which they pro-
ceeded to the palace, accompanied by a number of the first
citizens, to examine the articles of agreement. Orders were
given for the assembling of the Council to-day, for the purpose
of finally perfecting those articles, which, may it please God,
will soon relieve us of all further anxiety. We have not heard
anything here of the news given by the captain of Fivizzano,
and yet, according to the orders given, we ought to have heard
something about it. We have not, and shall not abate our
vigilance by day or night in accordance with orders given on
that point.

Nothing else occurs to me to write about, except to recom-
mend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

ANTONIO DE FILICAJA,
From the Camp, 1 June, 1509. General. Commiss.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 187

LETTER XVII.

Macniricent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

We wrote to your Lordships yesterday, at the fourth hour of
night, and reported all that had transpired up to that moment.
This morning, at the first hour and a half of the day, a messen-
ger arrived with letters from Tarlatino, informing us that the
ambassadors, who had returned from Florence, had referred
the question respecting the troops to us three commissaries ;
and that the troops had deputed him, together with four of
their number, to come here and settle that matter with us.
Judging that these soldiers wanted to press the settlement of
their case before it should become known what resolution had
been taken in council, so as to obtain more favorable conditions,
we have detained Tarlatino’s messenger here, on the ground
that, before replying to him, we wished to know what had been
decided in council yesterday. Whilst thus temporizing, Andrea
de Pucerello, brother of Filippo, arrives, at this sixteenth hour,
toinform us on the part of Filippo that the ambassadors are
hastening here to bring us the resolution of the acceptance of
the agreement, and that everything was settled. We have
deemed it proper to send this information to your Lordships by
a mounted messenger, so that you may know, from hand to
hand, how matters stand. We shall endeavor to do the best
we possibly can in the matter between your Lordships and
Tarlatino and the troops, and will inform you of all with the
utmost despatch. All that we write now is founded upon the
information sent us by the said Andrea. We shall, however,
report again so soon as we learn the particulars from the am-
bassadors, and will immediately after their arrival despatch a
mounted messenger to your Lordships.

ALAMANNUS SALVIATUS, ) Commissarii
NICOLAUS CAPPONEUS, Generales,

From the Florentine Camp at Mrzzana,
2 June, 1509, at the 15th hour.

188 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

LETTER XVIII.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

The last letter I have from your Lordships is of the 30th
ultimo, since which I have not heard from you. Yesterday all
three of us met at the camp at Mezzana, together with the
Pisan ambassadors, with whom we conferred at length in rela-
tion to the treaty of peace; they concluded by telling us that
they were going to Florence to ratify the treaty. Alamanno
goes with them, and we will inform your Lordships fully of all
particulars.

Nothing further occurs to me to say on the subject, except to
urge promptness, for in the present position of things all delay
will be of more advantage to the Pisans than to us. And yet
it will be difficult to prevent this altogether, for I am sure there
were yesterday not less than three hundred Pisans in the camp
at Mezzana; and, if I had not kept our troops on the trenches
this morning, so as to prevent persons from passing, the camp
would actually have been filled with Pisans, who would all have
returned to the city after having been well fed.

The time for paying the regular infantry falls on the 5th of
this month. On the same day comes due the pay of the Signori
Francesco dal Monte, Gianotto da Carda, Giannone da Libra-
fatta, and Auzino. And although the peace negotiations are
drawing to a close yet until they are definitely concluded I
deem it proper to remind your Lordships of the pay due the
infantry; for on the one hand the Pisans are still with their
ears erect, and on the other hand, if these troops are not paid
on the very day,they become at once turbulent. Your Lord-
ships can best judge of the result, and give such orders as the
case demands.

Nothing else occurs to me to say at present, except to recom-
mend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

ANTONIUS DE FILicasa,

From the Camp near San Jacopo, Commiss. Generalis.
this 2d day of June, 1509.

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 189

LETTER XIX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

This evening I have your Lordships’ letter, dated this morn-
ing at the fifteenth hour. As Alamanno with the Pisan ambas-
sadors will have arrived at Florence, it is not necessary for me
to say anything on that subject. A great crowd of men came
here yesterday from Pisa, and, as they came so freely and
showed so much good will, we felt that we could not refuse to
allow them to take a little bread away with them. It was the
same to-day, but they did not come in such numbers, nor did
we allow them to carry away so much bread with them; to-
morrow I shall restrict them still more, but always with kind
words, and shall not allow them to come into the camp nor to
carry anything away with them. But your Lordships can well
imagine that this cannot be done without the greatest difficulty,
as Alamanno will be able to explain to you; but matters are in
that state that we must very soon see the end. The regular
troops received their pay on the 25th, but Duccio and Gattame-
lata have not had theirs for thirty-seven days now; your Lord-
ships will please, therefore, to provide the money for it.

At the time of destroying the harvest, I informed your Lord-
ships of the death of several horses belonging to Giovanni
Capoccia and two other men-at-arms of the Signor Mare Anto-
nio; and as this destroying of the harvest had been a most
laborious and perilous work, I suggested that it would be well
for your Lordships to treat these men with some little con-
sideration, and in reply you directed me to let Capoccia and
the others who had lost their horses know that your Lordships
were disposed to make them some compensation. I have
waited until now to remind your Lordships of this, so as to see
whether there might not be some others who had suffered simi-
lar losses. The destruction of the crops being accomplished, I
have thought proper now to bring this matter to the notice of
your Lordships, as I had told these men of your Lordships’ in-
tention. The horse of Giovanni Capoccia was the best he had,
and was worth a hundred ducats; the other two were worth
together sixty to eighty ducats. I recommend this matter to
your Lordships so as to encourage the others, for your Lord-
ships know well that when a man loses a horse of such value
he is undone.

190 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

Nothing more at present, except to recommend myself to
your Lordships.

From the Florentine Camp at Mrzzana,
3 June, 1509, 4th hour of night.

P. 8. Although I believe that your Lordships will liberate
all the Pisan prisoners when the treaty goes into effect, yet I
desire much to have special instructions as to whether the
brother of Alfonso is to be treated the same as the others.

NICCOLAUS CAPPONEUS,
Commiss. Generalis.

P.S. I suppose that when we enter Pisa your Lordships.
will want to rebuild the citadel as soon as possible; and we
must therefore think of providing the necessary materials, more
particularly lime, which is not to be had in this country except-
ing at the one kiln at Vico. I have ordered some burned there ;
still it seems to me advisable that your Lordships should order
some to be prepared, so that no time need be lost.

eee

LETTER XX.

MaGniricent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday, and although I am sure
that it is unnecessary to remind your Lordships, yet I deem it
well to urge you to finish what is to be arranged with those
ambassadors ; for such is the necessity of the Pisans, and such
their confidence in your Lordships’ good intentions towards
_ them, and in the certainty that the treaty is concluded, that I
cannot prevent their continually coming into camp and carrying
off something from here. I have put guards at all the passages ;
bnt good words have no longer any effect, and 1 do not think it
well to employ harsh ones just at the moment when matters are
on the point of being closed. I shall of course do my best to |
restrain them and to prevent them from carrying things away,
but I await with eagerness the news that everything is settled
at Florence. I have nothing further to write, except to recom-
mend myself to your Lordships.

NICCOLAUS CAPPONEUS,
Commiss. Generalis.
From the Florentine Camp at Mrzzana, 4 June, 1509,

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 191

LETTER XXI.

MaeniFicEent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last to your Lordships was of yesterday, in which I re-
ported all I had to say. Last night I received your Lord-
ships’ letter through the hands of Niccolo Capponi addressed
to us jointly, to which I have no reply to make, other than that
I am executing and ever shall continue to execute all your Lord-
ships’ orders. I would now reiterate with the utmost respect
what I wrote yesterday, to urge your Lordships to make every
effort to close with the Pisan ambassadors; for, as matters now
stand, everything is of advantage to the Pisans and adverse to
us; and although it is generally said that the Pisans, and par-
ticularly the inhabitants of the city, are most favorable to the
conclusion of peace, yet I can assure your Lordships that there
are some crooked sticks left amongst them. At the last meet-
ing in council, when the return of the ambassadors to Florence
was decided upon, there was great difficulty to bring this
about; and had it not been for the country people who were
at the meeting of the council, they would have broken up and
left the palace in anger. And it is not without reason that
they watch most diligently to prevent letters from leaving or
coming into the city. These facts have been communicated
to me by a man of good character, and who desires to see the
treaty concluded.

In reminding your Lordships yesterday of the pay of the
infantry, I omitted to mention with the others Bernardino da
Carrara, who is at Librafatta, and whose pay falls due at the
same time as that of the other constables. Your Lordships -
will act in this matter according to the decision you may ar-
rive at with the Pisan ambassadors; a prompt conclusion will
be a great saving of money. I have nothing else to write,
except to recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene
valeant.

ANTONIO DE FILIcAJa,

Commiss. General.
From the Camp near San Jacopo, 4 June, 1509.

192 THIRD COMMISSION TO THE

LETTER XXII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

All three of us have met here in the camp at Mezzana, and
have ordered all our Condottieri to come here to devise the
mode of entering Pisa, how we are to maintain ourselves there,
what garrison we shall have to establish, etc., ete. We will
advise your Lordships in another letter of the result of our de-
liberations. I, Alamanno, left San Miniato this morning, and
on arriving at Cascina I sent from there by the direct road
those of the ambassadors who came with me, and who with
such cheerful mien expressed themselves so well satisfied with
all that had been done as actually to increase our favorable dis-
position towards them; Niccolo Machiavelli reports the same of
those who came with him. They lodged last night at Cascina,
and were to arrive at Pisa this morning at sunrise. It is now
about the eighteenth hour, but we have not yet heard from
Pisa what they have done in public. True, some three or four
hours ago several Pisan citizens came here, and assured us that
the ambassadors had made the most favorable report in pri-
vate, but that they had not yet spoken in public. So soon as
we hear anything further we will immediately write to your,
Lordships; we send these present lines merely that you may
not unnecessarily be kept in suspense, and that you may know
how matters stand at this hour.

We have also learned, thanks be to God, that Tarlatino has
left Pisa, and gone in the direction of Lucca, to go from there to
Lombardy. We are anxiously awaiting a supply of bread, which
of all things is most needed. We have nothing more to say at
this moment, but recommend ourselves to your Lordships.

From the Florentine Camp at Muzzana,
6 June, 18th hour and a half, 1509.

P. S. At this moment we receive your Lordships’ letter of
this morning, sent by an express messenger, and can only say
in reply that we shall conform with all possible diligence to all
the orders your Lordships may send us.

We shall carefully watch the soldiers, as well as all others
who may enter Pisa, and shall hasten the entrance into Pisa
either in the way in which your Lordships indicate, or in any

ARMY BEFORE PISA. 193

other possible way. We learn from a person just from there,

that the Council is assembling in the utmost haste, and nearly

the entire population of Pisa is rushing to the meeting.
ANTONIUS DE FILIcAaga,
ALAMANNUS SALVIATUS,
NICOLAUS CAPPONEUS,

Commiss.
Generales.

LETTER XXIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Yesterday evening I received a letter from your Lordships,
and to-night I have another. In reply I can only say that I
am expecting Alamanno to dinner and that Antonio will be
here after dinner, and should anything of interest occur I will
immediately inform your Lordships. The three ambassadors
could not reach Pisa last night, but stopped at Cascina, whence
they were to start at an early hour this morning. I firmly
believe that they will expedite matters to-day so that we may
enter into Pisa to-morrow; for if they are well disposed, there
will be no difficulties.

It has been impossible for the past two days to restrain the
people of Pisa, and prevent their coming into our camp; and
we on our part, in view of the certainty of the conclusion of
peace, defend ourselves the best way we can from their eager
attentions. Tarlatino left Pisa this morning, and has gone
towards Lucca. I have nothing further to write except to
recommend myself to your Lordships.

NICOLAUS CAPPONEUS,
: Commiss. Generalis.

From the Florentine Camp, 6 June, 1509.

LETTER XXIV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, JUAN OAR ere
We wrote to your Lordships to-day at the twenty-first hour
all that had occurred up to that time. Since then, at about the
twenty-third hour, Messer Francesco del Lante and Ser Tom-
mio da Calsi arrived here, and told us that they had come to
VOL. IV. 13

194. COMMISSION TO THE ARMY BEFORE PISA.

signify to us that immediately on their arrival in Pisa, and
after having informed their Priors of the terms of the treaty,
which were satisfactory to them as well as to all who had
heard them, they had endeavored to assemble their Council
with as many adjuncts as possible, so that this business, which
concerns every one, might be confirmed by every one; but that
with all their efforts they had not been able to get as many
together as they desired to have; for very many of them were
busy in getting their houses in order to receive us and our
troops; and a portion of the country people had gone out to
work in the fields and attend to other business. Thus they
had been obliged to put off the meeting for the approval of
the treaty until to-morrow ; but that at the first hour of night
they would have notice published for the meeting of the general
Council to-morrow morning; and that they would not have the
city gates opened to-morrow until after the Council had assem-
bled. They have promised to bring us the ratification to-morrow
before dinner, and seemed delighted to have found those persons
pleased and well disposed who until now had been very differ-
ently disposed. We fully believe that they will come to-morrow
according to their promise; and we shall sce to it that we get
possession to-morrow of the whole or part of the state, making
ourselves masters of the artillery and of some strong positions
in the city, of which we shall notify your Lordships successively.
The gentlemen Condottieri have met to-day for the object
mentioned in our letter of the 18th, and have concluded that it
will be necessary at first to keep a garrison of not less than
one thousand men in Pisa; and for this purpose we shall keep
six hundred of the regular infantry, and the other four hun-
dred of the troops under the old constables.
We have nothing further to write at present, except to recom-

mend ourselves to your Lordships.

ANTONIUS DE FILICAJA,

ALAMANNUS SALVIATUS,

NiIcoLaus CAPPONEUS,

ommiss.
Generales.

From the Florentine Camp at Mrzzana,
6 June, 4th hour of night, 1509.*

* The Florentines entered Pisa on the 8th of June, 1509. The letter of the
Commissaries giving an account of their entrance has not been found with the
others given above. A full account of the surrender of Pisa, and of the extrem-
ity to which the inhabitants had been reduced, will be found in the eighth book
of Guicciardini’s History, and in Biagio Buonaccorsi’s Journal, page 14.

MISSION TO MANTUA

ON BUSINESS WITH THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.*

COMMISSION

GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI TO PROCEED TO MANTUA AND
ITS VICINITY,

RESOLVED UPON ON THE 10TH NovEMBER, 1509.

NiccoLo, — You will proceed to Mantua, accompanied by two
or three mounted men, bearing the sum of money due on the
payment we have to make in that city to the Emperor, or his
legitimate representative, for the second term or second pay-
ment of the amount which we have engaged ourselves to pay
according to the treaty lately made with his Majesty. It is
important that all of you, or at least yourself, should travel

* After the fatal League of Cambray against the republic of Venice, the soil
of Italy was overrun, in the spring of 1509, by foreign armies, who from the first
had easy victories. But the Emperor Maximilian was less fortunate than the
other members of the league; for although his troops succeeded at the first rush
in taking Padua and Treviso, yet these cities soon freed themselves from this
new domination, and returned to their submission to the Venetians. When the
Emperor thereupon crossed the Alps in person, he began at once to molest the
Italian states with demands for money ; and, most naturally, the first called upon
was the republic of Florence, who sent ambassadors to the Emperor at Verona,
and concluded a treaty with him. By the articles of this treaty the Emperor
obligates himself to guarantee to the republic of Florence all her possessions,
and pledges himself not to disturb the actual government of Florence nor the
liberties of the state, nor permit his generals to do so. The Florentines, on the
other hand, obligate themselves to pay the Emperor the sum of forty thousand
ducats, in four instalments: the first, in the course of the month of October;
the second, on the 25th of November, which is the present one, to which this
mission relates; the third, in the course of January; and the fourth and last,
in February. See Buonaccorsi’s Diary, p. 144, and Guicciardini, Lib. VIII.

Having to make the second payment of ten thousand ducats in the middle
of November at Mantua, the Signoria of Florence commissioned Machiavelli to
proceed there for that purpose, giving him the following instructions.

196 MISSION TO MANTUA.

so as to arrive there on the 14th, or at latest the 15th, of the
present month. To enable you to transact this business the
more easily, you will be the bearer of a letter of credence to
the most illustrious Marchioness, to whom you will relate all
that may have happened to you, after having first thanked her
in the most grateful manner for all the good offices and kind-
ness which she has shown to our ambassadors, enlarging upon
this as fully as you may think suitable.

Some one will by that time have arrived in Mantua, who is
duly empowered to receive the payment in question; and for
your fuller information as to the course you will have to pur-
sue, you must know that out of the whole amount one thou-
sand ducats will have to be paid to Lante Bonifazio da Sarego,
a gentleman from Verona, as provided by the terms of the
treaty. All the rest is to be paid to the person sent by the
Emperor to receive it. But as the matter is very generally
known, it will be necessary for you to use every care and pre-
caution to know and legitimize the person to whom you have
to pay the money. You will have no great difficulty upon this
point with regard to Bonifazio; but whoever comes on behalf
of his Majesty the Emperor must be provided with proper and
sufficient credentials. The individual who came to receive the
first payment was thus provided with a royal commission au-
thorizing the payment to be made to him; and the same ought
to be the case on the present occasion. We desire you to take
an acquittance from the individual himself to whom the money
is paid, which must be properly attested; and moreover, we
want you to have both payments formally acknowledged as
public acts, as was done with regard to the first payment. Gio-
yanni Borromei, at whose house you will probably alight, will
be able to procure for you the services of the same notary.
After having made the payments, you will send back to us the
acquittances and other documents by the same mounted men
that accompanied you to Mantua, reporting to us at the same
time all that you may be able to learn respecting the Emperor’s
affairs, and especially everything relating to his Italian enter-
prise. After that you will proceed to Verona, or to wherever it
may seem most convenient to you to obtain more precise infor-
mation on the subject, and to communicate the same to us;
and you must not leave that region until you receive orders
from us, for, being once there on account of the payments, your

MISSION TO MANTUA. 197

presence will be less noted than if we were to send some one
else there. During your stay in the different places, and which
it would be well to change from day to day, as occasion may
require, you will write to us carefully and regularly all that
may occur worthy of notice; but so as to avoid all danger that
might result therefrom, you will send your letters by the regu-
lar courier. We would also recommend to you and the afore-
mentioned mounted men, that you move with great care and
circumspection, and with as little display as possible.

You will also be the bearer of a letter of credence to the
Right Reverend Monsignore di Gursa in connection with those
payments, or any other matter where you may need him. You
may present that letter to him either before or after the pay-
ments are made, according as you may find necessary. And
finally you will take with you a copy of the above-mentioned
royal commission, so that you may know the form in which the
present one will have to be drawn up and signed.

The person to whom the first payment was made was one of
his Majesty’s secretaries by the name of Wolfgang Hemerle, a
man of small stature, thirty to thirty-two years old, somewhat
stout, with red beard and hair slightly curled. The notary
who drew up the documents respecting the first payment was
Ser Gabriello, son of Ser Bartolommeo d@’ Albo of Mantua; he
could draw up the present papers the same as the first, of which
we furnish you a copy. The only alteration necessary will be
to state that this is for the second payment.

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUSTRIOUS SIGNORI, ETC. :—

I arrived here all safe on Thursday the 15th, and on the
same day came Pigello Portinari, and with him Messer Anti-
maco, who was formerly secretary of the Marquis, but having
been dismissed by him he has now become the Emperor’s fac-
totum. This same Messer Antimaco had an imperial commis-
sion to receive the payment, and therefore yesterday after
dinner I counted out to him nine thousand ducats, and have
now in my possession the imperial letter and an acquittance
from the hands of Messer Antimaco; and a properly attested

198 MISSION TO MANTUA.

document of the whole transaction has been drawn up by the
same notary who drew up the documents relating to the first
payment. With Messer Antimaco there came a young man
from Verona, who claimed the one thousand ducats which your
Lordships’ commission directs me to pay. But as he had no
mandate nor letter of any kind from the principal party, and
nothing but the guaranty of Messer Antimaco, I declined to
pay it to him, and told him to go back for a proper mandate,
and that then I would pay him; he agreed to do so, saying that
he would return here to-day. I shall wait for him here, and
when I get all the acquittances of these payments I will send
them to your Lordships, according to your instructions, by one
of the mounted men. If I could have made all the payments
yesterday and sent you the acquittances, etc., I would have de-
spatched them with this and with the enclosed letters from
Francesco Pandolfini, which Giovanni Borromei, by his par-
ticular instructions, sends to you in all haste by one of the
mounted men. And in that case I should have gone with Mes-
ser Antimaco and Pigello to meet the Emperor; but not having
been able to make both the payments, and my commission not
permitting me to do so at any other place, I remained here;
and so soon as I shall have accomplished all, I will send you
the documents, and then go to join the Emperor, whom Messer
Antimaco told me he left on the 12th at Rovere, whence he
was to proceed to Bassano, a town some twenty-five miles from
Verona towards Friuli. He also told me, that the Emperor
with a large army intended to attack the Venetians from
that side, whilst the attempt upon Lignago would have to be
made from the opposite direction, and that he himself would
have to remain here some days for the purpose of ordering and
buying certain necessaries for the enterprise, with a portion of
the funds received in payment. And finally he told me that
the Emperor had renewed his intimate relations with the king
of France, and had sent him a solemn and honorable embassy.
Whilst thus conversing with Messer Antimaco he talked to me
in the grandest manner about the affairs of the Emperor.
Afterwards, at about the twenty-second hour, whilst we were
engaged in counting the money, a mounted messenger arrived
from the Bishop of Trent, who, as your Lordships know, is the
governor of Verona, bearing letters to Messer Antimaco, who
after having read them approached me together with Pigello,

MISSION TO MANTUA. 199

and told me that he had received information that Vicenza had
revolted the day before, and that the Venetians had marched
into the city ; in consequence of which he had been ordered to
proceed as soon as possible with the money to Verona. He
gave me no further particulars, but when I went out, after hay-
ing completed the payments, I found that the news was already
known all over the place, but that the reports of the affair
varied materially. Some said that all the troops that were in
Vicenza had been stripped, and that Fracassa and the Marquis
of Brandenburg had been made prisoners. Others said that the
people, having risen in arms, had by common accord sent all
the troops away without doing them any harm. It has been
impossible for me to learn the real truth. I presume that
Francesco Pandolfini will have given you more correct accounts
of this affair in the letter which he despatched to you in such
haste. Many apprehend that Verona may follow the example
of Vicenza, and seem to think that, if she does not do so, it
will be out of respect for the French, who are near by and
hold some excellent fortresses that may prove very strong
when properly supplied with munitions, ete.

This is all I am able to tell your Lordships at the present in
relation to this matter, but so soon as I shall get to a place
where I can obtain more full and reliable information, I will
communicate it to your Lordships. I called yesterday morn-
ing to pay my respects to the Marchioness, but found that she
rises late and gives no audience before dinner. I could not go
again in the afternoon, as I was occupied until night with those
payments, but will try anyhow to see her to-day.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Mantua, 17 November, 1509.

I do not send one of my mounted men with this, as I want
one of them to carry the acquittances, etc. to you, and shall
require the other to remain with me here in case I shall have
to go farther.

Servus

NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

200 MISSION TO MANTUA.

LETTER II.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. :—

I counted upon making the payment of the one thousand
ducats to-day, and then to send your Lordships the acquittances
and documents relating to both the payments; but Bonifazio’s
agent came back this evening from Verona, and brought a man-
date so badly drawn up that our notary declared it insufficient
for the payments to be made under it, or to enable him to draw
up a properly attested notarial act of the transaction. Thus it
had to be sent back to Verona for rectification. Seeing this
fresh delay, I concluded to send Ardingo with the acquittance
for the nine thousand ducats paid to Messer Antimaco, as re-
ported to you in my letter of yesterday, which is herewith en-
closed, as also the letter of the Emperor commissioning Messer
Antimaco to receive the payment, and the acquittance from
Messer Antimaco’s own hand, and also the notarial act attest-
ing the said payment to have been made, drawn up by the same
notary who attested the first payment made by the ambassa-
dors. Messer Antimaco declined to say in his acquittance that
it relates to the second payment, although I urged it very
much; he says that he had no knowledge of the first payment,
and cannot refer to it upon the assurance of others, but he was
willing to say in the acquittance that it was for a payment due
to his Imperial Majesty in the month of November. In the
notarial act, however, it is distinctly stated and several times
repeated, that it relates to the second term and payment. I
shall wait here until day after to-morrow to pay the one thou-
sand ducats to the Veronese; after that I shall take Zerino
with me and leave for Verona, unless something special should
occur to prevent me. I shall leave the acquittance and the
notarial act with Luigi Guicciardini, with instructions to take
them with him to Florence and deliver them to your Lordships.

To-day I had an audience of the Marchioness, and thanked
her in your Lordships’ name for the honorable reception given
to your ambassadors, adding all I thought proper in offering
her your services, etc. She replied in the most gracious man-
ner, thanking your Lordships a thousand times; and then,
referring to the events at Vicenza, she told me that she had not
yet received any particulars; that it was reported that the

MISSION TO MANTUA. 201

troops and servants of the Emperor had been sent away from
there without any other harm; but that nothing had been heard
yet from any other quarter. We learn from Verona that the
Bishop of Trent has put some fifteen hundred Spaniards in the
different forts, and that the houses were being marked for
quartering French troops in the city. No one knows what
course things are likely to take there, for on the one hand it
is believed that the Veronese are greatly disposed to imitate
the Vicenzians, and on the other hand it seems probable that
they will be restrained by the forts and by the presence of the
French. And yet it happens sometimes that the people are
governed by their will, regardless of the results that may flow
from it; and in this instance such is likely to be the case if
the Emperor is really at Trent as is reported. Here, it is
said that he will go to Botzen to convoke a Diet there; I do
not mention this as absolutely certain, but it was stated to me
by a person just from Verona as a thing likely to occur.

Giovanni Borromei thought he would have found some one to
carry the letters which Francesco Pandolfini had charged him
to forward ; but being disappointed, he has concluded now that
Ardingo will do it as well as any other who has but one horse ;
and therefore he has given him four ducats on condition that
he shall reach Florence in two days and a half. Your Lord-
ships will please to reimburse this amount to Lionardo Nasi,
and also to reimburse the said Lionardo one and three quarters
florins gold, which I have paid to the notary for drawing up the
document which I send you.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, quae bene valeant.

Mantua, 18 November, 1509.

N. B. Your Lordships will please also pay Lionardo Nisi
half a ducat which Giovanni Borromei has paid to the mes-
senger who brought him the letter of Francesco Pandolfini,
according to his orders.

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

202 MISSION TO MANTUA.

LETTER III.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

The courier Ardingo left here yesterday morning with my let-
ters to your Lordships of the 17th and 18th, in which I reported
all that occurred to me of interest; he was the bearer, also, of
all the documents relating to the payment of the nine thousand
ducats. JI write these lines merely because Giovanni Borromei
is sending a special messenger to Florence by order of Francesco
Pandolfini, and I was not willing to let him go without a line
from me, although I have nothing new to write beyond what I
have already reported. I expect the young man from Verona
to-day to receive the thousand ducats; and after having made
that payment I shall mount my horse and proceed myself to
Verona, so as to be on the spot where all the hes originate, or
rather where it rains les, which abound even more at court
than in the public square. This morning it was said, and
positively affirmed everywhere, that the Emperor had entered
Padua, whilst the Venetians were leaving it to go to Vicenza.
As already said, so soon as I shall have paid over the thousand
ducats I shall go to Verona, or wherever I can be near the Em-
peror, provided the roads are passable. 1 have nothing further
to say, except to recommend myself to your Lordships.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Mantua, 20 November, 1509. Secret.
———o—_—_—__—
LETTER IV.

MaGniricent SiGNORI, ETC. : —

It was yesterday, and not the day before, that I left Mantua,
and arrived here. I made the payment of the thousand ducats,
and left the acquittance together with the power of attorney and
the notarial act of the transaction with Luigi Guicciardini, with
instructions to deliver them to your Lordships on his return to
Florence unless he received different orders from your Lordships.
The Emperor is at present at Acci, a few miles the other side
of Roveredo; and it is reported that he has ordered a levy of

MISSION TO MANTUA. 203

one man per hearth in the Tyrol, with which he intends to come
to the assistance of this city. His Majesty is expected here
from day to day, and therefore I did not go any farther; more-
over, the roads are not by any means safe, for only to-day the
Venetians captured ten horsemen on the road leading to Chiusi,
who were going to join the Emperor. I intend to wait for him
here, where it is likely he will remain during the whole of this
war. The state of things in this city is as follows: the gentle-
men, feeling themselves guilty, are not adherents of St. Mark,
but the citizens and the populace are altogether Venetian; and
yet with all this, the day when the Venetians retook Vicenza
things looked quite favorable; for at the very moment when
the loss of that city became known, a fight occurred amongst
some Spaniards in the public square which caused the whole
city to take to arms, and reports were spread that the Venctians
had entered the city. Nevertheless, none of the citizens left
their houses, and no ugly demonstrations were made. There
are within the city several posts that are garrisoned, which, if
properly supplied, are strong enough to make a long resistance.
The garrison consists of German infantry, but altogether does
not amount to a thousand men. There are, moreover, some
8,500 other infantry, partly Spanish and partly Italian, and
about 1,000 to 1,200 cavalry. You must bear in mind that all
the German infantry and cavalry have left here, except a small
force that is with the Bishop; there remain here some 1,000 or
1,200 Burgundian cavalry, and those Italians whom the Bishop
had in his pay. There are, moreover, some 400 French horse
here, that were sent here by the Grand Master on the loss of
Vicenza; and to-day there arrived some 150 cavalry under
command of acertain Count Giovan Francesco da Bergamo,
also sent here by the Grand Master.

The Venetians have established their camp at San Martino,
some five miles from here, where they are reported to have
some five thousand paid infantry, and a large number of enraged
peasants, besides all their cavalry. These have scoured the
country all day to-day, and have destroyed the roads, so that I
was most fortunate in having come here yesterday instead of
to-day. Itis supposed that the Venetians will have to make
great efforts to obtain possession of this town; they are roving
through the neighborhood to sound the disposition of the people,
and watching to see whether some disturbances may not arise

204 MISSION TO MANTUA.

in the town that will afford them a chance to get inside. It
is supposed that when they see that all this is of no use, they
will come with their artillery, for they know that they will have
to fight the soldiers that are in the place; although the people,
if they have not shown themselves friendly to them, have at the
same time shown no sign of being hostile. If they do not
attack the place this evening, they will not delay it beyond
Sunday, inasmuch as they cannot afford to lose any time;
and unless they take this place, it will be of little advantage to
them to take Vicenza; but having Verona would enable them
at the same time to close the pass to the French and to the
Germans, which Vicenza would not enable them to do. It is
said, moreover, that the latter city is so feeble that they can
retake it with the same facility with which it was taken by the
Venetians. The inhabitants of the place, who have no desire
to change masters, and the Germans, have placed all their
hopes upon the French, and say nothing more about help from
Germany. But they say that the Grand Master is coming here
in person, and that he has given orders to Messer Jacopo to
advance with all the men-at-arms which the King has in Lom-
bardy, and that he has raised a body of volunteers and engaged.
ten thousand Swiss to come down from their mountains, and
that with all these forces he will promptly retake Vicenza, and
push the Venetian army back into the Gulf. Your Lordships
can learn through Francesco Pandolfini whether all these prep-
arations are really true.

I have been told here that the Grand Master has sent these
few troops here merely to give the inhabitants the hope of
assistance; and that he has at the same time despatched a
messenger to the King (who ought to be back in nine days)
to learn how his Majesty wanted him to act under the circum-
stances. It is not known what course the King may intend to
take, and whether he may not prefer to recover what has been
lost for himself, rather than defend the possessions of others.
But this pass is of the greatest importance and value to any
one that wants to carry on a foreign war.

This morning I had an audience of the Bishop, and explained
to him the object of my coming here, and that | should remain
here some time, etc. He expressed himself much pleased to
see me, and praised highly your Lordships’ fidelity to your en-
gagements in making the payments, etc. I have been told

MISSION TO MANTUA. 205

privately by a trustworthy person, that, if Verona is this day
in the possession of the Emperor, it is due to the nine thousand
ducats, and that he will always acknowledge it. I hope your
Lordships will take note of this, so that you may be able to
remind him of it in future times, in case circumstances should
change; for it is really true, as I have been told, and as I now
write to you.

Ido not send Zerino, for I do not think it well for me to
remain here with only Marcone. True, I spend more than the
one ducat per day that is allowed me as salary; nevertheless,
as in the past, so shall I be in the future always satisfied with
whatever your Lordships may be disposed to do for me. I rec-
ommend myself to your Lordships.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Verona, 22 November, 1509. Secret.
——$_@—_—__—_—
LETTER VY.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Day before yesterday, which was the 22d, I wrote to your
Lordships all I had been able to learn up to that time in rela-
tion to matters here; I sent that letter to Giovanni Borromei,
at Mantua, but having resolved this morning to send the cou-
rier Zerino back to Florence, I have ordered him to see Gio-
vanni at Mantua and get my letter from him and take it himself
to Florence; and assuming it to have reached you safely, I do
not repeat what I wrote in that letter.

The Venetian army, which, as I stated in my last, had been
encamped at San Martino, some five miles from here, withdrew
from there yesterday and moved in the direction of Vicenza.
They say that this was done because they did not see that any
movement whatever was being made here; and that they did
not advance farther out of consideration for the French. And
although, as I said in my last, the French were but few in num-
ber, yet the Venetians did not want to open actual hostilities
against a place where the French were, as they did not wish to
irritate the King, and thus cause him to push his enterprise
against them with greater vigor. No one is bold enough to

{

206 MISSION TO MANTUA.

venture even a conjecture as to what the result of all this is going
to be. It is true, it is known that the king of France is very
desirous of having this city, and that many of the citizens and
gentlemen are equally willing that he should have it, and that
the Emperor does not seem sufficiently strong at this time
either to defend or guard the city; things cannot therefore re-
main long as they are, for in a very short time the people here
will die of hunger unless the French help them with provis-
ions as well as with arms. How these two sovereigns will
arrange matters between them can only be judged of by events ;
nothing is heard of any negotiations here. Your Lordships may
be able to obtain more light on the subject from Francesco
Pandolfini.

As I have already written, the Emperor is at Acci, a short
distance from Roveredo, where it is said he is waiting to raise
troops with which to come here; and had it not been for this
trouble at Vicenza, he would now be at Innspruck. It is quite
possible that the retreat of the Venetians may induce him to
undertake this journey for some good purpose, of which, how-
ever, nothing is known, although his Majesty is expected here
hourly with his troops. Unless otherwise ordered I shall not
leave here, for where the Emperor now is he does not want any
ambassador or any one else near him. Thus the French and
Aragonese ambassadors who were with him have been sent
back to Trent, where they now are. I believe that, for the pur-
pose of fully understanding all these manceuvres, it is better
for me to remain here than to go to Trent. One thing only
could induce me to go there, and that would be the hope of
securing those privileges which the Emperor promised under
the treaty, and which have not yet been obtained. But as
your Lordships did not say anything to me about it when I left
Florence, nor have written to me since on that subject, I do not
know whether it would be well or otherwise for me now to
claim them. I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene
valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Verona, 24 November, 1509. Secret.

Messer Pigello asks to remind your Lordships of his services,
and his affairs in Rome.

MISSION TO MANTUA. 207

LETTER VI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Since my arrival here I have written twice to your Lord-
ships, on the 22d and 24th, which Zerino will have delivered
to you. Nothing of moment has occurred since then, unless it
be that this place is every day becoming more and more filled
with troops. One thousand Gascons arrived yesterday from
Peschiera; and to-day two hundred men-at-arms arrived, also
French; and a large number of infantry and cavalry are re-
ported at Peschiera, which are to come here within a couple of
days under command of the Grand Master, at which time the
Emperor is also expected; and it is said that after these arri-
vals the army will move forward to avenge the sins of Vicenza.
The soldiers are eagerly looking forward to this move, in the
hopes of plunder; for the weakness of the place promises great
gain, with little fatigue and even less danger. We do not hear
that the Venetians have fortified the place, or that they have
made any other extraordinary provision, but are established
with their troops in certain little castles around the city. The
soldiers here are occupying themselves with plundering and
ravaging the country around, and we see and hear daily of the
most unexampled and extraordinary things, so that the minds
of the country people are filled with a desire for death and
vengeance, and they have become more obstinate and furious
against the enemies of the Venetians than ever the Jews were
against the Romans; and it happens almost daily that some
one of them that is taken prisoner, allows himself to be killed
rather than disown the name of Venetian. It was only yester-
day evening that one of them was brought before the Bishop,
saying that he was a Marchesco,* and would die a Marchesco,
and did not wish to live as anything else; so that the Bishop
ordered him to be hung; and neither the offer of letting him
go free, nor any other offer, could induce this man to change
his determination. Thus, all things considered, it would seem
impossible that these sovereigns should be able to hold this
country so long as these peasants live. I really do not know
whether after the loss of Vicenza they will attempt anything
else, nor do I know under what conditions the king of France

* Marchesco, an adherent of St. Mark, or of Venice.

208 MISSION TO MANTUA.

comes in this direction with such considerable forces. Upon
these points I must refer your Lordships to what Francesco
Pandolfini may have written you, who, being here so much
longer than myself, and near more communicative persons,
ought to have learned some of the particulars. The Bishop of
Gursa is not with the Emperor, but, according to what I hear,
has gone back to Germany to procure some money.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Verona, 26 November 1509.

I send this to Giovanni Borromei at Mantua, who will for-
ward it by the first courier whom he despatches.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.
——_—_——_—
LETTER VII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote you last on the 26th and sent it to Giovanni Borro-
mei at Mantua, with instructions to forward it with his first
despatches, and I shall do the same with this. Since my last.
some two hundred men-at-arms arrived here, part French and
part Italian, and sent here by Chaumont; amongst them is Tar-
latino with his company. Every one here now is full of curios-
ity to know what so considerable a force is going to do here.
The Emperor and the Grand Master were to have met at Obso-
lengo; the latter had been already for three days at Peschiera.
After uniting their forces, they are to decide as to the manner
in which this war is to be carried on. I have made every effort
to find out whether the king of France claims any compensa-
tion from the Emperor for carrying on this war, or whether he
really does it without compensation, deeming it sufficient gain
to keep the enemy at a distance from his frontiers, and thus
deprive the population, which is anyhow not very loyal, of the
opportunity to rebel. But I have not yet been able to obtain
any information upon this point satisfactory to myself, for I
do not believe that there is any one here that knows anything
about it; and those with whom I have talked on the subject
take very high ground, and say that the Emperor Maximilian

MISSION TO MANTUA. 209

will not give the king of France a single battlement of all that
belongs to him; and that he ought to be satisfied to have the
states of the Emperor as a shield to his possessions, and allow
himself to be trampled under foot first; and that the king of
France is obliged to undertake this defence, inasmuch as he
thereby defends his own state more advantageously and more
securely in keeping the enemy at a distance than by waiting
until he is on his frontiers. They seem to think that France is
necessarily obliged to take this course. We must wait now to
see how the King himsclf views the matter. All I can say to
your Lordships is, that this country cannot long remain in the
present condition ; for the longer these sovereigns protract this
war, the more ardent will the desire of these country people
become to return under the dominion of their original mas-
ters; for the inhabitants of the city are devoured by the troops
quartered in their houses, whilst those who live outside of the
city are plundered and killed. The Venetians, who are aware
of all this, act just in the contrary way, causing everything to
be respected both within and without the city, to a degree that
is almost incredible on the part of such an armed multitude;
thus, if these two sovereigns trifle with each other, and do not
make a prompt and vigorous war, it may give rise to events
that will cause these cities to return to their former allegiance
with more alacrity than they broke from it.

Two days ago the Emperor was at the place which I men-
tioned to your Lordships in my last letter. Fracassa came
here yesterday ; and it is said that the Emperor will make him
commander of the Italian troops in place of the Signor Costan-
tino, who is reported as returning to Rome in consequence of
having had a dispute with Monseigneur de la Palisse, of such a
nature that the latter sent him a challenge. Thus, to avoid
having anything to do with the French, Costantino returns to
Rome, not leaving a very high opinion of himself behind.

The Venetians have scattered their troops over a distance of
some twelve miles, and their Stradiotes often come within a
couple of miles of this city. It was only yesterday that they
took more than a hundred horses from the enemy’s teamsters,
so that to-day these teamsters did not venture out into the
country without an escort of more than five hundred cavalry.
There are now here 4,500 infantry, and 2,500 horse, of which
some 200 are French; 4,000 German infantry are expected here

' VOL. IV. 14

210 MISSION TO MANTUA.

to-morrow, and the Emperor is also looked for, after he shall
have met and conferred with the Grand Master.
I have no further news to commuicate, but recommend my-
self to your Lordships, que bene valeant.
Servitor
NiccoLO MACHIAVELLI,
Verona, 29 November, 1509. Secret.

LETTER VIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships on the 29th ultimo, and sent the let-
ter to Giovanni Borromei at Mantua. I wrote again very briefly
yesterday, and sent it to your Lordships by one of the Pope’s
couriers who was going to Florence; in that letter I advised
you of the arrival of the Emperor’s agent, together with the
Signor Costantino. This present letter I shall send you by
Messer Francesco da Santa Fiore, Pandolfo Petrucci’s secretary,
who returns by way of Florence. I avail myself of this oppor-
tunity to give you the news that the meeting of the Emperor
with the Grand Master did not take place. Nevertheless the
Grand Master was yesterday at Peschiera, and the Emperor left
Arco to go to Trent, which seems rather a bad way of getting
here. Some three thousand German infantry came here to-day ;
they are said to be a part of the garrison of Vicenza. I do
not see that any other troops arrive, and learn from persons
coming from Innspruck that there are none on the road, and
that nothing is said there of any troops that are to come here.
The Bishop Lieutenant, desiring to relieve the city, at the re-
quest of the inhabitants, and believing himself that there were
troops enough here to warrant their going out into the country
to be quartered in some of the neighboring castles, whence they
could press the enemy and at the same time relieve the city,
requested the French troops that are here to do so; but-they
replied that they would not leave the city to advance without
orders from the Grand Master. As chance would have it, news
came at the same time that the Emperor had sent the Signor
Lodovico da Gonzaga to Monseigneur de Chaumont with a sim-
ilar request, and that the latter had made a similar reply ;
namely, that without fresh orders from the King he would not

MISSION TO MANTUA. 214

make his troops go beyond Verona. Thus the Imperialists are
beginning to talk very disparagingly about the French; say that
the Emperor will make terms with the Venetians, and drive the
French out of Italy. Consequently, the whole of last night the
French troops in the city remained under arms and on horse-
back; and some of the gentlemen here were greatly afraid that
the French would return this morning to Peschiera, and that
on the day after the Venetians would come back here. And
yet to-day all seems to be arranged, but how it was done I know
not. The French captains have had a long consultation with the
Bishop, but the result of it is not yet made public. But we see
as it were from a distance that here are two sovereigns, one of
which has the ability to make war, but is not willing, whilst
the other is willing but lacks the ability; and the one who is
able trifles away his time. Would to God that he pushed mat-
ters energetically, for if he reflects to what point the despera-
tion of the inhabitants here goes, he must feel that he cannot
be prompt enough in removing from their sight the army upon
which they base all their hopes, and fix all their thoughts.
And if he continues by his present proceedings to keep up the
desperation of the people of this country, and to keep alive
the Venetians, then, as I have before remarked, it may at any
moment give rise to events that will make the King and the
Pope, as well as ourselves, repent that we have not done our
duty at the right time.

This community has to-day sent two ambassadors to the Em-
peror to represent to him the condition in which they are at
present, and their: apprehensions. They are awaiting their re-
turn, which will be of importance, even if it should not lead to
any change in the state of things. There is talk of a Diet to
be held at Kempten, a place three days’ journey beyond Inns-
pruck, and it is thought that perhaps the Emperor may be pres-
ent in person. The Venetians are seizing as many castles as
they please in this neighborhood, and it is stated that they have
done a great deal of damage in the territory of Ferrara, and
that they still continue to do so. But as I suppose that your
Lordships will have fuller information in relation to this from
Ferrara, I shall not attempt to give you any details of this.
Furthermore, it is reported to-day that the Venetians have taken
a number of galleys up the river Po, and that the Duke of Fer-
rara has had rocks sunk in the rear of these galleys, so that they
will not be able to return without risk of being wrecked; and

212 MISSION TO MANTUA.

that they are waiting for the French troops to lay their hands
upon these galleys.

If the Emperor stops at Trent, I may perhaps go there, un-
less your Lordships recall me before, which I entreat you to
do; for the Emperor does not permit any one to remain near
him; and if I am to remain at a distance from him, I might
as well be at Florence as here, particularly as Francesco Pan-
dolfini is near here and can keep your Lordships fully in-
formed of everything that is going on here, as he has intimate

relations with men, ete.
Servitor,
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Verona, December 1, 1509. Secret.

eee

LETTER IX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday and sent the letter by
Messer Francesco da Santa Fiore, Pandolfo Petrucci’s secretary,
who was returning to Florence. You will have learned from
that letter that the French had been much maligned on the
day previous, because they had refused to advance when so
requested ; and that they had been kept on foot the whole day,
but that on the following morning matters seem to have been
made up. I hear to-day that the cause of the dispute was that
the Grand Master had demanded possession of Valleggio, a for-
tress situated on the Mincio, and which together with Peschiera
commands the entire river. The French, wishing to obtain pos-
session of this post, which they regarded as very important, as
indeed it is, wanted on this occasion to try and make them-
selves masters of it ; rumor says now that the matter is about
to be adjusted. But what the French propose to do when they
get possession of this fortress I do not know for certain, as the
different reports about it vary very much. Some say that they
pledge themselves to hold the place for the Emperor until such
time as he shall be in condition to advance farther. Others
maintain that they have promised to aid that sovereign in his
attempt against Vicenza with 5,000 Swiss and 800 lances; but
I cannot say which of these two versions is true; but whether
they arrange the matter one way or the other, we shall soon
see what it will result in.

MISSION TO MANTUA. Zio

This is all the news I have to communicate to your Lord-
ships. Of the Emperor we hear nothing more than what I
wrote in my last to your Lordships, to whom I recommend my-
self most humbly. Valete /

Servitor,
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Verona, 2 December, 1509. Secret.
a en
LETTER X.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last was of the 2d; I sent it through Giovanni Borromei,
whom I also charge with this one. I stated to your Lordships
that the French wanted to have the castle of Valleggio placed in
their hands in case they were to serve the Emperor, ete. “ And
“soon after the Emperor sent letters to the castle of Valleggio
“ ordering that fortress to be transferred to the king of France ;
“which the commandant however was not willing to do; in
“consequence of which the French wanted to leave again. So
“that when this state of things became known to the Bishop,
“he sent a messenger this morning to the commandant of the
“ castle with a letter ordering him to hand the place over to the
“French, and that on his return he would see whether it had
“been done.” The two ambassadors who, as I told you, had
been sent by this city to the Emperor, have returned; they have
filled the whole city with the brightest hopes, telling the people
on behalf of his Majesty to be of good cheer, as he would be here
very shortly with a powerful army, with which he confidently
expects to terminate this war in the least possible time; so that
everybody is delighted and has the highest expectations. These
ambassadors report that they have left the Emperor between
St. Michele and Botzen, some eighteen miles the other side of
Trent; although it is said to-day that he is at Botzen attend-
ing with greatest diligence to all that can be done. “ There
“are about 8,000 infantry here, Germans and others, and about
“© 2,500 horse; and there are scattered here some 20,000 coun-
“try people and strangers, which brings the population of the
“place to some 45,000. These consume every day 1,500 meas-
“ures (mannalt) of grain and a proportionate quantity of wine ;

214 MISSION TO MANTUA.

“there is provision enough here for about two months. But
“the inhabitants of the place are poorly qualified to make fur-
*‘ ther provision, and the Emperor cannot do everything.” ....

On this side the Venetians continue to scour and ravage
the country, whilst the French confine themselves carefully to
guarding this city. The Grand Master has returned within the
last few days to Brescia, but is reported to have since gone back
to Peschiera, it is supposed for the reasons which I have before
mentioned to your Lordships. Nothing further occurs to me to
say except to recommend myself to your Lordships. I learn
that in all the places of which the Venetians make themselves
masters, they cause the image of St. Mark to be painted, but
with a sword in hand instead of a book; from which it would
seem that they have learned to their cost that books and study
do not suffice for the preservation of states. Valete /

Verona, 7 December, 1509.

I have forgotten to mention to your Lordships, that on the
4th instant at about the twentieth hour some Spaniards at-
tempted to force open a house in one of the suburbs called San
Zeno, and the occupants defended themselves; whereupon one
of the inhabitants of the suburbs rushed to the bell-tower and
sounded the tocsin. In a few minutes the whole city was in
arms, which was a dangerous thing, as it was some time before
the real cause of the tumult was found out. But so soon as it
was known the alarm subsided, and the individual who had
sounded the tocsin was seized and hung. During this tumult
all the German troops were on foot and assembled together, so
that their number could readily be seen, and I counted eighteen
banners, being about three hundred infantry per banner. When
the tumult ceased, these troops returned and were quartered in
the street of San Stefano within the town, directly under the
foot of San Piero. They had previously been quartered outside
of the city, but the term of these quarters had expired. In
fine, this city continues in a state of alarm, and more especially
the people from the country; and every day orders are pub-
lished directing them to present themselves at a fixed hour
before the Bishop. Valete tterum!

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

MISSION TO MANTUA. 215

LETTER XI.

MaGnirFicent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote last to your Lordships yesterday, and send that
letter at the same time with this one. The envoy who was
sent to hand Castel Valleggio over to the French has not yet
returned, and therefore I cannot explain to your Lordships how
the thing passed off. It is true, everybody says that the place
has been given up. Reason demanded that they should not
delay too long before advancing, if they wished to benefit the
city and be useful to the army, and at the same time do harm
to the enemy; for there are troops enough here, and more
arrive every day. Only yesterday evening several hundred
Gascon infantry arrived from Peschiera. The Spaniards that
are here have received money from the French, so that there is
really nothing wanting for the advance of the troops except the
final orders; and, as I have already said, it is important that
these should be received without delay. For it is known that
the Venetians are making intrenchments, which, if allowed to
be completed, will make it very difficult, in the opinion of per-
sons familiar with the country, to annoy the Venetians during
the winter in the direction of Vicenza. The Duke of Ferrara
will also have need that the Venetians should be restrained in
that direction, so that they may not attack him at their con-
venience, as they have done within the past few days, of which
attack different accounts have been given here; but knowing
that your Lordships will have been fully advised of all the par-
ticulars by the Duke’s ambassador, I shall say nothing more
about it.

This evening I had a conversation with a person just from
Botzen, who had left there the day before yesterday ; and this
individual told me that he had left the Emperor there, who had
made known his intention of leaving for Innspruck. The stran-
gers who are in the habit of following the court remain at
Trent, with orders not to leave, but to await him there, unless
differently ordered by him.

I believe that if Chaumont comes here he will be accom-
panied by Francesco Pandolfini, who can keep your Lordships
advised of what is going on here. In that case my remaining
here would be quite useless; nor would it be of any advantage

216 MISSION TO MANTUA.

to your Lordships that I should go to Innspruck to follow the
Emperor ; for it is evident that his Majesty wants no one near
him to watch his movements. And as to the payments that
remain yet to be made, the Emperor will no doubt have nego-
tiated them at Trent, so that whoever is to receive the money
will come direct to your Lordships at Florence. Thus my re-
maining here will be in every point of view superfluous; and I
shall wait here to learn by your first letter what course I am to
take. J am the more anxious to receive that letter, as I have
not heard once from your Lordships since I left Florence.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, yu bene valeant.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Verona, 8 December, 1509. Secret.

LETTER XII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. :—

Besides my other letters, | have written to your Lordships
on the 2d, 7th, and 8th, and as these have not yet been forward-
ed by Giovanni Borromei, they will now be sent together with
this one. The agent whom the Bishop had sent to Valleggio
returned here on the 9th, and reports having handed that place
over to the French, with the promise on their part to restore it
at any moment on demand of the Emperor. He has made two
inventories of the artillery and the munitions in the place, of
which one copy has been left with the French and the other he
has brought here with him. The French are now urged to
march, but they reply that they are waiting for their infantry
and for certain necessaries for the transport of the artillery. I
hear also from a good source that, with the view of leaving this
city in the rear with the greater safety, they demand one of the
forts to be placed in their hands, and that the Bishop will hand
the citadel over to them.

Now to enable your Lordships more fully to understand when
you hear this city spoken of at any time hereafter, you must
know that Verona bears some resemblance to Florence. For
the city walls take in a portion of the hill, and the river Adige,
which takes its rise in the mountains of Germany and runs
near and parallel to the Lago di Garda, does not spread into

MISSION TO MANTUA. PALL

the plain, but turns to the left, and, skirting close along the
mountains, divides the city of Verona in such wise that, look-
ing towards Germany, a portion of the plain and the entire hill
slope are on the other side of the Adige; and all the rest of the
city, that looks towards Mantua, is on this side of the river. But
very soon after leaving Verona the river turns from the moun-
‘tains and takes its course through the plain. On the height,
and as it were near the gate of San Giorgio, is the fort called
San Piero; and somewhat higher up and about two bowshots’
length from this fort, and on the very summit of the hill, there
is another fort, called San Felice. These two forts are guarded
by the Germans, and if they were lost the city would be almost
defenceless ; but they are very strong, owing to their situation
rather than to the strength of the walls. On this side of the
Adige looking towards Mantua, where the country becomes
level, as has been said, there are two other forts, one towards
Peschiera, which is called the old castle, and the other towards
Vicenza, which is called the citadel; these are about three bow-
shots distant from each other, and the outer wall of the city,
running from one to the other, forms a half-circle. Besides
this there is an inner wall running straight from the old castle
to the citadel, and having a deep ditch on each side. In the
space between the two walls and the two forts there are a num-
ber of houses, constituting the quarter of the Borgo di San Zeno.
In this Borgo, or suburb, a portion of the French troops are
quartered; but not satisfied with this, they also wanted the
citadel, in which the Spanish troops are quartered. This expla-
nation shows your Lordships of what portion of Verona the
French are masters. The gentlemen continue to manifest the
same disposition which I have mentioned in a former letter to
your Lordships; their actual situation is bad, and they appre-
hend worse, seeing the unstable and changeable character of
the Emperor, and that the Venetians are acting with renewed
vigor, and that the whole country is favorable to the latter.
They are consequently occupying themselves with great solici-
tude in removing their goods and chattels and their wives and
children to Mantua. They still look hopefully, however, for the
coming of Chaumont, who, as I have said above, is only wait-
ing for his infantry and artillery to arrive, after which he will
immediately come here.

I have mentioned to your Lordships that I had heard that

218 MISSION TO MANTUA.

the Emperor had left Botzen for Innspruck. Since then we
have positive news of his being at Augsburg, where he has con-
voked a Diet, so as to have everything in order to enable him
to act with vigor in the spring. At this news all the followers
of the court that were at Verona, and had remained here only
because they were in doubt where to find the Emperor, or what
they ought to do, have left here suddenly for that city. Thus,
when I perceived this, I thought it well to come as far as here,
where I arrived yesterday, and to send an express to your
Lordships. And to do this without involving your Lordships
in any extra expense I have chosen Marcone, my steward, for
that purpose, so that you may inform me through him what
you wish me todo now. Your Lordships’ predecessors had told
me orally, that whenever the Emperor returned to Germany I
should come back to Florence; nevertheless, I desire to have
your Lordships’ special instructions upon this point, and beg
you will be pleased to give me leave to return; for there seems
to me no necessity for my going to Augsburg to learn the decis-
ions of the Diet, which will not differ from those of the previous
Diets. Moreover, the Emperor, unlike other princes, is averse
to having the envoys of other sovereigns about him, and either
dismisses those that come, or confines them to some special
locality which he does not permit them to leave without his
orders. Thus we see that he has ordered all those who were
with him at Trent to remain there, and not to leave without his
permission. As to my staying here for the purpose of learning
what is going on, that seems to me equally unnecessary, for, as
everything will have to pass through the hands of Chaumont,
Francesco Pandolfini will always be able to give you carlher
and better information than any one else. I therefore reiterate
my request to be recalled, for you have it always in your power,
in the event of the Emperor’s return here, or for any other rea-
son, to send me back here. Should, however, your Lordships
decide differently, then I pray that you will send back with my
steward Marcone, who is the bearer of this, the courier “Ardin-
go; for I require some one here who knows the country, and
whom I can despatch to you so soon as the decisions of the
Diet are known, which you could not expect otherwise, nor
could you receive my letters, unless your Lordships are willing
to incur the expense of keeping couriers passing regularly to
and fro, as was done in the time of Francesco Vettori.

MISSION TO MANTUA. 219

I must beg your Lordships also to send me money enough to
pay my expenses for at least two or three months, including my
servants and three horses, and to enable me, in case of need, to
buy or change a horse, for in these places there is no one will-
ing to help another with a sou. I again recommend myself to
your Lordships, and beg you will send back Marcone with a
prompt reply. I had forgotten to say, that of the fifty ducats
which I received at Florence I have only eight left, which is
all the money I have. Valete /

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Mantua, 12 December, 1509. Secret.

LETTER XIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, 1 OY 6
I wrote to your Lordships on the 12th, and sent it by my
steward Marcone, and await your answer here. To-day Zerino
came back from Brescia; and it is understood that the Grand
Master will leave next Wednesday for Milan, which is just the
contrary of what was expected when I left Verona. Matters
do not seem to be pushed with the proper energy, for neither
the Emperor nor the Grand Master is here, and I really do
not see how the troops can take the field without the presence
of either the one or the other; nor can I see, if they do not
take the field, how the troops can remain many days longer in
Verona, for this large number of troops will cause a famine,
and a small number would expose the city to a thousand dan-
gers. So that one cannot remain here with any degree of secu-
rity ; especially if we have to fear that which your Lordships
in your letters of the 8th and 9th seem to apprehend. Never-
theless, I am ready to stay in any place you may indicate, there
to await your Lordships’ commands as to what 1 am to do.
Marcone will not have left Florence when Zerino arrives; you
will thus be able to deliberate anew upon the course which you
may desire me to take.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Mantua, 16 December, 1509. Secret.

THIRD MISSION TO THE COURT OF FRANCE.*

INSTRUCTIONS
FROM PIERO SODERINI, GONFALONIERE, TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI,
2 JUNE, 1510.t

AFTER having executed all that the Ten have commissioned
you to do, you will say to his Majesty the king, on my part, that
I have no other desire in the world but three things, namely,
the glory of God, the happiness of my country, and the welfare
and honor of his Majesty the king of France. And as I can-
not believe that my country can be happy without the glory
and prosperity of the crown of France, I do not value the one
without the other. You will also assure his Majesty, that my
brother the Cardinal is inspired by the same feelings and opin-
ions as myself; and if he has failed in his duty to call and pay
his homage to his Majesty, it is because the Pope has never

* This mission of Machiavelli to France relates to the first movements of
Pope Julius II. against the French. The Pope had been the originator of the
celebrated League of Cambray against the Venetians; but as those had been
completely crushed by the French at Vaila, the jealousy of Julius II. was ex-
cited by this victory and the advantages which France secured by the terms of
the treaty with the league. He became suddenly reconciled to the Venetians, and
formed an alliance with that republic; and thenceforward he directed all his
efforts against the French, with the view of driving them out of Italy. The
republic of Florence feared to become compromised in the war which was about to
break out between the king of France, Louis XII, and Pope Julius II. Machi-
avelli was sent to France mainly for the purpose of having Florence released
from openly furnishing assistance to the French, and at the same time to relieve
the republic of the suspicion of having become alienated from France, and of
having an understanding with the Pope. Machiavelli remained at the court of
France until he was replaced by Robert Acciaiuoli, who was sent there as am-
bassador.

For particulars relating to the war which resulted in consequence, see Guic-
ciardini, Lib. IX., Buonaccorsi’s Diary, and other historians of that period.

+ The instructions from the Magistracy of the Ten to Machiavelli have not

been found.

MISSION TO THE COURT OF FRANCE. 221

been willing to give him permission to do so; and that he is
bound to show all respect and obedience to his first master,
who combines with his great authority so violent and impetuous
a disposition that even princes are obliged to treat him with
deference. Thus my brother must be held excused, and you
must make his excuses, and recommend him to his Majesty the
king. You will, moreover, say to his Majesty that my sole
desire is that he may maintain and increase his credit and
power in Italy; but to do this he must keep the Venetians
down, and preserve his good relations with the Emperor of
Germany, as he has done until now. And if it were possi-
ble, it would be an admirable thing to induce the king of Hun-
gary to make war upon the Venetians in Dalmatia; for if they
were to lose that province they would be completely ruined,
and the king need not fear that they will ever recover from
it. But if this cannot be done, you will nevertheless urge his
Majesty to continue to cause them all possible expenses in that
direction by protracting the war as he has done hitherto, so
as to exhaust the Venetians as much as possible. For if his
Majesty desires to secure his possessions in Italy, he must give
his attention mainly to two points; the one to preserve friendly
relations with the Emperor, and the other to continue to harass
and enfeeble the Venetians. If he does this, he will have the
Pope and Spain for him, for the one has no good troops, and
the other is not in a situation to do him any harm. You must
make his Majesty understand how sorry I am that the Pope is
likely to employ Swiss troops, and that his Majesty must do all
in his power to prevent it, as that would make it easier for
him to keep the Pope down and to temporize with him. For
if the Pope adds the support of the Swiss to the advantages
which his money gives him and to his own personal character,
it would make him too strong and audacious, and might lead
to disastrous results. You will add, that according to my judg-
ment his Majesty ought to make every effort not to break with
the Pope; for even if a Pope’s friendship is of no great value,
yet his enmity may do great harm, through the influence of
the Church, and because you cannot make direct war upon him
without provoking the enmity of the whole world. It is of
importance to the king, therefore, to keep on good terms with
the pontiff, which ought not to be difficult on account of the
-Pope’s not having many firm supporters on whom he can rely.

222 THIRD MISSION .TO"THE

And if the Pope’s enmity can do him no harm, yet it may
cause him to incur very heavy expenditures.

As to the Emperor, I have told you above, that I think it
important that the king should temporize with him; and if
the king, whilst incurring such heavy expenses out of love for
the Emperor, were to ask him to cede Verona to him by way
of compensation, I should very much desire him to do so, as it
would more effectually secure to the king his possessions in
Italy. But if this cannot be brought about, then you will
suggest, on my part,-that there is a third way that might be
adopted; namely, to hand Verona over to some private gentle-
man, so that it would belong neither to the king nor the Em-
peror. Should this be done, it will afterwards be more easy for
the king to get possession of it; for whoever is master of it
will always find himself obliged to act according to the wishes
of his more powerful neighbor.

You will call his Majesty’s attention to the fact that ex-
traordinary fortifications are being built at Serezana, which if
done by his order would be all very well, but if done without
his knowledge then he ought to be informed of it, as it is a
matter of much importance. And finally you will recommend
me a thousand times to his Majesty.

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUSTRIOUS SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here to-day and found your Lordships’ two letters
of the 26th and 29th ultimo, containing further advices as to
the state of things in Italy; which I will communicate on my
arrival at court, and make such use of as your Lordships direct
and according as matters may have more or less changed dur-
ing the six or seven days which it will yet take for me to get
to the court. After my arrival there, I shall advise your Lord-
ships fully of all I can learn as to how matters are going on
here.

IT have heard that the Bishop of Tivoli, the Pope’s ambassa-
dor, left here two days ago to go to the court, where he had
been sent with all possible speed by the Pope to make known

COURT OF FRANCE. 223

to the king the reasons for his having arrested Monseigneur
d’Auch. Some one who met the Bishop on the road told me
‘that he went most reluctantly to the court because he expected
to have to treat of rather unpleasant matters; this person also
learned from the Bishop that the king of Spain had a powerful
fleet in Sicily, with ten thousand or more troops on board, which
he kept there with the intention of employing them in case of
need, either for his own use or for that of his allies in Italy.
Your Lordships can learn from other sources with more cer-
tainty whether this be true or not. As for myself nothing
could make me believe it if I saw the Pope less resolute against
the French; but as his boldness must have some other support
besides his mere sanctity, this sort of preparations must ne-
cessarily be true, or at least likely to become true.

Besides my duty of keeping your Lordships advised from
day to day of what I learn here, I have nothing of importance
to attend to excepting what relates to the presents that were
promised at the conclusion of the late treaty with the king,
as your Lordships may remember. It was for this reason that
I remained so long on the road with Alessandro Nasi, so as
to learn from him where those things were, and what I would
have to do in the matter. He has fully informed me upon
every point, and, as your Lordships will have learned all par-
ticulars from him, it is not necessary for me to repeat them
here, and I shall confine myself to giving you merely the sub-
stance; namely, that by orders from the office in Florence he
had promised to pay to Robertet and to Chaumont the amount
due them at the next fair in August; and as they count upon
this promise, it will have to be fulfilled. Nasi told me more-
over that he did not think that the city could possibly exempt
itself from the payment of the ten thousand ducats that had
been sent here for account of the Cardinal d’Amboise, which
had not been paid in consequence of the Cardinal’s death, and
for the reasons which Nasi has made known to you.* And that
he saw only one way to save that money, or at least to defer
the payment of it for some time; and that was to divide the
ten thousand ducats between the two above-named personages,
as so much on account of their portion, and that this might
probably satisfy them in full for what they have to receive; at

* The Cardinal d’Amboise, Archbishop of Rouen, had died at Lyons on the
25th of May, 1510.

294 THIRD MISSION TO THE

any rate, it would remove from before their eyes this bait, which
would attract their attention and desire so long as it was there.
But the paying the amount over to them would either cause
the matter not to be spoken of any more, or it would anyhow
be a great convenience to your Lordships in making the pay-
ments. Your Lordships must therefore write me how I am to
act in this matter, in case I should be spoken to on the subject.
I shall leave here for the court in a couple of days, and will
thence report at length to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.
Servitor
NIccoLO MACHIAVELLI,
Lyons, 7 July, 1510. Secret.

LETTER ILI.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here yesterday evening, but as it was at a late hour
I did not make my arrival known to any one. This morning,
however, I called upon Robertet, and explained to him the ob-
ject of my coming. I treated him with all the ceremony and
politeness due to so good a friend of our republic; and he
manifested pleasure at my mission, telling me that I had come
just in time, as his Majesty was on the point of sending an
envoy to Florence to ascertain your Lordships’ intentions to-
wards him; and that he had taken umbrage at Mare Antonio’s
having been allowed to leave, and at the recall of your ambas-
sador without his being at once replaced by another to attend
to these matters; that it was necessary, therefore, to efface
this alienation by acts of kindness; and that his Majesty would
let me know his intentions, which I ought promptly to com-
municate to your Lordships by a special courier. I replied to
his Lordship in suitable terms, justifying your Lordships, ete. ;
and to prove to him that in the Mare Antonio business you had
been undecided up to the 26th of the past month, I read to him
the letter which you had written to me that very day; and thus
with the truth it was easy for me to excuse your Lordships
completely. I told him of the pass which you had given to
Mare Antonio to go to Bologna, and the reasons that had in-
duced you to do it; to which Robertet promptly replied, that it

COURT OF FRANCE. 225

was not to Bologna, but to Genoa, that Mare Antonio wanted
to go.* I assured him that I had no knowledge whatever of
that; “although by your letter of the 10th instant I was in-
“formed of the whole; but if he had learned that your Lord-
“ships had been in doubt whether you ought to refuse this
“pass to Mare Antonio and the Pope’s troops for Genoa, they
“ would have thought they had discovered your intentions fully,
“and therefore I deemed it well that they should have the
“proposition and the reply here at the same time,” which, in
whatever manner your Lordships may make it, will, I think,
facilitate the reply which you will have to make to what I shall
tell you further on.

I was afterwards introduced to his Majesty the king, and
after presenting my credentials I stated to his Majesty in the
most friendly and becoming language the object of my mission,
and notified him of the appointment of an ambassador, who
would be here so soon as the distinguished character of the in-
dividual and the condition of the roads and the seasons would
permit. And I then entreated his Majesty to consider all these
little things as merely ordinary matters, as in reality they were,
and nothing else; and that a pass given to Mare Antonio did
not deserve to excite hard thoughts and complaints against
your Lordships, inasmuch as all your past acts were not such
as deserved suspicions of this kind.

His Majesty received me most graciously, and said that he
felt assured of your good faith and affection towards his per-
son, for you had received many benefits at his hand that had
been of great advantage to you, but that the time had come
now to be more particularly assured of your feelings towards
him ; and then he said: ‘“ Secretary, I have no enmity either
““with the Pope or any one else; but as every day gives rise
“to new friendships as well as enmities, I desire that your
*‘ Signori declare themselves without delay as to what and how
“much they will do in my favor if it should happen that either
‘‘the Pope or any one else were to molest or attempt to molest

‘“ my possessions in Italy. Therefore send an express at once,
“so that I may have a prompt reply, which they may make by
“letter or by word of mouth, as they may think proper. But I

* Mare Antonio had been sent by the Pope to stir up the city of Genoa
against the king of France; but he did not succeed in the attempt, and came
very near being taken prisoner and stripped.

VOL ty. 15

226 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“want to know who are my friends and who my enemies; and
“say to your Signori, that in return I offer them for the safety
“of their state all the forces of my kingdom, and if need be I
“‘ will come myself.”

His Majesty charged me again to communicate this promptly
to your Lordships, and to ask for an immediate reply ; and told
me to prepare this despatch together with Robertet. I replied
to his Majesty that I had nothing to say in answer to what he
had said to me, except that I would write to your Lordships
with all the diligence which he had charged me to employ. I
thought I could safely assure him that your Lordships were
incapable of failing in the strict compliance with the stipula-
tions of the treaty concluded with his Majesty, and that you
were ready to do all that was reasonable and possible. To
which his Majesty replied, that he had no doubts on that point,
but that he wanted still more positive assurance. I also spoke
to his Majesty of the sending of Tommaso to Venice, and of the
object of his mission, to which he seemed to attach but little
importance.

After this I accompanied Robertet to his lodgings, and re-
mained some little time with him; he repeated to me the same
thing that the king had said to me about writing to you, and
we agreed that I should bring the letters to him, and that he
would forward them by the king’s post to Lyons, and that I
should arrange to have them sent from there by a special cou-
rier. I have accordingly written to that effect to Bartolommeo
Panciatichi, and your Lordships will please to reimburse him
the expense, of which he will inform you. Robertet touched
again briefly upon the subjects of the ambassador and Mare
Antonio; and although he was convinced of the truth of what
I had told him, yet he observed that you had many enemies
here, who promptly seized every opportunity to calumniate you;
and therefore it was well in these times not to give them the
chance to speak ill of you; and that it was important that
they should be informed here by the first courier that the am-
bassador had already started, and that your Lordships should
act towards Mare Antonio in such a manner as to show that
his arrangement with the Pope had not been made with your
consent, and that he remained on Lucchese territory, or was
going elsewhere. ‘ He then broached the subject of Genoese
“ matters, and spoke of the favors which the Lucchese had

COURT OF FRANCE. 227

“shown to certain exiles, and how much they had helped in
“stirring up a revolution in Genoa;” but that the king was
resolved to pay them’for this, and that it would be well for
you to, think of this, as in troubles of that sort there was always
something to be gained. He told me furthermore, that as soon
as matters became so hot as to cause any apprehensions, the
king would come down into Italy as quickly as any private per-
son, even if it were in midwinter, and that then he would make
no terms with any one that had shown himself hostile to him
except at the point of the sword. These were times, therefore,
when one ought to know how to take a resolution, particularly
as experience had so often shown the king’s readiness for war,
the strength and resources of this kingdom, the fortunate suc-
cess of his enterprises, and his friendly disposition towards our
city and government. So that any one not blinded by passion
must see clearly that there was nothing that could interfere
with the prosperity of France and the success of the king’s
enterprises, except the king’s death, for which there were no
reasonable grounds for apprehension at the present. ‘I rec-
“ommend you, therefore, once more to write to your Signori
‘that these are times when much can be gained by making
“ one’s self agreeable.”

There is here at this moment a great embassy from the king
of England, which is going to Rome. I have not been able to
learn the object of it, but Robertet tells me, and I learn the
same from others, that these ambassadors have made a general
address to the king in presence of the principal nobles of the
realm, in which they spoke in the most forcible manner of the
strong friendship and union existing between their sovereign
and the king of France; and that they had gone so far as to
say that their sovereign esteemed the king of France to that
degree that he looked upon him almost as his father. After
this long interview I left Robertet.

In your Lordships’ letter of the 29th, you express a wish to
know upon what the Pope founds the arrogance with which he
acts towards the French. According to what I have been able
to learn in the short time that I am here, no one knows any-
thing positive about it, and therefore they mistrust everything
and everybody. “ Your Lordships see what they do to satisfy
“‘themselves as to your intentions, and they ought even to do
“more, and as promptly as possible to ascertain the intentions

228 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“of other states.’ I learn from a friend, what, however, is
only conjecture, that the support upon which the Pope relies
with most confidence at present is his money and the Swiss ;
and that he counts upon his authority to carry Spain and the
Emperor along with him. From Spain he must have received
good promises; for it was seen that in his enterprise against
Bologna he left Rome without having concluded anything defi-
nite either with France or any other power, and yet by his sole
audacity and authority he carried them all along with him.

For once, however, the rupture between the Pope and the
king of France may be said to be positive, seeing how openly
the Pope has shown himself in this affair of Genoa, and con-
sidering the complaints against him here. As to the Swiss, I
know for certain that within the past eight days the Pope sent
them thirty-six thousand ducats for six thousand men, which
he wanted them to levy at once. The Swiss took the money,
and then declared that they would not raise the men unless
they had three months’ pay, and that the Pope must send eigh-
teen thousand ducats more; and on the 11th of the month they
sent a courier from Geneva to Rome to demand these additional
eighteen thousand ducats. Some think that the Pope wanted
these men to overturn the government of Genoa; but it is not
known whether the Duke of Savoy will grant them passage
through his territory. Thus no one can judge how all this will
end, and we must wait for the results as they manifest them-
selves from day to day. The king ordered the recall of his
ambassadors from Rome, but has since then suspended this
order.

I beg your Lordships to come to some decision in relation to
the matter I wrote about from Lyons. To-day Robertet told
me frankly that he bore and had borne for you pondus diet et
estus, etc.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Brois, 18 July, 1510. Secret.

COURT OF FRANCE. 229

LETTER III.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

On the 18th I wrote to your Lordships, and sent the letter
through Robertet to Bartolommeo Panciatichi at Lyons, with
instructions to forward it by express to Florence. I presume
it has safely reached your hands; the reply is eagerly awaited
here. Yesterday I called upon Monseigneur de Paris, one of
the ministers at present at the head of affairs; I spoke to him
ceremoniously, and in a manner suitable to the individual and
the circumstances. This prelate is of a calm temper and is
reputed wise; and truly he could not have spoken more dis-
creetly of your Lordships and of the events that are approach-
ing. He remarked, “that the Pope made a great mistake in
“exposing himself and all the states of Italy to great danger
“for no other purpose than to injure others; and that if this
“war was carried any further, it would be the greatest and most
“obstinate war that had been seen for a long time, because the
“king, just in proportion as he had bestowed benefits upon the
“Pope and had earnestly sought his friendship, so he would
“then show himself his bitter and unrelenting foe, and pursue
“him in his states and even in his person, and that he should
“feel himself justified in doing this before God and men.”
And then, turning to other matters, he said, “that before God
“and men you could not be other than good Frenchmen, and
“that the king had never had any other opinion, and that you
“would see such military preparations in Italy for the defence
“of his own possessions, as well as those of his friends, as would
“relieve you of any apprehensions. And that even if the Pope
“were to declare himself your enemy, that ought in no way to
“hold you back; for his Majesty the king did not hesitate to
“declare himself against the Pope to serve your republic in the
“ Arezzo business, and to oblige the son of the Sovereign Pon-
“tiff to come to him with the halter around his neck.* So
“that now you ought to render him similar service, and declare
‘“‘vourselves in good time, so that the benefit of it would be the
“more agreeable, and might also result in advantage to your
“Lordships.” He alluded here to the Lucca business.

* Alluding to the rebellion of Arezzo, which was excited by the Duke of
Valentinois in 1502.

230 THIRD MISSION TO THE

I replied to Monseigneur de Paris in a becoming manner,
and after leaving him I called on the Chancellor, who is a man
of hot and passionate temper. He assailed me at once with
reproaches, both in relation to the ambassador who had left, as
well as to Mare Antonio, saying that these were acts of an evil
nature and calculated to fill every one with suspicion. And
although he poured out a perfect torrent of words, because |
did not remain quietly to listen to all he had to say, yet he
calmed down a little before I left him. In his remarks he said
more particularly, “that, if your Lordships were really good
“friends of France, you would, whenever the Pope communi-
“cated to you anything adverse to France, give notice of it
“here, and on the other hand show the Pope that your Lord-
“ ships did not wish to hold any communication with him; but
“that you had done nothing of the kind.” I replied, ‘* that at
“the time of my departure from Florence there was not a man
“in the whole city who imagined that any difference could
“arise between his Majesty and the Pope; and that therefore
“it was not necessary to resort to any such measures; and
“that since my leaving Florence I did not know what the Pope
“could have said or done to your Lordships; but that as re
* oards the affair of Mare Antonio you had communicated to
“the king all that had come to your knowledge, and that, if
“anything else of moment had occurred, you would certainly
“ have communicated it also.” Thereupon I left him, as I have
said, considerably calmed down.

I have yet to call on Monseigneur d’ Amiens, and Monseig-
neur de Bunicaglia, two other principal members of the council.
I have not done so before, owing to the difficulty of finding
them at home; during all these movements they are always to-
gether, and it is almost impossible to see them separately. I
have, however, spoken to both of them together on my arrival,
and since then in the presence of the king. I have called upon
the Spanish ambassador, on whose behalf I have a thousand
offers of service to make to your Lordships, which he says he
has been charged with by his sovereign. I have also called
upon the Emperor’s ambassadors, there being two, one resi-
dent here and the other arrived here only a few days since per
post, for the purpose, as I hear, of preventing the king’s troops
“from ceasing to make war upon the Venetians.” Besides
their formal civilities, they assured me with many protestations

COURT OF FRANCE. 31

that it would be impossible for his Imperial Majesty and the
king to be more united than what they are; and that their
sovereign would never separate himself from the king of France.
Time will show how true this is.

Afterwards I called upon the Pope’s ambassador, who is
really a most respectable gentleman, of great sagacity and ex-
perience in the affairs of state. 1 found him greatly dissatis-
fied with all these movements, and perfectly astonished that
things have so suddenly come to the point of drawing the
sword. And if he has told me the truth, he seems to be more
doubtful than any one else as to the resources and arrangements
of the Pope, assuring me that he knew nothing about them, and
begging me to tell him whether I had received any information
on the subject from your Lordships. He added, that when he
reflected as to what sort of a war this was likely to be, and how
desperate the attacks and defence, he actually trembled with
fear. And, in conclusion, he lamented the errors committed in
France as well as in Italy, of which the poor people and the
smaller princes would be the first victims; and that, so far
as he was concerned, he had left nothing undone to preserve
peace, but that he had no longer any hope of it. “He seemed
“altogether amazed at the conduct of the Pepe, for he did not
“see that he had at present any forces commensurate with
“these movements, nor did he see where the Pope could obtain
“them, or to what extent he could rely on them. And know-
“ing the Pope to be prudent and serious, he could not believe
“that he would have acted lightly in these matters, inasmuch
‘as he was well aware of his own needs and of those of the
“Church.” This is all I have been able to learn from this per-
sonage. In fact,no one here knows upon what foundations the
Pope bases his actions, and thus, as I have said in a previous
letter, “as nothing is really known here, they are afraid of
“everything and of everybody.”

News has been received here that twenty-two Venetian gal-
leys have been signalled in our waters, but no one knows how
they could have come there without the consent of Spain. We
also learn to-day from Chaumont, that the Marquis of Mantua
is free, and is going to Rome to see the Pope. Robertet has to-
day communicated this fact to the Pope’s ambassador here.
We are informed that some Genoese exiles have landed at
Spezzia, and have approached within a few miles of Genoa;

Dee THIRD MISSION TO THE

and this morning Robertet told me, with anything but a cheer-
ful face, that Mare Antonio had gone in that direction. We
hear consequently that it has been decided, unless they should
change their mind, to break up the army that had been organ-
ized against the Venetians, and to leave five hundred lances
with the Emperor’s troops, so as not to fail in the engagements
which they have contracted with him, and to send three hun-
dred lances to Ferrara with a like number of infantry. All the
other men-at-arms and infantry will be sent into the territory
of Parma, to be employed in the defence of Genoa, or against
Tuscany, after Genoa shall have been secured, ete.

“T have had some intimation that these French troops may
“possibly go and establish themselves in the territory of the
“Lucchese, for the purpose of punishing them, and preventing
“their giving support to the Genoese exiles who have gone
“there from here; and at the same time to encourage you to
“declare in favor cf the king of France. I have heard nothing
“further of interest up to the present. As to what is being
“said here of the Pope, your Lordships can readily imagine it:
“to throw off his authority, to summon him before a council,
“and to destroy his temporal and spiritual power,—these are
“some of the least evils with which they threaten him.”

I have nothing more to write, except to recommend myself
to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buots, 21 July, 1510. Secret.
——_e—_——.
LETTER IV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My first letter to your Lordships since my arrival here at
court was of the 18th, and, as it contained matters of the great-
est importance, I sent it through Robertet to Bartolommeo Pan-
ciatichi at Lyons, in accordance with the king’s wishes, directing
Bartolommeo, at the same time, to forward it to you by express.
Although I feel quite sure that it has arrived safely, yet by way
of extra precaution, and to make doubly sure, I enclose here-
with a brief summary of its contents, which I could not send
yesterday with the long letter I wrote to your Lordships, as the

COURT OF FRANCE. 233

courier could not wait until I had written it. And therefore
I resolved to send it to-day, and should not otherwise have |
written again, having reported to you fully yesterday all that
had taken place here. So there is nothing left for me to say in
this, except that after a solemn mass this morning his Majesty
publicly, and in presence of the English ambassadors, ratified
by a solemn oath the treaty that had been concluded between
his Majesty and the king of England during the past month ;
it having been previously ratiiied by the king of England in the
same way by a solemn oath. It is now said that these ambas-
sadors will not go to Rome, as stated in my first letter, but
that they will return to England. In fact, the Pope’s ambas-
sador told me this morning that there was no truth in the first
report that these ambassadors were going to Rome, as they had
come here exclusively for the ratification of the treaty.

Since writing the above, I have seen Robertet, who over-
whelmed me with complaints against your Lordships, telling
me that yesterday evening the king had complained very much
because you had not advised him of anything, nor given him
any information about Italian affairs, although you knew more
about them than any one else; and that this want of civility on
your part was due to nothing else than because you had not
yet fully relieved your mind of all the ill feeling against him.
Robertet added to this many harsh expressions of his own,
which I shall not repeat, as I do not wish to weary your Lord-
ships. I excused your Lordships, and corrected these opinions
as best I could; but, as every one that has ever been here
knows, these people close their ears to all one can say to them,
and therefore, O Magnificent Signori, if you desire not to lose
the friendship of the French, you must show them that you
really mean to be their friend. And if you cannot do this in
any other way, at least do not fail to send frequent letters and
information, and do not hesitate from time to time to send
a special courier to keep them advised of the state of affairs in
Italy, so as to give to whoever may be here the opportunity of
showing your good will, and thus preserve your Lordships’
credit with them.

The blow which the Pope has attempted to inflict upon the
French is of such a character, and is so keenly felt by the king,
that I believe I am safe in expressing the opinion that he will
revenge himself with great satisfaction and honor, or lose all

234 THIRD MISSION TO THE

his Italian possessions; and that he will promptly pass the
mountains with double the vigor of former years; and every-
body believes that he will do much more than what he threatens
if England and the Emperor remain firm, of which there ap-
pears no doubt.

It is understood that the French have raised ten thousand
men for the Genoese business, besides the men-at-arms which
they have sent there. As these troops will be in your neigh-
borhood, your Lordships will with your usual wisdom take
a prompt resolution, which on that account will prove the more

acceptable.
I recommend myself to your Lordships.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buois, 22 July, 1510. Secret.
LETTER V.

MaGniFICcENT SIGNORI, ETC.:—

I have received through Francesco Pandolfini two of your
Lordships’ letters of the 12th instant..... I shall write
to-morrow to your Lordships more fully and more at my ease,
and send these lines merely to acknowledge receipt of those
letters, as a courier is just leaving for Milan; I send this under
cover to Francesco Pandolfini. Since my being here I have
written to your Lordships on the 18th, 21st, and 22d ; and ear-
nestly hope those letters have reached you safely. The French
have received good news this morning from Genoa, and are all
in the highest spirits about it. Valete !

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buots, 25 July, 1510. Secret.

COURT OF FRANCE. 235

LETTER VI.*

MaGniFIcent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Your Lordships’ letters of the 16th instant, sent to me
through Francesco Pandolfini, being full of good news, “ coun-
“sels, and resolutions, has had the effect of completely assuring
‘the French that your Lordships desire to preserve their friend-
“ship. To come to particulars. So soon as I received those
“letters yesterday evening, I went to see Robertet, and informed
“him of everything. He was greatly rejoiced, and said, ‘ It
“seems your Signori are now doing all that the king wished
“them to do; it will be well, therefore, that his Majesty should
“ know all this... But as it was too late last night, I presented
“ myself early this morning before the king, and related to him
“all the particulars, and read to him the contents of your
“letters. When I came to tell him of the adherents upon
“which he had counted, beginning with the Siennese, his Ma-
“jesty said to me, ‘Do not these hold some town of yours, I
“know not exactly which?’ And on my answering, ‘ Yes,’
“he said, ‘If God gives me life, they will not hold it much
‘longer, nor their own city either. Write this to your Signori,
‘and bid them be of good cheer.’ When I came next to speak
“of the Marquis of Mantua, the king said that he had been
“liberated, but ought to be careful where he went. As to the
“ Emperor, he said that he felt quite sure of him. But of the
“‘ Swiss he said, ‘ By my faith, I am in doubt whether to let them
“ pass or not, for Ido not know whether it would be better that
“the Pope should be unarmed, or that he should have armor
“on his back that will hurt him.’ And then he spoke of the
“ character of the Swiss, saying that, with all his wealth and
“power, he had found it most difficult to manage them, and
“concluded that they would have treated him as they did the
‘Duke Lodovico; but that he had taken measures to hold them
“to their engagements. After that his Majesty thanked your
‘“ Lordships for the reply you intended to make to the Pope as

* Those portions of this letter comprised in quotation marks were written
in cipher, and are not given in the “ Italia” edition of Machiavelli’s works, from
which this translation is chiefly made, nor in any other edition published prior to
1877. I.have found them, however, in the edition published at Florence in 1877,

under the direction of L. Passerini and G. Milanesi, which unfortunately remains
incomplete owing to the death of one of the editors.

236 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“to the passage of troops for Genoa; and as to the trouble
‘which he caused you, he would order that all the troops which
“he had in the direction of Florence should always be at your
‘“‘ call whenever you might have need of them. And as to the
“ measures taken with regard to Genoa, he said,” Genoa was safe,
for he had letters yesterday evening telling him that three thou-
sand infantry had entered the city ; also the son of Messer Gian
Luigi del Fiesco with six hundred men, and a nephew of the Car-
dinale del Finale with as many more; and that the exiles, with
the troops they had taken there, had withdrawn; and that his gal-
leys, together with some Genoese vessels, had gone in pursuit of
the Venetian galleys, which dared not wait for them. Thus his
Majesty regards Genoa as safe, and the whole court is rejoicing
and keeping holiday to-day. He told me that in consequence
of this event the Venetians could neither advance nor attempt
any movement of importance ; for besides the large number of
his own troops, there were those of the Emperor and of Spain,
and that all this force was not only sufficient to hold the Vene-
tians in check, but even to combat them. And then, speaking
of the king of Spain, “his Majesty said to me that his fleet
“had gone there, but that he had not given the king of Spain
“any cause for enmity, nor did he believe that he had any such
“feeling towards him, for the very credit and influence which
‘‘his friendship gave the king of Spain sustained him in Castile.
‘And as to your Lordships, and the advice and information
“which you had sent him, he told me to go and see his Chan-
“cellor and Robertet, and give them a little memorandum of
“it. I have accordingly seen them since then, and they have
‘taken note to send two hundred lances to Serezana, and thus
“recover that place from the hands of San Giorgio, and from
“ Rafaellino, who had been sent to Savona. Thus it seems to
“me that the king and his counsellors attach much impor-
‘“‘tance to your information and counsels; and therefore I hope
“that, if your Lordships deem it well to keep the king and his
“ministers in good humor, you will continue sedulously to send
“them similar information.”

This is all I have been able to learn from the king or his
ministers in relation to the advices you have sent me. Nor is
there any further news in relation to Genoese affairs beyond
what his Majesty had told me.

All the above was written on the 25th. To-day is the 26th,

COURT OF FRANCE. 237

and news from Genoa received to-day confirms what we had
heard from there yesterday. A grand council of the people
had been held, at which some three hundred citizens were
present, and the question came up whether the funds of the
Bank of San Giorgio should be employed to defend the city in
behalf of the king of France; it was so decided with only eight
dissenting votes. His Majesty spoke of it this morning with
the English ambassadors, and said publicly that the Florentines
had refused to allow the Pope’s troops to pass through their
territory on their way to Genoa; and that the Florentines were
his great and good friends.

I have called to see the ambassador of the Marquis of Man-
tua, to know how he viewed the liberation of his master.* He
told me that he could not regard this liberation as having any
other ground than the hope of the Pontiff to avail himself of
services of the Marquis in the present movements, or perhaps
some promise which the Marquis had made to the Pope. And
when I told the ambassador that, if it were the latter, the Mar-
quis must either break his old engagements with the king of
France, or the new ones with the Pope, he answered, that prom-
ises made in captivity need not be observed, and that his master
would never take sides against his Majesty of France; and that
even if, for the sake of gaining his liberty, he had been forced
personally to oppose the king, yet his states would never do
anything to displease his Majesty, but would always remain
firm in their devotion to him.

I am fully aware, as I have already said in former letters,
that your Lordships desire much to know the course which
Spain and the Emperor are going to take, and I should be very
glad to be able to give you some information on that point, but
cannot well see the way to do it, for it is not likely that these
sovereigns would write here to communicate their intentions ;
and thus their ambassadors remain in the dark, and all that
could be said here about it would be mere conjecture ; and your
Lordships are in a situation to form such conjectures much
better than I can here. As regards England, I will only say
that on Sunday last, as I have already mentioned in a former
letter, the peace between the king of England, as represented by
his ambassadors, and the king of France, was solemnly sworn

* The Marquis of Mantua had been made prisoner of war by the Venetians
on the 7th of August, 1509.

238 THIRD MISSION TO THE

in presence of all the foreign ambassadors and the whole court.
And when I told his Majesty that the Pope also counted upon
England, he laughed, and said, ‘“ You have heard yourself the
oath of peace,” ete. |

This movement of the Pope displeases everybody here; all
seem to think that he seeks to ruin Christianity, and to accom-
plish the destruction of Italy. But as his attempt upon Genoa
proved a failure, it is to be hoped that, if he does not persist in
his obstinacy, and does not wish to cause so much ill, matters
may yet be arranged, and the more easily if there are good
intermediaries. For although the injury which the Pope in-
tended to inflict upon the crown of France was very great,
nevertheless as he failed in it, and, on the other hand, an at-
tempt on the part of the king to revenge himself being fraught
with much danger, inasmuch as there could not be a more hon-
orable action for a prince than to attack another in defence
of the Church, the result might well be that his Majesty, by
openly attacking the Pope, would expose himself to the enmity
of the whole world. Thus it is believed that he would readily
yield to good counsels, and that even an attack upon Ferrara
would not prevent it. It only remains, then, that the Pope
should want that which ought to be. His pride having been
brought down a little by the ill success of the attempt upon
Genoa, he will have seen from the failure of his first steps that
the difficulties of the enterprise are greater than he supposed.
And if this shall have made him a little more timid, ways and
means ought not to be wanting to make sure of him; particu-
larly if, as I have said, there are good mediators. I have been
requested, therefore, by a personage of worth and authority, to
beg your Lordships not to hesitate to undertake this negotia-
tion, and to use your influence to make the Pope understand all
that you can discreetly say to him; for this person apprehends
that, if it were attempted from here, it would not be well re-
ceived. I wanted to write to your Lordships these last partic-
ulars, thinking that I should not transcend the bounds of my
duty in communicating to you all I see and hear here at court.
Valete !

Servitor
NiccoLO MACHIAVELLI,
Buois, 26 July, 1510. Secr. apud R. Chr.

COURT OF FRANCE. 239

LETTER VIL.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last letter was of the 26th, in reply to two from your
Lordships of the 12th instant; in that letter I reported all that
had taken place here up to that day, and particularly that those
letters had caused his Majesty to be entirely satisfied with
your Lordships. Yesterday I received another letter from you,
of the 16th, and although the news it contains is already old,
nevertheless, by way of showing his Majesty that you did not
fail even for one day in your duty to him, I presented myself
this morning before him, and communicated to him the entire
contents of your letter, with all of which he was well satisfied ;
telling me that he had been already informed by the Grand
Master that your Lordships had been very zealous in keeping
him fully advised of every occurrence. His Majesty also told
me that he had news from Chaumont that his troops had cap-
tured Monselice in the most glorious manner possible; and that,
after taking the town by assault, they had with the same ardor
taken the castle, where they had killed some six hundred men
or more, not permitting one to escape. His Majesty smiled at
this and said, “ Last year I was looked upon as a bad man, be-
“cause in a battle which I fought so many men were killed;
“now Monseigneur de Chaumont will be regarded the same.”
His Majesty told me that the commander at Monselice had been
aman from Berzighella, but he did not know his name, and that
during the fight the Monselice men had all cried, “Julio!”
“Julio!” All this his Majesty related to me with infinite
pleasure. He told me also that he had no news from Genoa, but
that order had been at once restored there, and everything satis-
factorily settled. As Bartolommeo Panciatichi had written me
from Lyons that all letters were opened in Lombardy, not ex-
cepting your Lordships’, I spoke to his Majesty about it, espe-
cially as your last letters were handed to me open, and begged
him to be pleased to order the officials charged with that busi-
ness to discontinue opening the letters to and from your Lord-
ships. His Majesty said it should be done, and asked me to tell
Robertet of it in his behalf; that a general order for the opening
of letters had been given prior to my arrival, and that since my
coming they had not thought of exempting your Lordships’

240 THIRD MISSION TO THE

letters from this general order. I have since then spoken to
Robertet about it, who promised me to send the necessary in-
structions in relation to it by the very next courier. .

The ambassador from Ferrara told me this morning that the
Pope’s troops, after taking the two castles mentioned in your
Lordships’ letters of the 16th, have laid siege to another castle,
but as he did not remember the name I cannot give it to you.
On the approach of the Pope’s troops, the garrison of the castle
made a sortie and captured twenty-three men-at-arms of the
Pope’s forces. The King was delighted when he heard this.
I asked the Ferrarese ambassador how many men the Pope had
employed in this enterprise, but he could not tell me, and com-
plained that his master did not keep him well informed. He
said that he had urgently requested the king to aid the Duke
with infantry, and that his Majesty had given him the best
hopes. We shall see what will come of it.

As already mentioned in my former letters, it is reported
that the Marquis of Mantua is at Bologna; and his ambassador
here begins to apprehend that his liberation may make his con-
dition rather worse as regards his states. His proceedings are
being watched, which will enable us to form a better judgment
of his conduct.

Whilst writing this the ambassador of the king of Wirtem-
berg has returned here, it being now the twenty-third hour.
He is a German gentleman, accompanied by a suite of about
a dozen cavaliers. He was met on his entrance into the city
and received with all the honors. So soon as I learn why he
left here, and why he returns, I will inform your Lordships,
que bene valeant.

Buots, 29 July, 1510.

The English ambassadors left here two days ago to return to
their country, laden with honors and presents.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret. apud R. Chr.

P. S.— To-day is the 30th, and we have news this morning
that the troops which had gone by land to overturn the gov-
ernment of Genoa, finding themselves pursued, have in great
part re-embarked on board the Venetian fleet. Each galley has
taken six cavaliers and their captain; and about one hundred

COURT OF FRANCE. 241

cavaliers have rallied together to try and cut their way out.
They are not without hopes here that some mishap may befall
the Venetian fleet.

We also hear that the Marquis of Mantua has sent for his
son, to place him in the hands of the Pope; whereupon the
king has sent word to the ambassador of the Marquis to try to
induce the Marchioness to oppose it, and the ambassador is of
the opinion that she will never consent to it, and that secretly
the Marquis would be pleased that she should refuse to give
up the son.

The object of the Wiirtemberg ambassador’s coming is said
to be the following. The king of France, seeing the conduct
of the Swiss, and the hopes which the Pope builds upon them,
has resolved, for the purpose of making them pause and reflect
so that they may not so readily serve the Pope, to give them
some trouble, or at least to menace them through the king of
Wiirtemberg, who is their natural enemy. The Duke’s ambas-
sador has passed nearly the whole of to-day at the council in
deliberating as to the steps to be taken in this matter.

His Majesty has also sent the captain of his Swiss body-
guard to Switzerland, to try on the one hand to win back, if not
all the Cantons, at least a part of them, and so we shall soon
see whether by menaces or by persuasion these Swiss can be
detached from the Pope.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI ut supra.

LETTER VIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Your Lordships are aware, from what I wrote you a few days
since, that the Pope had not succeeded in his attempt to over-
turn the government of Genoa; and that the king of France,
on the one hand, had been more frightened than hurt, and that,
on the other hand, the Pope, by showing himself the open
enemy of the king of France, so far from causing him any seri-
ous trouble, had rather strengthened his Majesty’s position,
in more securely consolidating his authority in Genoa. His
Holiness having thus failed in gaining the advantages which

he had promised himself by this movement, it seemed to the
VOL. IV. 16

242 THIRD MISSION TO THE

good and sensible men of this court that possibly an agreement
between the king and the Pope might be hoped for, if a loyal
mediator could be found, who would intervene for the good of
Christendom in general and Italy in particular. For it would
be easy to show to the king in what position he would place
himself if he attempted to make war upon the Pope, and what
damage he might suffer himself by a proceeding, the cost of
which would be certain, but the final result most doubtful. And
in the same way the Pope could with like facility be persuaded
of the ills which this war might bring not only to himself per-
sonally, but also to the temporal and spiritual authority of the
Church, as well as to all Christendom.

Matters being in this position, and having several times con-
versed with the Pope’s ambassador here, who is grieved to the
heart by these movements, Robertet one evening sent for Gio-
vanni Girolami, who is the business agent here of his Emi-
nence the Cardinal Volterra, as Alessandro Nasi can tell you ;
and after having first talked with him about some of his pri-
vate affairs, Robertet suddenly turned the conversation upon
these troubles that are brewing, and complained to him bit-
terly about these movements, and demonstrated to him that
they could not but cause regret and injury both to the victor
and the vanquished. And going from one argument to another
he concluded by saying that, if the Pope were disposed to make
peace, he would be met half-way by the king; and that the
Pope ought to do so, unless indeed the Almighty had inspired
him with obstinacy for the ruin of the world. But that anyhow
he did not see clearly how a peace could be brought about un-
less some third party intervened, inasmuch as the king would
never be the first to yield, and as the Pope would probably
take the same ground. And having therefore thought much
as to how such an agreement might possibly be brought about,
he saw but one way, and that was that your Lordships and
the Cardinal Volterra should undertake the mediation, as any
others would only spoil the matter by trying to gain advantages
for themselves from this enmity. And then he intimated to
Giovanni that it would be well that he should go himself for
this purpose to Florence. Giovanni, on the one hand, ex-
pressed his willingness to go, but on the other hand declared
that the negotiation should be managed in such a way that
your Lordships should clearly see what sort of business they

COURT OF FRANCE. 243

entered upon, and that you ought to be well assured of the in-
tentions of the king, so as to be sure that neither you nor any
one else should be duped; and that he believed, if this were
done, you would readily undertake the mediation, knowing how
greatly your Lordships desired peace and concord between the
two sovereigns, and how much you dreaded discord, from which
nothing but enmity and disaster would result. Nothing was
concluded that evening, but another meeting was agreed upon.

When Giovanni related all this to me, I thought it best not
to discourage this negotiation, but rather to urge it forward
as much as possible, and communicated it to the Pope’s am-
bassador, not as to a party interested, but as to a mediator,
who would be useful in such a negotiation. He thought the
conversation with Robertet very opportune and to the purpose
for those who really aimed at the good of all, and resolved to
go and see the king. Having done so, he pointed out to his
Majesty the dangers to which he exposed himself, and the
frauds that had been practised underhandedly to bring the
Pope to the point where he was. He showed his Majesty first
the suspicions which the king of Spain had conceived in regard
to their alliance; for scarcely two months since the reported
treaty between them, the king of Spain, having become suddenly
apprehensive that the treaty would operate to his disadvan-
tage, sent a fleet to Sicily, under pretence of another enterprise.
Afterwards, when the disputes with Ferrara broke out, the
Spanish representative here persuaded the king of France not
to abandon Ferrara, whilst the Spanish envoy at Rome demon-
strated to the Pope that his Majesty of France had done wrong
to defend the Duke of Ferrara; and that it was in this way that
they had brought matters to the point where they wanted them.
His Majesty ought therefore to think well as to the course he
was about to engage in; for if the Pope had tried to do him an
injury, he had not succeeded in the attempt, and therefore it
would be well to forget it rather than to give him cause to think
of attempting another, which might succeed. To all this he
added a number of other reasons, which I will not relate lest I
should become tedious. The king listened to all this patiently,
and then replied: “TI admit the truth of all you say, but what
‘““would you have me do? I shall never be the first to de-
“clare myself. The Pope has struck a blow at me, but I will
“bear all except the loss of honor and my state. But I prom-

244 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“ise you faithfully that if the Pope makes any demonstration
“of affection towards me, be it only the thickness of my finger-
“nail, I will go the length of my arm to meet him; but other-
‘wise I shall not move an inch.”

The ambassador thought that he had sufficiently discovered
the king’s disposition in the matter, and took his leave. After
that he passed more than an hour with Robertet discussing the
best way of proceeding in this business; and in view of what
Giovanni Girolami had said, they concluded it would be best
to have him go to Florence, and try to persuade your Lord-
ships to undertake the task of acting as mediators between the
Pope and his Majesty of France; but that it would be neces-
sary for you to act as though it were spontaneous with you,
and that you should send at once one or two ambassadors to
Rome for this particular purpose. When informed of their
conclusion, I observed to them that, to induce your Lordships
the more readily to undertake this office of mediators, it would
be necessary that I should be able to write to you that this at-
tempt would be most agreeable to his Majesty and that your
undertaking it would be very gratifying to him; and that, if his
Majesty was not willing to say this to me himself, it should at
least be said to me by his counsellors. And so it was decided
that Robertet should communicate the whole project to the
king; namely, the sending of Giovanni to Florence, and your
proposed intervention, as well as the manner of making it
known to your Lordships. Robertet was entirely satisfied with
this, and this morning, whilst his Majesty had gone to breakfast,
Monseigneur de la Tremouille, who for two weeks has assisted
at every council together with Robertet and the Chancellor,
called me, and, after some sharp words against the Pope, said
to me that, notwithstanding all this, as Giovanni Girolami
was going to Florence, he wished to tell me on the part of
the king that his Majesty was satisfied and would have great
pleasure in your Lordships’ intercession between the Pope and
himself, and that you should send ambassadors to Rome for —
this purpose, and manage the whole affair as you thought best.
The business then stands thus. Giovanni, who will bring you
this letter, goes per post to Florence, and will tell you orally
all I have written, and give you any further particulars that
you may wish to know in relation to this affair. And so that
your Lordships may know how this affair is to be managed to

COURT OF FRANCE. 245

the satisfaction of France, Robertet said (and doubtless with
the full knowledge of the king) that if the Pope would submit
his claims upon Ferrara to arbitration, his Majesty would be
satisfied, and would not care to whose hands the Pope were to
confide this arbitration. This, however, relates rather to the
conclusion of the affair, than to the way of initiating it; it would
suffice that the Pope should put a stop to the preparations
he is making against the king of France, such as the stirring
up of the Swiss and the other powers; and that his Holiness
should orally express to your ambassadors his wish to be a
father to the king, provided that his Majesty would act the
part of a good son to him. And that the Pope should write a
brief to the king to that effect, who upon receiving it would
be prepared to send an envoy to Rome; and that, if the nego-
tiations were begun in this way, he doubted not but what good
would result from it.

Your Lordships will now with your habitual prudence take
into consideration what I have written, and what Giovanni will
communicate to you, and will then decide upon such measures
as you may deem most proper; but in all this business the
greatest promptness is most necessary.

I have not discouraged these overtures, because I think that
the enmity between these two sovereigns would be one of the
greatest misfortunes that could befall our city, for the reasons
which you have seen and heard from the first origin of the dif-
ficulty ; and therefore I have regarded all means as good that
may be employed to bring about a peace. And I cannot but
think that in becoming mediators your Lordships will gain
great advantages, whether the negotiation succeeds or not. If
it succeeds, then it will bring about the peace we so much hope
for and desire, and we shall escape the dangers which the war
would bring to our very doors. And the more important the
part which you take in the matter, the greater will be the satis-
faction and the advantages which you will derive from it. For
you will have laid both the king and the Pope under obliga-
tions, having labored for their interests no less than for your
own. And if it does not succeed, his Majesty of France will
remain equally obliged to you for having done that which he
approved of, and for having given him, in the face of the whole
world, more just grounds than ever for his contentions with
the Pope. Nor will the Pontiff be able to complain of you if,

246 THIRD MISSION TO THE

after your efforts to persuade him to a peace, which he has
rejected, you should take part against him in the war. All
these considerations induced me to become so readily mixed
in these negotiations, and if your Lordships approve of my |
course, I should prize it highly; but if not, then I must entreat
you to excuse me, for in my position here I could not view the
matter differently.

His Majesty is pushing his arrangements and preparations
most vigorously. He has ordered a meeting of a general coun-
cil of all the prelates of his realm for the middle of September,
at Orleans. He has taken the Duke of Wiurtemberg into his
pay, so as to have German troops and check the movements of
the Swiss, and at the same time he has sent the captain of his
Swiss guard amongst them to try and recover, if not all, at
least a part of the Cantons. He has ordered all the captains
of his infantry to make out their muster-rolls, so as to be ready
to start at any moment, and has ordered out the ban and rear-
ban for the protection of his realm, also a supply of horses for
a remount if necessary; and has also prescribed new ways of
raising money for the expenses of the war, without touching
his private treasury.

The arrival of Monseigneur de Gurck is looked for here; he
is the most important man of the Emperor. The king intends
to propose to Monseigneur de Gurek that the Emperor shall hold
himself in readiness to march in the spring with such troops
as he may have or may be able to raise. His Majesty is re-
solved to accompany him in person to Rome with twenty-five
hundred lances and thirty thousand infantry; and he has
sworn on his soul to achieve two things, at the risk of losing
his kingdom, namely, to have the Emperor crowned in Rome,
and to make a Pope to his own liking.

The king of Spain has written a letter most favorable to the
projects of the king of France, and censuring the Pope’s at-
tempt against Genoa; offering to his Majesty of France twelve
of his armed galleys, to be employed for or against whomever
his Majesty pleases. These letters are in every way favorable
to France, and do not spare the Pope in the least. His Ma-
jesty has also ordered a fleet to be fitted out by spring propor-
tionate to his land forces.

Your Lordships can imagine now how great in the sight of
God and men will be the merits of him who shall put a stop to

COURT OF FRANCE. 247

all these movements, and who by his wisdom will prove him-
self the physician to cure all these ills.

The great importance of these matters has almost made me
forget to mention the arrival at this court, two days ago, of an
ambassador from Lucca; but I will not weary you now with
any particulars respecting him, as Giovanni is fully informed,
and will tell you all about him.

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Bros, 3 August, 1510.

I have given Giovanni Girolami private instructions, in which
I mention the Pope’s ambassador, and say that this affair has
been conducted thus far entirely in accordance with his coun-
sels, and that he has taken upon himself to manage his Holi-
ness so as to bring him round to this proposition; bearing in
mind that the war which he is making against the king of
France is founded upon two things: the one, suspicion; and
the other, the wrongs he imagines he has received at the hands
of the king in the matter of Ferrara. As to the first, namely,
the suspicions, he must pretend to share them, but at the same
time show the Pope the necessity of adopting some prudent
measures to secure himself against the apprehended danger,
against which neither his arms nor ours would suffice, and
upon those of others we cannot rely. He must also tell the
Pope what the king of Spain has written in favor of France,
without referring to the Pope; and the same with regard to
the messages sent here by the Duke of Savoy. But it might
very possibly be arranged that the other princes would guar-
antee the promises of the king of France, and this would be
the safest plan to adopt, without having to upset the whole
world. Valete!

EVEL bx.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Since the departure of Giovanni Girolami from here with full
information as to the state of affairs here, and with instructions
(which your Lordships will have found enclosed in my letter)
to see whether some way could not be found for an arrange-

248 THIRD MISSION TO THE

ment between the king and the Pope, I have received your
Lordships’ letters of the 26th ultimo. As his Majesty has gone
on a pleasure excursion some three leagues from here, I went
to see Robertet and communicated to him the contents of your
letters; and amongst other things | mentioned the news that
the troops which had left Genoa had taken refuge at Camajore,
a place belonging to Lucca. To this Robertet replied that he
had letters from Genoa with quite contrary information, namely,
that Mare Antonio’s men had taken refuge on Pisan territory,
where they had been stripped by the peasants; but that your
Lordships had compelled these country people to make restitu-
tion of everything they had taken from these troops, which had
caused great dissatisfaction to his Majesty, who concluded from
this, and other similar acts of yours, that you did not go with
him entirely. I told him that my letters said exactly the con-
trary, and that it was not reasonable that these cavaliers, who
could with perfect safety take refuge on Lucchese territory,
should have sought it within your Lordships’ dominions. It
would be well, therefore, that your Lordships should inform me
fully as to how this affair really occurred.

Yesterday I thought it proper to go to see the king, and whilst
with his Majesty I told him what your Lordships had written ;
namely, that, having received his Majesty’s letter on the very
day that you had written to me, you could not reply to it at
once; but as you had already by your acts manifested your
good intentions, it might reasonably be assumed that you would
do the same in your letters. His Majesty said that he believed
it, but then at once began to speak on the same subject that
Robertet had spoken about; namely, the plundering of certain
troops by the peasants, and the reported restitution by your
Lordships; to which I made the same reply that I had made to
Robertet. And his Majesty then said, “‘The Grand Master has
“by my orders notified the Signori to keep their troops ready,
“so that I may make use of them whenever I require them ;
“and I now tell you to say the same thing to them, for in the
“ daily current of events I think no less of their interests than
“of my own.” And thereupon I took my leave, for as his
Majesty had been on horseback till the twentieth hour, he could
not prolong my audience.

Magnificent Signori, when I left yesterday morning to go and
see the king, it was in company with Robertet; and during the

COURT OF FRANCE. 249

whole distance of three leagues from here to where the king
was, we talked over all the affairs of Italy, and in a general
way also the events of the day. I say in a general way, for
no one has communicated to me any details of their plan for
attacking the Pope. For these French people do not trust us
altogether, and will, in fact, never trust your Lordships until
you declare yourselves openly in their favor and join them with
arms in hand. The character of the French is naturally sus-
picious, and they suspect your Lordships the more, because they
know you to be prudent, and therefore not apt to expose your
interests to great risks. It is this that gave rise to the request
which they made, and which I communicated to your Lordships
in my letter of the 18th, and which they now renew. And you
may believe as you do the Evangely, that, if war breaks out
between the Pope and his Majesty of France, you will not be
able to avoid declaring yourselves in favor of one of the par-
ties, wholly irrespective of the regards you may have for the
other; the present demand is proof of this. And as, in case of
being obliged to do what I have just said, your city will be ex-
posed to some risk, it is the opinion of your friends here that
it would be wise for you not to run that risk without receiving
some advantages by way of compensation. I have mentioned
to your Lordships that the king told me that he bore your in-
terests in mind; and Robertet has on several occasions said to
me, “ You never say anything to me about Lucca; it is time
“now to think of something.” And even to-day, whilst con-
versing with him, he came back to the same subject, and asked
me whether the duchy of Urbino would suit us. J turned the
conversation, as I always do on similar occasions, and did not
permit him to know my mind; for I make it a point to avoid
entering upon a discussion of any subject respecting which I do
not know your Lordships’ views. I notice, however, that my
reserve increases their suspicions, and makes them the more
pressing to have you declare yourselves for them. Nor do I
believe that the strictest observation of the terms of the treaty
will suffice them; they want more than that; for whilst the
treaty stipulations refer only to the defensive, they want to
force you to the offensive, so as to commit you the more effect-
ually to them. Thus they believe that, if the war does take
place, you will be obliged to declare yourselves in their favor,
or become their enemy. But do not persuade yourselves that

250 THIRD MISSION TO THE

this would make them hesitate, or that they cannot do without
you; for their pride and confidence in their power will never
allow them to come down to that point, and if such considera-
tions were to restrain them for one moment, they would quickly
disregard them. And therefore those persons here who are
really attached to you think that it will be necessary for your
Lordships, without waiting for time to press or necessity to
oblige you, to attend to present events; to reflect well, and
then take the direct course for the object you aim at; and
that in any event you form definite resolutions. And when
you think the time come for you to be obliged to declare your-
selves out and out in favor of the king of France, then you
ought at a suitable moment to think of your own interests; for
when the question presents itself of the possible loss of your
allies and your state, it is proper also that you should think of
the advantages and profits that may be gained. For if you
think it well to risk your fortunes with those of France, then
it comes to this, that you can dispose of a good part of Tuscany
as you may think proper, and contribute to the enterprise of
another with an annual subsidy during a suitable length of time ;
and as opportunity is anyhow but short-lived, it behooves you
to come to a prompt decision. And as I am not a personage of
sufficient consequence to begin negotiations of such importance,
your Lordships ought to charge the ambassador with it who is
now on the way here, and as quickly as possible instruct him
as to what arguments to advance in this negotiation ; so that he
may not be in the dark as to your Lordships’ intentions when
he arrives here, and so that he may be able promptly to say,
“Yes,” or “No”; for they do not mean to lose any time here.

To have a clearer understanding of the state of things here,
you must know that the French have their thoughts fixed upon
two things; namely, the first, to make peace with the Pope, pro-
vided he will make the first advances; of this Robertet has
again repeated to me his assurances. And the second is, if
peace is not made, then to win over to their side the Emperor
of Germany; for they do not see themselves how they could
succeed in the war alone and without the Emperor for an
ally. I should believe in peace, were it not that those who
are said to desire it most themselves spoil the chance of it;
for to bring the Pope to the point where they want him, they
ought to have delayed sending assistance to Ferrara, and should

COURT OF FRANCE. . - 251

not have talked about changing the government of Bologna, so
as not to arouse the suspicions of the Pope and exasperate him
the more. All this they promised at the time when Giovanni
Girolami was sent, but they do not stand by their promises, and
thus they fail in projects of this kind.

“ As to the Emperor, they make him larger or smaller offers,
“ according as they think they have greater or less need of him ;
‘Cand the king has repeatedly said to a person who is not given
“to tell lies: ‘The Emperor has several times urged me to di-
“vide Italy with him, but I have always refused my consent ;
“now, however, the Pope obliges me to do it.’ Your Lordships
“are thus exposed to two dangers in this war between the Pope
“and the king; the one that your ally may be defeated, and the
“other that the king of France makes terms with the Pope to
“your detriment. It would be well, therefore, that your am-
“ bassador should arrive here before Monseigneur de Gurck.
“Those of the Italians here who have anything to lose think
“that to avoid these dangers it is above all things necessary to
“see whether the Pope can be induced to make peace with the
“king of France, and if that cannot be done, then to convince
“the king that to hold the Pope in check it needs neither so
‘many emperors nor so much noise ; for those who in the past
‘have made war upon the Pope have either overreached him,
‘as was done by Philippe le Bel, or they caused him to be shut
“up in the Castel San Angelo by his own barons; and these
“are by no means so entirely exhausted but what means can be
“found to stir them up again. Thus in my ride yesterday with
“ Robertet I talked of nothing else; I pointed out to him all the
“examples of the past, and told him, moreover, that in making
‘war openly against the Pope they could not succeed without
“exposing themselves to great dangers; for if they attempted
“it by themselves, he could not but see that all the consequences
“would fall upon France alone; and on the other hand, if she
“had an ally, she would have to divide Italy with that ally,
“ with whom she would afterwards have to have a conflict, that
“would prove much more dangerous than the one she had had
“to sustain against the Pope.”

Robertet agreed with me upon all points, and we need not
despair of impressing their minds here with these examples,
if there were only some few Italians of consideration here,
who would take pains to do so.

252. THIRD MISSION TO THE

I have written all this at length to your Lordships, with no
other intention than to cause you to think well upon all that is
going on here, in case there should be anything in it that can
be turned to advantage for our city. And I entreat your Lord-
ships to instruct your ambassador promptly and fully, so that
by the force of your authority and his own he may open nego-
tiations upon such points as your Lordships may deem advan-
tageous to your city and conducive to your liberty. Valete!

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buois, August 9, 1510. Secret.
——_@————_
LETTER X.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. :—

Yesterday I received your Lordships’ reply to my letter of the
18th, and this morning I came here to Saiburg, where the king
is, for the purpose of communicating to him the contents of
your letter; this I have done, and will report to your Lordships
in detail and more at my ease in my next letter; the present
one I write on my knee, and in haste for the mail which is just
about to leave. I send this by way of Ferrara. After my
audience with the king, your Lordships’ letters of the 18th
instant arrived. I regret exceedingly the unfortunate fate of my
letters in Lombardy. Ten days ago, or more, I spoke to the
king and to Robertet about providing for the prompt transmis-
sion of my letters, which both promised me. I have now com-
plained to Robertet, who was surprised, and promised to write
again most earnestly about it. To enable your Lordships to
know which of my letters may have miscarried, I will state
that I wrote on the 18th, 21st, 22d, 26th, and 29th ultimo, and
on the 8d instant per Giovanni Girolami, and last on the 9th
instant. Rest assured that I have not failed to do my duty in
this respect. “After Robertet had spoken with the king, he
“told me on the part of his Majesty that it would be very agree-
“able .to him that your Lordships should secretly give some aid
“to the Duke of Ferrara; such, for instance, as to lend him
“ money on good security ; and if you did not like to do it pub-
“licly in your own name, then to have it done through some of
“your private citizens. He has since then written to me very

COURT OF FRANCE. 2538

“fully about this, and I have replied that 1 would write to your
“Lordships on the subject, alleging the difficulties that might
“ present themselves in this matter, as I will explain to you in
“my next more fully.” * I recommend myself to your Lord-
ships, gue bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,

From THE Royat CHATEAU OF SAIBURG, Secret.
12 August, 1510.

LETTER XI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC.: —

In my lines to your Lordships of yesterday, which I sent by
the ambassador of the Marquis of Mantua, I stated briefly that
I had been a considerable time with the king and Robertet
after receipt of yours of the 28th in reply to mine of the 18th.
“JT communicated to them the contents of your letter, which
“seemed very satisfactory to them; and his Majesty said to
“me, ‘You will see my chancellor, Robertet, and my other
“ ministers, who will acquaint you with my wishes.’ ”’

I had hardly left the king when your Lordships’ letter of the
13th came, informing me of the neglect and delay to which
your Lordships’ letters as well as mine have been subjected in
Lombardy. I went at once back to Robertet, and communi-
cated to him the information contained in your letter, and
complained to him, etc., etc. I told him also of the dangers
to which our merchants had been exposed in consequence of
the Pope’s having merely heard of the demands which the king
had made on my arrival. He manifested surprise at the first,
and said he would again give instructions about forwarding
the letters ; but as to the second, he said that he did not know
where the Pope could have heard of it; he would, however, re-
mind the king to be more cautious hereafter.

“His Majesty returned here to-day; and after dinner Mon-
“seigneur de l’Oratellis and the other five members of the
“council had me called, and the Chancellor, after a long ex-
“ordium upon the services rendered by France to Florence,

* This passage within quotation marks was written in cipher, and has not
appeared in any edition prior to that of Passerini and Milanesi.

254 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“beginning from the time of Charlemagne and coming down
“to the present King Louis, said that his Majesty had under-
stood that the Pope, moved by a diabolical spirit that had
“taken possession of his mind, wanted to renew his attempt
“against Genoa, in which case it might well be that Monscig-
“neur de Chaumont would have need of your troops to defend
“his Majesty’s possessions. He therefore desired that your
“ Lordships should keep your troops on foot, so that they might
“be ready for active service at any moment that Monseigneur
“de Chaumont should call for them. And that his Majesty
“also wished you to keep a few thousand regular infantry on
‘“‘the frontier ready for service; and that in this wise you would
“lay the king and the house of France under eternal obligations
“to you. I replied to all this in accordance with what your
“ Lordships had written me in your letter of the 28th in answer
“to mine of the 18th, that they ought to bear in mind that your
“dominion was entirely surrounded by the states of the Pope,
“who upon the least suspicion had threatened to have our
“merchants plundered, and would certainly do so upon the
“slightest demonstration on the part of your Lordships, and
“that moreover he would leave every other war for the pur-
“nose of combating you. And that therefore, inasmuch as his
“‘ Majesty could do very well without our being mixed up in the
“matter, he ought to have some little consideration for your
“Lordships. And as regards troops, we had but very few on
“the frontier, and that these would have to be paid whenever
‘ordered to be ready to march, and any expenditure in addition
“to. what we were already burdened with would be actually
‘“insupportable by our city. They answered nearly all at the
“same moment to my remarks, saying that the troops would
“be wanted only for a few days to repel an attack, and that
“your Lordships ought to remember that the king was as solici-
‘tous about your honor and interests as about his own. ‘That
“his Majesty’s preparations were on such a scale that he would
“make celum novum et terram novam in Italy, to the detri-
“ment of his enemies and the exaltation of his friends; and
“that I ought for these reasons to write to your Lordships and
“hand the letter to Robertet to be forwarded, which he prom-
“ised to do.”

I wrote to your Lordships on the 9th, giving full account of
the state of things here; if time permits, I will enclose a copy

COURT OF FRANCE. 255

of it with this letter, for I see that things are going in the way
I said they would; “that is to say, these people here want to
“involve you irretrievably in this war, and for that reason you
“should ponder well what I have written before, and bethink
“vourselves as to what advantages you may be able to gain;
“for according to their proposition we should be much exposed
“to loss.”

The Emperor has sent a herald to the army of the Church
to warn the Duke of Urbino and the other commanders not to
molest Ferrara, “at which the generals laughed.” According
to what we hear from there the Pope’s affairs are prospering,
for he has taken Cotignola and Luco. Monseigneur de Gurck
has not yet arrived, but is expected daily.

I have written to your Lordships on the 18th, 21st, 22d, 26th,
and 30th ultimo, and the 3d, 9th, and 12th instant. Your
Lordships will see now that my letters have been stopped some-
where on the road. The French are taking the course which
I indicated in my letter of the 8d; it is evident that they are
not disposed to reject the treaty of peace, whilst on the other
hand they are making great preparations for war, as I have
mentioned already in former letters. Valete /

Buots, 13 August, 1510.

Nothing more is said about the horses restored to Mare An-
tonio, and I keep quiet about it.

I send copy of my letter of the 9th hereto appended, or rather
herewith enclosed.

Servus
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.
——_—@—___—
LETTER XII.

Maeniricent SIGNoRI, ETC. : —

My last to your Lordships was of the 13th, and, assuming
that it has arrived safely, I do not now repeat its contents.
Yours of the 7th with the copy from Rome came yesterday ;
and those of the 4th, with which Reino had been charged, have,
according to what Bartolommeo Panciatichi writes, remained
in Lombardy ; not for want of great efforts on my part many

256 THIRD MISSION TO THE

days ago with his Majesty, as well as his counsellors. His Ma-
jesty told me that he had given orders to allow these letters to
pass, and the ministers say they have written about it. They
all profess to be astonished at this detention of my letters, and
I can do nothing more than to remind them of their promises,
which of course I shall do.

Immediately after receipt of the above-mentioned Ictter of
your Lordships of the 7th, I presented myself before his Ma-
jesty the king, and communicated to him the contents of that
letter ; which, being very full and acceptable, were listened to
by his Majesty with the greatest pleasure; and particularly,
it seemed to me, on account of the conclusions presented by
our ambassador at Rome; namely, “that if the Pope found
“terms of agreement that were satisfactory and to the purpose
“of which I wrote in my letter of the 8d, then to advise his
‘¢ Majesty to profit, with his habitual wisdom, by this discour-
‘agement of the Pope; and to avail himself of it as promptly
“as possible for making a favorable peace, provided his Holli-
“ness consented, rather than to think of punishing him by a
“war, the end of which no one could foresee ; and to remember
“that such movements were not becoming to Christians, nor to
‘one who had seen all his desires gratified, as was the case with
“his Majesty. The king replied to this with an earnestness
“which it would be difficult to describe ; averring with oaths
“that, inasmuch as it was not he who had originated the war
“acainst the Pope, so it would not be his fault if peace were
“not made. After that he went on with many words to com-
“plain cf the Pope’s conduct, and how, since the defeat of the
“Venetians, he had never been able to make him listen to
“reason; and although he was himse!f entirely disposed to
“make peace, yet he had not neglected to provide for war.
“That he had again sent three hundred lances into Italy that
“had just come from Burgundy, and three thousand infantry ;
“for he did not intend mercly to defend himself and his friends,
“but he wanted also to attack his enemies. He thanked your
“Lordships and praised you very much for the information
“given him, and assured me that he would be greatly pleased
“to receive similar advices from you daily. Thereupon I took
“my leave of his Majesty ; and as the council was assembled
“in session, | thought it well to go there, and in the presence
“of all I made them the same communications that I had made

COURT OF FRANCE. D257

“to the king. It would be impossible for me to tell your Lord-
“ships with what pleasure I was listened to by the whole coun-
“cil, and all declared that what your Lordships had done was
‘a real service and the act of a good friend.”

I have no other news to communicate to your Lordships,
excepting what the envoy from Ferrara had told me, that the
Grand Master had received full authority to defend Ferrara
cum totis viribus; and some days afterwards I saw him in
very good humor.

An agent of the Marquis of Mantua has come here secretly ;
and since his arrival here they are all much more favorably
disposed towards the Marquis ; and it is supposed that he also
wanted to avail himself of the occasion like the king of Spain.

His Majesty stated this morning that Gio Paolo Baglioni had
been killed by a bolt from a crossbow; your Lordships ought to
know whether or not this be true.

“Since the receipt of this news the same friend of mine
“whom I mentioned in my letter of the 3d is very hopeful
“that the treaty will be concluded, provided your Lordships
‘will actively intervene, particularly as he has letters from
“Rome that encourage similar hopes. This friend and Rober-
“tet are most anxious to know what decision your Lordships
“have come to with regard to my letter of the 5d, and since
“the arrival of Giovanni Girolami. Yesterday my friend had
“a long conversation with the king, and, after telling his Ma-
“jesty what he had heard from Rome, he suggested to him the
“same course of action that I had done, and received the same
“answer. He had, moreover, pointed out to his Majesty that
“the same persons who had caused him and the Pope to draw
“the sword were now doing their utmost to induce them to
“sheathe it again; on the one hand demonstrating to the king
“here the impossibility of the Pope’s ever acquiescing in any
“peace, and on the other hand proving to the Pope that he
‘could never trust the king. So long as this question is pend-
“ing, one of the parties imagines that his state is perfectly
“secure, whilst the other thinks that he will soon gain a por-
“tion of it. My friend added that he knew that Monseigneur
“de Gurek was coming here with his account already made
“out; but that if he found more favorable terms here he would
“accept them, and if not, then he would return to those who
“had made him fairer promises. His Majesty sees the force

VOL. IV, 17

258 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“of all these arguments, and assents; but in the end it came
“to this, that he said, ‘ What is it that you would have me do?
“Tam not going to allow the Pope to beat me.’ From this
“reply and from other indications it is evident that the king
“has decided most reluctantly upon this war; but if pushed to
“it by the force of circumstances, then he is resolved to make
“it the most magnificent war that has yet been seen in Italy.
‘‘ His intention is to temporize this winter, and to conclude
“firm alliances with England and the Emperor; and having
‘“‘oained these two powers he cares nothing for Spain, and says
“to every one that will listen to him that he looks upon the
“king of Spain as no more than king of Castile. And by way
‘of more surely winning the support of the two above-named
“sovereigns, and to leave nothing undone, he has ordered in
“the midst of all this the convocation of a council of the Gal-
“lican Church. A large number of these prelates have already
“arrived, and they are busy in preparing for the meeting which
“has been appointed to take place at Orleans; and at this
“council the obedience to the Pope will be formally abolished,
“and if England and the Emperor concur, they will elect a
“new Pope; and in the spring the king will descend into Italy
“with such an overwhelming force that it will not be war, but
“simply a promenade to Rome. Such are the plans of the
“king if peace is not made, and provided the two sovereigns
‘leave the direction of affairs in his hands to be managed as
“the Almighty may deem for the best. In truth, if your Lord-
“ships were situated elsewhere, all this would be very desirable,
“so that our priests might also taste a little of the bitterness
“of this world.” *

I entreat your Lordships with the utmost earnestness, if you
do not wish me to sell my horses and return on foot to Flor-
ence, to direct Bartolommeo Panciatichi to advance me fifty
scudi; for I am here with three horses. On my return I will
give full account of my expenditures, and I rely upon your
Lordships’ acting in this matter with your wonted goodness.
Valete !

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buors, 18 August, 1510. Secret. Flor.

* All within quotation marks in this and the subsequent letters was origi-
nally written in cipher.

COURT OF FRANCE. 259

LETTER XIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last of the 18th instant informed your Lordships fully
of all that was passing here, and at the same time I replied to
the letters which your Lordships had written me up to that
date. Since then I have received your two despatches of the
10th and 11th ; and as the king is suffering from a cough which
is prevalent throughout this whole country, | have communi-
eated to Robertet such portion of the information contained
in your letters as in my judgment I thought proper he should
know, and gave him moreover a note of it, so that he might
show it to his Majesty, etc.

Although your Lordships have been informed from Rome
that the Pope almost despairs of being able to count upon the
Swiss, yet it is evident that the French here are very appre-
hensive and suspicious of them, and the more so, as I am in-
formed, because the Swiss boast of being able at any time to
make a road over the Alps, which no one can prevent, nor
hinder them from coming down in the neighborhood of Savona.
Being accustomed to carry their provisions with them, they
could pass above Genoa and get into the Lucchese territory
by the Riviera di Levante, without being exposed to attack ;
and they could not be prevented getting from there into the
Bolognese territory, where they would unite with the Papal
forces. I do not know the country myself, and may possibly
be mistaken, and some persons think it a very long and round-
about way; but however that may be, the truth is that the
French stand in great fear of these Swiss; and I venture to
say that, if they were to declare themselves in favor of the
French, these would care but little for all the other powers.

They had also become somewhat distrustful of the Emperor,
because nothing more had been heard of Monseigneur de
Gurck ; yesterday, however, news was received that he had
started on the 18th instant. So they have recovered their con-
fidence a little, and are of good cheer upon that point: for if
the Emperor were to abandon the French, their want of German
infantry would then oblige them to look to their own homes
rather than to other people’s.

I wrote to your Lordships that the ambassador from Ferrara

260 THIRD MISSION TO THE

was well pleased with the preparations which the king had
ordered for the benefit of the Duke; but I have since then
found him in a very different humor, complaining that the
French order one thing to-day and recall it to-morrow. It
seems to me that he fears that in the end his Duke may fare
badly. He complains also that the French have their ideas
turned too much towards the next spring, thinking that the
arrival of the king with a powerful army will remedy every-
thing ; but they do not take into account that in the mean time
some of their allies may meet with disaster.

I learn from a good source that the Marquis of Mantua has
promised to serve the Pope with his person and his state, so
soon as his Holiness shall have made himself master of Fer-
rara, but that in the mean time he will remain neutral.

Nothing else occurs to me to say, unless it be to recommend
myself again to your Lordships, and to beg you to instruct Bar-
tolommeo Panciatichi to pay me the fifty scudi of which I am in
great need, as stated in my letter of the 18th, to enable me not
only to return home, but to have myself cured; for I am still
suffering from the effects of the cough, which has left my
stomach in such wretched condition that I have no appetite
for anything. I must add, that there is an extraordinarily great
mortality at Paris: more than a thousand persons die per day.
May the Almighty not abandon us! Valete !

Buois, 24 August, 1510.

For some days past the question has been discussed between
the king and his councillors of sending a representative of his
Majesty to reside near your Lordships ; and to hasten his com-
_ing to Florence it has been proposed to charge Monseigneur de
Chaumont with sending him. I do not know whether anything
has been done in the matter, for it is five days since I have
seen or spoken to any one, having been confined to my cham-
ber by this cough. Iterum valete !

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secr, Flor. apud. Chr. M.

COURT OF FRANCE. 261

LETTER XIV.

Macniricent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

The last letters I have from your Lordships were of the 11th
instant. Since then you will have received mine of the 3d, 9th,
12th, 13th, 18th, and 24th instant, from which if they have
reached you safely, you will have seen how matters are progress-
ing here.

Yesterday we had news of the capture of Modena, in conse-
quence of which a council was held yesterday and to-day in
relation to that matter; but I do not know as yet what has
been decided upon. True, 1 have seen the ambassador from
Ferrara, who was going to the council; he seemed discon-
tented, and repeated to me what I wrote you in my last he
had said to me, namely; “that the French had promised him
“a number of times powerful help, and had actually given
“the orders for it, but that these were afterwards revoked, as
“though they thought the Duke could help himself. On the
“other hand, they boast of their great preparations, without
“thinking of what may happen in the mean time, or that those
“who suffer the evils have also to bear the cost. Robertet,
“as stated in my last letter, has been ill with this cough, and
“having called to see him a couple of days ago, and being
‘alone with him, we had a long conversation about Italian
“affairs. Having the time, and the opportunity being favora-
“ble, I told him that, if this war between them and the Pope
“went on,it would be necessary that the king, for his own good
“as well as yours, should decide as to the manner of availing
“himself of your Lordships’ assistance; and as this subject
“was now under consideration, it would be well to review and
“discuss what you were able to do, how you were situated,
“and what service you could render the king. The first thing
‘to bear in mind, I said, was the fact that you were poor, and
“that in consequence of the long wars in which you had been
“engaged, and the expenditures which you had been obliged
“to incur and from which you were not yet entirely liberated,
“vou could not be called powerful nor well supplied as regards
“money. After that the geographical position of our territory
“must be taken into consideration, being entirely surrounded
“by the Pope and his allies, which made it easy for his Holi-

262, THIRD MISSION TO THE

“ness, with but little expense to himself, to give you much
“trouble, and subject you to much danger and enormous costs.
“That the late inconsiderable demonstration of the Venetian
“fleet had obliged you to send thousands of troops to Pisa,
“which certainly could not have been done without costing
“you large sums of money; and therefore it was necessary,
“after having carefully considered the matter, that the king
“should bear in mind, when he claimed your assistance against
“the Pope, that your aid should be efficient and advantageous
“to him, and not insufficient and hurtful. For if this aid was
“not to be of great advantage to his Majesty, and only served
“to saddle you with another war, the king would be obliged, not
“only to return to your Lordships the aid lent him, but also
“to add some of his own troops, so that where his Majesty has
“now to provide for the defence of Ferrara, Genoa, the Friuli,
‘and Savoy, he would then also have to provide for the safety
“of Florence and Tuscany. Such aid from you would therefore
“be more injurious than useful to his Majesty ; and for that
“reason I begged him to be very careful and to weigh matters
‘“maturely ; for if they wanted to act wisely they must regard
“this much as certain, that, if the war against the Pope went
‘any further, the Florentines would be of greatest assistance
“to the king if they defended themselves with all the ability
“they possess, so as not to need any help from his Majesty ;
“particularly considering the situation of their territory, and
“the facility with which the Pope could attack them on so
“many sides. When, therefore, the matter came to be dis-
“cussed in council, and they wanted the Florentines to act
“and speak, I begged him to see that their purposes respecting
“the Florentines should be well weighed and digested; for if
“these were carefully considered, I doubted not that on the
“whole the resolutions of the council thereupon would also be
“wise. And that it behooved his Lordship more than any one
“else to see to this, because he understood Italian affairs better
“than any of the other members of the council. It seemed to
“me that Robertet was pleased with my arguments, and he
“showed me that he had taken notes of them. Nevertheless,
“T could not rid myself of the idea which I have stated in a
“previous letter, namely, that they desire anyhow to implicate
‘‘you openly in this war, in case it should be pushed on; and
“consequently I do not cease to say the same thing to the

COURT OF FRANCE. 263

“others, doing so, however, always in such a manner as not
“to allow them to imagine that I say all this merely to avoid
“observing the stipulations of the treaty.” But where the
reasons are so palpable and manifest such suspicions ought
not to be entertained.

The king will leave here on Sunday or Monday next to go
to Tours, where that Council is to be held which was originally
convoked to meet at Orleans. He still intends to carry out his
project in the spring. ‘And as I have written before, it will
‘make a brilliant show if England and the Emperor stand by
“him; but if these should fail him, and the Swiss hold to the
“Pope, then his Majesty will confine himself exclusively to the
“protection of his own states; and it is believed that he will
“not be able to attempt any other enterprise unless he shall
“first have detached some of these Swiss. All others who
“may have need of his Majesty must have patience.”

Great hopes are founded here upon the coming of Monseig-
neur de Gurcek. It was said at first that he was to start on the
13th, but nothing further has been heard of him. The impe-
rial ambassadors manifest not the least apprehension as to any
discord between the Emperor and the king of France; and
they have said that within a few days the Pope would have
such a dog at his heels as would make him think of other
things than making war upon Ferrara. They report that
three thousand Bohemian infantry and two thousand German
cavalry are coming through the Friuli to attack the Venetians.
Time will show whether this be true or not.

“Since writing the above, I have spoken with the ambassa-
“dor from Ferrara, who tells me that it has been decided that
“Chaumont is immediately to send three hundred lances and
“two thousand infantry to Parma, where they are to join the
“fourteen hundred infantry which the Duke has at Reggio.
“Their object will be to go and retake Modena, in the event
“of the Pope’s army attacking Mirandola; but if the Papal
“army remains at Modena, then the above-mentioned troops
“on the one hand, and on the other hand those that are with
“Monseigneur de Chatillon will attack the Pope’s forces at
“Modena; and the ambassador has no doubt that, if these
“orders are not changed or the Pope’s forces not greatly
“increased, the Pope’s army will be obliged to withdraw,
“whether he will or not.”

264 THIRD MISSION TO THE

A proclamation by order of the king has been published here
to-day, and is to be published throughout the entire realm, that
no one shall dare to send to Rome in relation to church bene-
fices or any other clerical object, under penalty of losing life and
property ; and at the same time the king has released all his
subjects from their obedience to the Pope. It is well known
here that the Pope boasts of having a treaty of peace with the
king of France in his pocket, and this has increased the indig-
nation against him.

I assure your Lordships that it is quite possible that this
may be true to-day; but if the king succeeds in effecting a
firm alliance with the Emperor, the Pope will find that he has
been led into error, so that if any one were to tell him so, he
would be telling him the truth. And if his Majesty does not
avail himself of this occasion for his own advantage, he may
very likely have reason to repent it; for to detach the Emperor
from the king of France, he would in all reason have to give
and promise him greater advantages than what the king of
France can offer and give. And as I have already written in
a former letter, his Majesty of France will not refuse any con-
ditions that the Emperor may demand, for every other wound
and every other injury will seem to him more honorable and
bearable than those inflicted upon him by the Pope. Whether
waking or sleeping, the king thinks and dreams of nothing but
the wrong which he imagines he has received at the hands of
the Pope, and his mind is filled with nothing but thoughts of
revenge. I have been told again by a person high in authority,
that the Emperor aims at nothing less than to engage the king
in a partition of Italy between them.

I have no other news to communicate to your Lordships, to
whom I recommend myself.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buois, 27 August, 1510. Secret.

LETTER XV.

MAaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last letter was of the 27th, in which I reported all that
occurred to me of interest, and yesterday after dinner I re-

COURT OF FRANCE. 7 265

ceived your Lordships’ despatches of the 17th, with a copy of
the letter to Pandolfini. I communicated to Robertet what
you had decided “with reference to the coming of Giovanni
“Girolami, for I could not speak to the king about it, as he
“had never been willing to say the least word on the subject,
‘and there was no occasion to mention it to others. Robertet
“was pleased with your decision, but nevertheless said that he
“feared, if the Pope wanted now to treat, it would be too late ;
“still the negotiations could do no harm, provided due regard
“was had to the king’s honor. He told me that the Pope’s
“forces had gone to Mirandola, where they encountered the
“French and met with a terrible repulse.” He told me also
that an agent from Germany had arrived per post, and brought
amongst other news the positive departure of Monscigneur de
Gurek on the 13th instant. “He does not approve that you
“should have excused your not sending the troops by alleging
“the negotiations with Rome; for the king does not wish that
“it should be thought that the attempt to make peace had ori-
“ginated with him, and for that reason he did not want to
“talk with me about it, nor would he permit that any of his
“ministers should write to you about it; he desired that the
“whole should be regarded as coming from you. Your having
“mentioned it to Chaumont was therefore bad, and his Majesty
“is very much displeased about it. He approves my silence on
“the subject at the meeting of the council to-day, as I shall re-
“Jate more particularly hereafter.” I had this conversation
with Robertet yesterday evening at the first hour of night, and
after the following circumstances had occurred. ‘So soon as
“T had received your Lordships’ despatch, and had learned the
“contents of your letter to Pandolfini respecting your Lord-
“ships’ resolution about the troops asked for by Chaumont, I
“went to see the king, but did not succeed in obtaining an
‘audience, as his Majesty was still suffering from the cough,
“and was at the time locked in with the queen; and therefore,
“so as not to lose any time, I went to the Chancellor’s hotel
‘““where the council was assembled. Having been admitted
“to their presence, I told them that before your Lordships
“had received my letter, which I had been charged by the
“council to write to you on the 3d instant, and by which his
“Majesty the king requests that your Lordships should hold
“your troops in readiness to march at any moment that the

266 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“Grand Master asked for them, in the event of the Pope’s re-
“newing his attempt against Genoa, the Grand Master had
“sent an express to your Lordships with the request imme-
“diately to send your troops into Lombardy to be employed
“there in the service of the king. Whereupon your Lordships,
“desirous above all to observe the treaty stipulations, wanted
“without delay to order their mobilization. But as it required
‘some little time to expedite them, you wished, in the interest
“of the king as well as your own, during that interval to point
“out to his Majesty and to Chaumont the importance of such
“a step, so that they might know that your Lordships had
“foreseen all the evils that could result from it. And there-
“fore you gave them to understand that it would be well for
“his Majesty to bear in mind that his enemy was the Pope,
“whose forces completely enveloped the Florentine territory
“on all sides; and to demand now that your Lordships
“should send your troops away from home would in reality
“be nothing less than to demand leaving you unarmed in
“the very midst of your enemies, by whom you might at any
“moment be crushed; and that this would necessarily lead
“to one of two evils, namely, either that you would be over-
“whelmed, or that the king not only would be obliged at
“once to send your troops back to you, but would also have
“to add some of his own; and that in addition to the cost of
“defending Ferrara, aiding the Emperor, opposing the Swiss,
‘and guarding Genoa, his Majesty would also, at his own con-
‘siderable expense, have to defend Tuscany and Florence, or
“submit to their loss. And that consequently your Lordships
“begged them to be pleased to consider, on the one hand, the
“advantage to be derived from sending your Lordships’ troops
‘away from home, which would be absolutely null; and on the
“other hand, the damage which it would cause to his Majesty’s
“interests, as well as the dangers to which it would expose
“those of your Lordships, which would indeed be serious. And
“that I did not believe the council had ever entertained a more
“hazardous resolution, and one that would in all respects be
“useless and full of danger. And that for these reasons your
“Lordships had wished me to bring these considerations once
‘more before the council, as there was still time; and that
“your Lordships had no doubt but what they would have to
“recognize the truth of this, that the Pope would be more

COURT OF FRANCE. 267

“effectually curbed by leaving our men-at-arms in Tuscany,
“than by sending them elsewhere. And as I had told them
“before, so now I reaffirmed it, that if this war with the Pope
“went on, it would be advantage enough for the king not to be
“obliged to have the trouble of defending you, considering the
“situation of your territory, as well as your weakness and the
“exhausted condition of your treasury.

“‘ Tt seemed to me advisable to dwell mainly upon the subject
“of expense and of danger to them as well as to your Lord-
*‘ ships, without touching any other points, for if I had referred
“to any other point that depended upon them, it would have
‘“ excited either their anger or their scorn and derision; for, as
‘“‘ Girolami knows, Robertet is the only person fully cognizant
“of the whole matter. And although it was with the consent
“of the king that they have entered upon this affair, which
“was initiated by Robertet, the others having merely followed
“him, yet it is necessary to manage this negotiation discreetly,
‘and not to publish it to the whole world. They all listened
“to me with great attention, and when [| had finished they said
“that I had spoken wisely; that they would see the king that
“very morning, and believed they should be able to give me a
“satisfactory answer, for they knew how necessary it was to
‘save your Lordships and not to expose you to danger.”

This morning after Mass, as the king was walking in the
garden, I approached his Majesty and told him all I had said
yesterday to the council, adding moreover what I thought
proper to sustain my arguments. His Majesty said in reply,
that he would think of it all, and would then let me have his
answer. After that I spoke with every member of the council
separately, and solicited each one to try and obtain the king’s
reply as soon as possible, pointing out to them the importance
of avoiding delay. They told me to come to the council to-
day, and I accordingly went there after my dinner, but had to
wait a long time before being admitted, “and then the Chan-
“cellor said to me that, the gentlemen of the council having
“heard the statement I had made to them this morning on the
“part of your Lordships, and as the reasons I had adduced
“seemed to them sound, and knowing as they did the character
“of the Pope and the situation of your dominions, they ac-
“cepted the good will of your Lordships the same as though
“you had actually sent the troops; and that they had con-

268 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“ cluded it would be best that your troops should remain in
“Tuscany. They wished, however, that your Lordships should
“hold the troops in readiness, as also the infantry you have at
“ Tunigiana, so that they might be promptly sent to support
‘the king’s interests in case the Pope should attempt to molest
“Genoa. That they did not give me this as a formal answer,
“but merely as a resolution formed amongst themselves; that
“to-morrow, however, after having seen the king, they would
“‘oive me a final answer. I did not think it worth while to
“discuss their reply any further; for on the one hand I do not
“ think you could well refuse to succor Genoa, and on the other
“hand they ask that for which they have no present necessity.
“For if the French army is superior to that of the Pope, and
“the Swiss do not pass the Alps, then I do not see what the
“ Pope could possibly do at Genoa. And thus I left the coun-
“cil to await their final and complete answer to-morrow, which
“ought to be the same as what I have written above, unless
‘letters should arrive meantime from Chaumont that would
“disturb matters by some sinister interpretation. I have
“omitted no effort to bring this matter to a conclusion to-day,
“but have not been able to obtain anything further.” Thus
far I have written to-day, the 30th.

This is the 31st, and this morning before Mass, at the mo-
ment when Monseigneur de Paris and Monseigneur the Treas-
urer Robertet were coming from the king, I joined them; “ and
“then Robertet told me that his Majesty had confirmed the
*‘ resolution of the council precisely as the Grand Chancellor had
“stated it to me yesterday evening; namely, that your troops
“are to remain in Tuscany, but that you are to hold them in
“readiness, and the infantry which you have at Lunigiana like-
“wise, so that thay may at a moment’s notice be able to render
“assistance to Genoa, whenever a necessity for it should arise.”

Two days ago a proclamation was published here, forbidding
any one, on pain of corporal punishment and fine, to go or send
_ to Rome on any business with the Pope or the Apostolic Cham-
ber. I learn from a friend “that the French army have orders
‘to take Piombino if they can, and to sack it. If this be ne
“then the affair may possibly be over by this time.”

The king leaves on Monday next for Tours, to assist at the
Council which he has ordered to be held there. Valete/

Buols, 30 August, 1510, — retained till 31st.

COURT OF FRANCE. 269

I beg to remind your Lordships most respectfully of the
request made in a previous letter, to let me have fifty scudi
through the agency of Panciatichi.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.
a
LETTER XVI.

Maentricent SiGNoRI, ETC. : —

My last was of the 30th ultimo, but was forwarded on the
Sist. I sent it in duplicate, one through Bartolommeo Pancia-
tichi at Lyons, and the other by the royal post to care of Fran-
cesco Pandolfini. The substance of that letter was, that after
considerable delay I have obtained from the king that your
troops are to remain in Tuscany, but that you are to keep them
on foot the same as the infantry which you have at Lunigiana,
so that they may at any moment go to help Genoa, whenever
it might become necessary. Girolami arrived yesterday, and
brought me your Lordships’ letters of the 22d, and repeated to
me verbally what your Lordships had written me respecting
the negotiations with Rome, and about the troops. The matter
of the troops being settled, there is no occasion to say anything
more on that subject.

As to the negotiations with Rome, I repeated to Robertet
what I had already told him according to your previous letters,
and he made me the same answer, namely, that we must wait
and see what will come of it. This morning I spoke with his
Majesty the king, and told him that troops were being raised at
Perugia and at Sienna, and that the Pope’s army was being
increased. I also pointed out to his Majesty that by the cap-
ture of Modena his Holiness still more completely surrounded
your dominions, and became daily more threatening; and that
your Lordships desired to have his Majesty informed of this for
the sake of having his Majesty’s advice and assistance when
you should stand in need of it. His Majesty replied, that I
should write you on every occasion unhesitatingly to help your-
selves, and that he should not fail you, as he had already said
several times. He told me also, that he had at this moment fif-
teen thousand infantry in his pay; that he had to render help

270 THIRD MISSION TO THE

at many points, but that all would be settled at one blow; that
he wished me to see Robertet, and make him show me what he
had directed him to write to Chaumont. Thereupon I went to
see Robertet, who showed me that the king had written formally
to Chaumont as follows: “The governor of Genoa informs us
“that the Pope desires to change the government of Florence,
“and therefore, as we have already written, we do not want
“vou to call for any troops from the Florentine government, as
“we wish that they should employ them for their own defence ;
“and write to their Lordships boldly to prepare for anything
“that may happen, and that in case of need you will not fail
“ them.”

I did not neglect to do my duty with Robertet, and to re-
mind him that we wanted facts at the proper time; and that
even now it was necessary to take active measures against the
Pope, or things would not go well; and that if Ferrara was
lost, it would involve other losses, that would bring shame to
the king and injury to his friends. Robertet answered that
the Pope needed a good thrashing; and at these words he
laughed and slapped me on the shoulder, as much as to say,
and he will get it very soon. More than that I could not get
out of him; although he said that he would be glad to see a
couple of hundred more of French lances pass the Apennines,
but that they would have to get them together first, and see
what the Swiss were going to do.

Your Lordships wish to know the intentions of the king of
France; I think my letters must have pretty well informed
you upon that point. However, his Majesty is waiting for the
spring, and meantime he is negotiating with the Emperor, and
is making all other necessary preparations for his enterprise.
He would like to temporize until spring, and spend as little
money as possible, for all these little expenditures put him in
a bad humor. This reason, and the belief that the Duke of
Ferrara is able to defend himself, have caused the troubles at
Modena; and the same reasons may cause other: similar trou-
bles, to his own detriment and that of a third party; for he
hopes that by his mere coming he will at once settle all trou-
bles, and looks upon all money spent before that as good as
thrown out of the window. It is true, he could very well send
two hundred more lances to Ferrara, which might save it and
would not involve any extra expense. It is not his Majesty’s

COURT OF FRANCE. para |

fault that this is not done, but it is the fault of those who man-
age the details of the king’s business here and in Lombardy.
God grant that time may not show how great a loss the death of
the Cardinal d’Amboise has been to,the king as well as to others ;
for were he living now, Ferrara would never have suffered so
much. For the king is not accustomed to attend to the details
of all these things and neglects them, whilst those whose duty
it is to attend to them take no authority upon themselves either
to act or to remind the king what he ought to do; and so,
whilst the physician gives no thought to the sick man, and the
servant forgets him, the patient dies.

During my interview with Robertet, a painter brought a por-
trait of the late Cardinal d’Amboise, which caused Robertet to
exclaim with a sigh, “O, my master, if thou wert living, we
should now be with our army at Rome!” This exclamation
confirms me more fully in all I have said above.

I had written thus far when Robertet suggested that it would
be well that Giovanni Girolami should report in person to his
Majesty what your Lordships had done with regard to the
negotiations with Rome after his arrival at Florence. Accord-
ingly he did so, and his Majesty was well satisfied with all the
measures you have taken; so that as his Majesty manifests his
views in relation to this negotiation more clearly than before,
the subject might now be treated more openly here as well as
at Rome. God grant that some good beginning may be made
in this matter, before they change their opinion or disposition
here !

I have nothing new to communicate to your Lordships, and
can only confirm all I have written before. As to the Swiss,
everything is being done to try and effect some arrangement
with them, and I learn from good authority that they have
already secured eight of the Cantons. If the king’s troops
with the Grand Master withdraw from the Swiss frontier, it
may be taken as an indication that terms have been made with
them; but if they remain there, then we may conclude that
some apprehension as regards the Swiss still prevails. But
whenever they do withdraw, then your Lordships will be able
to get more prompt and reliable information about it through
Pandolfini.

I have told your Lordships in a former letter as to what
measures had been taken with regard to Ferrara, and shall

212 THIRD MISSION TO THE

therefore not repeat it now. The reported loss of the city
cannot be true, for we have no news of it here, and there seems
to be no apprehension of it here.
The king leaves to-morrow for Tours, where the council is to
meet. God grant that all may go for the best! Valete!
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buois, 2 September, 1510. Secret.

LETTER XVII.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

In my last of the 2d, I repeated, amongst other things, what
IT had written on the 31st ultimo, namely, that the king had de-
cided that your troops should remain in Tuscany for the protec-
tion of your dominions; and that his Majesty had been induced,
moreover, in accordance with your wishes, to send two hun-
dred lances over the Apennines in support of Tuscan interests
in case they should be needed. The king is resolved to do this
anyhow, whenever the whole or part of his troops are relieved
from the necessity of watching the Swiss. I wrote you many
details in relation to matters here, and refer to that letter re-
specting these things. Since then I have received your Lord-
ships’ letters of the 24th and the 25th, with copy of the one of
the 22d, which require no further answer beyond what I have
already written in my aforementioned letter. Still, as they
contain some important news, I went to Robertet, in the ab-
sence of the king, and communicated it all to him, for which
he charged me to thank your Lordships, although it was evi-
dent that he had already received the same information in some
other way. “I reminded him again of the importance that the
“king should look more closely to the interests of his friends
“in Italy than what he had done hitherto; to which Robertet
“replied as before, that all the present expenditures on the part
“of the king had no other object than that; and that he had
“at present more than sixteen thousand men in the field; and
“that the Swiss, either by agreement or necessity, would be
“obliged to leave the Church, and that thus the king would be
“more at liberty to see to everything, for until now it had re-
“ quired no little effort on his part to hold the Swiss in check ;

COURT OF FRANCE. 273

“for by thus restraining the Swiss the power of the Pope was
“ diminished, and the security of the king’s friends increased.
“ After that, Robertet began to speak of the Pope, saying that
“this attempt of his Holiness to make war upon the king of
“France was simply foolishness, and that a month would not
“pass without the Pope’s becoming sensible of the situation in
‘which he had placed himself; that Monseigneur de Gurck was
“now in Burgundy on his way here; and that if the king’s life
“was spared for another year we should see greater things
“than had ever been seen before.”

‘“ Magnificent Signori, respecting the state of Hye here and
“all the above arguments I can say no more than to repeat
“what I have said and written before, that is to say, if the king
“lives, and England and the Emperor stand firmly by him, then
“your Lordships may count upon seeing him at Florence in the
“month of March next. Either of these two sovereigns would
“have to make very extraordinary demands of the king for him
“not to concede them; and as his Majesty is entirely decided
“not to go forward with his enterprise until next spring, it
“results naturally that Ferrara must suffer meantime; and it
“may well be that others will likewise have to suffer; for his
‘“‘ Majesty dislikes every expense, and considers all money spent
“now as just so much thrown away. But as your Lordships
“say in your letter of the 22d that I must spur up the king
‘and remind him of his promises, I can assure you that I have
“not remained quict upon this point; and that I have stirred
“myself so much that I have perhaps gone too far. When the
“news came of the loss of Modena I went to the council and
“ complained of this disorder, and pointed out to them the dan-
“oer to which this would expose Ferrara, and the necessity of
“ providing against it; and I concluded by telling them that,
“if Ferrara were lost, it would carry with it the loss of Tus-
“cany and that of all the allies of France beyond Ferrara;
“thus making use of every argument that I thought it well
“ to employ. But the cause of all this tardiness on the part of
“the king is what I wrote to your Lordships on the 2d instant,
‘and have repeated above.

“TY learn from a friend that, at a late council held by his
“ Majesty in relation to Italian affairs and this new enterprise,
“all with one accord concluded that the only way to have less

“trouble and more security in Italy would be to increase the
VOL. IV. 18 1

274 THIRD MISSION TO THE

“‘ power and influence of your Lordships. The same suggestion
“has come to my ears from more than one quarter; thus, when
“the king comes into Italy, as it is said and believed that he will,
“and your Lordships are able to maintain yourselves in your
“ present position, you may, in compensation for the trouble and
“expense which you apprehend, hope also for much good, pro-
“vided your representative here manages the matter with skill
“and prudence, as will doubtless be done by his Magnificence,
“the ambassador who is coming here. And if in this affair
“you run some risks, your Lordships are too intelligent not
“to know that great results are not achieved without some
“ danger.”

I expect your ambassador on Monday or Tuesday next at
Tours; in the course of a couple of days I will post him thor-
oughly as to the state of affairs here, and then, with your Lord-
ships’ gracious permission, I hope to return to Florence.

At the king’s departure from here the Pope’s ambassador
was informed that he was not to come to Tours, but was to re-
main here or go where he liked. “The ambassador therefore
“ decided to go to Avignon, which will cause a serious interrup-
“tion in the negotiations with Rome; for it was he who had
“ conducted these negotiations until now, and I apprehend that
“ without him nothing satisfactory can be effected. I must not
“omit to tell your Lordships that some persons here think that
“there will be difficulty in the king’s passing into Italy, for the
‘‘ following three reasons: first, because the mass of the French
“ people will not submit to be burdened with extraordinary ex-
“penses; secondly, because the greater part of the gentlemen
* will refuse to go to Italy, where so many in former invasions
“have lost their fortunes and some their lives; and thirdly, be-
“cause the queen and the first princes will not be satisfied to
“ have the king leave the realm and expose his person to danger.
‘The answer to all this is the same as was made ten years ago ;
“and that the king has always gone and come back when it
“pleased him; for where everything depends upon the will
“of one man, the others will soon want the same thing as him-
“self.” Valete.

5 September, 1510.

The king will take four or five days to reach Tours, as he in-
tends stopping at some of the villages on the way, to hunt.

COURT OF FRANCE. 1b

By that time the ambassador will have arrived, and as I cannot
get any news in the mean time, nor transact any business with
the court, this will probably be the last letter which your Lord-
ships will receive from me in relation to passing events; for
after the arrival of your ambassador, I shall leave it entirely to
his Magnificence to write you. Jterwm valete!

May it please your Lordships, if you have not done so
already, to order Panciatichi to pay me fifty scudi, so that I
may return, and repay to Niccolo Alamanni thirty cok which
he has lent me.

Seon
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret. apud Reg. Christ.

LETTER XVIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Yesterday I received your Lordships’ letter of the 26th ultimo
addressed to me, and yours of the 27th for the ambassador Ro-
berto Acciaiuoli; as I have no news of him, I deemed it proper
to read your letter to him. In regard to the further reasons
which your Lordships say you have for not sending your troops
into Lombardy, there.is no occasion that his Magnificence should
take any more trouble about this matter, or even speak of it
any more, unless he should be spoken to about it; for it was all
settled on the last day of August that your troops are to re-
main in Tuscany. The king is, moreover, disposed to send
two hundred lances across the Apennines, provided that they
are no longer wanted for the purpose of keeping the Swiss in
check, or that there should already be French troops enough in
Italy to accomplish both at the same time. This they ought to
. be able to do, for the three hundred lances that were lately sent
for have arrived, also the one hundred pensionaries of the king,
which constitute, in fact, a body of more than one hundred and
fifty lances. I have strongly urged the sending of the two
hundred over the Apennines, and shall recommend the ambas-
sador to do the same; for if they are sent, it will give your
Lordships all the advantages you desire ; but if on the contrary
they are not sent, then it will indispose the French to ask again
for troops from you, when they see that you continually call

276 MISSION TO THE COURT OF FRANCE.

upon them for troops; and thus it will in any event produce a
good effect.

Since my letter of the 31st ultimo, I have written on the 2d
and the 5th instant, giving your Lordships an account of mat-
ters here; nothing new of interest has occurred since then.

The imperial ambassadors are every day with the king; they
are very active, and are expecting Monseigneur de Gurck.
Great preparations are being made here for the meeting of the
Ecclesiastical Council; and according to what I hear, a number
of questions have been prepared for discussion. Amongst these
I understand are the following: whether it is lawful for the
Pope to make war upon a Christian prince without having first
summoned and heard him; whether it is lawful for the Pope to
make war upon his Most Christian Majesty, even after having
first summoned him; whether a Pope who has obtained the
Papacy by bribery, and sold the benefices of the Church, ought
to be recognized as the Pope; whether a Pope who has been
proved guilty of numberless disgraceful acts ought to be recog-
nized as Pope. These and many other similar points are to be
discussed by this Council; after which they will put into execu-
tion what they believe to be most dishonoring to the Pope and
most advantageous for themselves. The other parts of your
Lordships’ letters, respecting the discussion of a new confedera-
tion and the advantages proposed to you, will all be communi-
cated to your ambassador, who will govern himself in these
questions according to your instructions and his own prudence.

We have nothing new from Ferrara calculated to diminish
their hope of being able to defend that state; and as to the
Swiss it would seem that, notwithstanding their having seized
the pass, the French still hope confidently to win them over to
their side, or to hold them in check.

It is now the twentieth hour, and a messenger has just arrived
from the ambassador notifying me that his Magnificence will be.
here this evening. I recommend myself to your Lordships,
quee bene valeant.

Servitor

. NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Tours, 10 September, 1510. Secret.

COMMISSION TO THE INTERIOR OF
THE STATE.

PACE UEN 2:

We, THE TEN oF LIBERTY AND BALIA OF THE FLORENTINE
REPUBLIC,

Make known to whomever these present letters patent may
come, that the bearer thereof is Niccolo Machiavelli, son of
Messer Bernardo, Secretary of our Illustrious Signori, who is
sent by order of our magistracy to enroll all who are to serve
in the cavalry in our pay.

And therefore we command all the Rectors to whom the
said Machiavelli may present himself to give him credit and
render him service in all things that he may require in con-
nection with this business. |

And to our subjects we command to render him all obedience,
if they value our good will or fear our displeasure.

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

Ex Patatio Fiorentino, 12 November, 1510.

COMMISSION TO SIENNA.

PATENT AND PASSPORT.

We, THE TEN OF LIBERTY AND BALIA OF THE FLORENTINE
REPUBLIC,

Make known to all to whom these our present letters patent
may come, that we send the excellent Niccolo Machiavelli, our
Secretary and citizen, to the Magnificent Signoria of Sienna, on
business of our republic; and we command our subjects that
for the love of us you will receive him in the most friendly
manner, and render him all opportune good offices, so that he
may with the greater ease reach his place of destination. This
will be most agreeable to us, and will cause us to hold ourselves
bound to render similar service to our aforesaid friends, when-
ever occasion shall arise; and we shall greatly commend our
subjects therefor. Bene valete.
MARCELLUS.

Ex Patatio Fiorentino, 2 December, 1510.

‘MISSION TO THE LORD OF MONACO.

PATENT AND PASSPORT.

WE, THE TEN OF LIBERTY AND BALIA OF THE FLORENTINE
REPUBLIC,

Make known to whoever may see these our letters patent, that
the bearer thereof is the excellent Niccolo Machiavelli, our
citizen and much beloved Secretary, whom we send on business
of our republic to the illustrious Lord of Monaco.

And therefore we beg all of you friends, confederates, and
protégés of our republic, and our subjects we command, to
render to the said Niccolo all opportune aid and good offices
that will conduce to the execution of his commission, for which
we shall be grateful to all of you friends, confederates, and pro-
tégés, and shall highly commend our subjects for the same.

Ex Patatio Frorentino, 12 May, 1511.

The purpose of Tur Convention to be concluded with Luciano Gri-
MALDI, Lorp or Monaco, ts as follows : —

1°. Between the exalted Florentine republic of the one part,
and the said Signor Prince of Monaco of the other part, there
shall be a good and true friendship, to endure for the next ten
years to come; during which time they shall treat each the
other, and e converso, and their troops and subjects, vessels,
goods and merchandise, and every other thing, as good and
real friends, and as good and real friends are used to treat
each other.

diem. The vessels, men, and goods of the aforesaid Prince
may, during the stipulated time, come, enter, and remain in

280 MISSION TO THE LORD OF MONACO.

every port belonging to the said exalted Florentine republic,
freely and without any safe-conduct. And they may stop in port
and lay in supplies of bread, water, provisions, and whatever
else they may need, the same as if they were vessels and men
belonging to Florence ; paying nevertheless for these things the
same dues as all other Florentines, and likewise paying the
same customs duties as are paid by other Florentines. And
e converso the Prince of Monaco shall observe the same condi-
tions in his ports towards the vessels, men, and goods of the said
exalted Florentine republic, and her subjects in all and for all.

It is nevertheless understood and declared that neither of the
two parties, nor their subjects, can seize in the same maritime
ports vessels, men, or goods, except such as belong to the ene-
mies of the power in whose port such capture is made. And
it is understood, by way of fuller explanation, that the port of
Livorno comprises the shallows of Meloria.

Nor can either one of the said parties enter or remain in the
ports of the other party with vessels, men, or goods captured
from others than from his own enemies or those of the power
to whom such port belongs; nor can such captured vessels be
discharged, nor the goods or men therefrom put on shore. And
in case such vessels should come in and stay and discharge
there, as has been said, then either party can forbid the other
to come to, enter, and remain in its ports, or to anchor there
and lay in stores of bread, water, and other provisions, or
anything else that they may need; and in such case neither
of the parties shall be bound to the observance of the present
friendship.

FOURTH MISSION TO THE COURT
OF FRANCE

LETTERS PATENT.

Dercemviri Libertatis et Pacis Reipublice Florentine, uni-
versis et singulis ad quos hee nostre patentes liters inciderint,
salutem.

Significamus vobis, qui nostro imperio paretis, mittere nos
Nicolaum Machiavellum, civem et Secretarium nostrum dilec-
tissimum, mandatarium ad Christianissimum Regem Franco-
rum, mandamusque ob id vobis, ut transeuntem per loca nostra
juvetis omni ea ope, qua illi opus erit ad pergendum securius et
celerius suum iter; sic enim rem vobis dignam facictis, et gra-
tissimam nobis. Amicos vero omnes alios, confederatosque
Reipublice nostre hortamur precamurque, si quid nostra ami-
citia meretur, faveatis illi, juvetisque iter quacumque ratione
potueritis, ut incolumis citoque in Galliam pervenire possit,
quo mittitur a nobis ad Regem Christianissimum ; quod erit in
primis gratissimum nobis, et quod semper habebimus beneficii

loco. Bene valete.
Marc. VIRGILIUS.

Ex Patatio nostro Fiorentino, die 10 Septembris, 1511.

INSTRUCTIONS

GIVEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, SENT BY THE ILLUSTRIOUS TEN
TO LOMBARDY AND FRANCE.

DELIBERATED ON, 6 SEPTEMBER, 1511.

NiccoLo, — You are perfectly aware of all that has taken place
here with regard to the Council to be held at Pisa; and on what
grounds and for what reason we were disposed, on its first pub-

282 FOURTH MISSION TO THE

lication, to allow that Council to be held at Pisa; and that not
many days afterwards we gave our full consent. But finding ,
now that the greater part and the most substantial of these
reasons no longer exist, and that we had offended the Pope
by our course, and thereby exposed ourselves to the greatest
danger, we have been forced by necessity to send you by post,
and with the greatest possible despatch, first to those most
reverend cardinals, and to the most illustrious Royal Lieuten-
ant at Milan; and after that as far as the court of his Most
Christian Majesty. And all our interest and aim in your mis-
sion is reduced to one single object; namely, to make every
effort and use all means to have this Council, the beginning
of which was so feeble and so perilous that an honorable
and safe end can hardly be expected, abrogated by such means
as can be found. Or if that cannot be, that it shall at least be
transferred elsewhere; which ought now to be an easy matter,
seeing what the attorneys of these cardinals have done at Pisa,
and how by anticipation they have validated the reasons of this
Pisan Council. And finally, if this cannot be done, then let us
have, as a last resort, an adjournment for some months; as
within that time various contingencies may arise that will enable
the Council to arrive at a much better settlement of all these
disorders. And even if no other result will be attained, still
two or three months’ time will be a great advantage and an
immense convenience to us. And we think that such a delay
should not be refused to us, as it is called for by the very
season which we are about to enter upon, and by the condition
in which this matter now stands. For it seems probable that
those who have not arrived up to to-day will not come to en-
counter the winter season here; and moreover, the French pre-
lates could under ordinary circumstances not reach the place in
two months.

Travelling, therefore, with all possible speed, you will take
the road to Milan; but before arriving at Bologna, you will care-
fully inform yourself as to the whereabouts of Santa Croce,
Narbonne, San Malo, and Cosenza, who some three or four
days ago were supposed to be at Borgo a San Donnino, and
were to pass through here on their way to Pisa. When you
have ascertained where they are, you will go to the place where
you will find them together, and in speaking to them all at the
same time and to each one separately you will give them to

COURT OF FRANCE. 283

understand that they are on no account to come to Florence;
pointing out the trouble to which they would expose us, and the
danger in which our merchants would be placed, with all their
goods and movables at Rome as well as elsewhere ; advising,
exhorting, and entreating them on no account to take this route.
You will add that you are going to Milan to make known to the
Royal Lieutenant the report that has been spread, and the con-
sequent apprehensions that the Spanish troops are about to
march towards Piombino, and that a fleet is being fitted out at
Naples, and that the Pope has already taken the Duke of Ter-
mini into his pay, and has appointed him his captain; adding
all that may occur to you according to what we have told you
here verbally. But should you not find the aforesaid cardinals
on your route, because of their having gone in another direction,
then you will proceed direct on the way to Milan and France.
We believe that with the above-mentioned cardinals you will
not require any other credentials than the letters patent which
you take with you, and which will suffice to prove your person
and your mission.

Having attended to this matter, you will take the diligence
for Milan, where you will see Francesco Pandolfini, and, after
having communicated to him our present instructions, you will
together call upon the Viceroy, but in your interview with him
you will confine yourselves to communicating to him that, whilst
sending you to the court of his Most Christian Majesty, we de-
sired also that his Excellency should be informed of the object
of this mission. And without touching upon anything else, you
will relate to him what has taken place at Rome; and what may
happen to our merchants any day there and elsewhere; also
the apprehensions with regard to Piombino and the Spaniards,
as we have stated above. The reason why we deem it proper
for you not to enter upon any other subject with him is, that we
do not wish the object of your mission known before your ar-
rival at court. We desire, nevertheless, that you should inform
Francesco of everything, not only of the particulars of these
instructions, but also of what we have stated to you verbally,
so that he may in future proceed in conformity with our views,
and govern himself in his actions according to these instruc-
tions.

Having accomplished this at Milan, you will proceed with the
same diligence and speed to the court of his Most Christian

984 FOURTH MISSION TO THE

Majesty. Immediately on arriving you will call to see Roberto,*
and, after communicating to him these instructions, as well as
what we have told you verbally, you will both together call upon
his Majesty the king; and in addressing his Majesty you will
begin by stating that we gave the concession of Pisa solely
to please him; and then you will go on to show to what point
matters have been brought here, and what has resulted and
is likely to result in Rome, against our city as well as against
our people and their goods. You will point out to his Majesty
what our people have had to suffer in the way of interdicts,
censures, war, and ransoms to be paid for persons and goods
everywhere; and show the reasons why it has come to this,
and what remedies there are for this state of things. And in
explaining the cause of these evils to which we are subjected,
you will remark that we have observed that the Emperor gives
little or no attention to these matters; and that, whilst we
believed that he would carry on the war advantageously, and
that he was on his way to Florence, he was still near Trent,
with little disposition to do anything more this year, and was
constantly on the point of turning back. That he is carrying
on most intimate negotiations with the Venetians, and has
convoked a Diet in Germany for the day of San Gallo; and
that all these things show manifestly that he gives little
thought to our matters. To this may be added, that we have
not heard of a single prelate’s coming from that great country
to take part in this council. In the same way it has been ob-
served that the French prelates that are to come manifest
such tardiness as to cause the belief that they do not come
of their own free will. But as this might possibly cause dis-
pleasure to the king, it seems to us best you should not refer
to it, unless perhaps merely in a passing word, so as not to give
umbrage to his Majesty. There are still other and more im-
portant points to touch upon; one of which is that, according
to what we hear, some of the cardinals named in the edicts
dissimulate their real views, and under various pretexts delay
their coming to Pisa. Another matter, and one that has as-
tonished us very much, is that a council should have been
opened by only three persons sent to Pisa, and these of such

* Roberto Acciaiuoli, Florentine Ambassador to the Court of France, where
he arrived at the very moment of Machiavelli’s departure, after having fulfilled
the object of his previous mission to France.

COURT OF FRANCE. 285

4

a character as they are; and that they have declared that
they wanted the forts in their hands, which would promptly
be filled with armed men. Owing to the lack of reputation
of these persons, great disorders have occurred, so that the
city found herself placed under an interdict, and that the
heads of the religious establishments have declared against
such a Council. All this is the consequence of having made
so feeble a beginning, and not having sent men capable of
defending their motives, and who might with proper authority
have given due character and reputation to such an under-
taking, which, once discredited, can hardly be carried to a sat-
isfactory conclusion. In consequence of these disorders, the
Pope, finding neither reputation, favor, nor power within the
Council, has manifested the most vigorous resentment, and,
having no one else upon whom to pour out his wrath, has
discharged it all upon us; and thence all the dangers which
threaten us, and which are so well known to you. These are
increasing with every day; and it is not likely that the Council
will gain in favor, having shown such weakness in the begin-
ning, for everybody will be disposed to believe that its end
will be similar to its beginning. And as no one at present
accepts the reasons alleged in favor of this Council at Pisa,
they will be still less acceptable in the future.

The remedies for this state of things are in our judgment
but few. Peace, however, would settle everything honorably,
and relieve all parties from their present anxieties; but of
this we do not wish you to speak, except as a last resort.
After having shown to his Majesty how little is to be hoped
for from this Council, and what has been the cause of its fec-
bleness, you will make every effort to persuade and beg his
Majesty to be pleased to have it discontinued, seeing how dif-
ficult it would be to carry it on. And if all these reasons do
not satisfy his Majesty, then you must endeavor, by pointing
out to him our present and future dangers, to persuade him
to relieve us from this care and anxiety, and show him that
now, since the initiative measures have been taken at Pisa,
the Council might readily be transferred to some other locality.
This is, in fact, what we should desire most in case you cannot
obtain a discontinuance of the Council, and therefore we want
you to urge it most vigorously, leaving nothing undone that
can help to induce the king to consent to such a transfer.

286 FOURTH MISSION TO THE

The reasons for this are numerous. First of all, the holding
of the Council at Pisa is really tantamount to holding it under
the very hands of the Pope; for it may be taken for granted
that it will at once provoke a fresh war by land and by sea,
in which his Majesty would be obliged to take a hand, if he
does not wish that his friends shall perish for having tried to
please him. But such a war would not take place if the Coun-
cil were held in a locality not so accessible to the Pope with
his army and his allies. And then there is the fact that the
Emperor has never been satisfied that the Council should be
held in Pisa, which doubtless is the reason why he and the
prelates of Germany have shown such indifference in the
matter. There are furthermore the reasons which we have so
many times written to Roberto Acciaiuoli; namely, the ruinous
state of Pisa, the unproductiveness of the country, the bad
harvest this year, and the fact that the place can so easily be
harassed by a hostile fleet. Above all must it be taken into
consideration, in connection with the first reason, that a war
resulting from the holding of the Council in Pisa would be a
very dangerous one, because all the states involved in it will
necessarily be divided, some declaring for and some against
the Pope. His Majesty will therefore have to bear in mind
that, if matters take this course, the burden of the war will
fall upon him, if not entirely, at least in great part. It is
necessary, then, that by means of these reasons, and such
others as may suggest themselves to you, you should strive
to persuade his Majesty to be satisfied that we may hence-
forth refuse Pisa to any one for the purpose of holding such
a Council.

And if you cannot even obtain this, then you must, as a last
resort, make every possible effort that for two or three months
to come no further action shall be taken in Pisa without a con-
sultation between the cardinals and the other promoters of the
Council, as they might possibly disagree. There would be a
manifest and natural reason for such a consultation, as the
cardinals are still in Lombardy, and the bishops and abbots
have not yet made their appearance. You will also point out
to his Majesty the great advantage of this, especially so far as
we are concerned, for it would afford us the time the better to
settle our own affairs and those of the nation. Nor would it
be at all extraordinary that it should bring with it some other

COURT OF FRANCE. 287

good results, and that it should dispose minds more favora-
bly to a peace, which it would be most reasonable the Pope
should desire, and to which his Majesty has always been well
inclined. But of this peace it is necessary you should speak
so as not to fail in any part of the object of your mission; at
the same time urging and entreating his Majesty, for the pur-
pose of avoiding the troubles of war, or for an infinity of other
reasons, not to allow any opportunity to be lost that may
present itself for concluding peace, but rather to seize every
chance that may be given him, and to that end to proffer him
all our best efforts and good offices. You must endeavor to
learn what the results of your efforts may be, and what diffi-
culties may present themselves; not only for the purpose of
advising us, but also to enable us to do all that in your judg-
ment may seem necessary to be done in the matter.

And we desire particularly that you should fully make known
our disposition in this business, so that his Majesty the king
and every one else may know that we have no aim or desire
for anything else than peace ; and that we shall ever be ready
to do all that is possible and becoming to our quality to bring
it about.

We remind you to write to us from Milan and from France,
promptly and carefully, all that you may have done ; what hope
there is for the accomplishment of our desire, and what may
ultimately be the result of this whole affair of the Council.

Ex Patatio Fiorentino, die 10 Septembris MDXI.

DECEMVIRI LIBERTATIS ET BALIZ REIPUBL. FLOR.

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUsTRIOUS SiGNoRI, ETC.:—

I arrived here yesterday at dusk, and found here the Cardi-
nals Santa Croce, San Malo, Cosenza, and San Severino. Santa
Croce is lodged outside the citadel, and the other three within.
I thought it proper to speak first with Santa Croce, partly be-
cause he is as it were their chief, and partly because I regard
him as being in some way more friendly to your Lordships than
the others. I had a long conversation with him in relation to

288 POCTDH (MISSION sO... ie,

the Council ; and finally he thought it advisable that I should
accompany him into the citadel to speak with the other car-
dinals ; and just as we were starting to go, Cosenza and San
Severino came to see him. The three withdrew and remained
together some three hours or more, during which time they
despatched both letters and messengers. After that they had
me called in, and I repeated to the three together all that I
had already said to Santa Croce. They then made me leave
the room, and after a long consultation they came out them-
selves and told me to follow them to the Castle. There they
went in to see San Malo, who was confined to his bed by an
attack of gout; after having remained with him some time,
they had me called in and made me repeat before San Malo
what I had previously told them. The sum and substance of
my remarks consisted in making known to them how greatly
the Pope was irritated against your Lordships when he was
informed of what had been done at Pisa,* the dangers to
which our merchants had been and were still exposed, the
threats which the Pope had made to attack you with his tem-
poral and spiritual weapons ; and that for that reason your
Lordships had charged me to go per post to Milan to see the
Viceroy, and make known to him the Pope’s disposition and
preparations, and your dangers, and to ask the Viceroy to
suggest a remedy for all this. And that your Lordships had
also commissioned me that, if on the way I should meet with
their most reverend Lordships, | should make the same facts
known to them; that you saw in all this two dangers, the
one real and immediate, and the other a future danger. The
present and real one was the plundering of your merchants
and the interdict of your city, while war constituted the
future danger. And to counteract the present danger, you
begged their most reverend Lordships to be pleased not to
come any nearer to Florence, so as to give our merchants time
to settle their affairs; and that their reverend Lordships could
do this without interfering with the Council, as none of the
matters that were to be brought before it were ready ; nor were
you prepared to combat the Pope’s temporal or spiritual powers.
And then I said all that could be said in relation to the dis-
orders that existed upon these two points, and begged them

* Certain initial acts had been done by the Council at Pisa on the 1st of
September, to which allusion is made in the instructions.

COURT OF FRANCE. 289

anew, in your Lordships’ name, to be pleased to delay their
further advance, which they could do perfectly well without in-
terfering with their plans; and in my effort to persuade them,
I omitted nothing that could possibly be said on the subject.
I told them also of the preparations of the Pope, what they
consisted in, and how much he expected from the Spaniards.

Having spoken to them thus this last time in presence of
San Malo, they had a long consultation amongst themselves, and
then had me recalled, whereupon San Severino replied to me in
the name of the others. The sum and substance of his remarks
was in justification of their undertaking, and how acceptable it .
ought to be to all Christians and to the Almighty himself; and
that the greater the participation in it, the greater would be
the glory derived from it. And that when it was published
six months ago that the Council would be held at Pisa, your
Lordships ought to have prepared yourselves for all the conse-
quences that might result from it, and that they could not
understand how, after having had so much time, any further
delay could be of advantage to you. After that he went on
trying to prove to me that you had nothing to apprehend from
war, because his Majesty the king of France had never had so
many troops in Italy as at the present time. And here he
magnified matters as much as possible, concluding finally by
saying that they did not intend under any circumstances to
come to Florence, but would go direct to Pisa by way of Pontre-
moli. That it would, however, be ten or twelve days before they
should leave, as they intended to wait for the French prelates
who would be here within that time, to the number of forty or
more, and that they would come accompanied by learned doc-
tors and preachers to enable them to raise the interdict; and
that whoever opposed them would be adjudged an_ heretic.
He alleged that in the year 1409, three years after your Lord-
ships had acquired Pisa, you permitted a Council to be held
there against a Pope of great sanctity; that that Council was
opened only by cardinals, and that you then had manifested no
fears, although the cause for that Council was not so just, nor
was the support you then had so powerful as at present, when
you have that of the king of France.

At this point the Cardinal Santa Croce spoke in turn, and
confirmed all that San Severino had said, adding that for the
love of Christ and for the good of the Church your Lordships

VOL. IV. 19

290 FOURTH MISSION TO THE

ought cheerfully to assume the burden of this Council; that
the Council at Basle had been begun by a single abbot, whilst
in the present case there would be so many cardinals and pre-
lates that they would be able to carry on work of much greater
difficulty ; that they intended to raise all interdicts, and would
so confound the Pope that he would have other things to think
of than excommunications or war.

I replied to such part of these remarks as seemed to me to
require an answer, by an attempt to persuade them not to go
any farther; but I could not move them to any other conclu-
sion than what I have stated above, that is to say, that they
would not hasten their departure from here, and would go to
Pisa by way of Pontremoli.

When I spoke yesterday with the Cardinal Santa Croce
alone, I concluded from what he said that they would have
gone to Pisa ere this, if they had seen your Lordships more
decidedly favorable to the Council; but seeing your irresolu-
tion had caused them to hesitate themselves. If this be so,
then I believe that my representation may cause them to
hesitate still more, for they seem not to consider themselves
safe in Pisa; and this may perhaps produce an effect which
might not be to the purpose, for they have always desired to
have the French army with them, and would desire it still
more now.

In fact, I learn this morning that they have sent a messenger
to the Viceroy at Milan, to solicit him to come in person with
three hundred lances to escort them to Pisa whenever they are
prepared to go. I shall be at Milan to-night, and will see with
Francesco what can be done to prevent this. In the reply
which Santa Croce made in the presence of the other cardi-
nals, he stated that it would anyhow be necessary to hold two
or three sessions more at Pisa, and that then, to accommodate
and please your Lordships, they would raise the Council and
transfer it elsewhere.

I learned yesterday evening that San Severino was to leave
here this morning for Germany, on a mission to the Emperor ;
the object being to persuade him to order his prelates to Pisa,
with the promise that, after the Council had once been organ-
ized at Pisa, then it might be transferred wherever else his
Majesty pleased. Another object of this mission is said to be
the negotiation of a marriage between the Emperor and a

COURT OF FRANCE. 291

French princess ; and also to try and recover from him certain
castles in the Veronese territory that were formerly obtained
from his father.

It is now two o’clock of the morning, and it is at this hour
that San Severino is to start. I recommend myself to your

Lordships.
Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.
Aut Boreo a San Donntno, 13 September, 1511.

LETTER II.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

On Saturday I wrote to your Lordships from Borgo a San
Donnino, and informed you particularly of the interview I had
with the cardinals. I left my letter with Giovanni Girolami,
who promised me to send it by the king’s post; and presuming
that you have received it, [ do not repeat its contents. Since
then I have arrived here and explained my commission to the
Viceroy. The particulars of my interview with him, and his
reply, will be reported to you by Francesco Pandolfini, having
conformed in all my proceedings to his orders, and therefore I
refer to his Magnificence. It is now the twenty-second hour,
and I am just about to leave for the court to execute the com-
mission of your Lordships, to whom I recommend myself.

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Miuan, 15 September, 1511. Secret.

LETTER III.

Maceniricent Signori, ETC. : —

My last was of the 17th; I sent it through Pandolfini by royal
post. Machiavelli arrived here safely day before yesterday.
Besides your Lordships’ letter of the 10th, which he brought
with him, he has informed me of the object of his mission ;
and as Robertet happens to be here, and his Majesty the king

292 FOURTH MISSION TO THE

being about three leagues from here, we thought it best not to
go to see him the first day, but to wait until the next morning
when we should find Robertet with the king, so that he could
be present at our audience in case it should be necessary to
expedite some order. We therefore went next morning to
court, having previously examined the instructions and made a
brief of all the arguments that could influence the king to
enter into your Lordships’ views. Accordingly we presented
ourselves before his Majesty, and after the first homage of
Machiavelli and the customary ceremonies, we read to his
Majesty a statement prepared from your Lordships’ commis-
sion, in which we had embodied all the arguments that seemed
most suitable and calculated to produce the desired effect of
making his Majesty relish the better and consider with more
attention the propositions we had to make. His Majesty
listened cheerfully and attentively, showing that he attached
great value to your representations an advice.

Our statement contained three principal points, the first
of which was to urge his Majesty to make peace, and dissolve
the Council by some reasonable agreement, and to offer him
mediators, ete. To this the king replied, “ Would to God that
“vou could bring matters to that point, for there is nothing
‘“‘that I desire so much, and I should feel very grateful to who-
“ever brings it about,’ — showing us that upon that point he
had always the same desire, and that he had never agreed to
this Council except for the purpose of bringing the Pope to
some agreement; and therefore he said, “ If now we were to raise
“the Council, the Pope would not want to hear anything more
“of peace.’ To this we replied, that that idea seemed to us
withont foundation, inasmuch as, according to all the indica-
tions, this Council was more apt to provoke war than peace, and
that it was this apprehension that caused the Pope to look
rather to a resort to arms than to ask for peace. To our
second proposition, which had for its object a change in the
locality where the Council was to be held, the king answered
promptly and resolutely : “This also is impossible, for I see
“no way in which it could be done, as it is necessary that the
“cardinals and prelates should proceed to Pisa for certain
‘‘ indispensable acts that have to be done there. But measures
“ could be taken so that they shall remain there as short a time
‘Cas possible, and this I shall urge upon them.” He could not

COURT OF FRANCE. 293

precisely specify these acts, not being familiar with the terms
employed in business of this kind. And then his Majesty
added: “For some days we have thought of everything that
“could relieve us from this burden and embarrassment, and
“have had the whole subject revised and studied minutely, so
‘‘as to see whether it could be arranged that the Council should
“not be held at Pisa ; but having in the first instance been con-
“ voked in that city, it has been found that the Council cannot
“be removed from there without prejudice to our rights. If it
‘Shad been possible, we should gladly have had it transferred to
“ Vercelli, to which place the cardinals and other members of
“ the Council could easily remove for this purpose, after having
“ made at Pisa their first, second, and third station” (that is the
word he used). “I do not, therefore, see the possibility of yield-
“ing to your demands. And moreover, I cannot act without the
‘¢ will and consent of the King of the Romans and the cardinals,
“ with whom I have agreed not to do anything in relation to this
“business without their concurrence. And after having given
“them the order to proceed there, and having invited our Galli-
“can Church to take the same way, I do not see how I can
‘now retract.”

And as we observed upon this point that the Council, if held
at Pisa, would not merely bring upon us the censures of the
Church, and reprisals upon the persons and goods of our
merchants, but would also kindle a war of such a character
that the republic could not support it, and which would expose
him to the gravest troubles and endless expense, his Majesty
replied that it was necessary that the merchants should be
relieved as much as possible, although he really did not believe
that the Pope would harm them in any way. As to the war
that might result from it, his Majesty did not seem to fear it
much, as he did not believe that the king of Spain would take
a hand in it, for he had had most excellent letters and several
embassies from that sovereign; and therefore he advised us
to have no apprehensions upon that point. His Majesty and
Robertet, as well as ourselves, came back several times to this
subject, and we believe that we did not omit a single argument
calculated to decide the king; so that his final conclusion was,
that it was his will and desire to gratify your Lordships, but, as
the Council had once been convoked at Pisa, it was impossi-
ble now to transfer it elsewhere. So far as we could judge

294 FOURTH MISSION TO THE

from the King’s countenance, gesticulations, and words, as well
as those of Robertet, we concluded that it was against his own
inclination that his Majesty had refused to accede to your
Lordships’ request, both on account of the danger to which it
exposed us, in which he would be equally involved, as well as
on account of the expense and anxiety which it would cause
him; and that, if he alone had to decide this matter, he would
not have refused. But the considerations referred to above
seem to have prevented his complying with your Lordships’
wishes; and these considerations are the conventions made
with the Emperor and the cardinals, his having directed all
the clergy of the Gallican Church to attend the Council at Pisa,
his having from the first published Pisa as the locality for its
meeting, and finally his unwillingness to abandon these rea-
sons without the Council’s having assembled at least once in
that place.

Besides these there is another reason, which the king does
not state, but which we have learned from Robertet, and which
is of no less importance than all the others; namely, his
Majesty fears lest some, if not all, of the cardinals would be
angered by such a transfer, and that in their anger they might
cause the King of the Romans to change, knowing perhaps
how easy it is to turn him, having but quite lately had proof of
his want of firmness. Having spent considerable time in this
discussion, and being convinced that we could not obtain any
other result upon the first two points, we came to the third,
which had for its object to gain a delay of two or three months.
The advantage of this, we argued, would be that, under color
of being able within that time to negotiate some agreement, we
should have the opportunity of seeing the issue of the Pope’s
illness, of increasing the difficulties of war by delaying it until
near winter, and finally of giving more time to our people for
securing themselves more effectually. His Majesty was per-
suaded by our arguments, and promised us to do all he could,
so that between now and All Saints no one should go to Pisa;
and he directed that the cardinals be written to, to defer their
departure. But I do not believe that his Majesty wants the
cardinals openly to know the motives of this postponement,
and therefore it will be done by various expedients. The first
one will be not to send them copies of the safe-conduct which
they have demanded; for they have declared that they will

COURT OF FRANCE. 295

under no circumstances go to Pisa unless they have the origi-
nal safe-conduct, or a copy of the same; and therefore thev
will not be written to by this post, so as the longer to delay
their reply. This first expedient will accomplish what has
been promised to us; and this delay seems to us to the pur-
pose, as the cardinals will not go any farther without being
thoroughly secured.

Your Lordships can see now what we have done and what we
have gained up to the present; and for the future we shall not
fail, not only to see that the promises are fulfilled, but also to
endeavor to obtain what until now has been refused.

Respecting English affairs I do not see that there is any
ground for apprehensions, and here they seem to feel entirely
secure upon that point. They have recently again had letters
from that sovereign and from his council, which have given
great satisfaction. Of the Emperor nothing of particular im-
portance is known, except that four days ago news came that
he had gone in the direction of Trent, whereupon it was imme-
diately decided that the imperial ambassador should leave in all
haste to find his Majesty. I believe the reason for this was the
fear lest the Emperor should change his intentions; and there-
fore they have sent his own ambassador back to him to keep
him firm to his purpose, and to conclude some arrangement
with him.

Since then, and just as the ambassador was about to leave,
fresh advices have come from the Emperor which caused them
not to carry out that intention, as these advices brought satis-
factory assurances from that quarter.

Not having anything further to communicate at this time, I
recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

Servitor

RoBeErRTuS ACCIAIOLUS,
Buors, 24 September, 1511. Orator.

P. S.— In speaking of peace the king charged me in the great-
est secrecy to write to your Lordships, and to urge you to make
every possible effort to bring about such a peace ; not, however,
on the part of his Majesty, but as being entirely on your own
account. And to request your Lordships most particularly to
let it be known only to very few persons. And to act in this
matter with the greater confidence, your Lordships must know

296 MISSION TO THE COURT OF TRANCE.

that his Catholic Majesty has given the king to understand that,
for the purpose of facilitating an arrangement so far as in his
power, he would be willing to let Bologna remain in the present
state. Monsignore di Tivoli has been informed in part of the
object of Machiavelli’s coming, and was well satisfied with it.
He has promised to use his good offices with the Pope in favor
of the object desired by your Lordships.

LETTER IV.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here last Monday at an early hour of the morning;
it was impossible for me to reach here sooner, having lost three
days at Borgo a San Donnino and Milan. I presented myself
before his Majesty the king in. company with his Magnificence
the ambassador, who has written you a detailed report of all
we did, to which I refer in all respects. I shall remain here
so long as it may please his Majesty; that is to say, so long
as he may deem it necessary for the object of my mission,
which cannot exceed six or eight days. After that I shall re-
turn with his Majesty’s gracious permission, and the good pleas-
ure of your Lordships, to whom I ever recommend myself.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Buots, 24 September, 1511. Secret.

COMMISSION TO PISA AT THE TIME OF
THE COUNCIL*

I.

THE TEN TO THE CARDINALS THAT WERE AT PISA.
2 NovEMBER, 1511.

REVERENDISSIMI IN CHRISTO PATRES, ETC. : —

Mittimus ad reverendissimas dominationes vestras Nicolaum
Machiavellum civem et Secretarium nostrum ; mandavimusque
illi multa que referat coram reverendissimis dominationibus
vestris: quibus placeat super eis nostra de causa fidem ili
habere certissimam. Que bene valeant.

* The two preceding legations and the present commission to Pisa relate to
the celebrated differences between Pope Julius II and Louis XII., king of France,
at whose instigation a General Ecclesiastical Council had been convoked at Pisa,
for the purpose of deposing Pope Julius II., who had contemptuously rejected
all offers of peace, and had carried his violence so far as to have the French
ambassador arrested, and had launched interdicts and excommunications against
his enemies. The Emperor of Germany, Maximilian I., had joined the king of
France in the project of deposing Pope Julius II. by a General Council; having
himself the extraordinary idea of assuming the papal tiara with his imperial
crown, in the event of Pope Julius’s deposition by the Council. The Florentines
at the request of the king of France had consented to allow the Council to be
held at Pisa; but they soon became alarmed at the dangers threatened in conse-
quence by the vengeance and violence of the Pope, with the Venetian army at
the north, and that of the Spaniards at the south. The Signoria saw no other
way to avert these dangers than to endeavor to persuade the king of France to
dissolve the Council and make peace with the Pope. It was for this purpose
that Machiavelli had been sent on these missions to the court of France, where
Roberto Acciaiuoli was at the time the accredited ambassador.

The Florentine Signoria had already sent several commissioners to Pisa to
be present at the meetings of the Council; and after Machiavelli’s return from
France, where he had successfully accomplished his mission, he was sent by
the Signoria to take a body of troops to Pisa, as a guard to watch the Floren-

298 COMMISSION TO PISA.

Le
THE TEN TO THE SEIGNEUR DE LAUTREC.
2 NoveMBER, 1511.

ILLUSTRIOUS SEIGNEUR : —

We send to your Lordship our citizen and Secretary, Niccolo
Machiavelli, to whom we have entrusted certain matters which
we desire your Lordship should know; and we therefore beg
your Lordship to give him the most entire credence.

—_——__—_@-——_—————

BEE
THE TEN TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.
3 NoveMBER, 1511.

We have nothing to communicate to you by this letter except
that since your departure from here we have heard from Rosso
Ridolfi and Antonio Portinari that matters are going on quietly
enough at Pisa; and therefore it seems to us proper to say to
you that, unless some special necessity should occur for the
three hundred infantry, you will not raise them. But should
you see that they are necessary, then you will act according
to the original order given you on the subject. We have
nothing else to say, for whatever is new here we write to
Rosso Ridolfi, from whom you will learn all we communicate
to him.

ve

Maceniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

You will have learned through the letters from the Lords
Commissioners how matters are going on here. By these
presents I have thought to make known to you that I went

tine interests ; and above all to dispose the prelates to leave that city, which had
been conceded with the utmost reluctance by the Florentine Signoria for the
purpose of this Council.

COMMISSION TO PISA. 299

this morning to make a visit to the Cardinal Santa Croce,
with whom I had a long interview, my sole object being to
point out to him the difficulties which this locality and the
times bring with them, and which will constantly increase,
the longer the cardinals remain, and the more people come
here, and therefore your Lordships begged him to excuse them,
ete., etc. To this the Cardinal replied, that although there
was no abundance, yet the scarcity was supportable, and that
therefore they did not complain. That they were fully aware
that the palaces were not equal to those of Milan, nor life so
agreeable as in France; still, if either on their own account,
or on account of your Lordships, it was deemed advisable to
change the locality, it might be done.

I told him that I should speak upon this point only according
to my own opinion, and that I believed it would be a wise thing
to go from here; for, first, they would be relieved of the anxiety
respecting lodgings ; and secondly, the removal of the Council
from his immediate neighborhood would make the Pope cool
down, and render him less active in opposing it by arms and
other means; and thirdly, by the transfer of the Council to
some place, either in France or Germany, the people there would
be found more disposed to obey than what the people of Tus-
cany are, because the Emperor and the King can control their
people more easily than what your Lordships ever could do.
And as the opportunity seemed to me favorable, I entreated
him not to consent to have your Lordships constrained to do
what you neither could nor should do; and that I believed
that the coming of one man voluntarily to this Council would
give it more reputation than twenty that were foreed to come
against their will. I went on trying to persuade him to the
best of my ability, and finally concluded by coming back to
the proposition to remove the Council from here, but as coming
entirely from myself; demonstrating to him that it would be
a wise and most useful thing to do, and calculated to produce
the best effects.

The Cardinal replied to me that he would speak with his
colleagues about it, but that it would be necessary to write to
France and to the Emperor; whereupon I reminded him that
at San Donnino he and the other cardinals had told me that,
after two or three sessions of the Council at Pisa, it should be
transferred to another place. He admitted the truth of this,

800 COMMISSION TO PISA.

and said that he would think of what they ought to do; and
that I might rest assured that nothing unbecoming would be
asked of your Lordships. “ In fact,” added he, “ your Signori
“will not be satisfied that we should dismiss those priests who
“will not obey us.” To which I replied, that I did not know
what support your Lordships could render them, but as to dis-
missing the priests, you had nothing whatever to do with it;
and that that was a matter which they must settle amongst
themselves.

His Eminence said nothing further on that point, but it
seems to me that it will not be long before some new demand
will be made of your Lordships, and of a sort that will not be
very much to your mind. I have communicated all this to the
Lords Commissioners, and they have thoroughly looked into the
matter, and will make a report to your Lordships, to whom I
recommend myself. Valete /*

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Pisa, 6 November, 1511. Secret.

* It may not be amiss to give here the relation of the sessions of the Council
held at Pisa, at which Machiavelli was present, and which were reported by the
Commissioners, who, in writing to the Signoria at Florence, say that with regard
to these reports they refer to thé wisdom of Machiavelli himself, he having
greater experience in these matters than themselves.

“ This morning, the 5th of November, the most reverend Monsignore di Santa
Croce celebrated a solemn mass in the cathedral, assisted by the other three
cardinals, Monseigneur de Lautrec, and the other archbishops, bishops, and pre-
lates, all seated in the greatest silence and devotion. After the mass, the deacon,
who was the Abate Zaccaria, proclaimed twice in a loud voice, ‘ Let all laymen
leave the choir.’ And then all the bishops put on their mitres, and Monsignore
di Santa Croce seated himself before the altar, turning his face towards the
prelates and the people, and intoned the Psalm of David, ‘ Deus qui glorificatur
in Concilio Sanctorum, magnus et terribilis super omnes, qui in circuita ejus
sunt”; and then exhorted all the prelates most earnestly to dispose themselves
by prayers and vigils for this holy Council, appealing to them with many other
words, etc., even unto tears. After this discourse Monsignore di Santa Croce
said three prayers with the utmost devotion; and then the aforesaid deacon
cried aloud,‘ Orate!’ Whereupon all made three genuflections, and, having taken
off their mitres, prayed in the greatest silence. Then the litanies were sung by
the chanters with great devotion, and when these were finished, being at the
words, ‘ Ut Ecclesiam tuam sanctam,’ the said President, that is to say Santa
Croce, turned towards the prelates and the people giving them his benediction,
and chanting in a loud voice, ‘Ut hance sanctam Synodum benedicere, regere
et conservare digneris’; to which all the prelates replied, ‘Te rogamus, audi
nos.’ Thereupon the Bishop of Lodeve, son of the Cardinale di San Malo, with
the cope on his shoulders and the mitre on his head, ascended the pulpit, and
published four decrees passed at the first session of the Council. The first of

COMMISSION TO PISA. S01

V.

MaGNIFICcENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Our last letter to your Lordships was of yesterday, and we
gave you therein full account of everything that had occurred.
This morning the third session of the Council was held, with the
usual ceremonies and sermons. After that two of the cardi-
nals and four of the bishops were named as Commissioners of
the Council; and without letters from them, or at least signed
by two thirds of them, no prelate could leave the Council. And
then it was announced that after the ceremonies of to-day’s
session every one was free to leave, at their convenience ; with
the obligation, however, to be on the 10th of next month at

these declared that the holy Council of Pisa, by the reasons alleged in the letters
of convocation, was legitimately convoked and convened, and that the city of
Pisa was deemed proper for the meeting of the said Council, unless some new
impediments should occur that would necessitate the transfer of the Council to
some other locality. The second decree declared all the interdicts, censures, and
deprivations of office that have been cr may be pronounced by Pope Julius II.
against the said Council, its adherents and supporters, to be of no validity what-
soever ; and as they are in fact, so they are declared, absolutely null, and are not
to be obeyed in any way by any one. The third decree declares that all who
had been summoned must appear, and if they do not make their appearance the
sacred Council will proceed, as by right, without them in the prosecution of its ob-
ject ; and severe pains and penalties were fulminated against all who by any means
attempt to interpose any obstacle, or in any way do any injury or damage to any
adherent or supporter of the present Council. And it further declares the Coun-
cil convoked by Pope Julius IJ. to be null by prevention, by the want of security
in the place where it is to convene, and by the sins by which he has scandalized
the Church of God; and which, being all chargeable to the head of the Church,
deprive him of the right to convoke a Council. The fourth decree appoints
officers of the sacred Council; namely, Monsignore di Santa Croce, President,
although he has declared that he accepts the office only for one month; Mon-
seigneur de Lautrec as guardian ; and four prothonotaries, in allusion to the four
Evangelists, whose duty it is to revise and correct all writings that may be made
during the continuance of the Council; and besides these a number of minor
officials. After this the Abate Zaccaria with cope and mitre went to ask, first
the most reverend cardinals, and then each prelate, one after the other, whether
the decrees that had just been read had their approbation. And although all
had replied in the affirmative, he nevertheless returned to the altar and re-
peated the question, saying in a loud voice, ‘Placet?’ All replied, ‘Ita nobis
placet.’

“Messer Ambrogio, whom we have already mentioned to your Lordships as
Procurator of his Imperial Majesty, has asked that an authentic minute shall be
made of all these acts, and has indicated the next session of the Council to be
on Friday next at the third hour.

“Yesterday morning, November 7, the most reverend cardinals and the other
prelates held the second session in the cathedral. Mass was chanted by the

302 COMMISSION TO PISA.

Milan, where, on the 13th, the day of Santa Lucia, the fourth
session of the Council was to be held in the cathedral; and
that in the interim they were to ask for a safe-conduct from the
Pope, so as to enable them to send an ambassador to his Holi-
ness to arrange for the transfer of the Council to some neutral
place that would offer security to both parties.

This is the sum and substance of what was done this morn-
ing. At the twentieth hour a general meeting is to be held at
the house of the Cardinale di Santa Croce ; and this morning
they have ordered Rosso to notify the Rectors to be there, so
as to take leave of them. We know of nothing else that they
would wish to say to them.

Rosso RIDOLFI ET ANTONIO PORTINARI,
Comnussioners, etc.

Pisa, 12 November, 1511.

most reverend Cardinale di San Malo; and the same ceremonies were gone
through as at the first session, and after mass the Abate Zaccaria chanted the
Evangely, ‘Homo quidam fecit cenam magnam et invitavit multos,’ etc.; and
then he ascended the pulpit and delivered a sermon on the following text from
St. John: ‘Lux venit in mundum, et magis dilexerunt homines tenebras quam
lucem.’ His sermon related mainly to the reformation of the Church, and
concluded with an exhortation that the most reverend cardinals and prelates
ought to reform themselves before attempting to reform the Church. When
he had finished, Monseigneur d’Haussun, ambassador of his Most Christian
Majesty, ascended the chair, and published four decrees : —

“Ist. A decree by the Council of Toledo on the profound silence to be observed
in the Council, where no one is to speak except in his turn; and whoever contra-
venes this rule will be excommunicated for three days.

“2d. A decree which suspends all actions against the adherents of the Coun-
cil, which cannot be judged except before the Council.

“3d. A decree appointing four bishops to hear the cases ‘ fidei et reformationis
Ecclesiz, et ad examinandos testes, et ad referendum sacro Concilio,’ which
would then proceed to the final sentence.

“4th. A decree appointing sundry officials, such as scrutators of votes, and
messengers to announce and to summon. ”

The third session of the Council was held, not on the 14th, but on the 12th;
as may be seen from the following letter of the Commissioners. After this session
the prelates prepared for leaving Pisa, where they had fallen into great disre-
pute with the people, and where they had been tolerated with no good will by
the Florentines.

COMMISSION FOR RAISING TROOPS.

LETTERS PATENT.

We, NINE OF THE ORDINANCE AND FLORENTINE MILITIA,*

Make known to all who may see these our letters patent, that
the bearer of the same is Niccolo Machiavelli, son of Messer
Bernardo Machiavelli, Secretary of our Illustrious Signori, and
who is sent by us into the province of Romagna to select and
enroll men capable of bearing arms, to serve on foot in our
militia organization, under such banners as we shall assign to
that province. And therefore we command all our subjects in
the said province of Romagna to render him all obedience ; and
you Rectors and officials are to give him all the aid and sup-
port he may need in selecting and enrolling these men.

Dart. IN Patatio Fiorentino, 2 December, 1511.

LETTER.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

To-day I have given the advance to one hundred new men
to serve in the cavalry, and have distributed them under the
same banners; namely, Val d’ Arno, Val di Chiana, and Casen-
tino. I found the two hundred infantry of the first levy in the
best order; and these new ones will be fully equipped during
this month, after which your Lordships can employ these three
hundred cavalry wherever you may wish. I leave here to-day
for Val di Bagno, to execute the order of the Nine, and com-
mend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Brssrena, 5 December, 1511. Secret.

* The Nine of Ordinance was a magistracy instituted when the national
militia was established, in which Machiavelli had taken so prominent a part.

COMMISSIONS TO PISA

AND OTHER PLACES WITHIN AND WITHOUT THE
FLORENTINE DOMINION.

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here yesterday evening, having written to your
Lordships from Poggibonsi that I would do so. I found here
your Lordships’ letters in which you inform me that you would
send me the money to-morrow ; which is very necessary, so
that the citadel may not remain bare. I had an interview this
morning with the constables of the citadel, together with the
captain; and after much discussion we have agreed to retain
of their old companies some eighty men, all of which have
served a considerable time in the wars of Pisa; they are relia-
ble and of good quality. To fill up their number | have sent
to Pescia for forty men; and to raise these I have sent them
forty ducats out of the money which I had with me from the
horses. They will be here to-morrow evening, and by day after
to-morrow I believe I shall have everything organized. Your
Lordships may perhaps think that I have allowed too many of
the old men to remain; but I thought it necessary, first because
it seemed to me cruel to discharge these men who have served
so long; and then the constables declared that they should
not know what to say or do without this half of their old com-
panies. And furthermore I believe that, when one commits a
place of so much importance as this to the charge of any one,
it is advisable to keep him as far as possible satisfied, so as to
afford him, in any event, as little ground as possible for excuse.

But let it suffice your Lordships, that with the old and the
new men a good garrison will be organized, and that you will
not be defrauded; for I shall order that the pay shall always

COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC. 305

be made according to the old list, and that you shall have a
duplicate of it; and that they shall neither diminish nor in-
crease the number without the express order of your Lordships,
to whom I recommend myself.

Pisa, 7 May, 1512.

P. S.— The money ordered will be enough for the number
of men decided upon, and will rather exceed what is required.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Secret.

LETTER OH.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

From your Lordships’ letter of yesterday I note again your
wishes respecting the garrison of the new citadel of Pisa, and
of the gates. Your Lordships had already told me verbally
of this, and wishing to be in a measure prepared when your
instructions should come to hand, I have enlisted fifty men in
the vicariate of San Miniato, and fifty in that of Pescia. These
men will make good soldiers, and are satisfied to be paid for
forty-five days; but it will be necessary that the Chamberlain
of Pisa should pay them, and that they shall not have to look
to Florence for their money, as in that case the forty-five
days would probably become fifty, and some fair day the citadel
would be left without a soldier; it is necessary, therefore, to
think of this and provide for it.

I am now here at Fucecchio and have finished to-day all I had
to do in this vicariate, and should have gone to-morrow to
Pisa to carry out your Lordships’ instructions if you had sent
me the money to pay these new troops. But as you have not
sent it, my going to Pisa would do harm rather than good ; for
I should not be able to say anything until the money arrived,
and thus my time would be lost. And were I to make this
fact known without being prepared to put other men in their
place, the posts would be left without any garrison. I shall
therefore go to-morrow to Pescia, and remain three or four days
in that vicariate, where your Lordships will please send me
the money for raising troops there, and to pay the others; and
I shall then go to execute the orders you have given me. But

VOL. IV. 20

306 COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC.

as your Lordships have told me in your verbal instructions
that, if amongst the thirty old troops that are to remain there
be any that deserved less pay than Daccio and Gianetto, and
yet more than ordinary men, I should give them thirty lire ;
and as you do not refer to this in your letter, I know not
whether you may not have changed your mind, and therefore
I beg you kindly to repeat your instructions upon that point.
I have nothing further to say other than to recommend my-
self to your Lordships.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Fucrccuio, 29 May, 1512. Secret.

LETTER III.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC.: —

I came to Sienna* in accordance with your Lordships’ in-
structions, but could not obtain an audience from the Balia
before Friday morning, when I communicated to them all that
your Lordships had charged me with; after which I thought
it proper to go and see Borghese.f I was most kindly received
by all, who showed that this demonstration towards them by
your Lordships was most grateful to them. Borghese in par-
ticular told me that your Lordships might count upon the
republic of Sienna as upon one of your own cities; and that
they wished in all respects to share the fortunes of your re-
public ; and he thanked your Lordships infinitely for the kind
interest you had taken in him. The Cardinal,{ according to
what I hear, will not be in Sienna before next Wednesday,
and as you have not told me, I do not think I shall stay here
for any other purpose except what your Lordships have spe-
cially charged me with.

* Machiavelli was sent to Sienna to condole with the Signoria of that republic
on the death of Pandolfo Petrucci, which occurred at San Quirico on the 21st
of May, on his return from the baths of San Filippo. Tizio, in his manuscript
history of Sienna, speaking of this mission of Machiavelli to Sienna, says: “ Die
“interea quarta anni 1512, Niccolo Machiavellus orator a Florentinis Senam
“ destinatus est ad condolendam Pandulphi mortem, obtulit quidquid per Floren-
“‘tinos agi poterat.”

t Borghese Petrucci, oldest son of Pandolfo, succeeded his father in au-
thority.

t Alfonso, brother of Borghese.

COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC. 307

The city of Sienna is very tranquil, and the only thing that
agitates it is the murder of the Bargello some days since under
the very eyes of Borghese ; the murderers being all his relations
and friends. To leave this murder unpunished would seem to
allow too much authority to Borghese; whilst to avenge it
might give rise to disturbances. I have conversed with some
of the first citizens, who tell me that so long as they had your
Lordships’ friendship there would be no disturbances in their
city; and being assured of that, you could depend upon their
good will. These persons also told me that they would desire
your Lordships to write to the Rectors nearest to Sienna, if
they heard of any gathering of their banished or any other
persons, to prohibit the same, and to advise your Lordships of
it. I promised to mention this to your Lordships, to whom I
recommend myself.

I am now here in Poggibonsi, but shall be at Pisa to-morrow
evening. Valete!

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Pogerponsi, 5 June, 1512. Secret.
—__@—__—_
LETTER IV.

MaGniFIcent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Day before yesterday your courier Domenico arrived with
the money to pay the garrisons of the citadel and gates. They
were all paid yesterday, in such manner as I shall report ver-
bally and in detail to your Lordships on my return to Florence,
which will be in six or eight days after I shall have done what
the Illustrious Nine have instructed me to do in relation to the
organization of the cavalry. I recommend myself to your
Lordships, gua bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI,
Pisa, 10 June, 1512. Secret.

308 COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC.

LETTERS PATENT.

We, THE TEN oF LIBERTY AND BALIA OF THE FLORENTINE
REPUBLIC, ETC.,

Make known to all who may see these letters patent that the
bearer thereof is Niccolo Machiavelli, son of Messer Bernardo,
our citizen and Secretary, whom we send as our Commissioner
for the whole of the Val di Chiana to execute the orders we
have given him.

And to that effect we command all of you Condottieri of men-
at-arms, and whoever is in command of the light cavalry of
the Ordinance, that you render obedience to the said Niccolo
in all he may direct you to do, the same as you would to our
magistracy, if they were themselves to give you orders.

And to you, Commissioners, Rectors, officials, and subjects of
ours, in whatever place of the said province you may be estab-
lished, we command to give him all aid and support in all
that he may ask of you; for it will be with our consent, and by
our order, if you attach any value to the satisfaction of our
magistrature.

MARCELLO VIRGILIO.

Ex Paxatio Fiorentino, 23 June, 1512.

LETTER V.

MaeniricEnt and Most Iuiustriovs SiGNoRI, ETC. :—

By our last of the 25th, we informed your Lordships what we
had learned and ordered up to the present. It seemed to us
proper by every consideration, and more especially on account
of those persons here who claim to be friendly to us, and most
of all on account of those of the country who were greatly
afraid lest they should in some way be injured, to send for
Aurelio da Castello with 300 of his infantry, who came very
promptly with a portion of his troop. During the night some
600 more came, although not ordered by us. Nevertheless, I
judge their coming was very opportune, because, first, whoever
was disposed to make trouble has seen that it would be a diffi-

COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC. 309

cult matter; and those who wish to live quietly have taken
fresh courage, seeing that your Lordships were not disposed to
abandon them.

The coming of Niccolo Machiavelli was also most oppor-
tune, and immediately upon his arrival I deemed it proper for
him to speak to the Priors, and these wanted the council to be
present. As you may well imagine, Machiavelli exhorted them
with great wisdom, and assured them, with most excellent and
efficient reasons, that they had nothing to fear, either on this
occasion or under more difficult circumstances, inasmuch as
your Lordships had such an affection for them that you would
never abandon them; to which he added other good words, etc.,
etc. So that, thanks to these two circumstances, everything
seems settled for the present; and, with a view not to incur
too much expense, we have sent back all the troops, retaining
only about 150 of the best. Of these we send 50 this morning
to Valiano, where there is still the company of Malatesta ;
and where some intrenchments are to be thrown up, as I stated
in a previous letter. We have given ten barili* to each chief
of a banner and captain of a squadron that we have kept; and
to those whom we have sent back, we have given each one
barile; although both Machiavelli and the Count thought I
ought to keep more of them. But we held to this because
I did not want to occasion any greater expense, and because
I thought the number kept were sufficient for the present.
Should, however, your Lordships think differently, you will
please advise me of your wishes in the matter.

The Papal troops that were at Pienza and at the Val d’ Or-
chia started yesterday morning and came to Torrita, Asina-
lunga and Rigomagno, and Lucignano, where they intend to
stop to-day. They are in all 238 horse, having been counted
by Ricafolo, captain of the Count’s light-horse. At an early
hour we sent this officer off with a squad of 25 horse, and he
has been close at the enemy’s heels until they were past, so
that they should not debauch our troops, as they had done in
the Siennese territory ; and thus they dared not halt on our
territory. Subsequently, the Signor Count also went off with
25 men-at-arms, to take up his quarters on the frontier, where
the Signor Giovanni Corrado came to meet him; and, as I am

* Barile,a piece of money so called formerly in consequence of its being
levied as a tax on each barrel of wine.

310 COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC.

informed, they had a long conference together. But it seems
to me, and to the Signor Count likewise, that he did not get
the whole truth from Corrado respecting the Pope’s intentions,
and as to what he was about to do. But he urged the Count
to make terms with his Holiness; to which the Count replied in
suitable manner, and afterwards requested me to write to your
Lordships about it, and ask you kindly to advise him what to do
in the matter, as he would ten times rather lose his state than
to take such a step without your approval. In truth, the Signor
Count manifests the greatest affection for our republic, both
in words and acts, and regards neither trouble nor expense to
render us service.

The troops that were at Orvieto went yesterday evening to
Ponte a Centino, and up to this morning we have no informa-
tion whether they have left there or not ; we believe they have,
but shall know definitely in a few hours. It is only the com-
pany of the Signor Julio, and consists of 250 horse. Since
then we learn that at this moment there are at Acquapendente
Piero and Antonio Santa Croce, and Orsino da Mugnano, with
some 200 horse more. The Count Alessandro da Marzano
with only four cavaliers arrived yesterday evening at Orvicto,
and had a conference with the Pope’s commissioner. It is
supposed that he will advance with his company, which has
remained behind, and consists of 25 men-at-arms; the same
with regard to the Conte dell’ Anguillara, who has 60 men-at-
arms.

This is all I have learned up to the present moment. These
captains have said that they sent two days ago to your Lord-
ships for a free passage; but they have said to some persons in
great secrecy that they have come for the purpose of carrying
into effect what I wrote to your Lordships in my last.

Niccolo Machiavelli left here yesterday morning for Vali-
ano to inspect the intrenchments there; and after that he
is to go to Monte San Savino to establish a point of de-
fence between there and Fojano, as I stated in my former
letter.

Here we are diligently engaged in establishing a good
guard, and shall be very vigilant; and we have no apprehen-
sions but what, with the provisions made, and the good judg-
ment and activity of the Signor Count, we shall be safe from
all harm. Should we hear differently, we shall immediately

COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC. owe

notify your Lordships, to whom I do not cease to recommend
myself. Nec plura.

MonrTEPutciano, 27 June, 1512.

P. S.— At this moment, it being near the tenth hour, I re-
ceive your Lordships’ letter of the 25th, to which we have no
further reply to make beyond what I have said above. I am
glad to learn that they have sent to ask free passage, and
hope your Lordships have granted that request. At the risk
of seeming presumptuous, 1 would humbly suggest that they
should be obliged to take another route from that through the
Mugello, so as to deprive them of all opportunity of doing
mischief. And if I speak too openly, it is my love and affec-
tion for my country that makes me do so, and I trust your
Lordships will pardon it.

Io. Battista DI NOBILE,
Podesta and Captain.

LETTER VI.*

MAGNIFICENT AND MOsT ILLUSTRIOUS SIGNORI: —

At this moment, it being the eighteenth hour, Niccolo Mach-
iavelli has left for Firenzuola; he has arranged for the money
to pay all the troops of this valley and those of Marradi, with
instructions to move them all in the least possible time to
Firenzuola. Notice of this has been given to Pier Francesco
Tosinghi at Barberino, on the supposition that he is there; of
all this you will be informed by Machiavelli, in his letter to
your Lordships.

Since my last, I have nothing to communicate, unless I were
to repeat the same things. The bearer of this, who was yes-
terday at Bologna, will give you a full verbal report. Two
notices in writing will be enclosed with this. Nee alia.

FRANCESCO ZATI,

Vicar and Commissioner.
Scarperia, 21 August, 1512.

* This and the other letters that follow are relative to the measures taken by
the republic to oppose the Spaniards, who were advancing for the purpose of
changing the government of Florence, and to re-establish the Medici there, as in
fact was afterwards done.

$12 COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC.

LETTER VII.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC.:—

This morning at the fourteenth hour I wrote to your Lord-
ships all that I had learned in relation to matters here. Since
then Lamberto Cambi arrived, whom I informed of all my pro-
ceedings and designs; and as he is writing at length to your
Lordships, I have nothing further to report about matters here.

By the hands of the courier Cecotto I have received fifteen
hundred ducats, according to what Quaratesi writes me, for I
have not counted them myself. To-morrow we shall pay the
troops, giving to each one third pay; and after that T shall
return to Florence, so that I may serve your Lordships in some
other way.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
FrreNzv0LA, 22 August, 1512.

LETTER VIII.

Maeniricent SigNorI, ETC.: —

This evening at half-past one of the night we arrived here, by
the grace of God, safe and sound. Upon asking his rene
the Cree oer and N. Machiavelli in what Pondion and
place the Spanish army and his Lordship the Viceroy might
be found, they replied that they had received various informa-
tion, but had reported all fully to your Lordships, as they
showed me by the registers. I will not, therefore, repeat all
the details of the reports I have had, but shall confine myself
to giving you the substance of what I have gathered from
them; namely, that if they received soon from your Lordships
an order to collect as large a force of infantry and cavalry as
could be got together for the purpose of making a decided
stand, they could readily do it; although they might not be
able to prevent the enemy’s passage. Nevertheless, you would
be able with the troops which Machiavelli will take from here,
to the number of more than two thousand choice men, to unite
with that force of infantry and cavalry raised for the purpose of

COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC. 313

making a stand. And assuming that everything remains quiet
in your city, as we confidently believe that it will, your Lord-
ships may hope that matters may result successfully, and ac-
cording to your desire. And may God in his grace cause it to
turn out so.

To-morrow morning I shall, God willing, leave in time to go
to Lojano. This route is not considered free from danger, on
account of the troops from Sassatello, and other Italians, who
are on this route to join the Spanish forces in the direction of
Bruscoli. I shall make every effort to obtain from his Lord-
ship the Commissioner, and from Niccolo Machiavelli, an escort
that will go in advance to examine the road and see whether
it is obstructed or not so far as it leads to that place, where
I hope to obtain positive information as to the whereabouts
of the Viceroy. So soon as I have ascertained this, I shall at
once seek an interview with him, and, with all the security
which his Lordship can procure for me, make a beginning at
the execution of the commission with which your Lordships
have intrusted me.

May God in his grace grant us a favorable issue! Bene
atque feliciter vestre valeant Dominationes.

Servitor
BALTHASAR CARDUCCI,
Firenzvora, 22 August, 1512. Orator Florentinus.*

LETTER IX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

At this moment, it being the fourteenth hour and a half, a
letter has been received from Niccolo Machiavelli, which is sent
herewith enclosed. In relation to what he says of Alessandro
del Nero, you may take it for certain that full information has
been received. The same with regard to the artillery ; and I
have ascertained, by persons whom I have sent for the purpose,
that all that is contained in his letter is correct. But it seems
to me that matters move a little more slowly than what they
pretend ; so that, if you hasten, you may yet retain them on the

* Balthasar Carducci was one of the persons sent to the Viceroy of Naples
Generalissimo of the Spanish forces, for the purpose of negotiating a peace.

314. COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC.

other side of the state ; although you will hear the truth more
fully from Francesco Tosinghi.

This morning, seeing that the men of this place complain
that they are unprovided with any means of defence, I had
them all called together, and exhorted them to guard their own
village. Should they therefore apply to your Lordships for
some artillery and ammunition for the defence of this place,
I beg your Lordships to let them have it. And moreover ]
have offered myself, as is in fact my duty, to share their fate
with them. I recommend myself to your Lordships, and may
God guard you! Nee alia.

FRANCESCO ZATI,

SCARPERIA, 22 August, 1512. Vicar and Commissioner,

LETTER X.

MaGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My last letter to your Lordships was written yesterday
evening; I therein told you all I had heard of the enemy up
to that time ; and that not a single man remains here. Since
then, two of your Lordships’ letters of yesterday have been
received ; one at the twentieth hour, and the other at night.
- In the latter, you commission me to send and have the roads
cut over which the enemy has to pass. But your Lordships
must know that it would be impossible to have this done, or
to have any other order executed; for, as I have already said
above, there is not a single man left here whom I could send
from one place to another, and to-night even we had to do
without escorts, and with no protection but what nature gave
us ; and therefore it is impossible for us to make any provision
for defence, and the enemy has it in his power to scour the
country wherever he pleases. This place is entirely abandoned,
and, according to what I hear, the Podesta and the customs
officer intend to leave here. But even if we had the men to
do the work, it would be of no use to cut the passes; for the
mountain on this side is so open, that artillery could easily pass
over it at this season; and, furthermore, the enemy is in such
force here, that the inhabitants cannot go where their business
calls them. In fact, those who have their property and dwell-

COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC. 315

ings on the mountain are all flying from here. I am informed
that at Bruscoli, which is but a few miles from here, some
hundred and fifty Spanish horse are quartered, who go about
everywhere robbing, and have captured some of the men of
Bruscoli. It is necessary, therefore, to think of other meas-
ures. I must govern myself according to the information I
receive from hour to hour.

To-night there came here three men, sent by the communes
of Ronta and Pulciano, to inform me that there was on the
borders of Marradi a large body of infantry under the com- :
mand of Vicenzio di Naldo of Berzighella, who purposed to
pass from there by the Marradi road. These men asked me
for a supply of artillery and munitions, showing me that they
were admirably disposed towards your Lordships; but they
had been robbed of everything, and were unable to offer any
resistance to the enemy. I advised them to be of good cheer,
and told them that I would write to your Lordships. I could
not do otherwise, and now give you notice of it. Yesterday [
wrote to Machiavelli at Firenzuola, urging him to gather a
strong body of infantry at Firenzuola and at the Stale, so as
to make the enemy less confident in their advance. But I
have no reply from him; I had, however, to-night a letter
from Lamberto Cambi of that place, who does not tell me
either whether Machiavelli is there, or whether the infantry
that was there had left, in which case it would be in the power
of a few of the enemy’s horse to scour the whole country. But
if there were a good body of troops there, then the enemy would
be obliged to have some respect for them.

The said Lamberto informs me in his letter of the substance
of two messages which he had received from Machiavelli re- —
specting the enemy; and so that your Lordships may also be
fully informed on the subject, I send you the said letter here-
with enclosed. Bene valete.

Piero FRANCESCO DE TOSINGHI,
Commiss. General.
BarBeRINO MucEtiana, 23 August, 1512.

316 COMMISSIONS TO PISA, ETC.

LETTER XI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Yesterday evening at the twenty-third hour I wrote to your
Lordships all that I had been able to gather from all sides
respecting the enemy. Since then two of our men returned,
to-night, and report matters to be unchanged, and that the
enemy has not advanced any farther. They may, however,
change their mind and make an advance; but your Lordships
shall be informed from hour to hour of whatever news I hear.

This morning I examined the place, and afterwards went to
the palace and ordered everything that can possibly be done
for the present. His Lordship the Vicar and Niccolo Machia-
velli and myself are in perfect harmony as to what is necessary
to be done, and in providing for it. We assembled a portion
of the infantry this morning, and gave to each man a ducat ;
and we are now calling the remainder together for the same
purpose. We do not as yet know the precise number, but we
agree in estimating it to be over a thousand ; so soon as they
are all together, we will inform your Lordships.

The ambassador, Messer Baldassare, left this morning at an °
early hour. In accordance with your Lordships’ orders, we
provided him with an escort, so that he may travel with more
security.

If we could have had for the defence of this place some
three or four more artillerists, we should have been very glad ;
nevertheless, we are of good cheer and consider ourselves quite
safe. May it please our Lord God that it prove so in reality!
I have nothing more to say except to recommend myself to
the good graces of your Lordships, and may the Almighty
bestow happiness on you! —

LAMBERTO DI CAMBI,

Firenzvoia, 23 August, 1512. Commissioner.

MISSION TO THE CHAPTER OF THE
MINORITE BROTHERS AT CARPI.*

INSTRUCTIONS OF THE EIGHT OF PRACTICE.
DELIBERATED, THE lltH or May, 1521.

NiccoLo,— You will proceed to Carpi, and manage to be
there the whole of Thursday, which you must not miss. Im-
mediately on your arrival you will present yourself before his
Reverence the Father-General of the Order of the Minorite
Brothers, and his assistants, who are holding their general
chapter in that place, and present to them our letters of cre-
dence. After that you will say to their Reverences on our
part, that they must be well aware that our republic ever .has
been, is, and always will be well disposed towards all pious and
ecclesiastical establishments, as is proved by the number of
hospitals, monasteries, and convents founded by our ancestors ;
and that nothing has conduced more to these pious works
than the edifying example of the habits and doctrines of these
religious bodies, whose conduct moved their souls to exalt and
support them. And you will add, that amongst those who

* After eight years of strictly private life Machiavelli reappeared in the pub-
lic service through the efforts of the Cardinale Giulio de’ Medici, afterwards Pope
Clement VIL, and was sent by the Magistracy of the Eight of Practice as Nun-
cio or Ambassador to the Chapter of the Minorite Brothers, which was held at
Carpi in 1521. The object of this mission was to induce this brotherhood to
form a separate and distinct organization for the Florentine dominion, it being
desired by these friars themselves, and especially by a certain Brother Hilarion
of that order, who had the confidence of the above-named Cardinale de’ Medici,
and was mainly instrumental in inducing him to have this mission decided upon.
Machiavelli remained but a few days at Carpi, where he also received a com-
mission from the Consuls of the Wool Guild to procure a good preacher for the
Metropolitan Church of Florence for the next Lent.

318 MISSION TO THE CHAPTER OF THE

have been special objects on the part of our republic, and have
received most benefits at our hands, are the brothers of their
order, because their honesty and their exemplary lives deserved
it. Unfortunately, it is true that for some time past it has
seemed, and still seems, to our best and most pious citizens,
that there has manifested itself amongst the brothers a lack of
that spirit of sanctity which formerly put them in such good
odor; and that in consequence the laymen have relaxed their
charitable zeal, which made them formerly shower benefits upon
the brotherhood. And in seeking for the cause we have readily
found that it arises from the relaxation of discipline that has
taken place in their convents. And in trying to find a remedy
for this, we learn that it is impossible for this order to recover
its ancient reputation, unless they form a separate and distinct
organization for our Florentine dominion. In adopting that
course the brothers would more easily know and correct each
other, and fear more to err. Fully persuaded that there is no
other course to be taken, we wish you to urge and beg these
reverend fathers to do our republic the favor to constitute
themselves a distinct organization for the Florentine domin-
ion, and separate from the rest of Tuscany.

If they do this, and we believe they will not hesitate, they
will be doing an act that will be most agreeable to our entire
city, which by former as well as by recent services rendered
to their religion deserves to obtain what she so much desires.
And they will be the cause of reviving in the convents which
they possess in our dominion the ancient zeal, and in our city
the charity of former days. They will also remove the causes
of those scandals that are likely to break out if this favor is
not conceded to us. You will endeavor, therefore, by all the
means in your power, to persuade the reverend fathers that
such is our great desire.

You will furthermore present to them the letters of the most
illustrious and most reverend Legate, the Cardinale de’ Medici,
and beg them on his behalf to render us this service, as his most
reverend Lordship has verbally commissioned you to do. Nor
can we believe that our prayers, the love of religion, and the
authority of Monsignore the most reverend Legate will fail to
move them. But if with all this you do not obtain the desired
result, then you will politely signify to the reverend fathers
that we are resolved not to give up our project; nor do we

MINORITE BROTHERS AT CARPI. 319

believe that Monsignore the most reverend Legate will cease to
support us, until in one way or another we accomplish our
desire.

Datum Fiorent1# in loco Residentie sub die 11 Maii 1521.

Octo Virt Practice Civitatis Florentie.
NiccoLo MICHELOTTO.

OTHER INSTRUCTIONS BY FATHER HILARION.

Inprimis, you will present yourself to me at Carpi, and I will
make known to you those brothers to whom it is important
you should speak ; and you must endeavor to be at Carpi dur-
ing the 16th, at least before vespers.

The letter to Brother Francesco da Potenza should be pre-
sented as soon as possible ; you will explain to him on the part
of the most illustrious and most reverend Legate, that his
reverend Lordship desires that our present organization should
be divided, for the reasons given below; and as his Lordship
has heard that this brother is opposed to such a division, you
will endeavor to persuade him to change his mind and favor
the measure. For his Lordship is certain that, if Brother Fran-
cesco will favor it, success will be the result; whilst the op-
posite course would be the reverse of agreeable to his most
reverend Lordship, who will not disappoint either the citizens
or the brothers.

You will have to add, that his most reverend Lordship an-
ticipated that he would be opposed to the Florentine brothers,
and that, if this were really the case, it would be agreeable to
him that in all reasonable matters he should be the friend of
his friends. In fine, you will try to convince him with those
persuasive words that are so natural to you.

In the letters of the Signoria and the Cardinal to the coun-
cil of the assistants, you are charged to beg them, in their
name, to consent that a separate organization be formed by the
brothers that are in the Florentine dominion. The reason of
this is, that for some time past it is reported that some of the
brothers stray very far from the exemplary and edifying life to
which their rules oblige them. And as they are informed that

320 MISSION TO THE CHAPTER OF THE

these disorders arise from a lack of discipline, they judge, to-
gether with all the other respectable people, that this will be
the only seasonable remedy; and you will use the following
arguments to persuade them : —

1. Because they desire the brothers to be in good, and not
in bad odor, — as they have been until now.

2. Because this measure is desired by many citizens, whom
their Lordships wish to satisfy.
2°. Because they know that, if this measure is not adopted, it
would give rise to inconveniences, of which they do not wish
to hear under any circumstances, but which they desire to pro-
vide against.

4. Because they know that the brothers of their dominion,
especially the good men, claim this measure as necessary for
their reformation, which they cannot and will not neglect.

5. Because their Lordships desire this measure to be adopt-
ed in the customary way of proceeding by the brotherhood, and
influenced by their love for their religion; and they do not
wish to think of any other means.

With the above arguments, excepting the last, you may urge
the measure in the name of the most reverend Cardinal ; per-
suading the fraternity on behalf of his most reverend Lord-
ship to satisfy the Hlustrious Signoria and the citizens. You
can add to your reply that the most reverend Legate viva
voce oraculi has twice tried within a few days to persuade the
Vicar of the order, who wanted to refer the matter to the
general chapter; and he now begs and exhorts their fraternity
to consent. That he deems it expedient, for the purpose of
removing all inconvenience, that they should do it; and that
they ought to think well, that if they do not do it his most rev-
erend Lordship has fully done his duty; and that, if at some
time hereafter the citizens wished to adopt some other expedi-
ent, his most reverend Lordship would not fail his citizens nor
his brothers. All these things you must arrange in such man-
ner and with such words as may seem most suitable.

MINORITE BROTHERS AT CARPI. 321

To THE MOST REVEREND AND MOST ILLUSTRIOUS CARDINALE
GIULIO DE’ MEDICI.

Most RevEREND FatHER : —

As these friars did not begin their chapter until Saturday, I
could not execute my commission sooner. On that day they
named for their Minister-General the Soncino, who had pre-
viously been their Vicar-General. On the Sunday following,
they appointed twelve Assessors, who were so called this time
because the brothers from across the mountains did not want
that, according to the old custom of the Italians, they should
create Diffinitori, with authority to determine and define ques-
tions of religion. By this change these Assessors are elected,
and these together with the Minister-General have authority to
hear and examine matters, and then to report them to the
chapter, which body then has power to terminate them.

I therefore presented myself yesterday morning before the
Minister and the Italian Assessor. I handed them my letters,
and explained to them my commission in such manner and with
such remarks as I thought best calculated to persuade them
to the desired course of action; and I neglected no argument
which your most reverend Lordship suggested to me verbally
at my departure, and which were subsequently recalled to me
by Brother Hilarion. Thereupon, the reverend fathers held a
long consultation amongst themselves, and then had me called
in and expressed to me first the great obligations which they
owed to our republic, to your illustrious house, and finally to
your most reverend Lordship; that they wanted not only in
thought, but in fact, to do what would be most agreeable to all ;
and that they knew full well that the motives of the Magistracy
of the Hight and the desires of your most reverend Lordship
were good, and inspired by the most just and most reasonable
considerations. But what was asked of them was in itself of
such importance as no other question that the order had been
called upon to treat for two hundred years; and therefore it
was necessary to give it the most careful examination, together
with the advice and opinion of the other fathers of the chapter,
as they had no authority to act without them. That they would
endeavor before the dissolution of the chapter to arrive at some

definite conclusion, that would be satisfactory to the illustrious
VOL. IV. 21

322 MISSION TO THE CHAPTER OF THE

Magistracy of the Eight, as well as to your most reverend Lord-
ship. But as the question was a knotty and difficult one, and
could not be so readily disposed of, and at the same time to
prove their good disposition to the illustrious Signori of the
Hight and to your most reverend Lordship, and so that I
should not be obliged to wait here several days in vain, they
would write to the illustrious Signori and to your most rever-
end Lordship the same as they had told me, and that I could
carry their reply away with me. And thus in all they said they
showed on the one hand the desire they had to oblige those
who had requested them, and on the other hand the importance
and difficulty of the subject; alleging the same reasons which
your most. reverend Lordship may have heard on former occa-
sions.

I did not fail to reply to them in the warmest manner possi-
ble, and urged them to leave these difficulties aside, and frankly
to come to a definite result; telling them particularly that I
had not been sent by the illustrious magistracy to dispute about
this matter, which they had themselves most carefully exam-
ined and discussed, but to make known their wishes to the
reverend fathers, and to beg them to satisfy the same, which
could only be done by complying with their request. I said,
furthermore, that I saw two points in their answer calculated
to displease the illustrious Signori; the one was the prolixity
of their resolution, and the other, their attempt to negotiate
about it, and remit the question to the chapter. For they well
knew that, when a few persons do not want to do a thing and
wish to make difficulties, they remit it to the multitude. But
that this point had been thought of, and provided against in
such manner that not only their reverences united, but the
Minister-General by himself, had authority from the Pope to
conclude such a separation, without having to submit it to the
chapter; and that, moreover, the briefs themselves imposed
this upon them, saying, “habito prius maturo examine, et
“super hoc onerando conscientias vestras.” But that we must
not think ill of them, as they would really do everything in
their power to satisfy us. And thus, after many words on both
sides, no other conclusion was reached.

Before speaking to all the fathers together, I had a spe-
cial conversation with Father Potenza, and presented to him
your most reverend Lordship’s letter, and pressed him hard,

\

MINORITE BROTHERS AT CARPI. 323

on your part, to show himself favorable to your wishes in this
matter, intimating to him dexterously that it was wisdom on
the part of men to know how to give that which they could
neither sell nor keep. It is impossible to evince greater warmth
in desiring to favor the matter. than he did, protesting that
he was the slave of your most reverend Lordship, whose slight-
est indications were commands for him. After that I spoke
with all the others, one at a time, employing more ardent and
pressing language than I had done in speaking to them all
in a body, as your reverend Lordship had suggested to me.
All pointed out the difficulty of carrying the matter through,
and the disorder that would result from it if done; but all of
them protested that your most reverend Lordship should be
satisfied. From the expressions used by some of them, I am
inclined to believe that they will commit the matter to their
Minister-General, who, accompanied by three or four of the
other fathers, will come to Tuscany to discuss and settle the
matter there. If this course is taken, then Brother Hilarion
feels sure that it will be concluded to our satisfaction.

Having thus done all that I have reported to your most rey-
erend Lordship, and having the letters which the reverend
fathers have charged me with, Brother Hilarion thought that
I had better mount and use all diligence to reach Florence on
Wednesday evening in time to enable the Eight of Practice to
write another letter that would reach them before the dissolu-
tion of the chapter, which is fixed for Saturday or Sunday next.
That letter should say to them that the Hight are not at all
satisfied with the delay of the fathers in coming to a decision,
and should conclude, in few but earnest words, that no other
decision would satisfy them except such as would effectually
make the desired division.

I arrived this evening here in Modena with that commission
and order, but find that riding in such haste does not at all
agree with me, owing to my being quite indisposed. I remem-
ber, also, that by order of your most reverend Lordship I was
to remain here one or two days; and therefore thought it well
to write to your most reverend Lordship, and give you infor-
mation upon all points, which will answer the same as my com-
ing in person, especially as it will be there quicker, in case
you should conclude to write to them again before the disso-
lution of the chapter.

824 MISSION TO THE MINORITE BROTHERS.

Messer Gismondi dei Sali, business agent of the Signor Al-
berto, has rendered very great service in this affair, of which
I wished to bear testimony to your most reverend Lord-
ship; for in words and in acts he shows himself most
devoted to your most reverend Lordship, to whom I recom-

mend myself.
Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

MISSION TO VENICE.

CREDENTIALS.

SERENISSIMO PRINCIPI ET EXCELLENTISSIMO DOMINO ANDRE
GRITTI, DEI GRATIA DUCI VENETIARUM PATR. OBSERY.

Most Serene Prince anp Most Excetient Lorp : —

We send to your Serene Highness our citizen Niccolo Machi-
avelli, who will relate to you in our name the extortion and
violence beyond all expectation, and done in contempt of what
is due to the friendship existing between your illustrious re-
public and ours, by a man in a port and town of your most
illustrious dominion, against three of our young men who were
coming from Ragusa with a sum of money which they brought
from the Levant as is usual.

We beg your Serene Highness to put full faith in all that
our envoy will explain to you in our name. And most ear-
nestly do we entreat you to receive his reclamation favorably,
and to cause restitution to be made to our merchants of what
has so violently been taken from them. This is what we hope
from the integrity and consummate justice of your most illus-
trious Serene Highness, to whom we recommend ourselves
most humbly, and whom we pray the Almighty most happily
to preserve.

ConsuLes ARTIS LAN ET
Cons. Rerp. FLORENTINZ
IN ROMANIA

Civitatis
Florentia.

Dat. FiorEent1# ex officio nostro die 19 mensis Augusti 1525.

326 MISSION TO VENICE.

BRIEF INSTRUCTION

TO YOU, NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, AS TO WHAT YOU HAVE TO DO
IN YOUR MISSION TO VENICE, BY OUR ORDER.

RESOLVED UPON BY US, 19 Aveust, 1525.

Very Dear NiccoLto: —

We use but few words with you, because we know your pru-
dence and the great experience you have so often shown in af-
fairs of much greater difficulty than the present, and because

you have fully understood our object in sending you to Venice.

But so as not to fail in the responsibility which rests upon
every one who sends another on a mission, we have prepared
these few lines relative to what we intend you to do in our
name on your mission to Venice. You will proceed then as
promptly and as conveniently as you can to Venice, whither
may our Lord God guide you safely. The first thing you are
to do after your arrival will be to call upon the Bishop of
Feltre, Papal Nuncio to that republic, for whom you have let-
ters from Rome; and after having delivered these to him, we
wish you to try, with all the skill you can command, to possess
yourself of a letter that is enclosed in the letter to him. That
letter is one of those which Benedetto Inghirami has written
to us from Ancona, and in it he relates at length the whole
affair. We had sent the letter to Rome, for the purpose of
more fully elucidating the case; and at Rome they have en-
closed it in the letter to the Nuncio which you are taking with
you. We tell you this because that letter varies in some re-
spects from the deposition of the witnesses, which might give
umbrage and perhaps create difficulties rather than serve our
cause.

After the Nuncio has read that letter, you must take it from
his hands, saying that it is superfluous, as the young men who
have written it are here in person, and can state their case
better and with greater brevity verbally. Coming then to dis-
cuss as to what course to take, you will follow his Lordship’s
advice, and then you will go with his Lordship, presuming
that he will want to accompany you, or alone, and present
yourself before the most illustrious Doge and the Venetian

MISSION TO VENICE. 327

lords, for whom you have a brief from his Holiness, and a
letter from our Magnificent Signori, which you will present to
them with the customary ceremonies. When you shall have
obtained an audience and permission to speak, you will ex-
pose to their Lordships, on our behalf, the extortion and rob-
bery beyond all expectation and what is due to the sincere
friendship existing between their republic and ours, in their
port and by a Venetian, upon three of our young men, who
were coming from Ragusa with money brought from the
Levant in the usual way. You will demand the restitution of
what has been taken from them, in the strongest and most
efficacious terms that you can employ, and which, with your
- habitual prudence, you will deem most suitable for obtaining
the result we so much desire, and to get back what has been
violently taken and stolen.

You will also take with you the deposition of the witnesses
taken at Ancona and elsewhere, which you will use at such
time and on such occasion as you may judge most to the pur-
pose. You will also have with you two of those young men
from whom the money was taken, so that you may daily make
known the precise facts, and avail yourself of them on every
occasion, and may boldly face any one who attempts to deny
the facts.

This is all that occurs to us to tell you at this moment, and
even this may be said to have been superfluous, for we feel
persuaded that you fully understand our wishes, and will know
better how to carry them into effect than we have told you
above. We have every confidence in you and hope, as well
from what we have heard, that his most illustrious Lordship
‘the Doge, moved by his extreme sense of justice,and having
heard the case, has already had the delinquent incarcerated,
as by your efforts, that you will return promptly with the
satisfaction which we ask.

THE CONSULS OF THE WooL GUILD OF THE
CITY OF FLORENCE.

328 MISSION TO VENICE.

REPRESENTATIONS.

SERENISSIME, ETC.:—

Certain of our citizens and merchants who have lately come
from Constantinople have reported an occurrence the outra-
geous nature of which has caused us great displeasure ; and
we hope that your Serene Highness in your benevolence to-
wards us, as well as by your innate sense of justice, will be
no less displeased. The following is a statement of the oc-
currence.

A brigantine coming from Ragusa, and having on board the
aforesaid merchants with a considerable sum of money, arrived
at Lesina, a port belonging to your illustrious dominion; there
they found the brigantine commanded by Giovan Battista
Donati, a Venetian citizen, who accompanied the Turkish
ambassador. This Giovan Battista had the said merchants
brought before him, and on certain iniquitous pretexts threat-
ened them with loss of their lives, although without the least
offence on their part. And after having subjected them to
indignities which we should blush to repeat, he finally com-
pelled them to ransom themselves with fifteen hundred gold
ducats, which he extorted from them by the most frivolous pre-
texts. This outrage seems to us the greater and the more
grave, as it has been inflicted upon us by a person whom we have
never offended, so far as we are aware, and within the juris-
diction of those whose good will we have ever endeavored to
merit by every kind of good offices. How deeply we have felt
this outrage, and in what light it must be regarded by whoever
hears of it, we do not think necessary to demonstrate by a
lengthy discourse, well knowing the supreme wisdom and jus-
tice of your Serene Highness.

We wished to bring this occurrence to the notice of your
Serene Highness by this present representation, persuaded
that you will not forget what is due to our friendship, nor
what is expected from your most illustrious republic, when
we beg you to have some regard for a city which is so much
attached to you as ours is; and to see to the indemnification of
these our merchants, who, not to use a harsher expression, have
not been treated as friends, and have been subjected to a villa-
nous outrage beyond all reason. Our most dear fellow-citizen,

MISSION TO VENICE. 329

Niccolo Machiavelli, goes for this purpose to Venice, and will,
in our name and on behalf of our merchants, explain the whole
affair to you by word of mouth, relating to you precisely how
the occurrences took place.

We desire above all things that your Serene Highness should
be convinced that you cannot at this moment do anything that
would be more agreeable to us than to order the restitution
to these our merchants of the money so unjustly taken from
them, — a restitution required by duty, so that every one may
know that this villany was perpetrated in direct contravention
of your will. If the habitual equity of your Serene Highness, as
well as your ancient good will towards us, accords this grace,
you will do what is really worthy of you, and most agreeable
to ourselves; and which we shall receive as a benefit, and if
occasion should ever present itself, we shall not fail to remem-
ber it at all times. Que bene valeat.

MISSION TO THE ARMY OF THE LEAGUE,
ENGAGED IN THE SIEGE OF CREMONA.* -

INSTRUCTIONS

GIVEN TO MICHIAVELLI BY FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI, LIEUTENANT
OF THE POPE AT THE ARMY OF THE LEAGUE.

THERE are two reasons for my sending you to Cremona;
the first is, to know with the greatest possible certainty what
the chances are for the success of that enterprise; and the
second is, to make every effort to have the attempt aban-
doned, if within five or six days the city does not surrender.
Therefore, besides the other efforts which you will make to
inform yourself thoroughly upon the first point, you will have
a letter of credence from me to the Venetian Proveditore, to
whom you will communicate the first cause of your mission,
begging him earnestly to tell you what he thinks of matters,

* The war which desolated Italy at this time, and in which the Pope, the
Venetians, and the French were leagued together against Charles V., had the
most disastrous termination for the League. It forms one of the most interesting
subjects of history, and was most fruitful in events ; amongst which the most
noteworthy are the sack of Rome, the captivity of the Pope, and the change in
the government of Florence from a republic to a monarchy. The famous histo-
rian Guicciardini was commissioner of the Pope with the army, and Machiavelli
had been sent to be near him by the Florentine government. The correspond-
ence between Guicciardini, Machiavelli, and Francesco Vettori, official as well
as private, gives most precious accounts of the most secret intrigues in the
affairs of the time. |

From the instructions of Guicciardini it would appear that Machiavelli was
near him, either voluntarily, or in virtue of a commission from the Floren-
tine government ; but that that commission was anterior to that which forms
the object of this mission, because the siege of Cremona, which is spoken of
in these instructions, occurred in the month of August, 1526.

Ee ee eee

MISSION TO THE ARMY OF THE LEAGUE. 331

and what the Duke’s* opinion is; giving him to understand
that he may talk as freely with you as with myself.

As to the second object, taking your cue from the answer of
the Proveditore, you will ask him on my part what he thinks
of doing in case the place is not taken within five or six days.
You can tell him that his Holiness, and the most illustrious
Signoria of Venice, as well as the captains of the army, are
of the opinion that to lose more time before Cremona would be
pernicious, because it involves the loss of the opportunity for
taking Genoa, which is the important object of the whole
enterprise ; and that, so long as the army remains before Cre-
mona, Genoa cannot be taken, as the fleet alone is insufficient
to do it; and the four thousand men of the Marquis of Saluzzo
are but a feeble resource, particularly now, since the Spaniards
that were at Alessandria are known to have entered Genoa;
moreover, we do not believe that the Marquis would attempt
to go there with so small a force.

Remind him that we have brought a large force of Swiss
together, and are obliged to have two thousand Grisons come.
And to see so great an accumulation of troops would be re-
garded by us as a great loss, and would create irreparable dis-
order, especially with regard to the Swiss, who when together in
great number indulge every day in some act of sedition. A
great many of them leave, but the expenses remain the same,
and rather increase every day, whilst the number of troops
diminishes. Presently we shall have winter upon us; and
then we shall have the Spanish reinforcements on our back,
which, according to the last news, are to set sail within a day
or two. If these things come to pass before we shall have
taken Genoa, or driven the enemy out of Milan; then our
enterprise will remain in terrible disorder. You must there-
fore urge his Lordship to do his utmost to have the siege
raised, in case the town cannot be taken within five or six days.
Should his Lordship deem it proper that you should speak to
the Doge, then you will do so; but you must do it with great
caution, and not let him know my opinion, nor that of the cap-
tains. Tell him merely that the Holy Father has written to
me that for the above-stated reasons it seems to him that no
more time should be lost; but that anyhow this resolve must

* Francesco Maria della Rovere, Duke of Urbino, and Captain-General of the
Venetian forces.

332 MISSION TO THE ARMY OF THE LEAGUE.

be left to the wisdom of his Excellency ; that on my part, how-
ever, I thought it proper to let him know the views of his
Holiness.

Of all this you will say nothing to the Doge except under
advice of the Proveditore, and in such manner as not to give
him cause to get vexed.

Write by post, giving the letters to the Proveditore.

MISSION TO FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI.

INSTRUCTIONS

TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI, SENT BY THE MAGISTRACY OF THE
EIGHT OF PRACTICE TO MESSER FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI, LIEU-
TENANT OF HIS HOLINESS THE POPE.

30 NovEMBER, 1526.

WHENEVER our city and this Magistracy have in the past sent
any one of its citizens on a mission similar to the present one,
they always selected a person whom they believed capable; and
having orally informed him of the business and of the manner
of proceeding, they did not deem it necessary to give him further
particular instructions, except in so far as it was a good usage
of the city to remind him of the principal points of the com-
mission which he bore. Therefore having chosen you, Niccolo,
because of your capacity and integrity, the present instructions
are given you, not to serve as your rule of proceeding, but to
conform to the old established usage, and so that you may
always remember that your commission consists in substance
of the articles given below, to wit: —First, you will proceed as
promptly as possible to join Messer Francesco Guicciardini, to
whom you will explain (although it would scarcely seem neces-
sary) the confusion existing in our city from want of troops,
money, and chiefs. And although our means of security are
very feeble for many reasons, despite of the arrival of the Lan-
squenets, which is known to you as well as to Guicciardini,
nevertheless we should cheerfully face fortune and defend our-
selves if we knew for certain that our forces were sufficient,
and that the hopes which we have placed in others would not
lead us to manifest ruin. It is this thought that occupies us
constantly, so that only to-day we have sent Francesco Antonio

334 MISSION TO FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI.

Nori to the Count Pietro Navarra to induce him to accept the
command of our troops. We shall make all possible provisions
for our defence, if we can only be assured that the confederates
and those who can help us do not withdraw to the rear. But
as a republic, and one like ours especially, should keep several
aims in view, carefully weighing each, so as to know their weak-
ness or their strength, the uncertainty of the one and the secu-
rity of the other, so as to be able to adopt the one that presents
the least danger; therefore have we thought of sending you to
his Lordship, as to one of our own citizens devotedly attached to
his country, so that he may examine our situation, and say what
he thinks of it according to his knowledge of events from day to
day ; and that we may know whether in his discretion they are
of a character to allow us but little hope, and whether he, like
ourselves, despairs of our safety. His Lordship must know
that our idea is to open negotiations for some arrangement,
rather than allow matters to come to such a point that it would
be difficult to remedy them.

And as we intend to devolve the charge of this matter entirely
upon him, after having made known to his Lordship our desire,
which cannot be more earnest, you will leave him to negotiate
as he deems proper. You will return from there so soon as
you are well informed as to what his Lordship thinks of the
plan of the war, of the conduct of the Lansquenets, of the dem-
onstrations of the Duke of Ferrara, of the movement of the
Spaniards of Milan and Pavia, and what is generally thought of
them; of the hopes that can be based upon the Marquis of
Saluzzo and the Venetian troops; and finally of all this tangled
mass, both on the part of the confederates and our own, as well
as the enemy’s; leaving the commission to negotiate to Messer
Francesco, assuring him that such is our intention and desire,
and that we thus give him all power to treat, governing him-
self, however, according to circumstances.

LETTER I.

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUsTRIOUS SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I arrived here to-day at an early hour, and immediately
called on his Lordship the Lieutenant, and presented your Lord-
ships’ letters, and explained to him in detail the reasons of my

9

MISSION TO FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI., 335

coming. His Lordship said to me: “For the satisfaction of
“your Signori I will tell you first where our troops are, as well
“as those of the enemy ; after that, I will tell you what is to be
“feared on the part of the enemy, and to be hoped for on the
“part of friends; and, lastly, what I think ought to be done in
“ease we have to negotiate. The Lansquencts were yester-
“day at Quistello, a place in the Mantuan territory this side
“of the Lecchia; they have crossed the river to-day, and
“have taken the road towards Rizuolo and Gonzaga, which
“would indicate that they are taking the road towards Milan
“to join the Spaniards. These Germans number some fiftecn
“or sixteen thousand, according to what we hear from various
“quarters, although one of my own men has written from
‘“ Mantua that they do not number more than ten thousand.
“The Spaniards of Milan are still in that city, but begin to
“ vive indications of their intention to leave, having agreed with
“the Milanese to accept thirty thousand florins and depart ;
“which accords with the route which the Lansquenets are
“taking. The Duke of Urbino finds himself, with all the troops
“he had brought with him, in the Mantuan territory, being
“quartered with the Germans, and shows no sign of moving
“from there, although I have several times solicited him to
“leave. True, he sends one of his captains to Piacenza with
“one thousand infantry, who will be there to-morrow. The
“ Marquis of Saluzzo is at Vaure, a little place in the Berga-
“ masque territory, fourteen miles from Milan and sixteen from
“ Bergamo; he has all his troops with him, more than three
“hundred Venetian men-at-arms, and about one thousand in-
“fantry. The infantry of the Signor Giovanni, about three
“ thousand in number, will be posted at Parma to-morrow. Be-
“sides these there are some four thousand troops there. So
“that, taking them all together, the League has over twenty
“thousand men in this province.

“Tf the Pope does not let them suffer for want of money,
“and they can all be brought together, we may perhaps continue
“to be safe; but if they lack the subsidies of his Holiness, the
“ others will become lukewarm, and we shall have much to fear.
“ Beyond doubt, if all these troops are kept together and are
“well paid, the enemy, whether they remain quiet or advance,
“will not be able to achieve any great results, without which,
“from lack of money, they will not be able to maintain them-

336 MISSION TO FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI.

“selves. For, remaining thus separated, and not agreeing
“amongst themselves nor having confidence in each other,
“little good can be expected from them. Since the enemy
“has shown signs of wishing to unite, he will in my opinion
“give us some days of quiet to think of peace or war; but
“when once he has united all his forces it is not reasonable
“to expect that he will lose any time, but will attack either
“the Venetian possessions, or those of the Church, or he will
“move into Tuscany. In the first two cases, you will have
“time to think of your affairs. In the third, I cannot for cer-
‘tain promise you other assistance than the six or seven thou-
“sand troops which the Church has here; because, with my
“knowledge of the Venetian character, you cannot count upon
“them for anything under similar circumstances. As to the
“French, I cannot say whether they will rather follow the
“advice of the Venetians, or that which will remind them of
“ your necessities, and I will therefore express no opinion on the
“ subject, but shall abide events. Therefore write to your Sig-
“ nori all [ have told you, and assure them that I shall not fail
“to make every effort to unite our troops, and to solicit Venice
“and Rome not to abandon us, but to do what I have said
“to you above.”

Respecting the negotiating of a peace here, the lieutenant
said to me: “It seems a useless thing to me, and of no advan-
“tage; for any attempt to corrupt the Germans, or to make
“terms with them, would not succeed, as they and the Span-
“iards form the same corps. Peace negotiations should there-
“fore be carried on with those who are authorized thereto by
“the Emperor, and I do not believe that the Constable de
“ Bourbon, or any other of the commanders on this side, is
“so authorized. But I believe the Viceroy and Don Hugo, who
‘Care on your side, have the authority ; for we hear that the
“ Viceroy with a portion of the fleet has landed at San Stefano,
“a port belonging to the republic of Sienna. Peace negotia-
“tions can therefore be initiated much better at Florence; and
‘“T believe the Pope has already moved in the matter, which is
“likely to have a good effect. In short, we see that these move-
“ments on this side will give us time to think of remedies,
“either by peace or by other means, and it will be well for you
“to make this known to your Signori.”

This is the substance of what I have been able to learn from

MISSION TO FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 337

the Lord Lieutenant, and I deem it proper to advise you of it
by these presents, so that your Lordships may understand the
whole matter. I shall remain here a couple of days longer, to
see whether anything special occurs, so that I may return more
fully informed about the state of things here.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

P. S.— Your Lordships will have heard of the death of the
Signor Giovanni, whose loss is regretted by everybody.*
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Mopena, 2 December, 1526.

LETTER II.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

In my letter of yesterday I reported at length what I had
learned from the Lieutenant respecting affairs here, and have
nothing of importance to add, but shall repeat the same very
briefly, viz): —If the enemy comes in your direction, you will
be able to avail yourselves of the troops which the Church has
here ; these number about seven thousand infantry. But you
must not count even upon all these, as a portion of them will
have to be left here. Perhaps you may be able to make use of
the French troops, but the Lieutenant has serious doubts upon
that point. As to the Venetians, it seems pretty certain that
they will want to remain at home. With regard to the com-
manders whom you can employ presently or with their troops,
your Lordships must know that there are here but three of
any importance upon whom you can rely with any degree of
confidence. These are the Count Guido, Pagolo Luzzasco, com-
mander of the Mantuan troops, and Guido Vaina; of these
three your Lordships can have the one that suits you best.
We have news to-day from several quarters that the Lansque-
nets are stationed between Guastalla and Berselli, so that they
can move either upon Piacenza or Parma; and although we

* This was Giovanni de’ Medici, Capitano delle Bande Nere, who died on the
24th of November, 1526. He was the son of the famous Catharine Sforza and
another Giovanni de’ Medici.

VOL. IV. 22

338 MISSION TO FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI.

have no official information about this, yet it comes to us from
so many quarters that we believe it.

Of the Spaniards of Milan we hear nothing further than what
I wrote yesterday. The Duke of Ferrara does not stir yet;
still there are two indications from which we may judge that
the country is likely to be troubled. These are, first, that some
months ago a truce was concluded between the inhabitants of
Ferrara and those of Carpi, to the effect that the territories
of each should reciprocally be respected; this truce has just
expired, and the people of Carpi have declined to renew it. The
other indication is, that the Duke used to keep the relays for
the post that ran from Ferrara to Reggio in this place. He
has now removed them, and placed them on the roads that run
entirely on his own territory.

The Lieutenant, seeing that the war was being removed from
here and was drawing towards Parma and Piacenza, mounted
to-day at the twenty-third hour, and rode, accompanied by the
Count Guido and Guido Vaina, towards Parma. JI shall there-
fore leave here to-morrow morning, and return to Florence by
short journeys, so as not to fatigue myself unnecessarily, having
nothing to communicate to your Lordships beyond what I have
already written. For as to peace or any other agreement that
would have to be negotiated here, the Lieutenant thinks it an
idle undertaking, and calculated to do harm without profiting
any one. J recommend myself to your Lordships, que bene
valeant,

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Mopena, 3 December, 1526.

SECOND MISSION TO FRANCESCO
GUICCIARDINI.

INSTRUCTIONS TO NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI,
RESOLVED BY THE Ereut oF Practice, 3 Fespruary, 1527.

NiccoLo, — You will proceed in all haste and by the most se-
cure route to Messer Francesco Guicciardini, and make known
to him that the letter of the 31st ultimo written to the most
reverend Legate had caused us great anxiety in announcing
that the enemy are massing themselves together, and that the
Spaniards, as well as the Lansquenets and the Italians, are
already on the road hither, first to Tuscany and then to Rome.
And as we always founded the hope of our defence upon the
troops of the League, we wish to know promptly from his Mag-
nificence whether that assistance will be of a kind that will be
able to give us security. We think this should be the case if
the troops of the League could be here some days before the
ememy, and move as soon as possible to Bologna, as from
there they could strike in every direction wherever the enemy
attempts an attack.

You will make Messer Francesco understand clearly that
this is our desire, and that we consider our security to depend
upon it; for if the troops of the League come here after the
enemy, then we see infinite dangers, which Messer Francesco
in his wisdom will perceive even better than we can. But by
coming here before the enemy, we could even strike a blow
with our own troops and then unite them with those of the
League, which would render these much more secure for them-
selves as well as for us. You will also urge upon him to exhort
the most illustrious Duke of Urbino, the Marquis of Saluzzo, and
all the other confederate commanders, promptly and effectually

340 SECOND MISSION TO

to march before the enemy. And if his Magnificence sees any
difficulties in persuading these commanders to that effect, then
let him give us the result of his judgment, so that we may
know on whom we may hereafter depend. Anyhow, we are
convinced that with the energy and support of his Most Chris-
tian Majesty and the Venetians, as well as the good will of
their commanders, we should lack nothing at a time when
reason itself is with us; for our cause is common with the
Most Christian King and the Venetians; and although we may
perchance be the first to suffer, yet they are sure to suffer
equally afterwards.

LECT 2b

MAGNIFICENT AND ILLUSTRIOUS SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Owing to the obstructions on the roads by the enemy I did
not arrive here until this morning. I had a long interview
with the Lord Lieutenant, and found that his Lordship had
of his own suggestion arranged with the commanders, and
especially with the Duke of Urbino, to march in all haste with
the whole army into Tuscany, in case the enemy should move
in that direction. He assured me that the Duke of Urbino was
most warmly in favor of it, only differing as to the manner and
order of doing it; for his Lordship wanted the Marquis of
Saluzzo to be the first to enter Tuscany with the advance-guard,
whilst the Lieutenant wanted the Duke himself to take the
lead, deeming that order to offer the greatest security. And
therefore he wanted me to speak to the Duke this evening,
which I did in his presence, employing the best arguments I
knew how to convince him of the necessity of prompt and
vigorous assistance in case the enemy should move upon Flor-
ence. I referred to the great confidence which that city had
in his valor and in his affection for her; and did not fail to
tell all IT knew of myself, and what the Lord Lieutenant had
suggested to me. But the Duke remained firm in his purpose ;
he agreed, however, to meet me to-morrow, when we are to ex-
amine this subject pen in hand in all its bearings, and thinking
of what ought to be done in connection with every movement
of the enemy. I shall not, therefore, enter into any further

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 341

particulars, but shall reserve myself for what may be con-
cluded upon to-morrow, of which your Lordships shall have the
most detailed account.

No news has been received to-day from Piacenza, and I
have therefore nothing further to say, except that the enemy
continue to occupy the same places. We do not hear that
they do anything beyond gathering provisions ; and from the
points to which they direct them, we surmise that they are
destined for Tuscany rather than elsewhere. The Lieutenant
makes every effort to ascertain the enemy’s movements, and
your Lordships shall be most fully informed of whatever he
may find out. Que bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
7 February, 1527.

LETTER II.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships yesterday evening all that had oc-
curred here. ‘To-day we have the news that a portion of the
Lansquenets have quitted Pontenuovo, and have gone to join
the Spaniards. We do not altogether understand the object of
this movement; some say that they are gone to attack Lodi,
others say Cremona. We also hear from the Count Guido, who
is at Piacenza, that yesterday some of the enemy’s horse came
almost to the walls of the city. The Count sent Paolo Luzzano
and the Count Claudio Rangoni after them, who dashed upon
them so furiously that they took the captains Zuccaro, Sca-
lengo, and Grugno, three officers of considerable importance,
and came very near taking the Prince of Orange also. They
captured, moreover, some eighty cavaliers and one hundred
infantry. And thus our people become every day more bold in
assailing the enemy, who on their part seem every day to be-
come more discouraged. It is impossible, however, that they
should remain thus any length of time, and that their ill humor
should not cause them to make an attack somewhere. If it
be on this side, as is now generally believed, we shall be re-
lieved of our suspicions. But if they come in the direction of

342 SECOND MISSION TO

Florence, then we shall observe the order which I communicated
to your Lordships yesterday evening, and which plan will most
probably be in some respects improved.

We believe that the Count Guido will find out from his
prisoners some of their plans, and the reason of their tardiness,
and the variety of their movements. He will best be able to
learn it from Scalengo, because he is said to be a special favor-
ite of the Viceroy, and knows many of his secrets. If the
said Count will get such information from him, we shall have
some certainty of the state of their affairs; and if I learn
anything about it, it shall be immediately communicated to
your Lordships, to whom I recommend myself. Que bene
valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Parma, 9 February, 1527.

LETTER III.

MaGniFicENT SIGNORI, ETC.:—

I did not write to: your Lordships yesterday, having nothing
of moment to communicate, and hoping to be able to give you
something positive to-day, persuaded that the Count Guido
would obtain some special information from those prisoners ;
but as he has not written, I suppose that he did not succeed.
We hear various accounts of the enemy’s movements. I wrote
you that the Lansquenets who were at Milan had left the
town to unite with those outside; to-day we hear that they
have not yet gone out, but that they are to go. We are in-
formed that they have secretly made provision of scaling-lad-
ders and spades. Some say that they want to make a coup,
others that they intend to prepare for taking the place by sap-
ping it, as they cannot assail it with artillery, as the Duke did
at Cremona. This morning we have a report that ten ban-
ners of the Spaniards that were this side of the Po have re-
crossed the river without our knowing the reason why. This
evening we learn that the enemy have furnished Pizzighettone
with provisions, and employed those Spaniards as an escort.
And thus we hear at every moment different accounts of their
movements, which are interpreted by some that they intend

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 343

coming into Tuscany, whilst others think that they will at-
tempt some enterprise on this side ; and those who in matters
of this kind have the best judgment know least what to con-
clude. Nevertheless everybody believes this, that if the enemy
could seize one of these strong places they would begin with
that, for they have great need of them; and if they do not
begin with that, it is because they do not believe that they
would succeed. But it seems a hard thing to believe that, if
they could for example take Piacenza, they would imagine that
they could take Tuscany, where it is so difficult to enter, re-
main, and combat. God knows what they ought now to do;
perhaps they do not know it themselves, for if they did they
would surely have effected it, so much time having passed dur-
ing which they could have formed a union of their forces. It
is believed even that they are but little to be feared, if they are
not aided by our own disorders; and all who have any experi-
ence in war judge that we ought to be victorious, unless either
evil counsels or the lack of money cause our defeat. For our
forces are so great that they should suffice to sustain the war ;
and we ought to be able to provide against the other two de-
fects, the first by taking good counsel, and the other that his
Holiness the Pope does not abandon us.

I have not yet left here because I wished to see which way
this water is going to run; so that, if it is going to take its
course towards Florence, I may return decided upon all points
as to the order and character of the remedies. I shall there-
fore remain here some three or four days yet, and after that,
with your Lordships’ gracious permission, I shall return under
any circumstances. I recommend myself to your Lordships,
qua bene valeant.

Servitor
Niccolo MACHIAVELLI.
Parma, 1] February, 1527.

LETTER IV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Since writing to your Lordships yesterday, some matters of
very little importance have occurred. I deem it proper, how-
ever, to report them to you, so that your Lordships may know

344 SECOND MISSION TO

all that we know here. The French commanders and the
Duke of Urbino resolved last night to make a cavalry raid upon
the enemy, just to show him that they were still alive, and
partly for the purpose of reconnoitring the country. Accord-
ingly they started last night, and when the French arrived
about daylight at Carpineto, they found an outpost of light
cavalry there under command of Camillo della Staffa. They
captured some sixty of his horses, and then charged upon the
enemy, who were obliged to remain all day under arms. Three
days ago the enemy had taken Busse, a small place some
twenty miles from here ; the castle of the place, however, still
held for the Church. The Duke sent some infantry there at
night, who made their way in through the castle, and made
prisoner one Folco, a Mantuan; his company of about two
hundred men were captured and put to the sword, and the
place was recovered.

Monseigneur de Bourbon came yesterday to the camp of the
Germans, to consult, as is supposed, respecting further opera-
tions. We have not heard yet of his having left there again,
nor is it known what has been decided upon. ‘True, the Count
Guido writes, that the Marchese del Guasto sent him word to
rest assured that the enemy would not move upon Piacenza, so
that we are as undecided what to do, as on the first day. It
seems impossible to believe that the enemy will not take some
action within three or four days, and we shall govern ourselves
according to their movements. And if the Duke of Urbino is
disposed to do his duty, which he certainly will if it be your
Lordships’ pleasure, then it is believed that the enemy will find
little profit in advancing. I recommend myself to your Lord-
ships, gue bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Parma, 12 February, 1527.

LETTER V.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, JOM C8

I did not write to your Lordships yesterday, as I had nothing
of interest to say, nor is there anything new to-day ; neverthe-
less, to continue my habit whilst here, I deem it proper to write

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 345

you a few lines and say that the imperial army has as yet made
no movement; although the Count Guido writes in a letter re-
ceived this morning that the said army was to start this morn-
ing for the purpose of making an advance. It is supposed that
this news is not true, for if it were we ought to know something
of it by this time, it being two o’clock of the night. But if the
army has not started yet, it is believed that it cannot remain
still much longer, and we hear from all sides that it is to break
camp shortly and move forward. In Lombardy they do not be-
lieve it possible that the enemy can take any of the places which
they intend to guard, for the people of the country seem resolved
to defend themselves. They have with great rapidity made all
the repairs and preparations ; and I believe they will resist with
great obstinacy, seeing the example of Milan and the other cities,
which, notwithstanding that they were given to the enemy and
received by him in good faith, were nevertheless first subjected
to the payment of heavy contributions, and then actually sacked.
This has so filled people’s minds with fear, that they will rather
die than submit to similar inflictions. If the enemy comes into
Tuscany, they will find the inhabitants similarly disposed, and
will meet not only with the same, but even greater difficulties ;
for that country is not able to support the war the same as this,
and the least impediment that holds them at bay may become
the cause of their dispersion. This has been affirmed by cer-
tain Spaniards who were taken prisoners at Lodi by Messer
Lodovico; they told him that their army was powerful and of
such character that it would be an evil counsel to give to the
army of the League to engage them in battle. But that there
existed such a state of confusion amongst their commanders,
that they did not know what to attempt with any hope of suc-
cess; and that they were so poor that, if our troops were to
delay action for any length of time, it would be impossible for
_ their army to be successful in any attempt whatsoever. We
shall therefore continue to watch them, and shall advise your
Lordships from day to day of the enemy’s movements, and of
the course which we shall adopt to avoid an engagement and to
follow them. The best part that we can play in this game is to
govern ourselves so that this Duke will have an inducement
gladly to make some effort, taking good counsel and executing
it still better; otherwise we might gain nothing but dishonor
and loss. I know that his Lordship the Lieutenant has written

346 SECOND MISSION TO

about this to Rome and here; but I did not wish to omit letting

you know; and as I have told you in my previous letter, so

soon as I shall see the enemy move, and it is known what road

he will take, I shall return with the plans and dispositions that

are regarded here as the best for the defence of our country.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.
Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Parma, 14 February, 1527. .

rene

LETTER VI.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I reported yesterday to your Lordships all that had taken
place, and write now to inform you that the Count Cajazzo came
to-day in person to Borgo a San Donnino with the troops under
his command. The other part of the enemy’s forces has not
yet moved, but it is supposed that they will start to-morrow or
next day ; and it is said that they will positively not stop at Pia-
cenza or Parma, but that they purpose laying siege to Modena,
or to move in the direction of Bologna and throw themselves
from there upon Tuscany or Romagna. On our part we shall
follow the enemy’s movements, according to the plans which I
communicated to your Lordships a few days since; that is
to say, so that a considerable part of our forces will be in Ro-
magna or Tuscany before the enemy, and the rest will follow
him. Amongst the latter will be the Duke of Urbino, whom it
has been impossible to persuade, up to the present, to form a
part of the advance-guard. But what is still more unpleasant is,
that he left here to-day for Casal Maggiore sick with fever and
gout, which has caused us great regret. For, as I have written
to your Lordships in a former letter, the general opinion is that
we cannot possibly fail in this undertaking, except from want
of good counsels or lack of money. We have no one who can
give better advice than the Duke of Urbino, and your Lordships
may imagine how much the want of it is regretted by those who
wish matters to result fortunately for the League. But what is
worse even is the fact that the Duke has left more indisposed
in mind than in body. As to the body, we can only address
ourselves to the Almighty to cure him; but as to the mind, we

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI., S47 .

must look to your Lordships. At any rate, that is the opinion
of every one here; and if those who are at Florence were here,
they would assuredly think the same, and would not believe
that the victories gained in Rome would suffice to enable us to
win in Lombardy.

Your Lordships shall be promptly advised of whatever occurs,
and of what is done by the enemy as well as by us, and of what
ought to be done by your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Parma, 16 February, 1527.

P. S.—The Lord Lieutenant has directed me to write to you
that the pay of the troops falls due the 23d instant, and begs
you will take the necessary steps to enable us to make this pay-
ment. For should there be any default in this, it would end
all uncertainty, as everything would be hopelessly lost. He has
therefore urged me to remind your Lordships of it, que bene
valeant.

LETTER VII.

MaGniricEnt SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I have written to your Lordships so often and so differently
about this Imperial army, that I am really ashamed to write
you any more; nevertheless, as it is necessary that 1 should
write, I may as well inform you of all the rumors I hear, and
afterwards compare them with the events. I wrote yesterday
that the enemy was hourly expected to move. To-day, being
the 18th, we do not yet hear of their having made the slight-
est attempt. True, there are letters to-day from the Count
Guido of the 16th, saying that on that day the Imperialists
held a review, and that twenty thousand florins had been sent
to the Lansquenets, so as to give them two florins per man,
and that on Monday or Tuesday, that is to-morrow or the next
day, they were actually to move; but he does not say in what
direction. He declares, however, that he is prepared to follow
them wherever it may be necessary, and that he would be at
Modena before them if they should attempt to take that route,
and that at the first halt which they made it would be seen

848 SECOND MISSION TO

what road they intended to take, whether to Bologna or to-
wards Pontremoli. He says, furthermore, that your Lord-
ships shall be fully advised both as to the routé and as to the
measures to be taken for the defence of Tuscany in the event
of the enemy’s moving in that direction. As to uniting all the
forces of the League in one camp, and attempting a battle with
the enemy, that was not SEE feasible, nor was much to be
hoped from it.

The Count Cajazzo, as I have already written to your Lord-
ships, is at the Borgo a San Donnino, with one thousand infan-
try and one hundred light-horse. The Lord Lieutenant has had
some negotiations with him to induce the Count to enter the
service of the Pope; the matter was concluded yesterday, so
that to-morrow these troops, infantry as well as cavalry, will
come over to our side, which has already added and will add
still more to our credit, and diminish that of the enemy. For
as everybody looks upon the Count as very prudent, they con-
clude that, if he had considered the affairs of the Imperialists
in good condition, he would not have taken such a step.

I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Parma, 18 February, 1527.

LETTER VIII.

Maceniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

If your Lordships had not been kept daily informed of every
occurrence here by the Lord Lieutenant in his letters to the
most reverend Legate, you might wonder at not having had
letters from me for several days, and might reasonably accuse
me of neglect. But I deemed it superfluous to tell you the same
things that the Lord Lieutenant has written and told you. Nor
have I returned yet, although the enemy has moved forward,
because the Lieutenant thought that before I left he would wish
to see for certain what the enemy really intended doing. And
truly, before they started, and even afterwards, we were not
without considerable apprehensions that they would move upon
Tuscany ; for we had understood that they had been so urged
by the Duke of Ferrara, and that in fact it had been their own

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 349

plan, as they believed that country to be more easily pillaged
than any other, its inhabitants being unaccustomed to the sight
of an enemy’s face. This opinion prevailed until yesterday,
although it was supposed that, if they wished to enter Tuscany,
they ought to have taken either the road by way of Pontremoli
or by way of Garfagnana, as both these routes lead to the Luc-
chese territory, where they might have hoped to find provisions
for some days; or they might either have had them brought
here from a country that was devoted to them, or they might
have been supplied from Ferrara; and once past, they might
have made the attempt upon Tuscany, and if successful they
could have followed up their victory, and failing they might
have passed on to the Siennese territory.

But since they have gone from Modena towards Bologna, no
reasonable man can suppose that they will come to Tuscany,
because there are but four roads leading to it, namely, the Sasso,
the Diritti, the Val di Lamona, and to pass the Alps of Crespino,
or by Val di Montone, in which case they would have to pass the
Alps of San Benedetto. Neither one of these roads is secure,
for besides the ordinary difficulties of passing the mountains,
all these passes lead into the Mugello, where they would die of
hunger in two days, unless they should take either Pistoja or
Prato; and as they cannot hope to do that, they cannot attempt
to come by these passes. There remains one other route by
which they could penetrate into Tuscany, and that is to enter
into the Marecchia above Cesena, and come to the Borgo San
Sepolcro. This road is easy, but it would be difficult for these
troops to get to Cesena, as all the places in Romagna are forti-
fied, and the country bare of provisions. Nevertheless, if the
enemy take either of these routes, all measures are taken for
our troops to arrive in Tuscany before them, in accordance with
the plans which the Lord Lieutenant has communicated to the
most reverend Legate ; and they will, moreover, have the Duke
of Urbino at their heels. We have news to-day that he is en-
tirely well again, and that he has passed the Po with all the
Venetian troops. If then it be true that the enemy has to en-
counter such difficulties in advancing, it follows that necessity
will oblige them to attempt some enterprise nearer at hand, and
which they could carry out at their ease, and which, if success-
ful, would open the way for them to succeed in all the others.

Yesterday the impression prevailed that they would make an

350 SECOND MISSION TO

attempt upon Ravenna, and therefore we sent a detachment of
six hundred troops there this morning. To-day it is feared
their attack will be upon Bologna; the fact that the fortifica-
tions of Ravenna are in a bad state of repairs is calculated to
decide them in favor of that place; whilst the reason for at-
tempting Bologna would be its population, which is believed not
to be all agreed to sustain a siege. We shall soon see which
of the two it will be; and if the enemy comes here, the most
important place for this game will be around the walls of this
place. But I believe we may remain here quite safely, for there
will be ten thousand troops here, the place is well fortified and
supplied with all necessaries, and the inhabitants are united
and well disposed to defend themselves.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Botoena, 4 March, 1527.

P. S.—I wrote the above to your Lordships yesterday, but
the letter was left behind, owing to the carelessness of the per-
son who makes up the packages. The enemy has made no
movement to-day, nor have they come to Castel San Giovanni
as was expected; nevertheless we are to-day of a somewhat
different opinion from yesterday. For if we were yesterday
sure that the enemy would not come into Tuscany, but would
attack this city, to-day we are quite in doubt, owing to the in-
formation we have that after all their real design is to enter
Tuscany; and that they feigned first that they were coming
here to Bologna, so that, having induced you to send all your
forces here, and having thus, as it were, disarmed you, they
might arrive before us and crush you at a single blow. The
Lord Lieutenant therefore writes you not to send any ‘troops
into Romagna, and has ordered that the troops of the Signor
Giovanni, if they are in a convenient place, shall come at
once in this direction. Or perhaps the Signor Giovanni may
go in person to Loglano, accompanied by a strong division
of infantry, so that he may be able to return here in case the
enemy should attack this city, or be in advance of them if
they should attempt to move upon Florence. I said that per-
haps this course might be taken, because the reasons which
I alleged in my letter of yesterday for not believing that the

eo

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 351

enemy would not come into Tuscany unless he had first taken
Bologna are so powerful in their nature that, notwithstanding
the information received since, we remain still of the same
opinion. But that which troubles our spirits is that a certain
Betto, one of our own people, has related to us that, having
been at the enemy’s camp to-day, the Constable de Bourbon
had told him to make known to the people of Bologna that, if
they would give him free passage and provisions, and become
good Imperialists, he would ask nothing else of them, and
would treat them as friends; but if they would not do this, they
might expect to see the army before their walls. This proposi-
tion seems to us most important, for if the enemy really takes
such a course, the population of the city being very great, and
seeing that they can escape such great dangers on such easy
terms, it is to be feared that they would eagerly accept them.
It is necessary, therefore to retain a sufficient force here to keep
the population firm in their good will towards us, and to be
able to show them the deceit which it is intended to practise
upon them, and the ease with which they can defend them-
selves against it.

But to do this, troops must not be sent to Loglano, unless
Bologna is first relieved; and thus what might be of advan-
tage to Florence would injure us here, and what would benefit
us here might do harm to Florence. Anyhow it is supposed
that all can be provided for; because, by not sending your
troops into Romagna, you will find yourselves with 5,000 men,
besides the 3,000 of the Signor Giovanni, which will be sent to
you under any circumstances. And as for the rest of the
army, excepting the troops that are with the Duke of Urbino,
they will remain here to watch the enemy, who must come
either by the Sasso road or by the Diritta. And we shall be
prepared to come by whatever road they do not take, and shall
anyhow be at Florence before them; for we shall come with-
out artillery, whilst they must bring theirs along with them.
These are the plans that have been discussed to-day ; they will
adopt that which is deemed the best, of which his Lordship the
Lieutenant will write most fully and distinctly to the most
reverend Legate.

| Iterum valete !
Botoena, 5 March, 1527.

302 SECOND MISSION TO

LETTER IX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

If I had not received your Lordships’ letter of the 10th in-
stant, I might have believed either that the letters which I have
written had failed to reach you, or that you had regarded them
as altogether superfluous, as in truth they have been. And if,
on the other hand, I have not returned, it is because the Lord
Lieutenant thought it best that I should remain until the Im-
perialists had taken a route that would prove conclusively that
they were not moving upon Tuscany. Or if they did take that
route, | might charge myself with some of the measures that
would have to be taken, according to the instructions which I
received from your Lordships before my departure from Flor-
ence; and whilst here I have attended to some of the business
confided to me by his Lordship. These are the reasons why I
have not written to you more frequently, and which have pre-
vented my return. Now, however, more for the purpose of obey-
ing your Lordships than because it is necessary, | beg to inform
you that the Impcrialists are at San Giovanni, some ten miles
from here, where they have been for several days, but have made
no movement of any kind; and although they were tempted
several times by our troops, and provoked to skirmish, yet they
never budged. Their generals have attempted to negotiate with
’ Ferrara, and we hear this morning from very reliable sources
that they have actually concluded an arrangement, according to
which the Duke is to furnish them 6,000 sacks of bread and
flour, 200 hundred horses for their artillery, 20,000 pounds of
coarse and 5,000 pounds of fine powder; and when all these
things have been supplied, they are to come into Tuscany by
the shortest route.

As to the army of the League there are here 10,000 infantry,
600 are at Ravenna, 4,000 at Pianora, and nearly all the corps
of the Signor Giovanni; and the Count Guido has 3,000 in
Modena. The greater part of the Venetian troops are with
the Signor Malatesta Baglioni between Reggio and Parma; the
Duke of Urbino with the remainder is on the other side of
the Po, unless he has passed it within the last two days. The
army of the League has placed itself in these different positions,
so that the enemy shall not carry out any plan they may at-

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 353

tempt. And it is supposed that, by holding these positions, it
will be able to be in Romagna or in Tuscany before the en-
emy, and defend either Bologna or Modena in case they should
attempt to attack either. And although until now opinions
have varied much as to the enemy’s intentions, yet the latest
reports which I have given you above have caused great appre-
hensions as to Tuscany; for the large quantity of provisions
that are being collected, according to the accounts from va-
rious sources, conirm these apprehensions. On the other
hand, we see no movement amongst the people subject to Fer-
rara, which the enemy would have to traverse to go into
Romagna; for common sense would at least have made them
clear the road.

The Marchese del Guasto, who is sick, sent to-day to ask for
a safe-conduct to enable him to go with all his family into the
kingdom of Naples by way of Romagna. It does not seem
reasonable that he should want to pass through a country
where after his passage they would raise the cry that his
troops were about to attack the country. On the other hand,
the shortest road is the one of Sasso, but it is regarded by
those who know the country well to be the most difficult, and
the Signor Federigo da Bozzolo expresses the same opinion of
it in a letter written by him to the Lord Lieutenant; and I
believe that they know very well, that both on this side and
towards Florence the road has been cut and fortiied, so as
to render it still more difficult. To come by the Alps of |
Crespino or San Benedetto seems to us out of all reason, so
that we doubt much whether they would not have to turn back
and descend into the Lucchese territory by the Garfagnana,
which amongst all these difficult routes is the easiest; and
once having passed it, they would find inhabitants who would
furnish them supplies, but would not combat them.

The road by the Marecchia, and passing the Borgo a San
Sepolcro, respecting which it seems there are some fears, is
easier than that of the Garfagnana, but is much less conve-
nient than what is believed here; and for that reason it would
be easier for them to fall back three days’ march, so as to
enter the Lucchese territory promptly, where they would be
received with open arms, instead of having to march six or
eight days through the enemy’s territory, where they would be
obliged to fight their way through from the beginning.

VOL. IV. 23

354 SECOND MISSION TO

There is another route which has come into notice within
the past few days, respecting which, however, there are great
doubts ; it begins below Bologna four miles in the direction of
Imola ; it crosses the Iddice and brings up at Cavrenno and at
Pietramala, and runs from there along the Stale to Barberino.
This was the route which the Duke Valentino took when he
attacked Florence in 1501, and is considered much less wild
than that of the Sasso. ‘There is a messenger here sent by the
inhabitants of Firenzuola to learn what measures are to be
taken in case our troops should move in that direction; the
Lord Lieutenant has conferred with this person about that
road, and has learned the same thing from him. True, he says
that about four miles from Stale there is a place called Covi-
gliano, where there is a bad pass that can be made even worse ;
and about a mile from there is another pass called Castro,
which is difficult by nature, but can be made still more so; and
the Lord Lieutenant has sent this person back to Firenzuola to
have this done; and your Lordships can have this road recon-
noitred and have similar work done.

It is believed that the enemy will require some days before
he can get his provisions together, and we are therefore on the
watch; and there is no lack of vigilance on the part of the
most illustrious Legate and the Lord Lieutenant to watch the
enemy’s movements, and in any event to forestall him. This
is all I have to write to your Lordships, to whom I recommend

myself most humbly.
Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Boroena, 12 March, 1527.

LETTER X.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote yesterday at length to your Lordships, and informed
you that the bad weather had prevented the enemy from breaking
up. This storm commenced on Saturday night, and up to now,
the twenty-fourth hour, it has rained and snowed incessantly,
so that the snow lies three spans deep in every part of the
city, and it still continues to snow. Thus the obstacle which
we could not have opposed to the enemy’s movements has been
sent by the Almighty.

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 355

We have not been able to obtain any news of the enemy, for
our trumpeter could not cross the river, nor could theirs come
to our side, but we rather think they are faring badly; and. if
the Almighty had really wished to do us a service, he would
have delayed this storm until after the enemy had passed the
Sasso, and had got fairly into the mountains. Perhaps this
weather would have overtaken them there if they had started
at the time they intended; but the mutinous movements of
their infantry, which at the time seemed so dangerous, caused
them to delay their starting, and thus saved them from the
consequences of this storm. Nevertheless, we believe that
they are badly off, for they are on low ground, which was for-
merly boggy, and has been made habitable by cultivation and
industry. We have endeavored to increase their troubles by
breaking the dikes of the Samoggia, and turning the water
upon them, and yesterday we sent off men for that purpose ;
but they had scarcely gone two or three miles, when they could
get no farther, and returned here reporting that the whole
country was under water. We have nevertheless attempted it
again, and have written to the men at Castelfranco, and have
also sent men by other routes with great promises of reward ;
we shall see what the result will be. We have no further
news of the illness of George Frondsberg, owing to the above
causes; but if fortune should change and favor us, he would
die anyhow, and that would be the real beginning of our sal-
vation and the enemy’s ruin.

I would furthermore say to your Lordships, that if this trou-
ble had come upon the enemy before he laid in his large store
of provisions, he would assuredly have been ruined. But the
great amount of supplies which they have gathered for their
movement upon Tuscany will save them. Had they been
obliged to procure their provisions from day to day, it would
not have been possible for them to live. And if the Duke of
Ferrara could get back a little brains into his skull, and this
weather were to continue a couple of days longer, he might
terminate this war in sitting down or in sleeping; every effort
should therefore be made to induce him to do so.

I wrote you yesterday evening that, if you wished to profit
by this trouble and inconvenience of the enemy, it would be
necessary to make the most of the time which fortune gives
us; for if fair weather should return, we should find ourselves

356 SECOND MISSION TO

where we were before, and the delay which the enemy expe-
rienced in going to Tuscany would have been injurious to us
rather than advantageous. And if it be desired that we should
be better prepared, then the Venetians ought to pay their troops
and make their whole army join ours; otherwise, things will
go badly. For it is the general opinion that if the Imperialists
pass into Tuscany, even if they do not ravage the country, but
merely pass through into the Siennese territory, we could never
hope to be successful in this war unless we should be yvicto-
rious in a battle, which it would be just as easy for us to lose.
The Lord-Lieutenant received letters this morning from the
Pope’s Nuncio and ambassador at Venice, which could not
possibly be more full of good promises or greater hopes; for
they say amongst other things that the Duke affirms that the
success of our enterprise is as good as assured, and that he will
under any circumstances destroy the enemy’s army. But the
Lord Lieutenant, seeing how much these letters differ from the
facts, has written them a letter of two sheets, in which he
reviews all their former errors, points out how greatly their
actions have differed from the words spoken at Venice, and
shows them exactly what they ought to do, if they intend to
speak the truth with regard to their plans as well as with re-
gard to the Duke’s hopes of victory. It is impossible to say
what the result of this letter will be; still we shall have the
satisfaction of having brought the matter to their notice, and
it will serve to show them that we shall not be taken in by
their outcries, and that fair words alone do not satisfy us.
Your Lordships must not cease to importune them, as I
wrote you yesterday; and to give them no rest until their
troops are actually paid and have joined ours, or until they are
forced to declare that they do not mean to do it. Valete/

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Bouoena, 18 March, 1527.

LETTER XI.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —
Since we have the news of the conclusion of the fruce, or

rather of the promise, I have not written to your Lordships,

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. BDF

as I wanted first to see how it was received here. The Fiera-
mosca wrote yesterday from the camp that, owing to the ab-
sence of the Marchese del Guasto from here, it was impossible
to conclude anything, but that he had found Monseigneur de
Bourbon well disposed; and he urgently requested the money
to be sent which, according to the promises, ought to have
been paid here yesterday, the amount being forty thousand
ducats. He has written again to-day, as your Lordships will
see from the copy which the Lord Lieutenant sends to the
most reverend Legate, and which, on the whole, shows that
everything goes well; but he demands that the whole sum of
sixty thousand frances be sent here, so that those who were not
favorably disposed to the truce might not have a hook to hang
their doubts upon. Therefore, O Magnificent Signori, if ever
you have had the thought of saving your country and enabling
her to escape the great and imminent dangers that threaten
her, then make this last effort to raise this money, so that this
truce may be concluded, and the present evils and dangers
averted, so as to give us time, or, to say better, put off the ruin ;
and so that, if the truce cannot be carried into effect, we may
at least have the wherewithal to carry on the war, or, to say
still better, to sustain it. For in either one case or the other
it would give us time; and if ever the proverb was true that
“to have time is to have life,” it is in this case most decid-
edly so.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Botoena, 23 March, 1527.

LETTER XII.

Maceniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote yesterday to your Lordships, giving account of what
had taken place here since the departure of the Fieramosca.
We have no later news of him, notwithstanding that yesterday
already two mounted messengers have been sent to inquire
after him. The reason of his silence is supposed here to be
because he has experienced some difficulty with those German

398 . SECOND MISSION TO

commanders, whom it is necessary to satisfy. He must have
had a hard time of it, more so than if the Captain George
Frondsberg had been present. But he has gone away to Fer-
rara so ill that, if he does not die soon, there will anyhow be
nothing to hope or to fear of him in a little while. The con-
tinued duration of this state of things greatly displeases the
Lord Lieutenant for many reasons ; principally because it seems
to him that the French and the Venetian troops may leave us
at any moment, although he has made every effort to prevent
it, and has said to the Marquis that he had no doubt but what
he would always get away safely, and has promised to accom-
pany him personally; although he showed no disposition to
move without first knowing that the truce was actually re-
solved upon. At the same time there are letters from a Mes-
ser Rinaldo Calimberto, whom the Lieutenant keeps near the
Duke of Urbino, stating that the Duke also says that he will
not move his troops without first knowing the terms of the
truce. They will adhere to this determination as long as they
ean, although they will not have to delay very long, for it is
impossible that by to-morrow or next day they should not
know all about it. It has been a good deal discussed here by
many, whether the Imperialists will accept the truce. Some
doubt it, seeing the delay in concluding it, and the more so as
they are clearing the way, as though they intended to attack
this city. They have made fresh requisitions for carts and pio-
neers; what troubles us most, however, is the fact that some
three thousand Spaniards presented themselves yesterday before
Castelfranco, and summoned the place by a trumpeter to sur-
render; being answered by gunshots, they withdrew, and then
made a regular attack upon San Cesario; but seeing that they
could not take it, they burned the suburbs and carried off all
the cattle they could. All this looks more like war than peace,
although some say that this is a common practice during the
interval between war and a truce. But all this must be cleared
up; and so soon as it is, your Lordships shall be informed of
all particulars.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

Botoena, 24 March, 1527, third hour of night.

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 359

LETTER XIII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I have not written to your Lordships for two days, having
been at Pianoro to review the troops. I returned here to-day,
and found matters in the same condition in which I had left
them; for there is as yet nothing definite from the Fieramosca,
although the Lord Lieutenant has written him every day, and
has with that prudence which is necessary under such circum-
stances urged him to bring matters to some definite conclusion.
The weather has been and continues bad, so that if the Span-
iards have not scoured the country during the past two days
it has been solely on that account. Nevertheless, we hear that
war is resolved upon; for we learn from those sources whence
we have been in the habit of receiving news, that the enemy have
changed their intention of coming into Tuscany by the Sasso,
or by any other route equally convenient, because they are
frightened by the bad roads and the weather; and that they
intend coming by way of Romagna, and entering Tuscany by
the Marecchia. They purpose occupying some one of the most
important towns on that road, and to be able to do so the more
securely, they want to arrive there before the troops of the
Church in the following manner. They will make their first
halt at Ponte a Reno, and in that way they hope to keep us
quict and in doubt, as they can take different routes from
there and attempt different attacks. After that they will di-
vide their forces, one portion remaining here and feigning an
attack on this city, and the other part will turn below Bologna,
placing itself half-way between Bologna and Imola. They be-
lieve that they can carry this plan out in security, as they
believe that either division of their forces is stronger than we
are all together, and that they can moreover unite their entire
forces with perfect safety should it be necessary. And thus
they count on being ahead of our troops, and finding the towns
unprepared ; and after having taken one, they think the others
will have to act according to their will.

Our situation seems to me the same that it has been ever
since we have been here; that is, one day we hear that one
thing has been resolved upon, and the next day we hear of
another plan directly the reverse; and therefore the one is as

360 SECOND MISSION TO

much to be believed as the one that has been told and written
before; nor is there as yet any positive reason for apprehend-
ing that the truce will not be concluded. Still, it is necessary
promptly to come to some conclusion either for or against it,
for many reasons, and mainly to enable us here to inspire the
Venetians with confidence, and settle the minds of the French
troops, so that we may not find ourselves left alone to bear the
burden of this war. For as the truce, if concluded, will be our
safety, so, on the contrary, if it is deferred or not concluded
will it be our ruin. Nor do I believe that there is any one who
thinks differently. But when Heaven intends to conceal its
designs, it leads men to that point that they cannot adopt any
definite plan for their safety. I have nothing further to add,
except to recommend myself to your Lordships, que feliciores
sint. Valete !
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Boroena, 27 March, 1527.

LETTER XIV.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships day before yesterday. Since then
we have the following respecting the truce. Messer Giovanni
del Vantaggio returned yesterday evening from the Spanish
camp, where he had gone with the Fieramosca, and reports
confusion and differences between the captains and the troops ;
the latter do not want the truce, whilst the captains, and espe-
cially the Captain-General, are in favor of it. Messer Giovanni
adds, that he came away from the camp partly because he did not
like to remain there, and partly for the purpose of reporting
the condition of things there. This evening, after five o’clock,
news came that the enemy had broken up and were marching
to Ponte a Reno to effect the division there of which I gave
notice to your Lordships in my last letter. They have not yet
started this morning, but we are told that they will certainly
do so to-morrow morning, and that they intend to retrace their
steps so as to enter Tuscany by the Garfagnana, for the rea-
sons which I have already written to your Lordships. Thus
we are in the greatest uncertainty as to what we ought to do.

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 361

To-day at about noon a trumpeter came with a letter from Mon-
seigneur de Bourbon to the most illustrious Legate, telling him
how greatly he had desired peace, and the efforts he had made
to obtain the assent of the troops to the truce, but that he had
not been able to satisfy them; and telling him that he needed
more money, but did not state the amount. He therefore
begged his Lordship not to be surprised if he saw the enemy
start in the morning, as he was not able to prevent it; and he
suggests that it would be well to make everything known at
Rome, so that the Viceroy and the Pope may satisfy the troops
by new agreements, and that he will do the same. Everybody
therefore, O Magnificent Signori, regards the truce as good as
broken, and that nothing remains except to think of war, un-
less, indeed, the Almighty should come to our aid by inspiring
these men to be more humble. For it seems that in the new
negotiations that are being carried on, it is agreed to expend
what money you have in the payment of these troops; and
then, if we wish them to agree to a truce, you would need to
have, besides this present payment to the troops, at least one
hundred thousand florins disposable in your purse. And as
this cannot be, it is folly to waste time in making a bargain
which we could not carry out afterwards for want of money.

Let your Lordships therefore prepare for war, win back the
Venetians, and make sure of them, so that their troops that
have passed the Po will return to our assistance. And bear in
mind that inasmuch as this truce, if concluded, would have
been our salvation, so it may in not being concluded and keep-
ing us in suspense prove our ruin. Valete !

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Boroena, 29 March, 1527.

LETTER XV.

MaGnriricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

The enemy’s troops did not start, as in my letter of yesterday
T reported they intended to do. I believe the cause is the heavy
rain and snow that has continued falling all night. We do not
know, therefore, whether they will move to-morrow or not, but
we do know that they maintain themselves here with the great-

362 SECOND MISSION TO

est difficulty, so that it seems almost impossible for them to
remain here; and what ought to alarm them most is that they
cannot better themselves by a change of encampment. If
these difficulties were increased in any way by us, they would
assuredly be destroyed; but our own unfortunate position pre-
vents our doing anything of the kind. This causes the Lord
Lieutenant the greatest anxiety; he organizes and applies
remedies wherever he can; may it please the Almighty to
enable him to do what is necessary to produce the desired
effect! Nothing more is heard of the Fieramosca or of the
truce; I have therefore nothing further to tell you on that
subject. Every one has come to the conclusion that we have
nothing to expect but war, since the perfidy of others prevented
the success of a peace that would have been most useful and
beneficial. There is no occasion, therefore, to delay resolving
upon war; it should be done at once, so as to show to
everybody that it is idle to think any more of peace. But
we must act so that the Venetians and the king of France
shall have no fear of our concluding any peace without their
consent. And if this be done, and you succeed promptly in
winning back the Venetians so that they come effectually to our
assistance, then the delays which the storm has caused to the
enemy will prove an advantage to us, inasmuch as it will have
given us time enough for our forces to be sufficiently united to
hold them in check. For your Lordships will see that it was
fifteen days ago to-day that they decided to pass, but have not
yet been able to do if; so that we may reasonably hope that
the same causes may keep them fifteen days more, if not here
where they are, at least this side of the mountains. But it be-
hooves us, as I have said, to employ this time well, otherwise
our ruin will only have been postponed, and will be the greater,
the same as bodies that have been enfeebled by long disease
are less able to support it than they were in its beginning.
Valete !
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Botoena, 80 March, 1527.

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 363

LETTER XVI.

MacGniFiIcent SIGNORI, ETC. :—

I have not written you for three days because so soon as
the enemy moved from San Giovanni the Lord Lieutenant sent
me here to provide quarters for the troops that are to arrive.
Your Lordships will have learned from his letters that the
enemy encamped day before yesterday at Ponte a Reno, but
made no movement yesterday. The Lord President with the
Marquis of Saluzzo and the Count Cajazzo, and all the rest of
our troops, came here; and there remain in Bologna only the
infantry of the Signor Giovanni, and those that are ordinarily
stationed there. We have not yet heard to-day that the enemy
has moved; and it is supposed either that they have not
moved, or that they have made but little progress, so that it
will take more than two days’ march for them to arrive here.
If we hear of his coming here, we shall leave fifteen hundred
men here. The Count Cajazzo has been sent with all his infan-
try to Ravenna, and thus we shall go on aiding and providing,
so as to prevent the enemy from taking any important place.
And if he does succeed in doing this, he will certainly be
ruined ; or he will be obliged to accept the truce that has been
made. But if our evil fortune should prevent this truce from
being definitely concluded, then it will be better to avoid it by
continuing the war, than to show that we desire it eagerly.
For the enemy have manifested their ill feeling so openly to-
wards Italy, and more especially towards Florence, which they
regard as their prey, that until they are undeceived upon that
point they will look upon any arrangement as unreasonable, un-
less they are moved by the authority of the Viceroy in some
way that I do not understand. For it is believed that the latter,
the Fieramosca, and the Marchese del Guasto act most willingly
in this matter; for he has gone expressly to Rome, and the Fie-
ramosca, according to what he writes, has done the impossible
on his part. And as to the Marchese, it is reported that, hav-
ing asked for a safe-conduct to go to Naples through Romagna,
and not having started yet, he has renewed his request, beg-
ging that it might be granted to him with the alternative to go
through Florence and Rome, as he wished to speak with the
Pope and discuss these matters with him; he complains much

364 SECOND MISSION TO

of the wickedness of those who disturb this peace. All this is
very well, and may help us to get our troops together if the
war is not given up; otherwise no reasonable agreement is to
be hoped for. For what sort of an arrangement can you ex-
pect from an enemy, who, despite of having the Alps between
you and himself, and with the number of troops which you
have on foot, still asks one hundred thousand florins of you
within the space of three days, and one hundred and fifty
thousand within ten days? When he gets to Florence the first
thing he will ask of you will be all the movable property you
possess. For without doubt (would it were not so!) the only
inducement they have for advancing is the hope of pillaging
your city. And there is no other way of escaping these evils
but to undeceive the enemy as to your ability to resist him;
and if this is to be done, then it is better to do it in the moun-
tains than within our city walls, and to employ all the forces
we have to keep him there. For if the enemy is detained in
the mountains but a short time he will have to disband, as we
learn from reliable quarters that if they do not succeed within
the present month in taking some one of the large places, in
which they will not succeed unless the places are abandoned,
then they must of necessity succumb. And even if you should
not succeed in defending yourselves on the other side or within
the mountains, there will be nothing to prevent you from bring-
ing the forces which you have there over to this side. For I
remember in the war with Pisa, that the Pisans, wearied by its
long duration, began to discuss amongst themselves whether
they ought not to make terms with you. Pandolfo Petrucci,
anticipating such an attempt, sent Messer Antonio da Venafro
to dissuade them from it. Messer Antonio addressed them in
public mecting, and after many other things said to them,
“that they had passed a very tempestuous sea, and wanted now
“to drown themselves in a well.’ I do not mention this be-
cause I think that Florence is about to abandon herself to de-
spair, but to give you certain hope of safety provided you are
willing rather to spend ten florins to secure your safety, than
forty that would serve to enslave and ruin you. I recommend
myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Botoena, 2 April, 1527.

J cote

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 865

LETTER XVII.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

My previous letters will have informed you of all that has
taken place here up till now. By the present you will learn
that the enemy did not leave his encampment of the night
before between Imola and Faenza, whence we greatly feared
they would take the road to Tuscany. They sent a trumpeter
to Faenza on behalf of Monseigneur de Bourbon, demanding in
his name three things. The first was to grant free passage to
his troops close under the walls of the place; the second, to
supply him with provisions on being paid for them in cash;
and the third was to receive his sick people within their town
so that they might be cured there. All three of these demands
were refused, and although the inhabitants were at first a little
displeased at receiving our troops into garrison, yet they after-
wards received them, and showed themselves more courageous
and disposed to defend themselves. This morning, however,
the enemy’s army approached within gunshot of Facuza, and
then turned off to the left, taking the lower road to Ravenna ;
so that we feel sure for the moment that they will not enter
Tuscany, Weare also almost certain for the present that they
will not attempt to take any of the places in Romagna; and
as we have supplied Faenza, Imola, and Furli with provisions,
so we shall equally supply Ravenna, Cesena, and Rimini.
And those places that cannot now be supplied by land will be
supplied by sea, so that they can remain perfectly safe, unless
something quite unexpected should happen.

The Count Guido, who was with his troops at Modena, and
the infantry of the Signor Giovanni, which had been left at
Bologna, must, at the moment of my writing, have arrived at
Imola. We are here at Furli with the Swiss and the French
troops; and they fight with much reluctance. The command-
ers of these troops, so soon as they are separated from the
Lord Lieutenant, carry out the plans agreed upon either very
slowly or very badly. These soldiers are insupportable, and
the inhabitants of the country are so afraid of them that they
receive them most unwillingly. The troops of the League
move very slowly, as they have no confidence in the truce, and
the reported coming of the Viceroy would have disaffected

366 SECOND MISSION TO

them entirely if the Lord Lieutenant had not represented to
them that it amounted to nothing. We also heard that the
Duke of Urbino had urgently demanded to come here, but it
was believed that his zeal would cool off when he should hear
that the coming of the Viceroy has revived the subject of the
truce.* Nevertheless, seeing the enemy marching towards his
home ought to make him more solicitous than ever.

The amount of all this is, that the advantage we have of be-
ing masters of the strong places, of having an open country,
of having had money, of having plenty of troops and experi-
ence, — all these things amount to nothing in consequence of
our being divided into so many parties, and having so little
confidence in each other.

On the other hand, the disadvantages which the enemy suffers
from being shut in by the mountains, where he is dying of
hunger, and having no money, —all these are causes of their
being united and acting together, and makes them obstinate
beyond all human belief. But to see their obstinacy overcome
by the arrival of the Viceroy would indeed be good and most
happy tidings for us. Valete /

Furut, 8 April, 1527.

P. S.—I had forgotten to tell your Lordships that the en-
emy yesterday entered Berzighella, where there were neither
inhabitants nor movables of any kind. The enemy burned the
town; the citadel capitulated, but the enemy did not observe
the terms of capitulation. Jterwm valete !

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.

* The truce so often referred to in these letters is the one concluded between
Pope Clement VII. (Medici) with the Viceroy of Naples and other ministers of the
Emperor. But it was never recognized either by the Imperial army that came
from Lombardy or by the Constable de Bourbon, who commanded that army.
The Pope, on the other hand, relied so thoroughly upon it that he disbanded his
forces, and thus found himself entirely unprepared when the Constable de Bour-
bon directed his march unexpectedly upon Rome.

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 367

LETTER XVIII.

MaGnirFicEnt SIGNORI, ETC. : —

I wrote to your Lordships day before yesterday. The enemy
did not stir yesterday. Bussi and Cotignola have capitulated,
and the enemy must have found sufficient provisions there to
feed on for a little while. They are still in a position to be
able by a single day’s march to lay siege to any one of the
three places, Furli, Faenza, and Imola. It is now twelve
o’clock and they have not stirred yet, nor do we know whether
they intend doing so to-day.

We are most anxiously awaiting that truce, and it is regarded
by every one here as a great necessity for us. I recommend
myself to your Lordships, que bene valeant.

Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Furut, 10 April, 1527.

LETTER XIX.

Maeniricent SIGNORI, ETC. : —

Day before yesterday I reported to your Lordships all that
had taken place here. Since then I have nothing special to
mention except that the enemy passed the river Lamone to-
day, and are taking the lower road towards La Marca. They
make as little progress as usual, and it is supposed that they
will not lay siege to any other place whilst they are in Ro-
magna, for we are always before them in time to garrison the
place. But it is believed that we shall not be in time to supply
garrisons to any of the towns of La Marca. Indeed, it is not
a good plan that does not permit us to advance with sufficient
troops to be able always to supply a sufficient garrison to the
places we leave behind, and yet to have troops enough to take
with us in our march forward. For it is like a consuming
disease to be obliged to withdraw the troops from the places
we have left behind for the purpose of placing them as garri-
sons in those that are before us; otherwise, we should not be
in time to do it, and disorders and inconveniences would arise
that would be apt to prove our ruin.

368 SECOND MISSION TO

According to the orders given by the Duke of Urbino, we
have commenced extending the army towards Parma, and have
come, thus diminishing our forces, as far as here to Furli,
where not enough troops remain to us to permit our leaving
any behind and advancing with the remainder to Cesena and
Rimini; for the Count Cajazzo was sent to Ravenna, and the
Swiss that were left here cannot be induced to separate, one
portion being unwilling to leave the other. If this could have
been done, we should have left one part here, and would have
gone with the other to Cesena; but as this was impossible, we
found it necessary to begin to make use of the troops which
we had left in detachments along the road. For it will not do
to strip a place of its garrison, unless the enemy is so far off
that he cannot return to attack it before a sufficient force
is sent back for its defence. We are therefore obliged to be
constantly on the alert, and to do everything just at the mo-
ment, if we wish to avoid the occurrence of disorders in front
or in the rear. And as we cannot always get exact informa-
tion, it is impossible entirely to prevent such disorders. Thence
the contradictory reports, according to which at one moment
the troops were coming from Tuscany, and the next moment
they were not coming. Thence came the untimely evacuation
of Imola, and the apprehensions in consequence on account of
Bologna. It results from this that with such a system and
such embarrassments it will be impossible for us to defend La
Marca; to which is superadded the fact, that the places there
are much less strong than those of Romagna. This plan of
proceeding has shown and will show from day to day how
much better the suggestions of Pietro Navarra were, and which
he wrote to the Duke here, who, however, would not adopt them.
According to Pietro Navarra’s plan, all our forces were to have
been united into one body. The enemy would not then have
been able either to have entered Tuscany, or to have come
here; for it would have sufficed in all these places merely to
have put men enough to guard the gates, as the enemy could
not have attempted to besiege a place with an army in the rear
that would have cut off their supplies. Anyhow there is the
whole difficulty, and if we have to carry on the war, and the
League does not unite its whole army, everything will go to
ruin, unless, indeed, some of the necessities on which we have
several times based our hopes should force the enemy to dis-

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. 369

band; but the obstinacy which the enemy manifests deprives
us of all hope that this will happen. Matters have come to
that point that we must either achieve or conclude a peace,
which, however unfavorable it may be, we shall not be able to
decline, provided the conditions are at all endurable. For if
we continue the war, and all our forces are not united, and if
the commanders are not satisfied, and the king of France and
the Venetians do not prove themselves better allies, and the
Pope does not show himself more liberal with his money, then
we shall be exposed to the most evident dangers of headlong
ruin.
Servitor
NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Furu, 11 April, 1527.

LETTER XX.

MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

According to what we hear up to the present hour, which is
the fifteenth, the enemy have broken camp and passed the Mon-
tone; they are moving by the lower road towards Ravenna and
Cesena. Yesterday they remained quiet, and there were vari-
ous and contradictory reports as to their plans and inten-
tions, all of which I write to your Lordships, not as positive,
but as having heard them in the same way as we may hear of
the movements of an army that does not know as yet what it
is going to do. However, one aim and object they evidently
have, and that is to try their fortune in Tuscany. But where,
when, and how they are going to do it, they seemingly have
not been able to decide themselves. Until to-day the impres-
sion prevailed that, before coming there, they wanted to secure
a roost here that would serve them as a ladder to cross the
mountains. This impression was confirmed by the report and
general rumor, that they expected ten cannon from Ferrara
wherewith to lay siege to one of the strong places. And
although the majority believed that this was merely a report
spread by the enemy’s commanders to serve as a pretext for
their delay, either for the purpose of further negotiations for
the truce, or for gaining time so that their other war material
might arrive; yet it was also thought that it might be true,

VOL. Iv. 24

370 SECOND MISSION TO

as the report about these cannon came from so many quarters ;
and it was feared that, if the thing were done, this place might
suffer, the greater part of the troops being Swiss, who do not
like to be shut up and exposed to the risk of being starved out,
as they could not be induced by any other reason to give up
the place. Fears were also entertained for Faenza, on the sup-
position that the enemy might have obtained knowledge of the
folly of its inhabitants, who had refused a large garrison, whilst
the few troops they had were so badly treated by them that
they are disposed at any moment to leave the place. Ravenna
is feared for as being a large city, and having at present a
garrison of not more than two thousand infantry; although
in case of necessity more troops could readily have been sent
there.

But all these doubts and fears were dispelled this morning
by a new piece of intelligence, brought us by some men just
arrived from the camp, and who are men of intelligence and
good judgment. They report that the four pieces of cannon
which the enemy had with them were sent by them to Luco ;
and that they had heard the Due de Bourbon say, in discuss-
ing this matter with the other commanders, that the enemy
wanted to pass into Tuscany regardless of everything else ;
and that he would go either by the Marecchia or some other
route not far from that, which led also to Borgo a San Sepol-
cro. Every effort will be made to learn whether it be true that
these four cannon are at Luco; for if that be so, then the
whole matter would be perfectly clear. Their coming there
must make us in part believe in the necessity in which they
find themselves of being obliged to do something; and that it
does not seem to them that they can make any progress in
Romagna. We know, moreover, that the Siennese are urging
them every day, and, according to a letter that has been inter-
cepted, offer them provisions for one year if they will come
that way. Our troops are all in such position that, with so
many roads open to them, they can at any time get into Tus-
cany before the enemy; and if your Lordships have ordered
that the most important places in the Val di Tevere and Val
di Chiana shall be well supplied, and the others evacuated, the
enemy, once entered upon your territory, will not make any
greater progress there than what he has done here, mainly
because he has no heavy artillery with him. So that it may

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. By@!

be said that so long as he shall not have arrived upon the
Siennese territory he will not be able to effect anything of
importance; and this will last long enough for us to have the
whole frontier guarded by our troops from here. It is said
that men ought to make a virtue of necessity; but if to virtue
supervenes necessity, then virtue ought to become powerful
and invincible. Your Lordships and our city have by your
virtue alone defended and saved both Lombardy and Romagna ;
and it is impossible that now, since necessity has supervened
to virtue, you should not be able to save yourselves.

It is now two o’clock of the night, and the enemy are
encamped on the river Montone, a little below Strada. The
reports multiply that they are going towards Tuscany, and
that they have sent their heavy artillery to Luco. The Lord
Lieutenant is resolved to wait until they have made another
day’s march; and having thus assured himself of the route
they are going to take, he will begin by sending the Count
Guido, who is at this moment at Imola with a portion of our
troops, in the direction of Tuscany; and we shall follow him
with the rest, so as to be there before the enemy.* And as
all this is an evil that has been foreseen, your Lordships must
not take another fright at it, for we have never thought here
that we should be able to hold them back if they really wished
to come. All that we could do was that they should have
ereater difficulties to encounter in coming, and that if possible
they should gain less credit by it. And this has been accom-
plished, for they have not taken a single place in this province,
and have not, therefore, any place that would, so to say, serve
them as a ladder to enable them to reach Florence; and thus
they have not the reputation which they would have had, if
they had made some honorable captures. Thus they remain
for the present like those bands of adventurers which, fer one
hundred and fifty years, have gone roving through the coun-
try, levying tribute, or ravaging it, without ever capturing any
places. There is no apprehension that our country is less

* The Constable Duc de Bourbon actually entered Tuscany ; but whether
this was a mere ruse to lull the suspicions of the too creculous Pope, or whether
it was that he really believed that no advantage could be yained from it, after
having been a short time on the Arezzo territory the Constable suddenly turned
and rapidly marched upon Rome, where the Pope was wholly unprepared, and

when the troops of the League were no longer in time to prevent this move-
ment.

372 SECOND MiSSION TO

capable of making resistance than the country here, or that
the aid which the enemy has obtained from Sienna would
prove more injurious to Tuscany than that which he has
received at the hands of the Duke of Ferrara. The Duke
of Urbino, as your Lordships will have heard, has sent two
thousand men to his duchy; and suspicions have arisen that
he has allowed some of his people to supply provisions to the
Imperialists, which, if true, would facilitate their passage. We
can only report what we hear from day to day; it is for your
Lordships to judge whether some steps should not be taken for
the protection of Florence through the Venetian ambassador.
I recommend myself to your Lordships, gue bene valeant.
Servitor

NiccoLo MACHIAVELLI.
Furut, 13 April, 1527.

LETTER XXI.

SigNor LIEUTENANT :—

The Captain Messer Andrea* has replied to the demand
which we have made upon him at your Lordship’s request, that
one of his galleys and a brigantine were at Livorno, and that
the rest of his fleet was here; but that he could not dispose of
any of his vessels owing to what was going on around us; that
at any moment it might happen that the Pope had need of him,
and if on such an occasion he were otherwise engaged he might
be blamed for it; but that the galley and the brigantine would
have to return from Livorno, and then he would place the brig-
antine at our disposal. He also informed us that the Marchio-
ness of Mantua was to be here to-morrow, and would proceed
with three galleys to Livorno, and that we might have passage
on board of these. But we finally arranged to go either in the
brigantine or galley, whichever should first return from Livorno.
We had a conversation with the Captain about your letter of
this morning, and he expressed himself pleased with every-
thing, provided you would make your second encampment
either at Monte Mari or in the Pope’s vineyard. And above
all he deemed it important that you should venture upon a
battle only when you had an advantage, fearing lest with equal

* Andrea Doria.

FRANCESCO GUICCIARDINI. ie

forces you would be beaten.* The news from Florence and
from France seemed to give him the greatest pleasure; and
as to Florence he said that, if the Pope had taken a similar
course a year ago, matters would now be in a very different
condition.
Niccoto MACHIAVELLI.
FRANCESCO BANDINI.
Civita Veccuia, 22 May, 1527.

* All this has reference to the march of the army of the League to liberate
the Pope from the Castel San Angelo, where he was besieged, together with the
whole court, after the taking of Rome on the 6th of May, 1527, by the Constable
Bourbon. The artful delays by the Duke of Urbino, commander-in-chief of the
forces of the League, have been made familiar by the historians of the time. He
first permitted the Imperial army to march upon Rome and make themselves
masters of it, and then refused to succor the Castel San Angelo, although he had
always troops enough to oppose the Imperial army, and even to beat them.

MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.

DESCRIPTION

OF THE

MANNER IN WHICH THE DUKE VALENTINO PROCEEDED TO
KILL VITELLOZZO VITELLI, OLIVEROTTO DA FERMO, AND
THE SIGNOR PAGOLO AND THE DUKE GRAVINA ORSINI*

Tur Duke Valentino had returned from Lombardy, where he
had gone to exculpate himself to King Louis XII. of France
from the many calumnies that had been told of him on account
of the revolt of Arezzo and other places in the Val di Chiana.
He had stopped at Imola with the intention of uniting all his
troops there for the purpose of attacking Giovanni Bentivoglh,
the tyrant of Bologna; as he wanted to bring that city under
his dominion and make it the capital of his duchy of Romagna.
When this project became known to the Vitelli and the Orsini
and their adherents, they became apprehensive that the Duke
would become too powerful ; and that it was to be feared that
after taking Bologna he would turn to destroy them, so as to
remain alone under arms in Italy. They therefore appointed a
meeting at Magione, in the Perugian territory, which was at-
tended by the Cardinal, Pagolo, and the Duke Gravina Orsini,
Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo, Giampagolo Bagliom,

* This description is contained in an official letter written by Machiavelli to
the Magistracy of the Ten at the very time when he was the Florentine envoy
to the Duke Valentino. The slight difference between that letter and the descrip-
tion, is one of words only, and not of facts. The beginning of the letter is as
follows : —

“ MAGNIFICENT SIGNORI, ETC. : —

“ As your Lordships have not received all my letters, which would in great part
have informed you of the circu™ stances connected with the event that has taken
place at Sinigaglia, I think it proper to give you by the present full particulars
of the same. I have ample leisure to do so now, having intrusted to our mag-
nificent ambassador all the business we have to attend to here at present. And I
believe that it will be agreeable to you to know these details, on account of the
character of the event, which is in all respects remarkable and memorable.”

378 DUKE VALENTINO'S MANNER OF KILLING

tyrant of Perugia, and Messer Antonio da Venafro, envoy of
Pandolfo Petrucci, chief of the government of Sienna. They
discussed the aggrandizement of the Duke, and his intentions,
and the necessity of checking his eager ambition, as otherwise
there would be danger of their being destroyed with the rest of
them. They resolved not to abandon the Bentivogli, and to
endeavor to win the Florentines over to their side. Accord-
ingly they sent agents to those places, promising help to the
one, and urging the other to unite with them against the com-
mon enemy. This meeting became quickly known throughout
Italy, and those peoples who were not satisfied to be under the
rule of the Duke, amongst whom were the people of Urbino,
took hope of a change for the better. Thus it came that, whilst
minds were thus undecided, certain men of Urbino formed the
plan to seize the castle of San Leo, which still held for the
Duke, and availed themselves of the following opportunity.
The governor was strengthening the castle, and, as he was get-
ting some timbers brought in, the conspirators placed themselves
in ambush; and whilst the drawbridge was encumbered by
some beams that were being brought to the castle, so that the
guard on the inside could not prevent them, the conspirators
seized the opportunity and leaped upon the bridge, and thus
obtained entrance into the castle. So soon as this capture
became known, the whole country rose in rebellion, and re-
called the old Duke; although the capture of the castle did
not inspire the people with as much hope as the meeting at
Magione, by means of which they hoped to obtain assistance.
So soon as the members of the assembly at Magione heard
of this revolt in Urbino, they felt that they must not lose this
opportunity. They at once called their troops together, for
the purpose of seizing any other place that might still re-
main in the hands of the Duke, and sent again to Florence
to solicit that republic to join them in extinguishing the
conflagration that threatened her equally with themselves.
They showed the Florentines how easy victory would be, and
that they could never expect a more favorable opportunity.
But actuated by their hatred against the Vitelli and the Or-
sini, from various causes, the Florentines not only declined to
unite with them, but sent their secretary, Niccolo Machiavelli,
to offer to the Duke Valentino shelter and assistance against
his new enemies. He found the Duke at Imola, full of appre-

VITELLI, FERMO, AND THE ORSINI. 379

hensions because his own troops had suddenly and quite unex-
pectedly turned against him; so that he found himself disarmed
at the very moment when war was almost upon him. But hav-
ing taken courage again in consequence of the offers of the
Florentines, he decided to protract the war with the few troops
that he had, and to endeavor by peace negotiations to obtain
assistance. This he managed in two ways: he sent to the king
of France for troops, and at the same time engaged every man-
at-arms, and others who followed the calling of mounted soldiers,
and was careful to pay them all most exactly.

Notwithstanding all this, his enemies advanced and moved
upon Fossombrone, where some of his troops had made a stand,
but were routed by the Vitelli and the Orsini. This induced
the Duke to try and stop these hostile attempts against him by
peace negotiations; and being thoroughly skilled in the art of
dissembling, he lost no chance of making his enemies under-
stand that they were making war upon a man who was willing
that they should have possession of all he had acquired, and
that he merely wanted the title of prince, leaving them to have
the principality. And so thoroughly did he persuade them of
this that they sent the Signor Pagolo to him to negotiate a
peace, and meantime they put up their arms.

But the Duke did not for a moment stop his preparations,
and made every effort to increase both his infantry and his
mounted force; and to prevent these preparations from being
noticed, he distributed his troops separately through all the
places of the Romagna. Meantime some five hundred French
lances had come to him, and although he felt strong enough to
revenge himself upon his enemies by open war, yet he thought
it would be safer and more advantageous for him to keep up his
deception, and not to stop his peace negotiations. And so well
did he manage this matter, that he concluded a peace with them,
according to which he confirmed to each of them their old en-
gagements; he paid them four thousand ducats at once, and
promised them not to disturb the Bentivogli. He also con-
cluded a matrimonial alliance with Giovanni, and consented
that none of them should ever be constrained to appear in
person before him, except so far as it might stiit themselves
to do so. On the other hand, they promised to restore the
duchy of Urbino to him, as well as all the other places which
they had taken up to that day, to serve him in all his expedi-

380 DUKE VALENTINO'S MANNER OF KILLING

tions, and not to make war upon any one without his permis-
sion, nor to engage themselves in the service of any one else.

After the conclusion of this treaty, Guido Ubaldo, Duke of Ur-
bino, fled again to Venice, having first caused all the fortresses
in his state to be dismantled; for having full confidence in the
population, he did not want these fortresses, which he believed
he could not defend, to fall into the enemy’s hands, who might
use them to restrain and oppress his friends. But the Duke
Valentino, after having concluded this convention, and having
distributed all his troops and the French lances throughout the
Romagna, suddenly left Imola, about the end of November, and
went to Cesena, where he remained many days, negotiating with
the agents of the Vitelli and of the Orsini, who happened to be
with their troops in the duchy of Urbino, as to what new enter-
prises were to be undertaken. But as nothing was concluded,
Oliverotto da Fermo was sent to make him the offer, that, if he
were disposed to undertake the conquest of Tuscany, they were
ready to co-operate with him; but if not, then they would go
and endeavor to capture Sinigaglia. To which the Duke re-
plied, that he had no intention of carrying the war into Tuscany,
as the Florentines were his friends; but that he should be well
pleased that they should take Sinigaglia.

Very soon after that, news came that the place had capitu-
lated, but that the citadel had refused to surrender to them, the
governor being unwilling to give it up to any one except to the
Duke in person; and therefore they urged him to come there
at once. The opportunity seemed favorable to the Duke, and
his going not likely to give umbrage, as he had been called by
them, and did not go of his own accord. And to make things
the more sure, he dismissed all the French troops, who returned
to Lombardy, except the one hundred lances under the com-
mand of Monseigneur de Caudales, his brother-in-law; and
having left Cesena about the middle of December, he went on
to Fano. There he employed all the cunning and sagacity that
he was capable of ; he persuaded Vitelli and the Orsini to await
him at Sinigaglia, assuring them that mistrust could not make
the agreement between them more sincere nor more durable,
and that, so far as he was concerned, he only wanted to be able
to avail himself of the arms and advice of his friends. And
although Vitellozzo remained very reluctant to accept the invi-
tation, his brother’s death having taught him that a prince

VITELLI, FERMO, AND THE ORSINI. 881

whom you have once offended is not to be trusted, yet he
yielded to the persuasion of Pagolo Orsino, who had been cor-
rupted by presents and promises of the Duke to wait for him
at Sinigaglia. The Duke thereupon, before leaving for Fano,
on the 80th of December, communicated his plan to eight of his
most trusty followers, amongst whom were Don Michele and
Monscigneur d’Enna, who afterwards became Cardinal. He
directed them that so soon as Vitellozzo, Pagolo Orsino, the
Duke Gravina, and Oliverotto came to meet him, each two of
them should take one of these four between them, mentioning
specially by name each one of the four which each two of them
were to take between them; they were to entertain them until
their arrival at Sinigaglia, and were not to permit them to leave
until they had reached the Duke’s lodgings, where they were to
make them prisoners. After that he ordered that all his armed
force, consisting of more than two thousand horse and ten thou-
sand infantry, should be at the break of day on the Metauro, a
river. five miles from Fano, and;there to wait for him. Having
met them there on the morning of the last day of December,
he sent about two hundred of his mounted men ahead towards
Sinigaglia, and then he started his infantry, after which he came
himself with the remainder of his mounted force.

Fano and Sinigaglia are two citics of the Marches, situated
on the shore of the Adriatic, and some fifteen miles distant
from cach other. Any one going to Sinigaglia has the moun-
tains on his right hand; their base in some places stretches
close down to the sea, so as to leave but a narrow space be-
tween, and at the widest place the distance between the moun-
tains and the sea is barely two miles. The city of Sinigaglia is
but little more than a bowshot’s distance from the foot of the
mountains, and less than a mile from the shore. By the side
of the city runs a little stream, which bathes that part of the
walls of the city that looks up the road towards Fano. On
approaching Sinigaglia the road runs for a considerable dis-
tance by the mountains; but on arriving at the stream that
bathes the walls of Sinigaglia, the road turns to the left, and
follows the banks of the stream for about a bowshot’s distance,
until it comes to a bridge that spans the stream almost in face
of the gate by which you enter Sinigaglia, not in a straight
line, but obliquely. Before the gate there is a suburb composed
of some houses and a square, one side of which is formed by
the bank of the little stream.

382 DUKE VALENTINO’S MANNER OF KILLING

The Vitelli and the Orsini, having given orders to await the
coming of the Duke, had, by way of personally showing him
honor, and for the purpose of lodging his troops, sent their
own away to some castles about six miles distant from Sini-
gaglia, and had only left Oliverotto with his men in Sinigaglia ;
these consisted of one thousand infantry and one hundred and
fifty mounted men, who were quartered in the above-mentioned
suburb. Matters being thus arranged, the Duke Valentino
went towards Sinigaglia; and when the head of his cavalry had
reached the bridge, they did not pass it, but halted, and one
half faced the river, and the other half fronted towards the
country, leaving a space between them for the infantry to pass
through, who entered the place without halting. Vitellozzo,
Pagolo and the Duke Gravina, mounted on mules, and ac-
companied by a few horsemen, came to meet the Duke. Vitel-
lozzo was without arms, and wore a cloak lined with green; he
seemed very sad, as though he had a presentiment of the death
that awaited him, which caused some astonishment, as his valor
and former fortune were well known. It was said that, when
he parted from his troops to come to Sinigaglia for the pur-
pose of meeting the Duke, it seemed as though he bade them
good by forever. He recommended his house and fortune to
his captains, and admonished his nephews not to remember the
fortune of their house, but only the valor of their fathers.

When the three arrived before the Duke, they saluted him
courteously, and were graciously received by him; and those
to whom the Duke had committed their charge took them at
once between them. But when the Duke noticed that Oliverotto
was not with them, (he having remained with his troops at Sini-
gaglia, whom he kept arrayed in line in the square opposite his
lodgings by the river, where he made them go through their
exercises,) he gave a wink to Don Michele, to whose charge
Oliverotto had been confided, to see that Oliverotto should not
escape. Don Michele therefore rode ahead, and having found
Oliverotto he told him that this was not the time to keep the
troops out of their quarters, which might otherwise be taken
from them by the troops of the Duke; and therefore he advised
him to let the troops go into their quarters, and come himself
with him to meet the Duke. Oliverotto followed this advice,
and went to join the Duke, who so soon as he saw him called
him; and after having duly saluted the Duke, he joined the
others.

VITELLI, FERMO, AND THE ORSINI. 383

When they had entered Sinigaglia they all dismounted at
the Duke’s lodgings, and, having entered with him into an inner
chamber, they were all made prisoners. The Duke immedi-
ately mounted his horse and ordered the troops of Oliverotto
and the Orsini to be disarmed and stripped. Oliverotto’s troops,
being near by, were completely stripped, but those of the Vi-
telli and the Orsini, being at a distance and having apprehended
the destruction of their masters, had time to unite, and, reeall-
ing the valor and discipline of the Orsini and the Vitelli, drew
together, and succeeded in saving themselves despite of the
efforts of the people of the country and the hostile troops.
The Duke’s soldiers, not satisfied with plundering the troops
of Oliverotto, began to sack Sinigaglia, and they would have
completely pillaged the town, if the Duke had not repressed
their rapacity by having a number of them put to death.

But when night came and the disturbances were stopped, the
Duke thought it time to make way with Vitellozzo and Olive-
rotto; and having them both brought into the same chamber,
he had them strangled. Neither of them before death said a
single word worthy of their past lives.  Vitellozzo conjured
those who put him to death to implore the Pope to grant him
a plenary indulgence for all his crimes. Oliverotto, weeping,
cast all the blame for the injuries done the Duke upon Vitel-
lozzo. Pagolo and the Duke Gravina Orsini were left alive
until Duke Valentino heard that the Pope had seized the Car-
dinal Orsino, the Archbishop of Florence, and Messer Jacopo
da Santa Croce. After having received this intelligence, the
Signor Pagolo and the Duke Gravina were strangled in the
same way as the others, at Castel della Pieve, on the 18th of
January, 1503.

REPORT ON THE AFFAIRS OF GERMANY.

No one can doubt the power of Germany, for she abounds in
population, wealth, and troops. As to riches, there is not a
community that has not a considerable amount in the public
treasury ; it is said that Strasburg alone has several millions of
florins so placed. This arises from the fact that they have no
expenses for which they draw money from the treasury, except
to keep up their munitions, which, when once provided, require
very little to keep them up. The order established in these
matters is really admirable; for they always keep in the pub-
lic magazines grain, drink, and fuel enough for one year.
They also keep a supply of the raw material for their indus-
tries, so that in case of siege they can feed the people, and
supply those who live by the labor of their hands with the
necessary materials for an entire year without any loss.

They spend nothing for soldiers, for they keep all their men
armed and exercised, and. on holidays these men, instead of
amusing themselves with idle play, exercise themselves, some
with the gun, some with the pike, and some with one or an-
other kind of arms; for which exercises they have established
prizes of honor and other rewards. These are their only ex-
penses, for in other matters they spend very little; and thus
every community is rich in public treasure.

The reason why the private citizens are rich is, that they live
as if they were poor; they do not build, and spend nothing on
dress or costly furniture in their houses. They are satisfied
with having plenty of bread and meat, and a stove where they
can take refuge from the cold; and those who have no other
things are satisfied to do without them, and do not seek after
them. They spend two florins in ten years for clothing to

REPORT ON THE AFFAIRS OF GERMANY. 385

put on their backs; all live in this proportion, according to
their rank, caring little for what they have not, but only for
that which is strictly necessary; and their necessities are
much less than ours. With such habits, it is natural that the
money does not go out of the country, the people being content
with what their country produces. But money is always being
brought into the country by those who come to purchase the
products of their industry, with which they supply almost all
Italy. And the profit which they make is so much the greater,
as the larger part of the money which they receive is for the
labor of their hands only, and but little is for the raw material
employed. And thus they enjoy their rough life and liberty,
and for that reason they will not take service to go to war,
unless they are exorbitantly paid; and this alone will not
satisfy them, unless they are ordered by their communities.
And therefore does the Emperor of Germany require much
more money than any other sovereign, for the more prosperous
the men are, the more unwillingly do they take service for
the wars.

It may happen that the cities unite with the princes to favor
the enterprises of the Emperor, or that they desire to do so by
themselves, which would be quite sufficient. But neither cities
nor princes would like the aggrandizement of the Emperor; for
if he ever had any states of his own, or were to become power-
ful, he would so subdue and abase the princes, and would re-
duce them to that degree of obedience, that he could avail
himself of them at his will, and not when it suited them; as
the king of France does nowadays, and as was formerly done
by King Louis XI., who by making war upon some of the
princes, and killing others, reduced them to the degree of sub-
mission in which we see them now. The same would happen
to the free cities of Germany, for the Emperor would want to
reduce them to such a degree of obedience that he could con-
trol them at his pleasure, and obtain from them whatever he
might ask, and not what might seem good to them.

The want of union between the free cities and the princes arises
from the many contrary dispositions and interests that exist in
that country. But reducing these to two principal divisions, it
may be said that the Swiss are hostile to all Germany, and the
princes to the Emperor. And yet it seems a strange thing to

say that the Swiss and the free communities of Germany are
VOL. Iv. 25

386 REPORT ON THE

inimical to each other, whilst both have one and the same ob-
ject, namely to save their liberties, and to protect themselves
against the princes. But their disunion arises from this, that
the Swiss are not only hostile to the princes, the same as the
free communities, but they are equally hostile to the gentle-
men, for in their country there is no difference of rank ; and all,
with the exception only of those who sit as magistrates, enjoy
without distinction an equal and entire liberty. This example
of the Swiss alarms the gentlemen in the free communities, and
their whole occupation is to keep up the disunion and enmity
between them and the Swiss. These have furthermore for
enemies all those men of the communities who make war
their trade, owing to a natural jealousy lest these should be
more esteemed than themselves. So that you cannot bring
ever so few or so many together in one camp without their
quarrelling or coming to blows.

As to the enmity of the princes towards the cities and the
Swiss, that is so well known as to make any discussion of it
unnecessary; the same with regard to the hostility between
the Emperor and the princes. It is well to bear in mind that
the Emperor, instigated by his hatred of the princes, and un-
able to lower their pretensions by himself, has sought the sup-
port of the free cities; and for the same reasons he has for
some time past taken the Swiss into his service, and has to
some extent gained their confidence.

Considering now all these differences, and adding those that
exist between one prince and another, and one community and
another, it will be seen how difficult it is to obtain in the Em-
pire that unanimity which is so necessary for an Emperor
to carry out his projects. But what makes the enterprises of
Germany vigorous and easy of success is, that there is not in
all Germany a prince who would dare to oppose the designs of
the Emperor, as used to be the case formerly. And yet it
must be borne in mind that it is quite a sufficient impediment
tor an Emperor not to be aided by the princes in any of his
projects ; for those who will not make open war upon him will
nevertheless dare to refuse him their support, and those who
will not dare to refuse him aid and support will yet dare not
to fulfil the promises which they may have made to the Em-
peror, while some who will not even dare this will yet venture
to be so slow in the execution of their promises, that their

AFFAIRS OF GERMANY. 387

performance will no longer be in time to be of value. All this
impedes and deranges the Emperor’s plans. 7

The truth of this was shown when the Emperor wanted to
pass into Italy the first time, contrary to the wishes of the
Venetians and the French. At the Diet held at that time in
Constanz, the cities of Germany promised the Emperor six-
teen thousand infantry and three thousand horse; and yet
they could never get enough of them together to make five
thousand men. The reason of this was, that, so soon as the
contingent of one community arrived, that of another went
home because they had completed their term of service. Some
cities, for the purpose of exemption from service, gave money,
which it was not difficult to induce the Emperor to accept.
And for this and other reasons the promised number of troops
was never brought together, and the enterprise failed in con-
sequence.

The power of Germany certainly resides more in the cities
than in the princes; for the latter are of two kinds, temporal
and spiritual. The first have been reduced to great weakness,
partly through their own acts, each principality being subdi-
vided amongst several princes, in consequence of the laws of
inheritance which they observe; and partly because the Em-
peror has debased their power, by the aid of the cities, as stated
above, so that they have become as it were useless friends.
As for the ecclesiastical princes, if not reduced by hereditary
divisions, yet have they been brought very low by the ambition
of their communities, sustained by the favor of the Emperor ;
so that the Archbishop Electors, and other dignitaries of this
sort, have no power or influence in their own large communi-
ties. The consequence is that the division existing between
them and their cities prevents their aiding the Emperor’s un-
dertakings, even if they had the wish to do so.

But we come now to the free and imperial cities, which are
the real nerve of the Empire, and have money as well as a good
organization. For many reasons they enjoy their liberty with
indifference, and have no desire to aggrandize their power ;
and what they do not desire for themselves they care little for
others to have. Moreover, as there are a good many of them,
and each one governs herself independently, their resolutions,
when they wish to decide upon anything, are slow, and have
not the desired efficiency. The following is an instance of it.

388 REPORT ON THE

Not many years since, the Swiss assailed the states of the Em-
peror Maximilian and Suabia. His Majesty agreed with these
communities to repel the enemy, and the free cities obligated
themselves to put and keep in the field fourteen thousand men;
but they never got the half of that number together, for when
the troops of one community arrived, those of another went
home. So that the Emperor, despairing of success, made terms
with the Swiss, leaving them the city of Basle. Now if such
was the conduct of these communities where their own inter-
ests were involved, think what they would do to aid the en-
terprises of others. All these considerations taken together
diminish the power of these cities considerably, and render
them of little advantage to the Kmperor.

Owing to the extensive trade which the Venetians have with
the merchants of the German cities, they have understood
this better than any one else; but in all matters that they
have had to do or to negotiate with the Emperor, they have
never swerved from a strictly honorable course. For if they
had feared the German power, they would have employed some
other means, either in the way of money or by the cession of
some place; or if they had believed that that power could have
been united, they would never have opposed it; but knowing
the impossibility of that, they opposed it courageously, and
bided their opportunity.

If, therefore, in one of these cities the affairs that concern a
great number of citizens are neglected, by how much greater _
reason will they be even more neglected in so great an empire.
Moreover, these cities know very well that every acquisition
made in Italy or elsewhere would only be for the benefit of
the princes, and not for their own, inasmuch as the princes
can enjoy them personally, which a community cannot do;
and whenever the reward is unequal, men do not like to spend
equally. Thus the power of these cities is great, but it is such
that you cannot avail yourself of it. If those who fear Ger-
many had examined the above-explained causes, and the results
which this power has achieved for many years past, they would
have seen to what extent it can be depended upon.

The German men-at-arms are very well mounted, and those
parts that are usually protected are very well covered by armor,
but their horses are heavy. And I must say that in a fight
with Italians or French they would not be able to resist; not

AFFAIRS OF GERMANY. 889

on account of the men, but they use no kind of general armor
for the horses; their saddles are small and are without saddle-
bows, so that the least shock unhorses the men. Another
thing that renders them less effective is that the lower part of
their bodies, that is to say their thighs and legs, are not pro-
tected by any armor; thus they are unable to resist the first
shock, in which the value of the men-at-arms and their service
consists.

For that reason they cannot use short arms, as they and
their horses are so easily wounded in those parts that are not
protected by armor. This puts it in the power of every foot
soldier to unhorse or run them through the body with his pike ;
and moreover, when their horses get very much excited, their
weight prevents them from being properly controlled. Their
infantry is excellent, and the men are of fine stature, — very
different from the Swiss, who are small, and neither clean nor
good-looking. The greater part of the infantry is armed only
with a pike or a short sword,so as to be more active, expedi-
tious, and light. They are in the habit of saying that they do
this because they have no other enemy but the artillery, from
the effects of which neither breastplate, corselet, nor gorget
can protect them. They fear no other weapons, for they say
that their discipline is such that it is impossible to penetrate
their ranks, or to approach them nearer than the length of a
pike.

They are most excellent troops for a battle in the open field,
but are not good for a siege, nor for defending a city; and
generally speaking, where they cannot preserve their order and
their ranks they are not to be depended upon. Experience
has proved this; for whenever they have had to do with Italians,
and especially when they have had to besiege a town, as was
the case at Padua and other places, they gave but poor account
of themselves; whilst, on the contrary, wherever they found
themselves in the open field, they have always shown to advan-
tage. So at the battle of Ravenna, between the French and the
Spaniards, the French would have lost the day if they had not
had the German Lansquenets. For whilst the men-at-arms of
the opposing armies were engaged hand to hand, the Spaniards
had already routed the French and Gascon infantry ; and if
the Germans, with their well-ordered ranks, had not come to
their support, they would have been all killed or taken pris-

390 REPORT ON THE AFFAIRS OF GERMANY.

oners. And so it was lately when the Catholic King declared
war against France, and made an attack in Guienne; the Span-
iards were more afraid of a body of ten thousand German
troops which the king of France had, than of all the rest of
his infantry, and avoided every occasion of meeting the Ger-
mans hand to hand.

SECOND REPORT ON THE AFFAIRS
OF GERMANY.

Mave 17 June, 1508.

In June last the Emperor held a Diet at Constanz of all the
princes of Germany, to provide for his passage into Italy, for
the purpose of being crowned. He had called this Diet of his
own accord, and also because he had been urged to it by the
Pope’s envoy, who promised him powerful support on the part
of the pontiff. The Emperor demanded of the Diet for his
enterprise three thousand mounted men and sixteen thousand
infantry, and pledged himself to add as many as thirty thou-
sand men of his own. The reasons why he did not ask for
more troops for so important an enterprise were, first, that
he believed that that number would suffice; persuaded that he
would have the support of the Venetians and other powers
of Italy, as I will explain hereafter. He could never have
believed that the Venetians would fail him, as he had but
lately rendered them important services, when they were
afraid of France, after her conquest of Genoa; for he had
then sent at their request two thousand troops to Trent. He
started the report that he intended to assemble all the princes ;
but, instead, went off into Suabia to threaten the Swiss,
if they did not abandon their alliance with France. This
caused King Louis to return to Lyons immediately after tak-
ing Genoa; so that the Emperor believed that he had saved the
Venetians from a war which they feared, and that therefore
they ought to be very grateful to him; in fact, he said several
times that “he had no better friends in all Italy than the Ve-
netians.” :

The other reason why the Emperor had asked for so small a
number of troops from the Diet was, that they would much
more readily grant him that small number, than if he had

392 SECOND REPORT ON THE

asked for more, and would more likely keep their promise.
And because the Diet would more readily place them all under
his command, without trying to give them commanders in
the name of the Empire, who would be his companions rather
than his captains. In fact, there were several members of
the Diet, and the Archbishop of Mayence amongst them, who
wished to push this enterprise with great vigor, and wanted to
provide at least forty thousand men, and give them four com-
manders in the name of the Empire. Whereupon the Emperor
became angry, and said, “I can carry this enterprise through
“by myself, and therefore want the honors of it.” The Diet
thereupon voted him the nineteen thousand men, and decided
moreover to give him one hundred and twenty thousand florins,
to supply the army with necessaries, and to hire five thousand
Swiss for six months, as he might think fit. The Emperor
proposed that the men should assemble by the day of San Gallo,
that seeming to him ample time to get them together, and con-
venient for their method of carrying on a war. He stated,
moreover, that in the mean time he should be able to accom-
plish three things: the one, to win over the Venetians, whom he
never mistrusted until the last moment, although their ambas-
sador had been sent away, as was well known; the second,
to make sure of the Swiss; and the third, to draw from the
Pope and other states of Italy a goodly sum of money. He
went on therefore with his negotiations; the day of San Gallo
came, and the men began to collect, but the Emperor had not
accomplished any one of the three things just mentioned. But
as it seemed to him that he could not start, and not having as
yet any doubts as to his final success, he sent some of the troops
to Trent and some to other places; and did not stop his ma-
neeuvres until January came, and he had consumed one half of
the time, and half of the supplies accorded to him by the Em-
pire, without having accomplished anything. Finding himself
in this position, he made the utmost efforts to win the Venetians.
First he sent Fra Bianco to them, and then the priest Lucas ;
he sent the despot of the Morea, and at several intervals he
sent his own heralds to them. But the more he went after
them, the more they discovered his weakness, and the more they
withdrew from him; for they found in all his promises not one
of the motives that induce states to form alliances, which
are either the common defence, or the fear of being attacked,

AFFAIRS OF GERMANY. 393

or simply their advantage. But they saw clearly that they
would enter into an alliance where all the expense and danger
were theirs, whilst the advantage would be all the Emperor’s.
The Emperor, however, having no other course open to him,
decided to attack them without further loss of time; thinking
that perchance this might induce them to change their course.
Perhaps this proceeding may have been suggested to him by his
envoys; or he may have hoped that such an attack might induce
the Empire to keep its engagements, and might possibly even
influence them to augment his subsidies, seeing that the first
did not suffice. But as he knew that before the arrival of such
increased support he could not continue the war, nor abandon
the country to the discretion of the enemy, he called a Dict of
the people of Tyrol to meet on the 8th of January at the town
of Botzen, which is about a day’s march above Trent. This
principality, which he had inherited from his uncle, gave him a
revenue of more than three hundred thousand florins, without
being obliged to lay any taxes. He could levy there over six-
teen thousand troops, and the inhabitants there are nearly all
wealthy. This Diet remained in session nineteen days, and
finally concluded to concede to the Emperor one thousand men
for his descent into Italy; and if that number did not suffice,
they would give him five thousand for three months, and would
even go as far as ten thousand men, if the defence of the coun-
try required it.

After this conclusion the Emperor went to Trent, and on the
6th of February he made two attacks, the one upon Roveredo,
and the other upon Vicenza, having only five thousand men,
or even less, for these two assaults. Thereupon he suddenly
left, and with a body of only about fifteen hundred infantry
and peasants threw himself into the Val di Codaura in the
direction of Treviso, ravaging a valley and taking certain
strongholds. But seeing that the Venetians did not budge, he
left his troops without notice, and retraced his steps to ascer-
tain the intention of the Empire. The troops which he had left
in the Val di Codaura were all killed, in consequence of which he
sent the Duke of Brunswick there, but nothing was afterwards
heard of him. He convoked the Diet in Suabia for the third
Sunday in Lent; but as he had perceived that the members
were not well disposed towards him, he went off to Guelders,
and sent the priest Lucas to the Venetians to try to bring about

894 SECOND REPORT ON THE

the truce, which was concluded on the 6th of the present month
of June, after having lost all that he possessed in the Friuli,
and being on the point of losing Trent also. But that place
was defended by the people of the Tyrol; so far as the Emperor
was concerned, however, and the troops of the Empire, Trent
would have been lost; for these troops left for home at the
most critical moment of the war, when their six months’ service
had expired.

I know that people hearing this, and having seen it, will
wonder and lose themselves in various conjectures, and cannot
imagine why nothing has been seen of those nineteen thousand
men which the Empire had promised, and how it is that Ger-
many has not more keenly felt the loss of her honor, or how
the Emperor could have deceived himself so completely. And
thus every one varies in his ideas as to what is to be feared or
hoped for the future, and what course matters may take. But
as I was on the spot, and have heard the matter often discussed
by many different persons, and having no other business but
to observe this, I shall report all the facts that seemed to me
worth noting. And if these observations do not explain every-
thing distinctly, all of them taken together may perhaps solve
the above questions. Nor doI give them as absolutely true or
reasonable, but I report them only as having heard them; it
seeming to me the duty of a servant to place before his master
all that he learns and that may be of interest to him, so that he
may make use of it for his advantage.

All whom I have heard speak on the subject agree that, if
the Emperor could have done one of two things, he would cer-
tainly have succeeded in his designs upon Italy, considering the
condition in which she is at present. And these things are,
either that he should have changed his nature, or that Ger-
many should have supported him in good earnest. Examining
now the first, they say that, considering his resources, and sup-
posing that he knew how to avail himself of them, he would not
be inferior to any other monarch of Christendom. His states
are said to give him a revenue of six hundred thousand florins,
without any taxes, and his office as Emperor gives him an ad-
ditional one hundred thousand florins. This income is entirely
his own, and obliges him to no expense whatsoever. He does
not expend one penny for either of the three items for which
other sovereigns are obliged to provide; that is, he keeps no

AFFAIRS OF GERMANY. 395

men-at-arms, he pays no garrisons of fortresses, nor any offi-
cials of the cities. For the gentlemen of the country owe him
military service, the fortresses are guarded by the inhabitants,
and the cities have their burgomasters, etc., who administer
their affairs.

He might nevertheless, if he were, for instance, like the king
of Spain, provide in a little time such means as would insure
the success of any enterprise. For with a revenue of eight to
nine hundred thousand florins the Empire would not be so
small a matter, nor would his country be so niggardly, but what
he could easily increase his income; and thus with the conve-
nience of declaring war suddenly, having troops prepared for war
in every place, and being provided with money, he could carry
the war promptly to every point, and fall unawares upon his
enemies. Add to this the credit which it gives him to have the
nephew of the king of Castile with him, the Duke of Burgundy,
and the Count of Flanders, and his connection with England.
All these things would be of such advantage, if well used, that
all his designs upon Italy would without a doubt prove suc-
cessful. But the Emperor, with all this income, never has a
penny ; and what is worse, no one knows what becomes of all
his revenues.

As to the management of other matters, the priest Lucas,
who is one of the Emperor’s principal agents, told me this:
“ The Emperor asks counsel of no one, but all the world advises
“him; he wants to do everything himself, but does nothing
“in his own way. And notwithstanding that he never com-
“municates to any one, of his own accord, the secret designs
“which he has formed, yet, as their execution makes them
“known, he is dissuaded from them by the persons he has
“about him, who draw him off from his original plans. And
“those two qualities which many persons praise in him, the
“liberality and facility of his character, are the very qualities
“that ruin him.” This is the very reason why his intended
descent into Italy caused such alarm. For his necessities in-
crease with his victories, and it is not reasonable to suppose
that he would have immediately changed his ways; and unless
he should do so, if all the leaves on all the trees in Italy had
become ducats, they would not suffice him. There is nothing
that with money in hand he would not have obtained; and
therefore were those considered wise by many who hesitated

396 SECOND REPORT ON THE

to give him money the first time, so as not to have to hesitate
still more about giving it to him a second time. And if he
could not by any other means have obtained money from any
prince, he would have asked it by way of loan; and if he could
not have borrowed it, all the expenditures made until then
would have been thrown away. I will give you a strictly true
instance of this. When Messer Pagolo,* on the 29th of March,
made his demand, Messer Francesco Vettori having been de-
spatched by him, I went to see him with the draft of the treaty,
prepared according to your request; and when he came to that
part which says, ‘Non possit Imperator petere aliam sum-
“mam pecuniarum,” etc., he wanted to have the word “ jure”
inserted before “ petere.” And when I asked him why, he re-
plied that the Emperor wanted it so as to enable him to ask the
money of us by way of loan; whereupon I answered him in
such manner as was satisfactory to him. It must be observed
that the Emperor’s frequent needs of money are the conse-
quences of his frequent irregularities, and these necessities give
rise to his frequent demands and the frequent Diets. And the
little estimation in which he is held causes his feeble resolu-
tions and their still more feeble execution.

But if the Emperor had come into Italy, you would not have
been able to pay him with Diets, as Germany does; and his
liberality would have been so much the worse for him, as he
requires more money for carrying on a war than any other
sovereign ; for his people, being free and rich, are not influ-
enced either by necessity or by affection, but serve him only by
express orders of their communities, and at their own price ; so
that if, at the end of thirty days, the money for their pay has
not come, they leave at once, and neither prayers nor promises
nor threats will prevail upon them to stay, if the money is
wanting. And when I say that the Germans are rich, the truth
of it is easily proved. ‘They become rich in great part because
they live as if they were poor; for they neither build, nor dress,
nor furnish their houses expensively. It is enough for them to
have plenty of bread and meat, and to have a stove behind which
they take refuge from the cold. Those who have no more con-
veniences do without them, and do not seek after them; they

* This is Paolo de Lichtenstein, confidential agent of the Emperor Maximilian,
mentioned by F. Vettori in his despatches to the Signoria of Florence. See
Letter X. of the Mission to the Emperor, ante, page 182.

AFFAIRS OF GERMANY. 397

spend about two florins in ten years on their back, and every
one lives according to his rank in that proportion. Nobody
cares for what he has not, but only for that which is necessary
to him, and their necessities are very much less than ours.
The result of these habits is that no money leaves their coun-
try, as the people are content with what their country produces ;
and thus they enjoy their rough and free life, and will not en-
list to go to war, unless they are overpaid. And even that
would not suffice, if the communities do not command their
going; for these reasons the Emperor requires much more
money than the king of Spain, or any other sovereign, whose
people have different habits.

The Emperor’s good and easy nature is the cause why all
persons whom he has about him deceive him. One of the men
attached to his person has told me that he can be deceived
once by everybody and everything, until he has found them out.
But there are so many men and so many things, that he is
exposed every day to being deceived, even if he were constantly
on his guard. He has endless good qualities, and if he could
overcome his two qualities of weakness and easy nature, he
would be a most perfect man; for he is a good commander,
governs his country with great justice, is affable and gra-
cious in his audiences, and has many other qualities of a most
excellent prince; and to conclude, if he could modify the two
above-mentioned defects, it is judged that he would succeed in
everything he undertakes.

The power of Germany cannot be doubted by any one, for
she has abundant population, wealth, and armies. As to her
wealth, there is not a community that has not a considerable
amount in the public treasury; it is generally said that Stras-
burg has several millions of florins so placed. This arises
from the fact that they have no expenses from which they draw
money from the treasury, except to keep up their munitions, ~
which, when once provided, require very little to keep them up.
The order established in these matters is really admirable; for
they always keep in their public magazines grain, drink, and
fuel enough for one year. They also keep a supply of the raw
material for their industries, so that, in case of siege, they can
feed the people and supply those who live by the labor of their
hands for an entire year without loss. They spend nothing
for soldiers, for they keep all their men armed and exercised.

398 SECOND REPORT ON THE

For salaries and other matters they spend very little, so that
every community has its public treasury well filled.

It remains now that these communities unite with the princes
to favor the designs of the Emperor, or that they should do so
themselves without the princes, which would suffice. Those
who occupy themselves with these matters say that the cause
of their dissensions is to be found in the many different dispo-
sitions that exist in that country. And as to a general want of
unity, they say that the Swiss are regarded as enemies by all
Germany, the free cities are so regarded by the princes, and
in the same way the princes by the Emperor. It may seem
strange to say that the Swiss and the free cities are hostile to
each other, as they both have one and the same object ; name-
ly, that of preserving their liberties and protecting themselves
against the princes. But their division arises from this, that
the Swiss are not only hostile to the princes, the same as the
free cities, but they are also inimical to the gentlemen in the
cities, because in their country there are neither princes nor
nobles, and everybody enjoys perfect liberty, without any dis-
tinction amongst men, excepting only those who are members
of the magistracies. This example of the Swiss alarms the
nobles who still exist in the free cities, and all their efforts
are directed to keeping alive this disunion and hostility. The
Swiss have for enemies also all those men of the cities who
devote themselves to military pursuits, being instigated by a
natural jealousy, for they imagine themselves less esteemed ;
so that it is impossible to bring together few or many of the
two countries in the same camp without their quarrelling and
coming to blows.

As to the enmity of the princes towards the communities and
the Swiss, it is unnecessary to say anything, as it is a notorious
fact; the same as the hostility between the Emperor and the
said princes. And you must know that, as the’ Emperor’s
greatest repugnance is towards the princes, not being able by
himself to humble them, he has availed himself of the support
of the communities ; and for the same reasons he has for some
time past had negotiations with the Swiss, whose confidence he
has of late gained to some degree. So that, taking into con-
sideration all these divisions, and adding thereto those which
exist between one prince and another, and one community and
another, it seems almost impossible to bring about that union

AFFAIRS OF GERMANY. 399

which is so essentially necessary for the Emperor. But what
has kept everybody hopeful, and made the affairs of the Em-
peror for some time past so promising, and his enterprises
likely to succeed, is the fact that there is not a prince in all
Germany who could venture to oppose the Emperor’s designs,
as has already been said above. This has been and still is the
truth; and people deceive themselves in supposing that it is
only war and sedition in Germany that can defeat the Em-
peror’s projects, for he can be thwarted as effectually merely by
not supporting him. And those who would not dare to declare
war against him would not hesitate to refuse him their assist-
ance, whilst those who would not venture to refuse him their
support will not fulfil the promises they have made him; and
those who would not even risk doing this will yet manage to
delay their compliance with their promises until their execu-
tion would no longer be of use to the Emperor. ALI this of-
fends the Emperor and deranges his plans.

The truth of this may be seen in the fact that the Diet had
promised him nineteen thousand men, as stated above, but we
have never seen as many as five thousand together. This could
only have arisen either from the above-explained causes, or
because the Emperor accepted money instead of men, and was
possibly satisfied to take five instead of ten.

And to explain still further as to the power and union of
Germany, I would say that this power resides more in the com-
munities than in the princes; for the princes are of two kinds,
namely, temporal and spiritual. The temporal princes are re-
duced to a condition of great weakness, partly by their own
action, each principality being divided between several princes,
according to the custom of succession which they observe, and
which requires such equal division; and partly because the Km-
peror, aided by the communities, has diminished their power, so
that they have become useless as friends and little to be feared
as enemies. As for the ecclesiastical princes, if their power
has not been annihilated by hereditary divisions, the ambition
of the communities favored by the Emperor has reduced their
authority very low; so that the Archbishop Electors, and other
similar dignitaries, can effect nothing in their own large com-
munities. The consequence is, that neither themselves nor their
cities, being thus divided amongst themselves, can do anything
to aid the Emperor’s enterprises, even if they wished to do so.

400 SECOND REPORT ON THE

But we come now to the free and imperial cities, which are
the very nerve of the country, and who possess riches and well-
regulated organization. These are for many reasons very luke-
warm in their disposition to aid the Emperor’s projects ; their
chief aim is the preservation of their liberty, and not increase
of their dominions; and what they do not desire for themselves,
they care not that others should acquire. Moreover, there be-
ing so many of them, and all accustomed to govern themselves,
causes their support to come very slow, even if they are willing
to grant it; so that their usefulness is no longer in time. The
following is an instance of this. Nine years ago the Swiss as-
sailed the states of Maximilian and of Suabia. The Emperor
agreed with the free cities to repel the enemy, and the cities
promised to keep fourteen thousand men under arms, at his
disposal; but they never had half of that number together, for
when the contingent of one city came, the others went away ;
so that the Emperor, despairing of the enterprise, made terms
with the Swiss, and abandoned to them the town of Basle.
Now if they act in this way where their own interests are con-
cerned, it is easy to judge as to what they are likely to do to
aid the enterprises of others. All these circumstances taken
together, therefore, reduce their power very much, and make
it of little advantage to the Emperor.

The Venetians, owing to their extensive commercial relations
with the merchants of the German cities, have understood this
better than any one in Italy, and have therefore more effectu-
ally opposed the power of the Empire. But if they had feared
that power, they would not have ventured to oppose it; and
even if they had opposed it, and had believed that it had been
possible for the whole Empire to unite against them, they
would never have attacked it.

But as they were satisfied of the impossibility of such union,
they did not hesitate to show themselves so bold as has been
seen. Nevertheless, all the Italians that are at the Emperor’s
court, and whom I have heard discuss all these questions, re-
main firmly attached to the hope that all Germany is on the
point of uniting, and that the Emperor will throw himself into
her arms; and that the plans that were discussed last year at
the Diet of Constanz as regards the generals and the troops
will be carried out; and that the Emperor will now yield from
necessity, and the Diet will do so voluntarily, so as to recover

AFFAIRS OF GERMANY. 401

the honor of the empire; and that they will care little about
the truce, which had been concluded by the Emperor and not
by them. To this others reply, that it is well not to put too
much faith in things that are yet to happen, because it is seen
every day that those matters which interest a great many in a
city are often neglected, and that such will be the case to a
much greater degree in a whole country. Moreover, the cities
know that the conquest of Italy would not be for their benefit,
but for that of the princes, who can personally enjoy that coun-
try, which they could not do. And where the benefit is un-
equal, people are not willing to bear equal expenses; and thus
Opinions remain undecided, without being able to determine
the events that are yet in the future.

This all that I have learned respecting Germany. As to
other matters that may influence peace or war between the
different princes of that country, I have heard a good deal
said, but as it was all based upon mere conjectures, of which
you may have more correct information and certainly better
judgment, I leave them without saying anything more about
them. Valete!

VOL. IV. 26

DISCOURSE ON THE AFFAIRS OF GERMANY
AND ON THE EMPEROR.

HAVING written on my return here last year all I knew about
the affairs of Germany and the Emperor, I am really at a loss
as to what more to say on the subject. I shall confine myself
therefore to a few remarks about the character of the Emperor.
There is not, and perhaps never has been, a prince more waste-
ful than he is. This is the reason why he is always in want,
and why he never has money enough, no matter in what situa-
tion he may find himself. He is very fickle, wanting one thing
to-day, and next day caring nothing about it; he takes counsel
from no one, and yet believes everybody. He desires what he
cannot have, and leaves that which he can readily obtain; and
therefore he always takes contradictory resolutions.

On the other hand he is most warlike, and knows how to
maintain and conduct an army well, preserving justice and
discipline. He bears any kind of fatigue as well as any other
man inured to it; is courageous in danger, and as a general is
not inferior to any man of the present day. He is affable in
his audiences, but will grant them only when it suits him; he
does not like ambassadors to come and pay their court to him,
unless he sends for them; he is extremely reticent; he lives
in a constant state of agitation of mind and body, and often
undoes in the evening what he has concluded in the morning.
This makes the missions near him very difficult, for the most
important duty of an ambassador, whether sent by a prince or
a republic, is to conjecture well the future, both as to negotia-
tions and events; for he who is able to form wise conjectures,
and make them well understood by his government, renders an
important service, and enables his government to take timely
measures. The envoy who does this does honor to himself,

GERMANY AND THE EMPEROR. 403

and benefits the government at home; and the contrary is the
case when the conjectures are badly made. To illustrate this
more particularly, assume that you are in a place where the
question is between making war or negotiating. To perform
your duty well, you have to say what the prevailing opinion is
respecting the one and the other. War has to be measured
by the number and quality of the troops, by the amount of
money, by conduct, and by fortune ; and it is to be presumed
that that party which has most of these advantages is likely to
be victorious. After having well considered thus who is likely
to be successful, it is necessary to make it well understood
here, so that the republic and yourselves may the better decide
upon the course to be adopted. The negotiations are of differ-
ent kinds, that is, they will be partly between the Venetians
and the Emperor, partly between the Emperor and France,
partly between the Emperor and the Pope, and partly between
the Emperor and yourselves. Respecting the last it ought to
be easy to conjecture rightly, and to judge of the Emperor’s
intentions with regard to yourselves,— what he really wants,
which way his mind is turned, and what could make him draw
back or go forward; and having found that out, to judge
whether it be more advantageous to temporize or to conclude.
But it will be for you to decide as to how far your commission
extends in relation to these matters.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE AFFAIRS
OF FRANCE.

DRAWN UP BY NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

THE Crown and the King of France are at this time more
flourishing, rich, and powerful than they have ever been; and
for the following reasons.

First, the Crown, being hereditary in the same family, has
become rich; for as it happens sometimes that the king has no
_ sons nor heirs to his properties, his states and substance have
fallen to the Crown. As this has been the case with several
kings, the Crown has been greatly enriched by the many states
that have thus come to her. Such was the case with the duchy
of Anjou, and such will happen to the present king, Louis XII,
who, having no male heirs, will leave to the Crown the duchy
of Orleans and the state of Milan; so that at this time all the
best fiefs of France belong to the Crown, and not to private
barons.

Another and most important cause of the power of this king
is, that formerly France was kept disunited by the powerful
barons, who dared on every occasion to take up arms against
the king; as was the case with the Dukes of Guienne and
of Bourbon, but who are now most submissive; and thus the
Crown has become more powerful. A further reason is, that
every neighboring prince did not hesitate to attack the king-
dom of France; for there was always either the Duke of Brit-
tany, or a Duke of Guienne, or of Burgundy, or of Flanders,
ready to aid him, and to grant him passage through his terri-
tory and give him asylum in case of defeat. This happened
whenever the English were at war with France, for they always
caused the king embarrassments through the Duke of Brit-
tany ; as did the Duke of Burgundy by means of the Duke of
Bourbon. But now that Brittany, Guienne, and the Bourbon-

ACCOUNT OF THE AFFAIRS OF FRANCE. 405

ese, as well as the greater part of Burgundy, are the most sub-
missive provinces of France, the neighboring princes have no
longer the same facilities for invading the kingdom of France ;
on the contrary, these provinces would now prove hostile to
such an invader. And the king, having acquired these prov-
inces, has himself become more powerful thereby, whilst the
enemy has become weaker.

There is still the further reason that nowadays the richest
and most powerful barons of France are of royal blood and
lineage, so that, if the superior branch were to lack heirs, the
Crown may descend to them. And therefore each maintains
his good relations to the Crown, hoping that either himself or
his descendants may some day attain that high rank.

To rebel, therefore, or to be mixed up in any way with such
opposition, might be of greater injury than advantage to him.
This came near happening to the present king, when made
prisoner in the war of Brittany, in which he took part with
that Duke against the French. And at the death of King
Charles VIII. the question came up whether, by his defection
from the Crown, he did not forfeit his rights to the succession.
But the riches which he had accumulated by his economies
enabled him to secure partisans; and the most immediate suc-
cessor to the throne, if he had been out of the way, namely,
the Duke of Angouléme, was but a child; and thus the pres-
ent king received the crown, for the reasons stated, and from
the general favor which he enjoyed.

The final reason is, that the properties of the barons of
France are not divided amongst the heirs, as is the case in
Germany and in the greater part of Italy; but they go entirely
to the oldest sons, who are the real heirs. The other brothers
submit patiently, but, aided by the older brother, they nearly
all take to the profession of arms, and strive in that career to
achieve a rank and wealth that will enable them also to pur-
chase a state, and in this hope they live. And thence it comes
that the French men-at-arms are nowadays the best, for they
are all nobles or sons of lords, and count upon achieving the
same rank as their fathers.

The infantry that is raised in France cannot be good for
much, for it is a long time since they have had a war, and
therefore they have no experience whatever. They are more-
over all of the lower order and tradesmen from the country,

406 AN. ACCOUNT OF THE

and are so subordinated to the nobles and so abject in all their
actions as to have become actually debased; and for that rea-
son the king does not employ them in war, for they have given
but poor proof of courage. There are however some Gascons
amongst them whom the king employs, as being somewhat
better than the others. This may be because they are from
near the Spanish borders and bear some slight resemblance to
the inhabitants of that country, although they have acted for
some years past more like robbers than like real soldiers.
Still, in the attack and defence of places they have not proved
themselves bad, but in the open field they are good for noth-
ing; differing in that respect very much from the Germans
and the Swiss, who have no equals in the open field, but are
not worth much in the attack or defence of a city. I believe
this arises from the fact that in the two latter cases they can-
not preserve the discipline and order which they keep in their
camps; and therefore the king of France always employs
Swiss or Lansquencets, for his men-at-arms have no confidence
in the Gascons when opposed to an enemy. If the French in-
fantry equalled in goodness their men-at-arms, then there can
be no doubt but what they would defend themselves success-
fully against all other princes.

The French are by nature more ferocious than vigorous and
adroit; and if you can resist the fury of their first onset, you
will find them so depressed and so entirely discouraged, that
they become cowardly like women. They do not support fa-
tigue nor discomforts, and soon become neglectful of every-
thing, so that it is easy to surprise them in disorder, and to
overcome them. We have had repeated experience of this in
the kingdom of Naples; and lately again on the Garigliano,
where their forces were nearly double that of the Spaniards, so
that it was supposed they could at any moment swallow them
up. But so soon as winter began to make itself felt and
the great rains commenced, they began to go off one by one
into the neighboring places, to find more comfort. And thus
their camp remained without sufficient force and in disorder,
so that the Spaniards proved victorious, contrary to all ex-
pectation.

The same thing would have happened to the Venetians, who
would not have lost the battle of Vaila if they had been con-
tent to observe the French for about ten days; but the im-

AFFAIRS OF FRANCE. 407

petuosity of Bartolommeo d’ Alviano encountered a still greater
impetuosity. The Spaniards experienced the same thing at
Ravenna; for if they had not attacked the French, these would
have been disorganized from lack of discipline and want of pro-
visions, which the Venetians interrupted in the direction of
Ferrara, and which could have been cut off by the Spaniards on
the side of Bologna. But as the first acted without good ad-
vice, so the other acted with even less judgment, and the French
remained victorious, although at the cost of much blood. And
though the struggle was great, it would have been greater still
if the main strength of the two armies had been of the same
character. But the strength of the French army consisted
mainly in men-at-arms, whilst that of the Spaniards was chiefly
in infantry ; and for that reason the slaughter was not greater.
Whoever, therefore, wishes to defeat the French must beware
of their first onset; whilst keeping them at bay for a time
will defeat them, for the above-stated reasons. And therefore
Cesar said that “at the beginning the French were more than
‘men, but in the end less than women.”

By the extent of her territory and the advantages derived
from her large rivers, France is very productive and opulent ;
but the abundant productions of the soil, as well as manual:
labor, have little or no value, owing to the scarcity of money
amongst the people, who can scarcely get enough together to
pay their dues to the lord proprietor, although the amounts
are but very small. This arises from their not having an out-
let for the productions of the soil, for every man gathers enough
to sell some; so that if in any one place a man wanted to sell
a bushel of grain, he would not find a purchaser, everybody
having grain to sell. And of the money which the gentlemen
draw from their tenants, they spend nothing except for their
clothing; for they have cattle enough to give them meat, innu-
merable fowls, lakes full of fish, and parks with an abundance
of every variety of game; and thus almost every gentleman
lives upon his estates. In this way all the money accumulates
in the hands of the proprietors, and their wealth is accordingly
great; whilst the people, when they have a florin, deem them-
selves rich.

The prelates of France draw two fifths of their revenues and
wealth from the kingdom, there being a good many bishoprics
having incomes from temporal as well as spiritual sources.

408 AN ACCOUN. Ol fur

And as they have abundant supplies of all the necessaries of
life, all the revenues and moneys that come into their hands
never leave them again, according to the avaricious nature
of prelates and churchmen; and all the money that is col-
lected by the chapters and colleges of the Church is spent
for silver, jewels, and costly church ornaments. Thus the
Church properties and what the prelates possess privately in
the way of money and silver plate, etc., amount to an immense
treasure.

In the council for the direction and management of the af-
fairs of the crown and the state of France, the prelates always
constitute the majority; the other lords care nothing about
this, for they know that the execution of the decisions always
devolves upon them; and thus both are satisfied, the first with
the direction, and the others with the execution; although at
times old and experienced officers are called into the council,
when military matters have to be discussed and decided, so
that they may guide the prelates, who have no practical ex-
perience in these matters.

In virtue of a certain pragmatic sanction * obtained long ago
from the Popes, all the Church benefices of France are be-
stowed by their colleges; so that, in case of the death of a
bishop or an archbishop, the canons of the Church meet and
confer the benefice upon the individual amongst themselves
who seems to them to merit it most. It happens not unfre-
quently that this gives rise to dissensions amongst them, for
there are always some who are favored on account of their
riches, and others for their virtues and good works. The
monks proceed in the same way in the election of their supe-
riors. The other small Church benefices are bestowed by the
bishops who have such livings in their gift. And if the king
ever attempts to disparage this pragmatic sanction by appoint-
ing a bishop of his own choice, he would have to employ force
to put him in possession, which the canons would refuse him ;
and if they had to yield to this force, they would abide the
death of the king to expel that bishop from his see, and give
it to the one elected by themselves.

The Frenchman is naturally covetous of other people’s goods,

* This pragmatic sanction was anterior to the concordat between Francis I.
and Leo X. It was issued by Charles VII. in 1438, and was the foundation of
the liberties of the Gallican Church.

AFFAIRS OF FRANCE. 409

of which, together with his own, he is afterwards prodigal.
Thus, the Frenchman will rob most skilfully, to eat, or to waste
what he has robbed, or even to enjoy it together with the
very person whom he has robbed; entirely different from the
Spaniard, who will never let you see again what he has taken
from you.

France fears the English, because she remembers the incur-
sions and devastations by the latter in the realm; so that the
very name of English is a terror to the people, who do not bear
in mind that France is nowadays in a very different position
from what she was in those unhappy times. For she is armed,
experienced in war, and united, and has possession of those
very provinces which served the English as a basis for their
operations, such as the duchies of Brittany and of Burgundy.
Moreover, the English are no longer disciplined, for it is a long
while since they have had a war, so that none of the people
now living have ever seen an enemy’s face; and then there is
no one save the Archduke who would be willing to see them
on the Continent.

The French would be much afraid of the Spaniards on ac-
count of their sagacity and vigilance. But every time that the
king of Spain would attack France, he would have to do it at
great disadvantage ; for from that point in his kingdom from
which his troops would have to start to the foot of the Pyre-
nees which stretch into France, the distance is so great and
the country so sterile that if the French make a stand at the
entrance of the Pyrenees by way of Perpignan or Guienne,
the enemy’s army would be disorganized, if not from want
of reinforcements, at least from the difficulty of obtaining pro-
visions, which would have to be brought from a great distance.
For the country which has to be traversed is uninhabited on
account of its sterility, and those who do inhabit it have
scarcely enough to sustain their own existence. For these
reasons, the French do not fear the Spaniards in the direction
of the Pyrenees.

Nothing is to be apprehended by the French of the Flemish,
whose country is so cold that they cannot raise sufficient pro-
visions, and particularly grain and wine, which they have to
procure from Burgundy, Picardy, and some other provinces of
France. Moreover, the people of Flanders live by the labor of
their hands, and they readily sell the produce of their manu-

410 AN ACCOUNT OF THE

factures, as well as other merchandise, at the French fairs;
chiefly at Lyons and Paris. They have no outlet for their
wares by sea, nor in Germany, for the Germans produce and
manufacture themselves even more than the Flemish. Thus,
when their trade with France is interrupted, they have no other
market for their merchandise, and thus their goods remain on
their hands, and they are not able to purchase provisions; and
therefore the Flemish never have war with France, unless they
are forced to it. |

The Swiss are much feared by the French, owing to their
close proximity, and the facility with which they can make
sudden and unexpected attacks, against which, owing to their
rapidity, it is impossible to provide in time. These incursions
of the Swiss, however, are mere predatory raids; for as they
have neither artillery nor horses, and as the strong places
which the French possess near the frontier are well supplied
with munitions, the Swiss are not able to make much progress.
And then the nature of the Swiss is better suited to battles in
the open field than to sieges or to the defence of places. But
the French of the frontier do not like to come to an open hand-
to-hand fight with the Swiss, for they have no good infantry
that can withstand the Swiss, and the men-at-arms without
infantry do not amount to much. The country, moreover, is so
formed that lances and other mounted men can but illy manceu-
vre there, whilst the Swiss go most unwillingly far from their
frontiers to reach level ground; for they would leave behind
them strong places well supplied with everything, as stated
above. They would also be afraid to expose themselves thus to
be short of provisions, and to be unable to return to their homes,
after having penetrated into the open country.

There is nothing to be feared from the side towards Italy ;
for the Apennine Mountains and the fortresses at their base
would arrest any one who wished to attack the kingdom of
France. And the country behind them is so unproductive that
they would starve; or they would have to leave these strong-
holds behind them, which would be great folly; or they would
have to go to work and take these fortresses. However, France
has nothing to fear from the side of Italy, for the reasons above
stated, and because there is not in all Italy a prince capable of
assaulting France, and Italy herself is not united, as she was
in the time of the Romans.

AFFAIRS OF FRANCE. 411

On the south side, France is sufficiently protected by the
Mediterranean, in the ports of which there are always vessels
enough, belonging to the king of France or other proprietors,
to be able to defend that part of the kingdom from any unex-
pected attack. Against a premeditated attack there is always
time to prepare, for whoever contemplates it needs time to
make the necessary preparations and arrangements, and this
will quickly become known to everybody. And all these prov-
inces are generally provided with a garrison of men-at-arms,
for the greater security.

Little is spent in guarding the country, for the people are
most obedient, so that fortresses are not needed for the preser-
vation of quiet within the realm; and on the frontiers, where
there would otherwise be some occasion for such expenditure,
the garrisons of men-at-arms make such expense unnecessary.
For against a great invasion there is always time to prepare,
as the invader himself would need time to gather his forces
for such an attempt.

The French people are submissive and most obedient, and
hold their king in great veneration. They live at a very small
expense, owing to the great abundance of the products of the
soil; and every one has a small property to himself. They
dress coarsely, in cheap cloth, and neither the men nor the
women use silk in any way, for it would at once be noted by
the gentlemen.

According to the last computation there are thirty-six bishop-
rics in France, and eighteen archbishoprics. Of parishes there
are one million * seven hundred, including seven hundred and
forty abbeys. Of the priories there is no account.

I have not been able to ascertain the ordinary or extraordi-
nary revenues of the Crown; I have asked a great many per-
sons, and they have all replied that the revenue depended en-
tirely on the will of the king. Some one, however, has told
me that a portion of the ordinary revenue, that is to say, that
part which is specially called “the king’s money,” and which is
derived from the gabel on bread, wine, meat, etc., yields about
1,700,000 scudi. The extraordinary revenue is derived from
taxes, and these are fixed high or low according to the king’s
will. And if these revenues are insufficient, then loans are
resorted to, which are, however, rarely repaid. The royal let-

* This must be an error, and probably meant one hundred thousand.

412 AN. ACCOUNT OF THE

ters by which these loans are called for, are drawn up in the
following form: “The king, our master, recommends himself
“to you, and, having need of money, he begs you will lend him
“the sum specified in this letter.” The amount is then paid
into the hands of the receiver of the place, there being one in
every place, who receives all revenues, whether resulting from
the gabels, taxes, or loans. The domains of the Crown have
no other regulations for the payment of dues except the will of
the king, as said above.

The authority of the barons over their vassals is complete.
Their revenues consist of bread, wine, and meat, the same as
those stated above, and so much for every hearth per year;
this, however, does not exceed six or eight sous per hearth for
every three months. The barons cannot raise taxes nor loans
without the king’s consent, which he rarely grants.

The Crown exacts from the barons nothing but the impost
upon salt, and never taxes them except on the occasion of some
extraordinary necessity.

The regulations established by the king with regard to ex-
traordinary expenses, for war as well as for other purposes, are
that he commands the treasurers to pay the soldiers, and accord-
ingly they pay the amount into the hands of those who review
the troops. The pensioners and the gentlemen go to the Gen-
erals of Finance, and make them give them a discharge; that
is, an order for their payment from month to month; and every
three months they go to the receiver of the province where
they reside, and are promptly paid.

The gentlemen of the king number two hundred; their pay
is twenty scudi per month, and they are paid wt supra, and
each hundred have a chief; these used to be Messire Guyon
d’Amboise, the Seigneur de Ravel, and the Vidame Louis
de Brézé.

The number of pensioners is not known; some of them are
paid little, others much, just as it may please the king. They
live in the hope of advancement, but there is nothing fixed as
regards this.

The duty of the Generals of Finance is to levy so much per
hearth, and so much for taxes with the consent of the King;
and to see that the expenses, ordinary as well as extraordi-
nary, are paid at the proper time, that is, the discharges, as
explained above.

AFFAIRS OF FRANCE. 413

The treasurers keep the money, and pay it out according to
the orders and discharges of the Generals of Finance.

The power of the Grand Chancellor is absolute ; he can grant
pardons, and can condemn at his pleasure “etiam in capitali-
bus sine consensu regis.” He can relieve litigants from the
charge of contumacy ; but he can grant pardons only with the
consent of the king, for all pardons are granted by royal letters
sealed with the great royal seal, and he is charged with the
keeping of this great seal. His salary is ten thousand francs
per year, and an allowance of eleven thousand frances for his
table. By table is understood giving dinner and supper to as
many members of the council as follow the Grand Chancellor,
that is, to the advocates and gentlemen that are attached to
him, whenever it pleases them to eat with him, which privilege
they use very often.

The pension which the king of France paid to the king of
England was fifty thousand francs per year; its object was
the repayment of certain outlays made by the father of the
present king of England in the duchy of Brittany. But this
pension is now terminated, and is paid no more.

At present there is in France but one Grand Seneschal; but
when there are several seneschals, —I do not mean grand, as
there is only one, — then their jurisdiction extends over the or-
dinary and extraordinary men-at-arms, who are obliged to obey
this Grand Seneschal because of the dignity of his office.

The number of governors of provinces depends upon the will
of the king, who pays them what he pleases; they are named
by him for life or for a year, according to his pleasure. The
other governors, and even lieutenants of the small places, are
all appointed by the king; and in fact all the offices of the
realm are bestowed or sold by the king, and by no one else.

Every year a general statement of expenses is prepared,
sometimes in August, sometimes in October or in January,
according to the pleasure of the king. The Generals of Finance
present an account of the ordinary revenues and expenses of
the year, and then a balance is established between the receipts
and the expenses, and the amount of the pensions and the
number of the pensioners are increased or diminished accord-
ing to the king’s orders.

The amount of distributions amongst the gentlemen and
pensioners is unlimited; they do not require the approval

414 AN ACCOUNT OF THE

of the Chamber of Accounts; the king’s authority is all-suffi-
cient.

The functions of the Chamber of Accounts consist in revising
the accounts of all who have anything to do with the adminis-
tration of the moneys of the Crown, such as the Generals of
Finance, the treasurers, and the receivers.

The University of Paris is paid from the revenues of the
endowments of the colleges, but very poorly.

There are five Parliaments, namely, Paris, Rouen, Toulouse,
Bordeaux, and the Dauphiné, and there is no appeal from any
of them.

The best Universities are the following four: Paris, Orleans,
Bourges, and Poitiers; after these come Tours and Angiers,
but these are not worth much.

Garrisons are placed wherever the king wills it, and as
many men as seems good to him, both of artillery and of
infantry. Nevertheless, all the places have a few pieces of
artillery in store. And within the last two years they have
established them in a great many places in the kingdom, at
the cost of the places where such depots have been formed,
by increasing the taxes one penny per head of cattle or per
measure of grain. Ordinarily, when the kingdom is at peace,
there are only four places that are garrisoned; these are
Guienne, Picardy, Burgundy, and Provence. These garrisons
change places, and are increased in numbers according to the
apprehensions of danger in either one or the other province.

I have made great efforts to find out what amount of money
is assigned to the king for the expenses of his household and
for his person, and find that he has all he asks for.

The archers are four hundred in number, and they are
charged with the guard of the king’s person. Amongst them
are one hundred Scotchmen; each man receives three hundred
franes per year, and a doublet of the king’s livery. The king’s
body-guard is composed of twenty-four men, who never leave
his side ; they have each four hundred franes per year; their
captains are Monseigneur d’Aubigny, Crussol, and the Captain
Gabriel.

The foot guard is composed of Germans, one hundred of
which are paid twelve francs per month; they used to be three
hundred, with ten francs per month pay; and two suits of
clothing, one for winter and one for summer, that is to say, a

AFFAIRS OF FRANCE. 415

doublet and hose of the king’s livery. The one hundred foot-
guards used to have the doublet of silk in the time of King
Charles VIII.

The fourriers are charged with providing lodgings for the
court; they are thirty-two in number, and receive three hundred
frances per year and a doublet of the king’s livery. In provid-
ing the lodgings they divide themselves into four sections, and
each section has a quartermaster, who receives six hundred
francs per year. The first section, commanded by a quarter-
master, or in his absence by a lieutenant, remains in the place
which the court leaves, so as to settle with the proprietors who
have furnished the quarters; the second division accompanies
the king; the third section proceeds to the place where the
king is to arrive on the first day ; and the fourth goes to where
the king is to arrive on the following day. They proceed with
such remarkable order that every one on his arrival finds his
lodgings fully prepared, even to a woman of pleasure.

The Provost of the Palace is an officer that always follows
the king’s person, and his office is one of absolute authority,
and wherever the court goes, his tribunal is the first, and
even the inhabitants of the place may be condemned by him,
the same as by the king’s lieutenant. Those who are scized
by him for any criminal cause cannot appeal to the Parlia-
ments. His pay is ordinarily six thousand frances per year.
He has two civil justices under him, who are paid by the king
six hundred francs per year each. He has also a lieutenant
for criminal cases, who commands thirty archers, and these
are paid the same as the archers mentioned above. He de-
cides in civil and in criminal matters, and when the complain-
ant has been confronted with the accused in the presence of
the provost, it suffices for him to decide the case.

The king has eight house stewards ; but they are not all paid
equally, for some have one thousand francs per year, and
others less, according to the king’s pleasure. The Grand
Master of the household, who has succeeded Monscigneur de
Chaumont, is the Marquis de Palisse, whose father formerly
held the same charge. His pay is eleven thousand francs per
year ; and his authority does not extend beyond commanding
the other house stewards.

The Admiral of France has command of all the naval forces
and all the harbors of the kingdom; he can dispose according

416 AN ACCOUNT OF THE

to his pleasure of all the vessels of the fleet. The present
Admiral is Monseigneur Pregent de Bedoux, and his salary is
ten thousand franes per year.

The order of knighthood has no fixed number; the knights
are as many as the king may choose to name. On their admis-
sion to the order they swear to defend the Crown and never to
bear arms against it. They cannot be deprived of their title
during their lifetime. Their pay is at most four thousand
francs per year, and some have less, for they have not all
the same grade.

The office of the chamberlains is to entertain the king, to
precede him to his chamber, and to assist in advising him; in
truth, they enjoy the greatest consideration throughout the
country. They receive large pensions, — six, eight, ten, and
eleven thousand francs per year; but some receive nothing,
for the king often confers this title upon persons whom he
wishes to honor for their services, and even upon foreigners.
They have, however, the privilege of being exempt from pay-
ing any gabels in any part of the kingdom, and whilst at court
they dine at the chamberlains’ table, which is the first after
that of the king.

The Grand Equerry always remains near the king; his duty
is to supervise the other twelve equerries of the king, the same
as the Grand Master of the household, the Grand Seneschal,
and the Grand Chamberlain over their subordinates. He has
charge of the king’s horses, and aids him in mounting and dis-
mounting. He has charge also of the king’s equipages, and
carries the king’s sword before him.

The councillors of state have a pension of from six to eight
thousand francs, as may please the king. They are now the
Bishop of Paris, the Bishop of Beauvais, the Bailli of Amiens
Monseigneur de Bussy, and the Grand Chancellor. But in real-
ity Robertet and the Bishop of Paris govern everything.

Since the death of the Cardinal d’Amboise of Rouen, no one
keeps open table. And as the Grand Chancellor has not been
replaced, the Bishop of Paris performs the duties of that office.

The reason why the king of France claims the duchy of
Milan is that his grandfather had married a daughter of the
Duke of Milan who died without male heirs. The Duke Gio-
vanni Galeazzo had two daughters, and I know not how many
sons. One of the daughters was Madonna Valentina, who

AFFAIRS OF FRANCE. 417

married the Duke Louis of Orleans, grandfather of the pres-
ent King Louis XII., descendant of the race of Pepin. When
the Duke Giovanni Galeazzo died, he was succeeded by his
son Duke Filippo, who died without any legitimate children,
leaving only an illegitimate daughter. Thereupon, according
to report, the state of Milan was illegally usurped by the
Sforzas; for it was said that that state should have gone to
the successor and heir of Madonna Valentina. And in fact
the day when the Duke of Orleans allied himself with the
house of Milan, he joined to his arms of three fleur-de-lis a
snake, which may be seen to this day.

Every parish in France keeps one man, who is well paid, and
is called the Franc-archer, and who is obliged to keep a good
horse, and be fully provided with arms and armor, whenever
the king requires him to follow him to the scene of war outside
of the kingdom, or for any other cause. These Franc-archers
are obliged to go into whatever province in the realm is at-
tacked or threatened. According to the number of parishes,
there must be 1,700,000 of these Franc-archers.*

The fourriers and quartermasters are obliged by their office
to furnish every one that follows the court with lodgings ;
those who are attached to the court are ordinarily lodged
with the well-to-do people of the place. And to prevent any
occasion for complaint, either by the owner of the house or
the lodger, a tariff of prices has been established, which serves
for all alike, and which fixes the price of a chamber at one sou
per day ; the chamber must be supplied with a bed and a couch,
and these must be changed once a week. Besides this, every
man pays two farthings per day for the linen; that is to say,
table-cloth, towels, napkins, and for vinegar and other condi-
ments. The linen must be changed at least twice per week ;
but as the people have plenty of linen, they change it more or
less frequently, as may be asked by the lodger. The chambers
must also be kept clean, and the beds properly made.

The price for stabling each horse is also two sous per day,
and the lodger is not bound to pay anything more, except that
he must have the manure removed every day. There are a
good many who pay less, either because of the good nature of

* This is undoubtedly an error, the same as in one of the preceding pages
when speaking of the number of parishes ; it means probably 100,000, instead of
1,000,000.

VOL. IV. 27

418 ACCOUNT OF THE AFFAIRS OF FRANCE.

the proprietor, or the good disposition of the lodger; but the
above is the regular tariff for the court.

The reasons for the recent pretensions of the English upon
France are the following. Charles VI. married his legitimate
daughter Catharine to the legitimate son of the king of Eng-
land, Henry VI. No mention was made in the contract of
Charles VII., who afterwards became king of France. Besides
the dowry of Catharine, Charles VI. stipulated that his son-in-
law, Henry VI., husband of Catharine, should become heir to
the crown of France; and that in case the said Henry VI.
should die before his father-in-law, Charles VI., but leave le-
gitimate or natural male children, then these said children of
Henry VI. should be the heirs and successors of Charles VI.
These dispositions, however, were declared null and contrary
to the fundamental law of the kingdom, because of the passing
over of Charles VII. by his father. The English, on the other
hand, claim that Charles VII. was the fruit of adultery.

In England there are two archbishoprics, 22 bishoprics, and
52,000 parishes.

OF THE NATURE OF THE FRENCH.

Tuery think so much of the present advantage or disadvan-
tage, that they remember but slightly past injuries or benefits,
and take little heed of the future, good or evil.

They are cavillers rather than prudent; and care little what
is said or written of them. They are more eager for money
than for blood, and are liberal only in fine specches.

If a gentleman disobeys the king in a matter concerning a
third person, there is nothing for him to do but to obey any-
how, if it still be in time; and if it is not in time, then he will
have to stay away from the court for four months. This has
cost us Pisa twice; once when Entraghes held the citadel, and
the second time when the French laid siege to the town.

Whoever wishes to carry a point at court must have plenty
of money, great activity, and good fortune.

If they are asked to do a favor, their first thought is, not
whether they can render the favor, but what advantage they
can derive from it for themselves.

The first agreements you make with them are always the
best.

If they cannot be useful to you, they make you fine promises ;
but if they can serve you, they do it with difficulty or never.

In adversity they are abject, and in prosperity they are in-
solent.

They weave their bad warp well and forcibly.

He who wins victory is for the time most in favor with the
king ; but he who loses is rarely so. And therefore any one
who is about to engage in any undertaking should consider
first whether he is likely to succeed or not, and whether it is
likely to please the king or not. This point, being well known
to the Duke Valentino, enabled him to march with his army
upon Florence.

420 Ono TUE ONATORE Of Lit FRENCH.

In many instances they are not very particular about their
honor, being in this respect very different from the Italian
gentlemen; and therefore they attached but little importance
to their having sent to Sienna to claim Montepulciano without
any attention being paid to their demand. :

They are fickle and light-minded, and have faith only in
success. They are enemies of the language of the Romans,
and of their fame.

Of the Italians none have a good time at court except those
who have nothing more to lose, and nothing to hope for.

CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS

BY NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI

TO RAFFAELLO GIROLAMI, ON HIS DEPARTURE, 23 OCTOBER,
1522, AS AMBASSADOR TO THE EMPEROR CHARLES V., IN
SPAIN.

HonorABLE RAFFAELLO, — Embassies are amongst those func-
tions in a republic that confer most honor upon a citizen; and
any one incapable of filling such an office cannot be regarded
as competent to take part in the government of the state. You
are about to go as ambassador to Spain, a country not known
to you, and materially differing in manners and customs from
those of Italy; and it is moreover the first time that you are
charged with such a commission. Thus, if you give good proof
of yourself, as everybody hopes and believes, you will derive
great honor from it, which will be the greater in proportion
to the difficulties which you have to encounter. And as I have
some experience in affairs of this kind, I will tell you what I
know about them, not from presumption, but simply out of the
love I bear to you.

Every honest man knows how to acquit himself faithfully of
a mission that has been confided to him; the difficulty is to do
it adequately. Now he executes it adequately who knows well
the character of the sovereign to whom he is accredited, and
that of those who govern him, and who knows best how to
adapt himself to whatever may open and facilitate the way
for a favorable reception. For difficult as every enterprise is,
yet gaining the ear of the sovereign renders it easy. Above
all things an ambassador must endeavor to acquire great con-
sideration, which is obtained by acting on every occasion like
a good and just man; to have the reputation of being generous
and sincere, and to avoid that of being mean and dissembling,

and not to be regarded as a man who believes one thing and
Says another.

422, CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS

This sincerity and this frankness are of great importance;
for I know some men who, from being cunning and dissem-
bling, have so entirely lost the confidence of the prince, that
they have never more been able to negotiate with him. And
yet if it be sometimes necessary to conceal facts with words,
then it should be done in such manner that it shall not appear ;
or should it be observed, then a defence should be promptly
ready. Alessandro Nasi was greatly esteemed in France from
having the reputation of being sincere; whilst some others,
from being regarded as the contrary, were held in great con-
tempt. I believe that you will the more easily observe this
line of conduct, as it seems to me that your very nature com-
mands it.

An ambassador will also derive great honor from the infor-
mation which he communicates to his government; and this
embraces three kinds, relating either to matters in course of
negotiation, or to matters that are concluded and done, or
respecting matters yet to be done; and to conjecture rightly
the issue which they are likely to have. Two of these are dif-
ficult, but one is most easy. For to know things after they
are done is generally speaking most easy, unless it should hap-
pen to be that an alliance is being formed between two princes
to the detriment of a third party, and that it should be im-
portant to keep it secret until the time for divulging it shall
have come; as happened with regard to the league between
France, the Pope, the Emperor, and Spain, concluded at Cam-
bray, against the Venetians, which resulted in the destruction
of the Venetian republic.

It is very difficult to penetrate the secret of such conclusions,
and it is therefore necessary to depend upon one’s judgment
and conjectures. But to find out all the intrigues, and to con-
jecture the issue correctly, that is indeed difficult, for you have
nothing to depend upon except surmises aided by your own
judgment. But as the courts are generally filled with busy-
bodies, who are always on the watch to find out what is going
on around them, it is very desirable to be on friendly terms
with them all, so as to be able to learn something from each
one of them. Their good will is readily won by entertaining
them with banquets and gaming. I have seen very grave gen-
tlemen who allow gambling in their houses, for the sole purpose
of having that class of men coming to see them, so as to be able

TO RAFFAELLO GIROLAMI. 423

to converse with them; for what one does not know another
does know, and very often it happens that amongst them all
the whole affair is known. But he who wants another to tell
him all he knows must in return tell the other some things
that he knows, for the best means of obtaining information
from others is to communicate some information to them.
And therefore if a republic desires that her ambassador shall
be honored, they cannot do a better thing than to keep him
amply supplied with information ; for the men who know that
they can draw information from him will hasten to tell him
all they know. I suggest to you, therefore, that you remind
the Hight, the Archbishop, and the Secretaries to keep you fully
advised of all that occurs in Italy, even the smallest item; and
if anything of interest happens at Bologna, Sienna, or Perugia,
let them inform you of it, and above all let them keep you ad-
vised of the affairs of the Pope, of Rome, of Lombardy, and of
the kingdom of Naples. And although all these matters have
nothing to do with your business, yet it is necessary and useful
for you to know them, for the reasons which | have given you
above. It is in this way that you have to find out the intrigues
that are carried on around you; and as amongst the things
you will thus learn some are true and some false, although
probable, you must weigh them carefully with your judgment,
and take cognizance of those that seem to you the nearest the
truth, and not notice the others.

When you thoroughly understand and have examined these
matters, you will be able to appreciate their aim and object,
and communicate your judgment to your government. But to
prevent such judgment on your part from seeming presump-
tuous, it is well in your despatches, after discussing the in-
trigues that are being carried on and the men who are engaged
in them, to employ phrases something like this: “ Considering
“now all I have written, the shrewd men here judge that it
“will produce such or such an effect.”

This plan carefully followed has, in my day, done great
honor to many ambassadors, whilst the contrary course has
brought shame and blame upon them. I have known others,
again, who for the purpose of filling their despatches with more
information make a daily record of all they hear, and in the
course of eight or ten days prepare a despatch from all these
notes, taking from the mass of news they have thus gathered

424 CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS

that which seems to them most interesting and likely to be
true.

I have also known wise men, who had experience in embas-
sies, adopt the plan of placing before the eyes of their govern-
ment, at least once in every two months, a complete report of
the state and condition of the republic or kingdom to which
they are accredited as ambassadors. Such information, when
exact, does great honor to him who sends it, and is of greatest
advantage to those who receive it; for it is much easier to
come to a decision when fully informed upon these points, than
when ignorant of them. And to enable you more precisely to
understand this part of your duty, 1 will more fully explain it.

You arrive in Spain, you present and explain your commis-
sion and office; and then write home at once and give notice
of your arrival at your post, and state what you have communi-
cated to the Emperor, and what reply he has made; leaving it
for another letter to give a particular account of the affairs of
the kingdom, of the character of the sovereign, and of all that a
few days’ stay in the country may have enabled you to report.
After that, you must note with the utmost care and industry
all that concerns the Emperor and the kingdom of Spain, and
you will make a full report upon it. And to come to details, I
would say that you must closely observe the character of the
man: whether he governs himself, or allows himself to be goy-
erned; whether he is avaricious or liberal; whether he loves
war or peace ; whether he has a passion for glory or for any-
thing else; whether he is beloved by his people; whether he
prefers to reside in Spain or in Flanders; what kind of men he
has about him as counsellors; whether their thoughts are
turned to new enterprises, or whether they are disposed to en-
joy their present good fortune, and what authority they have
with him; whether he changes them often, or keeps them long ;
whether the king of France has any friends amongst them,
and whether they are likely to be corrupted. And then it will
also be well to think of the lords and barons who are most
around him; find out what power they have, and how far they
are satisfied with him; and in case of their being malcontent,
how they could injure him; and whether it be possible, for
France to corrupt any of them. You must also find out about
his brother, how he treats him, whether he is beloved by him,
and whether he is content, and whether he could cause trouble

\
’

TO RAFFAELLO GIROLAMI. 425

within the kingdom, or in his other states. You must also
learn the character of the people, and whether the league that
took up arms is altogether quieted, or whether there is any
apprehension of their rising up again, and whether France
could rekindle that fire.

You must endeavor to penetrate the Emperor’s projects:
what his views are as to Italian affairs; whether he aspires to
the possession of Lombardy, or whether he intends to leave that
state for the Sforzas to enjoy ; and whether he desires to come
to Rome, and when; what his intentions are with regard to
the Church; what confidence he has in the Pope, and whether
he is satisfied with him; and, in the event of his coming into
Italy, what good or what ill the Florentines may have to hope
or fear.

‘ All these points carefully considered and skilfully reported
to the government will do you great honor. And not only
is it necessary to write it once, but it is well every two or three
months to refresh the remembrance of them, adding thereto an
account of any new events that may have taken place; but with
such skill that it may seem prompted by wisdom and necessity,
and not by presumption.

GENERAL

GENERAL INDEX.

A.

A BAtI family, I. 64; Veri, I. 83.

- A’Becket, Thomas, I. 34.
Abruzzi, III. 308.
Absolute monarchy, power, II. 14.
Acciaiuoli family : Archbishop Agnolo,

I. 107, 205-206, 272, 308, 334-335, *

842-350 ; Alamanno, I. 144; Donato,
I. 159-161, 386; Michele, I. 161;
Raffaelle, I. 334 ; Roberto, 3d and 4th
French Missions, IV. 220, 275-276,
284 ff.

Accidents, II. 180, 181.

Acconcio, Lorenzo, Valentino Mission,
ITI. 242 ff.

Achaians, II. 10, 74.

Achilles, II. 50.

Achmet Pacha, I. 395.

Acquapendente, 8d Sienna Mission, IV.
76.

Acquasparta, I. 79, 81.

Acri, I. 270.

Adda river, I. 270, 281, 297-298, 403.

Addresses: citizens, I. 124-128; War
party, L 173; Guicciardini, I. 135;
Gauthier, I. 102; Venetians, I. 240.

Adige river, I. 246-247; German Mis-
sion, IV. 106 ff.; Verona, IV. 216-
217.

Adimari family, I. 64, 74, 108-110, 157,
162, 164.

Admonished, the, I. 122, 129, 180, 157,
162.

Adolf of Saxony, I. 41.

Adorni party, Genoa, I. 221, 385 ff, 408.

Adrian V., I. 89.

Adriatic sea, I. 17, 45; ITI. 381.

Adula, I. 270.

Adulation, not M.’s intent, I. 4.

Adversity, II. 453.

/Emilius, Paulus, II. 371, 390.

/Eneas, II. 96, 98, 248.

/Etolians, Greece, II. 9, 10, 74, 336.

Affrico river, I. 81, 86.

Africa, I. 13-19, 24; II. 67, 78, 144,
256, 315, 354, 358.

Agapites, pope, I. 28.

Agathocles, II. 29-31, 256-257, 546.

Agesilaus, IT. 123, 462.

Agis, II. 121, 122.

Agli, the, I. 64.

Agobbio, I. 88, 89; Valentino Mission,
III. 162; 2d Roman Mission, IV.
38, ff.

Agolanti family, I. 64.

Agrarian Law, II. 175, 176.

Agriculture, M.’s maxims, II. 448-450.

Agrippa, II. 369.

Aguto, Giovanni (John Sharpe), I. 49,
150, 155; II. 42, 82, 853.

Aims and means, IT. 82, 83.

Aistolfo, I. 24, 25.

Aix, Mgr. d’, 2d Roman Mission, IV.
14 ff.

Ale, military division, II. 265.

Alamanni, count, I. 194.

Alans, the, I. 18, 14.

Alaric, I. 13.

Alba, IT. 119, 236.

Albanese, Valentino Mission, III. 258.

Albano, Monte, I. 35; II. 182.

Alberghettino, prison, I. 201.

Alberic of Tuscany, I. 27.

Alberigo, count, I. 172.

Albert of Bavaria, IV. 134.

430

Albert of Bohemia, I. 89.

Alberti family, I. 97, 181-168, 218.

Albizzi family, I. 120-263 passim; II.
369; III. 27-35, 369.

Albo family, IV. 197.

Alboin, Longobard king, I. 21, 22.

Albret, Mgr. d’, Valentino’s troops, ITI.
192 ff.

Alby, Mgr. d’, at French Court, ITI. 68 ;
conference, III. 47, 97, 100, 107.

Alcibiades, II. 370.

Alessandria, I 34, 58; II. 86.

Alexander the Great, II. 14, 16, 50, 54,
97, 148, 246, 251-253, 303-304, 313,
335, 365.

Alexander, emperor, II. 65-64.

Alexander of Epirus, II. 318.

Alexander IL, I. 29.

Alexander IIL., I. 38, 35.

Alexander VI., I. xix, 47; II. 12, 13,
28, 26, 30, 88-41, 58, 395; IIT. 123-
182, 187, 141 ff., 201-207, 262-264,
359, 885, 469.

Alexandria, Egypt, II. 96-98.

Alexandria, Lombardy, I. 34, 53 ; IT. 86.

Alexanemes, plot, II. 356, 837, 341.

Alfonsina, Medici, I. 417.

Alfonso of Aragon, Sicily, and Naples,
and son, I. 54, 219-222, 273, 281-290,
299, 300, 311-315, 346; II. 256.

Alfonso of Calabria, I. 884, 395, 401.

Alfonso of Ferrara, II. 341.

Alidosi of Imola, I. 47, 55, 171, 172.

Allegri, Mgr. d’, ITI. 133, 186, 290-292 ;
2d Roman Mission, IV. 20 ff. ; Julius
Th (i i.

Allia, battle, II. 307-309, 405, 429.

Alliances: Genoa, Venice, Florence,
1436, I. 222; why broken, II. 220;
purchased, II. 309-314; France,
England, Germany, IV. 258 ff.

All Saints, I. 97, 98; III. 124, 126; IV.
294.

All Souls, III. 126.

Allumiera, 3d Pisan Commission, IV.
168.

Almachilde, I. 22.

Alms-giving, II. 453-454.

Alps: fortresses, I. 17; French army,
Ill. 48; Maximilian I., IV. 195; 38d
French Mission, IV. 268; League
army, IV. 353 ff.; 2d Guicciardini
Mission, IV. 364 ff.

Altemura, prince of, I. 411.

GENERAL INDEX.

Altoviti family, I. 101, 347.

Altospacio, I. 98.

Alviano, Bartolommeo, I. xx ; II. 206;
III. 288, 290-292, 324, 341, 480, 482,
484; Sienna Mission, III. 457-481.

Ambassadors, M.’s opinions, IV. 421-
425.

Amboise, Cardinal Georges d’, prime
minister of Louis XII., II. 18, 28;
aids Florence against Pisa, III. 28;
French Mission, II. 44-134 passim ;
Valentino Mission, III. 149 ff.;
Roman Mission and cardinalate,
III. 284-312 passim; Roman Court,
III. 823-872 ; legate to France, III.
373-892 ; interviews with Florentine
embassy, III. 897-444; German Mis-
sion, IV. 88; death, IV. 223; por-
trait, EV. 271.

Amalasiunta, princess, I. 19.

Amelia, secretary of Valentino, III.
148 ff.

Amida, siege, IT. 301.

Amidei family, I. 62-64.

Amiens, Mgr. d’, 8d French Mission,
IV. 280.

Amieri family, I. 64.

Anagni, I. 41.

Anathema against Florence, I. 880.

Ancestry, II. 407, 452.

Ancients, Florentine officials, I. 69;
Pisan, III. 248.

Ancients, their love of freedom, III.
231-232.

Ancona, Rinaldo there, I. 263; Valen-
tino Mission, III. 228; Venetian
Mission, 1V. 326 ff.

Ancus and sons, II. 147, 326, 327.

Andaric, I. 15.

Andrea, Giovan, aqueduct, I. 862-365.

Andreas of Hungary, I. 48.

Angelo, Michael, III. 439.

Anger, III. 452.

Anghiara, bridge and battle, I. 260-275 ;
Valentino Mission, III. 166 ff; siege
of Pisa, IV. 174.

Anghiari, Baldaccio, I. 275-276.

Angioli, I. 826.

Angles, the, I. 14.

Anjou, Charles of, I.67; Louis of, I. 154.

Annalena, wife of Baldaccio, I. 276.

“ Annals of Italy,” IV. 60.

Anne of Austria, IV. 60.

Anne of Brittany, II. 23; III. 141.

GENERAL INDEX.

Annius, pretor, II. 261, 262.

Anselmi, Giovanni, I. 149.

Anteus, fable, II. 256.

Antimaco, Maximilian’s factotum, IV.
197 ff.

Antiochus, II. 10, 11, 74, 229, 255, 258,
400.

Antipopes, I. 49-53, 96.

Antiquity, respect, II. 93-94.

Antium, II. 175, 285.

Antoninus, II. 462.

Antonio, Marc, 8d French Mission, IV.
224 ff.

Antony, Mark, II. 124, 203, 276.

Antwerp, I. 82.

Apennines, IV. 270 ff., 410.

Apollo, II. 209, 824, 886, 396.

Apollonides, speech, II. 268.

Apostolic Chamber, revenues, I. 51.

Appearances and judgment, II. 59.

Appiano, Jacopo, mission, I. xvii, xix;
conspiracy, II. 333; Marradi, II.
315° Pisa, LV, 1614.

Appii, characteristics, II. 427.

Appius Claudius, II. 172, 182.

Aqueduct, I. 362-365.

Aquila, I. 54, 411.

Aquileia, sieges, I. 15, 18, 45; II. 67.

Arabia, occupied by Saracens, I. 24.

Aragon, rule in Italy, I. 31, 40, 300,
308.

Arato, IT. 456.

Aratus of Sicyon, II. 316, 828.

Arbia river, I. 66.

Arcadius, I. 13, 17.

Archers, III. 24; IV. 414-415.
CROSSBOWMEN. )

Archery, illustration, II. 18.

Archipelago, name, I. 18.

“ Archives, Monte Comune,” IV. 24.

“ Archivi delle Riformazione,” III. 388.

Arco, German truce, IV. 149; Man-
tuan Mission, IV. 210.

_ Ardea, IT. 307-809, 390-391.

Ardinghi family, I. 64.

Ardingo, courier, III. 17, 20, 22, 25;
financial documents, IV. 200.

Aretines, I. 65, 71, 179.

Aretino, depredations there, I. 390.

Arezzo: M. there, I. xviii, xxv; fights,
I. 7, 9, 87, 105, 112, 150, 155, 165, 262,
263; II. 99, 152, 179, 290, 291, 349,
398; III. 3, 453; IV. 229; Valen-
tino Mission, III. 142; IV. 377.

(See

431

Argenta, marquis, I. 402.

Argentino, life, IV. 61.

Arians, I. 18.

Ariosto, II. 200.

Arismino, Genoa, I. 222.

Aristides, II. 220, 221.

Aristitimus, II. 336.

Arles, Mgr. d’, ambassador, III. 94,
149 ff.

Armaments compared, IT. 257, 258.

Armenia, geography, II. 418.

Armies: supplies, I. 286; Sforza, I.
290; easily defeated, I. 889; two
kinds, II. 40; native, II. 42 ff.; Ro-
man emperors, II. 63, ff. ; disposition,
II. 188, 189 ; decemvirs, II. 189; reor-
ganization, II. 257; Roman plan, II.
265, 266; compelled to fight, II. 861
-364; leaders, II. 364-868; three
kinds, modern Italian, II. 412-4138;
before Pisa, III. 48; banners for Pi-
san war, IV.7,9; French and Swiss,
IV. 109; Verona, IV. 207 ff. ; French
against Rome, IV. 246; the League,
IV. 339 ff; French, IV. 414-418.

Armor, I. 262.

Armorial bearings, I. 120.

Arms forbidden, I. 160.

Arno river, I. 60, 96, 115, 116, 163,
256; III. 45.

Arnolfo, German emperor, I. 27.

Arnutes, story, II. 116, 117.

Arrigo, count, I. 284.

Arrigo the composer, IV. 86.

Arrigucci family, I. 64.

Artaud, works, IIT. 452.

Artillery, II. 268-273; IV. 107; Man-
tuan Mission, IV. 216.

Artisans of Florence, I. 157, 158.

Ascanio, cardinal, II. 28, 295, 303; III.
406, 468.

Ascesi, town, I. 216, 217.

Ascesi family, hacked to death, I. 111;
Valentino Mission, III. 268 ff.

Asdrubal, II. 253, 304, 372, 378.

Asia: crusaders, I. 32; French, I. 46;
Alexander, IT. 14, 16; Severus, II.
65; subjugated, II. 144.

Asola, I. 272.

Assassinations: Baldaccio, I. 275;
Medici, I. 370 ff.; danger, II. 331;
Borgias, III. 262-278; Valentino,
IV. 877-885.

Associates, II. 453.

432

Asti, governor of, III. 42.

Astorre, son of Galeotto, I. 416-420; of
Sienna, III. 72.

Astrology, II. 339.

Atalaric, grandson of Theodoric, I. 19.

Ataulf, Visigoth king, I. 13.

Athens: divisions, I. 8; under Sparta,
IL 17; dispersions, II. 19, 85; built,
II. 95; government, II. 102; com-
pared with Sparta, II. 112; grati-
tude, II. 157-158; generals, II. 207;
allusion, II. 218; example, II. 235-
238; Pericles, II. 253; Sicily, IT.
256; plot, II. 343; Pisistratus, II.
346.

Athens, duke of, I. 126; plot, II. 348-
349. (See GauruleEr.)

Athos, Mt., II. 97.

Attalus, IT. 306.

Attendoli family, I. 56, 260, 261, 271.

Attila, I. 15, 45.

Attilius, Regulus, II. 822.

Aubigny, Mgr. d’, III. 128, 128, 180,
137, 404, 434.

Auch Mer. cd’, LV; 223;

Audacity, II. 424-425.

Auditor, papal, IV. 21 ff.

Augsburg, German Mission, IV. 86 ff.;
diet, IV. 218.

Auguries, IT. 134, 404, 405.

Augustulus, son of Orestes, I. 16.

Auspices, IT. 135, 404, 405.

Austrasia, I. 25.

Austria: revolt, II. 280; German Mis-
sion, IV. 102 ff.

Auxiliary troops dangerous, II. 45-48,
283.

Aversa, Antonello, papal secrets, I. 412.

Avignon: papal residence, I. 49-51; 3d
French Mission, IV. 274 ff.

Avitus, emperor, I. 16.

Azzo, Visconti, I. 43.

B.

BACCHANALS, plot, IT. 480.
Baccino, courier, IV. 101, 146,
1473 TER 1G) fT.

Badia, built, I. 326.

Baglio, Odoardo, Valentino Mission,
III. 163 ff.

Baglioni family, including Carlo, Gio-
vanni, Malatesta, Paolo, I. xix, xx,

GENERAL [NDEX.

418; II. 27, 156-157, 366; IIT. 103,
285-309 passim, 328, 351-373 passim,
391, 445-459; 2d Roman Mission,
IV. 10 ff, 457.

Bagnesi family, I. 64.

Bagno, Valentino Mission, III. 254.

Bajazet, sultan, II. 147, 332.

Baldinatto, assassin, I. 419.

Baldovini, siege of Pisa, IV. 159 ff.

Baldraccani, secretary, III. 14, 16, 17.
22, 23.

Balia, rise and power in Florence, I.
153-134, 153-157, 202-206, 276, 3821-
524, 836, 342.

Baldwin the crusader, I. 82.

Bandini family : Bernardo, I. 873-377,
397, 419; Francesco, IV. 3878; Paolo,
lawsuit, III. 101; Pierantonio, liti-
gation, III. 188; Pisan war, III. 31;
cattle, IV. 159.

Banking-houses, IV. 197.

Banners, I. 71, 106, 115.

Barbadori family: Cosimo, I. 218;
Donato, I. 149; Niccolo, I. 198, 201,
207-210.

Barbarian inroads, I. 62, 214; II. 248-
249.

Barbarico, Venetian envoy, I. 272.

Barbarossa, Frederick, I. 33-42.

Barber, plot, IIT. 465, 468.

Bardi family, I. 64, 98-99, 105, 115-
118; Alessandra, I. 334; Andrea, I.
97 ; Piero, I. 97-98; Ridolfi, I. 114.

Bardolino, siege, I. 245.

Barga, siege, I. 226~227.

Bargamino, I. 416.

Bargello, Florentine office, L 88 ; Sienna,
IV. 3807.

Barile, money, IV. 309.

Barletta, I. 161; letter, III. 233.

Barnabas, St., church, I. 142.

Baroccio, I. 148.

Baroncelli, tribune, I. 48, 276.

Barons of France, IV. 404.

Bartoldo Orsini, I. 39.

Bartolini, letter, III. 30, 31, 35.

Barucci family, I 64.

Basle, IV. 888; council, IV. 290, 402.

Battifolle, count, I. 89.

Battista, Giovanni, siege of Pisa, IV.
158.

Battles, their conduct, II. 253, 267-268,
317, 353-368.

Bayeux, Mgr. de, III. 426.

GENERAL INDEX.

Beam, plot, III. 148.

Beasts, nature needful for princes, IT.
57-58.

Beatrice, sister of Henry II., I. 29.

Beatrice, widow of Cane, I. 53.

Beaumont, Mgr. de, II. 179; siege of
Pisa and results, III. 28-51, 42-99
passim, 114.

Becket, Thomas 4, I. 34.

Belanti, Julius, conspiracy, II. 880,
344.

Belfratelli, Zanobi, I. 218.

Belisarius, I, 19, 20.

Bella, Florentine reformer, I. 73-74,
87.

Bello, the peacemaker, ITI. 11, 12.

Bellovesus, II. 237, 247.

“ Belphegor,” M.’s novel, I. xxxvii.

Belvedere, III. 363.

Benchi, Florentine cavalier, I. 1238.

Benci family, I. 828.

Benedict, St., I. 20.

Benedict XI., I. 42.

Benedict XII., I. 47.

Benedict XIII., antipope, I. 51.

Bene, Niccolo, I. 144

Benevento, I. 23-26, 57-88, 46, 273.

Benevolence, IT. 453. .

Bentivogli family : fortunes, IT. 72, 278,
279; driven from Bologna, II. 295;
debt to Valentino, ITI. 223-231 pas-
sim; Annibale, I. 274-280 ; II. 61-62 ;
Valentino Mission, III. 153 ff, 180 ff. ;
Antonio, I. 171. 217; Ercole, I. 279;
siege of Pisa, II. 206; Giovanni, I.
279, 416-417 ; II. 62, 88-84; III. 48-
53, 62, 67, 79, 109, 111, 122-123, 401;
2d Roman Mission, IV. 10 ff., 377;
protonotario, III. 520 ff.; Santi, I.
801-302.

Berengarius family, I. 27.

Bergamesque territory, IV. 335 ff.

Bergamo, sympathy with German rule,
I. 86, 44, 46-47, 271, 310, 403, 417;
Bartolommeo of, IT. 43.

Bernabo, I. 44; II. 74.

Bernardi, siege of Pisa, IV. 159 ff.

Berzighella, burned, IV. 366.

Betica, Vandals, I. 13.

Bianca, Lady, I. 215.

Bianchi faction, I. 77-87, 126.

Bibbiena, captured, I. 257, 263; Ber-
ae of, 2d Roman Mission, IV.

VOL. IV.

28

433

Bicci, magistrate, I. 168, 169.

Bientina, I. 196.

Bierra, Valentino Mission, III. 252.

Biondo, historian, II. 398.

Bisdomini, Cerettieri, I. 111.

Bisignano, prince, I. 411.

Bleda, brother of Attila, I. 15.

Blois, letters, III. 106 ff; IV. 228-296
passim; postal mishap, III. 124;
kingly visits, III. 101, 187; peace,
TV 10:

Boccaccio, pestilence, I. 117.

Boezio, I. 17.

Bohemia: war, I.39; German Mission,
IV. 88 ff; soldiers, 3d French Mis-
sion, IV. 263.

Boldovinetti, Mariotto, defends Cosi-
mo, I. 205.

Bolignino, courier, III. 73.

Bologna, I. 18, 20, 23, 44, 49, 67;
starves Florence, I. 128; taken by
Virtu, I. 158; Canneto expelled, I.
217; capture, I. 288; disturbs Italy,
I. 278; family quarrels, I. 278-280 ;
sewers, I. 8301; Urbino, I. 402; Val-
entino: J). 23- Julius 1h fie
forts, II. 72; assault, IT. 85-86; cita-
del, II. 295; Louis XII., ITI. 133-
136; French intrigue, III. 182;
Valentino, III. 144; Valentino Mis-
sion, III. 245 ff.; governorship, II.
339; discussed in France, II. 416;
2d Roman Mission, IV. 10; ambas-
sadors, IV. 58; 3d French Mission,
IV. 225 ff.; 4th French Mission, IV.
282 ff.; Pisan council, IV. 296; 2d
Guicciardini Mission, IV. 349 ff. ;
letters, IV. 355 ff.; Valentino, IV.
377.

Bolsena, battle, I. 311.

Bona, duchess, I. 392, 403.

Bonatti, astrologer, I. 40.

Bondemo, battle, I. 405.

Boniface VIIL, I. 39, 41, 49.

Boniface IX., I. 51.

Bonifacius of Africa, I. 13.

Bonifazio, banking affairs, IV. 198 ff.

Booty, I. 261, 265; II. 244-245.

Bordoni, Gherardo, Florentine citizen,
I. 86.

Borghese, interviews with, IV. 306.

Borgia, Cesar, duke of Valentinois: Mis-
sion and M.’s books, I. xviii, xxix;
efforts of his father, and establish-

434

ment in Romagna; IT. 14-72 passim;
return to Rome, II. 178; conquests,
II. 295, 893; war in Romagna, III.
7; his father’s interest, III. 71; posi-
tion in Venice, III. 111; influence,
III. 125-128, 133, 185, 186; mission
of M., III. 141-280 passim ; troops,
III. 198-278 passim; Roman sojourn,
III. 281-860; Florentine grievance,
III. 380 ff.; prisoner, IV. 33 ff;
troubles, IV. 229, 854; murder of
his enemies, IV. 877-383; French
influence, IV. 419.

Borgia family, III. 205, 206.

Borgo, Criaco, II. 267.

Borgo, 2d Roman Mission, IV. 48.

Borromei family, II. 831; Carlo, I.
870; Giovanni, I. 370; Mantuan
Mission, IV. 198 ff.

Borso, marquis, I. 847-348.

Boscherino, letter, III. 453.

Boscoli, Antonio, I. 416.

Bostichi family, I 64.

Botti, pillage, I. 2638.

Botzen, letters, 1V. 88 ff., 99 ff; Ger-
man Mission, IV. 105 ff.; letter
from, IV. 115, 1386; diet, IV. 201;
Mantuan Mission, IV. 213 ff. ; Ger-
man Report, IV. 593 ff.

Bouillon family in crusades, I. 32.

Boundaries of Florence, I. 72.

Bourbon, Mer. de, III. 137.

Bourbon, constable, Guicciardini Mis-
sions, IV. 336 ff.

Brabant, I. 25.

Braccesca, mercenaries, I. 215; feud,
I. 294.

Bracceschi faction, II. 42, 48.

Braccio, I. 56, 173, 277, 860-861; II.
44,

Branca, captain of the people, Flor-
ence, I. 86.

Brandenburg: marquis, German Mis-
sion, IV. 107, 149, 199; prince, I.
28.

Brandino, Messer, IIT. 292.

Bravery of Florentine youth, I. 161-
163.

Bread, illustration, III. 208; despatch
concealed, IV. 150, 170; siege of
Pisa, IV. 159, 177.

Brescia: Lombardy League, I. 36, 44,
46, 47, 170, 180, 245, 248-253, 259,
270, 283, 292, 303, 310, 408; capture,

GENERAL INDEX.

II. 269; fortifications, II. 297-298;
revolt, II. 425; Mantuan Mission,
IV. 214 ff.

Bretons in Italy, I. 49, 121.

Bribery: essential in French Court,
III. 101; M.’s advice, III. 187;
for a prisoner, III. 263; papal, IV.
276.

Bridges, Florence, I. 96, 115.

Brigantine, IV, 328.

Britain, island, I. 14.

Britons, early, I. 14.

Brittany, province, I. 380; II. 8; IV.
405-418.

Brixen, IV. 116.

Bruccio, Carlo, I. 360-361.

Brulleschi, architect, I. 193, 194.

Bruneck, German Mission, IV. 119.

Brunelleschi family, I. 64, 108.

Brunswick, duke of, German Mission,
IV. 141; German Report, IV. 393.

Brutus, IT. 123, 138, 140-141, 321-326,
335, 335, 348, 374.

Bugliotto, Odorado, IIT. 120-130.

Buliot, chamberlain to Louis XIL., III.
41,

Bull, papal, TV. 62.

Buner, Swiss captain, ITI. 28.

Bunicaglia, Mgr. de, 38d French Mis-
sion, IV. 230.

Buno, Mgr. de, III. 42.

Buonconvento, Henry VIL, I. 87.
Buondelmonti family, I. 62-64; Uguce-
cione, I. 110; feuds, I. 121, 127.
Buonaccorsi, diary, III. 40, 95, 218, 279
—280, 445, 456-457, 482 ; IV. 194, 196,
220; Guglielmo, Valentino Mission,

j00 bea abs

Buonomini (goodmen), Florence, I. 69,
90.

Buosi: Carlo, farmer, IIT. 24; Salvestro,
question of liberty, III. 181, 250.

Burchard’s diary, III. 262, 280.

Burghers, Florence, I. 101.

Burgundy: invades Rome, I. 15-14;
French barons, I. 830; as a prov-
ince, II. 8; route from Germany,
IV. 114; cavalry, IV. 208; 3d
French Mission, IV. 256 ff.; Ger-
man Report, IV. 395 ff.; territory,
IV. 405-418.

Bustauro, IV. 120.

Butchers, Florentine, I. 109.

Butriano, Julius II., [V. 66.

GENERAL INDEX.

C.

Ct valley, IV. 120.
Cadolo, antipope, I. 29.

Cadore valley, German incursions, IV.
187.

Ceedicius, report, II. 213.

Cesar, Julius, I. 18, 61; II. 50, 58, 123,
125, 141, 160, 168-169, 176, 192, 203,
331, 343-346, 365, 388, 407, 463-464.

Cesars, Rome under, II. 141.

Caffagiuolo, I. 326, 850.

Cagli, Valentino Mission, IIT. 167 ff.

Cajazzo, count, 2d Guicciardini Mis-
sion, IV. 3868 ff.

Calabria, I. 20, 27-81, 887-394, 400;
duke, I. 402-404, 411-412, 417;
Spanish landing, IIT. 234.

Calais, IV. 142.

Calanus, Pacovius, II. 194-196.

Calcinaia, I. 196.

Calcutta, III. 214.

Caldane, I. 284.

Caliano, army, IV. 187 ff.

Caligula, II. 124, 141, 462.

Calimara, riot, I. 162.

Calixtus III., I. 311-8185.

Callippus, plot, II. 349.

Calumniators, II. 119-120.

Camajore, Lucchese war, I. 190, 227.

Camarata, fortifications, I. 287.

Cambi, Giovanni, I. 142.

Cambio, Giovanni, I. 151.

Cambray, league, IV. 195, 220.

Camerino, I. 155; revolt, III. 184 ff.

Camillus, II. 117, 132, 161, 208, 289~
290, 807-309, 820, 851, 364, 886-387,
397-402.

Campaldino, battle, I. 9, 72.

Campanians, the, II. 249-260.

Campanile, Florence, I. 96.

Campanola, camp, I. 193.

Campi, I. 355; III. 31.

Campiglia, I. 284-285; 2d Sienna Mis-
sion, III. 459 ff.

Campo, doge of Genoa, I. 169.

Canaccio, prisoners, IV. 168.

Cancellieri, feud, I. 76-78.

Candia, island, I., 46.

Cane, Fazino, I. 53.

Canne, battle, II. 205, 274, 312, 400,
415.

Canneschi family, I. 278, 279; con-
spiracy, II. 61, 62.

435

Canneta, Battista, I. 216, 217.

Cannon, LV. 870.

Cannon-balls, IIL. 17, 48.
Iron Batts.)

Cantons, Swiss, German Mission, IV.
84 ff.; 8d French Mission, IV. 241-
246.

Capaccio, wisdom, ITI. 437.

Capitolinus, story, IIL. 117, 154, 215-216,
821, 350-352.

Capoccia, horses, IV. 189.

Capo di Monti, LIT. 480.

Caponsacchi family, I. 64.

Cappiardi family, I. 64.

Cappolo, papal secrets, I. 412.

Capponi family: Agostino, I. xxviii;
Gino, I. 275; Neri, I. 241-243, 252-
264, 274-276, 279, 285-286, 296, 822 ;
Piero, I. 887; Niccolo, 8d Pisan
Commission and siege, 1V. 155 ff.,
1738 ff

Caprese, army, I. 258.

Caprone, army, ILI. 31.

Captains, Florentine officers, I. 70, 122;
of companies, I. 92. ,

Captain of the People, I. 204.

“Captain, The,” II. 199.

Capua, attacks, II. 17, 86, 219, 282-286,
297, 302, 315-316, 348 ; prince, I. 80-
81, 50.

Caracalla, emperor, II. 63-68, 339-342.

Caravaggio, wars, I. 288-291, 296; II.
42.

Caravels (ships), III. 214.

Cardinals, influence, I. 26; college, I.
406; II. 26; conciliation, III. 284-
285; Italian politics, III. 299-377
passim; Julius IL, IV. 17-85; 4th
French Mission, IV. 282-286; Pisan
council, IV. 287-802.

Cardona, Don Hugo, Valentino Mis-
sion, III. 152 ff.

Cardona of Pistoja, I. 98.

Carducci, Balthassar, letter, IV. 313.

Careggi, palace, I. 326.

Carinthia, German Mission, IV. 141.

Carlo of Faenza, I. 871, 887-3888.

Carmagnola family, I. 56.

Carmignuola, commander, I. 180; II.
43, 277-278.

Carmine, church,
419.

Carneades, in ancient Rome, I, 213.

Carpi, Minorites, IV. 317-324.

(See also

assassination, I

436

Carrara of Padua, I. 51; Bernardino,
pay, LV. 191.

Carthage, I. 60; II. 17, 29, 42, 206-207,
228, 247, 250, 256-257, 263, 303-304,
815, 846, 871, 402-408.

Carthagena, II. 440.

Casa, Francesco, Mission to France,
III. 37-41; safe-conduct, III. 45 ff. ;
letters, III. 54-106 pussim; salary,
TE; 07, 09.107.

Casale, battle, I. 281; Giovanni, III.
17, 21, 25.

Cascese family, I. 279.

Cascina, curate of, III. 15, 16, 25; wars,
III. 27-35, 51; Pisan war, III. 37;
IV. 178 ff.; letter, 1V.183; 8d Pisan
Commission, IV. 192 ff.

Casentino, I. 69, 112, 133, 234, 250, 257,
263, 827; enrolment, IV. 4.

Cassius, conspiracy, Il. 351, 848, 874.

Cassius, Spurius, II. 350.

Castels: Barco, I. 124; Bolognese, I.
171; IV. 61; Brettonico, LV. 124;
Franco, IV. 66 ff.; Guelfo, IV. 66;
Pieve, letter, III. 279; IV. 29ff;
San Piero, LV. 65 ff.

Castellana, letter, IV. 18.

Castellani, Francesco, I. 276.

Castelletto, Genoa, I. 385 ff.

Castellina, siege, I. 504, 584.

Castello: fights, I. 379, 388; II. 295,
310; Valentino, III. 288; Aurelio,
Pisan Commission, IV. 808 ff.

Castelnuovo, taken, I. 273.

Castiglionchio, Lapo, partisan chief,
Florence, I. 122-184 passim.

Castiglione, revolt, I. 112; del Lago,
2d Roman Mission, IV. 80 ff.

Castile, nobles, II. 73; king, IV. 59 ff.

Castracani of Lucca, I. 89-95: Fran-
cesco, I. 95; “ Life of,” I. xxxi.

Castrocaro, M. there, I. 346; III. 7.

Castruccio of Lucca, I. 42, 44, 135, 188;
II. 250, 257-258. (See CasTRACANI.)

Catalan horseman, I. 86.

Catapults, II. 273.

Catarrh, pestilential, IV. 60.

Catasto, re-establishment, I. 323.

Catasto, taxes, I. 181.

Caterina Sforza, countess, I. 415.

Catholics, I. 18.

Catiline, IT. 128, 346-347.

Catos, the two, I. 218; II. 161, 322.

Cattani family, I. 64.

GENERAL INDEX.

Cattle, IV. 159.

Caudine Forks, battle, II. 292.

Caudium, peace, II. 421.

Caution, injurious, II. 83.

Cavalcanti family, I. 64, 84, 116; Luca,
Pisan camp, III. 482.

Cavaliers, pay, III. 220.

Cavalry, plunder and flight, II. 267;
infantry compared, II. 274 ff.; Flor-
entine, IV. 303; sham, II. 367,
368 ; French, III. 452.

Cavicciuli family, I. 86, 109, 115.

Cavitelli, “Annals of Cremona,” IV.
53.

Cecco, engineer, I. 416.

Celon, archdeacon, III. 209.

Celestin III., I. 35.

Celestin V., hermit, I. 41.

Cennina castle, I. 284.

Censorship, If. 198, 427.

Censure, |. 24; papal, I. 129.

Cento, Lodovico, soldier, I. 51.

Cerchi family: feuds, I. 64, 76-78 121,
127; Niccolo, I. 81; Veri, I. 77-87
passim.

Cerchio, siege of Pisa, IV. 174 ff.

Ceri, Renzo, cattle, III. 458, 459.

Certaldo, sacked, I. 390.

Certomondo plains, I. 263.

Cervia, Valentino Mission, III. 244 ff.

Cesena: Longobards, I. 23; Ordelaffi,
I. 47; San Severino, I. 412; Orco’s
murder, II. 25; Valentino Mission,
III. 179 ff.; letters, III. 245 fh; 2d
Roman Mission, IV. 10 ff; letters,
IV. 54-60; 2d Guicciardini Mission,
IV. 365 ff.; Valentino, IV. 380.

Chalk, anecdote, II. 41; comparison,
ITI. 82.

Champagne, Louis XII. there, IIL 129.

Chancellery, I. xvii.

Chancelry, Florence, I. 110, 376.

Chancery of Reform, I. 276.

Charlemagne, I. 80, 62; II. 181, 422-
427; IV. 254.

Charles of Anjou, I. 38-40.

Charles of Bohemia, I. 48-49.

Charles of Burgundy, I. 882; II. 358-
359.

Charles of Calabria, I. 94-95.

Charles of Durazzo, I. 50, 155.

Charles of Valois, I. 79-82.

Charles, son of Robert of Naples, I. 89.

Charles the Bold, II. 252.

40 kel

GENERAL INDEX. 437

Charles the Great, I. 26.

Charles, emperor, descendants, I. 27.

Charles, king, I. 69-71.

Charles II. of Naples, I. 40-42.

Charles V., IIL. 72; LV. 880-332, 421-
425.

Charles VI., IV. 418.

Charles VII.: Italy, I. 314; delivers
France, II. 47-48; Italian forts, II.
297; cavalry, III. 452; Pragmatic
Sanction, IV. 408; allusion, IV.
418.

Charles VIII.: Italian affairs, I. 24; II.
11, 88, 256, 267, 428; III. 61, 81;
IV. 405.

Chase, illustration, II. 418.

Chastity, II. 60, 378.

Chatillon, Mgr. de: governor at Pisa,
III. 185; 8d French Mission, IV.
263.

Chaumont, Mgr. de, grand master:
Valentino Mission, IIT. 149; inter-
views, III. 394 ff.; 2d Roman Mis-
sion, [V. 21; Mantuan Mission, IV.
208 ff.; pay, IV. 223; 3d French
Mission, IV. 231 ff.

Checco, count, Pisan war, III. 34.

Chiana river, I. 61; 2d Sienna Mission,
IIT. 472.

Chianozona, an eloquent monk, I. 419.

Chianti, armies there. I. 304, 884.

Chiaramontesi family, I. 64.

Church, the, IT. 453; ‘church and lib-
erty,” I. 415; Gallican, IV. 408-418 ;
Greek, I. 18; compared with Roman,
I. 235-236; Roman, II. 14, 1381 ;
murder, II. 340.

Chiusi, ruined by the changes, I. 18,
258; story, II. 116-117; Valentino
Mission, III. 268 ff.

Christ, poverty, II. 322, 430.

Christianity, II. 180; M.’s maxims, IV.
437-438, 443.

Christians and heathens, I. 332; I.
241-242.

Christmas, III. 244, 258.

Ciarpellone, traitor, I. 270, 280.

Ciballinus, plot, IJ. 335.

Cibo family: Giovan, I. 406; Fran-
cesco, I. 417.

Cicero, IL. 106, 168, 203-204.

Cignano, siege, I. 271.

Cimbrians, I. 12; II. 258, 318, 415.

Cincinnatus, II. 200, 388-390.

Cini, tongue cut out, I. 107.

Cipher, III. 195; letters, III. 812-320 ;
IV. 94-97, 99-104, 185, 253-258 ; not
found in other editions, LV. 235 ff.

Cipriani family, I. 64.

Circea, revolt, II. 403.

Circumference of Florence, I. 72.

Cirignuola, II. 272.

Citerna, III. 828, 339, 356, 380.

Cities: foundation, II. 95-98; need of
inhabitants, II. 235, 450; Roman
capture, II. 314-317.

Citizens : interested in public affairs, IT.
118, 119; as office-holders, II. 178-
174.

Citizenship, Roman, II. 4380-431.

Citta di Castello: wars, I. 216, 258-260,
858, 888, 401, 405, 416, 418; dis-
mantled, II. 72; Valentino Mission,
III. 146 ff.

Civil laws, IJ. 94.

Civita Castellana, letter, IV. 18, 19.

Civita Vecchia, letters, IV. 373.

Clary, Mgr. de, III. 187.

Claudio, III. 498.

Claudius, Appius, IT. 183-190 passim ;
II. 359, 876-377, 404-405.

Clearchus, anecdote, IT. 139.

Clefi, Longobard king, I. 22, 46.

Clement II., I. 29.

Clement IV., I. 38.

Clement V., L. 42.

Cleomenes, II. 122, 146, 346.

Clement VI., I. 47; IIL. 8387.

Clement VII. : dedication, I. 3; elected
by ten cardinals, I. 49; earlier life,
IV. 817; Medici, IV. 366.

Clothing: Germany, IV. 885; French
soldiers, IV. 414.

Cloths, trouble about, FIL. 144.

Clusium, IT. 305.

Cocchi, loses his reason, I. 323.

Cocles, Horatius, IT. 154, 322.

Codefa, Genoese hill, IJ. 296.

Cola family : Antonio, letters, III. 123;
Giovanni, peace conference, IV. 161
ff. ; 3d Pisan Commission, IV. 168 ff.

Colione, commander, I. 846-3847.

Collatinus, IT. 158, 328.

Colle, surrender, I. 112, 388-890.

Colleges: Florence, I. 132; of Cardi-
nals, I. 406; French, IV. 408.

Cologne : bishop of, I. 28; German Mis-
sion, IV. 142, 149.

438

Colonies: ancient, I. 59-60; as means
of maintaining governments, II. 8-
9; land allowed, II. 245; M.’s
maxims, II. 449.

Colonna family, I. 41, 56, 405; IT. 23
ff., 38-39; III. 893, 448 ff.; Mare,
2d Roman Mission, IV. 10 ff. ; Car-
dinal Oddo, I. 42, 58; II. 28; Pros-
pero, baggage, IIT. 382.

Colonnesi, I. 48, 400; III. 105, 108, 122,
126. (See Ors1N1.)

Comedies by M., I. xxxiv ff.

Comitii, II. 305.

Commanders: choice of two things. II.
161-162; independent, II. 817-819;
important, II. 864-566; one enough,
II. 868-370; designs of enemies, IT.
873-875; tenure of office, II. 887-
388; geographical knowledge, I.
417-419.

Commerce, M.’s maxims, II. 448-450.

Commissions: France, II. 889-398 ;
Pisa, II]. 27-89; Latin, M. to France,
Ill. 40 ff ; Piombino, 1V. 161 ff ;
interior of the state, IV. 277; Sienna,
IV. 278; Monaco, IV. 279-280 ; 4th
French Mission, IV. 281 ff; Pisan
council, LV. 27.

Committee of eight, I. 180.

Commodus, emperor, II. 65, 64, 66, 68,
333, 339, 342, 347.

Commundo, Zephidian king, I. 21.

Commune, council, I. 148-144.

Communes, IV. 181, 187.

Como: bishop of, I. 864; cession, II.
414.

Companies of the people, I. 83.

Compassion, II. 453-454.

Compiobessi family, I. 64.

Concinello, Antonio, I. 411.

Concordat, Francis I. and Leo X., IV.
408.

Condottas, III. 8, 445-453, 455-456,
474, 487; IV. 37.

Condottieri, II. 47; IV. 27 ff., 194 ff. ;
pay, III. 9, 14, 20, 28, 379.

Condriono, Valentino Mission, III. 214.

Confession, seal of, IIT. 441.

Confidence in leaders, II. 404-405.

Conflagration, great in Florence,. I.
83.

Conradin, I. 87-88, 69.

Conrad of Suabia, I. 29, 37-88.

Conrinaldo, letter, III. 263-265.

GENERAL INDEX.

Conscription, M.’s plan, I. xxi.

Conservator, Florentine office, I. 100.

Consistories, papal, IV. 59-66.

Conspiracies: All Saints, I. 97-98;
Florentine families of 13438, I. 108-
109; Strozzi, I. 115; Florentine in
1897 and 1400, I. 161-164; Milan
and Florence, I. 868; philosophy of,
I. 869; Medici, I. 379; princes, II.
61; Commodus, II. 66; Maximinius,
II. 67, 329 ff.

Constance, council, I. 52, 53.

Constantine, emperor, I. 27.

Constantino, Mantuan Mission,
209 ff.

Constantinople : Roman capital, I. 12,
15, 23; capture, I. 810; troops in
Greece, II. 46; Venetian Mission,
EV. 325:

Constanz: German Mission, IV. 86 ff. ;
diet, LV. 127, 180, 151, 387, 891 ff,
400.

Constanza, daughter of William of
Naples, I. 85; daughter of Manfred,
I. 40.

Constitution, Roman, II. 113, 199;
state, II. 143.

Consuls, Roman, I. 21, 28, 35, 36; II.
121, 144, 171, 172, 198, 200, 215, 244,
317-819. .

Contempt works mischief, II. 801-303.

Contest, methods, II. 57, 58.

Contignuola, I. 53-54.

Cops, cardinal, LV. 54.

Coqueluche, disease, IV. 60.

Coraglia, Valentino Mission, ITI. 155 ff

Corbizzo family, III. 11, 12, 26.

Corciano, letter, 1V. 54.

Corcou, major-domo of Louis XII., ITI.
38, 41, 64-90 passim, 101, 118.

Coreyra, incident, II. 281-282.

Cordova, Spanish leader, IIL 283, 289.

Coriolano, courier, IV. 84.

Coriolanus, II. 114-115, 161, 364.

Cornelius, consul, geography, II. 418.

Corone, loss, III. 109.

Corps of battle, II. 268.

Corruption: Florentine, I. 106, 855;
easy, IT. 188.

Corsairs, II. 396.

Corsini, Pietro, I. 418.

Cortona: relations to Florence, I. 165;
condition, III. 446 ff.; 2d Roman
Mission, LV. 29 ff.

Ty

GENERAL INDEX.

Corvinus: John, I. 312; Valerius, II.
211-222, 802, 381-386, 414-417.

Cosenza, cardinal, Pisan Council, IV.
287 ff.

Cosimo L., III. 6.

Cospain, Emperor Maximilian, IV. 127.

Cossa, cardinal, I. 52.

Cotignola, army there, I. 282.

Cough, epidemic, IV. 259-261, 265.

Councils: the commons, I. 95; twenty,
I. 100-101; war, I. 187 ff; ten of
war, I. 284, 302; eight, I. 370; II.
191; ten re-established, II. 181; ten
and forty of Venice, II. 199; pre-
gadi, II. 199; numerous, IIT. 401;
eighty, III. 454; Louis XII, III. 400.

Councillors, French, IV. 416.

Count Palatine, IV. 134.

Count, title introduced into Italy, I. 27.

Countries, ancient names, II. 247, 248.

Courage, IT. 453.

Couriers, III. 54, 92, 185, 208, 257;
IV. 73, 101-149 passim, 207, 208,
218; scarcity, III. 242, 435; pay,
III. 78-94, 119, 124, 149, 161, 193,
213, 215, 233, 240, 246, 254, 260, 265,
273, 329, 349, 463, 472,481; LV. 153,
168, 205, 219, 226.

Cowardice, II. 453.

Craft, commendable, IT. 57-59.

Crassus, II. 276, 362.

Credentials to Venice, IV. 325.

Credenza, Florentine council, I. 69.

Credenziale of M. to Catherine Sforza,
&c., Li 10:

Crema, assaults, I. 83, 181, 285, 294,
295, 310.

Cremona: Mission, I. xxxv; history,
I. 28, 36, 259, 270, 272, 281-288, 310;
diet, I. 402; Carlo of, III. 31; ‘ An-
nals,” IV. 58; siege, IV. 830-332.

Cresta castle, IV. 140.

Criaco, Messer, Pisan war, ITI. 34.

Cries in battle, II. 866-368.

Crimes as stepping-stones, II. 28-382.

Creesus, II. 252, 255.

Crossbow, I. 115; death by, IV. 257.

Crossbowmen, III. 7, 12, 14, 21, 24, 31,
221, 388; IV. 20, 47.

Croy, siege, IV. 149.

Crusades, [. 32.

Cunning, usefulness, IT. 259.

Cursor, Papirius and son, II. 165, 253,
821, 412-4138, 440.

439

Curtius, Quintus, IJ. 251.

Custom-house, III. 274; at Genoa, I.
407.

Customs, better unchanged, II. 8.

Cyaxares, II. 259.

Cydnus river, I. 35.

Cyprus, seizure, I. 359.

Cyrus the Great, II. 19, 20, 50, 54, 85,
255, 878, 383, 440; “ Life,” ITI. 259.

Dd;

AMASK, III. 251, 259.
Dante, I. 60, 79, 81; II. 128, 204.
Danube river, I. 13-15.
D’Appiano, IIT. 3. (See Promsrno.)
Darius, IT. 14-16, 251, 315, 336.
Datary, office, III. 408.
Davanzate, Pisa, I. 235, 252.
David, Hebrew king, II. 47, 147, 455;
statue, III. 439.
Davizi, conspirator, I. 164.
Death, II. 454.
Death-penalty under Alexander, IT. 64.
Deaths from Florentine feuds, I. 8.
Decapitation, I. 218.
Deceit laudable, IL. 259, 419, 420.
Decemvirs, Roman, II. 171-1738, 182-
197 passim, 215, 821.
“ Decennali,” poem, I. xxii.
Decii, the two, IL. 264-265, 322; geo-
graphy, IL. 418, 419.
Decision advantageous, II. 262.
Decline of Rome, I. 10.
Decrees at Pisan council, IV. 300-
302.
Degli Agnoli, monastery, I. 184.
Deifobo, soldier, I. 387.
Dei, Rinieri, of Lyons, III. 56, 62, 64,
68, 72.
Del Bene, courier, III. 300, 305; IV.
29 ff.
Della Bella family, I. 64.
Della Scala family, I. 44, 45.
Della Torre family, I. 43.
Delphos oracle, II. 129, 596.
Demetrius of Athens, II. 219.
Demetrius of Florence, I. 418.
Deputies, siege of Pisa, IV. 178 ff.
Desiderius of Tuscany, I. 25-26.
Desires insatiable, II. 225.
D’Estes of Modena, I. 45.
Diaceto, Lucchese war, I. 194.

440

Dictators, Roman, IJ. 109, 117, 118,
169-172, 200, 215, 317-819, 368, 397.

Dido, queen, II. 55, 248.

Diets, LV. 121, 887, 891 ff; Botzen, IV.
148; Constanz, IV. 151; German
Mission, IV. 85 ff.; Suabia, IV. 1381,
137-189; Ulm, IV. 151.

Dikes, IV. 355; illustration, II. 82.

Dinnus, plot revealed, II. 335.

])inocrates, architect, II. 97.

Diocles, plot, II. 548.

TDiogenes in ancient Rome, I. 213.

Dion of Syracuse, II. 123, 141, 349, 462.

Dionysii, usurpers, II. 331.

Dionysius, ITI. 123, 462.

Diotisalvi, Neroni, I. 333-335, 339, 352.

Diovalaccio, courier, German Mission,
IV. 94 ff.

Diplomacy, IV. 421 ff.

Diritta, TV. 549 ff.

Disease, illustration, IT. 319.

Dissensions, internal, II. 299, 300.

Disviri, Mgr. de, German Mission, IV.
86 ff

Ditches, frozen, I. 172.

Divine providence, II. 81.

Doccia, Valentino Mission, III. 179 ff.

Doges: Genoa, I. 169, 221, 385 ff;
Venice, I. 253, 254.

Domenico, courier, III. 173 ff.

Dominicans established, I. 36.

Donatello, sculptor, II. 598.

Donati family: feuds, I. 62, 64, 76-78,
116 421,°127; Amerigo, 1.91, 110;
Corso, murderer, I. 73-87; Manno,
conspirator, I. 108; Simone, I. 81.

Doria, Andrea, I. xxxvi; IV. 372.

Dovadole, borgo, I. 846.

Dryden, translation of Virgil, IL. 55.

Duellius, Marcus, II. 191.

Duke, title bestowed by Longobards,
I. 20-238, 44.

Dunois, Valentino Mission, III. 191 ff.

Dupes always found, II. 58.

Duplessis. (See Corcov.)

Durazzo, Charles of, I. 149, 154.

Duties on merchandise, LV. 52.

E.

ARTHWORKS andartillery, I. 269,
Faster, IV. 140, 142.
Eastern Roman Empire, I. 15.

GENERAL INDEX.

Ecclesiastical councils: 38d French
Mission, papal bribery, &e, IV.
258, 276; Pisa, 4th French Mission,
IV. 285 ff., 289-290.

Ecclesiastical principalities, II. 37-40.
(See PRINCIPALITIES.)

Ecclesiastics, German, IV. 387.

Economy, II. 53.

Eduans, tribute to Rome, IT. 310.

Effeminacy in princes, II. 60.

Egidius, Spanish cardinal, I. 49.

Egypt: Turks, I. 24; crusaders, I. 32;
sultan and Lorenzo, I. 419; Moses,
II. 19; body-guard, II. 67, 68;
pachas, II. 97; allusions, II. 215,
224; artillery, II. 273.

Eight counsellors, Florence, I. 118-
114, 129, 219, 353.

Eight of the guard, Florence, I. 204.

Eight of practice, instructions, LV. 317,
333, 339.

Eighty, council of, Florence, I. 69.

Elections : packed, I. 218; plot, II. 339;
Florentine, III. 252; papal, III. 289-
299 passim.

Electors, German, IV. 387.

Elephants: in war, II. 272, 278, 277;
sham of Semiramis, II. 867-368.

Elisei family, I. 64.

Embassies, M.’s opinion, IV. 421-425.

Emperors: created by the people, I.
15; Greek, I. 25, 26; loss of power,
I. 26; appointment, I. 28; twenty-
six, II. 124; Roman, II. 468.

Empire: governing Florence, I. 8; de-
cline, I. 24; transferred to Germany,
Li:

Empoli, council, I. 67.

England: early, I. 14; crusades, I. 82;
soldiers in Italy, I. 51; troops in
Florence, I. 121; attacks France, II.
149; tribute from France, II. 3810,
812; attitude towards France, IV.
188; Roman embassy, IV.. 227;
French oath, IV. 238, 237, 238; af-
fairs, 1V. 295; feared by France, IV.
409; French annuity to, IV. 418;
church establishment, IV. 418; pre-
tensions to France, IV. 418.

Enmity, IT. 452.

Ennio, bishop, affairs of Valentino, III.
334 ff.

Enrolment in Florentine territory, IV.
3-9.

GENERAL INDEX.

Entraghes, III. 42; IV. eas

Envy, II. 396.

Epaminondas, IT. 42, 142, 149, 365, 417.

Ephores, Spartan, II. 122.

Epicaris, plot against Nero, II. 338.

Epiphany, IV. 85.

Epirus, plot, II. 336, 339.

Equality, ancient Rome and Florence,
I. 119.

Equeans, II. 133, 177, 363, 369, 374,

Era, Antonio, I. 56,

Ercole of Ferrara, I. 384.

- Erdonius, Appius, I. 135.

Errors suggest stratagems, IT. 428.

Ernicians, the, II. 177, 178.

Erulians, masters of Italy, I. 14-16.

Este family, I. 55; Azone of Ferrara,
I. 87; cardinal, IV. 68 ff.; Ercole, I.
346; Hippolite, cruelty, III. 200;
Niccolo of Ferrara, peacemaker, I.
217, 269.

Eudoxia, widow of Valentinian, I. 15.

Eugene II., I. 26.

Eugenius IV., I. 215, 216, 225, 234-237,
250-251, 254, 270-280.

Eulogy on Cosimo, I. 327-350.

Eumenes, Roman tribute, II. 310.

Eustace the crusader, I. 32.

Evil principle, II. 453.

Example, power, II. 822, 396.

Exarchate, I. 25.

Exarch, origin, I. 21.

Executions in Rome, II. 321.

Executor of justice, Florentine office,
I. 85.

Exiles: Florentine, caused by discords,
I. 8; recalled, I. 84; as enemies, I.
249; untrustworthy, II. 313, 514,
449 ; Cascina, III. 34; Genoese, IV.
231 ff.

Experience, IT. 453.

Ezzelino, father and son, I. 36-88, 438.

i.

ABI, the, II. 165, 173, 188, 305, 307,
318, 820-321, 405, 408-409, 412,
429-431.

Fabriana, Eugenius IV., I. 277.

Fabricius: example, II. 822; poison
offer, II. 378.
Pactions:: Florentine, d hag a helps to

princes, II. 70; injurious, IL ool.

441

Faenza: Longobards, I. 23; Manfredi,
I. 47, 55; Florence, I. 180, 241, 304,
860, 417, 418; Venice, II. 23; papal
relations, III. 71-72, 106; Benti-
vogli, III. 111; Valentino Mission,
III. 185, 141 ff.; Venice, III. 284,
294, 304, 336 ff; 2d Roman Mission,
IV. 10 ff.; Pisan siege, IV. 159; 2d
Guicciardini Mission, IV. 365 ff.

Fairs, French, IV. 410.

Faggiuola, Ghibelline chief, I. 85, 86,
87.

Faith, kept or violated by princes, II.
57-59.

Falari, usurper, IT. 331.

Faliscans, the, II. 164, 377.

Falls, illustration, II. 81.

Families: noted Florentine, I. 64, 76;
idiosyncrasies, II. 426.

Famine: fortresses, II. 295; Genoa, II.
296. .

Fano: Malatesta, I. 47; Valentino Mis-
sion; TL tiie. : saved, Ill. 312;
IV. 381.

Farinata, Messer, I. 66.

Farganaccio, ul, aids Cosimo in prison,
I. 203.

Farragano, chief priest, III. 12.

Fate or fortune, II. 307-309.

Fatherhood, II. 454, 455.

Federigo, Don, Valentino Mission, III.
219; affairs discussed in French
court, III. 422 ff.

Fedini family: Niccolo, treachery, I.
338; Rafaello, siege of Pisa, IV.
182.

Ferdinand of Aragon and Naples: rela-
tions to Italy, I. 804, 311, 816-318,
330, 831; Medici assassination, I.
873 ff; other princes, I. 398, 405,
411, 412; history, II. 44-45, 73-74,
160, 187, 256, 833; 2d Roman Mis-
sion, LV. 13 ff.

Fermo, I. 277; Oliverotto, history, II.
380-31; assassination, III. 142, 262-
278; IV. 377-883; Vitellozzo killed,
II. 30, 31.

Ferrara: history, I. 18, 55, 81, 182, 252,
308, 339; marquis in Florentine pay,
I. 887 ff. 401; war with Venice, I.
399-404 ; incidents, II. 6, 27, 87, 45,
133, 135, 272; French intrigue, IIL
132, 400; Valentino Mission, III.
153 ff.; 2d Roman Mission, IV. 10

442

ff.; German Mission, IV. 97; 3d .

French Mission, IV. 232, 247 ff., 271
ff.; Guicciardini Missions, IV. 358
ff.; ruler stupid, 1V. 355.

Festivals, Florentine, I. 835-336.

Feuds: Albizzi and Ricci, I. 120-129,
168 ; Bianchi and Neri, I. 126 ; Do-
nati and Cerchi, I. 121, 127; Uberti
and Buondelmonti, I. 121, 127; re-
kindled, I. 165.

Ficino the philosopher, I. 529.

Fidenati, the, stratagem with torches,
II. 368.

Fieramosca, the, 1V. 857 ff.

Fiesco, Luigi, I. 414.

Fiesole: changes, I. 18; colony, I. 60,
61; mountains, I. 256 ; palace, I. 326;
assassination banquet, I. 375.

Fifanti family, I. 64.

Fifty-six citizens, Florence, I. 128.

Figarolo castle, siege, I. 400-401.

Figaretta, 8d Pisan Commission, IV.
156 ff

Filicaja, letter, 1V. 172.

Filippo, duke, I. 187, 188, 216-291
passim.

Finance, French, IV. 411 ff

Finger-nail, illustration, IV. 243.

Firenzuola castle: Lorenzo, I. 418;
Pisan Commission, IV. 311 ff.

Fire-arms and personal valor, II. 268.

Fire in Florence, I. 83.

Fiume, Venetian possession, IV. 149.

Five deputies, III. 246, 252.

Flaminia, occupied by Alboin, I. 21.

Flaminius, Titus Quintus, II 240.

Flanders: rule in Italy, I. 31; relations
to France, IV. 409, 424; count of,
IV. 395 ff.

Flattery : ruin, II. 9; avoidance, II.
78.

Flexibility, II. 354.

Flood, illustration, IT. 82.

Mlorence’; «< Mistory Ol,4. 0. xx xaii ;
freed from the empire, I. 8; dissen-
sions and wars, I. 7-8; Lucca ac-
quired, I. 45; people, I. 55; origin,
I. 59; name, I. 61; liberty, I. 65;
insolence of nobility, I. 73; wealth
and military power, I. 76; family
factions, I. 78; fire, I. 83; Neri
party, I. 85; governed by Naples,
I. 89; Castruccio, I. 93; govern-
ment reorganized, I. 114; disorders,

GENERAL INDEX.

J. 135-134; quiet restored, I. 148;
offices divided, I. 148; disturbances
in 1878, I. 153; governmental
change, I. 155; families exiled, I.
157; troubles in 1396, I. 161; fami-
lies divided in 1597, I. 162; mis-
takes, I. 168; corruption, I. 355;
league with Venice and Milan, I.
369; aids Rimini, I. 401; war with
the San Giorgio, I. 409-410 ; Aquila,
I. 412; Faenza, I. 417; embel-
lished by Lorenzo, I. 418; danger
from Valentino, II. 26; papal rule,
II. 88; mercenaries, II. 42; origin,
II. 96; allusions, II. 114, 115; Ro-
man comparison, II. 118; army un-
der Guicciardini, II. 119; error, II.
179; driven into war, II. 180; year
1494, II. 190; expulsions, II. 195,
196; subjected to Roman Empire,
II. 198; two divisions, II. 207;
allusion, II. 211; year 1512, II. 220;
assailed by Naples, 1479, II. 254;
Lucca, II. 257 ; Louis XII., II. 264;
impoverished, II. 281; governs Pis-
toja, II. 285-286 ; tribute to smaller
states, II. 310, 311; restriction of
commanders, II. 818; magistrates,
1434-1494, II. 821; neighbors, II.
362; wars after 1490, II. 872; feuds
injurious, II. 893, 394; Turkish
embassy, III. 100; merchants re-
called from France, III. 110; repub-
lic re-established, III. 129 ; reliance
on Louis XIL, III. 183-185; dis-
union, III. 134-1385; annoyed by
Valentino, III. 141 ff.; offer of
money to Maximilian, IV. 89-154
passim; payment to France, IV.
156; complications of Julius II. and
Louis XII., IV. 220 ff. ; danger from
Rome, 8d French Mission, IV. 266
ff.; merchants plundered, IV. 288
ff.; change to monarchy, IV. 380.

Florino of Florentia, I. 61.

Fogliani, assassinated, II. 80.

Foiano, siege, I. 507.

Fojano, siege of Pisa, IV. 176.

Foix, Gaston, II. 267-272, 297, 298, 424-
425; Valentino Mission, III. 191 ff.

Folly, utility, II. 324.

Fondi, papal election, I. 49.

Fontana, Valentino Mission, III. 214.

Foraboschi family, I. 64.

GENERAL INDEX.

Force, usefulness, IT. 259.

Forgiveness, II. 452.

Fortebraccio, Niccolo, I. 187, 215-217,
234, 379.

Fortena, tumults, I. 399.

Fortifications : Verona, I. 247-248; IV.
217; aid to princes, II. 69; approved,
Il. 738; artillery, II. 269; injurious
or useful, II. 292-299; papal, III.
866, 369.

Fortini, Bartolommeo, I. 276.

Fortune: outwitted, II 81-83; a
woman, II. 84; risk, II. 151-153;
causes of change, II. 174.

Forty, council, Venice, II. 199.

Fossombrone, pillaged, III. 155.

Four counsellors, Florence, I. 114.

Fourriers, duties, [V. 415.

Fourteen chiefs, Florence, I. 71, 114.

Fox-nature needful, IL. 58, 65, 66.

Fracassa: Valentino Mission, III. 186
ff.; prisoner, IV. 199; Mantuan
Mission, IV. 209.

Franc-archers, LV. 417.

France: Missions, I. xvii, xix, xxv;
payment to, I. xxiv; M.’s descrip-
tion, I. xxv; alliance, I. xxvi; early,
I. 14-16; new language, I. 18; Ital-
ian politics, I. 31, 41; crusades, I. 82;
Gauthier, I. 106; D’Anjou, I. 155;
friendship with Florence, I 238, 303 ;
king, in Italian politics, I. 386; rule
in Italy, II. 12; oligarchy, II. 15, 16;
revolt against Rome, II. 16; Alex-
ander VI., Il. 23 ff.; Valentino, IL.
28; driven from Italy, II. 39; well
ordered, II. 62; alliance with Ven-
ice, II. 75; inundation, II. 82; Julius
II., II 88; allusions, IT. 209, 215, 224;
ancient name, II. 247; alliance with
Florence, Il. 254; poorly armed,
II. 257; Genoa, 11. 285; tribute to
smaller states, IJ. 310-312; defence,
II. 421; Pisan war, III. 28 ff; 1st
Mission, III. 40 ff.; the Borgias, IIL.
282; Garigliano, III. 291-308 pas-
sim; power in Italy, III. 875 ff.; 2d
Mission, III. 889-444; Roman Mis-
sion, IV. 10 ff.; agents in Germany,
IV. 85 ff.; Florentine tribute, IV.
156; Verona, IV. 201 ff. ; Maximil-
ian, IV. 209; 3d Mission, IV. 220
ff.; 4th Mission, IV. 281 ff.; M.’s
account, IV. 384 ff.; Report, IV.

443

404-418 ; productions, IV. 407-418 ;
royal household, LV. 408-418.

Francesco, count, papal commander, I.
216 ff., 227, 418.

Francesco, Lorenzo, III. 25.

Francis I.: Italy, 11. 152-158; Marig-
nan, Ul. 277; 3/4; Milan; 1. 287,
288; concordat, LV. 408.

Francis, St., order, I. 56.

Franks, invade Rome, I. 13-14.

Franzazi, Napoleone, I. 573, 379.

Fratta, Julius IL, 1V. 38-44.

Fraud, II. 455.

Frederick I. (Barbarossa), I. 33-34.

Frederick IL, rule in Italy, 1. 35-43, 63
-64, 87; ILI. 82, 88, 411, 475.

Frederick III., crowned in Italy, IL.
308.

Free cities of Germany, IJ. 279-281;
Report, IV. 884-390; matter of
previous report repeated, IV. 3897
i

Fregosa family : Genoa, I. 221; Agos-
tino, I. 406, 418; Battistino, doge of
Genoa, I. 385 ff., 405; Lodovico, I.
392; Ottaviano, II. 296; Paolo, I.
405; Pietro, I. 314-816.

Fregosi, Genoese party, I. 408.

French cavalry, II. 87; III. 452. |

French disease, ITT. 170.

French nature, IV. 419, 420.

French prelates, IV. 407-418.

French soldiery: Ravenna, II. 267;
reverses, II. 369; Valentino’s ser-
vice, III. 191, 194; Valentino Mis-
sion, (Il. 228 fh Cesena. 4a
252; Guicciardini Missions, IV. 337
ff.

French statesmanship, IT. 14.

French voyages to Asia, I. 46.

Frescobaldi family, I. 64, 99, 105; Bar-
do, I. 97, 98; Battista, I. 419; Nic-
colo, I. 141; Thegiao, conspirator,
I. 92:

Fribourg, freedom, IT. 280.

Friendship, II. 452, 453.

Frigio, Niccolo, IV. 134.

Friuli, 2d Roman Mission, IV. 138 ff.;
3d French Mission, IV. 262 ff.; Ger-
man Report, IV. 394 ff.

Frondsberg, George, 2d Guicciardini
Mission, IV. 355 ff.

Fronzola, city, I. 265.

Fucecchio, letters, IV. 306.

+44

Fuggers, bankers, IV. 87 ff.

Fulvius, stratagem, II. 108-109, 428.

Funeral, quarrel, I. 79.

Furli: Mission, I. xvii; history, I. 23,
40, 47, 55, 171-178, 234, 258, 270,
348, 415; II. 72, 340; M. there, III.

_ 6-26; Borgias, III. 71, 72; Valen-
tino Mission, III. 179 ff.; Ordelaffo,
III. 288, 291; 2d Roman Mission,
IV. 10 ff.; ‘ History of Marquis,”
IV. 58; 2d Guicciardini Mission, LV.
365 ff.; letters, LV. 372 ff.

GC.

ABADES, insulted, IT. 801.
Gabel, tax, IV. 411, 416.

Gabella, German Mission, IV. 83 ff.

Gabrielli, Jacopo, I. 97.

Gabriello, marquis, III. 95.

Gabriello, merchant, III. 214.

Gaddi affair, III. 199.

Gaeta: fleet I. 219-221; siege, II. 26;
military letter, III. 386.

Galanti, cattle robbery, III. 458 ff.

Galba, II. 124, 463.

Galeazzo family: duke of Milan, I.
164, 368; Ermes, I. 864; Giovan, I.
349, 364, 404; Giovanni and Philip,
I. 51; Visconti, I 48, 44. (See
VISCONTI.)

Galeotto of Faenza, I. 416.

Galgano, Saracen fortress, I. 27.

Galigai family, I. 64.

Galletti family, I. 72-73.

Galleys, IV. 52, 211, 240 ff; Pisan war,
III. 488; Venetian, LV. 2381.

Galli family, I. 64.

Gallican church, IV. 258, 408-418.

Gallipolis, taken by Venetians, I. 405.

Gambacorte, conspiracy, IT. 333.

Gambacorti, treason, I. 307-308.

Garigliano river: troops crossing, ITI.
291-340 passim, 365; bridge burned,
III. 871; Spanish and French, III.
378 ff. ; battle, IV. 406.

Garfagnana, League army, IV. 349 ff.

Garrisons, cost and use, II. 9 ; French,
IV. 414.

Gascons: Novara, IT. 277; Pisan war,
LIE 225, oo; 40) 58 spay, fi:
94; Valentino Mission, III. 153,
183; papal service, IV. 70; Man-

GENERAL INDEX.

tuan Mission, IV. 215; distrust, IV.
406.

Gascony, province, II. 8.

Gattamelata, commander, I. 216, 271.

Gaul, Roman province, I. 13.

Gauls: allusions, II. 136, 229; Italy,
II. 257-258 passim ; Roman embassy,
II. 805-809 ; capture Rome, II. 320;
inconsistencies, II. 411-4138, 415;
characteristics, II. 423-424; Rome
unguarded, II 429.

Gauthier, duke of Athens, I. 94-126
passim.

Geese, allusion, II. 316.

Generosity, useful or injurious, II. 52-
54.

Geneva, German Mission, IV. 88.

Genoa: history, I. 18, 28, 82, 87, 50, 55,
169-170, 219-225, 288, 302, 317, 885
ff., 893, 899, 405-410; IT. 86; French
governors, II. 285; citadel, II. 296;
Pisan war, III. 42; Charles VIIL.,
III. 61; De Ligny, III. 106; Pietra-
santa, III. 112-114; Louis XIT., III.
115-118; ambassador, III. 406, 433;
fleet, III. 409; revolt, IV. 189; 8d
French Mission, IV. 225 ff. ; League
Army, IV. 331 ff.; capture, IV.
391.

Genseric, Vandal king, I. 14-15.

Gente d’ arme, definition, III. 452.

Gentlemen, origin and definition, II. 110,
210.

Gentile religion, II. 129.

Geography, utility, II. 49-50.

Germany: M.’s essay, I. xxiii; early,
I. 14, 28; Italy, I. 31 ff.; Florence,
I. 121; Italian politics, I. 886; Vene-
tian war, I. 414; defences and lib-
erty, II. 86; inundation, II. 82;
Ravenna, IJ. 87; religion and pro-
bity, II. 209 ff.; allusion, II. 224;
republics, II. 279-281; bought off
by Rome, II. 311 ff.; war against
Pisa, III. 28-34; embassy to France,
III. 99-122; Louis XII, II. 122-
137; Valentino’s army, III. 185;
power in Italy, III. 375 ff. ; nego-
tiations, III. 402; ambassadors to
Louis XII., III. 411 ff. ; peace, IIT.
421; affairs with France, III. 450,
439; menaces Italy, IV. 28 ff.;
Mission, IV. 83-154; infantry, IV.
203; 4th French Mission, IV. 284

GENERAL INDEX.

ff.; Report on its emperors, cities,
customs, &cv., IV. 38i-390; 2d ditto,
IV. 391-403; matter of first re-
port repeated in second, IV. 897-
403.

Gherardesca, count, I. 284.

Gherardini family, I. 64; Lotteringo,
conspirator, I. 92.

Ghiaradadda, taken, I. 281.

Ghibellines : expelled from Florence,
I. 8, 30; origin, I. 37; German rule,
J. 87-88 ; Milan, I. 48-44 ; Brescia,
I. 44, 49; council at Empoli, I. 67;
defeat, I. 68; Prato and recall,
I. 69; factions extinguished, I. 70-
94 passim; Venice, I. 70. (See
GUELFS.)

Ghimel, 2d Roman Mission, IV. 20 ff.

Giacomini, Antonio, II. 206-207, 371-
3872 ; Pisan war, III. 482.

Giacopaccio family, I. 56.

Giandonati family, I. 64.

Gianfigliazzi family, L 64; Bongianni,
I. 400-410 ; Rinaldo, I. 159, 160.

Giannes, plot, II. 337.

Gianni, Astorre, I. 190-197.

Gié, grand marechal, III. 47, 187.

Gifts, Siennese list, IV. 82.

Gildon of Africa, I. 13.

Gino, Neri, I. 168, 198, 198-199, 206,
226.

Ginori: Bartolommeo, merchant, III.
80; Giorgio, I. 354.

Giordano, count, I. 66.

Giotto, painter, I. 96, 105.

Giovanni, the name, I. 18.

Giovanni da Fermo, antipope, I. 34-
35.

Giovanni Visconti, I. 44-49.

Girolami: Giovanni, IV. 242; 4th
French Mission, IV. 291 ff; Raffa-
ello, instructions by M., IV. 421-
425.

Girolamo, count, I. 349, 370 ff; 899-
406, 416.

Giugni family, I. 83.

Giuochi family, I. 64.

Giusto of Volterra, 1. 185-186.

Godago, Longobard king, I. 16.

Godfrey the crusader, I. 32.

Golferelli, Marchione, III. 11.

Seva and David, illustration, II.

Gonfalon, banner of Florence, I. 105.

445

Gonfalonier of justice, I. 72-73, 113-
117, 158-160.

Gonfaloniere, I. 105, 131, 824.
tory of Florence,” passim.)

Gonsalvo, II. 160; IIL. 382 ff. ; 394 ff. ;
407-410 ff.

Gonzadini, murder, LV. 53-54.

Gonzaga family, I. 45, 55; Francesco,
I, 227; Frederick, I. 404; Giovanni,
2d Roman Mission, IV. 20 ff. ; Mis-
sion, III. 454-456.

Good citizenship, II. 452-454.

Good faith, IL. 57-59.

Goodmen (buonomini), Florence, I. 69-
70.

Goodness the road to ruin, IT. 51-52.

Goro, prisoner, III. 268, 271.

Goths, I. 18-22 passim; allusion, II. 247.

Gottfried, prince, I. 29.

Government: two ways of success, II.
14; conquered independencies, three
ways, II. 17; Roman, II. 99; three
and six kinds, II. 99-101; organi-
zation, II. 121; freedom in a cor-
rupt state, IT. 143-146; reformation,
II. 154-155; corrupt, M.’s maxims,
II. 451-452.

Governors, Roman, I. 13.

Gracchi, the, II. 34, 105, 109, 176-177,
802, 565, 417.

Grace of God, IIT. 238. .

Grain: Milanese, I. 295 ; Sicily, II. 351 ;
monopoly, II. 394.

Granada, siege, II. 73.

Grand chancellor, official power, IV.
413.

Grand council, Venice, II. 200-201.

Grand master, 2d Roman Mission, IV.
15 ff.; Mantuan Mission, IV. 208
ff.; 8d French Mission, IV. 271
ig

Grand Turk: the Medici, I. 419; body-
guard, II. 67.

Gratz, 2d Roman Mission, IV. 28 ff.

Greece : popes, I. 24; Venetians, I. 46;
Mahomet, I. 310; Turkey, II 8, 46;
Rome, IL. 16; Darius, II. 21, 312;
Sparta, IT. 34, 112-114, 370.

Greek church, I. 235.

Greek emperors, I. 81, 46.

Gregory III, I. 24.

Gregory V., I. 28.

Gregory VIL, I. 31.

Gregory IX., I. 128.

(“‘ His-

446

Gregory X., I. 70.

Gregory XI, I. 49.

Gregory XII, I 62.

Grifoni family kiiled, I. 216.

Grisons, LV. 98, 127 ff., 331.

Gritti, doge of Venice, LV. 325 ff

Guadagni, gonfaloniere, I. 201-204, 218.

Guagni, Pisan war, III. 51.

Gualandi, Antonio, I. 308.

Gualdo, Valentino Mission, III. 265.

Gualterotti family, I. 64; Francesco,
ambassador, III. 40-51 passim.

Guasparre, Valentino Mission, III. 176.

Guelders, Maximilian I., 1V. 142, 149,
152.

Guelfs: Florence, I. 9, 30, 37-44, 64-72
passim, 89, 121, 126-134 passim, 151-
158, 159, 191, 201; Venice, II. 70;
condotta, III. 448 ff. (See GuisBet-
LINES. )

Guicciardini: Missions, I. xxxv, xxxvi;
Francesco, instructions to M., IV.
330-832; Mission, IV. 333-339 ff;
Giovanni, II. 119, 194, 196, 207;
Jacopo, comniissary, I. 388, 409, 415 ;
Liugi, gonfaloniere, I. 134-155, 141-
142, 199 ff.; Mantuan Mission, IV.
200-202 ; history, III. 200; IV. 84,
194, 196; 2d Roman Mission, IV.
10 ff.

Guiche, Mer. de, III. 398.

Guidalotti family, I. 64.

Guido, duke, marriage or cardinalate,
240, 261 ff.; Valentino Mission, III.
171 ii.

Guido del Torre, I. 48.

Guido, antipope, I. 33, 34.

Guidobaldo of Urbino, II. 72, 295.

Guidobuono of Tortona, I. 272.

Guienne, IV. 390, 409.

Guilds, Florentine, I. 71-72, 85, 133,
137, 148, 157, 158, 176; relation of
princes, IT. 76.

Guinigi family, Lucca, I. 55; Pagolo,
J. 187 ff., 194 ff.; plot, I. 195. (See
PaGoLo.)

Guiscard, Robert, I. 80-81.

Gunpowder, III. 7, 10, 13; price, TII.
11; Castrocaro, III. 17, 18; Milan,
III. 438.

Gurck, Mgr. de, 8d French Mission,
IV. 246 ff.

Gursa, Mgr. de, IV. 197.

Gye, admiral, III. 74.

GENERAL INDEX.

i.

ADRIAN, IT. 124.
Half-way measures, II. 289-293.
Hamilcar of Carthage, IL. 29.
Hanna, II. 3038, 312, 346-347.
Hannibal, I. 888; II. 56, 126, 152, 165,
194, 205, 206, 235, 250, 255, 258, 274,

402, 419-420.

Harvests: stolen, III. 24; destroyed,
1V. 189.

Hastati, military division,
266.

Heliogabalus, IT. 63, 67.

Hellespont, II. 21.

Hemerle, Wolfgang, IV. 197.

Henry, emperor, I. 30, 35-36, 62.

Henry, father of Otho, I. 28.

Henry of Bavaria, I. 28, 29.

Henry, son of Attila, I. 15.

Henry II. of Germany, I. 29.

Henry II. of England, I. 34.

Henry IV. of Germany, I. 31-33.

Henry VI. of Germany, IV. 418.

Henry VII. of Germany, I. 42, 48,
87.

Heraclea: massacre, II. 139; plot, II.
343.

Heraclius, emperor, I, 24.

Hercules the Egyptian, fable, IT. 256.

Hereditary sovereignty, II 8, 100.

Hernicians, the, II. 350, 396 ff.

Hieronymus, killed, II. 281, 268, 835-
336.

Hiero of Syracuse, II. 21, 47, 810.

Hilarion, minorite, IV. 817-824.

Hippias, II. 345.

“ History of Florence,” plan, I. 10.

Honorius, I. 13, 17, 36.

Horatius, II. 150, 158, 184, 189-190,
397.

Horsemanship, illustration, II. 275.

Horses: stolen, III. 239; stumbling,
illustration, III. 449; destroyed,
IV. 189; 3d French Mission, IV.
255.

Hostelries, IV. 77.

Hostilius, Tullus, IJ. 197.

Humanity: in princes, II. 59; value
of, II. 377, 378.

Humility : pride, II. 187; insolence, II. |
260-262.

Hungaria, named from the Huns, I. 14.

II. 265,

GENERAL INDEX.

Hungary: Italian politics, I. 50, 155,
386; Maximilian, IV. 28, 38.

Huns, I. 14, 15, 27.

Husbands, plot to murder, II. 429.

Hydra, illustration, II. 294.

Hypocrisy a virtue, I. 58.

if

| RUNS Ase es OL II. 422; family,
II. 426.

Idleness, M’s maxims, II. 450.

Tlarione, Lorenzo, I. 334.

Ildovado, king of the Goths, I. 19.

Illyria, I. 20, 24.

Il Moro, Ill. 448.
SFORZA.)

Il Pecorino, I. 356.

Imbault, II. 179-180.

Imborsations, Florence, I. 218.

Imola, I. 22, 47, 55, 172, 216, 238, 346 ;
Valentino Mission, III. 142 ff. ; let-
ters, III. 154; lost, III. 304, 306,
319; plans, III. 360 ff; 2d Roman
Mission, IV. 10 ff; scoured by
troops, IV. 39; letters, LV. 75; 2d
Guicciardini Mission, IV. 365 ff.;
Girolamo’s troops, I. 406.

Imperial guard, II. 65.
Imperialists, IV. 211;
Mission, IV. 347 ff.
Impetuosity, II. 424-425.
Importuni family, I. 64,

Inconstancy in princes, II. 60.

Industry, IIL. 76.

Infangati family, I. 64.

Infantry: M. on, I. xxii, xxxi; Floren-
tine, II. 267, 272; compared with
cavalry, II. 274-278 ff.; pay, IV.
191; French, IV. 269 ff., 405-
406.

Influence of great men, IT. 207-208.

Ingrati, Carlo, IV. 68, 70.

Innocent III., I. 86.

Innocent IV., IL. 37.

Innocent V., I. 70.

Innocent VI., I. 49.

Innocent VII., I. 52.

Innocent VIII., I. 406, 411.

Innspruck : German Mission, IV. 108;
letter, IV. 181; Mantuan Mission,
IV. 215 ff.

Insolence, how overcome, II. 260-262.

(See Lopovico

Guicciardini

447

Institutions : ancient times, I. 59; dif-
ficulty of reforming, II. 145.

Insults, II. 801-303, 453.

Integrity or deceit in princes, IT. 57.

Interdicts, papal, I. 88; IV. 62.

Interest, unpaid, I. 105.

Inundations, illustration, II. 82.

Tonia, IT. 21.

Iron balls, IT. 10, 138.

Irresolution in princes, IT. 60.

Israelites, illustration, II. 86.

Italia edition, LV. 235.

Italy : M.’s predictions, I. xli; changes
after decline of Roman Empire, I.
3; potentates, I. 9; new language
I. 18; Longinus, I. 21; rulers, I.
23-25; French, I. 26; Huns, L. 27;
states, 1. 28; Venice, I. 47; armies,
I. 55; government, I. 62; dismem-
bered, I. 214; condition in 14389, I.
236; peace, I. 3816; dissensions, I.
820-321; two hostile factions, I.
359; French monarchs, II. 11-138;
dike illustration, II. 82; plea for
freedom, IJ. 84-88; cause of dis-
union, IL. 181; poorly armed, II.
257; infantry, II. 275; league against
Venice, II. 359; Louis XII, III. 83;
union of cities, III. 859; German
troops, IV. 3889 ff.; Maximilian,
IV. 395 ff.; little feared by France,
IV. 410; Charles V., IV. 425.

Italians: in battle, II. 269, 869; in
France, III. 70, 87, 101; IV. 420.

J.

ACOPO, count, I. 387.
Jerusalem: origin of knights, I.
32; king of, Neapolitan title,
I. 36; siege, II. 315; asylum,
I. 326.
Joanna of Naples, I. 48, 50, 53-55, 149,
150, 154, 155, 173, 219; mercenaries,
II. 42.
Joanni, auditor of Catherine, III. 26.
John, descendant of Baldwin, I. 86.
John Francis II., Mission, II. 454-456 ;
IV. 12-14.
John of Anjou, I. 314, 318.
John of Bohemia, in Italy, I. 44, 45,
96.
John XXIL,, I. 42.

448

Jubilees, church: in 1300, I. 41; 1850,
I. 49; 1400, I. 51.

Judgment, II. 452.

Judgments often erroneous, II. 286-
288.

Jugurtha, IT. 246.

Jupiter Ammon, IT. 129.

Julian, character, II. 63, 65.

Julius II.: and M., I. xxii, xxv, xxvi;
made pope, II. 27, 28, 39, 45, 83, 156,
295, 354, 424; III. 283-376 passim ;
ambition, III. 471; 2d Mission, IV.
10-75; cardinals, troops, journeys,
IV. 17-69; Maximilian, IV. 76-102;
German affairs, IV. 134; quarrel
with France, IV. 220, 229-238 pas-
sim, 255; Robertet’s opinion, IV.
270; Pisan council, IV. 290-3801;
war with Charles V., 1V. 330-382.

Justice, ordinances of, I. 131.

Justice: origin of, II. 100; M.’s max-
ims, II. 446, 447.

Justinian, attacked by the Parthians,
T9520.

Justiniano, proveditore, I. 403.

Justiniani, Venetian envoy, I. 252.

Justinus, son of Justinian, I. 20, 22.

Juvenal, Satires, II. 282; quotation,
II. 381.

K.

EMPTEN, diet, IV. 211.
King of Jerusalem, I. 36.
“ King’s money,” IV. 411.
Kings: barbarian, I. 17; Roman, II.
146,
Knighthood, French, IV. 416.
Knights of Jerusalem, rise, I. 32.
Knight Templars, I. 32.
Konigsberg, troops, IV. 101.

uD,

ACED/AXMONIANS, II. 107.
Ladder, illustration, IT. 71.
Ladislas of Naples, I. 10, 50-53, 155,
165, 168, 178.

Lago di Garda, IV. 216.

La Marca: ceded to the pope, I. 25;
revolt, I. 129; mastered by Ladislas,
I. 165; Furlano, I. 284; Sforza, I.

GENERAL INDEX.

249-254 ; Piccinino, I. 263 ; Eugenius
IV., I. 278, 277; fresh wars, 1. 280-
281; disturbances, I. 417; Hannibal,
II. 872; Valentino Mission, III. 256;
2d Roman Mission, IV. 45 ff; 2d
Guicciardini Mission, IV. 867 ff.

Lamberti family, I. 63, 64.

Lamona valley, I. 255.

Lamone river, IV. 867.

Lampognano, I. 362; plot, II. 344.

Lances, hire, I. 253.

Landini, Cristofano, I. 418.

Lando of Agobbio, executor, I. 88, 89.

Lando, Michele, wool-carder, I. 145-154.

Landrech, troops, IV. 116.

Landriano, Ambrogio, III. 383 ff.; 2d
Roman Mi-sion, IV. 20 ff.

Lang, secretary of Maximilian, IV.
91 ff.

Language: M. on, I. xxx; affecting
conquests, II. 7, 8; change, II. 241.

Lansquenets, 1V. 289, 335, 406.

Lante, 8d Pisan Commission, IV. 194 ff.

Lanzilao, son of Pagolo, I. 195.

La Pergola, pillaged, IIT. 155.

Lapi, Giuliano, 2d Roman M:ssion, IV.
45 ff.

Lapo, Messer, I. 181.

Largesse, I. 265.

Latin: letter to Louis XII., III. 45;
saying of D’Amboise, III. 114.

Latium and the Latins, II. 177, 178,
227, 259-265 passim, 287-289, 293,
312, 317, 384.

Laudato, letter, IIT. 386.

Lautrec, seigneur, IV. 298, 301.

Laws: better unchanged, II. 8; new
ones, II. 20; armies, II. 40; Roman
regard, II. 126; observance neces-
sary, II. 143; bad examples of dis-
obedience, II. 190-191; of nations,
M.’s maxims, II. 443-445.

League, army of, IV. 880-832, 389 ff.,
352 ff.

Leagues: Lombardy against Barba-
rossa, I. 86; Genoa, Sienna, and
Piombino, I. 196 ff.; Venice and
Florence renewed, I. 196 ff. ; peace
of 1483, I. 215; Venice and Flor-
ence, I. 300; two in Italy, 1478, I.
369; Pope, Venetians, Genoese, and
Siennese against Florence, Naples,
and Milan, I. 399; Sixtus IV., Na-
ples, Milan, and Florence, I. 4€2-

Se

GENERAL INDEX.

404; Florence and Sienna, IIT, 466,
467.

Leghorn. (See Livorno.)

Legislators: Egypt, Il. 97; beginning
of a republic, II. 98, 99; Roman,
II. 111; duties, II. 120.

Lent, IV. 141, 169; disregarded, I. 355;
preacher, [V. 317.

Lentulus, plot, II. 246; on defence of
country, IT. 420, 421.

Lenza, I. 282.

Lenzi, Lorenzo, ambassador to France,
III. 40-62 passim.

Leonato castle, I. 272.

Leoni, Roberto, I. 342.

Leo IIL, I. 26.

Leo X.: friendship for M., I. xxix, xxxii,
xXxxiv ; papacy all-powerful, II. 40;
reasoning, II. 288; concordat, IV.
408.

Letters : intercepted, I. 251; pretended
of M., II. 439; Nemours to Chau-
mont, III. 233; lost, III. 259; opened,
III. 274; Bishop Ennio, III. 335; in-
jury in copying, III. 375; Garigliano
army, III. 386; about M. to Floren-
tine cities, IV. 3-9; in bread, IV.
150 ; opened by French government,
IV. 289; lost, IV. 252, 265; letters-
patent: 1V. 303; strategy, Venetian
Mission, IV. 826; carelessly delayed,
IV. 350.

Letus, plot, II. 339.

Levant, Venetian Mission, IV. 325 ff.
Liberality : in princes, II. 52-54; M.’s
maxims, II. 453, 454.
Liberty: love, I. 103, 125; struggle, I.
110; license, I. 167; endurance, II.
17, 18; public, II. 107-108; Roman,
IIL. 525-326 ; transition to servitude,
II. 849-350 ; long leadership, II. 387

-388 ; M.’s maxims, II. 452.

Librafatta: Lucchese war, I. 194-196;
letter, III. 95; easily taken, III. 96;
loss, ITI. 103 ; 8d Pisan Commission,
IV. 191 ff.

Lily, banner, I. xxi.

Lichtenstein, Paolo, German Mission,
IV. 91 ff. ; German Report, IV. 396.

Lictors, twelve, II. 183.

Lies, IV. 202.

Lieutenant of Holy Church, IV. 63.

Light-horse, stripped, IV. 66.

Lignano, Mantuan Mission, IV. 198.

VOL. IV.

29

449

Ligny, count: French court, III. 49;
plunders Ginori, III. 80 ; Genoa, III.
106 ; Nantes, III. 124; Valentino
Mission, ITI. 191.

Lime, IV. 190.

Lineage, effect in government, IT. 14.

Lion and fox, illustration, II. 58, 65, 66.

Lion, golden, gonfalon, I. 142.

Lione, commander, I. 217.

Lipari, IT. 396.

Literature and war, I. 218.

“Little Prefect,” III. 300.

Livery, French royal, IV. 414 ff.

Livius, M.’s Discourses, I. xxx, xxxviii;
remarks, II. 175, 189, 192, 194, 215;
Annius Setinus, II. 260; Latin and
Roman armies, II. 264-265; about
Capua, II. 281-282; justice and arms,
II. 285; text, II. 291; fate, II. 307,
308, 810; Nabis plot, IT. 342.

Livorno: added to Florence, I. 165;
not recovered by Lucca, I. 196;
galleys, I. 285-286; Genoese fleet,
I. 409; Pisan war, III. 34; French
designs, III. 90; 2d Roman Mission,
IV. 43 ff.; harbor rights, IV. 280;
2d Guicciardini Mission, IV. 372 ff.

Loans, Florentine, I. 105.

Locrians, tribe, II. 57.

Lodgings, French, IV. 417-418.

Lodi, I. 288; Guicciardini Missions,
IV. 345.

Lodovico of Marca, I. 52.

Lodovico, patriarch of Aquileia, I. 252.

Loggia, I. 144; Tornaquinci, I. 68; riot,
I. 162; allusion, II. 196.

Loire river, I. 25.

Lombardy : commission, I. xxiv; Ghi-
bellines, I. 8; name, I. 26; Ber-
engarius, I. 28; Barbarossa, I. 33,
86; Venetians, I. 55; conquests, I.
180; critical situation, I. 241; Pic-
cinino, I. 259; war, I. 272; danger
of Venetian mastery, I. 281; par-
tition, II. 12; alliance, II. 75;
sack, IT. 85; allusions, II. 210, 237;
ancient name, II. 247; Visconti, II.
259; fortresses, II. 298; discussed
in French court, III. 391 ff.; allu-
sions, III. 401, 419; Valentino, IV.
880; 2d Guicciardini Mission, IV.
845.

Longinus, I. 20, 22, 27.

Longobards, I. 16-26, 46.

450

Lord lieutenant, Guicciardini Mission,
_-IV. 847 ff.

Lorenzo de’ Medici. (See Mepict.)

Lorenzo, Messer, I. 405.

Lorenzo, Roman tribune, I. 48.

Lorini, Pellegrino, ILI. 53.

Lorraine, duke, I. 405-404.

Lotti, gonfaloniere of justice, I. 342.

Lottieri, bishop, I. 82.

Louis of Anjou, I. 50, 52, 155.

Louis of Bavaria, I. 42, 44, 47, 48, 94,
95.

Louis of France, and his barons, I. 330.

Louis of Hungary, I. 48.

Louis XI, II. 47; IV. 385, 391.

Louis XII.: missions I., xvii, xix, xxv;
alliance with Florence, I. xxvi;
Italy, III. 7-18 passim, 28, 28, 87,
44, 179, 264, 287, 296, 369; Flor-
entine embassy, III. 48-141 passim ;
marriage bull, III. 141; Valentino
complications, III. 141 ff.; letter
to Venetians, JI. 176; Borgias, III.
281, 283; Roman Mission, III. 287;
2d French Mission, III. 889-456 ;
quarrel with Julius II., 1V. 220-297 ;
Valentino, IV. 377; heirs, IV. 404.

Luca, padre, II. 78; Father Lucas,
adviser of Maximilian, LV. 392 ff. ;
Priest Lucas, IV. 126.

Lucani, pillage, I. 363.

Lucardesi family, I. 64.

Lucca: history, I. 9, 29, 44, 45, 52, 55,
66, 82, 87, 89, 90, 93, 95, 96, 99, 100,
186; Florentine war, I. 187-197 ;
attacks, I. 225-234 passim; Sforza,
J. 293; hatred of Florence, I. 387;
II. 286; claims Pietrasanta, I. 410;
Pietro Corsini, I. 413; Valentino,
II. 26; siege, IT. 119; allusion, II.
211; Pisan war, III. 42-45; diffi-
culty with Florence, III. 62-79 pas-
sim; offers to King Louis, III. 115
-116; complications, III. 127-129;
ambassador to Louis XII, III. 135-
186; plot, III. 450; rupture, III.
478; Pisan war, III. 483-487; siege
of Pisa, IV. 159 ff.; 8d French Mis-
sion, IV. 226; embassy in France,
IV. 247 ff.

Lucerne, German Mission, IV. 85 ff.

Lucia, Lady, I. 289.

Lucilla, plot, II. 342.

Luco, 2d Guicciardini Mission, IV. 370.

GENERAL INDEX.

Lucretia, story, II. 324, 328, 391.

Lucullus, infantry, II. 279, 365.

Lucumones, story, II. 116, 117.

Lunigiana: assailed, I. 90; troops, I.
800; spoliation, IIT. 95.

Luni, ruined by changes, I. 18.

Luoghi (shares), I. 407.

Lusignano, 3d Sienna Mission, IV. 77.

Luxury, M.’s maxims, ITI. 448-450.

Lycurgus, II. 98, 102, 111, 121, 122,
236.

Lyons: council, I. 37; IV. 129; letters,
III. 50-120 passim, 413-444; court
there, III. 124; Tosinghi, III. 184,
137.

M.

N ACEDON, ITI. 10, 92, 221, 229, 251.
Macerata, Julius II. IV., 52.

Machiavelli family, IV. 155; Girolamo,
I. 824; Totto, III. 67.

Machiavelli, Niccolo, author of these
volumes: biography, I. xv-xli; fam-
ily and citizenship, I. xv; studies
and secretaryship, I. xvi; missions,
I. xvii-xx ; military system, IL xx-
Xxii; poetry, I. xxii; missions, I.
xxii-xxvi; Julius II, J. xxvi; So-
derini, I. xxvii; punished, I. xxvii;
torture, I. xxviii; ‘‘ The Prince,” I.
xxix; literary works, I. xxx-xxxi;
military knowledge, I. xxxi; Leo
X. and Carpi, I. xxxii; come-
dies, I. xxxiv; Clement VII. and
fortifications, I. xxxv ; Guicciardini,
I. xxxvi; retirement, death, wife,
and “ Belphegor,” I. xxxvii; pov-
erty and religion, I. xxxviii;
lives and portraits, I. xxxix-xl ;
monuments, I. xli; flattery, I 4;
purpose of Florentine History, I. 9;
purpose of “The Prince,” II. 3-4;
conversations with Cesar Borgia,
II. 18; French statesmanship, II.
14; Orsini and estimate of Valen-
tino, II. 27; advising princes, II. 51;
virtue and vice, II. 52 ff.; deceit,
II. 58; wisdom, II. 59; providence
and fortune, II. 81 ff.; patriotism,
II. 84; plea to Lorenzo, II. 85-88 ;
greeting Cosimo, II. 91-92; resolu-
tion to write, II. 93; advice to

GENERAL INDEX. © 451

youth, II. 226; cunning, II. 259;
insolence and humility, II. 260-262 ;
decision and indecision, II. 262-264 ;
military systems, II. 264-268; artil-
lery, II. 268-274; infantry and cav-
alry, II. 274 ff.; wholesale measures,
II. 292; fortresses, II. 293-299; dis-
sensions, II. 299-300; insults, II.
3801-302; victory, II. 302-3805; re-
venge, II 305-307; fortune and fate,
II. 805-309; purchased alliances, II.
809-314; exiles untrustworthy, IL.
315, 314; sieges, II. 314-818; inde-
pendence of commanders, II. 317-
319; political utility of good prin-
ciples, II. 319-325; folly and wis-
dom, II. 823-825; Roman liberty,
II. 525, 326; destruction of enemies,
II. 526, 527; conspiracies, II. 829-
349; illustrations of assassination,
II. 351-349; servitude and liberty,
II. 849-350; republican changes, II.
850-355; usurpation, II. 352-353;
flexibility, II. 553; battles unavoid-
able, IJ. 355; indolence and effemi-
nacy, IJ. 356; first efforts against
enemies, II. 3859-360; compulsory
fighting, II. 361-3864; armies and
leaders, II. 864-366 ; military strata-
gems, II. 3866-368; one leader
enough, II. 868-370; merit or wealth,
II. 370-372; untrustworthy com-
manders, II. 372-373; enemies’ de-
signs, Il. 873-375; harsh or gentle
measures II. 376-877; Roman hu-
manity, II. 378-379; Hannibal and
Scipio, I. 379; Torquatus and Vale-
rius, IT. 881-385 ; vigorous measures,
II. 382; banishment of Camillus, IL.
886-387 ; prolongation of leadership,
II. 387-3888; Cincinnatus, II 388-
890; women ruin states, II. 390-
891; union or disunion in a city, II.
891-393 ; leaders to be watched, II.
894-395; faults in rulers, IL. 395-
396; envy, II. 396-399; equability,
II. 399-402 ; prevention of peace, IT.
403; confidence in commanders, II.
404, 405; popularity of magistrates,
II. 406-409 ; prominence in council,
II. 409-411; Gallic peculiarities, II.
411-413; skirmishes, II. 413-416;
qualities of a general, II. 416-417;
locality of wars, II. 417-419; deceit,

II. 419-420; defence, TI. 420-421;
enforced promises, II. 421-422; na-
tional idiosyncrasies, II. 422-424;
impetuosity and audacity, II. 424-
425; public and private wrongs,
II. 428; stratagems, II. 428-429;
national precautions, II. 429-431;
commendation and mission to Piom-
bino, III. 8-53; Furli, III. 6; Ottavi-
ano, III. 10; Castrocaro, III. 10-13;
interviews with Catharine, III. 13--
24; letters from Furli, III. 19 ff;
military review, III. 21; letters from
Furli, III. 25 ff.; Castrocaro, III.
26; army against Pisa, III. 27-39;.
letters for commissioners, III. 28;
Albizzi, capture, III. 28, 32, 34-35;
sent to France, III. 40 ff.; safe-con-
duct, III. 45; instructions, III. 46-
50; following Louis XII., III. 53;
meagre salary, III. 55; St. Pierre,
III. 56; first interview with Louis
XIL., III. 57 ff; long interview with
Amboise, IIT. 63-66 ; impoverished,
III. 67; Amboise, III. 68 ff.; letters,
III. 73-74 ; Corcou, III. 76; the car-
dinal, III. 78; grand chancellor, III.
79-80; opinion of Louis XII, IIL.
81; letters from Melun, III. 84 ff. ;
salary, III. 85-86; Trivulzio, III.
87; Amboise, III. 88-90; Robertet,
III. 92; courtesy to Amboise, and
interview, III. 103-104; anonymous
adviser, IIT. 105; sent from king to
Amboise, III. 107-111; expenses,
III. 112; interviews with Amboise,
III. 118-118; letters from Blois, III.
119 ff.; anxiety to return home, ITI.
124; letters from Nantes, III. 123 ff ;
interview with Amboise, III. 133-
134; interview with the king, III.
135; friend at court, ITT. 136; recall,
III. 140; mission to Valentino, IIL
141-280 ; outline, IIT. 141-142; com-
mission, III. 142-148; interviews
with Valentino, III. 144-158 ; letters
from Imola, III. 154 ff.; Agapito,
III. 159-160; talk with Valentino,
III. 162-167; secret friend, III. 168 ;
the duke again, III. 169-191 ; secret
conference, III. 192; Valentino’s
secretaries, III. 193; talk with Val-
entino, III. 197-202; copy of treaty,
III. 204-207; difficulty of sending

4

~

reliable news, III. 208; Borgia’s
plans and troops, III. 209-212; let-
ter shown, III. 213-214; talks with
Valentino, III. 215-218; confiden-
tial advice, III. 219; doubtfulness,
III. 222-226; various reports, III.
227-239; secret friend, III. 240-241,
255; expenses, III. 242, 245, 260,
257-259 ; Cesena, III. 242-259 ;
Gualdo and Sassoferrato, III. 265-
270; Ascesi, III. 271; further travels,
III. 272-280; brief mission to Si-
enna, IIJ. 281-282; mission to Rome,
III. 283 ff.; commission, ITI. 284 ff ;
papal election, III. 290 ff.; letters
from Rome, III. 292 ff; new pope,
III. 802; cardinals, III. 303 ff; Benti-
vogli, III. 320; with pope, III. 326-
333 ; temporizes with Valentino, ILI.
328; expenses, III. 342; Julius IL,
III. 362; catarrh, III. 381; commen-
dation from Volterra, III. 388; 2d
mission to France, III. 389-893 ;
Milan visit, II]. 8394-396; interviews
with Amboise, III. 397 ff.; tact, III.
899; French council, III. 400; inter-
views, III. 401-422; Milan, III.
403; letter, III. 403-404; Louis
XII., II. 415; return to Italy, III.
423; Venetian affairs, III. 441;
saved from insult by money,
III. 442; home again, III. 444;
instructions, and mission to Bag-
lioni, III. 445-453; instructions
for Mantua, III. 454-457; 2d Mis-
sion to Sienna, III. 457 ff. ; instruc-
tions, III. 457; Pandolfo, III. 458-
463; interviews, III. 463-480; im-
pecuniosity, III. 481; 2d mission
to Pisan army, III 482-488; Mu-
gello, IV. 3; enrolment, IV. 4-9;
2d mission to Rome, IV. 10-75; in-
structions, IV. 11-12; speech and
reply, IV. 12-14; letter from Cas-
tellana, IV. 18; letters from Vi-
terbo, IV. 19-24; Orvieto, IV. 26-
29; Pieve, IV. 31; Corciano, IV.
34; Perugia, IV. 36-45; Agobbio,
IV. 46; Urbino, IV. 48-52; Cesena,
IV. 54-61; Furli, IV. 61-65; Julius
II., IV. 64; Castrocaro, IV. 68;
Palazzuolo, IV. 69; Imola, IV. 71
ff.; 3d mission to Sienna, IV. 76-
82; Germany, IV.‘83-154; Vettori’s

O2 GENERAL INDEX.

letters, 1V. 89 ff.; urinal accident, IV.
148, 153; Vettori’s orders, IV. 150;
return to Florence, LV. 152 ; letters-
patent from ten of liberty, IV. 155;
8d Pisan commission, IV. 156-194;
faithfulness at Pisa, IV. 157-160;
peace conference at Piombino, IV.
161 ff.; inspection of infantry, IV.
170-175; reference, IV. 149; short of,
money, 1V. 155; under orders, IV.
174; secrets, lV. 178; Mantua, IV.
195 ff.; commission, IV. 195-197;
letters, IV. 199 ff. ; marchioness, IV.
199-200; salary, 1V. 205; Verona,
IV. 210-216; Mantua again, IV.
217; two men-at-arms, IV. 218; ex-
penses, IV. 219; presented to Louis
XII., IV. 225; behavior towards
France, IV. 233; editions of works,
IV. 235; mediation, IV. 240 ff.;
cunning in intervention between
Louis XII. and Julius II., IV. 247;
interview with king, IV. 248; let-
ters lost, IV. 252-255; opinion of
priests, IV. 258; money, IV. 258-
260; cough, IV. 260; king again,
IV. 267 ff.; money, IV. 275; com-
mission to the interior, IV. 277;
Sienna, IV. 278; Monaco, IV. 279-
280; 4th mission to France, IV. 281
ff.; efforts to transfer council of
Pisa, IV. 287-302; raising troops,
IV. 303 ff; mission of condolence to
Sienna, IV. 306; military mission
to Chiana, 1V. 308-316; mission to
Minorites, IV. 317-824; letter to
Cardinal de’ Medici, IV. 821-324;
mission to Venice, IV. 3825-330;
instructions from Guicciardini, IV.
3830-332 ; missions to him, IV. 333-
373; trust God and self, IV. 346;
Valentino murders, IV. 377-883 ;
German affairs, IV. 384-403 ; French
affairs, IV. 404-420; advice to di-
plomates, IV. 421-425.

Macrimus, character, II. 63, 67; plot,

II. 339.

Melius, corn-dealer, IT. 321, 394.
Maffeo of Milan, I. 43.

Magalotti family, I. 88, 156.

Magians, II. 336, 339.

Magione: convention of factions, II.

24; plot, III. 141-142; Valentino,
IV. 3877 fff.

ie ie 8

:

GENERAL INDEX.

Magistracy : Roman, II. 182, 221, 222;
institution, II. 197, 198; power, II.
200.

Mahomet, Saracen leader, I. 24.

Mahomet, sultan, I. 310, 812, 895, 398;
II. 147.

Mahometans and Knights of Jerusalem,
I. 32.

Magno, Francesco, courier, III. 175.

Magra river, boundary, I. 169-170.

Malaspini family, I. 64; Morello, III.
95. (See Massa.)

Malatesti family, I. 55, 253 ff.; Gale-
otto of Rimini, I. 47; Gismondo, I.
280, 285, 804; Pandolfo, I. 298.

Malavolti, jailer, I. 203.

Mamelukes, II. 97.

Mamercus: dictator, II. 198; torch
stratagem, II. 367-368.

Mancini family: Bardo, I. 156, 175;
Battista, robbed, III. 213.

Manelli family, I. 64.

Manfred, I. 37, 88, 66-67, 71.

Manfredi family: Faenza, I. 55; Gio-
vanni, I. 47.

Mangioni, arrest, I. 149.

Manieri family, I. 64.

Manlius family, II. 126, 173, 368, 406,
427-428.

Manna, illustration, II. 86.

Mantua: Missions, I. xx, xxiv ; Longo-
bards, I. 23; history, I. 29, 86-87 ;
Gonzaga, I. 155; keys, II. 425;
situation, IIT. 119; French intrigue,
III. 182; Mission, ITI. 454-458; IV.
195-219; letters, IV. 197 ff.; Guic-
ciardini Mission, IV. 385 ff.

Mantua, marchioness of, IV. 241.

Mantua, marquis of, I. 231, 239, 247-
248, 800, 387 ff.; Roman Mission,
III. 20 ff.; ambassador, III. 118,
405 ; Valentino Mission, III. 156 ff€. ;
pay, III. 468; freedom, IV. 281,
235, 237.

Manuscript of M., I. xxi.

Marcelli, Bartolommeo, ITI. 10, 246.

Marcellus: letter, III. 282 ; 2d Roman
Mission, [V. 12; ten of liberty, IV.
278, 281.

Marcia, marries Joanna, I. 53, 54 ; plot,
IIT. 839.

Marciano, count, I. 405, 410; III. 27,
195.

Marcheso, party-name, IV. 207.

453

Marchioness, the, IV. 197 ff

Marcus Aurelius, II. 63-68, 462.

Maremma, or low country, I. 87; 2d
Sienna Mission, III. 459 ff.

Marguerita, Donna, IV. 121, 122.

Maria, Francesco, II. 252, 298.

Mariana, historian, IV. 60.

Marignan, battle, II. 277, 874.

Marius, I. 12,61; II. 108, 141, 157, 176,
247, 331, 352, 388, 415-416.

Marostico castle, 1V. 107.

Marquis, title, I. 27.

Marradi: podesta, I. 98; castle, I. 255,
275; armies, II. 375.

Marseilles, I. 41, 275.

Martel, Charles, I. 25.

Martelli: couriers, III. 124, 300, 302;
Domenico, I. 339 ; IIT. 290 ; Giovanni,
III. 92-102 passim ; Ugolino, Il. 938,
94; ITI. 404.

Martialis, plot, IL. 339.

Martin IV., I. 40.

Martin V., I. 53.

Martinella, a bell, I. 65.

Martinengo, siege, I. 271.

Martino, chancellor, I. 178.

Marzocco, or lion, II. 893; “and St.
George,” III. 483.

Masi, courier, ITI. 419, 427.

Masinissa, king, tribute, II. 310.

Mass, assassination, I. 374 ff.

Massa: capture, I. 227; marquis, ITI.
93-97.

Massilians, IT. 248, 310, 316.*

Maternianus, II. 339.

Mathilda, countess, I. 28-83.

Mattei, modern name, I. 18.

Matthias of Hungary, I. 332, 419.

Mauroceno, envoy, I. 232, 254.

Maurusians, example, II. 248.

Maximilian I.: Mission, I. xxiii; se-
crecy, II. 79; alliance weak, II. 254 ;
2d Roman Mission, IV. 18 ff. ; Italy,
IV. 54, 76-82 passim; Mission, IV.
83-154; Cambray league, IV. 195;
diets, IV. 201-202; French relations,
IV. 209-218; Pisan council, IV.
277 ff.; character, revenues, &c.,
German Report, IV. 887-403.

Maximin, II. 468.

Maximinius, II. 63-68.

Maxims, M.’s, IT. 485-464.

Maximus: Roman citizen, I. 15-16 ; Fa-
bius, II. 57, 205, 297, 353-857, 420.

454

Mayence: bishop, I. 28; German Mis-
sion, IV. 142.

Mazzucco, disease, IV. 60.

Medes and Persians, IT. 19, 85.

Mediation of Florence between Julius
II. and Louis XII., IV. 240 ff.

Medici family: I. xxvi, xxviii-xxx, 7,
83, 109, 115, 180, 160, 164, 168, 207,
320, 339, 340, 368, 871, 878; IL. 86-
88, 202, 803-804, 331, 334, 340-342,
350; Valentino Mission, III. 145 ff. ;
re-establishment in Florence, IV.

; 811.

Medici, Alemanno, I. 181, 178.

Medici, Antonio, I. 159-162.

Medici, Averardo, I. 197, 204.

Medici, Bernardetto, I. 248, 265, 285.

Medici, Bernardo, I. 263.

Medici, Bianca, I. 827, 369.

Medici, Cosimo: career, I. 4, 7, 188,
197 ff., 201-206, 210-211, 218, 233,
256, 274, 279, 296-297, 321-8380, 334,
369; allusions, II. 167-168.

Medici, Filippo, archbishop of Pisa, I.
369.

Medici, Giovanni, I. 4, 7, 100-101, 171,
176, 182-184, 829, 417; III. 6; the
younger, IV. 887.

Medici, Giuliano, I. xxxii, 370 ff., 379.

Medici, Giulio, afterwards Clement
VIL, I. 379, 417; M.’s letter and the
Minorites, IV. 311-824.

Medici, John, I. 827.

Medici, Lodovico, illness, III. 23, 24.

Medici, Lorenzo: wings spread, I. xxx;
death, I. xxxii; career, I. 8, 188, 335
-336, 348, 351, 869-371, 877, 380,
891-894, 898, 402, 410-414, 417-420;
dedication, II. 3-4; exhorted to de-
liver Italy, II. 85-88 ; occurrence be-
fore death, II. 212; saying, II. 396.

Medici, Nannina, I. 327.

Medici, Piero: career, I. xvi, 4, 325,
327, 829, 333-342, 344, 348-350, 417 ;
III. 75, 99, 181-136.

Medici, Salvestro, I. 130-132, 142, 146,
158, 156, 168-169, 202.

Medici, Veri, I. 159-160.

Medicine, IT. 94.

Mediterranean sea, IV. 411.

Megara, plot, II. 346.

Melano, self-sacrifice, I. 179.

Melfi, William of England, I. 31.

Melichius, freedman, II. 835.

GENERAL INDEX.

Melius, grain monopoly, II. 321, 394.

Mellon, envoy, III. 288.

Melorco, governor, I. 30-81.

Meloria, shallows, IV. 280.

Melun, letters, III. 84, 86, 91, 98, 99,
LOT

Memmingen, German Mission, IV. 88
ff.; Maximilian, LV. 120.

Menchier, chamberlain, IV. 52.

Menenius, dictator, II. 108-109.

Meran, German Mission, IV. 118 ff.;
letters from, IV. 117 ff.

Mercato, Nuovo, Florentine riot and
fire, I. 74, 83.

Merchants, III. 239, 251: wronged by
Venetian subjects, LV. 825 ff.

Mercy, in princes, IT. 59, 453.

Merino, 2d Roman Mission, LV. 10 ff.

Merit, II. 370-872.

Mercenaries, II. 40-48.

Messana, letters, IV. 190.

Messagetes, war with Cyrus, II. 255.

Messenians, in Sicily, II. 250.

Messius, speech to soldiers, II. 363.

Mestri, soldiers, II. 86.

Metaurus river and battle, II. 253; 1V.
174.

Metius, treachery, IT. 150-151.

Mezzana, camp and letter, IV. 174.

Michele, Don, plundered, III. 862-880
passim, 382 ff.

Michele, cardinal, poisoned, III. 885.

Michele, Francesco, I. 148.

Micheletto, commander, I. 196, 281, 288.

Middle course, safety of, II. 324 ff.

Migliorelli family, I. 64.

Migration at decline of Roman Empire,
II. 249.

Milan: history, I. 3, 18, 21, 38, 36, 42,
44, 50, 120, 219, 281-283, 287-803
passim, 810-311, 869, 885 ff., 401, 403,
411; II. 5, 7, 22, 88, 42, 43, 72; lost
by its princes, II. 80; people, II.
142; Swiss and Francis I., II. 287-
288; citadel, II. 294-295; plot, IZ.
344; Louis XII, II. 369; engage-
ment with Catharine, III. 15-22;
French designs, III. 90-91, 108, 138 ;
Valentino Mission, III. 155 ff. ; re-
establishment of Sforzas, III. 589,
393; visit of M., ITT. 894-396 ; troops,
IIT. 400, 415, 418 ; 2d Roman Mission,
IV. 21; 4th French Mission, 1V. 282
ff.; letters, LV. 291 ff; army of the

GENERAL INDEX.

league, IV. 351; Guicciardini Mis-
sions, LV. 388 ff. ; claims of France,
IV. 416-417.

Milanesi, G.: editor of M., I. xv; edi-
tions, IV. 76, 254, 235; history, LV.
253 ff.

Military: valor, I. 119; enrolment, I.
160; modern and ancient systems,
II. 264-268.

Militia, M.’s plan, I. xxi, xxii; IV. 155.

Milonius, pretor, speech, II. 263.

Ministers, political, II. 76-77; M.’s
maxims, II. 458-459; IV. 421-425.

Minorite friars, I. 826; Mission, IV.
317-324.

Minutius, deposed, ITI. 389.

Mirandola family: Giovanni, I. 418 ;
Lodovico, Valentino Mission, III.
1037.) ous, 11 2i25 Ve 186;
144; 8d French Mission, IV. 263.

Misero, definition, II. 61.

Mithridates, I]. 865.

Modane, French in Italy, IV. 61.

Modena, I. 36, 282; Este family, I. 45,
55; French invasion, IV. 70 ff.; 8d
French Mission, IV. 261 ff.; letters,
IV. 837-338; 2d Guicciardini Mis-
sion, LV. 349 ff.

Moderation often injurious, II. 262.

Modesty, IT. 452.

Modigliana, I. 172.

Modone, loss, III. 109.

Monaco, Mission and agreement, IV.
279-280.

Monasteries sacked, IV. 72.

Money: base, I. 88; not the sinews of
war, II. 253; Florentine payments
to France, III. 88, 87, 89, 92; to
Maximilian, German Mission, LV.
83-154 passim.

Monferrato, marquis, I. 303.

Mons Sacer, allusion, II. 184, 189.

Monselice: Longobards, I. 23, 45; 8d
French Mission, IV. 239 ff.

Montano, murder rehearsal, I. 361-863.

Montargis, III. 638, 67 ff.

Monte Albano, antipope, I. 85.

Monte Carlo, I. 230, 234.

Monte Catini, siege, I. 88.

Monte Loro, I. 277.

Monte San Savino, army, I. 884.

Montecchio, Piccinino’s refuge, I. 277.

Montechiaro, German cavaliers, I. 95.

Montedoglio, capture, I. 827.

455

Montefeltro: Antonio of, I. 47; Fede-
rigo of Urbino, I. 280; robbery, III.
214.

Montefiascone, I. 34, 216; 2d Roman
Mission, IV. 23 ff.

Montepulciano, I. 165, 251; Louis XIL.,
III. 61, 72; 2d Sienna Mission, ILI.
460 ff. ; letter, IV. 311, 420.

Montesecco, condottiere, I. 371, 879;
II. 340.

Montison, Valentino Mission, III. 191 ff.

Montone: Oddo and Braccio, I. 54;
valley, I. 255; castle, I. 372-873;
river, 2d Guicciardini Mission, LV.
371 ff.

Montorto, count, I. 411.

Moors, Spain, II. 73.

Morat, camp, IT. 858.

Morattini, papal captain, IV. 58 ff.

Morgante’s troops, IV. 158.

Moro, fi, III. 7.

Moses, II. 19, 20, 85, 96, 121, 247, 398.

Mossi family, I. 64.

Mottino, captain, III. 877, 379.

Mountains as standpoints, II. 4.

Mozzi, Vanni, riot, I. 74.

Mugellana, Pisan Commission,
315 ff.

Mugello: M. there, I. xx; Piccinino, I.
256-257 ; enrolment, IV. 3.

Muratori, author, IV. 60.

Murders: Florence, I. 71; IV. 877-
383; Sienna, IV. 307; Sinigaglia,
III. 260 ff.

Murone, made pope, I. 41.

Mutianus, allusion, II. 160.

Mutolo, treason, II. 429; IV. 168.

IV.

N.

N4sis of Sparta, II. 34, 128, 186,
336-337, 462.

Naldi, commander, III. 11-12, 21-26,
185, 388 ff.

Names, European changes, I. 18.

Nanso (Nassau), III. 137.

Nantes, Louis XII, III. 111-128 passim.

Naples: history, I. 3, 18-19, 30-40 pas-
sim, 49, 55, 69, 71, 87, 150, 155, 219-
220, 272-273, 325, 347, 369, 389-395
passim, 402, 405, 411; II. 5, 12-18,
25, 38, 80, 85, 142, 210, 220, 254, 298,
880 ; III. 61, 71-72, 82, 99, 101, 105,

456

118, 119, 124; Valentino Mission,
III. 228 ff.; discussion in French
Court, IIL. 390 ff; 2d Sienna Mis-
sion, III. 480; 4th French Mission,
IV. 288; troops, IV. 406, 407.

Narbonne, Mgr. de, 2d Roman Mission,
IV. 35 ff.

Nardi family, Bernardo and Salvestro,
I. 351-355.

Narni, Francesco, Sienna Mission, III.
281-282 ; Florence, III. 440, 444.

Narsetes, Longobard king, I. 20-21.

Nasi, ambassador, I. 395.

Nasi, merchant, III. 54, 68, 119, 120;
3d French Mission, IV. 223.

National library, Florence, IV. 155, 157.

Navy, French, IV. 415-416.

Negropont, capture, I. 548.

Nelematus, plot, II. 886-359.

Nemours, duke: killed, II. 272; letter,
III. 283; French court, III. 392 ff ;
Ferrara, III. 410; names, III. 489.

Nephews of popes, I. 40.

Nepi, 2d Roman Mission, IV. 10 ff.

Neri faction, I. 77-87, 116.

Nerli family, I. 64.

Nero, II. 124, 141, 335-338, 462.

Nero, Bernardo, commissioner, I. 409.

Nero, Claudius, IT. 258, 372, 373.

Neroni family, I. 5438.

Nerva, II. 124, 462.

Nevers, letter, III. 63.

New Carthage, taken, IT. 314, 315, 378.

New market, Florence, I. 110, 115, 162.

Nicolini, Lapo, I. 168.

Nicholas II., I. 29, 31.

Nicholas III., I. 39, 70-71.

Nicholas V., I. 282-283, 310-3811.

Nicias of Athens, II. 206.

Nicomachus, plot, I. 335.

Nicomaco, the good father, II. 454-455.

Niger, commander, II. 65.

Nigi, Nerone, I. 168, 198, 199.

Nine of ordinance, I. xxi ff.; III. 476;
IV. 308, 307.

Nobile, podesta, IV. 811.

Nobles: Florentine, I. 73-76, 117, 249;
French, II. 15; not easily satis-
fied, II. 38-34 ; papal power, II. 58;
Italian, II. 44; Castile, II. 73; guar-
dians of liberty, II. 107-108; suffo-
cated, II. 232; German, IV. 384-
390.

Nocera, battle, I. 20, 37, 50.

GENERAL INDEX.

Nola, incident, IT. 235.

Nori, assassinated, I. 376.

Normandy, province, II. 8.

Normans, Italy, I. 31.

Novara, I. 53 ; II. 278, 277, 359.

Novello, count, I. 66, 88.

Numa, II. 147-148, 197.
PILIUS.)

Numantia, destroyed, II. 17.

Numicius, pretor, II. 287-288.

Numidia: cavalry, II. 277; lost, II.
304.

Nuremberg, German Mission, IV. 98
ff.; cavalry, IV. 141.

(See Pom-

O.

(jets: regard for, II. 26.
Obizzi, only man killed in a fa-
mous battle, I. 172.
Obsolengo, IV. 208.
Occan, bailli, hire, III. 412.
Occupations, IT. 453.
Octavian, II. 96, 203.
Octavius, I. 218.
Odoacer, I. 16-17.
Odoardo, answer of signoria, ITI. 134.
Oddi, battle-cry, II. 366.
Oddo, count, condottiere, I. 174, 179.
Offences, IT. 452.
Officers, exposure, IT. 271-272.
Offices, bestowal, IT. 408.
Oglio river, I. 259.
Old age, judgment, IT. 225.
Old market, riot, I. 162.
Olden time, praise of, II. 223-225.
Olgiato, Girolamo, I. 362, 565.
Oliverotto, II. 80. (See Fermo.)
One hundred and twenty, council, I. 70.
Opicino of Genoa, I. 222.
Orange, prince, III. 124, 137.
Oratellis, Mgr. de 1’, 83d French Mis-
sion, IV. 253.
Orco, executed by Valentino, IT. 25.
Ordelaffi family, I. 55; III. 288, 291;
IV. 58; Giorgio, I. 171; Sinibaldo
of Furli, I. 47; Tibaldo, I. 171-172.
Ordinances of justice, I. 73, 182.
Orestes, emperor, I. 16.
Oriental princes, IT. 234.
Orlandi: corporal, siege of Pisa, IV.
158; Guido, 2d Sienna Mission, III.
462.

GENERAL INDEX.

Orlandini, gonfaloniere, I. 255, 256,
275.

“ Orlando Furioso,” III. 200.

Orleans, Charles of, I. 288.

Orsini: family, I. 39-42, 56, 400, 405,
403, 412; Valentino, Il. 23-46 pas-
sim, 71, 103; Valentino Mission,
III. 144 ff.; withdrawal from Rome,
III. 288, 292, 299; pay, III. 383;
plot, III. 450; Alfonsina, I. 417;
Bartoldo, I. 39; cardinal, 1V. 385;
cavaliere, I. 417; Gravina, murder,
III. 142; IV. 877-883 ; Paola, Valen-
tino Mission, III. 142 ff; Pietro, I.
253-260 ; III. 262-278; Virginio, I.
413.

Orso, suspected, I. 415.

Ortanus, Persian plot, IT. 386-337.

Ortolano, courier, IV. 11 ff.

Orvieto, 2d Roman Mission, IV. 18-
29.

Osimo, town, I. 277, 414.

Osole river, III. 43-44.

Osporco, pope, I. 27.

Ostia, I. 20, 38; Valentino, III. 830 ff ;
IV 252:

Ostrogoths, I. 14-19.

Otacilius, defeat, II. 409.

Otho IIL., I. 28, 36.

Otranto, I. 895, 398.

“Our cardinal,” III. 367.
DERINI.)

(See So-

1 &¢

| ele Samnite priest, IT. 136.
Pachas, Egyptian, II. 97.

Padua: history, I. 23, 38, 36-38, 45-46,
51, 204, 244; pestilence, 1V. 60; Ger-
many, IV. 195.

Pagan religion, II. 232-233.

Paglia, 8d Sienna Mission, IV. 76 ff.
Pagolo, If. 177; assassination, IV.
377-883. (See PaoLo Orsin1.)

Pagolo, chancellor, I. 178.

Palepolis, capture, II. 316, 887-388.

Palatinate, prince, I. 28.

Palazzuolo, letter, IV. 69.

Palermini family, I. 64.

Palisse of Pisa, III. 135, 136.

Pallavicini: Pisan war, III. 41; Val-
entino Mission, III. 188 ff.; cardi-
nalate, ILI. 285.

Panaro river, boundary, I. 169.

457

Panciatichi, 8d French Mission, IV.
229 ff.

Pandolfini: Francesco letters, IV. 198 ;
Mantuan Mission, LV. 201 ff.; espi-
onage, LV. 215-220; 3d French Mis-
sion, LV. 254 ff. ; 4th French Mission,
IV. 288 ff., 291 ff; Giovanni, III.
292-294, 349, 385 ff.

Pandolfo of Sienna, I. 53, 417; II. 331,
344, 346; IIL. 281, 401, 450.

Pannonia, I. 14-21 passim.

Paolo, Ser., conference with M., IIT. 463.

Papacy : authority, I. 84; nepotism, I.
40; re-established, 1. 49; enmity to
Florence, I. 369.

Papirius, dictator, II. 184-185, 428.

Paradise, II. 233.

Paranno: 8d Pisan Commission, IV.
156 ff. ; death by treason, LV. 170.

Paris, deaths, IV. 260.

Paris, Mgr. de, 3d French Mission, IV.
229 ff.

Parishes: French, IV. 411; English,
IV. 418.

Parliament, Erench, II. 62, 328; IV.
415.

Parma: history, I. 23, 29, 36, 37, 45, 64,
99; III. 52-58; Valentino Mission,
III. 149; French troops, IV. 45, 67 ;
3d French Mission, IV. 282; Guic-
ciardini Missions, IV. 335 ff. ; letters,
IV. 343-345.

Parricides, illustration, IT. 291.

Parsimony commended, II. 53.

Parthians, I. 20; IL. 276, 311, 362.

Pascal I., I. 26.

Pascal IL., I. 32-338.

Pasgni, Guaspare, III. 18.

Passerini, author, I. xv, xxxvii; IV.
76, 235, 253.

Passignano, 2d Roman Mission, IV.
33 ff.

Passports, IV. 278-279.

Past and present, IT. 225-226.

Patriotism, II. 420-421, 428.

Patriarch of Alessandria (Vitelleschi),
I. 250-252.

Paul II., I. 338, 848.

Pausanias, vengeance, II. 806, 330-331.

Pavia: I. 16, 20-26, 34, 51, 287; 2d
Roman Mission, IV. 15 ff.

Payments: Florence to France, I. xxiv;
II. 264 ; IIT. 104-135 passim, 290, 392 ;
gold to Gauls, II. 309-310; to gen-

458

erals, IIT. 427; Florence to Maximil-
ian, IV. 89-156, 195 ff.

Pazzi family, I. 64, 116, 369-378, 394,
419; conspiracy, IL. 831-348 passim ;
Andrea, III. 6-8; Bianca, I. 378,
bishop, 2d Roman Mission, LV. 42 ff. ;
Cosimo, III. 61; Francesco, con-
spiracy, I. 869-877; Giovanni, lI.
3869-870; Guglielmo, I. 369, 878-879 ;
II. 348 ; Jacopo, ennobled, I. 869-379
passim; Rafaello, Valentino Mission,
III. 158 ff.; Rinato, I. 378.

Peace: Florence and Venice, I. 272;
La Marca, I. 278; prevention, II.
403; M.’s maxims, II. 438-442 ; Blois,
EV LO, .

Pears, IV. 69.

Peasantry, enrolment, IV. 5.

Pedro of Aragon, I. 59-40.

Pellegrino, Pisan war, III. 87.
FRANCESCO CaSA.)

Pelopidas, II. 112, 149, 345, 365.

Peloponnesian war, II. 370.

Pennoneri, Florentine offcers, I. 92.

Penula, Centenius, senate, II. 205-206.

Pensioners, French, IV. 412, 416.

Pepi, ambassador, LV. 10, 71-75.

Pepin of France, I. 25, 26, 46; race,
IV. 417.

Pepo, 2d Sienna Mission, III. 472.

Perennius, conspiracy, II. 333.

Pergola, Agnolo, I. 56, 172.

Pericles, II. 253.

Perpignan, III. 348; IV. 409.

Perseus, IT. 92.

Persia, I. 24; II. 19, 85, 278, 336.

Personal merit, II. 407.

Pertinax, character, II. 63-68 passim,
124, 463.

Perugia: history, I. 38, 54, 56, 87, 115,
129, 158, 258, 263, 860, 372, 376, 380,
888-390, 418; II. 26, 310, 366; Val-
entino Mission, III. 141 ff., 845, 395;
Mission, III. 445-453; 2d Sienna
Mission, III. 472; 2d Roman Mis-
sion, IV. 10 ff.; exiles, IV. 380 ff.;
letters, IV. 36-45; 8d French Mis-
sion, IV. 269; Valentino, IV. 377 ff.

Pernzzi family : Filippo, I. 276; Ridolfi,
J. 207-210.

Pessro, I. 47, 55, 280; Constanzo of, I.
399; saltpetre, III. 18; papal army,
III. 105; Valentino Mission, III.
243 ff

(See

GENERAL INDEX.

Pescara, Sforza drowned, I. 54.

Peschiera, I. 246, 269, 272; Mantuan
Mission, IV. 208, 214 ff.

Pescia, I. 187, 194; ILI. 35, 36, 68, 74;
IV. 158 ff, 804 ff.

Pestilence: saves Rome, I. 34; Flor-
ence, I. 117; result, II. 242.

Peter, St., successors, I. 23.

Peter the Hermit, I. 32.

Petrarch, quoted, II. 88.

Petrucci family: Cesare, I. 352-554,
376; Jacopo, Sienna, I. 417; Pan-
dolfo; I xx; Jl. O16) 111 72230.
148 ff, 280, 457-484 passim; IV. 10
ff., 81, 114, 306.

Phalaris, II. 128, 426.

Philibert, Mgr. de, III. 403, 406, 451.

Philip, archduke, III. 72, 82.

Philip, duke, I. 55.

Philip of France, I. 33, 41, 42.

Philip of Mantua, I. 44.

Philip of Macedon, I. 292; II. 10-11,
42, 148, 156, 164, 221, 229, 240, 259,
806, 3380-331, 857-358; father of
Perseus, II. 80, 415.

Philippe le Bel, IV. 251.

Philo, long consulate, II. 887-888.

Philopemen, prince, II. 50.

Piacenza, I. 271-272, 283-288 passim ;
III. 42-53; Guicciardini Missions,
LV. 338 ff.

Piancaldoli castle, I. 416.

Piazza, Florence, fortified, I. 160, 202.

Picardy, province, IV. 409.

Piccinino family : Astorre, I. 261; Fran-
cesco, I. 288, 261, 270, 277, 282, 287,
294, 297; Jacopo, I. 277, 294, 298,
311, 314, 331-8382, 393; Niccolo, I. 54
-56, 174, 179-180, 196-197, 216-217,
225-227, 237-288, 245-280 passim.

Piccino of Novara, IIT. 404.

Piegaio, 2d Roman Mission, IV. 18 ff.

Piene, town, I. 258.

Pienza, 8d Sienna Mission, 1V. 78,
80.

Pieri, modern name, I. 18.

Piero, Fra, I. 359.

Piero of Corvara, antipope, I. 44.

Piero of Naples, I. 88.

Pietro, camp, LV. 140, 150.

Pietrasanta, I. 190, 408-410, 418; HI.
33, 61, 66, 69, 79, 90, 98, 96-98, 103,
113, 114, 129, 185.

Pigello, IV. 206.

GENERAL INDEX.

Pigli family, I. 64.

Piles, siege of Pisa, IV. 157.

Pilgrimage of Rinaldo, I. 263.

Pino, cowardice punished, I. 179.

Pinoro, 2d Guicciardini Mission, IV.
359 ff.

Piombino, I. xix, xxiii, 284-286, 300,
857; Valentino, II. 26; Jacopo, III.
8; M.’s Mission, II. 4-5; Pisan
war, III. 33-37 ; French designs, ITI.
90; special mission, LV. 157; peace
conference, IV. 161; letter, LV. 168 ;
4th French Mission, IV. 285 ff.

Pioneers : implements, LV. 159; siege
of Pisa, IV. 176.

Pisa: incidents, I. xvii, xx, xxiii ff, 18,
28, 32, 37, 44, 52, 60, 87, 89, 94, 105,
112, 158, 165, 196, 225-226, 252, 284,
285, 369, 886-391, 408, 4138, 418-419 ;
II. 18, 26, 46, 70, 179, 180, 206-207,
286, 297, 334-338, 3872, 3875, 3892,
423, 429; III. 3-6, 18, 27-41; siege,
Ill. 42 ff.; French court, III. 58-
118 passim; history, HI. 180-1386
passim; Valentino Mission, III. 170
ff.; new revolt, IIL 302; affairs,
IIf. 401, 410; 2d French Mission,
III. 414 ff; war preparations, IIL.
450-459; 2d Sienna Mission, III.
460 ff; siege, III. 488; Maximilian,
IV. 81; siege and 8d commission,
IV. 156-192; grand council, IV. 193
ff.; 4th French Mission, LV. 281, ff. ;
ecclesiastical council, IV. 297-802 ;
citadel, 1V. 805; French connection
with loss, IV. 419.

Pisistratus, II. 102, 157-158, 230, 346.

Pistoja: incidents, I. xviii, 37, 65, 76-78,
84, 92-95, 194, 210; II. 55, 70, 300,
392-393; Valentino Mission, III.
145; Pisan war, III. 485; special
mission, IV. 157; siege of Pisa, IV.
159; letter, IV. 178; 2d QGuicciar-
dini Mission, IV. 349 ff.

Pitti: houses, riot, I. 117; Luca, I. 323-
825, 834, 835, 340-343.

Pittigliano, count, I. 402; Venetian
mercenary, II. 43; Valentino Mis-
sion, III. 220.

Pius I1., I. 315, 825, 832-333.

Pius IIL, I. xix; III. 283-288, 298.

Placidia, wife of Ataulf, I. 13.

Plague in Rome, III. 322-324.

Plantianus, conspiracy, II. 3838, 338, 842.

459

Platonic academy in Florence, I. xxx.

Pledges to be broken, II. 58.

Pliny the author, I. 61.

Po river: name, I. 18; cavalry, I. 252 ;
German Mission, IV. 99 ff.; galleys
and rocks, 1V. 211; League army,
IV. 352 ff.

Podesta, I. 65, 148.

Podesterias, III. 467; IV. 5-9.

Poems, M.’s, I. xxii, xxvii.

Poggio family: Messer, L. 7; Jacopo, I.
375-377 ; Piero, ILI. 64, 74.

Poggio Imperiale, I. 418.

Poggibonzi: troops, I. 388-890; 3d
Sienna Mission, IV. 79-80; Pisan
commissions, 1V. 804.

Poland, LV. 38.

Polenta of Ravenna, I. 47.

Polesine territory, 1.399, 404; III. 429,

Pollari, anecdote, II. 134-135.

Pompey, I. 18, 61; If 168, 176; 220,
222, 365.

Pompilius, Numa, II. 126-127.
Numa.)

Pomponius, tribune, IT. 126, 406.

Ponte alla Carraja, I. 116.

Ponte a Reno, 2d Guicciardini Mission,
IV. 359 ff.

Ponte Vecchio, I. 63, 72, 88, 115-117.

Pontedera, III. 3; artillery, ILI. 35, 37.

Pontius, Claudius, speech, I. 863.

Pontremoli, I. 281, 414; soldiers, EIT.
75; siege of Pisa, IV. 180 ff.; zd
Guicciardini Mission, IV. 349 ff.

Ponzio, naval battle, I. 220. :

Popes: authority, I. 238-27; three at
once, I. 52.

Popilius, plot, IT. 3438.

Popolonia, changes, I. 18.

Poppi, count, I. 284-285, 250, 257-259,
263-265, 279.

Poppi, M. there, IV. 9.

Population: northern regions, I. 12, 18;
free countries, II. 233; M.’s maxims,
IL. 448-450.

Porcari, Stefano, I. 305-806.

Porsenna, attack on Rome, II. 165.

Porta alla Croce, I. 86.

Porta Nuova, Milan, I. 298.

Portinari family, I. 828; Pigello, Ger-
man Mission, IV. 91 ff.; Mantuan
Mission, LV. 197 ff.

Porto Venere, I. 52.

Portugal, trade, III. 214.

(See

460 | GENERAL INDEX.

Posthumius, broken promises, II. 421.

Post, royal, LV. 269.

Postscript, lost, ILI. 266.

Pozzenere valley, I. 225.

Pretor, first Roman, If. 284-286.

Preetorian guard, II. 124.

Pragmatic Sanction, LV. 408.

Prato, I. 69, 82-84, 90-91, 234, 263, 352,
854, 418; II. 99, 804; Valentino
Mission, III. 218.

Preaching and practice, II. 59.

Precautions, II. 429-431.

Present and past, II. 223-226.

Pride and humility, II. 187.

Primus, Antonius, II. 159-160.

Princes: submission to Christianity, I.
23; gifts to, II. 8; conduct, II. 4;
maintain themselves, II. 6; natural
and usurping, II. 6; rebellion, IL.
6; conquered territory, Il. 7-9;
protection of lesser powers, II. 9;
friends of nobility, II. 10; absolute,
II. 14; residence in conquered state,
II. 19; Darius, II. 21; two ways, II.
22; attain states by crimes, LI. 28;
aid of nobles or people, II. 33-34 ;
good will of people secured in differ-
ent ways, II. 34; risk of changing
government, II. 85; authority felt,
II. 85; combat enemies, II. 36;
losses of subjects, II. 37 ; summary
II. 40; mercenaries, II. 41 ff; lead
of armies, II. 41; native troops, II.
48 ; military duties, II. 48 ff; art of
war, including topography, II. 49-
50 ; history, II. 50; winning applause,
II.51; special traits and good qual-
ities, II. 51; vices lead to safety,
II. 52; liberality and economy, IL.
52-54; mercy, II. 54; love or
fear, II. 55-57; cruelty a duty, II.
56; fidelity or deceit, I]. 57-59; fox
and lion, II. 58; pledges, IL. 58;
five advisable qualities, II. 59; pop-
ularity and strength, Il. 60; con-
spiracies, II. 61, 62; responsibili-
ties shifted, Il. 62; army, II. 63-
65; Roman emperors, II. 63-66;
pleasing people rather than army,
II. 67-68; fortresses useful, II.
69 ff.; arming subjects, II. 69-
70; factions and suspected ene-
mies, II. 70; reputation, II. 78; true
friends or fair enemies, II. 74; na-

tional allies, II. 75; industry, II. 76;
ministers and favors, II. 76, 77; flat-
tery, II. 78; counsel, Il. 79; new
rules, II. 80; loss of Italian states,
II. 80-81; blaming fortune, II. 81-
82; different qualities and occasions,
Il. 83; time for new rule in Italy,
II. 84; extraordinary measures, IL.
139; feeble, II. 147; virtuous suc-
cession, II. 148; lack of national
armies, II. 149; organizing anew,
II. 155-156; ingratitude, II. 158-
161; suspicion natural, II. 160; per-
sonal command of army, II. 162;
good will of people, II. 166; attack-
ing evils, II. 168; duty, II. 201;
people wiser, Il. 214-219; gratitude
and regret, II, 216; requirements,
II. 218; evil-disposed, II. 218-219;
princely alliances, II. 219-221 ; inter-
ests opposed to people, II. 231 ; hold-
ing other countries in subjection, II.

. 254; military duties, Il. 251; weak

alliances unwise, II. 254; where
best to make war, II. 255; where
enemies best met, II. 258; cunning
and force, II. 259; dignity, II. 261;
ancient Rome, II. 279-282; hire-
lings, IT. 282-284 ; distance, II. 285;
general inability, II. 289; middle
courses, II. 290; fortresses, II. 294—
298; insults, II. 802-305; revenge,
II. 505-807 ; purchased alliances,
II. 809-314 ; exiles, II. 314; religious
institutions, II. 320; destruction of
enemies, IT. 326, 827 ; thrones lost, II.
327-329; conspiracies, II. 329 ff;
assassinations, II. 831-332 ; familiar-
ity, II. 833-554; accused of cruelty,
II. 347 ; flexibility, II. 351-358 ; indo-
lence, II. 356; combinations unsuc-
cessful, IT. 5360; neighborly hatred,
II. 861, 862; Xenophon’s model, II.
384; popular and princely faults,
II. 595, 896; appointments, II. 406;
judgment poorer than that of people,
II. 409; revenge, II. 410; good
troops, II. 417; M.’s maxims, II.
455-464; Germany, IV. 384-390.

“Prince, The,” allusions, II. 229, 422.
Principalities: hereditary defined, and

new ones established, II. 5; old ones
easier to govern, II.6; mixed, II.6;
three ways to govern, II. 17; more

GENERAL INDEX.

easily subdued, II. 18; difficulty of
new ones, II. 18; acquired in differ-
ent ways, II. 21 ff.; crimes, II. 28;
prominence, II. 82; popular favor,
II. 33; measure of power, II. 35;
ecclesiastical, II. 37-40; stability
and divinity, II. 38; summary, II.
40; new ones made secure, II. 80.

Principi, military division, II. 265-266.

Priors, I. 97 ; Florence, I. 71, 72, 73 ff. ;
colleges, I. 133; trades, I. 324; lib-
erty, I. 824; III. 7, 10; Pisa, 1V.
194.

Priscus, assassination, II. 826, 327, 329.

Prisons: Florence, I. 76; Stinche, I. 84.

Prisoners killed, I. 265.

Privernum, forts, IT. 291-293, 299.

Promises not binding, II. 421-422.

Prophecy, II. 212-213.

Prophets, armed, II. 20.

Proscription, wholesale, I. 218.

Prosperity, IT. 453.

Providence, trust for health, IV. 346.

Provost of the palace, IV. 415.

Public funds misused, I. 82.

Public good, II. 452.

Publicola, Valerius, IT. 384.

Publicoli, characteristics, IT. 427.

Pucci family: banished, I. 204; An-
tonio, commissioner, I. 409-410;
Fra, Val di Bagno, I. 808; Lorenzo,
I. 148; Piero, courier, III. 30; Puc-
cio, I. 197.

Pregadi, council, IT. 199,

Puglia, I. 27-31, 87, 155, 398.

Pulcher, anecdote, II. 135,

Pulci family, I. 64.

Puliciano, halt, I. 256.

Punic war, II. 135, 258, 403.

Pusillanimity, II. 60.

Purses, election, I. 158, 218.

Pyrenees, boundary difficulties, IV. 409.

Pyrrhus: conquests, II. 16; poison
story, II. 377.

Q.

UALITIES, five advisable, IT. 59.
Quarters, Florentine divisions, I.
TH.
Quattrino, courier, IV. 73.
Quicksand, illustration, II. 84,
Quintianus, plot, II. 342.

461

Quintus, Titus, consul, IT. 80, 133, 366,
369, 376, 377.
Quosi, mill, 1V. 156; letter, IV. 160.

R.

ABELAR, Dr., IV. 95 ff.
Radda castle, I. 384.

Rafts, IV. 106.

Ragusa: origin, II. 96; Venetian com-
plications, III. 882 ff.; Venetian
Mission, IV. 325 ff.

Rain defeats an army, I. 172.

Ramazotto, papal captain, LV. 17.

Ramiro, Valentino Mission, III. 152
ff., 257 ff.

Ransoms, I. 267-268.

Rapacity, II. 60.

Rassina, I. 258, 263.

Ravel, Mgr. de, importunity, ITI. 423.

Ravenna: history, I. 15, 17, 18, 20, 23-
26, 47, 237, 238, 267, 270, 347, 412;
II. 45, 87; Valentino Mission, III.
154; 2d Guicciardini Mission, IV.
350 ff. ; battle, IV. 389.

Reale, Mgr. de, a Provengal in Tuscany,
Tt21;

Rear-guard, military term, IT. 268.

Record destroyed, II. 241-243.

Rectors, Florence, I. 69, 85, 96, 98, 106-
107, 110, 407.

Red sea, miracle, IT. 86.

Reforms, Lando, I. 145.

Reggio, I. 29, 86, 45, 55, 282, 297.

Regillus, battle, II. 274.

Regulus, IT. 277, 322, 389.

Regnier of Anjou, I. 219-221, 273, 294,
309-310, 317.

Rehoboam, II. 147.

Religion : changes, I. 18; Christian, I.
23; princes, II. 59; Roman, IL.
126-128; Gentile, II. 129; impor-
tance, II. 129; overcomes difficul-
ties, II. 133; basis, II. 134; extreme
remedy, II. 186; teachings, IT. 232;
change, II. 241; republics, II. 319-
823; conservative, II. 823; M.’s
maxims, II. 437, 438.

Republics: troubles, I. 119; revolu-
tions, I. 167; ancient, I. 265; gen-
eral, II. 3; subjection, II. 17; differ-
ent kinds II. 98-104; composition,
II. 107; two motives for war, IL

462

113; two advantages, II. 114; cal-
umnies and law-givers, If. 118; ne-
cessity in founding, II. 122; com-
manding citizens, II. 140; national
armies, II. 149; well ordered, IL.
153-154; good will of people, II.
165-166; evil temporized with, II.
167; feeble, II. 177-180 ; progress of
Rome, II. 197; duty, II. 201; private
ambition, II. 202; spending money,
II. 209; nobility opposed, II. 210-
212; alliances, Il. 219-221; destruc-

tion by Romans, II. 285; three an- |.

cient methods, II. 237; acting like
princes, II. 259; weakness fatal, II.
264; imitation ofRome, II. 278 ff.;
German, IT. 279-282; hirelings, II.
282-284 ; superior citizens hated, II.
286 ; general inability, II. 289; mid-
dle courses, II. 290; fortresses, II.
294; insults, II. 802-805; revenge,
II. 805-307 ; purchased alliances, IT.
309-314; long existence and good
principles, IT. 819-525; conspiracies,
IL. 345-346 ; changes, II. 350 ; effem-
inacy, II. 354; Roman in danger,
II. 359; neighborly hatred, IT. 361,
862; small personal merit, II. 570-
371; offenders untrustworthy, II.
372, 375; harsh measures, II. 376;
long leaderships, II. 887-588, Flor-
entine feeble, II. 892; danger from
leaders, II. 394-395; envy, II. 3896-
899; equability, II. 899-402; mili-
tary organization, II. 402; counsel-
lors, II. 409; precautions, IL. 429;
evils in Rome, IT. 480.

Reputation, IT. 407.

Resolution, IJ. 453.

Responsibilities, evasion of, IT. 62.

Rettori, Veronese piazza, I. 247.

Revenge, II. 9, 805-307.

Review, military, 1V. 58.

Rhegium, capture, II. 283.

Rhodes, I. 82, 157, 895; II. 510, 316;
IIT. 109.

Riario family: Girolamo, III. 6; Otta-
viano, M.’s Missions, III. 6-24 pas-
sim; Rafaelle I. 373 ff.

Ricanati, Eugenius IV., I. 277.

Ricci family: feud, I. 120-180, 149,
168-169; Michele, II. 476 ff.; Sam-
miniato, I. 164; Uguccione, I. 122,
128, 128, 129.

GENERAL INDEX.

Ricoveri, Niccolo, I. 161.

Rido, Antonio, I. 251.

Ridolfi family : Antonio, I. 395; Gio-
vanbattista, II. 369; III. 28, 81, 95,
162; 2d Roman Mission, IV. 10 ff. ;
Piero, I. 417; Rossi, Pisan council,
IV. 298-302.

Rimini: history, I. 22, 47, 52, 55, 401;
IT. 23; ILI. 108; Valentino Mission,
Ill. 152 f— ; 2d Roman Mission, IV.
10 ff.; 2d Guicciardini Mission, IV.
865 ff.; Gismondo, I. 848; Ruberto,
I. 860, 388, 400.

Rinaldi, borgo, Pisan war, III. 30-34
passim.

Ringhiera, steps of Florentine palace,
I. 104-105.

Rinieri Dei, merchant, IIT. 54, 63, 106.
(See DE.)

Rinuccio, count, III. 4, 195.

Rio, Francesco, papal court, III. 348 ff.

Riots, Florentine, I. 74, 162.

’Risorbolo, saltpetre, III. 18.

Riva, camp, IV. 187 ff.

Rivo Alto, Adriatic sea, I. 45.

Roads, III. 266.

Robertet, general, III. 57, 62, 66, 75,
83, 87, 92-93, 108, 114, 116, 119, 128,
134, 186-1387, 398 ff.; IV. 223-229
passim, 242 ff., 292 ff.

Robert of Naples, I. 42-47 passim, 87-
90, 100, 126; II. 250, 257.

Rocco di Vada, capture, I. 305, 307.

Romagna: history, I. 21, 26, 36, 40, 47,
129, 165, 170, 174, 178, 180, 238, 254,
262, 270, 274, 280, 871-373, 416; IT.
18; Valentino, II. 23 ff., 39, 46, 210,
256, 298, 395; papal wars, III. 7,
105, 108, 122-128, 141, 287, 304-307,
818 ff.; French court, IIT. 390 ff.,
409; 2d Roman Mission, IV. 19 ff. ;
2d Guicciardini Mission, LV. 371 ff ;
Valentino, IV. 377 ff.

Roman armies, II. 17, 42, 227-228, 238,
248, 246-250, 253, 254, 257, 258, 268,
284, 297, 301, 812, 314, 317-319.

Roman church, I. xix, xxiii, 25, 26,
235-236; II. 38, 73, 1380, 287, 320-
321; missions, III. 283-352, passim ;
IV. 10-75.

Roman emperors, I. 26; II. 62-68, 124,
125.

Roman empire, I. 10, 12, 28, 33, 60-
61; IL. 11, 16, 44, 48, 74, 105, 107,

GENERAL INDEX.

113-114, 144-145, 157, 158, 161-166,
173-174, 1938-199, 226, 229, 285-239
249-261, 281, 289-292, 351-352, 359,
396-397, 400.

Roman kings, II. 146, 205.

Romano, Greek emperor, I. 27.

Roman people, II. 213-217, 226-229,
237-239, 278.

Roman republic, I. 119.

Roman senate and consuls, I. 35, 35;
II. 88, 103-106, 111, 194, 217, 350.
Romans, king of, Maximilian, IV. 28,

293-294.

Rome, city, I. 8, 15, 18-23, 27, 30, 32,
165, 215, 310, 379 ff; II. 9, 88, 98-
103, 106-108, 181-1382, 308 ; IV. 330,
371-378.

Romena, captures, I. 2384, 257, 263.

Romolino, Valentino Mission, III. 155
ff.

Ronco river, earthworks, IT. 271.

Rondinelli family, riots, I. 115.

Rosamunda, Commundo’s daughter, I.
21-22.

Rossetto family, Valentino Mission,
Ill. 224 fff.

Romulus, II. 19, 20, 98, 120-121, 125-
127, 146-148, 197, 520, 464.

Rossi family, I. 64, 115-116; Antonio, -

at Lucca, I. 194 ff.; Gino, Valentino
Mission, III. 181.

Rothelin, marquis, III. 127, 137.

Rouen, IT. 18; III. 91-92.

Roverdo, forts, IV. 98.

Rovezzano, capture there, I. 86.

Rovigo, Venice, I. 404.

Royal lieutenant, Milan, LV. 282-283.

Rovere: Giovanni, prefect, III. 106,
108 ; Giuliano, cardinal, II. 107, 283;
IV. 42 ff. (See Juxius II.) ; Maria,
III. 800; Mantuan Mission, IV. 198
ff.; duke of Urbino, IV. 831-338,

Rubaconte bridge, I. 98, 115, 116.

Ruberto, great battle, I. 401.

Rubertino, 8d Pisan Commission, IV.
168.

Rubetius, Publius, I. 133.

Rucellai: gardens, I. xxx, xxxi; family,
I. 109; Naddo, I. 100, 101; Paolo,
III. 383 ff. ; Raffaello, IV. 94.

Rudolph, emperor, I. 39, 40.

Ruffoli, gonfalonier, I. 72.

Rufinus, governor, I. 13.

Ruggieri, I. 31, 36.

463

Ruosi, Giovanpaolo, IIT. 292.
Rustichelli, patriot, I. 105.
Rutilius, consul, IT. 348.

S.

ABINES, the, IT. 184.
Sabina, St., I. 26.

Sachetti family, I. 64; Giacopo, I. 49.

Sack, escape, I. 246.

Safe-conducts: for M., III. 45-46, 221,
224; Valentino Mission, III. 151 ff. ;
copy, III. 174-175; siege of Pisa,
TV, 178 i1.3 Fisan: council, fy,
294, 295.

Saginetto, vicar of Naples, I. 94.

Saguntum, allusion, IT. 220.

Saiburg, 3d French Mission, IV. 252 ff.

Sailors, Pisan war, ITI. 488.

St. Angelo, castle, I. 51, 251, 406; Val-
entino, III. 283-284; incidents, III.
817, 825, 373; LV. 251, 373.

St. Clement, usurping pope, I. 33.

St. Dominic and order, I. 36; II. 3822,
438.

St. Francis and order, I. 86; II. 822,
438.

St. Gregory, II. 242.

St. Jacobus, camp, IV. 171.

St. John: day and conspiracy, I. 108;
Lateran, III. 858, 367, 371, 372.

St. Mark: c-y, III. 155; image, IV.
207, 214.

St. Pierre le Moutier, letters, III. 55,
56.

St. Peter’s church, ITI. 207, 321.

St. Romulus, day, I. 62.

St. Stephen, day, I. 863.

Saints, the, political, I. 129.

Saladin, I. 382.

Sala, captain, ITI. 185.

Salarolo, Valentino there, ITI. 196.

Salary, M. and Casa, III. 55, 56, 85. 86.

Salerno, prince of, I. 30, 31, 149, 411.

Saliente, Monsieur, Pisan war, III. 28.

Salient, envoy, III. 99.

Sallust, II. 192, 246; history, IT. 346.

Saltpetre, III. 10, 11, 17, 18, 329.

Salt, purchases refused, I. 399.

Salutare, outrage by crossbowmen,
III. 12, 24, 26.

Saluzzo, marquis, III. 405; IV. 331-
339 ff.

464 GENERAL INDEX.

Salviati family: Alamanno, I. 193;
Francesco, archbishop, I. 97, 369,
3871; two Jacopos, plot, I. 873-377;
marriage, I 417.

Samaritans, illustration, III. 232.

Samnium and Samnites, II. 186, 137,
227, 230, 233, 234, 249, 260, 261, 282,
292, 362, 363, 383, 414, 420-428
passim.

Samplet, Pisan war, III. 42.

San Antonio, gate, 1. 247.

San Benedetto, pass, I. 255.

San Casciano, tempest, I. 313, 389; 3d
Sienna Mission, LV. 79.

San Donnino, letters, 1V. 291, 296, 299,
346 ff.

San Felice, fort, I. 247, 248.

San Gallo, day, IV. 284, 392.

San Gimignano, revolts, I. 112, 387, 890.

San Giorgio: soldiers, I. 51; Genoa,
I. 406-409 ; cardinal, II. 28; Valen-
tino Mission, III. 219; forts, Il.
339 ff.

San Giovanni, I. 68, 74; festival, I. 131;
alla Vena, I. 226; III. 80-88.

San Girolamo, erected, I. 326.

San Jacopo, camp and letters, IV. 188,
i.

San Leo, ITI. 148, 152, 154, 224; Valen-
tino, IV. 378.

San Lorenzo: church, I. 72; piazza,
I. 141; borgo, I. 256; eve, I. 324;
building, I. 326.

San Malo, cardinal, IV. 287 ff.

San Marco, erected, I. 326.

San Marino, papal court, IV. 52-58.

San Martino, IV. 120, 203 ff.; Gian-
otto, III. 43.

San Michele: Albizzi, III. 30; Maxi-
milian, IV. 108 ff.; Mantuan Mis-
sion, IV. 213.

San Miniato: church I. 28; new edi-
fices, I. 326; letters, IV. 182-188 ;
Pisan Commission, IV. 305 ff.

San Niccolo, siege, I. 257.

San Paolo, III. 372.

San Piero, Grado, siege of Pisa, IV.
171-182 passim; Maggiore, I. 80,
115, 141; Scheraggio, convention,
I. 124; Veronese fort, I. 247.

San Pietro in Vincola, II. 28.

San Pulinari, conspiracy, I. 206-207.

San Quirico, 3d Sienna Mission, IV.
78, 79.

San Salvi, monks, I. 86-87.

San Savino, Valentino Mission, ITI.
Za,

San Severino: Ruberto, I. 354, 355,
385-392 passim, 899, 403, 411-414
passim ; Venetian mercenary, II. 43;
cardinal, III. 124, 284; Pisan coun-
cil, IV. 287; Germany, IV. 291.

San Sepolcro, I. 234, 235, 259, 263, 270,
827 ; League army, IV. 349 ff.; 2d
Guicciardini Mission, IV. 370 ff.

San Sisto, I. 348.

Sansovino, sculptor, IV. 51.

San Spirito: Roman hospital, I. 386;
convent sacked, I. 134; piazza, L.
141; fire, I. 355.

Santa Cecilia, battle, II. 374.

Santa Croce, I. 102, 133, 326; cardinal,
III. 473, 479; IV. 76-82; Pisan
council, IV. 287-302.

Santa Fiore (Montefiore), IV. 49;
Mantuan Mission, IV. 212.

Santa Gonda, army, I. 226.

Santa Maria Castello, attack, I. 226-
227.

Santa Maria Nuova, hospital, I. 204.

Santa Reparata, church, I. 96, 110, 163,
235 ; assassination, I. 374; lightning,
I. 420.

Santa Stefano, I. 63.

Santa Trinita, I. 68, 78; church, I. 115.

Santa Verdiana, built, I 326.

Santi, illegitimate Bentivogli, I. 279-
280.

Santiano, Julius II. there, IV. 45.

Santo Arcangiolo, capture of ambassa-
dors, LV. 58 ff.

Santo Regolo, defeat, IT. 267.

San Zeno: borgo, I. 247; Mantuan
suburb, IV. 214 ff

Saracens, I. 24, 27, 31; II. 37, 224, 253-
254.

Sardinia, II. 228.

Sassetti family, I. 328.

Sassetta, political agent, III. 42, 47.

Sassoferrato, letters, III. 266 ff.

Sasso road, IV. 349 ff.

Saturninus, plot, II. 342.

Saul, king, II. 47.

Savelli family, III. 292, 448 ; Luca, III.
293, 865 ff.; Niccolo, IV. 51.

Savona, cardinalate, III. 284.

Savonarola, I. xv; II. 20, 128, 191, 212,
398.

ey ee err ere an, pe | ee ee

GENERAL INDEX.

Savoy, duke: Milan, I. 287, 288, 299;
8d French Mission, IV. 228 ff.

Saxony : prince, I. 28; troops, IV. 141.

Scevola, story, II. 154, 322.

Scali family, I. 64, 164; II. 34; Giorgio,
I. 130, 131, 148, 151, 152, 156, 167,
202; Guglielmo, I. 51; Mastino of
Verona, I. 99, 100.

Scarperia, Valentino Mission, III. 144.

Scesi, pope there, I. 51.

Scevinus, plot, II. 335.

Schaffhausen, German Mission, IV.
86 ff.

Sciarra of Colonna, I. 41.

Scipio Africanus, Il. 50, 56, 57, 123,
126, 161, 207, 217, 222, 256, 314-316,
821, 354, 358, 364, 378, 880, 400, 407,
408, 440.

Scipione, recommended, III. 196.

Sclavonia and Sclaves, I. 20, 24.

Scolari family, I. 64.

Scurcigliati, Giulio, III. 91, 101, 114,
115, 123-124, 138-139.

Scurvy, III. 156.

Scythia, II. 248.

Scythe chariots, II. 272-273.

Seal of decemvirs, III. 282.

Sejanus, conspiracy, II. 833.

Self-knowledge, II. 452.

Selim, sultan, II. 97, 409-410.

Selva, troops, III. 469.

Semenza, confidant of Maximilian, ITI.
128; IV. 53.

Sempronius, II. 374, 427.

Senate: Roman, I. 21, 49; II. 103, 177,
178, 186, 189, 190, 195, 204, 213;
Venetian, I. 233.

Senator, one Roman-papal, I. 36, 48,
51.

Seneschals, French, IV. 418, 416.

Senso, treason, I. 258,

Seragli family, I. 276.

Seravezzan peasants, speeches, I. 190-
192.

Serchio river, I. 193-195, 887; ITI. 44.

Serentano, German Mission, IV. 91 ff.,
153 ff.

Serezana, I. 170, 225, 227, 392, 405, 406,
408, 410, 411, 413, 417, 418; IV. 120,
222; 3d French Mission, IV. 235-
236.

Sergio, changed, I. 27.

Sergius, incident, II. 164.

Seristori, Giovanni, I. 377.

VOL. IV.

465

Ser Nihilo, nickname, ITI. 84.

Servi, erections, I. 326.

Servitude and liberty, IT. 349-350.

Servius, allusion, II. 197.

Sessa, duke of, I. 219.

Seven communes, German Mission, IV.
107 ff.

Severus, II. 63-68, 124, 333, 338, 342.

Sforza family: Milan, I. 44, 385, 392;
III. 3889; IV. 425; Alessandro, I.
280, 3800, 806; cardinal, III. 284;
Catharine, mission, I. xvii; II. 345;
III. 6-26 passim; Valentino Mission,
III. 179 ff.; Furli, III. 354; IV. 337;
Francesco, I. 56, 194 ff., 215, 226,
231, 282-259 passim, 269-299 pas-
sim, 315, 829-333; II. 5, 22, 42, 44,
49, 72, 294-300; Galeazzo, I. 3380,
333, 336, 546, 347, 355, 359, 3862-366,
385; Lodovico, I. 899-404, 413-416 ;
II. 7, 264, 360; IIT. 117.

Sforzesca, mercenary troops, I. 215,
294.

Sham fight, II. 272.

Ship supplies, IV. 279-280.

Siaga mountain, Maximilian, IV. 107.

Sibylline books, IT. 152.

Sicily, I. 19, 30; foreign rule, I. 31, 37,
40, 82; II. 29, 114, 228, 256, 351;
Valentino Mission, III. 228; 8d
French Mission, IV. 243.

Sicovesus, allusion, II. 247.

Sidicians, the, II. 253, 254, 260.

Sieges: artillery, II. 270, 272; descrip-
tion, II. 314, 315, 361; German
preparations, IV. 384.

Sienna: missions, I. xx, xxiii; his-
tory, I. 55, 65, 115, 134, 158, 165,
284, 301, 802, 310, 331, 344, 346, 357,
861, 372, 388-398, 417; Valentino,
II. 26; incidents, IT. 211, 286, 800 ;
Pisan war, III. 42; Louis XII., III.
72; complications, III. 127; Valen-
tino Mission, III. 164 ff., 269-280 ;
mission, III. 281-282 ; Valentino, III.
845; France, III. 393 ff., 401; 2d
mission, IIT. 457-463 passim; 38d
mission, IV. 76-82; German Mis-
sion, IV. 97; 8d French Mission,
IV. 269; mission of condolence,
IV. 306-307; ‘ History,” IV. 306;
Guicciardini Missions, IV. 336 ff. ;
allusion, IV. 420.

Sieve, enrolment, IV. 3.

466

Sigismund of Hungary, I. 52.

Signoria, Florentine, I. 74-191 passim.

Silkworms, IV. 158.

Simeonda, empress, I. 28.

Simmaco, death, I. 17.

Simoncino, church condottiere, I. 260.

Simone: count, I. 111; conspiracy, I.
141; courier, IV. 101 ff.

Simonetta, Cecco, I. 863, 385, 392.

Simony, LV. 276.

Sincerity, IV. 422.

Sinigaglia: Valentino’s enemies, III.
142, 260-264; IV. 377-888 ff.

Sitalces of Thrace, II. 341.

Six citizens, Florence, I. 74-76.

Six signori, Florence, I. 113.

Sixteen gonfaloniers, I. 114.

Sixths, Florentine wards, I. 69, 71, 118.

Sixtus IV., I. 348, 358-860, 883, 398 ff.,
402-405; factions, II. 39; fortresses,
IL. 295; election, IIL. 298, 337.

Sizi family, I. 64.

Skirmishes, utility, II. 413-416.

Slavonia, II. 65.

Slaves, subjects, If. 14.

Snow impedes army, IV. 354.

Soave, fortress, I. 244.

Soderini family: Cardinal Francesco,
Valentino, I11. 141-327 passim ; pa-
pal business, III. 374 ff.; 2d Ro-
man Mission, IV. 10 ff. ; Niccolo, I.
199, 334-347 passim ; Pagolantonio,
I. 413; Piero, gonfaloniere, I. xix,
xxvi, xxvii; II. 116, 202-203,
212-213, 825-326, 854, 898; III. 27,
47, 61, 66, 89, 108, 115, 160; 2d
Roman Mission, IV. 10 ff.; letter,
IV. 155; instructions, 1V. 220 ff. ;
Tommaso, I. 199, 888, 341, 350-351,
357, 358, 384-891.

Soldanieri family: I. 64.

Solderani, Giovanni, I. 68.

Soldiers: wages, I. 253; IL 41, 253;
III. 7, 9, 14, 18, 19, 28, 1738-176; IV.
185-187, 305-307 ff.; 356, 357, 361,
364; usurpers, II. 22; military
princes, II. 63; “of fortune,” II.
275; bribes, IV. 158-159; German,
Swiss, French, Spanish. IV. 3888-
390, 407.

Solomon, king, II. 147, 455.

Solon of Athens, II. 102, 252.

Soncino castle, I. 259.

Soncino, the, Minorite, IV. 39.

GENERAL INDEX.

Sophia, wife of Justinus, I. 20.

Sores of Italy, II. 85.

Sora, siege, II. 276.

Sovereignties; petty Italian, I. 171;
how achieved, 28-82; hereditary,
TT, 100;

Spain: early, I. 18, 14; language, I.
18; Italy, II. 12, 16, 25, 28, 75, 82,
83, 87, 209, 228, 267, 271, 287, 308,
304, 364; ILI. 82; France, III. 137;
Valentino Mission, II. 1538 ff. ;
troops, III. 340; Italy, 1503, III.
578; French court, III. 890-408 pas-
sim; complications, III. 474; 3d
Sienna Mission, IV. 81; Verona,
IV. 201 ff.; Mantuan Mission, IV.
215; 8d French Mission, IV. 228-
240 passim, 248 ff.; 4th French Mis-
sion, LV. 285 ff.; Pisan council, LV.
293; interference with Florence, IV.
S811 ff; League army, IV. 3381;
French borders, IV. 406, 409; Giro-
lami’s mission, IV. 421-425.

Spannochi, Valentino Mission, III.
151 ff.

Sparta, II. 17, 34, 42, 99, 102, 110-112,
122, 178, 215, 235-238, 251-258, 298,
336-341, 865, 870.

Speeches: Agrippa, II. 869; Amboise,
III. 77, 115-116; Andrea, I. 864;
Annius, II. 261-262; Apolionides,
II. 263; auspices, II. 405, 405;
Camillus, IJ. 290; Capponi, I. 264;
citizen to Lorenzo, I. 382; Clau-
dius Pontius, II. 863 ; conspirators, I.
168; Corcou, II. 77; Corvinus, II.
416; Cosimo, I. 280; doge of Ven-
ice, I. 254; Gasparo, I. 299; Julius
II., [V. 63-64 ; Livius, II. 192, 260;
Lorenzo, I. 880-882 ; Louis XII., UL.
60, 97,135; M., IV. 13-14; Messius,
IL. 863; Milanese envoy, I. 291-298 ;
Neri, I. 242; Pacovius, II. 195;
Palla, I. 206; Papirius, II. 412-413 ;
Piero de Medici, I. 341-842 ; Poppi, -
I. 264; Privernati, II. 291-292 ; reb-
els, I. 345; Rinaldo degli Abizzi, I-
175-176, 205; Robertet, III. 92 ; Ro-
man legate, II. 74; Sforza, I. 253-
254; Soderini, I. 340, 351; Uzano, I.
176, 198, 201, 208; Valentino, III.
147-150, 216-218, 271-274; Vene-
tian ambassador, I. 800-801; Vene-
tian prisoner, I. 289.

GENERAL INDEX.

Spedaletto, Florentines there, I. 284;
Valentino Mission, III. 271.

Spedale, Valentino Mission, III. 275.

Spezzia, exiles, IV. 231.

Spices from India, III. 214.

Spinelli, courier, III. 161.

Spini, Florentine leader, I. 74.

Spinola: Genoese insurrection, I. 222;
Gherardino, buys Lucca, IL 96;
Francesco, exile, I. 221.

Spinucci of Furli, IL. 8.

Spoleto, sacked, I. 358.

Squirrel, gonfalon, I. 142.

Squittini, Florentine election, I. 92.

Stale, League army, IV. 350 ff.

Stampace castle, abandoned, III. 27.

Standards, Florentine, I. 105.

States: free, II. 187, 188; evils at-
tacked, II. 166-169; of the Church,
I. 216, 217; feeble, II. 262, 310,
311.

Stefano, Messer, I. 142; priest and
plot, I. 573 ff.

Stephen VIIL, I. 28.

Stigliano cas le, burnt, I. 194.

Stilicho, governor, I. 13.

Stinche castle and prisons, I. 84, 110;
Ly 19.

Stolen property, III. 114.

Stradiotes, III. 258; IV. 20, 42, 209.

Strangling, Valentino, IV. 383.

Stratagems, II. 366, 428.

Strasburg, city, IV. 384.

Strozzi family: rebels, I. 164; Andrea,
I. 114, 115; Carlo, I. 122-134 passim,
149; Filippo, I. 149; Giovan, I. 345;
Leonardo, III. 18, 19; Palla, I. 206-
210 passim; Piero, I. 134; Tommaso,
I. 130, 131, 142, 144, 149-152.

Stufa, Giovenco, I. 142.

Suabia: league, II. 240; IV. 133;
Swiss, LV. 126-130 passim; Report
on Germany, IV. 391 ff.; diet, IV.
393.

Success: princely aim, II. 59; differ-
ences, II. 83; achieved by change,
II. 853.

Sulmona, Jacopo, I. 331.

Sulpicius, Cn., general, risking battle,
II. 357, 358; sham cavalry, mules,
II. 3867-368.

“Sun, selling in July,” old Italian pro-
verb, IIL. 463.

Superbus, Tarquinius and sons, story

467

of Lucretia, II. 326-329, (See Tar-
QUINS.)

Superior men hated, II. 286.

Sutrium, defeat, II. 318.

Swiss : hirelings, Il. 42-47 passim, 87,
131, 240, 267, 273-280, 287, 310, 358,
359, 374; III. 28-82, 41, 42, 53, 58,
59, 64, 66, 75-89 passim, 94-103 pas-
sim, 113, 114, 127; Valentino Mis-
sion, III. 153, 185, 393 ff., 409-421
passim, 485; IV. 57-62, 70; Ger-
man Mission, 1V. 85 ff, 126-143
passim ; Mantuan Mission, IV. 208 ;
papal employ, IV. 221, 228; 3d
French Mission, LV. 235 ff. ; League
‘army, IV. 3831; customs, IV. 885-
390; French employ, LV. 406 ff.

Switzerland : well armed, II. 257-258 ;
German Mission, IV. 84 ff.; matter
of 1st German Report repeated in
2d, LV. 397 ff.

Sylla, general, I. 61, 218; II. 157, 176,
352, 388.

Syphax, defeat, II. 304, 358.

Syracuse, II. 21, 29, 47, 92, 141, 231,
263, 310, 336.

Syria, I. 24, 82, 46.

a

(PACITUS, Cornelius and Frontinus,

I. 61; wrongs of princes, II. 159 ;

golden sentence, II. 329; severity,
II. 376-877.

Tagliacozzo, Conradin there, I. 38, 405.

Tamiris, queen, II. 255.

Tancred, I. 30, 35, 86.

Tarentines, peace intervention, IT. 254.

Taranto, prince of, I. 48-53 passim.

Tarentum, retaken, II. 297.

Tarlatino: enters Pisa by river, ITT.
45; Valentino Mission, III. 256;
siege of Pisa, IV. 178 ff.; Mantuan
Mission, IV. 208 ff.

Taro, army, II. 86.

Tarquins, the, IT. 104, 121, 187, 140, 141,
350, 389, 391. (See SupERBUus.)

Tartar hordes, II. 249.

Tassino, valet, I. 392.

Taxation: Florence, I. 68, 105, 106, 174,
175, 181-188, 201, 386; general, IL
8, 58, 76, 85; M.’s maxims, II. 447,
448; French, IV. 411 ff.

468

Teamsters, II. 367, 368; III. 11, 18.
Tebaldi family, I. 64. .
Tebalduccio, letters, III. 485-488.
Tedaldini family, I. 64.

Teja, Goth, I. 20.

Tempianus, saves army, II. 374.

Templars, Knight, I. 32.

Ten: council of, I. 170-176 passim ; 190
-200 passim; magistracy re-estab-
lished, III. 110; of liberty, I. xvi,
xvii; IIL. 7, 281-284; IV. 155, 277-
281, 308; of liberty and peace, III.
128; of the war, II. 180; ‘the ten,”
I. 194; IL 183; IV. 297 ff.

Tenedos, island, I. 50.

Teodatus, king, I. 19.

Terentillus, II. 182, 181.

Terma, town, I. 246, 248, 268.

Thebes, I. 292; II. 17, 42, 112, 142, 236,
8438, 347, 365.

Themistocles, allusion, II. 220, 221, 313,
314.

Theodore I., pope, I. 26.

Theodoric, I. 16-19.

Theodosius, I. 18, 14.

Theodorus, conspiracy, IL. 335, 336.

“ The Prince,” allusion, L xxix. (See
““ PRINCE.”’)

Theseus, IL. 19, 20, 85, 95.

Thessaly, IL. 865.

Thrace, plot, Il. 341.

Thracia, I. 20; II. 67.

Three governors, the, I. 71.

Thucydides, history, II. 370.

Tiberius, I. 22, 61; II. 333.

Ticino river, II. 152.

Timasitheus, piety, II. 596.

Timoleon of Corinth, IL. 123, 141, 328,
456, 462.

Tira, deprived of rights, I. 148.

Titus, emperor, II. 124, 462.

Tivoli, I. 216, 283, 284; bishop, IV. 222
ff., 296.

Tizio, “ History of Sienna,” IV. 306.

Tocsin, Verona, IV. 214.

Tolentino family, I. 56, 216, 378, 379.

Torch stratagem, IJ. 367-368.

Torello, Guido, I. 56, 171.

Tornabuoni family, I. 328.

Tornaquinci, family, I. 64.

Torquatus, Manlius and son, II. 264,
265, 289, 321, 876, 381-386, 411, 413.

Torsiano, Valentino Mission, III. 271 ff.

Torsi, Saracen defeat, I. 25.

GENERAL INDEX.

Tortona, imperialists, I. 34; conquest,
I. 58.

Tosa family : Giovanni, I. 104; Simone,
I. 88, 95, 96.

Toschi family, I. 64.

Tosignano, Valentino Mission, IL
214.

Tosinghi family, I. 64 ; courier, IV. 56;
Francesco, commissioner, III. 41,
121, 184; LV. 314 ff.

Totilas, king of the Goths, I. 19, 20,
62

Totti, courier, III. 17, 203, 208.

Tours, letters, III. 128-189 passim; 8d
French Mission, 1V. 263-274 ff.

Tozelli, Dr., mazzucco, IV. 60.

Trades, smaller, I. 148.

Trajan, II. 124, 462.

Trani, letter, III. 290.

Trans, Mgr. de, III. 288-290, 425 ff.

Trasimene lake, camp, I. 388.

Travel: cost in France, III. 85-86 ; IV.
78-83.

Treaties: Fillippo, Venetians, and
Florentines, I. 182-183; Lucca and
Florence, 14383, I. 196-197; ditto,
1438, I. 284; Venice and Sforza,
1438, I. 240-241; Milan and Venice,
I. 295; Florentines with France,
1451, I. 303; King Alfonso, and
Italian princes, I. 811; of 1468, I.
347; breaking, II. 221; Florence and
Louis XIL., 1499, III. 61; Valentino
with Orsini, III. 204 ff.; with Benti-
vogli, III. 232-238; with Sienna,
III. 280; France, Germany, and
Spain, IIT. 354-355; at Verona, IV.
195; Louis XII. and Julius IL, IV.
264 ff.

Trebbio, palace, I. 826.

Tremouille, Mgr. de la, IIT. 124, 187;
8d French Mission, IV. 244.

Trent, I. 36, 247, 414; German Mission,
IV. 86 ff.; letters, IV. 118 ff., 153
ff.; payment, IV. 114 ff.; Mantuan
Mission, IV. 205 ,ff., 216 ff; 4th
French Mission, IV. 284; German
Report, IV. 393 ff

Treves, bishop of, I. 28.

Trevisa, taken by Venetians, I. 99.

Trevisi, Lombardy, I. 36, 47.

Trevisian Marches, I. 36, 37; territory,
IV. 120.

Treviso, capture, IV. 195.

GENERAL INDEX.

Triarii, military division, II. 265-266. ,

Tribunes, Roman, I. 48; II. 103, 105
114, 144, 172, 174, 181, 193, 194, 820,
351, 859, 360, 368, 369.

Tributes, II. 310, 311, 428, 424.

Trieste, German Mission, IV. 136.

Trissino, German Mission, IV. 107 ff.

Trivulzi party, III. 42.

Trivulzio, Jacopo, French court, III.
44, 49, 57, 61, 70, 88.

Trono, Venetian envoy, I. 272.

Tronto river, troops, I. 274, 380, 399.

Troria, defeat, I. 318.

Troyes, Louis XII., III. 51, 72, 82.

Troops: hired, I. xx; Louis XIL, III.

' 421; pay, III. 445, 467, 470; Pisan
army, III. 486, 487; Julius IL, IV.
16; Switzerland, IV. 87; voted by
German diet, IV. 101; Maximilian,
IV. 106 ff., 116 ff; M.’s inspec-
tion, IV. 170-175; provisions, LV.
213-214.

Truces: Sforza and Milan, I. 295-297 ;
disastrous, I. 384; Louis XIL., III.
80, 91; of 1498, IIL 168; France
and Spain, 1504, III. 419 ff ; articles,
Ill. 481 ff; of 1498, ITI 459, 466-
467 ; Germany and Venice, IV. 152-
154; Clement VII. and others, LV.
361--66.

Trumpeter, IV. 355, 358, 861, 365.

Truth-speaking, II. 452.

Tullus, Servius, Il. 149, 150, 826, 327,
329.

Turingians, the, I. 14-16.

Turkey : Italy, I. 24, 396, 401; fleet, I.
413; Greece, II. 8; character, II.
15, 16, 224 ; artillery, II. 273; France,
III. 71, 82, 109, 122; spoliation, III.
137.

Turpin, the treasurer, III. 428, 438.

Tuscany : history, I. 8, 19, 21, 28, 37,
49, 55, 65, 76, 181, 268, 270; tempest,
I. 312-314; incidents, I. 847, 360;
Valentino, II. 26; spoliation, II. 85;
allusions, IT. 136, 211, 227, 230 ; wars,
II. 237-243 passim, 299, 305, 318,
428; Valentino, III. 141; French
court, III. 393 ff.; allusions, IIL
405; 2d Sienna Mission, III. 460;
8d French Mission, IV. 232; Louis
XII., 1V. 269; Guicciardini Mission,
IV. 336 ff. ; League war, IV. 345 ff. ;
Valentino, IV. 380.

469

Tusculum, I. 33, 34.

Twelve : buonomini, I. 113; cantons, Ger-
man Mission, IV. 122; captains of
quarters, I. 123; chiefs, I. 71; ma-
gistrates, 1. 69 ; of the people, I. 114.

Twenty citizens, taxes, I. 174.

Twenty-four Guelf citizens, I. 123.

Two and three signori, offices, I. 117.

Tyranny, II. 100.

Tyrants: Juvenal, II. 831; M.’s max-
ims, IT. 460-464.

Tyrannicides, II. 231.

Tyre, siege, II. 503-304.

Tyrol, German Mission, IV. 101 ff,
148, 146; conscription, 1V. 2038;
people, LV. 3893.

UC:

BALDO, Guido, and Valentino,
IV. 380.

Uberti family, I. 62, 64, 66, 76; Farin-
ata, I. 67; Stiatta, I. 63; Tolosetto,
I. 84; feud, I. 121, 127.

Ugolino, courier, II. 92; 2d French
Mission, III. 398 ff.

Ulm, German Mission, IV. 98 ff.; diet,
IV. 151.

Ultramontanes, I. 47; II. 269, 276, 279;
LV eT

‘ Umbrians, the, II. 136.

Umiliati, order, 1V. 98.

Universities: French, IV. 408-418;
Pisa, I. 419.

Uprightness, II. 59.

Urban IL., I. 32.

Urban IV.,, I. 38.

Urban V., I. 49.

Urban VL., I. 49-50.

Urbino: history, I. 25, 47, 195, 280,
285, 346; Valentino, II. 24: inci-
dents, II. 298; Valentino Mission,
IIT. 141 ff.; 2d Roman Mission, IV.
21 ff.; letters, IV. 48-52; Frederick
of, I. 346, 357, 359, 384, 399, 401,
402; Valentino Mission, III. 142 ff. ;
Julius If., III. 832 ff, 405; IV. 373;
Valentino, LV. 378 ff.

Uric, son of Attila, I. 15.

Usurpation, II. 352.

Utica, siege, II. 315.

Uzano: camp, I. 230; Niccolo, patriot,
I. 20, 168, 188.

470

Vi

Vana castle, siege, I. 409.

Vaila, battle, II. 48, 70, 86, 401;
IV. 220, 406.

Valdenses, German Mission, IV. 86 ff.

Val d’Arno, I. 64, 88, 257, 258, 284.

Val di Bagno, capture, I. 827.

Val di Chiana: book on, I. xviii, xxiii;
incidents, I. 258, 259, 304; revolt,
II. 290-291; plot, II. 849; incidents,
II. 893 ; Valentino Mission, III. 142;
3d Sienna Mission, IV. 77; siege of
Pisa, IV. 176; military mission,
IV. 308 ff. ; 2d Guicciardini Mission,
IV. 370 ff.; Valentino, IV. 377.

Val di Codaura, German Report, IV.
393.

Val d’ Elsa, citizens flee, I. 389.

Val di Greve, 8d Sienna Mission,
IV. 79, 84.

Val di Lamona, I. 417; II. 375; seiz-
ure, II. 185; Valentino Mission,
III. 152 ff., 256 ff.

Val di Nievole, battle, I. 88.

Val di Pesa, Medici property, I. 418.

Val di Pisa, estates, I. 889.

Val di Serchio, siege, IV. 174 ff; camp
and letter, IV. 180.

Val di Tevere, I. 2538, 259, 379; lost,
TI. 893; 2d Guicciardini Mission,
EV, S(0 iE:

Valentino and Valentinois.
SAR Boreta.)

Valentinian, emperor, I. 15, 17.

Valerius, II. 188, 158, 184, 189.

Valiano, Pisan Commission, IV. 309
ff

Valle, Antonio, II. 94.

Valleggio, in dispute, IV. 212, 213.

Valori family: Bartolommeo, [. 168;
Francesco, II. 115, 116; Niccolo,
ambassador, III. 889-410 passim ;
Taldo, gonfaloniere, I. 97.

Vandals, I. 18, 14, 19; II. 247.

Vanguard, military term, II. 268.

Vanne, Mgr. de, III. 254.

Varanos family, Camerino, I. 55.

Varchi, Luca, IV. 189 ff

Variableness, II. 60.

Varro, example, II. 165.

Vecchio, ponte, I. 146.

-Vechietti family, I. 64.
Veii, II. 180, 182, 204, 208, 245-245,

(See Cr-

GENERAL INDEX.

299-808 passim; 314, 315, 363, 864,
386, 38y6.

Velamir, the Ostrogoth, I. 15.

Velitra, revolt, 11. 403.

Velluti, gonfaloniere, I. 206, 207.

Venafro: minister at Sienna, II. 76;
Valentino Mission, III. 174; 2d
Sienna Mission, III. 468, 476; 2d
Guicciardini Mission, IV. 864 ff.;
Valentino, IV. 378.

Veneto, Leonardo, mob, I. 299.

Venezia, ancient province, I. 46.

Venice : history, I. 3, 15, 18, 82, 35, 45-
50, 99, 218-222, 231-236, 248, 252,
2538, 272, 274, 278-301 passim, 309,
327, 844-347, 359, 369, 883, 391-405,
413; II. 18, 23, 88-43, 70, 76, 83, 95,
110-112, 170, 173, 199, 200, 212, 281,
287, 288, 810, 811, 318, 359-362, 375,
401; III. 6, 14, 27, 71, 109, 122, 131,
187 ff., 141; Valentino Mission, III.
148 ff. ; Romagna, III. 284, 287, 303-
307; Julius II., III. 811 ff., 322 ff. ;
French court, II. 390 ff., 401, 407,
409, 464; 2d Roman Mission, IV.
10 ff; important letter, IV. 49;
German Mission, IV. 93 ff.; siege
of Pisa, 1V. 158; German threats,
IV. 198; Mantuan Mission, IV. 203;
crushed by France, IV. 220; 3d
French Mission, IV. 221 ff.; 4th
French Mission, IV. 284 ff.; special -
mission, IV. 825-330; League army,
IV. 531; Guicciardini Mission, 1V.
098 ff.; relations to Germany, IV.
387 ff.; matter of Ist German Re-
port repeated in 2d, IV. 897 ff;
league against, IV. 422.

Vercelli, city, I. 58.

Veri, Mgr. de, French court, ITI. 427 ff.

Verona: history, I. 19, 21, 38, 36, 37,
45, 47, 51, 244, 246-248, 252, 268,
270, 288, 292; II. 287, 401; German
Mission, IV. 102 ff.; treaty, 1V. 195;
Mantuan Mission, LV. 198, 201 ff. ;
letters, IV. 210 ff.; tocsin, IV. 214;
description, 1V. 216-217; 3d French
Mission, IV. 222.

Verruca, fort, IV. 173.

Vespasian, II. 159.

Vespucci family: Agostino, Valentino
Mission, III. 149 ff; Antonio, am-
bassador, I. 886; Giovanni, exile, I.
276; Piero, Pisan war, III. 34, 36.

ee

GENERAL INDEX. 471

Vetrella, camp, III. 459.

Vettori family : Francesco, ambassa-
dor, 1V. 88-154, 218, 380; German
Report, 1V. 396; Pietro, I. 413.

Viano, Bartolommeo, Valentino Mis-
sion, III. 142 ff.

Viareggio, Pisan war, III. 483.

Vicariate, IV. 306.

Vicenza, I 21, 86, 37, 46, 51, 99; Ger-
man Mission, IV. 107; Mantuan

" Mission, IV. 200 ff.; German Re-
port, IV. 393 ff.

Viceroy, Milan, IV. 2838, 290.

Vices, safety, II. 52; destruction, M.’s
maxims, IIT. 4438, 444.

Vico castle, I. 187, 226, 390; III. 33, 52.

Vicomercarto of Milan, revolt, I. 298,
299.

Victory sufficient, II. 303.

Villani, I. 60.

Villa Arnina, settlement, I. 61.

Vincenzio: Baglioni Mission, III. 445,
451; podesta, IV. 24.

Virajo, Federigo, peace conference,
LY. 160°ff-

Virgil, II. 50, 55, 207.

Virgilio, Marcello, LV. 308.

Virgilius, instructions, III. 446; IV.
157, 162.

Virginia, story, II. 184, 189, 214.

Virginius, story, II. 164, 184, 189, 190.

Virtu, count, I. 158.

Virtues : lead to ruin, II. 51-52 : prefer-
able, not obligatory, II. 59; passed
from one country to another, II. 224.

Visconti family : contests, L 42-46, 49,
93, 99, 117, 300: II. 423; Bernabo,
I. 49, 50, 158; Bianca, I. 272; Carlo,
I. 362, 365; Filippo, I. 9, 53, 169;
II. 142, 277, 800; Galeazzo, I. 49,
50, 94, 158; II. 259; Luchino, I. 49.

Visdomini family, I. 64.

Visigoths, I. 12-14.

Vitales, captain, I. 19.

Vitelleschi, patriarch, I. 250-252.

Vitelli family, I. 418; II. 27, 31, 46,
349, 393; 2d Sienna Mission, III.
460 ff; Niccolo, I. 358, 388 ff; 400,
405 ; Paolo, III. 27, 218; Vitellozzo,
III. 27, 71, 72, 108, 142; Valentino
Mission, III. 145 ff; murder, III.
262-278 ; IV. 877-3883.

Volscians, the, II. 133, 184, 807, 863-
866, 405.

Volterra: place, I. 65, 112, 183, 184,
285, 356-358, 379; Antonio, I. 373
ff.; bishop, II. 208; cardinal, 2d
Roman Mission, IV. 12 ff.; Fran-
cesco, IIT. 288. (See Soperin1.)

Voltigern, king of the Angles, I. 14.

Vote, Florentine, I. 189.

Vitellius, II. 124, 159, 160, 462.

Viterbo, I. 89, 52; 2d Roman Mission,
DV. 17 ff > letters, EV. 1947

Vitigites, Goth, I. 19.

Viviani, traitor, 1. 187.

W.

AGES of lances, I. 253.
Walls of Rome, I. 20.

War: art of, I. xxx; literature, I
213; without bloodshed, I. 259, 262;
selfishness, I. 265; irregularly man-
aged, I. 268-269; Venetian failure,
I. 290; neglect causes loss, II. 48;
Roman conduct, II. 243-245; two
kinds, II. 246; between sovereiyzns,
II. 249-250; money, II. 251-253;
three requisites, II. 253; at home
or abroad, II. 255 ff.; artillery, IT,
269; aggressive and defensive, IL.
270-271; impoverishment, II. 281,
282; cries, II. 366; geography, II.
417-419 ; deceit meritorious, II. 419-
420; M.’s maxims, II. 438-442; mu-
nitions, IV. 106 ff.

Wars: Florentine. I. 7; Florence and
Lucca, I. 9; Florence and Arezzo,
I.9; Sylla and Marius, I. 61; Are-
tine, I. 72; Visconti and Florence
in 1390, I. 158; Florence and Milan,
1400, I. 163-164; Florence and Na-
ples, 1414, I. 165; Florence and
Duke Filippo, I. 165; Lucca and
Florence, I. 187 ff.; renewed, I. 196,
228 ff.; Lombardy and Tuscany re-
sumed, I. 236, 239, 272; Venice and
Milan, I. 296; Florence and Venice,
I. 301, 302; Florence and King Al-
fonso, I. 303, 304; Fregosi and John
of Anjou, I. 316; John of Anjou and
King Ferdinand, I. 316; Pius II.
and Malatesti, I. 3825; Naples, I. 325;
King Louis and his barons, I. 350;
Venice andj Florence, I. 545-347 ;
Naples and Rome against Florence,

472

I. 379 ff.; Ferrara and Venice, IL
400; Carthage and Syracuse, II.
29; civil in Rome, II. 176; Sabines,
Volscians, and Romans, II. 184; —
Roman, mentioned in order, II. 227
—228 ; Carthaginian, II. 250; League,
Guicciardini Missions, IV. 830-373
passim.

Wealth: in free countries, II. 234;
merit, II. 370-372.

Weather, illustration, IT. 22, 81.

Western Roman Empire, I. 13, 15.

William, Ferabar, Tancred’s son, I. 30.

William, Guiscard’s son, I. 31.

William of Naples, I. 35.

William of Normandy, I. 31.

William of Puglia, I. 34, 35.

Wine, gift to pope, IV. 69.

Winter, IV. 282, 284, 390.

Wisdom : communicable to the wise,
II. 79; simulation of folly, II. 323.

Wives : plot, II. 429; honor, II. 453.

Women, ruin states, II. 890-391.

Wooden towers, IJ. 315.

Wool guild, III. 251; IV. 317.

Wiirtemberg, IV. 88, 140; king at
Blois, 1V. 240 ff.

THE

GENERAL INDEX.

>.

ENOPHON the author: Life of
Cyrus, II. 50, 259, 878; on Ty-
ranny, II. 231; chase, illustration,
II. 418; M.’s maxims, II. 440.

ne

YY OKE, Roman: Samnites pass un-
der, II. 292; ill effects, II. 420.
Young Florentine traders, injuries in
Levantine voyage, IV. 325-329.

Z.

ACCARIA, Pisan council, IV. 300-
302.

Zagonara, attacked, I. 172.

Zati, Francesco, letter, IV. 311.

Zeno, emperor, I. 16, 17.

Zepidians, the, I. 14-17.

Zerino, courier, Valentino Mission, III.
185 ff.; Mantuan Mission. IV. 200.

Zitolo, 2d Roman Mission, IV. 40.

END.

University Press: John Wilson & Son, Cambridge.

iversit

a

OTZeuOTdTp pus

<a ee amenmemmnmem gt

7 oA

PTouReg ar be a IY 98 eg
\. are . Au
“TROTYTTod 6 wo TIOAS TY ital

OTOOOTN §

CT7S

FT TAB TyoRy

Spa’
Fu67 TN
IH

WA

RY SS
RVs .
RAK
‘
SN S
SOT . SOON
~ \\
aS SNS SO
~ ~ S

SLES LLL EEE

id Meo Ls

Ap pgp

SALE ATE A Det Sd

SONA OOK

MQ(M[Cun

SSSA WMi@B@>s \\
