Popular Scientific Lectures (Ernst Mach (Thomas J. McCormack, trans.), 1895)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/popularscientif00machgoog). Mach's public lectures on the economy of thought, causality, and the philosophy of science.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES.


POPULAR


SCIENTIFIC LECTURES


BY

ERNST MACH

FORMERLY PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PRAGUE, MOW

PROFESSOR OF THE HISTORY AMD THEORY OF IMDUCTIVB

8CIEMCE IM THE UNIVERSITY OF VIEMMA


TRANSLATED

BY

THOMAS J. McCORMACK


SECOND EDITION. REVISED AND ENLARGED


WITH FIFTY CUTS AMD DIAGRAMS


CHICAGO
THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

LONDON: KEGAM PAUL, TEBNCH, TKUSBNBR & CO.

1897


MICROFILM AVAILABl^


n/R


% 7^


^^


.^ST'


\ r


^'»:


X


V Oj} '


1 i


COPYRIGHT

Bv The Open Court Publishing Co.

Pages 1-258 » . J.
Pages 309-345 f ° ^^^'
Pages 359-281 in 1896,
Pages 283-308 in 1897.


AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE FIRST
EDITION.


POPULAR LECTURES, owing to the knowledge they presnp-
pose, and the time they occupy, can afford only a modicum
of instruction. Tbey must select for Itiis purpose easy subjects,
and restrict lliemselves to llie exposition of the simplest and the
most essential points. Nevertheless, by an appropriate choice of
ihe matter, the charm and the poetry of research can be conveyed
by them. It is only necessary to set forth the attractive and the
alluring features of a problem, and to show what broad domains
of fact can be illuminaiEd by the light radiating from the solution
of a single and ofttimes anoblrusive point,

Farthermore, such lectures can exercise a favorable influence
by showing the substantial sameness of scientific and every-day
thought. The public, in this way, loses its shyness towards scien-
tific questions, and acquires an interest iu scientific work which is
a great help to the inquirer The latter, in his turn, is brought to
understand that his work is a small part only of the universal pro-
cess of life, and that the results of his labors must redound to the
benefit not only of himself and a few of his associates, but to that
of the collective whole.

I sincerely hope that these lectures, in the present excellent
tnuislation, will be productive of good in the direction indicated

E. Mach.
Prague, December, rS^.


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE TO THE
SECOND EDITION.


THE present second edition of this work has heea considerably
enlarged by the addition of four new lectures and arliclei,
vii.p Professor Mach's Vienna Inaugural Lecture, "The Part
Flayed by Accident in Invention and Discovery," the lecture on
"Sensations of Orientation," very recently delivered and samming
up the results of an important psychological investigation : and
two historical articles (see Appendix) on Acoustics and Sight,

The lectures extend over a loQg period, from r864 to 1897,
and differ greatly in style, contents, and purpose. They were first
published in collected form in English ; afterwards two German
editions were called for.

As the dates of the first five lectnres are aol given in the foot-
notes they are here appended. The first lecture, " On the Forms
of Liquids," was delivered in i863 and published with that " On
Symmetry " in 1872 (Prague). The second and third lectures, on
acoustics, were first published in 1865 (Graz); the fourth and fiEtb,
on optics, in 1867 (Graz). They belong to the earliest period of
Professor Mach's scientiflc activity, and with the lectures on electro-
statics and education will more than realise the hope expressed in
tbe author's Preface.

The remainiug lectures are of a more philosophical character
and deal principally with the methods and nature of scientific in-


viii TRANSLA TORS NO TE.

qniry. In the ideas summarised in them will be found one of the
most important contributions to the theory of knowledge made in
the last quarter of a century. Significant hints in psychological
method, and an exemplary specimen-research in psychology, are
also presented ; while in physics many ideas find their first discus-
sion that afterwards, under other names and other authorship,
became rallying-cries in this department of inquiry.

All the proofs of this translation have been read by Professor
Mach himself.

T. ]. McCORMACK.

La Sallb, III., October, 1897.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


PAGE

The Forms of Liquids i

The Fibres of Corti 17

On the Causes of Harmony 32

The Velocity of Light 48

Why Has Man Two Eyes ? 66

On Symmetry 89

On the Fundamental Concepts of Electrostatics 107

On the Principle of the Conservation of Energy 137

^On the Economical Nature of Physical Inquiry 186

xOn Transformation and Adaptation in Scientific Thought . .214

On the Principle of Comparison in Physics 236

'J^n the Part Played by Accident in Invention and Discovery . 259

On Sensations of Orientation . 282

On Instruction in the Classics and the Mathematico-Physical

Sciences 309

Appendixes.

I. A Contribution to the History of Acoustics .... 346

II. Remarks on the Theory of Spatial Vision 357

Index 365


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS.


WHAT thinkest thou, dear Euthyphron, that the
holy is, and the just, and the good ? Is the holy
holy because the gods love it, or are the gods holy be-
cause they love the holy ? By such easy questions did
the wise Socrates make the market-place of Athens un-
safe and relieve presumptuous young statesmen of the
burden of imaginary knowledge, by showing them how
confused, unclear, and self -contradictory their ideas
were.

You know the fate of the importunate questioner.
So-called good society avoided him on the promenade.
Only the ignorant accompanied him- And finally he
drank the cup of hemlock — a lot which we ofttimes
wish would fall to modern critics of his stamp.

What we have learned from Socrates, however, —
our inheritance from him, — is scientific criticism.
Every one who busies himself with science recognises
how unsettled and indefinite the notions are which he
has brought with him from common life, and how, on
a minute examination of things, old differences are


THE FORMS OP L/QUJDS.


I


effaced and new ones introduced. The history of sci-
ence is full of examples of this constant change, de-
velopment, and clarification of ideas.

But we will not linger by this general consideration
of the fluctuating character of ideas, which becomes a
source of real unComfortableness, when we reflect that
it applies to almost every notion of life. Rather shall
we observe by the study of a physical example how
much a thing changes when it is closely examined, and
how it assumes, when thus considered, increasing defi-
□iteness of form.

The majority of you think, perhaps, you know
quite well the distinction between a liquid and a solid.
And precisely persons who have never busied them-
selves with physics will consider this question one of
the easiest that can be put. But the physicist knows
that it is one of the most diflicult. I shall mention
here only the experiments of Tresca, which show that
solids subjected to high pressures behave exactly as
liquids do ; for example, may be made to flow out in
the form of jets from orifices in the bottoms of vessels.
The supposed difference of kind between liquids and
solids is thus shown to be a mere difference of degree.

The common inference that because the earth is
oblate in form, it was originally fluid, is an error, in
the light of these facts. True, a rotating sphere, a few
inches in diameter will assume an oblate form only
if it is very soft, for example, is composed of freshly
kneaded clay or some viscous stuff. But the earth,


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS. 3

even if it consisted of the rigidest stone, could not
help being crushed by its tremendous weight, and must
perforce behave as a fluid. Even our mountains could
not extend beyond a certain height without crumbling.
The earth may once have been fluid) but this by no
means follows from its oblateness.

The particles of a liquid are displaced on the ap-
plication of the slightest pressure ; a liquid conforms
exactly to the shapes of the vessels in which it is con-
tained; it possesses no form of its own, as you have
all learned in the schools. Accommodating itself in
the most trifling respects to the conditions of the vessel
in which it is placed, and showing, even on its surface,
where one would suppose it had the freest play, nothing
but a polished, smiling, expressionless countenance,
it is the courtier /n:r excellence of the natural bodies.

Liquids have no form of their own ! No, not for the
superficial observer. But persons who have observed
that a raindrop is round and never angular, will not be
disposed to accept this dogma so unconditionally.

It is fair to suppose that every man, even the weak-
est, would possess a character, if it were not too difS-
cult in this world to keep it. So, too, we must sup-
pose that liquids would possess forms of their own, if
the pressure of the circumstances permitted it, — ^if
they were not crushed by their own weights.

An astronomer once calculated that human beings
could not exist on the sun, apart from its great heat,
because they would be crushed to pieces there by their


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS.


own weight. The greater mass of this body would
also make the weight of the human body there much
greater. But on the moon, because here we should
be much lighter, we could jump as high as the church-
steeples without any difficulty, with the same muscular
power which we now possess. Statues and "plaster"
casts of syrup are undoubtedly things of fancy, even
on the moon, but maple-syrup would flow so slowly
there that we could easily build a maple-syrup man on
the moon, for the fun of the thing, just as our children
here build snow-men.

Accordingly, if liquids have no form of their own
with us on earth, they have, perhaps, a form of their
own on the moon, or on some smaller and lighter heav-
enly body. The problem, then, simply is to get rid of
the effects of gravity ; and, this done, we shall be able
to find out what the peculiar forms of liquids are.

The problem was solved by Plateau of Ghent, whose
method was to immerse the liquid in another of the
same specific gravity.* He employed for his experi-
ments oil and a mixture of alcohol and water. By
Archimedes's well-known principle, the oil in this mix-
ture loses its entire weight. It no longer sinks be-
neath its weight ; its formative forces, be they ever so
weak, are now in full play.

As a fact, we now see, to our surprise, that the oil,
instead of spreading out into a layer, or lying in a


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS.


VL


formless mass, assumes the shape of a beautiful and
perfect sphere, freely suspended in the mixture, as
the moon is in space. We can construct in this way a
sphere of oil several inches in diameter.

If, now, we affix a thin plate to a
wire and insert the plate in the oil
sphere, we can, by twisting the wire
between our fingers, set the whole ball
in rotation. Doing this, the ball as-
sumes an oblate shape, and we can, if
we are skilful enough, separate by such
rotation a ring from the ball, like that
which surrounds Saturn, This ring i
finally rent asunder, and, breaking up
into a number of smaller balls, exhibits
to us a kind of model of the origin of
the planetary system according to the
hypothesis of Kant and Laplace.

Still more curious are the phe-
nomena exhibited when the formative
forces of the liquid are partly disturbed
by putting in contact with the liquid's
surface some rigid body. If we im- """' ''

merse, for example, the wire framework of a cube in our
mass of oil, the oil wiil everywhere stick to the wire
framework. If the quantity of oil is exactly sufQcient
we shall obtain an oil cube with perfectly smooth walls.
If there is too much or too little oil, the walls of the
cube will bulge out or cave in. In this manner we


Tlhr Mw lOfw M««M» aMS AMBpAIS


• • Mp«N, M* Ml «< dtar K
rM|Mcl by y%t wMcltC. TMm befa« the case, we no
tonHn HMd ouf niulHra of kleohol and water for the
praductlOH of liiiufM, hwl cm cooctruct them la the


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS. 1

open air. And Plateau, in fact, found that these thin
figures, or at least very similar ones, could be pro-
duced in the air, by dipping the wire nets described
in a solution of soap and water and quickly drawing
them out again. The experiment is not difficult. The
figure is formed of itself. The preceding drawing
represents to the eye the forms obtained with cubical
and pyramidal nets. In the cube, thin, smooth films
of soap-suds proceed from the edges to a small, quad-
ratic film in the centre. In the p3rramid, a film pro-
ceeds from each edge to the centre.

These figures are so beautiful that they hardly ad-
mit of appropriate description. Their great regularity
and geometrical exactness evokes surprise from all who
see them for the first time. Unfortunately, they are of
only short duration. They burst, on the drying of the
solution in the air, but only after exhibiting to us the
most brilliant play of colors, such as is often seen in
soap-bubbles. Partly their beauty of form and partly
our desire to examine them more minutely induces us
to conceive of methods of endowing them with perma-
nent form. This is very simply done.* Instead of
dipping the wire nets in solutions of soap, we dip them
in pure melted colophonium (resin). When drawn
out the figure at once forms and solidifies by contact
with the air.

It is to be remarked that also solid fluid-figures can


* Compflre Mach. Uthtr dit Jtf^cHl^ntdrkujtg dtr Fl&isigktUtn^ Reporu


THE FORME OF LIQUIDS,


be constructed in the open air, if thei
enough, or the wire nets of very small dir
we make, for example, of very fine wire a cubical net
whose sides measure about one-eighth of an inch in
length, we need simply to dip this net in water to ob-
tain a small solid cube of water. With a piece of blot-
ting paper the superfluous water may be easily removed
and the sides of the cube made smooth.

Yet another simple method may be devised for ob-
serving these figures. A drop of water on a greased
glass plate will not run if it is small enough, but will
be flattened by its weight, which presses it against
its support. The smaller the drop the less the flatten-
ing. The smaller the drop the nearer it approaches
the form of a sphere. On the other hand, a drop sus-
pended from a stick is elongated by its weight. The
undermost parts of a drop of water on a support are
pressed against the support, and the upper parts are
pressed against the lower parts because the latter can-
not yield. But when a drop falls freely downward
all its parts move equally fast ; no part is impeded by
another ; no part presses against another. A freely
falling drop, accordingly, is not affected by its weight ;
it acts as if it were weightless ; it assumes a spherical
form.

A moment's glance at the soap-film figures pro-
duced by our various wire models, reveals to us a great
multiplicity of form. But great as this multiplicity is.


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS. 9

the common features of the figures also are easily dis-
cernible.


This hidden law Plateau discovered. It may be
expressed, somewhat prosily, as follows :

1) If several plane liquid films meet in a figure
they are always three in number, and, taken in pairs,
form, each with another, nearly equal angles.

a) If several liquid edges meet in a figure they are
always four in number, and, taken in pairs, form, eacli
with another, nearly equal angles.

This is a strange law, and its reason is not evident.
But we might apply this criticism to almost all laws.
It is not always that the motives of a law-maker are
discernible in the form of the law he constructs. But
our law admits of analysis into very simple elements
or reasons. If we closely examine the paragraphs
which state it, we shall hnd that their meaning is simply
this, that the surface of the liquid assumes the shape
of smallest area that is possible under the circum-


If, therefore, some extraordinarily intelligent tailor,
possessing a knowledge of all the artifices of the higher
mathematics, should set himself the task of so cover-
ing the wire frame of a cube with cloth that every piece
of cloth should be connected with the wire and joined
with the remaining cloth, and should seek to accom-
plish this feat with the greatest saving of material, he


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS.


would construct no other figure than that which is here
formed on the wire frame in our solution of soap and
water. Nature acts in the construction of liquid figures
on the principle of a covetous tailor, and gives no
thought in her work to the fashions. But, strange to
say, in this work, the most beautiful fashions are
of themselves produced.

The two paragraphs which state our law apply pri-
marily only to soap-film figures, and are not appUcable,
of course, to solid oil-figures. But the principle that
the superficial area of the liquid shall be the least
possible under the circumstances, is applicable to all
fluid figures. He who understands not only the letter
but also the reason of the law will not be at a loss
when confronted with cases to which the letter does
not accurately apply. And this is the case with the
principle of least superficial area. It is a sure guide
for us even in cases in which the above-stated para-
graphs are not applicable.

Our first task will now be, to show by a palpable
illustration the mode of formation of liquid figures by
the principle of least superficial area. The oil on the
wire pyramid in our mixture of alcohol and water, be-
ing unable to leave the wire edges, clings to them, and
the given mass of oil strives so to shape itself that its
surface shall have the least possible area. Suppose
we attempt to imitate this phenomenon. We take a
wire pyramid, draw over it a stout film of rubber, and
in place of the wire handle insert a small tube leading


THE FORMS OF' LIQUIDS.


into the interior of the sp&ce enclosed by the rubber
(Fig. 3). Through this tube we can blow in or suclt
out air. The quantity of air in the enclosure repre-
sents the quantity of oil. The stretched rubber film,
which, clinging to the wire edges,
does its utmost to contract, rep-
resents the surface of the oil en-
deavoring to decrease its area. By
blowing in, and drawing out the air,
now, we actually obtain all the oil
pyramidal figures, from those bulged
out to those hollowed in. Finally, when
alltheairis pumped or sucked out, the
soap-film figure is exhibited. The rub- ^'k- s.

ber films strike together, assume the form of planes,
and meet at four sharp edges in the centre of the
pyramid.


The tendency of soap-films to assume smaller forms
may be directly demonstrated by a method of Van der
Mensbrugghe. If we dip a square wire frame to which


la THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS.

a handle is attached into a solution of soap and water,
we shall obtain on the frame a beautiful, plane film of
soap-suds. (Fig, 4.) On this we lay a thread having its
two ends tied together. If, now, we puncture the part
enclosed by the thread, we shall obtain a soap-film
having a circular hole in it, whose circumference is
the thread. The remainder of the film decreasing in
area as much as it can, the hole assumes the largest
area that it can. But the figure of largest area, with
a given periphery, is the circle.


Similarly, by the principle of least superficial area,

a freely suspended mass of oil assumes the shape of a
sphere. The sphere is the form of least surface for a
given content. This is evident. The more we put
into a travelling-bag, the nearer its shape approaches
the spherical form.

The connexion of the two above-mentioned para-
graphs with the principle of least superficial area may
be shown by a yet simpler example. Picture to your-
selves four fixed pulleys, a, b, c, d, and two movable


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS. 13

rings/, g (Fig 5); about the pulleys and through the
rings imagine a smooth cord passed, fastened at one
extremity to a nail e, and loaded at the other with a
weight h. Now this weight always tends to sink, or,
what is the same thing, always tends to make the por-
tion of the string e h as long as possible, and conse-
quently the remainder of the string, wound round the
pulleys, as short as possible. The strings must remain
connected with the pulleys, and on account of the rings
also with each other. The conditions of the case, ac-
cordingly, are similar to those of the liquid figures dis-
cussed. The result also is a similar one. When, as
in the right hand figure of the cut, four pairs of strings
meet, a different configuration must be established.
The consequence of the endeavor of the string to
shorten itself is that the rings separate from each other,
and that now at all points only three pairs of strings
meet, every two at equal angles of one hundred and
twenty degrees. As a fact, by this arrangement the
greatest possible shortening of the string is attained ;
as can be easily proved by geometry.

This will help us to some extent to understand the
creation of beautiful and complicated figures by the
simple tendency of liquids to assume surfaces of least
superficial area. But the question arises, Why do
liquids seek surfaces of least superficial area?

The particles of a liquid cHng together. Drops
brought into contact coalesce. We can say, liquid
particles attract each other. If so, they seek to come


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS.


as close as they can to each other. The particles at
the surface will endeavor to penetrate as far as they
can into the interior. This process will not stop, can-
not stop, until the surface has become as small as un-
der the circumstances it possibly can become, until as
few particles as possible remain at the surface, until
as many particles as possible have penetrated into the
interior, until the forces of attraction have no more
work to perform.*

The root of the principle of least surface is to be
sought, accordingly, in another and much simpler
principle, which may be illustrated by some such an-
alogy as this. We can conceive o( the natural forces o!
attraction and repulsion as purposes or intentions of
nature. As a matter of fact, that interior pressure
which we feel before an act and which we call an in-
tention or purpose, is not, in a final analysis, so essen-
tially different from the pressure of a stone on its sup-
port, or the pressure of a magnet on another, that it is
necessarily unallowable to use for both the same term
— at least for well-defined purposes. | It is the pur-
pose of nature, accordingly, to bring the iron nearer
the magnet, the stone nearer the centre of the earth,
and so forth. If such a purpose can be realised, it is
carried out. But where she cannot realise her pur-

tConi[iiie Mach, Vsrtrage Sirr Piyckithfiik.V\r,aai.,-ti^, pace 41: Ctm-
ftndium dir Fk^sikflirMtdleintr. Vlanna. iSGa, page 134 ; aad alio TTUScina
^Mtchanlci, Chicago, iSgj, pp. 84 mA ^6^.


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS,


Iq this respect she acts
exactly as a good man of business does.

It is a constant purpose of nature to bring weights
lower. We can raise a weight by causing another,
larger weight to sink ; that is, by satisfying another,
more powerful, purpose of nature. If we fancy we
are making nature serve our purposes in this, it will
be found, upon closer examination, that the contrary
is true, and that nature has employed us to attain her
purposes.

Equilibrium, rest, exists only, but then always, when
nature is brought to a halt in her purposes, when the
forces of nature are as fully satisfied as, under the
circumstances, they can be. Thus, for example, heavy
bodies are in equilibrium, when their so-called centre
of gravity lies as low as it possibly can, or when as
much weight as the circumstances admit of has sunk
as low as it can.

The idea forcibly suggests itself that perhaps this
principle also holds good in other realms. Equilibrium
exists also in the state when the purposes of the par-
ties are as fully satisfied as for the time being they can
be, or, as we may say, jestingly, in the language of
physics, when the social potential is a maximum,*

You see, our miserly mercantile principle is replete
with consequences. I The result of sober research, it


•likarefleiions


Bie fon


ndin


Qu^l


let


D. lyMmi i«


-iaU.


tPwlhefollde


mo


tbis


dea


seeth


On Ihe Econ


rare or Pbyiiical


i8G,


and


Ibe c


sues," in lajificiama


(Clu


ugo


Th


flOpen


Court Publiabing Con


THE FORMS OF LIQUIDS.


has become as fruitful for physics as the dry questions
of Socrates for science generally. If the principle
seems to lack in ideality, the more ideal are the fruits
which it bears.

But why, tell me, should science be ashamed of
such a principle? Is science* itself anything more
than — a business? Is not its task to acquire with the
least possible work, in the least possible time, with the
least possible thought, the greatest possible part of
eternal truth ?


obi em, eiBclly
liaary life is is


THE FIBRES OF CORTI.


"f "1 7H0EVER has roamed through a beautiful coun-
' ' try knows that the tourist's delights increase
with his progress- How pretty that wooded dell must
look from yonder hill ! Whither does that clear brook
flow, that hides itself in yonder sedge? If I only
knew how the landscape looked behind that mountainl
Thus even the child thinks in his first rambles. It is
also true of the natural philosopher.

The first questions are forced upon the attention of
the inquirer by practical considerations ; the subse-
quent ones ate not. An irresistible attraction draws
him to these; a nobler interest which far transcends the
mere needs of life. Let us look at a special case.

For a long time the structure of the organ of hear-
ing has actively engaged the attention of anatomists.
A considerable number of brilliant discoveries has been
brought to light by their labors, and a splendid array
of facts and truths established. But with these facts
a host of new enigmas has been presented.

Whilst in the theory of the organisation and func-


20 THE FIBRES OF CQRTl.

not be connected with some special property of the
ear? It is quite probable; for the ear possesses a very
similar power. You know that it is possible to fol-
low the individual voices of a symphony. Indeed, the
feat is possible even in a fugue of Bach, where it is cer-
tainly no inconsiderable achievement. The ear can
pick out the single constituent tonal parts, not only of a
harmony, but of the wildest clash of music imaginable.
The musical ear analyses every agglomeration of tones.

The eye does not possess this ability. Who, for
example, could tell from the mere sight of white, with-
out a previous experimental knowledge of the fact,
that white is composed of a mixture of other colors?
Could it be, now, that these two facts, the property of
the ear just mentioned, and the structure discovered
by Corti, are really connected ? It is very probable.
The enigma is solved if we assume that every note of
definite pitch has its special string in this pianoforte
of Corti, and, therefore, its special branch of the audi-
tory nerve attached to that string. But before I can
make this point perfectly plain to you, I must ask
you to follow me a few steps into the dry domain of
physics.

Look at this pendulum. Forced from its position
of equilibrium by an impulse, it begins to swing with a
definite time of oscillation, dependent upon its length.
Longer pendulums swing more slowly, shorter ones
more quickly. We will suppose our pendulum to exe-
cute one to-and-fro movement in a second.


THS FIBRES OF CQRTI. ai

This pendulum, now, can be thrown into violent
vibration in two ways j either by a single heavy im-
pulse, or by a number of properly communicated slight
impulses. For example, we impart to the pendulum,
while at rest in its position of equilibrium, a very slight
impulse. It will execute a very small vibration. As
it passes a third time its position of equilibrium, a
second having elapsed, we impart to it again a slight
shock, in the same direction with the first. Again after
the lapse of a second, on its fifth passage through the
position of equilibrium, we strike it again in the same
manner ; and so continue. You see, by this process
the shocks imparted augment continually the motion
of the pendulum. After each slight impulse, the pen-
dulum reaches out a little further in its swing, and
finally acquires a considerable motion.*

But this is not the case under all circumstances.
It is possible only when the impulses imparted syn-
chronise with the swings of the pendulum. If we
should communicate the second impulse at the end of
half a second and in the same direction with the first
impulse, its effects would counteract the motion of the
pendulum. It is easily seen that our little impulses
help the motion of the pendulum more and more, ac-
cording as their time accords with the time of the
pendulum. If we strike the pendulum in any other
time than in that of its vibration, in some instances, it
is true, we shall augment its vibration, but in others


again, we shall obstruct it. Our impulses will be less
effective the more the motion of our own hand departs
from the motion of tbe pendulum.

What is true of the pendulum holds true of every
vibrating body. A tuning-fork when it sounds, also
vibrates. It vibrates more rapidly when its sound is
higher ; more slowly when it is deeper. The standard
A of our musical scale is produced by about four hun-
dred and fifty vibrations in a second.

I place by the side of each other on this table two
tuning-forks, exactly alike, resting on resonant cases.
I strike the first one a sharp blow, so that it emits a
loud note, and immediately grasp it again with my
hand to quench its note. Nevertheless, you still hear
the note distinctly sounded, and by feeling it you may
convince yourselves that the other fork which was not
struck now vibrates.

I now attach a small bit of wax to one of the forks.
It is thrown thus out of tune ; its note is made a little
deeper. I now repeat the same experiment with the
two forks, now of unequal pitch, by striking one of
them and again grasping it with my hand ; but in the
present case the note ceases the very instant I touch
the fork.

What has happened here in these two experiments?
Simply this. The vibrating fork imparts to the air and
to the table four hundred and fifty shocks a second,
which are carried over to the other fork. If the other
fork is pitched to the same note, that is to say, if it


T21B FIBKES OF CORTI. 23

vibrates wbea struck in the same time with the first,
then the shocks first emitted, do matter how slight they
may be, are sufficient to throw the second fork into rapid
sympathetic vibration. But when the time of vibra-
tion of the two forks is slightly different, this does not
take place. We may strike as many forks as we will, the
fork tuned to A is perfectly indifferent to their notes;
is deaf, in fact, to all except its own ; and if you strike
three, or four, or five, or any number whatsoever, of
forks all aX the same time, so as to make the shocks
which come from them ever so great, the A fork will
not join in with their vibrations unless another fork A
is found in the collection struck. It picks out, in other
words, from all the notes sounded, that which accords
with it.

The same is true of ail bodies which can yield
notes. Tumblers resound when a piano is played, on
the striking of certain notes, and so do window panes.
_ Nor is the phenomenon without analogy in other pro-
' vinces. Take a dog that answers to the name "Nero."
'. fie lies under your table. You speak of Domitian,
Vespasian, and Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, you call
upon all the names of the Roman Emperors that oc-
cur to you, but the dog does not stir, although a slight
tiemor of his ear tells you of a faint response of his
consciousness. But the moment you call "Nero" he
jumps joyfully towards you. The tuning-fork is like
your dog. It answers to the name A.

You smile, ladies. You shake your heads. The


THE FIBRES OF CORTI.


simile does not catch your fancy. But I have another,
which is very near to you: and for punishment you shall
hear it. You, too, are like tuning-forks. Many are the
hearts that throb with ardor for you, of which you take
no notice, but are cold. Yet what does it profit you !
Soon the heart will come that beats in just the proper
rhythm, and then your knell, too, has struck. Then
your heart, too, will beat in unison, whether you will
or no.

The law of sympathetic vibration, here propounded
for sounding bodies, suffers some modification for
bodies incompetent to yield notes. Bodies of this
kind vibrate to almost every note, A high silk hat,
we know, will not sound ; but if you will hold your
hat in your hand when attending your next concert you
will not only hear the pieces played, but also feel them
with your fingers. It is exactly so with men. People
who are themselves able to give tone to their surround-
ings, bother little about the prattle of others. But the
person without character tarries everywhere : in the
temperance hall, and at the bar of the public-house —
everywhere where a committee is formed. The high
silk hat is among bells what the weakling is among
men of conviction.

A sonorous body, therefore, always sounds when
its special note, either alone or in company with others,
is struck. We may now go a step further. What will
be the behaviour of a group of sonorous bodies which
in the pitch of their notes form a scale ? Let us pic-


THE FIBRES OF CORTf.


Ire to ourselves, for example (Fij
or strings pitched to the notes •
musical instrument the accord c e
one of the rods of Fig. S will see


. 8), a series of rods
dsfg. .... On a
f is struck. Every
if its special note is


cd,f^„bcdef


contained in the accord, and if it finds
it, it will respond. The rod £ will give
at once the note e, the rod £ the note e,
the rod g the note g. All the other
rods will remain at rest, will not sound.

We need not look about us long
for such an instrument. Every piano
is an instrument of this kind, with which the experi-
ment mentioned may be executed with splendid suc-
cess. Two pianos stand here by the side of each other,
both tuned alike. We will employ the first for excit-
ing the notes, while we will allow the second to re-
spond ; after having first pressed upon the loud pedal,
so as to render all the strings capable of motion.

Every harmony struck with vigor on the first piano
is distinctly repeated on the second. To prove that
it is the same strings that are sounded in both pianos,
we repeat the experiment in a slightly changed form.
We let go the loud pedal of the second piano and
pressing on the keys c^g ol that instrument vigorously
strike the harmony ccg on the first piano. The har-
mony c^g is now also sounded on the second piano.
But if we press only on one key g of one piano, while
we strike <-^f on the other, only g will be sounded on


as THE FIBRES OF COKTI.

the second. It is thus always the like strings of the
two pianos that excite each other.

The piano can reproduce any sound that is com-
posed of its musical notes. It will reproduce, for ex-
ample, very distinctly, a vowel sound that is sung into
it. And in truth physics has proved that the vowels
may be regarded as composed of simple musical


You see that by the exciting of definite tones in the
air quite definite motions are set up with mechanical
necessity in the piano. The idea might be made use
of for the performance of some pretty pieces of wiz-
ardry. Imagine a box in which is a stretched string
of definite pitch. This is thrown into motion as often
as its note is sung or whistled. Now it would not be
a very difficult task for a skilful mechanic to so con-
struct the box that the vibrating cord would close a
galvanic circuit and open the lock. And it would not
be a much more difficult task to construct a box which
would open at the whistling of a certain melody. Se-
same ! and the bolts fall. Truly, we should have here
a veritable puzzle-lock. Still another fragment res-
cued from that old kingdom of fables, of which our day
has realised so much, that world of fairy-stories to
which the latest contributions are Casselli's telegraph,
by which one can write at a distance in one's own hand,
and Prof. Blisha Gray's telautograph. What would
the good old Herodotus have said to these things who
even in Egypt shook his head at much that he saw?


THE FIBRES OF CORTI.

ifioi }ikv ov mora, just as simple- heartedly as then,
when he heard of the circumnavigation of Africa.

A new puzzle-lock ! But why invent one? Are
not we human beings ourselves puzzle-locks? Think
of the stupendous groups of thoughts, feelings, and
emotions that can be aroused in us by a word ! Are
there not moments in all our lives when a mere name
drives the blood to our hearts? Who that has at-
tended a large mass-meeting has not experienced what
tremendous quantities of energy and motion can be
evolved by the innocent words, "Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity."

But let us return to the subject proper of our dis-
course. Let us look again at our piano, or what will
do just as well, at some other contrivance of the same
character. What does this instrument do? Plainly,
it decomposes, it analyses every agglomeration of
sounds set up in the air into its individual component
parts, each tone being taken up by a difierent string ;
it performs a real spectral analysis of sound. A person
completely deaf, with the help of a piano, simply by
touching the strings or examining their vibrations with
a microscope, might investigate the sonorous motion of
the air, and pick out the separate tones excited in it.

The ear has the same capacity as this piano. The
ear performs for the mind what the piano performs for
a person who is deaf. The mind without the ear is
deaf. But a deaf person, with the piano, does hear
after a fashion, though much less vividly, and more


THE FIBRES OF CQRTI.


clumsily, than with the ear. The ear, thus, also de-
composes sound into its component tonal parts. I shall
now not be deceived, 1 think, if I assume that you
already have a presentiment of what the function of
Corti's fibres is. We can make the matter very plain to
ourselves. We will use the one piano for exciting the
sounds, and we shall imagine the second one in the
ear of the observer in the place of Corti's fibres, which
is a model of such an instrument. To every string of
the piano in the ear we will suppose a special fibre of
the auditory nerve attached, so that this fibre and this
alone, is irritated when the string is thrown into vibra-
tion. If we strike now an accord on the external
piano, for every tone of that accord a definite string of
the internal piano will sound and as many different
nervous fibres will be irritated as there are notes in
the accord. The simultaneous sense-impressions due
to different notes can thus be preserved unmingled and
be separated by the attention. It is the same as with
the five fingers of the hand. With each finger I can
touch something different. Now the ear has three thou-
sand such fingers, and each one is designed for the
touching of a difierent tone. * Our ear is a puzzle-lock
of the kind mentioned. It opens at the magic melody
of a sound. But it is a stupendously ingenious lock.
Not only one tone, but every tone makes it open ; but


each one differently. To each tone it replies with a
different sensation.

More than once it has happened in the history of
science that a phenomenon predicted by theory, has
not been brought within the range o! actual observa-
tion until long afterwards. Leverrier predicted the
existence and the place of the planet Neptune, but it
was not until sometime later that Galle actually found
the planet at the predicted spot. Hamilton unfolded
theoretically the phenomenon of the so-called conical
refraction of light, but it was reserved for Lloyd some
time subsequently to observe the fact. The fortunes
of Helmholtz's theory of Corti's fibres have been some-
what similar. This theory, too, received its substan-
tial confirmation from the subsequent observations of
V. Hensen. On the free surface of the bodies of Crusta-
cea, connected with the auditory nerves, rows of lit-
tle hairy filaments of varying lengths and thicknesses
are found, which to some extent are the analogues of
Corti's fibres. Hensen saw these hairs vibrate when
sounds were excited, and when different notes were
Struck different hairs were set in vibration,

I have compared the work of the physical inquirer
to the journey of the tourist. When the tourist as-
cends a new hill he obtains of the whole district a
diflerent view. When the inquirer has found the so-
lution of one enigma, the solution of a host of others
falls into his hands.

Surely you have often felt the strange impression ex-


30 THE FIBRES OF COKTl.

perienced when in singing through the scale the octave
is reached, and nearly the same sensation is produced
as by the fundamental tone. The phenomenon finds its
explanation in the view here laid down of the ear. And
not only this phenomenon but all the laws o( the the-
ory of harmony may be grasped and verified from this
point of view with a clearness before undreamt of.
Unfortunately, I must content myself to-day with the
simple indication of these beautiful prospects. Their
consideration would lead us too far aside into the fields
of other sciences.

The searcher of nature, too, must restrain himself
in bis path. He also is drawu along from one beauty
to another as the tourist from dale to dale, and as cir-
cumstances generally draw men from one condition of
life into others. It is not he so much that makes the
quests, as that the quests are made of him. Yet let
him profit by his time, and let not his glance rove aim-
lessly hither and thither. For soon the evening sun
will shine, and ere he has caught a full glimpse of the
wonders close by, a mighty hand will seize him and
lead him away into a different world of puzzles.

Respected hearers, science once stood in an en-
tirely different relation to poetry. The old Hindu
mathematicians wrote their theorems in verses, and
lotus-flowers, roses, and lilies, beautiful sceneries,
lakes, and mountains figured in their problems,

"Thou goest forth on this lake in a boat, A lily
juts forth, one palm above the water, A breeze bends


THE FIBRES OF COR TI.


it downwards, and it vanishes two palms from its pre-
vious spot beneath the surface. Quick, mathemati-
cian, tell me how deep is the lake ! "

Thus spoke an ancient Hindu scholar. This poetry,
and rightly, has disappeared from science, but from
its dry leaves another poetry is wafted aloft which can-
not be described to him who has never felt it. Who-
ever will fully enjoy this poetry must put his hand to
the plough, must himself investigate. Therefore,
enough of this ! I shall reckon myself fortunate if you
do not repent of this brief excursion into the flowered
dale of physiology, and if you take with yourselves the
belief tliat we can say of science what we say of poetry,


ON THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.


WE are to speak to-day of a theme which is perhaps
of somewhat more general interest — the causes of
the }iarmony of musical sounds. The first and simplest
experiences relative to harmony are very ancient. Not
so the explanation of its laws. These were first sup-
plied by the investigators of a recent epoch. Allow me
an historical retrospect.

Pythagoras (586 B. C") knew that the note yielded
by a string of steady tension was converted into its
octave when the length of the string was reduced one-
half, and into its fifth when reduced two-thirds; and
that then the first fundamental tone was consonant
with the two others. He knew generally that the same
string under fixed tension gives consonant tones when
successively divided into lengths that are in the pro-
portions of the simplest natural numbers; that is, in
the proportions of 1:2, 2:3, 3:4, 4:5.

Pythagoras failed to reveal the causes of these laws.
What have consonant tones to do with the simple nat-
ural numbers? That is the question we should ask


ON THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.


to-day. But this circumstance must have appeared
less strange than inexplicable to Pythagoras, This
philosopher sought for the causes of harmony in the
occult, miraculous powers of numbers. His procedure
was largely the cause of the upgrowth of a numerical
mysticism, of which the traces may still be detected in
our oneirocritical books and among some scientists, to
whom marvels are more attractive than lucidity.

Euclid (300 B. C.) gives a definition of consonance
and dissonance that could hardly be improved upon,
in point of verbal accuracy. The consonance (avfi-
(poavla) of two tones, he says, is the mixture, the
blending (apdaiS) of those two tones; dissonance
{Statpajvia), on the other hand, is the incapacity of
the tones to blend (afttSla), whereby they are made
harsh for the ear. The person who knows the correct
eKplanation of the phenomenon hears it, so to speak,
reverberated in these words of Euclid. Still, Euclid
did not know the true cause of harmony. He had un-
wittingly come very near to the truth, but without
really grasping it.

Leibnitz (1646-1716 A. D.) resumed the question
which his predecessors had left unsolved. He, of
course, knew that musical notes were produced by vi-
brations, that twice as many vibrations corresponded
to the octave as to the fundamental tone, etc. A pas-
sionate lover of mathematics, he sought for the cause
of harmony in the secret computation and comparison
of the simple numbers of vibrations and in the secret


O.V THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.


satisfaction of the soul at this occupation. But how,
we ask, if one does not know that musical tiotes are
vibrations ? The computation and the satisfaction at
the computation must indeed be pretty secret if it is
unknown. Whatqueerideasphilosophershave! Could
anything more wearisome be imagined than computa-
tion as a principle of aesthetics ? Yes, you are not
utterly wrong in your conjecture, yet you may be sure
that Leibnitz's theory is not wholly nonsense, although
it is difficult to make out precisely what he meant by
his secret computation.

The great Euler (1707-1783) sought the cause of
harmony, almost as Leibnitz did, in the pleasure which
the soul derives from the contemplation of order in the
numbers of the vibrations.*

Rameau and D'AIembert (1717-1783) approached
nearer to the truth. They knew that in every sound
available in music besides the fundamental note also
the twelfth and the next higher third could be heard;
and further that the resemblance between a fundamen-
tal tone and its octave was always strongly marked.
Accordingly, the combination of the octave, fifth, third,
etc., with the fundamental tone appeared to them "nat-
ural." They possessed, we must admit, the correct
point of view; but with the simple naturalness of a
phenomenon no inquirer can rest content ; for it is pre-


ON THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.


cisely this naturalness for which be seeks his explana-
tions.

Rameau's remark dragged along through the whole
modern period, but without leading to the full discov-
ery of the truth. Marx places it at the head of his
theory of composition, but makes no further applica-
tion of it. Also Goethe and Zelter in their correspon-
dence were, so to speak, on the brink of the truth.
Zelter knew of Rameau's view. Finally, you will be
appalled at the difficulty of the problem, when I tell
you that till very recent times even professors of phys-
ics were dumb when asked what were the causes of
harmony.

Not till quite recently did Helmholtz find the so-
lution of the question. But to make this solution clear
to you f must first speak of some experimental prin-
ciples of physics and psychology.

i) In every process of perception, in every obser-
vation, the attention plays a highly important part.
We need not look about us long for proofs of this.
You receive, for example, a letter written in a very
poor hand. Do your best, you cannot make it out.
You put together now these, now those lines, yet you
cannot construct from them a single intelligible char-
acter. Not until you direct your attention to groups
of lines which really belong together, is the reading of
the letter possible. Manuscripts, the letters of which
are formed of minute figures and scrolls, can only be
read at a considerable distance, where the attention is


ON THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.

no longer diverted from the significant outlines to the
details. A beautiful example of this class is furnished
by the famous iconographs of Giuseppe Arcimboldo in
the basement of the Belvedere gallery atVienna. These
are symbolic representations of water, fire, etc. : hu-
man heads composed of aquatic animals and of com-
bustibles. At a short distance one sees only the de-
tails, at a greater distance only the whole figure. Yet
a point can be easily found at which, by a simple vol-
untary movement of the attention, there is no difficulty
in seeing now the whole figure and now the smaller
forms of which it is composed. A picture is often seen
representing the tomb of Napoleon. The tomb is sur-
rounded by dark trees between which the bright heav-
ens are visible as background. One can look a long time
at this picture without noticing anything except the
trees, but suddenly, on the attention being acciden-
tally directed to the bright background, one sees
the figure of Napoleon between the trees. This case
shows us very distinctly the important part which at-
tention plays. The same sensuous object can, solely
by the interposition of attention, give rise to wholly
different perceptions.

If I strike a harmony, or chord, on this piano, by
a mere effort of attention you can fix every tone of
that harmony. You then hear most distinctly the
fixed tone, and all the rest appear as a mere addition,
altering only the quality, or acoustic color, of the pri-
mary tone. The effect of the same harmony is essen-


ON THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.


tially modi&ed if we direct our attention to different
tones.

Strike in succession two harmonies, for example,
the two represented in the annexed diagram, and first
fix by the attention the upper note e, afterwards the
base e — a ; in the two cases you will hear the same
sequence of harmonies differently.
In the first case, you have the im-
pression as if the fixed tone re-
mained unchanged and simply al-
tered its timbre ; in the second case,
the whole acoustic agglomeration
seems to fall sensibly in depth.
There is an art of composition to guide the attention
of the hearer. But there is also an art of hearing,
which is not the gift of every person.

The piano-player knows the remarkable effects ob-
tained when one of the keys of a chord that is struck


is let loose. Bar i played on the piano sounds almost
like bar 2. The note which lies next to the key let
loose resounds after its release as if it were freshly
struck. The attention no longer occupied with the
upper note is by that very fact insensibly led to the
upper note.


ON THE CAUSES OE HARMONY.

Any tolerably cultivated musical ear can perform
the resolution of a harmony into its component parts.
By much practice we can go even further. Then,
every musical sound heretofore regarded as simple
can be resolved into a subordinate suc-
I t p ■ § ■* r cession of musical tones. For example,
I PT) Sa I- if I strike on the piano the note i, (an-

\ nexed diagram,) we shall hear, if we

\ ^ — ^ ' \ \ make the requisite effort of attention,
besides the loud fundamental note the
feebler, higher overtones, or harmonics,
a .... 7, that is, the octave, the twelfth, the double
octave, and the third, the fifth, and the seventh of
the double octave.

The same is true of every musically available
sound. Each yields, with varying degrees of inten-
sity, besides its fundamental note, also the octave, the
twelfth, the double octave, etc. The phenomenon is
observable with special facility on the open and closed
flue-pipes of organs. According, now, as certain over-
tones are more or less distinctly emphasised in a
sound, the timbre of the sound changes — that peculiar
quality of the sound by which we distinguish the music
of the piano from that of the violin, the clarinet, etc.
On the piano these overtones can be very easily
rendered audible. If I strike, for example, sharply
note I of the foregoing series, whilst 1 simply press
down upon, one after another, the keys 2, 3, .... 7,
the notes 2, 3, .... 7 will continue to sound after the


ON 7 HE CAUSES OF HARMONY.


Striking of i, because the strings corresponding to
these notes, now freed from their dampers, are thrown
into sympathetic vibration.

As you know, this sympathetic vibration of the like-
pitched strings with the overtones is really not to be
conceived as sympathy, but rather as lifeless mechani-
cal necessity. We must not think of this sympathetic
vibration as an ingenious journalist pictured it, who
tells a gruesome story of Beethoven's F minor sonata,
Op. 2, that I cannot withhold from you. "At the
last London Industrial Exhibition nineteen virtuosos
played the F minor sonata on the same piano. When
the twentieth stepped up to the instrument to play by
way of variation the same production, to the terror of
all present the piano began to render the sonata of its
own accord. The Archbishop of Canterbury, who
happened to be present, was set to work and forthwith
expelled the F minor devil."

Although, now, the overtones or harmonics which
we have discussed are heard only upon a special effort
of the attention, nevertheless they play a highly im-
portant part in the formation of musical timbre, as also
in the production of the consonance and dissonance of
sounds. This may strike you as singular. How can
a thing which is heard only under exceptional circum-
stances be of importance generally for audition ?

But consider some familiar incidents of your every-
day life. Think of how many things you see which
you do not notice, which never strike your attention


OA' THE CAUSES OF HARMONY,

until they are missing. A friend calls upon you ; you
cannot understand why he looks so changed. Not
until you make a close examination do you discover
that his hair has been cut. It is not difficult to tell
the publisher of a work from its letter-press, and yet
no one can state precisely the points by which this
style of type is so strikingly different from that style.
I have often recognised a book which I was in search
of from a simple piece of unprinted white paper that
peeped out from underneath the heap of books cover-
ing it, and yet I had never carefully examined the
paper, nor could I have stated its difference from other
papers.

What we must remember, therefore, is that every
sound that is musically available yields, besides its
fundamental note, its octave, its twelfth, its double
octave, etc., as overtones or harmonics, and that these
are important for the agreeable combination of several
musical sounds.

2) One other fact still remains to be dealt with.
Look at this tuning-fork. It yields, when struck, a per-
fectly smooth tone. But if you strike in company with
it a second fork which is of slightly different pitch, and
which alone also gives a perfectly smooth tone, you
will hear, if you set both forks on the table, or hold
both before your ear, a uniform tone no longer, but a
number of shocks of tones. The rapidity of the shocks
increases with the difference of the pitch of the forks.
These shocks, which become very disagreeable for the


ON THE CAUSES OF JfARMONY. 41

ear when they amount to thirty-three in a second, are

called " beats."

Always, when one of two like musical sounds is
thrown out of unison with the other, beats arise. Their
number increases with the divergence from unison, and
simultaneously they grow more unpleasant. Their
roughness reaches its maximum at about thirty-three
beats in a second. On a still further departure from
unison, and a consequent increase of the number of
beats, the unpleasant effect is diminished, so that tones
which are widely apart in pitch no longer produce
offensive beats.

To give yourselves a clear idea of the production
of beats, take two metronomes and set them almost
alike. You can, for that matter, set the two exactly
alike. You need not fear that they will strike alike.
The metronomes usually for sale in the shops are poor
enough to yield, when set alike, appreciably unequal
strokes. Set, now, these two metronomes, which strike
at unequal intervals, in motion ; you will readily see
that their strokes alternately coincide and conflict with
each other. The alternation is quicker the greater the
difference of time of the two metronomes.

If metronomes are not to be had, the experiment
may be performed with two watches.

Beats arise in the same way. The rhythmical
shocks of two sounding bodies, of unequal pitch, some-
times coincide, sometimes interfere, whereby they al-


42 ON THE CA USES OF HARMONY.

ternately augment and enfeeble each other's effects.
Hence the shock-like, unpleasant swelling of the tone.
Now that we have made ourselves acquainted with
overtones and beats, we may proceed to the answer of
our main question, Why do certain relations of pitch
produce pleasant sounds, consonances, others unpleas-
ant sounds, dissonances 7 It will be readily seen that
all the unpleasant eSects of simultaneous sound-com-
binations are the result of beats produced by those
combinations. Beats are the only sin, the sole evil of
music. Consonance is the coalescence of sounds with-
out appreciable beats.


ll!imlf!ilHl^lfh


To make this perfectly clear to you I have con-
structed the model which you see in Fig. 12. It rep-
resents a claviatur. At its top a movable strip of wood
aa with the marks i, 2 .... 6 is placed. By setting
this strip in any position, for example, in that where the
mark r is over the note c of the claviatur, the marks
2, 3 .... 6, as you see, stand over the overtones of c.
The same happens when the strip is placed in any
other position. A second, exactly similiar strip, bb,
possesses the same properties. Thus, together, the
two strips, in any two positions, point out by their


ON THE CAUSES OF IJARMQNY.


43


marks all the tones brought into play upon the simulta-
neous sounding of the notes indicated by the marks i.

The two strips, placed over the same fundamental
note, show that also all the overtones of those notes
coincide. The first note is simply intensified by the
other. The single overtones of a sound lie too far apart
to permit appreciable beats. The second sound sup-
plies nothing new, consequently, also, no new beats.
Unison is the most perfect consonance.

Moving one of the two strips along the other is
equivalent to a departure from unison. All the over-
tones of the one sound now fall alongside those of the
other ; beats are at once produced ; the combination
of the tones becomes unpleasant : we obtain a disso-
nance. If we move the strip further and further along,
we shall find that as a general rule the overtones al-
ways fail alongside each other, that is, always produce
beats and dissonances. Only in a few quite definite
positions do the overtones partially coincide. Such
positions, therefore, signify higher degrees of euphony
— they point out the consonant mtervals.

These consonant intervals can be readily found ex-
perimentally by cutting Fig. 1 2 out of paper and moving
bb lengthwise along aa. The most perfect consonances
are the octave and the twelfth, since in these two cases
the overtones of the one sound coincide absolutely
with those of the other. In the octave, for example,
1 15 falls on 2 a, 2 i on 4(1, 31* on 6 a. Consonances,
therefore, are simultaneous sound-combinations not


44 OM THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.

accompanied by disagreeable beats. This, by the way,
is, expressed in English, what Euclid said in Greek.

Only such sounds are consonant as possess in com-
mon some portion of their partial tones. Plainly we
must recognise between such sounds, also when struck
one after another, a certain affinity. For the second
sound, by virtue of the common overtones, will produce
partly the same sensation as the first. The octave is
the most striking exemplification of this. When we
reach the octave in the ascent of the scale we actually
fancy we hear the fundamental tone repeated. The
foundations of harmony, therefore, are the foundations
of melody.

Consonance is the coalescence of sounds without
appreciable beats ! This principle is competent to in-
troduce wonderful order and logic into the doctrines
of the fundamental bass. The compendiums of the
theory of harmony which (Heaven be witness !) have
stood hitherto little behind the cook-books in subtlety
of logic, are rendered extraordinarily clear and simple.
And what is more, all that the great masters, such as
Palestrina, Mozart, Beethoven, unconsciously got
right, and of which heretofore no test -book could ren-
der just account, receives from the preceding principle
its perfect verification.

But the beauty of the theory is, that it bears upon
its face the stamp of truth. It is no phantom of the
brain. Every musician can hear for himself the beats
which the overtones of his musical sounds produce.


ON THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.

Evety musician can satisfy himself that for any given
case the number and the harshness of the beats can
be calculated beforehand, and that they occur in ex-
actly the measure that theory determines.

This is the answer which Helmhohz gave to the
question of Pythagoras, so far as it can be explained
with the means now at my command. A long period
of time lies between the raising and the solving of this
question. More than once were eminent inquirers
nearer to the answer than they dreamed of.

The inquirer seeks the truth. I do not know if the
truth seeks the inquirer. But were that so, then the
history of science would vividly remind us of that
classical rendezvous, so often immortalised by paint-
ers and poets. A high garden wall. At the right a
youth, at the left a maiden. The youth sighs, the
maiden sighs 1 Both wait. Neither dreams how near
the other is.

I like this simile. Truth suffers herself to be
courted, but she has evidently no desire to be won.
She flirts at times disgracefully. Above all, she is de-
termined to be merited, and has naught but contempt
for the man who will win her too quickly. And if,
forsooth, one breaks his head in his efforts of conquest,
what matter is it, another will come, and truth is al-
ways young. At times, indeed, it really seems as if
she were well disposed towards her admirer, but that
admitted — never ! Only when Truth is in exceptionally
good spirits does she bestow upon her wooer a glance


46 ON THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.

of encouragement. For, thinks Truth, if I do not do
something, in the end the fellow will not seek me at all.

This one fragment of truth, then, we have, and it
shall never escape us. But when I reflect what it has
cost in labor and in the lives of thinking men, how it
painfully groped its way through centuries, a half-
matured thought, before it became complete; when 1
reflect that it is the toil of more than two thousand
years that speaks out of this unobtrusive model of
mine, then, without dissimulation, I almost repent me
of the jest I have made.

And think of how much we still lack ! When, sev-
eral thousand years hence, boots, top-hats, hoops, pia-
nos, and bass-viols are dug out of the earth, out of the
newest ailuvium as fossils of the nineteenth century;
when the scientists of that time shall pursue their
studies both upon these wonderful structures and upon
our modern Broadways, as we to-day make studies of
the implements of the stone age and of the prehistoric
lake-dwellings — then, too, perhaps, people will be un-
able to comprehend how we could come so near to
many great truths without grasping them. And thus
it is for all time the unsolved dissonance, for all time
the troublesome seventh, that everywhere resounds in
our ears; we feel, perhaps, that it will find its solu-
tion, but we shall never live to see the day of the pure
triple accord, nor shall our remotest descendants.

Ladies, if it is the sweet purpose of your life to
sow confusion, it is the purpose of mine to be clear ;


ON THE CAUSES OF HARMONY.

and so I must confess to you a slight transgression
that I have been guilty of. On one point I have told
you aa untruth. But you will pardon me this false-
hood, if in full repentance I make it good. The model
represented in Fig. 12 does not tell the whole truth, for
it is based upon the so-called "even temperament" ■
system of tuning. The overtones, however, of musical
sounds are not tempered, but purely tuned. By means
of this sUght inexactness the model is made consider-
ably simpler. In this form it is fully adequate for
ordinary purposes, and no one who makes use of it in
his studies need be in fear of appreciable error.

If you should demand of me, however, the full
truth, I could give you that only by the help of a math-
ematical formula. I should have to taie the chalk into
my hands and — think of it l^reckon in your presence,
This you might take amiss. Nor shall it happen.
I have resolved to do no more reckoning for to-day.
I shall reckon now only upon your forbearance, and
this you will surely not gainsay me when you reflect
that I have made only a limited use of my privilege to
weary you. I could have taken up much more of
your time, and may, therefore, justly close with Les-"
sing's epigram :


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.


WHEN a criiDinal judge has a right crafty knave
before him, one well versed in the arts of pre-
varication, his main object is to wring a confession from
the culprit by a few skilful questions, lu almost a simi-
lar position the natural philosopher seems to be placed
with respect to nature. True, his functions here are
more those of the spy than the judge ; but his object
remains pretty much the same. Her hidden motives
and laws of action is what nature must be made to
confess. Whether a confession will be extracted de-
pends upon the shrewdness of the inquirer. Not with-
out reason, therefore, did Lord Bacon call the ex-
perimental method a questioning of nature. The
art consists in so putting our questions that they
may not remain unanswered without a breach of eti-
quette.

Look, too, at the countless tools, engines, and in-
struments of torture with which man conducts his
inquisitions of nature, and which mock the poet's
words :


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.


Look at these Instruments and you will see that the
comparison with torture also is admissible,*

This view of nature, as of something designedly
concealed from man, that can be unveiled only by
force or dishonesty, chimed in better with the concep-
tions of the ancients than with modern notions. A
Grecian philosopher once said, in offering his opinion
of the natural science of his time, that it could only be
displeasing to the gods to see men endeavoring to spy
out what the gods were not minded to reveal to them-t
Of course all the contemporaries of the speaker were
not of his opinion.

Traces of this view may still be found to-day, but
upon the whole we are now not so narrow-minded.
We believe no longer that nature designedly hides
herself. We know now from the history of science
that our questions are sometimes meaningless, and
that, therefore, no answer can be forthcoming. Soon
we shall see how man, with all his thoughts and quests,
is only a fragment of nature's life.


e lo Mr. Jtil,


b.b]^, c


cibii is


u Ionic foi

tk. cma, uid Geimsn ICrTie).—Trani.

IXenaphoD, Mcmorabilli iv. 7, pals iirlo the
rda: eirrc yhp eiipna av^i/unoii aira ivd/uC


iiii—hom xhe Le.ua mu-.

' JUK {ct. Mod^n Engliiii

month at Sociiles \he!,t
^ elviu, ovre xao'i'^'^a-


30 THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.

Picture, then, as your fancy dictates, the tools oi
the physicist as instruments of torture or as engines of
endearment, at all events a chapter from the history of
those implements will be of interest to you, and it will
not be unpleasant to learn what were the peculiar diffi-
culties that led to the invention of such strange appa-
ratus.

Galileo (born at Pisa in 1564, died at Arcetri in
1642) was the first who asked what was the velocity
of light, that is, what time it would take for a light
struck at one place to become visible at another, a
certain distance away.*

The method which Galileo devised was as simple

as it was natural. Two practised observers, with

mufSed lanterns, were to take up positions in a dark

night at a considerable dis-

A B tance from each other, one at

Fig. 13. A and one at B. At a moment

previously fixed upon, A was
instructed to unmask his lantern ; while as soon as B
saw the light of A's lantern he was to unmask his.
Now it is clear that the time which A counted from
the uncovering of his lantern until he caught sight of
the light of B's would be the time which it would take
light to travel from A to B and from B back to A.

The experiment was not executed, nor could it, in
the nature of the case, have been a success. As we

* Galilal, Diatrii i dImHiratInu maltmalickt. Lardsn, IGJB. DiaUge


now know, light travels too rapidly to be thus noted.
The time elapsing between the arrival of the light at
B and its perception by the observer, with that be-
tween the decision to uncover and the uncovering of
the lantern, is, as we now know, incomparably greater
than the time which it takes light to travel the greatest
earthly distances. The great velocity of light will be
made apparent, if we reflect that a flash of lightning
in the night illuminates instantaneously a very exten-
sive region, whilst the single reflected claps of thunder
arrive at the observer's ear very gradually and in ap-
preciable succession.

During his life, then, the efforts of Galileo to de-
termine the velocity of light remained uncrowned with
success. But the subsequent history of the measure-
ment of the velocity of light is intimately associated
with his name, for with the telescope which he con-
structed he discovered the tour satellites of Jupiter,
and these furnished the next occasion for the deter-
mination of the velocity of light.

The terrestrial spaces were too small for Galileo's
experiment. The measurement was first executed
when the spaces of the planetary system were em-
ployed. Olaf ROmer, (born at Aarhuus in 1644, died
at Copenhagen in 1710) accomplished the feat (1675-
1676), while watching with Cassini at the observatory
of Paris the revolutions of Jupiter's moons.

Let AB (Fig. 14) be Jupiter's orbit. Let 5 stand
for the sun, £ for the earth, / loi Jupiter, and Tioi


ja THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.

Jupiter's first satellite. When the earth is at E^ we
see the satellite enter regularly into Jupiter's shadow,
and by watching the time between two successive
eclipses, can calculate its time of revolution. The
time which Romer noted was forty-two hours, twenty-
eight minutes, and thirty-five seconds. Now, as the
earth passes along in its orbit towards E^, the revolu-
tions of the satellite grow apparently longer and longer :


jq^ i


O

8


ESP


the eclipses take place later and later. The greatest
retardation of the echpse, which occurs when the earth
is at E^, amounts to sixteen minutes and twenty-six
seconds. As the earth passes back again to E^, the
revolutions grow apparently shorter, and they occur
in exactly the time that they first did when the earth
arrives at £■,. It is to be remarked that Jupiter changes
only very slightly its position during one revolution of
the earth. R6mer guessed at once that these period-
ical changes of the time of revolution of Jupiter's satel-


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.

lite were not actual, but apparent changes, which were
in some way connected with the velocity of light.

Let us make this matter clear to ourselves by a sim-
ile. We receive regularly by the post, news of the
political status at our capital. However far away we
may be from the capital, we hear the news of every
event, later it is true, but of all equally late. The
events reach us in the same succession of time as that
in which they took place. But if we are travelling
away from the capital, every successive post will have
a greater distance to pass over, and the events will
reach us more slowly than they took place. The re-
verse will be the case if we are approaching the capital.

At rest, we hear a piece of music played in the
same tempo at all distances. But the tempo will be
seemingly accelerated if we are carried
rapidly towards the band, or retarded if
we are carried rapidly away from it.* ~

Picture to yourself a cross, say the
sails of a wind-mill (Fig. 15), in uniform F'fr's-

rotation about its centre. Clearly, the rotation of the
cross will appear to you more slowly executed if you
are carried very rapidly away from it. For the post
which in this case conveys to you the light and brings
to you the news of the successive positions of the cross
will have to travel in each successive instant over a
longer path.

■In Ihe Bsnie way, Itie pilch of ■ locomoiitB-irhiBtle i* higher u the


54


THE VELOCITY OF LICflT.


Now this must also be the case with the rotation
(the revolution) of the satellite of Jupiter. The great-
est retardation of the echpse (i6j^ minutes), due to
the passage of the earth from £, to E^, or to its re-
moval from Jupiter by a distance equal to the diameter
of the orbit of the earth, plainly corresponds to the
time which it takes light to traverse a distance equal to
the diameter of the earth's orbit. The velocity of light,
that is, the distance described by light in a second, as
determined by this calculation, is 311,000 kilometres,*
or 193,000 miles, A subsequent correction of the diam-
eter of the earth's orbit, gives, by the same method,
the velocity of light as approximately iS6,ooo miles a
second.

The method is exactly that of Galileo j only better
conditions are selected. Instead of a short terrestrial
distance we have the diameter of the earth's orbit,
three hundred and seven million kilometres; in place
of the uncovered and covered lanterns we have the
satellite of Jupiter, which alternately appears and dis-
appears. Galileo, therefore, although he could not
carry out himself the proposed measurement, found
the lantern by which it was ultimately executed.

Physicists did not long remain satisfied with this
beautiful discovery. They sought after easier meth-
ods of measuring the velocity of light, such as might
be performed on the earth. This was possible after the
difficulties of the problem were clearly exposed. A

'A kilomeli'e is o.&ii or aearl; £ve-elgbtb3 of a slilnle mile.


rilH VELOCITV OF Liciir.

measurement of the kind referred to was executed in
1S49 by FJzeau (born at Paris in iBig).

I shall endeavor to make the principle of Fizeau's
apparatus clear to you. Let s (Fig. 16) be a disk free
to rotate about its centre, and perforated at its rim
with a series of holes. Let / be a luminous point
casting its light on an unsilvered glass, a, inclined at
an angle of forty-five degrees to the axis of the disk.
The ray of light, reflected at this point, passes through
one of the holes of the disk and falls at right angles


upon a mirror b, erected at a point about five miles
distant. From the mirror b the light is again reflected,
passes once more through the hole in s, and, penetrat-
ing the glass plate, finally strikes the eye, o, of the ob-
server. The eye, o, thus, sees the image of the lumi-
nous point / through the glass plate and the hole of
the disk in the mirror b.

If, now, the disk be set in rotation, the unpierced
spaces between the apertures will alternately take the
place of the apertures, and the eye o will now see the
image of the luminous point in b only at interrupted
intervals. On increasing the rapidity of the rotation.


j6 THE VELOCITY OP LIGHT

however, the iaterruptloas for the eye become again
unnoticeable, and the eye sees the mirror b uniformly
illuminated.

But all this holds true only for relatively small ve-
locities of the disk, when the light sent through an
aperture m s to b on its return strikes the aperture at
almost the same place and passes through it a second
time. Conceive, now, the speed of the disk to be so in-
creased that the light on its return finds before it an
unpierced space instead of an aperture, it will then no
longer be able to reach the eye. We then see the
mirror b only when no light is emitted from it, but
only when light is sent to it ; it is covered when light
comes from it. In this case, accordingly, the mirror
will always appear dark.

If the velocity of rotation at this point were still
further increased, the light sent through one aperture
could not, of course, on its return pass through the
same aperture but might strike the next and reach
the eye by that. Hence, by constantly increasing the
velocity of the rotation, the mirror b may be made to
appear alternately bright and dark. Plainly, now, if
we know the number of apertures of the disk, the num-
ber of rotations per second, and the distance sb, we
can calculate the velocity of light. The result agrees
with that obtained by Romer.

The experiment is not quite as simple as my ex-
position might lead you to believe. Care must be
taken that the light shall travel back and forth over


the miles of distance sb and bs undispersed. This
difficulty is obviated by means o£ telescopes.

If we examine Fizeau's apparatus closely, we shall
recognise in it an old acquaintance: the arrangement
of Galileo's experiment. The luminous point / is the
lantern A, while the rotation of the perforated disk per-
forms mechanically the uncovering and covering of the
lantern. Instead of the unskilful observer B we have
the mirror b, which is unfailingly illuminated the instant
the light arrives from s. The disk j, by alternately
transmitting and interceptingthe reflected light, assists
the observer p. Galileo's experiment is here executed,
so to speak, countless times in a second, yet the total
result admits of actual observation. If I might be
pardoned the use of a phrase of Darwin's in this field,
I should say that Fizeau's apparatus was the descen-
dant of Galileo's lantern.

A still more refined and delicate method for the
measurement of the velocity of light was employed by
Foucault, but a description of it here would lead us
too far from our subject.

The measurement of the velocity of sound is easily
executed by the method of Galileo. It was unneces-
sary, therefore, for physicists to rack their brains fur-
ther about the matter; but the idea which with light
grew out of necessity was applied also in this field.
Koenig of Paris constructs an apparatus for the meas-
urement of the velocity of sound which is closely allied
to the method of Fizeau.


58 THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.

The apparatus is very simple. It consists of two
electrical clock-works which strike simultaneously,
with perfect precision, tenths of seconds. If we place
the two clock-works directly side by side, we hear
their strokes simultaneously, wherever we stand. But
if we take our stand by the side of one of the works
and place the other at some distance from us, in gen-
eral a coincidence of the strokes will now not be heard.
The companion strokes of the remote clock-work ar-
rive, as sound, later. The first stroke of the remote
work is heard, for example, immediately after the first
of the adjacent work, and so on. But hy increasing
the distance we may produce again a coincidence of the
strokes. For example, the first stroke of the remote
work coincides with the second of the near work, the
second of the remote work with the third of the near
work, and so on. If, now, the works strike tenths of
seconds and the distance between them is increased
until the first coincidence is noted, plainly that dis-
tance is travelled over by the sound in a tenth of a
second.

We meet frequently the phenomenon here pre-
sented, that a thought which centuries of slow and
painful endeavor are necessary to produce, when once
developed, fairly thrives. It spreads and runs every-
where, even entering minds in which it could never
have arisen. It simply cannot be eradicated.

The determination of the velocity of light is not the
only case in which the direct perception of the senses


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.

is too slow and clumsy for use. The usual method
of studying events too f5eet for direct observation con-
sists in putting iato reciprocal action with them other
events already known, the velocities of all of which
are capable of comparison. The result is
usually unmistakable, and susceptible of
direct inference respecting the character of
the event which is unknown. The velocity
of electricity cannot be determined by di-
rect observation. But it was ascertained
by Wheatstone, simply by the expedient of
watching an electric spark in a mirror rotating with
tremendous known velocity.

If we wave a staff irregularly hither and thither,
simple observation cannot determine how quickly it
moves at each point of its course. But let us look at
the staff through holes in the rim of a
rapidly rotating disk (Fig. 17). We
shall then see the moving staff only
in certain positions, namely, when a
hole passes in front of the eye. The
single pictures of the staH remain for a '"'*■ *

time impressed upon the eye ; we think we see several
staffs, having some such disposition as that represented
in Fig. 18. If, now, the holes of the disk are equally
far apart, and the disk is rotated with uniform velo-
city, we see clearly that the staH has moved slowly
from a to b, more quickly from b to c, still more quickly
from etod, and with its greatest velocity from d to e.


6d 7'HE velocity of LIGHT.

A jet of water flowing from an orifice in the bottom
of a vessel has the appearance of perfect quiet and
uniformity, but if we illuminate it for a second, in a
dark room, by means of an electric flash we shaJl see
that the jet is composed of separate drops. By their
quick descent the images of the drops are
1 O f obliterated and the jet appears uniform.

Oq j ff

Let us look at the jet through the rotating


30
40
50*


disk. The disk is supposed to be rotated so
rapidly that while the second aperture
Kg. 19. passes into the place of the first, drop i
falls into the place of 2, 2 into the place of 3, and so on.
We see drops then always in the same places. The
jet appears to be at rest. If we turn the disk a trifle
more slowly, then while the second aperture passes
into the place of the first, drop i will have fallen some-
what lower than a, 2 somewhat lower than 3, etc.
Through every successive aperture we shall see drops
in successively lower positions. The jet will appear to
be flowing slowly downwards.

Now let us turn the disk more rapidly. Then while
the second aperture is passing into the place of the
first, drop i will not quite have reached the place of 2,
but will be found shghtly above 2, 2 slightly above 3,
etc. Through the successive apertures we shall see
the drops at successively higher places. It will now
look as if the jet were flowing upwards, as if the drops
were rising from the lower vessel into the higher.

You see, physics grows gradually more and more


THE VELOCITY OP LIGHT.

terrible. The physicist will soon have it in his power
to play the part of the famous lobster chained to the
bottom of the Lake of Mohrin, whose direful mission,
if ever liberated, the poet Kopjsch humorously de-
scribes as that of a reversal of all the events of the
world ; the rafters of houses become trees again, cows
calves, honey dowers, chickens eggs, and the poet's
own poem dows back into his inkstand.

You will now allow me the privilege of a few gen-
eral remarks. You have seen that the same principle
often lies at the basis of large classes of apparatus
designed for different purposes. Frequently it is some
very unobtrusive idea which is productive of so much
fruit and of such extensive transformations in physical
technics. It is not otherwise here than in practical
life.

The wheel of a waggon appears to us a very simple
and insignificant creation. But its inventor was cer-
tainly a man of genius. The round trunk of a tree
perhaps first accidentally led to the observation of the
ease with which a load can be moved on a roller.
Now, the step from a simple supporting roller to a
iixed roller, or wheel, appears a very easy one. At
least it appears very easy to us who are accustomed
from childhood up to the action of the wheel. But if
we put ourselves vividly into the position of a man
who never saw a wheel, but had to invent one, we shall
begin to have some idea of its difficulties. Indeed, it


6a THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.

is even doubtful whether a single man could have ac-
complished this feat, whether perhaps centuries were
not necessary to form the first wheel from the primi-
tive roller.*

History does not name the progressive minds who
constructed the first wheel ; their time lies far back of
the historic period. No scientific academy crowned
their efforts, no society of engineers elected them
honorary members. They still live only in the stu-
pendous results which they called forth. Take from
us the wheel, and little will remain of the arts and in-
dustries of modern life. All disappears. From the
spinning-wheel to the spinning- mill, from the turning-
lathe to the rolling-mill, from the wheelbarrow to the
railway train, all vanishes.

In science the wheel is equally important. Whirl-
ing machines, as the simplest means of obtaining quick
motions with inconsiderable changes of place, play a
part in all branches of physics. You know Wheat-
stone's rotating mirror, Fizean's wheel, Plateau's per-
forated rotating disks, etc. Almost the same principle
lies at the basis of all these apparatus. They differ
from one another no more than the pen-knife differs,
in the purposes it serves, from the knife of the anato-
mist or the knife of the vine-dresser. Almost the same
might be said of the screw.


b the oh eel Is h


>,J»P


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT.


6j


It will now perhaps be clear to you that new
thoughts do not spring up suddenly. Thoughts need
their time to ripen, grow, and develop in, like every
natural product ; for man, with his thoughts, is also a
part o£ nature.

Slowly, gradually, and laboriously one thought is
transformed into a different thought, as in all likelihood
one animal species is gradually transformed into new
species. Many ideas arise simultaneously. They fight
the battle for existence not otherwise than do the
Ichthyosaurus, the Brahman, and the horse.

A few remain to spread rapidly over all fields of
knowledge, to be redeveloped, to be again split up, to
begin again the struggle from the start. As many
animal species long since conquered, the relicts of
ages past, still live in remote regions where their ene-
mies cannot reach them, so also we find conquered
ideas still living on in the minds of many men. Who-
ever will look carefully into his own soul will acknowl-
edge that thoughts battle as obstinately for existence
as animals. Who will gainsay that many vanquished
modes of thought still haunt obscure crannies of his
brain, too faint-hearted to step out into the clear light
of reason ? What inquirer does not know that the
hardest battle, in the transformation of his ideas, is
fought with himself.

Similar phenomena meet the natural inquirer in all
paths and in the most trifling matters. The true in-
quirer seeks the truth everywhere, in his country-


64 THE VELOaTV OF LIGHT.

walks and on the streets of the great city. If he is
not too learned, he will observe that certain things,
like ladies' hats, are constantly subject to change. I
have not pursued special studies on this subject, but
as long as I can remember, one form has always
gradually changed into another. First, they wore hats
with long projecting rims, within which, scarcely ac-
cessible with a telescope, lay concealed the face of the
beautiful wearer. The rim grew smaller and smaller;
the bonnet shrank to the irony of a hat. Now a tre-
mendous superstructure is beginning to grow up in its
place, and the gods only know what its limits will be.
It is not otherwise with ladies' bats than with butter-
flies, whose multiplicity of form often simply comes
from a slight excrescence on the wing of one species
developing in a cognate species to a tremendous fold.
Nature, too, has its fashions, but they last thousands
of years. I could elucidate this idea by many addi-
tional examples; for instance, by the history of the
evolution of the coat, if I were not fearful that my
gossip might prove irksome to you.


We have now wandered through an odd comer of
the history of science. What have we learned ? The

solution of a small, I might almost say insignificant,
problem — the measurement of the velocity of light.
And more than two centuries have worked at its solu-
tion 1 Three of the most eminent natural philosophers,
Galileo, an Italian, Komer, a Dane, and Fizeau, a


THK VMLOCITV O-F LIGJtT. 63

Frenchman, have fairly shared its labors. And so it
is with countless other questions. When we contem-
plate thus the many blossoms of thought that must
wither and fall before one shall bloom, then shall we
first truiy appreciate Christ's weighty but little con-
solatory words : " Many be called but few are chosen."

Such is the testimony of every page of history.
But is history right? Are really only those chosen
whom she names? Have those lived and battled in
vain, who have won no prize?

I doubt it. And so will every one who has felt the
pangs of sleepless nights spent in thought, at first fruit-
less, but in the end successful. No thought in such
struggles was thought in vain ; each one, even the most
insignificant, nay, even the erroneous thought, that
which apparently was the least productive, served to
prepare the way for those that afterwards bore fruit.
And as in the thought of the individual naught is in
vain, so, also, it is in that of humanity.

Galileo wished to measure the velocity of light.
He had to close his eyes before his wish was realised.
But he at least found the lantern by which his succes-
sor could accomplish the task.

And so 1 may maintain that we all, so far as inclina-
tion goes, are working at the civilisation of the future.
If only we all strive for the right, then are we aU
called and all chosen !


WHY HAS MAN TWO EYES ?


WHY has man two eyes? That the pretty sym-
metry of his face may not be disturbed, the
artist answers. That his second eye may furnish a
substitute for his first if that be lost, says the far-
sighted economist. That we may weep with two eyes
at the sins of the world, replies the religious enthu-
siast.

Odd opinions ! Vet if you should approach a mod-
ern scientist with this question you might consider
yourself fortunate if you escaped with less than a re-
buff. " Pardon me, madam, or my dear sir, " he would
say, with stern expression, " man fulfils no purpose in
the possession of his eyes ; nature is not a person, and
consequently not so vulgar as to pursue purposes of
any kind,"

Still an unsatisfactory answer I I once knew a pro-
fessor who would shut with horror the mouths of his
pupils if they put to him such an unscientific question.

But ask a more tolerant person, ask me. I, I can-
didly confess, do not know exactly why man has two


1

J


WHY HAS MAN TWO EYESf

eyes, but the reason partly is, I think, that I may see
you here before me to-night and talk with you upon
this delightful subject.

Again you smile incredulously. Now this is one of
those questions that a hundred wise men together
could not answer. You have heard, so far, only five of
these wise men. You will certainly want to be spared
the opinions of the other ninety-five. To the first you
will reply that we should look just as pretty if we were
born with only one eye, like the Cyclops ; to the sec-
ond we should be much better off, according to his
principle, if we had four or eight eyes, and that in this
respect we are vastly inferior to spiders ; to the third,
that you are not just in the mood to weep ; to the
fourth, that the unqualified interdiction of the question
excites rather than satisfies your curiosity ; while of
me you will dispose by saying that my pleasure is not
as intense as I think, and certainly not great enough
to justify the existence of a double eye in man since
the fall of Adam.

But since you are not satisfied with my brief and
obvious answer, you have only yourselves to blame
for the consequences. You must now listen to a longer
and more learned explanation, such as it is in my
power to give.

As the church of science, however, debars the ques-
tion "Why?" let us put the matter in a purely ortho-
dox way : Man has two eyes, what more can he see with
two than with one?


IVU7 fiAS MAN TlfU EVJiS?


I will invite you to take a walk with me ? We see
before us a wood. What is it that makes this real
wood contrast so favorably with a painted wood, no
matter how perfect the painting may be? What makes
the one so much more lovely than the other ? Is it the
vividness of the coloring, the distribution of the lights
and the shadows? I think
not. On the contrary, it
seems to me that in this
respect painting can ac-
complish very much.

The cunning hand of
the painter can conjure up
with a few strokes of his
brush forms of wonderful
plasticity. By the help of

can be attained. Photo-
graphs of reliefs are so
plastic that we often im-
agine we can actually lay
hold of the elevations and
depressions.

;ver can give with the

difference of near and

plainly that you can

inaccessibly


But one thing the painter
ividnessthat nature does— l!
In the real woods you s
hold of some trees, but that othi


far.


■. The picture of the painter is rigid.
of the real woods changes on the slighte!


The picture
t movement


WHY HASSAN TWO EYES Y


69


Now this branch is hidden behind that; now that be-
hind this. The trees are alternately visible and in-
visible.

Let us look at this matter a little more closely.
For convenience sake we shall remain upon the high-
way, I, II. (Fig, ao.) To the right and the left lies the
forest. Standing at I, we see, let us say, three trees
(1, 2, 3) in a line, so that the two remote ones are
covered by the nearest. Moving further along, this
changes. At II we shall not have to look round so far
to see the remotest tree 3 as to see the nearer tree 2,
nor so far to see this as to see i. Hence, as we move
onward, objects that are near to us seem to lag behind as
compared with objects that are remote /ram us, the lagging
increasing with the proximity of the objects. Very remote
objects, towards which we must always look in the
same direction as we proceed, appear to travel along
with us.

If we should see, therefore, jutting above the brow
of yonder hill the tops of two trees whose distance
from us we were in doubt about, we should have in
our hands a very easy means of deciding the question.
We should take a few steps forward, say to the right,
and the tree-top which receded most to the left would
be the one nearer to us. In truth, from the amount
of the recession a geometer could actually determine
the distance of the trees from us without ever going
near them. It is simply the scientific development of


IV//y HAS MAS TWO KVESt


this perception that enables us to measure the distances
o£ the stars.

Hence, from change of view in forward motion the
distances of objects in our field of vision can be measured.

Rigorously, however, even forward motion is not
necessary. For every observer is composed really of
two observers. Man has two eyes. The right eye is
a short step ahead of the left eye in the right-hand di-
rection. Hence, the two eyes receive different pic-
tures of the same woods. The right eye will see the
near trees displaced to the left, and the left eye will
see them displaced to the right, the displacement being
greater, the greater the proximity. This diiference is
sufficient for forming ideas of distance.

We may now readily convince ourselves of the fol-
lowing facts :

1. With one eye, the other being shut, you have a
very uncertain judgment of distances. You will find
it, for example, no easy task, with one eye shut, to
thrust a stick through a ring hung up before you ; you
will miss the ring in almost every instance.

2, You see the same object differently with the
right eye from what you do with the left.

Place a lamp-shade on the table in front of you
with its broad opening turned downwards, and look
at it from above. (Fig. 21.) You will see with your
right eye the image 2, with your left eye the image i.
Again, place the shade with its wide opening turned
upwards; you will receive with your right eye the im-


way HAS MAN TWO E YES ? 71

age 4, with your left eye the image 3. Euclid mentions
phenomena of this character.

3. Finally, you know that it is easy to judge of
distances with both eyes. Accordingly your judgment
must spring in some way from a co-operation of the


two eyes. In the preceding example the openings iu
the different images received by the two eyes seem
displaced with respect to one another, and this dis-
placement is sufficient for the inference that the one
opening is nearer than the other.

I have no doubt that you, ladies, have frequently
received delicate compliments upon your eyes, but I


ffZ/y HAS MAN TWO EYES f


feel sure that no one has ever told you, and I know not
whether it will flatter you, that you have in your eyes,
be they blue or black, little geometricians. You say
you know nothing of them? Well, for that matter,
neither do I. But the facts are as I tell you.

You understand littie of geometry? I shall accept
that confession. Yet with the help of your two eyes
you judge of distances? Surely that is a geometrical
problem. And what is more, you know the solution
of this problem : for you estimate distances correctly.
If, then, you do not solve the problem, the little geom-
etricians in your eyes must do it clandestinely and whis-
per the solution to you. I doubt not they are fleet little
fellows.

What amazes me most here is, that you know noth-
ing about these little geometricians. But perhaps they
also know nothing about you. Perhaps they are mod-
els of punctuality, routine clerks who bother about
nothing but their fixed work. In that case we may
be able to deceive the gentlemen.

If we present to our right eye an image which looks
exactly like the lampshade for the right eye, and to
our left eye an image which looks exactly like a lamp-
shade for the left eye, we shall imagine that we see
the whole lamp-shade bodily before us.

You know the experiment. If you are practised in
squinting, you can perform it directly with the figure,
looking with your right eye at the right image, and
with your left eye at the left image. In this way the


way HAS MAN TWO EYES?

experiment was first performed by Elliott. Improved
and perfected, its form is Wheatstone's stereoscope,
made so popular and useful by Brewster.

By taking two photographs of the same object from
two different points, corresponding to the two eyes, a
very clear three-dimensional picture of distant places
or buildings can be produced by the stereoscope.

But the stereoscope accomplishes still more than
this. It can visualise things for us which we never see
with equal clearness in real objects. You know that
if you move much while your photograph is being
taken, your picture will come out like that of a Hindu
deity, with several heads or several arms, which, at
the spaces where they overlap, show forth with equal
distinctness, so that we seem to see the one picture
through the other. If a person moves quickly away
from the camera before the impression is completed,
the objects behind him will also be imprinted upon
the photograph; the person will look transparent.
Photographic ghosts are made in this way.

Some very useful applications may be made of this
discovery. For example, if we photograph a machine
stereoscopically, successively removing during the
operation the single parts (^where of course the im-
pression suffers interruptions), we obtain a transparent
view, endowed with all the marks of spatial solidity,
in which is distinctly visualised the interaction of parts
normally concealed. I have employed tliis method for


tf'J/y HAS MAN TWO EYES t


obtaining transparent stereoscopic views of anatom-
ical structures.

You see, photography is making stupendous ad-
vances, and there is great danger that in time some
malicious artist will photograph his innocent patrons
with solid views of their most secret thoughts and
emotions. How tranquil politics will then be ! What
rich harvests our detective force will reap !


By the joint action of the two eyes, thereforcj we
arrive at our judgments of distances, as also of the
forms of bodies.

Permit me to mention here a few additional facts
connected with this subject, which will assist us in the
comprehension of certain phenomena in the history of
civilisation.

You have often heard, and know from personal ex-
perience, that remote objects appear perspectively
dwarfed. In fact, it is easy to satisfy yourself that
you can cover the image of a man a few feet away
from you simply by holding up your finger a short dis-
tance in front of your eye. Still, as a general rule,
you do not notice this shrinkage of objects. On the
contrary, you imagine you see a man at the end of a
large hall, as large as you see him near by you. For
your eye, in its measurement of the distances, makes
remote objects correspondingly larger. The eye, so to
speak, is aware of this perspective contraction and is
not deceived by it, althou gh its possessor is unconscious


WHY HAS MAN TWO EYES?

of the fact. All persons who have attempted to draw
from nature have vividly felt the difficulty which this
superior dexterity of the eye causes the perspective
conception. Not until one's judgment of distances iii
made uncertain, by their size, or from lack of points
of reference, or from being too quickly changed, is the
perspective rendered very prominent.

On sweeping round a curve on a rapidly moving
railway train, where a wide prospect is suddenly
opened up, the men upon distant hills appear like
dolls.* You have at the moment, here, no known
references for the measurement of distances. The
stones at the entrance of a tunnel grow visibly larger
as we ride towards it ; they shrink visibly in size as we
ride from it.

Usually both eyes work together. As certain views
are frequently repeated, and lead always to substan-
tially the same judgments of distances, the eyes in
time must acquire a special skill in geometrical con-
structions. In the end, undoubtedly, this skill is so
increased that a single eye alone is often tempted to
exercise that office.

Permit me to elucidate this point by an example.
Is any sight more familiar to you than that of a vista
down a long street? Who has not looked with hopeful


ThiB effMl [s p«1ical.rlT notice.


le in the


aiis o[


]«1.5.- W


Ibe Inwers of the Brooklyn bridge


(!77 'eel


iKbl. ih


eli <o painl Ihem, kppeiced, agaiasl


x.Wft.la.-Tram.


eyes time and again into a street and measured its
depth. 1 will take you now into an art-gallery where
I will suppose you to see a picture representing a vista
into a street. The artist has not spared his rulers to
get his perspective perfect. The geometrician in your
left eye thinks, "Ah ha I I have computed that case a
hundred times or more, I know it by heart. It is a
vista into a street," he continues ; "where the houses
are lower is the remote end," The geometrician in
the right eye, too much at his ease to question his
possibly peevish comrade in the matter, answers the
same. But the sense of duty of these punctual little
fellows is at once rearoused. They set to work at their
calculations and immediately find that all the points
of the picture are equally distant from them, that is,
lie all upon a plane surface.

What opinion will you now accept, the first or the
second? If you accept the first you will see distinctly
the vista. If you accept the second you will see noth-
ing but a painted sheet of distorted images.

It seems to you a trifling matter to look at a pic-
ture and understand its perspective. Yet centuries
elapsed before humanity came fully to appreciate this
trifle, and even the majority of you first learned it from
education.

I can remember very distinctly that at three years
of age all perspective drawings appeared to me as
gross caricatures of objects. I could not understand
why artists made tables so broad at one end and so


IVffY HAS MAff TIVO EYES t

narrow at the other. Real tables seemed to me just
as broad at ooe end as at the other, because my eye
made and interpreted its calculations without my in-
tervention. But that the picture of the table on the
plane surface was not to be conceived as a plane painted
surface but stood for a table and so was to be imaged
with all the attributes of extension was a joke that I
did not understand. But 1 have the consolation that
whole nations have not understood it.

Ingenuous people there are who take the mock
murders of the stage for real murders, the dissembled
actions of the players for real actions, and who can
scarcely restrain themselves, when the characters of the
play are sorely pressed, from running in deep indigna-
tion to their assistance. Others, again, can never for-
get that the beautiful landscapes of the stage are
painted, that Richard III. is only the actor, Mr. Booth,
whom they have met time and again at the clubs.

Both points of view are equally mistaken. To look
at a drama or a picture properly one must understand
that both are shows, simply denoting something real.
A certain preponderance of the intellectual life over
the sensuous life is requisite for such an achievement,
where the intellectual elements are safe from destruc-
tion by the direct sensuous impressions. A certain
liberty in choosing one's point of view is necessary, a
sort of humor, 1 might say, which is strongly wanting
in children and in childlike peoples.

Let us look at a few historical facts. I shall not


78 ir/ZJ' HAS MAN TWO EVES?

take you as far back as the stone age, although we
possess sketches from this epoch which show very orig-
inal ideas of perspective. But let us begin our sight-
seeing in the tombs and ruined temples of ancient
Egypt, where the numberless reliefs and gorgeous col-
orings have defied the ravages of thousands of years.

A rich and motley life is here opened to us. We
find the Egyptians represented in all conditions of life.
What at once strikes our attention in these pictures
is the delicacy of their technical execution. The con-
tours are extremely exact and distinct. But on the
other hand only a few bright colors are found, un-
blended and without trace of transition. Shadows are
totally wanting. The paint is laid on the surfaces in
equal thicknesses.

Shocking for the modern eye is the perspective.
All the figures are equally large, with the exception of
the king, whose form is unduly exaggerated. Near and
far appear equally large. Perspective contraction is
nowhere employed. A pond with waterfowl is repre-
sented flat, as if its surface were vertical.

Human figures are portrayed as they are never
seen, the legs from the side, the face in profile. The
breast lies in its full breadth across the plane of rep-
resentation. The heads of cattle appear in profile,
while the horns lie in the plane of the drawing. The
principle which the Egyptians followed might be best
expressed by saying that their figures are pressed in


WHY HAS MAN TWO EYES!


the plane of the drawing as plants are pressed in a

herbaiium.

The matter is simply explained. If the Egyptians
were accustomed to looking at things ingenuously
with both eyes at once, the construction of perspec-
tive pictures in space could not be familiar to them.
They saw all arms, all legs on real men in their nat-
ural lengths. The figures pressed into the planes re-
sembled more closely, of course, in their eyes the
originals than perspective pictures could.

This will be better understood if we reflect that
painting was developed from relief. The minor dis-
similarities between the pressed figures and the orig-
inals must gradually have compelled men to the adop-
tion of perspective drawing. But physiologically the
painting of the Egyptions is just as much justified as
the drawings of our children are,

A slight advance beyond the Egyptians is shown
by the Assyrians. The reliefs rescued from the ruined
mounds of Nimrod at Mossul are, upon the whole,
similar to the Egyptian reliefs. They were made known
to us principally by Layard.

Painting enters on a new phase among the Chi-
nese. This people have a marked feeling for perspec-
tive and correct shading, yet without being very logi
cal in the application of their principles. Here, too,
it seems, they took the first step but did not go far.
In harmony with this immobility is their constitution,
in which the muzzle and the bamboo-rod play sig-


M^J/y HAS MAN TWO EYES?

nificant functions. In accord with it, too, is their
language, which like the language of children has not
yet developed into a grammar, or, rather, according
to the modern conception, has not yet degenerated
into a grammar. It is the same also with their music
which is satisfied with the five-toned scale.

The mural paintings at Herculaneum and Pompeii
are distinguished by grace of representation, as also
by a pronounced sense for perspective and correct il-
lumination, yet they are not at all scrupulous in con-
struction. Here stiU we find abbreviations avoided.
But to offset this defect, the members of the body are
brought into unnatural positions, in which they appear
in their full lengths. Abridgements are more fre-
quently observed in clothed than in unclothed figures.
A satisfactory explanation of these phenomena first
occurred to me on the making of a few simple experi-
ments which show how differently one may see the
same object, after some mastery of one's senses has
been attained, simply by the arbitrary
movement of the attention.

Look at the annexed drawing (Fig. 22).
It represents a folded sheet of paper with
either its depressed or its elevated side
turned towards you, as you wish. You can
conceive the drawing in either sense, and
in either case it will appear to you differently.

It, now, you have a real folded sheet of paper on
the table before you, with its sharp edges turned to-


ir//y HAS MAN Tiro eves?

wards you, you can, on looking at it with one eye, see
the sheet alternately elevated, as it really is, or de-
pressed. Here, however, a remarkable phenomenon
is presented. When you see the sheet properly, neither
illumination nor form presents anything conspicuous.
When you see it bent back you see it perspectively
distorted. Light and shadow appear much brighter
or darker, or as if overlaid thickly with bright colors.
Light and shadow now appear devoid of all cause.
They no longer harmonise with the body's form, and
are thus rendered much more prominent.

In common life we employ the perspective and
illumination of objects to determine their forms and
position. Hence we do not notice the lights, the
shadows, and the distortions. They first powerfully
enter consciousness when we employ a different con-
struction from the usual spatial one. In looking at
the planar image of a camera obscura we are amazed
at the plenitude of the light and the profundity of the
shadows, both of which we do not notice in real ob-
jects.

In my earliest youth the shadows and lights on pic-
tures appeared to mc as spots void of meaning. When
I began to draw I regarded shading as a mere custom
of artists. I once drew the portrait of our pastor, a
friend of the family, and shaded, from no necessity,
but simply from having seen something similar in
other pictures, the whole half of his face black. I was
subjected for this to a severe criticism on the part of


WHY HAS MAN I'iVO EYES?

my mother, and my deeply offended artist's pride is
probably the reason that these facts remained so
strongly impressed upon my memory.

You see, then, that many strange things, not only
in the life of individuals, but also in that of humanity,
and in the history of general civiUsation, may be ex-
plained from the simple fact that man has two eyes.

Change man's eye and you change his conception
of the world. We have observed the truth of this fact
among our nearest kin, the Egyptians, the Chinese,
and the lake- dwellers ; how must it be among some of
our remoter relatives,— with monkeys and other ani-
mals ? Nature must appear totally diSerent to animals
equipped with substantially different eyes from those
of men, as, for example, to insects. But for the pres-
ent science must forego the pleasure of portraying this
appearance, as we know very little as yet of the mode
of operation of these organs.

It is an enigma even how nature appears to ani-
mals closely related to man; as to birds, who see
scarcely anything with two eyes at once, but since
their eyes are placed on opposite sides of their heads,
have a separate field of vision for each.*

The soul of man is pent up in the prison-house of
his head; it looks at nature through Its two windows,
the eyes. It would also fain know how nature looks
through other windows. A desire apparently never to


•See Job. HDllet, Cn-^fc/eAlirrff Pl^yiiehfl


JVHY HAS MAN TWO E YES ?

be fulfilled. But our love for nature is inventive, and
tieie, too, much has been accomplished.

Placing before me an angular mirror, consisting of
two plane mirrors slightly inclined to each other, I see
my face twice reflected. In the right-hand mirror I
obtain a view of the right side, and in the left-hand
mirror a view of the left
side, of my face. Also
I shall see the face of a
person standing in front

of me, more to the right with my right eye, more to
the left with my left. But in order to obtain such
widely different views of a face as those shown in the
angular mirror, my two eyes would have to be set much
further apart from each other than they actually are.

Squinting with my right eye at the image in the
right-hand mirror, with my left eye at the image in
the left-hand mirror, my vision will be the vision of a
giant having an enormous head with his two eyes set
far apart. This, also, is the impression which my own
face makes upon me. I see it now, single and solid.
Fixing my gaze, the relief from second to second is
magnified, the eyebrows start forth prominently from
above the eyes, the nose seems to grow a foot in
length, my mustache shoots forth like a fountain from
my lip, the teeth seem to retreat immeasurably. But
by far the most horrible aspect of the phenomenon is
the nose.

Interesting in this connexion is the telestereoscope


IVIly HAS MAN TWO EYES


of Helmholtz. In the telestereoscope we view a land-
scape by looking with our right eye (Fig. 24) through
the mirror a into the mirror A, and with our left eye
through the mirror b into the mirror B. The mirrors


!


^—Vi /^


A and B stand far apart.

Again we see with the

widely separated eyes

of a giant. Everything

appears dwarfed and

near us. The distant Fig. 14.

mountains look like

moss-covered stones at our feet. Between, you see the

reduced model of a city, a veritable Ljliput. You

are tempted almost to stroke with your hand the soft

forest and city, did you not fear that you might prick

your fingers on the sharp, needle-shaped steeples, or

that they might crackle and break off.

Liliput is no fable. We need only Swift's eyes,
the telestereoscope, to see it.

Picture to yourself the reverse case. Let us sup-
pose ourselves so small that we could take long walks
in a forest o£ moss, and that our eyes were correspond-
ingly near each other. The moss-fibres would appear
like trees. On them we should see strange, unshapely
monsters creeping about. Branches of the oak-tree,
at whose base our moss-forest lay, would seem to us
dark, immovable, myriad-branched clouds, painted
high on the vault of heaven; just as the inhabitanls
o{ Saturn, forsooth, might see their enormous ring.


fVffY HAS MAN TWO EVES?

On the tree-trunks of our mossy woodland we should
find colossal globes several feet in diameter, brilliantly
transparent, swayed by the winds with slow, peculiar
motions. We should approach inquisitively and should
find that these globes, in which here and there ani-
mals were gaily sporting, were liquid globes, in fact
that they were water. A short, incautious step, the
slightest contact, and woe betide us, our arm is irresist-
ibly drawn by an invisible power into the interior of
the sphere and held there unrelentingly fast 1 A drop
of dew has engulfed in its capillary maw a manikin,
in revenge for the thousands of drops that its big hu-
man counterparts have quaffed at breakfast. Thou
shouldst have known, thou pygmy natural scientist,
that with thy present puny bulk thou shouldst not joke
with capillarity!

My terror at the accident brings me back to my
senses. I see I have turned idyllic. You must pardon
me. A patch of greensward, a moss or heather forest
with its tiny inhabitants have incomparably more
charms for me than many a bit of literature with its
apotheosis of human character. If I had the gift of
writing novels I should certainly not make John and
Mary my characters. Nor should I transfer my loving
pair to the Nile, nor to the age of the old Egyptian
Pharaohs, although perhaps I should choose that time
in preference to the present. For I must candidly
confess that I hate the rubbish of history, interesting
though it may be as a mere phenomenon, because we


B6 lf//y //AS MAN TWO EYES?

cannot simply observe it but must 2X^0 feel it, because
it comes to us mostly with supercilious arrogance,
mostly unvanquished. The hero of my novel would be
a cockchafer, venturing forth in his fifth year for the
first time with his newly grown wings into the light,
free air. Truly it could do no harm if man would thus
throw off his inherited and acquired narrowness of
mind by making himself acquainted with the world-
view of allied creatures. He could not help gaining
incomparably more in this way than the inhabitant of
a small town would in circumnavigating the globe and
getting acquainted with the views of strangs peoples.

I have now conducted you, by many paths and by-
vays, rapidly over hedge and ditch, to show you what
wide vistas we may reach in every field by the rigor-
ous pursuit of a single scientific fact. A close exam-
ination of the two eyes of man has conducted us not
only into the dim recesses of humanity's childhood,
but has also carried us far beyond the bourne of human
life.

It has surely often struck you as strange that the
sciences are divided into two great groups ; that the
so-called humanistic sciences, belonging to the so-
called "higher education," are placed in almost a hos-
tile attitude to the natural sciences.

I must confess I do not overmuch believe in this
partition of the sciences. I believe that this view will
appear as childlike and ingenuous to a matured age


WHY HAS MAN TWO E YES f 87

as the want of perspective in the old paintings of Egypt
does to us. Can it really be that ' ■ higher culture " is to
be gotten only from a few old pots and palimpsests,
which are at best mere scraps of nature, or that more
is to be learned from them alone than from all the rest
of nature ? I believe that both these sciences are sim-
ply parts of the same science, which have begun at
different ends. If these two ends still act towards
each other as the Montagues and Capulets, if their re-
tainers still indulge in lively tilts, I believe that after
all they are not in earnest. On the one side there is
surely a Romeo, and on the other a Juliet, who, some
day, it is hoped, will unite the two houses with a less
tragic sequel than that of the play.

Philology began with the unqualified reverence and
apotheosis of the Greeks. Now it has begun to draw
other languages, other peoples and their histories, into
its sphere ; it has, through the mediation of compara-
tive linguistics, already struck up, though as yet some-
what cautiously, a friendship with physiology.

Physical science began in the witch's kitchen. It
now embraces the organic and inorganic worlds, and
with the physiology of articulation and the theory of
the senses, has even pushed its researches, at times
impertinently, into the province of mental phenomena.

In short, we come to the understanding of much
within us solely by directing our glance without, and
vice vena. Every object belongs to both sciences.
You, ladies, are very interesting and difficult problems


WHY HAS MAN TWO EYESt


for the psychologist, but you are also extremely pretty
phenomena of nature. Church and State are objects
of the historian's research, but not less phenomena of
nature, and in part, indeed, very curious phenomena.
If the historical sciences have inaugurated wide ex-
tensions of view by presenting to us the thoughts of
new and strange peoples, the physical sciences in a
certain sense do this in a still greater degree. In
making man disappear in the All, in annihilating him,
so to speak, they force him to take an unprejudiced
position without himself, and to form his judgments by
a different standard from that of the petty human.

But if you should ask me now why man has two
eyes, I should answer :

That he may look at nature justly and accurately;
that he may come to understand that he himself, with
all his views, correct and incorrect, with all his hizuie
politique, is simply an evanescent shred of nature;
that, to speak with Mephistopheles, he is a part of the
part, and that it is absolutely unjustified,


ON SYMMETRY.


AN ancient philosopher once remarked that people
- who cudgelled their brains about the nature of
the moon reminded him of men who discussed the
laws and institutions of a distant city of which they
had heard no more than the name. The true philoso-
pher, he said, should turn his glance within, should
study himself and his notions of right and wrong ; only
thence could he derive real profit.

This ancient formula for happiness might be re-
stated in the familiar words of the Psalm :
"Dwell in Ibe land, and verily thou shall be ted."
To-day, if he could rise from the dead and walk
about among us, this philosopher would marvel much


at the different turn which r

• Delivered belore Ihe Gennin Cii


latters have takei


ON SYMMETRY,


The motions of the moon and the other heavenly
bodies are accurately known. Our knowledge of the
motions of our own body is by far not so complete.
The mountains and natural divisions of the moon have
been accurately outlined on maps, but physiologists
are just beginning to find their way in the geography
of the brain. The chemical constitution of many fixed
stars has already been investigated. The chemical
processes of the animal body are questions of much
greater difficulty and complexity. We have our Mc~
eanique celeste. But a Mccanique sociale or a Mccaniqtie
morale of equal trustworthiness remains to be written.

Our philosopher would indeed admit that we have
made great progress. But we have not followed his
advice. The patient has recovered, but he took for his
recovery exactly the opposite of what the doctor pre-
scribed.

Humanity is now returned, much wiser, from its
journey in celestial space, against which it was so
solemnly warned. Men, after havingbecome acquainted
with the great and simple facts of the world without,
are now beginning to examine critically the world
within. It sounds absurd, but it is true, that only after
we have thought about the moon are we able to take
up ourselves. It was necessary that we should acquire
simple and clear ideas in a less compUcated domain,
before we entered the more intricate one of psychol-
ogy, and with these ideas astronomy principally fur-
nished us.


ON SYMMETRY. 91

To attempt any description of that stupendous
movement, which, originally springing out of the phys-
ical sciences, went beyond the domain of physics and is
now occupied with the problems of psychology, would
be presumptuous in this place. I shall only attempt
here, to illustrate to you by a few simple examples the
methods by which the province of psychology can be
reached from the facts of the physical world — especially
the adjacent province of sense-perception. And I wish
it to be remembered that my brief attempt is not to be
taken as a measure of the present state of such scien-
tific questions.


It is a well-known fact that some objects please us,
while others do not. Generally speaking, anything
that is constructed according to fixed and logically
followed rules, is a product of tolerable beauty. We see
thus nature herself, who always acts according to fixed
rules, constantly producing such pretty things. Every
day the physicist is confronted in his workshop with
the most beautiful vib rat ion -figures, tone-figures, phe-
nomena of polarisation, and forms of diffraction.

A rule always presupposes a repetition. Repeti-
tions, therefore, will probably be found to play some
important part in the production of agreeable efiects.
Of course, the nature of agreeable effects is not ex-
hausted by this. Furthermore, the repetition of a
physical event becomes the source of agreeable effects


I


ga ON SYMMETRY.

only when it is connected with a repetition of sensa-
tions.

An excellent example that repetition of sensations
is a source of agreeable effects is furnished by the
copy-book of every schoolboy, which is usually a treas-
ure-house of such things, and only in need of an Abb6
Domenech to become celebrated. Any figure, no mat-
ter how crude or poor, if several times repeated, with
the repetitions placed in line, will produce a tolerable
frieze.


Also the pleasant effect of symmetry is due to the
repetition of sensations. Let us abandon ourselves a
moment to this thought, yet not imagine when we have
developed it, that we have fully exhausted the nature
of the agreeable, much less of the beautiful.

First, let us get a clear conception of what sym-
metry is. And in preference to a definition let us take
a living picture. You know that the reflexion of an
object in a mirror has a great likeness to the object it-
self. All its proportions and outlines are the same.


dlMI


ON SYMMETRY. 93

Yet there is a difference between the object and its re-
flexion in the mirror, which you will readily observe.

Hold your right hand before a mirror, and you will
see in the mirror a left hand. Your right glove will
produce its mate in the glass. For you could never
use the reflexion of your right glove, if it were present
to you as a real thing, for covering your right hand,
but only for covering your left. Similarly, your right
ear will give as its reflexion a left ear ; and you will at
once perceive that the left halt of your body could very
easily be substituted for the reflexion of your right half.
Now just as in the place of a missing right ear a left ear
cannot be put, unless the lobule of the ear be turned up-
wards, or the opening into the concha backwards, so,
despite all similarity of form, the reflexion of an ob-
ject can never take the place of the object itself.*

The reason of this diflerence between the object
and its reflexion is simple. The reflexion appears as
far behind the mirror as the object is in front of it. The
parts of the object, accordingly, which are nearest the
mirror will also be nearest the mirror in the reflexion.
Consequently, the succession of the parts in the re-
flexion will be reversed, as may best be seen in the re-
flexion of the face of a watch or of a manuscript.

It will also be readily seen, that if a point of the ob-
ject be joined with its reflexion in the image, the line
of junction will cut the mirror at right angles and be


jidrr iBltftigcH ft


Q4


OAT SYAIMETay,


bisected by it. This holds true of all corresponding
points of object and image.

If, now, we can divide an object by a plane into
two halves so that each half, as seen in the reflectiog
plane of division, is a reproduction of the other half,
such an object is termed symmetrical, and the plane
of division is called the plane of symmetry.

If the plane of symmetry is vertical, we can say
that the body is vertically symmetrical. An example
of vertical symmetry is a Gothic cathedral.

If the plane of symmetry is horizontal, we can say
that the object is horizontally symmetrical. A land-
scape on the shores of a lake with its reflexion in the
water, is a system of horizontal symmetry.

Exactly here is a noticeable difference. The ver-
tical symmetry of a Gothic cathedral strikes us at once,
whereas we can travel up and down the whole length
of the Rhine or the Hudson without becoming aware
of the symmetry between objects and their reflexions
in the water. Vertical symmetry pleases us, whilst
horizontal symmetry is indifferent, and is noticed only
by the experienced eye.

Whence arises this difference? I say from the fact
that vertical symmetry produces a repetition of the
same sensation, while horizontal symmetry does not,
1 shall now show that this is so.

Let us look at the following letters ;
d b

q p


/ SVMMET/iV.


It is a fact known to all mothers and teachers, that

children in their first attempts to read and write, con-
stantly confound d and b, and q and p, but never d
and q, or b and p. Now d and b and q and p are the
two halves of a vertically symmetrical figure, while d
and q, and b and p are two halves of a horizontally sym-
metrical figure. The first two are confounded; but
confusion is only possible of things that excite in us
the same or similar sensations.

Figures of two flower-girls are frequently seen on
the decorations of gardens and of drawing-rooms, one
of whom carries a flower-basket in her right hand and
the other a flower-basket in her left. All know how
apt we are, unless we are very careful, to confound these
figures with one another.

While turning a thing round from right to left is
scarcely noticed, the eye is not at all indifferent to the
turning of a thing upside down. A human face which
has been turned upside down is scarcely recognisable
as a face, and makes an impression which is altogether
strange. The reason of this is not to be sought in the
unwontedness of the sight, for it is just as difiicult to
recognise an arabesque that has been inverted, where
there can be no question of a habit. This curious fact
is the foundation of the familiar jokes played with the
portraits of unpopular personages, which are so drawn
that in the upright position of the page an exact pic-
ture of the person is presented, but on being inverted
some popular animal is shown.


ON SYiMMETRV.


It is a fact, then, that the two halves of a vertically
symmetrical figure are easily confounded and that they
therefore probably produce very nearly the same sen-
sations. The question, accordingly, arises, -why do the
two halves of a vertically symmetrical figure produce
the same or similar sensations? The answer is: Be-
cause our apparatus of vision, which consists of our
eyes and of the accompanying muscular apparatus is
itself vertically symmetrical.*

Whatever external resemblances one eye may have
with another they are still not alike. The right eye of
a man cannot take the place of a left eye any more
than a left ear or left hand can take the place of a
right one. By artificial means, we can change the part
which each of our eyes plays. (Wheatstone's pseudo-
scope.) But we then find ourselves in an entirely new
and strange world. What is convex appears concave ;
what is concave, convex. What is distant appears
near, and what is near appears far.

The left eye is the reflexion of the right. And the
light-feeling retina of the left eye is a reflexion of the
light-feeling retina of the right, in all its functions.

The lense of the eye, like a magic lantern, casts
images of objects on the retina. And you may picture
to yourself the light-feeling retina of the eye, with its
countless nerves, as a hand with innumerable fingers,
adapted to feeling light. The ends of the visual nerves,
like our fingers, are endowed with varying degrees of

• Cooip»re Mich, Fickl.-i Zril^ikTifiyUr Philtufkii. iB6«, p. i.


ON SYMMETRY.

seDsitiveness. The two retioEe act like a right and a
left hand ; the sensation of touch and the sensatioo of
light in the two instances are similar.

Examine the right-hand portion of this letter T :
namely, T. Instead of the two retinae on which this
image falls, imagine feeling the object, my two hands.
The r, grasped with the right hand, gives a different
sensation from that which it gives when grasped with
the left. But if we turn our character about from right
to left, thus : 1, it will give the same sensation in the
left hand that it gave before in the right. The sensa-
tion is repeated.

If we take a whole T, the right half will produce in
the right hand the same sensation that the left half
produces in the left, and vice versa.

The symmetrical figure gives the same sensation

If we turn the T over thus : H , or invert the half
T thus \ L., so long as we do not change the position
of our hands we can make no use of the foregoing rea-
soning.

The retinffi, in fact, are exactly like our two hands.
They, too, have their thumbs and index fingers, though
they are thousands in number ; and we may say the
thumbs are on the side of the eye near the nose,
and the remaining fingers on the side away from the
nose.

With this I hope to have made perfectly clear that
the pleasing effect of symmetry is chiefly due to the


gS ON SYMMETRY.

repetition of sensations, and that the effect in ques-
tion takes place in symmetrical figures, only where
there is a repetition of sensation. The pleasing effect
of regular figures, the preference which straight lines,
especially vertical and horizontal straight lines, en-
joy, is founded on a simitar reason. A straight line,
both in a horizontal and in a vertical position, can cast
on the two retinae the same image, which falls more-
over on symmetrically corresponding spots. This also,
it would appear, is the reason of our psychological
preference of straight to curved lines, and not their
property of being the shortest distance between two
points. The straight line is felt, to put the matter
briefly, as symmetrical to itself, which is the case also
with the plane. Curved lines are felt as deviations
from straight lines, that is, as deviations from symme-
try.* The presence of a sense for symmetry in people
possessing only one eye from birth, is indeed a riddle.
Of course, the sense of symmetry, although primarily
acquired by means of the eyes, cannot be wholly lim-
ited to the visual organs. It must also be deeply
rooted in other parts of the organism by ages of prac-
tice and can thus not be eliminated forthwith by the
loss of one eye. Also, when an eye is lost, the sym-


itrsighl lino. Hi
nary mctbod ot le


sned ■ppiicabcmij


O.V SYMMETRV.

metrical muscular apparatus is left, as is also the
^mmetrical apparatus of iooervatioa.

It appears, however, uoquestiouable that the phe-
nomeDa mentioned have, in the main, their origin in
the peculiar structure of our eyes. It niil therefore
be seen at once that our notions of what is beautiful
and ugly would undergo a change if our eyes were dil-
ferenL Also, if this view is correct, the theory of the
so-called eternally beautiful is somewhat mistaken. It
can scarcely be doubted that our culture, or form of
civilisation, which stamps upon the human body its
unmistakable traces, should not also modify our con-
ceptions of the beautiful. Was not formerly the de-
velopment of all musical beauty restricted to the nar-
row limits of a five-toned scale ?

The lact that a repetition of sensations is produc-
tive of pleasant effects is not restricted to the realm of
the visible. To-day, both the musician and the phys-
icist know that the harmonic or the melodic addition
of one tone to another affects us agreeably only when
the added tone reproduces a part of the sensation
which the first one excited. When I add an octave
to a fundamental tone, I hear in the octave a part of
what was heard in the fundamental tone. (Helm-
holtz.) But it is not my purpose to develop this idea
fully here.* We shall only ask today, whether there
is anything similar to the symmetry of figures in the
province of sounds.

• See Ihe lecture On Ikt Camti ^Harmemf.


ON SYMMETRY.


Look at the reflexioQ of your piano in the mirror.

You will at ODce remark that you have never seen
such a piano in the actual world, for it has its high
keys to the left and its low ones to the right Such
pianos are not manufactured.

If you could sit down at such a piano and play in
your usual manner, plainly every step which you
imagined you were performing in the upward scale
would be executed as a corresponding step in the
downward scale. The efiect would be not a little sur-
prising.

For the practised musician who is always accus-
tomed to hearing certain sounds produced when cer-
tain keys are struck, it is quite an anomalous spectacle
to watch a player in the glass and to observe that he
always does the opposite of what we hear.

But still more remarkable would be the effect of
attempting to strike a harmony on such a piano. For
a melody it is not indifferent whether we execute a
step in an upward or a downward scale. But for a
harmony, so great a difference is not produced by re
versal. I always retain the same consonance whethei
1 add to a fundamental note an upper or a lower third.
Only the order of the intervals of the harmony is re-
versed. In point of fact, when we execute a m
ment in a major key on our reflected piano, we hear a
sound in a minor key, and vke versa.

It now remains to execute the experiments indi-
cated. Instead of playing upon the piano in the mir-


Olf SYMMETRY.

ror, which is impossible, or of having a piano of this
kind built, which would be somewhat expensive, we
may perform our experiments in a simpler manner, as
follows :

i) We play on our own piano in our usual manner,
look into the mirror, and then repeat on our real piano
what we see in the mirror. In this way we transform
all steps upwards into corresponding steps downwards.
We play a movement, and then another movement.
which, with respect to the key-board, is symmetrical
to the first.

2) We place a mirror beneath the music in which
the notes are reflected as in a body of water, and play
according to the notes in the mirror. In this way also,
all steps upwards are changed into corresponding,
equal steps downwards.

3) We turn the music upside down and read the
notes from right to left and from below upwards. In
doing this, we must regard all sharps as Hats and all
flats as sharps, because they correspond to half lines
and spaces. Besides, in this use of the music we can
only employ the bass clef, as only in this clef are the
notes not changed by symmetrical reversal.

You can judge of the effect of these experiments
from the examples which appear in the annexed musi-
cal cut. (Page 102.) The movement which appears in
the upper lines is symmetrically reversed in the lower.

The efiect of the experiments may be briefly formu-
lated. The melody is rendered unrecognisable. The


ON SYMMETRY.


harmony supers a transposition from a major into a
minor key and vice versa. The study of these pretty
effects, which have long been familiar to physicists
and musicians, was revived some years ago by Von
Oettingen.*

Now, although in all the preceding examples I have
transposed steps upward into equal and similar steps
downward, that is, as we may justly say, have played
for every movement the movement which is symmetri-
cal to it, yet the ear notices either little or nothing of
symmetry. The transposition from a major to a minor
key is the sole indication of symmetry remaining. The
symmetry is there for the mind, but is wanting for
sensation. No symmetry exists for the ear, because a
reversal of musical sounds conditions no repetition of
sensations. It we had an ear for height and an ear
for depth, just as we have an eye for the right and an
eye for the left, we should also find that symmetrical
sound-structures existed lor our auditory organs. The
contrast of major and minor for the ear corresponds to
inversion for the eye, which is also only symmetry for
the mind, but not for sensation.

By way of supplement to what I have said, I will
add a brief remark for my mathematical readers.

Our musical notation is essentially a graphical rep-
resentation of a piece of music in the form of curves,
where the time is the abscissae, and the logarithms of


I04 ON S VMME TR Y.

the number of vibrations the ordinates. The devia-
tions of musical notation from this principle are only
such as facilitate interpretation, or are due to histori'
cal accidents.

If, now, it be further observed that the sensation
of pitch also is proportional to the logarithm of the
number of vibrations, and that the intervals between
the notes correspond to the differences of the loga-
rithms of the numbers of vibrations, the justification
will be found in these facts of calling the harmonies
and melodies which appear in the mirror, symmetrical
to the original ones.

I simply wish to bring home to your minds by these
fragmentary remarks that the progress of the physical
sciences has been of great help to those branches of
psychology that have not scorned to consider the re-
sults of physical research. On the other hand, psy-
chology is beginning to return, as it were, in a spirit
of thankfulness, the powerful stimulus which it received
from physics.

The theories of physics which reduce all phenom-
ena to the motion and equilibrium of smallest par-
ticles, the so-called molecular theories, have been
gravely threatened by the progress of the theory of the
senses and of space, and we may say that their days
are numbered.

I have shown elsewhere* that the musical scale is

• CompBio Mach'« Ziir Thisrii dcs Ciksrerfaas, VienOB AodemT. iB^.


ON SYMMETRY.


simply a species of space — a space, however, of only
one dimension, and that, a one-sided one. If, now, a
person who could only hear, should attempt to develop
a conception of the world in this, his linear space, he
would become involved in many difficulties, as his space
would be incompetent to comprehend the many sides
of the relations of reality. But is it any more justifi-
able for us, to attempt to force the whole world into the
space of our eye, in aspects in which it is not accessi-
ble to the eye ? Yet this is the dilemma of all mo-
lecular theories.

We possess, however, a sense, which, with respect
to the scope of the relations which it can comprehend,
is richer than any other. It is our reason. This stands
above the senses. It alone is competent to found a
permanent and sufficient view of the world. The
mechanical conception of the world has performed
wonders since Galileo's time. But it must now yield
to a broader view of things. A further development of
this idea is beyond the limits of my present purpose.

One more point and I have done. The advice of
our philosopher to restrict ourselves to what is near
at hand and useful in our researches, which finds a
kind of exemplification in the present cry of inquirers
for limitation and division of labor, must not be too
slavishly followed. In the seclusion of our closets, we
often rack our brains in vain to fulfil a work, the
means of accomplishing which lies before our very
doors. If the inquirer must be perforce a shoemaker.


io6


ON SYMMETRY,


tapping constantly at his last, it may perhaps be per-
mitted him to be a shoemaker of the type of Hans
Sachs, who did not deem it beneath him to take a
look now and then at his neighbor's nork and to
comment on the latter's doings.

Let this be my apology, therefore, if I have for-
saken for a moment to-day the last of my specialty.


ON THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
OF ELECTROSTATICS.*


'T^HE task has been assigned me to develop before
^ you in a popular manner the fundamental quan-
titative concepts of electrostatics — "quantity of elec-
tricity," "potential," "capacity," and so forth. It
would not be difficult, even within the brief limits of
an hour, to delight the eye with hosts of beautiful ex-
periments and to fiil the imagination with numerous
and varied conceptions. But we should, in such a
case, be still far from a lucid and easy grasp of the
phenomena. The means would still fail us for repro-
ducing the facts accurately in thought — a procedure
which for the theoretical and practical man is of equal
importance. These means are the metrical concepts al
electricity.

As long as the pursuit of the facts of a given pro-
vince of phenomena is in the hands of a few isolated
investigators, as long as every experiment can be easily
repeated, the fixing of the collected facts by provisional

• A lectnie deliveied at (he Inleniatiaiiil Etect[[ci] Eihibition, [n Vieau,
on Ssplember 4, i8S].


io8 THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.

description is ordinarily sufficient. But the case is
different when the whole world must make use of the
results reached by many, as happens when the sci-
ence acquires broader foundations and scope, and
particularly so when it begins to supply intellectual
nourishment to an important branch of the practical
arts, and to draw from that province in return stupen-
dous empirical results. Then the facts must be so
described that individuals in all places and at all times
can, from a few easily obtained elements, put the facts
accurately together in thought, and reproduce them
from the description. This is done with the help of
the metrical concepts and the international measures.

The work which was begun in this direction in the
period of the purely scientific development of the sci-
ence, especially by Coulomb (1784), Gauss (1833), and
Weber (1846), was powerfully stimulated by the re-
quirements of the great technical undertakings mani
fested since the laying of the first transatlantic cable,
and brought to a brilliant conclusion by the labors ol
the British Association, 1861, and of the Paris Con-
gress, 1S81, chiefiy through the exertions of Sir Wil-
liam Thomson.

It is plain, that in the time allotted to me I cannol
conduct you over all the long and tortuous paths which
the science has actually pursued, that it will not be
possible at every step to remind you of all the httle
precautions for the avoidance of error which the early
steps have taught us. On the contrary, I must make


TffE COffCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


109


shift with the simplest and rudest tools. I shall con-
duct you by the shortest paths from the facts to the
ideas, in doing which, of course, it will not be possible
to anticipate all the stray and chance ideas which may
and must arise from prospects into the by-paths which
we leave untrodden.


Here are two small, light bodies (Fig. 27) of equal
size, freely suspended, which we "electrify" either


Q.


O


9


by friction with a third body or by contact with a body
already electrified. At once a repulsive force is set
up which drives the two bodies away from each other
in opposition to the action of gravity. This force could
accomplish anew the same mechanical work which
was expended to produce it.*

Coulomb, now, by means of delicate experiments
with the torsion- balance, satisfied himself that if the
bodies iu question, say at a distance of two centime-
tres, repelled each other with the same force with

•KtbelwQ bodies wen oppositelr electrified itaeywoald eieiiaunclioni


no THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.

which a milligram me- weight strives to fall to the
ground, at half that distance, or at one centimetre,
they would repel each other with the force of four
milligrammes, and at double that distance, or at four
centimetres, they would repel each other with the force
of only one-fourth of a milligramme. He found that
the electrical force acts inversely as the square of the
distance.

Let us imagine, now, that we possessed some
means of measuring electrica] repulsion by weights,
a means which would be supplied, for example, by our
electrical pendulums; then we could make the follow-
ing observation.

The body A (Fig. 28) is repelled by the body K at
a distance of two centimetres with a force of one milli-
gramme. If we touch A, now, with an equal body B,
the half of this force of repulsion will pass to the body
B\ both A and B, now, at a distance of two centi-
metres from K, are repelled only with the force of one-
half a milligramme. But both together are repelled
still with the force of one niiiligramnie. Hence, the
divisibility of electrical forte among bodies in contact is
a fact. It is a useful, but by no means a necessary
supplement to this fact, to imagine an electrical fluid
present in the body A, with the quantity of which the
electrica! force varies, and half of which flows over to
B. For, in the place of the new physical picture,
thus, an old, familiar one is substituted, which moves
spontaneously in its wonted courses.


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


Adhering to this idea, we define the unit of electri-
cal quantity, according to the now almost universally

adopted centimetre-gramme-second (C. G. S.) system,
as that quantity which at a distance of one centi-
metre repels an equal quantity with unit of force, that
is, with a force which in one second would impart to
a mass of one gramme a velocity- increment of a centi-
metre. As a gramme mass acquires through the action
of gravity a velocity-increment of about 981 centi-
metres in a second, accordingly, a gramme is attracted
to the earth with 98 1 , or, in round numbers, 1000 units
of force of the centimetre- gramme-second system,
while a milligramme-weight would strive to fall to the
earth with approximately the unit force of this system.

We may easily obtain by this means a clear idea of
what the unit quantity of electricity is. Two small
bodies. A', weighing each a gramme, are hung up by
vertical threads, five metres in length and almost
weightless, so as to touch each other. If the two bodies
be equally electrified and move apart upon electrifica-
tion to a distance of one centimetre, their charge is ap-
proximately equivalent to the electrostatic unit of elec-
tric quantity, for the repulsion then holds in equilib-
rium a gravitational force-component of approximately
one milligramme, which strives to bring the bodies to-
gether.

Vertically beneath a small sphere suspended from
the equilibrated beam of a balance a second sphere is
placed at a distance of a centimetre. If both be equally


ua THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTJiOSTAT/CS.

electrified the sphere suspended from the balance will
be rendered apparently lighter by the repulsion. It by
adding a weight of one milligramme equiiibrium is
restored, each of the spheres contains in round num-
bers the electrostatic unit of electrical quantity.

In view of the fact that the same electrical bodies
exert at different distances different forces upon one
another, exception might be taken to the measure of
quantity here developed. What kind of a quantity is
that which now weighs more, and now weighs less, so
to speak ? But this apparent deviation from the
method of determination commonly used in practical
life, that by weight, is, closely considered, an agree-
ment. On a high mountain a heavy mass also is less
powerfully attracted to the earth than at the level of
the sea, and if it is permitted us in our determinations
to neglect the consideration of level, it is only because
the comparison of a body with fixed conventional
weights is invariably effected at the same level. In
fact, if we were to make one of the two weights equi-
librated on our balance approach sensibly to the centre
of the earth, by suspending it from a very long thread,
as Prof, von Jolly of Munich suggested, we should
make the gravity of that weight, its heaviness, propor-
tionately greater.

Let us picture to ourselves, now, two different
electrical fluids, a positive and a negative fluid, of such
nature that the particles of the one attract the particles
of the other according to the law of the inverse squares.


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROST.ITlC'i.

but the particles of the same fluid repel each other by
the same law ; in non-electrical bodies let us imagine
the two fluids uniformly distributed in equal quanti-
ties, in electric bodies one of the two in excess; in
conductors, further, let us imagine the fluids mobile,
in non-conductors immobile ; having formed such pic-
tures, we possess the conception which Coulomb de-
veloped and to which he gave mathematical precision.
We have only to give this conception free play in our
minds and we shall see as in a clear picture the fluid
particles, say of a positively charged conductor, reced-
ing from one another as far as they can, all making
for the surface of the conductor and there seeking out
the prominent parts and points until the greatest pos-
sible amount of work has been performed. On in-
creasing the size of the surface, we see a dispersion,
on decreasing its size we see a condensation of the par-
ticles. In a second, non-electrified conductor brought
into the vicinity of the first, we see the two fluids im-
mediately separate, the positive collecting itself on the
remote and the negative on the adjacent side of its
surface. In the fact that this conception reproduces,
lucidly and spontaneously, all the data which arduous
research only slowly and gradually discovered, is con-
tained its advantage and scientific value. With this,
too, its value is exhausted. We must not seek in na-
ture for the two hypothetical fluids which we have
added as simple mental adjuncts, if we would not go
astray. Coulomb's view may be replaced by a totally


114 'fif^ CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.

different one, for example, by that of Faraday, and the
most proper course is always, after the general survey
is obtained, to go back to the actual facts, to the elec-
trical forces.

We will now make ourselves familiar with the con-
cept of electrical quantity, and with the method of
measuring or estimating it. Imagine a common Ley-
den jar (Fig. 29), the inner and outer coalings of which
are connected together by means of two common me-


pOn


\t»


tallic knobs placed about a centimetre apart. If the
inside coating be charged with the quantity of electri-
city -^q, on the outer coating a distribution of the
electricities will take place. A positivequantityalmost
equal* to the quantity -|- q flows ofl to the earth, while
a corresponding quantity ^q is still left on the outer
coating. The knobs of the jar receive their portion of
these quantities and when the quantity q is sufficiently
great a rupture of the insulating air between the knobs,

DuM be


only It lbs Inner eoilinf of lbs j


•a wbollr e.


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


o— 1


accompanied by the self- discharge of the jar, takes
place. For any given distance and size of the knobs,
a charge of a definite electric quantity q is always ne-
cessary for the spontaneous discharge of the jar.

Let us insulate, now, the outer coating of a Lane's
unit jar L, the jar just described, and put in connex-
ion with it the inner coating of a jar i^ exteriorly con-
nected with the earth (Fig. 30). Every time that L is
chained with -^q, a like quantity -|- ? is collected on
the inner coating of F, and the spontaneous discharge
of the jar Z, which is now
again empty, takes place. The
number of the discharges of
the jar L furnishes us, thus,
with a measure of the quan-
tity collected in the jar F, and
if after 1,1,3,... spontaneous \

discharges of L the jar 7^ is

discharged, it is evident that the charge of 7^ has been
proportionately augmented.

Let us supply now, to effect the spontaneous dis-
cbarge, the jar F with knobs of the same size and
at the same distance apart as those of the jar Z (Fig.
31). If we find, then, that five discharges of the unit
jar take place before one spontaneous discharge of the
jar F occurs, plainly the jar F, ior equal distances be-
tween the knobs of the two jars, equal striking dis-
tances, is able to hold five times the quantity of elec-


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


tricity that L can, that is, has five times the capacity
oiL*

We will now replace the unit jar Z, with which we
measure electricity, bo to speak, into the jar F, by a
Franklin's pane, consisting of two parallel flat nrietal
plates (Fig. 32), separated only by air. If here, for
example, thirty spontaneous discharges of the pane are
sufficient to fill the jar, ten discharges will be found

/


Uj


\ «


sufficient if the air-space between the two plates be
filled with a cake of sulphur. Hence, the capacity
of a Franklin's pane of sulphur is about three times
greater than that of One of the same shape and size


ctroda of <he macbine.
.EmuHinoonsly wiih Ibo
icily o[ Iha Blectrodo ■


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.

made of air, or, as it is the custom to say, the specific
inductive capacity of sulphur (that of air being taken
as the uait) is about 3.* We are here arrived at a
very simple fact, which clearly shows us the signifi-
cance of the number called dicleciric constant, or speci-
fic inductive capacity, the knowledge of which is so im-
portant for the theory of submarine cables.

Let us consider a jar A, which is charged with a
certain quantity of electricity. We can discharge the
jar directly. But we can also discharge the jar A


(Fig. 33) partly into a jar B, by connecting the two
outer coatings with each other. In this operation a
portion of the quantity of electricity passes, accompa-
nied by sparks, into the jar B, and we now find both
jars charged.

It may be shown as follows that the conception of


tally wilh Iho results obloined by mora d
^ainible prcdaioa one shoulcl byriEfaii i
HHT first grhollyia lir and iben wholly i


:iicll; Gils Ibe space bcli


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


a constant quantity of electricity can be regarded as
the expression of a pure tact. Picture to yourself any
sort of electrical conductor (Fig. 34) ; cut it up into a
large number of small pieces, andpiace these pieces by
means of an insulated rod at a distance of one centi-
metre from an electrical body which acts with unit of
force on an equal and like-constituted body at the
same distance. Take the sum of the forces which
this last body exerts on the single pieces of the con-
ductor. The sum of these forces will be the quantity
of electricity on the whole conductor. It remains the
same, whether we change the form and the size of the
conductor, or whether we bring it near or move it
away from a second electrical conductor, so long as we
keep it insulated, that is, do not discharge it.

A basis of reality for the notion of electric quan-
tity seems also to present itself from another quar-
ter. If a current, that is, in the usual view, a definite
quantity of electricity per second, is sent through a
column of acidulated water ; in the direction of the
positive stream, hydrogen, but in the opposite direc-
tion, oxygen is liberated at the extremities of the col-
umn. For a given quantity of electricity a given quan-
tity of oxygen appears. You may picture the column
of water as a column of hydrogen and a column of
oxygen, fitted into each other, and may say the electric
current is a chemical current and vice versa. Although
this notion is more difficult to adhere to in the field of
statical electricity and with non- decomposable con-


rUE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATlC^i iig

ductors, its further development is by no means hope-
less.

The concept quantity of electricity, thus, is not so
aerial as might appear, but is able to conduct us with
certainty through a multitude of varied phenomena,
and is suggested to us by the facts in almost palpable
form. We can collect electrical force in a body, meas-
ure it out with one body
into another, carry it
over from one body into
another, just as we can
collect a liquid in a ves-
sel, measure it out with
one vessel into another,
or pour it from one into
another.

For the analysis of
mechanical phenomena,
a metrical notion, de-
rived from experience,
and bearing the designation work, has proved itself
useful. A machine can be set in motion only when
the forces acting on it can perform work.

Let us consider, for example, a wheel and axle
(Fig. 35) having the radii i and 2 metres, loaded re-
spectively with the weights 2 and i kilogrammes. On
turning the wheel and axle, the 1 kilogram me- weight,
let us say, sinks two metres, while the 2 kilogramme-
weight rises one metre. On both sides the product


TKE CaXCEJ'TS Of ELE.CTJIOSTATJCS.


is equal So long as tlus is so, tbe wheel and axle
not more of itseU. Bat ii we take such loads, or so
change the radii oE the wheels, that this product (kgr.
X metre) on displacement is in excess on one side,
that side will sink. As we see, this product is charac-
teristic for mecbaaical events, and for this reason has
been invested with a special name, frcri.

la all mechanical processes, and as all physical
processes present a mechanical side, in all physical
processes, work plays a determinative part. Electrical
forces, also, produce only changes in which work is per-
formed. To the extent that forces come into play in
electrical phenomena, electrical phenomena, be they
what they may, extend into the domain of mechanics
and are subject to the laws which hold in this dcK,
main. The universally adopted measure of woi
now, is the product of the force into the distance
through which it acts, and in the C. G. S. system, the
unit of work is the action through one centimetre of
a force which would impart in one second to a
gramme-mass a velocity-increment of one centimetre,
that is, in round numbers, the action through a centi-
metre of a pressure equal to the weight of a milli-
Rrarame. From a positively charged body, electricity,
yielding to the force of repulsion and performing work,
Hows off to the earth, providing conducting connexions
exist. To a. negatively charged body, on the


lies I

nee T


the other ^^J


THE CONCEPTS OJ-' ELECTROSTATICS.

hand, the earth under the same circumstances gives
ofi positive electricity. The electrical work possible
in the interaction of a body with the earth, character-
ises the electrical condition of that body. We will call
the work which must be expended on the unit quantity
of positive electricity to raise it from the earth to the
body K the potenlial of the body K. *

We ascribe to the body K in the C. G. S. system
the potential -|- i, if we must expend the unit of work
to raise the positive electrostatic unit of electric quan-
tity from the earth to that body ; the potential — i, if
we gain in this procedure the unit of work ; the poten-
tial 0, if no work at all is performed in the operation.

The different parts of one and the same electrical
conductor in electrical equilibrium have the same po-
tential, for otherwise the electricity would perform
work and move about upon the conductor, and equili-
brium would not have existed. Different conductors of
equal potential, put in connexion with one another, do
not exchange electricity any more than bodies of equal
temperature in contact exchange heat, or in connected
vessels, in which the same pressures exist, liquids


conUdned in Ihe unit ot quulily, «s shiU oblain tke potinUil. Tbe vo^ea-
llil oti body AT miybs briefly and preciseir defined as [ollDwe: ItweeipaDd
Ihsitemealotoorlii^If loraiEB Iha Blemsnl of poiilive quinlily </0 (tddi Iha
nnb lo Ibe conduclor, lbs polealUI ol icohiIdcIoi A'lBill be given by V=
d VldQ.


Hi THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.

flow from one vessel to the other. Exchange of elec-
tricity takes place only between conductors of different
potentials, but in conductors of given form and posi-
tion a definite difference of potential is necessary for
a spark, which pierces the insulating air, to pass
between them.

On being connected, every two conductors assume
at once the same potential. With this the means
is given of determining the potential of a conductor
through the agency of a second conductor expressly
adapted to the purpose called an electrometer, Just as
we determine the temperature of a body with a ther-
mometer. The values of the potentials of bodies ob-
tained in this way simplify vastly our analysis of their
electrical behavior, as will be evident from what has
been said.

Think of a positively charged conductor. Double
all the electrical forces exerted by this conductor on a
point charged with unit quantity, that is, double the
quantity at each point, or what is the same thing,
double the total charge. Plainly, equilibrium still sub-
sists. But carry, now, the positive electrostatic unit
towards the conductor. Everywhere we shall have to
overcome double the force of repulsion we did before,
everywhere we shall have to expend double the work.
By doubling the charge of the conductor a double po-
tential has been produced. Charge and potential go
hand in band, are proportional. Consequently, call-
ing the total quantity of electricity of a conductor Q


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.

and its potential V, we can write : Q^ C V, where C
stands for a constant, the import of which will be un-
derstood simply from noting that C= Q/V- * But the
division of a number representing the units of quan-
tity of a conductor by the number representing its
units of potential tells us the quantity which falls to
the share of the unit of potential. Now the number
Chere we call the capacity of a conductor, and have
substituted, thus, in the place of the old relative de-
termination of capacity, an absolute determination. f

In simple cases the connexion between charge, po-
tential, and capacity is easily ascertained. Our con-
ductor, let us say, is a sphere of radius r, suspended
free in a large body of air. There being no other con-
ductors in the vicinity, the charge y will then distribute
itself uniformly upon the surface of the sphere, and
simple geometrical considerations yield for its poten-
tial the expression V^qjr, Hence, qjV=r; that is,
the capacity of a sphere is measured by its radius, and


siEn al divisioa. Where pLii< oi miona signs occut in lbs nnmenior or dr
nomiDBiDi, brackets or a vinculum is used.— Tr.

espucity, but the difference between the two itteis also should bs uretuIlT
itseir. TheeleclriEBlcupicilroliibodyA'is iDduenced by all bodies In lla

paciI7 (C) or » body y.Cis defined as (he lelaiioil QjVtot ihebndyA'in >
cerwio given position e( «11 neigbboring bodies, and during connexion of all
nei^bborlni! condnclois with Ibe eulh. In preclice Iha situalion Is tnqch

almost enveloped by ite outer coslioR, conimuni eating with the giount], is ool
Beosibly aSected by charged or nncharged adjacent conductors.


134


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


in the C. G. S. system in centimetres.* It is clear
also, since a potential is a quantity divided by a length,
that a quantity divided by a potential must be a length.
Imagine (Fig. 36) a jar composed of two concen-
tric conductive spherical shells of the radii r and r^,
having only air between them. Connecting the out-
side sphere with the earth, and charging the inside
sphere by means of a thin, insulated wire passing
through the first, with the quantity Q, we shall have
F=^(r, — ^'Mi.f'i*'') Qt and for the capacity in this case
(r, r)/(rj— r), or, to take
a specific example, if r=:i6
and r^^ig, a capacity of
about 100 centimetres.

We shall now use these
simple cases for illustrat-
ing the principle by which
capacity and potential are
determined. First, it is
clear that we can use the
jar composed of concentric spheres with its known ca-
pacity as our unit jar and by means of this ascertain,
in the manner above laid down, the capacity of any
given Jar F. We find, for example, that 37 discharges
of this unit jar of the capacity 100, just charges the


1 eulLy to


m Newfoi


from Ihii


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


jar investigated at the same striking distance, that is,
at the same potential. Hence, the capacity of the jar
investigated is 3700 centimetres. The large battery
of the Prague physical laboratory, which consists of
sixteen such jars, all of nearly equal size, has a capa-
city, therefore, of something like 50,000 centimetres,
or the capacity of a sphere, a kilometre in diameter,
freely suspended in atmospheric space. This remark


Fig- 37.


distinctly shows us the great superiority which Leyden
jars possess for the storage of electricity as compared
with common conductors. In fact, as Faraday pointed
out, jars differ from simple conductors mainly by their
great capacity.

For determining potential, imagine the inner coat-
ing of a jar F^ the outer coating of which commuDi-
cates with the ground, connected by a long, thin wire
with a conductive sphere K placed free in a large at-
mospheric space, compared with whose dimensions


126 THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.

the radius of the sphere vanishes. (Fig. 37.) The
jar and the sphere assume at once the same potential.
But on the surface of the sphere, if that be sufficiently
far removed from all other conductors, a uniform layer
of electricity will be found. If the sphere, having the
radius r, contains the charge q, its potential is V^qjr.
If the upper half of the sphere be severed from the
lower half and equilibrated on a balance with one of
whose beams it is connected by silk threads, the upper
half will be repelled from the lower half with the force
P^q'i j&T'^^^^V^. This repulsion P may be counter-
balanced by additional weights placed on the beam-
end, and so ascertained. The potential is then V^
V^P.*

That the potential is proportional to the square
root of the force is not difficult to see. A doubling or
trebling of the potential means that the charge of all
the parts is doubled or trebled ; hence their combined
power of repulsion quadrupled or nonupled.

Let us consider a special case. I wish to produce
the potential 40 on the sphere. What additional weight
must I give to the half sphere in grammes that the
force of repulsion shall maintain the balance in exact
equilibrium ? As a gramme weight is approximately

■TIlB eorrgy of m gpheis ol radius r chained with Ihe qalDlitr q it
K (j« lr\. II Ibe radius ioctonse by the spice rff a loss ot enetgy octurs, uDd
Ihoworkdoneia J4(f!/r«irfr. LBiIiOB/'dBnoiH Ihe tinifom eiacIriciilptBa-
■are on anil of larliics of the sphere. Ihe work done is also ^t%^pdr. Hence
/_(i/Bnir)(^Ir>), Subjected to Ibe sicne luperficiat pressnre on atl sides.
say in ■ fluid, oar halt iphere would be an e<iuilibrium. Hence we most make
the pressare p act on Ihe surface ai Ihe great circle lo obtlin ttaa eSocl on tbe
balance, which ). n ,r/' - M(rt''*J= M »^.


THE CONCEPTS OP ELECTROSTATICS.


equivalent to looo units of force, we have only the
following simple example to work out : 40 X 40=8 X
1000. :>;, where x stands for the number of grammes.
In round numbers we get x^o.2 gramme. I charge
the jar. The balance is deflected ; I have reached,
or rather passed, the potential 40, and you see when I
discharge the jar the associated spark.*

The striking distance between the knobs of a ma-
chine increases with the difference of the potential,
although not proportionately to that difference. The
striking distance increases faster than the potential
difierence. For a distance between the knobs of one
centimetre on this machine the difference of potential
is no. It can easily be increased tenfold. Of the
tremendous differences of potential which occur in
nature some idea may be obtained from the fact that
the striking distances of lightning in thunder-storms
is counted by miles. The differences of potential in
galvanic batteries are considerably smaller than those
of our machine, for it takes fully one hundred elements
to give a spark of microscopic striking distance.


We shall now employ the ideas reached to shed
some light upon another important relation between


aent described 19 tors


128 THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS,

electrical and mechanical phenomena. We shall in-
vestigate what is the potential energy, or the store of
work, contained in a charged conductor, for example,
in a jar.

If we bring a quantity of electricity up to a con-
ductor, or, to speak less pictorially, if we generate by
work electrical force in a conductor, this force is able
to produce anew the work by which it was generated.
How great, now, is the energy or capacity for work of
a conductor of known charge Q and known poten-
tial Vl

Imagine the given charge Q divided into very small
parts q, q^, q^ . . . ., and these little parts successively
carried up to the conductor. The first very small
quantity ^ is brought up without any appreciable work
and produces by its presence a small potential V,. To
bring up the second quantity, accordingly, we must do
the work q, V„ and similarly for the quantities which
follow the work q,,V,„ q,,,V,,„ and so forth. Now,
as the potential rises proportionately to the quantities
added until the value V is reached, we have, agree-
ably to the graphical representation of Fig. 38, for the
total work performed,

which corresponds to the total energy of the charged
conductor. Using the equation Q=^C V, where C
stands for capacity, we also have,

IV^^Cri, or W=Q^jiC.


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


It wilt be helpful, perhaps, to elucidate this idea
by an analogy from the province of mechanics. If we
pump a quantity of liquid, Q, gradually into a cylin-
drical vessel (Fig. 39), the level of the liquid in the
vessel will gradually rise. The more we have pumped
in, the greater the pressure we must overcome, or the
higher the level to which we must lift the liquid. The
stored-up work is rendered again available when the
heavy liquid Q, which reaches up to the level h, flows
out. This work IF corresponds to the fall of the whole


liquid weight Q, through the distance hja or through
the altitude of its centre of gravity. We have

Further, since Q = Kh, or since the weight of the
liquid and the height k are proportional, we get also

As a special case let us consider our jar. Its ca-
pacity is C= 3700, its potential r^iio; accordingly,
its quantity Q=^ (7^^407,000 electrostatic units and
its energy (F=J ^'^=22,385,000 C. G. S. units of
work.


I30 THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.

The unit of work of the C. G. 5. system is not readily
appreciable by the senses, nor does it well admit of
representation, as we are accustomed to work with
weights. Let us adopt, therefore, as our unit of work
the gramme-centimetre, or the gravitational pressure
of a gramme-weight through the distance of a centi-
metre, which in round numbers is looo times greater
than the unit assumed above ; in this case, our numer-
ical result will be approximately looo times smaller.
Again, if we pass, as more familiar in practice, to the
kilogramme- metre as our unit of work, our unit, the
distance being increased a hundred fold, and the weight
a thousand fold, will be ioo,ooo times larger. The
Dumencal result expressing the work done is in this
case 100,000 times less, being in round numbers 0.22
kilogram me- metre. We can obtain a clear idea of the
work done here by letting a kilogramme- weight fall 3Z
centimetres.

This amount of work, accordingly, is performed on
the charging of the jar, and on its discharge appears
again, according to the circumstances, partly as sound,
partly as a mechanical disruption of insulators, partly
as light and heat, and so forth.

The large battery of the Prague physical labora-
tory, with its sixteen jars charged to equal potentials,
furnishes, although the eflect of the discharge is im-
posing, a total amount of work of only three kilo-
gramme-metres.


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


In the development of the ideas above laid down
we are not restricted to the method there pursued ; in
fact, that method was selected only as one especially
fitted to familiarise us with the phenomena. On the
contrary, the connexion of the physical processes is so
multifarious that we can come at the same event from
very different directions. Particularly are electrical
phenomena connected with all other physical events ;
and so intimate is this connexion that we might justly
call the study of electricity the theory of the general
connexion of physical processes.

With respect to the principle of the conservation
of energy which unites electrical with mechanical phe-
nomena, I should like to point out briefly two ways of
following up the study of this connexion.

A few years ago Professor Rosetti, taking an in-
fluence-machine, which he set in motion by means of
weights alternately in the electrical and nan- electrical
condition with the same velocities, determined the
mechanical work expended in the two cases and was
thus enabled, after deducting the work of friction, to
ascertain the mechanical work consumed in the devel-
opment of the electricity.

I myself have made this experiment in a modifled,
and, as I think, more advantageous form. Instead
of determining the work of friction by special trial, I
arranged my apparatus so that it was eliminated of it-
self In the measurement and could consequently be
neglected. The so-called fixed disk of the machine, the


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


axis of which is placed vertically, is suspended some-
what like a chandelier by three vertical threads of
equal lengths /at a distance r from the axis. Only
when the machine is excited does this fixed disk, which
represents a Prony's brake, receive, through its recip-
rocal action with the rotating disk, a deflexion a and a
moment of torsion which is expressed by D ^={Pr^fr)a,
where /'is the weight of the disk.* The angle or is
determined by a mirror set in the disk. The work ex-
pended in « rotations is given \iy inn D.

If we close the machine, as Rosetti did, we obtain
a continuous current which has all the properties of a
very weak galvanic current; for example, it produces a
deflexion in a multiplier which we interpose, and so
forth. We can directly ascertain, now, the mechanical
work expended in the maintenance of this current

If we charge a jar by means of a machine, the en-
ergy of the jar employed in the production of sparks,
in the disruption of the insulators, etc., corresponds
to a part only of the mechanical work expended, a
second part of it being consumed in the arc which
forms the circuit.f This machine, with the interposed
jar, affords in miniature a picture of the transference


I dE the I


!d disks. This


isbrcba


I of defleiion


i lion alvrei gills J

r ciperimeDl bcih like an ■ccoainliiior, beiag charged by ■
The teUiion whicb cblains belweeD the expended and tbe
■) be gathered troin the tollaving limple eipoiltioa. A

pienUkI F, charges the jar ^ with the qnantiiy gallhtpo-


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTSOSTATICS.


of force, or more properly of work. And in fact nearly
the same laws hold here for the economical coefficient
as obtain for large dynamo-machines.

Another means of investigating electrical energy is
by its transformation into heat, A long time ago
(1838), before the mechanical theory of heat had at-
tained its present popularity, Riess performed expe-
riments in this field with the help of his electrical
air- thermometer or therm o-
electrometer.

If the discharge be con-
ducted through a fine wire
passing through the globe of
the air- thermometer, a devel-
opment of heat is observed
proportional to the expression
above - discussed W= \QV.
Although the total energy has
not yet been transformed
into measurable heat by this
means, inasmuch as a portion

is left behind in the spark in the air outside the ther-
mometer, still everything tends to show that the total


>!<me Is left. Hence IhB


siio


of Ihe available work la Ihe total

sLiU Iha parts ol tbe machine and 1
rtualls' such nnil jara and Iha torn

Qlhecircnitofcomiedoii.


U, new, we interpose no nn
or conduelLon are themsel
»i>b«l«sf7r+i;^, inwUc
troduced differences of pole


"7e
Qd.1


134 1'^^ CONCEPTS OF ELKCTROSTATICS.

heat developed in all parts of the conductor and along
all the paths of discharge is the equivalent of the work

It is not important here whether the electrical en-
ergy is transformed all at once or partly, by degrees.
For example, if of two equal jars one is charged with
the quantity ^ at the potential Fthe energy present
\%\QV. If the first jar be discharged into the second,
V, since the capacity is now doubled, falls to VJT..
Accordingly, the energy J- ^J^ remains, while \QV\%
transformed in the spark of discharge into heat. The
remainder, however, is equally distributed between
the two jars so that each on discharge is still able to
transform \ QVKwXq heat.

We have here discussed electricity in the limited
phenomenal form in which it was known to the in-
quirers before Volta, and which has been called, per-
haps not very felicitously, "statical electricity." It is
evident, however, that the nature of electricity is every-
where one and the same ; that a substantial difference
between statical and galvanic electricity does not exist.
Only the quantitative circumstances in the two pro-
vinces are so widely different that totally new aspects
of phenomena may appear in the second, for example,
magnetic effects, which in the first remained unnoticed,
whilst, vice versa, in the second field statical attrac-
tions and repulsions are scarcely appreciable. As a fact,
we can easily show the magnetic effect of the current


THE com:epTs of electrostatics.


of discharge of an influeoce- machine on the galvano-
scope although we could hardly have made the orig-
inal discovery of the magnetic effects with this cur-
rent. The statical distant action of the wire poles of
a galvanic element also would hardly have been no-
ticed had not the phenomenon been known from a
different quarter in a striking form.

If we wished to characterise the two fields in their
chief and most general features, we should say that in
the first, high potentials and small quantities come
into play, in the second small potentials and large
quantities. A jar which is discharging and a galvanic
element deport themselves somewhat like an air-gun
and the bellows of an organ. The first gives forth
suddenly under a very high pressure a smaU quantity
of air ; the latter liberates gradually under a very slight
pressure a large quantity of air.

In point of principle, too, nothing prevents our re-
taining the electrostatical units in the domain of gal-
vanic electricity and in measuring, for example, the
strength of a current by the number of electrostatic
units which flow per second through its cross-section.
But this would be in a double aspect impractical. In
the first place, we should totally neglect the magnetic
facilities for measurement so conveniently offered by
the current, and substitute for this easy means a method
which can be applied only with difficulty and is not
capable of great exactness. In the second place our
units would be much too small, and we should find


THE CONCEPTS OF ELECTROSTATICS.


ourselves in the predicament of the astronomer who
attempted to measure celestial distances in metres in-
stead of in radii of the earth and the earth's orbit ; for
the current which by the magnetic C. G. S. standard
represents the unit, would require a flow of some
30,000,000,000 electrostatic units per second through
its cross-section. Accordingly, different units must
be adopted here. The development of this point, how-
ever, lies beyond my present task.


ON THE PRINCIPLE OE THE CON-
SERVATION OF ENERGY.*


TN a popular lecture, distinguished for its charming
■^ simplicity and clearness, which Joule delivered in
the year 1847,"!" that famous physicist declares that the
living force which a heavy body has acquired by its
descent through a certain height and which it carries
with it in the form of the velocity with which it is im-
pressed, is the ei/uivaknl of the attraction of gravity
through the space fallen through, and that it would be
" absurd " to assume that this Jiving force could be de-
stroyed without some restitution of that equivalent.
He then adds: "You will therefore be surprised to
hear that until very recently the universal opinion has
been that living force could be absolutely and irre-
vocably destroyed at any one's option." Let us add
that to-day, after forty-seven years, the law of the con-
servation of energy, wherever civilisation exists, is ac-


\ Joule: Seintifii: Paftri. London,


138


Olf THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


cepted as a fully established truth and receives the
widest applications in all domains of natural science.
The fate of all momentous discoveries is similar.
On their first appearance they are regarded by the
majority of men as errors. J. R. Mayer's work on the
principle of energy (^^4^) ^^s rejected by the first
physical journal of Germany ; Helmholtz's treatise
(1847) met with no better success ; and even Joule, to
judge from an intimation of Playfair, seems to have
encountered di£Rculties with his first publication (1843).
Gradually, however, people are led to see that the new
view was long prepared for and ready for enunciation,
only that a few favored minds had perceived it much
earlier than the rest, and in this way the opposition of
the majority is overcome. With proofs of the fruit-
fulness of the new view, with its success, confidence
in it increases. The majority of the men who employ
it cannot enter into a deep-going analysis of it ; for
them, its success is its proof. It can thus happen that
a view which has led to the greatest discoveries, like
Black's theory of caloric, in a subsequent period in a
province where it does not apply may actually become
an obstacle to progress by its blinding our eyes to facts
which do not fit in with our favorite conceptions. If
a theory is to be protected from this dubious role, the
grounds and motives of its evolution and existence
must he examined from time to time with the utmost


The most multifarious physical changes, thermal,


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


electrical, chemical, and so forth, caa be brought
about by mechanical work. When such alterations
are reversed they yield anew the mechanical work in
exactly the quantity which was required for the pro-
duction of the part reversed. This is the prinapU of
the conservation of energy; "energy " being the term
which has gradually come into use for that "inde-
structible something " of which the measure is me-
chanical work.

How did we acquire this idea 7 What are the
sources from which we have drawn it? This question
is not only of interest in itself, but also for the impor-
tant reason above touched upon. The opinions which
are held concerning the foundations of the law of en-
ergy still diverge very widely from one another. Many
trace the principle to the impossibility of a perpetual
motion, which they regard either as sufficiently proved
by experience, or as self-evident. In the province of
pure mechanics the impossibility of a perpetual mo-
tion, or the continuous production of work without
some permanent alteratioo, is easily demonstrated. Ac-
cordingly, if we start from the theory that all physical
processes are purely mechanical processes, motions of
molecules and atoms, we embrace also, by this tne-
chanical conception of physics, the impossibility of a
perpetual motion in the whoie physical domain. At
present this view probably counts the most adherents.
Other inquirers, however, are for accepting only a
purely f,r/^r(V7«'n/a/ establishment of the law of energy.


140 ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

It will appear, from the discussion to follow, that
a// the factors mentioned have co-operated in the de-
velopment of the view in question ; but that in addi-
tion to them a logical and purely formal factor, hitherto
little considered, has also played a very important part.


The law of energy in its modern form is not iden-
tical with the principle of the excluded perpetual mo-
tion, but it is very closely
related to it. The latter
principle, however, is by
no means new, for in the
province of mechanics it
has controlled for centu-
nes the thoughts and in-
vestigations of the great-
est thinkers. Let us con-
vince ourselves of this by the study of a few historical
examples.

S. Stevinus, in his famous work Hypomnemata ma-
thematiea, Tom. IV, De staiiea, (Leyden, 1605, p. 34),
treats of the equilibrium of bodies on inclined planes.
Over a triangular prism ABC, one side of which,
A C, is horizontal, an endless cord or chain is slung,
to which at equal distances apart fourteen balls of
equal weight are attached, as represented in cross-
section in Figure 41. Since we can imagine the lower


symmetrical part of the cord ^^Ctaken away, Stevinus
concludes that the four balls on AS hold in equilib-
rium the two balls onB C, For if the equilibrium were
for a moment disturbed, it could never subsist : the
cord would keep moving round forever in the same di-
rection, — we should have a perpetual motion. He says:

"But if this took place, our row or ring of balls would come
□nee more into tbeir origins! position, and from the same cause Ibe
eight globes to the left woald again be heavier than the six to tho
right, and therefore those eight would sink a second time and these
sin rise, and all the globes would keep up, of themselves, a coatinu-
ous and unending tnolioii, -whieh is falsi."*

Stevinus, now, easily derives from this principle
the laws of equilibrium on the inclined plane and nu-
merous other fruitful consequences.

In the chapter "Hydrostatics" of
the same work, page 114, Stevinus sets
up the following principle : "Aquam
datam, datum sibi intra aquam locum
servare," — a given mass of water pre-
serves within water its given place. Fig. 41.
This principle is demonstrated as follows (see Fig.
42):

"For, assuming it to be possible by natural means, let us sup-
pose that A does not preserve (be place assigned (o it, bnt sinks
down to D. This being posited, the water which succeeds A will,


1/, qv^ ett fattunt."


142


ON THE CONSEKVATJON 0I-' ENERGY.


for ihB same reason, also flow down to D\ A will be forced out o£
its place in D ; and thns this body of water, tor (he conditions in il
are everywhere the same, ■mill sit up a perfelual motion, which is

From this all the principles of hydrostatics are de-
duced. On this occasion Stevinus also first develops
the thought so fruitful for modern analytical mechanics
that the equilibrium of a system is not destroyed by
the addition of rigid connexions. As we know, the
principle of the conservation of the centre of gravity
is now sometimes deduced from D'Alembert's princi-
ple with the help of that remark. If we were to repro-
duce Stevinus's demonstration to-day, we should have
to change it slightly. We find no difficulty in imagin-
ing the cord on the prism possessed of unending uni-
form motion if all hindrances are thought away, but
we should protest against the assumption of an accel-
erated motion or even against that of a uniform mo-
tion, if the resistances were not removed. Moreover,
for greater precision of proof, the string of balls might
be replaced by a heavy homogeneous cord of infinite
flesibUity. But all this does not affect in the least the
historical value of Stevinus's thoughts. It is a fact,
Stevinus deduces apparently much simpler truths from
the principle of an impossible perpetual motion.


01^ THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


In the process of thought which conducted Galileo
to his discoveries at the end of the sixteenth century,

the following principle plays an important part, that
a hody in virtue of the velocity acquired in its descent
can rise exactly as high as it fell. This principle,
which appears frequently and with much clearness in
Galileo's thought, is simply another form of the prin-
ciple of excluded perpetual motion, as we shall see it
is also in Huygens.

Galileo, as we know, arrived at the law of uniformly
accelerated motion by a priori considerations, as that
law which was the "simplest and most natural," alter
having first assumed a different law which he was com-
pelled to reject. To verify his law he executed expe-
riments with falling bodies on inclined planes, meas-
uring the times of descent by the weights of the water
which flowed out ol a small orifice in a large vessel.
In this experiment he assumes as a fundamental prin-
ciple, that the velocity acquired in descent down an
inclined plane always corresponds to the vertical height
descended through, a conclusion which for him is the
immediate outcome of the fact that a body which has
fallen down one inclined plane can, with the velocity it
has acquired, rise on another plane of any inclination
only to the same vertical height. This principle of
the height of ascent also led him, as it seems, to the
law of inertia. Let us hear his own masterful words
in the Dialogo ter%o {Opere, Padova, 1744, Tom. Ill),
On page 96 we read :


144 0^r THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

"1 take it for granted that the velocities acquired by a body
in descent down planes of different inclinations are equal if the
heights of (hose planes are equal."*

Thea he makes Salviati say in the dialogue •.\


"What you say si
d by an experiment


bable, but I wish to go further
the probability of it thai it shall

n mobiliB super divBraas plmorom
Ids, cum eorundum pliDorum eleyl-

e, ma olt™ U veri simile voglio con


quasi alia aegnita piiallela CD. reslancto di per vernirvi pe


piccolissimo in-


detl'aHa, e del


filo. Da] che poEsiBmo vencemenls coDcladere, che I'impe


ponlo B dalla palla nello scendere per I'arco CB. tn onlo


chebajta.riao-


apioRBial pet un simile arco BD alia medesima aliezza ; iat


a. epibvoltere-


llsrala colale esperienii, vcclio, the fiecbiamo nella pareie


.aaeme .1 per-


pendimlo ^B un chiodo come in E. owerp in F. che Bpori;.


sei dila, e questo accioccht 11 filo ^ Cigrnaodg come prima a


ripcrtar la palla


El chiodo E, si.


cbe diani! con-


palla airoriiionlale nel


I ctie accaderebbf
deir ^ iV coll'orii
ivolfierebbe in (on
'sriia del soppotK

Brl'arcn cat poll


leucbiCa./J^equalla
lasceHoeirarcDCi^, til
a 11 momenio acqalstato
edflsimo mobile per I'arco


imo arco da B in A ■icehe u


ON THE CONSERVATtO^ OP ENERGY.


145


amount almost to absolnte demonstration. Suppose this sheet of
pajjer to be a vertical wall, and from a nail driven in it a ball of lead
weighing two or three ounces 1o hang by a very fine thread AB four
or five feet long, (Fig, 43.) On the wall mark a horizontal line DC
perpendicular to the vertical AB, which latter ought to hang about
Iwo inches from the wall. If now the thread AB with the ball
attached take the position AC and the ball be let go, you will see
the ball first descend through the arc CB and passing beyond
B rise through the arc
BD almost to the level
of the line CD, being
preveoled from reach-
ing it enactly by the re-
sistance of the air and
of the thread. From
this we may truly con-
clude that its impetus at
the point ,5, acquired by
its descent through the
arc CB. is sufficient to
urge it through 3 similat
performed this experimei
drive in the wall, in the projection of the vertical AB, aa at i5 or
at F, a nail five or six inches long, so that the thread A C. carrying
as before the ball through the arc CB. at the moment it reaches
the position AB. shall strike the nail E. and the ball be thus com-
pelled to move up the arc BG described about E aa centre.
Then we shajl see what the same impetus will here accomplish,
acquired now as before at the same point B. which then drove the


Having


ichi DS. GB y^BODoeBuiilI."


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


same moving body through the arc BD to the height of the hori-
zontal CD. Now gentlemen, you will be pleased to see the ball
rise to the horizontal line at the point G. and the satne thing also
happen if the nail be placed lower as at^. in which case the ball
would describe the arc BJ. always terminating its ascent precisely
at the line CD. If the nail be placed so low that the length of
thread below it does not reach to the height of CD (which would
happen if ^were nearer B than to the intersection of AB with the
horizontal C/J), then the thread will wind itself about the nail.
This experiment leaves no room for doubt as to the truth of the
supposition. For as the two arcs CB, DB are equal and similarly
situated, the momentum acquired in the descent of the arc CB is
the same as that acquired in the descent cf the arc DB ; but the
momentum acquired at B by the descent through the arc CB is cap-
able of driving up the same moving body through the arc BD\
hence also the momentum acquired in the descent DB is equal to
that which drives the same moving body through the same arc
from B \o D,^a that in genera] every momentum acquired in the
descent of an arc is equal to that which causes the same moving
body to ascend through the <N3me arc : but all the momenta which
cause the ascent o£ all the arcs BD, BG. BJ, are equal since they
are made by the same momentum acquired in the descent CB, as
the experiment shows : therefore all the momenta acquired in the
descent of the arcs DB, GB, JB are equal,"

The remark relative to the pendulum may be ap-
plied to the inclined plane and leads to the law of in-
ertia. We read on page 124 :*


OH THE COr^SERVATlON OF El^ERGY. 147

"II ia plain now that a, movable body, starting from rest at A
and descending down the inclined plane A B, acquires a velocity
proportional to the increment of its time: the velocity possessed
at B is the greatest of the velocities acquired, and by its nature
immutably impressed, provided all causes of new acceleration or
retardation are taken away ; I say acceleration, having in view its
possible further progress along the plane extended ; retardation, in
view of the possibility of its being reversed and made to mount the
ascending plane B C. But in the horizontal plane G [I its equable
motion, according to its velocity as acquired in the descent from A
to 5. will be continued -ji^ijyfai/am." {Fig, 44.)

Huygens, upon whose shoulders the mantel of Gali-
leo fell, forms a sharper conception of the law of inertia


and generalises the principle respecting the heights of
ascent which was so fruitful in Galileo's hands. He
employs the latter principle in the solution of the prob-
lem of the centre of oscillation and is perfectly clear in
the statement that the principle respecting the heights
of ascent is identical with the principle of the excluded
perpetual motion.

The following important passages then occur (Hu-
genii, Horologium oscillatorium, pars stcundd). Hy-
potheses:

" If gravity did cot exist, nor the atmrophere obstruct the mo-


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


tions of bodies, a body would keep ap forever the motion once im-
pressed upon it, with equabts velocity, in a straight line."*

In part four of the Horologium de centra osciUationis
we read :

" If any number of weights be set in motion by the force of
gravity, the common centre of gravity of the weights as a whole
cannot possibly rise higher than the place which it occupied when
the moiion began.

"That this hypothesis of ours may arouse no scruples, we
will state that it simpty imports, what no one has ever denied, that
heavy bodies do not move upwards. — And truly if the devisers of
the new machines who make such futile attempts to construct a
perpetual motion would acquaint themselves with this principle,
they could easily be brought to see iheir errors and to understand
thai the thing is utterly impossible by mechanical means. " f

There is possibly a Jesuitical mental reservation
contained in the words "mechanical means," One
might be led to believe from them that Huygens held
a non-mechanical perpetual motion for possible.

The generalisation of Galileo's principle is still
more clearly put in Prop. IV o[ the same chapter :

" It a pendulum, composed o£ several weights, set in motion
from rest, complete any part of its full oscillation, and from thai


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


i»


point onwards, the individual weights, with their common connex-
ions dissolved, change their acquired velocitiea upwards and ascend
as Ear as they can, the common centre of gravity of all will be car-
ried up to tha same altitude with that which it occupied before the
beginning of the oscillation,"*

On this last principle now, which is a generalisa-
tion, applied to a system of masses, of one of Galileo's
ideas respecting a single mass and which from Huy-
gens's explanation we recognise as the principle of ex-
cluded perpetual motion, Huygens grounds his theory
of the centre of oscillation. Lagrange characterises
this principle as precarious and is rejoiced at James
Bernoulli's successful attempt, in 1681, to reduce the
theory of the centre of oscillation to the laws of the
lever, which appeared to him clearer. All the great
inquirers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
broke a lance on this problem, and it led ultimately,
in conjunction with the principle of virtual velocities,
to the principle enunciated by D'Alembert in 1743 in
his Traitc de dynamique, though previously employed
in a somewhat different form by Euler and Hermann.

Furthermore, the Huygenian principle respecting
the heights of ascent became the foundation of the
"law of the conservation of living force," as that was
enunciated by John and Daniel Bernoulli and em-


I JO Off THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

ployed with such signal success by the latter in his
Hydrodynamiet. The theorems of the Bemoulhs difier
in form only from Lagrange's expression in the Ana-
lytical Mechanics.

The manner in which Torricelli reached bis famous
law of efflux for liquids leads again to our principle.
Torricelli assumed that the liquid which flows out o(
the basal orifice of a vessel cannot by its velocity of
efflux ascend to a greater height thau its level in the
vessel.

L'Ct us next consider a point which belongs to pure
mechanics, the history of the principle of virtual mo-
tions or virtual velocities. This principle was not first
enunciated, as is usually stated, and as Lagrange also
asserts, by Galileo, but earlier, by Stevinus. In bis
Troehleostatica of the above-cited work, page 72, he
says;

" Observe Ihat this axiom of statics holds good here :

"Aa the Spac« of the body acting is to the space of the body
acted upon, so is the power of the body acted upon to the power of
the body acting,"*

Galileo, as we know, recognised the truth of the
principle in the consideration of the simple machines,
and also deduced the laws of the equilibrium of liquids
from it.

Torricelli carries the principle back to the proper-
ties of the centre of gravity. The condition control-

• ■' NpIMO .ulem b!e tllud sUtleuni aiioma elUm locum habere :
'■ Ul .pullum iitenlls "d Bpalium paiienlis
Sic polenli* pBiionlls >d potonilani aeeolls."


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY. 151

ling equilibrium in a simple macfaine] in which power
and load are represented by weights, is that the com-
mon centre of gravity of the weights shall not sink.
Conversely, if the centre of gravity cannot sink equi-
librium obtains, because heavy bodies of themselves
do not move upwards. In this form the principle of
virtual velocities is identical with Huygens's principle
cf the impossibility of a perpetual motion.

John Bernoulli, ini7i7, first perceived the universal
import of the principle of virtual movements for all
systems j a discovery stated in a letter to Varignon.
Finally, Lagrange gives a general demonstration of
the principle and founds upon it his whole Analytical
Mechanics. But this general demonstration is based
after all upon Huygens and Torricelli's remarks. La-
grange, as is known, conceives simple pulleys arranged
in the directions of the forces of the system, passes a
cord through these pulleys, and appends to its free
extremity a weight which is a common measure of all
the forces of the system. With no difficulty, now, the
number of elements of each pulley may be so chosen
that the forces in question shall be replaced by them.
It is then clear that if the weight at the extremity can-
not sink, equilibrium subsists, because heavy bodies
cannot of themselves move upwards. If we do not go
so far, but wish to abide by Torricelli's idea, we may
conceive every individual force of the system replaced
by a special weight suspended from a cord passing
over a pulley in the direction of the force and attached


i5« ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

at its point of application. Equilibrium subsists then
when the common centre of gravity of all the weights
together cannot sink. The fundamental supposition
of this demonstration is plainly the impossibility of a
perpetual motion.

Lagrange tried in every way to supply a proof free
from extraneous elements and fully satisfactory, but
without complete success. Nor were his successors
more fortunate.

The whole of mechanics, thus, is based upon an
idea, which, though unequivocal, is yet unwonted and
not coequal with the other principles and axioms of
mechanics. Every student of mechanics, at some stage
of his progress, feels the uncomfortableness of this
state of affairs ; every one wishes it removed ; but sel-
dom is the difficulty stated in words. Accordingly, the
zealous pupil of the science is highly rejoiced when he
reads in a master like Poinsot {Tkeorte giniraU de
Fequilibre el du mouvemenl des systemes) the following
passage, in which that author is giving his opinion of
the Analytical Mechanics :

" In the meantime, because our attention in that work was first
wholly engrossed with the consideration of its beantiful develop-
ment of mechanics, which seemed to spring complete from a single
formula, we naturally believed that the science was completed or
that it only remained to seek the demonstration of the principle of
virtual velocities. But that quest brought back all the difficulties
that we had overcome by the principle itself. That law so general,
wherein are mingled the vagus and unfamiliar ideas of infinitely
small movements and of perturbations of equilibrium, only grew


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY. 153

obscure upon examinatioD : and tbe work of Lagrange supplyini;
notlliilg clearer than fhe march of analysis, we saw plaioly that the
clouds had only appeared lifted frem the course of mechanics be-
cause they had, so to speak, been gathered al the very origin of that

"AC bottom, a general demonstration of the principle o£ vittnal
velocities would be equivalent to the establishment of the whole
of mechanics upon a different basis : for tbe demonstration of a
law which embraces a whole science is neither more nor less than
the reduction of that science to another law just as general, but
evident, or at least more simple than the first, and which, conse-
qnentljr, would render that useless." *

According to Poinsot, therefore, a proof of the
principle of virtual movements is tantamount to a to-
tal rehabilitation of mechanics.

Another circumstance of discomfort to the mathe-
matician is, that in the historical form in which me-
chanics at present exists, dynamics is founded on
statics, whereas it is desirable that in a science which
pretends to deductive completeness the more special


• ■■Cepend»nl,comme duis eel


nvrage on ne fot d'abord itlentif qn


CODudiier ce beaa diveioppemenl de


latle, et qn'il ae reaiait pins qn'fi chec


ber U d^moaBlnliaa da prindps d


vIleiaesviilDeUes. Miiscelterecfaer


be »mBns ipmes les difficnlliaqo'p


■viit Irincbles par 1e principe meme.


Cone iDi si Rinirale, oli sa melsnl d


idfes vaguBa et ^irang^resdeoionvEm


ma inlinBiaeiil pelilaetdepenurbatic


L»gr»ngon'offrBnl p[u9 slora rien de


Clair qne la inarcbe des calculs, on v


bien qae lea Duagn D'avaient pani


ev* tur iB cours de la rafcaniqae qi


pareequ'ils SlaiBni, pour aiDsi dira.


principe des vllesses vinuetles den


«D iDDd revenir a £(ablir \e mecanique


<,a\ibie sue use lutie base : car la d


te une scienca ne peul eite aalre cho


154 O.V THE CONSMRV'ATIoy OF ENEHGY.

Statical theorems should be deducible from the more
general dynamical principles.

In fact, a great master, Gauss, gave expression to
this desire in his presentment of the principle of least
constraint (Crelle's Journal fur rcine unii angeivandte
Mathemaiik, Vol. IV, p. 233) in the following words;
" Proper as it is that in the gradual development of a
science, and in the instruction of individuals, the easy
should precede the difficult, the simple the complex,
the special the general, yet the mind, when once it has
reached a higher point of view, demands the contrary
course, in which all statics shall appear simply as a
special case of mechanics." Gauss's own principle,
now, possesses all the requisites of universality, but
its difficulty is that it is not immediately intelligible
and that Gauss deduced it with the help of D'Alem-
bert's principle, a procedure which left matters where
they were before.

Whence, now, is derived this strange part which
the principle of virtual motion plays in mechanics ?
For the present I shall only make this reply. It would
be difficult for me to tell the difference of impression
which Lagrange's proof of the principle made on me
when I first took it up as a student and when I subse-
quently resumed it after having made historical re-
searches. It first appeared to me insipid, chiefly on
account of the pulleys and the cords which did not fit
in with the mathematical view, and whose action I
would much rather have discovered from the principle


A


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

itself than have taken for granted. But now that I
have studied the history of the science I cannot imag-
ine a more beautiful demonstration.

In fact, through all mechanics it is this self-same
principle of excluded perpetual motion which accom-
plishes almost all, which displeased LagrangCj but
which he still had to employ, at least tacitly, in his own
demonstration. If we give this principle its proper
place and setting, the paradox is explained.

The principle of excluded perpetual motion is thus
no new discovery; it has been the guiding idea, for
three hundred years, of all the great inquirers. But
the principle cannot properly be ias€d upon mechani-
cal perceptions. For long before the development of
mechanics the conviction of Jts truth existed and even
contributed to that development. Its power of con-
viction, therefore, must have more universal and
deeper roots. We shall revert to this point.


II. MECHANICAL PHYSICS.

It cannot be denied that an unmistakable tendency
has prevailed, from Democritus to the present day, to
explain all physical events mechanically. Not to men-
tion earlier obscure expressions of that tendency we
read in Huygens the following : *


■■There can be no doubt (hat light c
>in substance. For if we eiamine it


insists of the motion of a
produclioQ, we find that


156 ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

here on earth il is principally fire and flame which engender it, both
of which contain beyond doubt bodies which are in rapid move-
meni, since Ihey dissolve and destroy raauy other bodies more solid
than they : while if we regard its effects, we see that when light is
accumulated, say by concave mirrors, it has the property of com-
bastion just as fire has, that is to say, it disunites the parts of
bodies, which is assuredly a proof of inalinn. at least in the trut
philosophy, in which the causes of all natural effects are conceived
as "If c^nHiVd/ causes. Which in my judgment must be accomplished
or all hope of ever understanding physics renounced."*

S. Carnot.f in introducing the principle of excluded
perpetual motion into the theory of heat, makes the
following apology :

"It will be objected here, perhaps, that a perpetual motion
proved impossible for purely mtchanical nclions, is perhaps not so
when the influence of heat or of electricity is employed. But can
phenomena of heat or electricity be thought of as due to anything
else than to rerlaiti moliotis of bodies, and as such must they not bo
subject to the general laws of mechanics ? " \


•myt FhilfTopkit, dans Isquelle on con^oit la giue< de (ous Ics
iir del rsisaiiB ds intckattigui. Cs qu'il faal fairs ^ nwn avii.
ir & loui esptiance de jimala riea cumprendre dim ■■ Pby-


s/nr, tail de l'«Iectricil^ ; mail i
Etialeur el de TdleolrlciiA comme
■ciH^uiidescarfset camme tell ne


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


157


These examples, which might be multiplied by
quotations from recent literature indefinitely, show
that a tendency to explain all things mechanically
actually exists. This tendency is also inteUigible.
Mechanical events as simple motions in space and
time best admit of observation and pursuit by the help
of our highly organised senses. We reproduce mechan-
ical processes almost without effort in our imagina-
tion. Pressure as a circumstance that produces mo-
tion is very familiar to us from daily experience. All
changes which the individual personally produces in
his environment, or humanity brings about by means
of the arts in the world, are effected through the in-
strumentality of motions. Almost of necessity, there-
fore, motion appears to us as the most important
physical factor. Moreover, mechanical properties may
be discovered in all physical events. The sounding
hell trembles, the heated body expands, the electrified
body attracts other bodies. Why, therefore, should
we not attempt to grasp all events under their mechan-
ical aspect, since that is so easily apprehended and
most accessible to observation and measurement? In
fact, no objection is to be made to the attempt to elu-
cidate the properties of physical events by mechanical
analogies.

But modern physics has proceeded very far in this
direction. The point of view which Wundt represents
in his excellent treatise On the Physical Axioms is prob-


159 OA' THE COIVSERFAT/0,V OF EiVEKGY.

ably shared by the majority of physicists. The axioms
of physics which Wundt sets up are as follows :

1. All natural causes are motional causes.

2. Every motional cause lies outside the object
moved.

3. All motional causes act in the direction of the
straight line of junction, and so forth.

4. The effect of every cause persists.

5. Every effect involves an equal counterefiect.

6. Every effect is equivalent to its cause.

These principles might be studied properly enough
as fundamental principles of mechanics. But when
they are set up as axioms of physics, their enunciation
is simply tantamount to a negation of all events ex-
cept motion.

According to Wundt, all changes of nature are
mere changes of place. All causes are motional causes
(page z6). Any discussion of the philosophical grounds
on which Wundt supports his theory would lead us
deep into the speculations of the Eleatics and the
Herbartians. Change of place, Wundt holds, is the
only change of a thing in which a thing remains iden-
tical with itself. If a thing changed gualitaiively, we
should be obliged to imagine that something was an-
nihilated and something else created in its place, which
is not to be reconciled with our idea of the identity of
the object observed and of the indestructibility of
matter. But we have only to remember that the Ele-
atics encountered difficulties of exactly the same sort


ON THE CONSERVATION' OF ENERGY.

in motion. Can we not also imagine that a thing is
destroyed in one place and in another an exactly simi-
lar thing created? After all, do we really know more

why a body leaves one place and appears in another,
than why a cold body grows warm ? Granted that we
had a perfect knowledge of the mechanical processes
of nature, could we and should we, for that reason,
put out of the world all other processes that we do not
understand? On this principle it would really be the
simplest course to deny the existence of the whole
world. This is the point at which the Eleatics ulti-
mately arrived, and the school of Herbart stopped
little short of the same goal.

Physics treated in this sense supplies us simply
with a diagram of the world, in which we do not know
reality again. It happens, in fact, to men who give
themselves up to this view for many years, that the
world of sense from which they start as a province of
the greatest familiarity, suddenly becomes, in their
eyes, the supreme "world-riddle."

Intelligible as it is, therefore, that the efforts of
thinkers have always been bent upon the "reduction
of all physical processes to the motions of atoms," it
must yet be afGrmed that this is a chimerical ideal.
This ideal has often played an effective part in popu-
lar lectures, but in the workshop of the serious in-
quirer it has discharged scarcely the least function.
What has really been achieved in mechanical physics
is either the elucidation of physical processes by more


ON TJIE COMSKRVATION OF ENERGY.

familiar mechanical analogies, (for example, the theories
of light and of electricity,) or the exact quantitative
ascertainment of the connexion of mechanical pro-
cesses with other physical processes, for example, the
results of thermodynamics.

III. THE PRINCIPLE OF ENERGY IN PHYSICS.

We can know only from experience that mechanical
processes produce other physical transformations, or
vice versa. The attention was first directed to the con-
nexion of mechanical processes, especially the per-
formance of work, with changes of thermal conditions
by the invention of the steam-engine, and by its great
technical importance. Technical interests and the
need of scientific lucidity meeting in the mind of S.
Carnot led to the remarkable development from which
thermodynamics flowed. It is simply an accident of
history that the development in question was not con-
nected with the practical applications of electricity.

In the determination of the maximum quantity of
work that, generally, a heat-machine, or, to take a
special case, a steam-engine, can perform with the
expenditure of a given amount of heat of combustion,
Carnot is guided by mechanical analogies. A body can
do work on being heated, by expanding under pressure.
But to do this the body must receive heat from a hotter
body. Heat, therefore, to do work, must pass from a
hotter body to a colder body, just as water must fall
from a higher level to a lower level to put a mill-wheel


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY. j6i

in motion. Differences of temperature, accordingly,
represent forces able to do work exactly as do differ-
ences of height in heavy bodies. Camot pictures to

himself an ideal process in which no heat flows away
unused, that is, without doing work. With a given ex-
penditure of heat, accordingly, this process furnishes
the maximum of work. An analogue of the process
would be a mill-wheel which scooping its water out of
a higher level would slowly carry it to a lower level
without the loss of a drop. A peculiar property of the
process is, that with the expenditure of the same work
the water can be raised again exactly to its original
level. This property of reversibility is also shared by
the process of Carnot, His process also can be re-
versed by the expenditure of the same amount of work,
and the heat again brought back to its original tem-
perature level.

Suppose, now, we had two different reversible pro-
cesses A, B, such that in .^ a quantity of heat, Q,
flowing off from the temperature /j to the lower tem-
perature t^ should perform the work W, but in B under
the same circumstances it should perform a greater
quantity of work W-\- W \ then, we could join B in
the sense assigned and A in the reverse sense into a
single process. Here A would reverse the transforma-
tion of heat produced by B and would leave a surplus
of work W , produced, so to speak, from nothing.
The combination would present a perpetual motion.

With the feeling, now, that it makes little differ-


ence whether the mechanical laws are broken directly
or indirectly (by processes of heat), and convinced of
the existence of a universal law-ruled connexion of na-
ture, Carnot here excludes for the first time from the
province of general physics the possibility of a per-
petual motion. Sui it follows, then, that the quantity
of work W, produced by the passage of a quantity of heat
Q from a temperature t^ to a temperature t^, is inde-
pendent of the nature of the substances as also of the char-
acter of the process, so far as that is unaccompanied by
loss, but is wholly dependent upon the temperature t^, t^.
This important principle has been fully confirmed
by the special researches of Carnot himself (1824), of
Clapeyron (1834), and of Sir William Thomson (1849),
now Lord Kelvin. The principle was reached without
any assumption whatever conceiniTig the nature of heat,
simply bythe exclusion of a perpetual motion. Carnot,
it is true, was an adherent of the theory of Black, ac-
cording to which the sum-total of the quantity of heat
in the world is constant, but so far as his investiga-
tions have been hitherto considered the decision on
this point is of no consequence, Carnot's principle
led to the most remarkable results. W. Thomson
(1848) founded upon it the ingenious idea of an "ab-
solute " scale of temperature. James Thomson (1849)
conceived a Carnot process to take place with water
freezing under pressure and, therefore, performing
work. He discovered, thus, that the freezing point is
lowered 00075° Celsius by every additional atmos-


ON THE CONSERVATION OP ENERGY. 163

pheie of pressure. This is mentioned merely as an
example.

About twenty years after the publication of Car-
not's book a further advance was made by J. R. Mayer
and J. P. Joule. Mayer, while engaged as a physi-
cian in the service of the Dutch, observed, during a
process of bleeding in Java, an unusual redness of the
venous blood. In agreement with Liebig's theory of
animal heat he connected this fact with the diminished
loss of heat in warmer climates, and with the dimin-
ished expenditure of organic combustibles. The total
expenditure of heat of a man at rest must be equal to
the total heat of combustion. But since all organic ac-
tions, even the mechanical actions, must be set down
to the credit of the heat of combustion, some connex-
ion must exist between mechanical work and expendi-
ture of heat.

Joule started from quite similar convictions con-
cerning the galvanic battery. A heat of association
equivalent to the consumption of the zinc can be made
to appear in the galvanic cell. If a current is set up,
a part of this heat appears in the conductor of the
current. The interposition of an apparatus for the
decomposition of water causes a part of this heat to
disappear, which on the burning of the explosive gas
formed, is reproduced. If the current runs an elec-
tromotor, a portion of the heat again disappears, which,
on the consumption of the work by friction, again
makes its appearance. Accordingly, both the heat


i64 ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

produced and the work produced, appeared to Joule
also as connected with the consumption of material.
The thought was therefore present, both to Mayer and
to Joule, of regarding heat and work as equivalent
quantities, so connected with each other that what is
lost in one form universally appears in another. The
result of this was a substantial conception of heat and
of work, and ultimately a substantial conception of en-
ergy. Here every physical change of condition is re-
garded as energy, the destruction of which generates
work or equivalent heat. An electric charge, for ex-
ample, is energy.

In 1842 Mayer had calculated from the physical
constants then universally accepted that by the disap-
pearance of one kilogramme-calorie 365 kilogramme-
metres of work could be performed, and vice versa.
Joule, on the other hand, by a long series of delicate
and varied experiments beginning in 1843 ultimately
determined the mechanical equivalent of the kilo-
gramme-calorie, more exactly, as 425 kilogramme-
metres.

If we estimate every change of physical condition
by the mechanical work which can be performed upon
the disappearance of that condition, and call this meas-
ure energy, then we can measure all physical changes
of condition, no matter how different they may be,
with the same common measure, and say : the sum-
total of all energy remains constant. This is the form that
the principle of excluded perpetual motion received at


0^' THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


the hands of Mayer, Joule, Helmholtz, and W. Thom-
son in its extension to the whole domain of physics.
After it had been proved that heat must disappear
if mechanical work was to be done at its expense,
Carnot's principle could no longer be regarded as a
complete expression of the facts. Its improved form
was first given, in rSgo, by Clausius, whom Thomson
followed in 1851. It runs thus : " If a quantity of heat
Q' is transformed into work in a reversible process,
another quantity of heat Q of the absolute* tempera-
ture T^ is lowered to the absolute temperature 7'^."
Here (^ is dependent only on Q, T^, T^, but is inde-
pendent of the substances used and of the character of
the process, so far as that is unaccompanied by loss.
Owing to this last fact, it is sufficient to find the rela-
tion which obtains for some one well-known physical
substance, say a ^as, and some definite simple pro-
cess. The relation found will be the one that holds
generally. We get, thus,
Q'

that is, the quotient of the available beat Q trans-
formed into work divided by the sum of the trans-
formed and transferred heats (the total sum used), the
so-called economical coefficient of the process, is.


■ (■)


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


TV. THE CONCEPTIONS OF HEAT.

When a cold body is put in contact with a warm
body it is observed that the first body is warmed and
that the second body is cooled. We may say that the
first body is warmed af the expense of the second body.
This suggests the notion of a thing, or heat-substance,
which passes from the one body to the other. If two
masses of water w, m', of unequal temperatures, be
put together, it will be found, upon the rapid equali-
sation of the temperatures, that the respective changes
of temperatures u and u' are inversely proportional to
the masses and of opposite signs, so that the algebra-
ical sum of the products is.

Black called the products m u, m' u', which are decisive
for our knowledge of the process, quantities of heat.
We may form a very cieAt picture of these products
by conceiving them with Black as measures of the
quantities of some substance. But the essential thing
is not this picture but the constancy of the sum of these
products in simple processes of conduction. If a quan-
tity of heat disappears at one point, an equally large
quantity will make its appearance at some other point.
The retention of this idea leads to the discovery of
specific beat. Black, finally, perceives that also some-
thing else may appear for a vanished quantity of heat,
namely ; the fusion or vaporisation of a definite quan-


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

tity of matter. He adheres here still to this favorite
view, though with some freedom, and considers the
vanished quantity of heat as still present, but as latent.
The generaUy accepted notion of a caloric, or heat-
stuff, was strongly shaken by the work of Mayer and
Joule. If the quantity of heat can be increased and
diminished, people said, heat cannot be a suhstance,
but must be a motion. The subordinate part of this
statement has become much more popular than all the
rest of the doctrine of energy. But we may convince
ourselves that the motional conception of heat is now
as unessential as was formerly its conception as a sub-
stance. Both ideas were favored or impeded solely
by accidental historical circumstances. It does not
follow that heat is not a substance from the fact that
a mechanical equivalent exists for quantity of heat.
We will make this clear by the following question
which bright students have sometimes put to me. Is
there a mechanical equivalent of electricity as there is
a mechanical equivalent of heat ? Yes, and no. There
is no mechanical equivalent of quantity of electricity
as there is an equivalent of quantity of heat, because
the same quantity of electricity has a very different
capacity for work, according to the circumstances in
which it is placed ; but there is a mechanical equiv-
alent cf electrical energy.

Let us ask another question. Is there a mechan-
ical equivalent of water ? No, there is no mechanical
equivalent of quantity of water, but there is a me-


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY,


chanical equivalent of weight of water multiplied by
its distance of descent.

When a Leyden jar is discharged and work thereby
performed, we do not picture to ourselves that the
quantity of electricity disappears as work is done, but
we simply assume that the electricities come into dif-
ferent positions, equal quantities of positive and nega-
tive electricity being united with one another.

What, now, is the reason of this difference of view
in our treatment of heat and of electricity? The rea-
son is purely historical, wholly conventional, and, what
is still more important, is wholly indifferent. I may
be allowed to establish this assertion

In 1785 Coulomb constructed his torsion balance,
by which he was enabled to measure the repulsion of
electrified bodies. Suppose we have two small balls,
Ai B, which over their whole extent are similarly
electrified. These two balls will exert on one another,
at a certain distance r of their centres, a certain re-
pulsion p. We bring into contact with B now a ball
C, suffer both to be equally electrified, and then meas-
ure the repulsion of B from A and of C from A at the
same distance r. The sum of these repulsions is again
p. Accordingly something has remained constant.
If « e ascribe this effect to a substance, then we infer
naturally its constancy. But the essential point of the
exposition is the divisibility of the electric force/ and
not the simile of substance.

In 1 838 Kiess constructed his electrical air-therm om-


ON THE CONSERVATION OP ENERGY. 169

eter (the thermoelectrometer). This gives a measure
of the quantity of heat produced by the discharge of
jars. This quantity of heat is not proportional to the
quantity of electricity contained in the jar by Cou-
ioitib's measure, but if Q be this quantity and C be the
capacity, is proportional to Q^ /2C, or, more simply
still, to the energy of the charged jar. If, now, we
discharge the jar completely through the thermome-
ter, Wfi obtain a certain quantity of heat, IV. But if
we make the discharge through the thermometer into
a second jar, we obtain a quantity less than W. But we
may obtain the remainder by completely discharging
both jars through the air-thermometer, when it will
again be proportional to the energy of the two jars. On
the first, incomplete discharge, accordingly, a part of
the electricity's capacity for work was lost.

When the charge of a jar produces heat its energy
is changed and its value by Riess's thermometer is de-
creased. But by Coulomb's measure the quantity re-
mains unaltered.

Now let us imagine that Riess's thermometer had
been invented before Coulomb's torsion balance, which
is not a difficult feat, since both inventions are indepen-
dent of each other ; what would be more natural than
that the "quantity" of electricity contained in a jar
should be measured by the heat produced in the ther-
mometer? But then, this so-called quantity of elec-
tricity would decrease on the production of heat or on
the performance of work, whereas it now remains un-


01<r THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

changed ; in that case, therefore, electricity would not
be a substance but a motion, whereas now it is still a
substance. The reason, therefore, why we have other
notions of electricity than we have of heat, is purely
historical, accidental, and conventional.

This is also the case with other physical things.
Water does not disappear when work is done. Why?
Because we measure quantity of water with scales, just
as we do electricity. But suppose the capacity of
water for work were called quantity, and had to be
measured, therefore, by a mill instead of by scales ;
then this quantity also would disappear as it per-
formed the work. It may, now, be easily conceived
that many substances are not so easily got at as water.
In that case we should be unable to carry out the one
kind of measurement with the scales whilst many other
modes of measurement would still be left us.

In the case of heat, now, the historically established
measure of "quantity" is accidentally the work-value
of the heat. Accordingly, its quantity disappears when
work is done. But that heat is not a substance follows
from this as little as does the opposite conclusion that
it is a substance. In Black's case the quantity of heat
remains constant because the heat passes Into no other
form of energy.

If any one to-day should still wish to think of heat
as a substance, we might allow that person this liberty
with little ado. He would only have to assume that
that which we call quantity of heat was the energy of


O!^ THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

a substance whose quantity remained unaltered, but
whose energy changed. In point of fact we might
much better say, in analogy with the other terms of
physics, energy of heat, instead of quantity of heat.

When we wonder, therefore, at the discovery that
heat is motion, we wonder at something that was never
discovered. It is perfectly indifferent and possesses
not the slightest scientific value, whether we think of
heat as a substance or not. The fact is, heat behaves
in some connexions like a substance, in others not.
Heat is latent in steam as oxygen is latent in water.


The foregoing reflexions will gain in lucidity from
a consideration of the conformity which obtains in the
behavior of all energies, a point to which I called at-
tention long ago.*

A weight /■ at a height H^ represents an energy
W^=PH^. If we suffer the weight to sink to a lower
height H^, during which work is done, and the work
done is employed in the production of living force,
heat, or an electric charge, in short, is transformed,
then the energy W^=PH^ is still left. The equation
subsists

~ir~~H'


(3)


II Ihe lUialc
'icKU dcr J


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


or, denoting the irans/ormeii energy hy W^W^ — W^
and the transferred energy, that transported to the
lower level, by W=W^,

(3)


W


H. — H„


IV'+IV

an equation in all respects analogous to equation (i)
at page 165. The property in question, therefore, is
by no means peculiar to heat. Equation (a) gives the
relation between the energy taken from the higher
level and that deposited on the lower level (the energy
left behind) ; it says that these energies are propor-
tional to the heights of the levels. An equation analo-
gous to equation (2) may be set up for every form of
energy ; hence the equation which corresponds to
equation (3), and so to equation (i), may be regarded
as valid for every form. For electricity, for example,
H^, H^ signify the potentials.

When we observe for the first time the agreement
here indicated in the transformative law of the ener-
gies, it appears surprising and unexpected, for we do
not perceive at once its reason. But to him who pur-
sues the comparative historical method that reason
will not long remain a secret.

SinceGalileo, mechanical work, though long under
a different name, has been 3 fundamental concept of
mechanics, as also a very important notion in the ap-
plied sciences. The transformation of work into liv-

Madimii. Decembei. i»gi, inlillsd Cue


Vionsky [1


r (1884), Helm {.887).


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY. 173

ing force, and of living force into work, suggests di-
rectly the notion of energy — the idea having been first
fruitfully employed by Huygens, although Thomas
Young first called it by the wam^ of " energy." Let
us add to this the constancy of weight (really the con-
stancy of mass) and we shall see that with respect to
mechanical energy it is involved in the very definition
of the terra that the capacity for work or the potential
energy of a weight is proportional to the height ol the
level at which it is, in the geometrical sense, and that
it decreases on the lowering of the weight, on trans-
formation, proportionally to the height of the level.
The zero level here is wholly arbitrary. With this,
equation (2) is given, from which all the other forms
follow.

When we reflect on the tremendous start which
mechanics had over the other branches of physics, it
is not to be wondered at that the attempt was always
made to apply the notions of that science wherever
this was possible. Thus the notion of mass, for ex-
ample, was imitated by Coulomb in the notion of
quantity of electricity. In the further development
of the theory of electricity, the notion of work was
likewise immediately introduced in the theory of po-
tential, and heights of electrical level were measured
by the work of unit of quantity raised to that level.
But with this the preceding equation with all its con-
sequences is given for electrical energy. The case with
the other energies was similar.


174 OA' THE CONSEKVATJON OF ENERGY.

Thermal energy, however, appears as a special
case. Only by the peculiar experiments mentioned
could it be discovered that heat is an energy. But the
measure of this energy by Black's quantity of heat is
the outcome of fortuitous circumstances. In the first
place, the accidental slight variability of the capacity
for heat c with the temperature, and the accidental
slight deviation of the usual thermometrical scales
from the scale derived from the tensions of gases, brings
it about that the notion " quantity of heat " can be set
up and that the quantity of heat et corresponding to a
difference of temperature / is nearly proportional to
the energy of the heat. It is a. quite accidental his-
torical circumstance that Amontons hit upon the idea
of measuring temperature by the tension of a gas. It
is certain in this that he did not think of the work of
the heat.* But the numbers standing for tempera-
ture, thus, are made proportional to the tensions of
gases, that is, to the work done by gases, with other-
wise equal changes of volume. It thus happens that
temperature heights and level heights of work are pro-
portional to one another.

If properties of the thermal condition varying
greatly from the tensions of gases had been chosen,
this relation would have assumed very complicated
forms, and the agreement between heat and the other
energies above considered would not subsist. It is


very instructive to reflect upon this point. A natural
law, therefore, is not implied in the conformity of the
behavior of the energies, but this conformity is rather
conditioned by the uniformity of our modes of con-
ception and is also partly a matter of good fortune.

VI. THE DIFFERENCES OF THE ENERGIES AND THE
LIMITS OF THE PRINCIPLE OF ENERGY.

Of every quantity of heat Q which does work iii a
reversible process (one unaccompanied by loss) be-
tween the absolute temperatures T^, T^, only the por-
tion


is transformed into work, while the remainder is trans-
ferred to the lower temperature-level T^. This trans-
ferred portion can, upon the reversal of the process,
with the same expenditure of work, again be brought
back to the level T^. But if the process is not rever-
sible, then more heat than in the foregoing case flows
to the lower level, and the surplus can no longer be
brought back to the higher level T^ without some spe-
cial expenditure. W. Thomson (1852), accordingly,
drew attention to the fact, that in all non- reversible,
that is, in all real thermal processes, quantities of heat
are lost for mechanical work, and that accordingly a
dissipation or waste of mechanical energy is taking
place. In all cases, heat is only partially transformed
into work, but frequently work is wholly transformed


176 ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

into heat. Hence, a tendency exists towards a diminu-
tion of the mechanical energy and towards an increase
of the thermal energy of the world.

For a simple, closed cyclical process, accompanied
by no loss, in which the quantity of heat Q^ is taken
from the level T^, and the quantity Q^ is deposited
upon the level T'^, the following relation, agreeably to
equation (2), exists,

-^+^ = 0.

Similarly, for any number of compound reversible
cycles Clausius finds the algebraical sum

and supposing the temperature to change continuously,

/f-» w

Here the elements of the quantities of heat deducted
from a given level are reckoned negative, and the ele-
ments imparted to it, positive. If the process is not
reversible, then expression (4), which Clausius calls
entropy, increases, fn actual practice this is always
the case, and Clausius finds himself led to the state-
ment :

1. That the energy of the world remains constant.

2. That the entropy of the world tends toward a
maximum.

Once we have noted the above -indicated conform-
ity in the behavior of different energies, the peculiarity


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

of thermal energy here mentioned must strike us.
Whence is this pecuharity derived, for, generally every
energy passes only partly into another form, which is
also true of thermal energy? The explanation will be
found in the following.

Every transformation of a special kind of energy^
is accompanied with a fall of potential of that particu-
lar kind of energy, including heat. But whilst for the
other kinds of energy a transformation and therefore a
loss of energy on the part of the kind sinking in po-
tential is connected with the fall of the potential, with
heat the case is different. Heat can suffer a fall of
potential without sustaining a loss of energy, at least
according to the customary mode of estimation. If a
weight sinks, it must create perforce kinetic energy,
or heat, or some other form of energy. Also, an elec-
trical charge cannot suffer a fall of potential without
loss of energy, i. e., without transformation. But heat
can pass with a fall of temperature to a body of greater
capacity and the same thermal energy still be pre-
served, so long as we regard every quantity of heat as
energy. This it is that gives to heat, besides its
property of energ}', in many cases the character of a
material substance, or quantity.

If we look at the matter in an unprejudiced light,
we must ask if there is any scientific sense or purpose
in still considering as energy a quantity of heat that
can no longer be transformed into mechanical work,
(for example, the heat of a closed equably warmed


178 ON THE COXSERVATION OF ENERGY.

material system). The principle of energy certainly
plays in this case a wholly superfluous rule, which is
assigned to it only from fiabit.* To maintain the prin-
ciple of energy in the face of a knowledge of the dissi-
pation or waste of mechanical energy, in the face of
the increase of entropy is equivalent almost to the
liberty which Black took when he regarded the heat
of liquefaction as still present but latent. f It is to be
remarked further, that the expressions " energy of the
world" and "entropy of the world" are slightly per-
meated with scholasticism. Energy and entropy are
metrical notions. What meaning can there be in ap'
plying these notions to a case in which they are not
applicable, in which their values are not determin-
able?

If we could really determine the entropy of the
world it would represent a true, absolute measure of
time. In this way is best seen the utter tautology of
a statement that the entropy of the world increases
with the time. Time, and the fact that certain changes
take place only in a definite sense, are one and the
same thing.


pBien


1 Aoitlysis o/lif Srnsiiitni. Jena. iSSB: En^Ilsb traoaUlian.


■ S97.


Iter ic


rminolouy appears bighly desiiBblo in Ihe pl.<:e of ibe usi»l


bEBO


clearly eipressEd by F.Wald (lOtk)), We should call Ihe work


hile lb


1 work which can be aclua/fy performed in the pasaage of a


bUcb


I ths


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


Vn, THE SOURCES OF THE PRINCIPLE OF ENERGY.

We are now prepared to answer the question, What
are the sources of the principle o£ energy ? All knowl-
edge of nature is derived in the last instance from ex-
perience. In this sense they are right who look upon
the principle of energy as a result of experience.

Experience teaches that the sense-elements a^yS. . . .
into which the world may be decomposed, are subject
to change. It tells us further, that certain of these
elements are connected with other elements, so that they
appear and disappear together; or, that the appear-
ance of the elements of one class is connected with the
disappearance of the elements of the other class. .We
will avoid here the notions of cause and effect be-
cause of their obscurity and equivocalness. The re-
sult of experience maybe expressed as follows: The
sensuous elements ef the world {ut/3y6. . . .) show them-
selves to be interdependent. This interdependence is
best represented by some such conception as is in
geometry that of the mutual dependence of the sides
and angles of a triangle, only much more varied and

As an example, we may take a mass of gas enclosed
in a cylinder and possessed of a definite volume (a),
which we change by a pressure {y3) on the piston, at
the same time feeling the cylinder with our hand and


receiving a sensation of heat {y"). Increase of pres-
sure diminishes the volume and increases the sensa-
tioD of heat.

The various facts of experience are not in all re-
spects alike. Their common sensuous elements are
placed in relief by a process of abstraction and thus
impressed upon the memory. In this way the expres-
sion isobtained of the features of «^r«OTif«^ of extensive
groups of facts. The simplest sentence which we can
utter is, by the very nature of language, an abstraction
of this kind. But account must also be taken of the
difference! of related facts. Facts may be so nearly re-
lated as to contain the same kind oi a 0y . . ., but the
relation be such that the a^y . . . ol the one difier
from the a fly ... of the other only by the number of
equal parts into which they can be divided. Such
being the case, if rules can be given for deducing/rr^M
one another the numbers which are the measures of
these apy ..., then we possess in such rules the most
general expression of a group of facts, as also that ex-
pression which corresponds to all its differences. This
is the goal of quantitative investigation.

If this goal be reached what we have found is that
between the a^y.. . of a group of facts, or better, be-
tween the numbers which are their measures, a num-
ber of equations exists. The simple fact of change
brings it about that the number of these equations
must be smaller than the number of the ctfiy . . . If
the former be smaller by one than the latter, then one


4


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY. i8i

portion of the a /? y ... is Ba/yac^ determined by the

other portion.

The quest of relations of this last kind is the most
important function of special experimental research,
because we are enabled by it to complete in thought
facts that are only partly given. It is self-evident that
only experience can ascertain that between the afty ■ • ■
relations exist and of what kind they are. Further,
only experience can tell that the relations that exist
between the afiy ■ ■ ^^^ such that changes of them
can be reversed. If this were not the fact all occasion
for the enunciation of the principle of energy, as is
easily seen, would be wanting. In experience, there-
fore, is buried the ultimate well-spring of all knowl-
edge of nature, and consequently, in this sense, also
the ultimate source of the principle of energy.

But this does not exclude the fact that the princi-
ple of energy has also a logical root, as wilt now be
shown. Let us assume on the basis of experience that
one group of sensuous elements a0y. . . determines
uniquely another group X}iv... Experience further
teaches that changes of tx^y . . . can be reversed. It
is then a logical consequence of this observation, that
every time that a0y.. . assume the same values this
is also the case with X fiv. . . Or, that purely period-
ical changes of a§y... can produce no permanent
changes of Xjiv... If the group \)iv... is a me-
chanical group, then a perpetual motion is excluded.


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


It will be said that this is a vicious circle, which
we will grant. But psychologically, the situation is
essentially different, whether I think simply of the
unique determination and reversibility of events, or
whether I exclude a perpetual motion. The attention
takes in the two cases different directions and diffuses
light over difierent sides of the question, which logi-
cally of course are necessarily connected.

Surely that firm, logical setting of the thoughts no-
ticeable in the great inquirers, Stevinus, Galileo, and
the rest, which, consciously or instinctively, was sup-
ported by a fine feeling for the slightest contra dictions,
has no other purpose than to limit the bounds of
thought and so exempt it from the possibility of error.
In this, therefore, the logical root of the principle of
excluded perpetual motion is given, namely, in that
universal conviction which existed even before the de-
velopment of mechanics and co-operated in that de-
velopment-
It is perfectly natural that the principle o[ excluded
perpetual motion should have been first developed in
the simple domain of pure mechanics. Towards the
transference of that principle into the domain of gen-
eral physics the idea contributed much that all phys-
ical phenomena are mechanical phenomena. But the
foregoing discussion shows how little essential this
notion is. The issue really involved is the recognition
of a general interconnexion of nature. This once es-
tablished, we see with Carnot that it is indifierent


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.

whether the mechanical laws are broken directly or
circuit ously.

The principle of the excluded perpetual motion is
very closely related to the modern principle of energy,
but it is not identical with it, for the latter is to be
deduced from the former only by means of a definite
formal conception. As may be seen from the preceding
exposition, the perpetual motion can be excluded with-
out our employing or possessing the notion of work.
The modern principle of energy results primarily from
a substantial conception of work and of every change
of physical condition which by being reversed pro-
duces work. The strong need of such a conception,
which is by no means necessary, but in a formal sense
is very convenient and lucid, is exhibited in the case
of J. R, Mayer and Joule. It was before remarked
that this conception was suggested to both inquirers
by the observation that both the production of heat
and the production of mechanical work were connected
with an expenditure of substance. Mayer says : "Ex
nihilo nil fit," and in another place, "The creation or
destruction of a force (work) lies without the province
of human activity." In Joule we find this passage:
" It is manifestly d^jur^ to suppose that the powers
with which God has endowed matter can be destroyed. "

Some writers have observed in such statements the
attempt at a metaphysical establishment of the doctrine
of energy. But we see in them simply the formal need
qI a simple, clear, and living grasp of the facts, which


164


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY.


receives its development in practical and technical life,
and which we carry over, as best we can, into the
province of science. As a fact, Mayer writes to Grie-
singer ; "If, finally, you ask me how I became involved
in the whole affair, my answer is simply this : Engaged
during a sea voyage almost exclusively with the study
of physiology, I discovered the new theory for the
sufficient reason that I vividly felt the need of it.'"

The substantial conception of work (energy) is by
no means a necessary one. And it is far from true that
the problem is solved with the recognition of the need
of such a conception. Rather let us see how Mayer
gradually endeavored to satisfy that need. He first
regards quantity of motion, or momemtum, mv, as the
equivalent of work, and did not light, until later, on
the notion of living force {mv^/2). In the province
of electricity he was unable to assign the expression
which is the equivalent of work. This was done later
by Helmholtz. The formal need, therefore, is first
present, and our conception of nature is subsequently
gradually adapted to it.

The laying bare of the experimental, logical, and
formal root of the present principle of energy will per-
haps contribute much to the removal of the mysticism
which still clings to this principle. With respect to
our formal need of a very simple, palpable, substan-
tial conception of the processes in our environment, it
remains an open question how far nature corresponds
to that need, or how far we can satisfy it. In one


ON THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY, 185

phase of the preceding discussions it would seem as
if the substantial notion of the principle of energy, like
Black's material conception of heat, has its natural
limits in facts, beyond which it can only be artificially
adhered to.


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF
PHYSICAL INQUIRY.*


WHEN the human mind, with its limited powers,
attempts to mirror in itself the rich life of the
world, of which it is itself only a small part, and which
it can never hope to exhaust, it has every reason for
proceeding economically. Hence that tendency, ex-
pressed in the philosophy of all times, to compass by
a few organic thoughts the fundamental features of
reality. " Life understands not death, nor death life."
So spake an old Chinese philosopher. Yet in his un-
ceasing desire to diminish the boundaries of the in-
comprehensible, man has always been engaged in at-
tempts to understand death by life and life by death.
Among the ancient civilised peoples, nature was
tilled with demons and spirits having the feelings and
desires of men. In all essential features, this animistic
view of nature, as Tylorf has aptly termed jt, is shared
in common by the fetish- worshipper of modern Africa


t/VimiVAu (Mhm,


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS. 187

and the most advanced nations of antiquity. As a
theory of the world it has never completely disap-
peared. The monotheism of the Christians never fully
overcame it, no more than did that of the Jews. In
the belief in witchcraft and in the superstitions of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the centuries of
the rise of natural science, it assumed frightful path-
ological dimensions. Whilst Stevinus, Kepler, and
Galileo were slowly rearing the fabric of modern phys-
ical science, a cruel and relentless war was waged
with firebrand and rack against the devils that glowered
from every comer. To-day even, apart from all sur-
vivals of that period, apart from the traces of fetish-
ism which still inhere in our physical concepts,* those
very ideas still covertly lurk in the practices of modem
spiritualism.

By the side of this animistic conception of the
world, we meet from time to time, in different forms,
from Democritus to the present day, another view,
which likewise claims exclusive competency to com-
prehend the universe. This view may be character-
ised as W\e: physko-meekanical view of the world. To-
day, that view holds, indisputably, the first place in the
thoughts of men, and determines the ideals and the
character of our times. The coming of the mind of
man into the full consciousness of its powers, in the
eighteenth century, was a period of genuine disillu-
sionment. It produced the splendid precedent of a life

•Tylor,/or.«V.


l88 THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.

really worthy of man, competent to overcome the old
barbarism in the practical fields of life ; it created the
Critique of Pure Reason, which banished into the realm
of shadows the sham-ideas of the old metaphysics ; it
pressed into the hands of the mechanical philosophy
the reins which it now holds.

The oft-quoted words of the great Laplace,* which
I will now give, have the ring of a jubilant toast to
the scientific achievements of the eighteenth century :
"A mind to which were given for a single instant all
the forces of nature and the mutual positions of all its
masses, if it were otherwise powerful enough to sub-
ject these problems to analysis, could grasp, with a
single formula, the motions of the largest masses as
well as of the smallest atoms ; nothing would be un-
certain for it ; the future and the past would lie re-
vealed before its eyes." In writing these words, La-
place, as we know, had also in mind the atoms of the
brain. That idea has been expressed more forcibly
still by some of his followers, and it is not too much
to say that Laplace's ideal is substantially that of the
great majority of modern scientists.

Gladly do we accord to the creator of the Meca-
nigue ceUste the sense of lofty pleasure awakened in
him by the great success of the Enlightenment, to
which we too owe our intellectual freedom. But to-
day, with minds undisturbed and before new tasks, it


\ in IhiB toimiiUtiDii.


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OP PHYSICS. 189

becomes physical scieoce to secure itself against self-
deception by a careful study of its character, so that
it can pursue with greater sureness its true objects.
If I step, therefore, beyond the narrow precincts of my
specialty in this discussion, to trespass on friendly
neighboring domains, I may plead in my excuse that
the subject-matter of knowledge is common to all do-
mains of research, and that fixed, sharp lines of de-
marcation cannot be drawn.

The belief in occult magic powers of nature has
gradually died away, but in its place a new belief has
arisen, the belief in the magical power of science.
Science throws her treasures, not like a capricious
fairy into the laps of a favored few, but into the laps
of all humanity, with a lavish extravagance that no
legend ever dreamt of ! Not without apparent justice,
therefore, do her distant admirers impute to her the
power of opening up unfathomable abysses of nature,
to which the senses cannot penetrate. Yet she who
came to bring light into the world, can well dispense
with the darkness of mystery, and with pompous show,
which she needs neither for the justification of her
aims nor for the adornment of her plain achievements.

The homely beginnings of science will best reveal
to us Its simple, unchangeable character. Man ac-
quires his first knowledge of nature half -consciously
and automatically, from an instinctive habit of mimick-
ing and forecasting facts in thought, of supplementing
sluggish experience with the swift wings of thought.


190 THE ECONOMICAL NATUKB OF PHYSICS.

at first ooly for his material welfare. When he hears
a noise in the underbrush he constructs there, just as
the animal does, the enemy which he fears \ when he
sees a certaiu rind he forms mentally the image of the
fruit which he is in search of j just as we mentally as-
sociate a certain kind of matter with a certain line in
the spectrum or an electric spark with the friction of a
piece of glass. A knowledge of causality in this form
certainly reaches far below the level of Schopenhauer's
pet dog, to whom it was ascribed. It probably exists
in the whole animal world, and confirms that great
thinker's statement regarding the will which created
the intellect for its purposes. These primitive psych-
ical functions are rooted in the economy of our organ-
ism not less firmly than are motion and digestion.
Who would deny that we feel in them, too, the ele-
mental power of a long practised logical and physio-
logical activity, bequeathed to us as an heirloom from
our forefathers?

Such primitive ^ts of knowledge constitute today
the solidest foundation of scientific thought. Our in-
stinctive knowledge, as we shall briefly call it, by vir-
tue of the conviction that we have consciously and
intentionally contributed nothing to its formation, con-
fronts us with an authority and logical power which
consciously acquired knowledge even from familiar
sources and of easily tested falhbility can never possess.
All so-called axioms are such instinctive knowledge.
Not consciously gained knowledge alone, but powerful


THE ECONOMJCAL NA TURB OF PHYSICS.


intellectual instinct, joined with vast conceptive powers,
constitute the great inquirer. The greatest advances
of science have always consisted in some successful
formulation, in clear,ab5tract, and communicable terms,
of what was instinctively known long before, and of
thus making it the permanent property of humanity.
By Newton's principle of the equality of pressure and
counterpressure, whose truth all before him had felt, but
which no predecessor had abstractly formulated, me-
chanics was placed by a single stroke on a higher level.
Our statement might also be historically justified by
examples from the scientific labors of Stevinus, S.
Carnot, Faraday, J. R. Mayer, and others.

All this, however, is merely the soil from which
science starts. The first real beginnings of science
appear in society, particularly in the manual arts,
where the necessity for the communication of experi-
ence arises. Here, where some new discovery is to
be described and related, the compulsion is first felt of
clearly defining in consciousness the important and
essential features of that discovery, as many writers
can testify. The aim of instruction is simply the sav-
ing of experience ; the labor of one man is made to
take the place of that of another.

The most wonderful economy of communication is
found in language. Words are comparable to type,
which spare the repetition of written signs and thus
serve a multitude of purposes ; or to the few sounds
of which our numberless different words are composed.


igi THE ECONOMICAL NATURE. OF PHYSICS.

Language, with its helpmate, conceptual thought, by
fixing the essential and rejecting the unessential, con-
structs its rigid pictures of the fluid world on the plan
of a mosaic, at a sacrifice of exactness and fidelity but
with a saving of tools and labor. Like a piano-player
with previously prepared sounds, a speaker excites in
his listener thoughts previously prepared, but fitting
many cases, which respond to the speaker's summons
with alacrity and little effort.

The principles which a prominent poUtical econom-
ist, E. Hermann,* has formulated for the economy of
the industrial arts, are also applicable to the ideas of
common life and of science. The economy of language
is augmented, of course, in the terminology of science.
With respect to the economy of written intercourse
there is scarcely a doubt that science itself will realise
that grand old dream of the philosophers of a Uni-
versal Real Character. That time is not far distant.
Our numeral characters, the symbols of mathematical
analysis, chemical symbols, and musical notes, which
might easily be supplemented by a system of color-
signs, together with some phonetic alphabets now in
use, are all beginnings in this direction. The logical
extension of what we have, joined with a use of the
ideas which the Chinese ideography furnishes us, will
render the special invention and promulgation of a
Universal Character wholly superfluous.

The communication of scientific knowledge always


THE. ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.


involves description, that is, a mimetic reproduction
of facts in thought, the object of which is to replace
and save the trouble of new experience. Again, to
save the labor of instruction and of acquisition, con-
cise, abridged description is sought. This is really ail
that natural laws are. Knowing the value of thfi ac-
celeration of gravity, and Galileo's laws of descent, we
possess simple and compendious directions for repro-
ducing in thought all possible motions of falling bod-
ies, A formula of this kind is a complete substitute
for a full table of motions of descent, because by means
of the formula the data of such a table can be easily
constructed at a moment's notice without the least
burdening of the memory.

No human mind could comprehend all the individ-
ual cases of refraction. But knowing the index of re-
fraction for the two media presented, and the familiar
law of the sines, we can easily reproduce or fill out in
thought every conceivable case of refraction. The ad-
vantage here consists in the disburdening of the mem-
ory; an end immensely furthered by the written preser-
vation of the natural constants. More than this com-
prehensive and condensed report about facts is not
contained in a natural law of this sort. In reality, the
law always contains less than the fact itself, because it
does not reproduce the fact as a whole but only in
that aspect of it which is important for us, the rest be-
ing either intentionally or from necessity omitted.
Natural laws may be likened to intellectual type of a


194 77/^ ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.

higher order, partly movable, partly stereotyped, which
last on new editions of experience may become down-
right impediments.

When we look over a province of facts for the first
time, it appears to us diversified, irregular, confused,
full of contradictions. We first succeed in grasping
only single facts, unrelated with the others. The
province, as we are wont to say, is not clear. By and
by we discover the simple, permanent elements of the
mosaic, out of which we can mentally construct the
whole province. When we have reached a point where
we can discover everywhere the same facts, we no
longer feel lost in this province ; we comprehend it
without effort ; it is explained for us.

Let me illustrate this by an example. As soon as
we have grasped the fact of the rectilinear propagation
of light, the regular course of our thoughts stumbles
at the phenomena of refraction and diffraction. As soon
as we have cleared matters up by our index of refrac-
tion we discover that a special index is necessary for
each color. Soon after we have accustomed ourselves
to the fact that light added to light increases its in-
tensity, we suddenly come across a case of total dark-
ness produced by this cause. Ultimately, however,
we see everywhere in the overwhelming multifarious-
ness of optical phenomena the fact of the spatial and
temporalperiodicity of light, with its velocity of propa-
gation dependent on the medium and the period. This
tendency of obtaining a survey of a given province


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.

with the least expenditure of thought, and of repre-
senting all its facts by some one single mental process,
may be justly termed an economical one.

The greatest perfection of mental economy is at-
tained in that science which has reached the highest
formal development, and which is widely employed in
physical inquiry, namely, in mathematics. Strange as
it may sound, the power of mathematics rests upon
its evasion of all unnecessary thought and on its won-
derful saving of mental operations. Even those ar-
rangement-signs whi<^ we call numbers are a system
of marvellous simplicity and economy. When we em-
ploy the multiplication -table in multiplying numbers
of several places, and so use the results of old opera-
tions of counting instead of performing the whole of
each operation anew ; when we consult our table of
logarithms, replacing and saving thus new calcula-
tions by old ones already performed j when we employ
determinants instead of always beginning afresh the
solution of a system of equations ; when we resolve
new integral expressions into familiar old integrals;
we see in this simply a feeble reflexion of the intel-
lectual activity of a Lagrange or a Cauchy, who, with
the keen discernment of a great military commander,
substituted for new operations whole hosts of old ones.
No one will dispute me when I say that the most ele-
mentary as well as the highest mathematics are eco-
nomically-ordered experiences of counting, put in forms
ready for use.


196 THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.


In algebra we perform, as far as possible, all nu-
merical operations which are identical in forra once
(or all, so that only a remnant of work is left for the
individual case. The use of the signs of algebra and
analysis, which are merely symbols of operations to
be performed, is due to the observation that we can
materially disburden the mind in this way and spare
its powers for more important and more difificult du-
ties, by imposing all mechanical operations upon the
hand. One result of this method, which attests its
economical character, is the construction of calculating
machines. The mathematician Babbage, the inventor
of the difference -engine, was probably the first who
clearly perceived this fact, and he touched upon it,
although only cursorily, in his work, The Economy of
Manufactures and Machinery.

The student of mathematics often finds it hard to
throw off the uncomfortable feeling that his science, in
the person of his pencil, surpasses him in intelligence,
— an impression which the great Euler confessed he
often could not get rid of. This feeling finds a sort of
justification when we reflect that the majority of the
ideas we deal with were conceived by others, often
centuries ago. In great measure it is really the intelli-
gence of other people that confronts us in science.
The moment we look at matters in this light, the un-
canniness and magical character of our impressions
cease, especially when we remember that we can think
over again at will any one of those alien thoughts.


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.


Physics is experience, arranged in economical or-
der. By this order not only is a broad and comprehen-
sive view of what we have rendered possible, but also
the defects and the needful alterations are made mani-
fest, exactly as in a well-kept household. Physics
shares with mathematics the advantages of succinct
description and of brief, compendious definition, which
precludes confusion, even in ideas where, with no ap-
parent burdening of the brain, hosts of others are con-
tained. Of these ideas the rich contents can be pro-
duced at any moment and displayed in their full per-
ceptual light. Think of the swarm of well-ordered no-
tions pent up in the idea of the potential. Is it wonder-
ful that ideas containing so much finished labor should
be easy to work with?

Our first knowledge, thus, is a product of the
economy of self-preservation. By communication, the
experience of many persons, individually acquired at
first, is collected in one. The communication of
knowledge and the necessity which every one feels of
managing his stock of experience with the least expen-
diture of thought, compel us to put our knowledge in
economical forms. But here we have a clue which
strips science of all its mystery, and shows us what its
power really is. With respect to specific results it
yields us nothing that we could not reach in a suffi-
ciently long time without methods. There is no prob-
lem in all mathematics that cannot be solved by direct
counting. But with the present implements of mathe-


igS THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF FHYSICS.

matics many operations of counting can be performed
in a few minutes which without mathematical methods
would take a lifetime. Just as a single human being,
restricted wholly to the fruits of his own labor, could
never amass a fortune, but on the contrary the accumu-
lation of the labor of many men in the hands of one is
the foundation of wealth and power, so, also, no knowl-
edge worthy of the name can be gathered up in a
single human mind limited to the span of a human life
and gifted only with finite powers, except by the most
exquisite economy of thought and by the careful
amassment of the economically ordered experience of
thousands of co-workers. What strikes us here as the
fruits of sorcery are simply the rewards of excellent
housekeeping, as are the like results in civil life. But
the business of science has this advantage over every
other enterprise, that from Us amassment of wealth no
one suffers the least loss. This, too, is its blessing,
its freeing and saving power.

The recognition of the economical character of
science will now help us, perhaps, to understand bet-
ter certain physical notions.

Those elements of an event which we call "cause
and eSect " are certain salient features of it, which are
important for its mental reproduction. Their impor-
tance wanes and the attention is transferred to fresh
characters the moment the event or experience in
question becomes familiar. If the connexion of such
features strikes us as a necessary one, it is simply be-


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS. 199

cause the interpolation of certain intermediate links
with which we are very familiar, and which possess,
therefore, higher authority for us, is often attended
with success in our explanations. That ready experience
fixed in the mosaic of the mind with which we meet
new events, Kant calls an innate concept of the under-
standing (^Verstandesbegriff).

The grandest principles of physics, resolved into
(heir elements, differ in no wise from the descriptive
principles of the natural historian. The question,
"Why?" which is always appropriate where the ex-
planation of a contradiction is concerned, like all proper
habitudes of thought, can overreach itself and be asked
where nothing remains to be understood. Suppose we
were to attribute to nature the property of producing
like effects in like circumstances; just these like cir-
cumstances we should not know how to find. Nature
exists once only. Our schematic mental imitation alone
produces like events. Only in the mind, therefore, does
the mutual dependence of certain features exist.

All our efforts to mirror the world in thought would
be futile if we found nothing permanent in the varied
changes of things. It is this that impels us to form the
notion of substance, the source of which is not differ-
ent from that of the modern ideas relative to the con-
servation of energy. The history of physics furnishes
numerous examples of this impulse in almost all fields,
and pretty examples of it may be traced back to the
nursery, "Where does the light go to when it is put


aoo THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.

out? " asks the child. The sudden shrivelling up of a
hydrogen balloon is inexplicable to a child; it looks
everywhere for the large body which was just there
but is now gone.

Where does heat come from ? Where does heat
go to ? Such childish questions in the mouths of ma-
ture men shape the character of a century.

In mentally separating a body from the changeable
environment in which it moves, what we really do
is to extricate a group of sensations on which our
thoughts are fastened and which is of relatively greater
stability than the others, from the stream of all our
sensations. Absolutely unalterable this group is not.
Now this, now that member of it appears and disap-
pears, or is altered. In its full identity it never re-
curs. Yet the sum of its constant elements as compared
with the sum of its changeable ones, especially if we
consider the continuous character of the transition, is
always so great that for the purpose in hand the former
usually appear sufficient to determine the body's iden-
tity. But because we can separate from the group
every single member without the body's ceasing to be
for us the same, we are easily led to believe that after
abstracting all the members something additional
would remain. It thus comes to pass that we form
the notion of a substance distinct from its attributes,
of a thing-in-itself, whilst our sensations are regarded
merely as symbols or indications of the properties of
this thing-in-itself. But it would be much better to


A


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS. ^oi

say that bodies or things are compendious mental sym-
bols for groups of sensations — ^symbols that do not ex-
ist outside of thought. Thus, the merchant regards
the labels of his boxes merely as indexes of their con-
tents, and not the contrary. He invests their con-
tents, not their labels, with real value. The same
economy which induces us to analyse a group and to
establish special signs for its component parts, parts
which also go to make up other groups, may Hkewise
induce us to mark out by some single symbol a whole
group.

On the old Egyptian monuments we see objects
represented which do not reproduce a single visual
impression, but are composed of various impressions.
The heads and the legs of the figures appear in pro-
file, the head-dress and the breast are seen from the
front, and so on. We have here, so to speak, a mean
view of the objects, in forming which the sculptor has
retained what he deemed essential, and neglected what
he thought indifterent. We have living exemplifica-
tions of the processes put into stone on the walls of
these old temples, in the drawings of our children, and
we also observe a faithful analogue of them in the for-
mation of ideas in our own minds. Only in virtue of
some such facility of view as that indicated, are we
allowed to speak of a body. When we speak of a cube
with trimmed corners— a figure which is not a cube —
we do so from a natural instinct of economy, which
prefers to add to an old familiar conception a correc-


203 THE ECONOMICAL NA TURE OF PHYSICS.

tion instead of forming an entirely new one. This is
the process of all judgment.

The crude notion of "body" can no more stand
the test of analysis than can the art of the Egyptians
or that of our httle children. The physicist who sees
a body flexed, stretched, melted, and vaporised, cuts
up this body into smaller permanent parts ; the chem-
ist splits it up into elements. Yet even an element is
not unalterable. Take sodium. When warmed, the
white, silvery mass becomes a liquid, which, when the
heat is increased and the air shut out, is transformed
into a violet vapor, and on the heat being still more
increased glows with a yellow light. If the name so-
dium is still retained, it is because of the continuous
character of the transitions and from a necessary in-
stinct of economy. By condensing the vapor, the
white metal may be made to reappear. Indeed, even
after the metal is thrown into water and has passed
into sodium hydroxide, the vanished properties may
by skilful treatment still be made to appear ; just as a
moving body which has passed behind a column and
is lost to view for a moment may make its appearance
after a time. It is unquestionably very convenient
always to have ready the name and thought for a
group of properties wherever that group by any possi-
bility can appear. But more than a compendious eco-
nomical symbol for these phenomena, that name and
thought is not. It would be a mere empty word for
one in whom it did not awaken a large group of well-


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS. 203

ordered sense-impressions. And the same is true o£
the molecules and atoms into which the chemical ele-
ment is still further analysed.

True, it is customary to regard the conservation of
weight, or, more precisely, the conservation of mass,
as a direct proof of the constancy of matter. But this
proof is dissolved, when we go to the bottom of it,
into such a multitude of instrumental and intellectual
operations, that in a sense it will be found to consti-
tute simply an equation which our ideas in imitating
facts have to satisfy. That obscure, mysterious lump
which we involuntarily add in thought, we seek for in
vain outside the mind.

It is always, thus, the crude notion of substance
that is slipping unnoticed into science, proving itself
constantly insufficient, and ever under the necessity of
being reduced to smaller and smaller wo rid -particles.
Here, as elsewhere, the lower stage is not rendered
indispensable by the higher which is built upon it, no
more than the simplest mode of locomotion, walking,
is rendered superfluous by the most elaborate means of
transportation. Body, as a compound of light and 1
touch sensations, knit together by sensations of space, '
must be as familiar to the physicist who seeks it, as to
the animal who hunts its prey. But the student of the
theory of knowledge, like the geologist and the astron-
omer, must be permitted to reason back from the forms
which are created before his eyes to others which he
finds ready made for him.


All physical ideas and principles are succinct di-
rections, frequently involving subordinate directions,
for the employment of economically classified expe-
riences, ready for use. Their conciseness, as also the
fact that their contents are rarely exhibited in full,
often invests them with the semblance of independent
existence. Poetical myths regarding such ideas, — for
example, that of Time, the producer and devourer of
all things, — do not concern us here. We need only
remind the reader that even Newton speaks of an ad-
solute time independent of all phenomena, and of an
absolute space — views which even Kant did not shake
off, and which are often seriously entertained to-day.
For the natural inquirer, determinations of time are
merely abbreviated statements of the dependence of
one event upon another, and nothing more. When
we say the acceleration of a freely falling body is 9-810
metres per second, we mean the velocity of the body
with respect to the centre of the earth is g-Sio metres
greater when the earth has performed an additional
86400th part of its rotation — a fact which itself can be
determined only by the earth's relation to other heav-
enly bodies. Again, in velocity is contained simply a
relation of the position of a body to the position of
the earth.* Instead of referring events to the earth
we may refer them to a clock, or even to our internal
sensation of time. Now, because all are connected,

■II is clBiTtrom ibia thai nil ao-CBlled eltmenlur <dlS*ientl*l] liwi in-


THE JiCONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS. 205

and each may be made the measure of the rest, the il-
lusion easily arises that time has significance inde-
pendently of all. *

The aim of research is the discovery of the equa-
tions which subsist between the elements of phenom-
ena. The equation of an ellipse expresses the universal
conceivable relation between its co-ordinates, of which
only the real values have geometrical significance.
Similarly, the equations between the elements of phe-
nomena express a universal, mathematically conceiv-
able relation. Here, however, for many values only
certain directions of change are physically admissible.
As in the ellipse only certain values satisfying the
equation are realised, so in the physical world only
certain changes of value occur. Bodies are always ac-
celerated towards the earth. Differences of tempera-
ture, left to themselves, always grow less ; and so on.
Similarly, with respect to space, mathematical and
physiological researches have shown that the space of
experience is simply an actual case of many conceiv-
able cases, about whose peculiar properties experience
alone can instruct us. The elucidation which this idea
diffuses cannot be questioned, despite the absurd uses
to which it has been put.

Let us endeavor now to summarise the results of


m which bcBi Betvwl ai


ao6 77/i' ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS^

our survey. In the economical schematism of science '
lie both its strength and its weakness. Facts are al-
ways represented at a sacrifice of completeness and
never with greater precision than fits the needs of the
moment. The incongruence between thought and ex-
perience, therefore, will continue to subsist as long as
the two pursue their course side by side ; but it will
be continually diminished.

In reality, the point involved is always the com-
pletion of some partial experience ; the derivation of
one portion of a phenomenon from some other. In
this act our ideas must be based directly upon sensa-
tions. We call this measuring.* The condition of
science, both in its origin and In its application, is a
great relative stability of our environment. What it
teaches us is interdependence. Absolute forecasts,
consequently, have no significance in science. With
great changes in celestial space we should lose our
co-ordinate systems of space and time.

When a geometer wishes to understand the form of
a curve, he first resolves it into small rectilinear ele-
ments. In doing this, however, he is fully aware that
these elements are only provisional and arbitrary de-
vices for comprehending in parts what he cannot com-
prehend as a whole. When the law of the curve is
found he no longer thinks of the elements. Similarly,
it would not become physical science to see in its self-

* MeuDTemeni, in fAci, Is Ihe definlLion of one phenominan by uiotbor


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS. 207

created, changeable, economical tools, molecules and
atoms, realities behind phenomena, forgetful of the
lately acquired sapience of her older sister, philosophy,
in substituting a mechanical mythology for the old
animistic or metaphysical scheme, and thus creating
no end of suppositious problems. The atom must re-
main a tool for representing phenomena, like the
functions of mathematics. Gradually, however, as
the intellect, by contact with its subject-matter, grows
in discipline, physical science will give up its mosaic
play with stones and will seek out the boundaries and
forms of the bed in which the living stream of phe-
nomena flows. The goal which it has set itself is the
simplest and most ecanomi cal ahstract expression of facts.

The question now remains, whether the same
method of research which till now we have tacitly re-
stricted to physics, is also applicable in the psychical
domain. This question will appear superfluous to the
physical inquirer. Our physical and psychical views
spring in exactly the same manner from instinctive
knowledge. We read the thoughts of men in their
acts and facial expressions without knowing how.
Just as we predict the behavior of a magnetic needle
placed near a current by imagining Amp&re's swim-
mer in the current, similarly we predict in thought the
acts and behavior of men by assuming sensations, feel-
ings, and wills similar to our own connected with their
bodies. What we here instinctively perform would


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.


appear to us as one of the subtlest achievements of
science, far outstripping in significance and ingenuity
Ampere's rule of the swimmer, were it not that every
child unconsciously accomplished it. The question
simply is, therefore, to grasp scientifically, that is, by
conceptional thought, what we are already familiar
with from other sources. And here much is to be
accomplished. A long sequence of facts is to be dis-
closed between the physics of expression and move-
ment and feeling and thought.

We hear the question, "But how is it possible to
explain feeling by the motions of the atoms of the
brain ? " Certainly this will never be done, no more
than light or heat will ever be deduced from the law
of refraction. We need not deplore, therefore, the
lack of ingenious solutions of this question. The prob-
lem is not a problem. A child looking over the walls
of a city or of a fort into the moat below sees with
astonishment living people in it, and not knowing of
the portal which connects the wall with the moat, can-
not understand how they could have got down from
the high ramparts. So it is with the notions of phys-
ics. We cannot climb up into the province of psychol-
ogy by the ladder of our abstractions, but we can climb
down into it.

Let us look at the matter without bias. The world
consists of colors, sounds, temperatures, pressures,
spaces, times, and so forth, which now we shall not
call sensations, nor phenomena, because in either term


THE ECONOMICAL NATVHE Of PHYSICS. 209


an arbitrary, one-sided theory is embodied, but simply
elements. The fixing of the flux of these elements,
whether mediately or immediately, is the real object of
physical research. As long as, neglecting our own
body, we employ ourselves with the interdependence
of those groups of elements which, including men and
animals, make up foreign bodies, we are physicists.
For example, we investigate the change of the red
color of a body as produced by a change of illumina-
tion. But the moment we consider the special in-
fluence on the red of the elements constituting our
body, outlined by the well-known perspective with
head invisible, we are at work in the domain of physi-
ological psychology. We close our eyes, and the red
together with the whole visible world disappears.
There exists, thus, in the perspective field of every sense
a portion which exercises on all the rest a different
and more powerful influence than the rest upon one
another. With this, however, all is said. In the light
of this remark, we call all elements, in so far as we re-
gard them as dependent on this special part (our body),
sensations. That the world is our sensation, in this
sense, cannot be questioned. But to make a system
of conduct out of this provisional conception, and to
abide its slaves, is as unnecessary for us as would be
a similar course for a mathematician who, in varying a
series of variables of a function which were previously
assumed to be constant, or in interchanging the inde-


210 THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.

pendent variables, finds his method to be the source
of some very surprising ideas for him.*

If we look at the matter in this unbiassed light it
will appear indubitable that the method of physiologi-
cal psychology is none other than that of physics ;
what is more, that this science is a part of physics.
Its subject-matter is not different from that of phys-
ics. It will unquestionably determine the relations
the sensations bear to the physics of our body. We
have already learned from a member of this academy
(Hering) that in all probability a sixfold manifoldness
of the chemical processes of the visual substance cor-
responds to the sixfold manifoldness of color-sensation,
and a threefold manifoldness of the physiological pro-
cesses to the threefold manifoldness of space-sensa-
tions. The paths of reflex actions and of the will are
followed up and disclosed ; it is ascertained what re-
gion of the brain subserves the function of speech,
what region the function of locomotion, etc. That
which still clings to our body, namely, our thoughts,
will, when those investigations are finished, present no
difficulties new in principle. When experience has
once clearly exhibited these facts and science has


n Ibis calltictio


L


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS. an

marshalled them in economic aod perspicuous order,
there is no doubt that we shall understand them. For
other " understanding " than a mental mastery of facts
never existed. Science does not create facts from facts,
but simply orders known facts.

Let us look, now, a little more closely into the modes
of research of physiological psychology. We have a
very clear idea of how a body moves in the space en-
compassing it. With our optical field of sight we are
very familiar. But we are unable to state, as a rule,
how we have come by an idea, from what corner of
our intellectual field of sight it has entered, or by what
region the impulse to a motion is sent forth. More-
over, we shall never get acquainted with this mental
field of view from self-observation alone. Self-obser-
vation, in conjunction with physiological research,
which seeks out physical connexions, can put this field
of vision in a clear light before us, and will thus first
really reveal to us our inner man.

Primarily, natural science, or physics, in its widest
sense, makes us acquainted with only the firmest con-
nexions of groups of elements. Provisorily, we may
not bestow too much attention on the single constitu-
ents of those groups, if we are desirous of retaining a
comprehensible whole. Instead of equations between
the primitive variables, physics gives us, as much the
easiest course, equations between functions of those
variables. Physiological psychology teaches us how
to separate the visible, the tangible, and the audible


212 THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OE PHYSICS.

from bodies^a labor which is subsequently richly re-
quited, as the division of the subjects of physics well
shows. Physiology further analyses the visible into
light and space sensations ; the first into colors, the
last also into their component parts ; it resolves noises
into sounds, these into tones, and so on. Unquestion-
ably this analysis can be carried much further than it
has been. It will be possible in the end to exhibit the
common elements at the basis of very abstract but
definite logical acts of like form, — elements which the
acute jurist and mathematician, as it were, /mis out,
with absolute certainty, where the uninitiated hears
only empty words. Physiology, in a word, will reveal
to us the true real elements of the world. Physiological
psychology bears to physics in its widest sense a rela-
tion similar to that which chemistry bears to physics
in its narrowest sense. But far greater than the mu-
tual support of physics and chemistry will be that
which natural science and psychology will render each
other. And the results that shall spring from this
union will, in all likelihood, far outstrip those of the
modern mechanical physics.

What those ideas are with which we shall compre-
hend the world when the closed circuit of physical and
psychological facts shall lie complete before us, (that
circuit of which we now see only two disjoined parts,)
cannot be foreseen at the outset of the work. The
men will be found who will see what is right and
will have the courage, instead of wandering in the


THE ECONOMICAL NATURE OF PHYSICS.


intricate paths of logical and historical accident, to
enter on the straight ways to the heights from which
the mighty stream of facts can be surveyed. Whether
the notion which we now call matter will continue to
have a scientific significance beyond the crude pur-
poses of common life, we do not know. But we cer-
tainly shall wonder how colors and tones which were
such innermost parts of us could suddenly get lost in
our physical world of atoms ; how we could be sud-
denly surprised that something which outside us sim-
ply clicked and beat, in our heads should make light
and music ; and how we could ask whether matter can
feel, that is to say, whether a mental symbol for a
group of sensations can feel ?

We cannot mark out in hard and fast lines the
science of the future, but we can foresee that the rigid
walls which now divide man from the world will grad-
ually disappear ; that human beings will not only con-
front each other, but also the entire organic and so-
called lifeless world, with less selfishness and with live-
lier sympathy. Just such a presentiment as this per-
haps possessed the great Chinese philosopher Licius
some two thousand years ago when, pointing to a heap
of mouldering human bones, he said to his scholars in
the rigid, lapidary style of his tongue : ' ' These and I
atone have the knowledge that we neither live nor are
dead."


ON TRANSFORMATION AND ADAPTA-
TION IN SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT,*


TT was towards the close of the sixteenth century
-'- that Galileo with a superb indifference to the dia-
lectic arts and sophistic subtleties of the Schoolmen of
his time, turned the attention of his brilliant mind
to nature. By nature his ideas were transformed and
released from the fetters of inherited prejudice. At
once the mighty revolution was felt, that was therewith
effected in the realm of human thought — felt indeed in
circles far remote and wholly unrelated to the sphere
of science, felt in strata of society that hitherto had
only indirectly recognised the influence of scientific
thought.

■ InKagaral Addrasa, diliveied oa issumlDB ibo Rscioiate of ihe Univer-
sity cil Fugue, October la, 1S33,

The ideapraeemed in this essay is ooLihernowoorroiDole. I have louchod
upon il myself on Bovotal occasions (firsl in 1B67), bul heve never made it Ibe
subject of a [armal disquisilion. Donbllesa. alhers, too, bave Heated it ; il

received, altbouKh known only in an imperfect form from Ibe lecture itsell
and Ibe newspapers, I bave, contraiy to my original intention, decided (o
publisb il. It is not toy ialeolion to tieEpasetaere upon the domain o( biology.
My Btatemeiiti are to be lak^n merely as the eipression of (he fact IbalnaoDS
nn escape ibe Inflaenee of a great and (ar-reacblng Idea.


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.


And how great and how far-reaching that revolu-
tion was ! From the beginniog of the seventeenth cen-
tury till its close we see arising, at least in embryo,
almost all that plays a part in the natural and techni-
cal science of to-daj', almost all that in the two cen-
turies following so wonderfully transformed the facial
appearance of the earth, and all that is moving onward
in process of such mighty evolution to-day. And all
this, the direct result of Galilean ideas, the direct out-
come of that freshly awakened sense for the investiga-
tion of natural phenomena which taught the Tuscan
philosopher to form the concept and the law of falling
bodies from the observation of a falling stone ! Galileo
began his investigations without an implement worthy
of the name ; he measured time in the most primitive
way, by the efflux of water. Yet soon afterwards the
telescope, the microscope, the barometer, the ther-
mometer, the air-pump, the steam-engine, the pendu-
lum, and the electrical machine were invented in rapid
succession. The fundamental theorems of dynamical
science, of optics, of heat, and of electricity were all
disclosed in the century that followed Galileo.

Of scarcely less importance, it seems, was that
movement which was prepared for by the illustrious
biologists of the hundred years just past, and formally
begun by the late Mr. Darwin, Galileo quickened the
sense for the simpler phenomena of inorganic nature.
And with the same simplicity and frankness that
marked the efforts of Galileo, and without the aid of


ai6 ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.

technical or scientific instruments, without physical or
chemical experiment, but solely by the power of
thought and observation, Darwin grasps a new prop-
erty of organic nature — which we may briefly call its
plasticity* With the same directness of purpose, Dar-
win, too, pursues his way. With the same candor
and love of truth, he points out the strength and the
weakness of his demonstrations. With masterly equa-
nimity he holds aloof from the discussion of irrelevant
subjects and wins alike the admiration of his adherents
and of his adversaries.

Scarcely thirty years have elapsedf since Darwin first
propounded the principles of his theory of evolution.


•A[fin«»iKhI«iapp««nl


I isundoubledlylr


uelhaiastr


10 hecedil;f precludes great ca


abililjfot adaplalio


ism (□ be ■ plaslic masB which


il by (omer


inBneacea unlil mm ioflaence


modify l\ : ibe Ktc


property o


flaiUcily will


redily. Analo-


(tons to Ibis Ulhe case of a b


el ol high


coercive force:


(be steel ralains its raapielic


laplacea tbem.


TakealsoabodjlaBioUDn:.


body re.ama the


elocity acq


ired ia {inhtr-


iif«((roin)iheimervalDf tim


just preceding, ei


cep. it be


banRod in lbs


city t^iJa


drr<$n^ was loo


Ibe discm


olthepri


dpleot.««.V.


Darwin 'a


,onlhec<


,mrj. hmdil^i


while the


Pti


cipIeofB


riali(m {AMhJp


Brtp


origiaal


act!


emphasi


ed by Darwin.


be reached opiy by a study ot the
not by these analoftiet. The ei-
3iple relemng to motion, il I am not miBlaken, I Srsl heard, in conversa-
on, from my friend J. Popper, Esq., ofVieime.

Many inquirers look npon the Biabilityot ihe species as something settled,

i1ta"lbeoty." The essential modificalions which Daiwin'eviewa also are
ndeieoioR will be aeon bam ihe works of Wallace [and Weismann], bal mora
ipecially from a book of W. H. Rolph. Bioltgiickr PrMimi. Leipsic, iSSi.
□fortunaiely, (hie last talented inveitigaior is no longer numbered imoai;
le Uvinn-

T Written In isaj.


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION. 217

Yet, already we see his ideas firmly rooted in every
branch of human thought, however remote. Every-
where, in history, in phiiosophy, even in the physical
sciences, we hear the watchwords : heredity, adapta-
tion, selection. We speak of the struggle for existence
among the heavenly bodies and of the struggle for ex-
istence in the world of molecules.*

The impetus given by Galileo to scientific thought
was marked in every direction; thus, his pupil, Bo-
retli, founded the school of exact medicine, from
whence proceeded even distinguished mathematicians.
And now Darwinian ideas, in the same way, are ani-
mating all provinces of research. It is true, nature is
not made up of two distinct parts, the inorganic and
the organic; nor must these two divisions be treated
perforce by totally distinct methods. Many sides, how-
ever, nature has. Nature is like a thread in an intricate
tangle, which must be followed and traced, now from
this point, now from that. But we must never imagine,
— and this physicists have learned from Faraday and
j. R. Mayer, — that progress along paths once entered
upon is the only means of reaching the truth.

It will devolve upon the specialists of the future to
determine the relative tenability and fruitfulness of the
Darwinian ideas in the different provinces. Here I
wish simply to consider the growth of natural knowl-
edge in the light of the theory of evolution. For knowl-
edge, too, is a productof organic nature. And although

• See PUnndler, Pugi. Ann., fmitlband, p. iBa.


ai8 ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.

ideas, as such, do not comport themselves in all respects
like independent organic individuals, and although
violent comparisons should he avoided, still, if Darwin
reasoned rightly, the general imprint of evolution and
transformation must be noticeahle in ideas also.

I shall waive here the consideration of the fruitful
topic of the transmission of ideas or rather of the
transmission of the aptitude for certain ideas.* Nor
would it come within my province to discuss psych-
ical evolution in any form, as Spencerf and many other
modern psychologists have done, with varying suc-
cess. Neither shall I enter upon a discussion of the
struggle for existence and of natural selection among
scientific theories.]; We shall consider here only such
processes of transformation as every student can easily
observe in his own mind.

The child of the forest picks out and pursues with
marvellous acuteness the trails of animals. He out-
wits and overreaches his foes with surpassing cunning.
He is perfectly at home in the sphere of his peculiar
experience. But confront him with an unwonted phe-
nomenon ; place him face to face with a technical pro-
duct of modern civilisation, and he will lapse into im-
potency and helplessness. Here are facts which he

• See the beintiCul discuBBians of ihb poinl ia Heiing'e Mrmory ai a Cm-
trai Finctha iif Orsaniad Malltr (i8?ol, Chicago, The Open Couil Publishing
Co.. iSa?. ComparB sIbo Dobola, Uciirdii IfeiKng, Berlin, iStli,

t Spencor, Tkc Principin ^ F>)irh»hsy- London, 1871.

t See Ihe Brticle Tht ytlKili, ^ Light, page 63.


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION. 219

a not comprehend. If he endeavors to grasp their
meaning, he misinterprets them. He fancies the moon,
when eclipsed, to be tormented by an evil spirit. To
his mind a puffing locomotive is a Hving monster. The
letter accompanying a commission with which he is
entrusted, having once revealed his thievishness, is in
his imagination a conscious being, which he must hide
beneath a stone, before venturing to commit a fresh
trespass. Arithmetic to him is like the art of the
geomancers in the Arabian Nights, — an art which is
able to accomplish every imaginable impossibility.
And, like Voltaire's ingenu, when placed in our social
world, he plays, as we think, the maddest pranks.

With the man who has made the achievements of
modern science and civilisation his own, the case is
quite different. He sees the moon pass temporarily
into the shadow of the earth. He feels in his thoughts
the water growing hot in the boiler of the locomotive;
he feels also the increase of the tension which pushes
the piston forward. Where he is not able to trace the
direct relation of things he has recourse to his yard-
stick and table of logarithms, which aid and facilitate
his thought without predominating over it. Such opin-
ions as he cannot concur in, are at least known to him,
and he knows how to meet them in argument.

Now, wherein does the difference between these
two men consist ? The train of thought habitually
employed by the first one does not correspond to the
facts that he sees. He is surprised and nonplussed


ON &fE.VTAL ADAPTATION.


at every step. But the thoughts of the second mi
follow and anticipate events, his thoughts have be-
come adapted or accommodated to the larger field of
observation aud activity in which he is located ; he con-
ceives things as they are. The Indian's sphere of ex-
perience, however, is quite diSerent ; his bodily organs
of sense are in constant activity; be is ever intensely
alert and on the watch for his foes ; or, his entire at-
tention and energy are engaged in procuring suste-
nance. Now, how can such a creature project his mind
into futurity, foresee or prophesy? This is not possi-
ble until our fellow-beings have, in a measure, relieved
us of our concern for existence. It is then that we
acquire freedom for observation, and not infrequently
too that narrowness of thought which society helps and
teaches us to disregard.

If we move for a time within a fixed circle of phe-
nomena which recur with unvarying uniformity, our
thoughts gradually adapt themselves to our environ-
ment ; our ideas reflect unconsciously our surround-
ings. The stone we hold in our hand, when dropped,
not only falls to the ground in reality ; it also falls in
our thoughts. Iron-filings dart towards a magnet in
imagination as well as in fact, and, when thrown into
a fire, they grew hot in conception as well.

The impulse to complete mentally a phenomenon
that has been only partially observed, has not its origin
in the phenomenon itself ; of this fact, we are fully
sensible. And we well know that it does not lie within


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION. sai

the sphere o£ our volition. It seems to confront us
rather as a power and a law imposed from without
and controlling both thought and facts.

The fact that we are able by the help of this law to
prophesy and forecast, merely proves a sameness or
uniformity of environment sufficient to effect a men-
tal adaptation of this kind. A necessity of fulfilment,
however, is not contained in this compulsory principle .
which controls our thoughts j nor is it in any way de-
termined by the possibility of prediction. We are al-
ways obliged, in fact, to await the completion of what
has been predicted. Errors and departures are con-
stantly discernible, and are slight only in provinces of
great rigid constancy, as in astronomy.

In cases where our thoughts follow the connexion
of events with ease, and in instances where we posi-
tively forefeel the course of a phenomenon, it is nat-
ural to fancy that the latter is determined by and must
conform to our thoughts. But the belief in that mys-
terious agency called causality, which holds thought and
event in unison, is violently shaken when a person first
enters a province of inquiry in which he has previously
had no experience. Take for instance the strange
interaction of electric currents and magnets, or the
reciprocal action of currents, which seem to defy all
the resources of mechanical science. Let him be con-
fronted with such phenomena and he will immediately
feel himself forsaken by his power of prediction ; he
will bring nothing with him into this strange field of


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.


events but the hope of soon being able to adapt his
ideas to the new conditions there presented.

A person constructs from a bone the remaining
anatomy of an animal; or from the visible part of a
half- concealed wing of a butterfly he infers and recon-
structs the part concealed. He does so with a feeling
of highest confidence in the accuracy of his results;
and in these processes we find nothing preternatural
or transcendent. But when physicists adapt their
thoughts to conform to the dynamical course of events
in time, we invariably surround their investigations
with a metaphysical halo ; yet these latter adaptations
bear quite the same character as the former, and our
only reason for investing them with a metaphysical
garb, perhaps, is their high practical value.*

Let us consider for a moment what takes place
when the field of observation to which our ideas have
been adapted and now conform, becomes enlarged.
We had, let us say, always seen heavy bodies sink
when their support was taken away; we had also seen,
perhaps, that the sinking of heavier bodies forced
lighter bodies upwards. But now we see a lever in
action, and we are suddenly struck with the fact that
a lighter body is lifting another of much greater weight.

are thni ihe endeavor lo confine oneself [n nalural research


loy«fl


rouehl,


8 ot IboQghl wa


.Enolori


insUrac


q„ir«]b:,lh


lljlonoeii, or


rilherpH


pired (0


. iD the dBv


ne Buch way a


Haecke


, HErinK, a


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION. 223

Our customary train of thought demands its rights;
the new and unwonted event likewise demands its
rights. From this conflict between thought and fact ^u
the/>rDdUm arises ; out of this partial contrariety springs
the question, "Why?" With the new adaptation to the
enlarged field of observation, the problem disappears,
or, in other words, is solved. In the instance cited,
we must adopt the habit of always considering the
mechanical work performed.

The child just awakening into consciousness of the
world, knows no problem. The bright flower, the
ringing bell, are all new to it; yet it is surprised at
nothing. The out and out Philistine, whose only
thoughts lie in the beaten path of his every-day pur-
suits, likewise has no problems. Everything goes its
wonted course, and if perchance a thing go wrong at
times, it is at most a mere object of curiosity and
not worth serious consideration. In fact, the question
"Why?" loses all warrant in relations where we are
familiar with every aspect of events. But the capable
and talented young man has his head full of problems ;
he has acquired, to a greater or less degree, certain
habitudes of thought, and at the same time he is con-
stantly observing what is new and unwonted, and in
his case there is no end to the questions, "Why?"

Thus, the factor which most promotes scientific
thought is the gradual widening of the field of expe-
rience. We scarcely notice events we are accustomed
to; the latter do not really develop their intellectual


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.


significance until placed in contrast with something to
which we are unaccustomed. Things that at home
are passed by unnoticed, delight us when abroad,
though they may appear in only slightly different forms.
The sun shines with heightened radiance, the flowers
bloom in brighter colors, our fellow-men accost us
with lighter and happier looks. And, returniug horoe,
we find even the old familiar scenes more inspiring
and suggestive than before.

Every motive that prompts and stimulates us to
modify and transform our thoughts, proceeds from
what is new, uncommon, and not understood. Novelty
excites wonder in persons whose fixed habits of thought
are shaken and disarranged by what they see. But the
element of wonder never lies in the phenomenon or
event observed ; its place is in the person observing.
People of more vigorous mental type aim at once at an
adaptation of thought that will conform to what they
have observed. Thus does science eventually become
the natural foe o£ the wonderful. The sources of the
marvellous are unveiled, and surprise gives way to
calm interpretation.

Let us consider such a mental transformative pro-
cess in detail. The circumstance that heavy bodies
fall to the earth appears perfectly natural and regular.
But when a person observes that wood floats upon
water, and that fiames and smoke rise in the air, then
the contrary of the first phenomenon is presented.
Ad olden theory endeavors to explain these facts by im-


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION. 235

pating to substances the power of volition, as that at-
tribute which is most familiar to man. It asserted
that every substance seeks its proper place, heavy
bodies tending downwards and light ones upwards.
It soon turned out, however, that even smoke had
weight, that it, too, sought its place below, and that
it was forced upwards only because of the downward
tendency of the air, as wood is forced to the surface of
water because the water exerts the greater downward
pressure.

Again, we see a body thrown into the air. It ascends.
How is it that it does not seek its proper place? Why
does the velocity of its "violent" motion decrease as
it rises, while that of its "natural" fall increases as it
descends. If we mark closely the relation between
these two facts, the problem will solve itself. We shall
see, as Galileo did, that the decrease of velocity in
rising and the increase of velocity in falling are one
and the same phenomenon, viz., an increase of velo-
city towards the earth. Accordingly, it is not a place
that is assigned to the body, but an increase of velo-
city towards the earth.

By this idea the movements of heavy bodies are
rendered perfectly familiar. Newton, now, firmly
grasping this new way of thinking, sees the moon and
the planets moving in their paths upon principles sim-
ilar to those which determine the motion of a projec-
tile thrown into the air. Yet the movements of the
planets were marked by peculiarities which compelled


826 ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.

him once more to modify slightly his customary mode "
of thought. The heavenly bodies, or rather the parts
composing them, do not move with constant accelera-
tions towards each other, but "attract each other,"
directly as the mass and inversely as the square of the
distance.

This latter notion, which includes the one applying
to terrestrial bodies as a special case, is, as we see,
quite different from the conception from which we
started. How limited in scope was the original idea
and to what a multitude of phenomena is not the pres-
ent one applicable ! Yet there is a trace, after all,
of the " search for place " in the expression " attrac-
tion." And it would be folly, indeed, for us to avoid,
with punctilious dread, this conception of "attraction"
as bearing marks of its pedigree. It is the historical
base of the Newtonian conception and it still continues
to direct our thoughts in the paths so long familiar to
us. Thus, the happiest ideas do not fall from heaven,
but spring from notions already existing.

Similarly, a ray of light was first regarded as a con-
tinuous and homogeneous straight line. It then be-
came the path of projection for minute missiles; then
an aggregate of the paths of countless different kinds
of missiles. It became periodic ; it acquired various
sides ; and ultimately it even lost its motion in a
straight line.

The electric current was conceived originally as
the flow of a hypothetical fluid. To this conception


ON MENTAL ADAFTATIVN. 227

was soon added the notion of a chemical current, the
notion of an electric, magnetic, and anisotropic optical
field, intimately connected with the path of the cur-
rent. And the richer a conception becomes in follow-
ing and keeping pace with facts, the better adapted it
is to anticipate them.

Adaptive processes of this kind have no assignable
beginning, inasmuch as every problem that incites
to new adaptation, presupposes a fixed habitude of
thought. Moreover, they have no visible end j in so
far as experience never ceases. Science, accordingly,
stands midway in the evolutionary process ; and science
may advantageously direct and promote this process,
but it can never take its place. That science is incon-
ceivable the principles of which would enable a person
with no experience to construct the world of experi-
ence, without a knowledge of it. One might just as
well expect to become a great musician, solely by the
aid of theory, and without musical experience; or to
become a painter by following the directions of a text-
book.

In glancing over the history of an idea with which
we have become perfectly familiar, we are no longer
able to appreciate the full significance of its growth.
The deep and vital changes that have been effected in
the course of its evolution, ate recognisable only from
the astounding narrowness of view with which great
contemporary scientists have occasionally opposed
each other. Huygens's wave-theory of light was in-


O^ MENTAL ADAPTATION.


comprehensible to Newton, and Newton's Idea of uni-
versal gravity was unintelligible to Huygens. But a
century afterwards both notions were reconcilable,
even in ordinary minds.

Oa the other hand, the original creations of pio-
neer intellects, unconsciously formed, do not assume
a foreign garb ; their form is their own. In them,
childlike simplicity is joined to the maturity of man-
hood, and they are not to be compared with processes
of thought in the average mind. The latter are carried
on as are the acts of persons in the state of mesmerism,
where actions involuntarily follow the images which
the words of other persons suggest to their minds.

The ideas that have become most familiar through
long experience, are the very ones that intrude them-
selves into the conception of every new fact observed.
In every instance, thus, they become involved in a
struggle for self-preservation, and it is just they that
are seized by the inevitable process of transformation.

Upon this process rests substantially the method
of explaining by hypothesis new and uncomprehended
phenomena. Thus, instead of forming entirely new
notions to explain the movements of the heavenly
bodies and the phenomena of the tides, we imagine the
material particles composing the bodies of the universe
to possess weight or gravity with respect to one an-
other. Similarly, we imagine electrified bodies to be
freighted with fluids that attract and repel, or we con-
ceive the space between them to be in a state of elas-


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION. 319

tic tension. In so doing, we substitute for new idess
distinct and more familiar notions of old experience —
notions which to a great extent run unimpeded in their
courses, although they too must sufier partial trans-
formation.

The animal cannot construct new members to per-
form every new function that circumstances and fate
demand of it. On the contrary it is obliged to make
use of those it already possesses. When a vertebrate
- animal chances into an environment where it must
learn to fly or swim, an additional pair of extremities t9
not grown for the purpose. On the contrary, the ani-
mal must adapt and transform a pair that it already
has.

The construction of hypotheses, therefore, is not
the product of artificial scientific methods. This pro-
cess is unconsciously carried on in the very infancy of
science. Even later, hypotheses do not become det-
rimental and dangerous to progress except when more
reliance is placed on them than on the facts them-
selves; when the contents of the former are more
highly valued than the latter, and when, rigidly ad-
hering to hypothetical notions, we overestimate the
ideas we possess as compared with those we have to
acquire.

The extension of our sphere of experience always
involves a transformation of our ideas. It matters not
whether the face of nature becomes actually altered,
presenting new and strange phenomena, or whether


ajo


ON MENTAL ADAFTATION.


these phenomena are brought to light by an intentional*
or accidental turn of observation. In fact, all the va-
ried methods of scientific inquiry and of purposive
mental adaptation enumerated by John Stuart Mill,
those of observation as well as those of experiment,
are ultimately recognisable as forms of one fundamen-
tal method, the method of change, or variation. It is
through change of circumstances that the natural phi-
losopher learns. This process, however, is by no means
confined to the investigator of nature. The historian,
the philosopher, the jurist, the mathematician, the
artist, the Eesthetician,* all illuminate and unfold their
ideas by producing from the rich treasures of memory
similar, but different, cases ; thus, they observe and
experiment in their thoughts. Even if all sense-expe-
rience should suddenly cease, the events of the days
past would meet in different attitudes in tlie mind
and the process of adaptation would still continue — a
process which, in contradistinction to the adaptation
of thoughts to facts in practical spheres, would be
strictly theoretical, being an adaptation of thoughts to
thoughts.

The method of change or variation brings before us
like cases of phenomena, having partly the same and
partly different elements. It is only by comparing
different cases of refracted light at changing angles of
incidence that the common factor, the constancy of


■acktamgni Mtr vtricM*-


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.


in


the refractive index, is disclosed. And only by com-
paring the refractions of light of different colors, does
the difference, the inequality ol the indices of refrac-
tion, arrest the attention. Comparison based upon
change leads the mind simultaneously to the highest
abstractions and to the finest distinctions.

Undoubtedly, the animal also is able to distinguish
between the similar and dissimilar of two cases. Its
consciousness is aroused by a noise or a rustling, and
its motor centre is put ia readiness. The sight of the
creature causing the disturbance, will, according to its
size, provoke flight or prompt pursuit; and in the lat-
ter case, the more exact distinctions will determine the
mode of attack. But man alone attains to the faculty
of voluntary and conscious comparison. Man alone
can, by his power of abstraction, rise, in one moment,
to the comprehension of principles like the conserva-
tion of mass or the conservation of energy, and in the
next observe and mark the arrangement of the iron
lines in the spectrum. In thus dealing with the ob-
jects of his conceptual life, his ideas unfold and ex-
pand, like his nervous system, into a widely ramified
and organically articulated tree, on which he may fol-
low every limb to its farthermost branches, and, when
occasion demands, return to the trunk from which he
started.

The English philosopher Whewell has remarked
that two things are requisite to the formation of sci-
ence: facts and id^s. Ideas alone lead to empty


232 ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.

speculation ; mere fact's can yield no organic knowl-
edge. We see that all depends upon the capacity of
adapting existing notions to fresh facts.

Over-readiness to yield to every new fact prevents
fixed habits of thought from arising. Excessively rigid
habits of thought impede freedom of observation. In
the struggle, in the compromise between judgment
and prejudgment (prejudice), if we may use the term,
our understanding of things broadens.

Habitual judgment, applied to a new case without
antecedent tests, we call prejudgment or prejudice.
Who does not know its terrible power ! But we think
less often of the importance and utility of prejudice.
Physically, no one could exist, if he had to guide and
regulate the circulation, respiration, and digestion of
his body by conscious and purposive acts. So, too,
no one could exist intellectually if he had to form judg-
ments on every passing experience, instead of allow-
ing himself to be controlled by the judgments he has
already formed. Prejudice is a sort of reflex motion
in the province of intelligence.

On prejudices, that is, on habitual judgments not
tested in every case to which they are applied, reposes
a goodly portion of the thought and work of the natu-
ral scientist. On prejudices reposes most of the con-
duct of society. With the sudden disappearance of
prejudice society would hopelessly dissolve. That
prince displayed a deep insight into the power of in-
tellectual habit, who quelled the loud menaces and


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION. 233

"demands of his body-guard for arrears of pay and com-
pelled them to turn about and march, by simply pro-
nouncing the regular word of command ; he well knew
that they would be unable to resist that.

Not until the discrepancy between habitual judg-
ments and facts becomes great is the investigator im-
plicated in appreciable illusion. Then tragic compli-
cations and catastrophes occur in the practical lite of
individuals and nations — crises where man, placing
custom above life, instead of pressing it into the ser-
vice of life, becomes the victim of his error. The very
power which in intellectual life advances, fosters, and
sustains us, may in other circumstances delude and
destroy us.

Ideas are not all of life. They are only momentary
efBorescences of light, designed to illuminate the paths
of the will. But as delicate reagents on our organic
evolution our ideas are of paramount importance. No
theory can gainsay the vital transformation which we
feel taking place within us through their agency. Nor
is it necessary that we should have a proof of this pro-
cess. We are immediately assured of it.

The transformation of Ideas thus appears as a part
of the general evolution of life, as a part of its adap-
tation to a constantly widening sphere of action. A
granite boulder on a mountain-side tends towards the
earth below. It must abide in its resting-place for
thousands of years before its support gives way. The


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION.


shrub that grows at its base is farther advanced ; it
accommodates itself to summer and winter. The fox
which, overcoming the force of gravity, creeps to the
summit where he has scented his prey, is freer in his
movements than either. The arm of man reaches
further still j and scarcely anything of note happens
in Africa or Asia that does not leave an imprint upon
his life. What an immense portion of the life of
other men is reflected in ourselves ; their joys, their
affections, their happiness and misery ! And this too,
when we survey only our immediate surroundings,
and confine our attention to modern literature. How
much more do we experience when we travel through
ancient Egypt with Herodotus, when we stroll through
the streets of Pompeii, when we carry ourselves back
to the gloomy period of the crusades or to the golden
age of Italian art, now making the acquaintance of a
physician of Molifere, and now that of a Diderot or of
a D'Alembert. What a great part of the life of others,
of their character and their purpose, do we not absorb
through poetry and music ! And although they only
gently touch the chords of our emotions, like the mem-
ory of youth softly breathing upon the spirit of an
aged man, we have nevertheless lived them over again
in part. How great and comprehensive does self be-
come in this conception ; and how insignificant the
person ! Egoistical systems both of optimism and pes-
simism perish with their narrow standard of the im-
port of intellectual life. We feel that the real pearls


ON MENTAL ADAPTATION. 233

of life lie in the ever changing contents of conscious-
ness, and that the person is merely an indifferent sym-
bolical thread on which they are strung.*

We are prepared, thus, to regard ourselves and
every one of our ideas as a product and a subject of
universal evolution ; and in this way we shall advance
sturdily and unimpeded along the paths which the
future will throw open to us.f


Dd issenLi


g Ihal th


of our own. U is common


BdbylbBio
erlal limit


lioa of <h


e .go Is necessary Md suf-


lica! obJE.:


%«a&<^


aetSDbsislinabioadcon-


irtly may
individua


be liken


d ID . poljp-pluit. The
ve, indeed, been BBveted;


(reednm of


moveme


landevolatioD. Bat ths


tc


E.v


CQ Baer


tb


Bob


cquenl


cnsMd i


fill a


Iwi


Mnng,


i/Auff^


d V


AW


suing a


of >bo ^fl.


h rsRiir


■be


and


domplE


E.


D^tea


ON THE PRINCIPLE OF COMPARISON
IN PHYSICS.*


TWENTY years ago when Kirchhofi defined the ob-
ject of mechanics as the "description, in complete
and very simple terms, of the motions occurring in na-
ture," he produced by the statement a peculiar impres-
sion. Fourteen years subsequently, Boltzmann, in the
life-like picture which he drew of the great inquirer,
could still speak of the universal astonishment at this
novel method of treating mechanics, and we meet with
epistemological treatises to-day, which plainly show
how difficult is the acceptance of this point of view. A
modest and small band of inquirers there were, how-
ever, to whom Kirchhoff's few words were tidings of a
welcome and powerful ally in the epistemological field.
Now, how does it happen that we yield our assent
so reluctantly to the philosophical opinion of an in-
quirer for whose scientific achievements we have only
words of praise ? One reason probably is that few in-
quirers can find time and leisure, amid the exacting


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS. 237

employments demanded for the acquisition of new
knowledge, to inquire closely into that tremendous
psychical process by which science is formed. Further,
it is inevitable that much should be put into Kirchhoff's
rigid words that they were not originally intended to
convey, and that much should be found wanting in
them that had always been regarded as an essential
element of scientific knowledge. What can mere de-
scription accomplish ? What has become of explana-
tion, of our insight into the causal connexion of things?

Permit me, for a moment, to contemplate not the
results of science, but the mode of its growth, in a
frank and unbiassed manner. We know of only one
source of immediate revelation of scientific facts — our
senses. Restricted to this source alone, thrown wholly
upon his own resources, obliged to start always anew,
what could the isolated individual accomplish ? Of a
stock of knowledge so acquired the science of a dis-
tant negro hamlet in darkest Africa could hardly give
us a sufficiently humiliating conception. For there
that veritable miracle of thought-transference has al-
ready begun its work, compared with which the mir-
acles of the spiritualists are rank monstrosities — com-
munication by language. Reflect, too, that by means
of the magical characters which our libraries contain
we can raise the spirits of the "the sovereign dead of
old " from Faraday to Galileo and Archimedes, through
ages of time — spirits who do not dismiss us with am-


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS.


biguous and derisive oracles, but tell us the best they
know J then shall we feel what a stupendous and in-
dispensable factor in the formation of science com-
mvnication is. Not the dim, half- conscious surmises
of the acute observer of nature or critic of humanity
belong to science, but only that which they possess
clearly enough to communkate to others.

But how, now, do we go about this communication
of a newly acquired experience, of a newly observed
fact? As the different calls and battle-cries of gre-
garious animals are unconsciously formed signs for
a common observation or action, irrespective of the
causes which produce such action — a fact that already
involves the germ of the concept; so also the words
of human language, which is only more highly spe-
cialised, are names or signs for universally known
facts, which all can observe or have observed. If the
mental representation, accordingly, follows the new
fact at once a-nA passively, then that new fact must, of
itself, immediately be constituted and represented in
thought by facts already universally known and com-
monly observed. Memory is always ready to put for-
ward for eomparison known facts which resemble the
new event, or agree with it in certain features, and
so renders possible that elementary internal judgment
which the mature and definitively formulated judgment
soon follows.

Comparison, as the fundamental condition of com-
munication, is the most powerful inner vital element


ON CUMPAKISON IN PHYSICS. ajg

of science. The zoologist sees in the bones of the
wing-membranes of bats, fingers; he compares the
bones of the cranium with the vertebras, the embryos
of different organisms with one another, and the dif-
ferent stages of development of the same organism
with one another. The geographer sees in Lake Garda
a fjord, in the Sea of Aral a lake in process of drying
up. The philologist compares different languages with
one another, and the formations of the same language
as well. If it is not customary to speak of compara-
tive physics in the same sense that we speak of com-
parative anatomy, the reason is that in a science of
such great experimental activity the attention is turned
away too much from the contemplative element. But
like all other sciences, physics lives and grows by
comparison.

The manner in which the result of the comparison
finds expression in the communication, varies of course
very much. When we say that the colors of the spec-
trum are red, yellow, green, blue, and violet, the des-
ignations employed may possibly have been derived
from the technology of tattooing, or they may subse-
quently have acquired the significance of standing for
the colors of the rose, the lemon, the leaf, the corn-
flower, and the violet. From the frequent repetition
of such comparisons, however, made under the most
manifold circumstances, the inconstant features, as
compared with the permanent congruent features, get


Ha ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS.

so obliterated that the latter acquire a fixed significance
independent of every object and connexion, or take on
as we say an abstract or conceptual import. No one
thinks at the word " red " of any other agreement with
the rose than that of color, or at the word " straight "
of any other property of a stretched cord than the
sameness of direction. Just so, too, numbers, orig-
inally the names of the fingers of the hands and feet,
from being used as arrangement-signs for all kinds of
objects, were lifted to the plane of abstract concepts,
A verbal report (communication) of a fact that uses
only these purely abstract implements, we call a direct
description.

The direct description of a fact of any great ex-
tent is an irksome task, even where the requisite no-
tions are already completely developed. What a sim-
plification it involves if we can say, the fact A now
considered comports itself, not in one, but in many or
in all its features, like an old and well-known fact B.
The moon comports itself as a heavy body does with
respect to the earth ; light like a wave-motion or an
electric vibration ; a magnet, as if it were laden with
gravitating fluids, and so on. We call such a descrip-
tion, in which we appeal, as it were, to a description
already and elsewhere formulated, or perhaps still to
be precisely formulated, an indirect description. We
are at liberty to supplement this description, gradually,
by direct description, to correct it, or to replace it alto-
gether. We see, thus, without difiiculty, that what is


J


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS. 241

called a theory or a theoretieai idea, falls under the
category of what is here termed indirect description.

What, now, is a theoretical idea ? Whence do we
get it? What does it accomplish for us? Why does it
occupy a higher place in our judgment than the mere
holding fast to a fact or an observation? Here, too,
memory and comparison alone are in play. But in-
stead of a single feature of resemblance culled from
memory, in this case a great system of resemblances
confronts us, a well-known physiognomy, by means of
which the new fact is immediately transformed into an
old acquaintance. Besides, it is in the power of the
idea to offer us more than we actiially see in the new
fact, at the first moment; it can extend the fact, and
enrich it with features which we are first induced to
seek from such suggestions, and which are often ac-
tually found. It is this rapidity in extending knowl-
edge that gives to theory a preference over simple ob-
servation. But that preference is wholly quantitative.
Qualitatively, and in real essential points, theory dif-
fers from observation neither in the mode of its origin
nor in its last results.

The adoption of a theory, however, always involves
a danger. For a theory puts in the place of a fact A
in thought, always a different, but simpler and more
familiar fact B, which in some relations can mentally
represent A, but for the very reason that it is differ-
ent, in other relations cannot represent it. If now, as


ON COMFARISO.V IN PHYSICS.


may readily happen, sufficient care is not exercised,
the most fruitful theory may, in special circumstances,
become a downright obstacle to inquiry. Thus, the
emission- theory of light, in accustoming the physicist
to think of the projectile path of the "light-particles "
as an undifferentiated straight-line, demonstrably im-
peded the discovery of the periodicity of light. By
putting in the place of light the more familiar phe-
nomena of sound, Huygens renders light in many of
its features a familiar event, but with respect to polari-
sation, which lacks the longitudinal waves with which
alone he was acquainted, it had for him a doubly
strange aspect. He is unable thus to grasp in abstract
thought the fact of polarisation, which is before his
eyes, whilst Newton, merely by adapting to the obser-
vation his thoughts, and putting this question, "An-
non radiorum luminis diversa sunt laterat" abstractly
grasped polarisation, that is, directly described it, a
century before Malus. On the other hand, if the
agreement of the fact with the idea theoretically repre-
senting it, extends further than its inventor originally
anticipated, then we may be led by it to unexpected
discoveries, of which conical refraction, circular po-
larisation by total reflexion. Hertz's waves offer ready
examples, in contrast to the illustrations given above.
Our insight into the conditions indicated will be
improved, perhaps, by contemplating the development
of some theory or other more in detail. Let us con-
sider a magnetised bar of steel by the side of a second


Oy COMPARISOS IN PHYSICS. 143

umnagnetUed bar, in all other respects the same. The
secoad bar gives no indication of the preseoce of iroo-

filingsi the &rst attracts them. Also, when the iron-
filings are absent, we roust think of the magnetised
bar as in a diSeient condition from that of the nomag-
netised. For, that the mere presence of the iron-filings
does not induce the phenomenon of attraction is proved
by the second unmagnetised bar. The ingenuous man,
who finds in his will, as his most familiar source of
power, the best facilities for comparison, conceives a
species of spirit in the magnet. The behavior of a
warm body or of an eleeirified body suggests similar
ideas. This is the point of view of the oldest theory,
feliskism, which the inquirers of the early Middle
Ages had not yet overcome, and which in its last ves-
tiges, in the conception of forces, still flourishes in
modern physics. We see, thus, the dramatic element
need no more be absent in a scientific description, than
in a thrilling novel.

If, on subsequent examination, it be observed that
a cold body, in contact with a hot body, warms itself,
so to speak, at the expense of the hot body; further,
that when the substances are the same, the cold body,
which, let us say, has twice the mass of the other,
gains only half the number of degrees of temperature
that the other loses, a wholly new impression arises.
The demoniac character of the event vanishes, for the
supposed spirit acts not by caprice, but according to
fixed laws. In its place, however, instinctively the


244 O^ COMPARISON IN PHYSICS.

notion of a substance is substituted, part of which flows
over from the one body to the other, but the total
amount of which, representable by the sum of the pro-
ducts of the masses into the respective changes of
temperature, remains constant. Black was the first to
be povjerfully struck with this resemblance of thermal
processes to the motion of a substance, and under its
guidance discovered the specific heat, the heat of fu-
sion, and the heat of vaporisation of bodies. Gaining
strength and fixity, however, from these successes,
this notion of substance subsequently stood in the way
of scientific advancement. It blinded the eyes of the
successors of Black, and prevented them from seeing
the manifest fact, which every savage knows, that heat
is produced by friction. Fruitful as that notion was
for Black, iielpful as it still is to the learner to-day in
Black's special field, permanent and universal validity
as a theory it could never maintain. But what is essen-
tial, conceptually, in it, viz., the constancy of the pro-
duct-sum above mentioned, retains its value and may
be regarded as a direct description of Black's facts.

It stands to reason that those theories which push
themselves forward unsought, instinctively, and wholly
of their own accord, should have the greatest power,
should carry our thoughts most with them, and exhibit
the staunches! powers of self-preservation. On the
other hand, it may also be observed that when criti-
cally scrutinised such theories are extremely apt to
lose their cogency. We are constantly busied with


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS. 245

" substance," its modes of action have stamped them-
selves indelibly upon our thoughts, our vividest and
clearest reminiscences are associated with it. It should
cause us no surprise, therefore, that Robert Mayer and
Joule, who gave the final blow to Black's substantial
conception of heat, should have re-introduced the
same notion of substance in a more abstract and mod-
ified form, only applying to a much more extensive
field.

Here, too, the psychological circumstances which
impart to the new conception its power, lie clearly be-
fore us. By the unusual redness of the venous blood
in tropical climates Mayer's attention is directed to
the lessened expenditure of internal heat and to the
proportionately lessened eonsuntption of material by the
human body in those climates. But as every effort of
the human organism, including its mechanical work,
is connected with the consumption of material, and as
work by friction can engender heat, therefore heat and
work appear in kind equivalent, and between them a
proportional relation must subsist. Not f wry quantity,
but the appropriately calculated jwot of the two, as
connected with a proportionate consumption of mate-
rial, appears substantial.

By exactly similar considerations, relative to the
economy of the galvanic element, Joule arrived at his
view ; he found experimentally that the sum of the
heat evolved in the circuit, of the heat consumed in the
combustion of the gas developed, of the electro-mag-


ON COMPARISON IN FHYSJCS.


netic work of the current, properly calculated, — in
short, the sum of all the eflects of the battery, — is con-
nected with a proportionate consumption of zinc. Ac-
cordingly, this sum itself has a substantial character.
Mayer was so absorbed with the view attained,
that the indestructibility of farce, in our phraseology
■work, appeared to him a ^riVri evident. "The crea-
tion or annihilation of a force," he says, "lies with-
out the province of human thought and power." Joule
expressed himself to a similar effect : " It is manifestly
absurd to suppose that the powers with which God
has endowed matter can be destroyed." Strange to
say, on the basis of such utterances, not Joule, but
Mayer, was stamped as a metaphysician. We may
be sure, however, that both men were merely giving
expression, and that half-unconsciously, to a powerful
formal need of the new simple view, and that both
would have been extremely surprised if it had been
proposed to them that their principle should be sub-
mitted to a philosophical congress or ecclesiastical
synod for a decision upon its validity. But with all
agreements, the attitude of these two men, in other
respects, was totally different. Whilst Mayer repre-
sented this formal need with all the stupendous in-
stinctive force of genius, we might say almost with the
ardor of fanaticism, yet was withal not wanting in the
conceptive ability to compute, prior to all other in-
quirers, the mechanical equivalent of heat from old
physical constants long known and at the disposal of


OA' COMI'ARISON IN PHYSICS.

all, and so to set up for the new doctrine a programme
embracing all physics and physiology ; Joule, on the
other hand, applied himself to the exact verification of
the doctrine by beautifully conceived and masterfully
executed experiments, extending over all departments
of physics. Soon Helmholtz too attacked the problem,
in a totally independent and characteristic manner.
After the professional virtuosity with which this phys-
icist grasped and disposed of all the points unsettled
by Mayer's programme and more besides, what espe-
cially strikes us is the consummate critical lucidity of
this young man of twenty-six years. In his exposition
is wanting that vehemence and impetuosity which
marked Mayer's. The principle of the conservation
of energy is no self-evident or a priori proposition for
him. What follows, on the assumption that that prop-
osition obtains ? In this hypothetical form, he subju-
gates his matter.

I must confess, I have always marvelled at the
^esthetic and ethical taste of many of our contempo-
raries who have managed to fabricate out of this rela-
tion of things, odious national and personal questions,
instead of praising the good fortune that znade several
such men work together and of rejoicing at the in-
structive diversity and idiosyncrasies of great minds
fraught with such rich consequences for us.

We know that still another theoretical conception
played a part in the development of the principle of
energy, which Mayer held aloof from, namely, the con-


248 ON COMPARISON JN FNYSICS.

ception that heat, as also the other physical processes,
are due to motion. But once the principle of energy
has been reached, these auxiUary and transitional the-
ories discharge no essential function, and we may re-
gard the principle, like that which Black gave, as a
contribution to the dirfct description of a widely ex-
tended domain of facts.

It would appear from such considerations not only
advisable, but even necessary, with all due recogni-
tion of the helpfulness of theoretic ideas in research,
yet gradually, as the new facts grow familiar, to sub-
stitute for indirect description direct description, which
contains nothing that is unessential and restricts itself
absolutely to the abstract apprehension of facts. We
might almost say, that the descriptive sciences, so
called with a tincture of condescension, have, in re-
spect of scientific character, outstripped the physical
expositions lately in vogue. Of course, a virtue has
been made of necessity here.

We must admit, that it is not in our power to de-
scribe directly every fact, on the moment. Indeed,
we should succumb in utter despair if the whole wealth
of facts which we come step by step to know, were
presented to us all at once. Happily, only detached
and unusual features first strike us, and such we bring
nearer to ourselves by comparison with every-day
events. Here the notions of the common speech are
first developed. The comparisons then grow more
manifold and numerous, the fields of facts compared


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS.


more extensive, the concepts that make direct descrip-
tion possible, proportionately more general and more
abstract.

First we become familiar with the motion of freely
falling bodies. The concepts of force, mass, and work
are then carried over, with appropriate modifications,
to the phenomena of electricity and magnetism. A
stream of water is said to have suggested to Fourier
the first distinct picture of currents of heat. A special
case of vibrations of strings investigated by Taylor,
cleared up for him a special case of the conduction of
heat. Much in the same way that Daniel Bernoulli
and Euler constructed the most diverse forms of vi-
brations of strings from Taylor's cases, so Fourier con-
structs out of simple cases of conduction the most
multifarious motions of heat; and that method has
extended itself over the whole of physics. Ohm forms
his conception of the electric current in imitation of
Fourier's. The latter, also, adopts Pick's theory of
diffusion. In an analogous manner a conception of
the magnetic current is developed. All sorts of sta-
tionary currents are thus made to exhibit common
features, and even the condition of complete equilib-
rium in an extended medium shares these features
with the dynamical condition of equilibrium of a sta-
tionary current. Things as remote as the magnetic
lines of force of an electric current and the stream-
lines of a frictionless liquid vortex enter in this way
into a peculiar relationship of similarity. The con-


»)k.V fWHiKI/e/SOA /.V PHYSICS.


«t^ «t polWlklt originally enunciated for a
Itti^^rt |H«vinG^ Kquires a wide-reaching applica-
UK^JN TMnc* M dissimilar as pressure, temperature,
•mA <Mwll«MMiv« tOR«, now show points of agree-
VMM te WtetiM 10 tttoas derived by definite methods
kvw ikMil «««e*(>t : vU. . («U oX pressure, fall of tem-
V«(«IM«^ f)LU oi ),»Mvnti»l, as also with the further no-
ttOM ol U^uid, ttteiukd. aud electric strength of cur-
rent, rhat leUlioQship between systems of ideas in
which th« dissimilarity of every two homologous con-
cepts as welt as the agreement tn logical relations I
of ever)' two homologous pairs of concepts, is clearly 1
hrought to light, is called an analogy. It is an effective I
mMn» of mastering heterogeneous fields of facts in
Oiutary comprehension. The path is plainly shown in
which I) uttix'trsat physical phenomenology embracing all
domains, will be developed.

In the process described we attain for the first time
to what is indispensable in the direct description of
broad fields of fact — the wide-reaching abstract concept.
And now I must put a question smacking of the school-
master, but unavoidable : What is a concept? Is it a
hazy representation, admitting withal of mental visu-
alisation? No. Mental visualisation accompanies it
only in the simplest cases, and then merely as an ad-
junct. Think, for example, of the " coefficient of self-
induction," and seek for its visualised mental image.
Or is, perhaps, the concept a mere word ? The adop-
tion of this forlorn idea, which has been actually pro-


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS. 1151

posed of late by a reputed mathematician would only
throw us back a thousand years into the deepest scho-
lasticism. We must, therefore, reject it.

The solution is not far to seek. We must not think
that sensation, or representation, is a purely passive
process. The lowest organisms respond to it with a
simple reflex motion, by engulfing the prey which ap-
proaches them. In higher organisms the centripetal
stimulus encounters in the nervous system obstacles
and aids which modify the centrifugal process. In still
higher organisms, where prey is pursued and exam-
ined, the process in question may go through exten-
sive paths of circular motions before it comes to rel-
ative rest. Our own life, too, is enacted in such
processes ; all that we call science may be regarded
as parts, or middle terms, of such activities.

It will not surprise us now if I say : the definition
of a concept, and, when it is very familiar, even its
name, is an impulse to some accurately determined,
often complicated, critical, comparative, or construc-
tive activity, the usually sense-perceptive result of
which is a term or member of the concept's scope. It
matters not whether the concept draws the attention
only to one certain sense (as sight) or to a phase of a
sense (as color, form), or is the starting, point of a
complicated action; nor whether the activity in ques-
tion (chemical, anatomical, and mathematical opera-
tions) is muscular or technical, or performed wholly
in the imagination, or only intimated. The concept is


ojv comparison /jV physics.


to the physicist what a musical note is to a piaoo-
pJayer. A trained physicist or mathematician reads a
memoir Mce a musician reads a score. But just as the
piano-player must first leam to move his fingers singly
and collectively, before he can follow his notes with-
out effort, so the physicist or mathematician must go
through a long apprenticeship before he gains con-
trol, so to speak, of the manifold delicate innervations
of his muscles and imagination. Think of how fre-
quently the beginner in physics or mathematics per-
forms more, or less, than is required, or of how fre-
quently he conceives things differently from what they
are I But if, after having had sufficient discipline, he
lights upon the phrase " coefEcient of self-induction,"
he knows immediately what that term requires of him.
Long and thoroughly practised actions, which have
their origin in the necessity of comparing and repre-
senting facts by other facts, are thus the very kernel
of concepts. In fact, positive and philosophical phi-
lology both claim to have established that all roots
represent concepts and stood originally for muscular
activities alone. The slow assent of physicists to
Kirchhofi's dictum now becomes intelligible. They
best could feel the vast amount of individual labor,
theory, and skill required before the ideal of direct
description could be realised.


I


Suppose, now, the ideal of a given province of
*ts is reached. Does description accomplish all that


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS. 353

the inquirer can ask? In my opinion, it does. De-
scription is a building up of facts in thought, and this
building up is, in the experimental sciences, often the
condition of actual execution. For the physicist, to
take a special case, the metrical units are the building-
stones, the concepts the directions for building, and
the facts the result of the building. Our mental
imagery is almost a complete substitute for the fact,
and by means of it we can ascertain all the fact's prop-
erties. We do not know that worst which we our-
selves have made.

People require of science that it should prophesy,
and Hertz uses that expression in his posthumous
Mechanics. But, natural as it is, the expression is too
narrow. The geologist and the paleontologist, at times
the astronomer, and always the historian and the phil-
ologist, prophesy, so to speak, backwards. The descrip-
tive sciences, like geometry and mathematics, prophesy
neither forward or backwards, but seek from given
conditions the conditioned. Let us say rather : Sci-
ence completes in though! facts that are only partly given.
This is rendered possible by description, for descrip-
tion presupposes the interdependence of the descrip-
tive elements : otherwise nothing would be described.

It is said, description leaves the sense of causality
unsatisfied. In fact, many imagine they understand
motions better when they picture to themselves the
pulling forces ; and yet the accelerations, the facts,
accomplish more, without superfluous additions. I


334 "^'V COMPARISON IN PHYSICS.

hope that the science of the future will discard the
idea of cause and effect, as being formally obscure ;
and in my feeling that these ideas contain a strong
tincture of fetishism, 1 am certainly not alone. The
more proper course is, to regard the abstract deiermina-
tive elements of a faet as interdependent, in a purely logi-
cal way, as the mathematician or geometer does.
True, by comparison with the will, forces are brought
nearer to our feeling ; hut it may he that ultimately the
will itself will be made clearer by comparison with the
accelerations of masses.

If we are asbed, candidly, when is a fact clear to
us, we must say " when we can reproduce it by very
simple and very famiUar intellectual operations, such
as the construction of accelerations, or the geometri-
cal summation of accelerations, and so forth." The
requirement of simplicity is of course to the expert
a diflerent matter from what it is to the novice. Foi
the first, description by a system of differential equa-
tions is sufficient ; for the second, a gradual construc-
tion out of elementary laws is required. The first
discerns at once the connexion of the two expositions.
Of course, it is hot disputed that the artistic value of
materially equivalent descriptions may not be different.

Most difficult is it to persuade strangers that the
grand universal laws of physics, such as apply indis-
criminately to material, elecfrical, magnetic, and other
systems, are not essentially different from descriptions.
As compared with many sciences, physics occupies in


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS.


255


tBis respect a position of vantage that is easily ex-
plained. Take, for example, anatomy. As the anato-
mist in his quest for agreements and differences in
animals ascends to ever higher and higher classifica-
tions, the individual facts that represent the ultimate
terms of the system, are still so different that they
must be singly noted. Think, for example, of the com-
mon marks of the Vertebrates, of the class-characters
of Mammals and Birds on the one hand and of Fishes
on the other, of the double circulation of the blood on
the one hand and of the single on the other. In the
end, always isolated facts remain, which show only a
slight likeness to one another.

A science still more closely allied to physics, chem-
istry, is often in the same strait. The abrupt change
of the qualitative properties, in all likelihood condi-
tioned by the slight stability of the intermediate states,
the remote resemblance of the co-ordinated facts of
chemistry render the treatment of its data difficult.
Pairs of bodies of different qualitative properties unite
in different mass-ratios ; but no connexion between
the first and the last is to be noted, at first.

Physics, on the other hand, reveals to us wide do-
mains of qualitatively hofnogeneous facts, differing from
one another only in the number of equal parts into
which their characteristic marks are divisible, that is,
differing only quantitatively. Even where we have to
deal with qualities (colors and sounds), quantitative
characters of those qualities are at our disposal. Here


fdififMf «id«« aMd sot be nmoBs d p^jTsksfeK- ib»

t9 thak bnwIH u wdL Bat alco m other wqs tins

ll iMlfi »ba]l ud most change Chemistiy has ad-
Vji0m4 v*ry f»r in making the methods of physics her
own, Afilttt from older attempts, the periodical series
»t iidthut Mcytr and Meodelejeff are a brilliant and
ntUnuuim iti«inii o( producing an easily surveyed sys-
tO/ii til timiu, which by gradually becoming complete,


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS. 357

will Uke the place almost of a continuum of facts.
Further, by the study of solutions, of dissociation, in
fact generally of phenomena which present a contin-
uum of cases, the methods of thermodynamics have
found entrance into chemistry. Similarly we may hope
that, at some future day, a mathematician, letting the
fact-continuum of embryology play before his mind,
which the paleontologists of the future will supposedly
have enriched with more intermediate and derivative
forms between Saurian and Bird than the isolated
Pterodactyl, Archaeopteryx, Ichthyornis, and so forth,
which we now have — that such a mathematician shall
transform, by the variation of a few parameters, as in
a dissolving view, one form into another, just as we
transform one conic section into another.

Reverting now to Kirchhoff's words, we can come
to some agreement regarding their import. Nothing
can be built without building-stones, mortar, scaffold-
ing, and a builder's skill. Yet assuredly the wish is
well founded, that will show to posterity the complete
structure in its finished form, bereft of unsightly scaf-
folding. It is the pure logical and Eesthetic sense of the
mathematician that speaks out of Kirchhoff's words.
Modern expositions of physics aspire after his ideal ;
that, too, is intelligible. But it would be a poor di-
dactic shift, for one whose business it was to train
architects, to say: "Here is a splendid edifice; if thou
wouldst reaily build, go thou and do likewise.

The barriers between the special sciences, which


258


ON COMPARISON IN PHYSICS.


make division of work and concentration possible, but
which appear to us after all as cold and conventional
restrictions, will gradually disappear. Bridge upon
bridge is thrown over the gaps. Contents and meth-
ods, even of the remotest branches, are compared.
When the Congress of Natural Scientists shall meet a
hundred years hence, we may expect that they will
represent a unity in a higher sense than is possible to-
day, not in sentiment and aim alone, but in method
also. In the meantime, this great change will be
helped by our keeping constantly before our minds the
fact of the intrinsic relationship of all research, which
Kirchhoff characterised with such classical simplicity.


THE PART PLAYED BY ACCIDENT IN
INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.*


TT IS CHARACTERISTIC of the naive and san-
■^ guine beginnings of thought in youthful men and
nations, that all problems are held to be soluble and
fundamentally intelligible on the first appearance of
success. The sage of Miletus, on seeing plants take
their rise from moisture, believed he had compre-
hended the whole of nature, and he of Samos, on dis-
covering that definite numbers corresponded to the
lengths of harmonic strings, imagined he could ex-
haust the nature of the world by means of numbers.
Philosophy and science in such periods are blended.
Wider experience, however, speedily discloses the
error of such a course, gives rise to criticism, and
leads to the division and ramification of the sciences.
At the same time, the necessity of a. broad and
general view of the world remains ; and to meet this
need philosophy parts company with special inquiry.


l6o ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.

It is true, the two are often found united in gigantic
personalities. But as a rule tlieir ways diverge more
and more widely from each other. And if the estrange-
ment of philosophy from science can reach a point
where data unworthy of the nursery are not deemed too
scanty as foundations of the world, on the other hand
the thorough-paced specialist may go to the extreme
of rejecting point-blank the possibility of a broader
view, or at least of deeming it superfluous, forgetful
of Voltaire's apophthegm, nowhere more applicable
than here, Le superfiu — chose irbs niccssaire.

It is true, the history of philosophy, owing to the
insufficiency of its constructive data, is and must be
largely a history of error. But it would be the height
of ingratitude on our part to forget that the seeds of
thoughts which still fructify the soil of special re-
search, such as the theory of irrationals, the concep-
tions of conservation, the doctrine of evolution, the
idea of specific energies, and so forth, may be traced
back in distant ages to philosophical sources. Fur-
thermore, to have deferred or abandoned the attempt
at a broad philosophical view of the world from a full
knowledge of the insufficiency of our materials, is
quite a different thing from never having undertaken
it at all. The revenge of its neglect, moreover, is
constantly visited upon the specialist by his commit-
tal of the very errors which philosophy long ago ex-
posed. As a fact, in physics and physiology, par-
ticularly during the £rst half of this century, are to b^


ACCIDENT IN INVENTIUN AND DISCOVERY. 261

met intellectual productions which for nai've simplicity
are not a jot inferior to those of the Ionian school, or
to the Platonic ideas, or to that much reviled onto-
togical proof.

Latterly, there has been evidence of a gradual
change in the situation. Recent philosophy has set
itself more modest and more attainable ends ; it is
no longer inimical to special inquiry ; in fact, it is
zealously taking part in that inquiry. On the other
hand, the special sciences, mathematics and physics,
no less than philology, have become eminently phil-
osophical. The material presented is no longer ac-
cepted uncritically. The glance of the inquirer is
bent upon neighboring fields, whence that material
has bees derived. The different special departments
are striving for closer union, and gradually the con-
viction is gaining ground that philosophy can consist
only of mutual, complementai criticism, interpenetra-
tion, and union of the special sciences into a consoli-
dated whole. As the blood in nourishing the body
separates into countless capillaries, only to be col-
lected again and to meet in the heart, so in the science
of the future all the rills of knowledge will gather
more and more into a common and undivided stream.

It is this view— not an unfamiliar one to the pres-
ent generation — that I purpose to advocate. Enter-
tain no hope, or rather fear, that I shall construct
systems for you. I shall remain a natural inquirer.
Nor expect that it is my intention to skirt all the


a62 ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.

fields of natural inquiry. I can attempt to be your
guide only in that branch which is familiar to me, and
even there I can assist in the furtherment of only a
small portion of the allotted task. If I shall succeed
in rendering plain to you the relations of physics,
psychology, and the theory of knowledge, so that you
may draw from each profit and light, redounding to
the advantage of each, I shall regard my work as not
having been in vain. Therefore, to illustrate by an
example how, consonantly with my powers and views,
I conceive such inquiries should be conducted, I shall
treat to-day, in the form of a brief sketch, of the fol-
lowing special and limited subject — of the fart •which
accidental circumstances play in the development of inven-
tions and discoveries.

When we Germans say of a man that he was not
the inventor of gunpowder,* we impliedly cast a grave
suspicion on his abilities. But the expression is not
a felicitous one, as there is probably no invention in
which deliberate thought had a smaller, and pure luck
a larger, share than in this. It is well to ask, Are we
justified in placing a low estimate on the achievement
of an inventor because accident has assisted him in
his work? Huygens, whose discoveries and inven-
tions are justly sufficient to entitle him to an opinion
in such matters, lays great emphasis on this factor.
He asserts that a man capable of inventing the tele-

•ne ptuaie ll. Er k*t dm Pmhir nicU ir/Hndtm,


ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY. 163

scope without the concurrence of accident must have
been gifted with superhuman genius.*

A man Hving in the midst o£ civilisation finds him-
self surrounded by a host of marvellous inventions,
considering none other than the means of satisfying
the needs of daily life. Picture such a man trans-
ported to the epoch preceding the invention of these
ingenious appliances, and imagine him undertaking
in a serious manner to comprehend their origin. At
first the intellectual power of the men capable of pro-
ducing such marvels will strike him as incredible, or,
if we adopt the ancient view, as divine. But his as-
tonishment is considerably allayed by the disenchant-
ing yet elucidative revelations of the history of primi-
tive culture, which to a large extent provi; that these
inventions took their rise very slowly and by imper-
ceptible degrees.

A small hole in the ground with fire kindled in it
constituted the primitive stove. The flesh of the
quarry, wrapped with water in its skin, was boiled by
contact with heated stones. Cooking by stones was
also done in wooden vessels. Hollow gourds were
protected from the fire by coats of clay. Thus, from
the burned clay accidentally originated the enveloping
pot, which rendered the gourd superfluous, although


• Quod si


IS pdnclplii Bi geo-


Dioptrica (de telucopii


a6« ACCIDENT I.V mVEN-TlON AND DISCOVERY.

for a long time thereafter the clay was still spread
over the gourd, or pressed into woven wicker-work
before the potter's art assumed its final independence.
Even then the wicker-work ornament was retained, as
a sort of attest of its origin.

We see, thus, it is by accidental circumstances, or
by such as lie without our purpose, foresight, and
power, that man is graduaHy led to the acquaintance
of improved means of satisfying his wants. Let the
reader picture to himself the genius of a man who
could have foreseen without the help of accident that
clay handled in the ordinary manner would produce a
useful cooking utensil 1 The majority of the inven-
tions made in the early stages of civilisation, includ-
ing language, writing, money, and the rest, could not
have been the product of deliberate methodical re-
flexion for the simple reason that no idea of their
value and significance could have been had except
from practical use. The invention of the bridge may
have been suggested by the trunk of a tree which had
fallen athwart a mountain-torrent; that of the tool by
the use of a stone accidentally taken into the hand to
crack nuts. The use of fire probably started in and
was disseminated from regions where volcanic erup-
tions, hot springs, and burning jets of natural gas
afforded opportunity for quietly observing and turn-
ing to practical account the properties of fire. Only
after that had been done could the significance of the
fire-drili be appreciated, an instrument which was


ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY. 265

probably discovered from boring a hole through a
piece of wood. The suggestion of a distinguished in-
quirer that the invention of the fire-drill originated on
the occasion of a religious ceremony is both fantastic
and incredible. And as to the use of fire, we should
no more attempt to derive that from the invention of
the fire-drill than we should from the invention of sul-
phur matches. Unquestionably the opposite course
was the real one. *

Similar phenomena, though still largely veiled in
obscurity, mark the initial transition of nations from
a hunting to a nomadic life and to agriculture.^ We
shall not multiply examples, but content ourselves
with the remark that the same phenomena recur in
historical times, in the ages of great technical inven-
tions, and, further, that regarding them the most
whimsical notions have been circulated — notions which
ascribe to accident an unduly exaggerated part, and
one which in a psychological respect is absolutely im-
possible. The observation of steam escaping from a
tea-kettle and of the clattering of the lid is supposed
to have led to the invention of the steam-engine. Just
think of the gap between this spectacle and the con-
ception of the performance of great mechanical work
by steam, for a man totally ignorant of the steam-
engine 1 Let us suppose, however, that an engineer,

• 1 must not bs uuderaiaod ss EBjing U»l Ihii fire-dilll has pUjied no purl

I Compare on ihli poiat ths eiiremel; intsrestinR reiDU'kB o( Dr. Psnl
Cams in his /M/fcio/V <^ihi TmI, Cbicauo, 1893-


a66 ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.

versed in the practical construction of pumps, should

accidentally dip into water an inverted bottle that had
been Hiled with steam for drying and still retained its
steam. He would see the water rush violently into
the bottle, and the idea would very naturally suggest
itself of founding on this experience a convenient and
useful atmospheric steam-pump, which by impercept-
ible degrees, both psychologicaliy possible and imme-
diate, would then undergo a natural and gradual trans-
formation into Watt's steam-engine.

But granting that the most important inventions
are brought to man's notice accidentally and in ways
that are.^eipnd.Jiis. foresight, yet it does not follow
that accident alone is sufficient to produce an inven-
tion. The part which man plays is by no means a
J passive one. Even the first potter in the primeval
\ forest must have felt some stirrings of genius within
< him. In all such cases, the inventor is obliged to take
note of the new fact, he must discover and grasp its
advantageous feature, and must have the power to
turn that feature to account in the realisation of his
[purpose. He must isolate the new feature, impress it
I upon his memory, unite and interweave it with the
rest of his thought j in short, he must possess the ca-
\ pacity lo^^titfii. by exjierience.

' The capacity to profit by experience might well be
set up as a test of intelligence. This power varies
considerably in men of the same race, and increases
enormously as we advance from the lower animals to


ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY. aBy

man. The former are limited in this regard almost
entirely to the reflex actions which they have inherited
with their organism, they are almost totally incapable
of individual experience, and considering their simple
wants are scarcely in need of it. The ivory-snail
{Eburna ipirata) never learns to avoid the carnivorous
Actinia, no matter how often it may wince under the
tatter's shower of needles, apparently having no mem-
ory for pain whatever,* A spider can be lured forth
repeatedly from its hole by touching its web with a
tuning-fork. The moth plunges again and again into
the flame which has burnt it. The humming-bird
hawk-moth f dashes repeatedly against the painted
roses of the wall-paper, like the unhappy and desper-
ate thinker who never wearies of attacking the same
insoluble chimerical problem. As aimlessly almost as
Maxwell's gaseous molecules and in the same unrea-
soning manner common flies in their search for hght
and air stream against the glass pane of a half-opened
window and remain there from sheer inability to find
their way around the narrow frame. But a pike sep-
arated from the minnows of his aquarium by a glass
partition, learns after the lapse of a few months,
though only after having butted himself half to death,
that he cannot attack these flshes with impunity.
What is more, be leaves them in peace even after the

• VitlBlra, NaiurvHtinKha-JiUehtr Vmin far SOUamlt-lfiihlan, Klol,
tl •m Indabltd for thli obterviiioo la Protsisor KstKluck.


a68 ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.

removal of the partition, though he will bolt a strange
fish at once. Considerable memory must be attrib-
uted to birds of passage, a memory which, probably
owing to the absence of disturbing thoughts, acts with
the precision of that of some idiots. Finally, the
susceptibility to training evinced by the higher verte-
brates is indisputable proof of the abiUty of these ani-
mals to profit by experience.

A powerfully developed mechanical xae.raor^ , which
recalls vividly and faithfully old situations, is sufficient
for avoiding definite particular dangers, or for taking
advantage of definite particular opportunities. But
more is required for the development of inventions.
More extensive chains of images are necessary here,
the excitation by mutual contact of widely different
trains of ideas, a more powerful, more manifold, and
richer connexion of the contents of memory, a more
powerful and impressionable psychical life, heightened
_by use. A man stands on the bank of a mountain-
torrent, which is a serious obstacle to him. He re-
members that he has crossed just such a torrent be-
fore on the trunk of a fallen tree. Hard by trees are
growing. He has often moved the trunks of fallen
trees. He has also felled trees before, and then moved
them. To fell trees he has used sharp stones. He
goes in search of such a stone, and as the old situations
that crowd into his memory and are held there in liv-
ing reality by the definite powerful interest which he
has in crossing just this torrent, — as these impressions .


ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY. 369

are made to pass before his mind in the inverse order in
which they were here evoked, he invents the bridge.

There can be no doubt but the higher vertebrates
adapt their actions in some moderate degree to cir-
cumstances. The fact that they give no appreciable
evidence of advance by the accumulation of inven-
tions, is satisfactorily explained by a difference of de-
gree or intensity of intelligence as compared with
man; the assumption of a difference of kind is not
necessary, A person who saves a little every day, be
it ever so little, has an incalculable advantage over
him who daily squanders that amount, or is unable to
keep what he has accumulated. A slight quantitative
difference in such things eiiplains enormous differ-
ences of advancement.

The rules which hold good in prehistoric times
also hold good in historical times, and the remarks
made on invention may be applied almost without
modification to discovery ; for the two are distin-
guished solely by the use to which the new knowledge
is put. In both cases the investigator is concerned
with some newly observed relation of new or old prop-
erties, abstract or concrete. It is observed, for exam-
ple, that a substance which gives a chemical reaction
A is also the cause of a chemical reaction B. If this
observation fulfils no purpose but that of furthering
the scientist's insight, or of removing a source of in-
tellectual discomfort, we have a discovery; but an in-
vention, if in using the substance giving the reaction


v}o ACCIDENT IN INVENTION ANO DISCOVESV.

A to produce the desiied reaction B, we have a prac-
tical end in view, and seek to remove a source of ma-
terial discomfort. The phrase, disclosure of the eonaex-
ion of reactions, is broad enough to cover discoveries
and inventions in all departments. It embraces the
Pythagorean proposition, which is a combination of a
geometrical and an arithmetical reaction, Newton's
discovery of the connexion of Kepler's motions with
the law o[ the inverse squares, as perfectly as it does
the detection of some minute but appropriate altera-
tion in the construction of a tool, or of some appro-
priate change in the methods of a dyeing establish-
ment.

The disclosure of new provinces ol facts before
unknown can only be brought about by accidental cir-
cumstances, under which are remarked facts that com-
monly go unnoticed. The achievement of the discov-
erer here consists in his sharpened attention, which
detects the uncommon features of an occurrence and
their determining conditions from their most evanes-
cent marks,* and discovers means of submitting them
to exact and full observation. Under this head be-
long the first disclosures of electrical and magnetic
phenomena, Grimaldi's observation of interference,
Arago's discovery of the increased check suffered by a
magnetic needle vibrating in a copper envelope as
compared with that observed in a bandbox, Foucault's
obst'rvation of the stability of the plane of vibration

■CE. Iloppi, Sntdrsktm undFiudtn, iMj*.


I ACCIDENT m INVENTION AND DISCOVERY, ayi

of a rod accidentally struck while rotating in a tura-
ing-lathe, Mayer's observation of the increased red-
ness of venous blood in the tropics, Kirchhoff's obser-
vation of the augmentation of the /?-line in the solar
spectrum by the interposition of a sodium lamp,
Schonbein's discovery of ozone from the phosphoric
smell emitted on the disruption of air by electric
sparks, and a host of others. All these tacts, of which/
unquestionably many were seen numbers of times be- 1
fore they were noticed, are examples of the ioaugura-l
tion of momentous discoveries by accidental circum-l
stances, and place the importance of strained attention
in a brilliant light.

But not only is a significant part played in the be-
ginning of an inquiry by co-operative circumstances
beyond the foresight of the investigator; their influence
is also active in its prosecution. Dufay, thus, whilst
following up the behavior of one electrical state which
he had assumed, discovers the existence of two. Fres-
nel learns by accident that the interfere nee- bands re-
ceived on ground glass are seen to better advantage
in the open air. The diffraction-phenomenon of two
sHts proved to be considerably different from what
Fraunhofer had anticipated, and in following up this
circumstance he was led to the important discovery of
grating-spectra. Faraday's induction-phenomenon de-
parted widely from the initial conception which occa-
sioned his experiments, and it is precisely this devia-
tion that constitutes his real discovery.


37a ACCIDENT Iff INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.

Every man has pondered on some subject. Eveiy
one of us can multiply the examples cited, by less it-
lostrioQS ones from his own experience. I shall cite
but one. On roundiog a railway curve once, 1 acci-
dentally remarked a striliing apparent inclination of
the houses and trees, I inferred that the direction of
the total resultant physUal acceleration of the body
reacts physiologically as the vertical. Afterwards, in
attempting to inquire mote carefully into this phe-
nomenon, and this only, in a large whirling machine,
the collateral phenomena conducted me to the sensa-
tion of angular acceleration, vertigo, Flouren's ex-
periments on the section of the semi-circular canals
etc., from which gradually resulted views relating to
sensations of direction which are also held by Breuer
and Brown, which were at first contested on all hands,
but are now regarded on many sides as correct, and
which have been recently enriched by the interesting
inquiries of Breuer concerning the macula acusHca, and
Kreidel's experiments with magnetically orientable
Crustacea.* Not disregard of accident but a direct and
purposeful employment of it advances research.

The more powerful the psychical connexion of the
memory pictures is, — and it varies with the individual
and the mood, — the more apt is the same accidental
observation to be productive of results. Galileo knows
that the air has weight; he also knows of the "re-
■istance to a vacuum," expressed both in weight and


ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY, 873


in the height of a column of water. But the two ideas
dwelt asunder in his mind. It remained for Torricelli
to vary the specific gravity of the liquid measuring the
pressure, and not till then was the air included in the
Ust of pressure -exerting fluids. The reversal of the
lines of the spectrum was seen repeatedly before
Kirchhoff, and had been mechanically explained. But
it was left for his penetrating vision to discern the
evidence of the connexion of this phenomenon with
questions of heat, and to him alone through persistent
labor was revealed the sweeping significance of the
fact for the mobile equilibrium of heat. Supposing,
then, that such a rich organic connexion of the ele-
ments of memory exists, and is the prime distinguish-
ing mark of the inquirer, next in importance certainly
is that intense interest in a definite object, in a definite 1 — 7^"
idea, which fashions advantageous combinations of'
thought from elements before disconnected, and ob-
trudes that idea into every observation made, and into
every thought formed, making it enter into relation-
ship with all things. Thus Bradley, deeply engrossed
with the subject of aberration, is led to its solution
by an exceedingly unobtrusive experience in crossing
the Thames. It is permissible, therefore, to ask
whether accident leads the discoverer, or the discov-
erer accident, to a successful outcome in scientific
quests.

No man should dream of solving a great problem
unless be Is so thoroughly saturated with his subject


vji, ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


that everything else sinks into comparative insignifi-
cance. During a hurried meeting with Mayer in Hei-
delberg once, Jolly remarked, with a rather dubious
implication, that if Mayer's theory were correct water
could be wanned by shaking. Mayer went away with-
out a word of reply. Several weeks later, and now
unrecognised by Jolly, he rushed into the latter's pres-
ence exclaiming: "Es ischt asol" (It is so, it is
BOl) It was only after considerable explanation that
Jolly found out what Mayer wanted to say. The inci-
dent needs no comment*

K person deadened to sensory impressions and
given up solely to the pursuit of his own thoughts,
may also light on an idea that will divert his mental
activity into totally new channels. In such cases it is
a psychical accident, an intellectual experience, as
\ distinguished from a physical accident, to which the
person owes his discovery — a discovery which is here
made "deductively" by means of mental copies of the
world, instead of experimentally. Purely experimental
inquiry, moreover, does not exist, for, as Gauss says,
virtually we always experiment with our thoughts.
And it is precisely that constant, corrective inter-
change or intimate union of experiment and deduc-
tion, as it was cultivated by Galileo in his Dialogues
and by Newton in his Optics, that is the foundation of
the benign fruitfulness of modern scientific inquiry as


■Tblt Itorywu i(


M bT Jollj. ud tabiAinanUj n


ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVEKY. 175

contrasted with that of antiquity, where observation
and reflexion ofttimes pursued their respective courses
like two strangers.

We have to wait for the appearance of a favorable
physical accident. The movement of our thoughts
obeys the law of association. In the case of meagre
experience the result of this law is simply the mechan-
ical reproduction of definite sensory experiences. On
the other hand, if the psychical life is subjected to the
incessant infiuences of a powerful and rich experience,
then every representative element in the mind is con-
nected with so many others that the actual and natural
course of the thoughts is easily influenced and deter-
mined by insignificant circumstances, which accident-
ally are decisive. Hereupon, the process termed ima-
gination produces its protean and infinitely diversified
forms. Now what can we do to guide this process,
seeing that the combinatory law of the images is with-
out our reach? Rather let us ask, what influence can
a powerful and constantly recurring idea exert on the
movement of our thoughts? According to what has
preceded, the answer is involved in the question itself.
The idea dominates the thought of the inquirer] not
the latter the former.

Let us see, now, if we can acquire a profounder
insight into the process of discovery. The condition
of the discoverer is, as James has aptly remarked, not
unlike the situation of a person who is trying to re-
member something that he has forgotten. Both are


276 ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


sensible of a gap, and have only a remote presenti-
ment o( what is missing. Suppose I meet in a com-
pany a well-known and affable gentleman whose name
I have forgotten, and who to my horror asks to be in-
troduced to some one. I set to work according to
Lichtenberg's rule, and run down the alphabet in
search of the initial letter of his name. A vague sym-
pathy holds me at the letter G. Tentatively I add the
second letter and am arrested at e, and long before I
have tried the third letter r, the name "Gerson" sounds
sonorously upon my ear, and my anguish is gone.
While taking a walk I meet a gentleman from whom
I receive a communication. On returning home, and
in attending to weightier affairs, the matter slips my
mind. Moodily, but in vain, I ransack my memory.
Finally I observe that I am going over my walk again
in thought. On the street corner in question the self-
same gentleman stands before me and repeats his
communication. In this process are successively re-
called to consciousness all the percepts which were
connected with the percept that was lost, and with
them, finally, that, loo, is brought to light. In the
first case — where the experience had already been
made and is permanently impressed on our thought —
a systematic procedure is both possible and easy, for
we know that a name must be composed of a limited
number of sounds. But at the same time it should be
observed that the labor involved in such a combina-


I


ACCIDENT m INVENTION AND DISCOVERY. ^77

torial task would be enormous if the name were long
and the responsiveness of the mind weaker.

It is often said, and not wholly without justification]
that the scientist has solved a riddle. Every problem
in geometry may be clothed in the garb of a riddle.
Thus : ' ' What thing is that M which has the proper-
ties A, B, C )" " What circle is that which touches
the straight lines ^, B, but touches 5 in the point C7"
The first two conditions marshal before the imagina-
tion the group of circles whose centres lie in the line
of symmetry of A, B. The third condition reminds
us of all the circles having centres in the straight line
that stands at right angles to B in C. The common
term, or common terms, of the two groups of images
solves the riddle — satisfies the problem. Puzzles deal-
ing with things or words induce similar processes, but
the memory in such cases is exerted in many direc-
tions and more varied and less clearly ordered prov-
inces of ideas are surveyed. The difference between
the situation of a geometer who has a construction to
make, and that of an engineer, or a scientist, con-
fronted with a problem, is simply this, that the first
moves in a field with which he is thoroughly ac-
quainted, whereas the two latter are obliged to famil-
iarise themselves with this field subsequently, and in
a measure far transcending what is commonly re-
quired. In this process the mechanical engineer has
at least always a definite goal before him and definite
means to accomplish his aim, whilst in the case of the


278 ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.

scientist that aim is in many instances presented only
in vague and general outlines. Often the very formu-
lation of the riddle devolves on him. Frequently it
is not until the aim has been reached that the broader
outlook requisite for systematic procedure is obtained.
By far the larger portion of his success, therefore, is
contingent on luck and instinct. It is immaterial, so
far as its character is concerned, whether the process
in question is brought rapidly to a conclusion in the
brain of one man, or whether it is spun out for cen-
turies in the minds of a long succession of thinkers.
The same relation that a word solving a riddle bears
to that riddle is borne by the modem conception of
light to the facts discovered by Grimaldi, Romer,
Huygens, Newton, Young, Malus, and Fresnel, and
only by the help of this slowly developed conception
is our mental vision enabled to embrace the broad
domain of facts in question.

A welcome complement to the discoveries which
the history of civilisation and comparative psychology
have furnished, is to be found in the confessions of
great scientists and artists. Scientists and artists, we
might say, for Liebig boldly declared there was no
essential diflerence between the two. Are we to re-
gard Leonardo da Vinci as a scientist or as an artist?
If the artist builds up his work from a few motives,
the scientist discovers the motives which permeate
reahty. If scientists like Lagrange or Fourier are in
a ceitaia measure artists in the presentation of theii


ACCIDENT IN INVENTION AND DISCOVERY. 279

results, on the other hand, artists like Shakespeare or
Ruysdael are scientists in the insight which must
have preceded their creations.

Newton, when questioned about his methods of
work, could give no other answer but Ihat he was
wont to ponder again and again on a subject ; and
similar utterances are accredited to D'Alembert and
Helmholtz. Scientists and artists both recommend
persistent labor. After the repeated survey of a field
has afforded opportunity for the interposition of ad-
vantageous accidents, has rendered all the traits that
suit with the mood or the dominant thought more
vivid, and has gradually relegated to the background
all things that are inappropriate, making their future
appearance impossible; then from the teeming, swell-
ing host of fancies which a free and high-flown im-
agination calls forth, suddenly that particular form
arises to the light which harmonises perfectly with
the ruling idea, mood, or design. Then it is that that
which has resulted slowly as the result of a gradual
selection, appears as if it were the outcome of a de-
liberate act of creation. Thus are to be explained the
statements of Newton, Mozart, Richard Wagner, and
others, when they say that thoughts, melodies, and
harmonies had poured in upon them, and that they
had simply retained the right ones. Undoubtedly,
the man of genius, too, consciously or instinctively,
pursues systematic methods wherever it is possible;
but in his delicate presentiment he will omit many a


, . . rial on which a less
s energies in vain.
... ^^ in a brief space of
.-•1 ihe life of an ordinary
V--. We shall hardly go astray
. .'itly a slight deviation from
-fwrnent— as possessing simply
.. of cerebral reaction and a
iction. The men who, obeying
, make sacrifices for an idea in-
.liVLtifi (heir material welfare, may appear
vL'jWwI Philistine as fools; yet we shall
i^'l V-ombroso's view, that genius is to be
I disease, although it is unfortunately
1^ «i)nsitive brains and fragile constitutions
iily to sickness,
park of C. G. J. Jacobi that mathematics
growth and only reaches the truth by long
I paths, that the way to its discovery must
1 for long beforehand, and that then the
,ke its long -deferred appearance as if im-
Xy some divine necessity f — all this holds true


aatnicted by fcrlbei, II cec<


J


ACCIDENT m INVENTION AND DISCOVERY. 281

of every science. We are astounded often to note
that it required the combined labors of many eminent
thinkers for a full century to reach a truth which it
takes us only a few hours to master and which once
acquired seems extremely easy to reach under the
right sort of circumstances. To our humiliation we
learn that even the greatest men are bora more for
life than for science. The extent to which even they
are indebted to accident^to that singular conflux of
the physical and the psychical life in which the con-
tinuous but yet imperfect and never-ending adaptation
of the latter to the former finds its distinct expression
— that has been the subject of our remarks to-day.
Jacohi's poetical thought of a divine necessity acting
in science will lose none of its loftiness for us if we
discover in this necessity the same power that de-
stroys the unfit and fosters the fit. For loftier, nobler,
and more romantic than poetry is the truth and the
reality.


ON SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION.*


npHROUGH the co-operation of a succession of in-
-*■ quirers, among whom are particularly to be men-
tioned Goltz of Slrassburg and Breuer of Vienna,
considerable advances have been made during the
last twenty-five years in our knowledge of the means
by which we ascertain our position in space and the
direction of our motion, or orient ourselves, as the
phrase goes. I presume that you are already ac-
quainted with the physiological part of the processes
with which our sensations of movement, or, more gen-
erally speaking, our sensations of orientation, are con-
nected. Here I shall consider more particularly the
physical side of the matter. In fact, I was originally
led to the consideration of these questions by the '
observation of extremely simple and perfectly well-
known physical facts, before 1 had any great acquaint-
ance with physiology and while pursuing unbiasedly i
my natural thoughts; and I am of the conviction t


•a iMlure


, 1B97. before


SENSA 7 JONS OF ORIENTATION. 383

the way which I have pursued, and which is entirely
free from hypotheses, will, if you will follow my ex-
position, be that of easiest acquisition for the most of
you.

No man of sound common sense could ever have
doubted that a pressure or force is requisite to set a
body in motion in a given direction and that a con-i
trary pressure is required to stop suddenly a body in
motion. Though the law of inertia was first formu-
lated with anything like exactness by Galileo, the
facts at the basis o£ it were known long previously to
men of the stamp of Leonardo da Vinci, Rabelais,
and others, and were illustrated by them with appro-
priate experiments. Leonardo knew that by a swift
stroke with a ruler one can knock out from 3 vertical
column of checkers a single checker without over-
throwing the column. The experiment with a coin
resting on a piece of pasteboard covering a goblet,
which falls into the goblet when the pasteboard is
jerked away, like all experiments of the kind, is cer-
tainly very old.

With Galileo the experience in question assumes
greater clearness and force. In the famous dialogue
on the Copernican system which cost him his free-
dom, he explains the tides in an unfeiicitous, though
in principle correct manner, by the analogue of a
platter of water swung to and fro. In opposition to
the Aristotelians of his time, who believed the des-


284


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION.


cent of a heavy body could be accelerated by the
superposition of aaother heavy body, he asserted that
a body could never be accelerated by one lying upon
it unless the first in some way impeded the super-
posed body in its descent. To seek to press a falling
body by means of another placed upon it, is as sense-
less as trying to prod a man with a lance when the man
is speeding away from one with the same velocity as
the lance. Even this little excursion into physics can
explain much to us. You know the peculiar sensation
which one has in falling, as when one jumps from a
high springboard into the water, and which is aJso
experienced in some measure at the beginning of the
descent of elevators and swings. The reciprocal, grav-
itational pressure of the different parts of our body,
which is certainly felt in some manner, vanishes in
free descent, or, in the case of the elevator, is dimiD<-|
ished OQ the beginning of the descent. A similar seil*l
sation would be experienced if we were suddenly]
transported to the moon where the acceleration t^l
gravity is much less than upon the earth, I was ledl
to these considerations in 1866 by a suggestion in I
physics, and having also taken into account the alter-
ations of the blood-pressure in the cases in question, J
I found I coincided without knowing it with Wollastoa I
and Furkinje. The first as early as iSio in his Croo- ]
nian lecture had touched on the subject of sea-sicl
ness and explained it by alterations of the blood-pre


SENSATIOAS OF ORIENTATION. iSj

sure, and later had laid similar considerations at the
basis of his explanation of vertigo (iS20-i8z6).*

Newton was the first to enunciate with perfect
generality that a body can change the velocity and
direction of its motion only by the action of a force,
or the action of a second body. A corollary of this
law which was first expressly deduced by Euler is
that a body can never be set relating or made to cease
rotating of itseif but only by forces and other bodies.
For example, turn an open watch which has run down
freely backwards and forwards in your hand. The
balance-wheel will not fully catch the rapid rotations,
it does not even respond fully to the elastic force of
the spring which proves too weak to carry the wheel
entirely with it.

Let us consider now that whether we move our-
selves by means of our legs, or whether we are
moved by a vehicle or a boat, at first only a part
of our body is directly moved and the rest of it is
afterwards set in motion by the first part. We see
that pressures, pulls, and tensions are always pro-
duced between the parts of the body in this action,
which pressures, pulls, and tensions give rise to sen-
sations by which the forward or rotary movements in
which we are engaged are made perceptible. f But it


SENSATIONS OF OKIENTATION.


is quite natural that sensations so familiar should be
little noticed and that attention should be drawn to
them only under special circumstances when they oc-
cur unexpectedly or with unusual strength.

Thus my attention was drawn to this point by the
sensation of falling and subsequently by another sin-
gular occurrence. I was rounding a sharp railway
curve once when I suddenly saw all the trees, houses.


and factory chimneys along the track swerve from the
vertical and assume a strikingly inclined position.
What had hitherto appeared to me perfectly natural,
namely, the fact that we distinguish the vertical so
perfectly and sharply from every other direction, now

dinlely onlf upon limited pans. If Iba esnb wars a taaling bein^, ihe iid«


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION.


187


struck me as enigmatical. Why is it that the same
direction can now appear vertical to me and now can-
not? By what is the vertical distinguished for us?
(Compare Figure 45.)

The rails are raised on the convex or outward side
of the track in order to insure the stability of the car-
riage as against the action of the centrifugal force, the
whole being so arranged that the combination of the
force of gravity with the centrifugal force of the train
shall give rise to a force perpendicular to the plane
of the rails.

Let us assume, now, that under all circumstances
we somehow sense the direction of the total resultant
mass-acceleration whencesoever it may arise as the
vertical. Then both the ordinary and the extraor-
dinary phenomena will be alike rendered intelligible.*

I was now desirous of putting the view I had
reached to a more convenient and exact test than was
possible on a railway journey where one has no con-
trol over the determining circumstances and cannot
alter them at will. I accordingly had the simple ap-
paratus constructed which is represented in Figure 46.

In a large frame BB, which is fastened to the walls,
rotates about a vertical axis AA a second frame RR,
and within the latter a third one rr, which can be set


L


SE.VSA T/O.VS OF OHIENTA TJON.


at any distance and position from the axis, made sta-
tionary or movable, and is provided with a chair for
the observer.

The observer takes his seat in the chair and to
prevent disturbances of Judgrnent is enclosed in a pa-
per box. If the observer together with the frame rr
be then set in uniform rotation, he will feel and see
the beginning of the rotation both as to direction and


amount very distinctly although every outward visible
or tangible point of reference is wanting. If the mo-
tion be uniformly continued the sensation of rotation
will gradually cease entirely and the obser\'er will im-
agine himself at rest. But if rr be placed outside the
axis of rotation, at once on the rotation beginning, a
strikingly apparent, palpable, actually visible inclina-
tion of the entire paper box is produced, slight when


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION. aSg

the rotation is slow, strong when the rotation is rapid,
and continuing as long as the rotation lasts. It is ab-
solutely impossible for the observer to escape perceiv-
ing the inclination, although here also all outward
points of reference are wanting. If the observer, for
example, is seated so as to look towards the axis, he
will feel the box strongly tipped backwards, as it nec-
essarily must be if the direction of the total resultant
force is perceived as the vertical. For other positions
of the observer the situation is similar.*

Once, while performing one of these experiments,
and after rotating so long that I was no longer con-
scious of the movement, I suddenly caused the ap-
paratus to be stopped, whereupon I immediately felt
and saw myself with the whole box rapidly flung round
in rotation in the opposite direction, although I knew
that the whole apparatus was at rest and every out-
ward point of reference for the perception of motion
was wanting. Every one who disbelieves in sensa-
tions of movement should be made acquainted with
these phenomena. Had Newton known them and had
he ever observed how we may actually imagine our
selves turned and displaced in space without the as-
sistance of stationary bodies as points of reference, he
would certainly have been confirmed more than ever


Cnliht lo Ihe disc


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION.


in his unfortunate speculations legarding absolute
space.

The sensation of rotation in the opposite direction

after the apparatus has been stopped, slowly and grad-
ually ceases. But on accidentally inclining my head
once during this occurrence, the axis of apparent ro-
tation was also observed to incline in exactly the same
manner both as to direction and as to amount. It is
accordingly clear that the acceleration or retardation
of rotation is felt. The acceleration operates as a
stimulus. The sensation, however, like almost all
sensations, though it gradually decreases, lasts per-
ceptibly longer than the stimulus. Hence the long
continued apparent rotation after the stopping of the
apparatus. The organ, however, which causes the
persistence of this sensation must have its seat in the
kead, since otherwise the axis of apparent rotation
could not assume the same motion as the head.

If I were to say, now, that a light had flashed
upon me in making these last observations, the ex-
pression would be a feeble one. I ought to say I ex-
perienced a perfect illumination. My juvenile expe-
riences of vertigo occurred to me. I remembered
Flourens's experiments relative to the section of the
semi-circular canals of the labyrinths of doves and
rabbits, where this inquirer had observed phenomena
similar to vertigo, but which he preferred to interpret,
from his bias to the acoustic theory of the labyrinth,
as the expression of painful auditive disturbances. I


SENSA TIONS OF ORIENTA TION. 291

saw that Goltz had nearly but not quite hit the bull's
eye with his theory of the semi-circular canals. This
inquirer, who, from his happy habit of following his
own natural thoughts without regard for tradition,
has cleared up so much in science, spoke, as early as
1870, on the ground of experiments, as follows : "It
is uncertain whether the semi-circular canals are aud-
itive organs or not. In any event they form an appa-
ratus which serves for the preservation of equilibrium.
They are, so to speak, the sense-organs of equilib-
rium of the head and indirectly of the whole body." I
remembered the galvanic dizziness which had been
observed by Ritter and Purkinje on the passage of a
current through the head, when the persons experi-
mented upon imagined they were falling towards the
cathode. The experiment was immediately repeated,
and sometime later (1S74) 1 was enabled to demon-
strate the same objectively with fishes, all of which
placed themselves sidewise and in the same direction
in the field of the current as if at command.* Mai-
ler's doctrine of specific energies now appeared to me
to bring all these new and old observations into a sim-
ple, connected unity.

Let us picture to ourselves the labyrinth of the
ear with its three semi-circular canals lying in three
mutually perpendicular planes (Comp. Fig, 47), the


L


;rbrL


aga


SENSATIONS OF ORJENTATION.


mysterious position of which inquirers have endeav-
ored to explain in every possible and impossible way.
Let us conceive the neires of the ampuUs, or the di-
lated extensions of the semi- circular canals, equipped
with a capacity for responding to every imaginable
stimulus with a sensation of rotation just as the nerves
of the retina of the eye when excited by pressures,


TbB iBbyrii


Viesbadeu, BErgmaim, 1S91.


I


by electrical or chemical stimuli always respond with
the sensation of light; let iis picture to ourselves,
further, that the usual excitation of the ampullte
nerves is produced by the inertia of the contents of
the semi-circular canals, which contents on suitable
rotations in the plane of the semi-circular canal are
left behind in the motion, or at least have a tendency


SENSATJONS OF OA'IE.VTATION. 293

to remain behind and consequently exert a pressure.
It will be seen that on this supposition all the single
facts which without the theory appear as so many
different individual phenomena, become from this sin-
gle point of view clear and intelligible.

I had the satisfaction, immediately after the com-
munication in which I set forth this idea,* of seeing a
paper by Breuer appear f in which this author had
arrived by entirely different methods at results that
agreed in all essential points with my own. A few
weeks later appeared the researches of Crum Brown
of Edinburgh, whose methods were even still nearer
mine. Breuer's paper was far richer in physiologi-
cal respects than mine, and he had particularly gone
into greater detail in his investigation of the collat-
eral effects of the reflox motions and orientation of
the eyes in the phenomena under consideration. J In
addition certain experiments which I had suggested in
my paper as a test of the correctness of the view
in question had already been performed by Breuer.
Breuer has also rendered services of the highest order
in the further elaboration of this field. But in a
physical regard, my paper was, of course, more com-
plete.

In order to portray to the eye the behavior of the
semicircular canals, I have constructed here a little

• IfiiHir AiaJ., 6 NovBinbet, 1B73.
t (Cirwr CtKlltchafl drr Arrlte. 14 November. 18J4.
tlhBvemideacontribulion 10 this lisl question \a my Anafyiii 1^ tkt
Stm<H!<mi. (1SB6I, EDEliah transUllon. 1^97.


SEiVSA TIONS OF OHIENTA TIO.V.


apparatus. (See Fig. 48.)
represents the osseous semi
continuous with the bones of
which is free to rotate on the
sents the mobile and partly
circular canni, On rotatin


The large rotatable disc
-circular canal, which is
the head ; the small disc,
! axis of the first, repre-
:quid contents of the semi-
the large disc, the small
disc as you see re-
mains behind. I
have to turn some
time before the
small disc is carried
along with the large
one by friction. But
if I now stop the
large disc the small
disc as you see con-
tinues to rotate.

Simply assume
now that the rota-
tion of the small
disc, say in the di-
rection of the hands
of a watch, would
give rise to a sensation of rotation in the opposite
direction, and conversely, and you already under-
stand a good portion of the facts above set forth.
The explanation still holds, even if the small disc
does not perform appreciable rotations but is checked
by a contrivance similar to an elastic spring, the ten-


le icilan at Hi


SENSA TIONS OF ORIENTA TION. ags

sion of which disengages a sensation. Conceive, now,
three such contrivances with their mutually perpen-
dicular planes of rotation joined together so as to
form a single apparatus; then to this apparatus as a
whole, no rotation can be imparted without its being
indicated by the small mobile discs or by the springs
which are attached to them. Conceive both the right
and the left ear equipped with such an apparatus, and
you will find that it answers all the purposes of the
semi-circular canals, which you see represented ste-
rcoscopicaliy in Fig. 47 for the ear of a dove.

Of the many experiments which I have made on
my own person, and the results of which could be
predicted by the new view according to the behavior
of the model and consequently according to the rules
of mechanics, I shall cite but one. I fasten a horizon-
tal board in the frame RR of my rotatory apparatus,
lie down upon the same with my right ear upon the
board, and cause the apparatus to he uniformly ro-
tated. As soon as I no longer perceive the rotation,
I turn around upon my left ear and immediately the
sensation of rotation again starts up with marked viv-
idness. The experiment can be repeated as often as
one wishes. A slight turn of the head even is suffi-
cient for reviving the sensation of rotation which in
the perfectly quiescent state at once disappears alto-
gether.

We will imitate the experiment on the model. 1
turn the large disc until finally the small disc is car-


)96


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION.


ried along with it. If, now, while the rotation con-
tinues uniform, 1 burn oS a little thread which you
see here, the small disc will be flipped round by a
spring into its own plane 180°, so as now to present
its opposite side to you, when the rotation at once be-
gins in the opposite direction.

We have consequently a very simple means for de-
termining whether one is actually the subject or not
of uniform and imperceptible rotations. If the earth
rotated much more rapidly than it really does, or if
our semi-circular canals were much more sensitive, a
Nansen sleeping at the North Pole would be waked
by a sensation of rotation every time he turned over.
Foucault's pendulum experiment as a demonstration
of the earth's rotation would be superfluous under
such circumstances. The only reason we cannot prove
the rotation of the earth with the help of our model,
lies in the small angular velocity of the earth and in
the consequent liability to great experimental errors,*
Aristotle has said that "The sweetest of all
things is knowledge." And he is right. But if you
were to suppose that the publication of a new view
were productive of unbounded sweetness, you would
be mightily mistaken. No one disturbs his fellow-men
with a new view unpunished. Nor should the fact be
made a subject of reproach to these fellow-men. To


7 GriaulUnI


ngumpflKjunc"' '8?J.


led 10 Ibal of Fouc


SBJ/SATIONS OF ORIENTATION. 397

presume to revolutionise the current way of thinking
with regard to any question, 13 no pleasant task, and
above all not an easy one. They who have advanced
new views know best what serious difficulties stand in
their way. With honest and praiseworthy zeal, men
set to work in search of everything that does not
suit with them. They seek to discover whether they
cauDot explain the (acts better or as well, or approxi-
mately as well, by the traditional views. And that,
too, is justified. But at times some extremely artless
animadversions are heard that almost nonplus us.
"If a sixth sense existed it could not fail to have
been discovered thousands of years ago. " Indeed ;
there was a time, then, when only seven planets could
have existed 1 But I do not believe that any one will
lay any weight on the philological question whether
the set of phenomena which we have been considering
should be called a sense. The phenomena will not
disappear when the name disappears. It was further
said to me that animals exist which have no labyrinth,
but which can yet orientate themselves, and that con-
sequently the labyrinth has nothing to do with orien-
tation. We do not walk forsooth with our legs, be-
cause snakes propel themselves without them 1

But if the promulgator of a new idea cannot hope
for any great pleasure from its publication, yet the
critical process which his views undergo is extremely
helpful to the subject-matter of them. All the defects
which necessarily adhere to the new view are gradu-


agS


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION.


ally discovered and eliminated. Over-rating and ex-
aggeration give way to more sober estimates. And
so it came about that it was found unpermissible to
attribute all functions of orientation exclusively to the
labyrinth. In these critical labors DeJage, Aubert,
Breuer, Ewald, and others have rendered distin-
guished services. It can also not fail to happen that
fresh facts become known in this process which could
have been predicted by the new view, which actually
were predicted in part, and which consequently fur-
nish a support for the new view. Breuer and Ewald
succeeded in electrically and mechanically exciting
the labyrinth, and even single parts of the labyrinth,
and thus in producing the movements that belong to
such stimuli. It was shown that when the semi-circu-
lar canals were absent vertigo could not be produced,
when the entire labyrinth was removed the orienta-
tion of the head was no longer possible, that without
the labyrinth galvanic vertigo could not be induced. I
myself constructed as early as 1875 an apparatus for
observing animals in rotation, which was subsequently
reinvented in various forms and has since received the
name of "cyclostat,"* In experiments with the most
varied kinds of animals it was shown that, for exam-
ple, the larvae of frogs are not subject to vertigo until
their semi-circular canals which at the start are want-
ing are developed (K. Schafer). A large percentage
of the deaf and dumb are afflicted with grave afiec-


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION. 199

tions of the labyrinth. The American psychologist,
WilHam James, has made whirling experiments with
many deaf and dumb subjects, and in a large number
of them found that susceptibility to giddiness is want-
ing. He also found that many deaf and dumb people
on being ducked under water, whereby they lose their
weight and consequently have no longer the full as-
sistance of their muscular sense, utterly lose their
sense of position in space, do not know which is up
and which is down, and are thrown into the greatest
consternation, — results which do not occur in normal
men. Such facts are convincing proof that we do not
orientate ourselves entirely by means of the labyrinth,
important as it is for us. Dr. Kreidl has made ex-
periments similar to those of James and found that
not only is vertigo absent in deaf and dumb people
when whirled about, but that also the reflex move-
ments of the eyes which are normally induced by the
labyrinth are wanting. Finally, Dr. PoUak has found
that galvanic vertigo does not exist in a large per-
centage of the deaf and dumb. Neither the jerking
movements nor the uniform movements of the eyes
were observed which normal human beings exhibit in
the Ritter and Purkinje experiment.

After the physicist has arrived at the idea that the
semi-circular canals are the organ of sensation of ro-
tation or of angular acceleration, he is next con-
strained to ask for the organs that mediate the sensa-
tion of acceleration noticed in forward movements.


300 SEIfSA TIONS OF ORIENTA TION.

Iq searching for an organ for this function, he of
course is not apt to select one that stands in no ana-
tomical and spatial relation with the semi-circulai

canals. And in addition there are physiological con-
siderations to be weighed. The preconceived opinion
once having been abandoned that the entire labyrinth
is auditory in its function, there remains after the
cochlea is reserved for sensations of tone and the
semi- circular canals for the sensation of angular ac-
celeration, the vestibule for the discharge of additional
functions. The vestibule, particularly the part of it
known as the sacculus, appeared to me, by reason of
the so-called otoliths which it contains, eminently
adapted for being the organ of sensation of forward
acceleration or of the position of the head. In this
conjecture I again closely coincided with Breuer.

That a sensation of position, of direction and
amount of mass-acceleration exists, our experience in
elevators as well as of movement in curved paths is
sufficient proof. I have also attempted to produce and
destroy suddenly great velocities of forward move-
ment by means of various contrivances of which I
shall mention only one here. If, while enclosed in
the paper box of my large whirling apparatus at some
distance from the axis, my body is in uniform rotation
which I no longer feel, and I then loosen the connex-
ions of the frame rr with R thus making the former
moveable and 1 then suddenly stop the larger frame,
my forward motion is abruptly impeded while the


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION. joi

frame rr continues to rotate. I imagine now that I
am speeding on in a straight liae in a direction oppo-
site to that of the checked motion. Unfortunately, for
many reasons it cannot be proved convincingly that
the organ in question has Its seat in the head. Ac-
cording to the opinion of Delage, the labyrinth has
nothing to do with this particular sensation of move-
ment. Breuer, on the other hand, is of the opinion
that the organ of forward movement in man is stunted
and the persistence of the sensation in question is too
brief to permit our instituting experiments as obvious
as in the case of rotation. In fact, Crum Brown once
observed while in an irritated condition peculiar ver-
tigal phenomena in his own person, which were all
satistactorily explained by an abnormally long persist-
ence of the sensation of rotation, and I myself in an
analogous case on the stopping of a railway train felt
the apparent backward motion in striking intensity
and for an unusual length of time.

There is no doubt whatever that we feel changes
of vertical acceleration, and it will appear from the
following extremely probable that the otoliths of the
vestibule are the sense-organ for the direction of the
mass-acceleration. It will then be incompatible with
a really logical view to regard the latter as incapable
of sensing horizontal accelerations.

In the lower animals the analogue of the labyrinth
is shrunk to a little vesicle filled with a liquid and
containing tiny crystals, auditive stones, or otoliths, of


3oa SENSATIONS OF OR/ENTATIOfi.

greater specific gravity, suspended on minute hai
These crystals appear physically well adapted for in-
dicating both the direction of gravity and the direction
of incipient movements. That they discharge the for-
mer function, Delage was the first to convince himself
by experiments with lower animals which on the re-
moval of the otoliths utterly lost their bearings and
could no longer regain their normal position, Loeb
also found that fishes without labyrinths swim now on
their bellies and now on their backs. But the most
remarkable, most beautiful, and most convincing ex-
periment is that which Dr. Kreidl instituted with
crustaceans. According to Hensen, certain Crustacea
on sloughing spontaneously introduce fine grains ol
sand as auditive stones into their otolith vesicle. At
the ingenious suggestion of S. Exner, Dr. Kreidl con-
strained some of these animals to put up with iron
filings (^ferrum limatum). If the pole of an electro-
magnet be brought near the animal, it will at once
turn its back away from the pole accompanying the
movement with appropriate reflex motions of the eye
the moment the current is closed, exactly as if grav-
ity had been brought to bear upon the animal in the
same direction as the magnetic force.* This, in fact,
is what should be expected from the function ascribed
to the otoliths. If the eyes be covered with asphalt


SENSA TIONS OF ORIBNTA TtON. 303

varnish, and the auditive sacs removed, the crusta-
ceans lose their sense of direction utterly, tumble
head over heels, lie on their side or their back in-
differently. This does not happen when the eyes only
are covered. For vertebrates, Breuer has demon-
strated by searching investigations that the otoliths,
or better, statoliths, slide in three planes parallel to
the planes of the semi-circular canals, and are con-
sequently perfectly adapted for indicating changes
both in the amount and the direction of the mass-
acceleration.*

1 have already remarked that not every function
of orientation can be ascribed exclusively to the laby-
rinth. The deaf and dumb who have to be immersed
in water, and the crustaceans who must have their
eyes closed if they are to be perfectly disorientated, are
proof of this fact. I saw a blind cat at Hering's lab-
oratory which to one who was not a very attentive ob-
server behaved exactly like a seeing cat. It played
nimbly with objects rolling on the floor, stuck its head
inquisitively into open drawers, sprang dexterously
upon chairs, ran with perfect accuracy through open


• Perliapi the di>CD»<on coao


on their feet, which oecupiEd the


risisD society > lew jears a^o, will


be remembered here. I believe th.t Ih


qnesIioBB wbicb hioib are diepoaed


ISO partly nave, as early aa tBM, [he «I


paratus conceived by the Parisiu.


Bciantists to illustrate the phenomena .


question. Ono difficulty was left


nntoitcbed In the Parisian debate. Th


olDliih apparaloa al the cat can r


nderil DO service in A« descent. Th


as kdoitslla potUinD in space and is in


IttncUvBly consciouB o( the amoan


304 SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION.

doors, and never bumped against closed ones. The
visual sense had here been rapidly replaced by the
tactual and auditive senses. And it appears from
Ewald'a investigations that even after the labyrinths
have been removed, animals gradually learn to movf
about again quite in the normal fashion, presumably
because the eliminated function of the labyrinth is
now performed by some part of the brain. A certain
peculiar weakness of the muscles alone is perceptible
which Ewald ascribes to the absence of the stimulus
which is otherwise constantly emitted by the laby-
rinth (the labyrinth- tonus). But if the part of the
brain which discharges the deputed function be re-
moved, the animals are again completely disorien-
tated and absolutely helpless.

It may be said that the views enunciated by Breuer,
Crum Brown and myself in 1873 and 1874, and which
are substantially a fuller and richer development of
Goltz's idea, have upon the whole been substantiated.
At least they have exercised a helpful and stimulative
influence. New problems have of course arisen in the
course of the investigation which still await solution,
and much work remains to be done. At the same
time we see how fruitful the renewed co-operation of
the various special departments of science may be-
come after a period of isolation and invigorating la-
bor apart.

I may be permitted, therefore, to consider the re-
lation betweea hearing and orientation from another


SEf/SATIONS OF OJilENTATIO/f.

and more general point of view. What we call the
auditive organ is in the lower animals simply a sac
containing auditive stones. As we ascend the scale,
I, 2, 3 semi-circular canals gradually develop from
them, whilst the structure of the otolith organ itself
becomes more complicated. Finally, in the higher
vertebrates, and particularly in the mammals, a part
of the latter organ (the lagena) becomes the cochlea,
which Helmholtz explained as the organ for sensa-
tions of tone. In the belief that the entire labyrinth
was an auditive organ, Helmholtz, contrary to the re-
sults of his own masterly analysis, originally sought
to interpret another part of the labyrinth as the organ
of noises. I showed a long time ago (1873) that every
tonat stimulus by shortening the duration of the exci-
tation to a few vibrations, gradually loses its character
of pitch and takes on that of a sharp, dry report or
noise.* All the intervening stages between tones and
noises can be exhibited. Such being the case, it will
hardly be assumed that one organ is suddenly and at
some given point replaced in function by another. On
the basis of different experiments and reasonings S.
Exner also regards the assumption of a special organ
for the sensing of noises as unnecessary.

If we will but reflect how small a portion of the
labyrinth of higher animals is apparently in the service
of the sense of hearing, and how large, on the other

•See IheAppendiilolhuEogliih edition of my ^iMifjir^<**S«™ttMK,


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION,


hand, the portion is which very likely serves the pur- '
poses of orientation, how much the first anatomical
beginnings of the auditive sac of lower animals resem-
ble that part of the fully developed labyrinth which
does not hear, the view is irresistibly suggested which
Breuer and I (,1874, 1S75) expressed, that the auditive
organ took its development from an organ for sensing
movements by adaptation to weak periodic motional
stimuli, and that many apparatuses in the lower ani-
mals which are held to be organs of hearing are not
auditive organs at all.*

This view appears to be perceptibly gaining
ground. Dr. Kreidl by skilfully-planned experiments
has arrived at the conclusion that even fishes do not
hear, whereas E. H. Weber, in his day, regarded the
ossicles which unite the air-bladder of fishes with the
labyrinth as organs expressly designed for conducting
sound from the former to the latter, f Stfirensen has
investigated the excitation of sounds by the air-blad-
der of fishes, as also the conduction of shocks through
Weber's ossicles. He regards the air-bladder as par-
ticularly adapted for receiving the noises made by
other fishes and conducting them to the labyrinth.
He has heard the loud grunting tones of the fishes
in South American rivers, and is of the opinion that
they allure and find each other in this manner. Ac-
cording to these views certain fishes are neither deaf

• Cocopara taj Analyiii if Stnialhni.i^. iij K.


SENSAJ-JONS OF UKlENTATiON. 307

nor dumb.* The question here involved might be
solved perhaps by sharply distinguishing between the
sensation of hearing proper, and the perception of
shocks. The first-mentioaed sensation may, even in
the case of many vertebrates, be extremely restricted,
or perhaps even absolutely wanting. But besides the
auditive function, Weber's ossicles may perfectly well
discharge sotne other function. Although, as Moreau
has shown, the air-bladder itself is not an organ of
equilibrium in the simple physical sense of Borelli,
yet doubtless some function of this character is still
reserved for it. The union with the labyrinth favors
this conception, and so a host of new problems rises
here before us.

I should like to close with a reminiscence from the
year 1863. Helmholtz's Sensations of Tone had just
been published and the function of the cochlea now
appeared clear to the whole world. In a private con-
versation which 1 had with a physician, the latter de-
clared it to be an almost hopeless undertaking to seek
to fathom the function of the other parts of the laby-
rinth, whereas I in youthful boldness maintained that
the question could hardly fail to be solved, and that
very soon, although of course I had then no glimmer-
ing of how it was to be done. Ten years later the
question was substantially solved.

To-day, after having tried my powers frequently
and in vain on many questions, I no longer believe

•Stnrenicp, Jnri A:u. Pkyi.. London, Vol. ■} (1893),


SENSATIONS OF ORIENTATION.


that we can make short work of the problems of sci-
ence. Nevertheless, I should not consider an "ignor-
abimus"as an expression of modesty, but rather as
the opposite. That expression is a suitable one only
with regard to problems which are wrongly formu-
lated and which are therefore not problems at all.
Every real problem can and will be solved in due
course of time without supernatural divination, en-
tirely by accurate observation and close, searching
thought.


ON IlsrSTRUCTION IN THE CLASSICS
AND THE SCIENCES."


T31^RHAPS the most fantastic proposition that Man-


r


pertuis,t the renowned president of the Berlin


Academy, ever put forward for the approval of his

• An address delivmed before tbe Coaitress olOdcgales of Ihe Geimu
RaalscbnTmajiDervBreia, it Dortmond, April i6, 1SB6. Ttie full lille of tbe
address reads - ■' Oq the ReUilve Educational Value of the CUssics and tbe
Malbematict>-PbTiical Scieotss in Colleges and Higb Scbools."

Although substantially coniahied in an addteaa which I was to have made
Bl tbe meelini; of Natnral ScEenlists at Saliburg In iBSi (deferred on BccoDDt

"Physicil iDBlrnctlnn In Preparatoty Schools," which 1 delivereil in 1883, the
LDVLtation of the German ReatschulmlnnervcTela afforded me the Grat oppoi^
mnilT of pnlling my views upon this subjecl before a large circle of readers.
Owing to the place and dicDDiEIancBS oE deliverr, my remarks appl j of coorsa,
piimaiily. only to Cerman schools, hut, with slight modificallons, made In
Ibis


s translation, ate no
giving here eipressio


n to a strong


pers.


Dal oonvie


donio


med long ago, It


matter dI deep aau


nd Ibal tb


yagre


e in many points


.h tbe views recently


dvancedin


ndep


udenltora]


by P.


ulsen [Gtahithti


giUhrlm UKtirric/,


1^. Leipsic,


18B3)


ris, Cerf. iMj). Ilia


not my deal


merely to contribule


my mile to


»ards


brmgingat


out the Inevitable tero-


on now preparing ia


the world


eLen


enlsry inst


eiperienced educatio


nists the firs


t ol that re


olnlio


will be to make


eek and matheoBticB


.1 snbiecta


nihe


higher elasaes ol


and in tbe


titntio


», as has been done in the spiendi


emotinsim


ction


p between the Germ


Jilandscien


iSosc


hools goner


llT.ca


nlbns be bridged


inevitable 1


au^fq


malionswi


Itbea


el. (Prague, Ma


.1B86.)


». Dresden


iJSi,


p. 330.


contemporaries was that of founding a city in which,
to instruct and discipline young students, only Latin
should be spoken. Maupertuis's Latin city remained
an idle wish. But for centuries Latin and Greek in-
stitiitions exist in which our children spend a goodly
portion of their days, and whose atmosphere constantly
surrounds them, even when without their walls.

For centuries instruction in the ancient languages
has been zealously cultivated. For centuries its neces-
sity has been alternately championed and contested.
More strongly than ever are authoritative voices now
raised against the preponderance of instruction in the
classics and in favor of an education more suited to
the needs of the time, especially (or a more generous
treatment of mathematics and the natural sciences.

In accepting your invitation to speak here on the
relative educational value of the classical and the
mathematico- physical sciences in colleges and high
schools, I find my justification in the duty and the
necessity laid upon every teacher of forming from his
own experiences an opinion upon this important ques-
tion, as partly also in the special circumstance that in
my youth I was personally under the influence of
school-life for only a short time, just previous to my
entering the university, and had, therefore, ample op-
portunity to observe the effects of widely different
methods upon my own person.

Passing, now, to a review of the arguments which
the advocates of instruction in the classics advance,


OM THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 311

and of what the adherents of instruction in the physi-
cal sciences in their turn adduce, we find ourselves in
rather a perplexing position with respect to the argu-
ments of the first named. For these have been differ-
ent at different times, and they are even now of a very
multifarious character, as must be where men advance,
in favor of an institution that exists and which they are
determined to retain at any cost, everything they can
possibly think of. We shall find here much that has
evidently been brought forward only to impress the
minds of the ignorant; much, too, that was advanced
in good faith and which is not wholly without founda-
tion. Weshallget a fair idea of the reasoning employed
by considering, first, the arguments that have grown
out of the historical circumstances connected with the
original introduction of the classics, and, lastly, those
which were subsequently adduced as accidental after-
thoughts.

Instruction in Latin, as Paulsen* has minutely
shown, was introduced by the Roman Church along
with Christianity. With the Latin language were also
transmitted the scant and meagre remnants of ancient
science. Whoever wished to acquire this ancient edu-
cation, then the only one worthy of the name, for him
the Latin language was the only and indispensable
means; such a person had to learn Latin to rank
among educated people.

•F. Pauliea, GiKhicklt dtxgeliMTln UnltrriMi, Laiplic, iStJ.


312 Olsr THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.

The wide-spread influence of the Roman Church
wrought many and various results. Among those for
which all are glad, we may safely count the establish-
ment of a sort of uniformity among the nations and of a
regular international intercourse by means of the Latin
language, which did much to unite the nations in the
common work of civilisation, carried on from the fif-
teenth to the eighteenth century. The Latin language
was thus long the language of scholars, and instruc-
tion in Latin the road to a liberal education — a shib-
boleth stiil employed, though long inappropriate.

For scholars as a class, it is to be regretted, per-
haps, that Latin has ceased to be the medium of inter-
national communication. But the attributing of the
loss of this function by the Latin language to its inca-
pacity to accommodate itself to the numerous new
ideas and conceptions which have arisen in the course
of the development of science is, in my opinion, wholly
erroneous. It would be difficult to find a modem
scientist who had enriched science with as many new
ideas as Newton has, yet Newton knew how to ex-
press those ideas very correctly and precisely in the
Latin language. If this view were correct, it would
also hold true of every living language. Originally
every language has to adapt itself to new ideas.

It is far more likely that Latin was displaced as
the literary vehicle of science by the influence of the
nobility. By their desire to enjoy the fruits of litera-
ture and science, through a less irksome medium than


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.


Latin, the nobility performed for the people at large
an undeniable service. For the days were now past
when acquaintance with the language and literature of
science was restricted to a caste, and in this step, per-
haps, was made the most important advance of modem
times. To-day, when international intercourse is firmly
established in spite of the many languages employed,
no one would think of reintroducing Latin.*

The facility with which the ancient languages lend
themselves to the expression of new ideas is evidenced
by the fact that the great majority of our scientific
ideas, as survivals of this period of Latin intercourse,
bear Latin and Greek designations, while in great
measure scientific ideas are even now invested with
names from these sources. But to deduce from the
existence and use of such terms the necessity of still
learning Latin and Greek on the part of all who em-
ploy them is carrying the conclusion too far. All terms,
appropriate and inappropriate, — and there are a large
number of inappropriate and monstrous combinations
in science, — rest on convention. The essential thing
is, that people should associate with the sign the pre-
cise idea that is designated by it. It matters little
whether a person can correctly derive the words tele-
graph, tangent, ellipse, evolute, etc., if the correct idea


e, Ibe LatiD lin-


and llial Lsibolli I


314


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.


is present in his mind when he uses them. On the
other hand, no matter how well he may know their ety-
mology, his knowledge will be of httle use to him if
the correct idea is absent. Ask the average and fairly
educated classical scholar to translate a few hnes for
you from Newton's Principia, or from Huygens's Ho-
rologium, and you will discover at once what an ex-
tremely subordinate role the mere knowledge of lan-
guage plays in such things. Without its associated
thought a word remains a mere sound. The fashion of
employing Greek and Latin designations^ for it can
he termed nothing else— has a natural root in history;
it is impossible for the practice to disappear suddenly,
but it has fallen of late considerably into disuse. The
terms ^uj, ohm. Ampere, volt, etc., are in international
use, but they are not Latin nor Greek. Only the per-
son who rates the unessential and accidental husk
higher than its contents, can speak of the necessity of
learning Latin or Greek for such reasons, to say noth-
ing of spending eight or ten years on the task. Will
not a dictionary supply in a few seconds all the in-
formation we wish on such subjects?*


from DIUseldorl. Judge Harlwich writes


"nolegr ol Ibese Suon H


0^■ THE CLASSICS AN^D THE SCIENCES, 315

It is indisputable that our modem civilisation took

up the threads of the ancient civilisation, that at
many points it begins where the latter left off, and
that centuries ago the remains of the ancient culture
were the only culture existing in Europe. Then, of
course, a classical education really was the liberal edu-
cation, the higher education, the ideal education, for
it was the soh education. But when the same claim
is now raised in behalf of a classical education, it 1
be uncompromisingly contested as bereft of all foun-
dation. For our civilisation has gradually attained
its independence ; it has lifted itself far above the an-
cient civilisation, and has entered generally new direc-
tions of progress. Its note, its characteristic feature,
is the enlightenment that has come from the great
mathematical and physical researches of the last cen-
turies, and which has permeated not only the prac-
tical arts and industries but is also gradually finding
its way into all fields of thought, including philosophy
and history, sociology and linguistics. Those traces
of ancient views that are still discoverable in philoso-
phy, law, art, and science, operate more as hindrances
than helps, and will not long stand before the devel-
opment of independent and more natural views.


I


Grimms and olhcr Teu


lighl upon Iha origin an


of BO-callad classical educalioa


Oils of words of lonif.


oriain whose derivation Ihcy do


wot Ihamtbinkitwor


h whils in look DP anch words i


hough <be; love lo ma


ntaiD that people (honld stad


es (or lh6 sake ofCym


loRy alone/'


3l6 ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.

It ill becomes classical scholars, therefore, to re-
gard themselves, at this day, as the educated class
par excellence, to condemn as uneducated all persons
who do not understand Latin and Greek, to complain
that with such people profitable conversations are not
to be carried on, etc. The most delectable stories
have got into circulation, illustrative of the defective
education of scientists and engineers. A renowned
inquirer, for example, is said to have once announced
his intention of holding a free course of university lec-
tures, with the word "frustra" ; an engineer who spent
his leisure hours in collecting insects is said to have
declared that he was studying "etymology." It is
true, incidents of this character make us shudder or
smile, according to our mood or temperament. But
we must admit, the next moment, that in giving way
to such feelings we have merely succumbed to a child-
ish prejudice. A lack of tact but certainly no lack of
education is displayed in the use of such half-under-
stood expressions. Every candid person wiU confess
that there are many branches of knowledge about which
he had better be silent. We shall not be so unchari-
table as to turn the tables and discuss the impression
that classical scholars might make on a scientist or
engineer, in speaking of science. Possibly many ludi-
crous stories might be told of them, and of far more
serious import, which should fully compensate for the
blunders of the other party.

The mutual severity of judgment which we have


ON THE CLASSJCS AND THE SCIENCES. 317

here come upon, may also forcibly bring home to us
how really scarce a true liberal culture is. We may
detect in this mutual attitude, too, something of that
narrow, raediaval arrogance of caste, where a man
began, according to the special point of view of the
speaker, with the scholar, the soldier, or the nobleman.
Little sense or appreciation is to be found in it for the
common task of humanity, little feeling for the need of
mutual assistance in the great work of civilisation,
little breadth of mind, little truly liberal culture.

A knowledge of Latin, and partly, also, a knowl-
edge of Greek, is still a necessity for the members of
a few professions by nature more or less directly con-
cerned with the civilisations of antiquity, as for law-
yers, theologians, philologists, historians, and gen-
erally for a small number of persons, among whom
from time to time I count myself, who are compelled
to seek for information in the Latin literature of the
centuries just past.* But that all young persons in
search of a higher education should pursue for this
reason Latin and Greek to such excess; that persons
intending to become physicians and scientists should
come to the universities defectively educated, or even
miseducated; and that they should be compelled to

• Slundme remold from Ibe legal proressioa [ sbould nol bare venluied 10
declare thai Ibe sludy of Greek was nol necessary tor Ibe jurists; jel Ibia
view WIS lakea in (he debale Ihat loUoned Ibis leclare b; prDfesiional jitrisls


L


hJM opini


n, the prepu


uory education eb-


& InlheGermiaRMlgynina


i also be sufi


cientfor the futnre


ts aad iniuSciecl only tor lb


s. [In En El and and


tica nol only is Creek not ne


essary, bu


the law-La.j


is so peculiar that


3l8 ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.

come only from schools that do noi supply them with
the proper preparstoty knowledge is going a little bit
too far.

After the conditions which had given to the study
of Latin and Greek their high import had ceased to
exist, the traditional curriculum, naturally, was re-
tained. Then, the different effects of this method of
education, good and bad, which no one had thought of
at its introduction, were realised and noted. As nat-
ural, too, was it that those who had strong interests
in the preservation of these studies, from knowing no
others or from Uving by them, or for still other rea-
sons, should emphasise the good results of such in-
struction. They pointed to the good effects as if they
had been consciously aimed at by the method and could
be attained only through its agency.

One real benefit that students might derive from
a rightly conducted course in the classics would be
the opening up of the rich literary treasures of an-
tiquity, and intimacy with the conceptions and views
of the world held by two advanced nations. A person
who has read and understood the Greek and Roman
authors has felt and experienced more than one who is
restricted to the impressions of the present. He sees
how men placed in different circumstances judge quite
differently of the same things from what we do to-day.
His own judgments will be rendered thus more inde-
pendent. Again, the Greek and Latin authors are indis-


I


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 319

putably a rich fountain of recreation, of enlightenment,
and of intellectual pleasure after the day's toil, and
the individual, not less than civilised humanity gen-
erally, will remain grateful to them for all time. Who
does not recail with pleasure the wanderings of Ulys-
ses, who does not listen joyfully to the simple narra-
tives of Herodotus, who would ever repent of having
made the acquaintance of Plato's Dialogues, or of
having tasted Lucian's divine humor ? Who would
give up the glances he has obtained into the private
life of antiquity from Cicero's letters, from Plautus or
Terence ? To whom are not the portraits of Suetonius
undying reminiscences? Who, in fact, would throw
away any knowledge he had once gained ?

Yet people who draw from these sources only, who
know only this culture, have surely no right to dog-
matise about the value of some other culture. As ob-
jects of research for individuals, this literature is ex-
tremely valuable, but it is a different question whether
it is equally valuable as the almost exclusive means of
education of our youth.

Do not other nations and other literatures exist
from which we ought to learn ? Is not nature herself
our first school-mistress? Are our highest models al-
ways to be the Greeks, with their narrow provinciality
of mind, that divided the world into " Greeks and bar-
barians," with their superstitions, with their eternal
questioning of oracles? Aristotle with his incapacity
to learn from facts, with his word-science ; Plato with


3ao Oy THE CLASSICS AXO THE SCIENCES.

bis heavy, interminable diaJc^nes, with his barren, at
times childish, dialectics — are they onsuipassable ? •
The Romans with their apathy, their pompous exter-
nality, set off by fulsome and bombastic phrases, with
their narrow -minded, philistine philosophy, with their
benzied sensuality, with their cruel and bestial indul-
geoce in animal and man baiting, with their outrageous
maltreatment and plundering of their subjects — are
they patterns worthy of imitation ? Or shall, perhaps,
our science edify itself with the works of Pliny who
cites midwives as authorities and himself stands on
their point of view?

Besides, if an acquaintance with the ancient world
really were attained, we might come to some settle-
ment with the advocates of classical education. But it
is words and forms, and forms and words only, that
are supplied to our youth ; and even collateral sub-
jects are forced into the strait-jacket of the same
rigid method and made a science of words, sheer feats
of mechanical memory. Really, we feel ourselves set
back a thousand years into the dull cloister-cells of the
Middle Ages.

This must be changed. It is possible to get ac-


und br Ihe (act Ibil oui speculatiVB phlloiopby still moTM to ■ great ait
In their pathi nl thonuhl. The more prob.bla eonelasion ia thai this brai
haa raada vary litlla pragms in tba la!i( two IhouiaDd yaan. Natnril «ia:


ON Tim CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.


321


quainted with the views of the Greeks and Romans by
a shorter road than the intellect deadening process
of eight or ten years of declining, conjugating, analys-
ing, and extemporisation. There are to-day plenty of
educated persons who have acquired through good
translations vivider, clearer, and more just views of
classical antiquity than the graduates of our gymna-
siums and colleges.*

For us moderns, the Greeks and the Romans are
simply two objects of archaso logical and historical re-
search like all others. If we put them before our
youth in fresh and living pictures, and not merely in
words and syllables, the efiect will be assured. We
derive a totally different enjoyment from the Greeks
when we approach them after a study of the results
of modern research in the history of civilisation. We
read many a chapter of Herodotus differently when we
attack his works equipped with a knowledge of natural
science, and with information about the stone age and
the lake-dwellers. What our classical institutions /r^-
lend to give can and actually will be given to our youth
with much more fruitful results by competent historical
instruction, which must supply, not names and num-
bers alone, nor the mere history of dynasties and wars,
but be in every sense of the word a true history of
civilisation.

*t wonEd nol for n moineal coDteod Ihal we derive eiBCLlf the same prcfit


sriy bou^hl witb Ibe t


322 OH THE CLASSICS AKD TUE SCIENCES.


The view still widely prevails that althoDgb :
"higher, ideal culture," all extension of our view of
the world, is acquired by philological and in a lesser
degree by historical studies, still the mathematics and
natural sciences should not be neglected on account
of their usefulness. This is an opinion to which I must
refuse my assent. It were strange if mao could learn
more, could draw more intellectual nourishment, from
the shards of a few old broken jugs, from inscribed
stones, or yellow parchments, than from all the rest
of nature. True, man is man's first concern, but he
is not his sole concern.

In ceasing to regard man as the centre of the world ;
in discovering that the earth is a top whirled about
the sun, which speeds off with it into infinite space;
in finding that in the fixed stars the same elements
exist as on earth ; in meeting everywhere the same
processes of which the life of man is merely a vanish-
ingly small part— in such things, too, is a widening of
our view of the world, and edification, and poetry.
There are here perhaps grander and more significant
facts than the bellowing of the wounded Ares, or the
charming island of Calypso, or the ocean-stream en-
girdling the earth. He only should speak of the rela-
tive value of these two domains of thought, of their
poetry, who knows both.

The "utility "of physical science is, in a measure,
only a (ollatcral product of that flight of the intellect
which produced science- No one, however, should


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 323

underrate the utility of science who has shared in the
realisation by modern industrial art of the Oriental
world of fables, much less one upon whom those treas-
ures have been poured, as it were, from the fourth di-
mension, without his aid or understanding.

Nor may we believe ihat science is useful only to
the practical man. Its influence permeates all our af-
fairs, our whole life ; everywhere its ideas are decisive.
How differently does the jurist, the legislator, or the
political economist think, who knows, for example,
that a square mile of the most fertile soil can support
with the solar heat annually consumed only a definite
number of human beings, which no art or science can
increase. Many economical theories, which open new
air-paths of progress, air-paths in the literal sense of
the word, would be made impossible by such knowl-


The eulogists of classical education love to empha-
sise the cultivation of taste which comes from employ-
ment with the ancient models. I candidly confess
that there is something absolutely revolting in this to
me. To form the taste, then, our youths must sacrifice
ten years of their life I Luxury takes precedence over
necessity. Have the future generations, in the face
of the difficult problems, the great social questions,
which they must meet, and that with strengthened
mind and heart, no more important duties to fulfil than
these ?


324 1^^ "^^^^ CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.

But let us assume that this end were desirable.
Can taste be formed by rules and precepts? Do not
ideals of beauty change ? Is it not a stupendous ab-
surdity to force one's self artificially to admire things
which, with all their historical interest, with all their
beauty in individual points, are for the most part
foreign to the rest of our thoughts and feelings, pro-
vided we have such of our own. A nation that is
truly such, has its own taste and will not go to others
for it. And every individual perfect man has his own
taste.*

And what, after all, does this cultivation of taste
consist in ? In the acquisition of the personal literary
style of a few select authors ! What should we think
of a people that would force its youth a thousand
years from now, by years of practice, to master the
tortuous or bombastic style of some successful lawyer
or politician of to-day? Should we not justly accuse
tliem of a woful lack of taste ?

The evil effects of this imagined cultivation of the


• ■• The lempHtion," Judge Hsttwlch wr


IBS, " to regard fbe ' I


■ncisDls aa so lody and unagrpaisable app


ed in the rcprcsen.a


the buman body iha


iplendid models; and aecooillr, id Ibeii


EBQies Iheyhad Ibess model! ceiistaiilly be


ore.beirejcs. Nowo


tbal Iheit Glalues Hill eicEle onr admiralio


1 ForlbBtura, Ibe


bum an body hag not changed in the course


eaaily EI en, namel|r, I


MKilplure. as ■ univenal crilerion of ihe h


cienu-a (allwy ■(aJDM wtioh people cum


.,inB.yindgmenl,l»


wwiwA"


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 325

taste find expression often enough. The young savant
who regards the composition of a scientific essay as a
rhetorical exercise instead of a simple and unadorned
presentation of the facts and the truth, still sits uncon-
sciously on the school-bench, and still unwittingly rep-
resents the point of view of the Romans, by whom the
elaboration of speeches was regarded as a serious sci-
entific (!) employment.


Far be it from me to underrate the value of the de-
velopment of the instinct of speech and of the increased
comprehension of our own language which comes from
philological studies. By the study of a foreign lan-
guage, especially of one which differs widely from ours,
the signs and forms of words are first clearly distin-
guished from the thoughts which they express. Words
of the closest possible correspondence in different lan-
guages never coincide absolutely with the ideas they
stand for, but place in relief slightly different aspects
of the same thing, and by the study of language the
attention is directed to these shades of difference. But
it would be far from admissible to contend that the
study of Latin and Greek is the most fruitful and nat-
ural, let alone the snly, means of attaining this end.
Any one who will give himself the pleasure of a few
hours' companionship with a Chinese grammar; who
will seek to make clear to himself the mode of speech
and thought of a people who never advanced as far as
the analysis of articulate sounds, but stopped at the


\


336 OAT THE CLASSICS AND TUB SCIENCES.

analysis of syllables, to whom our alphabetical char-
acters, therefore, are an inexplicable puzzle, and who
express ail their rich and profound thoughts by means
of a few syllables with variable emphasis and position,
— such a person, perhaps, will acquire new, and ex-
tremely elucidative ideas upon the relation of lan-
guage and thought. But should our children, there-
fore, study Chinese ? Certainly not. No more, then,
should they be burdened with Latin, at least in the
measure they are.

It is a beautiful achievement to reproduce a Latin
thought in a modern language with the maximum fidel-
ity of meaning and expression — for the translator.
Moreover, we shall be very grateful to the translator
for his performance. But to demand this feat of every
educated man, without consideration of the sacrifice of
time and labor which it entails, is unreasonable. And
for this very reason, as classical teachers admit, that
ideal is never perfectly attained, except in rare cases
with scholars possessed of special talents and great
industry. Without slurring, therefore, the high im-
portance of the study of the ancient languages as a
profession, we may yet feel sure that the instinct for
speech which is part of every liberal education can,
and must, be acquired in a different way. Should we,
indeed, be forever lost if the Greeks had not lived be-
fore us ?

The fact is, we must carry our demands further
than the representatives of classical philology. We


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE HCIF.NCES. 327

must ask of every educated man a fair scientific con-
ception of tlie nature and value of language, of the
formation of language, of tfie alteration of tlie mean-
ing of roots, of the degeneration of fixed forms of
speech to grammatical forms, in brief, of ail the main
results of modern comparative philology. We should
judge that this were attainable by a careful study of
our mother tongue and of the languages next allied to
it, and subsequently of the more ancient tongues from
which the former are derived. If any one object that
this is too difficult and entails too much labor, I should
advise such a person to place side by side an English,
a Dutch, a Danish, a Swedish, and a German Bible, and
to compare a few lines of them ; he will be amazed at
the multitude of suggestions that offer themselves.*
In fact, I believe that a really progressive, fruitful, ra-
tional, and instructive study of languages can be con-
ducted only on this plan. Many of my audience will
remember, perhaps, the bright and encouraging effect,
like that of a ray of sunlight on a gloomy day, which
the meagre and furtive remarks on comparative phi-


"Aadlbeearlh was withDQI [arm snd void; and darkncu was upon Ibe face
'-of lbs deep. And ibe ipiiit ol God moved upon lbs face oE the waleis."—
Diilch: •■InhetbeginschiepGoddenhenielondoaardfl, Da aarda nu was

"opdeoaleren."— DanUb: "I BeKyDdelteuskable Cud Himmelen og Jor-
■■ dop. Or Jorden var ode og (om, og der var morkl ovenover AtKtundBn, og

"padeGud Himmel ocb Jotd. Ocb Jotden war Ode nch lam, ocb marker war
■'pftdjupet. ocbGodi Ande swtfde flfwer waiuiet,"-Gsniiaii ; "Am Aafang
" scbur Coll Himmel nnd Erda, Und dio Erde war wOsl und leer, und e> wax
"GnsteiaufderTiete; und dErCeisi Goiiei schwsbie auf dem Wauei."


328 O!^ THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.


lology in Curtius's Greek grammar wrought in that
barren and lifeless desert of verbal quibbles.


The principal result obtained by the present method
of studying the ancient languages is that which comes
from the student's employment with their complicated
grammars. It consists in the sharpening of the atten-
tion and in the exercise of the judgment by the prac-
tice of subsuming special cases under general rules,
and of distinguishing between different cases. Ob-
viously, the same result can be reached by many other
methods; for example, by difficult games of cards.
Every science, the mathematics and the physical sci-
ences included, accomplish as much, if not more, in
this disciplining of the judgment. In addition, the
matter treated by those sciences has a much higher in-
trinsic interest for young people, and so engages spon-
taneously their attention ; while on the other hand they
are elucidative and useful in other directions in which
grammar can accomplish nothing.

Who cares, so far as the matter of it is concerned,
whether we say hoviinum or hominorvm in the genitive
plural, interesting as the fact may be for the philolo-
gist? And who would dispute that the intellectual
need of causal insight is awakened not by grammar
but by the natural sciences ?

It is not our intention, therefore, to gainsay in the
least the good influence which the study of Latin and
Greek grammar also exercises on the sharpening of the


ON THE CLASSICS AND IHE SCIENCES. 329

judgment. In so far as the study of words as such

must greatly promote lucidity and accuracy of ex-
pression, in so far as Latin and Greek are not yet
wholly indispensable to many branches of knowledge,
we willingly concede to them a place in our schools,
but would demand that the disproportionate amount of
time allotted to them, wrongly withdrawn from other
useful studies, should be considerably curtailed. That
in the end Latin and Greek will not be employed as
the universal means of education, we are fully con-
vinced. They will be relegated to the closet of the
scholar or professional philologist, and gradually make
way for the modern languages and the modern science
of language.

Long ago Locke reduced to their proper limits the
exaggerated notions which obtained of the close con-
nexion of thought and speech, of logic and grammar,
and recent investigators have established on still surer
foundations his views. How little a complicated gram-
mar is necessary for expressing delicate shades of
thought is demonstrated by the Italians and French,
who, although they have almost totally discarded the
grammatical redundancies of the Romans, are yet not
surpassed by the latter in accuracy of thought, and
whose poetical, but especially whose scientific litera-
ture, as no one will dispute, can bear favorable com-
parison with the Roman,

Reviewing again the arguments advanced in favor
of the study of the ancient languages, we are obliged


330 O.V THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIE.VCES.

to say that in the main and as applied to the present,
they are wholly devoid of force. In so far as the
aims which this study theoretically pursues are still
worthy of attainment, they appear to us as altogether
too narrow, and are surpassed in this only by the
means employed. As almost the sole, indisputable re-
sult of this study we must count the increase of the
student's skill and precision in expression. One in-
clined to be uncharitable might say that our gymna-
siums and classical academies turn out men who can
speak and write, but, unfortunately, have little to write
or speak about. Of that broad, liberal view, of that
famed universal culture, which the classical curriculum
is supposed to yield, serious words need not be lost.
This culture might, perhaps, more properly be termed
the contracted or lopsided culture.


While considering the study of languages we threw
a few side glances at mathematics and the natural sci-
ences. Let us now inquire whether these, as branches
of study, cannot accomplish much that is to be attained
in no other way. I shall meet with no contradiction
when I say that without at least an elementary mathe-
matical and scientific education a man remains a total
stranger in the world in which he lives, a stranger in
the civilisation of the time that bears him. Whatever
he meets in nature, or in the industrial world, either
does not appeal to him at all, from his having neither


ON THE CLASSICS AND TlJii SCIENCES. 331

eye nor ear for it, or it speaks to him in a totally unin-
telligible language.

A real understanding of the world and its civilisa-
tion, however, is not the only result of the study of
mathematics and the physical sciences. Much more
essential for the preparatory school is the /^rma/ cul-
tivation which comes from these studies, the strength-
ening of the reason and the judgment, the exercise
of the imagination. Mathematics, physics, chemistry,
and the so-called descriptive sciences are so much
alike in this respect, that, apart from a few points, we
need not separate them in our discussion.

Logical sequence and continuity of ideas, so neces-
sary for fruitful thought, are /tirc*f^//i'ni-^ the results of
mathematics ; the ability to follow facts with thoughts,
that is, to observe or collect experiences, is chiefly de-
veloped by the natural sciences. Whether we notice
that the sides and the angles of a triangle are connected
in a definite way, that an equilateral triangle possesses
certain definite properties of symmetry, or whether we
notice the deflexion of a magnetic needle by an elec-
tric current, the dissolution of zinc in diluted sulphuric
acid, whether we remark that the wings of a butterfly
are slightly colored on the under, and the fore-wings
of the moth on the upper, surface : indiscriminately
here we proceed from observations, from individual
acts of immediate intuitive knowledge. The field of
observation is more restricted and lies closer at hand
in mathematics; it is more varied and broader but


33Z O.V THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.

more dJfScult to compass in the natural sciences. The
essential thing, however, is for the student to leara to
make observations in all these fields. The philosophi-
cal question whether our acts of knowledge in mathe-
matics are of a special kind is here of no importance
(or us. It is true, of course, that the observation can
be practised by languages also. But no one, surely,
will deny, that the concrete, living pictures pre-
sented in the fields just mentioned possess different
and more powerful attractions for the mind of the
youth than the abstract and hazy figures which lan-
guage offers, and on which the attention is certainly not
so spontaneously bestowed, nor with such good re-
sults.*

Observation having revealed the different proper-
ties of a given geometrical or physical object, it is dis-
covered that in many cases these properties depend \a
some way upon one another. This interdependence
of properties (say that of equal sides and equal angles
at the base of a triangle, the relation of pressure to
motion,) is nowhere so distinctly marked, nowhere is
the necessity and permanency of the interdependence
so plainly noticeable, as in the fields mentioned.
Hence the continuity and logical consequence of the
ideas which we acquire in those fields. The relative
simplicity and perspicuity of geometrical and phys-
ical relations supply here the conditions of natural and


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 333

easy progress. Relations of equal simplicity are not
met with in the fields which the study of language
opens up. Many of you, doubtless, have often won-
dered at the little respect for the notions of cause and
eSect and their connexion that is sometimes found
among professed representatives of the classical stud-
ies. The explanation is probably to be sought in the
fact that the analogous relation of motive and action
familiar to them from their studies, presents nothing
like the clear simplicity and determinateness that the
relation of cause and effect does.

That perfect mental grasp of all possible cases,
that economical order and organic union of the thoughts
which comes from it, which has grown for every one
who has ever tasted it a permanent need which he
seeks to satisfy in every new province, can be developed
only by employment with the relative simplicity of
mathematical and scientific investigations.

When a set of facts comes into apparent conflict
with another set of facts, and a problem is presented,
its solution consists ordinarily in a more refined dis-
tinction or in a more extended view of the facts, as
may be aptly illustrated by Newton's solution of the
problem of dispersion. When a new mathematical or
scientific fact is demonstrated, or explained, such demon-
stration also rests simply upon showing the connex-
ion of the new fact with the facts already known ; for
example, that the radius of a circle can be laid off as
chord exactly six times in the circle is explained or


334 OS THE CLASSICS AXD THE SCIESCES.


proved by dividing tbe regular bexagon inscribed in
tbe cirde into equiUteral triangles. Tbat tbe quantity
of heat developed in a second in a wiie convening an
electric current is quadrupled on the doubling of the
ctrength of the current, we explain from the doubling of
tbe fall of the potential due to the doobiing of the
current's intensity, as also from the doubling of the
quantity flowing through, in a word, from the quad-
rupling of the work done. In point of principle, ex-
planation and direct proof do not difier much.

He who solves scientifically a geometrical, phys-
ical, or technical problem, easily remarks that his
procedure is a methodical mental quest, rendered pos-
sible by the economical order of the province — a sim-
plified purposeful quest as contrasted with unmethod-
ical, unscientific guess work. The geometer, for ex-
ample, who has to construct a circle touching two given
straight lines, casts his eye over the relations of sym-
metry of the desired construction, and seeks the centre
of his circle solely in the line of symmetry of the two
straight lines. The person who wants a triangle of
which two angles and the sum of the sides are given,
grasps in his mind the determinateness of the form of
this triangle and restricts his search for it to a certain
group of triangles of Ihe same form. Under very dif-
ferent circumstances, therefore, the simplicity, the in-
tellectual perviousness, of the subject-matter of mathe-
matics and natural science is felt, and promotes both
the discipline and the self-confidence of the reason.


OA' TJIE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES,


33S


Unquestionably, much more will be attained by in-
struction in the mathematics and the natural sciences
than now is, when more natural methods are adopted.
One point of importance here is that young students
should not be spoiled by premature abstraction, but
should be made acquainted with their material from
living pictures of it before they are made to work with
it by purely ratiocinative methods. A good stock of
geometrical experience could be obtained, for exam-
ple, from geometrical drawing and from the practical
construction of models. In the place of the unfruitful
method of Euclid, which is only fit for special, re-
stricted uses, a broader and more conscious method
must be adopted, as Hankel has pointed out.* Then,
if, on reviewing geometry, and after it presents no
substantial difficulties, the more general points of view,
the principles of scientific method are placed in relief
and brought to consciousness, as Von Nagel,fJ. K.
Becker,J Mann,§ and others have well done, fruit-
ful results will be surely attained. In the same way,
the subject-matter of the natural sciences should be
made familiar by pictures and experiment before a
profounder and reasoned grasp of these subjects is
attempted. Here the emphasis of the more general
points of view is to be postponed.

Before my present audience it would be superfluous

• Otsckicktt Jir Mathtmallk, Leipalc, 1874.


336 ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.


for me to contend further that mathematics and nat-
ural science are justified constituents of a sound edu-
cation, — a claim that even philologists, after some
resistance, have conceded. Here I may count upon
assent when I say that mathematics and the natural
sciences pursued alone as means of instruction yield a
richer education in matter and form, a more general
education, an education better adapted to the needs
and spirit of the time, — than the philological branches
pursued alone would yield.

But how shall this idea be realised in the curricula
of our intermediate educational institutions ? It is un-
questionable in my mind that the German Rcalschulen
and Realgytnnasien, where the exclusive classical course
is for the most part replaced by mathematics, science,
and modern languages, give the average man a more
timely education than the gymnasium proper, although
they are not yet regarded as fit preparatory schools for '
future theologians and professional philologists. The
German gymnasiums are too one-sided. With these
the first changes are to be made ; of these alone we
shall speak here. Possibly a single preparatory school,
suitably planned, might serve all purposes.

Shall we, then, in our gymnasiums fill out the hours
of study which stand at our disposal, or are still to be
wrested from the classicists, with as great and as va-
ried a quantity of mathematical and scientific matter
as possible? Expect no such proposition from me.
No one will suggest such a course who has himself


J


L


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 337

been activeSy engaged in scientific thought. Thoughts
can be awakened and fructified as a field is fructified
by sunshine and rain. But thoughts cannot be jug-
gled out and worried out by heaping up materials and
the hours of instruction, nor by any sort of precepts :
they must grow naturally of their own free accord.
Furthermore, thoughts cannot be accumulated beyond
a certain limit in a single head, any more than the pro-
duce of a field can be increased beyond certain limits.
I believe that the amount of matter necessary for a
useful education, such as should be offered to all the
pupils of a preparatory school, is very small. If I had
the requisite influence, I should, in all composure, and
fully convinced that I was doing what was best, first
greatly curtail in the lower classes the amount of mat-
ter in both the classical and the scientific courses ; I
should cut down considerably the number of the school
hours and the work done outside the school. I am
not with many teachers of opinion that ten hours work
a day for a child is not too much. I am convinced
that the mature men who offer this advice so lightly
are themselves unable to give their attention success-
fully for as long a time to any subject that is new to
them, (for example, to elementary mathematics or
physics,) and I would ask every one who thinks the
contrary to make the experiment upon himself. Learn-
ing and teaching are not routine office-work that can
be kept up mechanically for long periods. But even
such work tires in the end. If our young men are


338


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.


not to enter the universities with blunted and impov-
erished minds, if they are not to leave in the pre-
paratory schools their vital energy, which they should
there gather, great changes must be made. Waiving
the injurious effects of overwork upon the body, the
consequences of it for the miad seem to me positively
dreadful.

I know of nothing more terrible than the poor crea-
tures who have learned too much. Instead of that
sound powerful judgment which would probably have
grown up if they had learned nothing, their thoughts
creep timidly and hypnotically after words, principles,
and formula, constantly by the same paths. What
they have acquired is a spider's web of .thoughts too
weak to furnish sure supports, but complicated enough
to produce confusion.

But how shall better methods of mathematical and
scientific education be combined with the decrease of
the subject-matter of instruction? I think, by aban-
doning systematic instruction altogether, at least in so
far as that is required of all young pupils. I see no
necessity whatever that the graduates of our high
schools and preparatory schools should be little phi-
lologists, and at the same time little mathematicians,
physicists, and botanists ; in fact, I do not see the pos-
sibility of such a result. I see in the endeavor to at-
tain this result, in which every instructor seeks for his
own branch a place apart from the others, the main
mistake of our whole system. I should be satisfied if


L


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 339

every young student could come into living contact
with and pursue to their ultimate logical consequences
merely a /i'2C mathematical or scientific discoveries.
Such instruction would be mainly and naturally asso-
ciated with selections from the great scientific classics.
A few powerful and lucid ideas could thus be made
to take root in the mind and receive thorough elabora-
tion. This accomplished, our youth would make a
different showing from what they do to-day."

What need is there, for example, of burdening the
head of a young student with all the details of botany?
The student who has botanised under the guidance of
a teacher finds on all hands, not indifferent things, but
known or unknown things, by which he is stimulated,
and his gain made permanent. I express here, not my
own, but the opinion of a friend, a practical teacher.
Again, it is not at all necessary that all the matter that
is offered in the schools should be learned. The best
that we have learned, that which has remained with
us for life, outlived the test of examination. How can
the mind thrive when matter is heaped on matter, and
new materials piled constantly on old, undigested ma-
terials? The question here is not so much that of the
accumulation of positive knowledge as of intellectual

• Mj idea here I9 an approptUlo selection of leadings from Galilen, Huy-
izens, Ne»lon. elc. The choice i; so eas^ily made Ihal Ihere can be no qne>-

(tie ociginal enpeiimeati peifornicd willi Ihem. ThoBe scholiis ilone should
receive this iaslructlon In the upper classes who did ndl look forwrard 10 ijv-
lemxical iDBlrqcIIoa in Ihe physical aciences. 1 do nol make lliis proposllioD
ol reforni bere tor the tn\ lime. 1 have no doubl, moicovu, Ibil lucb (n
cbaoEes wili only be slowly inlroduced,


340 0,V THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES

discipline. It seems also unnecessary that all branches
should be treated at school, and that exactly the same
studies should be pursued in all schools. A single
philological, a single historical, a single mathematical,
a single scientific branch, pursued as common subjects
of instruction for all pupils, are sufficient to accom-
plish all that is necessary for the intellectual develop-
ment. On the other hand, a wholesome mutual stim-
ulus would be produced by this greater variety in the
positive culture of men. Uniforms are excellent for
soldiers, but they will not fit heads. Charles V. learned
this, and it should never be forgotten. On the contrary,
teachers and pupils both need considerable latitude, if
they are to yield good results.

With John Karl Becker I am of the opinion that
the utility and amount for individuals of every study
should be precisely determined. All that exceeds this
amount should be unconditionally banished from the
lower classes. With respect to mathematics, Becker,*
in my judgment, has admirably solved this question.

With respect to the upper classes the demand as-
sumes a different form. Here also the amount of mat-
ter obligatory on all pupils ought not to exceed a cer-
tain limit. But in the great mass of knowledge that a
young man must acquire to-day for his profession it is
no longer just that ten years of his youth should be
wasted with mere preludes. The upper classes should
supply a truly useful preparation for the professions,

'DUMalhtmalik aIs Ukretgmtand dti Gimnasixmi, Berlin, tSSj.


ON THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 341

and should not be modelled upon the wants merely of
future lawyers, ministers, and philologists. Again, it
would be both foolish and impossible to attempt to
prepare the same person properly for all the different
professions. In such case the function of the schools
would be, as Lichtenberg feared, simply to select the
persons best fitted for being drilled, whilst precisely the
finest special talents, which do not submit to indis-
criminate discipline, would be excluded from the con-
test. Hence, a certain amount of liberty in the choice
of studies must be introduced in the upper classes, by
means of which it will be free for every one who is clear
about the choice of his profession to devote his chief
attention either to the study of the philologico-histor-
ical or to that of the niathematico-scientific branches.
Then the matter now treated could be retained, and in
some branches, perhaps, j udiciously extended, * without
burdening the scholar with many branches or increas-
ing the number of the hours of study. With more
homogeneous work the student's capacity for work in-
creases, one part of his labor supporting the other
instead of obstructing it. If, however, a young man
should subsequently choose a different profession, then
it is his business to make up what he has lost. No


pel iheologiana and phiioloe


sts, on ace


unl of the phye


suhjecls ^3 aoalyllul Keome


ry. MorEO


ver, I caDDDi be


ofanaJsIiMlKeometrjwoald


be a aerio


ns hindrance to


□Iherwise well versed in quan


ught, No apecia


ii Dbaemble in Ihs eraduale


s of tbe Au


slrian li^mnasiiin


■(Ddiad iDatTtical gecmelir.


[Retereto


an flsserlioQ o( r


A


O.V THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES.

harm certainly will come to society from this change,
nor could it be regarded as a misfortune if philologists
and lawyers with mathematical educations or physical
scientists with classical educations should now and
then appear.


The view is now wide-spread that a Latin and
Greek education no longer meets the general wants of
the times, that a more opportune, a more "liberal"
education exists. The phrase, "a liberal education,"
has been greatly misused. A truly liberal education is
unquestionably very rare. The schools can hardly ofier
such ; at best they can only bring home to the student
the necessity of it. It is, then, his business to acquire,
as best he can, a more or less liberal education. It
would be very difficult, too, at any one time to give a
definition of a "liberal" education which would satisfy
every one, still more difficult to give one which would
hold good for a hundred years. The educational
ideal, in fact, varies much. To one, a knowledge of
classical antiquity appears not too dearly bought "with
early death," We have no objection to this person,
or to those who think like him, pursuing their ideal
after their own fashion. But we may certainly protest
strongly against the realisation of such ideals on our
own children. Another, — Plato, for example, — puts
men ignorant of geometry on a level with animals.*


• Compu«U. C


I, aiciitiU dir Mai/umatik, Lflipilc, iSSo, Vol. I. p.


Otf THE CLASSICS AND THE SCIENCES. 343

If such narrow views had the magical powers of the
sorceress Circe, many a man who perhaps justly
thought himself well educated would become con-
scious of a not very flattering transformation of him-
self. Let us seek, therefore, in our educational sys-
tem to meet the wants of the present, and not estab-
lish prejudices for the future.

But how does it come, we must ask, that institu-
tions so antiquated as the German gymnasiums could
subsist so long in opposition to public opinion? The
answer is simple. The schools were first organised by
the Church ; since the Reformation they have been in
the hands of the State. On so large a scale, the plan
presents many advantages. Means can be placed at
the disposal of education such as no private source, at
least in Europe, could furnish. Work can be con-
ducted upon the same plan in many schools, and SO
experiments made of extensive scope which would be
otherwise impossible. A single man with inSuence
and ideas can under such circumstances do great
things for the promotion of education.

But the matter has also its reverse aspect. The
party in power works for its own interests, uses the
schools for its special purposes. Educational compe-
tition is excluded, for all successful attempts at im-
provement are impossible unless undertaken or per-
mitted by the State. By the uniformity of the people's
education, a prejudice once in vogue is permanently
established. The highest intelligences, the strongest


344 <^^ '^^^^ CLASS/CS AND I'HM SCIENCES,

wills cannot overthrow it suddenly. In fact, as every-
thing is adapted to the view in question, a sudden
change would be physically impossible. The two
classes which virtually hold the reins of power in the
State, the jurists and theologians, know only the one-
sided, predominantly classical culture which they have
acquired in the State schools, and would have this cul-
ture alone valued. Others accept this opinion from
credulity; others, underestimating their true worth for
society, bow before the power of the prevalent opin-
ion ; others, again, affect the opinion of the ruling
classes even against their better judgment, so as to
abide on the same plane of respect with the latter. I
will make no charges, but I must confess that the de-
portment of medical men with respect to the question
of the qualification of graduates of your RcalsehuUn
has frequently made that impression upon me. Let
us remember, finally, that an influential statesman,
even within the boundaries which the law and public
opinion set him, can do serious harm to the cause
of education by considering his own one-sided views
infallible, and in enforcing them recklessly and incon-
siderately — which not only can happen, but has, re-
peatedly, happened.* The monopoly of education by
the Statef thus assumes in our eyes a somewhat differ-
ent aspect. And to revert to the question above asked,
there is not the slightest doubt that the German gym-


ON THE CLASSICS AND TUE SCIENCES.


345


nasiums in their present form would have ceased to
exist long ago if the State had not supported them.

All this must be changed. But the change will
not be made of itself, nor without our energetic inter-
ference, and it will be made slowly. But the path is
marked out for us, the will of the people must acquire
and exert upon our school legislation a greater and
more powerful influence. Furthermore, the questions
at issue must be publicly and candidly discussed that
the views of the people may be clarified. All who feel
the insufficiency of the existing regime must combine
into a powerful organisation that their views may
acquire impressiveness and the opinions of the indi-
vidual not die away unheard,

I recently read, gentlemen, in an excellent book of
travels, that the Chinese speak with unwillingness of
politics. Conversations of this sort are usually cut
short with the remark that they may bother about such
things whose business it is and who are paid for it.
Now it seems to me that it is not only the business of
the State, but a very serious concern of all of us, how
our children shall be educated in the public schools
at our cost.


A CONTRIBUTION TO THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS"


TTTHILE searching for papers by Amontons, sev-
* ' eral volumes of the Memoirs of the Paris Acad-
emy for the first years of the eighteenth century, fell
into my hands. It is difficult to portray the delight
which one experiences in running over the leaves of
these volumes. One sees as an actual spectator almost
the rise of the most important discoveries and wit-
nesses the progress of many fields of knowledge from
almost total ignorance to relatively perfect clearness.

I propose to discuss here the fundamental re-
searches of Sauveur in Acoustics. It is astonishing
how extraordinarily near Sauveur was to the view
which Helmholtz was the first to adopt in its full ex-
tent a hundred and fifty years later.

The Histoire de VAcadimie toz 1700, p. 131, tells
us that Sauveur had succeeded in making music an

•Tbl> ■rtlcle, which appeared En the ProcesdloKS ot Ihe German Malhe-
iPBlicBl Sociely □[ Pngna Foi ths year iXgi, Is printsd a< a Eupptemeat lo Iha
le en "Tha CauBna ot Harmony." ni pafte jt.


ON THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS. 347

object of scientific research, and that he had invested
the new science with the name of "acoustics." On
five successive pages a number of discoveries are re-
corded which are more fully discussed in the volume
for the year following.

Sauveur regards the simplicity of the ratios obtain-
ing between the rates of vibration of consonances as
something universally known.* He is in hope, by
further research, of determining the chief rules of mu-
sical composition and of fathoming the "metaphysics
of the agreeable," the main law of which he asserts
to be the union of "simplicity with multiplicity,"
Precisely as Eulerf did a number of years later, he
regards a consonance as more perfect according as
the ratio of its vibrational rates is expressed in smaller
whole numbers, because the smaller these whole num-
bers are the oftener the vibrations of the two tones
coincide, and hence the more readily they are appre-
hended. As the limit of consonance, he takes the
ratio 5:6, although he does not conceal the fact that
practice, sharpened attention, habit, taste, and even
prejudice play collateral rdles in the matter, and that
consequently the question is not a purely scientific

Sauveur's ideas took their development from his


P>nly [rom tlie Mtmn,


348


OH THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS.


having instituted at all points more exact quantitative
investigations than his predecessors. He is first de-
sirous of determiDing as the foundation of musical
tuning a fixed note of one hundred vibrations which
can be reproduced at any time ; the fixing of the notes
of musical instruments by the common tuning pipes
then in use with rates of vibration unknown, appear-
ing to him inadequate. According to Mersenne [Har-
monie Universelle, 1636), a given cord seventeen feet
long and weighted with eight pounds executes eight
visible vibrations in a second. By diminishing its
length then in a given proportion we obtain a propor-
tionately augmented rate of vibration. But this pro-
cedure appears too uncertain to Sauveur, and he em-
ploys for his purpose the beats {baliemens), which were
known to the organ-makers of his day, and which he
correctly explains as due to the alternate coincidence
and non- coincidence of the same vibrational phases of
differently pitched notes.* At every coincidence there
is a swelling of the sound, and hence the number of
beats per second will be equal to the difference of the
rates of vibration. If we tune two of three organ-pipes
to the remaining one in the ratio of the minor and ma-
jor third, the mutual ratio of the rates of vibration of
the first two will be as 24:35, that is to say, for every
24 vibrations to the lower note there will be 25 to the
higher, and one beat. If the two pipes give together


ON THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS. 349

four beats in a second, then the higher has the fixed
tone of 100 vibrations. The open pipe in question
will consequently be five feet in length. We also de-
termine by this procedure the absolute rates of vibra-
tion of all the other notes.

It follows at once that a pipe eight times as long
or 40 feet in length will yield a vibrational rate of
i2j^, which Sauveur ascribes to the lowest audible
tone, and further also that a pipe 64 times as small
will execute 6,400 vibrations, which Sauveur took for
the highest audible limit. The author's delight at his
successful enumeration of the "imperceptible vibra-
tions" is unmistakably asserted here, and it is justified
when we reflect that to-day even Sauveur's principle,
slightly modified, constitutes the simplest and most
delicate means we have for exactly determining rates
of vibration. Far more important still, however, is a
second observation which Sauveur made while study-
ing beats, and to which we shall revert later.

Strings whose lengths can be altered by movable
bridges are much easier to handle than pipes in such
investigations, and it was natural that Sauveur should
soon resort to their use.

One of his bridges accidentally not having been
brought into full and hard contact with the string,
and consequently only imperfectly impeding the vibra-
tions, Sauveur discovered the harmonic overtones of
the string, at first by the unaided ear, and concluded
from this fact that the string was divided into aliquot


)5o ON THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS.

parts. The string when plucked, and when the bridge
stood at the third division for example, yielded the
twelfth of its fundamental note. At the suggestion
of some academician* probably, variously colored
paper riders were placed at the nodes (naeuds) and
ventral segments (ventres), and the division of the
string due to the excitation of the overtones (sons
harmoni^ues) belonging to its fundameotaJ note (sen
fondamental) thus rendered visible. For the clumsy
bridge the more convenient feather or brush was soon
substituted.

While engaged in these investigations Sauveur also
observed the sympathetic vibration of a string induced
by the excitation of a second one in unison with it.
He also discovered that the overtone of a string can
respond to another string tuned to its note. He even
went further and discovered that on exciting one string
the overtone which it has in common with another,
differently pitched string can be produced on that
other ; for example, on strings having for their vibra-
tional ratio 3:4, the fourth of the lower and the third
of the higher may be made to respond. It follows in-
disputably from this that the excited string yields
overtones simultaneously with its fundamental tone.
Previously to this Sauveur's attention had been drawn
by other observers to the fact that the overtones of
musical instruments can be picked out by attentive
listening, particularly in the night. f He himself men-

*mwfirti*rAatJiml.. AaD«e x-jK, p. 134- Ifild^ p. «g>-


ON' THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS. 351

tions the simultaneous sounding of the overtones and
the fundamental tone.* That he did not give the
proper consideration to this circumstance was, as will
afterwards be seen, fatal to his theory.

While studying beats Sauveur makes the remark
that they are displeasing to the ear. He held the beats
were distinctly audible only when less than six oc-
curred in a second. Larger numbers were not dis-
tinctly perceptible and gave rise accordingly to no
disturbance. He then attempts to reduce the differ-
ence between consonance and dissonance to a ques-
tion of beats. Let us hear his own words. f

"Beats are unpleasmg to the ear because of the uneveaness
ol Ibe sound, and it may be held with much plausibility that the
reason why octaves are so pleasing is that we never haar their
beats, ^

"In following out this idea, we find that tbe chorda whose
beats we cannot bear are precisely those which the mnsicians call
■a snd that those whose beats are heard are the disso-
3, and that when a chord is a dissonance in one octave and a
n another, it beats in the one and does not beat in the
other. Consequently it is called an imperfect consonance. It is
very easy by the principles of M. Sauveur, here established, to as-
certain wbat chords beat and in what octaves, alxive or below the
lixed note. If Ibis hypothesis be correct, it will disclose the true
source of the rules of composition, hitherto unknown to science,
and given over almost entirely lo judgment by the ear. These
sorts of natural judgment, marvellous though tbey may sometimea


3Sa ON THE HISTORY OP ACOUSTICS.

apfwar, are not so bnt have veiy real causes, the knowledge of
which belongs lo science, provided it can gain possessiOQ thereof."*

Sauveur thus correctly discerns in beats the cause
of the disturbance of consonance, to which all dishar-
mony is "probably" to be referred. It will be seen,
however, that according to his view all distant inter-
vals must necessarily be consonances and all near in-
tervals dissonances. He also overlooks the absolute
difference in point of principle between his old view,
mentioned at the outset, and his new view, rather at-
tempting to obliterate it.

R. Smithf takes note of the theory of Sauveur and
calls attention to the first of the above-mentioned de-
fects. Being himself essentially involved in the old
view of Sauveur, which is usually attributed to Euler,
he yet approaches in his criticism a brief step nearer

•<' Lesbiiiemens ae ptalseot pas & I'q^ille, 1 csnie de l-in£*|BliI^<lD son.

agrtahles, c'esl qii'oo n'y enlend jamais de ballemeiu.

"Ed snivanl cetle \&ie, an irauve que le^ accordsddDt on ae penlaDlendra


qu9Dd un accord est Dissonance dans nne cerlalna oclavc el Consoaance
diQs nnc aulie, c-eal qa'il bal dans I'nne, at qa'i] ae bat pu dan& I'aDtra.

de Mr. Sauveur qu'on a «iabli< ici. de voir quels accords ballent, bi dani
quellei OcUves ao-dessns dd au-desaoni do san fixe. Si cells bypolbin en
vraye, ells diconviirs la veritable source des R^glea de la csmpoiitioD. in-

menl su jagement de I'Oieille. Ces sailea de jugeinens oalnreli. quelqne
biaatcea qu'ill puroiaeenl quelqnelois, ne le sant point, ill ont del causes

B'on pulite mallre en possesiion."

i/iarmimici ir /At -mb-iaf Ay ^ Sfiuical Snniii, Cimbi\dse, 17*3- I uw
thli book onlT baatilT <o ia«4 and diew aucntion lo it in a work publiihed in
iSW. I did not come inlo ]u actual pDaaesalnn oDIll Ihiee jean ago and Ilieq
oolj did 1 lean lu atact CDDtenti.


ON THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS. 353

to the modern theory, as appears from the following
sage.*

"The tniHi is, this gentleman ctafairnds the distincti6n ba-
by comparing imperfoCt
;ssion of their short cy-
iipted, with perfect ones
of their short cycles ig


[ween perfect and imperteCt
consonances which beat because thi
cles+ is periodically confused and
which cannot beat, because the
never confused nor futerropted-

•"theJiiiiUring roJigfihess above rteitioiwl h" pferCiivaiAs
in all other perfect Consonaaces, in a smaller degree Jn projiorfton
as their cycles are shorter and simpler, and their pitch is higher ;
and is of a different kind from the smoolher beats and undula-
tions of tempered consonances ; because we Can alter the rate of
the latter by altering the temperarnent, but not of the former, the
consonance being perfect at a given pitch : And tiecaust a jutJiciWis
^V can often bear, at (he sanie time, botli the ftililEefines s^d tba
teats' Of a (empered consonance ; sufficienlly distinct from' eaoh

'■ For nothing gives greater offence to the hearer, though ig-
norant of the cause of it, than those rapid, piercing beats of high
and loud sounds, which make imperfect consonances with one an-
other. And yet a few sinw beats, tike' the stow u'hduTa'tioii's of a
iteae sftake now and then fritrodnced. aW far from Min'g-disa^rte-
ablfe."

Smith is iccordiDgly clear fliat other "fotigh-
nesses" exist besides the bea!ts whicli' Saiiveiir con-
sidered, and if the investigations had been continued
on the basis of Sauveur's idea, these additiorial rough-
desses would have turned out to be the beats of the

*ffarHtffnia, pp, 118 and 243.


I

I

i


3S4


ON THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS.


overtones, and the theory thus have attained the

point of view of Helraholtz.

Reviewing the differences between Sauveur's and
Helmholtz's theories, we find the following:

1. The theory according to which consonance de-
pends on the frequent and regular coincidence of vi-
brations and their ease of enumeration, appears from
the new point of view inadmissible. The simplicity
of the ratios obtaining between the rates of vibration
is indeed a mathemaiical characteristic of consonance
as well as a physical condition thereof, for the reason
that the coincidence of the overtones as also their
further physical and physiological consequences is
connected with this fact. But no physiological or psy-
chological explanation of consonance is given by this
fact, for the sirnple reason that in the acoustic nerve-
process nothing corresponding to the periodicity of
the sonant stimulus is discoverable.

2. In the recognition of beats as a disturbance of
consonance, both theories agree. Sauveur's theory,
however, does not take into account the fact that
clangs, or musical sounds generally, are composite
and that the disturbance in the consonances of distant
intervals principally arise from the beats of the over-
tones. Furthermore, Sauveur was wrong in asserting
that the number of beats must be less than six in a
second in order to produce disturbances. Even Smith
knows that very slow beats are not a cause of disturb-
ance, and Helmholtz found a much higher number


ON THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS. 355

(33) for the maximum of disturbance. Finally, Sau-
veur did not consider that although the number of
beats increases with the recession from unison, yet
their strength is diminished. On the basis of the
principle of specific energies and of the laws of sym-
pathetic vibration the new theory finds that two at-
mospheric motions of like amplitude but different pe-
riods, asin {rt) and osin [(r -(-/)) {^+r)]i cannot be
communicated with the same amplitude to the same
nervous end-organ. On the contrary, an end-organ
that reacts best to the period r responds more weakly
to the period ;'-|- p, the two amplitudes bearing to each
other the proportion a:<pa. Here <p decreases when
p increases, and when /3;=0 it becomes equal to 1, so
that only the portion of the stimulus <pa is subject to
beats, and the portion (1 — 9']<i continues smoothly
onward without disturbance.

If there is any moral to be drawn from the history
of this theory, it is that considering how near 5au-
veur's errors were to the truth, it behooves us to ex-
ercise some caution also with regard to the new the-
ory. And in reality there seems to be reason for
doing so.

The fact that a musician will never confound a
more perfectly consonant chord on a poorly tuned
piano with a less perfectly consonant chord on a well
tuned piano, although the roughness in the two caseB
may be the same, is sufficient indication that the de-
gree of roughness is not the only characteristic of a


356


ort THE HISTORY OF ACOUSTICS.


harmony. As the musician knows, even the harmonic
beauties of a Beethoven sonata are not easily effaced
on a poorly tuned piano; they scarcely suffer more
than a Raphael drawing executed in rottgh unfinished
Strokes. The positive physiologico-psyclwlogicdi charac-
teristic which distinguishes one harmony from another
is not given by th'e beats. Nor is this characteristic
to be found in the fact that, for example, in bounding
X major thitd the fifth partial tone of the lower note
coincides with the fourth of the higher note. This
chara'cteristic comes into consideration only foi" t"he
investigating and abstracting reason. If we should
regard it also as characteristic of (he sensation, we
should lapst into a fundamental error which would
be quite analogous to that cited in (1).

The posHive physiological characteristics of the in-
tervals would doubtless be spfcediiy revealed if it Were
possible to' conduct aperiodic, for example galvanic,
stimuli (o the single sound-sensing organs, in which
Case the beats' would be totally eliminated. Unfoi'tun-
ately such' ari experiment can hardly be regarded as
^a^eticable. The employnient of acoustic stimuli of
short duration and consequently also free from beats,
ini^olves the additional difficulty of a pitch not pre-
cisHly determinattle.


ON 7jy£ THEOKY OF SPATIAL VISION.


REMARKS ON THE THEORY OF SPATIAL VISION.*


According to Herbart, spatial vision rests on re-
production-series. Id sji^ch an event, of course, and
if the supposition is correct, the magnitudes of the
residua with which the percepts or representations
are coalesced (the helps to coalescence) are of cardi-
nal influence. Furthermore, since the coalescences
must first be fully perfected before they make their
appearance, and since upon their appearance the in-
hibitory ratios are brought into play, ultimately, then,
if we leave out of account the accidental order of time
in which the percepts are given, everything in spatial
vision depends on the oppositions and affinities, or,
in brief, on the qualities of the percepts, which enter
into series.

Let us see how the theory stands with respect to
the special facts involved.

T. If intersecting series only, running anteriorly
and posteriorly, are requisite for the production oi
spatial sensation, why are not analogues of them fouqd
in all the $enseG?

2. Why do we measure differently cplored objects


358


ON THE THEORY OF SPATIAL VISION.


and variegated objects with one and the same spatial
measure? How do we recognise differently colored
objects as the same in size? Where do we get our
measure of space from and what is it?

3. Why is it that differently colored figures of the
same form reproduce one another and are recognised


s the s


e?


Here are difficulties enougli. Herbart is unable to
solve them by his theory. The unprejudiced student
sees at once that his "inhibition by reason of form "
and "preference by reason of form" are absolutely
impossible. Think of Herbart's example of the red
and black letters.

The "help to coalescence" is a passport, so to
speak, made out to the name and person of the per-
cept. A percept which is coalesced with another can-
not reproduce all others qualitatively different from it
for the simple reason that the latter are in like manner
coalesced with one another. Two qualitatively differ-
ent series certainly do not reproduce themselves be-
cause they present the same order of degree of coales-

If it is certain that only things simultaneous and
things which are alike are reproduced, a basic prin-
ciple of Herbart's psychology which even the most
absolute empiricists will not deny, nothing remains
but to modify the theory of spatial perception or to
invent in its place a new principle in the manner indi-
cated, a step which hardly any one would seriously


ON 'HIE THEORY OF SPATIAL VISION. 359

undertake. The new principle could not fail to throw
all psychology into the most dreadful confusion.

As to the modification which is needed there can
be hardly any doubt as to how in the face of the facts
and conformably to Herbart's own principles it is to
be carried out. If two differently colored figures of
equal size reproduce each other and are recognised as
equal, the result can be due to nothing but to the ex-
istence in both series of presentations of a presenta-
tion or percept which is qualitatively the same. The
colors are different. Consequently, like or equal per-
cepts must be connected with the colors which are
yet independent of the colors. We have not to look
long for them, for they are the like effects of the mus-
cular feelings of the eye when confronted by the two
figures. We might say we reach the vision of space
by the registering of light-sensations in a schedule of
graduated muscle- sensations. *

A few considerations will show the likelihood of
the rote of the muscle-sensations. The muscular ap-
paratus of one eye is un symmetrical. The two eyes
together form a system which is vertical in symmetry.
This already explains much,

I. The position of a figure influences its view. Ac-
cording to the position in which objects are viewed
different muscle-sensations come into play and the
impression is altered. To recognise inverted letters

•Comp. CpmBliae, Vibir dai SriiH ; Wundt, TItraru der Sinmemahr-


ON THE THEORY OF SPATIAL VISION.

as such loDg experience is required. The best proof
of this are the letters d, b, p, q, which are represented
by the sajne figure in different positions and yet are
alW'Sys distinguished a.s different.*

a. Jt vill not escapee the aitentive observer that for
the sanie reasons and even with the same figure and
in ^.e saroe position the fixation point is also decisive.
The figure seems to change during the act of vision.
For exaipple, an eight-pointed star constructed by
successively joining in a regular octagon the first cor-
ner with Ihe fourth, Jh£ fourth with the seventh, etc.,
skipping in eveiy case two corners, assumes alter-
nately, according to where we suffer the centre of vi-
sion to rest, a predojuinantly architectonic or a freer
and more open character. Vertical and horizontal
lines are always difierently apprehended from whajt
oblique lines are.

3. The reason why we prefer vertical symmetry
and [egp.rd it as something special in its kind, whereas
we dfl not recognise
horizoatal symmetry
at aU iffimediately, is
due to the vertical
symmetry of the mug- r'K-49-

cular 9pparatug of the e.ye. The left-band side o(
the ac.cpmpanying veftjpaUy symmetrical figure in-
4u.i;es in thje left eye the same muscular feelings as ^tm

•pomp. M»cJi. i^f*"- >ia4 **«■ vp t-^en^ wrf it'inlrth- sn^mat. iltr


/^K


ON THE THEORY OF SPATIAL VISION.


rigljt-liand side b does in tlie right eye. The pleasing
effect of syraijietry has its cause priiparily in the repe-
tition of muscular feelings. That a repetition actually
occuf^ hex.e, sometimes sufficiently marked in char-
acter as to Jeajd to the confounding of objects, is
proved apart from the theory by the fact which is
familiar to every one quern dii oderunt that children
frequently reverse figures from the right to the left,
but never from above downwards ; for example, write
£ instead of 3 until they finally come to notice the
slight difference. Figure 50 shows how pleasing the
repetition of muscular
feelings pay be. As
will be readily under- Fig. %o.

stpod, vertical and horizontal lines exhibit relations
similar to symmetrical figures wliich are immediately
disturbed when oblique positions are chosen for the
lines. Compare what Helmholtz says regarding the
repetition and coincidence of partial tones.

I may be permitted to add a general remark. It
is a quite universal phenomenon in psychology tljat
certain qualitatively quite diSerent series of percepts
mutually awaken and reproduce one another and in a
certain aspect produce the appearance of sameness of
similarity. We say of such series that they are of
like or of similar form, naming their abstracted like-


^-^-^-^^


ss farm-
I. Of spatial fi
a. We call two melodies like melodies wli,en they


s we have already spoken.


36z ON THE THEORY OF SPATIAL VISION.

present the same succession of pitch-ratios;
the absolute pitch (or key) may be as different
as can be. We can so select the melodies that
not even two partial tones of the notes in each
are common. Yet we recognise the melodies
as alike. And, what is more, we notice the
form of the melody more readily and recognise
it again more easily than the key (the absolute
pitch) in which it was played.
3. We recognise in two different melodies the
same rhythm no matter how different the mel-
odies may be otherwise. We know and recog-
nise the rhythm more easily even than the ab-
solute duration (the tempo).
These examples will suffice. In all these and in
all similar cases the recognition and likeness cannot
depend upon the qualities of the percepts, for these
are different. On the other hand recognition, con-
formably to the principles of psychology, is possible
only with percepts which are the same in quality.
Consequently there is no other escape than to imagine
the qualitatively unlike percepts of the two series as
necessarily connected with other percepts which are
qualitatively alike.

Since in differently colored figures of like form, like
muscular feelings are necessarily induced if the figures
are recognised as alike, so there must necessarily lie
at the basis of all forms also, and we might even say
at the basis of all abstractions, percepts of a peculiar


ON THE THEORY OF SPATIAL VISION.


363


quality. And this holds true for space and form as
well as for time, rhythm, pitch, the form of melodies,
intensity, etc. But whence is psychology to derive all
these qualities? Have no fear, they will all be found,
as were the sensations of muscles for the theory of
space. The organism is at present still rich enough
to meet all the requirements of psychology in this di-
rection, and it is even time to give serious ear to the
question of " corporeal resonance " which psychology
so loves to dwell on.

Different psychical qualities appear to bear a very
intimate mutual relation to one another. Special re-
search on the subject, as well also as the demonstra-
tion that this remark may be generally employed in
physics, will follow later,*


deni. loglqar and hislorical, in


Aitaptra, (tae word, ]i4.


s, (be psychical activity oC,
ti; the langoageor. liB: their


II, beiRhiB of. 14


366


TNDEX.


Astronomer,


Bodies, heavy, sgeIi the


I places, a.


Etaeq.; roialinR, 185.


nlecedent to psycho 1-


Body, a meatBl symbol


or erotips t,l


ogy, 90; "n


dily of its .rnlhs, «..


Atomic tbBor


es, 104.


AloniB, m?.


Bcli-m^-n, ,j6.


rally, 226; ol liquid


Axioms, iDsiincliTs koowledge, ISK).
Babbage, on the economy al machln-


I


older, a granite. 133,


ooklyn Bridge, 75, toomoK


Brown, Cram, 293, 301.


BacoD. Lord. ^^, lio.


Building, our cancepls direcdoas


B.er, C, E. vop, .35.


for, 353^ facts "I" resull of. »S3'


Balance, electrical, 117, tootno.e;


fiuilding-BIones, mstrical nnits are,


Balloon, a hydrogen, igg.


i;3.


Bass-clef, toi.


compared to Ibe, 16.


99-


Calculating mBchiaea, their eeoniHn-


Beauty, objects of, in nature, gi.


BeckBr, I, K., 335, 340.


Calaiic, theory of, stood in the way


of scientific advancement. 13S. 167.


Beginnings of science, iSg, 191.


Bernoulli, Daniel, on the consetva-


Capacity, electrical. 1.6 el Beq., .J3 :


thermal, 123; specific inductive.


BemOQlll, james, on the centre ol


oscillation, ug.


Capulets and Montagues, 87.


Bemooili, John, on the conservation


Cards, difficult games of. 32*.


Df living force, 149 : on lbs princi-


Carnot, S.. etcludes perpetual mo-


ple of virtaal velocities. 1JI.


tion in beat, ijC, 161; his mechani-


Bible, parallel passages from, for


cal view of physics. .361 on Unrmo-


Isngnage study, 327.


dynBmics,i£oelaeq.; hia principle,


Binocular vision, M el aeq.


.fit: also, .9..


Black, hia theory of caloric, 13a, 161;


Carus, Dr. Paul, 26J, footnote.


on quantity of beat, iGfi, 174; on


Cassslli's telegraph, 26.


latent beat, 167, 17S; researcbea in


Cassini, SI.


heal generally, 144.


hened by science,
90. 19B " >eq., ill


po


ssib


ef


le


u[li


riumlo


nciplB


BEq.


Cen


fos


cilL


tion


Chu


se


m


of, in


CbLldo


the (or


St. hie


inlarprela


o( now BventB


iiS-a


9'


Childis


queslio


o!. .«-*».


Childre


n, Ihe d


awing


Ot. 101-2C


JanguH


stadr


of, jaj.


Chines


speak


unwilling


ofpo


lies, Hi


the


n oJ. 79-8<


DiaiiyB


d but lew


65.


Chris.,


a,!ngD


.65.


d Jews, moDolhelBm of


Cicero, 318.
Circa, 343.
Circle, the ligure of le


1, csllnTe, Ihe eocd


Character, a UniverBsl Real, 19a.


Coefficient otselMuduclion


2So,ai»


Cbaracier, iilce the forma of liquids.


ColophDnium, solution of, 7


Color, acouatic, 36.


Chamlcal, elenients, loi; symhols,


Colors, origin ol the names


(. J39.


Chemistry, character ot research in,


Col urns, body moving bebi


135; Iba method o[ thermodynam-


,imporl


and frnits, .97, 238 el seq


by laa


Chlld, a, modea ot thought of. «j;


guage, 137; hiKb imponao


eo[,.9i


itiou, a principle of sstbet-


Confusion otobjec


ilioti of weight or mass,


dflfinlilon of. ?3: eiplsnaii
42 ; icI«nCiflc defiDitioA of. 4'
disaonanci reduced to bSa'


t. Ihedielec
lis, (he m


■=1. 193.


Cornelius. 359 foolnoie.

toni. the Macchese, his discovery <

miaote toit {i m* labyrinrli'ot U

ear. 19.

CoMoiUb'.hh ^BciHcil resbitcbs

of Bisciricicy, 173 ) bis Cars!oh-bi<
»BCO, 16S.
Criticism. Socrales (he father at sc


acibie,


aaaifory filan


lemocrima. his medlianlcal cifDtBp-
lion df Ibe wortd. i;;, 1S7.
icmonBiracloD. chatieXerot. 333.


entlGc UuOvileage. ig3:


iats. Ibett> rela-


llSif!


eieclr


oaJ. 135-136; of heal, 544,


*5o;s


ranpbof.iso.


Cur<iu>.


Cnrv^d


DM, .Ii8ira5))nimelly,9!


CtirVei.


bow tbeir laWs are Inv


ga^.d.


Cycles.


Cyclids


prdCBBMS, cLoBBd, 175,


Cyoiapa


67.


CycloBta


t.igS.


CyHHdB


of dii,fl: mflssof fras


clpwd


in 0, IJ9.


D'Alem


en, on the uusea of


SQS34, J79.


Daniib


bkrwiQ


his study of organic oa


a.sels


eq.:liismeilioiboIre3ea


Discharge of Leyden ja


endDfasttck,^: iatiUia-

teyniond, 34 r. foAMdtr.

s, roundallom of, i;3 el Mq.


^^■^■H^^^H


INDEX. 369 T


E«. re^«ch« in .he .h.orj pf. .7


Eledroilalics, concepla of. 107 et


elseq.; dUgram df, iB; its analysis


seq.


o( sounds, M elieq.; B po«le-lock,


zS; reSected in a mirror, 93; no


symmBlry in its Bensalion. 103.


phenomena, equations between.


01,204; intetnal dis.drtances ot.


Ellipse, equaiion nt, joj; the word.


.83.


263.


Ecpnomioal, nature o[ physical in-


Embryology, possible future state of,


qniiy, 186; praeEdnteaf the human


mind, 185; order to physicB, 197;


Enerxies. conformity in Ihe depotl-


achematism of acitnce, »6; tools


mont o(, 171-.JS ; differences of,


of science, w; CDsfficiepl of dyna-


Economy, of the actions oi nature, ij;


servatlon of, 137 el seq.; defined.


guKge. 191 el seq.; pf the iodustria]


the doctrine of, 183; kinetic, .77;


arts, igi ; of mathematics, 19J-19S ;


conception of. 164, 1B5, J44 et seq.;


nation, our first hnowledge derived


conservation of, in electrical pbe-


troiD. it|7; geQeially, 186 el aeq..


nomeqa,i3ietseq,; limits of prin-


iSg.


ciple of. iJi ; principle of. in phys-


Education, higher, 86 ; liberal. 311 el


ics, .60-166; sources of principle


of. .79, .Bi; thermal, i??; Thomns


Efflux, liquid, ISO.


YounK on, .73.


Egp, its nature, .3,-^3,.


Enerey-valuB of heat, 17B. toomolB.


Enypi. *M.


EnliRhtenmeat, the, .68.


EKjpiians, an of, 7B et seq., mi.


Entropy, a metrical notion, 17B.


Eigtleenlh cenlnry. the scienlihc


Environment, stability of our, 106.


achievement of, 187, 1B8.


Equaiiona far ohlalning facte, .Bo;


EleaticE. on motion, ijS.


between the elements of phenom-


Electrical, attraction and repulsion,


ena, lOJ.


109 et aeq., isa; eapacit,, ii6ctseq„


force, HP, 119. 168; spark, 117, isj,


machines, 15. ; fiRnres of liqnid, «


in the State, .j.


cepliona pf. 118, 131, laj-'lfi. ai6-


Etymology, Ihe word, misused tor en-


tonlia^l, izi et aeq. ; quanlit,, nt.


nance, 33 i his geome^y, 33S.


impression of the malbemalicai


mption, 170; difference hetween the


proce3se5on,.s6; on the vibrations


conceptions of beat and, 168 et seq..


orBtrlngB, 141), 285,347.


rflle of iTOrk in,,»elseq.; Ralvanlc.


Enler and Hermann's principle, 149.


134. StiEUcMral.


Eutbyphron. questiuned by Socra-


tes, ..


Evolnle, Ibc word, 313.


Electrometers, ,«, 117.


Evoln.lon, theory of. as applied 10 ^^


■ Electrostatic unit, »..


»a et seq. ^^^^H


S70 INDEX. ^k


£wa]d,ige, 304.


Eicliided perpetaal mallon, loKical


TOO! □! Ihe [nincipla of, iBi.


Flower-girl, tbe baskets ot a. gj.


Fluids, electrical, it* et eeq.


Force, electric, 110,119. 16B; nnit of ,


0111r.adT.1g9; the ptinciple o( =n-


iti; living, 137,149,184; generally.


ergj derived (torn, 179; <he well-


153. See the related headings.


Forces, will compared to. IJ4.


181 ; iocongrueQca between Ibought


and, 306.


Formal oDneeptiqns, Iftle ol. 183.


Formal Deed ot a clear view ot tacts.


nature, 184.


Eye, cannol analyse colors, iq: ce-


Fonnalive forces of liquids, \.


FormsQf liijuids. jetseq.


soq,; iQSS of, H6 atf=q.ine vision, 98,


Forwatds. propbeaying, 153.


auucmre Bymmetrical DoL identi-


Foocault, S7, 70, J96.


cal, 96.


Foundation ol scientific thought,


Face, homan, [avened. 93.


Pacts and ideaB.necasBary 10 science.


Fourier, on processes of beat, 149,1178.


Facia, description of. loB ; agreement


Frary. 309, loolnote.


Free ling-point, lowered by pressore.


elseq.; eqoations tor obtaining, rSo.


Fresnel, 1171.


Falling bodies. «m, «Sj Galileo on


Frogs. lorvB of, not siibject to ver-


thelawot, L,selaeq.,ia,,


tigo, «»■


Falling, cats, 303, footnote.


Future, science ot Ihe, li3-


thoughl. 198,


o( eleclricity. tit, I7i'


Feoboer, Ibeorj ot Corti's fibre., ig


Blseq,


tbe velocity of liRht. 50 et seq.; bis


Faelina, cannot be eiplained by mo-


Feiishism, iSe. W3. 154 ; in our phys-


descent. 143-1*7; on 'tie law of in-


ical concepts, 1B7,


artia, 146-147; on virtual ve loci lies.


Fibres otCorti, 17 etsaq.


Fick. bis theory of diffusion, 149.


scent. 193: on falliog bodies, ais;


Figures, symniBlry of. 93 et seq.


gieat results gf his study of nature.


Fire, use of, .64.


Pishes, J06.


also loj, t8a. 187, J37, S7«, "74. *83.


Firoau, bis determination of tbe ve-


Gallo. observes tbe plane! Nepwoe.


locity ot light, jj el seq.


_^^


^^^^^^^V 371 1


^^^SScf^blrloitT, IJ4: ™"n<.


Haeckel, hm, aj].


1^2; diumeGS, 291; vertigo, igB.


Hamilton, deduction of the conical
refraction of light, 39.


Galvanoscope. 133.


Hankel, 33J.


Garda, Lake, 239.


Harmonics, 38, 40.


Gas. tlw word, 164; mB»s ol, enclosea


Harmony, on the causes ol, 39 et


m3cylmd«,.79.


seq.; laws of the theory of, e«-


Oaaes, IBnaioDii □!, foe scales d( (em-


plained, 30: Ibe Invesligailen of


pEiatnie. 174.


GausB, OD the foundalionB o( dynnni-


ica. 154; lii^ principle, .5*; aLso,


■o8, «J4.


Genius, 279, !to.


Hartwich, JndRe, 314, 314, footnote. t


GsoKraplir, compariBOn in, «39.


Hat, a high silk, 14.


Qe0.ropia»,a8,.


Hearing and orientadon, relation


between. 304 et seq.


Heat, a material subalanoe, .77; dil- ,


GboBIs, photograpbii:, 7j.


fereni» between the concEplions


GlovB, in a mirror, 91.


of eleclrieity and, i6§ el seq,; siib-


Goethe, qnotatiom from. 9, ai, 49, B8;


on the eauMoi harmony. 35.


Carnot on, 156, .60 et seq.; Fourier


Golti, ^, ^,.


Gothic cathedral, 94.


eessarily a motion, ifi?, W '7' i


Graviuiioo, ditcoverj of, M5 et aeq.


mechanical equivalent of, 164. r671


Gravity, how to gel rid of the eSecIs


of liqneteclion, .78; quanllty of.


□r, inliqnidB. 4: alsouS.


rSfi: iBient, i6j, .78, S44: specific.


i66i 244 ; the conceptioM of, 160-


Greased plue, drop ot water on a. B.


Great miads, idio^yncrsiieE of, 147,


elecliical energy, 133 et leq.; me-


Greelt language, icienlifig terms de-


chanical theory of, 133 ; where does


it come from' 900.


derived from. 314, Eootnole; still


Heavy bodies, sinking of, «a.


Heights of ascent, 143-151.


Helm. 171.


Helmholti, applies the principle of


energy 10 electricity. 1S4'. bis lele-


ti's fibres, 19 et seq.; on harmonF,


eigy, iGj,247: his meihod at thought.


Hensen, V., on the andilorr funcdoo


Griesinger, tS,.


Grunting iishes, jofi.


Heredity, in organic and inorganic 1


Habitudes o( IhonRjit. 199. "4, 2i7.


matter. 216, Eoolnote. ^^J


m iNL

Ion, «io.
Hermann, E., on the economy of the

Hermann, L.. 29^.
Herodotus, iS, 534, 318, 331.
Hem, bis waves, 141; his use of Ihe
phrase "prophesy," ajs.

Hindu mathemalicians, their heauli-
ful problems, 30.

Horse, 63.

Household, physics compared to a

well-kept. .97.
Housekeeping in science and civil

life, is8.
Hudson, the, 94.
Hnman beings, puzilo-locks, 17.

Human mind, must proceed econom-
ically, 186.
Humanity, likened to a polyp-plant,

Hureens, his mechanical view of
physics, 15s : on Ihe nature of ll«hi
and heat, 155-156; hia principle of
the heights of ascent, 149; on ihe

the impossible peipelna! motion,
.47-148; on work, 173; seletlioM
from his works [or use in instruc-
tion, 339: bis view of light, aJT-iiS,

Hydrogen balloon, 199.
Hydrostaliis, Stevinus's principle
of. .41.

oSelseq.

Icblhyomis, a;?-

Idea? wbal is a theoretical, 141,

Ideal lam, 109.

Ideas, a product of organic nature.

a product ol universal evolulioni


J3S ; 111" Wslory of, My et H^tJ^^
great minds, 128; tbe rich conlolU

in'com'u-on lite, their clarification
in science, 1-1.
Ideography, the Chinese, 191.

et seq.
Inclined plane, law of, 140-141.

Indian, bis modes of conceplioD aod

Individual, a thread on which pearls

are strong, I34-S3S,
Industrial an., economy of the, B.

116, footnote, 183 et seq.
ing, Kant on, 199.

compared 10 a ahoemakBt, 105-106 ;
what constitutes tbe greU,<9>;lho
true, seeks the truth everywhere, 63
ot aeq.; Iho.compared to a wooer.4s.

Instruction, aim ol, the saving of ei-

iialion o( matter of, 336 el seq.
Integrals, iss.

of. 186 et seq.
Intentions, acts ol nalurB compared

to. 14-iS.
Inlerconneaion of nature. iBi.

Internalional Interconrse.MUbHibed
by Lalin, 3H.

Invention, discovery mid, dl.tloWiOB
between, .169.

opment of, 166, aCa et seq.
Iron-filings, i», 143
Italian art, 134.


^^^r 373 ^^M


^^Ssbr. C. G. J., on m«hEiosU«,iiBo.


Labels, the valne ot, wi. ^^H


James. W., 175. «99.


Labor, the accumutalion ol, the fonn- ^^1


J^va. ,6s.


datien e( wealth and power, 198; ^^M


Jews ind Chrislinos, niDnollieisni of


inqnirefs division dl. toj, «B. ^H


lh<, 1B7.


LahrriDth, ot the ear, iS, ^i. jdj. ^^H


Jqliy. ProlesMr von. iii, J74.


Lactanllus, on the study ol moral and ^^^H


JonlB, J. P., on the oo«>er.«aon ol


physical science, Bg. ^^H


Ladder of our abstraction, (he, wS. ^^H


CBplioD of =n«rg,, 245; his men-


Ladies, their eyes, 7> 1 like tuning- ^H


physics, 1B3. 346: his method ol


thought. 347: =1=0.37. '38.


Lagrange, on Hnygens's principle, ^^|


JndgB. criinin.1, the n.inr.l philiso-


143 : DD the principle of vinnal ve- ^^H


pher eompared 10 ■. 48.


iDcKies. TjD-ijs ; cbarac(ei □[ the ^^1


judgment, eisenti.lly economy o(


inlellectual activity of a, 193, 178. ^^1


Kai«e) and sciences, aaB-3191 «lso


Lamp-shade. 70. ^H


"SM3J. S38.


Lane's 1T3. ^^M


Joli«. Romeo snd. 87.


Language, knowledge of (be naluts ^^M


jBpiiflT. iissaiellilBsBrnpioyedidihe


tioa, 317: telatioDship between, and


liHh..5.etseq.


tbeught, 3^; communication by.


337; ecodomy of. 191 el aeq.; human.


itscharacter.ijB; of animals, 338; ^^


19.. ^m


Laplace, on (lie atoms dt (he brain, ^^^|


Kanl. bis hypalhesis at the orii!ln of


(he planetary system, y. bis Criliqui


if Purr RtaviH, 188; OP innate eOE-


hypothesis o( the origin of (he plan- ^^H


elary system, 5. ^^H


time. 904 ; ilao foolnDle. gj-


Latent heal, 167. .78, 144. ^H


Kepler, 187, 170.


Kinetic energy. 177.


Latin, IdslrucIioD in. 3,1 et seq.; in- ^H


troddced with (heChrisUanChurch. ^^H


311: (he language ol scholars, (ha ^^H


io. 5j6, is8, 171, a73.


median, of international inter- ^|


Knight, 389.


course, its po«r„, utility, uid final


study of, 317, 3 m, jaj, 314- its power


thonght. 19S ; our first, derived trom


to sharpen the judpnenl, 338-319. ^^_


Lavish Hlravagance ol science, ,89. ^^^H


197; the theory of. 503: gut piimi-


Law-maker, motives of not always ^^H


olsound, S7elseq.


ditCBmible, 9. ^^H


KG Hiker, ,9.


Layard, 79. ^H


Kopiich, 61.


Learning, its nature, 337 el aeq. ^^^|


Least superficial area, principle ol, ^^H


171


accounted lor hy tbe mutual altrac- ^H


LEverrier, pr

Nopluii*. n

Leydm far. i

Libeni idaci


Liebiit. iGj, 170,
Life ind deufa, i(
Ugbt. hifloiy of


ve


ocit, o(


jS^wbo


lly. <a e


Lilio


'eas^SS


Dlikecir
361.


'="""""'■ ■


ol.a*.


. slr»ighi, ih.lr


v»d. >h


mEiry, 98;


Link

Liqu


> or ih

eticlion


«gb.. in


e»i Dt, 17S.


Uqn


d. Bffiu


, 150; eqailF


u,.6eot


s ol, 4 e


9eq.; the loll


opep


ur, 7-8; .he


be


«ly«id


diy or form.


8;


made pe


rminan


br mailed col


ily and aduplivEneBB el form


LIvlnittDiee, 137,184; low Dt (be c(

Lloyd, observation ol the conical 1


Hagnelic needle, nei
Magnetiudbuolgte
Majpr and minor ktr


in. 309-14); C. G. J.


Msjer. J,
ergy, 14


[63, 164,1^, .67, 183, 184;


Ries bemecD and


Iherms


etgy. i7Bt.eq,;c<n.lv


alenl o[


eleclriclly, elc, 164,


le? e(


mylhology, K7; phao


mena. p


physic-. .5i-.6o. '«,


SDbslItU


v«1uB d( heil, 17B, [00


Uecfauics, Kirohhoff'-


^


Melody, 1 01.


Jiical pbitosDptiy, i3S.


Maauc ol Ihoughl. 192,


or Bcbemilic, igg:


Mil Her, Job
Mulliplicit
Mullfplier.


are, 17S; unils, tbe bDilding-s
otthaphyaidsi, 133.

Meyer, Lolbir. bis periodical 11


376 INDEX, ^


MjItoloKy, tbe mechanical, of phi-


Numbers, economy ot. .9; ; .heir con-


losophy, JO?.


Nmgal, TOB, 331.


Nuiseo, 196-


Ocoan-stream, 1171.


Umb ol, 36.


Nataial coaataalB, igj.


Ohm, on electric currents, 549.


Natural law, s, not cnntainEd in Ihe


Ohm, the word, 31,.


confoimlly ot Ihe eaerities. i?;.


Oil. alcohol, water, and, employed in


Natural laws, abtidged descriptions.


ol, assumes the shape 0( a sphere.


Natural mollons, «).


.1; geomelrical figures of, sot seq.


Nalaral Eeleclian In scientific theo-


One- eyed people, vision of. 98.


ries, 63, a.S.


Nalure, eiperienee IhewelL-spriai? ot


Optic nerves. 96.


all knowledge of. 181 ; fashions o(.


64; E.SI knowledge Dt, in^tinqlive,


Order ot physics, 197.


, IBs; genera] interconneiion of, iil2;


Organ, bellows ot an, 13;,


has many sides, 117: her forces


Organic nature, resntts ot Darwin-s


studies ot, IIS el seq. Se^Adafta-


Ulha and Hiridity.


Ihoecononiyof her actions, ij ; how


she appears to other animals, S3 el


Boq.; inquiry ol, viewed as a tor-


Oaiwald, 17J,


designedly cnnct^aled from man, 49;


Otoliths, 301 et aeq.


Overtones, a8, 40. 149.


powers o(, tSg; our view of, modi-


Ozone. Scbbbein'a discovery of, ayi.


fied by binocular vision, S, ; the e»-


ol, 48.


I»een real and. 68.


Negro bamlet, the science of a, 137.


Palealrina, 44.


Neptune, prediction and discovery of


Parameter. «57.


the planet, 29.


Partial tones, 361.


Particles, smallest. 104.


Newton, describea polarisation, j+i;


Pascheles. Dr, W., sB;.


upresses his wealth of tboughi in


Latin, jn; his discovery ot Rfa.iia-


Pearls of lite, ilrnng on Ihe individ-


ual as on a thread. «34-=JJ.


peraion, 333; his principle of the


eqnatily of pressure and eonnler-


in intelligence, .96.


prassnre, igr; his view of light. «?-


Pendulum, motion ot a, m4 el Boq„


lions from his works for use in in-


impulses, 31 ; electrical, tio.


atmction. 339: also 170, 174, 179,


Percepts, of like form. 361.


»S5.-B9.


Periodical, changes, iBi ; series. as6-


Nobility, Ihey displace Latin, 163.


Peimaneni, cbauRei. iBi, .99; ela-


aientsot.heworld,,94.


Perpetual motion, a, 181 ; defined.


^^^r ^'^i^^l


^^" iig; impoBSibility of, .39 o< seq.;


^^H


the printiple at the, elcluded, 140


Pike, learos by experience, 367. ^^^^|


el seq.; Bicluded from genural


phjsi«, .62.


Places, heavy bodies seek their, >^^^H


PBraonaiily, ila natare, =34-135.


PerspeclivB, Tfi el seq,; eanlracdot.


Planetary syelem, origin of, iUn»'^^^^|


o(.7*etaBq.;dis.orlioiiof, 77.


^^H


PhsraohB, as.


Plateau, bis law of free liquid equb^^^l


PhenocoEiiology, > universaL physi-


liUium, 9 ; his method of Eettin^!^^H


os), 150.


Platesotoi],ihio,G. ^^M


^^M


Philology, compsrison in, 239.


^^M


and physical sciencea, B9,


Philosopby, ilsctiaraclei al all limes.


.86; mochanical, iji el seq., 18S,


^H


PboDetic ilpbabela. [heir economy.


Poinsot, on Ibe foundations of mo'^^^H


chanics. ijs et seq. ^^H


Po]arisalioo,9i;KbsIrBcl]ydescribadi^^H


by Newlon, 112. ^^H


Physical, coDceplB, felishism in our.


Politics, Chinese apeak with unwO-^^l


sSf, ideas and piinciples. their na-


of, 34S. ^^1


inre, sn*; inquiry, Ihe ccnnomieal


Pollak, 299. ^^1


Polyp plant, humanity likened » V^^^H


335. ^^M


Physical phenomena, as mechanical


Pompeii, 134 : an in, So. ^^H


pheaomeaa, 183; lelaliona bet ween,


Popper J., 172, 21G. ^^M


Poienlial. social, 15', elecliical, i*I^^^^|


et seq.; measutemenl of, iz6; EtH^^H


world, 187, iSa, 107, isi el Beq.


of, 177; swarm of nolloDS in Of^^H


Physics, compared id i nell-kept


idea of, 197; its wide scope, aso, ^^^^|


household, 197; economical e.pe-


Pottery, invention of. 163. ^^H


[ieoce, i{i7; the pcinciples of, de-


lta method characeiised,!!.; 00m-


psrison in, 139 ; Ihe facts of, qua] i-


beRBn, 3J1 helped by psychology.


should leach, 336 et seq.


Pressure of ■ stone or of ■ magnet,


,89;lho«oaior.™7,=o,.


Primiiiveacis of knowledge the foun-


oda, ail el seq.


dntion of scisniihc thonghl, igo.


Problem, osiure of a, 223. ^^m


Piano, its mirrored cooolerpati, 100


Problems wbich ate wrongly lormaf^^^H


etseq.; used lo illustrale the lac ts


^^H


of sympaihmic vibration, 15 el aeq.


Process. Canol's, 161 el leq ^^^M


Piano-player, a speabei compared lo,


Prony's brake, ^^H


\


nalure of, 184. ^^^H


^^^^^^^^H


Research, foncrion ot Sjl^SB^^


PhLide, quptmlion trqni ihe, Sg.


Resomb lances bolween facts, 155,


P«ycholoi!7. prmeiled bj asttonomy,


go; how reKhsd. 91 el seq.: bElps


»eq.


ciplg ot loaal lupeificial area, 11-


Reversible proceases, 161 el seq,, 175.


PntkEnje. 184. ^Bs, J9'. >M.


Rbine,'lh'e!9,.


Riddles, 177.


Pnizle-lock, a. i6.


Riess, eiperimenl wilh the Ihermo-


Poziles. w.

PTTamid ol oil, 6.

PylhiRotaB. his discoTary of Ihs laws


Rigid conneiinns, 141.


Rind of a fruit, igo.


Rings of oil, illuslraltng formation of


rings 0! Sain tn, 5.


QoaliiTDdoBea, 36.


Ritler, 19!. 399.


Rods ol Corti, 19-


Holph. W. H„ 1.6,


Quanlily ol eleclrie[tr, iii, iiB, iig,


Roman Church, Lalin inlrtidnesd


i6?-i?D, 173: of heat, 166, 167-171.


wilh the, 3.1 el seq.


174. '77.144 ; of mo'ton, '84.


Queala made ot (he inquirer, nol by


bim, 30.


Romeo and Juliel, «?■


Quitelel, ij, foolno.o.


ROmer, Olsl, 3. el«q.


Roois, the nature ot, in lanKuaKB.ajj.


Rabelai., 083.


Raindrop, form ol, 3.


required lo develop eleolrlcily. iji.


Routing bodies, iSj,


Reaction and action, principle of, 191.


RolBllon, apparatus of. in phrsioa. 59


ReK:lions, disclosarc ol Ihe conne.-


principle ot least eupsrScial araa.


Reaaon, Blands above Ibe senses, 105.


Ruysdae], 179.


ReSei action, no.


Sachs, Hans, io«.


Salviali, 144.


Refraction, jg, 193, 194, J08, 530, 231-


Salum. rings ol, thair (orm.iion il-


Relief!, pbotoiniphs of, S8.


Saurians, Js7.


foomoie, g. el seq., 57. 98 el seq.;


Sauvenr, on .contllcs, 3*. 34* «t seq.


36..


Reprodoction of facis in Iboughl. iSg.


Repulsion, eleclrie, 109 el seq., 168.


Scbool-boT, copybook ot, gi.

Schnltie, Mai. ig.
pie ■! Its bails, i; ; compired Ic


in, 343 : described, 131 ; llsCunclion,
asi; cUsiifiwiiiDn In, ajj. ijg el
seq. See alBO nyilcs.
Sciences, partilion ol the, 86; IbE
barriers and refilions between Ibd,
iSj-JSS; on insirnciion in the, 309-

tulhn- of, I, 16; discoTeries, ibeit
lite, 138; knowledge, IniolvBa de-


■eq,; Iboughl, the dif-


Seek Ibeir pUcea, bodlea, nS.
SelUndaction. coeffleieni o(, 150. tja.
Seir-ob.^ervation, ziT.
Sel[-preseivaiion,Dni first knowledge
derived from Ibe economy of, ,97;

Sensation ot roundini; ■ railnsr
curve, 386.

ilsr, produce iRreeible effects, 96;


Similarity, 149.
Simony, 980.
Simplicity, a varyiDg el
scripilon, »54,


-liKbl,yibritionsof,is


I of tbe principle dI to


38o INDEX. ■


Space, Bj : seiisitlon of, no.


Slniggle for existence atnonK Ideas


Spsrk, eleeurle. "7. '»7. -J", i33, 190.


Spatial vliion, 357.


Species, Blibilil; ol, 1 Ibeoiy, 316,


Specific eneieies, »9i.


Specific heal, 166, M4'


th^ notion ol, M3. ^ et seq,^ en-


Specific inda«ivBc.p.ci.s. ..7.


ergy CQDceivEd as ., 164, IBs, '44 el


Spectral analysis ot sound, 17,


Snbstitiition-value of beat. iTlt, loot-


■sn.


Speech, Ihe instinci of. cultivalod by


Suetonius, 319.


languaRei, 31 j.


Sulphur, specific inductive capacity


Spcace.. «8, «.,


Spbero, a bo(. rotatinf:. i ( (he figure


Sun, hutoan beings could nut exist


of least surface, ii; electrical capa-


eily or, «3 et wq.


Swift,- B4,jao.


Spberlol shell, law of altraclion for.


Swimmer, Amptre's. »?.


Symmetry. deGnilioii of, gz: EgnrBs


Spiders, .he eyes of, 87.


and horizontal, 94 ; in music. 99 el


Sympathetic vibration, M el Beii..35o.


SquiDting, 7J,


Tangent, the word. 863.


Stars, the filed, 90.


State, benefits aDtl evils of [ts control


classics, 313-334; ol .ho ancients.


1 ?j,t:S!i-"""'-^""


■ Statical electricity, 134.


■ Stationary cnrrenls, J«.


Teaohinn, its nature, 337 el seq.


m Statnliths, 303.


TeleBraph. the word. 163.


Steam engine, 160, !i6s.


Stereoicope, WheaHtone and Btews-


Temperament, evon, in Inning, «.


Temperature, absolute. 162; differ-


H SleviDus, on the inclined plane. 140;


as level surUcee, i6t : heights ol.


■ Ibe principle of virtual velocitio..


^1 ijo; characterisation of bis thought.


Terence. 31a.


■ >4ii;alao>ai, ra?, igi.


Terms, scientific, 313-314.


■ Stone Age, 46, 3i'.


Tbales, aw.


Theories, their scope, function, and


power. 341-141, must be replaced


H Straight line, a. Its syniinetry, 99.


by direct description, 148.


■ Straight, meaning of ihs word. ^0.


Thermal, energy, 174. I77: capacily.


^H Striking distsncB, iij, 137.


ThermoelECitometer. Rieia's. 133. teg.


Thing-in-ilself. the, aoo.


^^^^^^^^H


INDEX, 38 1


Thinga, miinlil armbali for groups o(


TbomsoD. jamei. an ibe lowsring of


Tylor. iS6.


ibe IreMlng-poini at witst by pres-


suts, 161.


Type, natural laws likened tc, 193 :


TliomvjD. W.. bi< abaolule electro-


melit, H7, footnote; on thermodj-


nunics, iSi: on tbe coDiervation


U lyases, 318,


of energy, i6ji on Ibo mechuica]


Understanding, whit It means, lit.


Uniforms, do not fit heads. 340,


"fff. '7S;«l>o 108,173, fooinolfl.


Unison. «.


TboDght, biblmiles of, 199. :u, 317.


Unit, eleclrostatlc. tit. See Fin-cr


and \V„rk.


Bud, 3«!,; iotningruence belwaen ei-


Universal Real Cha racier, a, KM.


perien».nd,«6; luxuriant of.


Utility of physical science, su.


inndeatific. JU-13S.


VarialioD, the method of, in science.


Tbonghis, ibeir development and the


«o;inbiolai|y, 116.


alrDggle for eiilteoce among Ibam,


Velocity, of iight. 4a ot seq,; of (hede-


B; ; importance ot erroneous, Gj \ as


scent of bodies, 143 el aeq.', mean-


reprodoctiona of facta, 107.


ing of, J04; vinnsl, 149-135-


TbrB»d, the individuBL a, on which


peu-laarealrung. aji-ajS-


Verlical, percepiion of ihe, a7a, 1S6


Tide,, 5B3.


Timbre, 3?, 38, 39.


Vertigo, 38), Ifi.


Time, 17B, «H, ws, foolnoiB,


Vestibule of Ihe car. 300.


Tone-Egurea, 91.


Vibradon, sielseq.


Tonea. M-47. M el aoq., an.


Torsion, monient of, 13J,


Toralon-balance. Coulomb'., 109, iM.


Violent motions, laj.


Torricelli, on irirtual velocities, ijo;


Virtual velocities. i4g-i5S-


bis liK of liquid emoi, ijo; on the


of, 96. See E^.


Touriai, jonmey of. work of the in-


Visual nerves, 96.


quirer compared 10, 17, ig, 30,


Trmaatlantio cable, 108,


Voli, tbe word, 314.


acieniific though I, »i4-a3S.


Vailaire, 160.


Voltaire's ingtnn. „g.


Vowela, composed qC simple lanllcal ^^^


Ttanalalion, dlfficoltiea of. 3«S.


Tree, eonceplaal life compared to a,


Wagner, R.cbard, m. ^^^H


JJi-


Wald. F., ^^^H


sides and angles or a, 179,


Waste of mechauical enerw. W. ^


Triple accord, ,fi.


Thomson on, m. \


Truth, wooed by the inquirer, 43 ; dl(-


Watches, esperimenl with, 41 : in a 1


GcullyoflieacqulaitloD.4G.


Water, jet of, resolved into drops, 60; 1
1


38.

fleeted in, 34, 13'
ot measurcmeal r
Wilt. 166.


■Wheel, hisii

et seq.
Wbeirall.an Ihe form


deifut,>ciencetbei


llan □!, iS]-i3i. S«a £«-
Wronsky, .71.

of phyiicB, isriM; aw t*

XenophoD, 49. lootnole.


THI WORKS OF KRNST MACH.

THE SCIENCE OF MECHANICS.


By DR. ERNST MACH.


Translated from tha Second German Edit!
By THOMAS J. McCORMACK.


zjo Cuts. 534 Pages. Half Morocco, Gilt Top, Marginal Analfsea.
Exhaustive Index. Price $3.50.


TABLE OP CONTENTS.


Ttis Levm
Tho Comi


Newton' B ViswB al Timg, SpiiCB,and

Mot inn.
Crillque ol (be NswIodUd EDDnda.

Relrospect of llii DsTsIopmwIt ol


THE Pun


I of (he Ne«loni«n PrinclplBS. Prfnciplo of fit Cnro.

itviIioD of Moinenluui, ConBe> Principle of Lea^I Aclieo.

on of Iho Centre o( Gnvily, H»m 11 loo's Principle.

I ol Areu. Hydroatstic and HTdrodTDuaig


3f Im]


it, Dkv»lopiiriit of Mich*kic».
lemi. AnalMical MechsD

id Mritlcal The Eiroaooi} ot Si


^p


1


THX WORKS or ERNST MAC!..


1


^^^v


PRESS NOTICES.


"71..


ppeaianu ot


. translation Inio Engliab of thia rem-rt


blebeok


•hDOld


wrv


. lo revivify


agnadng


liaatme


iusuhjoc.


nd should call op the ihooghU which pu<d


Biwbea


■ elliiii


of


Mach is .


nsikiBK


ni


uce of tb»


dge with


eiporim


enti


]>liin,uei


mplified not only by >h. elefant Jlloslrali


nsolme-


ch^ica


pr


mciplss whic


h abound in this Irexise. but abo tram hi


brilliant


eiperim


enu


on (he pho..


grspliy bI buUsIS. ... A CUefnl Etndr of


Professor


Mach'i


wo


k, and 1 Ilea


n. on the


linsi la


dd


wn in the in


eresling diaarami of bii Sritna if Mtda


nia. win


do aacb


lo


revivilT Ihe


rotical mechanical acioncB. m developed


from (ha


.Iccnanu b]P rlcDcan* 1p


i«l tTe>imeaL"-^raLA.G. GresohiU, inA^o/anr, |


London


"Th


aao


who at> cri


on> lo leira how lb* principles of mechai


icshan


b«Baei


'"


d, from what


Esarce they lake their oHgin, and how f.
d peimaQEnt value, will End Dr. Uach'a


they can


ii.e ir


=nc


ngiT intare


manyr*


iT.=cl>. whil


tbe miilur


of history with the lateal «i«ntifie principlea and |


■b^ol^t.


m


themalical


^■■^Ifc-


cianica


w


■fU. Manchei


ler and London, England.


-M


Ch-


Hachanlu


i> nnlqne. It la not a lexl-book, bnt lorm.


.nielnl


en t


o Ab ordin


r; leil-book. The latter is naually a ika


etoD on|.


IIds, tul


of


malhematica


symbols and other abstraclioni. Mach'i


book baa


■niiHcIo


an


clolbiDB,- a


tiDducei


th


leadinp! c™


tihstors in 9DCce»ioa, taUa irta« they did


and how ■


lb<iT did


il,


and oflEn w


at manner of men they wufl. Thus ii i


,L., ,h. 1


P»g" K


ow


.^„. 1


liSc boo


. The booli


m roeep- ■


UoDftpn


si


inlero»l«ilnlh.progrB.aoI.i!i«M."-7a#/llr«*W««.it«.,Bew |


York -n


Ix


odon.


"Mt


T


]. McCormack. by hli effacliTB tianilatlall, where tr


«nal.U6B


•»> DO 1


Eh


task, or this


masterly tte><ise upon the earliest and m


SI (anda-


menial


b .peak-


\ut .IBd


Dt.


The a erma


n aid English laagnages are geaerally a


CCOUDlcd


Ihoagh,


bn


U.B conver


into th.


olh«r,.a


as


o prcacire a


1 the meaning and spiril of the original an


lesedl


.»llT ai


1


aturallr into


Blty. oA


1


THE WORKS or KBN


ST MACH.


1


^^


when p«[oni


=d.


wail u in cbe pcaianl In


tance.


meril


t eouinrnda-


lioa. Dr. Mi


tabs


crEitBd for fail OWD work


slhes


yeres


pos


lblsatind:i[d


To


>pe<:<nDme>ehainIheb


oksol


sucb


Ll.«


»r than from


IhB elsmenla


r pf


dacliona of an ordinary


toBcbe


inth


soi


nde would be


nndne mod^r


alioQ


Co I Kulbor bia lifted


whal, 1


man


of


(, wssaiooe


time 1 court


of


enlal g


mnss


ica.


euCDmpiesed


gnlyslvasle


ipso


JlatB of Intellccmal effor


, into 1


Sludy


pos


essing a deep


y>]u


B and iqgtlDCt wilb life


nd in


eresl.


■N


profit grows


wbsre ■> no p1«.su


oil eg


ill turn wilb


nirrow melhods of the


D.(-boD


ktow


ors


be aclence ii


miilitoilhi;


rMa.


fay a lrBa.n.enl at <mce br


ad an


dee


comiBilDn bs


wee


all Ihe phyEieal EciBQCB


ukeo


logel


- TJu Mining


/noTtaALon


on,


ngland.


"Ai ■ hiB


otTO


mecbmics, the work i>


admin


blB/>-


r**


Nali«,, New


Y«rk.


■■An Bice


book, admirably illuntril


d,"-7


luLi


„,»._.. L..,- 1


i*a. England


■■S«15 fo


b 11,


B BlenteDlt ot lU BubiocI


wiU. 1


luoid


ly.c


eamen, and


(orca unknon


a In


oks..


.ill


dmi


ably eilad to


■Brve iiuden


tie


n inireductioii on biitorii^


I line


tolh


priu


dplesoime-


chanical sciB


CB."


-C^«^J,<.»Mi.f.f^ndA


ff^i^n


alR^


titw.


Olliwi. Can.


-A mastB


J bo


ok. . . . To my one who


eeia lb


alfae


does


DO I know IB


mncb IB bs


ught


to iboul phjslcs, -e can


CDQim


endii


mos


beaoily la i


■cbDlarJy >n


lb


e ireali^ bolb Inler


eating


and I


blB.^^— A. M.


Ea^nnriHT ^noi. New Voik


"TliBboo

■I BOiBIlCe


pbi


osophy. . . . Reproduction


valuib


eidd


o'lT


le iny llhrBiy


TipiBtlea Rive


piqu


,>cy lo Ihe pagei. The n


umerou


9 ma.


io>


litlea form 1


Dine


of Ihe woiki Bud there 19


.bitiu


VI III lb


e adjunct, a good g


JndBi. Altog


Ihet


the publishers ire to be louKtii


liled


npon


producing • ■


Oi^hnlul wo


k tb


I Is tbocougbly iKcsctly


lain


make-


up.'


-Piol. a. W. 1


HurlDK, in SeHntt.


1


"TbeTBi.


DUO


tberpolDtapDDwblcbthis


Yolnn


.faon


dbe


■DdthllUth


per


Ilia.


ommo


nf.


It lb 11 boaki 1


or thB gTBBKB


inl


res. <u,d value in the orig


nil ar


e ofte


eit


bnlchered or 1


mada rldicnlg


nsby


a clnmay lran>Uto[, Th


pieae


oole


•orihy Bleep- 1


tioB,"-^«A™> .</..


■


■


■


^


THE WORKS or ERNST MACH.


d bound, . . . Tlie prosawoili is ni


clMrlj ud well eiecated.


TESrrMOMALS op PROMINENT EDUCATORS.


; or ComsU Uaivei


Ilhica. N. ¥.


Ticing ths mrk in i


( Ph7»io«, Uni»Br«ltjf ol


ivs read Mach'i Sriincr ^AficAamia with Krsit pleaioi
linitly imeresling,"— W. f. JUafu, Pratmor at Phyaic


■'Th« Scitna 0/ UicAan/a bf Mac


mosi taTcrablT Ihe rundaniBiiIa
iHilaD witb IhB highest matheo


al Kiigln»ring, ObioStala Llnii


ir Fhysici loiludr oi


THK WORKS OF ERNST MAt:H.

POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES.

A PORTRAVAL OP THE SPIRIT AND METHODS


By DR. ERNST MACH.


TrwulBtal by THOMAS J. HcCORMACK.


Srctmd Editiam, Rn-ind Thn


ngkaut and Griatly Enlarged.


CI oih, Gill Top. EihausiivEir ludei


d. Pa Res, 38a, Culs, JO. Price, »i.oo.


TITLES OF THE LECTURES.


The Formi of Liquids,


On (be Principle o( Compariion in


The Fibres ot Corll,


Ptyaic.


On Ihi Cansea o( Harmony.


On the Part Played by Accident in


OnlheVelocilyofLight,


Why Has Man Two E,M?


On Symmetry.


df the ClflSEicB and the Matbemal-


Sialic Electrioily.


im-Physical Sciences.


On the Principle o[ Ihe Conservation


A Canlrihgtinn lo the History o(


ol Enerny.


On the Economicl Nalure of Phys-


Remarks on the Theory o( Spatial


ical Inquiry.


lallon in Scientific ThouRbl.


.r«.ed.in..«ilgh,fm..yIo^dwI


h wonderful cleamets. For liRhUiees


ation Iba chapter ' Why Has Man Two


B realm of popular sci entitle nrilloK."


—TktBialBH TrawUtr.


varlDDB fields doltiyalcd nnder the n


.as.a. These r„,nre,,toge.he, wiUf


e the volome one that may bo (airly


called rare. The .piri. o. .he a.,ho


is preserved in sncb ollracliye, really


al Jaurnal.


■


■


THE WORKS OF ERNST MACH.


■


"A vory


deKuhtru] and


irsetul book.


-.The


uthor tread


ome of Ibe


in


■1 fecon


ile ptoblema o


nilural Sdien


E, in so


charmingly nn


echnical a


w


y, wftb s


ch a wealtb of


brigbt illnslra


on, as m


akes bis mean


PC c'eu to


Ihe p»r«>D


0( ordicar; m


educalio


n. . - . This is


■ work Ihal


9b


old find


a pLaCB in evEij library, and It


ai peop


should be en


opraged lo


«wl."-n=


/r Pira^ne. N


w OrlBi-n..


"In bi>


translation M


McCormacl.


aanell


preaened the


frank, aim-


pi


. and pie


a»ng .tyle ol Ibis ramoua led


rer on s


ientific topics


Protesiot


M


cb deals


with the live (


CIS. Ibe aalien


points o


science, and


not with its


m


siicism o


T dsad liadiiio


s He uses Ih


sipiple


1 pt itinstrati


PS and ei-


Vt


sseibiiu


self clearly, te


9e)y, and irith


a deligbifnl freahnEis


bal makes


en


erulnin


reading of lib


tin other hand


1 won Id


bednll and proar,"— £■ |


r


«r,-g!^


™i, N. Y.


■


■■Tbeg


neral reader li


led b; plain an


ih


□ggb oh


1 would be IP


him without a


cb a be


p a complica


ed DiaiB ol


dj


Eculties.


Uarvela are [


vented and sci


ncelari


vealedaathe


natiml (oo


to


-V""-.


" Tbs b


antlftilqualil;


o( the work l3


oimar.


d by abslruae


diacDsslona


■hichwoul


require a acie


1131 lo talhom


but 15 «


oaimpleands


clear that


>I


cmg!i u<


nio direct con


act wilh the m


tier irea


ed."— n? Bo


(«fi.K


"Amu


oI iniportaat i


cientific


ruiha.--S^


man. Edin-


bn


gb.


■■Th«B


laolnres by Dr


Mach are deligbKnlly s


nple and Ira


k; there Ja


DO


di7n="


rdarkne^^oft


chnicnliiips,.


d s^^ieac


a and commoD


Hie do aol


Me


m aepar


led by a gplf. -


. The slylB is


admira


le, >Ddtbewb


Ola volume


•e


TM gLori


QSly aliye and


liiiman."-ft-K


d.n^, >


irnal. R. I.


-Tbe n


on-iciBDlific re


der who dMir


es to le


el modern


sc


enliac th


Dries, and the


easone tor the


eiisten


ce, cannoldo


bettei than


c^


=fu1ly <l


dy those lector


s. The Engi:


h is en


elleal through


ut. and re-


de


IB great


rodil 00 the ir


inslalor."— -Iffl


uf^.„r.


■>■ «Hd Buildrr


■■Welik


a the qiiiel, co


n«iderRle ialel


igenee of tb.» lectu


■af-Aa-,-


fH^dn-I.Se


irYork.


'■Protes


orMacb'elsctDrtaaniople


aaollyw


rillen and illu


mined with


n


bcbann
w Y,rk C


sm. Advirliifr.


Ihal they liave


all the In


eresliidivcl


""'"■'■"-


■■The 11


erary and phil


•aphii:al lugge


llveness


of the book is


very noh."


^k. "^


rtfi>rJ Simina-y Kicird.


^


^


THE WORKS OF ERNST MACH.


THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSATIONS

By DR. KRNST MACH,


Pages, 208 Illustrations. 37. Indexed,
(Price, Clolh, H,«j.)


Iinroduclorj ; Aiilimetapby»ic;.i.
Tha Cbler Poiois ot View For Ihe I


IE Eje. The Sen


Phytic!


a Ods Anolher uil ro Ihe


n lbs Mcde of Con


"A nonderrully oriKinil lillle book. Like «ver>tblDg be writes a work of
geniiiB."— /y^ H'. Jamci of Harvard.

" 1 consider each »ork of Professor Macb s dist!iii:i acquisilinn la a
librarj of science,"— /V^ D. W. Htring. Now York University.

-There is uo work known to Itae wriUr which, in iu Reneral iciendfic

and clariaed by MacVs wondorfnlly orieinil and Hholesome book. II is not
sayinti loo much lo mainlain that every mtellinnt person should have a copy
of il.~ind abcuLd Biudy ibat oopy."-ft-4;^ /. 2, Trni^, Cornell.

"Smdents may here make Ihe acouainlance of some of Ihe open ques-
licma of senaalion and at Ihe same time take a leaaon in Ihe charm of acien-
lific modesty Ihal can hardly be eicellad."— />^ B. C. Sanjerd. Clark Uni-


te thought, with m


)( one."— TA* Ulcraiy W


CHICAGO :

The Open Court Publishing Company


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS


OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.


COPE, E D.

THE PRIMARY FACTORS OF ORGANIC EVOLUTION,
lai ciils. Pp., ivi. 517. Cloth, ta.M). nel.
MULLEK, F MAX.

THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF
THOUGHT.
With a correspondsDce on "Ttaoui^hl Wllhout Words." betoien P.
Mai Mailer and Francis GhIiod. the Duke of Argyll. GeorKe J. Ro-
Diaaes and DIhera. iiS pases. Cloth. 7; cenis. PMper. ■; cents.
THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OP LANGVAGE.


The I


I ford U


with a


. Cloth.


m Qumlians. Threi


Pp. 181.
^XAMIN;

THOUGHTS ON

EdilBd hy Charlei Gois. M. A., Canon of W
Pages. 1S4. Clolb, gilt top. ti-ij.
RIBOT, TH,

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION.

THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY.

THE DISEASES OF THE WILL.

Anlhoriscdiranalatinns. CInih.71|oen(!o


bvT.r. \
)PULAR S


P MECHANICS.

HlSIOKICAt ElPPSITlOB or ITS Pb

ft SCIENTIFIC LECTURES,
second Edition. jSi panel, jocuu. Cloth, gil
THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSATIONS.

GOODWIN, REV. T. A.

LOVERS THREE THOUSAND YEARS AGO.
Ab Indicated by the Song of Solomon. Pp. 4'.
HOLYOAKE, G ],

ENGLISH SECULARISM. A CoHFEsaioN of BiLt!
Pp. 146. Cloth, joc., net.
CORNILL, CARL HEINRICH.
THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL,

THE RISE OF THE P°^PLE OF ISRAEL."'
See Efil^m v/ Tkrci Scicnctt. belo'-.
BINET, ALFRED.

THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS.

ON DOUBLE CONSCIOUSnIss*"'

Studies in Eiperimenial Fsychaloitr. 93 pages.


martin' lu^^I

lllugtrated. Pp
HERING, EWALD,


d THE SPECIFIC ENERGIES OFT


THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND,

WHEELBARROW: Articles'anb DrecuBsioKS otr the Lubdb gtinBiicN.

Wifhpotlrailorihaanlhor. 303 panes. Clolh. Ii, 00; paper, js CBnli.
EARL GREV ON RECIPROCITY AND CIVIL SERVICE REFORM.

With Commeola by Gen. M. M. Trumbull. Price, 10 cenlB.
GOETHE AND SCHILLER'S XENIONS,


: ITS LANGUAGE AND RELIGIONS,


CARUS, PAUL.

THE ETHICAL P .

gapaies. Clelb, so cents; fap
FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS.


I edition.
THE SOUL OF MAN,

With i;a curt and diagrania, isSpagei.
TRUTH IN FICTION. TwitLvn titea wi-


THE RELIGIOS OF SCIENCE.

Second, emra edition. Pri
FRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY.


Cloth, 13.00

I^DidYindinV, KiUedgei.

R.S. L.editi


THREE llkCTll RES iCOThePhilosophv or thbTdo!


THE GOSPEL I
jth Edition.

BUDDHISM A^
PBgB9. ill. I

KARMA. A Sto


EVELiTioN. Pages, II. Piper, jc.
e BUDDHA. According 10 Old Recordi
p.,«5. ClDtb,»i.do. P»pBi, 35 cents. In
) [TS CHRISTIAN CRITICS.


F THE BRAHMAN.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF A

Pp. 89. CloIh. 50c. Paper, 15c.

EPITOMES OF THREE SCIENCES.

I. The Study op S>hskbit. By f/. OUiHierr.

OGV. By 7bmj»« Jailrra: 3. The Rise or


The Religion of Science Library.


% pabLished by Tbe Open Court PublisI


OfdiDg I


UDlcd. Tbe books i


■ood paper, from Jii^e typo.

The RellgloD or Scisnce Library, by iu
will plBce s IsrRe Dumber o( valusible bouk

The following have already appeared ii


the 9


I. Tkt Riligion o/Sciiicc. By Paul Cahus. ase.

1. Tkrtt tntroductarj Licfrnt e* Iki Sciena < TViwu^'Af. By F

MBLLER. XiC.

J. Tim Ltclurti M tki SciiMct qfLaUiUagr. By F. Mil UDLLER.

i. TTuDia'UiKfFtricHalily. ByTn.RiioT. ajc.

5, The Piyrh^g^ ^ AMinihK. By Th. Riboi. ijc.

6. Tki P^ckic Lift <^ Mir:Tc-OrgaHiimi. By AuBBO BimiT. ase.
J. The Naturg,^ the Stall. By Pa 111. Ciena, ijc.

i. On Ds^le Qmieiounira. By Alfred BiHET. ijc.

). Jfmidamiiilai PrMena, By PAm, CAana. soc.

D, TktDiieaiestfthe Witt. ByTH, Ribqt, 55c,

1. The Origin ^ Langttage. By LuDwiQ Noiite. 15c.

1. The Free Tradr Struggtt in England. By M. M. THUHHULI.. IJ

;. Whieliarram on the Labor Qacilbm. By M. M. Truubitll. jjc.

I. TheCsitetsfBiiddha. By Paui. Carus. 35c.

5. -nie Primer i^i^ilsiofty. By PAUt C«RUa, ajc.

b. Oh Memery. and The Specific Energiei ^tke tfenmiu Srilim. By

J. TheKedemftiBni/lkiBTakiivin. A Tale of Hindu Lite. By Ri

ClUIBK. IJC.

fl.A»E^ami<u,tiH>^IVtitmannlim. By G. J. Romanss. 350.
^. On Germinal Selfclien. By August Weismanh. ajc.
a. Lmiert Tkree Thatuand Yeatt Ago. By T. A. GumiwtH. i]e.
!. Popular Scientific Ueli,rei. By Ermbt Mach. jjc.

3. Tkt Fnfketi ^ Ancient liratl. By Paor, C. H. CoaBiLi.. lic.

\. Homtliei^ Science. By Paul Carus. jjc.

i. Thoagkti on Religion. By G. J. RowiHES. jo cents.

6. The Pklloafk} ^ Ancient India. By Prof. Richarh Gabbe. «ji

7. Martin iMther. By Gdbtav Frittag. ijc.


THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.

334 Dbarborn Street. Chicago, III,
LONDON : Kegan Taul. Trench. Trliboer & Co,


THE OPEN COURT


THE OPEN COURT doeE not uoderBIand by teliglcti ui; creed or dog-
iBtic beliet, bul mnn' i world-concepllon in so far as. it regulales bii conduct

me is Ihe object o[ Th, Optn C-nin. Thus, the religion o( Tkr Ofm Caurl ii

in Religion of Science, that is, ibe religtoa of letified and verifiable truth.

AUhougb oppoasd to irtalionil oithodoiy and Durravi bigolrr, Thi Ofrn


The current numbers at Tki Ofrn Q'«rt
om the pens ot dislioRuisbEd iblokeis,
ons are made In Philosophy, Scienec, an


THE MONIST

A QUARTEBLV MAG*ZINH OF

PHILOSOPHY AND SCIENCE.


of Ibe day. The foUowine have coottlbuled to its cDlamas :
Prof. Josiph L» Cohtb, Phop, G.J. Boha«e9, Paop. C. Lomhboso,
Dk. W T. HARais, Prof, C.Llovd Morgan, Phof. E. Haecihi.,

M. D. Cosw.y, jiiiM SuLL», Prof. H. HflFPninG.

Prof. F. Ma« Mdller, Dr. A. BiMEr, ' Pbof.'j, Delbouf,

Pbof. E, D. Cofb, Phof. Ekmbi M*ch, Paqp. P. Jnni,,

Mrb. C. LaddFiakiimn. LuBtEii F.Ward, ' G. FeixEFo',

Pbof[Fbi.iik"btt., ' Dk.Edh. MOKTGOuinv, Prop. H. VDN Hoi-BT.
PerCopy,socenlB: Veatl)-,»a.oci. In England and all countries in U.P.U.
pet Copy, as ed ; Yearly, ga 6A,

CHICAGO:

THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.,

MoDun Building, 324 Dearborn St ,


<r •• -: O'


I


iiiiiiiiiii

3 blDS on 164 DflE


STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004

|650) 723-9201

5olcirc@sulmail.stanford.edu

All books are subject to recall.

DATE DUE


:JUN ^ 2000
