Ornaments in Jade
Arthur Machen (1924)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/ornamentsinjade00mach
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

GH ea oa hel é 5 Y .. ee tes OS fe fe ai ate Se EBay Pe ik ok Deen ea ty 


iWin 


el 
Ae 
Petes 


- 
fy 
at? 


ae 


ans 
SaeeeS 

Sehr chy 
SPO ee 


Tre 


ee 


PPK 
we 
< 


. Sa Be A eta oe Ae 2 % rn . Ba E : ni se. iors « ie aS re ws ons 
TH is CX : Paes : fame : . = : See se 
2 ; Sl eae aie ‘ ; A * 
BP 4 : ? . os oa ; wens * f 
; Fa : ? ys 


eee, 


Pei eter 
FP 8, te 
Pikc at! > 


x, 
* 


ET: 
Te Tel 
a 


ons 


cin 


‘St 

Alas pt ek. 
Pe pr ee se 
ree Noe 


"4: 


y 


vate 


ae 
* 


oye 


at Rese Ie * 
Ch 


ye aD 
Pe tei 


0 assent Miiseatn 
ONE Ade PP cn ope Scene 
eS i Rng So or 


LIBRARY 
Brigham-Young University === 
RARE-BOOK COLLECTIOIN 


il 


6 


| 


w 
D 
9) 
ae 
> 
= 
< 
O 
iS 
— 
G) 
e 
Z 
< 
m 
D 
D 


VICES 9L6cc 


A COLLECTION OF 
FIRST EDITIONS 


brought together by 


FRED A. AND FRANCES 
ROSENSTOCK 


acquired by the Library with the 
assistance of the classes of 1942, 
1948, 1951, 1960, and I961. 


Sipe RON a Shite 


ales e 


Pennie, 


‘ if 
Pay ie kf 


me 


apes 
“Sie 
= 


ean 


i 


ath 


TS 


ee Ey bed 
The Rose Canin a) 

ta Wier ome an ) ) 
a The Idealist Lenya ; | : ) | Ps. 
Witchcraft A | 


a: oe The Ceremony oy ) | x 
ae. ap Psychology 


Torture 
DRO I Midsummer 
ae Nature 


The Holy Ti ings 


“<- 


q! 
7 


~ 
oi, 


a 


Ornaments € 


If) / 
fe. ibe bo 
3 Jade iy 


/ ARTHUR MACHEN 


New York 
ALFRED A. KNOPF 


TO 2a: 


Printed in the United States of America 
COPYRIGHT 1924, BY ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC. 


“yy”? 


UPB 


GR 2 mw 


The ‘Rose Garden 


vate afterwards shewent very softly,and opened the 
window and looked out. Behind her, the room was in a 
mystical semi-darkness; chairs and tables were hovering, 

ill-defined shapes; there was but the faintest illusory glit- 
ter from the talc moons in the rich Indian curtain which 
she had drawn across the door. The yellow silk draperies 
of the bed were but suggestions of colour,and the pillow 
and the white sheets glimmered as a white cloud ina far 
sky at twilight. 

She turned from the dusky room, and with dewy ten- 
der eyes gazed out across the garden towards the lake. 
She could not rest nor lay herself down to sleep; though 
it was late, and half the night had passed, she could not 
rest. Asickle moon was slowly drawing upwards through | 
certain filmy clouds that stretched in a long band from 
east to west,and a pallid light began to flow from the dark 
water, as if there also some vague planet were rising. She 
looked with eyes insatiable for wonder; and she found 
a strange eastern effect in the bordering of reeds, in their 
spearlike shapes, in the liquid ebony that they shadowed, 
in the fine inlay of pearl and silver as the moon shone free; 
a bright symbol in the steadfast calm of the sky. 

There were faint stirring sounds heard from the fringe 
of reeds, and now and then the drowsy, broken cry of the 

water- 


The ‘Rose waterfowl, for they knew that the dawn was not far off. 
Garden Tn the centre of the lake was a carved white pedestal,and 
on it shoneawhite boy, holding the double flute to his lips. 
_ Beyond the lake the park began, and sloped gently to 
the verge of the wood, now but a dark cloud beneath the 
sickle moon. And then beyond, and farther still, undis- 
covered hills, grey bands of cloud, and the steep pale 
height of the heaven. She gazed on with her tender eyes, 
bathing herself, as it were, in the deep rest of the night, 
veiling her soul with the half-lightand the half-shadow, 
stretching out her delicate hands into the coolness of the 

misty silvered air, wondering at her hands. 

And then she turned from the window, and made her- 
selfa divan of cushions on the Persian carpet,and half sat, 
half lay there,as motionless, as ecstatic as a poet dreaming 
under roses, far in Ispahan. She had gazed out, after all,to 
assure herself that sight and the eyes showed nothing 
but a glimmering veil,a gauze of curious lights and fig- 
ures: that in it there was no reality nor substance. He had 
always told her that there was only one existence, one 
science, one religion, that the external world was but a 
variegated shadow which might either conceal or reveal 
the truth; and now she believed. 

He had shewn her that bodily rapture might be the 
ritual and expression of the ineffable mysteries, of the 
world beyond sense, that must be entered by the way of 
sense; and now she believed. She had never much doubt- 
ed any of hiswords, from the moment of their meeting a 
month before. She had looked upas she sat in the arbour, 
and her father was walking down through the avenue 
of roses, bringing to her thestranger,thin and dark, with 
a pointed beard and melancholy eyes. He murmured 

sOome- | 


QR 5 mw 


something to himself as they shook hands; she heard the The Rose 
tich, unknown words that sounded as the echo of far Geren 
music. Afterwards he had told her what those words 
signified: 
“How say ye that I was lost? I wandered among roses. 

Can he go astray that enters the rose garden? 

The Lover in the house of the Beloved is not forlorn. 

I wandered among roses. How say ye that I was lost?” 


His voice, murmuring the strange words, had per- 
suaded her, and now she had the rapture of the perfect 
knowledge. She had looked out into the silvery uncer- 
tain night in order that she might experience the sense 
that for her these things no longer existed. She was not 
any more a part of the garden, or of the lake, or of the 
wood, or of the life that she had led hitherto. Another 
line that he had quoted came to her: 

‘The kingdom of I and We forsake and your home in 
annihilation make.” 

It had seemedat first almost nonsense—if it had been 
possible for him to talk nonsense; but now she was filled 
and thrilled with the meaning of it. Herself was anni- 
hilated; at his bidding she had destroyed all her old 
feelings and emotions, her likes and dislikes, all the in- 
herited loves and hates that her father and mother had 
given her; the old life had been thrown utterly away. 

It grew light, and when the dawn burned she fell 
asleep, murmuring: 

“How say ye that I was lost?” 


GR 6 mw 


The Turanians 


ie smoke of the tinkers’ camp rosea thin pale blue 
from the heart of the wood. 

Mary had left her mother atwork on“things,’and had 
gone out with a pale and languid face into the hot after- 
noon. She had talked of walking across the fields to the 
Green, and of having a chat with the doctor’s daughter, 
but she had taken the other path that crept down towards 
the hollow and the dark thickets of the wood. 

After all, she had felt too lazy to rouse herself, to make 
the effort of conversation, and the sunlight scorched the 
path that was ruled straight from stile to stile across the 
brown August fields, and she could see, even from far 
away, how the white dust clouds were smoking on the 
toad by the Green. She hesitated, and at last went down 
under the far-spreading oak-trees, by a winding way of 
grass that cooled her feet. 

Her mother, who was very kind and good, used to 
talk to her sometimes on the evils of “exaggeration,’on 
the necessity of avoiding phrases violently expressed, 
words of too fierce an energy. She remembered how she 
had run into the house a few days before and had called 
her mother to look ata rose in the garden that“burnt like 
aflame.” Her mother had said the rose was very pretty, 
anda little later had hinted her doubts as to the wisdom 
of “such very strong expressions.” 

on 


GR 7 


“I know, my dear Marty,”she had said,“that in your The 
case it isn’t affectation. You really fee/ what yousay,don’t T#ranians 
you? Yes; but is it nice to feel like that? Do you think 
that it’s quite r7ght, even?” 

The mother had looked at the girl with a curious wist- 
fulness, almost as if she would say something more, and 
sought for the fit words, but could not find them. And 
then she merely remarked: ) 

“You haven’t seen Alfred Moorhouse since the tennis 
party, have you? I must ask him to come next Tuesday; 
you like him?” 

The daughter could not quite see the link between 

her fault of “exaggeration” and the charming young bar- 
rister, but her mother’s warning recurred to her as she 
strayed down the shadowed path, and felt the long dark 
grass cool and refreshing about her feet. She would not 
have put this sensation into words, but she thought it 
was as though her ankles were gently, sweetly kissed as 
the rich grass touched them, and her mother would have 
said it was not right to think such things. 

And what a delight there was in the colours all about 
her! It was as though she walked in a green cloud; the 
strong sunlight was filtered through the leaves, reflected 
from the grass,and made all visible things, the tree-stems, 
the flowers, and her own hands'seem new, transformed 
into another likeness. She had walked by the wood-path 
over and over again, but to-day it had become full of mys- 
tery and hinting, and every turn brought a surprise. 

To-day the mere sense of being alone under the trees 
was an acute secret joy,and as she went down deeper and 
the wood grew dark about her, she loosened her brown 
hair, and when the sun shone over the fallen tree she saw 

her 


er § mw 


The her hair was not brown but bronze and golden, glowing 
Turanians on her pure white dress. 

She stayed by the well in the rock, and dared to make 
the dark water her mirror, looking to right and left with 
shy glances and listening for the rustle of parted boughs, 
before she would match her gold with luminous ivory. 
She saw wonders in a glass as she leaned over the shad- 
owed mysterious pool,and smiled at the smiling nymph, 
whose lips parted as if to whisper secrets. 

Asshewent on her way, the thin blue smoke rose from 
a gap in the trees,and she remembered her childish dread 
of “the gipsies.” She walked a little farther, and laid her- 
self to rest on a smooth patch of turf, and listened to the 
strange intonations that sounded from the camp.““Those 
horrible people” she had heard the yellow folk called, but 
she found now a pleasure in voices that sang and, indis- 
tinctly heard, were almost chanting, with a rise and fall 
of notes anda wild wail, and the solemnity of unknown 
speech. It seemed a fit music for the unknown woodland, 
in harmony with the drip of the well,and the birds’ sharp 
notes, and the rustle and hurry of the wood creatures. 

She rose again and went on till she could see the red 
fire between the boughs; and the voices thrilled into an 
incantation. She longed to summon up courage, and talk 
to these strange wood-folk, but she was afraid to burst 

_ into the camp. So she sat down under a tree and waited, 
hoping that oneof them might happen to come her way. 

There were six or seven men,as many women, anda 
swarm of fantastic children, lolling and squatting about 
the fire, gabbling to one another in their singsong speech. 
They were people of curious aspect, short and squat, 
high-cheekboned, with dingy yellow skin and long al- 


mond 


GR QC ew 


_ mondeyes; only in one or two of theyoungermenthere The 
was a suggestion of a wild, almost faunlike grace,as of T#/anians 
creatures who always moved between the ted fire and 
the green leaf. Though everybody called them gipsies, 
they were in reality Turanian metal-workers, degen- 
erated into wandering tinkers; their ancestors had fash- 
ioned the bronze battle-axes, and they mended pots and 
kettles. Mary waited under the tree, sure that she had 
nothing to fear, and resolved not to run away if one of 
them appeared. 

The sun sank into a mass of clouds and the air grew 
close and heavy;a mist steamed up about the trees, a blue 
mist like the smoke of a wood-fire. A strange smiling 
face peered out from between the leaves, and the girl 
knew that her heart leapt as the young man walked to- 
wards her. 

The Turanians moved their camp that night. There 
wasated glint, like fire, in the vast shadowy west, and then 
a burning paten floated up froma wild hill. A procession 
of weird bowed figures passed across the crimson disk, 
one stumbling after another in long single file, each bend- 
ing down beneath his huge shapeless pack, and the chil- 
dren crawled last, goblinlike, fantastic. 

The girl was lying in her white room, caressing a small 
green stone, a curious thing cut with strange devices, 
awful with age. She held it close to the luminous ivory, 
and the gold poured upon it. 

She laughed for joy,and murmured and whispered to 
herself,asking herself questions in the bewilderment of 
her delight. She was afraid to say anything to her mother. 


ee Os 


The Idealist 


Di» you notice Symonds while Beever was telling 
that story just now?’ said one clerk to the other. 

“No. Why? Didn’t he like it?” 

The second clerk had been putting away his papers and 
closing his desk ina grave and business-like manner, but 
when Beever’s story was recalled to him he began to bub- 
bleanew, tasting the relish of the talefora second time. 

“He’s a fair scorcher,old Beever,’ he remarked between 
little gasps of mirth.“ But didn’t Symonds like it?” 

“Like it? He looked disgusted, I can tell you. Madea 
face, something in this style:”and the man drew his fea- 
tures into a design of sour disapproval, as he gave his hat 
the last polish with his coatsleeve. 

“Well, ?’m off now,” he said.“I want to get home early, 
as there’s tart for tea,’and he fashioned another grimace, 
an imitation of his favourite actor’s favourite contortion. 

“Well, good-bye,” said his friend.“You are a hot’un, 
you are. You're worse than Beever. See you on Monday. 
What will Symonds say?” and he shouted after himas the 
- door swung to and fro. 

Charles Symonds, who had failed to see the humour 
of Mr. Beever’s tale, had left the office a few minutes ear- 
lier and was now pacing slowly westward, mounting 
Fleet Street. His fellow clerk had not been much amiss in 

his 


wer |] ew 


his observation. Symonds had heard the last phrases of The 
Beever’s story,and unconsciously had looked half round [east 
towards the group, angry and disgusted at their gross and 
stupid merriment. Beever and his friends seemed to him 
guilty of sacrilege;he likened them to plough-boys paw- 

ing and deriding an exquisite painted panel, blaring out 

their contempt and brutal ignorance. He could not con- 

trol his features; in spite of himself he looked loathing at 

the three yahoos. He would have given anything if he 
could havefound words and told them what he thought, 

but even to look displeasure was difficult. His shyness 

wasa perpetualamusement to theother clerks,who often 

did little things to annoy him, and enjoyed the spectacle 

of Symonds inwardly raging and burning like Etna, but 

too hopelessly diffident to say a word. He would turn 

dead man’s white, and grind his teeth at an insult, and 
pretend tojoininthelaugh,and pass it offasajoke.When 

he was a boy his mother was puzzled by him, not know- 

ing whether he were sullen or insensible, or perhaps very 
good-tempered. 

He climbed Fleet Street, still raw with irritation, partly 
froma real disgust at the profane coarseness of the clerks, 
and partly froma feeling that they talked so because they 
knew he hated such gross farces and novels. It was hid- 
eous to live and work with such foul creatures, and he 
glanced back fury at the City, the place of the stupid, the 
blatant, the intolerable. 

He passed into the rush and flood of the Strand, into 
the full tide of a Saturday afternoon, still meditating the 
outrage, and constructing a cutting sentence for future 
use, heaping up words which should make Beever trem- 
ble. He was quite aware that he would never utter one 

of 


GR 1) ew 


The of those biting phrases, but the pretence soothed him, 
Idealist and he began to remember other things. It was in late 
November and the clouds were already gathering for the 
bright solemnity of the sunset, flying to their places be- 
fore the wind. They curled into fantastic shapes, high up 
there in the wind’s whirlpool, and Symonds, looking to- 
wards the sky, was attracted by two grey writhing clouds 
that drew together in the west, in the far perspective of 
the Strand. He saw them as if they had been living crea- 
tures, noting every change and movement and transfor- 
mation, till the shaking winds made them one and drove 

a vague form away to the south. 

The curious interest he had taken in the cloud shapes 
had driven away the thought of the office, of the fetid 
talk which he so often heard. Beever and his friends 
ceased to exist, and Symonds escaped to his occult and 
private world which no one had ever divined. He lived 
far away down in Fulham, but he let the buses rock past 
him, and walked slowly, endeavouring to prolong the 
joys of anticipation. Almost with a visible gesture he 
drew himself apart, and went solitary, his eyes downcast, 
and gazing not on the pavement but on certain clear im- 
agined pictures. 

He quickened his steps as he passed along the north- — 
ern pavement of Leicester Square, hurrying to escape the 
sight of the enamelled strange spectra who were already 
beginning to walk and stir abroad, issuing from their 
caves and waiting for the gas-light. He scowled as he 
looked up and chanced to see ona hoarding an icon with 
raddled cheeks and grinning teeth, atwhichsome young 
men were leering; and one was recalling this creature’s 
great song: 

“And 


wr 15 ew 
“And that’s the way they do it. 
How d’ye fink it’s done? 


Oh, that’s the way they do it. 
Doesn’t it taike the bun?” 


Symonds scowled at the picture of her, remembering 
how Beever had voted her “good goods,” how the boys 
bellowed the chorus under his windows of Saturday 
nights. Once he had opened the window as they passed 
by, and had sworn at them and cursed them, in a whis- 
per, lest he should be overheard. 

He peered curiously at the books in a Piccadilly shop; 
now and then when he could save a few pounds he had 
made purchases there, but the wares which the book- 
seller dealt in were expensive, and he was obliged to be 
rather neatly dressed at the office, and he had other eso- 
teric expenses. He had made up his mind to learn Persian 
and he hesitated as to whether he should turn back now, 
and see if he could pick up a grammar in Great Russell 
Street at a reasonable price. But it was growing dark, 
and the mists and shadows that he loved were gathering 
and inviting him onwards to those silent streets near 
the river. 

Whenhe at last diverged from the main road he made 
his way by a devious and eccentric track, threading an 
intricate maze of streets which to most people would 
have been dull and gloomy and devoid of interest. But 
to Symonds these backwaters of London were as bizarre 
and glowing as a cabinet of Japanese curios; he found 
here his delicately chased bronzes, work in jade, the flush 
and flameofextraordinary colours. Hedelayedatacorner, 
watching a shadow ona lighted blind, watching it fade 
and blacken and fade, conjecturing its secrets, inventing 

dialogue 


The 
Idealist 


wr 14 =~ 


The dialogue for this drama in Ombres Chinoises. He glanced 
Idealist up at another window, and saw a room vivid, in a hard 
yellow light of flaming gas, and lurked in the shelter of — 
an old elm till he was perceived and the curtains were 
drawn hastily. On the way he had chosen, it was his for- 
tune to pass many well-ordered decent streets, by villas 
detached and semi-detached, half hidden behind flower- 
ing-shrubs and evergreens. At this hour, on a Saturday 
in November, few were abroad, and Symonds was often 
able, crouching down by the fence, to peer intoa lighted 
room, to watch persons who thought themselves ut- 
terly unobserved. As he came near to his home he went 
through meaner streets, and he stopped at a corner, ob- 
serving two children at play, regarding them with the 
minute scrutiny of an entomologist at the microscope. 
A woman who had been out shopping crossed the road 
and drove the children home, and Symonds moved on, 
hastily, but with a long sigh of enjoyment. | 

His breath came quick, in gusts, as he drew out his 
latch-key. He lived in an old Georgian house, and he 
raced up the stairs, and locked the door of the great 
lofty room in which he lived.The evening was damp and 
chilly, but the sweat streamed down his face. He struck 
a match, and there was a strange momentary vision of 
the vast room, almost empty of furniture, a hollow space 
bordered by grave walls and the white glimmer of the 
corniced ceiling. 

He lit a candle, opened a large box that stood in a 
corner, and set to work. He seemed to be fitting to- 
gether some sort of lay figure; a vague hint of the human 
shape increased under his hands. The candle sparkled at 
the other end of the room, and Symonds was sweating 

Over 


qs 15 ew 


over his task in a cavern of dark shadow. His nervous The 
shaking fingers fumbled over that uncertain figure, and east 
then he began to draw out incongruous monstrous 
things. In the dusk, white silk shimmered, laces and 
delicate frills hovered for a moment, as he bungled over 
the tying of knots, the fastening of bands. The old room 
grew rich, heavy, vaporous with subtle scents; the gar- 
ments that were passing through his hands had been 
drenched with fragrance. Passion had contorted his face; 
he grinned stark in the candlelight. 

When he had finished the work he drew it with him 
to the window, and lighted three more candles. In his 
- excitement, for that night he forgot the effect of Ombres 
Chinozses, and those who passed and happened to look 
up at the white staring blind found singular matter for 
speculation. 


Witchcraft 


Bee left the others behind, haven’t we, Miss 
Custance?” said the captain, looking back to the gate 
and the larchwood. 

“Tm afraid we have, Captain Knight. I hope you 
don’t mind very much, do you?” 

“Mind? Delighted, you know. Sure this damp air isn’t 
bad for you, Miss Custance?” 

“Oh, d’you think it’s damp? I like it. Ever since I can 
remember I’ve enjoyed these quiet autumn days. I won’t 
hear of father’s going anywhere else.” 

“Charmin’ place, the Grange. Don’t wonder you like 
comin’ down here.” 

Captain Knight glanced back again and suddenly 
chuckled. 

“T say, Miss Custance,” he said, “I believe the whole 
lot’s lost their way. Don’t see a sign of them. Didn't 
we pass another path on the left?” 

“Yes, and don’t you remember you wanted to turn 
off?” 

“Yes, of course. I thought it looked more possible, 
don’t you know. That’s where they must have gone. 
Where does it lead?” 

“Oh, nowhere exactly. It dwindles and twists about 
a lot, and I’m afraid the ground is rather marshy.” 
“You 


ee a 


“You don’t say so?” The captain laughed out loud. Wétchcraft 
“How awfully sick Ferris will be. He hates crossing Pic- 
cadilly if there’s a bit of mud about.” 

“Poor Mr. Ferris!” And the two went on, picking 
their way on the rough path, till they came in sight of a 
little old cottage sunken alone in a hollow amongst the 
woods. 

“Oh, you must come and see Mrs. Wise,” said Miss 
Custance. “She’s such a dear old thing, I’m sure you’d 
fall in love with her. And she’d never forgive me if she 
heard afterwards that we’d passed so close without com- 
ing in. Only for five minutes, you know.” 

“Certainly, Miss Custance. Is that the old lady there 
at the door?” 

“Yes. She’s always been so good to us children, and 
I know she'll talk of our coming to see her for months. 
You don’t mind, do you?” 

“T shall be charmed, I’m sure,” and he looked back 
once more to see if there were any appearance of Ferris 
and his party. 

“Sit down, Miss Ethel, sit down, please, miss,” said 
the old woman when they went in. “And please to sit 
down here, sir, will you be so kind?” 

She dusted the chairs, and Miss Custance enquired 
after the rheumatism and the bronchitis, and promised 
to send something from the Grange. The old woman 
had good country manners, and spoke well, and now 
and then politely tried to include Captain Knight in 
the conversation. But all the time she was quietly look- 
ing at him. 

“Yes, sit, 1 be a bit lonely at times,” she said when 
her visitors rose. “I do miss Nathan sorely; you can 

hardly 


CR 18 sw 


Witchcraft hardly remember my husband, can you, Miss Ethel? 
But I have the Book, sir, and good friends too.” 


A couple of days later Miss Custance came alone to 
the cottage. Her hand trembled as she knocked at the 
door. 

“Is it done?” she asked, when the old woman ap- 
peared. 

“Come in, miss,” said Mrs. Wise, and ate shut the 
door, and put up the wooden bolt. Then she crept to 
the hearth, and drew out something froma hiding-place 
in the stones. 

“Look at that,” she said, showing it to the young lady. 
“Isn't it a picture?” 

Miss Custance took the object into her fine delicate 
hands, and glanced at it, and then flushed scarlet. 

“How horrible!” she exclaimed. “What did you do 
that for? You never told me.” 

“It’s the only way, miss, to get what you want.” 

“It’s a loathsome thing. I wonder you're not ashamed 
of yourself.” 

“I be as much ashamed as you be, I think,” said Mrs. 
Wise, and she leered at the pretty, shy-faced girl. Their 
eyes met and their eyes laughed at one another. 

“Cover it up, please, Mrs. Wise; I needn’t look at it 
now, at all events. But are you sure?” 

“There’s never been a mishap since old Mrs. Cradoc 
taught me, and she’s been dead for sixty year and more. 
She used to tell of her grandmother’s days when there 
were meetings in the wood over thete.” 

“And you're quite sure?” 

“You doas I tell you. You must take it like this”; and 

the 


Gem 19 mo 


the old woman whispered her instructions, and would Witchcraft 
have put out a hand in illustration, but the girl pushed 
it away. 
“I understand now, Mrs. Wise. No, don’t do that. 
I quite see what you mean. Here’s the money.” 
“And whatever you do, don’t you forget the oint- 
ment as I told you,” said Mrs. Wise. 


“I’ve been to read to poor old Mts. Wise,” Ethel said 
that evening to Captain Knight. “She’s over eighty 
and her eyesight is getting very bad.” 

“Very good of you, Miss Custance, I’m sure,” said 
_ Captain Knight, and he moved away to the other end of 
the drawing-room, and began to talk toa girl in yellow, 
withwhom he had been exchanging smiles at a distance, 
ever since the men came in from the dining-room. 

That night, when she was alone in her room, Ethel 
followed Mrs.Wise’s instructions. She had hidden the 
object in a drawer, and as she drew it out, she looked 
about her, though the curtains were drawn close. 

She forgot nothing, and when it was done she lis- 
tened. 


Cw? 20 aw 


The (eremony 


F ROM her childhood, from those early and misty 
days which began to seem unreal, she recollected the 
grey stone in the wood. 

It was something between the pillar and the pyramid 
in shape,and its grey solemnity amidst the leaves and the 
grass shoneandshonefrom those early years,always with 
some hint of wonder. She remembered how, when she 
was quite a little girl, she had strayed one day, on a hot 
afternoon, from her nurse’s side, and only a little way in 
the wood the grey stone rose from the grass,and she cried 
out and ran back in panic terror. 

“Whata silly little girl,’ the nurse had said. “It’s only 
the... stone.” She had quite forgotten the name that the 
servant had given,and she was always ashamed to ask as 
she grew older. 

But always that hot day, that burning afternoon of 
her childhood when she had first looked consciously on 
the grey image in the wood, remained nota memory but 
a sensation. The wide wood swelling like the sea, the 
tossing of the bright boughs in the sunshine, the sweet 
smell of the grass and flowers, the beating of the summer 
wind upon her check, the gloom of the underglade rich, 
indistinct, gorgeous, significant as old tapestry; she could 
feel it and see it all,and the scent of it was in her nostrils. 

And 


ee ON 


And in the midst of the picture, where thestrange plants The 
gtew gross inshadow,was the old grey shape of thestone. Ceremony 

But there were in her mind broken remnants of an- 
other and far earlier impression. It was all uncertain, the 
shadow of a shadow, so vague that it might well have 
been a dream that had mingled with the confused wak- 
_ ing thoughts of a little child. She did not know that she 
remembered, she rather remembered the memory. But 
again it was a summer day, and a woman, perhaps the 
same nutse, held her in her arms, and went through the 
wood. The woman carried bright flowers in one hand; 
the dream had in ita glow of bright red, and the perfume 
of cottage roses. Then she saw herself put down for a 
moment on the grass,andthe red colourstained the grim 
stone, and there was nothing else—except that onenight 
she woke up and heard the nurse sobbing. 

She often used to think of the strangeness of very early 
life; one came, it seemed, from a dark cloud, there was 
a glow of light, but for a moment, and afterwards the 
night. It was as if one gazed at a velvet curtain, heavy, 
mysterious, impenetrable blackness, and then, for the 
twinkling of an eye, one spied through a pin-hole a 
storied town that flamed, with fire about its walls and 
pinnacles. And then again the folding darkness, so that 
sight became illusion, almost in the seeing. So to her 
was that earliest, doubtful vision of the grey stone, of 
the red colour spilled upon it, with the incongruous epi- 
sode of the nursemaid, who wept at night. 

But the later memory was clear; she could feel, even 
now, the inconsequent terror that sent her away shrick- 
ing,runningtothenurse’sskirts. Afterwards,throughthe 
days of girlhood, the stone had taken its place amongst 

the 


wr 2) em 


The the vast array of unintelligible things which haunt every 
Ceremony child’s imagination. It was part of life, to be accepted 
and not questioned; her elders spoke of many things 
which she could not understand, she opened books and 
was dimly amazed, and in the Bible there were many 
phrases which seemed strange. Indeed, she was often 
puzzled by her parents’ conduct, by their looks at one 
another, by their half-words,and amongst all these prob- 
lems which she hardly recognized as problems, was the 

grey ancient figure rising from dark grass. 

Some semi-conscious impulse made her haunt the 
wood where shadow enshrined the stone.One thing was 
noticeable; that all through the summer months the 
passers-by dropped flowers there. Withered blossoms 
were always on the ground, amongst the grass, and on 
the stone fresh blooms constantly appeared. From the 
daffodil to the Michaelmas daisy there was marked the 
calendar of the cottage gardens, and in the winter she 
had seen sprays of juniper and box, mistletoe and holly. 
Once she had been drawn through the bushes by a red 
glow, as if there had been a fire in the wood, and when 
she came to the place, all the stone shone and all the 
ground about it was bright with roses. 

In her eighteenth year she went one day into the 
wood, carrying with her a book that she was reading. 
She hid herself in a nook of hazel, and her soul was 
full of poetry, when there was a rustling, the rapping 
of parted boughs returning to their place. Her con- 
cealment was but a little way from the stone, and she 
peered through the net of boughs, and saw girl timidly 
approaching. She knew her quite well; it was Annie 
Dolben, the daughter of a labourer, lately a promising 


pupil 


08 mo 


pupil at Sunday school. Annie was a nice-mannered girl, 
never failing in her curtsy, wonderful for her knowledge 
of the Jewish Kings. Her face had taken an expression 
that whispered, that hinted strange things; there was a 
light and a glow behind the veil of flesh. And in her 
hand she bore lilies. 

The lady hidden in hazels watched Annie come close 
to the grey image; for a moment her whole body palpi- 
tated with expectation, almost the sense of what was to 
happen dawned upon her. She watched Annie crown 
the stone with flowers, she watched the amazing cere- 
mony that followed. 

And yet, in spite of all her blushing shame, she her- 
self bore blossoms to the wood a few months later. She 
laid white hothouse lilies upon the stone, and orchids 
of dying purple, and crimson exotic flowers. Having 
kissed the grey image with devout passion, she per- 
formed there all the antique immemorial rite. 


The 
Ceremony 


wr 24 


‘Psychology 


Me. DALE, who had quiet rooms in a western part 
of London, was very busily occupied one day with a 
pencil and little scraps of paper. He would stop in the 
middle of his writing, of his monotonous tramp from 
door to window, jot down a line of hieroglyphics, and 
turn again to his work. At lunch he kept his instru- 
ments on the table beside him, and a little notebook ac- 
companied him on his evening walk about the Green. 
Sometimes he seemed to experience a certain difficulty 
in the act of writing, as if the heat of shame or even in- 
credulous surprise held his hand, but one by one the 
fragments of paper fell into the drawer, and a full feast 
awaited him at the day’s close. 

As he lit his pipe at dusk, he was standing by ne win- 
dow and looking out into the street. In the distance cab- 
lights flashed to and fro, up and down the hill, on the 
main road. Across the way he saw the long line of sober 
grey houses,cheerfully litup forthe most part, displaying 
against the night the dining-roomandtheevening meal. 
In one house, just opposite, there was brighter illumi- 
nation, and the open windows showed a modest dinner- 
party in progress, and here and there a drawing-room 
on the first floor glowed ruddy, as the tall shaded lamp 
was lit. Everywhere Dale saw a quiet and comfortable 

respectability 


wr D5 


respectability; if there were no gaiety there was no riot, Psychology 
and he thought himself fortunate to have got “rooms” , 
in so sane and meritorious a street. 

The pavement was almost deserted. Now and again 
a servant would dart out from a side door and scurry off 
in the direction of the shops, returning in a few minutes 
in equal haste. But foot passengers were rare, and only 
at long intervals a stranger would drift from the high- 
way and wander with slow speculation down Abingdon 
Road, as if he had passed its entrance a thousand times 
and had at last been piqued with curiosity and the desire 
of exploring the unknown. All the inhabitants of the 
quarter prided themselves on their quiet and seclusion, 
and many of them did not so much as dream that if 
one went far enough the road degenerated and became 
abominable, the home of the hideous, the mouth of a 
black purlieu. Indeed stories, ill and malodorous, were 
told of the streets parallel, to east and west, which per- 
haps communicated with the terrible sink beyond, but 
those who lived at the good end of Abingdon Road 
knew nothing of their neighbours. 

Dale leant far out of hiswindow.The pale Londonsky 
deepened to violet as the lamps were lit, and in the twi- 
light the little gardens before the houses shone, seemed 
as if they grew mote clear. The golden laburnum but re- 
flected the last bright yellow veil that had fallen over 
the sky after sunset, the white hawthorn was a gleam- 
ing splendour, the red may a flameless fire in the dusk. 
From the open window, Dale could note the increasing 
cheerfulness of the diners opposite, as the moderate cups 
were filled and emptied; blinds in the higher stories 
brightened up and down thestreet when the nursescame ~ 


Mae 


wr 26 ew 


Psychology wp with the children. A gentle breeze that smelt of grass 
and woods and flowers, fanned away the day’s heat from 
the pavement stones, rustled through the blossoming 
boughs, and sank again, leaving the road to calm. 

All the scene breathed the gentle domestic peace of 
the stories; there were regular lives, dull duties done, 
sober and common thoughts on every side. He felt that 
he needed not to listen at the windows, for he could 
divine all the talk, and guess the placid and usual chan- 
nels in which the conversation flowed. Here there were 
no spasms, nor raptures, nor the red storms of romance, 
but a safe rest; marriage and birth and begetting were 
no more here than breakfastandlunchandafternoon tea. 

And then he turned away from the placid transparen- 
cy of the street, and sat down before his lamp and the 
papers he had so studiously noted. A friend of his, an 
“impossible” man named Jenyns, had been tosee him the 
night before, and they had talked about the psychology 
of the novelists, discussing their insight, and the depth 
of their probe. 

“It is all very well as far as it goes,” said Jenyns. “Yes, 
it is perfectly accurate. Guardsmen do like chorus-girls, 
the doctor’s daughter is fond of the curate, the grocer’s 
assistant of the Baptist persuasion has sometimes reli- 
gious difficulties, ‘smart’ people no doubt think a great 
deal about social events and complications: the Tragic 
Comedians felt and wrote all that stuff, I dare say. But 
do you think that is all? Do you call a description of the 
gilt tools on the morocco here an exhaustive essay on 
Shakespeare?” 

“But what moreisthere?’said Dale.“Don’t youthink, 
then,that human nature has been fairly laid open? What 
more?” “Songs 


GR 2] 


“Songs of the frantic lupanar delirium of the mad- Psychology 
house. Not extreme wickedness, but the insensate, the 
unintelligible, the lunatic passion and idea, the desire 
that must come from some other sphere that we cannot 
even faintly imagine. Look for yourself; it is easy.” 

Dale looked now at the ends and scraps of paper.On 
them he had carefully registered all the secret thoughts 
of the day, the crazy lusts, the senseless furies, the foul 
monsters that his heart had borne, the maniac phanta- 
sies that he had harboured. In every note he found a 
rampant madness, the equivalents in thought of mathe- 
matical absurdity, of two-sided triangles, of parallel 
straight lines which met. 

“And we talk of absurd dreams,” he said to himself. 
“And these are wilder than the wildest visions. And our 
sins; but these are the sins of nightmare. 

“And every day,” he went on, “we lead two lives, and 
the half of our soul is madness, and half heaven is lit by 
a black sun. I say 1am a man, but who is the other that 
hides in me?” 


wR DS ew 


Torture 


it REALLY do not know what to do with him,” said 
the father. “He seems absolutely stupid.” 

“Poor boy!” said his mother, “I am afraid he is not 
well. He doesn’t look in good health.” 

“But what's thematter with him? He eats well enough; 
he had two helpings of meat, and two of pudding to-day 
at dinner, and a quarter of an hour afterwards he was 
munching some sweet stuff. His appetite’s all right, you 
see, anyhow.” 

“But he’s very pale. He makes me feel anxious.” 

“And he makes me feel anxious. Look at this letter 
from Wells, the head master. Here you see he says: ‘It 
seems almost impossible to get him to play games; he 
has had two or three thrashings, as I hear, for shirking 
cricket. And his form master gives mea very bad account 
of his work during the term, so that I fear the school is 
doing him little if any good.’ And you see, Marty, it isn’t 
as if he were a little boy; he was fifteen last April. It’s 
getting serious, you know.” 

“What d’you think we had better do?” 

“I wish I knew. Look at him here. He’s only been 
home for a weck, and you'd think he’d be in the best 
of spirits, enjoying himself with the squire’s boys, and 
singing and racketing about all over the place. And you 

know 


wee 29 mw 


know the way he has been going on, almost from the Torture 
day he came back; lounging and crawling from the 

house to the garden and back again, staying in bed half 

the day, and coming down with his eyes half open. I 

must insist on that being put a stop to, at all events. © 

I shall trust to you to get him up at a proper time.” 

“Very well, dear. I thought he looked so tired.” 

“But he does nothing to make him tired! I wouldn’t 
mind so much if the fellow were bookish, but you see 
what Wells says on that score. Why, I can’t even get 
him to read a story-book. I declare his face is enough to 
_ make one angry. One can see he’s totally devoid of any 
interest in anything.” 

“T am afraid he’s unhappy, Robert.” 

“Unhappy! A schoolboy unhappy! Well, I wish you’d 
see what you can do. I find it perfectly useless to talk to 
him myself.” 

It was curious, but the father was quite right in laugh- 
ing at the notion of his son’s unhappiness. Harry was, 
in his quiet way, in the best of spirits. It was perfectly 
true that he hated cricket, and, the head master might 
have added, he hated other boys. He cared nothing for 
printed matter of any kind, whether fact or fiction, and 
he found Treasure Island as dull as Cicero. But allthrough 
the past term he had been pondering an idea; it had been 
with him in the early mornings in the dormitory, in 
schooltime and in playtime, and he watched with it at 
night, long after the other boys had gone to sleep. Be- 
fore the coming of the idea he had found his existence 
unhappy enough. He had a puffy, unwholesome face 
and sandy hair, and his great wide mouth was made the 
subject of many jests. He was unpopular because he 

did 


ww 4() ew 


Torture did not like games, and because he would not bathe un- © 
less he were flung into the water, and he was always in 
trouble over his lessons, which he could not understand. 
He burst out crying one night in the middle of prepa- 
ration, and of course he would not say what was the 
matter. The fact was that he had been trying to extract 
the meaning from some weaty nonsense about triangles, 
known by the absurd name of Euclid, and he had found 
it utterly impossible to learn the rabid stuff by heart. 
The impossibility of it, and the hopeless cloud in his 
mind, and the terror of the thrashing he would get in 
the morning, broke him down; the “blubbering idiot,” 
as they said. 

Those were unhappy times, but that very night his 
idea came to him, and the holidays became indeed de- 
sirable, and ten times desirable. Every day and all the 
day he elaborated and re-elaborated his great thought, 
and though he was as stupid, unpopular, and unprofit- 
able as ever, he was no longer wretched. 

When he got home at the end of term he lost no time 
in setting about his task. It was true that he was sleepy 
and heavy in the mornings, but that was because he 
worked till late at night. He found it impossible to do 
much in the day-time; his parents spied out his ways, and 
he knew that he was much too dull to invent lies and 
explanations. The day after his return his father had come 
across him as he slunk into a dark corner of the shrub- 
bery with something hidden under his coat. He could 
only stand and look hopeless, idiotic, when an empty 
beer bottle was drawn forth; he could not say what he 
was doing or what he wanted with a green glass bottle. 
His father had left him, telling him not to play the fool, 


and 


Gs 4] ow 


and he felt that he was always watched. When he took Torture 
the cord from the back-kitchen one of the maids was 
peering after him down the passage, and his mother 
found him trying to bind a large log of wood to the 
trunk of one of the trees. She wanted to know what he 
was doing, and whether he could not find some more 
sensible amusement, and he stared at her with his heavy 
white face. He knew that he was under observation, and 
so he worked at night. The two servant girls who slept 
in the next room often awoke, fancying they heard a 
queer sort of noise, a “chink-chink,” as one of them de- 
_ scribed the sensation, but they could not make out what 
it was. 

And at last he was ready. He was “loafing about’’one 
afternoon, and he happened to meet Charlotte Emery, 
a little girl of twelve, the daughter of a neighbour. 
Harry flushed to a dull burning red. 

“Come for a walk with me to the Beeches?” he said. 
“I wish you would.” 

“Oh, I mustn’t, Harry. Mother wouldn’t like it.” 

“Do come. I’ve got a new game; grand fun.” 

“Is it really? What sort of game is it?” 

“I can’t show you here. Just walk on towards the 
Beeches, and I'll follow you directly. [ knew you would.” 

Harry ran full tilt to the hiding-place where he had 
bestowed his apparatus. He soon overtook Charlotte, 
and the two went off together towards the Beeches, a 
lonely wooded hill, a mile away. The boy’s father would 
have been astonished if he could have seen him; Harry 
was glowing and burning with that dull red colour, but 
he laughed as he walked beside Charlotte. 

When they were alone together in the wood, Char- 
lotte said: “Now 


Torture 


Gere 4) 


“Now you must show me the game. You promised.” 

“I know. But you must do just as I tell you.” 

“Yes, I will.” } 

“Even if it hurts?” 

“Yes. But you wouldn’t hurt me, Harry. I like you.” 

The boy stared at her, gazed with his dull, fishy, light 
blue eyes; his white, unwholesome face glared at her al- 
most in terror. She was a dark girl, olive-skinned, with 
black eyes and black hair, and the scent of her hair had 
already half-intoxicated him, as they walked close to- 
gether. 

“You like me,” he said at last, stuttering. 

“Yes, I like you very much. I love you, Harry dear. 
Won't you give mea kiss?” And she put her arm round 
his neck, round the neck of the ugly, pasty schoolboy. 
The leaden marks under his eyes seemed to grow darker. 

He dropped the parcel that he held under one arm. 
It broke open and the contents fell to the ground. There 
were three or four fantastic instruments, ugly little 
knives made of green bottle-glass, clumsily set into 
wooden handles. He had stolen a broom for this pur- 
pose. And there were some lengths of rope, fitted with 
running nooses. It was the idea that he had so long 
cherished. 

But he threw himself full length upon the grass, and 
burst into tears—the “blubbering idiot.” 


WR 34 ew 


Midsummer 


ie old farm-house on the hill flushed rose in the 
afterglow, and then, as the dusk began to mount from 
the brook, faded and yet grew brighter, its whitewashed 
walls gleaming as though light flowed from them, as 

the moon gleams when the red clouds turn to grey. 
The ancient hawthorn tree at the barn-end became a 
tall black stem and its leaves and boughs a black mass 
against the pale uncertain blue of the twilight sky. Leon- 
atd looked up with a great sigh of relief. He was perched 
on the stile by the bridge, and as the wind fell, the ripple 
of the water swelled into a sweeter song, and there was 
no other sound to be heard. His pipe was finished, and 
though he knew that his rooms up at the farm looked 
out on the red rose and the white, he could not make 
up his mind to leave the view of the shimmering un- 

earthly walls, and the melody of clear running water. 
~The contrast of it all with London was almost too 
immense, hardly realized or credible. Afew hours before, 
and his ears seemed bursting with the terrible battle of 
the streets, with the clangour and jangle of great wag- 
gons thundering over the stones, with the sharp rattle 
of hansoms, the heavy rumble of swaying omnibuses. 
And during the journey his eyes still saw the thronging 
crowds, the turbid, furious streams of men that pushed 
eastward 


wer 34 mo 


Mid- eastward and westward, hurrying and jostling one an- 
summer other, weatying the brain with their constant move- 
ment, the everlasting flux and reflux of white faces. And 
the air, a hot smoke, a faint sick breath as though from 
a fever-stricken city; the sky, all grey heat that beat upon 
weary men, as they looked up through the cloud of dust 

that went before and followed them. 

And now he was soothed in the deep silence and 
soothed by the chanting water, his eyes saw the valley 
melting into soft shadow, and in his nostrils was the 
ineffable incense of a summer night, that as a medicine 
allayed all the trouble and pain of body and mind. He 
wet his hands in the dew of the long grass and bathed 
his forehead, as if all the defilement and anguish of the 
streets should thus be washed utterly away. 

He tried to analyse the scent of the night. The green 
leaves that overshadowed the brook and made the wa- 
ter dark at noon, gave out their odour, and the deep 
meadow gtass was fragrant, a gale of scent breathed 
from the huge elder-bush that lit up the vague hillside, 
hanging above the well. But the meadow-sweet was 
bursting into blossom at his feet, and ah! the wild red 
roses drooped down from dreamland. 

At last he began to climb the hillside towards those 
white magic walls that had charmed him. His tworooms 
were at the end of the long low farm-house, and though 
there was a passage leading to the big kitchen, Leon- 
ard’s sitting-room opened immediately on the garden, 
onthecrimson roses. He could go andcomeashe pleased 
without disturbing the household, or as the pleasant — 
farmer had expressed it, he had a home of his own. He 
entered and locked the door, and lit the two candles that 

stood 


wr 3) mw 


stood in bright brass candlesticks on the mantelpiece. /id- 
The room had a low ceiling crossed by a whitewashed 4#”ér 
beam, the walls were bulging and uneven, decked with 
samplers, with faded prints, and in a corner stood a glass 
cupboard, displaying quaint flowery china of some for- 
gotten local pattern. 

The room was as quiet, as full of peace, as the air and 
the night, and Leonard knew that here, at the old bureau, 
he would find the treasure he had been long vainly seek- 
ing. He was tired, but he did not feel inclined to go to 
bed. He lit his pipe again, and began to arrange his pa- 
pers, and idly sat down at the bureau, thinking of the 
_ task, or rather of the delight, before him. An idea flashed 
suddenly into his mind, and he began to write hurried- 
ly, in an ecstasy, afraid lest he should lose what he had 
so happily found. 

At midnight his window was still bright on the hill, 
and he laid down his pen with a sigh of pleasure at the 
accomplished work. And now he could not go to bed; 
he felt he must wander into the night, andsummonsleep 
from the velvet air, from the scent of darkness, from 
the dew. He gently unlocked and locked the door, and 
walked slowly between the Persian roses, and climbed 
thestone stile in the garden wall. The moon was mount- 
ing to a throne, in full splendour; below, at a little dis- 
tance, there seemed the painted scene of a village, and 
higher, beyond the farm-house, a great wood began. 
And as he thought of the green retreats he had glanced. 
at in the sunlit evening, he was filled with a longing for 
the wood-world at night, with a desire for its darkness, 
for the mystery of it beneath the moon. He followed the 
path he had noted, till on the wood’s verge he looked 

back 


wr 36 mw 


Mid- back and found that the shape of the farm-house had 
summer fallen into the night and vanished. 

He entered the shadow, treading softly, and let the 
track lead him away from the world. The night be- 
came full of whisperings, of dry murmuring noises; it 
seemed soon as if a stealthy host were beneath the trees, 
every man tracking another. Leonard quite forgot his 
work, and its triumph, and felt as though his soul were 
astray in a new dark sphere that dreams had foretold. 
He had come toa place remote, without form or colour, 
made alone of shadow and overhanging gloom. Uncon- 
sciously he wandered from the path, and for a time he 
fought his way through the undergrowth, struggling 
with interlacing boughs and brambles that dragged 
back his feet. 

At last he got free, and found that he had penetrated 
into a broad avenue, piercing, it seemed, through the 
heart of the wood. The moon shone bright from above 
the tree-tops, and gave a faint green colour to the track 
which ascended to an open glade; a great amphitheatre 
amidst the trees. He was tired, and lay down in the dark- 
ness beside the turfy road, and wondered whether he had 
lit on some forgotten way, on some great path that the 
legions had trodden. And as he lay there watching, gaz- 
ing at the pale moonlight, he saw a shadow advancing 
on the grass before him. 

“A breath of wind must be stirring some bough be- 
hind me,” he thought, but in the instant a woman went 
by, and then the shadows and white women followed 
thick. 

Leonard gripped hard at a stick he was carrying, 
and drove his nails into the flesh. He saw the farmet’s 

daughter 


wr 47 


daughter, the girl who had waited on him a few hours id- 
before, and behind her came girls with like faces, no $#””¢r 
doubt the quiet modest girls of the English village, of 
the English farm-house. 

For a moment they fronted him, shameless, un- 
abashed before one another, and then they had passed. 

He had seen their smiles, he had seen their gestures, 
and things that he had thought the world had long for- 
gotten. : 

The white writhing figures passed up towards the 
glade, and the boughs hid them, but he never doubted 
as to what he had seen. 


wr 38 mw 


Nature 


Ase there was a broad level by the river,” Julian 
went on, telling the story of his holiday. “A broad level 
of misty meadows, divided by low banks, between the 
hills and the river. They say the Roman world is lost be- 
neath the turf, that a whole city sleeps there, gold and 
marble and amber all buried for ever.” 

“You did not see anything?” 

“No, I suppose not. I used to get up early, and go out, 
and leave the little modern village behind me, hidden 
in the hot haze. And then I would stand in the misty 
meadows,and watch the greenturf shimmer and lighten, 
as the grey halo rolled away. Oh! the silence. There was 
no sound except the lapping of the river, the wash of 
the water on the reeds. 

“The banks are yellow mud,” he went on, “but in the ~ 
early morning, as the sun began to shine in the mist, they 
pearled and grew like silver. There was a low mound 
that hid something, and on it an old thorn tree bent to- 
wards the east; it was a little way from the tide’s brim. 
I stood there and saw the woods swell out of the haze 
in the early morning, and that white sun seemed to en- 
compass the town with gleaming walls. If I had stayed 
still, [think Ishould have seen the glittering legion and 
the eagles, I should have heard the sonorous trumpets 
pealing from the walls.” pa 


Gere 4Q 


“I expect you have seen and heard more than that,” Nature 
said his friend. “I always told you that the earth too, and 
the hills, and even the old walls are a language, hard to 

translate.” 

“And I came upon a place that made me think of that,” 
said Julian. “It was far from the town; I lost my way 
amongst those rolling hills, and strayed by footpaths — 
from field to wood, and all that I saw of man was here 
and there a blue smoke that crawled up from the earth, 
from the tree, it might be, or the brook, for Icould see no 
house. [went on, always with the sense that I wasfollow- 
ing an unknown object, and, suddenly,a shape rose from 

_ forgotten dreams. An old farm-house, built of grey, sil- 
vering stones; a long barn wavering and dipping down 
to a black pool, pine trees overhanging the roof. It was 
all dim, as if it had been seen reflected in water. I went 
a little nearer, and I found that I was lifted free of the 
maze of hills. I fronted the mountain, looking across a 
deep broad valley, and all the year the mountain winds 
must blow upon the porch; they look from their deep 
windows and see the fleeting of the clouds and the sun, 
on that vast green hillside. Yellow flowers were shak- 
ing in the garden, for even on that still day the mountain 
wind swept across the valley. But those grey glistening 
walls! A light flowed from them,and they spoke of some- 
thing beyond thought. 

“I visited, too, the river valley, passing out to the 
north. The town was soon hidden behind trees, behind 
a cuttain of Lombardy poplars, whispering of Italy, of 
the vine, the olive garden. The curving lane led me be- 

| neath orchards, their under-boughs dark-green, almost 
black, in the shadow, and the road winding between 
3 orchard 


ae 4() sw 


Nature orchard and river led me into the long valley, where the 
forest is as a cloud upon the hill. I watched the yellow 
tide cease, and the water flow clear, and the breath of the 
wind was unearthly. It was there that Is saw the burn- 
ing pools.” 

“You stayed for the sunset?” 

“Yes, I stayed all day within the valley. The sky was 
grey, but not cloudy; rather it was a glowing of silver 
light that made the earth seem dim and yet shining. In- 
deed, I say that though the sun was hidden, you would 
have dreamed that white moons were floating through 
the air, for now and again I saw the misty hillside pale 
and lighten, and a tree would appear suddenly in mid- 
forest, and glitter as if it blossomed. Yes, and inthe calm 
meadows by the riverside there were little points of 
brightness, as if tongues of white fire sparkled in the 
grey grass.” 

“And the river itself?” 

“It was all the day a hieroglyphic, winding in esses 
beneath those haunting banks, colourless, and yet 
alight like all the world around. At last, in the evening, 
I sat down beneath a wych-elm on the slope, where I 
breathed the scent and knew the heavy stillness of the 
wood. Then a strong wind blew, high up in heaven, and 
the grey veil vanished. The sky was clear pale blue; in 
the west there was exhibited an opal burning green, and 
beneath a purple wall.Then, in the middle of the purple, 
a rent opened; there was a red glint, and red momen- 
tary rays, as if rose-hot metal were beaten and dinted on 
the anvil, and the sparks fled abroad. So the sun sank. 

“I thought I would wait and see all the valley, the 
river, and the level, and the woods sink into twilight, 

become 


wr 4] me 


become sombre, formless. The light went out from the’ Nesure 
tiver, the water paled as it flowed between the sad reeds 

and grasses. I heard a harsh melancholy cry, and above, 

in the dusky air, a flight of great birds passed seaward 

in changing, hieroglyphic order. The keen line of the 

hills by sunset home seemed to melt away, to become 
vague. 

“Then I saw the sky was blossoming in the north. 
Rose gardens appeared there, with golden hedges, and 
bronze gates, and the great purple wall caught fire as it 
grew leaden. The earth was lit again, but with unnatu- 
tal jewelled colours; the palest light was sardonyx, the 
_ darkness was amethyst. And then the valley was aflame. 
Fire in the wood, the fire of a sacrifice beneath the oaks. 
Fire in the level fields, a great burning in the north, 
and vehement flame to the south, above the town. And 
in the still river the very splendour of fire, yes, as if all 
precious things were cast into its furnace pools, as if 
| gold and roses and jewels became flame.” 

“And then?” 

Vihen, the Shining of the evening Stat. 

“And you,” said his friend, “perhaps without know- 
ing, have told me the story of a wonderful and incred- 
ible passion.” 

Julian stared at him, in amazement. 

“You are quite right,” he said at length. 


wre 4) 


The Holy Things 


fl He sky was blue above Holborn, and only one little 
cloud, half white, half golden, floated on the wind’s way 
from west to east. The long aisle of the street was splen- 
did in the full light of the summer, and away in the west, 
where the houses seemed to meet and join, it was as a 
tich tabernacle, mysterious, the carven house of holy 
things. 

A man came into the great highway from a quiet 
court. He had been sitting under plane-tree shade for 
an hour or mote, his mind racked with perplexities and 
doubts, with the sense that all was without meaning or 
purpose, a tangle of senseless joys and empty sorrows. 
He had stirred in it and fought and striven, and now dis- 
appointmentand success were alike tasteless.Io struggle 
was weariness, to attain was weariness, to do nothing 
was weatiness. He had felt, a little while before, that 
from the highest to the lowest things of life there was 
no choice, there was not one thing that was better than 
another: the savour of the cinders was no sweeter than 
the savour of the ashes. He had done work which some 
men liked and others disliked, and liking and dislik- 
ing were equally tiresome to him. His poetry or his 
pictures or whatever it was that he worked at had utterly 
ceased to interest him, and he had tried to be idle, and 

found 


wre 43 wo 


found idleness as impossible as work. He had lost the Ie Holy 
faculty for making and he had lost the power of resting, 7#gs 
he dozed in the day-time and started up and cried at 

night. Even that morning he had doubted and hesitated, 
wondering whether to stay indoors or to go out, sure 

that in either plan there was an infinite weariness and 

disgust. 

When he at last went abroad he let the crowd push 
him into the quiet court, and at the same time cursed 
them in a low voice for doing so; he tried to persuade 
himself that he had meant to go somewhere else. When 
he sat down he desperately endeavoured to rouse him- 
self, and as he knew that all the strong interests are ego- 
tistic, he made an effort to grow warm over the work 
he had done, to find a glow of satisfaction in the thought 
that he had accomplished something. It was nonsense; 
he had found out a clever trick and had made the most 
of it, and it was over. Besides, how would it interest him 
if afterwards he was praised when he was dead? And 
what was the use of trying to invent some new tricks? 
It was folly; and he ground his teeth as a new idea came 
into his mind and was rejected. To get drunk always 
made him so horribly ill, and other things were more 
foolish and tiresome than poesy or painting, whichever 
it was. 

He could not even rest on the uncomfortable bench, 
beneath the dank, stinking plane tree. A young man 
and a girl came up and sat next to him, and the girl said, 
“Oh, isn’t it beautiful to-day?” and then they began to 
jabber to one another—the blasted fools! He flung him- 
self from the seat and went out into Holborn. 

As far as one could see, there were two processions 

of 


wee 4A 


The Holy of omnibuses, cabs, and vans that went east and west 
Things and west and east. Now the long line would move on 
briskly, now it stopped. The horses’ feet rattled and 
pattered on the asphalt, the wheels ground and jarred, a 
bicyclist wavered in and out between the serried ranks, 
jangling his bell. The foot passengers went to and fro 
on the pavement, with an endless change of unknown 
faces; there was an incessant hum and murmur of voices. 
In the safety of a blind passage an Italian whirled round 
the handle of his piano-organ; the sound of it swelled 
and sank as the traffic surged and paused, and now and 
then one heard the shrill voices of the children who 
danced and shrieked in time to the music. Close to the 
pavement a coster pushed his barrow, and proclaimed 
flowers in an odd intonation, reminding one of the 
Gregorian chant. The cyclist went by again with his 
jangling insistent bell, and a man who stood by the 
lamp-post set fire to his pastille ribbon, and let the faint 
blue smoke rise into the sun. Away in the west, where 
the houses seemed to meet, the play of sunlight on the 
haze made, as it were, golden mighty shapes that paused 
and advanced, and paused again. 

He had viewed the scene hundreds of times, and for 
a long while had found it a nuisance and a weariness. 
But nowas he walked stupidly, slowly, along the south- 
ern side of Holborn, a change fell. He did not in the 
least know what it was, but there seemed to be a strange 
air, and a new charm that soothed his mind. 

When the traffic was stopped, to his soul there was a 
solemn hush that summoned remnants ofa far-off mem- 
ory. The voices of the passengers sank away, the street 
was endued with a grave and reverent expectation. A 

shop 


UPB 


wr 45 mo 


shop that he passed had a row of electriclamps burning The Holy 
above the door, and the golden glow of them in the 7#gs 
sunlight was, he felt, significant. The grind and jar of 

the wheels, as the procession moved on again, gave 

out a chord of music, the opening of some high service 

that was to be done, and now, in an ecstasy, he was sure 

that he heard the roll and swell and triumph of the 

organ, and shrill sweet choristers began to sing. So the 

music sank and swelled and echoed in the vast aisle—in 
Holborn. 

What could these lamps mean, burning in the bright 
sunlight? The music was hushed in a grave close, and 
in the rattle of traffic he heard the last deep sonorous 
notes shake against the choir walls—he had passed be- 
yond the range of the Italian’s instrument. But then a 
tich voice began alone, rising and falling in monoto- 
nous but awful modulations, singing a longing trium- 
phant song, bidding the faithful lift up their hearts, be 
joined in heart with the Angels and Archangels, with 
the Thrones and Dominations. He could see no longer, 
he could not see the man who passed close beside him, 
pushing his barrow, and calling flowers. 

Ah! He could not be mistaken, he was sure now. The 
ait was blue with incense, he smelt the adorable fra- 
grance. The time hadalmost come. And then the silvery, 
reiterated, instant summons of a bell; and again, and 
again. 

The tears fell from his eyes, in his weeping the 
tears poured a rain upon his cheeks. But he saw in the 
distance, in the far distance, the carven tabernacle, 
golden mighty figures moving slowly, imploring arms 
stretched forth. 

There 


wre 46 ms 


The Holy ‘There was a noise of a great shout; the choir sang in © 
Things the tongue of his boyhood that he had forgotten: 
SANT. SANT... SANT 
Then the silvery bell tinkled anew; and again, and 
again. He looked and saw the Holy, White, and Shining 
Mysteries exhibited—in Holborn. 


One Thousand copies of this book designed by'T. M. Cleland, 
printed under his superviston by the Pynson Printers and 


autographed by the Author. No. 334
