The Royal Masonic Cyclopaedia
========================================
Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie (1877) — Mackenzie's Masonic encyclopedia — the Victorian reference work by a Golden Dawn founder. Source: https://archive.org/details/mackenzie-the-royal-masonic-cyclopaedia. Public domain.

THE

ROYAL

MASONIC =CYCLOPAIDIA

OF

HISTORY, RITES, SYMBOLISM,
AND BIOGRAPHY.

EDITED BY

KENNETH R HH. MACKENZIE, IX’,
(“«CRYPTONYMUS,”)

HON, MEMBER OF THE CANONGATE KILWINNING LODGE, NO. 2, SCOTLAND.

CONTAINING UPWARDS OF THREE THOUSAND SUBJECTS, TOGETHER WITH
NUMEROUS ORIGINAL ARCHEOLOGICAL ARTICLES ON TOPICS
NEVER BEFORE TREATED IN ANY SIMILAR WORK.

LONDON:
Bro. JOHN HOGG, PATERNOSTER ROW.

MDCCCLXXVII.

(All rights rescrved.)

THIS

Cyclopedia of Freemasonry

Is

BY PERMISSION, INSCRIBED TO

JOHN HERVEY, Esquire, 32°

GRAND SECRETARY OF THE UNITED GRAND LODGE OF ANCIENT FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS

OF ENGLAND,
WITH EVERY FEELING OF FRATERNAL RESPECT AND REGARD,

BY HIS NEPHEW, THE EDITOR,

KENNETH R. H. MACKENZIE, IX°.

THE HINDU ISIS.

PREFACE.

THis book does not contain the accumulation of the
knowledge of one person, but of many—nor does it
express the opinions of an individual. It would be very
inadequate to its purpose were it the former, and wholly
impertinent were it the latter. It should also be remem-
bered, that nothing can be truly effective of good without
an attempt at impartiality ; and to the merit of such an
attempt the author or editor has throughout aspired.
Had it not been for the valuable assistance obtained from
brethren far more distinguished in the Craft than he can
ever expect to be, many inaccuracies would have been
perpetuated,and much important and valuable information
continued unrecorded ; but it may still be urged on the
reader, that the best way of using this work is to study
its pages with the sense of its presenting a coherency,
from beginning to end, of great advantage to the Masonic
Student. Perfection, in that which is progressive and
hence incomplete, was an impossibility ; but it has been
endeavoured throughout to give a tone of consistency to
the form in which the various topics have received illus-
tration. Many collateral matters have been introduced,
being of interest to a right comprehension of the scope of
Masonic science ; some digressions have not been excluded,
as it was thought they would be found valuable in the
ultimate aim of throwing new light upon the central
idea of the Fraternity ; and where, in certain articles,
censure has been made of particular views, it has only
been to strengthen the entire fabric, and eliminate errors
of more or less danger. While the Craft, with all respect
and affection, has received a willing tribute at the writer’s
hands, difficulties have been presented, and an open critical

Preface.

spirit allowed ; and if certain legends have been treated
with a free method of inquiry, it has always been essayed
to perform the necessary labour with a due respect for the
superior knowledge of special points possessed by experts
in the various systems by which the spirit of Masonry
has received expression. There has, therefore, been no
attempt to glorify certain rites at the expense of others ;
there has been a constant endeavour to put things in the
truest light attainable by archeological and_ historical
research ; and everywhere there has been kept in view
the cardinal fact, that the three degrees of Craft Masonry
form the substantial foundation and essence of the whole
science. As Hutchinson wisely says: “Take away from
the spirit of our mysteries and ceremonies, and they be-
come ridiculous.”

A remarkable author of the last century (Carl August
Ragotzsky), in summing up his experiences of the Masonry
of his time, which he found broken up into numerous
fantastic sects, with an ever-varying standard of Masonic
truth, observes, with a sort of prophetic felicity: ‘“ But,
my dear brother, what is there that is not now loaded
upon the shoulders of Masonry? Truths and fictions of
the most dissimilar kind could not avoid becoming inter-
woven with Freemasonry. In one hundred years (if indeed
it be possible that Freemasonry should stand so long ! ! !)
—in one hundred years, if Freemasonry was continually
to be exhibited in such an eccentric light, the necessity of
a Masonic Lexicon of Lodges and Sects would become
an absolute fact, and most certainly such a work would
contain as many rubrics and singularities as the orthodox
and heretical Lexicon of the Christian Church! But be
that as it may, it has been of old, and will for ever remain,
the first requirement of a Freemason to possess a pair of
clearly-seeing eyes!” And certainly the prediction of
Brother Ragotzsky—amid the confusion and whirl of

vi

Preface.

class rites—has been fulfilled; the continual creation of
new systems built upon the frailest of traditions has not
ceased, nor does the fertility of imagination, on the part
of founders of sects, exhibit many signs of flagging.

In the various new rites introduced within the memory
of the present generation, it is not to be denied that many
interesting features are present ; but, at a time when every
new idea is brought rigidly to the touchstone of truth, it
must be confessed that works of supererogation abound,
and the reconstructed sub-Masonic fraternities, how-
ever excellent their intentions, by no means satisfy his-
torical conditions, or anywhere approach in grandeur
of conception the original plan; while, in many in-
stances, the substructure of these rites, on investiga-
tion, coincides in no accurate measure with the ascer-
tained facts of history. In the last century, there con-
tinued a belief in the mystical, which the light of science
has been insufficient to discourage; and at the present
day, in various directions, we perceive this lingering love
of the marvellous still holding the minds of many in
thrall. This very attitude of the reduplicators of Masonic
sects renders the whole suspicious to the very large
majority of thinkers and students; and men accustomed
to dissect history, like De Quincey, the essayist, and
Carlyle, the historian, instinctively shrink from the in-
accurate. But let it once be admitted that the basis of
Freemasonry, like that of many other institutions, is of a
purely symbolical and moral character, and there need be
no such outcry. But, above all things, let it be clearly
seen as a purely social institution, having no political or
religious tendency at all, tending to make men friendly
upon vastly different grounds than those of agrarian and
political rights. In England, at any rate, agitation of a
party kind is impossible in the Lodge, for men of all
shades of political belief meet there on neutral ground,

vii

Preface.

while the exercise of religious freedom is admitted and
proclaimed to be the inalienable possession of each indi-
vidual brother.

On the various theories concerning the origin of Masonry,
it is advisable to be prudently reticent : there are of these
so many that each student may select his own favourite
theory without prejudice to any other. It is only re-
quisite to recognise the actual good effected by Masonic
association to perceive that its enemies are at fault. And
whatever opposition may be brought against Masonry, or
ridicule heaped upon it, it has too firmly established itself
in the minds of benevolent and far-seeing men to be in
any danger of overthrow. To my brethren I need say no
more, and to the general public I can only say—read in
these pages, and see if there be anything worthy of repre-
hension.

I am greatly indebted to the personal kindness of
many brethren for aid in my work—beyond the ordinary
printed sources—and especially for the supervision of the
proof-sheets, by the following eminent Members of the
Craft—who have, in fact, formed a most efficient Com-
mittee of Aid in the present undertaking—often saving
the reader from the redundance and reiteration unavoid-
able in works of this kind. My acknowledgments are
therefore heartily offered to Bros. W. Hyde Pullen,
W. J. Hughan, Captain F.G. Irwin, D. F. Ranking, M.A.,
John Yarker, Thomas Sampson, R. Wentworth Little,
A. A. Pendlebury, Dr W. R. Woodman, Captain J. H.
Lawrence Archer, Benjamin Cox, J. Leyland Feilden, and
many others, who in various ways have contributed to
ensure accuracy and perspicuity throughout the work.
And I ought to add my special acknowledgments for the
valuable assistance at all times rendered by my publisher,
Bro. John Hogg.

KENNETH R. H. MACKENZIE, IX°.

vill

THE

ROYAL MASONIC CYCLOPADIA.

A.

A.—the letter 8, Aleph, signifying oz, is first in the alphabets of
all languages except the /Zthiopian, Japanese, Mongolian, and
Tibetan, but is not given this position in the Runic system. In
the Hebrew and Armenian numerical systems its value is 1.
From the peculiar sanctity it has acquired in the Hebrew and
Greek, in which the Sacred Scriptures are written, certain
mysterious qualities and mystical values have been assigned to
it. It is emphatically the sacred Aleph, and has even been held
to typify the Trinity in Unity, being composed of two Jods,
upright and reversed, with a transverse bar or nexus; thus—
\’ The St Andrew’s Cross is occultly connected therewith; and
as the latter enters largely into Masonic combinations and signs,
itis fitly to be placed at the commencement of this work, The
name of God in Hebrew, corresponding with Aleph, is my,
AéHeléH.

AARron.—The name signifies the wdluminated. Elder brother of
Moses, and first High Priest of the Hebrew Church; the dignity
of the priesthood being hereditary in his family. He died on
Mount Hor, aged 123, and was buried in a cavern on the
mountain. He was succeeded by Eleazar, his son, in the office
of High Priest,

Aaron’s Banp.—A degree fabricated by Joseph Cerneau at New
York, and conferred by an independent body. It was censured
and suppressed by the Royal Arch Chapter of New York State
in 1825.

Aaron’s Rop.—This symbol was introduced into Royal Arch
Masonry because it was one of the three holy things preserved
in the most holy place of the Tabernacle. It refers to the
rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.

AB—28. 1. The eleventh month of the Hebrew civil year, cor~
responding to July and August. In 1875, Ab begins on the 4th
of July, and in 1876 on the a of July. 2. A Hebrew word,

I

ABA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABB

signifying father, and a component of the designation, Hiram
Abts.

rer ae ancient architecture, the chequered or square
divisions of the Mosaic pavement; the material of which the
ground floor of the First Temple was supposed to have been
made.

Asacus.—l1. An instrument for facilitating arithmetical computa-
tions. 2. In architecture, a table forming the upper or crowning
member of a column and its capital. 3. In the Masonic system
of Knights Templar, the term has been wrongly considered the
name of the Grand Master’s staff of office. (See Baculus.)

ABappon (Hebr, i128, exterminans, vel perditio, destruction).—The
name of the Angel of the Abyss. Used in the 17th degree of the
Scottish Rite. The Greek word is ’AvoAAday, the “destroyer.
(Rev. ix. 11.)

ABAMaRUS.—A buttress, or second wall built to strengthen another.

ABANO, PETRUS DE. (See Magic.)

ABAzAR.—Grand Master of Ceremonies in the 6th degree of the
Modern French Rite. The father of Mithridates.

ABBA.—The Hebrew word 3x, father, in the Chaldee idiom. As it
is used in some simple and compound forms in Masonic and
other occult mysteries, it is given here. The Talmudical writers
employ Na to express Rabbi or Master. (Matthew xxiii. 9.)

ABBREVIATIONS, Masonic.—So many and diverse are the degrees
and orders of Freemasonry, and the rites and ceremonies since
connected with the Royal Art proper, that a necessity for
Masonic abbreviations has arisen. To give a complete list of a

series of contractions, to which additions are constantly being
made, is all but impossible ; but the following series of contrac-
tions may be considered as full as can be made. Masonic
abbreviations are commonly indicated by the use of three points
(as thus *.* or .".), placed after the letter. As to .., it would seem
to refer to the officers and their work on all points ‘of the triangle.
It has been thought that they refer to the three lesser lights in the
Lodge, or the situation of the Master and Wardens in Continental
Lodges. It more probably refers to the triune nature of the
Deity, thus alluding to the initial name of God, as represented in
the original of the Hebrew forming the triwne circles of eternity ;

thus, we 7s hence, | ’, the Hebrew Yod.
e

Ragon says these points were first used. on the 12th of August,
1774, by the Grand Orient of France, in an address to the subor-
dinate Lodges.
A.. Auditor. A degree in the Order of Apex and Sat Brhai.
2

ABB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABB

>

“. C.. (Anno Cedio.) Year of destruction ; referring to 1314,

and the catastrophe of the Knights Templar.

.. C.. K.. York year of Christian Knighthood (a.D. 32.)

“ O.. Mu, or Av. ¥...M. Ancient Craft, or York Masonry.

.and A.. 0... D.. Antient and Archeological Order of

Druids.

. and A..S.. BR... Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.

and P.. R.. Antient and Primitive Rite.

A.D. (Anno Domini.) Year of Our Lord.

A... Dep. (Anno Depositionis.) In the Year of the Deposit. The
date used by Royal and Select Masters in Cryptic
Masonry.

A.. F.. M.. Ancient Freemasons.

. F.. and A... M.. Ancient Free and Accepted Masons.

G.M. Acting Grand Master.

H. (Anno Hebraico.) Hebrew Year. Used in the A. and
A. Rite. The Hebrew Year begins in September, on the
Ist of Tisri, being the Ist of September, 1875, the 20th of
September, 1876.

A.. Inv. (Anno Inventionis.) In the Year of the Discovery.

Used in Royal Arch Masonry and in other rites.

A.L, (Anno Lucis.) In the Year of Light, 4000. The date
used in Craft Freemasonry. The A. and A. R. use 4004,
added to the common style, or A. D.

Aw Lo. G.. Do. Go. Av. De. LU. (A la gloire du Grand Archi-
tecte de 1 Univers.) To the glory of the Grand Architect
of the Universe. Used at the head of all French Masonic
documents.

A. L’ Or... (4 POrient.) At the East. The seat of the Lodge.

A.M. (Anno Mundi.) Year of the World. Used by the A. and
A. R. in conjunction with A. H.

A.. 0... (Anno Ordinis.) In the Year of the Order. The date

used by Knights Templar and other Chivalric Orders in

accordance with the year of their several institutions.
. 0. I. Ancient Oriental Order of Ishmael.

R.. Year of Revival (1686), used by the K. T. priests.

Ur. TO. An G. (Ad univers terrarum orbis swmmi

Architect gloriam.) To the glory of the Grand Architect

of the Universe. Used at the head of the documents of
the A. and A. R.

Aw. Ve. Ls. (An du Vraié Lumiére.) Year of True Light. The
A. and P. Rite uses the Indian 000,000,000.

B.. A.. (Buisson Ardente.) Burning Bush.

B... B.. Burning Bush. Used in documents of the A. and

>> bbb

A.
A.
A.

A.
Ae.
A...

2
my

ABB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABB

B.L.R.T. Brotherly Love, Relief, and Truth.

Br. or Bro. Brother (German, Bruder or Briider; French,
Frere.)

.. Censor; Courier.

“.C.. Celestial Canopy. Used in documents of the A. and
A. R.

“F.C. Committee on Foreign Correspondence.

..G.. Captain General; Captain of the Guard.

C.H. Captain of the Host.

C.N. Conductor of Novices; an officer in the Rosicrucian
Fraternity.

Comp. a Designation of a member of the Royal
Arch,

D.. A..F. Due and Ancient Form.

D.C. Director of Ceremonies.

D.D.G.M. District Deputy Grand Master.

Deg. Degree or Degrees. Also designated thus: e.9., 18°.

D.. G.. Be. Av. We. (German, Der Grosse Baumeister aller
Welten.) To the glory of the Grand Architect of all
Worlds.

D.G.H.P. Deputy Grand High Priest.

D.G.M. Deputy Grand Master; District Grand Master.

D.. M.. J... (Deus Meumque Jus.) God and my Right. Motto
of 33° of the A. and A. R.

E.. East; the place or emblem of Light; also Eminent,
Excellent.

E. A. or E. A. P. Entered Apprentice.

Ec... (French, Ecossats.) Scottish.

E.. G.. C.. Eminent Grand Commander.

Eu. 0... L.. (Ex Oriente Luc.) From the East cometh Light.

E.V. (Era Vulgus.) Common Era.

E.. V.. (Bre Vulgatre.) Vulgar Era.

F.. or FF... (Frére or Freres.) Brother or Brethren.

¥F. A.M. Free and Accepted Mason.

F.C. Fellow Craft.

Fy. F.. Z... Freedom, Fervency, and Zeal.

F. H.C. Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Fra. Frater (used to denote a Brother of the Rosicrucian
Order and Knight Templar).

F..U.. A.M. (Frece und Angenommene Maurer.) Free and
Accepted Masons.

F.. U.. Z:. Faith, Unity, and Zeal.

F. Y. Fraternally yours.

G. God; Grand; Geometry; Guardian; Generalissimo.

G. A. Grand Architect ; Grand Almoner.

4

TMQ 22

ABB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABB

G.A.C. Grand Arch-Chancellor.
G. C. Grand Chaplain; Grand Chapter; Grand Council; Grand
ae Grand Conclave; Grand Chancellor; Grand
erk.
. O.G. Grand Captain General; Grand Captain of the Guard.
. C0. H. Grand Captain of the Host; Grand Chapter of
Herodom.

.Com. Grand Commander; Grand Commandery.

. D.C. Grand Director of Ceremonies.

.E. Grand East; Grand Encampment.

.G. Grand Geometrician; Grand Generalissimo; Grand

Guardian.

.G.C. General Grand Chapter.

.H. P. Grand High Priest; Grand High Patriarch.

.J. W. Grand Junior Warden.

.K. Grand King. Peculiar to the Royal Arch in the U.S. A.

and in the Irish Rite.

.K.8. Grand Keeper of the Seals.

.L. Grand Lodge; Grande Loge ; Grosse Loge.

. M. Grand Master; Grand Marshal.

.M.V. Grand Master of the Veils.

.O. Grand Orient; Grand Orator; Grand Organist; Grand

Overseer.

G. P. Grand Prelate; Grand Patriarch; Grand Prior; Grand
Preceptor; Grand Preceptory; Grand Pursuivant; Grand
Patron; Grand Priory; Grand Principal.

G. P. K. T. Grand Priory of the Knights of the Temple—the
supreme body in Scotland.

G.P.8. Grand Principal Sojourner.

G.R. Grand Recorder; Grand Registrar.

G.R. A.C. Grand Royal Arch Captain. Grand Royal Arch
Chapter.

G.S. Grand Secretary ; Grand Scribe; Grand Sentinel; Grand
Steward; Grand Sojourner.

G.S8.B. Grand Sword Bearer.

.S.E. Grand Scribe Ezra,—in Royal Arch Masonry.

. 8. N. Grand Scribe Nehemiah, ——in Royal Arch Masonry.

. 8. V. Guardian of the Sacred Vault.

.8. W. Grand Senior Warden.

. STD.

. STD.

RARQM QARRA MAAR aq

Grand Steward.

B. Grand Standard Bearer.
.T. Grand Treasurer; Grand Tyler.
. W. Grand Warden.
. Herald; Harbinger.
. A.B. Hiram Abii.

TM AARAMAAAS

ABB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABB

H.. J... (German, Heilige Johannes.) Holy Saint Johns.

H. K.T. Hiram, King of Tyre.

H. P. High Priest.

H.R. A.C. Holy Royal Arch Chapter.

H-R-M. Herodom, Rite of.

I.G. Inner Guard; Intendant General.

Inu... Illustrious.

Ins.. GEN... Inspector General. One who has received the 33°.

LL. H.. S.. Vi. (in hoe signo vinces.) By this thou shalt
prevail.

I.Nw. RD. (Zesus Nazarenus Rex Iudeorum.) Jesus of
Nazareth, King of the Jews. Motto of the Knights of
Malta, of the Red Cross of Rome and Constantine, and
of the Rosicrucian Society.

1.8. Inside Sentinel.

LL. Ts. No. On. To. Go. Av. On. TU. In the name of the Grand
Architect of the Universe. Initials sometimes used on
Warrants and Certificates in the English language.

J.D. Junior Deacon.

J.G. Junior General.

J.G.D. Junior Grand Deacon.

J.G. W. Junior Grand Warden.

J... Vi.S.. Pu. Le. Nv. Ma. Qe. Nv. S.. C.:. (French, Je vous salue
par les noms Maconniques que nous seul connoissons.) I
salute you by the Masonic names which we only

now.

. Junior Overseer.

. Junior Warden.

'S. Knight of the Order of Charles XIII. of Sweden.

-D-H. Rnight Kadosch.

a Knight « of the Eagle and Pelican.

. 5. Knight of the Holy Sepulchre.

_M. Knight of Malta.

KR. C. Knight of the Red Cross; Knight of the Rose-
Croix.

K.8. King Solomon.

K. Sr. J. Knight of St John.

Kt. or Kyv. Knight.

K.T. Knight Templar.

L. Lieutenant.

L. LL. Lodge, Lodges. (German, Lehrling, Apprentice.)

L.. E.. T. (Luce é tenebris,) Light out of darkness,

Lr. G. C. Lieutenant Grand Commander.

L. P. D. Labour, Prudence, Duty ; Love, Patience, Devotion.

L.. V. Lord of the Valley. An officer in the Order of Ishmael.

ralctalalatababel
Ree ay

al

ABB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABB

L.. V.. X.. (Zuz.) Light. A mystical word among the Rosi-
crucians and other orders,

M... (French, Maitre; German, Meister; Spanish, Maestro.)
Master; Marshal; Mark; Minister; Mute.

M.C. Master of the Ceremonies; Mark of the Craft; Mystic
Circle.

M. E. C. Most Enlightened Commander.

. E.G. H. P. Most Excellent Grand High Priest.

.E. M. Most Excellent Master.

.E. Z. Most Excellent Zerubbabel.

.G. Master General.

“ K..G.. (German, Maurer Kunst Geselle.) Fellowcraft.

M... L.. (German, Maurer Lehrling.) Entered Apprentice.

M..M.. Master Mason; Mark Master; Mois Macgonnique :
Masonic Month. The French begin the Masonic year in
March. (German, Meister Maurer; Spanish, Maestro
Mason.)

M.P.S. Most Puissant Sovereign. President in a conclave
of the Red Cross of Rome and Constantine.

M.T. Master of the Temple. An officer in a Rosicrucian
College.

M. W.G.M. Most Worshipful Grand Master.

M. W.S. Most Wise Sovereign of a Rose-Croix Chapter.

N.-. Novice.

N. E. C. North-east Corner.

N’o.. P.. Vi. Di. Mi. (French, N’oubdlicz pas vos décorations
Maconniques.) Used in France at the left-hand corner of
the summons,meaning: Do not forget your Masonic regalia.

Q.. A. Order of Apex (which see.)

0... A... C.. (Ordo ab Chao.) Order out of Chaos. Motto of
the 33°.

O. ©. 8. Oriental Chair of Solomon.

0. G. Outside Guardian.

Or.:. Orient—the East, the station of the Master; Orator.

P... Prefect; Prelate; Prior.

P.C. W. Principal Conductor of the Works.

P.G. M. Past Grand Master.

Pro G. M. Pro Grand Master.

Prov. G. M. Provincial Grand Master.

P. J. Prince of Jerusalem ; Provost and Judge.

P.:. K... Past King, in the Irish Rite.

P..M.. (French, Mattre Passé, Ex-Vénérable; German, Alt
Meister, Passirt Meister.) Past Master; Perfect Master.

R. Registrar.

R. A. Royal Arch; Royal Art.

SSESS

ABB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABB

R. A.C. Royal Arch Captain, or Chapter.

R. A.M. Royal Ark Mariner; Royal Arch Mason.

R. +, or R. C. Rose Cross. The signature of a Prince Rose-
Croix.

R.. Es. A. et Aw. (Rite Ecossais Ancien et Accepté.) Ancient
and Accepted Scottish Rite.

R.E. G. C. Right Eminent Grand Commander.

R. L. (Réspectable Loge.) Worshipful Lodge.

R. 0.8. Royal Order of Scotland.

.0. 0.8. Bu. Royal Oriental Order of Sat Bhai.

.R. P. Right Reverend Prelate.

~S-Y-C-S. Rosy Cross. The Royal Order of Scotland.

. W. Right Worshipful.

W.M. Right Worshipful Master. The title of a Provincial
Grand Master in England, and of the Master of a Lodge
in Scotland.

S.. Sponsor; Sentinel; Seneschal.

8. B. Standard Bearer.

8... Bu. Order of Sat B*hai (which see.)

8.. C.. 8... G..I-.G. Supreme Council Sovereign Grand In-
spector General. A member of the 33°.

Sec. Secretary.

Sec. Gen. Secretary General.

8.G. D. Senior Grand Deacon.

S.G. W. Senior Grand Warden.

S.M. Secret Master; Substitute Master; Select Master;
Secret Monitor; Sovereign Master; Speculative Master ;
Supreme Magus (in Rosicrucianism.)

8. O. Senior Overseer.

S.. P.. R.. 8. Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret.

8.8. Sanctum Sanctorum.) Holy of Holies.

8.8.8. (French, Trois fois salut.) Thrice greeting.

SS... GG. II. Sovereign Grand Inspectors.

SS. Joun. Saints John.

Surv. ler. (French, Premier Surveillant.) Senior Warden.

Surv. 2¢ (French, Second Surveillant.) Junior Warden.

S. W. Senior Warden.

T. Tyler; Treasurer.

T. B. Torch Bearer.

T... C., or V.. F. (French, Trés cher ou Vénérable Frere.) Very
dear or Venerable (Worshipful) Brother.

T. G. A. O.T. U. The Grand Architect of the Universe.

TreEAS. Treasurer. A necessary officer in a Lodge.

T.. 5... (Trés Sage.) Wisest. The presiding officer in the
French Rite.

bd Fd Fd

ABB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [app

. (Vénérable.) Worshipful. The title of the Master in
France. Verger.
.D. B, Very dear Brother,
.D.§. A. (Used by the Knights Templar.)
. HE. Viceroy Eusebius.
.G.C. Vice Grand Chancellor.
.L.. (Vraié Lumiere.) True Light.
W. Very Worshipful.
. Warden.
-M. Worshipful Master; Wiirdiger Meister.
. LF. Yours in Fraternity.

aA +NT$4"

(a.) (2) () Gd) @) Q*) @ @.) a 7)

(a.) and (6.) Lodge, Lodges.

(c.) The Delta is the Emblem of the Chapter in Royal Arch
Masonry; Overseer’s mark of approval in Mark Mas-
ter’s Degree ; Emblem of the Trinity.

(d.) Passion Cross. The prefix to the signature of a Knight
Templar.

(e.) Templar Cross, used before the signature of a Grand
Commander.

(7) Patriarchal Cross, used before official signature of Grand
Officers.

(g.) Cross of Salem, used before the signature of the Grand
Master of Knights Templar. All these Crosses should
be made in red ink.

(h.) Hermetic Cross, used by members of the Governing
Body of the Order of Ishmael, Esau, Reconciliation,
and Expiation. The position of the Cross in relation
to the signature is varied, according to instructions
issued from time to time, and marks the rank of the
signatary ; the colour of the ink is also varied.

(z.) The sign of a Knight Rose-Croix; also used in 1725 to
signify the Lodge of St John (Johannite Masonry.)

AxBcHAL—The father of King Hiram of Tyre. (1 Chron. xiv. 1.)

Aspa.—A word used in some of the high degrees, especially in the
degree Provost and Judge. He is stated to have been the father
of Adoniram. (1 Kings iv. 6.)

ABDAMON.—Orator in the 14th degree of the Rite of Perfection
(Sacred Vault of James VI.); corrupted from abad, to serve, in
Hebrew.

9

ABD | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia.

[ABL

ABDEVEUM.—In Astrology, the 12th house in a scheme of the
heavens.

ABDITORIUM.—A secret place for the preservation of important
documents and records. Tradition asserts that the two columns
of the First Temple porch were constructed hollow to serve for
this purpose.

ABELITES.—So called from Abel, the second son of Adam, whose
name was properly Hebel, and primarily signified weakness or
vanity, and secondarily, grief or lamentation. His murder by
Cain (the possessor), the first city builder on earth, was con-
sidered to have laid the first foundation-stone of the City of God
in the heavens; Abel was revered as the prototype of the
Saviour, Sotor or Healer. 1. The name of a sect in Northern
Africa, professing a sort of Gnosticism. 2. It was also the
name of a secret or guasi-Masonic society existing in Germany
about 1746. A pamphlet setting forth the nature of the Order
was published in that year at Leipzig, under the title of “The
Abelite.” Its principles were Christian, moral, and philan-
thropic ; and it possessed secret signs, ceremonies, and passwords.
It was, however, confined to Germany, and is now extinct. Its
motto was: “Sincerity, Friendship, and Hope.”

AxiB—The name given to green ears of corn by the Jews, and
adopted as that of the first month of their ecclesiastical year,—
our March,—because at that time corn was in the ear. This
month was afterwards called Nisan.

ABIBALA.—A name of the first assassin in the Elu of the French
Rite. From Hebrew abi and balah, ‘ax and yda, father of
destruction. It is sometimes erroneously given as Abibalk.

Asir.—The Hebrew word vax-oV7, signifying Hiram, his father.
The word was often used as a2 title of honour (see Abba), and
included the signification of master, inventor, or chief operator.
In 2 Chron, iv. 16, Huram, his father, is represented to have
made “the pots also, and the shovels, and the flesh-hooks, and
all these instruments.” This reference to the great Tyrian
architect as a potter is significant in connection with Egyptian
mysteries, in which Kneph, the potter god, played a part. He
was also the creator of the mundane egg. As a title of honour
it was very probably given by Solomon to Hiram. (See under
Hiram, the Builder.) Abif is, however, incorrect.

ABIRAM.—In the higher degrees, one of the assassins received the
name of Abiram Akirop. The last word is not Hebrew, nor of
any known language. It may be thus construed from ADI" 2y,
abi-ramah, destroyer of the father.

ABLUTION.—In some of the higher degrees of Masonry, purification
pie)

ABN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABR

by water is enjoined upon the candidate, as in the religious rites
of antiquity. The ceremony is especially used in the Antient
and Primitive Rite, also in the Rite of Ishmael.

ABNET.—The band of fine linen of various workmanship—borrowed
by the Jewish priests from the Egyptians. It has the same
relative signification as the zennaar of the Brahmins, and the
Masonic apron.

ABORIGENES.—An imitative society, flourishing about 1783. Its
chief officer was styled Grand Original, and an oath was admin-
istered. It was a purely social society. The password was Eden.

Asra,—Hebr. 13x, malus pater. A word in the 28th degree,
Scottish Rite.

ABRACADABRA.—An amulet written in a triangular form, thus :—

ABRACADABRA
ABRACADABR
ABRACADAB
ABRACADA
ABRACAD
ABRACA
ABRAC
ABRA
ABR
AB
A

Occurs in the Carmen de Morbis et Remediis of Q. Serenus Sam-
monicus, in the time of the Emperor Severus. It is supposed to
have had some connection with the word Abraxas. Higgins
(Celt. Druids, p. 246) derives it from abra (Erse), God; and cad,
holy ; hence God—the holy—God. Southey had a similar word
quite as powerful—Aballiboozobanganorribo—and would cure
the tertian ague quite as readily.

ABRAHAM.—Some authors introduce the name of the Jewish patri-
arch into Masonry—probably on account of the meeting with
Melchizedek (the Just King), who founded an Order of Priest-
hood. (See Melchizedek.)

ABRAHAM, ANTOINE FirMinN.—A mason who was notorious in Paris
about the beginning of the present century for the sale of
spurious degrees. The Supreme Council xxxiii’. of France pub-
lished a circular repudiating him, in 1811.

ABRAXAS.—The MS. published by Locke, but which is now con-
demned as spurious, attributed at one time to King Henry
VI., says, that the Freemasons, among other secrets, possess
“the facultye of Abrac.” Oliver fancifully connects the word
Abraxas with Abraham; but it is known to have been the name

be

ABR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ABS

applied by Basilides, the Pythagorean of Alexandria, to the
Supreme Deity, from whom all other divinities emanated, being
seven in number, with 365 virtues, typified in Greek numera-
tion by the value of the word, thus :—

B= 2 a= 1 p= 40
n= 8 B= 2 e= 58
a= 30 p=100 i= 10
t= 5 a= 1 §= 9
v= 50 &= 60 p=100
o= 70 a= 1 a= 1
¢=200=365 ¢=200= 365 ¢= 200 = 365

It will be seen that, placed side by side with Meithras or Mithras,
and Belénus, the Gaulish sun—the sum of the values is the same,
and corresponds to the ancient length of the year in days—
Abraxas, Belénus, and Mithras, all signifying the sun. Beau-
sobre, in the History of Manicheism, enters into a long etymolo-
gical disquisition to prove that Abraxas is derived from the two
Greek words, ASfos 3aw; or, “the magnificent Saviour, he who
heals and preserves.” Afpos is an epithet of the Sun, and those
who perceive in the Sun and Mithras a type of the Saviour,
may draw some curious inferences as to the identity of these
personages in philosophical mythology. But the futility of such
figures, and any deductions from them, is shown by the fact
that the terminal letters in all these, furnish the major portion
of the common product, and the root words, in a philological
sense, would give results of no significative meaning at all; while
three widely scattered countries—Gaul, Greece, and Persia—
have been laid under contribution for this common addition to
the pseudo-philosophy of the Solar myth. The fact that the
word Abraxas was first applied by Basilides, a philosopher of the
Alexandrian school, about the year 250, is enough to show from
what base sources the fictions of this class of sophists were drawn.
ABSENCE—Freemasonry does not now, although ample records
exist that it did in the last century, recognize the principle of
fining its members for non-attendance at the Lodge. Were
attendance thus diligently enforced, great good would be the
consequence, as members of the craft would be led to regard
Masonry as other than a great dining institution, and fulfil their
functions with greater alacrity and satisfaction to themselves,
and the honour of the Fraternity. Brother Mackey says, that it
would “be a descent in the grade of punishment, and manifestly
tend to weaken the solemn nature of those obligations which
every member and officer contracts.” This would be right, if the
majority of members were uniformly as true in the spirit as they
12

ACA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ACA

are in the letter to those obligations. But it is enough, in these
degenerate days, to knock into the Lodge at the eleventh hour,
and participate in the hurry of the closing, and the banquet!
In the Ancient Charges, it was prescribed as a rule—“ That no
Master or Fellow could be absent from the Lodge, especially
when warned to appear at it, without incurring a severe censure,
until it appeared to the Master and Wardens that pure necessity
hindered him.” Fines, to a Fund of Benevolence, would be
severely felt by the unhappily large class of dining Masons.

AcaciA.—The symbolical plant of Freemasonry—an evergreen.
It has been identified with the acacia vera of Tournefort, and
the mimosa Nilotica of Linneus. It may, however, be the
Acacia Lebbeck of Egypt. It flourishes in the Levantine coun-
tries. It was the sacred wood of the Jews, called Shittah,
in the plural Shittim. The emblem of initiation, immortality,
and innocence. The acacia was used to indicate the place
where dead bodies had been interred among the Jews. In
relation to a certain famous event, much spoken of in Masonry,
it would seem rather strange that the three culprits, Fanor.
the Syrian mason; Amru, the Pheenician carpenter; and
Metusael, the Hebrew quarryman, should have exposed them-
selves to the certainty of detection by the planting of a loose
acacia upon the place where they had concealed the evidence of
their crime. It is also significant that the discoverer of the
hidden body should have been named Benoni. Those skilled in
the reading of ancient myths may again find much to reflect
upon in these facts. The Greek word dxuxia, signifies innocence
or freedom from sin. Other nations, with mysterious rites.
adopted special plants: the Egyptians, the palm and the lotos;
the Greeks, the myrtle; and the Druids, the mistletoe. Errone-
ously, the Freemasons of the last century confused the acacia
with cassia, and sung egregiously absurd lines of doggrel about
the plant.

ACACIAN.—1. A term used by Hutchinson, in his Spirit of Masonry.
as denoting a Mason, who, by a strict obedience to the obliga-
tions and precepts of the Fraternity, is free from sin; derived
from é&xaxia, innocence. 2. The name of a religious sect in the
early times of the Church, from Acacius, Bishop of Cesarea.

ACADEMIE DES ILLUMINES D’AVIGNON.—Academy of the Illuminati
of Avignon. An androgynous system, established 1785. The
ritual combined ideas taken from the Hermetic Philosophy, with
the doctrines of Swedenborg. (See Académie des Vrates Macons.)

ACADEMIE DES SUBLIMES MAITRES DE L’ANNEAU LUMINEUX.—Aca-
demy of the Sublime Masters of the Luminous Ring. <A degree
introduced by Baron Grant of Blairfindy, Scotland, first in 1780,

13

ACA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [acc

and afterwards in 1815, in the Lodge of Douai, France. He was
chief of the Scottish Philosophical Rite. This was the eighth
and highest degree, formed into three Orders—beginning with
the study of the history of Freemasonry, and ending in the study
of Natural Science in its widest extension. Pythagorean prin-
ciples were inculcated.

ACADEMIE DES VRAIES Macons.—Academy of True Masons. A
French Chapter of the high degrees, having alchymistical ten-
dencies, founded at Montpellier in 1778, by Boileau, the pupil
of Pernetti. This rite had six degrees beyond those of Ancient
Craft Masonry, which, although essential for admission, were not
practised. In this the Hermetic Science was taught. The
degrees were—1. The True Mason; 2. The True Mason in the
True Way; 3. Knight of the Golden Key; 4. Knight of the
Rainbow; 5. Knight of the Argonauts; 6. Knight of the Golden
Fleece. (See Pernetit.)

AcaDEmMy.—In Schreeder’s system, the fourth degree of the Rectified
Rose-Croix.

ACADEMY OF ANCIENTS OF ANTIQUITY, OR OF THE MYSTERIES.—An
alchymistical fraternity, masonically constituted, founded at
Rome by John Baptista Porta, in the sixteenth century (it is
said), and revived at Warsaw, in Poland, in 1763, by Thoux de
Salverte.

ACADEMY oF SaGEs.—A society for the interpretation and propaga-
tion of the high degrees, introduced into France in 1776, by the
Ecossais Mother Lodge—Philosophical Rite. It had existed in
Sweden at a previous time, and was attributed to a society
formed in London by Elias Ashmole. Afterwards it had.a brief
existence at Mohilow, near Moscow.

ACADEMY, PLatonic.—Founded in 1480 by Marsilius Ficinus, under
the reign of Lorenzo di Medici, at Florence. Ficinus was an
illustrious student of Plato, and this Society probably occupied
itself with a study of the recondite mathematical philosophy of
the Greek writer. Hence, the employment of mathematical
formule has led some writers to assign it a Masonic character.

AcANTHUS.—Justicia biflora of the botanists. Used in Egypt asa
poultice. An herbaceous plant, commonly called bear’s breech,
with large whitish flowers and pinnatifid leaves. To the acan-
thus, Masonic tradition refers the idea of the Corinthian capital,
from a basket covered with a tile having been left on the crown
of a root of the plant. When the leaves began to grow, they
climbed up round the sides of the basket, until, encountering the
under side of the tile, they were turned back in the form of a
volute.

ACCEPTED.—From Masonic tradition we learn that the Masons first

14

ACC | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [Acc

acquired the name of “accepted” at the building of the Second
Temple, the Fraternity having been declared “free” by King
Solomon, probably at the dedication of the First Temple. Cyrus,
King of Persia, exempted the builders of the Second Temple
from every kind of taxation, as a consequent upon the freedom
granted by Solomon. In modern times, a more probable
reason for the term “accepted” has been found in the admission
of non-operative Masons by the original Society of Craftsmen,
thus being made free of and accepted into the Guild, as in the case
of any other Company. In the regulations made on St John’s
Day, 1663, under the Grand Mastership of the Earl of St Albans
(see under list of Grand Masters before 1717), these conclusive
words occur:—“ No person hereafter, who shall be accepted
a Freemason, shall be admitted into any Lodge or assembly,
until he has brought a certificate of the time and place of his
acceptation, from the Lodge that accepted him, unto the Master of
that limit or division where such Lodge is kept.” Also—“No
person shall be made or accepted a Freemason, unless,” etc. The
production of a certificate is here made obligatory, and no brother
ought to attend any Lodge, except his own, without having his
certificate ready for production, at least. If the prominent mem-
bers of the Fraternity, by example, would thus submit them-
selves, if necessary, to personal identification, the observance of
this rule would rapidly become general, and no longer be
felt as irksome or humiliating, In some provinces, the pro-
duction of the Grand Lodge certificate is a sine qua non. In
America, very properly, the examination of a strange brother is
excessively strict, and is an admirable check upon many abuses
liable to creep into every institution; however jealously and
zealously the avenues to the Lodge may be barred, it is impossible
to prevent moral deterioration, and, in a Masonic Lodge, where a
brother is an equal directly he has passed the door of the Lodge,
and subject to no further question on the degree in which it may
be working, such preliminary care is absolutely necessary.

ACCHO.—Now the city of St Jean d’Acre. An ancient Phoenician
settlement, first known by the Arab name of Akka, thirty miles
south of Tyre. It was the last fortified place wrested from the
Christians by the Mohammedans.

ACCLAMATION.—An exclamation of reverence, admiration, or ap-
proval, in connection with the battery among Masons. In the
Ancient and Accepted Rite, it is Auzza, housa, or Hoshea; in
French, vivat ; in the rite of Misraim, hallelujah; in the English
rite, it is so mote it be. In the rites of Adoption, eva and viva.

ACCOLADE.—A ceremony at one time in use during the conferring
of the honours of knighthood, by the Sovereign, the Grand

15

ACE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ACH

Master, or other authorized person laying his arms about the
neck of the person to be knighted, and saluting him usually on
both cheeks. It has since been limited to the act of gently
stroking with the sword about to be bestowed the neck or
shoulder of the recipient. Among the Romans, a slave was
“ manumitted” or freed by a blow; in Chivalry, it was said to
be the last blow to be received without resentment by the new-
made knight. (See Dub.)

ACELDAMA.—Field of Blood. A small piece of land south of Jeru-
salem—the Potter’s Field—used as a cemetery, like the ancient
Ceramicos of Athens. During the Crusades, pilgrims were buried
in it, and it was afterwards used as an Armenian burial-ground.
It is alluded to in the Lectures of the Degree of Knights Templar.
The earth of the Potter’s Field was renowned for its flesh-con-
suming power. Sandys, in his Relation (p. 189), says, that “the
earth thereof, within the space of eight and forty hours, will
consume the flesh that is laid thereon.” The earth of the Campo
Santo at Rome is endowed with the same virtue, imparted to it
by 270 shiploads exported to Rome. It was frequently exported
by the princes during the Crusades for the same reason. It is
now desolate.

ACERELLOS, R. S—A name assumed for literary purposes by Carl
Roessler, a Masonic author. (See Roessler.)

AcHaD.—One of the numerous names bestowed upon God in the
Hebrew Scriptures, and adopted by the Masons, the meaning
being the one, in Hebrew was. It occurs in Deut. vi. 4: “ Hear,
O Israel: Jahve (the Eternal) our Lord is (achad) one.” The
verses from 4 to 9, both inclusive, form the most important
prayer of the true Israelite, and it is known by the name of
Shema, from the first word. The Talmud enjoins its recital
morning and evening ; and it is the only one respecting which
any discussion has been raised as to whether it must be recited
in the original Hebrew, or may be lawfully said in any other
language. The Bal-Hatourim says, that the y in yow (Shema)
being of the value of 70, indicates that the Tora (Law) may be
explained in seventy different ways; and the 7 in 18 being of
the value 4, refers to the four cardinal points, signifying that
God governs the whole universe. you numerically contains 410,
the number of years of the duration of the First Temple. In the
prayer there are 248 letters, corresponding, according to the
Talmudists, to the parts of the human body. Achad not un:
frequently occurs in magical talismans.

AcHARON ScuHitton.— Hebrew, the new kingdom, jinde’ jins.
Used in the high degrees.

16

ACH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ADA

Acuias.—Used .in the high degrees.

ACHISHAR.—Mentioned in 1 Kings iv. 6, under the name of
Ahishar, as being “over the household,” an officer of great
importance in the court of an Oriental sovereign. The spelling
of the name has been varied for reasons of philology. He is one
of the persons referred to in the degree of Select Master.

ACHTARIEL—A Kabbalistic name of God; belonging to Kether,
the first of the ten Sephiroth.

ACKNOWLEDGED.—Candidates invested with the Most Excellent
Master’s degree are termed “received and acknowledged,” from
their more intimate acquaintance with the penetralia of Masonry.
The word réceived alludes to the original reception of the first
supposed possessors of the degree by King Solomon.

ACOUSMATICI—The lowest degree, that of Auditor, in the Pytha-
gorean system ; it endured five years, when the disciples received
the rank of mathematici. (See Pythagoras.)

Acta Latomorum. (See Thory.)

ACTING GRAND MastTer.— Under the English constitution, when-
ever a Prince of the Blood Royal, as in the case of H. R. H. the
Prince of Wales at present, accepts the office of Grand Master,
he has the right to appoint a Peer of the Realm as Acting or
Pro-Grand Master.

AcTiIveE.—A Lodge is said to be active when it assembles at regular
stated times, and a brother is denominated active when he is
punctual in his attendance upon his Masonic duties.

ApaD.—Principal deity among the Syrians, signifying the sun
(Macrohius, Saturnal, i.23). According to Selden, this author is
wrong, and it has reference to Achad, one. Pliny (Hist. Nat.,
XXxvli. 11), speaking of remarkable stones named after parts of
the body, mentions some called “ Adadunephros, eyusdem oculus
et dignitus dei,” and adds, “ et hie colitur a Syris.” Philo Byblius
(in Eusebii, Prapar. Evan., i. 10), calls him “Adwdesg Bacireds dediv,”
the broad a being pronounced o in the Western Aramean dialect.
It is used in the high degrees.

ApaM.—1. The mystical parent of the human race. He is said to
have received a book of Kabbalistic wisdom (Razit) to console
him after the Fall. According to the doctrines of Swedenborg,
Adam signified not a man, but a Church of Primitive Light. (But
see further under Kadmon, Adam.) 2. The principal officer in
the 28th degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite; in Hebrew
DIN, humus, terra. (But see further under Knight of the Sun.)

ApaMs.—The most ancient, honourable, and venerable Society of
Adams. A social society, ciredé 1750, held at the Royal Swan,
Kingsland Road. (See Derisive Societies.)

Apar.—Hebrew 178. The Saxth month of the civil, and twelfth

ag 17

ADA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ADM

of the ecclesiastical Jewish year, beginning the 27th January,
1875, and the 14th February, in 1876.

AparrL.—Angel of Fire. The splendour of God. Referred to in
the Hermetic degree of Knight of the Sun, from 1718 (Adr), splen-
dour, and dx, God.

ADELPH.—Greek—brother. The fourth degree in the Order of the
Palladium. It is said that the ritual of an Order of Adelphs is pre-
served at Douai, but this may be the Primitive Rite of Narbonne.

ADEPT.—From the Latin adeptus. 1. A name given to the Order of
INuminati. 2. The Rosicrucians also used the titles of Adeptus
(the 7th degree of the rite of Zinnendorf), Adoptatus, Adeptus
Coronatus (the 7th degree of the Swedish Rite), and Adeptus
Exemptus (the 7th degree of the Rosicrucians.) 3. The chief of
the consistory of the 28th degree is called Prince Adeptus.
4, The 23d degree of the Chapter of Emperors of the East and
West of Clermont.

Avert, L’. (See Chaos.) The 4th degree in the Hermetic Rite,
and of the Lax-observance.

ADEPT MERCHANT OF LuEBECK. (See Kosicrucians, Eminent.)

ADEPTE MopDERNE L’, ov LE VRAI SECRET DES Franc Macons.—A
mystical romance published in London in the last century, treating
of Alchymy and the Rosicrucians. The author says, after Behmen,
that the secret of the Philosopher's Stone was communicated by
Adam to his children, and that it was thus the patriarchs lived
to such enormous ages. Noah, however, only instructed one of
his sons in the art, and hence arose a body of men called Sages.
Eeypt first, and then Judea, were the countries in which this
wisdom was perpetuated; and in Palestine they pursued their
teachings under the veil of the construction of a Temple, and
are now the modern Freemasons.

Apnuc sTaT—It stands yet. A Latin motto, often found on
Masonic medallions.

ADJOURNMENT.—It is unlawful to adjourn a Masonic Lodge ; but the
Master has a right to suspend its labours, by directing the proper
officer to call off for refreshment, and subsequently, by resuming
the work, the Lodge can be properly closed. The Master of a
Lodge has necessarily many arbitrary powers, and it is right he
should have them, as he is personally responsible to the Grand
Lodge for the proper behaviour of the brethren he governs.

ADMIRATION, SIGN Or—Employed in the Most Excellent Master’s
degree, the 6th of the new American rite. It refers to the legend
of the visit of Balkis, Queen of Sheba, to Solomon.

ADMISsIon.—Peculiar qualifications are requisite on the part of
those who seek admission into the Masonic Fraternity. The
candidate must be free born; that is, a free man, under no

18

ADO | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [ ADO

bondage, of at least twenty-one years of age, in the possession
of his sound senses, free from any physical defect or dismem-
berment, of irreproachable manners, and able to read and write.
No idiot, atheist, or woman can be admitted. The objects of
these various restrictions can easily be understood. The son of a
Freemason, technically called a Lewis, has the right of being
initiated, subject to similar conditions, and the ballot of the Lodge,
at the age of eighteen, a dispensation having been obtained, before
any other candidate, whatever may be his rank. If a candidate
be rejected on a ballot in any Lodge, he cannot be proposed any-
where for initiation until three calendar months have elapsed.
In England, not more than five initiates (except by dispensation
of the Grand Master) can be received on one evening or occasion ;
nor can more than one degree be given at the same time, nor at
any shorter interval than twenty-eight clear days. In Scotland,
there is no restriction as to the numbers admitted, and the age
of qualification is eighteen.

ADOLESCENT, THE.—First degree of the Order of the German Union,
known as the Twenty-two.

Aponal—1l. The Jews are said to have substituted the epithet
Adonai, ‘s78, commonly rendered in English, Zord, for the un-
pronounceable name Jehovah or Jahve, nim; this may, however,
admit of some doubt. St Jerome, and after him Bellarmin,
questioned the fact, as Jehovah and Adonai were two several
names of God, and equally legitimate; and in some instances
were even used in conjunction, as Jehovah Adonai, and the
Septuagint translate it by Kugmws. It should be remembered that
Adonai is the old plural form of the word y118, Adon. 2. Adonai
is also used in the ceremonies of the Hermetic system. (But
see also under Jehovah.) 38. Adonai is used in the 11th, 12th,
and 28th degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

ADONHIRAM. (See Adontram.)

AvonIrAM.—Although this is given as the proper name of the
principal treasurer of King Solomon, and the chief overseer of
the 30,000 brethren sent to fell the timber in the forests of
Lebanon, it is clear from the meaning of the name, which is
High Lord, that it must have been an official title. (1 Kings
iv. 6.) Masonic tradition informs us, that, to ensure the utmost
regularity among the workmen, this personage divided them
into Lodges, placing three hundred in each, under a Master and
Warden, himself being Grand Master over all. Was, however,
this Adoniram not rather Hiram, King of Tyre, who specially
had the supply of the wood from the forests? As Hiram, the
artificer, was principally engaged in the castings on the plains of

19

ADO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ADO

Zaredatha, and there were only three Grand Masters at the
building of the First Temple, this would seem a likely division
of their functions, King Solomon remaining at Jerusalem, in the
exercise of regal authority and final supervision. This Adoniram,
who is also said to have married a sister of Hiram, the builder,
was also constituted by the King one of the Seven Superin-
tendents, and Chief of the Provosts and Judges. He is intro-
duced in the degrees of Secret and Perfect Master and Intendant
of the Building, in the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, and
in the degree of Royal Master.

ADONIRAMITE Masonry (Magonnérie Adonhiramite)—Among many
other innovating Masonic societies in the latter half of the
eighteenth century, we find this especial rite established. From
a small work in French, published at “ Heliopolis,” in 1787,
which professes to account for the mysteries of antiquity, and is
entitled “Originie de la Magonnerie Adonhiramite,” it would
seem to have been pretty firmly established by that time. The
degrees were twelve:—(1) Entered Apprentice; (2) Fellow
Craft; (8) Master Mason; (4) Perfect Master; (5) Elect of
Nine; (6) Elect of Perignan; (7) Minor Architect, or Scottish
Apprentice; (8) Grand Architect, or Scottish Fellow Craft;
(9) Scottish Master; (10) Knight of the East; (11) Knight of
Rose-Croix ; (12) Prussian Knight. Of these degrees, the
6°, 7°, 8°, and 9° are peculiar to this rite, the others re-
sembling in main features the Ancient and Accepted Scottish

tite. The title of the Order is taken from the name of Adoniram,
respecting whom see the special article on him; he was said to
have taken charge of the works at the First Temple, at a crisis
in the history of the structure. Many of the legends of the
high degrees refer to this individual, but, for archeological
reasons, we are disposed to reject them.

Apvonis, MYSTERIES OF. (See Zammuz.)

AporTion, Ritz or.—In some countries, and especially in France,
a Rite of Adoption has been for many years in use, whereby the
son of a Master Mason is formally admitted within the pale of
Masonic influence; and the brethren of his father’s Lodge, in
testimony of their fraternal regard, undertake certain responsi-
bilities connected with the child’s wellbeing. This rite is
beautiful for its simplicity: a name is formally given to the
infant, and it is regarded as the adopted child of the Lodge.
The technical term for a Mason’s son is, in England and America,
Lewis or Lufton (French, louvetean). The peculiar strictness
exercised in the admission of candidates, which it would be wise
to imitate here, renders these responsibilities of a very binding
nature: by them a certain surveillance is maintained over the

20

ADO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ADO

conduct, and moral and social fitness, of the adopted Lewis; and
his subsequent Masonic career is materially strengthened by the
counsel afforded him by his seniors.

ADOPTIVE Masonry.—Although the laws of Freemasonry ordain
that no woman can become a Freemason, several attempts have
been made to give women a status of some kind in relation to
Masonry. The results of this procedure have not hitherto been
worthy of much notice in a truly broad sense. In France,
where androgynous Masonry was first introduced, it was made
either an excuse for sensuality and good living, or employed
as an astute means of political control. In England, the ad-
vocates for female Masonry may be counted on the fingers
of the hand. And in America, where, in the lone backwoods,
amidst a sparse population, the number of adopted Masons’
wives, daughters, and widows are but few, it might be thought
that a means of recognition between Masons and unprotected
women would be most fitting; but very little favour have such
combinations received. Perhaps the logical female mind re-
quires greater mathematical demonstration than that of the
social male ; nor has the necessary mystery in which Freemasonry
is enshrouded made the ladies apt pupils, or even ready re-
cipients, of the diluted wonders vouchsafed to them. For this
reason, societies of this kind have ever enjoyed only a brilliant
and evanescent existenee; and, however distinguished the pre-
sumed female initiates, the organization has lasted but for a
brief time. Such Lodges as were established in France at the
latter end of the last and the beginning of the present century,
have, in all cases, collapsed; and the condition of the Order of
the Eastern Star, specially created for the admission of women,
whatever its peculiar merits (see Hastern Star, Order of), is not
reassuring on this point. To a certain extent, the Freemasons of
the eighteenth century formed Lodges to which ladies might be
admitted, in self defence, as various androgynous institutions
had been set on foot without the pale of Masonry. The Grand
Orient of France established, therefore, a new rite in 1774, called
the “ Rite of Adoption,” under its own control. Regular Free-
masons alone, of the men, were admitted; and each Lodge was
warranted by some regularly constituted Masonic Lodge, whose
Master or representative should direct the proceedings in all
cases, assisted by a female President or Mistress. The first of
these Adoptive Lodges was that of St Anthony, in 1775, in
which the Duchess de Bourbon presided; she was also installed
as Grand Mistress of the Adoptive Rite. This rite consisted of
four degrees :—(1) Apprentice; (2) Companion; (3) Mistress ;
and (4) Perfect Mistress. The first degree was purely symbolical

21

ADO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ADO

and introductory, intended rather to impress the mind than to
convey any very definite idea of the institution. The second
degree depicted the scene of temptation in Eden, and the un-
fortunate companion was reminded in the lecture of the penalty
incurred by the Fall. The third degree sarcastically alluded to
the Tower of Babel and the Confusion of Tongues as a symbol
of a badly regulated Lodge, while Jacob’s Ladder was introduced
as a moral lesson of order and harmony. The fourth degree,
that of Perfect Mistress, represented Moses, Aaron, their wives,
and the sons of Aaron; the ceremonies referred to the Passage
of the Red Sea by the Israelites; and thus symbolized the passage
of man from the world of change and discord, to a happier land
of rest and peace. The modern character of such a rite, and its
puerility, cannot but raise a smile on the cheek of every real
brother of the Fraternity. The officers consisted of a Grand Master
and Grand Mistress and Orator, an Inspector and Inspectrix
(Senior Warden), a Depositor and a Depositrix (Junior Warden),
a Conductor and a Conductress (Deacons). The sash and collar
were blue, with a gold trowel suspended therefrom. The Grand
Master and other officers were provided with gavels, and each
member was clothed with a plain white apron and white gloves.
The brethren, in addition to their proper insignia, wore swords
and a gold ladder of five rounds, the jewel of Adoptive Masonry.
The business of the Lodge was conducted by the Sisterhood, the
brethren being regarded as adjoints or assistants. The various
degrees demanded different decorative hangings ; in the first, four
curtains divided the room into four sections, representing Europe
(W.), Asia (E.), Africa (8.), and America (N.), Two thrones were
erected in the east for the Grand Master and Grand Mistress;
before them was placed an altar, and to the right and left were
eight statues, representing Wisdom, Prudence, Strength, Temper-
ance, Honour, Charity, Justice, and Truth. The members sat in
two rows to the right and left—the brethren behind, and the
sisters in front—the brethren being armed with swords. A
banquet and a ball usually terminated the meetings of these
androgynous Lodges. As Clavel says: “The preliminary cere-
monies are but the formal prelude to these latter all-important
objects, much as in modern English Masonry the ceremonies are
the excuse for the eating and drinking, which is the real business,
when toasts and mutual compliments become the order of the
night.” Adoptive Masonry was seized by the comprehensive
mind of the first Napoleon as a means of consolidating his
power; and, in 1805, the unfortunate Empress Josephine was
installed Grand Mistress of the “ Loge Impériale d’Adoption des
Francs Chevaliers.” In a modified manner, this Adoptive Rite
22

ADO] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ADV

still exists, but has been rejected with a contempt almost
amounting to indignation in the Lodges of England, Scotland,
Ireland, and the Colonies. The Antient and Primitive Rite
possesses power to confer these degrees, but has never encouraged
them. (But see Hastern Star for an account of the American
Rite, as yet unsuccessful in this country. For Adoptive Masonry,
Egyptian, see Lgyptian Masonry.)

ADORAM.—The abbreviated name of Adoniram, treasurer of David,
King of Israel (2 Sam. xx. 24), and subsequently of Solomon
and Rehoboam, under whose reign he was stoned to death by
the people, for injustice in the collection of the taxes (1 Kings
xii. 18.) (But see Adoniram as to the identity of the Adon-
hiram placed over the 30,000 workmen at Mount Lebanon.)

ADORATEURS, CULTE DES.—A. philosophical sect in the time of the
French Revolution. A small volume descriptive of its principles
was published in Year IV. (1795) of the Republic.

ADORATION.—There is no portion of the Masonic ceremonies so
grand and touching as that in which the Worshipful Master
calls upon the members of the Lodge to join in a common sup-
plication to the Supreme Grand Master in heaven. Every true
Mason at such times must really feel the sacredness of the
occasion; that immediate relation which the unit, man, then
enters into with the infinite, God, is chastening in the extreme,
and comforting to the weary mind, perplexed by the daily cares
of the outward material world. At such a time, also, the know-
ledge that the beautiful and simple invocations of our Fraternity
are offered up to the Throne of Mercy and Fountain of Wisdom
in common, affords a holy calm to the mind of each brother, and
is in itself a guarantee, if such be required, for the stability of
the system of Freemasonry.

ADVANCED.—This term is used when a Master Mason is admitted
and invested a Mark Master. The Mark degree holds an inter-
mediary position between the Craft Master's degree and the
Royal Arch, as at present practised. Many eminent Masons
consider the degree to be properly a portion of the Fellow Craft
degree, in allusion to certain expressions used by the Senior
Warden in open Lodge. The Mark degree is divided into two
sections in some countries, that of Mark Man and Mark Master.
The former degree is not now generally given in England,
although instances are given of it. Brother “Hughan has given
an instance of Mark Man being given to a Fellow Craft, and.
Mark Master only to Master Masons, as early as 1778. That it
is as genuine as the rest of Craft Masonry cannot be doubted,
especially when the ceremonies of the Holy Royal Arch are
taken into consideration, these being open to considerable doubt.

23

ADV | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [AFF

ADVANCEMENT, HurRIED.—It is unlawful, according to the English
Rite, to advance any brother to a superior degree, without
the lapse of at least twenty-eight full days having taken
place. The custom which prevails in Scotland is highly repre-
hensible. In the degree of the Holy Royal Arch, a year must
elapse, and in the higher degrees a still further period. In
Germany the degrees are very sparingly given, and consequently
German Masons are usually better informed as to their duties.
It is absurd to initiate an outsider, and congratulate him on his
progress an hour or so after.

ApytuM—That which is inaccessible or impenetrable ; it is a word
descriptive of the holy of holies in the temple of Jerusalem, and
of all other temples of ancient worship. Adyta existed in all
temples in Egypt, and usually consisted of three blocks or pillars,
answering to those of Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty; also re-
presenting the mysterious Triad of the Deity. In the Druidical
mysteries the adytum was specially sacred, and in Britain the
Adytum, or Lodge, was actually supported by three stones or
pillars, by passing under which the aspirant was supposed to
obtain for himself regeneration. In the Hindu system the
arrangement was the same, the names the same, and three
human heads crowned the pillars. In the more esoteric rites
of Masonry, the adytum is considered to be the heart and con-
science of a man, always to be held inviolable, and that
sacred solitude in which he can commune with the Shekinah ;
which if any man behold he shall surely die. Three ideas enter
into the Divine Word; three form the adytum; three officers
tule a Lodge.

AENEID.—It has been contended by Bishop Warburton, and others
since his time, that Virgil, in his sixth book, described under the
figure of the descent of Atneas into the lower world, an initiation
into the mysteries, Although it may be partly true, when we
recollect the fact of the banishment of Ovid for a presumed
breach of discretion, it can hardly be maintained as a whole.
In times more remote, Aischylus was imperilled on a similar
charge.

Hon (Greek, afwy)—1. The age or duration of anything. 2. In
the Gnostic doctrine, the sublime rays, natures, or emanations
from the Abyss of Deity.

AFFILIATE, Free—The French term for “ honorary member.”

AFFILIATED.—A_ Mason belonging to some regular Lodge ; one who
has retired from active participation in the labours of Free-
masonry is said to be “ non-affiliated ;” this position, however,
does not relax his fealty to the Craft at large, or exempt him from
censure for non-Masonic offences by the Grand Lodge whence

24

AFF | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [AFR

his certificate has been derived. A Mason may at any time
resume active work, upon being balloted for in a regular Lodge,
and is again entitled to Masonic privileges. While non-
affiliated, he cannot visit Masonic Lodges, in his own district,
more than once, without again joining some Lodge of his own
rite. It is important that this rule should be enforced, as
its evasion is prejudicial to the rights of his brethren who
continue their pecuniary contributions and personal exertions.
(See Dimit.)

AFFILIATION.—The act by which a Lodge receives a Mason among
its members. A Mason may belong to more than one Lodge if
he choose. A cowan, or profane, is initiated, whereas a Mason is
affiliated ; there is no ceremony on the occasion. In America,
candidates are usually initiated in the Lodge nearest their places
of habitation ; but in other parts of the world it is notso. Many
distinguished Masons are honorary members of Lodges at great
distances from their homes.

AFFIRMATION.—In the case of Quakers seeking admission into the
Order, an affirmation is received in the same light as an oath
taken by a Mohammedan on the Kéran, or any attestation
regarded as binding on the conscience of any religionist.

Arrica.—In the French rite of Adoption, the South is called Africa.

AFRICAN ARCHITECTS OR Master BuILpERS.—Between 1756 and
1767, a society was instituted under the patronage of Frederick IT.
of Prussia, by Baucheren, under the name of the Order of African
Architects. The objects of the society were chiefly historical,
but its ritual was a compound of Masonry, Christianity, Alchymy,
and Chivalry. ‘The last remaining Chapter was that of Con-
stantinople, which meant Berlin. One of its claims was, that
“when the architects were by wars reduced to a very small
number, they determined to travel together into Europe, and
there to form together new establishments. Many of them came
to England with Prince Edward, son of Henry III., and were
shortly afterwards called into Scotland by Lord Stewart. They
received the protection of King Ing of Sweden, in 1125; of
Richard Cceur-de-Lion, King of England, in 1190; and of Alex-
ander IIT. of Scotland, in 1284.” The society ceased to exist in
1786. The rite was divided into two temples, and consisted of
eleven degrees. The first temple comprehended the three first
Craft degrees. In the second temple the degrees were—4. Ap-
prentice of Egyptian Secrets (Menes Muse); 5. Initiate in the
Egyptian Secrets ; 6. Cosmopolitan Brother; 7. Christian Philo-
sopher; 8. Master of Egyptian Secrets; 9. Esquire; 10. Soldier ;
11. Knight. The three last degrees conferred offices for life.
They possessed a large building for the meetings of the Grand

2§

AFR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [AGA

Chapter, containing a library, a museum, and a chemical labo-
ratory. For many years they gave an annual gold medal of fifty
ducats for the best essay on the History of Masonry.

AFRICAN BRoTHER.—One of the degrees of the Clerks of the Strict
Observance.

Arrican Lopces. (See Negro Lodges.)

AGAPE.—Love Feast. Banquet of charity among the primitive
Christians, perpetuated from the earliest mysteries. The
communion of the mass; hence our word for a common
meal, mess. The Saxons discussed weighty matters over a
common meal or mass. St Chrysostom refers to these meals
as of usual occurrence; the victuals being supplied by the
rich, and the poor taking a common part in them, as among
the modern Sandemanians. The meetings were secret. Professor
A. Kestner, of the faculty of theology at Jena, published in
1819 a book entitled, “The Agape, or the Secret World
Society (Weltbund) of the Primitive Christiaus,” a society
apart from their religious organization, “founded by Clemens
at Rome, in the reign of Domitian, having a hierarchical
constitution, and a groundwork of Masonic symbolism and
mysteries.” In this work he attempts to establish a direct con-
nection between the Agape and the Table Lodges of the Free-
masons. Lessing refers largely to this subject in his “ Ernst und
Falk.” (See my translation of, and commentary upon, “ Ernst
und Falk,” in the Freemason (London) paper, from March to
June, 1872.)

AGATE.—The agate, in Hebrew 12v, SHeBO, was the centre stone
of the third row in the High Priest’s breast-plate, and dedicated
to Naphthali. It is a kind of flint. The agate has always been
regarded as a mystical stone; indeed, it is asserted that the stone
of foundation was the agate or of porphyry. The obvious con-
nection between the architect, the stone, and the name of the
tribe, should not be neglected. Agate has been held to be the
symbol of strength and beauty. Its especial month is June; in
the material world, it signities long life and health; in the
spiritual world, immortality.

AGATHOPADES, THE ORDER OF.—Founded in Brussels in the fifteenth
or sixteenth centuries, as a medium between the fanaticism of
the Roman Catholics and Protestants. Many eminent persons
were members of this order. Among them were the Prince of
Epinoi, the Duke de Bournonville, Marshal Moritz of Saxony,
Peter Paul Rubens, and Voltaire. This fraternity expired in
1837, with the Advocate Pins, who had, a few months before
his death, initiated his friend Schayes, by whom the order was
Bove as the New Agathopades, on the 29th September, 1846.

2

AGE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [AHI

The chief of the society is called the Hog, and all the members
are called by the name of some wild beast. Motto: Amis
comme Cochons ; and the Pentastigma (-:-) is the. holy sign of
recognition.

Acr.—In the French, Scottish, Spanish, Italian, and some other
rites, each degree has an emblematic age. Three is that of the
Entered Apprentice, because in the system of mystical numbers
it is the number of generation, comprising three terms—the
agent, the recipient, and the product. Five is that of the Fellow
Craft, as being emblematic of active life and the five senses.
Seven is the age of the Master Mason, in allusion to the seven
primitive planets of the solar system; a Petit Architect is 21; a
Grand Architect, 28; a Knight of the East is 70; a Prince of
Jerusalem is 5x 15='75; a Secret Master, 2 Maitre Ecossais,
and a Prince of Mercy, is 81; and a Scottish Knight, 500 years.
It was for this last reason that the Count St Germain asserted
that he was five hundred years of age.

AGE FOR ADMIssion.—In England, 21 (except in the case of a
Lewis, when it is 18 by dispensation); Frankfort-on-Maine, 20;
Switzerland, 21; the Hanover Grand Lodge demanded 25;
Prussia, 25; Hamburg, according to the nationality of the can-
didate and the laws regulating the same; France, 21 (or 18 in
the case of a young man who has borne arms for six months, or
whose father may have performed some important Masonic
service) ; in America, 21 without exception.

AGENDA.—Things to be done. In Masonry, small books of precept
and practice.

AGLA.—One of the twelve Kabbalistic names of God. It is derived
from Atah Gibor Loham Adonai, “Thou art mighty for ever,
O Lord!” The others were Ehje, Jehovah, Elohim, El, Gibbor,
Eloah, Sabaoth, Isebaoth, Schaddai, Adonai, and Makom. In
the last century these four letters, #2>x, in the Hebrew character,
were sometimes inscribed on the floorcloth of the Lodge.

AGNosTus, IRENAUS.—Regarded as the assumed name of Gotthardt
Arthusius, who published several works en Rosicrucianism, be-
tween 1617 and 1620. (See Arthusius.)

AGnus Drt—Lamb of God. The name of an amulet, and also of
the seal of the old Order of Knights Templar, and of the jewel of
the Generalissimo.

AGrippa, Henry CorNELIuS. (See Nettesheim, Von.)

AHABATH OLAM.—Hebrew for eternal love; the name of a Jewish
prayer distributed over the Roman empire during thetimeof Christ.

AHIAH, or ACHIAH (see 1 Kings iv. 3).—Scribe, together with Eli-
choreph, to Solomon. The Wardens in the 7th degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite.

27

AHI | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ALB

AHIMAN Rezon.—The title of the Book of Constitutions used by
the “ Ancient” Masons who separated in 1739 from the Grand
Lodge of England. Laurence Dermott, in 1772, at that time
Deputy Grand Master, compiled the “True Ahiman Rezon.”
The title is derived from the Hebrew, and signifies “the law
of chosen brothers,” from ahim, brothers; manah, to choose; and
ratzon, “the will or law.” (See Book of Constitutions.)

AHISAR. (See Achishar.)

AHOLIAB.—An architect of the tribe of Dan, appointed with Beza-
leel to construct the Tabernacle. Moses, Aholiab, and Bezaleel,
in some versions of the Royal Arch degree, are placed in juxta-
position with Shem, Ham, and Japhet, the ark builders; and
with Zerubbabel, Haggai, and Jeshua (or Joshua), the builders
of the Second Temple. This is, however, purely fanciful.

AHRIMANES.—The evil principle in the Persian system. (But
see Zoroaster.)

AICHMALOTARCH.—tThe title of the Prince of Captivity, or represen-
tative of the Kings of Israel at Babylon. (See Prince of the
Captivity.)

Axrrop.—The name of an assassin at the building of King Solo-
mon’s Temple. (See Abiram.) Perhaps from 3237p, karab, to
join battle.

ALABAMA—Masonry was introduced into this State of the Union
at the beginning of the present century, but the Grand Chapter
was not instituted until June, 1827; a Grand Commandery was
established in October, 1860.

ALAIN OF Liste. (See Rosteructans, Eminent.)

ALAPA.—When a Roman master manumitted his slave, he did it by
a blow, which was thus called. In the middle ages, the same
word was applied to the blow given to a newly created knight
by the Sovereign—as a reminder that it was the last blow he was
to receive without resenting it. (See Accolade.)

AtARM.—The signal of the approach of a person demanding admis-
sion to the Lodge.

ALASKA.—Masonry was introduced by dispensation into Alaska, at
Sitka, April 14, 1868, by Brother James Biles, Grand Master of
Washington Territory, and a warrant was granted by the Grand
Lodge of Washington Territory, September 17, 1869.

ALBAN, St. (See Saint Alban.)

ALBERTUS MaGnus.—Scholastic philosopher and architect, by some
reputed a magician,—born at Lauingen in Swabia, 1205, of noble
family, sub-title being Count of Bollstadt; he entered the
Dominican Order in 1223, and in 1260 became Bishop of
Ratisbon, but resigned that see in 1262, and, returning to
coleens, devoted himself to philosophy, and died 1280. The chief

2

ALB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ALE

reason for naming him in a Masonic work is, that he has been
regarded the founder of Teuto-Gothic architecture. His works
were published at Lyons in 1651, in twenty-one folio volumes.
He revived the symbolic language of the ancients; and the
Masons accepted his recommendations, and used his syste
of symbolism. That he was secretly affiliated to the occult
fraternities of the time seems certain ; it is said that he gave the
operative Masons a new set of laws.

ALBRECHT, HEINRICH CHRISTOFF, a German, author of a book pub-
lished at Hamburg, 1792, entitled “ Materialen zu einer kritischen
Geschichte der Freimaureret.” The first part only was completed.
He also wrote the “ Secret History of a Rosicrucian,” and other
works. He considered the Society of Freemasons to have origi-
nated with the Stein-metzen of Strasburg.

ALCANTARA, MILITARY ORDER OF. (See Pear T'rec, Order of St
Julian of the.)

AucHymy. (See Hermetic Philosophy.)

Aucoran, (See Kordn, The.)

ALDALS.— A fanatic Persian sect who, like the Malays, run-a-muck,
and kill others of a different faith ; if any of themselves should
be killed, they are regarded as martyrs.

ALpwortH, THE Hon. Mrs.—This is one of the rare exceptions to
the rule, that ladies cannot be made Freemasons. She received,
from necessity, the first and second decrees at Doneraile, Ireland,
in Lodge 44, about 1735. It was obviously impossible to admit
her to the third degree, so that the statements made on the
subject are inadmissible. The circumstances are romantic, and
highly coloured; but she was in great peril had she not con-
sented to undergo the then very severe trials demanded from
candidates. It is to be presumed that her presence, concealed
in a closet or clock case, was entirely inadvertent. She, how-
ever, remained true to her obligations, and was a sincere friend
to the Craft up to the time of her death. She was born the
Hon. Miss Elizabeth St Leger, about 1713, and was the youngest
child and only daughter of the first Viscount Doneraile, and
during the whole of her long life she was a pattern of benevolent
virtue. Subsequently to her initiation she married Richard
Aldworth, Esq. of Newmarket, county Cork.

ALETHOPHILE— Lover of Truth. Fifth degree of the Order of
African Architects.

ALEXANDER I.—Emperor of Russia, succeeded Paul I. in 1801, and
renewed Paul’s prohibitions against Freemasonry and other
secret societies. In 1803, the counsellor of state, Boeber, had an
audience of the emperor, and made him acquainted with the real
objects of the Fraternity. The emperor thereupon expressed a

29

ALF | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ALL

wish to be initiated, but Boeber told him it was impossible with-
out sanction and compliance with the usual rites. A meeting of
Masons took place, and the emperor was duly initiated, and the
Grand Lodge of Astrea was the result, of which Brother Boeber
was elected Master. Masonry does not, however, directly flourish
in that country; and since then, in common with all the dis-
sident sects, has been placed under a sort of ban. (See, however,
Ishmael, Order of.)

ALFADIR.—The chief divinity of the Scandinavians. There were
twelve names assigned to him in Asgard, the divine abode, the
first of which was Alfadir, or Universal Father.

ALFARABI (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

ALGABIL—A name of God, signifying the Builder, equivalent to
TG: A: 0-7. 0;

ALLAH.—The Arabic name of God. The Koran thus describes his
character and attributes :—“ He alone is self-existent; He has
no rival; is from everlasting to everlasting; fills the universe
with his presence; is the centre in which all things unite ;
Almighty, All-wise, All-merciful, Tenderhearted ; and his de-
crees are unchangeable because forethought.”

ALLI ALLAHIS—A Persian secret society, derived by tradition from
the ancient Magi, their ceremonies presenting considerable ana-
logy to those of the Freemasons, and modern Bekton Der-
vishes. Their antiquity is very great, as they are described
by Herodotus (i. 132) in his account of the ceremonials of
the Persians. The modern sect or fraternity repairing to some
secluded place, sacrifice a sheep or an ox in the open air,
while a priest, or peer, chants a hymn in praise of the God-
head. The flesh of the victim is boiled on the spot, and is
then distributed by the peer among the attendant disciples, who
creep up on their hands and knees towards the fire to receive
their portion. A blessing and prayer is pronounced during the
repast. To these festivals the initiated alone are admitted ; and
should strangers (cowans) or Mohammedans approach the com-
pany, the lights used during the ceremony are immediately ex-
tinguished. From this circumstance they have received the
name of Cherayh-Kushan, or Lamp Extinguishers. Little is
known of the nature of the ceremonies; but the peer carries
with him sprigs of myrtle and muskwillow. In Herodotus, the
god is stated to be placed on a bed of grass, and trefoil—a plant
always associated with occult mysteries; strangely enough, the
Trish name of shamrock for the trefoil is, in Arabic, shamrackh.
On entering the fraternity or order, the novitiate breaks a nut-
meg with the peer (the Spiritual Teacher or Worshipful Master),
by way of a solemn obligation. That half retained by the novi-

30

ALL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedza. [ALM

tiate he carries about him. He is now called sir supurdeh,
“ He who has given over his head,” and he is bound to constant
and implicit obedience. His period of probation lasts for years,
and is never under three. At the expiration of the time he is
admitted to a meeting of the society; he then resigns his half of
the nutmeg, partakes of the sacrifice, and assumes his place in
the ranks of the initiated. It is not clear whether these cere-
monies are wholly religious, or whether some social or political
duties ave now connected with them; but they are evidently
Mithraic in origin.

ALLocuTION.—The address of the presiding officer of a Supreme
Council of the Ancient and Accepted Rite is thus designated.
It is derived from the usage of the Roman Catholic Church, in
which the pope’s addresses to his cardinals are technically so
called. The speeches of the generals, in ancient and Roman
times, to the soldiers, were denominated allocutions.

ALLOWED.—A term now obsolete, but used in the old MS. con-
stitutions in the sense of accepted or approved.

ALL-SEEING Eye.—An emblem in the degree of Master Mason,
reminding us of the superintending Providence perceiving the
most secret things. As Pliny says, Deus totus visus—God is all
eyes. The eye was also the symbol of Osiris, and in the hiero-
glyphic form of his name, appears in conjunction with the throne,
and is to be read Hes-iri. The eternal watchfulness of T. G. A. O.
T. U. is beautifully typified in the following passage from the
Book of the Conversation of God with Moses on Mount Sinai :—
“Then Moses said unto the Lord, O Lord, dost Thou sleep or not ?
The Lord said unto Moses, I never sleep: but take a cup and fill
it with water. Then Moses took a cup and filled it with water,
as the Lord commanded him. Then the Lord cast into the heart
of Moses the breath of slumber ; so he slept, and the cup fell
from his hand, and the water which was therein was spilled.
Then Moses awoke from his sleep. Then said God unto Moses,
I declare by my power and by my glory, that if I were to with-
draw my providence from the heavens and the earth, for no
longer a space of time than thou has slept, they would at once
fall to ruin and confusion, like as the cup fell from thy hands.”
(See also the expressions in Proverbs xv. 3, 11.)

Att Souts’ Day.—The second of November, a feast-day in the
Rose-Croix.

ALMANSOR.—A Saracen prince. (See Rosterucians, Eminent.)

Atmicuty. (See £1 Shaddaz.)

ALMoDOvAR.—A young Spaniard, burnt to death at Seville, in Spain,
in the last century, by the Holy Inquisition, for the crime of

being a Freemason.
3t

ALM | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [ALP

ALMOND TREE.—The tree of which Aaron’s rod which budded was
a branch. The flowers were pure white. Referred to in the
third degree. (Eccles. xii. 5.)

ALMoNER.—An officer formerly existing in religious and monastic
orders ; it is also a dignity in the degree of Knights Templar, as
in some other chivalric orders.

ALOADIN.—Prince of the Assassins or Arsacides, commonly called
the Old Man of the Mowntain—the sheikh of a Syrian tribe,
professing the Mohammedan faith. (See Assassin.)

Au-om-JAH.—Tri-syllabic name of God, from 5x, Al or El; Aum,
Hindoo; and 7, Jah of the Syrians.

ALOYAU, SocieTE DE L’.—The Society of the Loin. A Masonic
institution in France, which ceased at the Revolution.

ALPHA AND OmeGa.—The first and last letters of the Greek alpha-
bet, equivalent to the beginning and end of anything. The Jews
used Aleph and Tau in a figurative sense, to express the whole
compass of things; as when they said, “ Adam transgressed the
whole law, from Aleph to Tau.” The author of the Apocalypse
substituted the Greek letters for the Hebrew (xxii. 13.)

ALPHABET, HEBREW.—As so many Hebrew words occur in Masonry,
it may be convenient to give the entire Hebrew alphabet, toge-
ther with the significations and numerical values in full :-—

Hebrew. Signification. Character. Equivalent. Number. Greek.
Aleph, . . Ox, 8 A. 1 A.
Beth,. . . House, 2 B. 2 B.
Gime], . . Camel, P] G. 3 ly
Daleth, . . Door, . 7 YD. 4 A.
He, . . . Window, . Pai H. 5 E
Vau,. . . Hook,. 1 Y. O. 6 F. Bev.
Zain,. . . Sword, ; Z. 7 Z.
Cheth, . . Fence,. tT Ch. 8 H.
Teth,. . . Snake,. 12) T. 9 ©.
Jod, . . . Hand,. ’ J. Y. 10 I
Caph,. . . Hand bent, > C.K. 20 k.
Lamed, . . Ox Goad, . 5 L. 30 A.
Mem,. . . Water, ra) M. 40 M.
Nun,. . . Fish, . a a N. 50 N.
Samech, . . Prop, . D s. 60 Siype.
Ain, . . . Eye, . YD NY, guttural. 70 O.
Pe, . . . Mouth, 5 P. 80 IL
Tzaddi, . . Fish Hook, x Tz. 90
Koph, . . Baad, p Q. K. 100 Kéwwa.
Resh, . < * Head, . a] R. 200 PR

32

ALP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ALT

Hebrew. Signification. Character. Equivalent. Number. Greek,
Shin,. . . Tooth, wv Sh. 300 Sév.
Tau,. . . Cross,. n T. Th. 400 T.
Final Caph, I Cc. K. 500
Final Mem, ia) M. 600
Final Nun, ] N. 700
Final Pe,.  . 5 P. 800
Final Tzaddi, . Yr Tz. 900

ALPHABET oF ANGELS.—The Jews speak of a celestial and mystical
alphabet, communicated by the angels to the patriarchs. No
doubt that certain figures were traced in the heavens by the
early astronomers and astrologers. Several of these mystical
alphabets are in existence. The angelic alphabet is alluded to
in the 4th or Secret Master’s degree of the Ancient and Accepted
Rite. The ancient Phcenicians had a sacred alphabet formed
from the curves of serpents. (See also Hermetic Philosophy.)

ALPHABET, Masonic. (See Secret Writing.)

ALPHABET, SAMARITAN.—This alphabet varies in form from the
Hebrew, but not in power. It is but little used, and then
employed from a love of pedantry.

ALPHONSO.—King of Castille. (See Rosierucians, Eminent.)

ALPINA.—The Grand Lodge of Switzerland, established 22d of J une,
1844, by fourteen Lodges i in the various Cantons.

Aurar-—The place of sacred offerings—either as altars of sacrifice
or as altars of incense. Altars are common to all religions, and
are still in use, except in the Protestant faith, in which the com-
munion table has very properly been substituted. In an ordinary
English Craft Lodge, the altar is also called the pedestal, and is
placed immediately in front of the Master; on it lie the volume
of the Sacred Law, and the working tools of the degree in which
the Lodge is open. In America, the altar is situated in the centre
of the Lodge, in the form of a cube, three feet high, with four
horns, one at each corner, the open Bible, square and compass
being displayed, and the three lesser lights placed in proper
position around it. In some of the higher degrees, thirty-three
lights are placed upon the altar, then somewhat differently
situated; and the number of lights vary according to the degree,
as nine, twelve, fifteen, &c.

ALTAR, KNIGHTS OF THE. (See Knights of the Altar.)

ALTENBERG, CONGRESS OF. (See Johnson, Hund, and Strict Observ-
ance, Rite of)

ALTENBERG, LopGE aTt—One of the oldest Lodges in Germany,
established January 31, 1742, by a deputation of brethren from
Leipzig, known as “ Archimedes zu den drei Reissbrettern”

33

AMA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [AMB

(Archimedes at the Three Tracing Boards). It struck a medal
in 1804, and celebrated its centenary in 1842. In 1808, this
Lodge published a Book of Constitutions.

AMALTHEA,—The name of the horn of the Cretan goat ; the mytho-
logical horn of plenty, or cornucopia. The jewel of the Stewards
in a Master Mason’s Lodge.

AMARANTH.—Cock’s Comb, the celosia cristata of the botanists, from
#, privative, and papaivw, to wither—hence a symbol of immor-
tality ;—used in Sorrow Lodges.

AMARANTH, ORDER OF THE, OR IMMORTALS.—An Equestrian Order,
instituted by Queen Christina of Sweden, in 1653. Badge, two

AA interlaced KX in a laurel crown, surrounded by a label

bearing the motto, Dolce nella memoria. Ribbons, white and
crimson, shot or shaded blue. Jewel set with gold and diamonds.
Knights 15-in number ; ladies 15 in number; grandmistress, the
Queen—altogether 31. The Knights, if on investiture, still
bachelors, could not marry, and married Knights took an oath
not to marry a second time. Sir Bulstrode Whitelock, Crom-
well’s ambassador, was one of the first of this Order. The annual
festival was held at the Epiphany.

AMARANTHINE CiuB.—A society subsisting in Europe since the
French Revolution, numbering many thousand members; it is a
society of mutual succour, with forms of admission, and an oath.

AMAR-JAH.— An important word, implying God spake, used in the
high degrees. Used in the 11th and 32d degrees Ancient and
Accepted Rite. Hebrew, Ax.

AMAZONS, ORDER OF —A system of androgynous Masonry, which
for a time excited some interest in South America during the
last century. It was attempted to be introduced into the United
States in 1740, but did not answer.

AMBURVALIA.— Religious festivals of an agricultural character
among the Romans, celebrated at the latter end of May, consist-
ing of processions in the fields in honour of Ceres, with invoca-
tions of that goddess, in favour of an abundant harvest. Ceres
was always represented with ears of corn, and her place in the
Zodiac—that great mirror of ancient religious mystery—was in
the constellation, or rather, from the precession of the equinoxes,
sign, Virgo. The changes made from time to time in the objects
offered in sacrifice—as horses, rams, bulls, fishes, &c.—were, owing
to this precession, observed by the ancient Magi or astrologer
priests. The whole of the religions of the ancient world are
depicted upon the constellated astronomical globe, and the sin-

34

AME | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [AMP

gular adventures of the pagan gods are still to be read by a
comparison of the mythological poets, and the eternal volume
presented by the heavens.

AmeEN.—An ejaculatory phrase, as old as the first forms of Khemi-
worship, signifying either assent or hope, according to the prayer
of the petition. It only binds by private judgment.

AMENDMENT.—AIl amendments in bye-laws must be submitted for
approval to Grand Lodge. In voting, amendments are put first ;
and if lost, the original motion is put; if the amendment is
carried, then the question would be on the original motion as so
amended. This being lost, the whole question falls to the
ground,

AMENTHES or AMENTI.—The Egyptian Hades, or Place of Judgment
of the Dead; it was situated in the west, where Osiris was sup-
posed to be buried (Hes-iri—Eye and Throne). The forty-two
assessors of sin sate in judgment on the dead, and the osirified
person passed in turn before each of them. In Dr Birch’s trans-
lation of the Egyptian Scriptures, the Book of the Dead, this
passage is fully described. The west is the commencement and
end of the eternal circle, whence the Mason sets out, and whither
his steps are directed.

AMERICAN MysTERIES. (See Mexican Mysteries.)

AMERICAN Rite. (See Rite, American.)

AMETH. (See Emeth.)

Ameruyst (717978).—The ninth stone in the High Priest’s breast-
plate, and appropriated to the tribe of Gad. Its colour is deep
red, tinged with blue or dove colour.

AMICISTS, ORDER OF.—A secret order, established in the universities
of North Germany, first about 1793, and again in 1810. It
derived its origin from the College of Clermont, at Paris. It was
suppressed by the government.

Amis R&unis, LoGE DEs—Founded by Savalette des Langes (circd
1772), and the origin of the rite of Philalethes. It strove to
obtain for Masonry a philosophic character. (See Cagliostro.)

Ammon. (See Amun.)

AMMONITISH WaR. (See Ephraimites.)

AMOR HONORES JUSTITIA—Sometimes used as the motto of the
Grand Lodge prior to the union of 1813, and is so engraved on
the “Masonic Token,” issued in 1794, commemorative of the
election of H. R. H. the Prince of Wales as M. W. G. M.,
November 24, 1790.

AMPHIBOLUS.—The holy cloak brought by St Augustine to England.
By an amusing error, this article was converted into a saint, who
was supposed to have converted Saint Alban. In the British
Museum MS., these words allude to the tradition :—“ And sone

35

AMP The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ANC

after that came Seynt Adhabell into Englond, and he convertyd
Seynt Albon to Crestendome.”

AMPLE Form.—A. Grand Lodge is said to be opened in ample form
when the ceremony is performed by the Grand Master or Pro-
Grand Master; when it is done by the Deputy Grand Master, it
is said to be in due form; and when by any other officer, it is
said to be simply in form. In Provincial Grand Lodges, a Lodge
is opened in due form by thé Prov. G. M., and in form by any
other officer.

AmrRu.—A name given in some legends to one of the assassins:
Fanor was said to be a Syrian mason, Amru a Phoenician car-
penter, and Metusael a Hebrew quarryman.

AMSHASPANDS,—The six genii round the throne of Oromazes; the
six summer months; the six working properties of nature.

AMULET.—A piece of stone, metal, parchment, or other substance,
marked with peculiar figures, and worn, in faith, by individuals
as a protection against danger, for good fortune or other pur-
poses, The word is derived from the Arabic hamail, a locket,
anything hung from the neck. These are still common in the
Orient and the Occident, and were used by all the nations of
antiquity, and are even found among the remains of prehistoric
or savage mankind. The Basilideans introduced them into
Christianity, and the mystic word Abraxas (see Abraxas) was
engraven upon them. The Jews valued them highly, and the
Christians wore them in the form of a fish (176s), as a symbol of
Christ or Chrest. They are common in many societies, and in
Mark Masonry, such an amulet reappears as the Tyrian signet,
with the letters H.T.W.S.8.T.K.S. The totems of the Indians
and the heraldic insignia of other nations partook of this charac-
ter. In the ceremonies of theurgic and goetic magic all over the
world, they form an integral part. (See Mark, and Mark of the
Craft.

tice tie ram-headed God of the Egyptians; Jove of the Greeks ;
and Jahve of the Jews.

ANANIAH.—Said by Dr Oliver to have introduced the Order of
Mizraim from Egypt into Italy. Very doubtful even to the
Doctor. (See Mizraim, Rite of.)

ANCHOR AND ArK.—A manufactured degree of no validity. It was
not until the time of Cross, that the Anchor was ever introduced
as a pseudo-masonic symbol. The idea is in itself unobjec-
tionable.

ANcHOR, KNIGHTS AND LADIES OF THE. (See Félicité, Ordre de.)

ANCIENT AND ACCEPTED Rite. (See Scottish Rite.) It has been
placed under this head in order to enable the Fraternity to com-
pare for themselves the distinctions existing between the French

36

ANC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [AND

Ecossais system and the A. and A. R., or 33° of the Supreme
Grand Council of England and Wales.

ANCIENT AND PrimITIVE Rive. (See Antient and Primitive
Rite.)

ANCIENT Crarr Masonry.—The degrees of Entered Apprentice,
Fellow Craft, and Master Mason, have been thus called, as
they were the only degrees anciently practised by the Craft.
The Volume of the Sacred Law, however, gives indications of
other degrees at the time of the erection of the First Temple.

ANCIENT Masons. (See Modern Masons.)

ANCIENT OF Days.—Applied by Daniel to Jahve, in his visions, to
signify that his days were beyond numbering (Dan. vii. 9). It
is used by Webb in the Most Excellent Master’s Song—

Fulfilled is the promise
By the Ancient of Days,
To bring forth the cape-stone
With shouting and praise.
The Ancient of Days also appears as the Reverend Prince of the
Universe in the Book of Enoch, translated from the thiopic
by Laurence. In some sections of philosophical magic, this
becomes of great importance.

ANCIENT REFORMED Ritx.—A rite differing very slightly from the
French rite, practised in Belgium and Holland about 1783.

ANCIENT, THE.—The third degree of the German Union of Twenty-
two.

ANDERSON.—James Anderson, D.D., the original compiler of the
English Book of Constitutions, was born at Edinburgh, in Scot-
land, on the 5th of August, 1662, and was for many years minister
of the Scotch Presbyterian Church in Swallow Street, Regent
Street, London. The date of his initiation is unknown. He was
the author of several historical and genealogical works, but his
Masonic reputation will ever rest upon the work he performed
by order of the Grand Lodge at London, on the 29th September,
1721. He was directed to revise the old Gothic constitutions,
and his work was issued in 1723, under the title of “The Con-
stitutions of the Freemasons; containing the History, Charges,
Regulations, &c., of that Most Ancient and Right Worshipfui
Fraternity, for the use of the Lodges.” A second edition, revised,
was published in 1738. He died in the year 1739.

ANDRE, CuristorF Kary.—A worthy Mason, who resided at Briinu,
Austria, 1798. He wrote several numbers of a valuable work of
a cyclopsedic character.

ANDREA, JOHANN VALENTIN.—Born 17th August, 1586, at Herren-
berg, in Wiirtemburg. He died 27th June, 1654. He has been
usually supposed to have been the founder of the Rosicrucian

37

AND | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | ANN

Society; and he certainly was author of several works con-
nected with that body. He was a stout defender of Protestant
principles, and his main merit may be said to be based upon
his thorough advocacy of the right of private judgment. (See
Rosicructanism.)

Anprew, Day or St—The patron saint of Scotland has the 30th
of November sacred to him. It is the day on which the Scottish
Lodges, and others under their constitution, hold their annual
festival and elect their officers. The Grand Lodge of Scotland
was instituted on November 30, 1736.

ANDREW DEGREE, OR ANDREW’S Masonry.—lIntroduced into France
and Germany by the partisans of the Stewarts in 1736. In the
Swedish system, the fourth degree is formed by the “ Apprentice
of St Andrew” and the “Companions of St Andrew.” The
“Master of St Andrew” is the fifth degree. The ninth degree
consists of the “Favourite Brother of St Andrew” and the
“ Knight of the Purple Band.”

ANDREW, St.—Brother of Saint Peter, and one of the twelve
Apostles, The Russians, Swedes, and Scotch hold him in the
highest reverence. Tradition says he was crucified on a cross
thus shaped x. There are orders of knighthood and degrees
established in the above countries in honour of him.

ANDROGYNOoUS Masonry.—Degrees having Masonic attributes, in-
stituted for the initiation of males and females, so called from
the two Greek words signifying man and woman. (See Adoptive
Masonry.)

ANGELIC BRoTHERS (German, Hngels-Brider).—A system of mysti-
cal association inaugurated by Gichtel (obit 1710); it had a
similarity to the Rosicrucian system, but was formed with
vastly different objects.

ANGELS.— Messengers between God and man; they play a great
part in Biblical history, and are called Malachim. In some of
the high degrees, these beings are alluded to; they are not ex-
cluded in philosophical magic.

ANGERONA.—The Goddess of Silence. Both the Romans and the
Egyptians worshipped the gods and goddesses of silence. The
Latins especially worshipped Angerona and Tacitus, whose image
stood upon the altar of the goddess Volupia, with its mouth tied
up and sealed ; because they who endure their cares with silence
and patience, do by that means procure to themselves the
greatest pleasure. (See Harpocrates.)

ANGLE. (See Right Angle.)

ANGULAR Tr1aD.—The three principals of a Royal Arch Chapter,
according to Oliver.

ANNALES CHRONOLOGIQUES, Litéraires et Historiques de la Macon-

38

ANN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ANN

nerie de la Pays Bas, & dater de 1 Janvier, 1814, “Chrono-
Jogical, Literary, and Historical Annals of the Masons of the
Netherlands, from 1814.” Published by Bros. Melton and De
Mareny, at Brussels, from 1823-26, in 5 volumes, and con-
taining an enormous number of documents translated from
many languages.

ANNALES ORIGINIS MAGNI GALLIARUM ORIENTIS, ETC. (See Thory.)

ANNICHIARICO, Crro.—~A bandit chieftain, head of one of the insur-
rectionary bands of Southern Italy, and formerly a priest. The
history of this famous outlaw deserves notice here from his con-
nection with the Decisi. He was born at Grottaglie, of very
reputable parents, and joined the ecclesiastical profession at an
early age. Annichiarico began his career of crime by killing a
young man of the Motolesi family in a fit of jealousy, and he
continued his vendetta against the Motolesi through life, exter-
minating them all except one, who fortunately survived him.
He was condemned to fifteen years of chains or exile by the
tribunal of Lecce, and remained in prison four years, when he
effected his escape ina daring manner. For many years he lived
the life of a brigand and bravo, robbing and murdering on his
own hand, and at the bidding of others. When he was finally
condemned to death, as we shall presently see, Captain Montorj,
reporter of the military commission which condemned him,
asked him how many murders he had committed ; he carelessly
answered—* Li chi lo sa? saranno tra sessanta e settanta.” “Who
knows ?—some sixty or seventy!” His extraordinary address,
audacity, and skill, together with his activity, was the astonish-
ment of the country, and among the peasantry he acquired, from
his ubiquity, the reputation of a magician, which he ever took
care to maintain. He was a scholar too, and published papers
against the priests—although himself a priest, when he thought
fit to resume that character; he forbade them to preach in the
villages under his influence, “ because,” said he, “instead of the
true principles of the Gospel, they taught nothing but fables and
impostures.” The paper in which he published this, was headed—
“In nome della Grande Assemblea Nazionale dell? Ex-Regno di
Napoli, o piuttosto dell Europa intera, pace e salute:” “In the
name of the Grand National Assembly of the ex-Kingdom of
Naples, or rather of all Europe, peace and health.” His courage
was undoubted. On one occasion, being pursued by the Corsican
General d’Octavio, with a thousand men, he suddenly presented
himself before that officer, armed at all points, when he was alone
in a garden. Discovering himself to him, he told the General
his life was in his hands; “ but,” he added, “I will pardon you
this time, although I shall no longer be so indulgent, if you con-

39

ANN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ANN

tinue to hunt me about with such fury.” With these words he
leapt over the wall, and disappeared. His physiognomy was
agreeable, and had nothing repulsive about it; he was of middle
stature and Herculean strength. He was very much addicted
to women, and had mistresses in all the towns of the district
over which he ranged. When King Ferdinand returned to his
States, Ciro had the effrontery to present himself as a political
adherent, received a safe conduct to Bari, but, on finding he was
to be treated as a prisoner, he escaped to Naples. At this time
he placed himself at the head of the secret societies, the Patrioti
Europei and the Decisi; he was also affiliated to the Carbonari.
These societies were in great strength in December, 1817, and
January, 1818—numbering 20,000, and the power they exercised
was despotic in the extreme. Any one down in their lists was
doomed without hope. And yet there was no way of getting at
the perpetrators of these deeds; sometimes the most frightful
murders took place, but the assassins escaped without hope of
identification. Persons have been known to sign, under their
poignards, contracts for the sale of their houses and lands, exe-
cuted in all the forms of the law, acknowledgments being given
by the owners for sums they never received. The Lodges of the
Decided (4 deciso), were called Decisions (Decisiont); the Assem-
blies of the European Patriots, Squadrons (Squadriglie), each from
forty to sixty strong; and those of the Philadelphes, Camps
(Campi), about three or four hundred strong. One hundred and
thirteen such camps and squadrons existed in the province of
Lecce, and four in the town itself. The members, in great part,
lived unsuspected and in tranquillity, pursuing various osten-
sible callings. The organization of these societies was military ;
there was a President-Commandant, two Counsellors, two Captains,
an Aide-de-Camp, a Captain-Reporter, a Secretary, a Keeper of
the Seals, and soon. They even began to organize a corps of
cavalry, and a great revolution was intended. The watchwords
on their patents were Sorrow, Death, Terror, Mourning ; and the
Decisions (Lodges) assumed regular names, such as, del Tonante
Giove (Jupiter the Thunderer). Peter Gargaro was Illustrious
Grand Master Decided; Vito de Serio, Second Decided; and
Gaetano Caffieri, Registrar of the Dead. Such a document
actually was signed the 29th October, 1817. They had also a
Director of Funeral Ceremonies. The Salentine Republic, the
ancient name of the district, was the name they assumed.
Colours—red, yellow, and blue. The Philadelphes and European
Patriots had an era of their own, their year 1 being 1814. Of
course, it was necessary to crush this formidable body ; therefore
General Church, with royal powers, crossed the Ofanto with 1200
40

ANN] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ANN

regular troops. To the last citation of the Royal Commission of
17th July, 1817, Ciro returned a long and rambling justification ;
but finding the military in earnest, attempted flight. The captain
of a ship, who recognized him, demanded 2000 ducats as the
price of his safety; this being not forthcoming, Ciro was
compelled to prepare for the worst, and ordered a rendezvous of
his adherents for the 27th February, at San Marzano, between
Manduria and Tarentum. However, this rendezvous was destined
never to take place. Ciro Annichiarico set out from Grottaglie
on the 25th January, 1818, with forty horsemen and ten foot,
when, at two o’clock in the afternoon, he fell in with a detach-
ment of cavalry of eighteen men, commanded by Captain Mon-
torj, who charged him, and drove him as faras Neviera,a farm at
the foot of the hill of San Marzano. He retreated into the town,
and attempted a defence, but was obliged to fly. His adherents
were discovered, and Vito Serio, the brothers Vite Lecce, Raf-
faello Zaccharia, and Pietro Barbuzzi, were executed. On the
5th or 6th of February, intelligence was received that Ciro had
thrown himself into a strongly defensible masseria—half farm-
house, half fortress—at Scaserba, some ten miles from Francavilla.
Worn out with fatigue, Ciro and three companions, Vito di
Cesare, Giovanni Palmieri, and Michele Cuppoli, had proposed
to rest for a few hours. The militia of San Marzano, under the
threat that the town should be pillaged, had agreed to join in the
pursuit of Ciro. The first man within range, Ciro shot dead, and
had he then fled might yet have escaped; but reinforcements under
Lieutenant Fonsmorte came up, to the number of forty, and Ciro
found himself besieged. Mounting the tower of the masseria,
which was very massive, he and his companions loaded all their
guns, of which they had a store, and resolved to sell their lives
dearly. A line of siege was formed by 132 men in all, and Ciro
and his companions fought desperately until sunset. In the night
they attempted to escape, but found themselves too vigilantly
watched, so they returned to the pursuit of making cartridges.
At daybreak an attempt was made to break open the door of the
courtyard; but Ciro and his men, by a well-directed fire, killed
five, and wounded fourteen of the assailants. A barrel of oil was
brought in order to burn the door; the first man who set fire to
it was shot through the heart. A four-pounder was next directed
against the roof of the tower, and Ciro was forced from the second
story to the first. At last, tormented by thirst, Ciro surrendered,
descended the ladder, opened the door of the tower, and emerged,
saying—* Eecomi— Don Ciro !”—* Here Iam, DonCiro!” He beg-
ged for water, and for the liberation of the farmer and his family in
the barn, who were quite innocent, and distributed money among
4

ANN] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ANN

them. He allowed himself to be searched and bound; poison
was found on him, but he asserted that his companions had pre-
vented him from taking it. His conduct was quiet on the road
to Francavilla, and he begged mercy for his adherents. When
condemned to be shot, a priest offered him religious consolation ;
but Ciro replied— Lasciate questa chiacchiere ; siamo dell’ istessa
professione ; non ct burliamo fra not :”—* Let us leave alone this
prating; we are of the same profession ; don’t let us laugh at one
another.” On being led to execution, on the 8th of February,
1818, he recognised Lieutenant Fonsmorte, who had been the first
to arrive at Scaserba, and said— Se to fosse Re, vi faret Capitano:”
“Were I king, I would make you a Captain.” On his arrival at
the place of execution, Ciro wished to remain standing; he was
told to kneel; he did so, presenting his breast. He was then told
that malefactors like himself were shot with their backs towards
the soldiers; he submitted, and a volley was fired: though
twenty-one bullets took effect, he still lived; but the twenty-
second bullet gave him the coup de grace. “ As soon as we per-
ceived,” said one of the soldiers, “that he was enchanted, we
loaded his own musket with a silver bullet, and this destroyed
the spell,”—ending his life much as did Graham of Claverhouse.
This destroyed the Sects of the Decisi, many of whom were
executed; and thus Italy was freed from an armed curse, under
the name of a secret society, which headed its patents with
Masonic formule. Probably it is the only known instance in
which a priest turned brigand with such singular adjuncts.

ANNIVERSARY.—The two anniversaries of Symbolical Masonry are
the festivals of the Holy St Johns—St John the Baptist, and St
John the Evangelist, 24th of June and 27th of December. The
anniversary of the Princes of Rose-Croix is Shrove Tuesday.
That of the Order of Ishmael is the Ist of May.

ANNO DEpositTIonIs.—In the Year of the Deposit. The date used
by Royal and Select Masters, found by adding 1000 to the vulgar
era, as 1876 4-1000=2876.

Anno Ecyptiaco—In the Egyptian Year; used in the Hermetic
Fraternity ; found by adding 5044 to the vulgar era, and after the
20th of July one year more,—thus: 16th January, 1876+ 5044=
6920, 20th July, 1876+-5044+4+-1=6921, being the number of
years since the consolidation of the Egyptian monarchy under
Menes, or MNA,

ANNO Hesraico.—In the Hebrew Year. Used in the Ancient
and Accepted Rite, and found by adding 3760 to the vulgar era,
until September, and afterwards one year more, the chronology
being the Hebrew; thus: July, 1876+ 3760=5636, and October,
1876 +3760 +1=5637,

42

ANN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ANT

Anno Lucis.—In the Year of Light. Used in Masonic documents.
To obtain the A. L. of Craft Masonry, add 4000 to the current
year, thus 1875+ 4000=5875. In the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite, and several others, it is customary to add 4004—
thus, 1875 a.D. would be 5879. Strictly speaking, this is most
correct; but chronology cannot measure the era of the Creation
in reality; hence it is that the Antient and Primitive Rite uses
000,000,000, the nearest approach to an exact chronology we
shall have at any time.

Anxo Munpi.—In the Year of the World. (See Anno Hebraico.)

ANNO OrDINIS.—In the Year of the Order. The Knights Templar use
this era; found by subtracting 1118 from the current year—
thus: 1876-1118=758. The Red Cross Knights subtract 313
thus: 1876 —313=1563.

ANOINTING.—A custom of ancient use at the coronation of kings
and the consecration of priests. It is still performed on the
admission of candidates in some of the higher degrees of Free-
masonry.

Anonymous SocrEty.—Of these there have been several, and several
still exist. The special Society now alluded to was formed in
Germany, and was limited to 72 members: 24 E.A.P., 24 F.C.,
and 24 M.M.; the object was the proper study of occult science.
It was said that the Grand Master was in Spain, and he was
designated by the name of Tajo.

ANSYREEM.—A_ sect in Northern Syria, professing a faith com-
pounded of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and possessing a
secret system of signs. They disagree with the Druses.

ANTEDILUVIAN Masonry. (See noch.)

ANTIENT AND PRIMITIVE R1iTE—This system of Masonry arose from
the French Primitive Rite of Philalethes, brought from Egypt by
Brother Samuel Honis, a native of Cairo; with the aid of Brothers
Gabriel Matthieu Marconis de Negre, the Baron Dumas, the
Marquis de Laroque, Hippolyte Labrunie, J. Petit, and others ; he
established it at Montauban, 30th April, 1815. In 1826, a por-
tion of the Rite went under the Grand Orient, while another
portion, with additions from all the other Rites, was re-established
as a system of 95° at Paris, 7th July, 1838, by Jacques Etienne
Marconis de Negre, and others, among whom should be named
Dr Morison de Greenfield (Physician to H. R. H. the Duke of
Sussex, G. M. of English Freemasonry). It thence appears to
be chartered in America, 9th November, 1856, with Brother David
M‘Clellan as G. M., with others as subordinates. About 1862,
the Rite submitted entirely to the Grand Orient of France, and
reduced its workings to 33 degrees in 1865 (with rights to revive
and use the supplementary degrees, and established representa-

43

ANT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ANT

tives with the Order in America). In 1872, October 8, a Sove-
reign Sanctuary of the Rite was established in England by the
American Grand body, with Brother John Yarker as G. M., and
now continues in constant work. The sections are three in
number—Modern, Chivalric, and Egyptian—divided in all into
seven classes. The first three degrees of Symbolic Masonry (and
the Holy Royal Arch) are recognised as being the prerogative of
the Grand Lodge of England; but it claims the power of giving
further degrees to Rose-Croix (18°) to worthy aspirants. The
Chivalric degrees are scientific, philosophic, and historical,
(18°-33°); whereas the Egyptian degrees are esoteric and reli-
gious, embracing speculative and archeological topics of an
intensely interesting nature. The present arrangements of this
Rite are as follows :—The three symbolical degrees.—Section I.
Chapter of Rose-Croix. 4. Discreet Master. 5. Sublime Mas-
ter. 6. Sacred Arch. 7. Secret Vault. 8. Knight of the Sword.
9. Knight of Jerusalem. 10. Knight of the Orient. 11. Rose-
Croix. Section II. Senate of Hermetic Philosophers. 12. Knight
of the Red Eagle. 13. Knight of the Temple. 14. Knight of
the Tabernacle. 15. Knight of the Serpent. 16. Knight Kadosch.
17. Knight of the Royal Mystery. 18. Grand Inspector. 19.
Sage of Truth. 20. Hermetic Philosopher. Section ITI. Grand
Council, 21. Grand Installator. 22. Grand Consecrator. 23.
Grand Eulogist. 24. Patriarch of’ Truth. 25. Patriarch of the
Planispheres. 26. Patriarch of the Sacred Vedas. 27. Patriarch
of Isis, 28. Patriarch of Memphis. 29. Patriarch of the Mystic
City. 30. Master of the G.. W.. P.. P.. Section IV. Official.
31. Grand Defender of the Rite. 32. Sublime Prince of Mem-
phis. 33. Sovereign Grand Conservator of the Rite. In England,
however, these rites are varied; thus:—16. Sage of Truth. 17.
Hermetic Philosopher. 18. Knight Kadosch. 19. Royal Master.
20. Grand Intendant.

Antin, DuKe D’.—Grand Master of France, elected 24th June, 1738.
Was succeeded, in 1743, by the Count of Clermond.

ANTIPODEANS (Les Antipodéans).-—The 60th degree of the Metro-
politan French Chapter.

ANTIQUITY, LoDGE or.—One of the four Lodges to whom the forma-
tion of the Grand Lodge in 1717 is due. It retains its place on
the roll of the Fraternity as No. 2, but was No. 1 prior to the
Act of Union, 1813.

ANTIQUITY Manuscript.—An MS, roll of parchment, nine feet long
by eleven inches wide, stated to have been written in 1686, by
Robert Padgett, Clearke to the Worshipful Society of the Free-
masons of the city of London. First published entire by Bro. W.
J. Hughan, in his “Old Charges of British Freemasons.” It is the

44

ANT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ANT

property of the Lodge of Antiquity, and is considered a document
of extreme historic value.

ANTIQUITY OF FREEMASONRY.—On this point much has been written
to little purpose, and it is not proposed to farther discuss the
question here. That mystical societies have flourished long
before the dawn of history is not to be denied, but that such
societies essentially resembled Freemasonry it is more than futile
to opine. Our extended knowledge of hieroglyphics, derived
from such masters as Champollion, De Rougé, Birch, Chabas,
Sayce, and many others, has, however, divested the Egyptian
symbolism of much of its mysterious importance. Inscriptions,
presumed, somewhat simply, to contain wonderful secrets of
occult and magical signification, have been found to mean
nothing more important than boundary definitions, public in-
scriptions relating to political triumphs, and exoteric praises of
the Egyptian gods, while the boasted esoteric mysteries of the
land of Khemi have not been unveiled. It is only natural to
suppose that the jealous priesthood of Egypt would scarcely be
willing to publicly display its secrets to the gaze of the multi-
tude, any of whom might learn and reveal the secrets, were they
so openly set forth. This holds good equally of all other eras
of man’s history ; and hence it is that tradition and oral trans-
mission in the colleges of the priests can alone give us any clue
as to what interpretation the original possessors of the mysteries
placed upon the phenomena of Nature. Consequently, it is idle
to speculate upon such a topic as the antiquity of these secret
associations; and it is far wiser to accept the development, as
being, in essentid, all that we can know upon the subject. It
would, however, appear that a portion of the ritual of Free-
masonry originated in Egypt, and was engrafted upon the system
of the Sidonian builders. No doubt the illustrious artificer
Hiram was one of these; and hence the adoption of rites
analogous to those of Osiris and Adonis, or Tammuz (see Tam-
muz). We find the Collegia Fabrorum instituted in the times
of Numa Pompilius, King of Rome, with like privileges. In
1717, the descendants of the Building Fraternities laid aside
their purely operative character, the Fraternity then assuming
sumewhat of its present form. Since then, the Royal Arch
degree has been added, the Mark degree established, Ark
Marinery has been manufactured, and many rites concocted,
having little to recommend them to the Masonic student.

Anton, Dr Kart GorrLos von.—Died 17th November, 1818. An
extensive writer on Templarism.

Anton, Hirronymus.—A German corruption of Adon Hiram
(which see).

45

APE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [APP

APE AND Lion, KnicuT oF THE. (See Knight of the Ape and
Lion.)

APEX, Rive or. (See Sat Bhat, Order of.)

APHANISM.—In ‘the ancient mysteries, there was always a legend
of the death and subsequent resurrection or discovery of the
body of some distinguished personage. That part of the cere:
mony, which represented the concealing of the body, was termed
the aphanism, from the Greek word, apavi{w, to conceal.

APHTHARTODOCITES.—A small sect in the sixth century. They
held that the body of Jesus Christ was incorruptible, and that
He had never suffered death.

Apis.—A bull, to which divine honours were paid in Egypt. It
was necessary that he should be black, with a white triangle on
his forehead, a white spot in the shape of a crescent on his side,
and a knot like a scarabzeus or beetle under the tongue. When
one was found, he was fed for four months in a building facing
the East. At the New Moon, he was led to a splendid ship with
great solemnity, and conveyed to Heliopolis, where he was ted
for forty days more by priests and women. After this no one
of the profane was permitted to approach him. Thence he was
taken to Memphis, where he had a temple, two chapels to dwell
in, and a large court for exercise. He had the gift of prophecy,—
the omen being fortunate or unfortunate, according to the chapel
he entered on his return from exercise. Notwithstanding all
this reverence, he was not suffered to live more than twenty-
five years, the years of St Peter in the Romish Church. His
death was a sign of universal mourning. He was an important
symbol in the mysteries of Isis, and his worship was continued -
to a later period, down to and during the Roman domination in
Egypt.

ApooAEyPe (See Revelations.)

APOCALYPSE, ORDER OF THE—LInstituted at the end of the seven-
teenth century by Gabrino, who assumed the title of Prince of
the Septennary Number, and Monarch of the Holy Trinity. It
was the precursor of some of the rites of Masonic Templarism.
The arms of the Order were a naked sword and a blazing star.

APOCALYPTIC DEGREES.—Some few degrees are thus called, such as
the seventeenth of the Ancient and Accepted Rite, or Knight of
the East and West.

APOLLONIUS OF TyANA. (See Magic.)

APORRHETA (Greek, asogénra).—Things only known to the initiated.

APPEAL.—The Master of a Lodge is its supreme head, and is not
amenable for his government of it to its members, but to the
Grand Lodge alone. He can arbitrarily decide points of order,
pie incre is no appeal; and if any such appeal were proposed,

4

APP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [APP

such is the apparently anomalous position of the Master, that it
would be his duty, for the preservation of discipline, to refuse
to put the question. Should a member feel aggrieved at the
conduct or decision of the Master, his redress lies in an appeal
to the Grand Lodge, which will, of course, investigate whether
the Master is ruling his Lodge “in an unjust or arbitrary
manner.” ‘There is no other course open. The First Principal
of a Chapter is in exactly the same position, and a similar
principle prevails amongst Knights Templar. Hence it becomes
a matter of the highest importance to judge well of the general
character of any candidate before initiation, inasmuch as every
initiate, like the French soldier, carries a Marshal’s baton in his
knapsack. Instances of bad conduct on the part of Masters are,
however, exceedingly rare, the spirit of the Fraternity generally
discouraging such extremely arbitrary conduct on the part of the
chiefs of Lodges.

APPENDANT ORDERS.—(1) Knight of the Red Cross; (2) Knight
of ue (3) Knight of the Holy Sepulchre; (4) Knight of St
John.

APPLE TREE TAVERN.—The place where the four London Lodges
organized the Grand Lodge of England,in 1717. It was situated
in Charles Street, Covent Garden.

APPRENTI.—French for Apprentice.

APPRENTICE.—The first and lowest degree in Freemasonry ; but, in
so far as it is the groundwork of the others, no less honourable
in itself. The modesty with which an apprentice deports him-
self in his Lodge, is a sure index of his moral worth, and the
best guarantee for his future proficiency and eminence. An
initiate is said to be “ entered,” for a reason well known in Free-
masonry.

APPRENTICIAL DEGREES.—I am obliged to coin a word to compre-
hend within one caption several widely differing subjects :-—
(1) Hermetic A., thirteenth degree of the Metropolitan Chapter
of France; (2) Kabbalistic A., a degree in the Mother Lodge,
Philosophic Rite; (3) Mystic A.,a degree in Pyron’s Collection ;
(4) Ap. of Paracelsus, a degree preserved by Peuvret, and a part
of Hermetic Masonry; (5) A. of Egyptian Secrets, first decree
of the African Architects; (6 and 7) A. Philosophers of numbers
iti. and ix., in Peuvret’s Collection; (8) A. Philosopher, Hermetic,
Peuvret’s Collection; (9) A. Zcossais, and (10) A. Ecossais T'rini-
tatre, Pyron’s Collection; (11) A. Theosophist, first degree, Rite
of Swedenborg ; (12) Egyptian A., the first degree in the Egyptian
Rite of Cagliostro; (13) Theosophic A., Rite of Swedenborg ;
(14) A. Cohen in the collection of the Mother Lodge, Philosophic
Rite; (15) A. Architect, in Fustier’s Collection; (16) A. Perfect

47

APR| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [APR

Architect, in Le Page’s Collection ; (17) A. Prussian Architect, in
Le Page’s Collection.

Apron.—The principal clothing of a Freemason, adopted from the
Operative Guild of Masons. It is the first gift bestowed by
the Master upon the newly initiated apprentice. Its use in
Operative Masonry is sufficiently obvious, but Speculative
Masons use it with a nobler symbolism. By the whiteness of its
colour, and the innocence of the animal—a lamb—from which
it is obtained, we are admonished to preserve that blameless
purity of life and conduct which will alone enable us hereafter
to present ourselves before T. G. A. O. T. U. unstained with sin
and unsullied with vice. In this investiture we find something
of a similar kind to all the investitures of previous rites of
antiquity. The Essene was clothed in a white garment reach-
ing to the feet, girded with a linen girdle, and bordered with
a fringe of blue, as an emblem of holiness. Cicero tells us
that the garment in the mysteries of Hellas was white,
that being a colour most acceptable to the gods. This robe
was esteemed so holy that it was never to be taken off
until worn to rags; and many Masons of the present day
regard their soiled and creased apron as an insignium of high
honour. In the mysteries of Mithras, the robes of investi-
ture were the girdle, on which were depicted the signs of the
Zodiac, the Tiara, the white apron, and the purple tunic. In
the Hindoo mysteries, the aspirant received a consecrated sash,
consisting of a cord of nine threads, worn from the left shoulder
to the right side. An apron composed of the three Masonic
colours—blue, purple, and scarlet-—was worn by the Jewish
priesthood; and the prophets, on all occasions of moment, in-
vested themselves with a girdle or apron. All the ancient
statues of the heathen gods were similarly clothed, whether in
Greece, Asia, or America, in superb aprons. It is hence that we
may justly claim the apron as “a badge more ancient than the
Golden Fleece or Roman Eagle, and more honourable than the
Star and Garter.” This apron, in the Apprentice and Fellow-
craft degrees, is a pure white lambskin, from fourteen to sixteen
inches wide, and from twelve to fourteen deep; square at the
bottom, without ornament. In the French rite, it is shaped
somewhat like a spade, with a pointed bottom, and is much
smaller. In the Master’s degree, and higher ones, it is bound
with blue ribbon, ornamented with rosettes, levels, and other
designs. In the Royal Arch, it is bound with scarlet, or blue
and scarlet. The Mark Apron is bound with scarlet. In France,
the Master Mason wears a blue sash, embroidered with a golden
Representation of the Temple, the letter “G,” and other emblems.

4

APU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ARC

In Scotland the Johannite Masons select such colours at the
formation of the Lodge as may be preferred.

APULEIUS. (See Golden Ass of Apuleius.)

AQUARIANS.—A sect of Christians in the third century, who used
water instead of wine in the Eucharist. Their ceremonies had
some analogy with the Egyptian Hermeticists.

Aquinas. (See Saint Thomas Aquinas.)

ARABICI.—An Arabian sect of the second century. They taught
that the soul could not exist without the body, and there-
fore died with it, to be again revived with it at the general
resurrection. They were fervent believers in the providence
of God, but considered that man was free to study material
science,

ARAUNAH. (See Ornan.)

ARBITRATION.—This mode of settling disputes has always been re-
commended in Masonry as a more reasonable way than going
to law, a method ever leading to disagreeable results.

ARCADE DE LA PELLETERIE—A nickname of the so-called Orient
of Clermont in France, or old Grand Lodge, before its union
with the Grand Orient in 1799.

ARCANA.—From the Latin. Secret things, communicated only to
the select, and not to be divulged. (See Secrets.)

ARCANI DiscipLina.—the initiatory process of admission into the
primitive Christian Church, which, as is shown under Carbonari
(which see), was in the beginning a secret, moral, and religious
societiy.

Arcu.—In architecture, a construction supported by its curve.
The arch is a prominent idea in the ritual of Holy Royal
Arch Masonry.

ARCH, ANCIENT; or ARCH OF ENocH (which see)—This is the
thirteenth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.
(See Knights of the Ninth Arch.)

ArcH, ANTIQUITY OF THE—Until very recently, it has been sup-
posed that the invention of the Arch and Keystone was not
anterior to the era of Augustus Cesar. Modern antiquaries,
however, have traced the existence of the Arch as far back as
460 years before the building of King Solomon’s Temple, thus
completely reconciling Masonic tradition with the truth of
history. (But see also the article Keystone.)

ARCH, CATENARIAN. (See Catenarian Arch.)

ARCH, CONFRATERNITY OF THE SACRED STANDARD.—A society of
builders existing in 1540, who had possession of the Colosseum
(commenced by Vespasian, AD. 72; finished, a.p. 80, with
dedication). This society enacted miracle or mystery plays
within the vast arena, until ube earth sank considerably below

49

ARC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ARC

its former level. It is believed that this society is still in
existence.

Arcuimacus.—Chief of the Sages and High Priest of the Chaldean
Mysteries. In the ceremony of initiation he represented Ormuzd
(Ahutramadza), the god of beauty, light, and truth; and the rite
was intended to illustrate the struggles of that god with Ahri-
man, the god of darkness, evil, and lies, and his final victory
over him. (See Zoroaster.)

ARCHITECT.—There are several degrees of Architect. 1. African
Architect (which see); 2. Grand Architect by 3, 5, and 7, a
degree in Peuvret’s MS. collection; 3. Grand Architect, the 6th
degree in the rite of Martinism, the 4th degree of the rite of
Elect Cohens, the 23d degree of the rite of Mizraim, and the 24th
degree Metropolitan French Chapter; 4. Grand Master Archi-
tect (which see); 5. Little Architect, the 23d degree Metro-
politan French Chapter, and 22d degree rite of Mizraim ; 6. Archi-
tect of Solomon, a degree in Peuvret’s collection; 7. Perfect
Architect, the 28th degree rite of Mizraim, while the 25th, 26th,
and 27th degrees are E. A. P., F.C., and M. M. Perfect Archi-
tect; 8. Perfect and Sublime Grand Architect, a degree in the
collection of the Loge des Amis Réunis, at Calais; 9. Architect
of Solomon, Peuvret’s collection.

ARCHITECT, AFRICAN. (See African Architects.)

ARCHITECTONICUS.—Relating to architecture. The Grand Lodge of
Scotland has used this word in some Latin inscriptions in a
Masonic sense. A Lodge, in the Grand Lodge Certificate, is
called “ soctetas architectonica.” It is, however, unusual. The
English Grand Lodge says “ Latomorum.”

ARCHITECTURE.—1. One of the most ancient and important arts
known to man. As geometry is the science on which Masonry
is founded, so architecture is the art whence it borrows the
language of symbolic instruction. Some knowledge of the art is
necessary for the speculative Mason as well as the operative
Mason. There are five orders of architecture—the Doric, the
Tonic, the Corinthian, the Tuscan, and the Composite. Of these
the first three are the originals, and were invented in Greece;
the others owe their origin to Italy. 2. A name given to the
24th degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

ARCHITECTURE, PIECE OF (Morgeau d@ architecture)—The desig-
nation of the minutes in a French Lodge.

ARCHIVES.—A term for the minutes and other documents of record
in a Lodge.

ARCHIVES, GRAND GUARDIAN OF THE—1. A title for the Secretary-
General of the Grand Council of Rites in Ireland. 2. Granp
KEEPER OF THE—The high degrees in France have an officer who

50

ARC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ARE

combines the custody of the archives with that of the seals. In
a private Lodge or Chapter he is called Archiviste ; and in Ger-
many, Archivar.

ARCH OF Enocu.—This is explained in the degree of the Knights
of the Ninth Arch, the ritual saying: “Enoch was the ninth in
descent from Adam, and lived in the fear and love of his Master.
Being inspired by the Most High, and in commemoration of a
wonderful vision, this holy man built a nine-fold Temple under-
ground, and dedicated the same to God. He was assisted in
this subterranean Temple by Jared, his father, and Methuselah,
his son, without being acquainted with his motives. This
happened in that part of the country which was afterward
called Canaan, or the Holy Land.” Enoch is regarded by
Hermetic philosophers as their inspired founder. Vestiges of
this are to be found in the Rosicrucian Rite, and also in the
Order of Ishmael. Enoch is connected with the Pillars of
Wisdom.

ARCH OF HEAVEN.—Job xxvi. 11 speaks of the “ pillars of heaven.”
Cahen says these are only allegorically put for very high moun-
tains. Those familiar with the perpendicular rocks of Arabia
can well understand the beauty of the metaphor. Dr Cutbush
on the passage remarks: “The arch in this instance is allegorical
not only of the arch of heaven, but of the higher degree of
Masonry, commonly called the Holy Royal Arch. The pillars
which support the arch are emblematical of Wisdom and
Strength: the former denoting the wisdom of the Supreme
Architect, and the latter the stability of the universe.”

ARCH oF SoLomon, RoyaLt.—tThe thirteenth degree of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite, to distinguish it from the Holy Royal Arch,
which it resembles in the main features.

ArcH oF STEEL.—Grand honours are conferred, in the Templar
and the French Rite, by two ranks of brethren elevating and
crossing their drawn swords. It is termed voute d’acier.

ARCH OF ZERUBBABEL, ROYAL.—The 7th degree of the American Rite.

ArcHontics.—A branch of the Valentinians, arising in the second
century. They supposed the world to have been created, not by
God himself, but by his archontes or archangels. They distin-
guished between active (male) and passive (female) beings, and
attributed the creation of the latter to dark principles or demons.
Astrologers, in like manner, have ever distinguished between the
hot and light creative powers, and the moist and dark.

Arcu, RoyaL. (See Royal Arch.)

ARDAREL.—Used in the high degrees—a corruption of Adarel
(which see). (See Hrel.)

ARELIM.—D&, used in the high degrees, (See Isaiah xxxiii. 7.)

51

ARE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ARK

Cahen translates it “men of war,” and refers it to Ashur. 2. In
the Kabbalah, Arelim is the angelic name of the third Sephiroth.

AREoPAGUS.—1. The hill of: Mars, séat of the supreme court of
Athens and Greece, from which there was no appeal. In Free-
masonry the name is, in France and Belgium, applied to a
council or assembly of the 30th degree of the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite. 2. The fifth section in Antient and
Primitive Masonry.

ARGENT.—French for silver. An heraldic term in emblazoning arms;
thus the arms of the Company of Freemasons in the reign of Henry
IV. were “ Azure on a chevron between three castles argent.”

ARGONAUTS, ORDER oF.—i1. An androgynous Masonic society,
founded in Germany in 1775, by members of the Strict Observ-
ance. The presiding officer was called Grand Admiral, the place
of meeting a ship, and the appointments were named from
various parts of a vessel. Motto—Zs lebe die Freude—Joy for
ever. The seal was a silver anchor inlaid with green. 2. Name
of the first point of the degree of the Golden Fleece, in the
Hermetic Rite of Montpellier.

ARITHMETIC.—The science of the proportion of numbers. In the
lecture of the degree of Grand Master Architect, the candidate
is reminded that a Mason is continually to add to his knowledge,
never to subtract anything from the character of his neighbour,
to multiply his benevolence, and to divide his means ‘with a
distressed brother.

ARrk.—In the American Royal Arch degree three arks are alluded
to:—1. The Ark of Noah or of Safety. 2. The Ark of the
Covenant or of Moses. 3. The Substitute Ark, or of Zerubbabel.
In the ceremony of passing the veils, this system of symbolism
is enlarged upon. The first Ark, constructed by Shem, Ham,
and Japhet, was an ark of refuge; the second Ark we treat in a
separate article: it was burnt at the destruction of the First
Temple; the Ark of Substitution was prepared by Zerubbabel
on the rebuilding of the Temple, in exact imitation of the former
or Mosaic Ark.

eRe AND ANCHOR—Emblems of a well-spent life and a well
grounded hope. There is no symbol more common to ancient
rites than that of the ark. It was equally used by the Greeks,
the Latins, the Celts, the Hindoos, the Goths, the Pheenicians,
the Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Babylonians, the Mexicans,
the Northern Americans, and the Pacific Islanders. Historically,
this ark referred to the Ark of Noah, but symbolically it was used
as a coffin to receive the body of the candidate, and was an
emblem of regeneration or resurrection. It would exceed our
limits to enter upon an excursus apon Arkite legends.

52

ARK | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ARM

ARK AND Dove.—An American illustrative degree, preparatory to
the Royal Arch degree, and, when conferred at all, given imme-
diately before the ceremony of exaltation. The name of Noachite
sometimes bestowed upon it is, however, incorrect, as this belongs
to the 21st degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite, aud the
35th of the Rite of Misraim. It is very prokable that it was
derived from an older rite, called the Royal Ark Mariner, to
which the reader is referred,

ARKANSAS.—The Grand Lodge of Arkansas was organized February
22, 1832, at Little Rock, by the four Lodges in the country.
The Grand Chapter, April 28,1851. Grand Council Royal and
Select Masters, 1860. There is no Grand Commandery—the
four Commanderies are subordinate to the Grand Encampment
of the United States.

Ark Mariner, Roya. (See Royal Ark Mariner.)

ARK OF THE COVENANT.—This was originally constructed by Moses
at God’s command (Exod. xxv. 16); in it were kept the two
tables of stone, on which were inscribed the ten commandments,
a golden pot filled with manna, Aaron’s rod, and possibly other
palladia of the Israelites. It was at first placed in the Tabernacle,
afterwards in the sanctum sanctorum of King Solomon’s Temple,
and was lost upon the destruction of that building by the Chal-
deans. The ark and its traditions are closely associated with
the ceremonies of Royal Arch Masons.

ARMIGER.—1. A bearer of arms. The heraldic term for an esquire
in attendance on a knight. 2. The 6th degree of the Order of
African Architects.

Armory.—The place in which the furniture, swords, and regalia
of a commandery, priory, or preceptory of Knights Templar are
deposited for safe keeping.

ARMS OF FREEMASONRY.—According to Bailey, the Masons were
incorporated in 1419, and according to Stowe, in 1412—the
armorial bearings being azure on a chevron between three
castles argent, a pair of compasses somewhat extended of the
first. Crest—a castle of the second, granted by William Hawks-
low Clarence, king-of-arms. The crest of the operative masons
slightly varied, being an arm extended grasping a trowel proper ;
supporters—two bearers proper. The arms of the Grand Lodge
now in use may be thus blazoned: Party per cross, vert voided
or; in the first quarter azwre a lion rampant o7, for the tribe of
Judah; in the second ov an ox passant sable, for the tribe of
Ephraim ; in the third or a man erect proper, for the tribe of
Reuben; in the fourth azure a spread eagle or, for Dan. Crest,
an ark of the covenant ; and supporters, two cherubim, all proper.
Motto—Holiness to the Lord. Of course, these refer to the four

53

ARR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Asc

mystical beasts of the Apocalypse and of Assyria. They have
also a specific Chaldean or magical bearing. The modern arms
are not the same. (See under United Grand Lodge, Arms of.)
The banners which adorn the Royal Arch Chapters of England,
representing the twelve tribes of Israel, are as follows :—Scarlet,
a lion couchant, for Judah; blue, an ass crouching beneath its
burthen, for Issachar; purple, a ship, for Zebulon; yellow, a
sword, for Simeon; white, a troop of horsemen, for Gad ; green,
an ox, for Ephraim ; flesh colour, a vine by the side of a wall, for
Manasseh ; green, a wolf, for Benjamin ; purple, a cup, for Asher;
blue, a hind, for Naphthali; and green, an eagle, for Dan.

ARRAS, PRIMORDIAL CHAPTER OF.—In Arras, Artois, Charles Edward
Stewart, April 15, 1747, founded this Chapter of Rose-Croix
Freemasons. The distinctive title was that of Lcosse Jacobite—
Scottish Jacobite. Some other Chapters were founded on it,
especially the Chapter of Arras, in the Valley of Paris, 1780.
It has been sought to trace a connection between this and
R.8. ¥. ©. 8. or Royal Order of Scotland.

Art, Royat. (See Royal Art.)

ARTEPHIUS (See Rostcrucians, Eminent.)

ARTHUSIUS, GOTTHARDUS.—A Danish author, rector of the Gym-
nasium at Frankfurt-on-the-Maine. His assumed name was
Trenzus Agnostus (which see).

ARTIZAN CulEF, ARTIZAN MasTER.—Officers in a Council of Knights
of Constantinople.

Arts—In Masonic phraseology, the arts, parts, and points of the
mysteries of Masonry are severally defined to be, the knowledge
or things made known, the degrees into which Masonry is
divided, and the rules and usages of the Craft. (See Parts, and
also Points.)

ARTS, LIBERAL.—The seven liberal arts and sciences receive illus-
tration in the Fellow Craft’s degree. These are grammar,
thetorie, logic, arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy.

AsarotTa.—A kind of pavement in variegated colours, used by the
ancients for floors of temples.

ASCENSION Day.—A festival in Chapters of Rose-Croix.

ASCITES or ASCODOGRITES.—A sect of Montanists in the second
century, who brought leathern bottles filled with new wine into
their churches, and were said to celebrate the sacrament with
dancing and intoxication.

AscoponTEs.—A Gnostic sect in the second century, who main-
tained that divine mysteries, being the images of invisible
things, ought not to be represented by visible signs, nor incor-
poreal by corporeal: therefore they rejected the sacraments, and
exercised a purely mental worship.

54

ASH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ASH

ASHE, JONATHAN, D.D.—An author of small note, who published,
in 1813, “The Masonic Manual.” A mere copyist of Hutchin-
son.

ASHER, CARL WILHELM, PH.D.—The translator of the Halliwell
MS. into German, where English and German may both be
found.

ASHLAR.—“ Freestone as it comes out of the quarry.”—Bailey.
Masonry adopts the ashlar as a symbol in two forms: in its
rude, unhewn state, in which it is called the rough ashlar—re-
ferring to the uncultivated, ignorant condition of mankind, yet a
mere mass of material blindness and moral confusion; and also
as the perfect ashlar, where the mind has assumed its harmonic
proportions and symbolic form, and may be said to represent
that condition of mental and intellectual health and suavity
agreeable to all educated minds. To attain to the condition of
this latter stone—by some said to be the White Stone of the
Apocalypse—a man must have purified his mind from all earthly
taints, and have arisen in the strength of his divine humanity
from the figurative déath of the mysteries. In. this condition,
any one would necessarily be actively moral and intelligent,
vitally benevolent, and indulgent to the human weakness exhi-
bited by those in an unenlightened state. It is then masonically
correct to say that the stone has been properly squared and
fitted for its place in the Temple. (See Temple.) Technically
speaking, the perfect ashlar is said to be “a stone of a true die
or square, which can only be tried by the square and compasses.”
Rites differ upon this point, as essential, but it may safely be
considered as correct.

ASHMOLE, Evias.—A celebrated antiquary, historian, and occult
philosopher, born at Lichfield, 23d May, 1617; died at London,
18th May, 1692. He wrote the “ History of the Order of the
Garter.” His Masonic fame rests upon certain well-known
entries in his diary, in which he gives a date, October 16, 1646,
as the time of his initiation into Masonry ; and 36 years after-
wards, March 10, 1682, he records his admission to the fellow-
ship. Had Masonry been an organized system of scientific
teachings in those days, it would have been impossible for a man
otherwise so distinguished in matters harmonious with his own
pursuits, to have remained in stait, pupillari for so long a time.
But in Rosicrucianism he played a more prominent part, as we
shall hereafter see. The initiation. of Ashmole has been made
a handle of in various ways; but it is a terrible weapon, re-
coiling upon the critics with fatal effect. Had Freemasonry
existed as a speculative science in anything like its present
form, with the superadded traditions, Ashmole would not have

55

AST] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ass

been a Fellow, but a Master Mason. The last century is charge-
able with many such forgeries. (See Speculative Masonry.)

Asta.—The east end of the Lodge is thus called in the French Rite
of Adoption.

Asia, Knicuts AND BROTHERS OF.—This was a schismatical rite,
introduced in Germany, either at Vienna or Berlin, about 1780,
by some members of the German Rose-Croix. Its symbolism
was drawn from Judaism, Christianity, and Isl4ém, and its char-
acter was tolerant. Rosicrucian and Hermetic science occupied
the attention of this body; and, in common with many other
Masonic rites, the philosopher's stone was one of the objects of
research. The governing body was the Grand Synédrion, or
Sanhedrim, consisting of seventy-two members. The degrees
beyond the three symbolical degrees were six in number,
1. Seekers; 2. Sufferers; 3. i. Initiated Knights, and ii. Brothers
of Asia in Europe; 4. i. Masters, and ii. Sages; 5. Royal Priests,
or True Brothers of Rose-Croix; 6. Melchizedek. The order
has long ceased to exist. Vienna in this rite was called Thes-
salonica.

ASIA, PERFECT INITIATES OF.—A rite said to have been founded at
Lyons, consisting of seven degrees. Very little is known of it,
and it does not seem to be worked, or in working order.

ASPIRANT.—1. A seeker after Masonic light, who has applied for
admission to the mysteries of the Fraternity, and having been
accepted, is preparing himself in a careful manner for the solemn
obligations of initiation. 2. A term applied to Master Masons
desiring further light in the higher degrees. 3. The designation
of a candidate for Rosicrucian honours.

Ass.—1, An emblem of stupidity and ignorance. In the Egyptian
system it represented the uninitiated, ignorant, and profane.
2. Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, the occult philosopher, in
his “Vanity of the Arts and Sciences,’ however, praises and
defends the ass in no measured terms, and by instances from
Scripture and ancient history, assigns it an important place,
especially from its having been the animal selected by our
Saviour on his entrance into Jerusalem. White asses were much
esteemed in the East, and usually ridden by men in authority—
such as judges, prophets, and persons of rank.

Assassins.—The Order of Assassins was founded by Hassan Sabah
in Persia, about 1090. In order to place themselves in direct
communication with Heaven, and enjoy celestial visions, they
were addicted to the use of hascheesh (henbane). They were
most probably a sect of Sujis—teachers of the secret doctrines of
Islamism; they encouraged mathematics and philosophy, and
produced many valuable works. The chief of the Order was

56

Ass | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [AST

called Sheikh-el-Jebal, translated, Old Man of the Mountain ;
and, as their Grand Master, he possessed power of.life and death.
Higgins, in the Anacalypsis (i. 700), says, that this title signifies
Sage of the Kabbalah or Traditions. They had a series of degrees
similar to those of Templarism and Freemasonry, together with
oaths of secrecy.

ASSEMBLY.—The yearly meetings of the Craft, previous to the
organization of Grand Lodges, in their present form, were known
as General Assemblies. In 1663, the then Grand Master, the
Earl of St Albans (see list of Grand Masters prior to 1717), con-
vened them on St John’s Day, the 27th of December, as a
“General Assembly.” Anderson mentions the purchase of a
free charter by Prince Edwin, in 926 aD. (AL. 4930) from
King Aithelstane, his brother, for the Masons of that time, “to
regulate themselves, to amend what might happen to be amiss,
and to hold a yearly communication in a General Assembly.”
These powers were first exercised at York, in England—hence
the term York Masonry.

ASSOCIATES OF THE TEMPLE.—A quasi-rank given to eminent donors
and benefactors of the Order of the Temple—not themselves
affiliated by vows.

AsTtR#A.—The name of the Grand Lodge established at St Peters-
burg, 30th August, 1815, but suppressed in 1822.

ASTROLOGY.—A system of divination by the relative positions of
the planets and other heavenly bodies towards the earth, so as
to foretell future events,—used by the Hermetic philosophers,
alchymists, and other occult students, and at one time as firmly
believed in, and with far greater justice, than the infallibility
of the Pope, the Immaculate Conception, or the divine right of
kings. In the sense of an archeological pursuit, it is still of
value in enabling the Masonic student to learn a portion of his
art, and the constellated globe is an index to the mythologies of
antiquity. Very eminent men have given in their adhesion to
the truth of astrology as a science; and Samuel Taylor Coleridge
says no more than the truth, when he observes :—“It is curious
to remark how instinctively the reason has always pointed out
to men the ultimate end of the various sciences, and how, imme-
diately afterwards, they have set to work, like children, to realize
that end by inadequate means. Now they applied to their
appetites, now to their passions, now to their fancy, now to the
understanding, and lastly, to the intuitive reason again. There
is no doubt but that astrology of some sort or other would be the
last achievement of astronomy ;—there must be chemical relations
between the planets; the difference of their magnitudes com-
pared with that of their distances is not explicable otherwise.”

57

AST | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ATH

Since the time of Coleridge, the curious researches made by
means of the prism into the chemical structure of the stars,
fixed and moveable, have to some extent verified his words.
The study of astrology, to be useful to the archeologists, only
requires, in addition to the erudition of a classical scholar, a fair
knowledge of the use of astronomical tables and logarithms, and
a good memory for certain technical rules, which, intelligently
applied to such a book, for instance, as Ovid’s Metamorphoses,
would amply repay the labour of acquiring a knowledge of
astrology. The science has fallen into disrepute, like many
other occult sciences, from the generally low and degraded
characters, who for some three hundred years have traded upon
its mysterious fascinations for the credulous; but that there is
a higher and philosophical side to astrology, as there is to magic,
cannot be doubted.

Astronomy.—This article can only be recarded as a continuation
of the preceding. Freemasonry, without its disciples being
acquainted with the true reason, has borrowed most of the signi-
ficant emblems of astronomy. The form of the Lodge is said to
be in accordance with the general belief and knowledge of the
times in which astronomy and astrology were synonymous
terms,—a parallelogram, extending in every direction, but longi-
tudinal from east to west, in consequence of the apparent motion
of the sun. The tracing boards of Masonry sufficiently show
how the ancient symbolism has remained, but the modern science
of astronomy, which assumes heliocentricity for the system of
which our earth is a part, has nothing to do with forms of thought
essentially different from the hard definitions of modern science,
eliminated from observations which may or may not be true in
themselves.

AsyLuM.—During the session of an Encampment of Knights
Templar, a part of the room is called the asylum ; the word has
hence been adopted, by the figure synedoche, to signify the place
of meeting.

ATELIER (French).—A lodge, or workshop. In the French and Scot-
tish Rites, it denotes council, tribunal, consistory, college, court,
and areopagus.

ATHEIST.—One who openly professes his disbelief in the existence
of God—a state of mind which many of the wisest and best of
men have for a time entertained. In the absence of, to them,
material evidence of a Supreme Being, the fatal logic which
would, on the other hand, conduct them to blind fanaticism,
leads them to the negation of the Grand Architect. Most atheists
have recovered from this unhappy condition of thought, which,
orn the constitution of the human mind, they could not refuse

5

ATH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ATW

to suffer. It is a condition, however, not incompatible with
moral virtue and humane benevolence, and those who reprobate
its supporters are usually shallow thinkers, or interested persons
who have something to lose by toleration. Very rightly, no
atheist is admitted to the privileges of Freemasonry; but once
balloted in, if he choose to sign the candidate’s book, and join
in the ritual, there is nothing to exclude him, but, in order to do
this, he must be either a hypocrite or a coward.

ATHELSTAN.—The reputed patron of Freemasonry, according to the
Old Constitutions. He ascended the Anglo-Saxon throne in 924,
and died 940.

ATHENS, Knicuts or,—tThe fifty-second degree of the Rite of Mis-
raim. The ritual is in the archives of the Mother Lodge of the
Philosophical Rite.

ATHERSADA.—A Persian word, meaning the strong hand. 1. In
Hebrew, xnvinn. This name, in the Septuagint, is given to the
Persian governor of Jerusalem, who accompanied Zerubbabel and
Nehemiah (Esdr. ii. 63; Nehem. vii. 65-70). In the Order of
Heredom of Kilwinning, it was the appellation of the chief of
the Order; and in French Masonry it is the official name of the
head of a chapter. 2. The designation of the President of the
18th degree in the Ancient and Accepted Rite. He is called
Most Wise.

ATHOL Masons.—After the seceding body of Freemasons, in 1739,
had established themselves with some degree of security, under
the name of “Ancient Masons,” they placed themselves under
various noblemen; in 1771, under the wxgis of the third Duke of
Athol, who died 1774, and was succeeded by the fourth duke,
whom they elected Grand Master in 1775, an office which he
held until 1781; being re-elected in 1791, he resigned in 1813,
and was succeeded by H. R.H. the Duke of Kent. At the
Solemn Act of Union in 1813, H. R. H. the Duke of Kent yielded
the supremacy of the Craft to his brother, H.R. H. the Duke of
Sussex, The Lodges comprehended under this act of union, and
who claim to act, although quite inaccurately, from time im-
memorial, are sometimes termed Athol Lodges, and their members
Athol Masons.

ATTOUCHEMENT (French).—A grip.

ATWooD, Henry C.—An American Mason, who introduced Jeremy
L. Cross’s system of working into New York, about 1825. In
1837, he aided in the establishment of the schismatical St John’s
Grand Lodge, and was its Grand Master in 1850, when it was
united with the legitimate Grand Lodge of New York. He
edited a periodical called The Sentinel, was the author of a
Masonic Monitor, and died in 1860.

59

ATY The Royal Masonie Cyclopedia. [azu

ATys, Mysteries or. (See Tammuz.)

AUDI, VipE, TacE.—Hear, See, and Be Silent. The Masonic motto.

Aupitor.—A degree in the Order of Sat B’hai.

AUFSEHER—The German name for the Warden of a Lodge; it
literally means overseer.

AuGER.—A tool used in the Ark Mariner’s degree.

Aucust.—A title given to the Royal Arch Degree, from the impos-
ing nature of its ceremonies, and the importance of the mysteries
it ‘contains.

AUGUSTINE, St. (See Saint Augustine.)

Aum, Aun, and On.—The Hindoo and Egyptian chief divinity in a
triform character. (See Jehovah.)

AUMONT.—The supposed successor of Molay in the Grand Master-
ship of the Temple. The traditions respecting his flight with
seven other Knights to Scotland will not bear critical examina-
tion.

AURORA, KNIGHTS OF, Ok OF Hoprt.—A modification of the K—D.,
and belonging to the Rite of Palestine.

AUSTRALASIA.—Masonry was introduced into the Australian
colonies very soon after their first settlement; and under the
Grand Lodges of England, Scotland, and Ireland, numerous
Lodges are at work, as well as Chapters and other Masonic
bodies. The York rite is chiefly worked in Craft Masonry.

AvsTRIA.—Masonry was introduced into Austria in 1742, in the
Lodge of the Three Cannons, but was immediately " suppressed.
Maria Theresa further prohibited it in 1764; in 1780, on the
accession of Joseph IL, the Fraternity was tolerated, and so con-
tinued, with certain restrictions, throughout his reign. Francis II,
his successor, was hostile to it, and even now Masonry is only
carried on in a quasi-secret manner. A small periodical,
“ Humanitas,” advocates its cause at Vienna at the present time
with considerable ability. (See Hungary.)

Autorsy.—From the Greek airolia, seeing with one’s own cys.
A complete revelation of the ancient mysteries, when the initiate
was invested by the hierophant, with the aporrheta, or sacred
things,

AVENGERS, ORDER OF. (See Vendicosi.)

AVICENNA, 1030.—Physician at Bacara, Persia. (See Rostcrucians,
Eminent.)

Avicnon, ILLUMINATI OF. (See [lluminati of Avignon.)

AVIS OF PORTUGAL, ORDER OF. (See Evora, Brothers of.)

Axe, (See Knights of the Royal Ave.)

AZARIAH (Hebrew, W"1y).—A name in the high degrees, signifying
Helped of God.

Azure—Sky blue. The appropriate colour of the symbolic Lodge.

60

B| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BAB

B.

B.—Beth, the second letter of the Hebrew alphabet, signifying
house, The form of the letter indicates shelter, or a house, 2.
As a compound of a root, it is constantly used for the purpose of
showing that it had to do with stone; when stones at Beth-el are
set up, for instance. The Hebrew value as a numeral is two.
Joined with its predecessor, it forms the word Ab, 38, the root of
Father, Master, one in authority, and it has the Kabbalistical
distinction of being the first letter in the Sacred Volume of the
Law. The Divine name connected with this letter is Wn2,
Bakhour.

Baat.—The word >u2, Ba’al, signifying Lord and Master, is a
generic name for God in many of the Syro-Arabian languages.
The Israelites do not appear ever to have applied this term to their
God Jehovah, although we find a multiplicity of epithets bestowed
in various portions of Scripture upon their tutelary deity. When
spelt with the definite article, xan, Radaal (Judg. ii. 18), it is
appropriated to the chief deity of the Pheenicians, the principal
seat of his worship being at Tyre. Baal was identical with the
sun, and in the building of the First Temple it was adorned with
many representations of solar worship. Bel or Baal was wor-
shipped among many nations—as among the Celts, the Franks,
the Saxons, and the Northern nations, The Druids especially
venerated the sun, and in Egypt an important politico-religious
revolution took place under Aakh-en-a-ten, Amenophis IV., 18th
Dynasty (1591 3B.c., Lepsius), known as the Solar-disc heresy.
The female companion of Baal was Ashtoreth, or the moon. In
most Oriental nations, however, the moon was male, and the
sun female. (See the articles Bel and Shemesh.) The Masonic
Fraternity regard the symbol of the sun with other eyes—as the
source of Light, Heat, and Beneficence.

BaBeL.—This word in Hebrew signifies confusion, and was the
name of the celebrated Tower attempted to be built on the

- plains of Shinar, a.m. 1775, one hundred and forty years after
the Deluge. This deluge was, properly speaking, only a mystical
event, referring to changes in theological opinion, whence a
purer form of worship was destined to emerge, according to the
doctrines of Swedenborg. Scripture informs us that the Tower
of Babel was destroyed by a special interposition of the Almighty.
The Noachite Masons date the commencement of their Order
from this event (see Noachites); and much information on the

subject is preserved in the ineffable degree of Patriarch Noachite.
61

BAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BAC

It is said that spurious Masonry took its rise at Babel, the people
then abandoning their worship of the true God. In the tradi-
tionary ceremonies, the lofty Tower of Babel is regarded as the
cause of the confusion of tongues, and the consequent loss of
the general and true principles of Masonry. It is probable that
we may dimly see in this some great heresy which had arisen
among the early architects, one form of structure being repudiated
with shame. In the French Masonic Rite of Adoption, an
anagram of Babel is used as a password. (See Ornan.)

BaBYLON.—The ancient metropolis of Chaldea, on the Euphrates,
once the most magnificent city in the world. It was here that,
upon the destruction of Solomon’s Temple by Nebuchadnezzar,
in the year of the world 3394, the Jews of the tribes of Judah
and Benjamin, who had been the inhabitants of Jerusalem, were
conveyed and kept in captivity for seventy-two years, until
Cyrus, King of Persia, issued a decree for restoring them, and
authorised the rebuilding of the Temple by Zerubbabel, the
Jewish governor of Judea, with the assistance of Joshua the
high priest, and Haggai the scribe. Upon the building of this
Second Temple, the degree of Holy Royal Arch is founded.

BaBYLoN, Rep Cross or. (See Babylonish Pass.)

BaBYLONISH Captivity. (See Captivity.)

BABYLONISH Pass.—A degree conferred in Scotland under the
Grand Royal Arch Chapter.

Back.—It is a duty incumbent on every Free and Accepted Mason
to support a brother’s character in his absence equally as though
he were present; not to revile him behind his back, nor suffer
it to be done by others without using every necessary attempt
to prevent it. It is likewise considered a Masonic duty to warn
a brother of danger, in cases of a non-criminal nature.

Bacon, Francis, BARON VERULAM—The celebrated philosopher,
and author of the “New Atlantis,” in which is described the
House of Solomon. Nicolai, among others, has ascribed to this
celebrated romance the origin of Masonry in its present form.
Certain it is that the occult students of the seventeenth century
formed a kind of society, and many of their disciples afterwards
appear as Masons, on the establishment of the Grand Lodge in
1717.

Bacon, NicHotas.—Lord Keeper of the Seals. In the little
banqueting-house in the orchard at Gorhambury House, St
Albans, supposed to have been built about 1565, a singular
series of inscriptions exist. First, the walls have the liberal arts
beautifully depicted upon them, and over them portraits of such
learned men as had excelled in each, and under them verses
expressive of the benefits derived from the study of them :—

62

BAC | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [BAT

GRAMMAR.—“‘ Lex sum sermonis, linguarum regula certa.
Qui me non didicit cetera nulla petat.”

Donatus, Linty, Servius, and Priscian.
ARITHMETIC. —“ Ingenium exacuo numerorum arcano recludo.
Qui numeros didicit quid didicisse nequit.”
STIFELIUS, Bupeus, PyrHAGORAS,
Locic.—“‘ Divido multiplicis, res, explanoque latentio
Vera exquiro falsa arguo cuncta probo.”
ARISTOTLE, Ropotpy, Porpuyry, SETON.
Music.—“‘ Mitigo merores et ecerbas lenio curas
Gestiat ut placidis mens hilarata sonis.”
ARIAN, TERPANDER, ORPHEUS.
Ruxrroric.—“ Ile duce splendescit gratis prudentia verbis,
Jamque ornata nitet qui fuit ante rudis.”
Cicero, IsocraTEs, DEMOSTHENES, QUINTILLIAN.
Grometry.—‘‘ Corpora describo rerum et quo singula pacto,
Apte sunt formis appropriata suis.”
ARcHIMEDES, Evciip, StRABO, APOLLONIUS.
AstroLocy.—‘‘ Astrorum lustrans cursus veresque potentes
Elicio miris fata futura modis.”
REGIoMONTANUS, HALY, CoPPpERNICUS, PTOLEMY.

Ds AmiciTiA.—In amico ad monendo melius est successum quam fidem
deesse. Omnia cum amico de libera: sed de ipso, prius.

De Amore.—Amor insane amicitia: illius affectas istuis ratio causa: et ea
sola amicitia durat cui virtus basis est.*

Bacon, Rocer.—Friar. (See Magic.)

BacuLus.—The Grand Master’s staff among the Templars. The
upper part of the staff is gilt, with a Templar’s cross, enamelled
red, edged with gold, within a circle; on the centre of the cross
is borne a black shield, displaying a silver square. The motto
of the Order, “In Hoc Signo Vinces,” surrounds the whole.

BapvEen.—Masonry was soon introduced into Baden, but was sus-
pended from 1785 to 1805. In. 1809, a Grand Orient was
established at Manheim, but again suppressed in 1813. In 1846
and 1847, the Masons of Baden were allowed to recommence
their labours. Since the re-establishment of the German Empire,
the Baden Masons are under the Grand Lodge of Germany.

BapGs oF A Mason.—The lambskin or white leather apron, which
must be worn in all Lodges during the hours of labour. (See
Apron.)

BatyLea.—Sacred stones, said to have fallen from heaven ; probably
meteoric stones, adored by the Phcenicians and other ancient
nations.

* T am indebted to the kindness of Brother Captain N. G. Philips, 33d degree, for

this inscription. —K.R. H.M. 63

BAF | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [BAL

BaroMet. (See Baphomet.)

Bac.—The insignia of the Grand Secretary, and supposed to con-
tain the seal of which he is custodian.

BaGNoLiAns.—A sect which arose at Bagnoles, in Languedoc, in
the eighth century. It rejected the whole of the Old Testament
and most of the New.

BaGuLKAL—A word used in the high degrees. According to
Lenning, derived from the Hebrew Begoal-Kol, “ all is revealed ;”
but it is in Hebrew So-byia, in abominatis omnis.

Banrpt’s RitE—A rite founded by Carl Friedrich Bahrdt, a
German (born, 1741; died, 1792), about 1787. He was a.learned
divine, and the author of many works on theology, ethics, and
philology. He opened a Lodge at Halle, in Germany, under the
name of the German Union; and placed it under the protection
of the Prince of Anhalt-Bernburg, securing the co-operation of
many persons of rank and condition. The rite comprehended
six degrees, viz.:—(1) The Youth; (2) The Man; (3) The Old
Man; (4) The Mesopolyte; (5) The Diocesan; (6) The Superior.
The Grand Lodge, however, dissolved the Fraternity on the
ground of their working without a charter, and Bahrdt himself
was soon after imprisoned for writing a corrupt work. This
system has fallen into disuse. Bahrdt’s character has been much
assailed. (See German Union.)

BALcANIFER. (See Beaucenifer.)

BALDACHIN.—The canopy placed over the Oriental chair in the
Lodge ; also significative of the covering of the Lodge itself;
a symbol of the starry firmament, and a sign of the uni-
versality of Freemasonry. In the Catechism of Pritchard
we find the following: “What has the Lodge for a covering?
Answer—The vaulted skies of various colours, or the clouds.”
Klause remarks that “the sense of this beautiful system of
symbols is not well understood. Some think that the primitive
Lodge was not covered above, and that the skies were literally
the covering; hence the ceiling of a Lodge room is generally
made to represent 2 celestial planisphere.” The Egyptian
temples also present ceilings exhibiting the planisphere, as in
the well-known Zodiac of Denderah; although this has been
proved to be of comparatively late date, not being earlier than
the era of the Ptolemies. The Baldachin is also a symbol of the
real catholicity of Freemasonry; for as the heavens with their
galaxy of stars spread over all the regions of the earth, so Free-
masonry holds in its embrace all the world, reaching through all
time and space. There is also a Rosicrucian and Hermetic
meaning attached to the celestial canopy, in relation to astro-
logical science.

64

BAL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BAL

BaLDER.—The Scandinavian Osiris, slain by Loke, the evil
principle.

BaLtpwyn ENcAMPMENT.—This encampment is claimed to have
existed at Bristol from time immemorial; and four similar inde-
pendent encampments are said to have existed in London,
Bath, York, and Salisbury. The real date is about 1780. It has
now become reconciled to the Grand Conclave of England, but
still is recognised with immemorial existence,

Baukis. (See Sheba, Queen of )

Battot.—The mode of electing candidates for initiation is by
ballot. Each Lodge has a right to prescribe the number of
black balls which exclude. It is best to have unanimity; but
when one black ball appears, a fresh ballot is usually directed
by the Master, after which, should the ballot prove unfavourable,
the candidate is rejected without appeal, and cannot be proposed
anywhere for three calendar months. Every member of a Lodge
is bound to vote upon the occasion of a candidature, although
this rule is frequently infringed. The ballot, in fact, forms the
only protection of the Fraternity against the admission of persons
unqualified for Masonic privileges, no matter otherwise how
worthy. Where a member has no personal knowledge of any
disqualification, he is, however, bound to uphold the nomination
of the candidate; whether he is personally known to him or no,
especially if the report of the reporting committee admits of the
tongue of good report having been heard in his favour. In
England, Ireland, and Scotland, these committees are unfortun-
ately the exception, not the rule. Many an unfortunate mistake
might be avoided, when it is too late, if such committees were
imperative. The ballot is, in all cases, in the hands of the
Lodge: a candidate having been properly and duly proposed
and seconded, the Master's duty is to order the election to
proceed. The Senior Deacon then takes the ballot box, and,
opening it, places all the white and black balls indiscriminately
in one drawer, leaving the other empty. He then should hand
it to the Junior Deacon, who should carry it to the Junior
Warden, who should see that it is intact. The Senior Warden
then receives it from the Junior Deacon, and, having also ex-
amined it, directs the Senior Deacon to carry it to the pedestal,
where it should be left vefore the Worshipful Master. The
Secretary should then call the roll of the Lodge, beginning with
the Master and ending with the Tyler (who is, however, not
necessarily a member of the Lodge, and, in the case of payment
for his services, has no vote). As each officer is called,—with
the exception of the Master, who votes last (having a casting
vote), the balls having been cise wet rae Srenennes with

5

BAL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BAN

the sign of the first degree, deposits his ballot, and retires. On
the completion of the ballot by all present, the members should
rise in their stations and seats, and salute the box with the
ordinary sign. This is done in honour of the occasion, and in
the hope of a favourable issue for the candidate. Upon this, the
Master directs the Senior Deacon to take charge of the ballot-
box; and he, in common with the Junior Deacon, proceeds to
the Junior Warden, who examines the box, and reports all clear
in the south, or all foul, as the case may be. The Senior Deacon
then proceeds to the Senior Warden and the Master, who
respectively report, with the necessary verbal variations of
“West” and “East.” The ballot being clear, the candidate is
declared elected, and the Secretary makes a minute to that
effect. If the box is “foul,” subsequent proceedings depend
upon the bye-laws of the Lodge in which the election takes
place. The candidate being usually in attendance, he is now
ordered to be “properly prepared,” and the first degree is con-
tinued. Otherwise, the course of proceedings will be regulated
according to circumstances. The presentation of the box to
each member is much to be deprecated, as it is a frequent source
of confusion.

BALSAMO, JOSEPH. (See Cagliostro.)

BALusTRADE—A row of balustres. Although archeological re-
searches have failed hitherto to find this architectural invention
among the ruins of ancient buildings, yet it is difficult to con-
ceive that an arrangement of such obvious utility should have
been wholly unknown to the builders of antiquity.

Batustre.—A small column or pilastre. Documents issued by the
Grand Lodges of the Latin countries, such as Italy, Spain,
Portugal, and Brazil, and the Ancient and Accepted Scottish
Rite, under the Sovereign Inspectors or Supreme Councils of the
33d degree, are thus denominated. They are usually issued at
times when assurances of mutual confidence and support on
special or general questions are necessary.

Bawzac, Louis CHARLES.—A French architect and member of the
Institute of Egypt; founder of the Lodge of the Great Sphinx at
Paris, and author of many French Masonic songs. He died
inspector of public works on the Seine, 31st March, 1820.

Banp.—A ribbon worn round the neck of the officers of Grand
Lodges, and others high in office,—past or actual,—and also of
individual Lodges to which the jewels are attached, denoting the
special office of the wearer. The colour differs according to the
prevalent colour of the degree or Lodge. Blue is correct for
Craft Lodges, scarlet for Mark Lodges, and different colours are
adopted in the higher degrees.

66

BAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BAP

BANNER BEARER.—An officer in the high degrees of the English
and French Rites,

BaNNERET.—1. A small banner. 2. A Justice of the Peace. 3, In
the Knights Templar system, an officer who, together with the
Marshal, conducted all warlike enterprises. 4. In France and
England, the word formerly designated an Order of Knighthood
and great dignity, only to be won on the field of battle. The
title of Knights Banneret has now fallen into desuetude.

BANNERS.—Banners are more in use in America than in other parts
of the world, processions being frequent and popular. Symbol-
ical Masonry has had invented, for its votaries, six banners, being
of white satin or silk, fringed with blue, and bearing the words
Faith, Hope, Charity, Wisdom, Strength, Beauty. In like
manner, Royal Arch Masonry has appropriate banners. (See
Arms of Freemasonry.)

BANQUET OF THE SaGES.—One of the high degrees of the Primitive
Rite of Narbonne.

BANQUETS.—Masonic banquets usually close the proceedings of a
Lodge. At these social gatherings Masonic and loyal toasts are
proposed, and general harmony is presumed to prevail. These
toasts are honoured in a particular way known as firing; none
but Masons are allowed to be present.

BaPHoMet.—Among the charges preferred against the Order of
Knights Templar, for which Jacques de Molay suffered martyr-
dom, was that of worshipping an idol or image called Baphomet
or Baphometus. Many discussions have arisen respecting this
word. Maccoy considers it to have been a corruption of
Mohammed; but when it is remembered that the very object of
the Templar Order was to combat the faith of Islam, it is easy to
see that such a view must be erroneous. Von Hammer suggests
that it may have arisen from the two Greek words, Bagi, wiris,
the baptism of wisdom; and Nicolai suggests that the three
heads, sometimes shown on the image, referred to the Trinity ;
but it might be as well referred to Cerberus, as we have dog-
headed divinities constantly in the Egyptian and Hellenic
mysteries. It is curious that dafa is the Provengal for a false-
hood. That it was a Kabbalistical talisman is unquestionable,
and was connected with the esoteric doctrines of Hermetic
philosophy. It is very likely that an image embodying these
doctrines may have existed, nor is it difficult to reconstruct
its singular form, in itself essentially Masonic and universal.
Be it remembered that the Rabbis were the jealous custodians
of the science of the Cabala or Kabbalah, and that their
mystical form of reading would prevail in the terminology of
that science. Ifthe word be read in the Hebrew mann (that

7

BAP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BAT

is, instead of BAPHOMET, read thus, TEMOHPAB), it is found to be
an abbreviated cipher of the words, Templi Omnium Hominum
Paces ABbas—‘ The father of the Temple, the universal peace of
men,” thus conveying in a phrase an appropriate and universal
sentiment of a Masonic nature. It has been suggested that
Baphomet is none other than the Ancient of Days or Creator.
More cannot be said here without improperly revealing what we
are bound to hele, conceal, and never reveal.

Baptism, Masonic.—A simple purification by water. (See Zustra-
tion.

Bats (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

Barp.—1. Ninth degree of the Kabbalistic Rite. 2. The lowest
degree of the Druidical system. (See Mysteries of the Druids.)
BARDESANISTS.—The followers of Bardesanes, a Syrian of Edessa,
in the second century. They held that the actions of God, as
well as of man, were subject to necessity, and denied the incar-

nation of Christ.

Bareroor. (See Discalceation.)

BARRUEL, AUGUSTIN.—A French abbé, born at Villeneuve de Berg,
October 2, 1741; died, October 5, 1820. He was the author
of an infamous book on Masonry—* Mémoires pour servir a
L Histoire de Jacobinisme,’ 4 vols. 8vo, London, 1797. In this
work he wilfully distorted the truth, and promulgated views
having no foundation save in his own truculent mind. He
accused the Freemasons of having been the instigators of the
horrors of the French Revolution, and sought in every way to
discredit the Fraternity. His book is now a dead letter.

BasiLica—By this name, market-houses and halls of justice,
erected after the fashion of religious edifices and Christian
churches, were called in the middle ages. These buildings were
of an oblong rectangular form, with a narrow side suitable for
a semicircular niche. Anderson, in his “ Book of Constitutions,”
remarks that “our modern temple has arisen from the Basilica,
having the same interior arch.” Does “our modern Temple”
mean Sir Christopher Wren’s St Paul’s ?

Basxet.—A symbol of the purification of the soul among the
Egyptians. The sacred basket was termed the liknon; and the
officer who carried it in the Ancient Mysteries was called liknop-
horus, or basket-bearer. The basket contained the first-fruits
and other offerings.

Bato Kon (npn, daughter of the voice)—A mystical voice of
God, heard from between the Cherubim (see Cherubim). The
Midrashim and Gemara affirm that the Bath Kol was the voice
which spoke to Abraham, Moses, David, and others.

cae eae OF THE. (See Orders, Royal English.)

BAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BEA

Baton.—A staff or truncheon about two feet long, generally orna-
mented or gilt at each end, and the middle enveloped in a scroll.
The heralds and ambassadors of antiquity carried such staves.
Carried in the right hand, it is the emblem of the authority of
marshals in Masonic processions. The badge of a marshal ina
subordinate Lodge is two cross batons, and that of the marshal
in the Grand Lodge two cross batons encircled in a wreath.

BATTERY. (See Acclamation.)

BavartA.—Masonry was introduced into Bavaria in 1737, suspen-
ded in 1784, 1799, and 1804, but revived in 1812 and 1817.
The Grand Lodge of Bayreuth was constituted under the title
of Grand Lodge of the Sun. In 1868 a Masonic conference took
place, and a constitution adopted, under which perfect liberty
was guaranteed to every strictly Masonic rite.

Bazot, ETIENNE Francois.—A French Masonic writer of eminence,
born at Niévre, March 31, 1782. He published, in 1811, a
“Manual of Freemasonry,” still in general esteem for its judi-
cious treatment of the subject. He was also well known in
general literature.

B.D.S. P. H. G. F.—tThe initials of Beauté, Divinité, Sagesse, Puis-
sance, Honneur, Gloire, Force, used in the ritual of the Knights of
the East and West. The English equivalents are B.D. W. P.H.G.8.

BEADLE—An officer in the ancient Knights of the Holy Sepulchre,
corresponding to the Junior Deacon of a symbolic Lodge.

BeEaTi Paout, Society or. (See Paul, Society of St.)

Beaton, Mrs,—If we may trust a book called “A General History
of the County of Norfolk,” 1829 (vol. ii. p. 1804), the Hon. Mrs
Aldworth was not the only female who learnt the secrets of
Freemasonry. Mrs Beaton was a native of that county, and
concealed herself in the wainscoting of the Lodge-room. How-
ever, she appears to have known how to keep the secret, and
died, aged 85, at St John’s, Maddermarket, Norwich, in July,
1802, An instance in which the landlady of a Devonshire hotel,
where a Lodge was held, did the same thing, a few years ago, and
caused the removal of the Lodge, was recently related to me by
a member of the Lodge in question.

BEAUCENIFER.—The title of the officer whose privilege it was to
bear the Beauseant of the Templars. It is still retained in some
high degrees.

BEAUCHAINE, CHEVALIER.—One of the irremovable Masters of the
Ancient Grand Lodge of France. He lived at the Golden Sun,
Rue St Victor, Paris, and for six francs gave all the degrees of
Masonry! He founded the Order of Fendeurs or Woodcutters,
at Paris, 17th August, 1747. (See Fendeurs.)

BEAUSEANT.—The banner was composed of a black and white

69

BEA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BxéD

horizontal stripe, the upper half being black, and the lower half
white. It bore the inscription:—‘ Non nobis, Domine, non
nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam.” It was carried by the ancient
Teutonic Knights, from whom sprang the present kingdom of
Prussia; it signified that they were fair and favourable to the
friends of Christ, but black and terrible to his enemies. It was
probably derived from the Arabs, or it might have typified good
and evil fortune. Alexander the Great is said to have used a
similar banner in his wars—a somewhat unlikely story. Beau-
séant was also the battle cry and the most sacred oath of the
Templars; in allusion to their seal, whereon two brethren were
represented as riding on one horse, which was regarded by the
Order as a fair seat—bien séant; ae. as a seat of true fraternal
alliance. It was thus a token of true brotherly love.

Beauty.—One of the three principal supports of Masonry, the other
two being Wisdom and Strength. It is represented by the
Corinthian column and the Junior Warden, that column being
the most beautiful and highly finished of the orders, and because
the situation of the J. W. in the south enables him better to
observe that bright luminary which, at its meridian height, is
the beauty and glory of the day. H.A.B. is also considered as
the representative of the column of beauty which supported the
Temple. He was also the third in rank of the three Grand
Masters at the erection of King Solomon’s stately edifice.

BEavuTy AND Banps.—The application of beauty and bands to the
science of Freemasonry was in much esteem with our brethren
at the beginning of the present century—the symbolical refer-
ence was to the two rods, spoken of by Zachariah the prophet;
but, at the reunion in 1813, being pronounced inconsistent with
the general plan of the Order, it was expunged, and is now
nearly if not quite forgotten.

BECHER, JOHN JOACHIM. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

Becker. (See Johnson.)

BrEcKER, RuDOLPH ZACHARIAS.—A Masonic author of Gotha—pub-
lished, in 1786, a history of the Bavarian Illuminati. He was
also highly esteemed in general literature. He belonged to the
sentimental (Sturm und Drang) period of German literature, in
a very small way. He died 1802.

BEDARRIDE, THE BROTHERS.—Marc, Michel, and Joseph Bédarride,
like many others, on insufficient grounds, have been condemned
as charlatans. There is nothing to distinguish in point of verity
between the founder or introducer of one rite above another. It
must depend upon the coherence and intellectual value of the
rite, which becomes quite superfluous where there is no sub-
stantial advantage gained for the true archeological and scien-

7o

BEE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BEL

tific value of Masonry, under whatever name the rite may be
formulated. It is in this sense that the authorities of the Grand
Lodge of England (ever the honourable custodians of Masonry)
have most properly resisted innovations. But there are several
quasi-Masonic bodies in this country, let in as it were by a side
door. Hence the brethren Bédarride had as much right to carry
their false ware to market as these. They introduced the Rite
of Mizraim in 1813, at Paris, alleging the authority of Lechan-
geur for the establishment of a Supreme Puissance for France.
Mare died April, 1846; Michel, the most important of the
brothers, died February 16,1856. (See Mizraim, Rite of.)

BEEHIVE.—An emblem of industry; appropriate to the third degree.
This virtue is ever held in high esteem in the Craft, for the Old
Charges tell us that “all Masons shall work honestly on working
days, that they may live creditably on holidays.” The esoteric
meaning of the beehive was that of regeneration; and a hive
was a type of the ark. “Hence,” says Faber (Orig. of Pag. Idol.,
vol. ii, p. 133), “both the diluvian priestesses and the regener-
ated souls were called bees; hence bees were feigned to be pro-
duced from the carcase of a cow, which also symbolized the ark
and, hence, as the great father was esteemed an infernal god,
honey was much used both in funeral rites and in the mysteries.”
Samson found honey in the carcase of the dead lion. Bees and
lilies have many esoteric significations.

Becuin, JOHN. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

Bruaviour.—A Mason should always be cautious in his words and
carriage, that the most penetrating stranger may not be able to
discover what is not proper to be intimated ; and sometimes he
should divert a conversation and manage it prudently for the
honour of the Fraternity. Not one of the least of the benefits
of Masonic initiations consists in the acquirement of this habit
of circumspection in conversation.

BEHOLD youR MasTER.—A term used in Lodges, in some countries,
on an installation in connection with the formula—* Master,
behold your brethren,” tending to cement authority with
brotherly love, teaching alike the lessons of humility and respon-
sibility.

BrL.—Bel, Baal, or Bul, is the name of God as worshipped among
the Chaldeans, Phoeniceans, Assyrians, and the Mesopotamian
nations in general. (See Jehovah.)

BELENUS. (See Abraxas.)

BeLcium.—Possesses a Grand Orient, founded in 1833. There is
also a Grand Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted
Rite. A chancellorship of the Order of Ishmael has existed in
Belgium since 1861,

71

BEL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BEN

BeEtis.—Bells were the most notable ornaments on the robe of the
chief pontiff of the Hebrews: “And it shall be to Aaron to
minister, and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto
the Holy Place before the Lord, and when he cometh out, that
he die not.”

Benac.—A corrupted form of a Hebrew word, signifying the builder,

Benal.—The Benai were setters, layers, or builders, at the erection
of King Solomon’s Temple, being able and ingenious workmen
(Fellow Crafts), distributed into Lodges, with a Master and
Wardens in each, to take every supervision as to conduct,
labour, and wages. (See Bonaim.)

BEnakaR (Heb. ya, filius sterilis)—The name of the cavern to
which the assassins fled.

BENDEKAR.—Significant in the high degrees, (See 1 Kings iv. 9.)
W?I12, filius contortus; in Hebrew, means the son of him who
divides or pierces. Also Bendaca in corrupted rituals.

Benepict XIV.—A pope whose name was Prosper Lambertini,
born at Bologna, 1675, became pope after Clement XIT., 1740,
died 1758. He fulminated a bull against Freemasons, like many
of his successors, 18th May, 1751. (See Bull.)

BENEDICTION.—Pronounced at the close of Masonic labour by a
Past Master, to which every brother is bound to reply,—So mote
it be. Amen,—in an audible voice.

Benerit Funp.—A society for the relief of sick, aged, and im-
poverished brethren, and the protection of their widows, wives,
and children, was established under the patronage of the Prince
of Wales, the Earl of Moira, and the other officers of Grand
Lodge, in 1798. This fund flourished for some years; but in
principle Masonry not being a benefit club, it was erroneous,
and other-more fitting and valuable institutions have taken its
place. The whole system of Friendly Societies is fraught with
much danger to the body politic; it encourages idleness and
fraud, while the real objects of commiseration and charity seldom
reap any benefit from it. Even in Masonry, to the writer’s
personal knowledge, within the last few years, a brother, who
had been relieved with the munificent sum of £250 by the Board
of Benevolence, grumbled at the small amount of aid, to the
writer himself. Another brother who received, upon very slight
claims, £100, considered himself almost insulted at the grant.
Surely it is not for brethren such as these that the open hand
of charity is intended !

BENEVOLENCE, KNIGHTS OF, OR OF PERFECT SILENCE.—The 49th
degree of the Metropolitan Chapter of France.

BENGABEL (Heb. 1237/2, flius hominis)—In some rituals, for Ben-
72

BEN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ BEY

dekar. It is given as Bengaber, 1 Kings iv. 13, the son of Geber,
or the son of the strong man.

BENGAL.—Masonry introduced into Bengal, in 1729, by the estab-
lishment of a Lodge under dispensation from Lord Kingston,
Grand Master of England.

BENGAREL OF Pisa. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

BENJAMIN (j'9°93, wtatum filius; Gen. xxxv. 18).—A significant word
in the Holy Royal Arch.

BENKHORIM.—From bd“ inja, son of the freeborn.

BENYAH OR BENIAH.—The son of Jah; important in the high
degrees ; Heb, m\"]2.

BERIGARD, CLAUDE. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

BERITH (n"73).—A covenant.

BERLIN. (See Germany.)

BERNARD, Count OF TREVISAN. (See Rosicructans, Eminent.)

BERNARD, Davip.—A work entitled “Light on Masonry” was
published in 1829, under the name of this person, whose faults
had caused his expulsion. It is emphatically unworthy of notice.

BERNARD, SAINT.—Born in France, 1091, founder of the Order of
Cistercians, and a member of the Order of Templars; or at any
rate founder of their rule. He was a distinguished and benevo-
lent man; and his “Sermo exhortatorius ad Milites Templi ;” or,
“Exhortations to the Soldiers of the Temple,” deserves the most
careful perusal at the hands of Masonic students. He died, 1153.

BeEry_ (Heb. wwn).—The first in the fourth row of the High Priest’s
breast-plate, of bluish green, belonging to the tribe of Benjamin.

BetTrayinc.— By a full and fair exposition of our leading
principles we betray no Masonic secrets—these are safely locked
up in the heart of every Mason, and are never to be imparted
except in a constitutional manner. But our leading tenets are
no secrets. It is no secret that Masonry is of Divine origin;
it is no secret that the system embraces and inculeates evan-
gelical truth; it is no secret that there is no duty enjoined, nor
a virtue required, in the Volume of Inspiration, but what is found
in and taught by speculative Freemasonry; it is no secret that
the appropriate name of God has been preserved in this institu-
tion in every country where Masonry existed, while the rést of
the world was literally sunk in heathenism; and above all, it is
not, neither can it be, a secret that a good Mason is, of neces-
sity, truly and emphatically a Christian.” This is the definition
of Dr Oliver, and is excellent in its way; but Jews, Mohamme-
dans, Hindoos, and Chinese, are also Masons, or where would be
the universality ?

BEYERLE, FRancois Louis DE—A French Masonic author at the

73

BEZ | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ BIG

end of the eighteenth century. He belonged to the Strict
Observance, and his name in that rite was Eques 4 fascia. He
was a scientific man in the acceptation of that transition period,
and wrote several Masonic essays.

BEZALEEL (Heb. >xova).—Employed with Aholiab, at the construc-
tion of the Tabernacle, as a skilled artificer, and most zealous for
the work.

Brere.—In all Christian countries the Holy Bible is not only a part of
the necessary furniture of the Lodge, but is esteemed the first great
light of Masonry ; indeed, independently of other considerations,
this place must be given to it, as it contains the most authentic
account of the building of that magnificent structure commemor-
ated in the ceremonies of the Fraternity. Nor is it without a
feeling of respect towards our Mohammedan, Hindoo, Parsee, or
other brethren, that they are severally obligated by that book,
most dear to the leading principles of their several faiths. It
would not be possible for individuals professing other creeds to
believe in the sincerity of the obligations taken by Christians,
were this not the case. Whatever our personal views, we are
bound to respect those of others, if we would inspire mutual
confidence; and it is the best proof of the advancing refinement
of mankind, that this toleration of other forms of reverence for
the Great Creator and Father of mankind is extending every-
where in a rapidly increasing ratio. The Vedas, the Shasters,
the Koran, the Zendavesta, and the works of Confucius and of
Laou-tsze, contain precepts infused by the all-comprehending
mind of God, and are by no means to be disregarded by Free-
masons, whatever belief they may profess. (See Furniture.)

Bis.eE BEARER.—1. On a grand Masonic procession, an esteemed Past
Master is selected to bear the Sacred Volume of the Law ona
cushion, together with the square and compasses, in immediate
advance of the Chaplain. 2. Also a Grand Office of the Grand
Lodge of Scotland, and of several Scottish Lodges.

BIELFELD, JACOB FRIEDRICH, BARoN.—Born March 31, 1717; died
April 3, 1770. Envoy from Prussia to the Hague, and an
intimate friend of Frederick II., known as the Great. To his
influence Masonry owes the adhesion of that great prince to the
principles of the Fraternity, and his subsequent active interest
in all its concerns.

Bicotry.— There are some bigots in their opinions against Free-
masonry. It is, they cry, a bad thing, an unlawful thing, a
sinful thing. Why? Because we detest it—abhor it! To pity
such is no mean part of Christian love, since I am persuaded
that even in good hearts the first emotions respecting them were

74

BIR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BLA

those of scorn or contempt. Of what use is it to reason with
bigots, whether in religion, morals, or politics?”— Turner. To
these remarks it may be added that many persons inveigh against
Masonry, upon the ground that when all is known there is nothing
in it, in which they are aided by persons who ingeniously
employ destructive criticism, derived from modern ideas on
archeology. To these last it might be replied, that the whole
past history of man may be logically demonstrated as false by
adopting their method, which is a reductio ad absurdam, while to
the former it might be well to put the question, Whether the
perfect discipline of mind, the strengthening of the intellectual
faculties, and the pure morality inculcated, are not arguments in
favour of the institution, its broad code of charity towards all
men being left out of the question ?

BirKHEAD, MATTHEW.—Chietiy known for the fact of his being the
author of the Entered Apprentice’s song, beginning “Come let us
prepare.” The song was first published in the Book of Constitu-
tions, 1723, but at that time the author was dead. He is pre-
sumed to have been an actor; but as actors and authors were
very little regarded in those days (the percentage of attention
has not greatly risen since that time), his song remains as his
only permanent epitaph.

Biack.—The colour of grief and mourning among the nations-of
the West. In the degree of Knights Templar, it refers to the
martyrdom of Jacques de Molay; in the elected (elu) degrees of
the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, and in other rites, to the
death of the Chief Builder of the Temple; and in the Rose-Croix,
of the Ancient and Accepted Rite, to the crucifixion ; and in that
of the Antient and Primitive Rite, to the sufferings of humanity.

Biack BrorTHers, ORDER OF THE.—According to Lenning, die
Schwartzen Brtider was a Collegiate Society, but its members
attributed its origin to 1675. It was largely spread throughout
Germany, and observed the ritual of the Kadosch. It at last
emerged as a political society, and was incorporated, under Major
Liitzow, as the Free Corps, in 1813.

Brack Friars, Society or.—Existing in New York in 1793. The
little we know about it is derived from a notice in Bro. E. T.
Carson’s admirable bibliography in the Masonic Review, edited
by Bro. C. Moore, at Cincinnatti, August, 1875, page 238. The
officers were chancellors, cardinals, and friars.

Brazinc Srar—An ornament of the Lodge, connected with
Hermetic science. The symbol of Divine Providence, and
emblematic of prudence. By no means the sun, as may be seen
by reference to many philosophic works. Under this title, an
important work was printed concerning Freemasonry, in two

75

BLU] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BOA

volumes duodecimo, by Baron de Tschoudy, at the end of the
last century. The doctrines therein promulgated were never
used as a rite.

BiLvue.—The appropriate colour of the first three, or symbolical
degrees. Morally, it inculcates that the mind of a Mason should
be as expansive, and his heart as universal, as the blue arch of
heaven itself. (See Blue Masonry.)

BLUE AND ORANGE, THE LOYAL AND FRIENDLY SocIETY oF.—This
society met in 1742, at Kouli Khan’s Head, Leicester Fields.
(See Derisive Societies.)

Biuz Bianket.—Such an article is preserved by the Lodge of
Journeymen in Edinburgh, and has been used as a banner. The
story connected with it runs thus:—A number of Scotch
mechanics followed Allan, Lord Steward of Scotland, to the holy
wars in Palestine, under a banner on which were inscribed these
words: In bona voluntate tua edificentur muri Hierosolyme.
(Psalm li.) On their return they deposited this honoured
banner, called by them “the banner of the Holy Ghost,” on the
altar of St Eloi, patron of goldsmiths, and patron of Edinburgh
tradesmen in those days, in the Church of St Giles. There it
remained, being occasionally displayed, until 1482, when James
TIL, for signal ¢ services, both personal and pecuniary, renewed to
the Edinburgh craftsmen their banner of “The Blue Blanket.”
It has since been honoured, and is always preserved with jealous
care. There is an analogy between this and the blacksmith’s
apron, so long the standard of Persia. Masonic archeologists
may make something of this.

Bive Cross, KNIGHTS oF THE. (See Cross, Knights of the Blue.)

Biue Masonry.—The degrees of Entered Apprentice, Fellow
Craft, and Master Mason, are called Blue Masonry, in contradis-
tinction to Mark and Royal Arch Masonry, which are called
Red Masonry (which see). The colour blue was adopted as the
favourite colour of the Craft after the initiation of William III,
so it is not in any way a landmark.

Boaz (¥3).—The name of the left-hand pillar that stood at the
porch of King Solomon’s temple. It is derived from the Heb.
ab “in,” and w oaz “strength.” (See Pillars.) One of the rules
of the Jewish Kabbalah is called Transposition, and is used by
finding an appropriate meaning to a word formed anagrammati-
cally from any other word, Acting upon this rule, Brother
Rosenberg, an eminent Jewish Mason, residing in Paris, thus
improves the names of the two pillars: “In the first degree the
candidate receives in his preparation the elements of the sciences;
it remains for him to instruct or to fortify himself by means of
the higher sciences. The word fortify, in Hebrew, is zoaB. At

76

BOC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BoH

the moment when the young neophyte is about to receive the
physical light, he should prepare himself to receive the moral
light. The word prepared, in Hebrew, is NIKAJ. The word is very
important for him who proposes to fullow the paths of virtue.”

Bocuim (0°93, weepings).—This word is of great importance in the
Order of Ishmael. Hagar wept at the well, when turned into the
wilderness with Ishmael her son, when an angel spoke to her.
In the traditions of the Order, Bochim is said to be identical
with the locality in which the people of Israel were reproved by an
angel of the Lord, a messenger or prophet, for their disobedience
and remissness in taking possession of their inheritance (Judg.
ii. 1). This prophet may have been Phinehas, at that time
high priest; but in the legend of Hagar and her son, it is con-
sidered that the angel was a spiritual being, and none other than
the Great Angel of the Covenant—the same Michael who
appeared to Moses in the Burning Bush, and to Joshua as
captain of Jehovah’s hosts. In the Order of Ishmael, this word
Bochim is a password of importance.

Bopr, JOHANN JOACHIM CHRISTOPH—Born in Brunswick, 16th
January, 1730 ; died at Weimar, 13th December, 1793. At first a
musician, but afterwards a bookseller at Hamburg, where, about
1753, he was initiated into Masonry. He translated many popular
English books by Fielding, Smollett, and Goldsmith, and also
translated Montaigne’s Letters. He was at one time a zealous
promoter of the Rite of Strict Observance, but in 1793 joined the
Illuminati under Weishaupt. His knowledge of Masonic rites
was very extensive, but his theories were vague and unfounded.

BorsBer, JOHANN.—Councillor of State, and Director of the School
of Cadets in the reign of Alexander I. of Russia, whom he inter-
ested in Masonry, and initiated. He was Grand Master of the
Astrea Lodge of Russia from 1811 to 1814.

BorHMeEn, JacoB.—Born near Gorlitz in 1575, died 1624. He was
a famous mystic, and a self-educated and enlightened philosopher,
the founder of a school of theosophy since imported into the
higher degrees. Probably no man exercised so great an in-
fluence in speculative philosophy in comparatively modern times.
(See Theosophy.)

BOHEMANN, Kari ADOLF.—Born in Denmark in 1770. <A very
zealous member of the Order of Asiatic Brethren. He was ap-
pointed Court Secretary in 1802, in Sweden; but, being detected
in revolutionary schemes, he was banished. He published a justi-
fication of himself in 1815; but after that year he is lost sight of.

BouEmMiA.—Masonry was introduced into Bohemia from Scotland,
in 1749, and continued prosperous until 1776, when the Austrian
government suppressed it.

77

BOM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [B00

BomsBay.—Masonry introduced from England in 1861, where it
flourishes to the present day.

Bona, Petro DE. (See Magic.)

Bona (Hebrew, builders; 1 Kings v. 18).—Sometimes erroneously
called Benai, and said to represent the Fellow Crafts.

BonD AND FREE. (See Ishmael.)

Bong.—A word now corruptly pronounced in one syllable, from the
Hebrew 732, boneh, “ builder;” from the verb 2, banah, “to
build.” It was peculiarly applied to Hiram Abif, who super-
intended the erection of the First Temple.

BONNEVILLE, CHEVALIER DE.—Founded, 24th Nov. 1754, the Chapter
of Clermont in Paris.

BoNNEVILLE, NicoLas DE—A historian and Masonic author, born
at Evreux, France, March 13,1760. He wrote several important
works on Masonry, but the theories on which they were founded
have been disproved. He attributed the origin of Masonry to
the Jesuits. He was imprisoned as a Girondist in 1793; but
was liberated, and died in 1828.

Book oF CHARGES.—Referred to in a MS. of the fifteenth century, in
the British Museum and the Library of the 8S. G. C., 33 Golden
Square, London—where it is said “other charges that ben wryten
in the Boke of Chargys.” Other MSS. also allude to it.

Boox or Consritutions.—The Book of Constitutions, as its name
implies, contains the fundamental rules for the government and
guidance of the Craft, while the bye-laws of each Lodge regulate
the proceedings peculiar to such Lodge. These bye-laws are
always submitted to the Grand Secretary for approval, and on
his certificate become effective upon the members and future
members of such Lodge. Perhaps there is no code of laws drawn
up by the wisdom of man so explicit and simple as the Book of
Constitutions, and yet in the face of it, continually questions
have been put, and are still stated for the decision of Masonic
jurists. It may, however, be safely assumed as a guiding prin-
ciple, that that which does not interfere with the known land-
marks of the Fraternity, cannot be against either spirit or letter
of the Book of Constitutions. Much time might be saved by
a consideration of this very important fact. There is some little
doubt as to when this code of law was first formulated, but the
generally received view, founded upon a document of the reign
of Edward IV., is, that Prince Edwin, in 926 (it has been
suggested, by no mean authority, that there is an error here, the
Prince Edwin in question having lived in 626), having assembled
the Masons at York, with their assistance framed, from various
antecedent records in different languages, at least the basis of
what we now term the Book of Constitutions. But this basis,

78

BOO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Boo

which received the name of the Gothic constitutions, was found
to be faulty and circumscribed, and hence, in September 1728,
the Duke of Montague, then Grand Master, desired Brother
Anderson to digest them “in a new and better method.” This
was speedily accomplished, and by December of the same year, a
committee of fourteen examined what had been done, and reported
favourably of it by the following March; and after some emen-
dations it received the approbation of the Grand Lodge, and was
published in 1723, and a second edition was published in 1738.
The next revisions took place in 1756, and in 1767 the
fourth edition was published. That which is now known as
Freemasonry was at first confined to very few, and although
there is an obvious connection between its old operative form
and its present speculative form, it is doubtful as to when it
really emerged as a moral form of controlling the mind, and,
through the mind, the heart. It is, however, certain that Sir
Christopher Wren, the great architect of London’s noblest basi-
lica, St Paul’s, was Grand Master in the time of Queen Anne,
and it is possible, as Lessing insists, that he first connected the
Philosophical Society of Masons with the Operative, as a Specu-
lative Society, and breathed into it its present vitality at the
time of the erection of that great building. This much is certain,
that when he was proclained Grand Master, only four Lodges led
a languishing life in London. On the accession of George I.,
these Lodges determined to revive the ancient Grand Lodge, and
to renew the quarterly communications and the annual feast.
They were invested afterwards with peculiar rights and privi-
leges, among which was that of bearing—in the person of their
oldest Master—the Book of Constitutions on all high proces-
sional occasions of solemnity. This book, guarded by the Tyler's
sword, is an emblem in the Master’s degree, intended to admonish
him that he should be guarded in all his words and actions,
especially preserving unsullied the Masonic virtues of silence
and circumspection.

Book or GoLv.—The book in America, in the Ancient and Accepted
Rite, in which are entered the transactions, statutes, decrees,
balustres, and protocols of the Supreme Council or Grand Con-
sistory. In England, however, the names of the members only
appear, in their own autograph, in the book of the Ancient and
Accepted Rite—every member beyond the fourth degree sign-
ing his name.

Book oF THE Deap. (See Turin Funercal Papyrus.)

Book or THE Law.—The Holy Bible, an emphatically Masonic
book, ever open in a Lodge, as a symbol that its light should
always be diffused among the brethren.

79

BOO | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [BRE

Book WITH THE Five Krys. (See Hermetic Brothers of Egypt.)

Borper.—The ornaments of a Lodge are said to be the Mosaic
pavement, the indented tessel and blazing star. The indented
tessel represents the beautiful border that embellished the outer
edges of the Mosaic pavement. This border consisted of small
stones of various colours, artistically arranged, so as to produce a
most pleasing effect.

Borri. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

Bosontan, THE.—The fourth degree of the African Architects.

BraHMANS.—Members of the priestly caste in Hindostan, and also
professors and owners of eastern Masonic secrets, and other
mysterious knowledge of oriental occult fraternities.

BRASSARD OR BRASSART.—A piece of armour worn by the Knights
Templar to protect the upper part of the arm, from the elbow to
the shoulder.

Brazen Prttars.—The pillars Jachin and Boaz, at the entrance of
the porch of King Solomon’s Temple. They were cast in brass,
and prepared on the clay ground between Succoth and Zaredatha,
together with the other holy vessels. They were made hollow
in order to contain documents respecting the national and holy
records,

Brazen SERPENT.—It is unnecessary to enlarge upon the import-
ance of this emblem, entering as it does into so many esoteric
mysteries of the Holy Royal Arch, and of the higher degrees.
To Christians it has also a religious significance ; 1t was a type
of a Mediator, and a promise of redemption. (See also Serpent
and Cross.)

BRAZEN SERPENT, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knights of the Brazen
Serpent.)

Brazit.—Masonry was established at Rio de Janeiro in 1821, and
the Emperor Dom Pedro I. was the first Grand Master; but he
closed the Lodges in the following year for political reasons.
After his abdication in 1831, Masonic meetings were again held ;
and, in 1832, the Marquis de Jequitinhonha established a Supreme
Council of the Ancient and Accepted Rite. Brazil has been in
a disturbed state in reference to Masonry for many years, and
although, at the present time, there is greater unanimity, still
violent disputes continue to take place between the Roman
Cathclic clergy and the Grand Orient.

BrEAST-PLATE.—A piece of embroidery about ten inches square,
worn by the Jewish High Priest, attached to the shoulder and
the ephod or girdle by bands. The front was set with twelve
precious stones, each bearing the name of one of the Twelve
Tribes, set in four rows, beginning with the Sardius in the right
hand upper corner.

80

BRE | The Royal Masonic Cyzlopedia. [BRE

Carbuncle. Topaz. Sardius.
npr2 TID DIN
Bareketh. Pitheda. Odem.
LEvI, SIMEON. REUBEN.
Diamond. Sapphire. Emerald.
Dom VED 2)
Jahlom. Saphir. Nophech.
ZEBULON. IsSACHAR, JUDAH.
Amethyst. Agate. Sigure.
nn>nN yaw pu»
Ahalamah. Schebo. Leschem.
Gap. NAPHTHALI. Dan.
Jasper. Onyx. Beryl.
maw ony wwiIn
Joschpheh. Schoham. Tarschisch.
BENJAMIN. JOSEPH. ASHER.

The colours were as follows:—1. Sardius or ruby—red, with
admixture of purple. 2. Topaz or modern chrysolite—pale green,
with admixture of yellow. 3. Carbuncle was of a fiery red.
4. Emerald—a beautiful pure green. 5. Sapphire or modern
lapis lazuli—a deep blue, veined with white, and spotted with
small golden stars. 6. Diamond—perfectly white. 7. Ligure or
hyacinth, of dull red, mixed with yellow. 8. Agate—gray honey
colour, spotted with different colours, chiefly of a dusky hue.
9. Amethyst—purple. 10. Beryl—the modern aqua marina,
bluish green. 11. Onyx—bluish white. 12. The Jasper—a
beautiful green, sometimes clouded with white, red, ur yellow.
This breast-plate formed an integral portion of the priestly gar-
ment, and was called the “memorial,” as it was to remina the
High Priest how dear the tribes, whose names it bore, should be
to his heart. This breast-plate thus contained twelve stones, but
each stone was further cut into six facets or sides, and on each
of these was engraven one of the seventy-two names of God.
When it was necessary to consult the breast-plate, the priest
detached it and set it on the sy top of the ark of the en
I

BRI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BRO

and, with a prayer for enlightenment, the breast-plate was caused
to revolve, and on its ceasing to do so, the High Priest observed
the reflection of the four mystical animals on the top of the ark,
and combining their significations with those of the names of
God on the stones of the tribe, regarding which the prediction
was sought, Kabbalistically drew certain prophetic inferences,
The following diagram gives the names of the Twelve Tribes as
engraven on the stones in question :—

m punw pawn
yor yoww rahe
7 wonbd "
pron hDY TWN

(See also Urim and Thummim.) Bro. John Yarker says:—<A
century ago there were three higher degrees practised by the
York Grand Lodge, called the Holy Royal Arch, Knight Templar,
and Knight Templar Priest, or Priestly Order of Melchizedek :
in each of these grades the presiding officer was named High
Priest, and wore sometimes the Jewish breast-plate.”

Buipce.—In the higher degrees of Masonry, the Bridge has a Masonic
use, and is an important symbol.

Brier.—tThe technical term for the diploma of a Knight Rose-Croix.

Bricut.—A bright Mason is one who is thoroughly apt in the
ceremonies of the ritual, and the general duties of the Lodge. It
does not, however, happen that a bright Mason is always well-
informed upon the history of Freemasonry, and its esoteric
mysteries.

BRITHERING—A Scotch term for making a brother.

BROACHED THURNEL.—The name of one of the immovable jewels
among the most ancient brethren, and used for the apprentice to
work upon—it is now called the Brute Stone, or Rough Ashlar.
(See Ashlar.)

BrokEN CoLumn.—Columns were used metaphorically among the
Hebrews to signify princes or nobles—pillars of the State. In
Psalms xi. 8, our faulty English version reads, “If the foundations
be destroyed, what can the righteous do?” This is properly to

be rendered, “ when the pillars are cast down.” In Freemasonry,
82

BRO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BRO

the Broken Column is the emblem of the fall or death of one of
the chief supporters of the Craft.

BROTHER.—The term applied by Freemasons to one another. It is
imperative in the Lodge and in private communications between
brethren; from this no rank is exempted. Géadicke properly
says, “No one hath a brother who is not a brother himself.” It
serves to keep in mind that solemn covenant into which every
Mason enters upon his initiation.

BROTHERLY Kiss.—At the close of their meetings the first Christians
were accustomed to kiss each other; this took place also at the
holy banquets or Agape of the community of brothers and
sisters. To this practice the apostles Paul and Peter refer in
their epistles: “Greet each other with the holy kiss,” gijuars
ayiw (Rom. xvi. 16; 1 Pet. v. 14). This holy kiss, as a sign or
token of brotherly love, is found likewise as a venerable custom
in many Lodges, particularly in Continental Europe, where the
Master greets with a kiss each newly initiated Member. This
practice is also adopted in the Lodges (or Tents) of the Order of
Ishmael or Wanderers, also called the Order of Esau, or of
Reconciliation.

BrorHerty Love, RELIEF, AND TruTH.—According to one of the
Ancient Charges, “the foundation and copestone, the cement and
glory of our ancient Fraternity ;’—words, if truly considered, of
wide importance, and possessing in them the whole principles
upon which the Fraternity are founded. True Masons keep them
continually in mind, and thus perpetuate the humanity of the
Fraternity from generation to generation.

BROTHERS, HERMETIC. (See Hermetic Brothers of Egypt.)

BROTHERS OF THE BRIDGE.—A charitable and religious brotherhood
which arose in the South of France in the middle ages, the
members devoting themselves to building bridges, making roads,
erecting hospitals, the maintenance of ferries, and otherwise
providing for the comfort and protection of travellers and pilgrims.
Two bridges, in particular, are mentioned, as having been con-
structed by them; that of Bon Pas, three miles from Avignon
(1177-1184-8), and the bridge over the Rhéne, Pont d’Esprit, in
the department of Gard, which was commenced in 1185. Pope
Clement III. granted them a charter and other peculiar favours
in 1189, in consideration of their works of mercy and humanity.
The peculiar token of the order was a pickaxe, worn upon the
breast. Ramsay, in a discourse published in Paris, 1741, affirms
that this order united or established communications with the
Knights of St John of Jerusalem, and afterwards with the Roman
builders, and thus would imply a direct connection between
them and Freemasonry. Several of the high degrees Fis the

3

BRO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BUL

French system have taken some of their decorations from the
Order of the Brothers of the Bridge.

BROTHERS OF THE Rosy Cross. (See Rosicrucianism.)

Browne, Jonn.—A publication in 1798, and again in 1802, called
“Browne’s Master Key by way of Polyglot.” It is printed in
cipher, which is somewhat complicated, and totally unintelligible
without the Key. I deciphered the whole book for the Grand
Lodge of the Three Globes at Berlin, and translated it into
German, in 1872. It contains a fairly complete representation of
the lectures according to Preston ; but it forms very good evidence
of the imperfect state of the three degrees at that time, and the
comparative unimportance of the Royal Arch. Several copies
were recently sold in the Spencer collection. It has been in part
printed by Krause.

Bru. (See Viélle Bru, Rite of)

Bruce, Rospert.—F ounded the Order of St Andrew of Chardon
after the battle of Bannockburn, June 24,1314. To it was united
the Order of Herodim, at Kilwinning, for the reception of those
Knights Templar who had fled from France. He died 9th July,
1329. But there is considerable doubt as to the truth of this
tradition.

Brun, ABRAHAM Van.—A wealthy Mason and Rosicrucian at Ham-
burg. He died at an advanced age in 1768, and had been a very
active member of the Society of True and Ancient Rosicrucians.

Bucks, Tue Society of.—Several Lodges of this convivial order
were held in London in the last century. One was held at the
Rose, in Monkwell Street, about 1750. The president was called
the Grand Buck. There were thirteen Lodges, in 1770, in
London, and a few others elsewhere.
3UENOS AYRES.—Lodges existed here in 1846, but .Masonry was
not actually in a permanent condition until 1853. In 1838, a
Supreme Council and Grand Orient was instituted, and is still in
operation.

BUHLE, JOHANN GOTTLIEB, Professor of Philosophy at Gdéttingen,
and author of a book on Resicrucianism and Freemasonry, pub-
lished 1804, and answered by Friedrich Nicolai in 1806. He
was born 1753, and died 1821. His book is of little value.

Bumper SMirren.—This refers to the third degree. Our Jewish,
as well as our Christian brethren, will apprehend no evil in the
words—“ The veil of the Temple is rent; the builder is smitten;
and we are raised from the tomb of transgression.”

But.—The compounds of this divine name Bel are of great variety.
Bel-us was used by the Chaldaans; and the deity was known
amongst the ancient Celts by the name of Bel, or Belenus,
whieh title, by modern authors, is identified with Apollo, or the

4

BUL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [BUR

Sun. The primitive name of Britain was Vel-ynys, the island
of Bel; and the fires lighted upon May-day were in honour of
this divinity, and called Bel’s fire, Bel or Baal-tein. The inha-
bitants made use of a word only known to themselves to express
the unutterable naine of the Deity, of which the letters O. I. W.
were a sacred symbol. In this they resembled the Jews, who
always said Adonai (see Adonat), when the name of Jahve or
Jehovah occurred. Baal was the most ancient name of the chief
god of the Canaanites, and was, in like manner, referred to the
Sun. Manasseh raised altars to this deity, and worshipped him
in all the pomp of heathen superstition; and when these altars
were destroyed by Josiah, the worship of Baal was identified
with that of the Sun.

Butt, Papat.—An edict or proclamation issued from the Apostolic
Chancery at Rome, with the seal and signature of the Pope. The
term is derived from the leaden seal attached to it, called, in
medizval Latin, bulla. Several bulls have been issued against
Freemasonry, 7.e.:—(1) Clement XII., 27th April, 1738 ; (2) Re-
peated by Benedict XIV. 18th May, 1775; (3) An edict issued
by Cardinal Gonsalvi, Secretary of State to Pius VII ; (4) Pius
IX.

Burpens, Bearers or.—Workmen at King Solomon’s Temple,
known as Ish Sabal. (2 Chron. ii. 18.)

Luriat.—No brother, except raised to the sublime degree of Master
Mason, can be buried with Masonic ceremonies. Among the
old regulations we find: “No Mason can be interred with the
formalities of the Order unless it be at his own special request,
communicated to the Lodge of which he died a member—
foreigners and sojourners excepted; nor unless he has been
advanced to the third degree of Masonry, from which there can
be no exception.” The burial-place of a Master Mason is under
the Holy of Holies, and the following legend is depicted on the
monument—A virgin weeping over a broken column, with a book
open before her; in her right hand a sprig of cassia, in her left
an urn; Time standing behind her, with his hands enfolded in
the ringlets of her hair. The weeping virgin denotes the un-
tinished state of the Temple; the broken column that one of the
principal supporters of Masonry (H. A. B.) had fallen; the open
book implies that his memory is recorded in every Mason’s heart;
the sprig of acacia refers to the discovery of his remains; the
urn shows that his ashes have been carefully collected ; and Time
standing behind implies that time, patience, and perseverance
will accomplish all things.

BurRieD TREASURES.—The wealth of King Solomon was proverbial.
It was probably true in a Hermetic sense. It is a tradition that

85

BUR | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [BYE

some still knew of buried wealth which aided in the rebuilding
of the Temple, which in a similar sense is likewise true.

Burnes, JAMES.—Author of “A Sketch of the History of the
Knights Templars. By J. B., LL.D.,F.RS., Knight of the Royal
Hanoverian Guelphic Order. London, 1840.” He was formerly
Prov. Gr. M. of Western India.

BurninG Busit.—The burning bush, out of which the messenger or
the angel of the Lord appeared unto Moses at Mount Horeb
(said by the Kabbalists to have been Michael), is referred to in
the ceremonies of Royal Arch Masonry. It was on that occasion
that the Tetragrammaton was delivered to the Jewish lawgiver,
probably—he being learned in Egyptian lore—having in his
mind the Nuk-pe-Nuk—I am that I am—of the Egyptians.
This formed the true source of Masonic light ; and for this reason
the Supreme Council of the 33° dated their protocols “ near the
B.. B..” or Burning Bush, to intimate that they are in their own
right the exclusive source of all Masonic instruction. (2) Knight
of the Burning Bush. Theosophical degree in the collection of
the Mother Lodge of the Scottish Philosophical Rite.

Burns, Ropert, the poet, born at Kirk Alloway, near Ayr, 25th
Jan., 1759; died 22d July, 1796; initiated 1781. He devoted a
considerable portion of his time to Masonry, and was Master of
a Lodge at Mauchline. He wrote several Masonic odes, among
which his beautiful “Farewell to Tarbolton Lodge” is most
admired. A monument to his memory was erected, 25th Jan.,
1820, at his birthplace, the corner stone of which was laid, with
due Masonic ceremony, by the Deputy Grand Master of the
Ancient Mother Lodge, Kilwinning, in the presence of a brilliant
assemblage.

BusarRpDiER. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

Business.—The initiation, passing, and raising of candidates and
brethren is the work of the Lodge—its business consists in the
settlement of all other details. (See Order of Business, and Order,
Rules of.)

Butter (1624).—An Irish Adept. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

Bysios.—A Pheenician city, where the mysterious worship of Adonis
was celebrated. It was the same as Gebal, the birthplace of
the Giblimites, or stone-squarers, who worked at the First
Temple.

Byr-Laws.—These are permitted to be made by every subordinate
Lodge. They are submitted to the Grand Secretary for exami-
nation, tu ascertain that they are in no way in contravention with
the ancient usages of the Craft or with the Book of Constitutions.
They form the basis of contract between the Lodge and each
candidate, who promises obedience to them in all respects.

&6

caA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAB

C.

CAaABA.—The name of the sacred and mysterious stone preserved
at Mecca. It has been reverenced by the Arabians from time
immemorial. In the Eastern Hermetic mysteries it is regarded
as the Perfect Ashlar. Mohammed consecrated it as a symbol of
the eternal mysteries, and an emblem of the perpetual duration
of the truth—that is, that “God is One, and his name One.”
(See Achad.) It is in this sense that our Mohammedan brethren
approach the stone on their pilgrimage. Among the Hebrews
there was a reverence for stones, as being set up in commemora~
tion of certain important facts, such as contracts with the
Invisible, and so forth; and among the Greeks we find similar
ideas, stones being landmarks irremovable. Stone in a perfect
form, as a symbol of majesty, was regarded and imitated by the
Mexicans and Peruvians, and the former made the sharp dizli
stone into one of the signs of their calendar. In a Hermetic
sense, the stone is yet to be perfected by every true philosopher.

Capata. (See Kabbalah.)

CaBALA, KNIGHT OF THE—Eightieth degree of the Metropolitan
French Chapter.

CABALARIANS, THE VERY HONOURABLE ORDER oF.—This Society
was held at the Magpie Tavern, without Bishopsgate, in the
middle of the last century. The President sat astride of a hobby-
horse, with a fool’s cap on his head and 9 knotted whip in his
hand, with which he struck the table at the meetings, to keep
order among the members.

CaBIRI, MysTERIES OF THE—These were originally of Syrian or
Pheenician origin, and all that we know about the Cabiri is
comprised in a fragment of the historian Sanconiathon, quoted
by Eusebius, where they are said to be the children of Sydyk
(supposed by some to be identical with Noah), and reputed to be
the inventors of shipbuilding. Bishop Cumberland thinks that
Sydyk was the same as Shem, a just man,—in Hebrew, Sadek,
—as Melchizedek, the just king. In the time of Chronos, or
Saturn, their descendants, while at sea, ran aground on Mount
Cassius in Samothrace, and there erected a temple. The
worship of the Cabiri was thus established in that island;
afterwards they were celebrated at Thebes and Lemnos. The
word Kabir signifies powerful, and there were four of these
Kabiri: Axieros, Axiokersos, Axiokersa, and Cadmillus. The
last had been slain by the three former, and the murder was
commemorated in the secret rites, The candidate was crowned

87

CAB] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAB

with an olive branch, and girded with a purple ribbon or apron.
He was placed upon a throne, around which the priests and
initiated performed sacred dances. The initiate was afterwards
tmaade to represent Cadmillus, and the murder was re-enacted.
The rite was very popular in Greece, and it is said that Orpheus,
Cadmus, Hercules, and Ulysses were initiated into it. Pytha-
goras is said by Iamblichus to have gained much of his learning
at Lemnos. Great care was taken to conceal the true nature of
these ceremonies; and the priests were of a peculiar caste, called
Corybantes. By some it is thought that the rite was instituted
in honour of Atys, the son of Cybele. Macrobius says that Atys
was one of the names of the sun, and the mysteries were cele-
brated at the vernal equinox. They lasted three days, during
which they represented, in the person of Atys, the enigmatical
death of the sun in winter, and his regeneration in the spring.
These mysteries existed until a.D. 18, at least, in which year the
Emperor Germanicus embarked for the purpose of initiation, and
would have proceeded to Samothrace,. but was prevented by
adverse winds, It has been said that Hiram, king of Tyre, was
a high priest of these mysteries, and that through him the lead-
ing feature of the Cabirian initiation was incorporated into
Masonry, and perpetuated in the legend of the third degree.
But if the legend of the third degree, as many hold, arose from
historical events, this would seem impossible. It has been also
said that the Order of the Essen or Essenes grew out of the
Cabirian rites. This also seems doubtful. The best account of
the Cabiri is given by Faber.

CABLE Tow.—The tracing board of the first or Entered Apprentice
degree should always be enclosed with a cord, technically called
a cable tow, having four tassels placed at the four angles,
referring to the four cardinal virtues and their illustrative points,
while the cable tow is emblematic of the cord or bond of affec-
tion which ought to unite the whole fraternity (see Hosea xi. 4):
“JT drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love;” or
rather, in the more accurate translation of Cahen, “I have drawn
them with the bands of humanity, the cords of love.” But there
is also another use, in a less figurative sense, to which the cable
tow is applied, and with which all Masons are familiar, after-
wards accompanying them throughout their Masonic lives, viz.,
the obligation to attend their Lodge, when summoned, if within
the distance of three miles, metaphorically supposed to be the
length of a cable tow.

CaBUL.—The name of the district in the north-west part of Galilee
adjacent to Tyre, containing twenty cities, given by Solomon to
Hiram for his services in the construction of the Temple. They

88

cAc | Lhe Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Cac

are alluded to in the degree of Intimate Secretary, in the
Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Cacovac.—A word employed, on the doubtful authority of the
Abbé Barruel, by Voltaire in his correspondence with D’Alembert,
to signify one who could be depended upon. Another phrase,
indicating the flourishing condition of their plans, according to
the same writer, was to say—*The vine of truth is well culti-
vated,” «e, amazing progress was made against religion.
Voltaire was a Freemason, so for religion we may read intole-
rance.

Capet-GassicourT, CHARLES Lovuis.—Author of “ Le Tombeau de
Jacques Molay. Paris, 1796.” He began by attacking Masonry,
and ended a sincere upholder of its principles. He was Master
of the Lodge PAbéille in 1805. Born at Paris, 23d Jan., 1769,
and died there, 21st Nov., 1821.

CADMILLUS.—The youngest of the Cabiri, and, from his murder,
analogous to the Builder in Masonry.

CADUCEUS.—The magic wand of the god Hermes, in the form of
an olive staff twined with fillets, passing into the shape of
winged serpents. Hermes was the conductor of souls to Hades,
and the restorer of life; also the herald or messenger of Zeus.
By a particular method of interpretation of mythology (on which
I have no room to dilate, but to which I have alluded in the
article Astrology, which see)—a method quite different to that
offered by Brother Melville some years ago in the now unhappily
defunct Freemason’'s Magazine and Masonic Mirror—it would be
easy to understand why Hermes or Mercury, the inventor of the
lyre, made from the shell of the tortoise, should exchange it for
the magic wand of Apollo or Helios. The olive staff and the
serpents.are both emblems of immortality, and signify, taken
together, peace. Mercurius Caducifer, the bearer of the herald’s
staff, finds his analogue in a Mason’s Lodge, in the Senior Deacon,
who accompanies the initiate throughout the ceremonies, and
assists at his restoration, although himself unable to restore life.

C#MENTARIUS.—A wall builder. Sometimes used as a Latin term
for Freemason. The usual word is Latomus.

CaGLiostRo, Count.—The subject of Alexander, Count Cagliostro,
his acts in this world as a man and a Mason, and indeed the whole
course of his life, is fraught with more difficulty than at first
appears. Like Count or Prince Bismarck, he might well be said
to be the best abused and most hated man in Europe. It has
ever been the fashion to load him with opprobrious titles, and
in all ways to consign him to infamy, and in even the calm light
of the next century the name of Cagliostro has been associated
with fraud, humbug, and even greediness. Mr Thomas Carlyle—

89

caG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cac

whose just indignation at anything like falsehood has rendered
him the honoured and famous historian cf men like Frederick
the Second, Mirabeau, and last, but greatest, Oliver Cromwell—
exhausted himself in powerful invective against Cagliostro ;
but even he would pardon me for saying that the dislike and
disdain he has ever shown for Freemasonry, render him, by
that very fact, unfit for the task of estimating the life of this
extraordinary man. Carlyle, like De Quincey, whose great genius
was allied in kind to that of the historian, holds Masonry in
little liking, because, from causes not appreciated by either of
them, they could not well see what work Masonic society was
doing during the latter portion of the last century. JI am sure that
the time has come fora review of the lives of such men as Caglios-
tro, St Gerrnain, Mesmer, Dupuytren, and others. Let us look upon
theconditions of social existence, both from their politicalandscien-
tific side ; and at the same time glance at the philosophical state of
thought which accompanied the transitional period from blind
obedience totheological dogmatism, tothe more enlightened, but not
wholly illuminated, systems of the present day. It will not be
denied, even by the most intolerant writers, that men, whensoever
they appear, emerge upon the scene impelled by motives produced
by the state in which they find the world. Iam not going to make
a hero of Cagliostro. I, however, purpose attempting explana-
tions. There are existing prominently before society at the
present time many persons as enigmatical as the Count Cagliostro,
although they support their singular claims by very different
arguments, and illustrate them by other kinds of actions; nor
were the anterior centuries of which we have historical cogniz-
ance without similar persons. John of Trittenheim, Paracelsus,
Raymond Lully, Nicolas Flame], Jerome Cardan, Cornelius
Agrippa, Jacob Boehmen, and a host of others, not omitting the
cloudy founders of Rosicrucianism, might be named as instances
of such individuals. As we have to deal, however, at the present
moment, with the condition of society at from a little time after
the reconstitution of Masonry in 1717, down to a period just ante-
cedent to that of the first French Revolution, it is better to look
sincerely at the matter, without prejudicing any one in memory.
The loyalty we hope to receive from our posterity should be
ensured, as far as possible, by dispassionate criticism of the past.
Although in the course of this work the critical faculty of the
writer will have frequently to be exercised, there is no prominent
instance in which it is more necessary than in the case of
Cagliostro, When I add to this, that from the very nature of the
principles of the Fraternity, much must remain undisclosed, I
am sure I shall be understood by the initiated, and to the unini-
go

CAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAG

tiated what isomitted is ofno moment. The position of philosophy,
as understood in reference to the natural sciences, at the period
of Joseph Balsamo’s birth at Palermo, was very singular. Scientific
men, unless under the special protection of powerful nobles, or of
Princes of the Church of Rome, dared not to make known their
discoveries, that Church being very naturally averse to the sub-
stitution of the d@ posteriori argument to the d priori form: as it
had been settled by the Church, so it was to remain, until the
machine of human society was forced onward, not by human
ordinances, but by the will of Providence, interpreting itself and
being interpreted at the same time by the events of the world,
and the men appointed to carry out this mode of interpretation.
Balsamo was born at Palermo, the 8th of June, 1748, at a time
when the onward progress of Masonry on the continent, having
been poweriully supported by the great “heretic” state, England,
was exciting the anxiety of Roman ecclesiastics; anathemas had
been hurled in 1738 against that body or Fraternity ; manners
were everywhere as easy and lax as the best well-wishers to the
system of the Confessional could desire; while at the same time
the nations of the North were engaged in either overt or covert
active protest against the infringement of liberty of conscience,
and individual rights of private judgment. To secure the ends
which brought revenues to the Church of Rome was the work of
her every true son, and hence youth were superficially trained at
all times in such necessary arts as might exalt the supremacy of
the clergy ;—in common fairness, it should be added, without
sinister motives in every individual case. Hence a somewhat
irregular youth and a love of gain might not be an insuperable
objection to great kindness being shown by superiors to those
likely to prove instruments in the great, if not the good, cause.
Besides, should the instrument prove dangerous or unworthy in
his future life, what so easy a process as to turn round, blacken
his character, and, apparently with great justice, try to destroy
the Frankenstein-like creation? It would seem, in the case of
young Balsamo, that his parents died when he was a child, leaving
him to the care of some maternal uncles. The station of the
family was mean, it is said—possibly it had no name at all; for it
is singular to remark that Joseph Balsamo, when literated into
Oriental forms, as was the way of certain theosophical professors
of the time, means nothing else but The Given—the Lord of the
Sun, a fitting patronymic for one who was subsequently to play
such a singular part in history. Probably this early erraticity
attracted the attention of the good fathers, both in the
Seminary of St Roch at Palermo, where he received the rudi-
ments of learning, and afterwards when, at the age of thirteen, he
gr

caG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [caG

was placed in the convent of the Good Brotherhood at Castiglione.
It is somewhat singular, however, that the fact of his playing
foolish pranks at his earliest school should, in the meagre
chronicles of his life, uniformly published by Roman Catholics,
receive such wonderful prominence; it is almost on a level with
the charity of dissenting old women, who always knew “that
boy would turn out bad,’—ex post facto prophecies of most satis-
factory comfort to the prophet. Be it as it may, Cagliostro—for
so I will call him in preference to the attributive name, well
understood by occult students in a far higher sense—seemed to
make great progress in such chemistry as was taught in the
convent, and of course, as a seapegoat, behaved himself badly
while there; in fact, his biographers say that he was frequently
in prison for irregularity. I should think that, even allowing
for the precocity of the south, a poor lad studying as novice
apprentice to a convent apothecary had not even the chances of
a modern medical student of the last generation. Be it sufficient
to say, that he shortly returned to Palermo, and seemed to enter
with fervour, although not perhaps with anything beyond a
mercenary motive, into the study of such chemical and medical
science as he could attain. He seems to have left Palermo, in
consequence of some difficulties with a goldsmith (perhaps
banker), and gone to Messina, where he encountered, it is said, a
great Hermetic sage, who is variously called Athlotas and Altotas.
It must be remembered that any connection with occult science
would render him a fit object for ecclesiastical rigour. It is
said that he visited Egypt (this, of course, was inserted to
account for his subsequent Masonic aetion); yet we find him
shortly afterwards confidentially employed by the Grand Master
of the Knights of Malta—Pinto—as a chemist in his laboratory,
by whom, even his biographers admit, for their own purposes,
he was recommended to Naples under the proteetion of one of
the Knights. He here made the acquaintance of a Sicilian
prince, who also honoured him with support. Is it possible that
a man of such engaging manner could have been the lying
impostor his enemies endeavoured to prove him? Probably in
consequence of orders from his ecclesiastical superiors, he left
Messina again, and apparently supported himself by pursuits in
connection with Art. It is stated that in Naples and Rome he
sometimes appeared in a secular and sometimes in an ecclesiastical
dress, which, unless it had been winked at by the authorities of
those cities, would have at once subjected him to the utmost
rigour of the Inquisition. At Rome he married Lorenza Feliciani,
a young woman of strangely fascinating beauty, and who after-
wards appears in connection with him in the course of his career.
92

CAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cac

It is somewhat strange that his mother’s name should have been
Felicia. His wife subsequently became the destruction of his
social existence, when he was at last tried at Rome for infidelity
to the principles of the Romish religion, in which he had been
educated. It is asserted that about this time Cagliostro—in
that name—associated himself with one Marquis Agliata and
a certain Ottavio Nicastro, subsequently capitally executed.
Certain frauds were perpetrated by this company, and Cagliostro
and his wife were left destitute by the flight of Agliata with all
their funds ; so that, after begging their way through Piedmont
and Genoa, they arrived first at Barcelona, and then at Lisbon,
whence they took ship to London, where we find him, at the age
of twenty-nine,in 1772. That year in London, if we may judge
from the journals of the time, was very prone to patronise any
amount of trickery, provided it promised youth and beauty to
the aged and haggard, and health and strength to the wearied
roué of fashion. It would not seem to have been a happy visit ;
for the scriveners, from whom he was obliged to borrow con-
siderable sums, threw him into prison at the King’s Bench, and
he was forced to take the benefit of such Acts as then existed.
It is easy to imagine, from the prints of the period, what his
want of prudence caused him to undergo. The mode of fashion-
able life in London at that day was inconceivably expensive,
and the summary process of imprisonment consequently in-
supportable. On his release he returned to France. We have
no positive evidence to support the fact, but it is likely that
Cagliostro did not, as it is asserted, first enter Masonry in
England, on his return to London in 1776; it is more probable
that he affiliated himself to the Jesuit Chapter of Clermont
while in France. He seemed to have led a wandering life since
his admission to the confidence of the Knights of Malta, who
may have numbered amongst them members of the Fraternity.
Things were during this time undergoing a singular phasis in
France. Frederick the Great had won most of his battles,
military and Masonic, during the eventful period of Cagliostro’s
life; the egg of the high degrees had been hatched; the Philo-
sophers had published the “Encyclopedia;” Louis XIV. and
Louis XV. had had their several reigns; and the French Revolu-
tion, im an uneasy manner, gave indications of its approach.
During the whole of this time, Cagliostro was pursuing his
avocations in different parts of Europe, was partly distrusted as
a mystificator, partly as a known adherent of the Roman
Catholic Church. That he ever mixed himself up with political
intrigue is very uncertain ; he most certainly was unknown in
that capacity to those who have jealously guarded the pre-
93

CAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cac

paratory archives of the Revolution, and his appearance as an
advocate of revolutionary principles has no basis in fact. It is
said, as we have named above, that he received the three first
degrees of Masonry in London, in the Espérance Lodge (No. 289),
at the King’s Head Tavern, in the month of April, 1776. It is
possible that, as an agent of the Jesuits, he passed through those
rites again with which his foreign experience had made him
familiar. There is a remarkable print extant, in which he is
humorously depicted as Masonically floored by Brother Mash
at the Lodge of Antiquity, November 1, 1786. I wish it to be
understood that I am not writing a brief for Cagliostro; but such
whim-whams were only too common at the time, and any
foreigner who transgressed the laws of English society by pre-
tending to be of them, and cure their diseases as well, was
subject to the greatest abuse. There were many other men of
ability in London at the time, as there always must be in every
great city; but there was something about the Count that
stamped him as a successful man. He had lorded it in Paris,
and he sought to do the same with the more practical English.
He failed similarly, because men who assume preposterous pre-
tensions never hold their own against clear truth. Taught by
the Jesuits in the beginning,—faithless, because useful to no
end of theirs,—he succumbed to their influence, and immediately
made use of papers in his possession for the establishment of a
system of Masonry (see Lgyptian Masonry), into which he
massed things acquired from the Jesuits (stolen by them from
the Rosicrucians proper), and partly based upon the erroneous
ideas then current upon Egyptian rites. When any one assumes
a position as finally supreme, he thereby renders himself ridicu-
lous; and this is best demonstrated by the correspondence
between Cagliostro and the Conference of Paris, which I sum-
marize from Thory, it being understood that Cagliostro must be
regarded as the actual victor, M. Savalette de Langes, as the
master of a private Lodge, having no right to impose terms upon
any one; and a Masonic Conference in itself can only be con-
vened by the supreme powers. Here it was that Cagliostro, as
a Mason, was finally exploded. He had asserted himself as the
possessor of a power which was sot disant, and hence was him-
self his own abrogator. But for this there might have been
reasons. It is, however, quite certain that, as a friend of the
Cardinal de Rohan, he enjoyed privileges quite at variance with
the idea of ignoble birth; but we may charitably presume that
Roman Catholics are as liable to be gulled as other people:
their undoubted supremacy in logic does not guard them against
the irresistible power of humbug. Observe then, that at Paris,
94

CAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [caG

on the 15th of February, 1785, the Lodge of Philaléthes (or
Lovers of Truth), in solemn Session—with Savalette de Langes,
royal treasurer; Tassin, the banker; and Tassin, an officer in
the royal service—opened a Fraternal Convention at Paris;
and, if space permitted, there might be a goodly roll of
members cited in the matter. Princes (Russian, Austrian, and
others), fathers of the Church, councillors, knights, financiers,
barristers, barons, Theosophists, canons, colonels, professors of
magic, engineers, literary men, doctors, merchants, postmasters,
dukes, ambassadors, surgeons, teachers of languages, receivers-
géneral, and notably two London names,—Boosie; a merchant,
and Brooks, of London,—compose this Convention, to whom may
be added M. le Comte de Cagliostro, and Mesmer, “the inventor,”
as Thory describes him (Acta Latomorum, vol. ii, p. 95), “ of the
doctrine of magnetism.” Surely such an able set of men to set the
world to rights, as France never saw before or since! They met
for the following purposes, hoping for replies to the following
questions :—(1) What is the essential nature of Masonic science,
and its distinctive characteristic? (2) What epoch and origin
may rationally be attributed to it? (3) What societies—what
bodies or individuals—may we believe to have anciently pos-
sessed Masonry ? Who are the corporations by which they have
been perpetuated to our times? (4) What societies, bodies, or
individuals may be regarded, at the present time, as the real
guardians of the secret? (5) Are the traditions preserving it
oral or written? (6) Has Masonic science any relations-with
the sciences known as occult or secret sciences? (7) With which
of these sciences has it most relation, and in what does that
relation consist? (8) What advantage is to be anticipated from
Masonic science? (9) Which of the present rites would be
the best to adopt, not as a general principle, but as that which
would make for zealous and working disciples the promptest
and most useful progress in real Masonic science? (10) Where-
fore, by general consent, do all the Masons denominate their
assemblies, and the places in which they are held, Lodges?
What may be the origin and true definition of the word Lodge,
of the word Teraple, sometimes bestowed as a designation on the
place of assembly? Also of the formula—opening and closing
the works; of the word Scottish or of Svotland, in the higher
degrees ; of the word Venerable (or Worshipful), given in France
to the Master of the Lodge; and that of Mattre en chaire (Meister
von Stuhle), given in Germany? Now, these questions were all
legitimate questions to be discussed; and itis very difficult to say
whether the promoters of the Convention were in the wrong. If
the initiative be not taken by some one, who is to “bell the cat?”
95

CAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAG

Now, Cagliostro, for reasons best known to himself, was that cat,
and showed claws of extra sharpness. We must go back a little.
It would seem that, on the 23d November, 1784, Monsieur
Savalette proposed to summon the Count to the Convention,
together with Mesmer. On the 10th February, 1785, a summons
was actually sent to him, and the messenger who served the
notice testified the assent of Cagliostro to the summons, saying
that he would attend. But in a few days he changed his
opinions, desired that all the members of the Convention should
adopt the constitutions of the Egyptian Rite, and be initiated in
the Mother Lodge at Lyons; also requiring that the archives of
the Philaléthes should be burnt. In consequence of this, the
Baron von Gleichen was deputed to see him, and request the
renunciation of so severe a condition, at the same time request-
ing the presence of the members of the Mother Lodge of Lyons
(of Triumphant Wisdom) at the Convention. The reply was as
follows :—* Dated the 1st of the 5555.—The unknown Grand
Master of true Masonry has cast his eyes upon the Philaléthians,
and upon the two invitations they have spread among the
body of the brethren. Touched by their piety, moved by the
sincere avowal of their desires, he deigns to extend his hand
over them, and consents to give a ray of light into the darkness
of their temple. It is the wish of the unknown Grand Master
to prove to them the existence of one God—the basis of their
faith ; the original dignity of man; his powers and destiny ; in
fact, the whole contents of their belief. It is by deeds and facts,
by the testimony of the senses, that they will know God, man,
and the intermediary spiritual beings created between them; of
which true Masonry gives the symbols and indicates the real
road. Let, then, the Philaléthes embrace the doctrines of this
real Masonry, submit to the rules of its supreme chief, and
adopt its constitutions. But above all, let the sanctuary be
purified, let the Philaléthes know that light can only descend
into the Temple of Faith, and not into that of scepticism. Let
them devote to the flames that vain accumulation of their
archives ; for it is only on the ruins of the Tower of Confusion
that the Temple of Truth can be erected.” It does not require
much wisdom to see that this request, or rather command,
would emanate from a Jesuit source. On the 6th April, 1785,
the Lodge of Triumphant Wisdom addressed to the Convention
a letter conveying similar ideas; to which the Convention re-
plied, by the 12th of April, saying they could entertain no such
project. Whereupon a letter emanates from Cagliostro, with a
certain amount of sorrowful inflated dignity about it, bidding
them a farewell, flavouring of the touching pathos of the romantic
96

CAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cac

drama. There is one remark of Cagliostro’s which would really
appeal to every stockjobber that ever hovered about Capel
Court. He replies, the 13th April, 1785: “ We have offered you
the truth; you have disdained it. We have offered it for the
sake of itself, and you have refused it in consequence of a love
of forms. What are forms without funds? Can you only
elevate yourselves to God and to the knowledge of yourselves
by the assistance of a secretary and a convocation? Is a secre-
tary neglectful, and do days pass by when hearts are on fire
with ardent and pure desires? Do not justify yourselves; we
are not offended. Consider that if, in order to elevate you, we
have recommended to you our subjects, how can you hope to
rise to our own height?” . . . and so on, rather high and
mighty throughout. Count Cagliostro withdrew his offers, but
only in order to set a higher value on himself and his system.
Finally, three delegates from the Convention set forth for Lyons,
were initiated into Egyptian Masonry—Brothers Paul of Mar-
seilles, the Marquis de Marnezia of Franche Comté, and Rai-
mond of Beganson. They professed themselves highly pleased
with their reception, and with the urbanity of the Count, to-
gether with the excellence of his system. In their report occur
the following significant words :—“ His doctrine ought to be
regarded as sublime and pure; and without having a perfect
acquaintance with our language, he employs it as did the pro-
phets of old.” However, the negotiation fell through, and Cag-
liostro shook off the Convention altogether. Cagliostro’s fame,
or infamy, has been associated with the history of the Diamond
Necklace, so graphically told by Carlyle, and for which there is
no space here. He visited London, but was obliged to leave it
again ; and in May, 1787, he departed from England altogether.
It is a curious circumstance that his manifestoes while in
London were issued from the Hercules Pillars, a tavern still in
existence, immediately opposite Freemasons’ Hall, in Great
Queen Street. After this time the Count and his wife led a
wandering life, but were unmolested until he dared to set up a
Lodge of Egyptian Masonry at Rome, in 1789. Probably he
had ceased to be useful as a spy to the Roman Catholic party.
He was thrown into the Castle of San Angelo, tried by the In-
quisition in December, 1789, condemned to death, but after-
wards sentenced to imprisonment for life, as a foe of the Roman
Catholic religion ; and it is said that he finally died of apoplexy,
in 1795, in the prison of St Leo, in the Duchy of Urbino.
Strange stories, however, continued to be circulated, according
to which he escaped from confinement; and, thanks to the
Elixir of Life he claimed to possess, he still lives on, like the
G 97

CAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cac

Mejnour of Lord Lytton’s “Zanoni,” under some other name.
But let us suppose that this artfully concocted narrative, in
which the Count is represented in such shameful colours, to be,
as indeed it was, the last .kick that the Church of Rome could
give to one who honestly opposed them on questions of morals
and conduct. His early education among the corrupt ecclesiastics
of the south of Italy must have shown him that they were men
actuated by no high motives, supported by no learning, and
selfish as celibacy often is. It is easy, then, to see that the
active, far-seeing mind would rebel at monkish harness, and aim
at an intellectual freedom for which innate tendencies prepared
the youth. The priests in the Sicilian monastery had, perhaps,
unconsciously and unintentionally touched a powerful spring in
his nature, when they placed him in the mean employment of an
apothecary’s boy. That an arduous desire to become con-
versant with the mysteries of nature should arise in a healthy
mind is nothing astonishing ; that a quick southern nature should
master details in which it had any interest, cannot surprise; but
that the reconciliation of such free research into nature should
be compatible with an almost prison rule, is beyond nature,
Hence Cagliostro—we use the name he is best known by—
quitted the convent in haste, and allied himself, as has already
been said, to one who either was, or who at any rate professed to
be, an Eastern sage. That story of robbing a goldsmith is not
to be credited, the false biography having been evidently written
and published long after his capture by the Inquisition, either
by a miracle-monger, or one who must have had access to his
private papers, and so distorted them when he thought he could
turn, like Vespasian, an honest penny out of a very worthless
and obnoxious article. Probably the “Compendio della Vita ¢
delle Geste di Guiseppe Balsamo denominato tl Conte di Cagliostro :”
Roma, 1791, has no higher origin ; of this we have no proof, save
by the analogous conduct of other partisans of the Pontiff in
other cases, such as Arnold of Brescia, Savonarola, and many
more. The peculiar language of a mystic, as it has fascinated
thousands, may thus have wrought its work with the youthful
chemist, and caused him to subject himself blindly to rules and
principles, by which it might be possible to attain that physical
and intellectual liberty he saw nowhere exhibited amongst his
late teachers; a voyage to Egypt—one of no great difficulty, but
some tediosity, in those days—completed a transformation; and
from an awkward, nameless lad, under the instruction of his new
teachers—behold, at the entrance of life, a new being—a Count
Cagliostro indeed! As to who his teachers were, that is a ques-
ion neve to be solved, especially if his subsequent pretensions
9

caG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAG

and obligations equally bound him as to publicity on the one
point, and silence on the other. It is a rule recognised amongst
adepts—in fact, a stringent obligation—that they shall not reveal
the identity of their preceptors and initiators; and if that rule
was applicable in times before Cagliostro, so it was in his own
time. He was sent, in accordance with occult discipline, to rove
about Europe, and we have before seen him under the protection
of the Knights and Order of Malta; he completes his course by
going to Paris and London, and there, as before asserted, he is
initiated into Masonry. We cannot at the present time say
whether this was his first entry. If the former view of him. be
adopted, he would not hesitate at repeating the obligations he
might have before taken; but if we consider the state of Free-
masonry in England in 1776, when he is said to have been
admitted, the whole ceremonies of the Order were anything but
solemnly, and hardly soberly, conducted. At any rate, they
would not coincide with the aspirations of a high-minded
man, even of a convivial turn of mind. There is a very
curious and rare print in existence, in which the interior of the
Lodge of Antiquity, as it appeared the lst November, 1786, is
displayed. In this caricature, Count Cagliostro is presented in
an apparently humiliated position; but any candid reader can see
that the laugh is all on the other side. Those who have read the
rituals of that time, can plainly see that an educated enthusiast
would by no means feel himself at home amidst punch bowls,
riot, and confusion, and that Brother Mash, who ridiculed the
pretensions of the Count, is in a far less honourable position
than the foreign brother who had relied upon the universality of
Masonry as a protection. A learned and enthusiastic brother,
whose acquaintance with the history of Cagliostro is deep, true,
and sincere,—I mean Captain F. G. Irwin,—repudiates many of
the slanders laid at the door of the Count; and if anything can
more effectually refute itself than this print, I should like to be
made cognisant of it. The vulgarity of the Lodges of one
hundred years ago, both in practice and principle, was unbear-
able. Brother Mash, an optician of some repute at the time, is
represented as standing up with a phial of elixir, and bating the
Count with such words as, “Are you shot through the heart ?
take a drop of my balsam,” and the acolytes and admirers of
Brother Mash are jeering and laughing at the apparent confusion
of Cagliostro, while his partisans are represented in equal dis-
comfiture at their leader’s exposure, uttering ejaculations of an
egregiously stupid nature. Now, whatever Count Cagliostro’s
faults may have been,—however slender his chemical knowledge
(as it appeared to his time), and pressing his material wants —
99

CAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAH

no one can deny his personal courage, and his entire belief in the
doctrines he endeavoured to teach. On the other hand, the Free-
masons of that time were three-bottle men, with tracing boards
executed on the floors of taverns in rough charcoal, who, like
their descendants, thought more of banquets than of learning;
men, in point of fact, who worked their little rituals with no
higher views than mere immediate satisfaction of their various
vanities. It will be conceded, that if Freemasonry be what the
venerable George Oliver desired to make it,—a means of human-
izing and differentiating the evils of social life-——-it cannot be
effected by heavy dinners, excesses of every description, and a
blind adherence to forms never contemplated by the founders of
the Fraternity. It is all very well to scout humbug, and to brand
pretensions not based upon truthful ideas, but the actual fact,
that any set of men could so far debase themselves as to push their
foreign brother—for brother he was—beyond their gates with con-
tumely, is sufficient to put them in the wrong. If they could
tolerate Dr Graham, with the luxurious brothel in Pall Mall —the
wonderful quack who boasted of the magnetic bed,—they might
well admit of the contemporaneous existence of a more enlightened
teacher. It has always been the way of the world to scorn its
best educators, and Cagliostro was no worse than others. And
perhaps it is worthy of notice, that Cagliostro maintained his
dignity after this insult, and sought in no way for revenge upon
his petty enemies. His system of Masonry, of which we shall
speak hereafter, was not founded upon shadows. Many of the
doctrines he enunciated may be found in the Book of the Dead,
and other important documents of ancient Egypt; and though
he may have committed the fatal error of matching himself with
the policy of Rome, and getting the worst of it, I have not yet been
able to find one iota of evidence that he was guilty of anything
more reprehensible than an error in judgment during his various
journeys. I do not propose to go into the story of the Diamond
Necklace—the evidence is not strong enough to connect him with
the Countess de Valois or D’Oliva, and it is certain that, how-
ever lavish his expenses, his means were not derived from that
source. It should be stated that Count Cagliostro was an inti-
mate friend of Lord George Gordon, whose reputation was bound
up with the No-Popery riot of 1780, and therefore the partisans
of the Pope would lose no opportunity of censuring Cagliostro.
All that remains for the present writer to add is, that it is to
be hoped that this double view of a singular and eventful life
may receive impartial consideration at the reader’s hands,
Canter (French).—A term for a Eoeepales in which is written

portions of the ritual.
100

CAT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAL

Cain.——The elder brother of Abel. A degree has been formed
respecting him, called Knight of the Black Cross.

Cairo, LODGE oF. (See Wisdom, Lodge of.)

CALATRAVA, MILITARY ORDER OF.—Instituted 1158, during the reign
of Sancho TIL, King of Castile, who, having conquered the Castle
of Calatrava, an important fortress of the Moors of Andalusia,
gave it to the Knights Templar, who, being unable to maintain
the place, resigned it to the king. Its defence was then under-
taken by Don Raymond, of Bureva in Navarre, abbot of St Mary
of Hitero, a Cistercian convent. His gallantry maintained the
possession, and the king gave it to him and his companions,
whereupon the Order was established. A Grand Master was
nominated, and this was approved of by Pope Alexander III,
1164, Innocent IIT. confirming it, 1198. The knights at first
wore a white robe and scapular, similar to the Cistercians; but
Pope Benedict XIII. dispensed with the habit, and Paul ITI.
gave them permission to marry, but only once, Arms: a red
cross-fleury, or, or according to others, the cross is green, charged
at the lower point with two handcuffs; but the former cross is
now worn pendant from a broad red ribbon. The knights elected
their own Grand Master; but on the death of Don Garcias Lopez
de Pardella in 1489, Ferdinand and Isabella annexed the Grand
Mastership to the crown of Castile, with the approbation of Pope
Innocent VIII.

CaLcort, WELLINS.—Author of “A Candid Disquisition of the
Principles and Practices of the M. A. & H. 8. of F. & A. M,”
London, 1769. His labours were supplemented by Hutchinson.
(See Hutchinson.)

CALENDAR, Masonic.—The Masonic method of dating charters,
warrants, certificates, and balustres, varies from that adopted in
general civil matters, and different dates are used according to
circumstances connected with the various rites. In the York
and French rites —viz., among the Masons of England, Scotland,
Ireland, France, Germany, and America—the date is from the
creation of the world, B.C. 4000, technically called Anno Lucis
(A.L.), signifying In the Year of Light. Thus the year 1876
would be A.L. 5876. This chronology is adopted, not because the
institution of Freemasonry is, in the ordinary sense, coeval with
the creation, but on account of its symbolism in reference to the
creation of light. In the Ancient and Accepted Rite, the
Jewish chronology is, however, used, and hence 1876 would be
called Anno Mundi (A.M.), or Anno Hebraico (A.H.), Year of the
World, or in the Hebrew year, A.M. or A.H. 5636. This reckoning
also ends in the Jewish way, on the 16th September, and the

names of the Hebrew months are expressed, the new year
Ior

CAL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAL

beginning on the 17th September, or 1 Tisri. In the Rite of
Mizraim, the chronology of Archbishop Usher is adopted, and
thus adding 4004 years, 1876 would be A.L. 5880. Inthe York
rite the year begins with the 1st of January, but in the French
rite it begins on the 1st of March, and the months are named
first, second, third, &c., so that a document civilly dated the first
of January, would be styled first of the eleventh month in any
particular year. The French sometimes put, instead of A.L., the
words, L'an de la Vraié Lumiere, or V.". L.:. viz., Year of True
Light. Royal Arch Masons commence their era with the year
in which Zerubbabel began to build the Second Temple, B.C. 530.
Their style for 1876 would therefore be A... Inv..—Anno Inven-
tionis—or in the Year of the Discovery, 2406. In the Cryptic
rite (including the degrees of Royal and Select Masters, Super-
Excellent Master, and Most Excellent Master), the proper era is
from the year in which the First Temple was completed, the style
being Anno Depositionis, or in the Year of the Deposit, thus
making the year 1876, A. Dep. 2876. Knights Templar dated
from the era of their organization, in A.D. 1118. Thus 1876
would be A.O. or Anno Ordinis, Year of the Order, 758. Knights
of the Red Cross of Rome and Constantine date from the institu-
tion of their order in A.D. 313, and thus 1876 would be A.O. 1563.
Oriental orders date in a very different way, from remarkable
events in their traditions, or the promulgation of some principle
in their tenets.

CaLip.—Sultan of Egypt. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

CatiFrornia—Grand Lodge organized 19th April, 1850, at Sacra-
mento City. Grand Chapter and Grand Commandery, in 1854.

CALLED, OR CALLING OFF.—A term applied to the ceremony by
which the Craft is summoned from labour to refreshment. To
call off for any other purpose is somewhat irregular; but on the
occasion of the discussion of a difficult question, when the
harmony of the Lodge might be in jeopardy, an adjournment for
unofficial conference is considered admissible, and often is
attended with good results.

CALLED, OR CALLING ON.—When the brethren are summoned to
their labours by command of the W.M., the ceremony is de-
nominated calling on.

CALOYERS.—A general name for the monks of the Greek church,
following the rule of St Basil) There are three classes :—
Ceenobites, who perform their religious exercises from midnight to
sunrise; Anchorets, who live in hermitages and cultivate the earth;
and Recluses, who hide themselves in grottoes and caverns.

Catvary, Mount. (See Golgotha.)

CaLves’ HeaD CLus.—A club instituted by the Independents and

102

cam | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAN

Presbyterians to commemorate the decapitation of Charles I.
Their chief fare was calves’ heads, and they drank their
wine and ale out of calves’ skulls. A society now happily
extinct.

Camp.—A. part of the paraphernalia of a Consistory of Sublime
Princes of the Royal Secret; the 32d degree of the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite. The symbolism is entirely esoteric.

CAMPE, JOHANN HEInRIcH.—Doctor of theology, and director of
schools in Dessau and Hamburg, born 1746, died October 22,
1818. He was a correspondent of G. E. Lessing, the author of
many philosophical works, and a zealous Mason.

CanaDA.—Under its own Grand Lodge since 1855, its institutions
in all ways resembling those of England.

CANCELLARIUS.—An office in the Templar Masonry of the middle
ages. Each province and prefect had its Chancellor, who con-
ducted the correspondence; he was also the proper custodian of
the mysteries, and had to instruct the novitiate knights in their
duties. Similar functions are exercised by an officer in each
country in the Oriental Order of Ishmael, or of Esau, or Re-
conciliation; in countries of the first rank, this officer is deno-
minated by the title of Arch Chancellor.

CaNDIDATE.—In ancient Rome, any one seeking office at the hands
of the people wore a white shining robe of a particular kind,
open at the breast, showing the wounds he had received in the
public defence. From the colour of this robe, or toga candida,
he was called candidatus, whence our word.

CANDIDATI. (See Sefidel-Schamegan.)

CANDLESTICK, GOLDEN.—The candelabrum which Moses was com-
manded to make for the Tabernacle. There were ten in the First
Temple, but only one in the Second. The seven-branched
candlestick is an indispensable emblem in the Royal Arch, and
also in several degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

CaNEPHORUS.—1. The bearer of the round flat basket containing
the sacred cake, chaplet, frankincense, and implements of
sacrifice. Usually a young Athenian maiden, who walked in
the processions of the Dionysia, Panathenza, and other public
festivals. 2. A favourite attitude with architects.

CANNIBAL CiuB.—A dining club connected with the Anthropo-
logical Society of London, consisting of the founders and certain
of the principal members, among whom were Captain R. F.
Burton, Dr James Hunt, Dr R. 8S. Charnock, Mr Algernon
C. Swinburne, Mr J. Frederick Collingwood, myself, and many
others. On the death of Dr Hunt, August 29, 1869, the founder
of the society, the club fell into desuetude. There were many
Masons members of this club.

103

CAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cap

Canopy.—In architecture, the label or projecting roof surrounding
the arches and heads of Gothic niches. (See Baldachin.)

Canopy, CLOUDED. (See Covering of the Lodge.)

CANTALEVERS.—In architecture, blocks of wood or iron placed at
regular intervals, projecting from the wall at right angles, to
support the house-eaves, or the upper mouldings of a cornice.

CANZLER, CARL CHRISTIAN.— Born September 30, 1733 ; died October
16,1786. He was a zealous Freemason, and well acquainted
with its archeology, and published a journal, Fur dltere Litteratur
und neuere Lectiire, in conjunction with A. G. Meissner, at
Leipsic, 1783-5.

CaPE Stone. (See Cope Stone.)

CAPITULAR DieGREES.—The designation of certain degrees in France,
from the fourth to the eighteenth (Ancient and Accepted) inclu-
sive, which the French have contracted to four series, thus :—
1. 1v°. Scottish Rite, Secret Master; v°. Perfect Master; v1°.
Intimate Secretary; vi’. Provost and Judge; vu’. Intendant of
the Building. 2. 1x°. Scottish Rite, Master Elect of Nine; x°.
Grand Elect of Fifteen; x1°. Sublime Knight Elect. 3. xm”.
Scottish Rite, Grand Master Architect; xm°. Knight of the
Royal Circle ; x1v°. Scotch Elect. 4. xv°. Scottish Rite, Knight of
the East; xvi’. Prince of Jerusalem; xvu°. Knight of the East
and West; xvi’. Knight of the Rose Croix.

CAPRIPEDE, RATUR ET Luci FUGE—A burlesque dining degree,
named in the collections of Fustier.

CAPTAIN GENERAL—Formerly third officer in an Encampment or
Commandery of Knights Templar, presiding over the Encampment
in the absence of his superior, and a representative. His duties
comprise the preparation of the council chamber and asylum,
and the communication of all orders issued by the Grand
Council, being stationed on the left hand of the Grand Com-
mander. Jewel—a level surmounted by a cock, the emblem
of courage. (See Templarism.)

CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD.—Sixth officer in a Council of Royal and
Select Masters, representing in the latter Azariah, son of Nathan
(1 Kings iv. 7). His duties are similar to those of a Senior
Deacon. Jewel—trowel and battle-axe within an equilateral
triangle.

CAPTAIN OF THE Host.—Fourth officer in a Chapter of the Royal
Arch; his station is to the right in front of the Council, the duty
being that of Marshal, having charge of the Chapter when in
procession, and also receiving the orders of the Council and carry-
ing them into execution. He is likewise entrusted with the pre-
servation of the ancient ordinances. This, however, is to be in
general applied to American Chapters, where many ceremonies,

104

caP| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAR

such as those of the veils, are in use, though no longer extant in
England.

Captiviry.—The captivity of the Jews, after the siege of Jerusalem
by Nebuchadnezzar, B.C. 588 and ended B.C. 536, forms a part of
the legend of the Royal Arch, the Knight of the East, and some
other high degrees. The captives were bound with triangular
chains, from the triangle being highly revered by them as an
emblem of the Sacred Name.

CaprucHins.—Friars of the Order of St Francis, dressed in brown or
gray, barefoot and bearded.

Carausius.—A Roman emperor, traditionally said to have patronized
the Masons of Great Britain, A.D. 287. A Roman knight named
Albanus, being much interested in the prosperity of the Craft,
influenced the emperor in favour of it, and the Craft obtained
through him especial privileges. A charter was granted to the
Masons, and Albanus was appointed their Grand Master; and
under his rules the main constitutions were settled, and the
ritual revised. Albanus was converted to Christianity, martyred
and canonized at St Alban’s, in the county of Herts, where a
magnificent abbey was erected. (See St Alban.)

CARBONARI, ORDER OF THE, OR CHARCOAL BuRNERS.—It is uncertain
at what time the Carbonari originally formed themselves into
Lodges in the sense of a secret society, but it is probable that
the scheme was derived from an anterior association known as
the Good Cousins (Le Bon Cousinage), in the mountains of the
Jura department. The Order of Fendeurs (Hewers) also furnished
some hints for this modern political society, which, at the present
day, may be looked upon as extinct, its aim, the liberation of
Italy, having been accomplished. The reviver of the Good
Cousins was the Marquis de Champagne, about the beginning of
the present century, but at the feasts of the Carbonari it was
usual to drink the health of Francis I. of France, as the founder
of the Order. Signs, grips, and passwords were in use among the
Carbonari. The following legend is connected with the origin
of the society, which must, however, be received with great
caution. It is said that during the troubles in Scotland, in the
time of Queen Isabella (it is strange to find how secret societies
are always connected with Scotland), many illustrious persons
escaped into the forests, and took to the pursuit of charcoal
burning, and under the show of this business, in private pursued
their object of reinstating the government most favourable to
them. They met in huts in the forests, and established a species
of government, with a system of legislation. The executive con-
sisted of three chiefs, elected triennially, and these chiefs presided

over three Lodges or vendite—one legislative, another administra-
105

CAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAR

tive, and a third judicial; the last was called the Alta Vendita.
These vendite were divided into a number of Barrache, each
erected by a Good Cousin of distinction, who communicated
with the chiefs. In the forest resided a hermit named Theobald,
under whose protection they placed themselves, and, in fact, he in
all subsequent times has been regarded as their patron saint. (See
Thibault.) If for Scotland we, however, substitute France, we
shall read the legend of Francis the First's connection with the
Carbonari, or rather, Les bon Cousins, aright. One night he was
overtaken in a forest and lost himself, but stumbling across one
of the barrache, asked for shelter. This being granted, the king
took an interest in the lives of these mystic forest-dwellers, and
discovered who he was. At his own request he was initiated, and
ever afterwards protected the Order. The reform and restora-
tion of the Carbonari is ascribed to an unknown officer who had
spent some time in Spain; and next to him may be placed Mag-
hella, a Genoese, who, originally a merchant’s clerk, afterwards
became director-general of police under Murat, at Naples. He
was King Murat’s adviser, and counselled him to take no part in
the Russian expedition of 1812; he even suggested that an in-
surrection should take place against the domination of France.
Maghella was taken prisoner, and remained at Paris under the
surveillance of the police until December, 1813, when he effected
his escape, returning to Italy to plot for the independence of his
country; in 1815, however, he became prisoner to the Austrians,
and was taken to a Hungarian fortress. He was not long in con-
finement, but was given up to the King of Sardinia, who in a
year set him at liberty. There were many men of heroic
principles connected with the Carbonari: the present Pope,
Napoleon III., Ugo Foscolo, Mazzini, Louis Blane (it is said),
Garibaldi, and other men of note. It is, however, most of all as
a secret society with ceremonies that it finds a place in the
present work. A ritual of the degrees is in existence, and
resembles that of the Freemasons. The degrees in Carbonarism
are two: 1. Apprentice; 2. Master; to which some add an
esoteric third degree, comprehending a study of universal symbol-
ism. The colours of the Order are black, blue, and red. Black,
or charcoal, is Faith; blue, or the smoke of the furnace, Hope;
and red (the fire), Charity. Jewel of the Apprentice, a specimen
of wood in the form of the pole of operative charcoal burners,
pendant from a tricoloured ribbon, the extremities cut diagonally.
The Master G. C. C. wears the same in silver. And the Grand
dignitaries are Grand Master, two Adjutants, Grand Adminis-
trator-General, two Grand Conservators-General, and one Grand

Representative of the Grand Master. Next in rank are the
106

CAR| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CAR

following :—1. Ordinary Representative of the Grand Master;
2. Grand Conservator; 3 and 4. First and Second Assistants ;
5. Grand Orator; 6. Grand Treasurer; 7. Grand Keeper of Seals;
8. Grand Keeper of Archives; 9 and 10. Two Grand Masters of
the Ceremonies; 11. Grand Almoner; 12 and 13. Two Grand
Master Adepts; 14 and 15. Two Grand Adepts. Succeeding to
them are—l, 2, 3. Three Presidents; 4 to 9. Three First and
three Second Assistants; 10 to 12. Three Orators; 13 to 15.
Three Secretaries; 16. One Treasurer; 17 to 19. Three Keepers
of the Seals; 20 to 22. The Keepers of the Archives; 23. Assis-
tant Treasurer; 24 to 27. Four Masters of the Ceremonies; 28.
Almoner; 29. Accountant; 30 to 37. Hight Adepts or Experts.
The following account of the principles professed by the Car-
bonari, and contained in a document addressed by them to Pope
Pius VIT. in 1820, is a most complete and succinct statement :—
“The Roman Catholic and Apostolic religion, that which our
fathers have ever maintained unimpaired (intemerata), that
which acknowledges in your Holiness the Vicar of Him who
was God and man; who, with his divine blood founded the
sublime, true, and only religion; this is the only one which, in
the spirit of truth, is preserved and professed by the Society of
the Carbonari. Every society has its liturgy. That of the
Carbonari breathes only the religion of Jesus Christ. The cross,
the sign of our religion, forms a principal part of its rites. Faith,
Hope, Charity, devices of the Catholic Church, according to the
Apostle St Paul, form the language which distinguishes the
Society, and by means of which it communicates. The conduct
which is inculcated in the education of the Carbonari is precisely
the practice of the morality of the Gospel. The most eminent
among the precepts of this divine morality, that of universal
charity, not only binds them together, but obliges them to
practise it, even towards those who do not belong to the Society.
It is true that such a Society has a political object; but this is
not in the slightest degree contrary to the maxims of religion.
It preserves that respect to sovereignty, which the Apostle
requires from Christians; it loves the Sovereign, it preserves the
State, and even the succession of families; but it supports a
democracy, which, instead of offending monarchy, forms that
happy addition which endears it more to the nation, and
which alone can render the rights of empire and those of the
citizen less fluctuating, and which, therefore, prevents political
disorders by constitutional means, and consolidates the true
basis of national felicity, a felicity to which the Christian religion
directly leads those nations that have the glory to profess it.

Such, most blessed Father, is the state, the object, and the secret
107

CAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | CAR

of the Society of the Carbonari. Far from that secret, now no
longer such, be every suspicion as to its dogmas or morals. If
it separate itself from the public, if it hold its meetings apart,
if it have its peculiar rites, it is answered that all this is neces-
sary to preserve the spirit that distinguishes it. Man is, in a
manner, subject to the senses. Truth, veiled in rites, which are
its symbols, insinuates itself more firmly into the mind ; and a
ceremony which inspires the newly-initiated with a ” sacred
horror, is warranted even by that once imposed on the prose-
lytes of the Church. The rite which is still preserved in the
administration of baptism, is respected because it is figurative,
although it does not correspond with the actual state of the
infant Christian. But the ceremonies of the Society of the
Carbonari are in no wise opposed to the profession of the
Catholic and Apostolic religion, which its members jealously
maintain.” The authors of this manifesto conclude by praying
that Pope Pius VII. would declare the Society*free from the
penalties pronounced against it in the Bull of 1815. The docu-
ments contain a curious passage, with which I will conclude
this notice of Carbonarism. “Was not the Church, itself, of
Jesus Christ, from its origin to the period of the victory of Con-
stantine over the tyrant Maxentius, a secret society? Was not
its discipline concealed? What monstrous ideas against the
Society did not the concealment of its mysteries and sacred rites
excite, not less in the minds of the sovereigns than of the pagans
generally? A glance at the works of our apologists shows us
that the secret so jealously kept by our fathers was the means of
their being looked upon as infanticides, as adorers of beasts, as
magicians, and as sworn enemies to the State, notwithstanding
the sanctity of those who belonged to the Society, and in spite
of their good conduct, and of that spirit of charity which taught
them not only to obey, but even to offer up their most fervent
prayers to God, for the happiness of a state in which their life
was daily sought.” These words are worthy of a much more
general application by the opponents of secret societies.

CaRBUNCLE (Heb. npia, Baraketh).—The third stone in the first
row of the High Priest’s breast-plate, according to the authorized
version, but the first in the second, according to the LXX., and
consecrated to Judah. It was probably an emerald, in fact.
The carbuncle has, from its bright red colour, been associated
in Christian rites of Masonry with the wounds of Christ, his
blood and passion.

CARDINAL VIRTUES.—Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, and Justice.
These are. dilated upon in the first degree, and their practice
age upon the initiate.

Io

CAR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cat

CARLILE, RICHARD.—A very active agent in early reform, who,
owing to the foolish state of the law in his time, was made a
martyr, and suffered imprisonment for very free opinions on
religion, in 1819. He was born, 1790, and died, 1843; and
although he was fanatical in the expression of his unbelief, and
very hostile to Freemasonry, which he professed to expose, he
was, in private life, a man of singular benevolence. Undue pro-
minence was given in those days by prejudiced governments to
agitations and statements which modern statesmen do not hesi-
tate to abet on the hustings. In this way the Rev. Robert
Taylor, M.A., was treated, mainly to the advantage of the cause
for which he was, or professed to be, fighting. Imprisonment
for religious opinion is now at an end, fortunately for the country,
the last prisoner having been Mr George Jacob Holyoake, the
earliest historian of Co-operation.

CARMELITES.—A mendicant order, wearing a brown scapular thrown
over the shoulder.

CARPENTER OF St ANDREW.—A degree in the collection of M. Le
Page.

CARPENTERS, ORDER OF.—In Holland and Belgium there was still
existing a body, about 1815, under this name, the headquarters
being Antwerp and the Hague. They met at night in a forest. .

CaRrPET.—A painting or diagram displaying the emblems of a par-
ticular degree; otherwise a flooring or tracing board. It is so
called, because the emblematic designs of the Lodge are usually
laid on the floor for the purposes of instruction. (But see
Tracing Board.)

CARPOCRATIANS.—A. Gnostic sect of the second century, followers
of Carpocrates, who preached the doctrines of Simon Magus and
Menander. They denied the divinity of Christ, and held a com-
munity of women.

CARTHUSIANS.—A severe religious order, founded by Bruno in the
11th century, in the district of Chartreuse, in France. Women
were not allowed to enter their churches.

CarTULARIUS.—An ecclesiastical officer who had charge of the
records of a monastery.

Casanova. (See Seingalt.)

CasMARAN.—The angel of air, according to corrupt rituals. Used
in the 29th degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Cassia.—A corruption. (See Acacia.)

CASTELLAN.—In Germany, a steward or superintendent of Masonic
buildings. He has charge of the furniture of the Lodge, and the
direction of the banquet. In England, his place is supplied by
an honorary officer, who is known as the Wine Steward.

CATAFALQUE.—A wooden structure, decorated with funeral emblems,

109

CAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cEN

used in a Lodge of Sorrow ; also in the third degree of the Modern
French Rite.

Cat AND Bacpirian SocieTy.—A society which met at their office
in the Great Western Road. In their summons, published in
the daily papers, it was added that the kittens might come with
the old cats without fear of being scratched. It existed about
1750, but, like the old highwaymen, is now a thing of the past.

CATECHUMEN.—A candidate for baptism in the primitive Church.

CATENARIAN ARrcH.—A rope being loosely suspended by its two
ends forms a curve, which is called a Catenarian Curve; and
this inverted is said to be the strongest of all arches, and is called
the Catenarian Arch. As the form of a symbolic Lodge is a
parallelogram, that of a Royal Arch Chapter, according to the
English ritual, is, or should be, held in the form of an arch.

CATHARI, SOCIETY OF THE—An Italian heretical secret society,
having at heart the interest of the Ghibellines, in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries. Its doctrines resembled those of the
Manichees and Albigenses. It preached metempsychosis, prac-
tised industry, founded schools and hospitals, enjoined charity
to all men, was averse to the judicial privilege of assigning
death as a punishment, and considered suicide no crime. They
rejected the adoration of the cross, conceiving it impossible that
Christians could worship the instrument of suffering on which
the Saviour was tortured to death. They had four sacraments;
and the consolation consisted in the imposition of hands, or the
gift of the Holy Spirit, as promised. Their ceremonies were
secret, and hence fell under the ban of the Roman Catholic
Church. On initiation, every novice was presented with a gar-
ment of fine linen and wool, which he wore next the skin;
while women received a girdle to be worn in a similar manner.

CATHARIST (from xadapés, pure).—A term applied to persons aiming
at excessive purity of morals. It, after a time,—like the term
Purist,—was used in a reproachful sense.

CATHERINE II., in 1762, prohibited Masonry in Russia, but after-
wards relaxed her edicts and proclaimed herself protectress of the
Lodge Clio, at Moscow. On her death, 6th Nov., 1796, the old
persecution against Masonry was renewed. (See Alexander I)

Cavution.—In the ritual of the last century the Entered Apprentice
received, on his initiation, the name of Caution. This has fallen
into disuse. In some rituals of the higher degrees, the adoption
of some specific name is still considered essential.

CazoTTE. (See Rosicrucians, Lminent.)

CELEBRATION.—The third degree of Fessler’s Rite. (See that article.)

CELTIC Mysteries. (See Mysteries of the Druids.)

CEeNsER. (See Pot of Incense.)

T1090

CEN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CEP

Crnsor.—According to Giadicke, only an occasionally appointed
officer in some German Lodge. 1. One of the seven chief officers,
next to the Sponsors, in the Royal Oriental Order of Sat-Bvhai.
2. An officer in a Tent in the Ancient Oriental Order of Ishmael ;
his duties comprise a preliminary inquiry into the general fitness
of a candidate.

CENSURE.—The mildest form of Masonic punishment, comprising
an expression of dissatisfaction at the conduct of a brother. It in
no way affects his standing, and the resolution conveying censure
may be rescinded on any future occasion at a regular meeting.

CENTAINE, ORDRE DE LA (Order of the Century).—An androgyne
system of Masonry, which was introduced at Bordeaux, in France,
about 1735.

Crntenary.—A festival usually observed in a Lodge on the hun-
dredth anniversary of its existence. It is usual to further com-
memorate the event by a jewel presented to the members of such
Lodge, obtained from the Grand Secretary, after due authoriza-
tion.

CENTENAIRE, LE, DE NevitLy.—An aged Mason, whose name was
Noel de Quersonniers, who lived to the age of 117. He was
made a Mason in 1764, and was affiliated to the Lodge Trinoso-
phes, at Paris, in 1844, eighty years after his initiation.

CENTRAL Point. (See Point within a Circle.)

CENTRALISTS.—A_ society existing in Europe, of alchymical, reli-
gious, and political tendencies, under a mask of Masonry, with a
spice of Jesuitism, from 1770 to 1780.

CENTRE oF Unity.—The central force or authority. In most organ-
izations it exists, as in the case of Rome, in the person of a
visible material power. But the Masonic centre of unity is
neither material nor visible. It consists in an internal principle
or sentiment pervading the Fraternity, and binding them to-
gether ina harmonious whole. It is in this principle that the
strength of Masonry and similar Orders exists, and, being un-
assailable, renders the Fraternity invulnerable to the attacks of
its enemies.

CENTRE, OPENING ON THE—A declaration made by the W. M. in
the beginning of the third degree, and no other degree can be thus
opened, in the very nature of things. It is, however, not univer-
sal. A very good reason why Master Masons’ Lodges can alone
be opened on the centre, is that the Entered Apprentice Lodge
is the exterior circle, the Fellow Craft the intermediate circle,
and the Master Masons’ Lodge alone in possession of the true
light. Similar to this is the constitution of the Essenes, the
Pythagoreans, and the Order of Ishmael.

CrpHas.—A Graco-Syriac word, signifying rock, or stone. In the
I

CER] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CHA

degree of Royal Master, it is used in reference to the cubical
stone of Masonry.

CERCLE Soctat (Social Circle)—An Order which sprang up in Paris
in 1790, and endeavoured, though happily without effect, to
induce the Masonic Brotherhood to play an important part in
the French Revolution. The society published a journal called
La Bouche de Fer («The Mouth of Iron”), the object of which
claimed to be “to establish a universal confederation of the
friends of truth.”

CEREMONIES, Master oF. (See Master of Ceremonies.)

CERES.—The symbol of the earth among the Hellenes, and patroness
of the Eleusinian mysteries; among the Romans, the Goddess of
Agriculture. (See also Demeter.)

CERIDWEN.—The Druidical Isis.

CERNEAU, JOSEPH.—Born at Villeblerin, in France, 1763 ; emigrated
to America, and in 1812 established a body called the “ Sovereign
Grand Consistory of the United States of America.” For this,
Cerneau was expelled by the Supreme Grand Council, Ancient
ag rea Scottish Rite, sitting at Charleston, South Carolina,
in 1813.

CERTIFICATE.—A diploma issued by a Grand Lodge, Grand Chapter,
or other supreme authority, testifying that the bearer thereof,
duly named and authenticated, is a true and trusty brother. It
is, however, by no means in itself a voucher for the capacity and
standing of the holder, who is at all times liable to an examina-
tion of the strictest character by duly qualified persons. In fact,
proficiency alone can entitle the brother to a participation in
Masonic privileges ; and in cases where, by unavoidable accident,
the certificate cannot be presented, special care is necessary, and
collateral evidence admissible. In the Regulations of the General
Assembly of Masons in England, made on St John the Evange-
list’s Day, 1663, when the Earl of St Alban’s was Grand Master,
we read—* That no person hereafter who shall be accepted a
Freemason, shall be admitted into any Lodge or Assembly until
he has brought a certificate of the time and place of his accept-
ation from the Lodge that accepted him unto the Master of that
kind or division where such Lodge is kept.”

CHAILLON DE JOINVILLE. (See Joinville, Chaillon de.)

Cuan, Mystic.—A circle formed by the brethren of a Lodge in
some degrees. In France it is called chaine d’union.

CHAIN OF FLowERS.—In French Masonry, on foundation days or
great anniversaries of any kind, or on the baptism of a louveteau,
the Lodge-room is decorated with flower garlands.

Cuan or Union. (See Chain, Mystic.)

CHAIN, TRIANGULAR.—A Masonic tradition says, that when the Jews

112

CHA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CHA

were carried captive from Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, their
chains were formed of triangles, in derision of their religious
reverence for the triangle, or delta, their symbol for the Deity.

Cuair.—1. Eligible to the Chair—+.c,, fit to be Master of a Lodge.
2, Chair—z.e., the Master.

CuHarr, ORIENTAL—The seat of the Master; the Oriental Chair of
King Solomon.

Carr, PassING THE.—The ceremony of installation.

CHALDEA.—The country into which the Jews were carried captive,
the chief city of which was Babylon (which see).

CHALDEANS OR’ CHALDEES.—A distinction should be drawn between
the Chaldees and the Culdees, although they both exercised, by
right of birth, the priestly office. Modern investigations have
shown that the existence of a powerful guild, controlling the
accepted science and religion of the two empires of Mesopotamia,
prevailed from the most remote period. That country being
subject to periodical inundations, like Khemi or Egypt, required
a class of men instructed in all matters of weather, in the details
of astronomy,—in brief, “the signs of the times.” As their
observations were conducted with method, they received the
sanction of political authority, much in the same way that the
not less accurate authorities at Flamsteed House obtain the
support of the State. It was easy, therefore, in a time when
nature worship had not been rooted out, for this body of men to
receive, on account of their merits and their sanctity of life,—
exhibited by their recluse habits,—the honours of the priest-
hood. They were the servants of the appointed messengers of God,
visible in the starry heavens, and the interpreters of their will, and
formulating their experience—as modern statists do their tabular
statements; and thus they drew a series of natural inferences,
afterwards embodied into a system of Astrology. (See Astrology.)
The doctrine of analogy has always had great charms for minds
prone to dream of art; and surrounded, as primeval man was, by
beautiful forms or abhorrent sights, it was easy for him to create
for himself a religion compounded from the elements which
excited him. All that was lovely, and charming, and benevolent,
he could not but see, reminded him of the clement universal
First Cause; all that was terrible and nocent to him, tended to
the creation of that inevitable equipoise, gradually reduced to
the devil in our modern speech. The later Chaldeans, under
other guidance, reduced all things into two principles—Good
and Evil, Light and Shadow, and so built up another stately
temple of theosophy. To this, modern forms of thought, for a
long time guided by the Papacy, but arrested by Luther, have
succeeded ; and the whence ana whither question, in our imme-

113

CHA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CHA

diate times, is left to science, the only unerring guide in this
world; of the next, it would be both presumptuous and wrong
to speak, save “with bated breath.” The Chaldeans, in posses-
sion of all the wisdom of their time,—for nature is chary,—held
the field, but receded into blank obscurity before the Magi of
Persia; they in turn have given way, as is always the case in
the progress of time, to numerous sects. Had they, like the
philosophic Masons of all ages, kept to original principles, all
the heart-burnings and animosities of the world would have
given way to peace.

Cuatice.—1. A cup used in religious rites. 2. The chalice is part
of the furniture of Knights Templar, and also used in the high
degrees.

CHALK, CHARCOAL, AND CLay.—The symbolical qualifications of the
servitude of an Entered Apprentice—Freedom, Fervency, and
Zeal.

CHAMBER, MIDDLE. (See Middle Chamber.)

CHAMBER OF REFLECTION.—In the French and Scottish Rites, a
small room adjacent to the Lodge, where, before initiation, the
candidate reflects upon the serious nature of the ceremonies in
which he is about to take part. It is also used by the Knights
Templar and other Orders.

CHANCELLOR.—1. An officer in Council of the Knights of the
Red Cross, corresponding in some respects to the Senior Warden
of a symbolic Lodge. 2. Initiating officer in the Eastern Order
of Esau, Ishmael, or Order of Reconciliation.

CHANCELLOR, GRAND, and Vice Grand Chancellor, are recording
officers in Knight Templarism.

CuA0, ORDO AB (Order out of Chaos)—One of the mottoes of the
high degrees.

CHaos.—Discrete and Wise Chaos are the names of the 49th and
50th degrees of the Rite of Mizraim. (See Knight of the Sun.)
CHaos DISENTANGLED.—Formerly applied to the 28th degree, or

Knight of the Sun of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

CHAPEL.—In every convenient place, the architect of a Lodge should
contrive secret crypte or closets. They are of indispensable
utility, but are not sufficiently attended to in practice. On the
continent they are numerous, and are called Chapels. They ought
to be seven in number :—1. A room for visitors; 2. The Tyler's
room; 3. A vestry where the ornaments, furniture, jewels, and
other regalia are deposited; 4. A chapel for preparation, hung
with black, and having only one small lamp placed high up near
the ceiling; 5. A chapel of reflection, furnished with a table on
which are a lamp and the emblems of mortality; 6. A chancery
containing the records of the Lodge ; and 7. An underground crypt

114

cHa] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cHA

in the centre of the Lodge-room, to which access is obtained by a
moveable trap-door, seven feet long and three feet broad.

CHaPiTER—An ornamental finish to the top of a pillar. (See
Pillars of the Porch.)

CHAPLAIN.—An office usual but not peremptory in a Lodge. It is
generally conferred as a mark of respect on a brother in holy
orders, but was unknown to the earlier Masons. As a matter of
practice, it depends upon the wishes of the Lodge in general.

CHAPLAIN, GRAND.—An office in Grand Lodge, first instituted 1st
May, 1775, and since universally adopted.

CHaPTER.—A convocation of Royal Arch Masons and others, such
as the degree of Rose-Croix, 18th in the Ancient and Accepted
Rite. In England, Royal Arch Masonry is under a some-
what similar government to the Craft, although in America
and other countries it is not. The Presiding Officers of a Royal
Arch Chapter are the Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and Haggai, commonly
called the three first Principals. In the ineffable degrees, the
name of the Assembly is also Chapter. 2. The third section
of the Antient and Primitive Rite.

CHAPTER, GENERAL—The name of the supreme body of Templars,
the chief seat of which is in Scotland. Its powers include the
establishment of Grand Priories, Encampments, and Preceptories,
in any part of the world.

CHAPTER, GRAND.—The governing body in Royal Arch Masonry in
any jurisdiction, usually meeting in a quarterly communication.

CuarTeR Mason.—A term sometimes applied to a Royal Arch
Mason.

Cuarces, ANCIENT.—That monitory addresses prevailed amongst
all the ancient guilds appears to be well warranted by history,
and so important a body as the operative masons could not have
been without them. But, strange to say, long subsequent to the
admission of Elias Ashmole, who was made, according to his own
statement, in 1646, in the town of Warrington, Lancashire, merely
scattered records could be found as to the ancient regulations
of the Craft. That some regulations existed is beyond doubt, but
in what form, or how expressed, it is wisest to remain neutral.
The whole subsequent history of modern Freemasonry becomes
inconsistent if we assign a higher antiquity to it than that of Sir
Christopher Wren, who, at the building of our national palladium
(itself founded on the site of a temple conjointly to the Sun and
Moon, Apollo and Diana), turned the principle of the Society
back to this inward Sun and Moon, recognised as Vitality and
Conscience. It is to the credit of Sir Christopher Wren that he
was among the founders of the Royal Society, and proposed a

Society for the Encouragement of Morality. When he was made
115

cHA| The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [cHA

Grand Master of Freemasons, it is probable that he considered
this design sufficiently realized; and although Craft Masonry at
the present day only presents the shell of a psychological society,
and contents itself with the practice of certain ceremonies, in the
mind of Wren it probably had assumed proportions as colossal
as those of St Paul’s, and objects as universal as those of the Royal
Society in relation to science—To return to the Old Charges.
These are ranged under six general heads: 1. Concerning God
and religion ; 2. Of the civil magistrates, supreme and subordinate ;
3. Of Lodges; 4. Of Masters, Wardens, Fellows, and Apprentices ;
5. Of the management of the Craft in working; 6. Of behaviour
under different circumstances and in various conditions,

CuariTy.—The cementing bond and mystic tie between all Free-
masons, and the essence of the Rose-Croix, 18°. A virtue on
which it is unnecessary to expatiate, as it has received attention
at the hands of every preacher, and is open to the practice of any
one, whatever his religious faith. It is to be feared that its
essence is more expatiated upon than favoured in actual life.

CHARLES I. and II. (See Stewart Masonry.)

CHARLES IST., ORDER OF. (See Immaculate Conception, Order of the.)

CHARLES XIIT., OnpER of.—An Order of Knighthood, instituted in
1811 by Charles XIII, King of Sweden, and attainable only by
Freemasons of the most illustrious virtue in his dominions. In
the manifesto establishing the Order, the King declares :—*To
give to this society [the Masonic] a proof of our gracious senti-
ments towards it, we will and ordain that its first dignitaries, to
the number which we may determine, shall in future ‘be decor-
ated with the most intimate proof of our confidence, and which
shall be for them a distinctive mark of the highest dignity.”
The number of knights is 27 (a multiple of nine), with three
extra. ecclesiastical knights, the King being the perpetual Grand
Master. Knights can only be installed on the 28th of January
in each year. The badge is a cross of four points, of ruby red,
with a golden border, surmounted by the royal crown. In the
centre of the obverse, on a white ground, are the initials of the
royal founder—viz., the number xiii between two CC’s, interlaced
with each other; on the reverse, in a triangle, the letter B. It
is worn pendant to a red watered ribbon.

CHARLES MarTeL.—Known in the Lansdowne MS. as “ one Charles
Marshall; and he was a man that loved well the said Craft, and
took upon him the Rules and Manners.” Mayor of the Palace,
in France, from 716 to 741.

CHARLESTOWN.—Lhis city, in South Carolina, was the first place in
which the Ancient and Accepted Rite (in the form we at pre-
sent eens it) was established, in the year 1801. The

II

cHa] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CHE

present seat of the “Mother Council of the World” is at
Washington, D. C., U.S. A.

CHARNOCK. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

CHARTER.—In Freemasonry, a document issued by a Grand Lodge,
Chapter, or other supreme body, to a certain number of members,
empowering them to organize a Lodge, Chapter, Conclave, College,
or other body, and to confer degrees. A Lodge can never be
legally opened for labour unless the charter or warrant is pre-
sent; and it is the right of every brother to see it when he
desires to do so.

CHASIDEES, CHaspim—A elass or order of men mentioned in the
first book of Maccabees, chap. vii. 13. The Septuagint desig-
nates it by the Greek name Assidai. The word means, skilled
im all wisdom, human and divine. This association was com~
posed of the most noble and learned men of Israel, most noted
for their charitable and peaceful dispositions, their superior
knowledge of the law, and their zeal for the purity and preserva-
tion of the Temple. Scaliger connects this society with that of
the Essenes, deeming it the predecessor of the latter.

CHASTANIER, BENEDICT.—A French Mason, who established a Lodge,
named the Illuminated Theosophists, in London, in 1767, as a
modification of the Rite of Pernetti. It had nine degrees: 1, 2,
and 3. EAP., FC., and MM.; 4, 5, and 6. Theosophic EAP., FC.,
and MM.; 7. Sublime Scottish Mason, or Celestial Jerusalem ;
8. Blue Brother; and 9. Red Brother.

CHASUBLE.—A circular cloth, which falls down over the body; so as
completely to conceal it. Used in the Rose-Croix degree.

CHEREAU, ANTOINE GUILLIAUME.—Author of two hermetico-philo-
sophical tracts on the Cubical Stone and the Philosophical
Cross, Paris, 1806.

CHERUBIM.—The second order of the angelic hierarchy, succeeding
the seraphim. In Hebrew, the singular form of DAD is ANI;
but the description is nowhere found. According to Aben Ezra,
the word means all sorts of images in general. Several rabbis
assert that the form was that of a child; considering the 5 as a
servile letter, they read 8°272, Chrbia, which in Chaldee means,
like an infant. From this idea have arisen the little winged
heads used in religious paintings. The etymology of the word is,
however, doubtful. In Syriac, 2D means strong, powerful,
perhaps in allusion to the ox used in agriculture, the root 29>
meaning labourer. Rosenmiiller considers that Moses found the
fioure of the chroub in the sanctuaries of ancient Egypt, where
the image of the lion symbolized strength and majesty ; the bull,
constancy, firmness, and force; the man, corresponding with
humanity and gentleness—¢uaavépwaria; and the eagle, with the

117

CHE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cur

energy and. sublimity of the Divine nature. Among the.seven
ophite spirits, the first, the lion, corresponded with Michael; the
second, the bull, with Uriel; the third, the dragon, with Raphael ;
the fourth, the eagle, with Gabriel; the fifth was a bear, corres-
ponding with Thautabaoth; the sixth, according to Celsus, had
the form of a dog, and was named Erataoth; and the seventh,
according to Origen, had the shape of an ass, and was called
Onod or Thartharaoth. The Cherubim have also been compared
to the ypiges, or griffins of the Persians—guardians of the moun-
tain of gold. But the word 2172, Chroub or Cherub, has a great
affinity with Chebub, a celebrated spirit in the Persian my-
thology, who is represented with wings, and a sword in his hand.
The first mention of chroubim is in Genesis iii, 24, where they
are thus described; and as Moses must have been undoubtedly
familiar with Persian, Assyrian, and Ninevite cosmology, it is
there we may seek for the true origin of the term. If the dis-
coveries of Mr George Smith in Assyria prove anything more
distinctly than anything else, it is that the mythology of Genesis
was derived by the Jehovistic and Elohistic authors of the
Jewish cosmogony from the libraries of the sovereigns of
Nineveh, Babylon, and Warka, or Erech. The cherubim also
overshadowed the mercy-seat, or covering of the ark, and between
them the Shekinah rested, and thence the bathkol, or voice of
God, issued. The four mystical animals played a great part in
the Kabbalah, and the cherubim no doubt partook of their nature
in the eyes of the ancient worshippers of God.

CHESED.— Usually Hesed. It is Heb. 1D, mercy. It is the fourth
of the Kabbalistic Sephiroth.

CHEVALIER, IMPERIAL. (See Rosicrucians, Hminent.)

CHIBBELUM.—A corrupted word, used in the rituals of the eighteenth
century.

CHIEF OF THE TABERNACLE.—The twenty-third degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite. In it is commemorated the
institution of the order of the priesthood in Aaron and his son
Eleazar, and Ithamar. The officers are three in number: a
Sovereign Sacrificer, and two High Priests. The assembly is
termed a Court or Hierarchy, and the members Levites. Apron:
white, lined with deep scarlet, bordered with red, blue, and
purple ribbon. A golden seven-branched candelabrum is painted
on the centre, and a violet-coloured myrtle on the flap. Jewel:
a thurible, worn from a broad yellow, purple, blue, and scarlet
sash, over the left shoulder. It is the first of three degrees
referring to the setting up of the Tabernacle in the wilderness
(Exodus xxix. and xl.). The hangings of the apartment are
we supported by red and black columns—by two placed at

II

CHI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cut

intervals. The standards of the tribes are planted round the
rooms near the walls, ‘in the following order: East: 1. Judah,
crimson standard, in stripes or waves; device, a lion couchant
between a crown and sceptre. 2. Towards the North, Issachar ;
colour, greenish yellow; device, an ass couchant beneath its
burthen. 3. Towards the South, Zebulon; colour, light green ;
device, a ship. Southwards, 4. Simeon; colour, yellow; device,
a naked sword. South, 5. Reuben; colour, brilliant crimson ;
device, a man. Westward, 6. Gad; colour, bluish green; de-
vice, a field semée, with stars next towards the west. 7. Ma-
nasseh; colour, variegated, like agate; device, a vine running
over a wall. 8. West, Ephraim; colour, variegated, like opal;
device, a bull. Next towards the North, 9. Benjamin; colour,
violet; device, a wolf. Next towards the North, 10. Asher; colour,
blue; device, a tree in full foliage. North, 11. Dan; colour, gold ;
device, an eagle holding a serpent in his beak. Next to Dan,
towards the East, 12. Naphthali; colour, bluish green; device,
a female deer running at full speed. In the centre of the Court
is a representation of the Tabernacle of Moses (Exodus xxvi. and
xxxvi.). For reception an extra apartment is required, with an
altar, a feeble light, and other appropriate emblems.

CHIEF OF THE TWELVE Tripes.—The 11th degree of the Chapter
of Emperors of the East and West... Also called Illustrious Elect.

CHIEFS OF ENLIGHTENED Men.—A title often applied to the Masonic
rulers in Lodges and Chapters, on certificates privately issued ;
a custom in vogue until a few years ago.

Cuiers or Masonry.—Formerly applied to Princes of Jerusalem,
but properly appertaining rather to the Grand Master of symboli-
cal Masonry, the M. E, First Principal of the Grand Chapter,
and the Inspector-General of the 33d degree.

CHILI. Masonry was introduced into Chili under the Grand Orient
of France in 1841, The 20th April, 1851, witnessed the forma-
tion of an independent Grand Lodge, and a Grand Chapter was
soon after formed.

Cuina.—The Grand Lodge of England introduced Masonry into
China, and a Provincial Grand Lodge now exists at Hong Kong,
together with Chapters and the Knight Templar degree.

CHINESE SECRET SocIETIES. (See Societies, Secret, China.)

CuIsEL.—One of the working tools of a Mark Master, emblematic
of the effects of education on the human mind. It is to the Mark
Master what the Ashlar is to the Entered Apprentice, and also
enters largely into the speculative education imparted.to the
latter, being also one of his working tools.

Cuivatry.—The chivalric principles of the middle ages were
embodied, to a certain extent, in ceremonies of a similar charac-

11g

CHR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cIR

ter to those of Masonry. The profession of arms, indeed, could
not be followed by men of nobility without passing through its
degrees, three in number—1, Page; 2, Esquire; 3, Knight. The
page was educated by some noble dame, with great care, and at
the age of fourteen was presented at the altar, where the priest,
having consecrated a sword, suspended it from his shoulder,
thus marking his advance to the degree of esquire. After this
he accompanied some knight, and upon having acquitted him in
this character for a certain period, received the honour of knight-
hood. The day before the ceremony of installation was a solemn
fast, and the night was passed in a church, at the foot of the
altar, in the midst of profound darkness. The next day he was
sworn, and received with the Accolade (see Accolade), and was
clothed in armour, the emblematic meaning of which was
explained to him. He received certain passwords and signs,
(See also Knighthood.)

Curestos. (See Soter.)

CurisT, ORDER OF —When the Knights Templar were overthrown
throughout Europe, they were, it is said, protected in Portugal,
and converted by the sovereign, Dennis I., in 1317, into a new
order, called the Order of Christ, the secret part of the ritual being
abolished. In 1789 the members were—1l. The Sovereign; 2.
Six Grand Crosses; 3. Four hundred and fifty Commanders; 4.
Knights unlimited. A Masonic order of the same name was, in
1807, established in Paris by a Portuguese named Nunez.

CHRIST, ORDER OF JESUS. (See Obrine, Order of.)

CHRONOLOGY.—From chronos, time, and logos, a discourse; 2.¢., the
science of time, or that of computing time and arranging dates.
This differs throughout the world, and forms a sub-section of
the science of history, the eras of various nations being estab-
lished according to different principles. The common chronology
adopted in the Bible, and hence in Masonry, is not really correct,
and has been overthrown by the subsequent discoveries of
archeology.

CHURCH, FREEMASONS OF THE— Under the designation of “ Free-
masons of the Church, for the Recovery, Maintenance, and
Furtherance of the True Principles and Practice of Architec-
ture,” an architectural college was formed in London in 1842.
Of its present position little is known.

CIPHER WRITING. (See Secret Writing.)

CircLe. (See Point within a Circle.)

CircuLak TEMPLES.—Used in the initiations of Zoroastrianism and
Druidism.

CIRCUMAMBULATION.—Processions round the centre object of wor-

ship, such as statues and altars, have always been in vogue, and
120

cir] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CLA

a certain symbolical meaning was attached to the ceremony.
The procession in all ancient religions usually followed the course
of the sun, and in part and in whole we still possess hymns sung
by the priests on such occasions; for instance, the hymn of the
priests of Delos, sung in praise of Apollo the Sun, the burthen
of which was, “We imitate the example of the sun, and follow his
benevolent course.” In the same way, the Druidical priests
circumambulated their altars thrice. Nor is this custom extinct in
the Highlands of Scotland to the present time. In passing round
the monumental cairns, the people go thrice round by the south,
and term it deiscal, from deas or deis, the right hand, and soz! or
sul, the sun, Circumambulation is also practised in Freemasonry
during certain ceremonies, such as the consecration of Lodges,
initiation or advancement of members, and other circumstances.

CincUMSPECTION.—A. watchfulness of conduct recommended in the
teachings of Masonry, and very important to the conservation
of secrets. It is a duty enjoined in the most explicit manner
in the Ancient Charges.

City, KNIGHT OF THE Hoty.—The fifth and last degree of the
rectified rite of the Benevolent Knights of the Holy City, or the
Rite of Strict Observance, settled at Wilhelmsbad in 1782.

CLANDESTINE.—Not legal. Masons working the ceremonies illegally,
with intent to avoid the control of their governing authorities, are
called Clandestine Masons. Initiates thus introduced are illegally
made. It can scarcely be said that friendly instruction on parti-
cular points is clandestine, where the participators are known to
be regularly certificated.

CuARF, MaRTIN, F.R.S.—A distinguished Mason of the eighteenth
century. In 1732, it is said, he was appointed to revise the
lectures by Grand Lodge; in 1735, he was Junior Grand Warden;
and in 1741, he was Deputy Grand, Grand Master. Clare’s
lectures were a great improvement upon those previous to his
time, but have since been replaced by much more elegant
discourses.

CxassEs.— Ancient Masonic tradition informs us that the specula-
tive and operative Masons who were assembled at the erection of
the Temple, were ranged in nine classes under their respective
Grand Masters, viz.: 30,000 Entered Apprentices under their
Grand Master Adoniram; 80,000 Fellow Crafts under Hiram
Abif; 2,000 Mark Men under Stolkyn; 1,000 Master Masons
under Mohabin; 600 Mark Masters under Ghiblim; 24 Archi-
tects under Joabert; 12 Grand Architects under Adoniram; 45
Excellent Masters under Hiram Abif; 9 Super-excellent Masters
under Tito Zadok ; besides the Ish Sabbal, or labourers. This is,
however, 2 purely imaginary arrangement, and probably the

I2r

CLA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cur

fiction of some Mason of the last century, as the names have no
archeological warrant, and are, indeed, impossible in the Hebrew
language. Many such inconsistencies occur.

CiaveL, THE ABBE.—Author of a work on Masonry, in which
many of the degrees are misrepresented, and none properly
described. The book is, however, amusing, and not likely to do
harm.

Ciay GRrounp.—In the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredatha,
Hiram Abif cast all the sacred vessels of the Temple, and the
pillars of the porch. This spot was about 35 miles north-east
of Jerusalem. (See 1 Kings vii. 42, and 2 Chron iv. 17.)

CLECHE.—A cross charged with another cross of the same figure,
but of the colour of the field.

CLEMENT XII.—Pope, 12th Aug. 1730; died 6th Feb. 1740. He
fulminated the celebrated bull of excormmunication, entitled In
Eminenti Apostolatus Specula, 28th April, 1738, in which the
Freemasons were condemned. On the 14th January, 1739, he
caused Cardinal Firrao to issue a still more strict edict, in which
persons were prohibited from being Freemasons under pain of
death, confiscation of goods, and utter exclusion from future
grace or mercy.

CLERICI ORDINIS TEMPLARIORIUM—A name adopted by a sect of
the Strict Observance system, at the conclusion of the Seven
Years’ War. It was established by Starck in 1767, and for a
time flourished, but is now extinct. Its degrees were: 1, 2, 3.
Symbolic Masonry ; 4. Junior Scottish Mason ; 5. Scottish Master,
or Knight of St Andrew; 6. Provincial Capitular of the Red
Cross; 7. Magus, or Knight of Purity and Light. This last was
divided into five sections. 1. Knight Novice of the Third Year;
2. Knight Novice of the Fifth Year; 3. Knight Novice of the
Seventh Year; 4. Levite; and 5. Priest. (See Starck.)

CLERMONT, CHAPTER OF.— Under this name Chevalier de Bonneville
founded at Paris, 24th November, 1754, a chapter of the high
degrees. There were at first six degrees: 1, 2, 3. Symbolic
Masonry; 4. Knight of the Eagle; 5. Illustrious Knight or
Templar; 6. Sublime Illustrious Knight.

CLERMONT, CounT DE—Louis de Bourbon, a prince of the blood,
and Count de Clermont, was elected by sixteen Paris Lodges
perpetual Grand Master; which office he neglected, although he
was not displaced. He died in 1771, and was succeeded by his
nephew, the Duke de Chartres.

Cuinton, De Wirt.—Born at New York, 2d March, 1769 ; died, 11th
Feb. 1828 ; initiated in 1793, he became Master of his Lodge in
the following year. In 1806, he was Grand Master of the Grand
Lodge of New York; and in 1814, Grand Master of the Grand

122

CLO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [coc

Encampment. In 1816, he was General Grand High Priest of
the General Grand Chapter of the United States. He was a
zealous Mason; and when the Anti-Masonic excitement arose in
America in 1826, being Governor of the State of New York, he
nevertheless took all necessary steps for the arrest of the sup-
posed criminals; but as no murder had been committed, no
persons could be arrested. (See Morgan, William.)

CLosinc.—An important part of the ceremonies consists in the
proper closing of the Lodge: it should be done with the same
impressiveness and calmness with which the opening has been
effected. Hither the Lodge should thus be closed, or the brethren
called off to refreshment (see Calling off), as adjournments are
impossible in Masonry; and after an interval devoted to the
discussion of the disturbing cause, the Lodge should be called
on, and continued until the closing ceremony. It is very much
to be regretted that many brethren are in the habit of present-
ing themselves just before the closing of the Lodge, in order
that they may afterwards participate in the banquet. This is a
practice which the W. M. might reprobate from the chair of
K.S., and thus, during his term of office, contribute to dis-
courage. In America, where Grand Lodges sometimes sit for
several days, the session is adjourned by calling off to refresh-
ment, and calling on, the following day. No other method, in
fact, is constitutional.

CLOTHED.—Proper clothing consists of white leather gloves, the
apron, of course, and the jewel, if any, of the rank of the
wearer. The gloves are, however, often improperly dispensed
with, except on occasions of importance. Formerly, part of the
costume of the W. M. consisted of a hat which he wore in that
capacity.

CLOUDED Canopy. (See Covering of the Lodge.)

CocHLEA.—A staircase contrived in the form of a screw within the
inner court of the Temple. Peculiar to the 4th degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Cock.—The emblem of courage among the ancients. He was
sacred to Ares (Mars), Pallas, and Bellona, deities of war. Heré
(Juno) was also represented with the bird; and a white cock was
a tribute of sacrifice to Asklepios or Aisculapius. One of the
final and most pathetic acts of-Socrates, before his unjust execu-
tion by hemlock, is mentioned by Plato at the end of the
“ Pheedo,” when, knowing that all would be well with him, he
desired that a cock should be sacrificed to Asklepios, the god of
health ; thus disproving by his final act that he was a defier of
the gods of his country. The cock was also the sign of life and

of the sun; and hence we find it mentioned in connection with
123

coc] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [con

the death of the Saviour of Christianity. It was a Christian
emblem of the Knights Templar.

COocKLE SHELL. (See Scallop Shell.)

CopHEADS.—A_ society meeting in London in derision of the
Masons, about 1750.

Corrcion.—It is one of the peculiar excellencies of Freemasonry,
that it cannot coerce any one to join it, or to proceed further in
it than his inclination allows. Every candidate must come of
his own free will and accord ; and even in the preliminary cere-
mony he is admonished to this effect. If coercion be therefore
impossible, how much more cautious should be the true Free-
masons in acting or speaking before persons who have expressed
any desire to enter the Fraternity, lest this perfect freedom of
will should be lost. It may be right, nay, even Christianlike, to
say, that to see any one a Mason would be pleasant or agreeable
in particular cases, but mercenary and interested motives should
be strongly repressed. A good man does not lose any of his
goodness by not belonging to the brotherhood, although a good
man would unquestionably find a more congenial sphere of
action among the sons of light. The practice, too unhappily
common, of thrusting Freemasonry down the throats of the un-
initiated, is a veritable scandal.

Coetus (Latin, Act, assembly).—Incorrectly used in some old Latin
Masonic diplomas. Dermott, however, signs himself, “ Sec. M.
Coetus,” in a document of the date, 10th Sep., 1764.

Caur, JACQUES. (See Rosicrucians, Eminent.)

Corrin.—In all the ancient mysteries, the aspirant could not parti-
cipate in the highest secrets until he had been placed in tho
Pastos, Bed, or Coffin. In this he was symbolically said to die,
and his resurrection was to the light. The Greek verb Teleutao,
in the active voice, signified “I die,” and in the middle voice,
“T am initiated.” Stobzeus quotes an ancient author, who says:
“The mind is affected in death, just as it is in the inztiation into
the mysteries; and word answers to word, as well as thing to
thing; for redcurdy is to die, and reAciodcu, to be initiated.”

CoHEN (Heb. >17).—A priest.

CoHens Evecrep. (See Pascalis a Martin.)

CoLu, BENJAMIN.—Published the Old Constitutions in 1728 and
1731, and a third edition in 1751.

CoLzt, SAMUEL—At one time Grand Secretary of the Grand Lodge
of Maryland—author of the “ Freemasons’ Library, or General
Ahiman Rezon,” 1817 and 1826.

CoLE, WILLIAM.—The ‘successor to Pine, as the publisher of the
engraved lists.

Cottar.—An ornament worn about the neck by the officers of

124

CoOL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cou

Lodges, to which is suspended the jewel indicative of rank. Its
colour varies in different degrees. That of the symbolic or craft
Lodge is blue; of a Past Master, purple; of a Royal Arch Mason,
scarlet; of a Secret Master, white, bordered with black; of a
Perfect Master, green, &c. Nor are the colours arbitrary, but
fitted with an emblematic meaning, Chains are used in the
Grand Lodge of England.

CoLLeGE.—1. The regular assembly of a body of Rosicrucians is
called a College, at which they celebrate their mysteries and
perform the ordinary acts, incidental to the admission and ad-
vancement of aspirants. 2. The second section of the Antient
and Primitive Rite.

CoLLEGES, IRISH, or IRISH CHAPTERS.—These were established at
Paris about 1730, and soon spread over the whole of France;
they were, however, superseded by the Scottish Chapters. (See
Irish Chapters.)

CoLLecEs, Masonic.—It has been thought by many that it would
prove of great advantage to establish institutions of this kind.
On mature consideration, it does not seem by any means politic.
The rudiments of education are imparted in such schools as we
have, without distinction of religious creed; and the Masonic
body, by its own constitution, would be ultra vires to attempt
anything further. It would indeed be narrowing Freemasonry
to ask it to do more than really charitable actions; and as
education involves, more or less, the whole sacrifice of a life to
certain principles, it would be unwise to attempt—as the Jesuits
do—to influence that life except in the freest direction.

CoLLEGIA ARTIFICIORUM. (See Roman Colleges of Artificers.)

CoLtecia ARTIFICIUM—The “Enclycopedia Americana,” art.
Masonry, derives the Fraternity from the Collegia Artificium of
the Romans, and says its members were introduced into this
country by the Kings Alfred and Athelstan, to build castles and
churches. They then united under written constitutions of the
Greek and Roman Colleges and the provisions of the civil law.
Their religious tenets being often objects of suspicion to the
orthodox Catholics, and often differing among themselves, they
were not allowed to obtrude in their meetings, and of course they
were kept secret.

CoLtocatio.—In ancient times, a ceremony at the funerals of Greeks
and Romans, who were accustomed to place the corpse, laid on a
bier, near the threshold of the door of the house, that all might
see whether the deceased had met his death by violence or
otherwise.

CoLOGNE, CHARTER OF —This document has been a bone of conten-

tion between the two parties who discuss the history of Masonry.
125

coL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [con

It would appear to have been originally written in Latin, and to
bear the date of 1535. According to its supporters, there would
seem to have been a Lodge in Amsterdam named Het Vredendall
(Valley of Peace), from 1519 to 1601. In the latter year this
Lodge was closed, but was revived by four surviving members in
1637, by the name of Frederick’s Vredendall; and about the time
of the Restoration there was found in the Lodge-room a brass-

_ bound chest, secured by three locks and three seals, and, accord-
ing to a protocol, issued the 29th of January, 1637, this chest con-
tained:—1. The original warrant of the Lodge Het Vredendall in
English. 2. A roll of members from 1519 to 1601. 3. The
original charter given to the brotherhood at Cologne. These
documents passed into the hands of Brother James Van Vasner,
Lord of Opdem, and after his death they remained among the
family papers until 1790, when M. Walpenaer, one of his descend-
ants, presented them to Brother Van Boetzelaer, Grand Master of
Holland ; finally, 1816, they found their way into the possession of
Prince Frederick of Nassau. There is another version of this
history, which asserts that the papers had long been in the family
of Van Opdem, by a member of which they were given to Van
Boetzelaer, who transmitted them to Van Jeylinger, his successor,
with injunctions to preserve them until the restoration of the
Orange family to political power. The documents are still pre-
served in one of the Lodges at Namur. They have been very hotly
debated: on the one hand, Oliver, Regheillini, and some others,
treat them as authentic, and the antiquaries of the University of
Leyden certify that the paper on which the register of the Lodge
at the Hague is written is of the same kind as that used in
Holland in the beginning of the seventeenth century. Now this
register refers to the charter of Cologne as being in existence, so
that the fraud, if a fraud, is two centuries old; Helderman,
Bobrik, Morsdorf, Kloss, and others, reject the documents, and, in-
deed, internal as well as external evidence would seem to be
against the authenticity of the documents. There is said to have
been a congress at Cologne in 1525, called together by the repre-
sentatives of nineteen Lodges, and that this famous charter was
then issued. Itis probably one of the many frauds which ac-
companied the re-establishment of Masonry about the beginning
of the present century. It is to be found by the Masonic reader
in Dr Burnes’ “Sketch of the History of the Knights Templar,”
London, 1840; in D. Murray Lyon’s edition of Findel’s “ History
of Freemasonry;” in the American Quarterly Review of Free-
masonry, where it is commented upon by Dr Mackey; and in
the Freemason’s Magazine and Masonie Mirror.

CoLoRADO,—Masonry was introduced into this territory in 1860;

126

cou | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [com

but a Grand Lodge was formed in the August of 1861, the
Orient of which was at Denver City. Royal Arch Chapters
and Knights Templar have since been established.

CoLours.—Every grade in Freemasonry has its appropriate colour,
bearing a mystic meaning; and a similar principle held good in
other occult fraternities as well as in Heraldry. The three
symbolic colours of the Druids, in their three degrees, were
green for Hope, blue for Truth, and white for Light. The colours
of Ancient York Masonry are blue, purple, and scarlet. Besides
these, different chivalric orders adopted different colours. (But
see under the special colours.)

CoLumaia, BritisH—A Grand Lodge of Freemasons was organized
the 2d Dec. 1871.

CoLumBiA, District or—Grand Lodge formed Dec. 11, 1810.

CoLUMBRARIANS.—The brethren of this honourable society assem-
bled, 1743, at the Bull Inn in Bishopsgate Street, London. Like
other societies, it was of a convivial character.

CoLtumn.—A round pillar to support and adorn a building, the
architectural peculiarity of which varied according to its order.
(See Broken Column.)

CoMMANDER, EMINENT.—The presiding officer in an encampment
of Knights Templar. The present title is Preceptor, and a
Commandery, a Priory. The jewel of his office is a cross,
from which issue rays of light. 2. The superintendent of a
Commandery of Knights of Malta was so called.

CoMMANDER, GRAND. (See Grand Commander.)

CoMMANDER-IN-CulEF.—The president in a Consistory of Sublime
Princes of the Royal Secret, Ancient and Accepted Rite. Ina
Grand Consistory he is styled Very Illustrious.

ComMANDERY.—-An assembly of Knights Templar, consisting of at
least nine members, properly constituted by some more supreme
authority to confer the degrees of knighthood, was formerly
called by this name. The officers are a Commander, Generalis-
simo, Captain General, Prelate, Senior Warden, Junior Warden,
Treasurer, Recorder, Standard-bearer, Sword-bearer, Warder,
three Guards; and a Sentinel. Peculiar to America. In Eng-
land, it is now Priory.

CoMMANDERY, GRAND.—Title of supreme Knight Templar autho-
rity in each State of the United States, subordinate to the Grand
Encampment. (See Encampment, Grand, and Priory.)

CoMMITTEE.—Private committees, or unauthorized sub-sections of a
Lodge, are expressly forbidden to be held in a Lodge—hence
brethren talking together during the ceremonies, or on the busi-
ness of the Lodge, may, and should at all times be, reproved by
the Worshipful Master.

127

com | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [com

COMMITTEE ON FoREIGN CORRESPONDENCE.—A select body of
Masons, appointed by each Grand Lodge, Chapter, or other
body, in the United States, whose duty it is to report on the
doings of other Grand Lodges and Masonic bodies; these reports
are usually issued annually, and form a most valuable contribu-
tion to Masonic literature and history.

Common GAVEL. (See Gavel.)

CommunicaTE—A degree is said to be communicated when its
secrets are verbally described by the bestower without a reoular
initiation. This is never permitted in Craft Masonry, but is
occasionally admissible in Scottish Masonry, and some of the
side degrees.

COMMUNICATIONS.—Sometimes the meetings of private Lodges are
called Communications. The quarterly assembly of a Grand
Lodge is always thus denominated.

Como. (See Magistri Comacint.)

Compacnon.—A Fellow Craft, in French Masonry.

CompaGnonacr.—Although working men in our own day have
formed protective associations, of more or less importance, the
idea is not new. The institution of the Compagnonage is of con-
siderable antiquity, and there can be little doubt that in all
trades it was formed from a common necessity. We have here
rather to deal with the historical than the political aspects of the
question. It is asserted by historians that, based upon similar
traditions to those of the Masons, the Companions of the Tower
(de la Tour) are of origin almost coequal with that assigned to
our ancient brethren of the First Temple; but when it is con-
sidered that the word Tour has also the signification of Journey,
it may be seen that it signified rather the usual journey made by
handicraftsmen in their respective trades, before it was admis-
sible for them to esteem themselves entitled to claim guild
privileges in their native towns; in fact, they went forth, like
the early Masons, to acquire dexterity in their several arts. It
was neither an unjust nor an inconvenient practice; the men
acquired greater ideas, learnt new methods in their trade; and
where trades are necessities of life, the interchange of ideas could
not but promote the general good. Returned to his native place,
the journeyman performed his masterpiece, and was then admit-
ted to his proper station among his predecessors and contempor-
aries. But in days of great oppression and very unequal laws,
it was not unnatural that men should superadd to this general
and ordinary obligation, certain secret. means of inter-protection.
It was not only that they desired to retain in their own custody
the best processes of their trade, but, as is the case in every close
business, they wished to be certain that these processes would

128

coo | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [com

not ultimately become common property, for upon their skill
their very livelihoods depended. Seeing, as they did, that the
cleric, the physician, the lawyer, were by jealous laws saved
harmless in the exercise of their several professions, it can
hardly be thought wrong of these men, who performed heavy and
accurate labours, that they should form semi-occult bodies among
themselves. Patents were unknown; and the very handiwork
at that time depended upon the individual capacity, and in many
cases upon the probity, of the labourer, for in the event of any
catastrophe in any particular art, his life or his liberty might
become forfeit, at the irresponsible will of feudal lords, It is,
however, puerile, in our opinion, to refer every institution, no
matter what, where it assumes an associative form, to King
Solomon’s Temple. We are living in times rife with instructive
discovery, showing us that civilizations, as perfect as our own,
existed long ago; that even in the most remote times, far beyond
our ken, man possessed liberal arts, great intellectual activity,
and a keen perception of beauty, and a consequent love of luxury.
Prehistoric times, as unveiled to us, evince great minuteness of
execution in things not usually supposed to appertain to rude
ages; and hence it is but fair to urge that we should not under-
value the productions discovered in the truthful, terraqueous
globe on which we live. As we find objects of art,—constructed
according to a different taste, indeed, but true to the standard
of the requirements of the time,—we have no right to undervalue
such productions; eg., 2 common Birmingham button by no
means represents either the skill or the labour of a gold torque,
or a polished implement of the stone age. Hence we must really
come to reasonable conclusions, and admit, with modern times,
that many of our traditions have been lying inventions. And so
with the presumed Hebraic origin of the Compagnonage. But
as we are concerned here with historical legend, let us say, that
three divisions of the Compagnonage have been recognised :—1.
The Children of Solomon. 2. The Children of Maitre Jacques.
3. The Children of Pére Soubise. The first of these branches
assert that King Solomon, on the completion of the Temple,
formed them into a guild, and gave them their liberty; but of
this, either in the Bible or anywhere else, there is not a jot of
proof. Next, Maitre Jacques is claimed to have been the son of
one of Solomon’s workmen, named Jacquain or Jachin, born in
the Gaulish city of Carte, now St Romille, not discoverable on
the map, and as great an anachronism as the conjunction of
Peter Gower or Pythagoras, and Charles Martel, King of France,
“who loved Masons well,” as we are told. Pére Soubise was an

associate of Maitre Jacques, and dwelt in a similar land of fable,
I 129

com | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [con

and the area of his presumed living influence was France, where
he met with a similar knockdown blow to H. A. B. Other
traditions—mirabile dictu!—convert him into a Benedictine
monk, or into Jacques de Molay; but, in fact, he never could
have had any real existence at all. It is impossible to avoid the
conclusion, that the founders of the Compagnonage merely ideal-
ized, in a saint-like fashion, some patron whose mythical history
it was necessary to believe, die, or—be turned out of the Society !

CoMPAGNONS DE LA Tour. (See Compagnonage.)

CoMPANION.—The distinctive appellation of a Royal Arch Mason,
corresponding to the word brother in symbolic Lodges. It is
supposed to refer to the companionship in exile and captivity of
the ancient Jews, from the destruction of the Temple by Nebu-
chadnezzar to its restoration under Zerubbabel by command of

rus,

CoMPASSES.—These are used in operative Masonry for the adjust-
ment of distances, and to obtain those just proportions endowing
architectural work with strength and beauty. In speculative
Masonry, the implement is symbolical of that even tenour of
deportment so desirable in the social state. The compasses are
thus the most prominent emblem of virtue, and the measure of
a, Mason’s life and conduct. They teach a lesson concerning the
duty we owe to ourselves and others, and inculcate the impera-
tive duty of circumscribing our passions and keeping our desires
within due bounds.

ComposiTE.—One of the five orders of architecture, compounded of
the other four.

Comus’s Court.—A social society, held about 1750, at the Half-
Moon Tavern, Cheapside, London.

CONCEPTION, CHRISTIAN Knicuts or St Mary or THE. (See Coss,
Knights of the Blue.)

ConcLaVE (from con, with, and clavis, a key).—1. A secret assem-
bly, where the key is turned. The College of Cardinals assembles
thus for the election of a Pope. 2. A designation of a Com-
mandery, Preceptory, or Priory of Knights Templar. 3. A session
of Knights of the Red Cross of Rome and Constantine.

CoNncoRD, ORDER OF.—Several societies have borne the name, but
the first that could lay any claim to a Masonic character was the
Order of Concord or of United Hosts. It was founded, in 1696,
on Masonic principles, by the Prince of Nassau. Prince Schwartz-
burg-Rudolstadt founded another of the same name, which
admitted ladies to membership, in 1718; and in 1759 another
arose in Hamburg, which still flourishes.

Concorpists.—An order established in Prussia by M. Lang on the
wreck of the Tugendverein (Society of Virtue), the latter having

130

CON] - The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Con

been formed on the suppression of the Illuminati in 1790, and
suppressed in 1812 on political grounds.

CONFERENCE.—Sometimes conferences have been called together by
intellectual Masons, to consider the interests of Masonry. In
the last century, the most memorable of these were the Confer-
ences of Copenhagen, Hamburg, and Mattisholm.

Conructus. (See Societies, Secret, China.)

Concress, Masonic. (See Convention.)

Connecticut.—The first Lodge organized was the Hiram Lodge at
New Haven, under a charter, in 1750, from St John’s Grand Lodge,
Boston. On July 8th, 1789, twelve Lodges assembled at New
Haven, and organized the Grand Lodge of Connecticut, of which
Pierpoint Edwards was elected Grand Master. In 1796, there
were three Royal Arch Chapters in that State; but the Grand
Chapter was not instituted until May 17th, 1798. The Grand
Council of Royal and Select Masters was organized in 1819, and
the Grand Encampment in September, 1827.

CONSECRATION.— When a new Lodge is formed, it is always hallowed.
or consecrated by an officer specially appointed by the Grand
Master for the purpose. The ceremonies vary according to the
country.

CoNSECRATION, ELEMENTS oF—In Masonry these are corn, wine,
and oil, being symbolical of nourishment, refreshment, and joy,
and also of health, plenty, and peace.

CONSERVATOR GENERAL.—The name of an officer of the Grand
Orient of France. His duty is to advise the Grand Master. In
1814, three Grand Conservators were appointed in the absence of
Joseph Napoleon and his deputy, Prince Cambacéres.

ConsisToRY.—1. The meetings of members of the 32d degree are thus
called, being Sublime Princes of the Royal Secret. The officers
are: Thrice Illustrious Grand Commander, two Thrice Illustrious
Lieutenant Grand Commanders, Grand Orator, Grand Chancellor,
Grand Treasurer, Grand Secretary, Grand Master Architect,
Physician General, Keeper of the Seals, Grand Master of Cere-
monies, Captain of the Guards, and Tyler. 2, The sixth section
of the Antient and Primitive Rite.

ConsoLipATION LopcEs.—Towards the middle of the eighteenth
century, many Lodges under the Scottish Rite, having alchymis-
tical tendencies, were constituted under this name, One of the
most interesting of the Masonic degrees was derived from them.

ConsTABLE, GRAND.—Fourth officer in a Grand Consistory, and a
Grand Officer of the Knights Templar.

CoNSTANTINE. (See Red Cross of Rome and Constantine.)

CONSTANTINOPLE, Knicut or. (See Knight of Constantinople.)

CoNSTITUTION OF A Lopce—Any number of Master Masons (not

131

con | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [con

less than seven) may apply for a warrant for a new Lodge, to be
held regularly at a specified place and time. It is usual to obtain
the recommendation of other members of the Craft for this pur-
pose. If within the metropolitan district, the application is made
to the Grand Lodge; but in the case of a provincial Lodge, it
passes through the hands of the provincial authorities. Should
the Grand Master, or Provincial Grand. Master, on a proper
report, deem the new Lodge necessary, a day is appointed for its
consecration by a duly qualified officer, and the officers named
in the petition are subsequently installed, and the new Lodge is
at liberty to work under the warrant entrusted to them. It
has been customary for the first Master and his two immediate
subordinates to provide the Lodge furniture and other necessaries
on the occasion; but this is not actually so in all cases.
Constitutions. (See Book of Constitutions.)
ConsuMMaAtTUM Est.—A term used in some forms of the Rose-Croix
degree, :
ContraT Socran, or SoctaL Contracr.—A union of Lodges for
purposes of instruction, founded in Paris about 1776. It made
a new arrangement of degrees.

Convention.—A general Masonic meeting, now called a Congress,
was formerly termed a Convention. The following are the
principal Conventions, in chronological order :-—

926. York, under Prince Edwin of England.

1275, Strasburg, under Edwin von Steinbach.

1459. Ratisbon, under Jost Dolzinger.

1464. Ratisbon, convened by the Grand Lodge of Strasburg.

1469. Spire, by the same.

1535. Cologne, by Hermann, bishop of Cologne.

1563. Basle, by the Grand Lodge of Strasburg.

1717. London, by the four Lodges of London. Institution of
the Grand Lodge.

1730. Dublin, by the Lodges of Dublin.

1736, Edinburgh. Institution of the Grand Lodge.

1756. The Hague, by the Royal Union Lodge.

1763. Jena, by the Lodge of Strict Observance.

1764. Jena, by Johnson or Becker, who was denounced by
Baron Hund.

1765. Altenberg, in continuation of the preceding. At this,
Baron Hund was elected Grand Master of the Rite
of Strict Observance.

1772. Kohl, convened by Ferdinand of Brunswick and Baron
Hund, but was unsuccessful.

1775. Brunswick, by Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick.

132

con | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cor

1778. Lyons, by the Lodge of Chevaliers Bienfaisants.

1778. Wolfenbiittel, convened by the Duke of Brunswick.

1782. Wilhelmsbad. An attempt to purify Masonry, then in
much confusion.

1784. Paris, The Convention of the Lovers of Truth, under
the auspices of the Lodge of United Friends. The
Duke of Brunswick, St Martin, and Mesmer, were
active participants in this Convention. See Cagliostro.

1785-1789. Paris. A similar attempt at reform.

1822. Washington. A Conference of American Lodges.

1843-1847. Baltimore. A similar Conference.

1853. Lexington, Kentucky. Another of like character.

1855. Paris, summoned by the Grand Orient of France.

1859. Chicago. An American Conference of similar nature to
the former.

1875. Lausanne.

ConvocatTions.—(1) Meetings of Royal Arch Chapters; (2) Meet-
ings of Councils of Royal and Select Masters; (3) Meetings of
Rosicrucian Colleges.

CoprEstong.—Improperly called capestone; from the Saxon kop, the
head; the topmost stone in a building, and the last laid. The
celebration of the copestone is still usual among operative
Masons, and is a time of rejoicing.

Corp, Hinpu Sacrep. (See Zennaar.)

Corp, Sitver. (See Silver Cord.)

Corp, THREEFOLD. (See Threefold Cord.)

Corpon.—Equivalent, in France, to the English collar.

CORINTHIAN ORDER.—(1) The lightest and most ornamental of the
Orders of Architecture. (2) The column of Beauty in the South,
appropriated to its proper officer. (For the origin of this Order,
see Acanthus.)

Corn.—1. Conjointly with wine and oil, the elements of Masonic
consecration, and derived from the practice of the most ancient
nations. It is unnecessary to expatiate upon the meanings or the
use of these substances, as they are well known to all. In pro-
cessions, the corn alone is carried in a golden vessel, the wine
and oil being conveyed in vessels of silver: the superiority of
corn as the first necessity of subsistence being thus marked.
(See Psalms, civ. 14.) 2. An emblem in the F. C. degree.

Corner, Nortu-East. (See North-East Corner.)

CornER StonE.—tThe first stone in the foundation of every building
of magnitude is usually, if not invariably, laid in the north-east,
with solemn ceremonies. Oliver justly says that its position
“accounts in a rational manner for the general disposition of a

133

coR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cou

newly initiated candidate ; when enlightened, but uninstructed,
he is accounted to be in the most superficial part of Masonry.”
(Signs and Symbols, p. 225.)

Cornucoria.—The horn of plenty, and a symbol of abundance,
adopted as the jewel of the Stewards of a Lodge; it, however,
has no authority as an effective symbol in Masonry, and may be
omitted without any loss.

CoRYBANTES, MYSTERIES OF THE—These rites were instituted in
Phrygia in honour of Atys, the lover of Cybele. The goddess
first bewailed the death of her lover, and afterwards rejoiced at
his resurrection. The ceremonies depicted the sufferings of
Atys, who was placed in a coffin or pastos,

CosMopoLiteE.—tThe third degree of the African Architects.

CoTtyto, Mysrerizs or.—lInstituted in Thrace, and afterwards
imported into Greece and Rome, where they were known as the
Rites of the Bona Dea. Women alone were members and
participants in this association; and one Clodius, who disguised
himself in female apparel, and thus intruded himself upon the
ceremony, is stated to have paid very dearly for the knowledge
he acquired.

Councin.—1. In several of the higher degrees the meetings are
denominated Councils; as, a Council of Princes‘of Jerusalem, a
Council of Royal and Select Masters, and in other cases. 2. The
seventh and last section of the Antient and Primitive Rite.

CounciL, GRAND. (See Grand Council.)

Counci. oF KNicuTs OF THE RED Cross.—1. The first degree of the
American Knights Templar is conferred in a Council, under a
charter from a Commanding Officer, Sovereign Master, Chancel-
lor, Master of the Palace, Prelate, Master of Despatches, Master
of Cavalry, Master of Infantry, Standard-Bearer, Sword-Bearer,
Warder, and Sentinel. 2. The sixth degree of the French Rite.

Counci. oF RoyaL AND SELECT Masters. (See Secret Vault.)

Council OF THE TrRINITY.—A Christian Masonic jurisdiction, in
which are conferred the degrees of Knight of the Christian
Mark and Guard of the Conclave, Knight of the Holy Sepulchre
and the Holy and Thrice Illustrious Order of the Cross. They
are conferred after the Encampment degrees. The system is
exclusively Christian and Trinitarian.

CounciL, SUPREME. (See Supreme Council.)

Courtrr.—An officer in the Royal Oriental Order of Apex and the
Sat B’hai. Immediately under the Censor. See Sat Bhai.

Court, GEBELIN DE. (See Monde Primitif and Voltaire.)

Court or Nut Tret Recorp.—A society held, in 1756, at the One
Tun, in the Strand, London.

Cousins, THE Goop CoLLieR.—An ancient order in the west of

134

cou] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cou

France, having a mystical and social character; the precursors
of the Carbonari. (See Carbonari.)

Coustos, JoHN.—The history of John Coustos, who was tortured
by the Inquisition at Lisbon, in 1743, is only another illustration
of the relentless policy of the Church of Rome, the authori-
ties of which are the legitimate heirs and faithful copyists of
the bloodthirsty priests of the pagan rites. Coustos was born
at Berne in Switzerland, but was brought to England by his
father in 1716, and there became naturalized. He followed the
business of a lapidary, and, in 1748, removed to Lisbon, and
there was master of a Masonic Lodge. He was denounced in
confession by a female, who averred that the members were
“monsters in nature, who perpetrated the most shocking crimes.”
This denunciation was acted upon, and Coustos was seized, in a
coffee-house, on the plea of his being connected with a jewel
robbery, of which one of his wardens, previously arrested, was
accused. On being arrested, he was inhumanly treated, robbed
of everything he possessed, and thrust into a loathsome dungeon,
and forbidden to speak on any pretence. The next day he was
brought before an inquisitor, with four assistants, and questioned
on oath, being also required to make a full confession of all the
crimes he had ever committed. This he firmly refused to do,
stating that he had never confessed to man but to God, and that
he was an innocent man. Upon this he was led back to his
dungeon, and left there for three days, after which he was again
brought before the tribunal. On this occasion he learnt that his
real crime was that of being a Freemason, and that for that cause
alone he had been imprisoned. He was more rigorously confined
after this, and on several occasions brought up for further exa-
mination, but he steadfastly refused to violate the obligations he
had taken, or to satisfy the curiosity of his judges. Upon this
he was put to the torture in a subterranean vault, first racked,
until he fainted with agony, and he was otherwise maltreated,
but remained steadfast to his principles. This condition of things
continued for months, and the ingenuity of his captors was
exerted to the uttermost to invent variations in his sufferings.
It is too horrible to relate here what these holy and reverend
fiends, in the name of Christianity, perpetrated on the body of
this unfortunate man. He was continually remanded, in order
that he might regain strength to undergo more torture. He was
racked many times; thrice was he nearly rent to pieces in an
erect posture, by having the palms of his hands turned outward,
and his arms so wrenched behind that the backs of his hands
touched. After another two months, a new system was initiated,
which can be best described in his own words :—“ The torturers

135

cou | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cow

turned twice round my body a thick iron chain, which, crossing
upon my stomach, terminated afterwards at my wrists. They
next set my back against a thick board, at each extremity whereof
was a pulley, through which there ran a rope, that catched (sic)
the ends of the chains at. my wrists. The tormentors then
stretched these ropes by means of a roller, pressed or bruised my
stomach, in proportion as the means (sic) were drawn tighter.
They tortured me on this occasion to such a degree, that my
wrists and shoulders were put out of joint. The surgeons, how-
ever, set them presently after; but the barbarians, having not yet
satiated their cruelty, made me undergo this torture a second
time, which I did, with fresh pains—though with equal constancy:
and resolution. I was then remanded back to my dungeon,
attended by the surgeons, who dressed my bruises; and here I
continued until their auto-da-f¢, or gaol delivery.” He was
finally sentenced to four years at the galleys; but was unable, on
account of his injuries, to undergo his sentence. He was claimed
by the British government as a subject, and returned to England,
where he published a history of his sufferings. The inflexibility
of his courage deserves the respect of every good Mason. The
papal priests would do the same to-morrow if they dared, for
the deadly policy of Roman Catholicism has never been known
to change. Several editions of his exposé of the Roman Catholic
persecution have been issued since 1746.

Couvreur.—French for Tyler.

Covvrir LE TEMPLE—1. In French, to close the Lodge. 2. To cover
the Temple to a brother, means to exclude him from the Lodge.

CovENANTS OF Masonry.—The various oaths of obligation in the
several degrees are sometimes thus called.

COVERING OF THE LopGz.—Our ancient brethren met beneath no
other covering than the cloudy canopy of heaven. The innumer-
able stars that decked its concave surface were living witnesses
of Him at whose sacred name they were taught to bow; and were
nightly winning from the virtuous Mason, by their bright efful-
gence, the prayer of hope and the hymn of praise. In a Masonic
sense, this bright firmament is still the covering of the Lodge;
its mystic characters are ever blazing with Masonic truths and
the secrets of science, and the surrounding galaxy of worlds bears
testimony to the truth that, “in my Father's house are many
mansions.” There is another technical reason for calling the
starry heavens the proper covering of the Lodge.

Cowan.—One of the profane, or uninitiated. Derived from the Greek
xvav, a dos—from the inquisitive and foul habits of that animal.
In the symbolical language of the East, dogs and swine are always
associated with uncleanness. (See Matth. vii. 6, and Philip, iii. 2.)

136

CRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CRE

Many fancy derivations of Cowan have been given, but none
generally satisfactory. The word occurs in Anderson’s Constitu-
tions, p. 97, 1769, “ Working masons ever will have their own
wages ... let cowans do as they please.” In Scotland, a Cowan
in operative Masonry is a workman building “drystane dykes,”
4.¢, Walls, without mortar being used. From these and similar
words, it has been inferred by good authorities, such as Brother
Hughan, that a Cowan is a Mason, but illegally so, being by that
designation distinguished from an eavesdropper. This may be
right so far as operative Masonry is concerned, but it does not
extend to speculative Masonry. But I am disposed to think the
term Cowan to be very ancient. Moloch, the Syrian Saturn
(Arabic, jx, Kevan; Hebrew, #2; Syriac, p82), devourer of
his children in both countries, was the primitive Chronos, who
was the tutelary god of Italy; and Chronos was a corruption of
y*>, Chion—Chone being the first name of Italy (Amos v. 26).
‘his Moloch or Saturn was the Cabiric Mars. Plutarch says, that
Kiev (Kyon) was the same as Chronos. Now, the objects of the
Masonic mystery being eternity, harmony, and peace, they would
naturally exclude representatives of Kyon, Cuon, or Cowans.
As Cowans, they therefore would follow Chronos or Time, and
defeat the first principle—as Molochites, the sacrifice of children
would be obnoxious to the disciples of the mysteries; and, as
votaries of Mars, they would offend against the great principle of
peace and good-will, There is another meaning to Cowan, which
cannot be placed on record here,

Crart, THE.—The persons practising speculative Masonry whereso-
ever dispersed; from kraft, power, or ere/t (Anglo-Sax.), skill.
CRAFTED.—A term sometimes used to express that an initiate has

been passed.

CRAFTSMAN.—A. Fellow Craft Freemason.

CraTa Repoa.—An Egyptian rite, consisting of seven degrees. 1.
Pastophoros or Apprentice. 2. Neocoros or Fellow Craft. 3.
Melanophoros or Master. 4. Kistophoros, Provost and Judge.
5. Balahate, Knight and Priest Philosopher. 6. Knephnu,
King (Royal Arch or Astronomos). 7. Propheta. But the
degrees of Crata Repoa seem not to have any real ancient
authority. They were first published in 1770, and were con-
demned by Kloss, although Lenning and Ragon have treated
them as real degrees.

CREATE, (See Dub.

CREATED.—Knights of the Red Cross, Knights of Malta, and Knights
Templar, when advanced to those degrees, are said to be dubbed
and created.

CREED oF A Mason.—Properly speaking, a Mason has no creed, as

137

CRE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cRo

the only profession of belief required at his hands is an acknow-
ledgment of the existence of God, and of His protective power
and infinite love. Any one, however, who would hesitate at so
simple an affirmation of faith, could not become a Freemason
without flagrant violation of conscience. Although the Free

mason leaves religious questions at the door of his Lodge, it does
not preclude his following the faith of his fathers, or the convic-
tions of his heart, conscience, and reason, at any time appointed
by his own impulses or the rules of the religious fraternity to
which he may belong; but a true Freemason cannot be an irreli-
gious man.

CREMER (1312).—Abbot of Westminster. (See osicrucians,
Eminent.)

CREUZER, GEORGE F RIEDRICH.—Professor at Heidelberg, born 1771,
died 1858; profoundly attached to the study of ancient religious
symbolism. His main theory was that all the religions and
mythologies of the ancient Hellenes were borrowed from a much
more archaic oriental priesthood, who received them as a revela-
tion. The astounding discoveries made in Assyriology by Mr
George Smith of the British Museum, together with the results of
the labours of the Egyptologists, have caused the origenes of mytho-
logy to recede by many ages; even the Assyrian scribes, from
whom the Deluge tables have been translated, confess that to
them the traditions they record are lost in the night of time.
His chief work was published at Leipzig, in 1819, under the title
of “Symbolik und Mythologie der alten Volker, besonders der
Griechen.” No English translation exists.

CrImMEs, Masonic.—Offences against the moral law; including
breach of love of God, our neighbour, and duty to ourselves and
dependants. 1. Love of God. This category comprises offences
by profanity and irreverence. 2. Love of one’s neighbour.
Offences by want of benevolence, cruelty to one’s inferiors and
dependants, uncharitableness to the poor and needy, contempt of
our fellow-beings. 3. Transgressions of civil or criminal law.
4, Violations of the landmarks and regulations of the Fraternity.

Crimson.—This rich and beautiful colour signifies fervency and
zeal, and is appropriated to the Holy Royal Arch.

CROMWELL, OLIVER, LorD Protrector—The Abbé Larudan very
absurdly, in his “Francs Macons Ecrasés” (“Freemasons Crushed”)
attributes the origin of Masonry to Cromwell. It is unnecessary to
say that not one iota of evidence in his book is to be regarded
as trustworthy.

Cross.—Although the cross to Christians possesses a well-known
meaning as a symbol of salvation, it is by no means peculiar to
Christianity. The Egyptians, Assyrians, Ancient Americans,

138

cro | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cro

Hindus, Greeks, and Romans, were all acquainted with the
cross in one or other of its modifications. Among the Egyptians
it was the sign of life, and so occurs continually in the rituals of
that country, where, under various forms, and associated with
various legends, we find the worship of one God inculcated by
the priesthood. The Brahmans and Buddhists, in like manner,
adored one God under various aspects. In Masonry, we find the
cross retained in the Royal Arch degree as the Triple Tau; and
this may be also found of continual occurrence in the higher in-
effable and philosophical degrees. Indeed, according to an
ancient Masonic tradition, we find the cross foreshadowed in the
Temple of King Solomon, This noble structure was said to have
three foundations; the first of which contained seventy stones,
five rows from north to south, and fourteen in each row running
from east to west. The centre row corresponded with the up-
right of a cross, the transverse of which was formed by two
stones on either side of the eleventh stone, from the east side of
the centre row of which the upright is formed, and the fourth
stone from the west end of it. This stone, which hence occupies
the crossing of the beams, was under the sanctum sanctorum,
where were deposited the Ark of the Covenant and the Shekinah.
(See Triple Tau.)

Cross-BEARING Men.—In the Miracula Nature (1619) there is a
letter beginning Philosophi Fratres, Viri Crucigerx— Brother
Philosophers, Cross-Bearing Men;” applied to the Rosicrucians.

Cross, HERMETIC, OR JAINA. (See Jaina Cross.)

_ CROSSING THE River. (See Passing the River, and Kabbalah.)

Cross, JEREMY L.—Born 27th June, 1783, at Haverhill, New
Hampshire, U.S. A.; died there in 1861. Initiated in 1808, he
became a pupil of Thomas Smith Webb, who modified the
Preston lectures. This modification Cross afterwards taught
by lectures throughout the country. In 1819, he published the
“True Masonic Chart, or Hieroglyphic Monitor,” and in 1820,
“The Templars’ Chart.” They enjoyed a very good sale, and
have passed through many editions, the idea of engraving the
emblems being novel and acceptable, but the text is a plagiarism
from Webb. Cross was implicated in an attempt to found a
spurious Supreme Grand Council of the Ancient and Accepted
Rite. He invented the Broken Column as a symbol.

Cross, JERUSALEM.—1,. Arms, argent, a Greek cross, or, between
four crosslets of the second. Adopted by Baldwyn as the arms
of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Brother Devey Fearon Ranking,
M.A., writes: “This was a striking violation of the Heraldic law
that metal should not be charged upon metal: from this circum-
stance the name Arms of Inquisition was given to them, the

139

CRO] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cRo

peculiarity being specially intruded to provoke inquiry.” 2.
Jewel of the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre.

Cross, KNIGHTS OF THE BLUE. An order of Roman Catholic origin,
erected in the year 1619, with the consent of the Pope, at Olmiitz,
and afterwards at Vienna, in Austria, by Count Althahn, Count
Gonzaga, the Duke of Nevers, and a certain Sforzi. The Knights
wore a blue enamelled cross, with gilt edges, on the breast, attached
to a cord, the obverse bearing the picture of the Virgin and Child,
with the moon beneath the feet of the Virgin, and the reverse
St Michael slaying the dragon—the ordinary symbol of the
destruction of heretics. It was also known as the Order of
Christian Knights of St Mary of the Conception. It is men-
tioned by Nicolai, and by the Abbate Guistiniani, in “ storie
cronologiche dell’ Origine deg? Ordini militari” (Venice, 1692).

Cross-LEGGED.—The bodies of Knights Templar in the middle
ages, when laid out after death, always had one leg crossed over
the other; and in the effigies of such individuals remaining in
our cathedrals and churches, we find them so depicted. The
reason is apparent to those who have taken the degree.

Cross, Mattesze.—A cross of eight points, worn by the Knights of
Malta; heraldically, a cross pattée, the extremity of each pattée
notched at a deep angle.

Cross OF CONSTANTINE. (See Labarum.)

Cross oF SateM—1. The pontifical cross borne before the Pope.
2. Knight Templar cross. 3. Cross of the Sovereign Grand
Commander of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Cross, Passion.—The insignia of the Commander of Knights
Templar, American Rite.

Cross, PATRIARCHAL—A cross; the upright piece being twice
crossed, the upper arm shorter than the other. Used by all pos-
sessors of the 33° Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Cross, St ANDREW’s.—A saltire cross, in the form of a letter X,
1. Part of the jewel of the Grand Master Mason of Scotland.
2. Jewel of the 29th degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Cross, Tau.—The cross on which St Anthony is said to have
suffered martyrdom is in the form of aletter T, (See Tau Cross.)

Cross, TEMPLAR.—At first the Templars wore a white mantle with-
out any cross, but in 1146, Pope Eugenius III. granted them, as
a cognizance, a red cross pattée on the breast.

Cross, TEvToniIc—1. Worn by the Teutonic Knights; a cross
potent sable, charged with another cross double potent 07, sur-
charged with an escutcheon argent, bearing a double-headed eagle
ne 2. The jewel of the Kadosch, Ancient and Accepted

tite,

Cross, Turice ILLusTRIoUS ORDER OF THE—A degree formerly

140

cro | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [CRY

conferred in America, under the authority of the Ancient Council
of the Trinity, on Knights Templar. Now extinct.

CroTrona.—An important city in Magna Grecia (Southern Italy),
where Pythagoras, in the sixth century B.C., established his school.

Crow.—An iron implement to raise weights; one of the working
tools of a Royal Arch Mason. (See Pickaxe.)

Crown, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the Crown.)

CROWN, PRINCESSES OF THE (Princesses de la Cowronne).—A system
of androgynous Masonry, established in Saxony about 1770.

CROWNED Martyrs. (See Four Crowned Martyrs.)

CROWNING OF Masonry.—The 61st degree of the collection of the
French Metropolitan Chapter.

CruciFIx.—A necessary portion of the furniture of a Priory of
Knights Templar, and of a Chapter of Princes Rose-Croix.

Crucerix, R. T., M.D.—Born in London, 1797 ; initiated, 1829. An
earnest advocate for the charities, and founder of the Freemason’s
Quarterly Review, as well as the Asylum for Aged and Decayed
Masons. In 1840, he was impeached by his enemies (for, as
Mackey truly observes, “he was too great a man not to have
had some”); he was suspended on unproven charges, but afier-
wards restored. He showed the nobility of his character by
advocating the cause of Masonry during his long life. He died,
universally respected, at Milton, by Gravesend, 25th February,
1850.

CRUSADES.—Some Masonic writers have connected the introduction
of Masonry into Europe with these wars. It is, however, enough
to point out that the date of the first crusade was 1065, whereas
tradition teaches us that the Masons assembled at York, under
Prince Edwin, in 926, one hundred and thirty-nine years before.

Crux ANsATA.—The handled cross. $. The symbol of immortality
among the Egyptians, with some other occult values hardly ex-
plicable here. It was the jewel in the Egyptian Masonry of
Count Cagliostro. (See Cteis and Phallus.)

Crypt.—A subterranean vault. On the top of the Mount of Olives
was a vast and very ancient crypt, in the shape of a cone
of immense size; the vertex alone appearing level with the soil,
and exhibiting by its sections at the top a small circular aperture,
the sides extending below toa great depth, lined with a hard,
red stucco, It was an idolatrous construction, perhaps as old as
Solomon, and profaned by Josiah. If Solomon built this crypt,
as the Jews say he did, he was very likely to have constructed
one of the same kind beneath the Temple, for the reception of
the ark, and other important historical monuments, in case of
danger. (See Secret Vault.)

141

cry] The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [cus

Cryptic Masonry. (See Secret Vault.)

CrypTonymus.—One whose name is hidden. The favourite nom-
de-plume of the author of this book. He may be without much
vanity allowed to state the reason of its assumption. Names go
for very little in these days, unless backed by great rank, position,
or wealth; but in the mysterious science of Masonry the author
had in view'a good object, being well aware that such observa-
tions as he might make would not be calculated to endanger any
portions of the structure of Masonry ; and being gifted with rare
opportunities, and the taste for unravelling intricate problems,
and at the same time anxious to impart his knowledge with-
out offence, he assumed the name of Cryptonymus, to mark alike
his sense of the necessity of secrecy and modesty, and his personal
feeling that, after all, what he had to communicate was not to be
found on the surface of things. Without deep study and very
close application nothing can be arrived at, and hence the crypt
was the only place whither the author could resort to revolve in
his mind the many important questions arising in reference to
the history and archeology of Freemasonry. In one sense,
Masonry in this book is shown to be very modern, but it can
hardly be doubted that the science is rooted in the very self-
conscience of mankind itself.

Crzis (Greek, xreis).—The female personification of the productive
principle generally accompanying the phallus. It was analo-
gous to the yoni in the Hindu symbology, and was joined to the
lingam, as in the Crux Ansata.

Cuse—A regular solid body, consisting of six square and equal
faces or sides, the angles being all right angles. In the double
cube, five of the faces are parallelograms. From its perfect form,
this is an important geometrical figure among Masons. The
Perfect Ashlar is taken to be of this figure, and the form of a
Masonic Lodge, taken in its height and depth, as well as in its
length and breadth, is a double cube, though in its superficies it
only constitutes an oblong square. In Freemasonry, it must be
remembered, spherical geometry, as such, has no part, and the
general idea of extension is rather that of a Mercator map of the
world, than that of a spherical oblate. (See Form of the Lodge.)

CusICAL STONE (French, pierre cubique ; German, Kubik Stein).—
This stone is an important emblem in the ritual of the Royal Arch
and the Rose-Croix, and also occurs in some other high degrees.
There is a Masonic tradition respecting the cubical stone, upon
which the sacred name was inscribed in a mystical way. Upon
this stone Adam is supposed to have made his offerings to God,
and when Jacob fled from Esau to his uncle Laban, in Mesopo-
tamia, this stone was taken with him, and, in his memorable

142

cuB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cum

dream, the foot of the ladder appeared to rest upon the stone.
It was subsequently taken by him into Egypt, and when the
Israelites departed from that country, it was said to have been
taken away by Moses, and, in the battle with the Amalekites, he
seated himself on the stone. According to another tradition, it
was conveyed by certain of the tribe of Judah through Spain to
Treland, thence to Scone in Scotland, by King Kenneth, and is
now the coronation stone in Westminster Abbey, where, if the
tradition be true, may it long remain. The former Masonic
tradition, however, goes on to say that it was deposited in a
secret crypt in the Temple, and remained there until its re-
discovery on the rebuilding of the Temple by Zerubbabel. The
qualities and virtues of stones led to their adoration in ancient
times, and in these latter days the worship of certain precious
stones, together with a belief in certain occult powers contained
in them, can hardly be doubted. Stone worship was known
among the Druids, the Hindus, the Mexicans, and the Peruvians ;
and there are indications of a similar worship on the sculptured
palaces of Uxmal, Palenque, and other great structures of Central
America. There is, however, another meaning in reference to
the cubical stone, to which it is impossible to refer here.

Cusir.— A measure of length, originally denoting the distance from
the elbow to the extremity of the middle finger, or the fourth
part of a well-proportioned man’s stature. Bishop Cumberland
gives the Hebrew cubit as twenty-one inches; other authorities
make it eighteen inches. There were two kinds of cubits, sacred
and civil, the former thirty-six inches, the latter eighteen inches.
The common cubit is the measure of the dimensions of the
Temple.

CuLpEES.—An order which had at one time established itself all
over England, Scotland, and Ireland. Some derive the name
from Cultor Dei, a worshipper of God; others, however, think it
comes from the Gaelic Kyldee, from cylla, a cell, and dee, a house
—a building composed of cells. Perhaps the best derivation
is from Cuil, retired, secret; and Azthcach, inhabiting—thus, a
dweller in secret. They were much persecuted, and lived in as
retired a manner as possible.. A society of them settled at York,
and were found there by King Athelstan on his return from
Scotland, in 936. They were described as holy men—veros
sanctee vite et conversationis honest dictos adhune Calideas.
Fessler thinks he finds a connection between them and the
building corporations of Great Britain, and thus connects them
with the Masonic Fraternity.

CuMULATION OF RiTes.—When a Lodge practises two or more
Rites, it is thus termed: such as a simultaneous working in the

143

cun | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DAG

York and French Rite would be. It has been done in France
and Louisiana, but has since been condemned as injurious to the
interests of the Craft.

Cunninc.—Used in the sense of skilful. (See 1 Kings viii. 14.)

Cup or BiTTERNESS.—Used in the first degree of the French Rite.

Cup or SWEETNESS.— Used in the first degree of the French Rite.

Curetes.—Priests of ancient Crete, serving Cybele, mother of the
gods. The initiation lasted twenty-seven days, during which the
neophyte was strictly confined in a cave. It is said - Pythagoras
received this initiation.

CYNOCEPHALUS.—A man with the head of a dog; an important
hieroglyphic in Egypt, and a symbol of the sun and moon. It
has a certain significance in the high degrees.

Cyrus.—The King of Persia who released the Jews, A.M. 3466, or
B.C. 538, and sent them back to Jerusalem to rebuild the Temple
under Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and Hageai.

D.

D—The fourth letter of the English and Hebrew alphabets. In
Hebrew its signification was door, and its numerical value was
Jour. The divine name associated with Daleth was cat (Daghoul),
Insignis.

Da Costa, Hiprotyte Jose—A Portuguese, who for Masonic
reasons was persecuted by the Inquisition in the earlier part of
this century. He was a refined scholar, and published—besides
his account of his persecution, which appeared, in 1811, at London
—a “ History of the Dionysian Artificers.”

DactyLi —Priests of Cybele, in Phrygia, so called because their
number could not exceed five, in allusion to the salutation and
blessing of the five fingers of the hand. Their ceremonies were
similar to those of the Corybantes and Curetes, priests of the
same divinity, in Phrygia and Crete.

Dapoucuos.—A torch-bearer. The leader into the Eleusinian mys-
teries. Of these there were several, and their only public appear-
ances were at the Panethenaic games at Athens, where they pre-
sided over a public torch race.

Daccer.—A symbol of Masonic vengeance in the high degrees.
(See Vengeance.)

Dacraim, Hupert.—The author of an article on Freemasonry in the
Amsterdam Journal, Nov. 3, 1735, in consequence of which the
States General, on ‘the 30th Nov., issued an edict forbidding
Masonic meetings throughout the country.

144

DAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DAN

DacRain DES HuBeRT, PHILIPPE CHARLES.—Grand Inspector of the
Mother Lodge of the Scottish Philosophical Rite in 1805.

DaGRAN, Louis. —President of a General Assembly of thirty Lodges,
held at the Hague, 27th December 1756, for the formation of a
Grand Lodge of Holland. Baron Van Aerssen Beyeren Van
Hogerheide was appointed Grand Master, and Baron Boetzelaer,
D.G.M.

Dais.—The platform. or raised floor in the East of a Lodge, where
the Master sits. In a Lodge, the steps to this should be three ;
in a Royal Arch Chapter they are seven. In some degrees, the
steps are increased to nine, and even fifteen.

Da.Berc, Baron.—President of the Prussian Chamber, attended.
several conventions, especially that of Paris in 1785 ; a member
of the Strict Observance, in which his name was Egues d sacra
tuba.

Da.cuo, Frepertck, M.D.—One of the founders, in 1801, of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite, in the southern section of the
United States. Born at London, England, 1770, of Prussian
parents. He published the “Ahiman Rezon” in 1807. Died
24th Nov. 1836.

Datton.—A linen draper in London, W.M. of No. 259. He was
highly esteemed. More than two hundred brethren in full
Masonic costume followed his remains to the grave, in 1805.

DamE.—The Apprentice, in one of the old York MSS., was not to
bring harm “either to his master or dame.” (See Sisters.)

Dames OF Mount Tasor.—An androgynous Masonic society, estab-
lished 1818, under the Grand Orient of Paris. Its design was
charitable.

DAMES OF THE ORDER OF St JOHN —Religious ladies admitted to a
participation in the privileges of the Knights Hospitallers of St
John of Jerusalem. They had many establishments in Italy,
Spain, and France.

DamIANIsts.— Disciples of Damian, Bishop of Alexandria in the 6th
century. They disowned any distinction of persons in the God-
head, professing the same to consist of one single nature, inca-
pable of mutation. They used, however, the ordinary formula of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in speaking of the Trinity in unity.

Daniex (58°24, Judicium Dei).—1. The word for Monday in the 32°
A. and A. Rite, with Darius. 2. The orator, in the sixth degree
of the Modern French Rite, is Grand Master of the Palace, ‘and
represents Daniel.

DANNEBROG, ORDER OF THE.—A red basket (the. basket of the Magi)
falling from heaven while a battle was going on between the
Danes and the Livonians, in which he obtained the victory, in

K 145

DAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DAR

the year 1219, caused Waldemar II. of Denmark to institute the
Order. Christian V. renewed it in 1612, and it was revived, 1693,
and reconstituted in 1808. It has usually been bestowed by the
sovereigns of Denmark in appreciative testimony of signal aid to
society. Thus it-was that Sir Samuel Morton Peto, Bart.,
received the knighthood of the Dannebrog for his services in the
promotion of the Royal Danish railway. Badge: a four-pointed
cross, base elongated, enamelled in white, border red enamel,
with eleven stones suspended from a gold ring, and worn scarf-
wise, attached to a rich watered ribbon. Emblem: W. sur-
mounted with an antique crown of gold, C, with an S in the
hollow, and the white enamelled cross. A star is also worn with
eight points with silver rays, the four angular rays being more
produced. On this star is a cross of silver, the extremities of
which are squared, the lower limb being longer, covering one of
the points. On the centre of the cross is placed the letter C,
with a 5 in the middle, surmounted by a crown royal or; legend:
Restitutor ; motto: Pietati et Justitice. 2. The banner of Den-
mark is also called the Dannebrog, containing a red cross.

Dantzic.—The burgomaster and magistrates of Dantzic passed an
edict against Freemasonry on the 3d October, 1768, forbidding
the institution under penalties of fine and imprisonment.

Dao.—The Zend name for light, from daer, to shine; also, wisdom.

DARAXIEL (wo74, Directio Dei)—A password in the twenty-third
degree, A. and A. Rite.

Darius.—The successor of Cyrus, B.c. 521, He was friendly to the
captive tribes, and continued his predecessor's policy. Darius is
referred to in the degrees of Princes of Jerusalem, the 16th
degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite; also in the Red Cross
degree of the American Rite.

DaRKNESS.—This state is symbolical of ignorance in Masonic and
other occult matters. In the interrelations of things of this
description it has a necessary existence, on which it is needless
to expatiate. But as a portion of the ceremonies it has ever
played no mean part. In days when very severe trials were
expected of the initiate, lengthened periods of dark probation
were imposed upon candidates. Among the Druids of Britain
the time of darkness was nine days and nights. In the Greek
mysteries thrice nine, or twenty-seven days, were exacted; and
Porphyrius states that among the Magi of Persia fifty days was
the time. In many of the Oriental rites of the present time,
however, much longer periods of seclusion are necessary to pre-
pare the initiate, the commonest period being three hundred and
nxt ave days, after which annual period certain rites are per-

14

DAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DEC

formed and signs communicated, giving access to a portion of the
secrets. This was done in order to impress the disciple with the
utter nullity of man before God and Nature. So reverent should
we be: before the mysterious Author of every thing about us,
that we should not lift our eyes until they are properly unveiled.

DARMSTADT, GRAND LopGE or.—Established 23d March, 1846, in
consequence of a difference of opinion as to the admission of Jews.
It was under the patronage of the Grand Duke of Hesse.

Dassicny, Dr Firtgtp.—An Irish Mason, who published in 1744
a work entitled “A Serious and Impartial Enquiry into the
Causes of the Present Decay of Freemasonry in the Kingdom of
Ireland” It is chiefly remarkable for containing a kind of refer-
ence to the Royal Arch degree, but competent authorities are of
opinion that Dassigny was unacquainted with the nature of that
degree.

DATES. (See Calendar, Masonic.)

DaTHAN.—He, together with Korah and Abiram, revolted against
Moses. He is referred to in the Order of High Priesthood in the
American Rite.

Daucuter, Mason’s. (See Mason's Wife and Daughter.)

Davip, Kine.—Father of Solomon. He has no connection with
Freemasonry.

Davip, SHIELD oF. (See Shield of David.)

Dazarp, MIcHEL Francois.—Born at Chateaudun, in France, 2d
May, 1785. An eminent authority on the high degrees, but a
merciless critic of the Supreme Council, against whose jurisdic-
tion he directed most of his literary efforts.

Deacon.—1. In symbolical Masonry the fourth and fifth officersof the
Lodge are termed Deacons. They receive visitors in cases where
no special doubt arises as to the standing of such visitors, and
they are the representatives of the Senior and Junior Wardens.
Deacons were not, however, introduced as special officers before
1777 in America, and still more recently in England. 2. Deacon,
an old Masonic title in Scotland.

Deacon’s Rop. (See Rod, Deacon’s.)

DECALOGUE.—The ten commandments or precepts delivered to
Moses by the God of Israel on Mount Sinai. On the relapse of the
Israelites to image worship, Moses broke these tablets and pre-
pared others, by command It is doubtful what was ultimately
placed on them, (See Exodus xx., xxxv., Deut. v.) It forms an
important part of the symbolism of the Royal Arch degree
In the Christian degrees the decalogue is not visible, but appre-
hended.

Decatocuz, Masonic.—The following decalogue was found in the
pockets of a French dragoon, killed at the battle of Solferino :—

147

DEC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DED

I. Adore T. G. A. O. T. U., who is God: the true worship of God
consists in good manners. II. Ever preserve thy mind in a
state of purity, in order that thou mayest worthily appear before
T.G.A.0O.T. U. III. Ever listen to the voice of thy conscience ;
do no evil; do good; do good from a love of good itself. IV.
Love thy neighbour; be the father of the poor. V. Esteem the
worthy ; pity the feeble; flee the wicked; hate no one. VI. Pe-
spect women; never abuse their weakness; die rather than dis-
honour them. VII. Avoid quarrels; prevent insults; ever keep
reason at thy side. Speak soberly with the great, prudently with
thy equals, gently with the young, tenderly with the unfortunate.
VIII. Be content with all everywhere, and with all. Think that
it is not thy condition which honours thee, or degrades thee, but
the manner in which thou exercisest it; rejoice in justice; be
zealous against iniquity ; endure without complaint. IX. -Read
and profit; behold and imitate; reflect and labour. Give worth
to the usefulness of thy brethren: thus thou art working for
thyself. X. Do not lightly judge the actions of men; condemn
not forwardly: it is for T.G. A. O. T. U., who sounds hearts, to
judge of His works.

DeEcanus.—An honorary officer in the Knights Templar system of
Baron Hund. In the absence of the Grand Master and the
Prior his right was to preside as Chief of the Chapter. When a
vacancy occurred in the office of Grand Master, he was one of
four vicars who governed a province.

DECISI, ORDER OF THE. (See Annichiarico, Ciro.)

Drcius.—The nom de plume of C. L. Reinhold, a Masonic author.
(See Reinhold.)

DECLARATION OF CANDIDATES. (See Questions to Candidates.)

DECLARATION OF Master. (See Installation.)

DECLARING OFF.—When a brother ceases to visit a Lodge and to
pay his subscription. (See Dimit.)

Depication.—Any Masonic building on its completion is dedicated
in a solemn manner to Masonry, Virtue, and Universal Bene-
volence. Lodges themselves are, however, differently dedicated.
In the English system the dedication is to “God and his service,”
inasmuch as a dedication to the two Saint Johns, the Baptist
and the Evangelist, would savour too much of sectarianism, and
would be at variance with the universal principles of Freemasonry,
although it has been urged that the dedication to these Saints did
not arise from circumstances connected with the doctrines of
Christianity, but from historical facts. It is most probable, how-
ever, that the custom of dedicating Lodges to these saints arose
from astronomical reasons. The Sun enters Cancer on or about
the a day of June, and the 24th is dedicated to St John the

14

DED | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DEF

Baptist, and reaches Capricorn on the 22d December, the 27th
being dedicated to St John the Evangelist. These two important
heliacal periods being so close to the festival days of the St Johns,
in the course of time caused their adoption as patrons. Royal
Arch Chapters are dedicated to Zerubbabel, the Prince of Judah,
who rebuilt the Temple, and Encampments, Priories, or Pre-
ceptories of Knights Templar to St John the Almoner. Mark
Lodges are dedicated to Hiram, Past Masters’ Lodges to the
St Johns, and Most Excellent Masters’ Lodges are dedicated to
King Solomon. Tents of the Ancient Order of Ishmael are dedi-
cated to Ishmael, Hagar, and Esau.

DEDICATION OF THE TEMPLE—The temple was dedicated to
Jehovah by King Solomon in the month Tizri, in the year of the
world 2,999 and 1,005 B.C. According to Masonic tradition, the
King assembled his nine Deputy Grand Masters in the holy place,
from which all natural light had been carefully excluded, and
which was illuminated only by the artificial lights in the East,
West, and South; and after certain ceremonies had been performed,
he then approached the altar of the Lord, and publicly opened
the Temple as described in the Old Testament (1 Kings, vill. 12-62).
Another dedication took place B.C. '726, when Hezekiah had puri-
fied it from the abominations of Ahaz. Zerubbabel dedicated
the Second Temple B.C. 517, Judas Maccabeeus re-dedicated it
B.C. 164, after expelling the Syrians. Herod’s Temple was
dedicated B.C. 22.

Dez, Dr Joun. (See Magic.)

ele are KNIGHT, OF FREEMASONRY.—A degree in the collection
of Pyron.

Dernivion or FREEMASONRY.—The definitions of Freemasonry have
been very numerous, and it is difficult to hit upon one which
is sufficiently comprehensive. Bro, Jeremiah Howe, in his
excellent Freemason’s Manual, says (p. 28) :— Speculative
Masonry is a science, which, borrowing from the operative art its
working tools and implements, sanctifies them, by symbolic
instruction, to the holiest of purpouses—the veneration of God,
and the purity of the soul. The operative Mason constructs his
edifice of material substances ; the speculative Mason is taught
to erect a spiritual building, pure and spotless, and fit for the
residence of Him who dwelleth only with the good. The opera-
tive Mason works according to the designs laid down for him on
the trestle board by the architect; the speculative is guided by
the great trestle board, on which is inscribed the revealed will of
God, the supreme Architect of heaven and earth. The operative
Mason tries each stone and part of the building by the square,
level, and plumb; the speculative Mason examines every action

149

DEG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DEG

of his life by the square of morality, seeing that no presumption
nor vainglory has caused him to transcend the level of his allotted
destiny, and no vicious propensity has led him to swerve from
the plumb line of rectitude. ... Masonry is a progressive
science, and not to be attained in any degree of perfection,
except by time, patience, and a considerable degree of application
and industry; for no one should be admitted to the profoundest
secrets or highest honours of the Fraternity, till, by time, he has
learned secrecy and morality. In our own times, the vast pro-
gress and general diffusion of Masonry through the habitable
globe cannot but be satisfactory to every one interested in the
cause of humanity and the happiness of his species. At present,
as in every former age over which it hath spread its principles,
Masonry constitutes the affectionate and indissoluble alliance
which unites, in warm cordiality,manto man. It forms the most
liberal and extensive connections. No private prepossession, nor
national predilection ; no civil policy, nor ecclesiastic tyranny ;
no party spirit, nor dissocial passion, is suffered to prevent the
engagement, or interfere with the free exercise of that brotherly
love, relief, and fidelity, which it never fails to produce. It has
for ages been lamented that petty distinctions and partial con-
siderations, irrational prejudices and contracted sentiments,
should so much obstruct the free intercourse of mankind.
Masonry breaks down these barriers. In its solemn assembly,
around its social altar, meet the inhabitants of different countries,
with benignant looks of esteem, and sentiments of unfeigned
friendship. Around distant lands it casts philanthropy’s con-
necting zone, and binds together in the same sympathies the
whole family on earth. Blending their resources in a common
stock, and forming a community of interests, Freemasonry makes
the prosperity of each individual the object of the whole; the
prosperity of the whole the object of each.” Dr Mackey defines
it to be a science which is engaged in the search after Divine
Truth, and which employs symbolism as its method of in-
struction.

Decrees.—Ancient Craft Masonry consists only of three symboli-
cal degrees, viz. Entered Apprentice, Fellow Craft, and Master
Mason. No further advance can be made by the Masonic
student until he has received these three indispensable degrees,
and is well grounded in the principles and lessons they instil.
It is usual, but not invariable, for the Master Mason, after a
certain time, to take upon himself the Companionship of the
Holy Royal Arch—a degree in which many most impressive
historical events of Masonry are communicated according to the
traditions of the Craft. The ceremonial in this degree is of a

150

DEG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DEI

very gorgeous kind, and alludes to the building of the Second
Temple by Zerubbabel. It is somewhat uncertain when the
Royal Arch degree was introduced. It is, however, probably
little over one hundred and thirty years old in its present form.
Previous to 1717, these degrees were not kept so distinct as
they now are. An Operative Ritual of 1727, transcribed from
a document anterior to 1717, says that the F. C. ceremony
was the same as the E. A. P., with the difference of the
secrets. In 1722, however, we find the Fellow Craft degree
introduced as a qualification for Grand Master, although the
word degree is not used. “No brother can be a... Grand
Master, unless he has been a Fellow Craft before his election.”
It would seem quite clear that the Fellow Craft formerly
oceupied a relatively higher position than at the present time,
when it is simply, although perhaps erroneously, the connecting
link, in a very jejune manner, between the lowest degree and the
third or Master’s degree. In fact, the Master and Wardens of a
new Lodge in early times were selected from among the Fellow
Crafts, and no brother was called a Master Mason unless he had
absolutely passed the chair, or was Master of a working Lodge,
and the degree of Fellow Craft and Master Mason were, in 1721,
only conferred in Grand Lodge; but by 1738, the three degrees
are defined in the Book of Constitutions. Hence it is that the
Holy Royal Arch did not come until much later, and the Mark
degrees of Mark Man and Mark Master latest of all. In the
ancient Hindu system there were four degrees; three in the
Greek mysteries, and in those of the Druids, while among the
Mexicans there were only two.

DEGREES, ANCIENT CRAFT. (See Ancient Craft Masonry.)

Decrees, ANDROGYNOUS. (See Adoptive Masonry.)

DrGREES, APOCALYPTIC. (See Apocalyptic Degrees.)

Decrees, HIGH. (See Hautes Grades.)

Decrees, Honorary. (See Honorary Degrees.)

DEGREES, INEFFABLE. (See Jneffable Degrees.)

DEGREES OF CHIVALRY. (See Chivalry.)

DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE. (See Fessler’s Rite.)

DEGREES, PHILOSOPHICAL. (See Philosophical Degrees.)

DEGREES, SYMBOLIC. (See Symbolic Degrees.)

DEISEIL (On the right of the Sun)—Used by the Druids as a term
for the circumambulation of the sacred cairns. Derived from
Deas, south, and Tul,a course = Deiseil, in a southward direction,
following the course of the sun. The opposite is Tuathal, in a
northward direction, as is observed at the present day in ap-
proaching the grave with a corpse. (See Circwmambulation.)

Deitsm.—This is 2 subject much misunderstood. A Deist can be a

Ist

DE! | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DEM

Mason, an Atheist can not. There are many forms of Deists, and
a system which embraces such widely different creeds, as
Mohammedanism, Judaism, and Trinitarianism, cannot exclude
the Unitarian. (But see under Creed of a Mason.)

Deity. (See Grand Architect of the Universe.)

DE LALANDE, CHARLES FLORENT JACQUES.—An eminent French
Masonic essayist of this century. His principal work was a
Defence of Masonry, a prize essay, published at Leghorn, in 1814.
He was the founder of the archives of the Philosophic Rite of
Douai, in France.

De Latanpr, JOSEPH JEROME FRANGOIS.—Astronomer, and Free-
mason, born 1732, died 1807. One of the founders of the Grand
Orient of France.

DeELaunay, Francois H. SraniLaus.—Author of many works on
Masonry, 'the chief of which is the “ Zuzleur des Trente Trois dégres
de U Ecossisme du Rite Ancien et Accepié.” In the present state of
the Masonic world it is not of much value, if we are to regard
Masonry as a progressive science.

DeLawarE.—Grand Lodge, organized 6th June 1806, at Wilming-
ton. Grand Chapter, 1818; reconstituted, 1869.

DELEGATES.—An improper word implying espionage. There is no
power to appoint delegates anywhere in the Constitutions or the
Ahiman Rezon.

Detta.—1l. A triangle. The name of part of the furniture in an
assembly of Knights Templar. 2. The luminous triangle
enclosing the ineffable Name in the French and Scotch rites. 3.
A symbol of the Deity. (See Triangle.)

DEMETER.—The Greek or Hellenic name of the Goddess Ceres
among the Romans, She is connected with the astronomical
sign Virgo, and is the symbol of prolificacy. She was also the
patroness of the Eleusinian Mysteries, and the Sheaf of Corn is
part of the machinery of the second degree in Masonry.

Demit —Practically, a resignation from a Lodge or Chapter, upon
which a certificate of demission is granted by the body in ques-
tion. This is an American practice, and its object is to show
that the brother to whom it is granted leaves the association in
good standing. The fact of its frequency in the United States is
owing to the migratory habits of the citizens, and owing to the
strict custom-—which has almost the force of law—that any
brother should live within the length of his cable tow. A demit
involves no disgrace on the person receiving it; he is qualified
to affiliate in another Lodge willing to receive him, and it con-
stitutes a sort of certificate in the meantime. It is free of all
charges, and merely incapacitates a reception of Masonic rights
in transitd. Asa demit is only applied for in cases of urgent

152

DEN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DER

necessity, it throws no slur upon the brother, and his re-affiliation
restores him to all the privileges temporarily suspended. It is
commonly called, with some inaccuracy, a dimit; but although
the word is most correct according to derivation, still, when a new
nation starts up, it has a right to make its own language. It is
not used in England.

DENMARK.—Masonry introduced into Denmark at Kjobenhaven,
11th Nov. 1743, from the Three Globes at Berlin, in Prussia. In
consequence of informalities which, in a formal age, were always
taking place, a new Lodge was formed called Zorobabel. A
warrant was obtained for the second Lodge in 1745, from Lord
Cranstoun. Subsequently, a warrant was obtained from England,
in 1749, from Lord Byron, the then Grand Master. The present
system worked in Denmark is that of Zinnendorf, since January
6, 1855.

DeEposif OF THK SUBSTITUTE ARK. (See Select Master.)

Deposit, YEAR OF. (See Anno Depositionis.)

Deposirary.-—l. Of Secrets. 2. Of Kabbalistic Secrets. 3. Grand
Depositary. 4. Depositary of the Number Five; all degrees in
Peuvret’s collection. 5. Depositary Elect.

Deptu.—The depth of a Lodge is figuratively said to be from the
surface to the centre.

Deputation.—At one time the authority granted by the Grand
Master to any brother to act as Provincial Grand Master was
called a deputation. It was sometimes used in the sense of dis-
pensation.

DepuTaTIon Lopces.—Assemblies composed of deputations from
several Lodges, meeting with some common end important to all
concerned. They are very unusual, and indeed, now that so
many Grand Lodges exist, they are practically irregular and
supererogatory.

DepuTte Masrrr.—An officer in a Scottish Lodge of Masons.

Deputy GRAND CHAPTER.—Formerly existing in the United States,
under the warrant of the General Grand Chapter of the Northern
States.

Deputy GRAND MasTER.—The assistant, and, in his absence, the
representative of the Grand Master, usually a nobleman of high
tank, or a gentleman of well-known standing in society.

DerisivE Societies.—The mystery with which Masonry was
shrouded led to the formation, during the last century, of many
absurd societies of a social and grotesque nature. The names of
these societies have been inserted in this work, in their proper
places, as a matter of amusement,

Dermott, Laurence.—At first Grand Secretary, and afterwards
Deputy Grand Master of that body of Masons who seceded in

153

DER] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | DES

1739, and were known as Ancient York Masons. He was the
author of the Ahiman Rezon, first published in 1756. It is now
considered of no authority.

DERWENTWATER.—Charles Radcliffe, Earl of Derwentwater, by
patent of the exiled Stewart family—the brother of James,
Earl of Derwentwater, executed in 1716—was the first Grand
Master elected, in 1725, to preside over the Grand Lodge of
France. Like his brother, he paid the price of his loyalty
to the Stewarts with his head, being decapitated at London,
December 8, 1746.

DESAGULIERS, JOHN THEOPHILUS.—Born at Rochelle in France, 12th
March, 1683, died at London in 1749. He wes a very distin-
guished writer and physicist, an LL D., and Fellow of the Royal
Society. He was educated at Christ Church, Oxford, and in
1713 received the degree of Master of Arts, and succeeded the
well-known Dr Keill as lecturer on experimental philosophy at
Hart Hall, but speedily transferred his lectures to Westminster,
and became the friend of Sir Isaac Newton. About this time he
was admitted to clerical orders, and was chaplain to the Duke of
Chandos, from whom he obtained the living of Whitchurch ; but
he afterwards had several other livings in Norfolk and Essex—
continuing, however, to reside in London. In the present in-
stance, however, we have only to consider Dr Desaguliers in his
Masonic capacity. He was initiated in the Lodge which met
at the Goose and Gridiron, in St Paul’s Churchyard, afterwards
known as the Lodge of Antiquity, and seems to have been en-
thusiastic in Masonic science from the very beginning. By his
ardour he awoke the energies of the Masons of his time, and after
preliminary conferences with the aged Sir Christopher Wren, he
managed to obtain a meeting of the four London Lodges in 1717,
at the Apple Tree Tavern, when the Grand Lodge was constitu-
ted, Anthony Sayer, Esquire, being elected first Grand Master, on
St John the Baptist’s Day, in that year. In 1719, Desaguliers
himself was elected Grand Master, in succession to Bro. George
Payne, the second Grand Master. Under Dr Desaguliers the
Craft rapidly increased in numerical strength, respectability, and
influence, many noblemen taking part in the ceremonies, and
subsequently officiating as officers. Another point in which
Desaguliers took much interest was the collection of anterior
documents concerning the Craft ; and we are indebted to him
for the preservation of the “ Charges of a Freemason,” and the
preparation of the “ General Regulations.” After retiring from
office in 1720, he was thrice appointed Deputy Grand Master—in
1723, 1724, and 1725, and he first founded that scheme of charity
now known as the Fund of Benevolence. During this period he

154

DES | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DEs

visited the Operative Lodges of Edinburgh. He afterwards went
to Holland, and was W.M. of a Lodge especially convened for
initiating the Duke of Lorraine, afterwards Grand Duke of Tus-
cany and Emperor of Germany, in 1731. He also initiated the
Prince of Wales at Kew, at a special Lodge held for the purpose.
The last time Desaguliers is recorded to have been present in
Grand Lodge was the 19th of March, 1741. His latter years
were clouded by adversity, and even by fits of insanity. His
great connections had brought him fame, but no bread; his un-
affected endeavours to aid, instruct, and benefit his fellow-men
met with no return; and Desaguliers died in want, obscurity,
and mental darkness, after an ineffectual struggle with the
world and its ways.

DESERT.—The outer court of a Tent in the Order of Ishmael, or of
Reconciliation.

Des Eranes, Nicolas CHARLES.—Born at Allichamps, France,
7th September, 1766; died at Paris, 6th May, 1847. Initiated in
the Lodge L’Heureuse Rencontre (Happy Meeting), 1794; Mas-
ter of the Lodge des Trinosophes, 1822, and for nine subsequent
years. He attempted a Masonic reform of a very decided nature.
His rite comprises the three Symbolical Degrees, 4. Rectified
Rose Croix, and 5. Grand Elect Knight Kadosch. He published
the whole of his system in 1823, in his work “ Véritable Lien des
Peuples.” Tes Etangs had peculiar ideas on Masonry, and to him
the building of the Temple was a symbol of the better spirit of
humanity—assailed and destroyed by ignorance, falsehood, and
ambition. Although he incorporated two other degrees into his
system, he regarded them as of minor importance.

DesicN oF Masonry.—The design of Masonry is a search after
truth, and the effectual spreading of the doctrines of the unity of
God and the immortality of the soul; but in doing this it sets it-
self against no special religions, only-demanding the acknow-
ledgment of the existence of God from those entering the frater-
nity. A second object in Masonry is a search into the ancient
archeological history of the world and its symbolism. It is in
this sense especially that Masonry deserves the name of a science,
and a progressive science, fearing no future, as its principles are
supported by faith in T.G. A.O.T.U. Whatever facts have
transpired at any time have only confirmed the general history
of Freemasonry in its main integrity. (See Definition of Free-
masonry.)

DESTRUCTION OF THE TEMPLE—The Temple of Solomon was des-
troyed A.M. 3416, B.C. 588, during the reign of Zedekiah, by
Nebuchadnezzar, the King of the Chaldees, four hundred and six-
teen years after its dedication. The foundations were alone left,

155

DET | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DEV

and these were in ruins. The Royal Arch degree deals with the
traditions concerning this Temple and its restoration.

DETACHED DEGREES. (See Side Degrees.)

DEUCHAR CHARTERS.—So called from Alexander Deuchar, an
engraver, who was the principal mover in the establishment
of the Grand Conclave of Knights Templar in Scotland, and
its tirst Grand Master in the early part of this century
Deuchar seems to have become acquainted with Knight Tem-
plarism, in consequence of communications he had with Fratres
serving in the Shropshire Militia, who had been dubbed
under a warrant emanating from Dublin. This corps was
quartered in Edinburgh in 1798; and from the Fratres of this
corps it is most probable that the first Grand Assembly of
Knights Templar was opened in Edinburgh; this, however, gave
place to the Grand Assembly of High Knights Templar, working
under a charter No. 31 from the Early Grand Encampment of
Ireland, of which Deuchar was Grand Master. But these
Deuchar Charters were clearly extra-Masonic, as they authorised
Encampments to instal Knights Templar and Knights of St
John of Jerusalem, on the one condition that no such Encamp-
ment should hold any communion or intercourse with any
Chapter or Encampment, or body assuming. that name, holding
meetings of Knights Templar, under a Master Mason’s Charter.
This body, however, lost its authority, in consequence of having
nothing over which to exercise it, about 1837.

Drus MEumQueE Jus (God and my Right)—Translated from Diew
et Mon Droit, the parole phrase given by Richard Cceur de Lion,
in 1198, when besieging Gisors, in Normandy, a town of which
Philip Augustus, king of France, in defiance of Richard’s just
rights, had taken possession, It has been the motto of England
ever since that time, and is also the motto of the 33° of the A
and A. Rite in all parts of the world.

DEVEK (P33)—The Hebrew word for union in a Masonic manu-
script.

prvice—An emblem, suitable to the persons or corporation of
persons adopting it. 1. Ancient Craft Masonry, the square and
compasses. 2. Royal Arch Masonry, a triple tau within a triangle.
3. Knights Templar, formerly a seal bearing the effigies of two
knights riding on one horse, in allusion to their vow of poverty;
now a cross patée, 4. Scottish Rite Masonry, a double-headed
eagle crowned, holding in his claws a wavy sword. 5. Cryptic
Masonry, a trowel suspended within a triangle. 6. Rose-Croix
Masonry, a cross charged with a rose; at its foot an eagle and a
pelican, 7. Knight of the Sun, rays of light issuing from a
triangle inscribed within a circle of darkness, That of the Antient

156

DEV | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DIo

and Primitive Rite is a Kneph, or winged egg enclosing Masonic
emblems, and surrounded by a serpent. Each of these devices
was accompanied by a motto (see Motto); the device was called
the body, and the motto, the soul. The device of the Ancient
Order of Ishmael is a serpent erect; the motto, Destruenda sunt
altena ut nostris credatur.

DeEvoir.—The Lodges of the French system of Compagnonage are
called Devoirs. (See Compagnonage.)

Devorr, KniGHTLy —The duties of an ancient Knight Templar
comprised the defence of innocent virgins, destitute widows,
helpless orphans, and the Christian religion; in former times, it
was also incumbent upon him to protect pilgrims on their visit
to the Holy Land, and to defend the Holy Places.

Devorions.—The technical name for the prayers in any assembly
of Knights Templar.

Diarecrics.—A branch of logic, including the rules of reasoning.
We find dialecticke and dialecticus in some of the old MS.
constitutions instead of logic.

Diamonp (Hebrew 0m, Jahlom).—The third stone in the second
row of the High Priest’s breast-plate, appertaining to Zebulun ;
but, as it is doubtful whether the diamond was known in the
time of Moses, we should read with the Vulgate, Jasper. (See
Breast-plate.)

Dieu eT Mon Droit. (See Deus Mewmque Jus.)

Dieu LE VeEut (God wills it)—The battle-cry of the Crusaders,
and a motto of the Templars.

Dieniraries.—In a French Lodge, the Vénérable (Master), Sur-
veillants (Wardens), Orator, and Secretary, are thus denominated ;
and the corresponding officers in the Grand Orient are called
Grand Dignitaries. In England and America, the term is be-
stowed only on Grand Officers,

Dimir. (See Demit.)

Diocrsan.—The fifth degree of the German Union, or Twenty-two,
of Bahrdt.

Dionysian ARCHITECTS.— At a very early period in the historic
times of the world, we find in existence 4 wandering guild of
builders, consecrated to Dionysos or Bacchus. They make their
appearance certainly not later than 1000 B.C., and appear to
have enjoyed particular privileges and immunities; they also
possessed secret means of recognition, and were bound together
by special ties only known to themselves. The richer of this
fraternity were bound to provide for their poorer brethren. They
were divided into communities, governed bya Master and Wardens,
and called cuvoxia: They held a grand festival annually, and were
held in high esteem. Their ceremonials were regarded as sacred,

1$7

DIO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ DIO

and, provided we could unreservedly accept the legend of the build-
ing of the First Temple, it would seem that they were employed
by Solomon, at the instance of Hiram, king of Tyre. They were
also unquestionably employed at the construction of the Temple
of Diana, or Artemis, at Ephesus, the foundations of which have
been recently explored by Mr George Wood, and the magnificent
proportions of which have been admirably described by him.
They had means of intercommunication all over the then known
world; and from them, doubtless, sprang the guilds of Travelling
Masons known in the middle ages.

Dionysian Mysteries —Celebrated generally throughout Hellas
and Ionia, but chiefly at Athens. They were introduced from
Egypt into Greece, in honour of Dionysos or Bacchus. The legend
of the murder of Dionysos was commemorated in their cere-
monies. In the outset of these mysteries was shown the
consecration of the mundane egg, of which all Eastern religions
from Japan, India, Burmah, and the Hellenic countries make
mention. Lustration by water having taken place, the candidate
was crowned with a myrtle branch, introduced into the sacred
vestibule, and clothed in the sacred habiliments. He was then
delivered to the conductor, who proclaimed in a loud voice,
“"Exas, txas, tort BéBnao!” “ Depart hence, all ye profane!”
After exhortations to the candidate, enjoining fortitude and
courage, he was led through dark caverns, termed by Stobzus
“a rude and fearful march through night and darkness.” Here
wild beasts howled, and artificially-produced thunder and light-
ning prevailed, while monstrous apparitions were from time to:
time shown through the gloom. These scenes continued for
three days and nights; after which the mystical death of
Bacchus or Dionysos, displayed in the person of the candidate,
began to be enacted. The candidate was now placed on the
pastos, couch, or coffin, and closely confined in a chamber, where,
in solitude, he was left to feel all the horrors of the situation.
Typhon, searching for Osiris,—for the legends are the same,—
seeks for the ark in which he is enclosed, and rends it to pieces
by his mighty power, scattering the limbs upon the waters,
upon which arise mournful lamentations upon the decease of
the god. Rhea or Isis then begins her search for the remains
of Dionysos or Osiris, and indescribable howlings ensue, made
by the priests and assistants at the ceremony ; until, at a signal
from the Hierophant, mourning is changed into rejoicing. the
body is found, and the candidate released amidst shouts of
“ Eupyxdwev, Evyxaipuuev!” “We have found it! let us rejoice
together !” The candidate was next made to descend into
Terans, or the infernal regions, and behold the blessings and

15

DIP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Dis

happiness of the good and the punishment of the wicked. He
was then, like the modern initiates of Freemasonry, given a new
vestment of white, and received among the number of the
*Exéarns, or Epopts. By this series of trials, he was supposed to
receive regeneration; and, of course, public consideration and
rank were the due meed of every individual favoured enough, or
courageous enough, to undergo the ordeal.

Diptoma (from the Greek diraow, I fold up; literally, a paper
folded only once).—It is, in practice, a document signed and
sealed, conferring certain rights and privileges on the holder of
it, and is usually executed on parchment. In Freemasonry, it
is usually called a certificate. In some rites, a similar document
is called a patent; in the Royal Order of Apex and Sat B’hai,
the parchment is called a mandate; in the Order of Ishmael, it
is a warrant. In all cases, such papers should be preserved with
the greatest care, as in some places even the most accomplished
Mason cannot visit an assembly of Masons without producing
his papers.

DirEcTOR OF CEREMONIES.—The Grand Director of Ceremonies is
annually appointed by the Grand Master on the day of his
installation. He has the care of the regalia, insignia, and jewels
belonging to the Grand Lodge He must be a Master Mason,
and punctually attend all the ordinary and extraordinary meet-
ings of the Grand Lodge. His jewel is two batons crossed in
saltire. It is optional on the part of private Lodges to have
such an officer; but it is not infrequent to find the office of
Director of Ceremonies held by some able Mason, in connection
with that of Wine Steward in a private Lodge.

DirecTory.—In German Lodges, the principal officers form a
council of management, called a Directorium or Directory.

Directory, Roman HELvetic.——A title assumed, 1739, by the
supreme Masonic authority at Lausanne, in Switzerland. (See
Switzerland.)

Dirk orn Daccer.—An attribute of the clothing of the members of
the degree of the Elect, the fourth degree of the French Rite;
and of the Knights Kadosh, 30° of the A. and A. Rite.

DISCALCEATION.—An ancient ceremony, common to all nations, in
which the feet are bared whenever holy ground is approached or
touched. In Exodus iii. 5, Moses was commanded to put off his
shoes at the Burning Bush; and in Joshua v. 15, and Eccles. v.
1, it is again alluded to. The Jews, the Mohammedans, and
other Oriental races, have always observed the Rite; and among
the directions of Pythagoras to his disciples, we find “ Avorédnros
due nal aphoxuver:” “ Offer sacrifice and worship with thy shoes off.”
Justin Martyr, and Drusius in his “Notes on the Book of

559

DIS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Dis

Joshua,” also mention the practice. Maimonides, in the Beth
Habbechirah (c. 7), says that “it was not lawful for a man to
come into the mountain of God’s house with his shoes on his
feet, or with his staff, or in his working garments, or with dust
on his feet;” and Rabbi Solomon (on Levit. xix. 30) speaks in
the same terms. The custom was also prevalent in the early
Abyssinian Church. The Druids and the Peruvians also observed
the Rite. In the ceremonies of Freemasonry, it has a special
signification, which can only be alluded to in this place.

DiscieLine.—A Mason is said to be disciplined when he received
punishment at the hands of his Lodge, by way of admonition or
reprehension. In America, where things in Masonry are taken
au grand sérieux, and not, asin England, aw secret de Polichinelle,
this discipline healthily exercises a wise control. In fact,
America has adopted Masonry as an institution, with such
sincerity, that the Freemasons of that country are the admiration
of the Masonic world.

DiscipLina ARCANI—The name given to the secret ritual and
practices of the primitive Christian Church. The necessities of
the time, and the common principles of mysticism, caused the
first Christians to veil their rites in secrecy. (See Carbonari.)
Lucian of Samosata speaks of Christ as a magician who estab-
lished new mysteries; and, in the reign of Trajan, Pliny tells us
that the Christians were not persecuted on account of their
religious views, but because the law of the empire prohibited all
“secret associations ”—a law which the popes have upheld to the
present hour. There were four degrees in the Ancient Christian
Mysteries: 1. ’O: aioror, the Faithful; 2. dwriZéwevor, the En-
lightened ; 3. Mewunuévor, the Initiated ; 4. Tedrssovpévor, the Perfect.
The terms Micra: and Micrayoyjras are often used, and the whole
phraseology is that of a mysterious initiation. Cyril of Jerusalem
considers baptism to be the exact equivalent of the initiatory
Rites of Isis, Eleusis, Samothrace, and Phrygia.

Discovery.—Anno Inventionis, or, in the Year of the Discovery.
1. The style assumed in the Royal Arch, in allusion to an event
which took place soon after Zerubbabel commenced the building
of the Second Temple. 2. A date in the Red Cross degree, also
taken from the discovery of the True Cross by the Empress
Helena. (See Calendar, Masonic.)

DIscoveRY OF THE Bopy. (See Luresis.)

DISPENSATION.—A permission to dispense with the ordinary regu-
lations appointed to be observed in any institutions. Dispensa-
tions can only be obtained from the Grand Master, or his repre-
sentatives, and on rare occasions. 1. A Lodge cannot be opened

and held without a Warrant of Constitution, obtained from the
160

DIS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DIs

proper authority; but the Grand Master may issue a dispensa-
tion to the legal number of Masons, being in good standing, to
open and hold a Lodge until it can be properly constituted
A Lodge under dispensation, however, has no representative
abilities, and a mere ad interim status. 2. Not more than five
candidates can be initiated at any one meeting of a Lodge, with-
out a dispensation. 3. In some countries no brother can belong
to two Lodges within three miles of each other, but this does
not apply to England.

DISPENSATION, LODGES UNDER. (See Lodges under Dispensation.)

DispuTes.—On his initiation, the candidate is exhorted never to
invest himself with the badge of a Mason, should there be any
member in the Lodge with whom he feels he is at variance, or
against whom he may entertain any animosity. In a more
general sense, arbitration has ever been recommended as a means
of settling disputes or controverted points in Masonry, being
more in harmony with the peaceful spirit of Masonic institutions
and ideas. An old record of the fifteenth century expressly says :
“Yf any discorde schall be betwene hym and his felows, he
schall abey hym mekely, and be stylle at the byddyng of his
Master, or of the Wardeyne of his Master, in his Master’s
absens, to the holy day folowyng, and that he accorde then at
the dispocition of his telows.”

Dissotvep LopcEs.—Lodges are subject to dissolution by their
decay in the number of members, by voluntary dissolution, or by
misconduct They then become virtually dead, and their number
and authority revert to Grand Lodge.

Distinctive TITLE—AlIl Lodges are in general known as St John’s
Lodges, but every Lodge has its own name, by which it is more
particularly known. On the Continent, the name of the St Johns is
preserved in the Johannite Rite, but not in England or America,

Distress, SigN or.—According to Rosenberg and the Book of
Raziel, this sign is said to have been derived from the expulsion
of Adam from the Garden of Eden. He communicated it,
together with the divine mysteries he had learned there, to his
son Seth (or, according to some, his son Loth); Seth gave them
to Enoch; Enoch to Methusalem; Methusalem to Lamech;
Lamech to Noah; Noah to Shem; Shem to Abraham; Abraham
to Isaac; Isaac to Jacob; Jacob to Levi; Levi to Kelhoth;
Kelhoth to Amram ; Amram to Moses; Moses to Joshua; Joshua
to the Elders; the Elders to the Prophets; the Prophets to the
Seers: and thus from one to the other down to Solomon, who
perpetuated it in Freemasonry. This, however, is purely mys-
tical. This sign of distress differs but slightly from that of the

modern Freemasons. Various signs of distress, however, are to
L 161

DIs| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DOR

be met with in various countries and nations. Jt has sometimes
been called the “Master’s Clap,” and the “Grand Hailing
Sign.”

District DEpuTY GRAND Master—In America, an officer of
Grand Lodge similar to the English Provincial Grand Master.
District GRAND LopcEs.—In America and the colonies of Great

Britain, analogous to Provincial Grand Lodges in England.

Documents, THREE OLDEsT. (See Krause.)

Dopp’s ConstiTuTIONS.—In 1739, Mrs Dodd published a Book
of Constitutions or Old Charges, which is exceedingly rare;
only three copies being mentioned as extant in the Spencer
catalogue. It is a pamphlet of 20 pages, in quarto, the title
being “The Beginning and the First Foundation of the Most
Worthy Craft of Masonry ; with the Charges thereunto belonging.
By a deceased Brother, for the Benefit of his Widow. London:
Printed for Mrs Dodd at the Peacock, without Temple Bar.
1739. Price Sixpence.” Brother Spencer has not reprinted this,
but mentions it m the preface to the reprint of the “Old Consti-
tutions, 1871,” as resembling the Constitutions of 1726.

Doc.—A symbol in the higher degrees. (See Cynocephalus.)

Doming, Deus MEus! (ies ‘WN, adonat elohat).—Used in the third
degree of the Scottish Rite.

Dominican RepusBuic.—This republic has a National Grand Orient,
and the form of working is that of the Ancient and Accepted
Rite The Grand Orient is divided into three subdivisions: a
National Grand Orient Lodge, governing the Craft Lodges; a
Sovereign Grand Chapter General, governing Chapters; and a
Supreme Council, supervising the high degrees.

Dominicans, ORDER OF.—Founded by Dominic de Guzman, born
1170, at Calovoga, in Old Castile.

Donatists.—A sect founded by Donatus, about 311 A.D., in
Africa. They held that baptism out of the Church was void,
and therefore they rebaptised their converts, and reordained the
clerics who espoused their opinions. Their doctrines resembled
those of Arius.

Donats.—Serving brethren, who did not take vows, but were
attached to the Order of St John of Jerusalem and the Order of
Malta. They wore the demi-cross, and attended to the menial
duties of the convent and hospital. (See Knight of Malta.)

Doric OrpER.—The oldest and simplest order of Greek architec-
ture, It is indicative of strength, and is appropriated to the
West and the Senior Warden. (See Order of Architecture.)

Dormant Lopce.—A Lodge, the charter of which has not been

revoked, but which has ceased to meet and work. The Grand
162

DOR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DRA

Master can restore it to activity on petition of its members, one
of whom, however, should be a Past Master.

DorMER.—The dormer window in the lectures is associated with
the porch and mosaic pavement. It is the window that gives
light to the entrance of the Holy of Holies, or Sanctum Sanc-
torum.

Dotack.—The initiation of an aged man in his dotage is strictly
forbidden.

DovusiE Cuse, (See Parallelepipedon.)

DOUBLE-HEADED EAGLE. (See Lagle, Double-headed.)

Dove.—1. A symbol of purity and innocence; also peace, 2. A
symbol of the Holy Spirit and Comforter, or Paraclete. Really a
most quarrelsome and spiteful bird, and by no means a proper
emblem, being also of an ultra-amative nature.

Dove, KNIGHTS AND LADIES OF THE (Chevaliers et Chevaliéres de
la Colombe).—A secret society on the model of Freemasonry, of
an androgynous kind, instituted at Versailles in 1784, now long
since extinct.

DowLanp Manuscript.—A MS., first published, by James Dowland,
in Gentleman's Magazine, vol. lxxxv., p. 489. It is described as
being “ written on a long roll of parchment, in a very clear hand,
apparently early in the seventeenth century, and very probably
is copied from a manuscript of earlier date.” There seems, from
its resemblance to the other records in the British Museum, no
reason to doubt its authenticity. Brother Hughan, in his Old
Charges of British Freemasons (p. 22), says :—‘ Brother Wood-
ford, Mr Sims, and other eminent authorities, consider the
original of the copy, from which the transcript for the Gentleman’s
Magazine was written, to be a scroll of at least a century earlier
than the date ascribed to Mr Dowland’s MS, and, in consequence,
date it about A.D, 1550.”

DRAESECKE, JOHANN HEINRICH DERNHARDT.—A learned clerical
Mason, Master of the Lodge (Oelzweiy) Olive Branch, at Bremen.
Ilis writings were collected and published by A. W. Miiller in
1865, under the title of “Bischof Drdsecke als Freimaurer,”
—“ Bishop Drasecke as a Mason.”

Dracon, KNIGHTS OF THE—A degree in Knight Templarism,
popular in Strasburg, Lyons, and Bordeaux, from 1766 to 1783.
It had a legend of its own, and a peculiar cipher.

Drake, Francis, M.D., F.R.S—An antiquary and historian, ini-
tiated at York, 1725, chosen Junior Grand Warden of York in
the same year. He was the author of a much-admired oration
published in 1726, and again in 1729. In this work Drake
makes the important statement that the first Grand Lodge in

England was held at York, and that while it recognises the
163

DRa| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DRO

Grand Master in London as Grand Master of England, it claims
the Grand Master of York as the Grand Master of all England;
also that the Prince Edwin of the ancient MSS. alludes to
Edwin, King of Northumbria, A.D. 626, and not to the brother
of Athelstan, A.D. 926. The MSS. are full of historical
anachronisms.

Dramatic LITERATURE OF FREEMASONRY.—The wit of society
could not be satisfied without displaying itself in dramatic
efforts in relation to Masonry. Hence a large number of very
dull pieces, including farce, drama, history, and oratorio, have
been inflicted on the world. Pasquinades, to have any point,
must know at what they aim, and hence this large series of
squibs have failed to exercise any effect, or live any permanent
life. Moribund from the commencement, these effusions were
still-born into the world, and may be passed by without further
notice.

DrEspEN, ConGress or.—Held in 181], in which representatives
of twelve Lodges in Saxony took part. A national Grand Lodge
of Saxony, recognising the Johannite system, was established on
the 27th September in the same year; all the Saxon Lodges went
under its rule, except a Lodge at Leipzig. Great freedom was
permitted ; some of the Lodges worked Fessler’s Rite, and others
the ordinary Rite.

Dress oF A Mason.—Oliver (Landmarks, vol. i. p. 169) says
that “the ancient symbolical dress of a Master Mason was a
yellow jacket and blue breeches, alluding to the brass compasses
with steel points, which were assigned to the Master, or Grand
Master, as Governor of the Craft; but the real dress was a plain
black coat and breeches, with white waistcoat, stockings, apron,
and gloves.” The ancient Operative Ritual of Scotland taught
the initiate to say that the compasses and square were “ Master,”
and, under God, made him a Mason. The modern dress of a
Mason much depends upon the prevailing state of the fashion
of the country, and also upon the nature of the degree and the
general character of the Rite.

Drop CLotH.—An American term for the raising sheet used in the
third degree.

Drops, THreE—In the Persian mysteries, three drops of blood
from the White Giant restored the sight of all the captives in
the subterranean regions, when applied by his conqueror Rustam.
In Britain, three drops of water were sacred; and in Mexico,
three drops of blood. In India, a girdle composed of three triple
threads was holy; and China, three strokes of a letter.

Drotres.—The priests of Scandinavia, instituted by Segge, a
Scythian prince.

164

DRU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DUE

DrvuIpDH.—The Gaelic word for a wise man or magician.

DRuips, THE ANTIENT AND ARCHAOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF.—A quasi
Masonic body, reconstituted by Bro. R. Wentworth Little in
October, 1874, It can hardly be said to be fairly launched as
yet, no meetings having been held. Funds have, however, been
collected for the purpose of fully investigating the Masonic
claims of the Druids. Master Masons alone are admissible to
this body, which, it is to be hoped, will show signs of vitality at
some time not far distant.

Druips, ANCIENT. (See Mysteries of the Druids.)

Druses.—A singular sect of mystical religionists inhabiting Mount
Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon in Syria. They settled there about
the tenth century, and seem to be a mixture of Kurds, Mardi-
Arabs, and other semi-civilized tribes. Their religion is com-
pounded of Judaism, Christianity, and Mohammedanism. They
have a regular order of priesthood, and a kind of hierarchy.
Their sacred books, forty-five in number, are written in early
Arahic, and in order that the three classes of Druses can recog-
nise each other, there is a regular system of passwords and signs.
The initiated Druses are known as Okkals or Spiritualists.
Twelve months’ probation, to which either sex is admitted, pre-
cedes initiation. Some have thought that the 22° ofthe A. and A.
Rite, that of Prince of Lebanon, has some reference to this race
of Syrians.

Dvuap.—The duad, representing the number two, answers to the
geometrical line, which, consisting of length without breadth, is
bounded by two points. Dr Oliver, in his posthumous work on
The Pythagorean Triangle (London, 1875) has a long chapter on
the Duad. (See also Z'wo.)

Duaism.—A doctrine prevailing throughout the Oriental religion.
In the system of Zoroaster we have Ahrimanes and Ormuzad, in
the Hebrew cosmogony—the Creator and the Serpent; and in
the book of Job, the Creator and Satan the adversary. In pbilo-
sophical magic the same idea prevails. We have light and
shadow, noon and night, moist and dry. In fact, dualism pervades
all ancient systems of thought. In Masonry also we find in the
first degree, Darkness dispelled by Light; in the second, Igno-
rance conquered by Wisdom; and in the third, Death van-
quished by Immortality.

Dus.—A Knight was dubbed or created by receiving three blows
on the neck with the flat side of the sword. The word is derived
from the Saxon dubban, to strike. (See Accolade.)

Dus East AND WeEst.—A Lodge room should always, if possible,
as in the case of a church, stand due east and west. In fact, in

theory it is always presumed to do so. (See Orientation.)
165

DUE| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [DUN

Dur EXAMINATION.—A mode of testing a strange brother according
to the methods prescribed by law. The other modes are strict
trial and lawful information. (See Vouching.)

Due Form. (See Ample Form.)

Dur Guarp.—We are by this strongly reminded of the time and
manner of taking our solemn vows of duty, and hence we are
duly guarded against any violation of our sacred promises as
initiated members of a great moral and social institution.

Dues.—Annual dues do not appear to have existed anterior to 1717
Indeed, we learn from Preston, that Lodges before that time, not
having any warrants, or any practically supreme authority over
them, met, when there were a sufficient number present, accord-
ing to their convenience; and in the memorable visit paid by
Elias Ashmole to the Lodge held at Mason’s Hall in March, 1682,
the subsequent banquet was “at the charge of the new Accepted
Masons.” There would not seem to have been any necessity at
this time for contributions to form a Lodge fund in Speculative
Lodges, the members being usually wealthy, or, at least, well-
to-do persons. Dues appear, however, to have existed in the
Operative Lodges of Scotland, but no mention of dues is
made in the Old Constitutions. Such annual payments are mat-
ters of arrangement between an individual member and his
Lodge, and non-payment cannot be considered an offence against
the Craft in general, but only against the Lodge; and the only
punishment which can be inflicted on the defaulter is to strike
him off the roll of the Lodge. It is the general view of Masonic
jurists that expulsion or suspension cannot be inflicted for non-
payment ofdues. But if the quarterages to Grand Lodge cease
to be paid, the defaulter ipso facto loses the benefits to which he
is entitled.

DUNCKERLEY, THoMAS.—A very eminent Mason of the last century,
whose private history was as remarkable as his Masonic career
was unblemished and honourable. He was born at London, on
the 23d of October, 1724, the reputed son of Mr and Mrs Mary
Dunckerley, but really the son of the Prince of Wales, afterwards
George IT., to whom he bore a striking personal resemblance. He
was not made acquainted with the circumstances of his paternity
until after his mother’s death, and for more than half a century
occupied a very humble position in society. He entered the
navy at the age of ten, and continued in that service, in various
parts of the world, until his return to England in January, 1760,
when he found his mother had died a few days before, having
left a solemn declaration behind her as to the parentage of her
son, of which, however, she had never apprized the King. As
to this declaration, Dunekerley himself says :—“ This informa-

166

DUN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | DUN

tion gave me great surprise and much uneasiness, and as I was
obliged to return immediately to my duty on board the Van-
guard, I made it known to no person at that time but Captain
Swanton. He said that those who did not know me could look
on it to be nothing more than a gossip’s story. We were then
bound a second time to Quebec, and Captain Swanton did pro-
mise me that on our return to England he would endeavour to
get me introduced to the King, and that he would give me a
character ; but when we came back to England the King was
dead.” No further steps seem to have been taken at this time in
the matter. In 1761 he again left England as a gunner in Lord
Anson’s fleet, not returning until 1764, when, finding himself in
much embarrassment on account of debts incurred on behalf of
his family (for he had married early—in 1744),as he knew no
one who could aid him in the substantiation of his history, he
sailed for the Mediterranean in a merchant vessel His small
superannuation pension he left behind him for his family. At
this time the romantic history of his birth became talked about,
and an attempt was made, but without effect, to interest the
Dowager Princess of Wales on his behalf. In 1767, however,
the King, George III., his father’s grandson, was informed of the
matter, and having directed enquiries to be made into his charac-
ter which proved satisfactory, on the 7th May, 1767, he was
assigned a pension of £100, which was afterwards increased to
£800, with a suite of apartments in Hampton Court Palace. He
was also permitted to bear the royal arms, with the bar sinister,
and adopted as his motto the appropriate words :—“ Fato non
merito.” In familiar correspondence, and on his book-plate, he
used the name of Fitz-George. In 1770 he became a student at
law, and was called to the bar in 1774, but he never shone in his
new profession. He died, aged seventy-one, at Portsmouth, his
last years being embittered by the dissolute conduct of his son,
who, falling lower and lower in the social scale, became a brick-
layer’s labourer, and died, the grandson of a King of England, as
a. pauper in a cellar in St Giles’s. Dunckerley’s Masonic career
was one of great importance to the Craft. It is not known when
he was actually received into the Fraternity, but it was probably
about 1755, as in 1757 he delivered an address before the Ply-
mouth Lodges—published under the title of “The Light and
Truth of Masonry Explained.” He here simply announces him-
self as a Master Mason, and was most likely initiated in a Ply-
mouth Lodge. Oliver says he was elected Master shortly after
his return to England, perhaps about 1766, as in 1767 Lord
Blaney appointed him Provincial Grand Master for Hampshire

He also soon afterwards superintended the Lodges in severa
167

DUP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EAG

other English counties, and some years later the Grand Lodge,
in testimony of its approval of his indefatigable assiduity, gave
him the rank of Past Senior Grand Warden. At the time of his
death he was Grand Superintendent and Past Grand Master of
Royal Arch Masons, and Supreme Grand Master of the Knights
of Rose-Croix, Templars and Kadosch—which last dignity was
conferred upon him by H. R. H. the Duke of Kent, father of her
present Majesty. His principal Masonic labours consisted in a
reconstruction and reformation of the lectures, a revision of the
rituals, and a collation of all the ancient formulas. Preston
styles him “ that truly Masonic luminary,” and Oliver says that
he was the “oracle of Grand Lodge.”

Dupaty, Louis EMANUEL CHARLES MERcIER.—Author of many
Masonic songs, and, in conjunction with Révéroui de Saint Cyr,
of a comic opera— Cagliostro, ou les Illuminés” (1810). He also
published a Masonic novelette, “L’Harmonie.” In general litera-
ture he also did good service. He was born in the Gironde, 1775,
elected to the French Academy 1835, and died 1851.

Duty.—Masonic duty consists in a proper appreciation of the rights
and feelings of others, an amiability of carriage, and a prudent
reserve where caution is necessary ; honesty and uprightness in
worldly affairs, and a patient submission to the decrees of
T. G. A. O. T. U. is an essential part of Masonic conduct.

Dyaus,—The Sanskrit word for sky ;—anything elevated, bright, ex-
alted; the Deity, the Sun, Heaven, the Firmament.

E

E.—In the Ehevi system of reading Hebrew, 7 takes the place of
E. Its numerical value is five; and its signification, window.
It represents the fifth name of God, 17 (Hadour), Formosus,
Majestuosus.

EacGLe.—The symbolism of the Eagle is of the most remote anti-
quity. In Egyptian its name was Ah, in Coptic, Ahom; and
with the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Persians, the eagle was
sacred to the sun. It was an emblem of Zeus, and a symbol of
the Supreme God of the Druids. Its magnificent powers of
endurance, keen sight, and majestic flight endeared it to the en-
thusiastic lovers of nature; and its accompanying analogies being
so many, it became gradually one of the most important symbols
in all faiths. The symbolists among the ancients equally cele-
brated the praises of the eagle; and it formed a constituent part
of the cherubic symbol. It was referred to by Daniel, because

168

EAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EAG

he spake with angels, and received messages which relate to all
time; and by Saint John, who, in his gospel, treats of Christ’s
essential divinity, and who soars to heaven like an eagle in the
Apocalypse. It is perhaps right to say that it is doubted whether
the Evangelist, and John the Divine of the Apocalypse, were the
same persons. The general tenor of that composition is so much
at variance with the style and language of the Gospel narrative,
that the arguments have been almost unanimous against an
identical authorship. A fantastical claim, supported by a vast
array of learning, to a much greater antiquity for the Apocalypse,
has been advanced by the author of a work entitled “The Book
of God,” on which see Jonah. The heralds have explained the
eagle as the analogue of the lion, among animals, as being the
swiftest, strongest, most laborious, generous, and boldest of birds.
One of the jewels of the Rose-Croix degree displays an eagle, with
outstretched wings, at the foot of the cross,in which position it is
a type of Christ, in his divine character, bearing the children of
his adoption on his wings towards their appointed home amidst
the many mansions of heaven.

EAGLE AND PELICAN, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the Eagle
and Pelican.) .

EaGLe, DouBLE-HEADED.—Heraldically, the Eagle displayed.—The
eagle was first used by Marius, B.C. 102, as the ensign of Rome
at the head of the Legions, and, on the division of the empire
into East and West, a double-headed eagle was substituted ;
this being afterwards adopted by the Carlovingians, when the
Holy Roman Empire was consolidated. On the dissolution of
the Holy Roman Empire, the German emperors, who claimed to
be the legitimate representatives of that empire, assumed it as
their device, thus blazoned :—Or, an eagle displayed sable,
having two heads, enclosed within an amulet or, beaked and
armed gules, holding in his right claw a sword and sceptre or,
and in his left, the imperial mound or ball. In like manner,
Russia, adding the eagle of Poland to her own, assumed the
double-headed eagle. It may, however, refer to the eagle of
Byzantium, as the Russian Greek Church, by virtue of having
adhered to the orthodox faith, laid claim to Constantinople. In
the year 1758, we first find the double-headed eagle introduced
into Masonry, by the body calling itself the Council of Emperors
of the East and West, then established at Paris. (See Scottish
Rite.) Two of the officers of this body are still called Secretary
and Treasurer of the Holy Empire. The jewel of the 33°, or
Sovereign Grand Inspector-General, is a doubled-headed eagle
(originally sable, but now usually argent), a crown or resting on
both heads, wings displayed, beak and claws, ov, the talons

169

EAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EAR

grasping a cherubic or wavy sword. The banner is similar
to this.

EaGue, KNiGuHT OF THE AMERICAN. (See Knight of the American
Eagle.)

EAGLE, KNIGHT OF THE Biack. (See Knight of the Black Eagle.)

EaGLe, KNIGHT OF THE BLACK AND WHITE. 1. The 6° of instruc-
tion in the Philosophical Rite. 2. Illustrious Knight Com-
mander of the B. and W.E. The 24°, seventh series, of the
collection of the Metropolitan Chapter of France.

EaGLE, KNIGHT oF THE GOLDEN. (See Knight of the Golden
Eagle.)

EAGLE, KNICHT OF THE, OR, OF ELECTED MasTErS. (See Knight of
the Eagle.)

EAGLE, KNIGHT OF THE, OR, PERFECT MASTER IN ARCHITECTURE.—
The 56°, seventh series of the collection of the Metropolitan
Chapter of France ; 37° of the Rite of Mizraim. The 60° of the
same Rite is called Grand Knight of the Eagle.

EAGLE, KNIGHT OF THE PrussIAN. (See Knight of the Prussian
Eagle.)

EAGLE, KNIGHT OF THE RED. (See Knight of the Red Eagle.)

EaGLe, KNIGHT OF THE REVERSED. (See Knight of the Reversed
Eagle.

EAGLE, pies OF THE BLack.—A degree in the Philosophical
Scottish Rite.

EaGLe, PRINCE OF THE GREAT BLACK.—A degree in Pyron’s col-
lection.

EaGLes, KNIGHT OF THE Two CROWNED. (See Knight of the Two
Crowned Eagles.)

Ear or Corn.—An emblem of plenty among the ancients, and
especially sacred to Ceres, otherwise called Demeter or Gemeter
mother earth In Hebrew, the two words signifying an ear of
corn, are derived from roots typifying abundance. Shibboleth,
nav, meaning an ear of corn and a water-flood, has its root in
shabal, to increase or to flow abundantly, and the other word
dagan, corn, is derived from dagah, to multiply. The ear of
corn is a symbol in the second degree, alluding to increase of
knowledge, and to the general fruitfulness of research. The word
Shibboleth is also used in the 14th degree of the Ancient and
Accepted Rite. (But see Shibboleth.)

Ear, THE LisTENING.—One of the three precious jewels of a Fellow
Craft Mason.

EarTHEN Pan.—Used in the early lectures of the eighteenth
century, together with chalk and charcoal, as a symbol of zeal,
the two other substances signifying freedom and fervency. In
the modern lectures, the word clay has been substituted. Pan

1790

EAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EAS

once signified hard earth, but is obsolete in that sense at the
present day.

East.—£x Oriente lux, from the East, light. Not only in allu-
sion to the rising of the sun, but in consequence of our
modern civilization being derived from the Eastern countries.
It is an important circumstance that all mysticism found
its natural birthplace in Oriental climes, and this may be
attributed not alone to the historical progress of the race from
the Hindu Koosh, but to the climate and its flora, which in primi-
tive times was favourable to the promotion and preservation
of a meditative philosophy—speculations of the most daring
mental character, as we may perceive in the Vedas, Puranas, and
Shasters, being the natural intellectual food of the primeval
founders of Oriental philosophy. 2. In a secondary sense, the
East has ever been regarded with reverence, owing to its associa-
tion with the religious mythologies of various nations, extending
to our own times. St Augustine plainly says (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte, c. 5), “The East is the most honourable part of the world,
being the region of light whence the glorious sun rises.” In like
manner, the West was the region of rest, and all early religions
founded upon Nature, placed the regions of the departed in that
quarter. Hence the S.W. of a Lodge pays the wages in the
West, while the J.W. sits in the South to allow of refreshment
at mid-day. The North was always esteemed a place of dark-
ness; and, indeed, was a waste wilderness full of wonder and
woe to the primitive nations. 3. The place of the Worshipful
Master in the Lodge, who presides there for the purpose of
instruction. Bazot (Manuel, p. 154), says—“The veneration
which Masons have for the East, confirms the theory that it is
from the East that the Masonic cult proceeded, and that this
bears a relation to the primitive religion, whose first degeneration
was sun worship.”

East AND WEST, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the East and
West.)

East, GRanND.—In America, the place where a Grand Lodge holds
its communications, and whence its edicts emanate, is often called
the Grand East. It is a term not to be confused with Grand
Orient, which has been adopted as the designation of several
grand bodies or “Lodges.

East Inpres. (See India.)

East, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the East.)

Easter,—Easter Sunday being the day of the resurrection of Christ,
is kept as a festival by Rose-Croix Masons; and, on Easter
Monday, in every third year, Councils of Kadosch in the Ancient
and Accepted Rite hold their elections.

171

EAS | ce he ae Masonic Cyclopedia. [EAV

EASTERN Srar, OnvER OF THE—Established in the United States
in 1778, but did not flourish until a comparatively recent period,
when Brother R. Morris, well known for his enthusiasm on
Masonic subjects, and his desire to make it useful as well as
ornamental, truly archeological as well as traditional, revived it
for the benefit of the wives and daughters of America, to whom,
often living in vast wildernesses, it might be vitally important.
The obligations are founded upon the honour of the female sex,
and so framed that equality and justice may be regarded as their
essence, to the extent that between Freemasons and Members of
the Eastern Star there necessarily exist mutual obligations.
Such aid as can or ought to be rendered by the Masonic body to
this adoptive rite, is bound to be returned by the members of it.
It is founded upon the Holy Writings; and five prominent
female personages, illustrating as many Masonic virtues, have
been selected, adopted, and placed under the Masonic egis.
1. Jephthah’s Daughter (daughter’s degree), illustrating respect
to the binding force of a vow. 2. Ruth (widow’s degree), devo-
tion to religious principles. 3. Esther (wife’s degree), fidelity
to kindred and friends. 4. Martha (sister’s degree), undeviating
faith in the hour of trial. 5. Zlecta, or the Benevolent (mother's
degree), patience and submission under all wrongs. It can only
be conferred on Master Masons in good standing, their wives,
widows, sisters, daughters, and mothers. Ladies under 18 years
of age cannot receive any degree ; ; and half-sisters or step-
daughters are ineligible. ° Colour, blue; symbol, the violet;
emblem, sword and veil. 2° Yellow ; ” symbol, sunflower ;
emblem, sheaf of corn. 3°. White; symbol, the white lily;
emblem, crown and sceptre. 4°. Green; symbol, the pine leaf;
emblem, the broken column. 5°. Red; symbol, the red rose;
emblem and grip, the cup and clasped hands.

East Port.—A clerical error in the Lansdowne manuscript, where
the words “the city of East Port” occur instead of “the cities of
the East.”

EAVESDROPPER.—One who, standing outside an assembly, listens
eagerly for anything that may drop from speakers within. It is
said to have been derived from the punishment inflicted upon a
detected cowan, who was to be placed under the eaves of the
house in rainy weather, till the water runs in at his shoulders
and out at his heels; and this was actually done in the ancient
Operative Lodges of Scotland, the cowan being set to work at
the door in rainy weather. It is not, however, a word peculiar to
Masons. Blackstone, in his Commentaries (iv. 13) says :-—“Eaves-
droppers, or such as listen under walls, or windows, or the eaves
of a house, to hearken after discourse, and thereupon to frame

172

EBA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EcK

slanderous and mischievous tales, are a common nuisance, and
presentable at the court leet; or are indictable at the sessions,
and punishable by fine, and finding sureties for their good
behaviour.” (See Cowan.)

EpaL.—the following was introduced into the lectures of Masonry
in the last century. Moses commanded Israel that as soon as
they had passed the Jordan, they should go to Shechem, and
divide into two bodies, each composed of six tribes: one placed
on, that is adjacent to, Mount Ebal; the other on, or adjacent to,
Mount Gerizim. The six tribes on or at Gerizim were to pro-
nounce blessings on those who should faithfully observe the law;
and the six on Mount Ebal were to pronounce curses against
those who should violate it. This Joshua executed (Deut.
xxvii, Joshua viii. 30-35). Moses enjoined them to erect an
altar of unhewn stones on Mount Ebal, and to plaster them over,
that the law might be written on the altar. Shechem is the
modern Nablous.

EseN-BoHAN (Hebrew }937}28).—Bohan signifies a thumb. The
stone of Bohan was set up as a witness-stone, and afterwards
served as a boundary mark on the frontier between Judah and
Benjamin (Joshua xv. 6; xviii. 17).

Esen-EzeEL (Hebrew DITA, stone of departure)— An old stone of
testimonial named in 1 Sam. xx. 19. A word of importance in
the Order of Ishmael.

Epen-Ezer (Hebrew 3yn7jax, stone of help)—Set up by Samuel
between Mizpeh and Shen, in testimony of the divine assistance
obtained against the Philistines (1 Sam. vii. 12).

ExsionitTes.—A sect of the second century, denying the divinity of
Christ, but honouring him as an inspired teacher. They main-
tained the universal obligation of the Mosaic law, and rejected
the writings of St Paul, together with his authority.

Esony Box.—Used as a symbol of the human heart in some of the
high degrees, and supposed to teach reserve and taciturnity. It
is metaphorically said that the ebony box contained the plans of
Solomon’s Temple, which signifies that in the human heart are
deposited the secret designs and motives of that conduct by
which the spiritual temple of our lives is erected.

ECKARTSHAUSEN. (See Magic.)

Ecker, JOHANN CARL Baron von.—Chancellor of the Order of St
Joachim; one of the founders of the Order of Initiates of Asia:
he was prosecuted by the other German Freemasons in con-
sequence.

Eckrr von ECKHOFFEN, JOHANN HEINRICH BARON.—Brother of the

173

ECL | T: he oe Masonite Cyclopedia. [xc

preceding, sana one of the founilers and superiors of the same
Order.

Eciectic Masonry.—A rite established by Baron von Knigge, at
Frankfort, in 1783, for the purposes of controlling the high
degrees and limiting their number, then greatly on the increase.
Eclectic Masonry only recognised the three symbolical degrees,
but permitted the Lodges, under its system, to select any of the
philosophical degrees in continuation, provided they in no way
interfered with the uniformity of the workings of the three first
degrees. Eclectic Masonry, however, was not successful, and is
at present almost in a dormant condition. (See Eclectic Union.)

Eciectic Union.—The great idea of a general union in all matters
religious, civil, archeological, and philosophical, has occupied
many minds; and while Germany remained unpractical, and
could not understand its greatest men, such as Lessing and
Croethe, but was content with the violence of Schiller’s Rauber,
such books as Werner could produce, and the still life of De la
Motte Fouquéd, with shadowy pictures of water nymphs, such as
Undine, no unity could be expected. It has been reserved for
our own time to see, in a remarkable way, this idea, to some extent
carried out. The German mind is peculiar, both in its demand
for facts, and the philosophical construction it places upon them.
Without Germany, despite the violent opposition constantly at
work in this country, who could perfect anything in art or beauty,
verify anything with patience, or criticise results? It is
Germany which has always put clear issues before the entire
thoughtful world, and such replies have been attained that would
amaze minds less abstracted. Germany is not a nation of
dreamers, as is supposed, but a practical race of people, carrying
their ideas of essence from the quarry, so to speak, to the study.
It is not surprising, therefore, that we find a protest against
humbug recorded by them in the Eclectic Union, a brief account
of which we shall now give. It is usually supposed that Baron
von Knigge, who distinguished himself as a poet, was the first
to bring the Eclectic Union before the Masonic world, but in fact
it was older; the Baron von Ditfurth, in 1779, first brought it
forward. He had been a strenuous member of the Rite of Strict
Observance, and noticed matters creeping in, contrary to the
principles of true Masonry. He, therefore, gave his personal
influence in the direction of a reformation ; “and Von Knigge
afterwards supplemented this by a powerful circular to the
Lodges. In 1783, the Provincial Grand Lodges of Frankfort-on-
Maine and of Wetzlar took action in the matter, and issued what
may be termed an encyclical letter, the object of which was the
restoration of pure Masonry by these means: 1 That the Lodges

174

ECO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Eco

assenting to the propositions of the letters should pledge them-
selves to uphold, in their integrity, the ancient landmarks of the
Craft, especially as regarded the three symbolical degrees. 2.
That each Lodge might, according to its own good disposition,
select such of the high degrees as it might sanction without
prejudice to others. 3. That all the Lodges of the Eclectic Union
should be sovereign within such limits. Several Lodges accepted
these propositions, and from it emerged the Hclectisches Bund, or
the Eclectic Union of Germany. The basis is in the three
degrees, the development in the selected philosophical degrees.

Ecossats.—A. French word usually translated Scottish Master, and
first introduced by the Chevalier Ramsay, whose theory was that
Freemasonry originally came from Scotland in the general form
it is now practised. The number of Ecossais degrees is very
large; and there is no rite in use without some trace of the
system. Oliver mentions eighty, Ragon eighty-three, and Baron
von Tschoudy, who rejects twenty-seven as incorrect, retains a
very large number as legitimate. The legend on which all
degrees of the Ecossais system is founded, is, that the builder of
the Temple engraved the Word on a triangle of pure metal, and
wore it secretly under his clothes from a band round the neck,
At a period of great peril to himself, and fearing it should be
discovered, he threw it into an old dry well in the south-east
corner of the Temple, where it was afterwards discovered by three
Masters, who, observing the rays of the sun at its meridian
striking some brilliant object, descended, and conveyed it to
King Solumon. A more modern form of the tradition is, that it
had been deposited in a special vault prepared for its preserva-
tion ; and the symbolism connected with the loss and recovery of
the Word is in better harmony with this view. Indeed, it would
seem very unlikely that the builder, who, conjointly with his
employers, the two kings, also possessed the Sacred Word, should
run the risk of its discovery by bearing it about his person daily,
when exposed to all the eventualities of life. According to the
Craft legend, great curiosity was entertained by the craftsmen as
to the nature of the Word, which led to sad results in the end.

Ecossais.—1. The fourth degree in Ramsay’s Rite. 2. The fifth
degree of the French Rite. 3. The fourth class of the Rite of
Mizraim contains the Ecossais degrees from the fourteenth to
the twenty-first degrees.

Ecossats ARCHITECT, PERFECT. (Zcossais Architecte Parfait.) A
degree in Pyron’s collection.

Ecossais D’ANGERS, OR EcossaiIs D’ALCIDONY.—Two degrees men-
tioned in the work entitled, “ Philosophical Considerations on
Freemasonry.”

175

ECO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Eco

Ecossals, ENGLISH, OR, OF ELDER BROTHERS. (£coss, Anglais ou de
Sréres ainés.) In the archives of the Mother Lodge of the
Philosophie Rite.

Ecossals, ENGLISH GRAND ARCHITECT, OR, GRAND PATRIARCH.—A
degree in the collection of Viany.

Ecossals, FAITHFUL. (See Viédle Bru and Menatzchim.)

Ecossals, FRENcH.—Thirty-fifth degree, fourth series, of the Metro-
politan Chapter of France.

Ecossals, GRAND.—1. Third of the high degrees of instruction in
the Philosophical Rite. 2. Sublime Master of the Luminous
Ring.

Ecossais, Granp ARcHITECT.—Forty-fifth degree of the collection
of the Metropolitan Grand Chapter of France.

Ecossais, GRAND Master.—Once the sixth degree of the capitular
system of Holland.

Ecossais, GRAND, OF ST ANDREW OF SCOTLAND.—1. One of the
degrees of Baron de Tschoudy. 2. The twenty-ninth of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite; and adopted in several other
systems.

Ecossals, GRAND, OR GRAND ELEct.—The fourteenth degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Ecossals, GRAND, OF THE CRUSADES.—In Viany’s collection.

Ecossals, GRAND, OF THE PATRIARCHS.—In Viany’s collection.

Ecossals, GRAND, OF WALLACHIA, OF COPENHAGEN, AND OF STOCK-
HOLM, OR, OF THE INTERIOR. Mentioned by Fustier.

Ecossais, GRAND MAasTER.—Sixth degree of the Chapters of
Holland before the reorganization.

Ecossais, GRAND PaTRIARCH.—In Viany’s collection.

Ecossals, GREEN—The second point of the fifth degree of the
Royal York Lodge at Berlin. It is preserved in the archives of
the Lodge of St Louis des Amis Réunis at Calais.

Ecossals, ILLUSTRIOUS ARCHITECT.—In Viany’s collection.

Ecossals, Knicut.—A synonym of the Illuminati, sixth degree.
Commonly called Nluminatus Dirigens, or Illuminated.

Ecossals, LEVITE AND Martyr.—Mentioned in the collections of
Fustier.

Ecossais, Master.—1. The first of the high degrees in the German
Chapters before the French high degrees were introduced. 2.
The fifth degree of the Rite of Zinnendorf. 3. The first point of
the fifth degree of the Clerks of the Strict Observance. 4, The
first degree of Hund’s system. 5. The fourth degree of the recti-
fied rite of the Holy City. 6. Eighteenth degree of the Rite of
Mizraim.

Ecossats, Novicr—1. A degree in Templarism. 2. The eighth
degree in Illuminism, known as Iluminatus Major.

176

ECO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ECO

Ecossals oF CLERMONT.—Thirteenth degree, fourth series, of the
Metropolitan Chapter of France, and a degree in the Chapter of
Clermont.

Ecossais oF Dunkirk.—In Fustier’s list.

Ecossais OF ELDER BROTHERS, OR, OF THE TRIPLE TRIANGLE.—
Thirty-seventh degree, fifth series, of the collection of the
Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Ecossals oF ELpEst Sons.—In Fustier’s collection.

Ecossals oF ENGLAND.—A degree in Le Rouge’s collection.

Ecossais or Forty.—In Fustier’s collection.

Ecossais or Forty —Thirty-fourth degree, fourth series, of the
collection of the Metropolitan Chapter of France. It is very
similar to the Ecossais of Montpellier and Paris.

Ecossais OF FRANVILLE.—Thirty-first degree, fourth series, of the
Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Ecossais OF HEREDOM.—Thirteenth degree of the Rite of Miz-
raim.

Ecossais oF HiraM.—In the lists of the Metropolitan Chapter of
France.

Ecossais or LILLE—In Fustier’s collection.

Ecossais or Lyons.—Degree in the archives of the Lodge of
St Louis of Amis Réunis, at Calais.

Ecossais OF MeEssinA.—In Fustier’s collection.

Ecossals oF Mitirary Lopces.—This degree is divided into three
sections, and is to be found in the lists of Pyron.

Ecossais OF Minor APARTMENTS.—In Fustier’s collection.

Ecossais OF MontTpELLIeR.—-Thirty-sixth degree, fourth series of
the Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Ecossals OF NAPLES, OR, OF SICILY.—Forty-second degree, fifth series,
of the same Chapter.

Ecossats oF Paris.—Named in the Philosophical Considerations.

Ecossais OF PERFECTION.—Thirty-ninth degree, fifth series, of the
Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Ecossals OF Prussta.—In the archives of the Mother Lodge of the
Ecossais Philosophical Rite.

Ecossais OF SAINT ANDREW.—1. Forty-seventh degree of the sixth
series of the Metropolitan Chapter of France. 2. Second degree
in the Rite of the Clerks of Strict Observance; also in other
systems. 3. Twenty-first degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

Ecossais oF Saint ANDREW OF CHARDON.—Seventy-fifth degree,
ninth series, of the Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Ecossais oF Saint ANDREW OF ScoTLAND.—1. One of Baron von
Tschoudy’s degrees. 2. The twenty-ninth degree of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite. 3. The sixty-third degree of the sixth series
of the Metropolitan Chapter of France.

M 177

ECO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Eco

Ecossals or St GEORGE—In Le Page’s collection.

Ecossals OF THE Hoty Trinity.—In Fustier’s collection.

Ecossals OF THE LopGE or Prince Epwarp (G. M.).—In the
collection of Pyron.

Ecossals OF THE RING.—In Fustier’s collection.

Ecossals OF THE SECRET Vault oF James VI.—1. Thirty-third
degree, fourth series, of the collection of the Metropolitan Chapter
of France. 2. Twentieth degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

EcossaIs OF THE THREE J.J.J. (UNKNoWN).—1l. Thirty-second
degree, fourth series, of the Metropolitan Chapter of France. 2.
Nineteenth degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

Ecossais OF TouLoUSE.—In the archives of the Scottish Philo-
sophical Rite.

Ecossals, ParIsIAN.—Seventeenth decree of the Rite of Mizraim.

Ecossais Perrect.—In Fustier’s collection.

Ecossais, Perrect ENGLISH Master.—In Pyron’s collection.

Ecossals, PHILOSOPHICAL RITE oFr.—Introduced into Paris by the
Lodye Contrat Social, in 1775.

Ecossais, Puriricator.—A degree in the collection of Heécart.

Ecossais, Rep —First point of the fifth degree of the ancient sys-
tem of the Royal York Lodge at Berlin.

Ecossais, RitE or.—This name is given to the rite practised long
ago in the Mother Lodge of St John at Kilwinning, and in
Lodges under their constitution. (See under Kilwinning.)

Ecossais (SUBLIME) OF THE GRAND LODGE oF PRINCE EpwarD.—
Tn Pyron’s collection.

Ecossais (SUBLIME), OR CELESTIAL JERUSALEM.—One of the de-
grees formed by Chastannier, according to the system of
Swedenborg.

Ecossals, SUBLIME PuRIFICATOR.—Quoted by Fustier.

Ecossais, TRINITARIAN.—Forty-third degree, fifth series, of the
Metropolitan Chapter of France ; mentioned by Fustier.

Ecossals, TRINITARIAN, OR, GLOBE OF THE GRAND Masters Con-
MANDERS OF THE TEMPLE.—A degree in the collection of Hécart.

Ecossals, TRINITARIAN, OR PUISSANT GRAND MASTER OF THE
ORDER OF THE Hoty Trinity.—1. To be found in the archives of
the Philosophical, Ancient, and Accepted Scottish Rite. 2. The
fourteenth degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

EcossaIszE, PERFECT.—Androgynous Masonry. The degree was
formed by M. de la Chaussée, in 1763.

Ecossalse (Sublime Lady—Dame Sublime).—Belonging to androgy-
nous Masonry. The Rite is to be found in Pyron’s collection.
EcossaIsES (ORDER OF LADY) OF THE Hospita oF Mont Tazor.

—A Benevolent Society instituted in Paris, in 1809.

EcossisM.—This name was given to the Ancient and Accepted Rite,

178

ECU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EDW

at an early period of its existence—hence the term Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite. (See Scottish Masonry.)

Ecuapor.—Masonry introduced into this country, in 1857, from
Peru, under the auspices of the Grand Orient of Peru. The
battle of Masonry, 2¢., Tolerance, has been great in Spanish
America, and here the priests of the Roman Catholic Church
had, and to the present time keep, the upper hand. All Latin
races are obstinately superstitious, and any attempt to convince
them that morality is superior to ceremony, has hitherto failed
to convince them of their error. Our Spanish brethren may be
regarded in the light of Masonic martyrs, for where our prin-
ciples have taken Toot, they have been adhered to with more
than Roman tenacity.

Epicr oF Cyrus.—Issued B.C. 536, permitting the Jews to return
to Jerusalem from their captivity, and rebuild the Temple. To
the Prince of Judah, Zerubbabel, he restored such vessels as
could be found as belonged to the First Temple, and the nobility
of his conduct is commemorated in the Royal Arch degree, and
that of the fifteenth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish
Rite.

Epicts,—The decisions of a Grand Master, in America, have the
force of law, and obedience to them is necessarily a duty on the
part of Masons under their jurisdiction.

EpINBURGH.—tThe capital of Scotland. According to the Official
Register of the Grand Lodge of Scotland, the Lodge of Edinburgh,
No. 1, was instituted in 1518. The minutes of St Mary’s Lodge,
now the oldest Lodge in the city, are stated in Lawrie (Hist.
Freemas., p. 102) to extend as far back as 1598, and its history
has been most ably written by Bro. D. Murray Lyon, the Scot-
tish Masonic historian.

EDINBURGH, CONGRESS OF—Convoked by William St Clair of
Rosslyn, Patron of the Masons of Scotland, in 1736, in order to
abdicate his dignity as Grand Patron, which had been patented
to the family of Rosslyn by James IT. in 14380, and afterwards to
settle Masonry upon a new basis. Thirty-two Lodges were re-
presented at this Congress, and the Grand Lodge of Scotland was
instituted with St Clair as Grand Master.

ay KILwinninc Manuscript. (See Kilwinning Manu-
script.

Epiine, Count.—Chamberlain of the King of Saxony, advanced to
the thirty-second degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite, at
Paris, at the same time as Prince Bernard of Saxe-Weimar, in
1813.

EDWARD THE CONFESSOR, KING.—Was Patron of the Masons of Eng-
land, in 1041.

179

EDW | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EGG

Epwarp I.—King of England. Protected the Art of Masonry, in
1272.

Epwarp IT.—King of England. Favoured the Masons, and many
stately edifices were erected during his reign, about 1307.

Epwarp III. Manuscript.—Quoted by Anderson in his second
edition (p. 71), and also by Preston, as an old record referring to
the glorious reign of King Edward III. It was a similar docu-
ment to that in the British Museum.

Epwarp III.—King of England. Masonry flourished under this
prince.

Epwarp IV.—King of England. Protected the Masons during his
reign.

Epwanb, PrINcE.—H.R.H. the Duke of Kent, son of King George
ITI., was initiated into Masonry in the Lodge Del Union des
Coewrs (Union of Hearts), at Geneva,in 1790. He subsequently
became Grand Master of the Ancient or Schismatical Grand
Lodge, and resigned his throne to his brother, H.R.H. the Duke
of Sussex, on the Union, in 1813.

Epwin Cuarces.—The charges said to have been given by Prince
Edwin are sometimes so called, and contained in the Antiquity
MS. (Which see.)

Epwiy, Prince.—Said to have been Grand Master of Masons in 926.
He was the son of Edward, Saxon King of England, and brother
of Athelstan, his successor, 924. Woodford, following Dr
Drake, the eminent antiquary (in “Old Charges of the British
Freemasons,” p. xiv.), thinks, however, that this is erroneous,
and that the tradition relates to Edwin, King of Northumbria,
whose residence was at Auldby, near York, in 626, and who as-
sisted in building a stone church at York—St Peter’s—after his
baptism in 627. He was slain in 633. St Peter’s Church was
destroyed in 741. The Prince Edwin, or Eadwine, Atheling of
926, was drowned in 933. (But see under York Constitutions.)

Errrontes.—A sect, about 1534 who scraped the forehead till it
bled, and poured oil on the wound as a baptismal rite.

Ecaz-Money.—Grand Master of the Portuguese Lodge in 1805.

Ecc, MunDANE.—1. In ancient times it was almost universally
believed that the world was created from the Mundane egg, origi-
nally the work of the Demiurgos, and hatched by the Spirit “of
God itself. Among the recondite mysteries of symbolical
Masonry, this Mundane Egg frequently re-appears, veiled in
other forms, such as the Vesica Piscis, the Egyptian anch or
Crux ansata, and other shapes. It is therefore worth while to
trace the symbolism of the Mundane Egg throughout history, as
we find it used by Egypt, India, Japan, “and other countries. It
seems a long distance from the land of Khemi to modern Europe

189

EGG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EGG

with its Easter eggs, but we must adventure the journey. It is
to Egypt that we must turn for the origin of every religious rite
of antiquity. At a period so remote as to appear almost fabulous,
were it not for the monuments now so faithfully translated for
us, there was a civilization on the banks of the Nile which had
attained its apogee, while other races were only in the dawn of
progress. This civilization was guided by a learned, accurate
and considerate priesthood, with well-defined rights and pre-
rogatives, and a system of symbolical teaching never since
equalled in the world’s history. It must ever remain an un-
solved problem as to whether the inhabitants of the Nile valley
were, as is held by many, indigenous to their locality, or whether
at some still more remote period they had penetrated from their
Aryan birthplace by a system of colonization. When we first
historically perceive them by the dim light of tradition and the
earliest monuments, they would seem to be a nation coming out
of the throes of settlement under the guidance of a master-spirit
—their king, MNA or Menes—about the year B.C. 5044. Like
the Babylonians we read of in Mr Smith’s translations of the
Genesis myth, they had anterior legends concerning themselves,
and like all other races of men, they were not indisposed to arro-
gate the remotest antiquity for ‘what was to them immediate and
true—especially in religious matters. They, like the Indians
and the remoter Burmese, had a chronology of a monstrous kind,
if taken au pied de la lettre. They boasted of a government in
Egypt by actual Divine intervention, and at a very early period
of their history we find them in possession of architectural secrets
and mathematical knowledge never since surpassed. We find
them constellating the Zodiac, forming several cycles of Egyptian
gods, in the numbers of eight and twelve; we find them with a
settled government when all other nations were in disorder or
decay, and the Egyptians certainly seem to be the first nation
possessing any definitive ideas on social economy. Yet even they
were puzzled by problems of operative nature, and like many mil-
lions who have succeeded them, knew not how to account for the
mystery of the egg. They were as much troubled with the pre-
existence of the egg as their so-called wiser descendants, and had
they not resorted to a species of self-delusion—yclept symbolism
—they would never have got at any solution sufficient for the
mind to grasp. The phenomenon of the secret development of
the germ within the shell—displaying an amount of latent force,
gradually working without any outward apparent aid, save that
of heat—was an enigma they could not solve. Thus, the egg,
revered by the people, was soon incorporated by the Pharaonic

pontitis into their sacred cosmogony, and it passed among the
181

EGG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EGG

less instructed into a religious emblem of the most awful sanc-
tity. It was rapidly seen, with a due sense of awe, that the
cerastus, which is oviparous in its generation, emerged from the
same form of generative life, and hence the serpent, invested with
all its mysterious horror, soon became a religious symbol, as we
find it on the Temple of Phile, and in many other sanctuaries of
Egypt. And while the egg remained a symbol of mystery, it also
became a symbol of hope and protection. It is necessary to say
here that nowhere in Egyptian lore do we find those legends of
a successive destruction and re-creation of the Kosmos we find
among the Indians and the still farther Oriental nations. There-
fore it need not surprise us, that in the progress of time the
Ureus, when associated with the egg, was again regarded with
approbation, as the custodian of the mystic generative force of
Nature. The religion of natural forces promptly developed it-
self. Special names were atiributed to every phenomenon, and
these became applied to divine beings, whose attributes were
made to harmonize with the special ideas conveyed by their rela-
tions to the Mundane Egg itself. The creative power was known
as Noum, the moist power, water being looked upon as the
cause of all things, and in this the egg floated. This Noum
afterwards concreted itself into Ammon—‘ the Divine former of
gods and men ”—and the egg was thus lost sight of. The deity
of fire, Phtha, who presided over heat and the generation of man,
on many monuments bears the mythical egg in his hands, as a
type of his general sustenance of the universe. The egg is also
seen issuing from the mouth of Kneph, and afterwards the
creative god, emerging from the egg, appears as a winged ser-
pent. The Logos here plainly meets its antecedent symbol. The
‘Word proceeding from the mouth of the Creative Power is the
processional power, indeed, if anything can be, just as in the
doctrines of Moses, issuing from his mouth, the Word of God is

declared. Diodorus Siculus says (I. 29), that Osiris was born
from an egg, hence eggs were strictly consecrated to this divinity

From the Egg of Leda, Apollo and Latona were born; and Cas-
tor and Pollux—the Gemini of the Zodiac—had a similar origin.
The egg was also symbolically attributed to Isis, and is to be
found in the hieroglyphic name of that goddess. The priests of
Eeypt strictly abstained from eating eggs, from a respect inspired
in them by the founder of their religion being thus born, and
they also feared lest they should anger the Deity by the destruc-
tion of the germs of a being thus destined to live. Still more
curious is the symbol of the egg in Egypt, when we consider that
the sacred anch or crux ansata was in Coptic called by the name
of “ Supine: of Life,” or Mic, mici, being an egg standing sup-

182

EGG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | EGG

ported by the Sacred Tau mentioned in Job xxxi. 35,—Job
using the sacred Tau in a manner woefully misinterpreted in
our English version, which should read: “ Who will listen unto
me (2.¢.,as a judge)? Behold, here is my Tau [or absolution,
holding it up Masonically] ; the Omnipotent will answer for me ;”
in Psalms Ixxviii. 41, the Jews did not turn back and tempt
God, but “they became converted, and implored Tau, or absolu-
tion, from the Holy One of Israel;” and in 1 Sam. xxi. 10-15,
King David made Tav at the court of Achish, King of Gath.
On Egyptian mummy cases we frequently find the egg in con-
junction with the hawk, as symbols relatively of mortal and
immortal life, and in one papyrus preserved in Kircher (Edzpus
Lgyptiacus, vol. iii, p. 124), above the mummy the egg is float-
ing as a symbol of the new life attending the Osirified person
(the deceased), the purified soul, after his sojourn in the place of
expiation—whence the Roman Catholics have derived their
notion of Purgatory. In India, as in Egypt, the myth of the
Cosmical Egg was taught, but on the banks of the Ganges its
symbolism already became tinged with the elevated notions of
the philosophy which affirmed the doctrine of metempsychosis,
and preached pantheism. There is little doubt that the Brah-
manical beliefs were mere echoes of the doctrines of the Egyptian
faith—India having, perhaps, borrowed its myths and its icono-
graphy from the land of Khemi, or from earlier common sources.
Under the name of Brahmanda—by which it was deified—the egg
continued to be the emblem of the creation. Noum was adored
by the Egyptians as the father-mother of the world, in accordance
with the principle afterwards enunciated that Jove is a virgin and
bissexual; and the Institutes of Manu especially declare that
water is the cause of all things, as Thales of Miletus taught, who
was himself an initiate into the mysteries of Memphis. Manu
says (Jnst. I, 8, 13) that “the Eternal, desiring to create beings,
by an act of thought (the Logos) produced the moist principle,
and deposited in it the generative principle. This primitive germ
floated on the waters, and soon after the unformed matter con-
densed itself into’an egg, brilliant as gold, and full of light. In
this mysterious covering, Brahma, the father of all living beings,
was born——-an emanation of the first cause, the un-named God—
He who is. Brahma lived within the egg, and the power thus
confined within its prison remained inactive for a long period—
a year of the Creator—at the end of which period the egg burst
of itself. The upper half formed heaven, and the lower half,
earth. The airis in the midst, with the light regions and the
waters above the earth. When Brahma had thus finished the
work of the creation, he was reabsorbed into the oe of
103

EGG | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [EGG

God-——thus passing from a time of activity to a time of rest.’
Perhaps we may thus account for labour and refreshment. The
six sects into which the Hindu religion is divided uniformly
repeat the same myth. In one of the Purdnds we find it
stated that the goddess-creatrix Ixoretta was herself the uni-
versal germ. Being first a drop of dew, next a pearl, at last
she transformed herself into an egg; this egg contained five
elements, and was covered by seven coverings, similar to the
skins of the onion. At once God and the world, the egg burst
into two unequal parts. From the shell, fire and air escaped
forming the superior region and heaven, and the yolk and white
formed the earth and water. The seven coverings became the
seven heavens, and the seven worlds of Brahmanical cosmogony.
According to other versions of the legend, the mysterious egg
contained Vishnu, who brought the lotus; and again it was
asserted that Brahma, by means of his breath, emitted a little egg
which fermented, grew, and formed the world. This reproduces
the Egyptian legend before mentioned. The egg plays its part
in other legends. On his seventh avatar, Vishnu, who had be-
come Juggernaut, had by Bex a son born from an egg, in the
sacred island of Ceylon. Diti, wife of Koshiapa, gave birth to
two eggs—one of which became Annura, or the wind guiding
the chariot of the sun, and after five hundred years, the second
egg gave birth to Garuda, the eagle, who vanquished the serpents,
and was taken up by Vishnu to heaven in the form of an cagle
with a human head. In the ancient beliefs of-the Aryan races,
the bull was the emblem of cosmical force, which caused the
world to emerge from chaos. Matter had assumed the spherical
form of the ege—and by a violent blow of his horns, the bull,
Abudad, broke the shell, and released all forms of matter. In
Zend, bull is expressed by Gaus, or Gaos—in Sanskrit, Go means
bull or earth ; among the Persians it was Gosh, and was analogous
to the Apis of the Egyptians. The modern Persians, at a period
of the year very close to our modern Easter, distribute gilt eggs
in great numbers to their friends. According to the Chinese,
Puontzu, their Adam, was born from an egg, which had pre-
existed from all eternity, and the Coreans have a similar tradi-
tion. Ina Japanese temple at Miaco, on a large square altar,
there stands a bull in massive gold on a piece of rock; the
animal is adorned with a rich collar of gold, and is butting an
egg floating in water, in a cavity of the rock, with his horns.
There is a Japanese interpretation of this statue, analogous to
the legend cited above. We find similar myths among the
Greeks, Phcenicians, and Gauls ; and the egg of the Druids—
the i ae was a terror to the whole of Rome. In Central
184

EGL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EGY

America, the serpent’s ege is equally an object of religious
reverence, and is associated by the natives with the destinies of
their race. It is impossible to afford space to the numerous
symbolisms of the egg—even at the present day, the ovoid form
may be seen on funeral monuments and other buildings—the
lustral egg, wov ex xadeports (Lucian, Dial. I. 1), constantly re-
appearing. This was a favourite ornament among the operative
Masons of the middle ages, and was known as the ovolo. 2, The
Mundane Egg is a symbol in the Royal Oriental Order of Apex
and the Sat B’hai.

Ecuinton Manuscript.—This is an old record attributed to the
year 1599, and was discovered many years since in the charter
chest at Eglinton Castle. It is written in the Scottish dialect,
bearing the date “xxvii December 1599.” In it the Lodge of
Edinburgh is termed “the first and principal Lodge,” while Kil-
winning is called “the heid and secund Lodge of Scotland, in all
tyme cuming.” It has been published in full by Brother W. J.
Hughan, in his “ Unpublished Records of the Craft.”

Ecyptian Masonry.—l. We have now to return to Alexander,
Count Cagliostro, as promised under the article concerning him.
Having acquired certain knowledge, according to his own state-
ment, from the various occult students he met with in the East, he
resolved to communicate the results to persons properly fitted to
receiveit. Barruel (Hist. Jac. vol. iu., p. 8) says, that this Egyptian
Masonry was introduced into Europe by a Jutland merchant,
about 1771, who had been in Egypt—his name was said to be
Ananiah. He remained some time in Malta, where Cagliostro
may have seen him. His doctrines were those of Manes. Other
statements aver that he bought certain manuscripts from one
George Cofton in London, leading up to the idea. However
acquired, upon this basis—like many others—he resolved to
build. To himself he assigned the post of Grand Kophta, a
title borrowed from that of the high priests of Egypt, and he
would also seem to have been the initiator of his disciples. He
proposed to conduct them to perfection by moral and physical
regeneration. He taught that the philosopher’s stone was no
fable, and in that belief many before and since his time have
shared; and he also promised to his followers to endow them
with the pentagon, which restores man to a state of primitive
innocence, forfeited by Adam at the Fall. Egyptian Masonry
he asserted to have been instituted by Enoch and Elijah, who
taught its divine mysteries, and he reintroduced adoptive or
androgynous Masonry. The Grand Kophta possessed the power
of commanding the angels; and, in all cases, he was supposed

to accomplish by the miraculous power with which he had been
185

EGY | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EGY

endowed by Divine power. All religions were tolerated under
this system: a belief in God was the sole qualification, with the
additional necessity of having been regularly initiated into the
three degrees. Three additional degrees were added, and the
initiates, if men, assumed the names of the ancient prophets,
while the women took the names of the ancient Sybils. The
following obligetion was taken by the men :—“I promise, I
engage, and I swear, never to reveal the secrets which shall
be imparted to me in this temple, and blindly to obey my
superiors.” The female oath was as follows :—“I swear before
the eternal God of the Grand Mistress, and of all who hear me,
never to write, or cause to be written, anything that shall pass
under my eyes, condemning myself, in the event of imprudence,
to be punished according to the laws of the grand founders,
and of all my superiors. I likewise promise the exact observ-
ance of the other six commandments imposed on me; that is to
say, love of God, respect for my sovereign, veneration for religion
and the laws, love of my fellow-creatures, an attachment without
bounds to our Order, and the blindest submission to the rules
and code of our ritual, such as they may be communicated to me
by the Grand Mistress.” When a woman was admitted to the
degree of apprentice, the Grand Mistress breathed upon her face
from the forehead to the chin, saying :—“I thus breathe upon
you to cause the truths possessed by us to germinate and pene-
trate within your heart; I breathe upon you to fortify your
spiritual part; I breathe upon you to confirm you in the faith
of your brothers and sisters, according to the engagements that
you have contracted. We create you a legitimate daughter of
the true Egyptian adoption, and of the Lodge N , we will that
you be recognized as such by all the brothers and sisters of the
Egyptian ritual, and that you enjoy the same prerogatives with
them. Lastly, we impart to you the supreme pleasure of being
henceforth, and for ever, a Freemason.” The address to a brother
on his admission to the degree of Companion, or Fellow Craft,
ran thus :—“ By the power that I hold from the Grand Kophta,
the founder of our Order, and by the grace of God, I confer upon
you the degree of Companion, and constitute you a guardian of the
new science, in which we are preparing to make you a participator,
by the sacred names of Helios, Mene, Tetragrammaton.” In the
admission to the Master’s degree, great pomp and ceremony was
used, and although it is undoubted that this Egyptian system of
Masonry was spurious, we nowhere find the charges of blas-
phemy brought against it by the Roman Catholics justified. In
this degree, a young girl (or sometimes a boy), in a state of
innocence, and called a pupil or dove (colombe) was introduced.
186

EGY | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EGY

The Master of the Lodge then, with great ceremony, imparted
to this child the power he possessed of communicating with pure
spirits. These spirits were seven in number, governing the
seven planets, and surrounding the throne of the Eternal, their
names being, Asael, Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, Uriel Zobiachel,
and Anachiel, The dove was then placed before the Master,
and the members offered up a prayer to heaven, in order that the
power granted to the Grand Kophta might be exercised, in which
prayer the dove joined. Being clothed in a long white robe,
adorned with blue ribbons and a red scarf, she was enclosed in
the tabernacle, which was hung with white. In the door of the
tabernacle was a window, through which she gave her responses ;
and within the tabernacle was a seat with a small table, on which
three tapers were burning. The Master then repeated the for-
mule by which the presence of the seven angels was invoked,
and when they presented themselves to the eyes of the seer or
dove, certain questions as to the fitness of the candidate were
answered, and responses given, after which other ceremonies
completed the advancement of the individual. The ceremony
of admitting women to the degree of Mistress, was somewhat
similar. The Lodges of Egyptian Masonry were dedicated to St
John the Evangelist, on account of the great affinity existing
between the Apocalypse and the ceremonies of the ritual. The
emblems used in the Rite were the septangle, the triangle, the
trowel, the compass, the square, the gavel, the death’s head, the
cubical stone, the rude ashlar, the triangular stone, the wooden
bridge, Jacob’s ladder, the phcenix, the globe, Time, and others.
It seems somewhat uncertain at what time Cagliostro perfected
his system. In November, 1786, he appeared in London, and
tried to unite the Swedenborgians and the members of the Rite
of Zinnendorf, and issued the following advertisement, which
appeared in the Morning Herald :—“To alltrue Masons. In the
name of JEHOVAH. The time is at length arrived for the con-
struction of the New Temple of Jerusalem. The advertiser
invites all true Masons to meet him on the 3d inst., at nine
o’clock, at Reilly’s Tavern, Great Queen Street, to form a'plan
for levelling the footstone of the true and only Temple in the
visible world.” Cagliostro introduced himself on this occasion
as a Polish nobleman, under the name of Count Sutkowski, and
asserted that he hailed from a Swedenborgian secret society at
Avignon, which had been formed in Courland, in 1779. He
visited the Swedenborgians at their rooms in the Middle Temple,
where they met as a Theosophical Society, and he displayed a
minute knowledge of the doctrines of Swedenborg. He specially
entreated the members to have the communion delivered ae each
107

EGY | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | EGY

meeting. He claimed to be in possession of a Grand Secret, of
which he spoke in a mysterious manner. His charming conver-
sation and engaging conduct rendered him a general tavourite
among those who met him. At the end of 1786, he returned to
France, and soon afterwards addressed a letter to his former
friends, in which he thanked them for the attentions they had
shown him, and informed them that his name was not Sutkowski
as they had thought, but that he was the Count Grabianca. In
1779, Cagliostro had been in Courland, whence he was obliged
to fly, and in the letter just mentioned, dated 12th February,
1789, he says, that he and his companions had been in enforced
obscurity and silence for eight years, which would bring us back
to the former date. For the rest of the life of Alexander Connt
Cagliostro, see the article Cagliostro, anté. 2. The Rite of Miz-
raim is sometimes called EgyptianMasonry. (See under dMizraim,
Rite of.)

Ecyptian Montus.—The Egyptian year consisted of twelve months
of thirty days each, and five supplementary days—called epago-
menoi—respectively dedicated to Hesiri (Osiris), Hor (Horus),
Set (Typhon), His (Isis), and Nebti (Nephthys). The Sacred
year began on the 20th July, while the Alexandrian year, adop-
ted in the reign of Augustus (B.C. 25), began on 29th August.
The months were named Thoth, Paophi, Athyr, Choiak, Tybi,
Mechir, Phamenoth, Pharmuthi, Pashons, Payni, Epiphi, and
Mesore. (See Anno Egyptiaco.)

Ecyptian Mystertes—Although we have meagre statements in
several classical authors respecting the Mysteries of Egypt, there
is little of which any use can be made. Herodotus, Plato,
Pythagoras, and Plutarch were initiated into these mysteries,
but they are all very guarded in their statements concerning
them. The descriptions, therefore, published from time to time,
cannot be regarded with satisfaction. It is only certain that
these mysteries were very secret, very severe in their trials, and
connected with the esoteric worship of the deities of Egypt.
The principal seat of the mysteries was at Memphis, the ancient
capital of Lower Egypt. They were of two kinds—the greater
and theless. The former were devoted to Osiris and Serapis,
the latter to Isis. The mysteries of Osiris or Hesiri were cele-
brated at the autumnal equinox, those of Serapis at the summer
solstice, and those of Isis at the vernal equinox. The character
of the candidate was rigidly inquired into, and if report was un-
favourable, exclusion was certain. He was prepared for initia-
tion by a period of fasting, and by particular ceremonies, calcu-
lated to inspire him with a sense of religious awe. Apuleius
(Met., Book xi.), who had been initiated into all the mysteries,

183

EGY | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EGY

speaks of those of Isis in the following way :—“The priest—all
the profane being removed to a distance—taking hold of me by
the hand, brought me into the inner recesses of the sanctuary
itself, clothed in a new linen garment. Perhaps, curious reader,
you may be eager to know what was then said anddone. I
would tell you were it lawful for me to tell you; you should
know it if it were lawful for you to hear. But both the ears
that heard those things, and the tongue that told them, would
reap the evil results of their rashness. Still, however kept in
suspense, as you probably are with religious longing, I will not
torment you with long-protracted anxiety. Hear, therefore, but
believe what is the truth. JI approached the confines of death,
and having trod on the threshold of Proserpine, I returned there-
from, being borne through all the elements. At midnight I saw
the sun shining with its brilliant light; and I approached the
presence of the gods beneath and the gods above, and stood near
and worshipped them. Behold, I have related to you things
of which, though heard by you, you must necessarily remain ig-
norant.” It is most probable that the mysteries of Isis alluded
to her personification of Nature. In addressing Apuleius she
says :—“ I am Nature—the parent of all things, the sovereign of
the elements, the primary progeny of time;’ and Plutarch in-
forms us that on the front of the Temple of Isis was placed this
legend :—* I, Isis, am all that has been, that is, or shall be, and
no mortal hath ever unveiled me.” The Isiac Mysteries would
seem to be the first degree among the Egyptians. The second
degree consisted of the Mysteries of Serapis. Of their nature
we know scarcely anything. In the Mysteries of Osiris, which
completed the series of Egyptian esoteric teaching, the lesson of
death and resurrection were symbolically conveyed; the legend
of the murder and restoration of Osiris was displayed to the
affiliate in a scenic manner. The legend itself was that Osiris, a
wise king of Egypt, left the care of the kingdom to Queen Isis,
and set forth to communicate the secrets of civilization to other
nations. Isis here represents Egypt, and Osiris, the sun. During
his absence, his brother Typhon conspired against his throne;
and on the return of Osiris, Typhon, in the month of November,
invited him to a banquet, where he produced a chest (ark, pas-
tos, or coffin) inlaid with gold, promising to give it to any person
then present whose body it would fit Osiris laid himself down
in the chest, when the lid was immediately closed and he was
cast into the Nile. The body of Osiris was tossed about by the
waves, and finally cast on shore at Byblos, in Pheenicia, at the
foot of a tamarisk tree. Isis, in lamentation, traversed the whole
world in search of the body, which had been mutilated, Pus Te-
189

EHE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ELE

covered it at last and brought it in triumph to Egypt, where it
was committed to the tomb. She is variously represented as
the mother, wife, and sister of Osiris, the judge and father of the
world of spirits.

EHEYEH ASHER EHEYEH (Hebrew 778 We TAN, [am that I am).
—The name by which the Eternal announced, or, rather, defined,
Himself to Moses at the Burning Bush (Exod iii. 14).

E1gut.—The first cube of the Pythagoreans, formed by the con-
tinued multiplication of 2 x 2 x 2, signifying friendship, prudence,
counsel, aud justice. The most recent, and perhaps most com-
plete essay on the number eight, is to be found in the recently-
published posthumous work of Bro. Dr George Oliver on “The
Pythagorean Triangle. London, 1875.”

EIGHTY-ONE.—The square of nine. A sacred number in the high
degrees.

EICKING, BARON von.—Knight of the Order of Stanislaus at Warsaw
—present at the Convention of Paris in 1785.

Ex (Hebrew >). —One of the names of God, signifying Mighty
One ; and, as entering into the composition of many other words,
peculiarly important.

ELAi BENI AL'MANAH (Hebrew m3bx ya ‘x, Huc venite fildi viduer).
—Third degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

ELAI BENI EMETH (Hebrew nox a ‘bx, Huc venite filié veritatis).
—Twenty-sixth degree of the French Ancient and Accepted Rite.

ELcHaNnan (Hebrew, “nabs, God has graciously given).—1. A pass-
word in the French fourteenth degree of the Ancient and Accepted
Rite. 2. A password in the fifth degree of the Modern French
Rite. There has been much dispute about this word, but this is
admitted to be the correct form.

ELpErs.— Used in some of the old Constitutions to designate those
Masons, who, from their rank and age, were deputed to obligate
apprentices when admitted into the Craft. It occurs in the
Constitutions of Masonrie, in the archives of the Lodge at York,
dated 1704, first published by Bro. W. J. Hughan (Hist. Freem.
in York, p. 97) thus:—Tune, unus ex Senioribus teneat librum,
&c., translated in another manuscript, dated 1663 (also first
published by Bro. Hughan) :—“ Then one of the elders takeing the
Booke, and that hee or shee that is to be made Mason shall lay
their hands thereon, and the charge shall be given.”

EuecT. (See Zlw.)

Evect BrorHer.—Seventh degree of the Zinnendorf Rite, and of
the National Grand Lodge of Berlin.

ELEcT CoMMANDER (Evu Commandeur)—In Fustier’s collection.
190

ELE | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [ELE

Exect, Deposirary.—In Pyron’s collection.

Exect, GRanp.—Eighth degree of the Chapter of Holland before the
introduction of the French Rite.

ELect, GRAND.—1. Fourteenth degree of the fourth class of the
Chapter of Emperors of the East and West. 2. Fourteenth degree
of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

E1ect, GRAND PRINCE OF THE THREE.—In the cojlection of Pyron.

Erect, [risH.—First of the high degrees in the Chapter of that
designation.

Exect, Litrte ENGLISH (Petit Llu anglais)—_A degree, now extinct,
of the Ancient Chapter of Clermont.

Exect Master (Mattre élw).—1. Thirteenth degree of the second
series of the collection of the Metropolitan Chapter of France.
2. The fifth degree of the Zinnendorf Rite.

ELEcT OF FIFTEEN, Knicut (Elu des quinze, Chevalier).—1. Tenth
degree, third class, of the Chapter of the Emperors of the East
and West. 2. Tenth degree in the Ancient and Accepted Rite.
3. Eleventh degree of the Rite of Mizraim. 4. (Without the
Knight) eleventh degree, seeond series, Metropolitan Chapter of
France. (See also lect of Perignan.) 5. E. of F. Master.
Tenth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite. 6. E. of F.
Sublime in the collection of Pyron.

Evect or Lonpon (Eu de Londres).—Seventeenth degree, eighth
series, Metropolitan Chapter of France.

ELecT oF NINE (Elw des Neuf).—1. Ninth degree of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite. 2. Tenth degree, second series, Metropolitan
Chapter of France. 3. Ninth degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

ELect oF NINE AND FIFTEEN (Anserwdhlte der Neun and der
Fiinfzehn)—First and Second points of the fourth degree of the
old system of the Royal York Lodge at Berlin.

Evect oF Perianan.—l. A degree in the French rite corresponding
with the degrees of Elected Knights of Nine, and Illustrious
Elected of Fifteen in the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.
2. Sixth degree of the Adonhiramite Rite. 3. In Pyron’s col-
lection. (See Perignan.)

ELECT OF THE NEW JERUSALEM.—Eighth and last degree of the
Grand Chapter of Berlin.

ELEcT OF THE TWELVE TRIBES.—Seventeenth degree, second series,
Metropolitan Chapter of France.

ELECT OF THE UNKNOWN (Elu de U'inconnu).—Tenth degree of the
Rite of Mizraim.

Exect oF TRUTH, OR LODGE OF PERFECT Union.—A Rite adopted in
the Lodge Perfect Union, about 1776, at Rennes, in France.
Everything allusive to the Templar system was excluded as well
as all things connected with magic alchymy, or the Kabbalah.

191

ELE | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [ELE

It consists of fourteen degrees, divided into three classes :—L., 1.
EAP. 2. FC. 3. MM. 4. Perfect Master. II. Elect of
Truth. 5, Elect of Nine. 6. Elect of Fifteen. 7. Master
Elect. 8. Minor Architect. 9. Second Architect. 10. Grand
Architect. 11. Knight of the East. 12. Rose-Croix. III, 13.
Knight Adept. 14. Elect of Truth. This rite has ceased to
exist.

ELecT oF TWELVE. (See Knight Elect of Twelve.)

ELEcT, PerFEcT. (Parfait élu)—1. Twelfth degree, second series,
Metropolitan Chapter of France. 2. Twelfth degree of the Rite
of Mizraim.

ELEcT, PERFECT AND SUBLIME Mason.—The fourteenth degree of
the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. (See Perfection.)

ELEcT PHILOSOPHER Knicut.—1. Second degree in the Philosophic
Scottish Rite. 2. E.P. Sublime Master. A degree in the collec-
tion of Viany.

Exect, Scorrisi (Zlu Ecossais).—Seventeenth degree, second series,
Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Exect, SEcRET.—First order of the Chapter of the French Rite.

Eect, SecreT, SEVERE InsPpEcToR.— Fourteenth degree, second
series, Metropolitan Chapter of France.

EuecT, SOVEREIGN.—Fifty-ninth degree of the Rite of Mizraim ;
mentioned also by Pyron and Fustier.

ELEcT, SUBLIME.—1. Fifteenth degree, second series, Metropolitan
Chapter of France. 2. E.S. Knight. Eleventh degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Erect, Supuime Lapy.—An androgynous degree in Pyron’s
collection.

Exect, SUPREME.—1. Seventy-fourth degree, ninth series, Metropo-
litan Chapter of France. 2. Also as Adjutant of the Tabernacle
of Perfect Elect. In Pyron’s collection, and in the archives
ot the Mother Lodge of the Philosophical Rite.

ELEct, SYMBOLICAL.—Fifth degree of the Reformed Rite of Baron
von Tschoudy.

Execta.—the fifth degree in the Order of the Eastern Star. The
personage whose name it preserves was a lady of high repute in
Judea, and the decree is intended to illustrate benevolence and
hospitality. (See Lastern Star.)

ELECTED COHENS OR PRIEsTS.— A rite founded by Martinez
Paschalis, between 1754 and 1760, and by him introduced into
the Lodges of Bordeaux, Marseilles, and Toulouse. It was
divided into two classes—the fall of man from a state of virtue
and happiness was represented in the first, and his final restora-
tion in the second. There were nine degrees. 1. E.A.P. 2.
F.C. 3. M.M. 4. Grand Elect. 5. Apprentice Cohen. 6.

192

ELE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ELE

Fellow Craft Cohen. 7. Master Cohen. 8. Grand Architect.
9. Knight Commander. This rite was very popular among the
literary class in Paris; if not entirely extinct, it is now at any
rate in abeyance. (See Paschalis.)

ELecTeD KNIGHTS OF NINE (Mattres dlu des neufs.)—The ninth
degree in the Ancient Scottish Rite. There are only two
ofticers—the Most Powerful or Thrice Illustrious representing
Solomon, and one Warden in the West representing Stolkin.
The meetings are called Chapters. The legend of the degree is
occupied with the punishment of certain persons well known in
Masonic history. The Lodge represents the audience chamber of
K. §., and is lighted by nine yellow wax candles. Apron: white
lamb’s skin, spotted with red, lined and bordered with black;
on the flap is an arm holding a dagger, and in the middle of the
apron an arm holding a bloody head by the hair. Sash: A
broad, black, watered ribbon, worn from the right shoulder, at its
lower end are nine red rosettes, four on each side, and one below
in the centre. The jewel, a dagger, is dependent from the sash,
the hilt is of gold, and the blade of silver. It is the fourth
degree Hlu of the French rite, and in the Ancient and Accepted
Rite it resembles the eleventh degree, being preparatory to the
degree of Sublime Knight Elect.

ELECTION oF OrFIcERS.—This usually takes place in England about
the beginning of the autumn or winter session of the Lodges—
as near to St John the Evangelist’s Day as possible. The Mas-
ter, Treasurer, and Tyler are the only elected officers in England,
but in America the majority of the officers are elected by the
members. In the event of the decease of the W. M. the S. W.
takes his place until the next day of election, as far as summon-
ing the Lodge is concerned, while the immediate P. M. acts as
W.M. (But see Vacancy.)

Evewam. (See Elchanan.)

ELEPHANTA.—This temple cave, situated in the island of Gharipour,
in the Gulf of Bombay, is one of the most ancient religious struc-
tures in the world, and in it the mysteries of India were celebra-
ted. It is 135 feet square, 18 feet high, supported by four
massive pillars, its walls being covered with sculptures and
decorations, The adytum at the western end, sacred to Phallic
worship, was accessible only to the initiated. Chambers and cells
for various purposes led out of the temple.

ELEUSINIAN MysTERIES.—The most famous of all the mysteries of
the ancient world, celebrated at the hamlet of Eleusis, near
Athens. According to St Epiphanius, they were also the most
ancient, as he traced them to the time of Inachus (B.C. 1800).
They were held in honour of Pemcien, the Hellenic Ceres, who

193

ELE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ELE

was honoured by the Greeks as the symbol of the prolific earth.
Plutarch (De Js. e¢ Os.) says that the wanderings of Demeter in
search of Persephone were similar to those of Isis in search of
Osiris—the symbolical doctrine intended to be conveyed being
the same in both cases. Virgil, in the sixth book of the Mneid,
is generally admitted to have intended to give a description of
these mysteries, when he causes Aineas to descend into the in-
fernal regions, There were two classes of these mysteries—the
greater and the less. The latter were celebrated on the banks of
the Ilyssus, in the waters of which stream the aspirants purified
themselves, while the greater mysteries were held in the temple
of Eleusis itself. The former were held in March, the latter in
September ; and a year at least was the time set for the aspirant
to pass from the lesser to the greater mysteries. The officers
were four in number :—1. The Hierophant, explainer of sacred
things; 2. The Dadouchos, or torch-bearer; 3. The Hierocéryx,
or sacred herald ; and 4, the Epibomos, or altar server, who con-
ducted the sacrifices. The “ceremonies of the lesser mysteries
were merely purificatory and preparatory to the greater. The
candidate was lustrated in the temple, and his feet—or, as
Hesychius says, his left foot—placed on the skins of the victims
sacrificed to Zeus: In this position he was interrogated and
passed through several ceremonies, after which he took an oath
of secrecy, and received the title of Mystos, to signify that he was
yet blind to the greater light. One cannot help remarking an
analogy between this ceremony and that of closing and opening
the mouth of a new-made cardinal in the Roman Catholic
Church. The greater mysteries lasted nine days, and were partly
conducted on the Thriasian plain, surrounding the temple, and
partly in the temple of Eleusis itself. The site of Eleusis is
now occupied by the village of Lepsina. The temple was de-
stroyed first by Xerxes, but immediately rebuilt, and finally
ruined utterly by Attila—* the scourge of God.” Public pro-
cessions by day occupied the first five days of the mysteries, in
honour of Demeter, Persephone, and the infant Iacchus ; but on
the sixth and seventh nights the initiations began by the herald,
who proclaimed aloud, “"Exas, éxas, tort BeBnror!” “ Retire, O ye
profane!” On this the initiate was clothed in a calf’s skin, and
a, second obligation was required from him. He was then asked:
—*Have you eaten bread?” To which he replied :—“TI have
fasted; I have drunk the sacred mixture; I have taken it out of
the chest ; I have spun; I have placed it in the basket, and from
the basket laid it in the chest.” These expressions referred to what
he had witnessed in the lesser mysteries. After a number of cere-
monies, the initiate was at last admitted to the greater degree of
194

ELE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ELI

Epopt. The latter part of the ceremony resembled, on a magnifi-
cent scale, the rites of the Master Mason’s degree. There was a
catastrophe and a resurrection. These mysteries were protected
by the State, and the Council of Five Hundred especially watched
over the purity of the ordinances regulating them. Bya law of
Solon these magistrates met every year at the close of the festivals
to try, and punish, those who might have transgressed the rules.
The penalty was death. Plutarch tells us, in his “ Life of Alci-
biades,” that the latter was indicted for sacrilege, for having
shown himself in public in the sacred costume of the Hiero-
phant; and Livy (xxxi. 14) mentions the case of two Acar-
nanian youths who were punished with death for their temerity
in endeavouring to pass themselves off as initiates. At first none
but natives of Greece were eligible for initiation, but in process
of time—even so long ago as the time of Herodotus—this rule
was relaxed, and citizens of all countries were alike admitted.
In the days of the Roman empire these mysteries became highly
popular throughout the then known world. It is impossible to
avoid the conclusion that the Eleusinian mysteries exercised a
powerful influence in perpetuating a desire for mysterious unions,
and hence modern Freemasonry must he considered indebted to
them for the maintenance of the leading idea of a secret bond of
union between men of pure lives and conduct.

ELEUTHERIA.—A festival, celebrated at Plateea, in honour of Zeus
Eleutherius, or the asserter of liberty, by delegates from almost
every city of Hellas or Greece. He was the Saviour, or Soter, of
Greece, by the dethronement of his father Chronos. A similar
festival was held by the Samians in honour of the god of love,
and when slaves were manumitted they kept a holiday which
they called Eleutherion.

ELeveN.—A mystical number in Preston’s lectures, but subse-
quently omitted. In the Knights Templar system, the number
eleven is still significant. In the Hermetic system, eleven is
impar, and follows the perfect number ten. It has a magical
meaning.

ELIGIBILITY FOR INITIATION. (See Qualifications of Candidates.)

Evinu (Hebrew rire, God Jehovah ; Sept. ’Edso¥s).—One of the
friends of Job, the example of patience under adversity. Accord-
ing to the Chaldees, Elihu was a relative of Abraham, and the
traditions of the Order of Ishmael confirm this idea. Eliphaz
(Edy, God the Puissant), a grandson of Esau and Adah, was
another friend; Zophar (75i¥, by Kitto interpreted sparrow, but
really light moving power or laughter), said to be ason of Abraham
by Keturah; and Bildad (aa, The lord of the basket—the

195

ELT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ELO

sacred basket of the Magi) was the third. In the Order of Ish-
mael the book of Job takes a most important place.

ELaH (Hebrew mx, God-Jehovah; Sept. ’H2v0d)—This famous
prophet is introduced to our notice in the same way that Melchi-
zedek (The Just King) is spoken of, no parentage being assigned.
The patriarch-king appears to disappear after the meeting
with Abraham (Gen. xiv. 18; Heb. vii. 3). Elijah’s general
conduct and ultimate reward resembles that of Enoch (see Enoch),
and his reputation as a prophet survived until the time of Jesus,
The only idea that can be formed respecting him is from his cog-
nomen—the Tishbite—derived from the Hebrew radical syy%,
signifying a converter or reformer. Like the later John the Bap-
tist, he was a wilderness-dweller, and was fed by D’s1y (orebim),
Arabs, or ravens, by the side of a rushing stream, that of Kerith,
which refers to the second degree of Masonry, and also to the
mystic raven of the Norse mythology. He abode by the torrent
of Kerith in solitude, water and the inspiration of the Holy Spirit
(lustration and contemplation) being the means by which he at-
tained the power of prophecy. Levi Ben Gershon says that a
direct inspiration from God prompted this retirement. Together
with Enoch and Melchizedek he forms a triad with the natural
supplement, Elisha, as human successor.

ELISHA (vex, God the Deliverer).—The merciful successor of
Elijah, who succeeded to his mantle—the mystic veil of the
prophets—on his ascension into heaven. It would require an
essay of itself to tell the whole symbolism of this wonderful
legend. He is, however, analagous to the Soter.

ELISHOREPH.—One of Solomon’s secretaries. (See Ahiah.)

ELIZABETH OF ENGLAND. — Preston (lilustrations of Masonry,
B. iv. § 4), says that Queen Elizabeth, in 1561, determined to
suppress Masonry, and sent an armed force to York to put down
the Lodge; but Sir Thomas Sackville initiated some of the chief
officers of this force, and they reported so favourably of the insti-
tution that she never afterwards disturbed the Craft.

ELIZABETH OF PoRTUGAL.—This queen, in 1792, having conceived a
suspicion of the Madeira Lodges, ordered the arrest of all Free-
masons in the island, that they might be handed over to the
Inquisition.

ELIZABETHS.—A_ society for commemorating the anniversary of
Queen Elizabeth, who met at the sign of her head at Hicks’s
Hall, in the room said to be that in which she received her
juvenile education.

E1oumm (Hebrew o'7>x).—A name applied to any deity; when

196

EL| The Royal Masontc Cyclopedia. [EMA

the > is doubled, it signifies lords or princes, According to
Lanci, it means the most beneficent. It is little used in Masonry.

Eu Suappal (Hebrew vte-5x).—This word is usually translated
as Almighty, but it signifies rather the Pucssant or the Conqueror.
It is rendered ©zé¢ in the Septuagint version, but not uniformly.
Maimonides says :-—The God sufficient for Himself, > sorinn.
Onkelos explains it thus: 1p n>», Apply thyself to adore Me.
It was by this name that the patriarchs knew the Eternal, and
from Him in a particular manner it would seem that their wives,
sterile before, became fruitful. It is upon this very slight and
superstitious text of Scripture that the Roman Catholics have
built up their doctrine of Immaculate Conception. The word
El Shaddai has another meaning, which must not be named here.

Exv. (See Llus, Elected.)

Exvut (>x).—The sixth month of the ecclesiastical and the
twelfth of the civil year of the Hebrew calendar. It is,
therefore, the twelfth month used in the Ancient and Accepted
Rite. It began on the 2d August, 1875, and falls on the 21st
August in 1876.

Exus, ELecrep.—All the degrees bearing this designation allude to
the same historical circumstance, but the way in which it is
named differs in the various rites. The York or English Craft
system alludes to the matter, but does not confer any special
distinction in connection with it. In the French rite, as we have
seen, it is made into a special degree, and in the Ancient Scottish
Rite three degrees are occupied with the subject. The arrange-
ment suggested by Ragon, and known to the possessors of the
degrees, is not satisfactory. In the Ancient and Accepted Scot-
tish Rite the designation elu is replaced by the more fitting word
Kadosch, which article should be read in connection with the
subject. The Antient and Primitive Rite has repudiated all
the Elus except the Templar Kadosch.

EmANATION.—A flowing forth. A theory adopted in most oriental
religions, especially in Brahmanism and Parseeism. It was
adopted by the Gnostics and Kabbalists, and taught by Plato,
Philo, Proclus, and others. It assumed the derivation of all
things by a series of flowings forth, or emanations from the Deity,
and resembling in this the doctrine of evolution now discussed in
the scientific world. In the ancient religion of India, the soul of
the world was identical with Brahma, and by his son Daksha all
things were caused to receive form. In like manner, the Gnostics
taught that all things emanated from the Deity ; that there was
a progressive degeneration of these beings from the highest to the
lowest form, at which point the scale turned, and a process of

197

EMA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EME

redemption and purification set in, culminating, in the Indian
religions, in absorption into divinity or nirwdna. Philo Judeus
taught the identity of the Supreme Being with the Primitive
Light or its Archetype; and St John (i. 4) points to the same
belief. It was, however, distinct from physical light; a distinct
creation of God, as we find in Genesis, and this primeval light
was not the light of the sun, moon, or stars. We have, in the
Christian system, three distinct kinds of light: the light of God
or Wisdom, a light only faintly visible to the human mind, but
manifested through the Logos or Word; the primordial light
created by God, which may be a kind of fiery, latent, and un-
ponderable zthereal light; and the physical light exhibited by
the sun and its derivative, fire. Light is peculiarly interesting to
the Mason; and in the higher degrees many references are made
to light, in connection with the doctrines of Philo, the Gnostics
and the Kabbalists.

EMANUEL (Hebrew dynxey, God with us).—1. Used in the eighteenth
and nineteenth degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

-Empassy.—The embassy of Zerubbabel and his companions to the
Court of Darius (Josephus, Antig. xi. 3; Ezra iv. 23; Haggai
i, 1-14; ii. 1), on the occasion of the Samaritans hindering the
work of the reconstruction of the Second Temple, is the subject
of the sixteenth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite, and
also appears in Red Cross degree, American Rite (1 Esdras. vi.
8-21), and in the degree of Knight of Jerusalem; the 9° of the
Antient and Primitive Rite.

EmsiemM.—A concrete visible picture or sign representing principles,
or a, series of principles recognisable by those who have received
certain instructions. An emblem veiy often comprises a larger
series of thoughts than a symbol, which may be said rather to
illustrate some single, special idea. All esoteric societies have
made use of emblems and symbols, such as the Pythagorean
Society, the Eleusinia, the Hermetic Brethren of Egypt, the
Rosicrucians and the Freemasons. Many of these emblems it is
not proper to divulge to the general eye, and a very minute
difference may make the emblem or symbol differ widely in its
meaning. The magical sigilla, being founded on certain principles
of numbers, partake of this character, and although monstrous or
ridiculous in the eyes of the uninstructed, convey a whole body
of doctrine to those who have been trained to recognize them.
(See Symbol.)

EMERALD (Hebrew 753, Nophech).—The third stone in the second
row of the High Priest’s breast-plate, assigned to Judah.

EMERGENCY.—Among the prerogatives of the principal officer of a

198

EME | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EMP

lodge, chapter, conclave, commandery, convocation, tent, or other
assembly, is the undoubted right of assembling his associates for
the despatch of business. Should the Master of a Lodge be
absent or incapacitated, this right devolves upon his immediate
representative, the Senior Warden. The special reason of such
Lodge or Assembly of Emergency must, however, be recited on
the summons, and no other business than that stated on the
summons can be entertained on the occasion. The minutes of a
Lodge or Assembly of Emergency are not binding as a matter of
record, until they have béen submitted at the next regular
meeting.

EmERGENCY, LoDGE or.—A Lodge called for a special purpose, as
described in the previous article.

EmERITUS.—Latin ; plural, emeritz. From the verb emerere, to be
greatly deserving. Applied to any one who is made a member
of any Rite, honoris causd. He has the privilege of proposing
measures, and being heard in debate; but unless he is also a
subscribing member he cannot vote.

EmetH, properly Emeneth (Hebrew ni2x, Zruth)—I can find no
warranty for this word, as asserted by Mackey, in the high
degrees, but it appears in the French Rite of Adoption in the
fourth degree, in the following series :—first, Emeneth, as given
above ; next, wn (Hur), Liberty; third, 822 (Cana), Zeal, Emula-
tion; and Eubulus, Greek Ei@ovdes, prudence, or good counsel,
forming together the motto Truth, Liberty, Zeal, and Prudence.
In the Scottish Rite, the Sublime Knights Elect of Twelve, of
the eleventh degree, are styled Princes Emeth, signifying men of
exalted character, devoted to truth.

Emperor or LEBANON.—A degree in the collection of Le Rouge,
composed in the Mauritius, in 1778, bythe Count de Beurnonville,
French National Grand Master of the Lodges of India.

EMPERORS OF THE EAST AND WEST.—This degree was established in
1758 at Paris by a Council. The members called themselves
“Sovereign Prince Masons. Substitutes General of the Royal
Art, Grand Superintendents and Officers of the Grand and
Sovereign Lodge of St John of Jerusalem.” The ritual contained
twenty-five degrees, the first nineteen being identical with the
corresponding degrees in the Scottish Rite. The 20th was Grand
Patriarch Noachite; 21, Key of Masonry ; 22, Prince of Lebanon ;
23, Knight of the Sun; 24, Kadosch; 25, Prince of the Royal
Secret. The Grand Lodge of the Three Globes at Berlin
accepted the system in the same year, and Frederick II. (the
Great) is said to have merged this rite in the Ancient and
Accepted Rite, with the addition of eight degrees, making

199

EMI | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ENO

the whole thirty-three, the supposed number of years during
which Christ’s life lasted—or, as some rites say, ripe manhood.
As in all other matters, there is considerable doubt to be thrown
upon this assumption. It is known that Frederick nobly and
cordially supported the peaceful aims of Masonry, but it 1s not
known how far-he himself proceeded; it seems historical that he
was a Past Master, at any rate, and a Patron; but, as in the
case of other very distinguished men, it does not argue deep
Masonic knowledge; and, after his earlier Masonic years, his per-
sonal co-operation is very doubtful. (See Frederick IT.)

EmInENT.—The President of a Commandery, Priory, or Preceptory
of Knights Templar is thus called, and in a Grand Priory or
Commandery all the officers are thus designated. The Grand
Commander, Prior, or Preceptor is termed “Right Eminent,”
and the Grand Master “ Most Eminent.” It signifies “exalted,
or standing above,” and hence is a title of cardinals in the Roman
Catholic Church.

Emunan (Hebrew nox, Faith, firmness, truth)—Used in the
ladder of the thirtieth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite,
and the sixteenth degree of the Antient and Primitive Rite.

ENCAMPMENT. (See Priory.)

ENCYCLICAL.— A circular letter sent to many persons. It is very
uncommon to find an encyclical letter sent out from any Grand
Lodge, but it has been done. In 1848, the Grand Lodge of
South Carolina issued “an encyclical letter of advice, of admoni-
tion, and of direction,” to the Lodges under its own jurisdiction.
A similar document was issued, in 1865, by the Grand Master
of Iowa. Perhaps it is hardly fair to deprive the Roman Catholic
hierarchy of one of its favourite terms.

EncieT.—A corruption of Euclid, found in the British Museum
and Golden Square MSS. of the old Constitutions, occurring in
the following passage :—“ Wherefore y® forsayde maister Englet
ordegnet thei were passing of conying schold be passing hon-
oured” (line 674-7). I agree with Mackey in considering that
the copyist made a blunder, and mistook an old English w for
an 7, and that the original was Euglet, a nearer approach to
Euclid.

EncraveE—In French Lodges, the word buriner is used, instead of
écrire, to write. Thus, engraved tablets signify written records.
ENLIGHTENED.—A word equivalent to the Latin dluminatus, some-
times applied to a Freemason. Some old Latin diplomas begin,

“ Omnibus illuminatis,” 7.¢., to all the enlightened.

Enocu.—Those who adhere to the theory of the extreme antiquity
of Masonry, hold that he was one of the founders of the Order;
another class who regarded the subject in 2 more modified light,

200

ENO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ENO

look upon the legend connecting him with occult matters, as
having been esoterically adopted as the type of a particular
phase of thought. He is described in Genesis as being the
seventh patriarch, the son of Jared, and the great grandfather of
Noah ; according to Usher’s chronology, adopted in the autho-
rized version of the Scriptures, he was born A.M. 622, and such
was his virtue, that, according to the Holy Scriptures, he was
bodily taken up into heaven, without undergoing the ordinary
fate of mortals. It is somewhat singular that this legend should
have been repeated in a later time, and applied to Elijah (see
Elijah). The mode of translation does not appear to have been
the same. We have now to look into the name. In Hebrew it is
Khanoch or Enoch (q3n, lit. the initiator and instructor). He
walked with God, accompanied the visible symbol of God, and
after 365 years, God took him. The conclusion at which we are
justified in ariving is, that the year is Enoch, its days 365, and,
its astronomical meaning being left out of the question for a
time, it had a mystical meaning, for Enoch is by some identified
with Hermes, the Hellenic Mercury, and the Egyptian Thoth.
To him were attributed certain learned books; by him also the
brazen and stone pillars connected with the learning of the
ancient world were erected; and by the Arabs—the conservators
of all traditional lore—he was in their emphatic manner termed

Edris (2 yi), or the Learned. (See the Koran, Surdi, xix.)

But the whole doctrine respecting Enoch is involved in mystery.
It was an euthanasia, similar to that of Romulus, having no
basis save in fable, except in so far as the language of
mythology is intelligible to its students. It may be as
well to add to this article a few words about the Abyssinian
Book of Enoch. This book was known to exist from very
ancient times, and is continually alluded to by the fathers of the
Church. Bruce brought home three copies from Abyssinia ;
one, since translated by Archbishop Laurence, was deposited at
Oxford, another was given to the National Library at Paris, and
the third was among other documents connected with the Canon.
There are strong similarities between this book, the Apoca-
lypse, and the Prophetical Books of the Old Testament. The
Masonic tradition about Enoch is as follows :—During the
degeneracy of manners before the Deluge, Enoch feared that the
real secrets would be lost—to prevent which he concealed the
Grand Secret, engraven on a white oriental porphyry stone, in
the bowels of the earth. I leave those who are acquainted with
occult symbolism to enjoy the unravelment of this legend. Bar-

Hebreeus says, that Enoch was the inventor of books and writ-
201

ENO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ENV

ings; that he taught men the art of building, which cannot be
true, if we believe the legend of Cain; that he first constellated
the statry heavens, and reduced to rule the progress of the
planets; he was also said to be the founder of a worship of God,
by abstinence, prayer, alms, votive offerings, and he likewise
instituted that very unpopular institution, tithes—from which
our modern taxes are derived. It is said that Enoch delivered
up the Grand Master’s office to Lamech, Enoch may be identi-
fied with the Hea-bani of the Babylonian deluge-tablets, who
was an astrologer at the court of Isdubar, and raised to heaven,
. a command of the god Hea, ruler of the spirits of the
ead.

Enocu, BroTuer (Frere Enoch).—A certain brother, in 1773, in the
Jesuit interest, published two books under the titles—1. “Le
Vrai Frang-Magon,” (278 pp.), and “ Lettres Maconniques.” They
were hardly worthy of notice.

Evocu, Rite or.—Attempted to be established by the preceding
at Liége, in 1773. It had four degrees—1. Manouvre, Appren-
tice (friendship and benevolence). 2. Owvrier, Fellow Craft
(fidelity to the Sovereign). 3. Mattre, Master (submission to
the Supreme Being) ; and, 4. Architecte, or Architect (perfection)
It was pretended that Louis le Debonnaire, in 814, was the
first Grand Master.

En Sopu (510"]'8).—The Divine Word or Supreme Creator is thus
called in the Kabbalah, also with the prefix 11% Awr, Light—
the Primeval Light.

ENTERED.—A candidate who has been accepted by ballot and
initiated, is said to be entered, because his name appears at the
bottora of the roll-call. This roll-call is not used now.

ENTERED APPRENTICE. (See Apprentice.)

EntTIcK, JoHN, Rev.—Born 1713, died 1773. He revised the third
(1756) and fourth (1767) editions of Anderson's “ Constitutions,”
and published some general works.

ENTOMBMENT.—A ceremony in the Degree of Perfect Master of the
Scottish Rite.

ENTRANCE, Points oF. (See Points of Entrance.)

ENTRANCE, SHOCK or. (See Shock of Entrance.)

Envy.— None shall discover envy at the prosperity of a brother,”
say the Ancient Charges, “nor supplant him, nor put him out of
his work, if he be capable to finish the same, for no man can
finish another’s work so much to the Lord’s profit, unless he be
thoroughly acquainted with the designs and draughts of him
that began it.” This short sentence contains a better commen-
tary upon the doctrine of non-interference with a man’s laudable
designs than anything more pretentiously urged.

202

EON | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | EPH

Eons.—In Gnosticism, divine spirits, occupying an intermediate
position between the Supreme Being and the Jewish Jahve or
Jehovah. They were only abstractions, such as Wisdom, Faith,
Prudence, &c. ; and the term was derived from the Greek dsr,
an age, in reference to their long duration. Valentinius admitted
of the existence of thirty eons, but Basilides considered there
were three hundred and sixty-five.

Eons, Rite or—Mentioned by Thory and Ragon, and said to have
been a very beautiful rite, practised in Asia, and founded on
Zoroastrianism.

Eostrz.—Worshipped by the Anglo-Saxons in the month of April,
then called Hostre-monath. Hence the name of Easter has been
given to the paschal festival, as it usually occurs in the month
of April.

Epuop.—A sleeveless garment divided below the armpits into two
divisions, back and front, reaching to the thigh. It was richly
ornamented and set with jewels, and was worn by the priesthood
only. The costume afterwards used by heralds and ambassa-
dors was of a similar kind, and in like manner protected the
wearer by its sacred character. King David, when bringing the
Ark of the Covenant to Jerusalem, is described as being “ girt
with a linen ephod.” He was, for the time being, thus clad in a
sacerdotal garment; this bringing home of the national palla-
dium being an important religious ceremony. The ephod worn
by the High Priest was of a most costly description ; and the
three royal colours, blue, purple, and crimson, were used in its
adornment.

EPuHRAIMITES.—The children of Ephraim, inhabiting the middle of
Judea, between the Mediterranean and the Jordan. They were
a “clamorous and turbulent people,” as they are termed in the
Fellow Craft Degree. The circumstances which caused them to
be mentioned in Masonry are these. The Ammonites, the de-
scendants of the younger son of Lot, inhabited a territory east
of the Jordan, and they declared war upon the Israelites, on the
pretext that they had been deprived of certain lands rightfully
their own. Jephtha, general of the Israelites, defeated the Am-
monites with great slaughter, but without calling in the aid of
the Ephraimites, who, incensed at the slight, declared war upon
Jephtha and his followers of Gilead, when the latter vanquished
them. The land of Gilead was on the west side of Jordan, and
the Ephraimites, being in full flight, had to recross that river.
Jephtha, aware of this, placed forces at the various fords, and
detected friend from foe by a special defect in their pronuncia-
tion, they not being able to pronounce the w, or sh ; hence they

would pronounce the word Shibboleth, Sibboleth. This became
203

EPI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EQu

a password ; and those who could not pronounce it were slain as
enemies to the Israelites.

EPIsTILIUM.—The Greek name for the architrave of a building.

EPitITHIDES.—The crown or upper mouldings of an entablature.

Epocu. (See Calendar, Masonic.)

Eport.—1. An initiate into the Greater Mysteries of Hellas. It
distinguished the possessor from the class of mystes, who had
only been admitted to the lesser degree. ‘Eméarrng signifies a
witness, looker on, overseer, or guardian. 2. The Illuminati
designated certain members of the order by this name as being
more fully instructed in the mysteries of the society, and espe-
cially in its objects. It formed the 6th degree of the Illuminati
system.

Equa.ity.—In ancient times equality was symbolized by a female
figure holding in one hand a pair of scales in equipoise, and in
the other a nest of swallows. Modern times have substituted
the level, it being the symbol of perfect equality.

EQuerry.—An officer having the charge of horses. It is met with
in some of the high degrees.

Eques.—A knight or member of the Equestrian Order. In the
Strict Observance Rite of Baron von Hund, established 11754, in
Germany, it was the sixth degree. On being invested with the
honour of knighthood, they received a name peculiar to the
order, an escutcheon, and a special device; such as eques @ ser-
pente—knight of the serpent; eques ab agquild—knight of the
eagle.

Eques ProFessus, Professed Knight—1. Eighth and last degree of
the African Architects. 2. A degree added by Baron von Hund
to the Rite of Strict Observance.

EQUILATERAL TRIANGLE.—The following explanation is given in an
-old code of lectures. An equilateral triangle is perfect friendship.
The base of a triangle signifies duty, the perpendicular signifies
sincerity of performance, the hypothenuse the advantage arising
from the performance. If the duty of sincerity flow equally,
the advantage will flow equally, and produce not a rectangle but
an equilateral triangle. The equilateral triangle enters into
many masonic and occult combinations ; and, from the time of
Pythagoras onward, has received high honour in all esoteric
matters. (But see Triangle.)

Equity.—tThe balance in equipoise is an ancient emblem of equity.
In the Ancient and Accepted Rite the 31st degree is especially
associated with equity, and also in the 16th degree of Princes of
Jerusalem. It appertains also to the Grand Defender, thirty-first
degree of the Antient and Primitive Rite.

Equivocation.—The obligations of Masonry are required to be

204

ERA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ESO

taken without evasion, equivocation, or mental reservation of
any kind; and properly so, because the covenant or contract is
in the nature of a promise made to the Fraternity the obligatee
is about to enter. vasion is eluding or avoiding the terms of
the promise; eguivocation is assigning different meanings to the
words of the O. B.; and mental reservation consists of a secret
contract to misconstrue the letter of the O. B., so as to defeat its
spirit. It is well known that the casuists of the Jesuit schools
lay down a very different doctrine.

Eranot—Friendly societies amongst the Greeks, for purposes of
succour in necessity. They were associative, and supported by
voluntary contributions; if any one was reduced to misfor-
tune by accident, he applied to the Eranos of his society, and a
certain amount of relief was granted him by way of loan, to be
returned in more prosperous times.

EREL (Hebrew DN IN). —Used in the twenty-ninth degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite. The corrupt complements are :—
Adorel, angel of fire; Casmaran, angel of air; Talliud, angel of
water; Furlac, angel of earth. For the three last substitute the
following equivalents, which are correct:—Hhassan (Hebrew
jon, Hassan), air; Taljahhad (Hebrew sin~dp, Teljahad), angel
of water ; Phorlach (Hebrew AND, Porlach), angel of earth.

Ertca.—A sacred plant among the Egyptians—the tamarisk tree.
The Temple of Phil, where the remains of Osiris were supposed
to have been interred, was overshadowed by groves of the
tamarisk.

ERNEST AND FALK.—“ Ernst und Falk, Gespriche fiir Freimaurer”
—“ Conversations for Freemasons.” A remarkable work by Bro.
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, translated by me, first, in part in the
London Freemason’s Quarterly, 1854, and afterwards republished
and completed in the London Freemason for 1872. Findel’s
opinion is, that this work, unfortunately only a fragment, is one
of the best treatises ever written on Freemasonry.

Erwin Von Stemnsacu.—Born in the middle of the thirteenth
century at Steinbach, near Buhl; architect of Cologne cathedral,
the towers of which he commenced in 1275; he died in 1318.
He was the head of the German guild of Steinmetzen, or Stone
Masons.

Esau. (See Ishmael, Order of.)

EsoTeric Masonry.—There can be little doubt that in the days of
Elias Ashmole and his immediate successors, many doctrines were
taught in the Lodges which now have disappeared. Certain it
is there must have been some reason for the extensive destruc-

tion of manuscripts at the close of the seventeenth and the begin-
205

ESP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | Ess
ning of the eighteenth centuries. At the present day there are
many secrets not usually given, and indeed the condition of
Masonic education, except among a certain class, is very low.
There are many good Masons well acquainted with the ritual,
and even the lectures, but they fail from want of taste and op-
portunity to grasp the subtler philosophy of Freemasonry. That
this class may be roused from apathy is the earnest wish of the
author of this book.

EspErRaAncr Loces.—Lodges of Hope; under the name of Knights
and Ladies of Hope, an Order was instituted early in the last
century in France, with Lodges bearing their adopted symbolic
names, The introduction of York Masonry into France soon led
to Lodges of both sexes, and thus originated Adoptive Masonry.

Esquire—aA. grade or rank in the degree of Knights Templar, ac-
cording to the Ancient Scottish Rite. (See Knights Templar.)

Essenes (Greek ’Econvo/)—Among the mysterious fraternities of the
ancient world we find the brotherhood of the Essenes. Apart
from the peculiar tenets of this body, we find many analogies
between it and the modern Freemasons. They possessed cere-
monials of initiation, solemn obligations, and inculeated a parti-
cular rule of life. Indeed, the authorship of the New Testament
has been attributed to this Fraternity by a learned and interesting
writer—General Hitchcock—in his work entitled “Christ, the
Spirit.” It is not the office of the writer to enquire into this
point, but certainly the Essenes, if not absolutely Christians,
taught doctrines so closely resembling those of Christianity as to
be entitled to rank as a Christian body. The Essenes were sworn
to hold their doctrine a secret, to communicate it to no one out-
side of their community, and like their analogues, the Hermetic
Brethren of Egypt, they were not to write of it except in allegory
and symbolism. Eusebius, as late as the fourth century, insisted
upon the identity of the Essenes with the early, Christians, and
Philo would seem to have held a similar opinion. But it is more
probable that the sect of the Essenes assurned the name of Chris-
tians at Antioch (Acts xi. 26). The worship of Christ was not
universal at this early date, by which I mear that Christolatry
had not been introduced ; but the worship of Chréstos—the Good
Principle—had preceded it by many centuries, and even survived
the general adoption of Christianity, as shown on monuments
still in existence. Thus we find (Lepsius, Kénigsbuch, 6. 11. tal. 7.
dyn. 5, h.p.) the word Nofre, or Chréstos, “Good,” in the usual
distinctive name of Osiris—viz., Onnofre—the Goodness of God
made manifest; again, we have an inscription which is pre-
Christian on an epitaphial tablet (Spon. Mise. Brud. Ant. x.
XVili. 2), Yaxsvbe Aaproaswy Anuwoors Hpws Xpyore Xasps, and De Rossi

206

ESS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ess

(Roma Sotteranea, tom. i. tav. xxi.) gives us another example
from the catacombs—“ Aelia Chreste in Pace.” The deri-
vation of the name Essenes is very uncertain. Philo (Quod
omnis probus liber, § 12) deduces it from dos, holy; others
have thought it arose from NDN, to heal, as the Essene frater-
nity also treated diseases medically. They were ascetic in
their lives, and admission to their ranks was only vouch-
safed after a strict novitiate of two degrees, extending over three
years. The first degree lasted twelve months, and on entering
the fraternity the candidate resigned all his property for the
common benefit of the Brotherhood. He then received a spade,
an apron, anda white robe. The first was intended for the pur-
pose of burying the natural products of the body ; the apron and
robe were worn at the ceremonies and as a symbol of purity.
During this period the candidate was still regarded as in only a
probation state, and was not allowed to be present at the daily
meals of the fraternity, which were taken in common by the
members. At the end of the probationary year the novice was
advanced to the second degree, that of approacher, and remained
in it for two years. He then joined in the lustrations, but not
in the other privileges. This second stage being happily passed
through, he was at length admitted an associate, and was entitled
to all the rights of the Brotherhood. There was a still further
degree—that of disciple or companion. He then took a solemn
oath to love God, to be just to all men, to practise charity, main-
tain truth, and to conceal all the mysteries of the Essenes. They
eschewed marriage, not so much from any absolute disapproval
of married life as from a peculiar delicacy ; wealth they held in
little esteem, and such necessaries as they required were en-
joyed in common. Although they appear to have had colleges
of their own near the Dead Sea, they mingled with the general
population, acting as physicians and spiritual advisers. On their
travels they bore nothing with them except weapons of defence,
and in every place were entertained by members of their own
body without payment. Their daily life was as follows :—They
rose before dawn, and first put up prayers for preservation and
enlightenment during the day, and then proceeded, under the
guidance of curators or foremen, each one to labour in the artin
which he was skilled until eleven of the day. At that hour,
being clothed in white veils, they bathed in cold water, and then
repaired to the refectory, where the simplest fare was placed be-
forethem. After a prayer being offered up, they proceeded to their
repast, which being ended, another prayer succeeded by way of
thanksgiving, and they returned to their pursuits—reassembling
in like manner in the evening. In the dispensation of their
207

EST | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EUR

charities they were forbidden to extend aid to their own kindred
unless in cases where the overseer’s sanction was obtained. This
obviated nepotism. Next to God, Moses was held in the deepest
veneration. To blaspheme the name of Moses was a capital
offence, and their observance of the Sabbath was especially strict.
They did not offer oblatious in the Temple of Jerusalem, although
they sometimes sent presents to the Temple. Slavery was un-
known and absolute equality was enforced, and the will of the
majority was law. (See also Therapeute.)

EsTHER.—The second degree of the American Eastern Star Order.
It is called the wife’s degree, comprehending the history of Queen
Esther. This queen was called Hadassah, NDI, myrtle (Esther
ii. 7). Myrtle was an attribute of Venus, and in the second Tar-
gum it is said that “she was called Esther, from the name of the
star Venus, which in Greek is derjp. In Persian, Satérah is star
or happiness, and thus by an easy transition we arrive at the
Syrian goddess of love, Ashtéreth—Esther being the Syro-
Arabian modification.

ETERNAL Lire.—Taught in the Master’s degree and in the fraterni-
ties and mysteries of all nations, both in the Old World and
America. Its symbol was the Crux Ansata.

ETERNITY.—Symbolized by a serpent in the form of a circle with
its tail in its mouth; and the simple circle is an emblem of like
meaning. This symbol is to be found on the present centenary
jewel authorized by the Grand Lodge of England.

Eruics oF FREEMASONRY.—These are founded on the principle of
the universal Fatherhood of God and brotherhood of man, and
hence conflict with no other system of ethics.

Eruiorr1a.—Erroneously referred to the lecture of the MM. degree
in the American Rite.

Evciip.—The famous mathematician. He has been constantly as-
sociated with Freemasonry, but it does not seem with much
truth. Still, he is mentioned in most of the old MS. charges.
His forty-seventh problem is of importance as an adopted dis-
tinction.

Evumo.rus.—King, or Chief, of Eleusis (B.C. 1374), and founder of
the Mysteries. His descendants hereditarily, for 1200 years, pre-
sided as Hierophants.

Eunucu.—From the physical and moral deterioration observed in
persons who have been emasculated, they have been excluded
from participation in Masonry; although it is only right to add
that this law does not apply to England.

Evupurates.—One of the largest rivers in Asia. Referred to in de-
grees of Knights of the East.

Bc (Greek cipeoss, discovery).—The discovery of the body was

20.

EUR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Evo

an important feature in ancient rites, and is perpetuated in the
third degree of Masonry.

Evrope—The west end of the Lodge in the French Rite of
Adoption.

Eutycuians.—aA sect of the fifth century following Eutychius, who
maintained that the soul of Christ was in union with the divinity
before incarnation, and hence that there was no distinction be-
tween his divine and human natures,

Eva.—The word of acclamation in the French Rite of Adoption.

EVANGELIST, Knicut. (See Knight Evangelist.)

Evantes.—Priests of Dionysos, who used the exclamation ohe evan
in their ceremonies.

Evates.—A degree in the Druidical system, the lowest being
Bards, the next Evates, and the highest Druids,

EVEILLKs, SECTE DES.—Sect of the Enlightened. A body of initiates,
being a branch of the Institution of Weishaupt. It existed in
Italy.

livenceres OrDER o¥r.—Established by Fessler at Breslau, about
1789. His intention was to effect similar results to those effec-
ted in Freemasonry. The society was dissolved in 1795, having
proved a, failure.

Evora, BroTHers or.—During the siege of Lisbon, against the
Moors in 1147, Don Ferdinand de Monteyro and the troops under
his command displayed such extraordinary courage, as to induce
King Alfonso I. of Portugal to institute the Order of the New
Militia, otherwise known as the Brothers of Evora. Of this
order Don Ferdinand was appointed Grand Master. The knights
observed the rules of Saint Benedict, taking vows of chastity and
obedience, and especially to maintain the Catholic faith and de-
fend the country against the Moors. As they possessed no place
as the seat of the Order, they continued to be known by their
original title, until they conquered Evora in 1166, when the king
granted them the palace, and by an edict changed their name.
It was afterwards determined to build a fortress in the country of
Santara, as a stronghold against the Moors, and the king thought
proper to exchange this with the Knights of Evora. On the
Grand Master, with a deputation of Knights, going to view the
new lands, he beheld (according to Rodrigo Mendez da Silva) two
eagles perched upon an oak tree, which was considered an aus-
picious omen, and thereupon they gave the name of Avis to that
district. They built an important fortress there, in 1184, and
thenceforward took the style of the Knights of the Order of Avis.
The uniform of the Order is black, over which is worn a short
white mantle, on the left side of which is a green cross bordered
or. The cross is in the form of four fleurs-de-lis joined at the base.

re) 209

EXA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EXE

Jewel, a white enamelled cross or, of similar shape, pendant from
a broad, rich, green, watered ribbon. During the fusion of
Portugal with Spain, the Order was incorporated with that of
Calatrava; but, on the restoration of the autonomy of Portugal
in the seventeenth century, it again became a distinct and inde-
pendent Order, under the Grand Mastership of the sovereign.
At first the knights possessed the power of electing their Grand
Master in General Chapter, and twenty Grand Masters were thus
elected; but the Pope having interposed his authority, six prin-
ces of the blood were successively denominated to fill this dig-
nity. In 1521, however, John III. of Portugal annexed the
Grand Mastership to the Crown.

EXALTED.—The ceremony of reception into the companionship of
the Holy Royal Arch is thus termed.

ExcatcgaTion. (See Discalceation.)

EXCELLENT.—The title of a Grand Captain of the Host and Grand
Principal Sojourner of a Grand Chapter, and of the principals of
an ordinary Royal Arch Chapter.

EXcELLENT Masons.—Dr Oliver speaks of a special class of nine
Lodges of Excellent Masons (Hist. Landmarks, i. 420), and Dr
Dassigny also seems to allude to them. The “ Ancients” had a
certain number of these to manage the Royal Arch. We are
aware that our excellent brother Oliver laboured hard through-
out his long life to identify Masonry with Christianity, and
although he displayed great enthusiasm and vast erudition, every
thinking Mason must perceive in what a hopeless task he had
engaged. Of course, Masonry contains nothing contrary to
Christianity, as the Romish authorities so continually assert.

EXCELLENT Master.—A degree in Cryptic Masonry, which, with
Super-Excellent Master, is given after the Mark and before
the Royal Arch. It is, however, little worked in Ireland. It
is not peculiar to that country ; is a pre-requisite for the Royal
Arch in Scotland, the United States, and elsewhere, but not in
England.

EXCELLENT, (1) Mosr; (2) Ricut; (3) Super; (4) Very. (See
under the articles reversed.)

Exciusion.— While expulsion is the prerogative of Grand Lodge,
exclusion may be exercised by private Lodges, after due notice, to
the offending member, of the nature of the charge against him,
and of the time appointed for its consideration. It is, however,
necessary to inform the Grand Secretary of the circumstances.
Exclusion deprives a brother of visiting rights, and otherwise
disqualifies him. (See Expulsion.)

Executive Powsrs. (See Grand Lodge.)

EXEGETICAL AND PAILANTHROPICAL SociETy.—Founded at Stock-

210

EXO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [EXT

holm in 1787. It affected Swedenborgian and magnetism, and
had a few Lodges elsewhere, especially at Strasburg. It is now
extinct.

Exoreric Masonry. (See Esoteric Masonry.)

Expert.—In the French Lodges there are officers named first and
second Experts, who assist in the initiation of candidates.
Senior and Junior Experts are officers in a Lodge of Perfection
in the Ancient and Accepted Rite, as practised in France.

Expert, Perrect.— Conferred in three degrees; in Fustier’s
collection.

Expert, SUBLIME ENGLISH. In Fustier’s collection.

EXPULSION—The severest penalty with which a brother can be
visited, involving, as it does, virtual Masonic death or extinction.
It disqualifies the culprit from every Masonic Rite, and only
continues binding upon him with reference to his duties and
obligations, which having been voluntarily contracted, remain
ineffaceable. He can ask no aid from his brethren, nor require
from them the performance of any duty; he cannot visit any
Lodge, nor can he unite in any public or private ceremony. Any
brother aware of his expulsion would be acting criminally to con-
fer with him on any Masonic subject. This penalty can only be
imposed by the Grand Lodge, and even then the Grand Lodge
has a right to reverse its judgment and restore the expelled
Mason, on due submission and investigation. In England the
Grand Lodge alone is invested with this supreme power :—“ The
SubordinateLodge may suspend and report the same to the Grand
Lodge. If the offence and evidence be sufficient, expulsion is de-
creed.” See on the subject the 16th regulation of United Grand
Lodge. Even a Prov. G. M. has only authority to report (Prov. G.
M. Regulation 4th); but in the case of a District G.M. on a colonial
or foreign station, a power of expulsion is conferred. (Distr.
Grand Lodge, Reg. Ist.) A Mason guilty of unmasonic conduct,
it is said, can be tried by any Lodge within whose jurisdiction he
is resident, but this is uncertain. Immorality or criminality are
Masonic crimes of the chief class. If a Mason be expelled from
Blue Masonry, all his rights suffer, for as every member of a high
degree is necessarily a Blue or Craft Mason, he is incapacitated
to sit and vote, or take any other part with his brethren ; whether
it is operative downwards is a question open ta discussion, but it
is quite evident that such circumstances would practically act
as a bar to a Mason’s free communication with brethren of a degree
lower than that from which he may have been expelled.

EXTENDED Wincs.—A term in the tenth degree of the American
Rite or Royal Master.

EXTENT OF THE LODGE. (See Form of the Lodge.)
2u1

EXT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FAL

Exterior.—The first degree of the Oriental Rite, according to
Fustier.

EXTERNAL QUALIFICATIONS.—These are based upon moral and
religious worth, the frame of body, and intellectual constitution of
the mind.

Extinct Lopcr.—A Lodge is extinct when it has ceased to exist in
the person of at least three members, is no longer at work, is no
longer to be found on the register of Grand Lodge, or if its
warrant has been revoked for any misdemeanance, or through
other circumstances.

Extra COMMUNICATION. (See Special Communication.)

EXTRANEOUS.—A word now obsolete, but conveying the same
meaning as clandestine.

Exrrusion,—Used only in the Constitution of the Royal Order of
Scotland in the sense of expulsion, and nowhere else.

Eyz. (See Allsecing Eye.)

EZEKIEL, TEMPLE OF. (See Temple of Ezekiel.)

Ezet. (See Lben-ezel.)

Ezra.—Two persons of this name are mentioned in Scripture. 1.
Ezra, a prominent member of the priesthood who accompanied
Zerubbabel to Jerusalem; and 2. Ezra, the celebrated Jewish
Scribe and restorer of the law, who came to Jerusalem forty-two
years after the building of the Second Temple had been com-
pleted. It is impossible to enter here upon the discussion of the
question.

F

F.—The Sixth letter of the English alphabet. The Latins received
this letter from the Aolians in Greece, who wrote it in the form
of a double Fy, hence it has been very absurdly called the
Digamma. It corresponds in power to the Greek @ phi. Asa
Latin numeral, it denotes 40, and thus, F, 40,000. In French
Masonic documents it is the abbreviation of Frére, or Brother, in
the plural FF.

FABRE-PALAPRAT, BERNARD RaymMonpD.—Reorganizer of the order
of the Temple at Paris, and elected Grand Master in 1804. Died
at Pau in the Pyrenees, 18th February, 1838. (See Temple, Order
of the.

Be The lowest round in the theological ladder.

Fatk.—An interlocutor in Lessing’s “Conversations for Free-
masons.”

Faux, De, Raspi.—aA native of Fiirth, and professing the Israelitish
faith, He came to England about 1780, and lived in the east

212

FAL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FAL

end of London. The possession of supernatural powers has
been usually attributed to those Jewish doctors who have
mastered the secrets of the Kabbalah, and the character of a
Thaumaturgist is by no means new in Jewish history. De Falk
himself was without means when he reached this country.
Whether he owned among his other secrets the grand one of the
transmutation of metals, or whether he followed privately some
lucrative occupation, like a common mortal, we are unable to
state. But by all accounts, soon after his arrival in London, De
Falk was seen to be in possession of considerable funds, and one
of his first cares was te remit to the congregation of Firth, the
amount of the expenses incurred for his mother’s funeral.
Usually, De Falk was well provided with cash; but occasionally
he found himself in absolute need, when he did not disdain to
seek advances on his plate from a pawnbroker in Houndsditch.
The bolts and bars of the pawnbroker’s. strong room were in-
sufficient to confine there De Falk’s valuables, when he summoned
them back to his own closet, but he always honourably acquitted
his debt. One day, shortly after having deposited some gold and
silver vessels with the pawnbroker, the Kabbalist went to the
shop in question, and laying down the duplicate with the sum
advanced and exact interest, he told the shopman not to trouble
himself for the plate, as it was already in his possession. The
incredulity with which this statement was received, changed into
absolute dismay, when it was ascertained that De Falk’s property
had really disappeared, without displacing any of the articles that
had surrounded it. Rabbi De Falk lived in Wellclose Square,
where he kept a comfortable establishment. He had there his
private synagogue, and he exercised great benevolence towards
the deserving. He is described as a man of universal knowledge,
of singular manners, and of wonderful talent, which seemed to
command the supernatural agencies of spiritual life. Instances
are given of his extraordinary faculties, by respectable witnesses
of his day, who evidently placed implicit faith in the stories they
related. Dr De Falk was a frequent guest at Aaron Goldsmid’s
table. One day, it is said, the Baal Shem (or pronouncer of the
Ineffable Name) was invited to call on one of Mr Goldsmid’s
visitors, a gentleman dwelling in the chapter-house in St Paul’s
Churchyard, to hold some conversation with him in a friendly
manner on philosophical subjects: “When will you come?”
asked the gentleman. De Falk took from his pocket a small
piece of wax candle, and, handing it to his new acquaintance,
replied: “ Light this, sir, when you get home, and I shall be with
you as soon as it goes out.” Next morning the gentleman in

question lighted the piece of candle. He watched it closely, ex-
213

FAL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FAM

pecting it to be consumed soon, and then to see De Falk. In
vain. The taper, like the sepulchral lamps of old, burned all day
and all night without the least diminution in its flame. He re-
moved the magic candle into a closet, when he inspected it
several times daily, for the space of three weeks. One evening,
at last, Dr De Falk arrived in a hackney coach. The host had
almost given up all expectation of seeing De Falk, as the taper,
shortly before his advent, was still burning as brightly as ever.
As soon as mutual civilities were over, the master of the house
hastened to look at the candle in the closet. It had disappeared.
When he returned, he asked De Falk whether the agent that
had removed the candle would bring back the candlestick. “Oh
yes,” was the reply ; “it is now in your kitchen below,” which
actually proved to be the fact. Once a fire was raging in Duke’s
Place, and the synagogue was considered in imminent danger of
being destroyed. The advice and assistance of De Falk were
solicited : he wrote only four Hebrew letters on the pillars of the
door, when the wind immediately changed its quarter, and the
fire subsided without committing further damage. When Dr De
Falk made his will—for not all his knowledge could save him
from the fate of ordinary mortality—he appointed as his executors,
Mr Aaron Goldsmid, Mr George Goldsmid, and Mr De Symons.
He bequeathed to the Great Synagogue a small legacy of £68,
16s. 4d., and an annual sum of £4, 12s. to whomsoever fulfilled
the functions of Chief Rabbi. To Aaron Goldsmid, De Falk, in
token of his friendship, left a sealed packet or box, with strict in-
junctions that it should be carefully preserved, but not opened.
Prosperity to the Goldsmid family would attend obedience to De
Falk’s behests ; while fatal consequences would follow their dis-
regard. Some time after the Kabbalist’s death, Aaron Goldsmid,
unable to overcome his curiosity, broke the seal of the mysterious
packet. On the same day, he was found dead. Near him was
the destructive paper, which was covered with hieroglyphics and
kabbalistic figures, All we have to add with reference to De
Falk is, that the poor considered him as a benefactor, and con-
sulted him on every emergency during his life, while they
blessed his memory after death for the liberal donations he left,
which were dispensed by Mr De Symons, the surviving
executor.

FALK, JOHANN FRIEDRICH. (See Rosierucians, Eminent.)

FAL oF WaTER. (See Waterfall.)

FAMILIAR SpiRITs.—Witchcraft in Judea, as in all other countries,
was repressed by the political authority, as in the case of Saul;
but continued to retain a certain hold upon the superstitious
sensibilities of the people. Very memorable is one passage in

214

FAM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FAN

Isaiah (viii. 19), thus :—“ When they shall say unto you, Seek
unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep,
and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for
the living unto the dead?” The force of this passage has been
entirely misunderstood by the English translators: it should run
thus :—“ And when they say unto you, Question the Oboth and
Tidomine, who whistle like the manes of the departed, and sigh
like the shades of the dead, Answer, should not each people
question its own deity—the dead rather than the living?” The
Septuagint version translates oboth as ventriloquists: 1 Sam.
xxviii. 7; Isa. xxix. 3; Deut. xviii. 11; 2 Kings xxi. 6; 2 Chron.
xxxiii, 6; Lev. xix. 31, xx. 6; Isa. xix. 3.

FamitisM—A Dutch sect founded by Heinrich Nicolas of West-
phalia, about 1555. It asserted that the doctrine of the apostles
was imperfect, and was to be superseded by an association founded
by him in consequence of an hereditary prophetic right existent
in his family. His disciples were called the Family of Love.

Famity Lopce.—Lodges sometimes held in France and Germany
for the discussion of delicate matters, when visitors were espe-
cially excluded. Such an arrangement is unknown in England
or America.

FANATICISM.—Fanaticism, or a fanatic, dare not be permitted among
Freemasons. “ We should unanimously strive,’ says Gadicke,
“to obtain that object for which the rules of the Order so power-
fully work, and thus there can be no disputes or persecutions
among us for diversity of opinion. Every Freemason prays to
God in the way his religion teaches him, and he is encouraged
to do so in the Lodge. If we did not allow the wild dreams of
imagination, or the still wilder ones of superstition, to have any
effect upon our ideas of God and of godly things, all persecution
for difference of religious opinions would fall of themselves. Of
fanaticism of whole Lodges against each other for a difference of
their rituals and systems, there were formerly too many traces ;
but they have happily for many years entirely ceased. Religious
fanaticism cannot have any place in a Freemason’s Lodge, for
the members of every sect of the Christian Church have an equal
right in the Order. If a Roman Catholic is at the head of the
Lodge to-day, and a Lutheran or a member of the Reformed
Church to-morrow, it is scarcely remarked by the brethren.”
To this it may be added, that in this country and America, very
many excellent and learned Jews have added lustre to the Fra-
ternity by evincing great aptitude for the ceremonies, by princely
charity towards their brethren, and by distinguished learning in
the unravelling of obscure and difficult points of Masonic history

and archeology. Nor is the Mohammedan, Hindu, and Parsee
215

FAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FEL

at all behind hand in enthusiasm and generosity. Indeed, the
adherence of these last is a proof in itself that fanaticism has no
place in the hearts of true Masons.

Fascrs,—In French Masonry a number of speeches or records tied
up in a roll, and deposited with the Archiviste, is thus termed,
from the bundle of rods borne before Roman magistrates as a
symbol of authority.

FAVOURITE BROTHER OF St ANDREW.—1. The ninth Degree in the
Swedish system of Masonry. 2. Favourite Brother of St Joun,
or of THE WHITE CoLLAR, the eighth Degree, third series, of the
same Rite. 3. Sixth Degree of the Chapter attached to the
National Grand Lodge of Berlin.

FAVOURITE BROTHER OF SOLOMON.—Seventh Degree, third series, of
the Swedish system.

Freast.—The annual festival of a Grand Lodge is thus termed. In
England it usually takes place some time in April; but the feasts
of the Fraternity are properly those of the two St Johns, on the
24th of June, and 27th of December.

FECIALES.—Priests at Rome, who had the right of making war and
concluding peace. Thirty-three days were allowed for the con-
sideration ' of the matter, when, if submission were not made, the
Fecialis hurled a bloody spear into the territory about to be
invaded, and war began.

FEELING—One of the five human senses, greatly esteemed by
Masons—in consequence of the grip.

Fees oF Honour.—Every Grand Officer (except the Grand Master,
the Grand Chaplains, the Grand Organist, and the Grand Pursui-
vants), on his appointment, pays certain fees, according to his rank.
This practice prevails in England, Ireland, and Scotland. It has
the advantage of ensuring men of respectability for these offices.

Frix-Feax.—A word used in the first degree in the French Rite of
Adoption. Said to mean School or Academy of Wisdom.

Fetp Locr.—The German term for a Military Lodge, attached to
a regiment, which naturally shifts its quarters from garrison.

FELiciré, ORDRE DE—Order of Felicity. Instituted in 17438, at
Paris, by M. Chambonnet, and had an androgynous character.
There were four degrees—1. Cabin boy. 2. Patron. 3. Com-
modore. 4, Vice-Admiral; and the Grand Master was Admiral.
The seal of the Order was an anchor, pendant from three silken
cords. The password was Shelum lecka—Peace be with you! In
1748, it was reconstituted as Knights and Ladies of the Anchor.
The proceedings at the Lodges of this Order were signalized by
a great display of gallantry, and it is very doubtful whether the
Order of Felicity should not rather be classed with those institu-

tions which brought shame and scandal upon the Fraternity at
216

FEL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FEN

large, than in any way aided to enlarge its benevolent sphere

- of action,

FEL1x, Count——A name occasionally assumed by Cagliostro.

FeLtow.—In Saxon felaw, from the Anglo-Saxon folgian, to follow ;
thus a fellow would be a follower, companion, or associate. The
fellowcraft Mason has his analogue in the journeyman of the
guilds who went from place to place to practise his art.

FeLtLow Crarr.—The second degree; in French, Compagnon ;
Spanish, Compafiero; Italian, Compayno; German, Gesell. It
stimulates to scientific exertion.

FELLOW Crart PERFECT ARCHITECT.—(Compagnon Parfatte Archi-
tecte), The twenty-sixth degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

FELLOWSHIP, FIVE Points oF. (See Points of Fellowship.)

FEMALE Masons.—They say there is no rule without an exception,
and this is as true in Freemasonry as elsewhere. Some noble
words of the late Brother Dr Crucefix are very apposite here :—
“ The only reason why ladies cannot be present in an open Lodge
of Freemasons is, that their mysteries, being symbolical of labour
as performed by men, could not in that case be shared by
‘women ; no honest-hearted man could for one moment believe
that in mind she was inferior; if a man existed who thought so,
let him ask from whom he first imbibed lessons of piety, virtue,
and honour. But if ladies could not share our labour of work,
there was no reason why they should not enjoy our labour
of love.” (See Aldworth, Beaton, and Xantrailles.)

FENDEURS, ORDRE DE.—Order of Woodcutters. Established for both
sexes at Paris, in 1743, by the Chevalier Beauchaine, claiming
from the woodcutters of Lebanon. The Lodge was styled a
Woodyard, and was supposed to represent a forest, being usually
held in a garden. The officers were—1. Father, Master, or Pre-
sident; 2. Cousin of the Oak, Godfather or Sponsor; 3. Cousin
of the Elm, Introducer; 4. Cousin of the Beech, Wine-steward ;
5. Cousin of the Service Tree, Pantler; 6. Cousin of the Yoke-
Elm, Guardian of Hospitality ; 7. Cousin of the Maple, Guardian
of the Chair; 8. Cousins of the Ash, Guard of Honour. The
brethren and sisters were called Cousins, and the Candidate
was termed a Brick. The place of meeting was in New France,
outside Paris; persons of the greatest distinction went out in
crowds, dressed in blouses and petticoats of frieze, wearing
wooden shoes. The President was seated on a log of oak, his
left elbow resting on a table, a slouched hat and a crown of oak
leaves on his head. Round his neck hung a cordon of green
silk, from which depended a wedge of boxwood—in his right
hand he held an axe, and his robe was of coarse linen. The

object of the Order was to bring about a feeling of equality
217

FER] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FES

among the various classes of France. It had an existence of
many years. The best work on the Fendeurs, was that of Dr
G. F. D’Hermilly Cauchard, Paris, 1822.

FrraLia.—A festival in honour of the dead, observed in ancient
Rome, on the 17th or 21st of February. It continued for eleven
days, during which presents were carried to the graves of the
dead, marriages were forbidden, and the temples of the gods
were closed.

FERDINAND IV., King of the Two Sicilies, issued an edict against
Masonry, 12th September, 1775, rendering its practice a capital
offence. In 1777, at the solicitation of Queen Caroline, this
was recalled, but renewed in 1781.

FERDINAND VI, of Spain, at the request of Joseph Ferrubia, Visitor
of the Holy Inquisition, in 1751, enforced the bull of excom-
munication of Benedict XIV., and rendered it a capital crime to
meet in Lodges.

FERDINAND VIL, of Spain, was the most bigoted sovereign of his
time. On his accession to the throne, in 1814, he re-established
the Inquisition, and persecuted Masonry with the utmost rigour.
The Revolution of 1820 put an end to this.

Ferr#.—Solemn festivals observed by the Romans on the Alban
Mount, during which vows of friendship were renewed.

FERVENCY.—Symbolized by ignited charcoal. Fervency and zeal
were afterwards indicated by the colour scarlet, the appropriate
colour of Royal Arch Masonry.

Fusster, Ignaz AURELIUS.—Born at Czurendorf in Hungary, in
1756, of very poor parents, of the Roman Catholic religion. He
was educated at the Jesuit School at Raab, and, in 1772, took
orders and removed to the Capuchin monastery at Vienna. He
exposed some of the monastic abuses to the Emperor, Joseph II,
and was accordingly persecuted by his superiors. Hereupon the
Emperor, in 1783, constituted him Extraordinary Professor of
Oriental Languages at the University of Lemberg. He was
forced to fly from that place by the monks, who again threatened
him, and took refuge at Breslau, where he was tutor to the son of
the Prince Von Corolath. He here established the Order of
Evergetes (see Everyetes), which, however, failed to meet his ex-
pectations, and expired in 1793. In 1791, he adopted the Lutheran
faith,and having married, resided for some years at Berlin, where he
devoted himself tothe practiceof the civil law,and wasalso a super-
intendent of schools,until 1806. In1798,he accepted a commission
to revise and reform the high degrees, to which he had been opposed.
He was at one time Deputy Grand Master of the Royal York
Lodge of Friendship at Berlin. His private life seems to have
Been Unlappy, for he was.divorced from his wife in 1802; and,

21

FES | The Royal Masonie Cyclopedia. [FES

losing his official position in consequence of the French victories,
he retired with another wife to the country, in 1803. During
these years, he received much pecuniary assistance from the
German Lodges. In 1808, he received the appointment of a
professor in the University of St Petersburg, but was compelled to
Telinquish it, in consequence of the intrigues of the clergy. He
afterwards obtained the post of superintendent of the Evangelical
Community, in nine departments, and was Ecclesiastical President
of the Consistory at Saratow, with a liberal salary. In 1827, he
was recalled by the Emperor Alexander to St Petersburg, where, in
1833, he was made Ecclesiastical Counsellor, and died there, 15th
December, 1839, at the age of eighty-three. He was initiated at
Lemberg in 1783, and affiliated to the Royal York Lodge at
Berlin, in June, 1796 ; in 1798, he was elected Deputy Grand
Master, with three Lodges under the Royal York; by Fessler’s
efforts, these had risen in 1801 to sixteen. In 1802, tired out by
the captious opposition made to his views, he resigned all his
offices, and continued to work for Masonry in a more retired
way. Before his resignation he had, however, matured and
carried out a great union of scientific Masons, for the investiga-
tion of Masonic history and science, (See Scientific Masons.)
His chief work has never been printed ; it was a “Critical History
of Freemasonry and the Masonic Fraternity, from the earliest
times to the year 1802,” in four folio manuscript volumes, sold
at the price of £30 to persons who pledged themselves ultimately
to return it. Fessler was a man of singular erudition, and his
labours were all directed to an elevation of the intellectual side
of Masonry.

FessLer, RITE oF.—Prepared by Fessler at the request of the Grand
Lodge Royal York zur Freundschaft at Berlin. The degrees are
nine in numover: 1, Apprentice Theosoph. 2. Fellow Craft
Theosoph. 3. Master Theosoph (differing only slightly from
ordinary symbolical Masonry). 4. Holy of Holies (compre-
hending an historical investigation of the theories concern-
ing the alleged origin of Masonry). 5. Justification (historical
enquiry into the high degrees, such as the Ecossais and the
Chapter of Clermont). 6. Celebration (critical examination of
the Rose-Croix, Strict Observance, African Architects, and
Initiated Brothers of Asia). 7. True Light or Passage (investi-
gation of the Swedish system, the Zinnendorf Rite, the English
Royal Arch, and the Mysteries). 8. The Country or Fatherland
(examination of the mysteries of the Divine Kingdom of Jesus of
Nazareth, and the secret doctrines of Christianity, to the time of
the Gnostics). 9. Perfection (a degree never completed, although
the general principles were approved by Frederick William, in

219

FEU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FID

1797). Fessler’s Rite is rather to be regarded as a grand educa-
tional Masonic experiment, than a practicable system. His mind
had been so steeped in the mysticism he loved, that, like many a
great scholar, he expected too much from those he was qualified
to teach ; little thinking of his own naturalization, as it were,
among such matters, he failed to convey those ideas to others,
clear as daylight to himself. He was undoubtedly the greatest
writer Masonry has ever seen.

FEUILLANTS.—1. A Masonic order, governed by the Statutes of St
Bernard. In Fustier’s collection. 2. Another phase of an-
drogynous Masonry.

FIpELIT#, ORDER oF.—A form of Adoptive Masonry, instituted at
Paris, about 1748, styled the “Order of Knights and Ladies of
Fidelity.” It existed for a number of years, and from France was
introduced into Germany. It is now extinct.

Fipenity OF BADEN DurLACH, ORDER OF.—Instituted by Charles
Margrave of Baden Durlach, in 1716, the reigning princes being
hereditary Grand Masters. Badge: an eight-pointed cross, or, in
the centre of which is a white shield enamelled, upon which are
displayed masses of stone, with a double 00, surrounded by the
word Fidelitas. On the reverse is an escutcheon of white
enamel, with the arms of the Margrave on a field, or. The Cross
is surmounted by a prince’s cap, bordée with ermine. In each
of the four principal angles is a double 00, or. Ribbon: broad,
orange-coloured, bordered, argent. Knights (who must be noble
and of ancient family) wear on the left breast an eight-pointed
silver star, the four centre rays of which are produced beyond
the angular rays. Centre: an escutcheon of silver, displaying
oc with the border of ermine, surrounded by a circle of red
velvet, with the motto: Fideliter et Sincere, embroidered, or.

FIDELITY OF DENMARK, ORDER OF.—Instituted by Queen Sophia
Magdalena of Denmark, 7th August, 1732, in commemoration of a
happy marriage. Badge: a white enamelled cross, composed of
four points, each surmounted by a regal crown, or. In the centre
is an enamelled shield, azure, with the Queen’s cypher, or. In
the four chief angles of the cross are the Prussian Eagle and the
Lion of Norway, alternate. Motto on the reverse:—Jn Felicissime
Unionis Memoriam ; suspended from a sky-blue watered ribbon,
bordered, argent. Since 1770, this Order has not been conferred
on any one.

Fives, or Fipius.—Latin for facth or fidelity. Also the name of a
Roman deity, who presided over contracts, sanctified oaths, and
punished their violation. Numa Pompilius, the second King of
Rome, 714 to 672 B.C., erected temples and consecrated altars to
her service. The goddess was usually represented by two hands

220

FID] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | FIR

joined together, or by two figures holding each other by the right
hand. Very recently, a Roman Catholic has been agitating for
the abolition in France of the abominable English custom, derived,
according to him, from the Freemasons, of agitating a part of the
body in the shaking of hands. This is amusing, but not up to
the standard of Roman Catholic learning. The ancient Latin
oath was Me Deus Fidius adjuvet, So help me the God Fidius.

FipuciaL Sicn.—A sign of confiding trust given in the English
Royal Arch System.

FretpD Lopces.—Also called Army Lodges. In the war of the
American Revolution, they were found both in the English and
Continental armies; and during the war between the Confe-
derate and United States of 1861 to 1865, they did much to
mitigate the necessary horrors of war. The same may be said of
the Franco-German war of 1870. In fact, although, in theory,
Freemasons are supposed to suspend their labours during a war,
there is perhaps no period in which the individual Masonic
charity of true brethren is more put to the test, both as to saving
life and preventing the destruction of property. During our
long contest with France, terminated by Waterloo, the Field
Lodges of both armies respected and assisted each, as far as they
could, consistently with their sworn military duties.

Firrenn.—1, A sacred number, alluding to the name of God—the
numerical value of m (Jah) being fifteen. 2. An inportant
number alluded to in the third degree. 3. In systems of philo-
sophical magic, the number fifteen has a great importance.

Finances.—In practice, the subscriptions and other dues are
received by the Secretary, and handed by him to the Treasurer,
who is the banker of the Lodge. The Master of the Lodge, for
the time being, has absolute control over the funds, and is per-
sonally responsible for the dues to Grand Lodge.

Fincy, WittiaM—An expelled Mason, who made large sums of
money which did not profit him, for he died in abject poverty, in
1816. His works are of no authority, and of a misleading
character.

Fire, To.—In the French Lodges drinking a toast is called firing.
In the English Lodges a special action succeeds the drinking of
any toast.

Fire Worsuip —This was an ancient form of worship, and a develop-
ment of Sabaism, in which the sun was regarded as the Universal
Fire. The Parsees have retained the faith of the ancient Magi;
and the Persians, with whom the sun was invoked, according
to Quintus Curtius, as Mithras, the sacred fire. Fire-worship
was very generally spread over the ancient world, and we find it

in America among the most ancient wandering tribes of that con-
221

FIR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FIR

tinent; in fact, they symbolically regarded themselves as being
born of fire. As alearned German author remarks(Vollgraff, vol. i,
p.23. Anthropognoste) :—“ Light is the life of ther or its Thought;
unlimited, indifferent sther, is darkness, and in this consists
the being or state of rest of Aither. Chaos, therefore, was dark-
ness ; the world arose from darkness, or from the motion of Chaos,
There is no night for this world any longer, but only for the
planets. Permanent night would have invested the air with
quite other properties—for only by means of light does it become
vital air. Light is time become real, the first appearance of God
is God defining himself, and the Dyadic God. The self-conscious
God is Light itself—Light being the illuminating Deity. Nor
is light, matter. There is no special light-matter; but the ether
is illuminating by its dualism. Hence, the sun gives nothing off
to its own destruction ; but psychicizes the planets, and loses
nothing of its own magnitude. Al that the sun does is to give
an impulse—not a mechanical, but a purely spiritual impulse, in
the same way that the nerves govern the muscles. Hence it is,
that the sun can never lose its light, nor become dark—for it
lights the world not as a fire, but solely because it occupies the
central position. The reason of this,’ adds this artfully Her-
metic author, “is, that it is in the bonds of extinct planets or
dead stars. A body of the sun, which merely consumed itself,
would not be visible to us. The whole universe is transparent,
because all things have emerged from the etherial power of
motion. Light constitutes everything, and the end of every-
thing is only the modification of light in position. The world
is a globe, transparent throughout, and a rotatory circle of light.
The solar system must have been created according to the laws
of light. Kosmical phenomena are only optical representations,
and may be regarded as animated geometry. By light the ether
is at one and the same time set in motion and controlled. The
end of electricity, galvanism, and magnetism, is motion. All
these polar functions are only repetitions of primeval polarity.
From this motion is begot warmth ; or, in other words, zther in
motion is heat. Without light, the world would not only be
dark, but absolutely cold, to such a degree that no system could
appreciate the minus degree. Cold is ether in a latent condition—
Death, Nothing, Darkness, are identical. Thus, there cannot
exist any matter of caloric, any more than a matter of light.
Heat, with light, is fire. Fire is the unity of ether, the apparent
God in his universality. Therefore, no higher or more perfect
symbol of the Deity can exist than Fire. Everything has taken
its rise from fire; everything is only fire in a state of declension,
and all can be destroyed by fire, and by fire again re-created, and
222

FIR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedut. [FIV

actual changes in things only occur through fire. Thus, we may
consider the first appearance of God to be Weight—sther or
chaos; the second, Light; the third, Heat; the fourth, Fire.”
No wonder then that Fire has been reverenced in mythology
and religion beyond every other manifestation of the power of
T. G. A. O. T. U., and hence the respect entertained by the
Masonic Fraternity and others for the glorious orb of day.
(See Theosophists, and Zoroastrianism.)

Firrao, JoserpH#.—Cardinal-priest of the Roman Catholic Church.
He published an edict of the Pope against Freemasonry in 1739,

Fisu (Greek ’Ix@rs3, a fish).—The initials of the words, *Inoods Xprords
O20d Libs Swrhp, Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Soter, or Saviour.
The primitive Christians, from this circumstance, adopted the fish
as a symbol—but it is probably very much older, as we find
Jonah swallowed by a fish—absorbed into the Vesica Piscis, 7.c.,
initiated into the mysteries, and rendered on the third day—just
as Jesus, whose Syriac name was Joshua, the Soter, or Deliverer,
was given up by the tomb on the third day. I fear the Vesica
Piscis has many traditional sins to answer for—“ He was swal-
lowed up for our transgressions.” There is an occult connection
between this and the entrance of Cidipus into the cavern, which
might either be Hades, or the Cave of Trophonius, With the
Greeks, plays partook of a religious character (or they would
never have indicted Aischylus), and hence we may regard the
Cidipus Rex of Sophocles, with its complement, the Cdipus in
Coloneus, as religious dramas. This swallowing up and redeliver-
ance is constant in mythology—finds its analogue in Adonis,
Atys, Osiris,and many others. Margoliouth (Vest. of Gen. Freem.
p. £5) says, “In former days, the Grand Master of our Order used
to wear a silver fish on his person; but it is to be regretted that,
amongst the many innovations which have of late been intro-
duced into the society to conciliate the prejudices of some who
cannot consistently be members of it, this beautiful emblem has
disappeared.” Ihave read somewhere, but where I cannot call
to mind at the present moment, that the fish, the wolf, and the
tiger, are the emblems of salacity; and hence could scarcely be
adopted as emblems in an Order in which temperance and chas-
tity are enjoined. The Vesica Piscis is fully treated of in Bro.
Dr Oliver’s “ Discrepancies of Freemasonry,’ London, 1875.

Five.—This was a mystical number with the Pythagoreans, being
formed from the union of the first even number with the first
odd—unity being rejected; thus it symbolized the mixed states
of order and disorder, happiness and misery, life and death.
It was also the symbol of marriage, being the union of odd and

even. Diodorus calls it the emblem of the world, representing
223

FIV] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ FLo

ether and the four elements. It was a sacred number among
the Hebrews. Brother Dr Oliver’s posthumous work, “The
Pythagorean Triangle,” London, 1875, enters elaborately into all
matters relating to numbers. (But see under Scale of Numbers.)
In Masonry, five brethren are required to constitute a Fellow
Craft Lodge, according to an old system. There are five orders
of architecture, and Geometry is technically called the fifth
science.

Five-PoInteD Star.—This is not to be confounded with the Blazing
Star. It is of recent introduction into Masonry, and its outlines
are the same as the pentalpha of Pythagoras, and the symbol of
health. It is a common symbol on the Egyptian monuments.

Five Points or FeLtowsuir. (See Points of Fellowship.)

Five SeNnsEs.—The five senses of hearing, seeing, feeling, tasting,
and smelling, are referred to in the lecture of the Fellow Craft's
degree.

Fixep LicHts.—In the lectures of the last century, the fixed lights
were the three windows supposed to be placed in the East,
South, and West; the ritual saying that they were “to light the
men to, at, and from their work.” They have been omitted in
the modern Lodges, their place being supplied by the three lesser
lights. An Operative Scottish Ritual (before 1717) says: “There
are three lights—south-east, south, and south-west; and that at
work the Master Mason (now called the W.M.) stands at the
south-east corner of the Lodge, the Fellow Crafts next to him,
and next to them the Wardens, and finally the Entered Prentices.

FLAGELLANTS.—They arose in Italy about 1260, and their founder
was a hermit named Rainer, who maintained that flagellation
was of equal virtue with baptism and the sacrament. They ran
about the streets lashing their bare shoulders with great severity.
About 1414, their subsequent leader, Courad Schmidt, was
brought to the stake in Germany, with several others.

FLAMEL, Nicouas. (See Magic.)

FLAMING SworD.— A sword, the blade of which is in a spiral, wavy,
or twisted form. It is the proper form of the Tyler’s sword,
although an ordinary sword is now erroneously used. It referred
to the flaming sword with which the cherubim guarded the gates
of Paradise.

Fioats.—Timber rafts for the transport of material. They were
used at the building of the First Temple (2 Chron. ii. 16).

Fioor.—A. properly ‘adorned Lodge-room should have its floor
covered with alternate squares of black and white, in memory of
the Mosaic pavement of King Solomon’s Temple. The symbo-
lical reference is to the vicissitudes of human life, joy and sor-
row, good and evil fortune, and the like.

224

FLO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FOL

FiLoor Ciotu. (See Tracing Board.)

FLoripa.—Masonry was introduced into this State at St Augustine
City, in 1806, by the constitution of the San Fernando Lodge,
under the Grand Lodge of Georgia, but it was suppressed by the
Spanish government in 1811. After many changes, the Grand
Lodge of Florida was finally instituted at Tallahassee, on the
5th of July, 1830.

Fiorian, Squin DE—Infamous as the first accuser of Jacques de
Molay and the Templars; he was, soon after, assassinated.

Fiupp, Ropert.—Born in England, 1574, studied at Oxford, where
he took his B.A. and M.A. degrees, and finally became a doctor
of medicine. He was a prominent member of the Rosicrucian
Fraternity, and died in 1637. He published, in 1616, the “Apo-
logia Compendaria, Fraternitatem de Rosea Cruce, suspicionis et
infanric inaculis aspersum abluens,” or, “ A brief Apology, clear-
ing the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross from the stigma of sus-
picion and infamy with which they have been aspersed ;” and, in
1617, he also issued, “Tractatus-apologeticus integritatem Soctetatis
de Rosea Cruce defendens contra Inbanium et alias,” or, “An Apo-
logetic Tract, defending the purity of the Society of the Rosy
Cross against Libanius and others.” His last book was entitled,
“Summum bonum, quod est verum Magie, cabale,alchymice, fratrum
Rose Crucis verorum vere subjectum.” He was known by his
Latinized name of Robertus de Fluctibus, and his influence did
more to confirm the existence of the Rosicrucian Society in
England, than that of any writer before or since.

FoLKEs, Martin.—Born in Queen Street, Leicester Fields, West-
minster, 29th October, 1690, entered at Clare Hall, Cambridge,
1707, elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, 1713, and a Vice-
President in 1723. He was a candidate for the Presidency, on
the death of Sir Isaac Newton, but was defeated by Sir Hans
Sloane, who, however, continued him as Vice-President, and on
the resignation of Sir Hans, he eventually succeeded him, in
1741. In 1742, he was elected a member of the Royal Academy
of Sciences at Paris, and received the degree of Doctor of Laws,
in 1746, from both Oxford and Cambridge. In 1750, he was
elected President of the Society of Antiquaries, He was a skil-
ful numismatist. He was struck with paralysis, 30th November,
1753, and never completely recovered—died 25th June, 1754.
He was an intimate friend of Sir Christopher Wren, and of Dr
Desaguliers, and took an active part in the restoration of Masonry
in 1717, and was Deputy Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of
England in 1725. Little is known of his Masonic career. A
medal was struck in his honour by the Masons of Rome in

1742. On one side is a pyramid, a sphinx, some Masonic
P 225

FOO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FOR

ciphers, and the two pillars, and on the other a likeness of
Folkes.

FooTsTonE.—-Identical with Corner Stone, which see.

Foor to Foor. (See Points of Fellowship.)

FoRrIGN CounTRY.—The foreign country into which the Master
Mason seeks to travel is Heaven, where he hopes to receive his
wages by obtaining the knowledge of the Truth, only to be learned
in that better land.

Foresters’ DecREES.—This term is derived from the fact that cer-
tain secret associations, such as the Carbonari, the Fendeurs, the
Foresters, and other bodies, were presumed to practice their cere-
monies in the depths of the forests.

Form. (See Ample Form.)

Form OF THE LopcE.—A parallelogram, having its greatest length
from east to west, and its greatest breadth from north to south.
If a map of the world, as known to the ancients at the time of
the building of the First Temple, is drawn extending from the
pillars of Hercules, at Gibraltar, to the Mesopotamian countries,
it will be seen, according to ancient geography, to very fitly
symbolise a Mason’s Lodge, which is universal.

Formuta.—A special mode of doing or saying anything. Such
formule are very numerous in Masonry, and require to be com-
mitted to memory.

Fortirupe.—One of the four cardinal virtues. By fortitude, we
are taught to resist temptation, and encounter danger with spirit
and resolution. This virtue is equi-distant from temerity and
cowardice ; and he who possesses it, is seldom shaken, and never
overthrown, by the storms that surround him.

Forty.—The two perfect numbers four and ten, being multiplied
into each other, produce the number forty, which was also sacred,
and bore a reference to the number seven. ‘Thus, the probation
of our first parents in the garden of Eden, as is generally sup-
posed, was forty years; the deluge was occasioned by a rain of
forty days and nights, of which event Noah had seven days’
notice ; and the waters remained upon the face of the earth forty
days. The days of embalming the dead were forty, and of
mourning, seventy. The concealment of Moses in the land of
Midian was forty years, and he was on the mount forty days and
nights. The Israelites were forty years in the desert. Jesus
Christ fasted forty days and nights in the wilderness to prepare
for his ministry, and was tempted of the devil forty days; and
the same term elapsed between his resurrection and ascension.
It must be remembered, however, that forty was the determinate
expression among the Hebrews for an unknown or indeterminate
number, just as,1n modern English, we exclaim, “The cup was

226

FOR | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [Fou

broken into a hundred pieces!” not meaning exactly one
hundred, but a great many.

Forty-SEVENTH ProposiTion.—Discovered by Pythagoras, and in-
corporated by Euclid in his Geometry as the forty-seventh
proposition of his first book. From its valuable properties it has
been adopted as a symbol of the Master of a Lodge, and is also
the jewel of a Past Master. There was formerly a statement in
some versions of the third degree, that this problem was invented
by H. A. B, just before his death, which further greatly re-
sembles the received account of the death of Pythagoras.
Pythagoras was Buddha’s gooroos, or the Hermetic, Mercurial
spiritual teacher.

Forty-Two.—The number of judges before whom a deceased
Egyptian had to appear to purify himself of sin. Without
this the Osirified (deceased) individual had no hopes of rest in
Amenti,

Fout.—tThe ballot box at an election is said to be “foul ” when one
or more black balls are found in it. A ballot is usually re-
directed in this instance, to test whether it has resulted from an
inadvertence or as an expression of opinion.

FounpaTion, STONE OF. (See Stone of Foundation.)

FounTain.—In some high degrees a fountain constitutes a part of
the furniture.

Four.—tThe tetrad ; a sacred number in the degree of Perfect Mas-
ter, but of no importance in Craft Masonry.

Four CrowneD Martyrs.—The Roman Church has consecrated
the 8th of November to the memory of these stone masons, also
mentioned in Halliwell’s MS. of 13th century, in the British
Museum, by name Claudius, Castorius, Symphorianus, and Nico-
stratus. Dioclesian having gone to Pannonia, determined person-
ally to superintend the transport of metals and stones from the
neighbouring mines of Noricum, in order to construct a temple to
Helios, Apolo, the sun god. He had assembled six hundred and
twenty-two artizans for this purpose, and among them came the
four above-mentioned workmen, who were, however, secretly
converts to the Christian religion, always invoking the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ at their labours, It would seem (says the
Breviary of Spires) that in company with these four laboured
another mason, one Simplicius, who had adhered to the ancient
pagan faith, While he was employed near them, he was amazed
to see that they succeeded in all their efforts, while he was always
breaking his tools. At last he approached Claudius, and said to
him :—“ Strengthen, I beseech thee, my tools, that they may no
longer break.” Claudius took them in his hands and said :—

“In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, be these tools henceforth
227

FOU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Fou

strong and faithful to their work.” From this time Simplicius
did his work well, and succeeded in all that he attempted to do.
Amazed at the change, Simplicius continually asked his fellow-
workmen, how it was that the tools had been so strengthened
that now they never broke. At length Claudius replied :—“ God,
who is our Creator, and the Lord of all things, has made his
creatures strong.” Then Simplicius inquired :—*“ Was not this
done by the god Zeus?” To this Claudius replied :—“ Repent,
O my brother, of what thou hast said, for thou hast blasphemed
God, our Creator, whom alone we worship ; that which our own
hands have made we do not recognise as God.” ‘With these and
such sentences they converted Simplicius to the Christian faith,
who, being baptized by Cyrillus, bishop of Antioch, soon after-
wards suffered martyrdom for his refusal to sacrifice to the pagan
gods. During the progress of the work, an order was issued by
the Emperor Dioclesian, that from a piece of marble there should
be executed a noble statue of Helios in the sun-chariot. Of
course, this led to a consultation ; and when a huge block had ar-
rived from the island of Thasos, it was found unfit for the pur-
pose, upon which great war of words arose between the workmen
and the designers. The legend goes on to say that, on one occa-
sion, all the six hundred and twenty-two workmen, with five
philosophers, architects, or designers, met to examine the veins
of the stone, upoa which arose a further difference. Then the
designers blamed Claudius, Symphorianus, Nicostratus, and Cas-
torius, saying :—“ Why do you not hearken to the command of
our devout emperor, Dioclesian, and obey his will?’ Upon
which Claudius replied :—“ Because we cannot offend our Crea-
tor, and commit a sin of which we should be found guilty in his
sight.” Then the philosophers said :—“ From this it appears that
you are Christians.” And Claudius answered :— Truly, we are
Christians.” Upon which the stone was ordered to be made into
a statue of Aisculapius or Asklépios, the Healer or Soter (see
Soter), and after thirty-one days, 1t was finished and presented.
When the Emperor Dioclesian saw it he was greatly amazed, and
said :—* This is a proof of the skill of these men, who receive my
approval as sculptors.” Itis perhaps necessary to intercalate the
observation that A®sculapius, the god of health, was in the
ancient system cf pagandom the analogue of Christ, the Saviour
or Soter, and the symbol of good, or Chréstos. When Dioclesian
had thus expressed his admiration of the statue, the architect,
or philosopher, said :—“ Most mighty Cesar, know that these men
whom your majesty has praised for their skill in masonry,
namely, Claudius, Symphorianus, Nicostratus, and Castorius, are
Christians, and by magic spells or incantations make men
228

FOU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Fou

obedient to their will.” Upon this, Dioclesian said :—“If they
have violated the laws, and if your accusations be true, let them
suffer the punishment of sacrilege.” The emperor, at the same
time, having a respect for their‘skill, sent for the tribune, Lam-
padius, and said :—* If they refuse to offer sacrifice to the sun-
god Helios, let them be scourged with scorpions; but if they are
willing to do so, then let them be treated with kindness.” Lam-
padius, for five days, remained in constant attendance before the
temple of the sun-god, and called on these men by proclamation
of the herald, and exhibited implements of torture, and then he
said to them :—* Hearken to me and avoid the doom of martyrs,
and be obedient to the mighty prince, and offer a sacrifice to the
sun-god, for no longer can I speak to you in gentle words.”
Claudius, however, replied for himself and his companions :—
“This let the Emperor Dioclesian know: that we truly are
Christians, and never can depart from the worship of our God.”
Thereupon Lampadius caused them to be seized and whipped
with scorpions, while announcement was made by the herald
that this was done because they had disobeyed the commands of
the emperor; whereupon Lampadius died suddenly, as in all
legends of the kind. It is then stated that Dioclesian, hearing
of the death of his officer, caused the four martyr-masons to be
enclosed, while yet alive, in leaden coffins, and thrown into the
Danube. Some legends give the names as Severus, Severianus,
Carpophorus, and Victorinus. The substance above given is from
the “ Roman Breviary” of 1474. A church was erected at Rome
in commemoration of this act of faith, on the side of the Esqui-
line Mount, whither—miraculously, of course—the bodies of the
Quattro Coronati had been conveyed. The date of their martyr-
dom was the 8th Nov. 287, and they were afterwards adopted as
the patron saints of Operative Masonry. Now, here we have a
case against the Roman Catholic Church, as clear as clear can be.
Steadfastly adhering to the faith they had adopted, they refused
adoration to principles identified with that heresy the present
Roman Catholics charge upon modern Freemasons, as they did
upon the Templars, upon similar crude grounds. (But see
Intolerance.)

Four-FroLD Corp.—In the American Past Master’s degree, an ex-
pression is used as follows :—“ A two-fold cord is strong, a three-
fold cord is stronger, but a four-fold cord is not easily broken.”
age to suit the symbolism of the degree from Ecclesiastes
iv. 12.

FouRTEEN.—Fourteen days of burial in the Master’s degree. The
body of Osiris was severed into fourteen pieces by Typhon, and
thrown into the Nile. “The body of Osiris,” says Plutarch (De

229

FOU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FRA

Is. et Osir.), “ was cut into fourteen pieces; that is to say, into
as many parts as there are days between the full moon and the
new. This circumstance has reference to the gradual diminution
of the lunary light during the fourteen days that follow the full
moon. The moon, at the end of fourteen days, enters Taurus,
and becomes united to the sun, from whom she collects fire upon
her disc during the fourteen days which follow. She is then
found every month in conjunction with him in the superior parts
of the signs. The equinoctial year finishes at the moment when
the sun and moon are found united with Orion, or the star of
Orus (Hor), a constellation placed under Taurus, which unites it-
self in the Neomenia of spring. The moon renews herself in
Taurus, and a few days afterwards is seen, in the form of a cres-
cent, in the following sign, that is, Gemini—the house of Mer-
cury. Then Orion, united to the sun in the attitude of a for-
midable warrior, precipitates Scorpio, his formidable rival, into
the shades of night, for he sets every time Orion appears above
the horizon. The day becomes lengthened, and the germs of
evil are by degrees destroyed. It is thus that the poet Nonnus
pictures to us Typhon conquered at the end of winter, when the
sun arrives in Taurus, and when Orion, the Deliverer (see Soter)
mounts into the heavens with him.” (See, for suggestions, our
article Astrology.)

FRANCE.—The exact year of the introduction of Freemasonry into
France is unknown, but it would not be earlier than 1718, or
later than 1725, in which year Lord Derwentwater, the Chevalier
Maskelyne, Mr Heguetty, and others, established a Lodge in the
house of an English confectioner, named Hure, in the Rue de
Boucheries, the warrant being probably derived from the English
Grand Lodge. In ten years, the number of Paris Lodges was six,
and others had been established in the provinces. Lord Der-
wentwater continued Grand Master until 1736, when Lord Har-
nouester was formally elected Provincial Grand Master, which
office he held until succeeded by the Duke d’Antin; andin 1743
the Count de Clermont was elected in place of the Duke. This
year, 1743, may be regarded as the beginning of organized Free-
masonry in France. The French Lodges had, in 1735, petitioned
the Grand Lodge of England for a Provincial Grand Lodge,
which, for political reasons, had been refused; but, in 1743, it
was granted and constituted as the “Grand Loge Anglaise de
France,” but, as the Count de Clermont was weak and inefficient,
and very likely the natural French leaven of jealousy was at
work, anarchy ensued, and, in 1756, the French declared them-
selves independent, especially as they were harassed by the com-
petition of the French Provincial Mother Lodges. The new

230

FRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FRA

body took the name of “National Grand Lodge of France,”
only recognising the three symbolical degrees, while the grand
officers were exclusively chosen from among members of the
Parisian metropolitan Lodges—excluding the members of the
provincial Lodges. The history of French Masonry has ever
been stormy, and although, to supply his own inefficiency, the
Count de Clermont appointed a number of deputies, he does not
seem to have pleased the Craft; indeed, the nomination of
Lacorne, a dancing master, evidently was received with great
umbrage, as, in 1762, he was obliged to revoke the appointment,
and prevail upon Chaillon de Joinville to aceept the post. The
Count de Clermont died, in 1771, while the two factions were
disputing, and the Duke de Chartres (afterwards Duke of Orleans,
and subsequently Philippe Egalité) took the Grand Mastership
of the malcontents who were excluded when Lacorne was de-
prived of his position. Under the Duke de Chartres some kind
of arrangement was arrived at between what may be termed the
ancient and modern Masons of France, and a regular Grand
Lodge again began to work. Anterior to, and during this time,
a number of bodies referred to in various parts of this book
sprang up and materially hampered the action of those who
deemed real symbolic Masonry most genuine, and they manufac-
tured, partly under the orders of the Jesuits, and partly by means
of unscrupulous charlatans, a number of degrees. It is to be re-
membered that the Papal authorities lent themselves to this, and
such was the confidence of the Masonic body, anxious for peace,
that we find them even electing Pope Benedict XIV. an honorary
member of an English Lodge. Yet this Pope was one of those
who finally launched a fulminatory Bull against his brethren !
The subsequent history of the Craft has shown how much faith
is to be placed in Roman Catholics. In December, 1771, depu-
ties from all the Lodges of Paris and the provinces met under
the presidency of the Duke of Luxemburg, and on the 24th of
that month the Ancient Grand Lodge of France was declared
extinct, and was formally replaced by the Grand Orient of France.
The former Grand Lodge, however, continued to meet and exer-
cise its functions,and during the terrible years which ensued, these
rival bodies harassed each other, until the political events of the
Revolution forced them both into inactivity. On the 28th June,
1799,the Grand Lodge was, however, at last solemnly incorporated
with the Grand Orient. At this time there appeared a prospect
of peace, but now came in the new source of disturbance—the
various high degrees. Some of these had adhered to the Grand
Orient as the supreme authority, but soon violated their agree-

ment; and, after much wrangling, it was finally decreed, on the
231

FRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FRA

16th September, 1805, that the Supreme Council of the Thirty-
third degree should become an independent body, with the
power to confer all degrees superior to the 18th or Rose-Croix,
while the Chapters of that and the inferior degrees were placed
under the special and exclusive control of the Grand Orient.
Even this agreement was not observed by either body, and it was
not until 1841 that some effective settlement was made. As,
however, the Grand Orient of France has continued in a most
extraordinary way to intermeddle with the jurisdictions of other
Grand Lodges, it has been placed out of communication with
many Grand Lodges, including the Grand Lodges of England,
Germany, and the United States. It is deeply to be regretted
that some arrangement cannot be made to put an end to this
state of things. France numbers amongst its citizens some of
the ablest and most distinguished Masons in the world, and the
attitude of the Grand Orient is hence sincerely to be deprecated.
Perhaps, as Dr Mackey says, “ one of the most extraordinary acts
of the Grand Orient of France has been the recent abolition of
the office of Grand Master—the duties being performed by the
President of the Council of the Order.”

Francis IJ.—Emperor of Germany. He was a bitter enemy to
Freemasonry, and ordered all Lodges to be closed throughout his
dominions, in 1789, He also proposed at the Diet of Ratisbon,
in 1794, the persecution of the Masons, Illuminati, and other
secret societies, but this was negatived. In 1801, he again re-
newed his stringent regulations against the Craft.

FRANCKEN, Henry A.—Appointed Deputy Inspectors General by
Stephen Morin, under his patent from the Emperors of the East
and West, at Kingston, Jamaica, between 1762 and 1767. He
in turn appointed Moses M. Hayes, Deputy at Boston, Mass., and
organized a Council of Princes of Jerusalem at Albany, N.Y.

Franc Macon, Franc MaconneriE— The French equivalent for
Freemason and Freemasonry.

FRANKFORT-ON-THE-Main.—The English Grand Lodge established
a Provincial Grand Lodge in this city, in 1766. It declared its
independence in 1782. Since 1825, it has worked under the
title of “ Grand Lodge of the Eclectic Union of Freemasons,” but
is now absorbed.

FRANKLIN, BenJAMIN.—Born at Boston, Mass., 6th January, 1706.
Probably initiated in England during or before 1730, In 1732
he was J. W. of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. On 24th
June, 1734, a letter was sent by him as Grand Master of Penn-
sylvania to the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. In the same
year he brought out an edition of Anderson’s “ Constitutions.”
Afterwards, when ambassador to France, he affiliated himself to

232

FRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FRE

the Lodge of the Nine Sisters, of which Lalande, Court de
Gebelin, and others were members. He took a prominent part
in the initiation of Voltaire. This Lodge held him in such
esteem as to strike a medal in his honour; one of these medals,
the only one known to exist, belongs to the Provincial Grand
Lodge of Mecklenburg.

FRANKS, ORDER OF REGENERATED.—In the autumn of 1815, a
political Fraternity, with ceremonies borrowed from Freemasonry,
was organized in France; its motto was—‘ For God, the King,
and Fatherland.” It had a brief, but successful, existence.

Frater.—Latin, Brother. Used by the Knights Templar, Rosi-
crucians, and other high degrees. The plural is Fratres.

Fraternity. Anglo-Saxon, Brotherhood; German, Briiderschaft.
In the earliest lectures of the last century we find this word
used :—“@Q. How many particular points pertain to a Free-
mason? A. Three; Fraternity, Fidelity, and Taciturnity. @.
What do they represent? -A. Brotherly Love, Relief, and Truth,
among all right Masons.”

FRaATRICELLI—The Order of Little Brethren, dissidents from the
communion of St Francis ; they renounced all possessions, begging
from house to house in rags, and preached against all the vices
of the popes and bishops, predicting the reformation of the Church
and the restoration of the Gospel. They were greatly persecuted,
and finally embraced the doctrines of Luther.

FREDERICK OF Nassau, Prince.—Son of the King of the Netherlands,
and for many years Grand Master of the National Grand Lodge
of that country. He attempted a Masonic reform, in 1819,
rejecting the high degrees, and suggested that the degrees should
be limited to five. 1. Apprentice. 2. Fellow Craft. 3, Master
Mason. 4. Elect Master. 5. Supreme Elect Master. <A few
Lodges adopted this ritual; but, in 1830, when the kingdom of
Belgium was established, they were dissolved, and it has fallen
into disuse.

FREDERICK THE I], SURNAMED THE GREAT.—Born 25th January,
1712, died 17th August, 1786; initiated at Brunswick, 14th
August, 1738; king of Prussia and Protector of the Fraternity.
His life has been written by Thomas Carlyle, the great historian,
and to his pages we may refer the reader. Several accounts are
extant concerning his Masonic career; but there would seem
to be little doubt that for a king, whose business was fighting,
he showed much interest in Masonry. According to Bielfeld,
while still Crown Prince, he established a Lodge at Reinsberg, in
1739, and invited the Baron Von Oberg and Bielfeld to take
part in it, and into this Lodge Count Keyserling, Jordan, Morlen-
dorf, Queis, and Fredersdorf (the Pruce’s valet), were admitted.

233

FRE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FRE

It is also stated that, on the 20th June, 1740, Frederick, after he
had ascended the throne, held a Lodge at Charlottenburg, and, pre-
siding himself as Master, initiated his brother Prince William,
the Margrave Charles of Brandenburg, and Frederick William,
Duke of Holstein. The last named brother was, seven years
later, elected Adjutant Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of the
Three Globes at Berlin. On the 16th July, 1774, Frederick
granted his protection to the National Grand Lodge of Germany,
and officially approved the treaty with the Grand Lodge of
England. In 1777, the Mother Lodge Royal York of Friendship
celebrated the King’s birthday by a festival, upon which Frederick
wrote a memorable letter, as follows :—“ I cannot but be sensible
of the new homage of the Lodge Royal York of Friendship, on
the occasion of the anniversary of my birth, bearing, as it does,
the evidence of its zeal and attachment for my person. Its
orator has well expressed the sentiments which animate all its
labours; and a society which employs itself only in sowing the
seed, and bringing forth the fruit of every kind of virtue in my
dominions, may always be assured of my protection. J¢ is the
glorious task of every good sovereign, and I will never cease to
fulfil it. Aud so I pray God to take you and your Lodge under
His holy and deserved protection. Potsdam, this 14th February,
1777, FREDERICK.” In the Circular issued by the Supreme Council
of Sovereign Inspectors from Charlestown, S.C., 10th October,
1802, it is stated that “on the lst May, 1786, the Grand Constitu-
tion of the xxxiii°®, called the Supreme Council of Sovereign
Grand Inspectcrs General, was finally ratified by His Majesty
the King of Prussia, who, as Grand Commander of the Order of
the Princes of the Royal Secret, possessed the sovereign Masonic
power over all the Craft. In the new Constitution, this higher
power was conferred on a Supreme Council of nine brethren in
each nation, who possess all the Masonic prerogatives, in their
own district, that his Majesty individually possessed, and are
sovereigns of Masonry.” Eight degrees were added by Frederick,
it is said, but the whole question is very obscure.

FrepEricK WiLuiaM III. or Prussta.—Himself not a Mason, he

was a generous patron of the Fraternity, and professed a sincere
desire to see it flourish. He writes thus to the Lodge Royal York
of Friendship, 29th December, 1797:—“<I have never been
initiated, as every one knows, but I am free from conceiving the
slightest distrust of the intentions of the members of the Lodge.
I believe that its design is noble, and founded on the cultivation
of virtue ; that its methods are legitimate, and that every politi-
cal tendency is banished from its operations. Hence I shall take
pleasure in manifesting, on all occasions, my goodwill and my
234

FRE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FRE

affection to the Lodge Royal York of Friendship, as well as to
every other Lodge in my dominions.” An edict was issued by
this sovereign, 20th October 1798, against secret societies, but a
special exception was made in favour of the Freemasons.

FREDERICK WILLIAM IV. oF Prussia——This truly learned and
benevolent prince and man deserves mention in a work of the
present kind. Probably no monarch ever so warmly and con-
sistently gave countenance and help of the most substantial and
enduring nature to archeology. Under his beneficent sway, went
forth from Prussia that expedition to Egypt, under the learned
Dr Lepsius, and during his time was published the most regal
volume the world has yet seen—“ Deukmdler der Algypter,”
Monuments of Egypt—while the patient labours of the scholars,
Lepsius and Brugsch, were supplemented by large funds to
enable their researches to be published in the most beautiful
and correct form. There is a narrow prejudice in this country,
most pitiful to see, against the Prussians; it is most ungenerous
for a nation so closely allied in every way as England is to
Prussia, to evince such utter childishness. Any one who has
ever visited the Egyptian Museum at Berlin, ur its magnificent
art galleries, arranged with the greatest skill, cannot but see
how deeply and truly that noble nation has worked for the
common benefit of the world. We possess, in our own country,
treasures of priceless value, but has there ever been any attempt
to use these for general educational purposes? If we wander
through the halls of the British Museum, we perceive grand and
beautiful objects of art and antiquity, but the palsied hand of
routine cannot write an order that they shall be made means of
education. On the other hand, we find classification and explana-
tion the rule at Berlin. Monuments of the various dynasties of
the land of Khemi are set up in a series, schools of art are
arranged, according to date of production, and the result is, not
the confusion of a “rudes indigestaque moles,’ but an orderly
progression of objects teaching their own story, and this we owe
to that much maligned king, Frederick William IV., who has
been ridiculed by shallow men, as only being fit for a professorial
chair, and slandered as a drunkard by wits over their grog.
It is somewhat extra-Masonic to relate the following anecdote,
never before in print, but it will illustrate the kindly good-
humoured spirit of the late king :—Kladderdatsch, the Berlin
Punch, on one occasion chose to cover its back-page with a car-
toon exhibiting the king in an inebriated state, with bottles of
champagne. Instead of being angry, the king laughed at the
joke, and sent the editor a case of the best Clicquot. Mr Punch,
of London, in his infinite wisdom, delighted, during the Paris

235

FRE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FRE

conferences after the Crimean War, to depict the King of Prussia
as a tipsy person, with a bottle of champagne. This was the
return the English artist made to the patron of Cornelius, Rauch,
and Kaulbach.

FrreE.—Derived from the ordinary practice of the guilds, in the
Middle Ages, to make such persons free as could show a master-
piece in their special art; but in the case of Masons, an oath
and ceremonial, preceded, in the Operative Lodges, the admis-
sion: if not admitted, the Mason, in Scotland, was considered a
Cowan. (See Cowan.) But, as speculative Masons, it indicates
that one who is free should be so in all his thoughts and actions;
and, in another, free in his person and surroundings. A case
as to surroundings occurred in 1782. The W.M. of the Royal
Military Lodge at t Woolwich got into debt, and was confined in
the King’s Bench Prison. The Lodge was an Itinerant Lodge,
and conveyed its warrant (necessarily in the custody of the
Master, who was in the custody of His Majesty) into the prison,
and being securely tyled, made several Masons. The Grand
Lodge, being informed of the matter, summoned the Master
(let us hope with success) and his Wardens before them, “to
answer for their conduct in making Masons in the King’s Bench
Prison,” and passed a resolution “ that it is inconsistent with the
principles of Freemasonry for any Freemasons’ Lodge to be held,
for the purpose of making, passing, or raising Masons, i in any
prison or place of confinement.”

FREE AND ACCEPTED. (See Accepted.)

Free Bornx.—In all the old Constitutions, free birth is required as
@ qualification for an Apprentice. “That the ’Prentice be able
of birth, that is, free born.’—(Lansdowne MS. and others).

Freepom (German, Freiheit)—Freedom, although many confound
it with liberty, is actually very distinct from it. Liberty im-
plies license to act, do, or perform, whereas freedom is the power
of performing proprié motu—from one’s own license—subject to
conscience alone; hence it partakes of the original Anglo-Saxon
meaning of frankness, generosity, a generous willingness to work,
or perform one's duty. Of freedom, Gidicke says:—* A word
that is often heard among us, but which is restricted to the same
limitation as the freedom of social life. We have in our assem-
blies no freedom to act each one as he pleases. But we are, or
should be, free from the dominion of passion, pride, prejudice,
and all the other follies of human nature. We are free from the
false delusion that we need not be obedient to the laws.” A
free-born child is hence jilius generosus, the son of a gentleman
full of integrity.

FREE-MAN, OR FREE AGENT.—A term substituted, by some thought

236

FRE | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [FRE

erroneously, in the qualification for candidates for “free-born,”
or “freeman,” by the Grand Lodges of England and Scotland.

FREEMASON.—An initiate. So called, to distinguish him from an
operative mason. The word was, however, used very early in
tbe parish registers of England. Thus we find (Manchester
Register) “ Burial 1610, Sept. 29th, Edmund Holland, of Man-
chester, ffreemason.” (Astbury Register) :—“ 1685, Small-
wood, Jos. fils Jos. Henshaw, Freemason, bapt. 3° die Nov.
1697, Jos. fils Jos. Henshaw, Freemason, buried 7 April.” In
Cawdray’s “Treasurie of Similies” (1609), copied from Cover-
dale’s translation of Werdmuller’s “Spiritual and Most Precious
Perle” (1550), we find:—“ As the Free-mason heweth the hard
stones .... even so God, the Heavenly Free-mason, buildeth
a Christian Church.” Inastatute passed, 1350 (25 Edward III),
the wages of a Master Freemason are fixed at fourpence per day,
and other Masons at threepence. A Master Freemason was,
“Mestre de franche-peer,” and the others were workers in “ grosse-
peer,’ ie. the former worked in the freestone and finished—
the latter prepared stones for the more experienced work-
men.

FREEMASONS OF THE CuurcH. (See Church, Freemasons of the.)

Free WILL AND Accorp.—A candidate must come of his own free
will and accord, as otherwise his promises before the aporrheta
are shown him become null and void. And it is very reprehen-
sible indeed to persuade any one to join Freemasonry—although
I am sorry to say it is done every day among the dining class of
Masons, who form such a strong body in the Craft. Besides, the
old proverb, “That a volunteer is worth ten pressed men,”
very aptly applies in these cases. Any one seeking admission
should not be actuated by vulgar curiosity, or stimulated by the
idea that he will be, “not as other men are.’ The way of
Masonry is long, and its greatest rewards are only of value to
the man of noble mind and refined heart; for if he have entered
from a mere desire for jewels and letters after his name—pur-
chased however liberally—he will, if he reflect, see that his
breast, adorned with jewels of various degrees, has only become
the shop-window in which he displays the tinsel of his own
vanity. Hence, whoever approaches the confines of the Lodge,
must come with a faith to undergo the ordeal, and uninfluenced by
friends, or by any improper motive. In the spirit in which he
comes, so will he find his ultimate reward. The wisest and best
authorities in the Craft have, for many years, pointed out the
necessity for caution in this matter, but, until some very flagrant
case occurs, the Fraternity will still be blind to the wisdom of
their admonitions,

237

FRE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FRE

FREIMAURER, FREIMAUREREIL—German; Freemason, Freemasonry.

FRENCH, BENJAMIN BRrown.—Born at Chester, New Hampshire,
US., 4th September, 1800; died at Washington, D.C., 12th
August, 1870. Initiated in 1825. He soon became General
Grand Secretary of the General Grand Chapter, and Grand
Recorder of the Grand Encampment of the United States. In
1846, he was Grand Master of the District of Columbia, and in
1859, he was Grand Master of the Templars of the United
States, and was re-elected in 1862. He held corresponding rank
in the Ancient and Accepted Rite in America. His main dis-
tinction was that of a prompt and wise Masonic jurist, but he
also contributed many songs, odes, and other poetical effusions
to the literature of the Craft.

FRENCH Rite (Rite Frangais ou Moderne)—Instituted by the
Grand Orient in 1786, consisting of seven degrees:—l, 2, 3.
E.A.P., F.C.,and M.M.; 4. Elect, or First Order of Rose-Croix ;
5. Ecossais, or Second Order of Rose Croix; 6. Knight of the
Fast, or of the Sword, Third Order of Rose-Croix; 7. Sovereign
Prince Rose-Croix, or ne plus ultra. Practised in France, in
Brazil, and in Louisiana. In the fourth degree there are three
chambers: the Room of Preparation, the Cavern, and the Council
Chamber. The moral of this degree is the fact of the certainty
of crime being promptly avenged by punishment. The presi-
dent is called Trés-Sage (very wise), the S. W. Grand Inspector,
the J. W. Severe Inspector, and the members are termed Secret
Elects. In the fifth degree three chambers are also required.
1. Preparation Room; 2. Secret Vault; 3. Temple of Perfection,
or Sublime Lodge, divided by a curtain into two divisions.
President is termed Trés Grand (very great), the Wardens are
Grand Wardens, and the members Sublime Masters. Sixth
degree, three chambers as before: 1. Preparation; 2. Council
of Cyrus; 3. Hallof the West. The President represents Cyrus,
as Sovereign Master; the Orator represents Daniel, and is Grand
Master of the Palace; the S. W. is General Grand Master of
Cavalry, representing Sisinna; the J. W. is General Grand
Master of Infantry, representing Nabuzardan ; the Keeper of the
Seals is Grand Master of the Chancery, representing Ratim;
Treasurer, Grand Master of Finances, representing Mithridates,
son of Gabazar; Secretary, Grand Master of Dispatches, repre-
senting Semelius; the Grand Master of Ceremonies represents
Abazar, and the candidate representing Zerubbabel, Prince of
Judah ; the president is termed Very Illustrious Master, and the
wardens are styled Illustrious ; the members are called Knights.
The seventh degree is identical with the eighteenth degree of
the A. and A. Rite, with some modifications. In 1860, the

238

Fre | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [FUR

seventh degree was made conformable to philosophic principles,
and so remains at the summit of the French modern system. It
is also practised in some Lodges in Holland.

Frkres Pontives. (See Brothers of the Bridge.)}—John de Medicis,
Master of this community in 1560, was probably a son of Cosmo,
Duke of Florence, who died a cardinal, in 1562.

Freya.—A deity of an hermaphrodite nature in Scandinavia ; also
the Scandinavian Isis.

FRIEND oF St Joun.—The sixth degree of the Swedish system, and
comprised in the degree of Knight of the East and West.

Frienp or Trutu.—The fifth degree of the rite of African Archi-
tects.

FRIENDLY SocleTIEsS—A number of societies for the relief of
mechanics have sprung up in England, some with sufficiently
fantastic names; but as they have no connection with Free-
masonry, and are merely for special purposes, they may be
omitted here.

FRIENDS, ORDER OF PerFect.—A society of distinguished German
savans, meeting in the last century, under the presidency of
Baron Knigge, the poet, sometimes called the Seven Allies.

Funp oF BENEVOLENCE.—By the Constitutions, its distribution and
application is directed to be monthly, for which purpose a Lodge
of Benevolence is held on the last Wednesday of every month,
consisting of all present and past Grand Officers, all actual
Masters of Lodges, and twelve Past Masters.

Funp, GranD Master’s,—A fund over which the G.M. exercises
sole control, The principal sum is derived from a testimonial
in money, given to the late Earl of Zetland, K.T., when G. M.,
accepted by him, and directed to be so appropriated.

FUNDS OF THE LODGE. (See Finances.)

FuNERAL Rites. (See Burial.)

FurniTture.—Technically, the Bible, square, and compasses, dedi-
cated to God, the Master of the Lodge, and the Craft. Formerly,
the Mosaic pavement, Blazing Star, and the Indented Tessel,
were regarded as the furniture, to which the former have been
added. The furniture of a Masonic Lodge, in former times, was
disposed with the same scrupulous exactness as the furniture of
the tabernacle which Moses made according to the pattern which
the Deity showed him in the Mount. The tracing board was
then placed beside the Master’s pedestal, the Bible, square, and
compasses upon it, the first great Light being displayed in Ruth.
This is for the first degree. The Book of Constitutions was
placed before the I. P. M.; the globes in the west; the rough
ashlar in the north-east, the perfect ashlar in the north-west ;
the Master Masons were stationed in the south-west, and Past

239

FUS] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [c

Masters in the south-east; the Fellow Crafts and Apprentices
in the north, with the Secretary, while the Treasurer’s post was
not far off.

Fustizr.—An officer of the Grand Orient of France at the begin-
ning of this century. In 1810 he published a “Geographical
Chart of the Lodges in France and its Dependencies,’ and
was also the author of “Alphabetical Nomenclature of the
Degrees.” Lenning says that Fustier was a Masonic jeweller,
and also dealt in Masonic rituals, of which he had made a collec-
tion of more than four hundred, which he sold at fixed prices to
members of the Fraternity.

Futtocks, SociETY oF.—A nautical society, with passwords, existing
among sailors, when pressgangs were in vogue, now happily
unnecessary. The members were chiefly sailors of the commer-
cial navy, and they protected themselves by these means.

Fytrot. (See Jaina Cross.)

G

G.—1. The seventh letter of the English alphabet, and its fifth arti-
culation, derived to us through the Latin and Greek, from the
early Aryan languages. In Greek, Chaldic, Syriac, Hebrew,
Assyrian, Samaritan, Etrurian, Coptic, in the modern Romaic
and Gothic (perhaps in the Bugis, Tibetan, Mongolian, and in
the Mkhedrih of the Georgians), it occupies the third place;
while in the Cyrillic, Glagolitic, Croat, Russian, Servian, and
Wallachian, it stands fourth. It is the fifth in the Arabic, and
the twentieth in the Ethiopian. In the Hebrew system it was
called Gimel, with the numerical value of 4, and the significa-
tion of Camel. As a numeral, it formerly also stood for 400,
and with a dash over it, G, 40,000. It was associated with the
third sacred name of God in Hebrew bing (Ghadol), magnus.
2. In Masonry, the letter G, equivalent to the Hebrew and the
Greek ©, is constantly displayed in the Masonic Lodges.
Whether the substitution of the letter G, and its reference to
geometry in the second degree, is grounded in real tradition, is
difficult to say. I am disposed to think it an invention of the
last century. Perhaps it is as well to refer to the Syriac
Gad, the Swedish Gud, the German Gott, and the English God,
all derived from the Persian Goda or Khoda, itself a derivation
from the pronoun signifying himself. That the letter G should
have been intruded into the Fellow Craft’s degree, only shows

that the ceremony of that degree must have been put into its
240

GAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GAB

present form at a comparatively recent period. The following
doggerel may go for what it is worth :—

‘*Resp. In the midst of Solomon’s Temple there stands a G,
A letter for all to read and see ;
But few there be that understand
What means the letter G.

Ex. My friend, if you pretend to be of this Fraternity,
You can forthwith and rightly tell what means that letter G.

Resp. By sciences are brought about
Bodies of various kinds,
Which do appear to perfect sight ;
But none but males shall know my mind.-

Ex. The Right shall.
Resp. If Worshipful.

Ex. Both Right and Worshipful I am ;
To hail you I have command,
That you forthwith may let me know,
As I you may understand.

Resp. By letters four and science five,
This G aright doth stand, :
In a due art and proportion ;
You have your answer, Friend.”

Gasaon-NoreL (Hebrew, Ses Ty, perfect friend; also assumens
collis)—1. A word used in the Ancient and Accepted Rite. It
is sometimes corruptly given as Gabaon-Notade. Oliver says
(Landm. i. 335): “In philosophical Masonry, heaven, or more
correctly, the third heaven, is denominated Mount Gabaon, which
is feigned to be accessible only by the seven degrees that com-
pass the winding staircase. These are the degrees terminating
in the Royal Arch.” The Septuagint and Vulgate form of jw22
(Gibeon), the city where the tabernacle existed during the reigns
of David and Solomon (1 Chron. xvi. 39; xxi. 29; 2 Chron.
i, 3), meaning a city built on a hill. Ina ritual of the middle of
the last century, Gabanon is given as the name of a Master
Mason, and in the French ritual of Adonhiramite Masonry, a
Master is called Gabaoc, the reason assigned for this being “that
the heart of a Mason ought to be pure enough to be a temple
suitable for God.” Thus we see that the heart of a Mason is
directly connected with the Ark of the Covenant, and the place
of its deposit. Josephus calls it Gabao. The place Gabaon is
now called El Jeb, the Arabic equivalent, and is mentioned by
Bohaeddin (Vita Saladin, p. 243).

GABAONNE.—In French, a term for the widow of a Master Mason.

Gazor (Hebrew, 1323, strong).—An important word in some of the
high degrees.

Q 241

GAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GAT

GABRIEL (813, a man of God)—The name of one of the arch-
angels referred to in several of the high degrees, especially the
twenty-eighth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite. Gabriel
was connected with the planet Jupiter, the greater benefic.

GABRIELITES.—A_ sect of Anabaptists in Pomerania, Germany,
founded by Gabriel Scherling.

GABRINO.—The founder, at the end of the seventh century, of the
Order of the Apocalypse.

GAEDICKE, JOHANN CHRISTIAN.—A Berlinese bookseller, born 14th
December, 1763 ; initiated 1804. He published, in 1818, the
Freimaurer Lexicon.

GacaRIN, PRrince.—Present at several conventions, and especially
at those of 1785 and 1787, at Paris.

GaGEs, Marquis pE.—Chamberlain of the Emperor of Germany,
called to the Convention of Paris,

GAILLARD-LAFERRIERE—An advocate. Elected an officer of the
Grand Orient of France, the 5th February, 1808, and re-elected
14th August, 1812.

GatRAL.—A jurisconsult. Elected an officer of the Grand Orient
of France, and re-elected at the same time as Gaillard-Laferriére,

GALAHAD, or GALAAD (Hebrew, “1373, tumulus, testis, Gen. xxxi.
48).—He was the son of Machir, son of Manasseh, eldest son of
Joseph (Josh. xvii. 1). He occurs as an officer iu the fourteenth
degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite, or Secret Vault of
James VI., being Keeper of the Seals.

GALBERT.—Grand Master of Knights Templar in 1500.

GALLOWAY, ALEXANDER, EARL oF.—Grand Master of Scotland, 3d
November, 1757.

GANGLER—1. Zhe Wanderer, name of the candidate in the
mysteries of Scandinavia. 2. The sun, in the same mysteries.
G. A. O. T. U—Abbreviation of The Grand Architect of the

Universe.

Garinous.—1. Said to have been that Patriarch of Jerusalem
between whose hands the Knights of the East and West first
took their vows in 1182. It was a corruption of Garimond. 2.
Tent G in the thirty-second degree of the Ancient and Accepted
Rite.

GARTER, ORDER OF THE. (See Orders, Royal English.)

Gaston, JoHN.—Grand Duke of Tuscany. In 1737, he inaugura-
ted a persecution against the Freemasons in his dominions. (See

Tuscany.)

GATES OF THE TEMPLE.—The east, west, and south gates of the
temple exist only in philosophical Masonry. There were no such
gates in Solomon’s historical structure. They allude to the sun

242

GAU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GEB

rising in the east, at its zenith in the south, and setting in the
west. In the third degree they allude to birth, life, and death,
and youth, manhood, and old age.

GAUDIN, THEOBALD.—Better known as the monk Gaudini. Elected
Grand Master of the Templars, 1291, died 1301, according to the
list of the Strict Observance.

GauGE. (See Twenty-four Inch Gauge.)

GAUNTLETS.—1. Gloves, at one time cased in steel, worn for protec-
tion in battle. In America they have been adopted as part of the
costume of a Knight Templar, under regulation of the supreme
authority, which directs them to be made of buff leather, the flap
to extend four inches upwards from the wrist, having the appro-
priate cross embroidered in gold on the proper coloured velvet,
two inches long. 2. Gauntlets are also worn by Grand and
Provincial Grand Officers in England.

GaveL —The gavel is at once appropriate to the Master of a Lodge
and the Junior Entered Apprentice. This tool is placed in the
hand of the latter on his first entrance into Masonry as a sign of
labour, and therefore is specially the implement with which his
duties towards the Rough Ashlar (himself) should be performed.
It is also the sign of authority in the Master, and the fact that
he still holds it in his hand is to remind him that, notwith-
standing he has arrived at the highest office in the Lodge, there
may still be acerbities of manner and imperfections of character
he may correct by means of the gavel, which he has learnt to
wield. It is true that the Master is supreme in his Lodge, but
the gavel remains an instrument in common with the very
least of his brethren. In Operative Masonry it is made use
of to chip off the rough corners of the Brute Stone, and thus fit
it better for the use of the great Designer in that house not
made with hands, built eternal in the heavens. In speculative
Masonry it has a similar importance in mental and moral affairs.
The word Gavel is derived from Giebel or Gupfel, gable or peak,
in German—the idea of a pointed extremity being present in
both nouns. This Gavel is also sometimes called a Hiram, be-
cause it denotes the practical governor of the Craft, and is em-
ployed to keep that orderin a Lodge that he is supposed to have
done in the course of the construction of the Temple. The
proper form of the gavel is that of a stonemason’s hammer. The
little auctioneer’s hammer sometimes is too strongly suggestive
of the initiate’s being sold, in more senses than one, and it is
quite certain that the latter implement is quite inappropriate,
not being fitted “to break off the corners of rough stones.” It
has occasionally been confounded with the setting maul

GEBAL. (See Giblimites.)

243

GED | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GEN

GEDALIAH (Hebrew, $21; Taught of God.)—The second officer
ina council of Super-Excellent Masters. He represents Geda-
liah, the son of Pashur (Jer. xxxviii. 1), one of the courtiers of
Zedekiah. He was present at the destruction of the Temple, and
advised the surrender of the prophet Jeremiah to death, from
which he was saved by Ebed-melech, the Ethiopian eunuch.

GEDER (Hebrew, 773; Septuagint, rade) —A password, implying a
fortified place; used in the Order of Ishmael.

GEHAZI (Hebrew, "03, Vision Valley)—1. The servant of Elisha,
who was so signally punished for disobedience. 2. The term
for an acolyte in the Order of Ishmael, but not applied until
the second series of degrees is entered upon.

GemaRa. (See Talmud.)

GENERAL ASSEMBLY. (See Assembly.)

GENERAL GRAND CHAPTER.—After much anterior negotiation, the
General Grand Chapter of Royal Arch Masons for the United
States of America was established at a meeting at Middletown
on the 9th January, 1806, and since 1826 it has met triennially.

GENERAL GRAND HiGH Priest.—The presiding officer of the
General Grand Chapter, U.S.A. Elected every third year.

GENERALISSIMO.—Second officer in a priory, encampment, precep-
tory, or commandery of Knights Templar in America. His
functions are similar to those of a Senior Warden ; his jewel is a
square, surmounted by a paschal lamb. The dignity was first
assumed by Cardinal Richelieu, on his leading the French army
into Italy.

GENEROSITY OF PRusSIA, ORDER OF.—lInstituted by Frederick I
king of Prussia, in 1685, being then Electoral Prince. Badge:
a cross or, emaillée azure, on the part of which appears the letter
F, or. On the three other arms of the cross is the motto Gener-
osite, so disposed that GENE is on the right, Rosi on the left,
and TE at the bottom. The four chief angles are occupied by
golden eagles displayed. Ribbon: black. Charles Louis, Baron
de Pollnitz, the historian, and Voltaire, were knights of the
Order.

GENEUX.—Chief of the Royal Treasury. Elected an officer of the
Grand Orient of France, 25th March, 1801; president of the
Symbolical Grand Lodge, 24th June, 1813.

GENTLEMAN Mason.—Some old lectures contain the following :—
“@Q. What do you learn by being a Gentleman Mason? A. Se-
crecy, morality, and good-fellowship. @. What do you learn by
being an Operative Mason? A. To hew, square, mould stone,
lay a level, and raise a perpendicular.”

GENUFLEXION.—A bending of the knee, or kneeling. The act of

244

GEO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GER

kneeling has, among all peoples and in all ages, been a token of
reverence, and a sign of dependence, supplication, and humility.

GEOMETRICAL MasTER Mason.—Used in the last century to denote
a Past Master, also a Gentleman Mason—a Domatic Mason being
the designation of an Operative Mason. In applying for admis-
sion to the Royal Arch, according to the rules of those days, the
applicant produced a certificate that he was a Geometrical Master
Mason. The term was used in Operative Lodges prior to Grand
Lodges.

GEOMETRIC PorntTs.—In French Masonry, the four cardinal points.

GEOMETRY.—Among the mathematical sciences, geometry is the
one which has the most especial reference to architecture, and
we can, therefore, under that name, understand the whole science
of Freemasonry. In Anderson’s “ Book of Constitutions,” Free-
masonry is frequently called geometry ; and of the latter he says
that the whole being of the Fraternity is comprehended in it.

Grorce, Knicut oF St. (See Knight of St George.)

GEoRGIA.—Masonry was introduced into this State at a very early
period, between 1730 and 1735, a warrant, since destroyed, hav-
ing been granted to Roger Lacey for a Ladge called Solomon’s
Lodge, at Savannah. In 1786, the Grand Lodge of Georgia was
instituted, Bro. William Stephen being the first Grand Master.

GERBIER, Dr.—One of the irremovable Masters of the ancient Grand
Lodge of France. He is said to have fabricated the title of the
Metropolitan Chapter of France, which it was pretended had
emanated from Edinburgh, in 1721.

GERMAN Union oF TwENTY-TWo.—Founded by Bahrdt, with
twenty-one others. There is little to add on this subject to the
article Bahrdt. It only lasted four years, and the publication,
in 1789, of a work entitled Mehr Noten als Text (“More Notes
ra Text, or the German Union of xx11.”) hastened its down-
all.

GERMANY.—To the real Masonic student, Germany must ever be a
hallowed country. It was there that the Teutonic Knights es-
tablished themselves ; it is thence that our real Masonic learning
is derived, and it is the only country which, at all times, and at
any risk, has maintained the principle of Tolerance. Those who
are acquainted with magical affinities can well understand why,
in Germany, should have been centred, not only the philosophy
and learning of this planet, but also its Masonic sympathies and
excellencies, Aware of this idea, Frederick II. of Prussia was
anxious to draw towards his State the minds and hearts of all
feeling and thinking men in a free communion, and hence, work-
ing on the foundation of the Teutonic Knights, he and his suc-
cessors have erected an empire, which, despite the cavils of the

245

GER] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GER

Roman Catholic priests (although the laity do not sympathise),
is likely to give them some trouble. As we have heard it in the
motto, Ordo ab Chao, so in a seething, burning, brilliant Ger-
many, not as it has been represented, we can most distinctly see
the little shining light of Masonry, pure and clear. Rent as
Russia at this moment is with the dissident sects of Raskol, it
never was so rent as was Germany a hundred years ago, or 80,
when Frederick II. ascended the throne. Mysticism of the older
kind was disappearing, rascaldom of the first water was just put-
ting its otter-like nose above water, and the old straightforward
system of Three Degrees was nigh ended, when Frederick, whom
I should rather be disposed to call the Eccentric, than the
Great, became, in virtue of his obligations, Protector of Free-
masons throughout his realms, It is very certain that his own
affiliation to the Fraternity inspired him with better notions of
government; but his fantastic mind, as we can see it through
the self-confident letters, always asking for flattery, that he
addressed to Voltaire, was more likely to revel in gorgeous
adjuncts than true principles; hence his royal protection being
given to Masonry, and secured, through his descendants, as a
possession, there was an end—Masonry was left in confusion, so
tar as Prussia was concerned, at his death. Gradually, several
Grand Lodges grew up, and were recognized; dissident sects of
the Fraternity arose, flourished, and faded away ; and the usual
battle between Mason and Church was fought out. The one
side could not interpret the views of the other; while the other
claimed priority of existence, and the right of prescription ; and
so the matter stood for many years in a clearly undefined
position ; just as the position of Ultramontanes, Old Catholics,
and Protestants is now. These battles forcibly illustrate the
fact that, however you may contemn or oppress any institution,
you cannot serve it better than by prominent notice. The early
history of Freemasonry in Germany is certainly interwoven with
the history of the building fraternities of the Middle Ages, there
being a strong similarity between the usages, customs, and special
terms of the Freemasons, and the Stein-Metzen, or stone cutters, of
Germany. These ere:—1l. Their classification into Masters,
Fellow Crafts, and Apprentices. 2. The government of the
society by a special number of officers. 3. The exclusion of the
uninitiated from their meetings. 4. The peculiar qualifications for
membership. 5 The equality of all members. 6. Their mutual
obligations of succour. 7. Peculiar laws, jurisdiction, and general
regulations, 8. Ceremonies. 9. Opening and closing. 10.
Privileges of a Mason’s son. 11. Examination of strange
Brephren etc. It is stated by Preston, that, in 1733, eleven
24

GER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GHI

German Masons applied to Lord Strathmore for authority to
open a Lodge at Hamburg, and a dispensation was granted them.
On the 6th of December, 1737, another Lodge, known as
“ Absalom” (from 1741), was instituted in Hamburg; and in
August, 1738, the special Lodge at Brunswick initiated the
Crown Prince Frederick, afterwards King of Prussia (see
Frederick II.), and he afterwards was Master of his own Lodge
at Charlottenburg. In 1738-9, several Lodges were established
at Dresden; and, in 1741, the Lodge Minerva of the Three
Palm Trees was instituted at Leipzig In 1742, Frankfort-on-
the-Main established the Lodge of Unity, and a Provincial
Grand Lodge for Hamburg and Lower Saxony was established in
1741. <A second Lodge, the St George, was founded in 1743,
and the Lodge Frederick was instituted at Hanover in 1744,
although it did not enter upon an active career until 1746. The
Seven Years’ War closed almost all the Lodges. In 1757, the
first Lodge under the Strict Observance was opened at Naum-
burg, by the name of Lodge of the Three Banners. The Provincial
Grand Lodge of Frankfort was chartered in 1766. In Prussia,
the Lodge over which Frederick II. presided, was called the
“First Lodge,” or “ The Lodge of the King, Our Grand Master.”
In 1740, September 13th, another Lodge was established in
Berlin, “ Zu den Dret Welt Kugelen,” the Three Globes ; and, in
1744, this Lodge assumed the title of Royal Grand Mother
Lodge of the Three Globes, constituting under it subordinate
Lodges at Meiningen, Frankfort, Breslau, Halle, and other
places. In 1747, Frederick, who continued Grand Master,
appointed the Duke of Holstein-Beck, Vice Grand Master <A
new Lodge, La Petite Concorde, was soon afterwards instituted at
Berlin ; and, in 1760, a third Lodge was opened called “the Three
Doves,” the founder being Tilley de Lerney, and the members
French prisoners of war. In 1765, Zinnendorf became Grand
Master of the Grand Lodge of the Three Globes, but abandoned
it in the following year, and, in 1770, obtained a warrant for a
new Lodge, called the Grand National Lodge of Germany, with
the royal sanction. In 1772, the Grand Lodge of the Three
Globes assumed the title of the “ National Grand Mother Lodge
for the Prussian States.” The Lodge of the Three Doves,
founded in 1760, separated from the Three Globes, and assumed
the title of “Royal York of Friendship.” These three Grand
Lodges still exist, and are under the protection of the Emperor,
King William I who is himself an ardent and efficient Free-
mason; the Imperial Prince of Germany, and heir to the two
crowns, being the Grand Master.

GuiBLiM —Dr Anderson thus spells Giblum It is stated that in

247

GIB The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [crc

1350 John de Spoulee, “called Master of the Ghiblim,” built
St George’s Chapel.
GIBALIM.—A corruption of Giblim. (See Gblites.)

Giss.—Grand Secretary of the Royal Grand Lodge, and Grand
Chapter of the Order of H. R. D. M. of Kilwinning, at Edin-
burgh, 1806.

GIBBER, GABRIEL —Warden under Sir Christopher Wren; said to
have been Grand Master of Masons in England, in 1685.

GIBEON.—A city of Judea, north of Jerusalem. The seat of the
Tabernacle was at this place. The name is symbolically used
in the French rite for the Master, who must have a pure heart,
in which the High and Holy One may dwell. It is also used in
the Swedish ritual

GiBLITEs, or GrBLimiTes (Hebrew, 0523)—1. An important word
in Masonry 2. The inhabitants of the city and district of
Gebal, in Phoenicia, were called the Giblites. Although the
territory was assigned to them by prophecy, like many other
prophecies it was not accomplished. In fact, like many other
races spoken of and magnified into importance, it had no exist-
ence in any system. It was to the city of Byblos, said to be
identical with Gebal, that the mystic coffin of Osiris was wafted.
And hence Past Masters are invested with a peculiar title and
password. It is quite unnecessary for me to attempt to instruct
on this point. Every Past Master knows the square in its
proper delineation. 3. The inhabitants were said to excel in the
art of stone squaring. It is somewhat singular that King
Solomon should have been obliged to call in the aid of so many
nations, unless the legend is intended to refer to the universality
of Masonry, and prophetically to the aphorism, that “many are
called, but few are chosen”

GICHTEL, JOHN GEORGE—A celebrated theosophist, born at Ratis-
bon, in 1638, and died, 1710. His parents were wealthy and
well born people, of good repute Saint Martin gives a graphic
account of him. He drew upon himself the hatred of the priests
by a treatise on the bad state of the clergy in his country, and as
he refused to recant, the priests persecuted him and forced him
to fly to Holland, where for a time he lived in the greatest
poverty, at Amsterdam. He was, like Bohme, a born theoso-
phist, and had glinipses of Sophia, or the Eternal Bride (Wisdom),
before he made acquaintance with the works of the other philo-
sophers. Shortly after his arrival at Amsterdam, these works,
then excessively rare, fell into his hands, and after a diligent
study of the Three Principles,and the Seven Fornis of Nature, he
fathomed their meaning, and pursued the study of theosophy as

248

cic] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cic

the sole delight of his life. Gichtel called prayer the spiritual
meat, and reading the drink, of the soul. While at Amsterdam,
he became acquainted with an enormously wealthy and worthy
widow. After she had come to know him well, she frankly ex-
pressed to him her desire to be united to him indissolubly. He
esteemed her, and even felt a sort of inclination towards her, but he
gave no answer; he withdrew, and remained at home, without
going out, for four weeks. One day, as he was walking in his
chamber, he saw, at noon, a hand come down from heaven, which
joined his hand with that of the widow. He heard, at the same
time, a strong, clear voice, which said, “You must have her.”
Anyone else, in his place, would have taken this manifestation
as a divine direction, but he soon saw it was only the widow’s
spirit, which, in the fervency of her prayers, had penetrated the
outward heaven, and reached the astral spirit. “From that
moment,” says St Martin (from whose letter to Baron Kirch-
berger the foregoing is condensed), “ he gave himself altogether to
Sophia, who would have no divided heart ; he saw that he was
called to the priesthood of the highest order. Without any seek-
ing of his own, he received letters from several lords of Germany—
even sovereigns consulting him ; women of all classes sought his
acquaintance, and his hand. It is remarkable that the prayers
he offered for them only added oil to their fires, till Sophia ad-
vised him to leave off praying for them.” It would seem, accord-
ing to the stories related of him by his followers, that his powers
not only resembled, bnt transcended, those of Swedenborg, whose
spiritual powers were not unfolded until many years after Gich-
tel’s decease. In 1672, when Louis XIV. laid siege to Amsterdam,
Gichtel, by the power of his will, is reported by his disciples to
have exercised influence enough to cause the raising of the siege,
and he afterwards found in the papers the names of the very
regiments and squadrons he had beheld in hisvision. St Martin
thus relates his marriage to the heavenly Sophia, the divine Wis-
dom, which, of course, we must take in a mystical sense :-—
“ Sophia, his dear divine Sophia, whom he loved so well, and had
never seen, came on Christmas day, 1673, and made him her first
visit : he, in the third principle, saw this shining, heavenly virgin.
On this occasion she accepted him for her husband, and the mar-
riage was consummated in ineffable delight. She, in distinct
words, promised him conjugal fidelity—that she would never
leave him, neither in his crosses, nor in his poverty, nor in sick-
ness, nor in death, but that she would always dwell with him in
the luminous ground within. She assured him she would abun-
dantly recompense him the sacrifices he had made in having
given up, for her, an alliance with any of the rich women who
249

cic] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GIL

had wanted to have him. She gave him to hope for a spiritual
progeniture; and for dower she brought essential, substantial
faith, hope, and charity, into his heart. The wedding festivities
lasted to the beginning of 1674. He then took a more com-
modious lodging —a good-sized house at Amsterdam,—though he
had not a farthing of capital of his own, nor undertook anything
to make money, nor ever asked a groat from anybody, either for
himself or others ; yet, as several of his friends went to visit him,
he had to entertain them. Sophia had also a central language,
without words, without vibration of air, which was like no human
language; nevertheless, he understood it as well as his mother
tongue. This is what assured him that he was seduced by no
external astral, and he trusted it with all his heart. Thus his
vocation was derived from the sublimest source, and he would
not have exchanged the poverty of Jesus Christ, which formed
part of the dower of Sophia, for all the treasures of the world.
All the most hidden mysteries were disclosed to him. His
spouse revealed to him one wonder after another, as well in the
inward light world, as in outward nature; and he lived more in
heaven than on earth. He followed the direction of Sophia in
everything, and had no will of his own. From that time he gave
himself a sacrifice, to be accursed for his brethren, even without
knowing them ; and all that he asked in his prayers—often only
even in thought—was granted. Sophia gave him to understand
that if he desired to enjoy her favours without interruption, he
must abstain from every earthly enjoyment and desire, and he
did so scrupulously. At the beginning of his union with Sophia,
he thought he might rest there, and wanted only to enjoy. She
showed him that that could not be, and that he must fight for his
brothers and sisters ; that he ought, as long as he remained under
the earthly covering, to employ the time for the deliverance of
those who have not yet obtained their inheritance and inward re-
pose.” (Saint Martin’s Correspondence, pp. 170 and 99.) He
founded the Society of the Thirty, was a contemporary of Raadt
(afterwards his enemy), and of Ueberfeld, his most intimate dis-
ciple. In 1682, his edition of Jacob Bohme’s works was com-
pleted and published.

GILBERTINES, ORDER OF.—A religious fraternity and sisterhood
founded by St Gilbert of Sempringham, Lincolnshire, in 1148.

GiLzEAD. (See Galahad.) The Keeper of the Seals in the Scottish
degree of the Sacred Vault of James VI.

GILGUL, DoctrinE or —Certain of the learned Jews have believed,
for many centuries, in the doctrine of Gilgul, according to which
the bodies of Jews deposited in foreign tombs contain within
them a principle of soul, which cannot rest until, by a process,

250

GIL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cIv

called by them the “ Whirling of the Soul,” the immortal particle
reaches once more the sacred soil of the Promised Land. This
whirling of souls was supposed to be accomplished by a process
somewhat similar to that of the metempsychosts of the Hindus,
the psychical spark being conveyed through bird, beast, or fish,
and sometimes the most minute insect. The famous Rabbi
Akiba (followed by the R.R. Judah and Meir) declared that
none could come to the resurrection save those of the Jews who
were buried in the Holy Land, or whose remains were in the
process of ages gradually brought thither. I have already referred
to the earth in the Campo Santo at Rome, Pisa, and elsewhere,
which is connected with this strange belief. In Picart’s wonder-
ful and laborious work there are many references to the doctrine.
The learned may consult further authorities on this curious sub-
ject in the Kabbala Denudata of Heinrich Khunrath, 1677.

GILKES, PETER WILLIAM.—Born at London, 1763, died 1833. His
knowledge of Masonry was very great, and he taught the prin-
ciples of the Craft orally with much success and credit to him-
self; and he can never be forgotten wherever Masonry is in any
degree of substantiality. (See Oliver’s “ Discrepancies of Free-
masonry.” London, 1875.)

GirDLE.—This was regarded as the symbol of chastity and purity;
and to unloose the cincture of Venus was to initiate a female
into the solemn duties of maternity. It is, in many rites,
analogous to the Masonic apron, and especially sacred to all
the female virtues. The girdle is also a symbol of strength
and power.

GIVING UP Masonry.—It may not be out of place to say a few
words on a point of no little moment to the ardent and enthusi-
astic student of Freemasonry ; and although it cannot be to the
real Mason any cause of alarm, as the Royal Art is not in any
danger of perishing, it is still a source of regret. It is always sad
to see friends, who, in the brightness of the summer morning, had
set forth with alacrity and cheerfulness, first lagging behind, and
then sitting down with an indolent tranquillity, and saying: “I
have done “enough ; I know all about Masonry I care to know,
and care not to go “further.” Surely it is far more delightful to
the intellectual Mason to go on labouring and increasing know-
ledge by labour, than to resign the implements of the art, and
fold his arms, like a dissatisfied workman on strike! There are
such infinite resources to be utilized, that every speculative
Mason can find in some department of the science sufficient to
occupy, delight, and instruct him. Hence it is obvious that
those brethren who retire from an indolence of character, or a

lack of energy, indirectly stay the onward progress of the art.
25

GLA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GLo

To any such who may read this work I would ardently appeal,
and entreat them to return to the pleasing labours of the science,
and not rest content with the honours of brevet rank, or think
their duty performed when the Past Master's honoured seat of
rest is reached. It is then, indeed, that the leisure afforded by
the position should give greater opportunity for study and
further instruction.

GLAIRE, PETER MauriceE—Born in Switzerland, 1743, died 1819.
He was the founder of a rite of seven degrees, and, in 1764, an
intimate friend of King Stanislaus Poniatowski. He returned
to his native country in 1788; in 1810 he was elected Grand
Master for three years of the cantons of Switzerland, and, in
1813, Grand Master ad vitam of the Roman Grand Orient of
Helvetia, by which body his rite had been adopted.

GLastonBurY, Hoty Tuorn or.—Glastonbury Abbey is by tradi-
tion supposed to be the oldest church in Albion, and said to have
been founded by Joseph of Arimathea, who begged the body of
the Saviour. Joseph is said to have come to England in the
year 63 of our Lord, and to have been buried in the church he
built at the place, called by the Britons Ynis-witryn, in Somerset-
shire, afterwards known as Avallonia, and as Glastron or Glascon.
Here the venerable Joseph, in the company of his disciples,
stuck his staff in the ground, and prostrated himself in prayer at
a spot called Weary-all Hill (“for weary all they were”) This
staff miraculously took root, and for centuries budded and
blossomed on Christmas Day. It is of the genus Crategus, or
the Sharp-spine. The legend of the Holy Thorn and its history
has been succinctly and beautifully told by Brother Thomas
Sampson, of Yeovil, Somersetshire. The famous King Arthur
was said—and apparently with all historical certainty—to have
been buried here; this ancient church is undoubtedly mentioned
in the Culdee legends and romaunts of King Arthur. An
historian of the twelfth century, speaking of the extreme holi-
ness of every part of this ancient church, says :-—‘ Moreover, in
the pavement, on every side, may be found stones designedly
interlaid in triangles and squares, under which, I believe, some
sacred enigma be enshrined. Ido no injustice to religion.” He
also mentions two ancient pyramidical structures.

GLEASON, BENJAMIN.—A distinguished Masonic lecturer, who was
a pupil of Thomas Smith Webb, from 1806 to 1842.

GLOBES, CELESTIAL AND TERRESTRIAL—Adopted, in the second
degree, as symbols of the universality of Masonry. The Mexicans
regarded the globe as an emblem of universal power, and our
own sovereign is supposed to receive the sacred orb as a symbol,

on coronation. The old Frankish monarchs received a globe of
252

GLo| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GLo

crystal for their enlightenment, and some of these are preserved
at the Louvre. The Druids of the highest class were invested
with crystal globes of rock-beryl, as a means of divination. To
possess one of these rare and beautiful objects has ever been
regarded by the philosophical magicians as a sacred trust, and,
according to its use, an augury of good or evil ultimate fortune.
Sir Walter Scott possessed one of these, reputed to have belonged
to the famous Dr John Dee of Mortlake. This is now in the
British Museum. I have a very fine one, in which visions have
been beheld by those blessed with the privilege of sight. The
winged globe was the national symbol of Egypt, and the land of
Khemi is frequently alluded to as the land of the winged globe.
Masonically speaking, the globes were the chapiters of the two
columns of King Solomon’s Temple, and the pomegranate was
the lotus, an emblem of silence and abundance.

Gory, SYMBOL oF.—The Blazing Star used to be, in the old lectures,
called “the glory in the centre.”

GuovEs.—1. Gloves of white lambskin, in token of purity, should
always be worn in the Lodge; and if by accident they are
omitted at ordinary meetings, they are de rigeur on the occasion
of an installation, or any other solemn ceremony. 2. In France
and Germany it is customary to present the initiate with two pairs
of gloves; one for himself, and one pair for the lady best
esteemed by him. The lesson intended to be conveyed by this
ceremony is, that he should be thereafter enabled to come into
the Lodge with “hands pure and undefiled;* that his acts
(handlungen) shall be as pure and spotless as those gloves.
This is a custom of great antiquity ; and when we consider that
the stone masons used to put on gloves for the more delicate
part of their work, we can perceive the symbolism in the con-
tinuation of the practice. 3. Gloves are a symbol of purification ;
because, as Wemyss says in his Clavis symboiict, “Hands are
the symbols of human action; pure hands are pure actions;
unjust hands are deeds of injustice.” When Pilate, most
absurdly, was forced to condemn Christ, he brought out a basin
and washed his hands, to acquit himself of the crime, Thus we
have in the Psalms :—“ I will wash my hands in innocence, and
I will encompass (¢c., cireumambulate) thine altar, Jahve.” In
the Mysteries, purification by water was always a precedent
ceremony, and it was enjoined on all those who entered the
temples. We find an inscription on a Cretan temple thus :—
“Cleanse your feet, wash your hands, and then enter.” This
was a deliberate act on the part of the devout worshippers, and
Shakspere alludes to it when, in the jocose conversation between
Prince Hal and Falstaff, they propose to rob the treasury, “and

253

GNO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GNo

do it with unwashed hands, too,” implying with haste and with-
out consideration. Homer makes Hector say :—
“TI dread with unwashed hands to bring
My incensed wine to Jove an offering.”
The Jews adopted the same custom—and Pilate washed his hands
in token of his innocence in relation to the crucifixion of Jesus.
Gloves were worn by the bishops and priests during the perform-
ance of ecclesiastical duties. Durandus says, that “ by the white
gloves were denoted chastity and purity, because the hands were
thus kept clean and free from all impurity.” Didron, in his
Annales Archéologiques, gives an engraving from a stained glass
window, in the cathedral of Chartres in France, of the thirteenth
century, representing a number of operative masons at work.
Three of these wear laurel crowns, and perhaps represent the
officers, and all wear gloves. In 1331, the castellan of Villaines
Duemois bought a considerable number of gloves for the work-
men, “to shield their hands from the stone and lime,” and similar
instances occur at Dijon in 1383, and in 1487 at Amiens.
Gnosticism (Greek, Tyvwws, or Knowledge).—There was a period of
a priort knowledge, which, fostered by the ideas of Proclus and
his school—itself founded upon Platonism—intermingled with the
more recondite mysteries of the east, in which a powerful and
singular sect of philosophers arose, called the Gnostics. _ Gnos-
ticism was very attractive to minds imbued with mystical ideas;
and semi-pantheistic in its nature, it sought to purify its dis-
ciples from the corruptions of matter, and elevate them to a
higher scale of being, suited only to those who were to become
perfect by knowledge. As nearly as that ancient doctrine can
be interpreted, it ran thus—1. That the supreme God had dwelt
from all eternity in a pleroma of inaccessible light—perhaps, in
comparison with this world’s material light or fire, inappreciable
light. 2. They called this, God, first Father, or Principle; also,
Bythos, to denote his unfathomable nature. 3. Copying from
the Brahmans, they considered that this Being, by a purely men-
tal operation, or by his bissexual character, derived from Platon-
ism, produced from his own being, in striking similarity to the
Genetical mystery, two other beings of different sexes, from
whon, by a series of avatérs or descents, of a more or less nume-
rous character, several pairs of beings, termed eons, or eons, en-
sued. These were successively inferior in quality, and they
were an essential ingredient in the great plan, in order to
account for the creation of the world, without making the supreme
God the author of evil; and these ons existed throughout
countless ages, in a state of quiescence, with their Father—being
constantly, however, given off by their ever prolific Creator, and
254

GNO] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GNo

as they were ejected from this first primordial Being, they de-
teriorated in proportion to their distance from the pleroma in
which He existed. A collision between these and the pre-existent
dead matter would naturally occur within the course of ages, and
this collision so altered the form of dead, latent, or inert matter,
that it became instinct with a species of secondary or mortal life
—not immortal, because derived, created, and yet not made,—in-
evitable, although not designed, but a natural result of the inter-
mixture between that which partook of the divine and eternal
nature, and that which, although perishable, was susceptible of
mutation of form; in other words, was corruptible, and might
again arise into new forms of life. Although such crude notions
may be resisted by the philosophies of modern ages, still, behold-
ing as we do new discoveries every year in the richness and
fulness of microscopical animal life, they are worthy of a passing
notice. And the more carefully research is pushed, with our
gradually improving instruments, into the Microcosm or Infinitely
Little, the greater must be our appreciation of those truths
dimly taught by the Gnostics. Everywhere we perceive orderly
laws, even regulations of a fiscal and communal life, and a cease-
less activity on the part of the organized microscopie. Doubt-
less, with better magnifying power, we could trace, and even be-
come familiar with, many forms of life as yet beyond our know-
ledge or conception. It is wise under the circumstances to bear
in mind some very ancient lines alluding to this continual action
of the formative principle. Men, unfamiliar with any forms but
their own, are too apt to hold in contempt other admirable ani-
mated shapes, and hence the words of Xenophanes (Fragmenta,
V. and VI.) may well be quoted here :—

“But men foolishly think that gods are born like as men are,
And have, too, a dress like their own, and their voice, and their figure :
But if oxen and lions had hands like ours, and fingers,
Then would horses like unto horses, and oxen to oxen,
Paint and fashion their god-forms, and give to them bodies
Of like shape to their own, as they themselves too are fashioned.”

In fair defence of Gnostic ideas, we may readily ask, why may
not the lower creations, as man proudly calls them, have Soters
or Saviours of their own, in their own forms, and why is mortal
man to arrogate to himself the humiliating and odious necessity
of a Saviour? Surely man must, with his known gifts of reason,
memory, and discrimination, be far below the brutes, and even
the animalcule, to require, or even to merit, a special elevating
power to redeem him from the results of the inadvertent error of
original sin? Original sin, in its essence, I take to be nothing
but ignorance; and ignorance has ever led to intolerance, strife,
255

GNO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Goa

and opposition,—a fatal waste of mortal life, lamentably illustra-
ted by the known history of the world. Divested of the portions
of eastern lore derived by slow and imperfect means from their
source, and even then first misrepresented, and afterwards mis-
understood, Gnosticism offers a fair picture of philosophic
thought at a time when to think freely, and even reverently, was
death ; and when, also, the rival principles of ancient polytheism
and nascent Christianity were engaged in the throes of a death
struggle. That struggle has been prolonged through the centu-
ries by the political power—now, happily, on the wane—acquired
by the Church of Rome, as the true inheritrix of the pagan
system. Perhaps the main reason why Gnosticism has not re-
commended itself to the world, is in the base and slavish worship
paid by its votaries to the mere outside show of amulets and
phylacteries, derived from the Jewish element in its main philo-
sophy. To regard an emblem as typical of something beyond
has been, in all times, a custom—to adore it as the thing or es-
sential principle is exactly as reprehensible, and by the common
consent of mankind this has been banished from the realm of
thought. It was therefore to that time, when men of the Gnostic
faith pinned their success in everyday concerns to the possession
of certain talismans, or palladia, that we may refer the downfall
of their otherwise pure and wise views on creation. In these
troublous times, such arrogance is best replaced by humility ;
such speculations, by industrious emulation in the attainment of
knowledge, and in faith and charity towards all mankind. The
principal defenders and instructors in it were Basilides, Menan-
der, Saturninos, Persicos, Marcion, and Valentinus, and es-
pecially Cerinthus. ‘They were stigmatized by the later Koman
Church because they came into conflict with the purer Church of
Christianity——the possession of which was usurped by the
bishops of Rome, but which original continues in its docility to-
wards the founder, in the Primitive Orthodox Greek Church.
Goat (Hebrew, ty, ez, Gen. xxvii. 9; 980, chasiph, 1 Kings xx. 27;
MAY, athud, Gen. xxxi. 10-12; VY, sair, Lev. iv. 24; "3, gedz, a
kid, Gen. xxxviii. 17; Exod. xxiii. 19; in Chaldee, it is izea;
Pheenician, aza; Arabic, jidda and hedzjez)—To those unac-
quainted with our Masonic mysteries, the Goat has been a
puzzle. But when it is considered that it was the animal sent
into the wilderness as an atonement, our Romish friends will
forgive it. The goat in ancient times received much notice
from the Hebrews and from the Greeks. The Tragos was a pro-
minent figure in the Thespian processions, and has given rise to

our modern word tragedy,—plays having originally been religious
256

Goa | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Goa

rites, as they were in the middle ages, and as they are at the present
moment in parts of Bavaria. The ceremony connected with the
liberation of the scapegoat among the ancient Israelites also relates
to the mysticism connected with that animal. In the ordinary
English version of the passage in Leviticus (xvi. 8, 10, 26), we read:
—““And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the
Lord, and the other for the scapegoat, [but, properly, for Azdzél].
But the goat on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat shall be pre-
sented alive before the Lord, to make an atonement with him, and
to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness... ... And he
that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his clothes,” &c.
Lanci (librarian to the Vatican, and the learned author of Sagra

Serittura and Paralipomeni) says respecting PINIY, Azézél: “This
terrible and venerable name of God, through the pen of Biblical
glossers, has been a devil, a mountain, a wilderness, and a he-goat.”

This word should be divided into Azaz (Arab. Je) and El, and

signifies God of Victory, but is here used in the sense of Author
of Death, in contrast to Jehovah, the Author of life; the latter
received a dead goat as an offering. As Gliddon says (“Types
of Mankind,” p. 600): “ Death to the Lifegiver, life to the Death-
dealer, The symbolical antithesis is grand and beautiful.” Aben-
Ezra says -—‘ If thou art capable of comprehending the mystery
of Azdzél, thou wilt learn the mystery of His name, for it has
similar associates in Scripture. I will tell thee by allusion one
portion of the mystery ; when thou shalt have thirty-three years,
thou wilt comprehend me.” This reference is Masonically sug-
gestive, but may also be connected with the cycle of the century,
of which thirty-three rudely suggests the third. Herodotus (ai.
38-39) says that the male kine are sacred to Epaphus, and that
they were proved in a particular manner; when, if found pure,
ai.¢,, Without a black hair, and with the prescribed marks on the
tongue, the examiner marks the animal by rolling a piece of
byblus round the horns, and, impressing his signet on some
sealing earth, he drives it away. To kill one of these animals,
unless marked, was a capital offence. On the occasion of a
sacrifice, imprecations were pronounced upon the head, and the
body, after being flayed, was usually sold to the Greeks, or
thrown into the Nile. The formula of imprecation was,—* If any
evil is about to befall either those who now sacrifice, or Egypt in
general, may it be averted on this head.” And no Egyptian
would taste of the head of any animal. Plutarch says (De Is.
et Osir., p. 380): “But when a great and troublesome heat prevails,
which excess either brings along with it destructive sickness or
other strange and extraordinary misfortunes, the priests take some
R 257

Gos | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Gos

of the sacred animals, in profound silence, to a dark place. There
they threaten them first, and terrify them; and when the
calamity continues, they offer their animals in sacrifice there.”
It was supposed in Egypt that the barren regions were sacred to
Typhon, hence Moses must have copied his ideas from the
Egyptian system in this particular, as in so many others, As
previously shown, however, Az4zé] cannot be identified with
Typhon, being itself a name of God. During the long period
after Moses fled to Arabia, or Midian, it is possible that
he wandered to all the then centres of learning, and thence
carried away many ideas from many creeds, which served as a
substratum for his own subsequent code of laws; thus it would
not be surprising to find Assyrian ideas from Erech or Warka,
combined with Egyptian formule. 2. A very vulgar idea was
promulgated among the non-initiated in the last century—ic,,
that in the ceremonies of the Freemasons, candidates and others
were made to “ride the goat;” or that the devil, in the form of
a hairy goat, was “raised” inthe Lodges. This absurd notion is
on a par with the wicked misrepresentation of the Roman
Catholics, repeated ad nauseam to the present hour, about hanging
up the dead body of a traitor Mason in the Lodge as a warning
to future initiates. It does seem strange that, in the nineteenth
century, bishops of the Romish faith, and other well-informed
persons, can be found gravely asserting such trash to be ab-
solutely true. 3. The god Pan, who, in the Philosophical Rites,
is an emblem of the Universe, has been figured under the form
of a goat, but this is susceptible of a very different explanation.
(See Pan.)

Gos.rts.—This would seem a fitting place to mention the goblets
and other vessels of gold and silver made for the service of the
First Temple, according to Josephus :—

Gold. Silver.
Vessels of Gold ; . 20,000 40,000
Candlesticks . ; . 4,000 8,000
Wine Cups . . . 80,000 Sat
Goblets. : . . 10,000 20,000
Measures . ‘ : . 20,000 40,000
Dishes. : ; . 80,000 160,000
Censers. : . . 20,000 50,000
234,000 318,000

Vestments for the priests, 21,000.
600,000 gold and silver musical instruments.
200,000 stoles of silver for the Levites.

The consideration of these wonderful ageregations of gold and
258

GoB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cos

silver plate leads us to the farther contemplation of the enor-
mous mass of mineral wealth existing in the earlier times of the
world, and the consequent perfection of metallurgical skill in
those days. For without a knowledge of the treatment of
metals, all this bounteous provision of rich and gorgeous matter
would have remained as mere dross in the bowels of the earth,
or distributed, as in Australia and California, on or near to the
surface. It has become the habit of mankind to esteem the pos-
session and exchange of gold and silver tokens as the real signs
of wealth, just as shells on the Coromandel coast, and cowries
and ivory on the coast of Guinea, have actual representative
value. It seems as if mankind would, by common consent,
turn away from the actual idea of what constitutes intrinsic
value, and Almighty Providence is now proving the utter
nullity of the worth of these precious articles by the liberal
discoveries made at the present time of diamonds, emeralds,
precious metals, and other objects. The real objects of im-
portance — viz, monuments and documents illustrating the
history and progress of mankind—have been, until com-
paratively recent times, positively ignored and misinterpreted
when brought under notice. Surely, in a shifting and changing
world such as ours, it would be wiser to look upon the progress
and amelioration of our race rather than an adventitious glory
derived from inanimate matter; we can rejoice in the evidences
of art we see around us, without for one moment thinking that
we can rival the works of Nature, or rather of God. It is only
a just use we are making of the globe, placed at our disposal by
a Being of infinite wisdom; and our return should be one of
praise for His goodness, It is not by extolling our own age,
with its undoubted scientific triumphs, that we are doing the
work of the Unseen; and our duty to our neighbour is impera-
tive that like benefits should be conferred in all worthy direc-
tions. Things, however intrinsically valuable, are only “ worldly
possessions,” and fleet like all other phenomena of nature; the
enduring monuments we are enabled to erect are—greater
physical comforts, better education, proper food; and the comforts
professed to be sought by so many and found by so few—of a sure
reliance that the everlasting arms may ever be found to hold us
up in seasons of doubt and disbelief. Hence goblets, in which,
as Freemasons, we drink to a happy future, are symbolical of
both Faith and Hope, illustrated by Works, and consecrated
by Fidelity, while the cup has been ever the symbol of Charity
and Truth. The Roman Catholic Church denies the cup to the
laity, on account of reasons exactly in opposition to the above
principles.
259

Gop |

The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia.

[Gop

Gop, SEveNTY-TWo Names or.—The following list is given, not
because it is absolutely accurate, but because it frequently occurs
in books connected with occult science :—

1,
2.

6

SONa apo

10.
i.
12.
13.
14.
15,
16.
17.
18,
19.
20.
21.
22,
23.

24,
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

Abyssinians,
Adeni,
Albanians, .

. Angolese,

. Arabs,.

. Armenians, .
. Assyrians, .
. Bactrians,

. Beotians,

Bohemians, .
Brahmans, .
Cabbalists, .
Californians,
Cambodians,
Canadians, .
Carmanians,
Chaldeans, .
Chilians,
Congos,
Copts, .
Cretans,
Cyrenians, .

Hebrews,

Egyptians,
Elamites,
English,
French,
Georgians
Greeks, ‘
Gymnosophists,
Hetrurians, .
Hollanders, .
Hungarians, .
Japanese, .
Illyrians,
Indians,

A

Agzi.
Thi,
Bogo.
Anub.
Allah,
qnbe.
Adad.
Sila.
Aris.
Bueg.
Pora.
Agla.
Solu.
Miri.
Biub,
Suna.
abe.
Hana.
Aneb,
Otos.
Atos.
Popa.
HD or

2 Adon.

;

Oavr, Amu
or Teut.

Para.
Good (sic)
Dieu.
Moti.
Otos.
Tara.
Esar.
Godt.
Bogi.
Zaca.
Boog.
Tura.

37.

38.
39.
40.
41,
42,
43.
44,
45.
46,

59.

61.

64.

69.
70.
71.
72.

Hesperides, .
Trish,
Icelanders,
Italians,
Latins, .
Magi,
Maldivians, .
Moors, .
Melindians, .
Mesopotamians,

. Mexicans,

. Mogors,.

. Negroes,

. Muscovites, .
. Narsingians, .
. Ormusians,

. Paraguayans,
. Peloponnesians,
. Persians,

. Peruvians,

. Philippinians,
. Philosophers,

Phrygians,

. Poles,

Quitensians, .

. Samatrani,
. Saracens,

Scotch, .

. Chinese,
. Spaniards,
. Syrians,

Tartars, ‘

Teutons, .
Thracians,
Tibetans,
Zetlanders,

Agad.
. Dieh.
Gudi.
Idio.
Deus.
Orsy.
Orba.
Alla.
Abag.
Ella.
Bosa.
Auli.
Abgd.
Tios.
Bila.
Alai.
. Puir.
Ahos (sic)
-  Syps (sic)
Zimi.
Mora.
. Abda.
- Zeut.
Boog.

. Hoba.

Pola.
Agdi.
Goot (sic)
Teli.
Dios.
qs.
Anot, or
Igfa.

. Gott,
Kalo.
Gena.
Bora.

Gop.—All nations have acknowledged the existence of a Supreme
Uncreated Being, who, by the progressive force of his all-embrac-

ing intelligence, brought the Kosmos into existence.

~ 260

“God,

cop | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cop

perfect and blessed,” says Josephus (Contra Apion, lib. ii., cap. 2),
“contains all things, is self-existent, and the cause of existence
to all,—the beginning, the middle, and the end of all things.” It
has been the fashion for Jewish and Christian writers to assert
that the principle of monotheism was proclaimed and admitted
in primitive times, by the Jews alone, but other nations asserted
the existence of the unity of God in very remote ages; the
Egyptian rituals breathe a spirit of monotheism, and the Indians
again held this faith in primeval times. The subsequent ad-
mission of a triune nature in the Divinity was the result of
philosophical reasoning; but there can be no doubt that even
among the Greeks and Romans there was an unseen Deity recog-
nised as supreme and unapproachable, infinitely beyond their
own mythologies. The following definitions of deity are taken
from a Kabbalistic poem by the Rabbi Solomon Ben Gabirol, in
the Kether-Malchut, extracted from the prayers of Kippir :—
“Thou art One, the beginning of all numbers, and the foundation
of all edifices; Thou art One, and in the secret of Thy Unity, the
wisest of men are lost, because they know it not. Thou art
One, and thy Unity is never diminished, never extended, and
cannot be changed. Thou art One, but not as an element of
numeration; for Thy Unity admits not of multiplication,
change, or form. Thou art One, and no thought of mine can fix
for Thee a limit, or define Thee ; hence watch I over my conduct,
and study to avoid the failings of my lips. Thou art One,
whose excellence is so exalted that it cannot be cast down in any
wise, or in the way any finite being may cease. Thou art Exist-
ent; but the understanding and vision of mortals cannot attain
to Thy existence, nor determine for Thee the Where, the How,
and the Why. Thou art Existent, but in Thyself alone, there
being none other that can exist with Thee. Thou art Existent,
before all Time, and without Place. Thou art Existent, and
Thy Existence is so secret and profound that none can pene-
trate or discover Thy secrecy. Thou art Living, but within no
time which can be known and fixed; Thou art Living, but not
by a spirit or a soul, for Thou art Thyself the Soul of all souls.
Thou art Living, but not as the life of mortals, which is but a
breath, and the end of whom is a banquet of worms. Thou art
Living, and whoso can attain unto Thy mysteries shall enjoy
eternal raptures, and live for ever. Thou art Great, and before
Thy greatness all other powers are naught, and everything which
is good appears wanting. Thou art Great, above all imagina-
tion, and Thou art above all the celestial hierarchies. Thou art
Great, above all greatness, and Exalted above all praises. Thou

art Mighty, and not one of Thy creatures can do the work
261

cop | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cop

Thou canst, nor can any power be compared with Thine. Thou
art Mighty, and Thine is the invincible Power which changeth
not, and cannot change. Thou art Mighty, and by Thy magna-
nimity Thou wilt pardon even in the season of Thy fiercest
wrath, and Thou manifestest patience towards sinners. Thou
art Mighty, and Thy mercies which have existed from eternity
are spread over all Thy creatures. Thou art the Eternal Light,
visible to the eyes of pure souls, and hidden by the clouds of sin
from the eyes of sinners. Thou art the Light hidden in this
world, and visible in the other, where the glory of the Lord
showeth itself. Thou art Sovereign, and the eyes of under-
standing which desire to behold Thee are astonished at seeing
only a part, and never the whole. Thou art the God of gods
before all Thy creatures, and in honour of Thy Great Name they
owe unto Thee all worship. Thou art God, and all created beings
are Thy servants and adorers; Thy Glory is not tarnished though
others may be worshipped, for their desire is to glorify Thee;
they are as the blind who desire to follow the highway, but who
lose themselves in the byepaths ; the one is drowned in a ditch,
and the other falls into the mire; all believe that they have
accomplished their desires, but have taken their pains in vain.
But Thy servants are as the enlightened who walk in a sure
path, and wander neither to the right nor the left, until they
enter into the confines of the palace of the King. Thou art
God, and by Thy Divinity art the support of all created things,
and bearest up by Thy Unity all creatures. Thou art God, and
there is no distinction between Thy Deity, Thy Unity, Thy
Eternity, and Thy Existence; for these are but One Mystery,
and though the names differ, they are but One. Thou art Wise,
and the wisdom in which consisteth the source of life cometh
out from Thee ; before Thy Wisdom the wisdom of the most wise
on earth is folly. Thou art Wise, and the Ancient of Ancients,
and Wisdom hath ever been nourished by Thee. Thou art Wise,
but Thou didst not learn Thy Wisdom of any, nor have any
learnt wisdom from any one save Thee only. Thou art Wise,
and Thou hast, like a workman and an architect, reserved in Thy
Wisdom a Divine Will, within a marked time, to attract beings
from nothing ; like as the light which issueth from the eyes is
attracted from its own centre by no kind of instrument or
utensil. This Divine Will hath moulded, traced, purified, and
founded ; this Divine Will commanded Nothing to open itself,
Being to enter therein, the Universe to extend itself therefrom.
It measured the heavens with its palms; by its power it assembled
the canopy of the spheres; with the cords of its might it has
drawn aside the curtains of the creatures of the universe, and
262

cop | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cop

hath joined the superior part to the inferior.” Thus far our
Jewish philosopher ; but in support of our proposition that mono-
theism was by no means confined to that nation, the following,
from the writings of the Sikhs, may be read with advantage :—
“ The true name is God, without fear, without enmity, the Being
without Death, the Giver of Salvation. Remember the primal
Truth—Truth which was before the world began—Truth which is,
and Truth, O Nanuk! which will remain. How can truth be
told ? How can falsehood be unravelled ? O Nanuk! by follow-
ing the will of God, as by Him ordained. One Self Existent,
Himself the Creator, O Nanuk! One continueth, another never
was and never will be. Thou art in each thing, and in all places,
O God! Thou art the One Existent Being. My mind dwells
upon one,—Him who gave the soul and the body. Numerous
Mahomets have there been, and multitudes of Brahmas, Vishnus,
and Sivas, thousands of peers and prophets, and tens of
thousands of saints and holy men; but the Chief of Lords is the
One Lord, the true name of God, O Nanuk !—of God, His qualities
without end, beyond reckoning, who can understand ?” (Cunning-
ham’s “ History of the Sikhs,” pp. 355-6.) Again, we may quote
(Journ. Asiat. Soc, Bengal, vi., pp. 484-487, 750- 756) the following
expressions, conveying in themselves opinions of the utmost
importance :-—* Whatever Ram willeth that without the least
difficulty shall be: why, therefore, do ye kill yourselves with
grief, when grief can avail you nothing? Whatsoever hath
been made, God made. Whatsoever is to be made, God will
make. Whatsoever is, God maketh. Then why do any of
you afflict yourselves? Thou, O God, art the Author of
all things which have been made, and from Thee will originate
all things which are to be made. Thou art the Maker and
the Cause of all things made. There is none other but Thee.
He is my God, who makes all things perfect. Meditate upon
Him, in whose hands are life and death. He is my God, who
created heaven, earth, hell, and the intermediate space, who
is the beginning and end of all creation, and who provideth for
all. I believe that God made man, and that He maketh every-
thing. Heis my Friend. Let faith in God characterise all your
thoughts, words, and actions. He who serveth God places confi-
dence in nothing else. If the remembrance of God be in your
hearts, ye will be able to accomplish things which are impracti-
cable. But those who seek the paths of God arefew! O foolish
one! God is not far from you: He is near you. You are
ignorant ; but He knoweth everything, and is careful in bestow-
ing. Care can avail nothing ; it devoureth life ; for those things
shall happen, which God shall direct. Remember God, for He
263

cop | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cop

endued your body with life; remember that Beloved One, who
placed you in the womb, reared and nourished you. Preserve
God in your hearts, and put faith in your minds, so that by God’s
power your expectations may be realised. In order that He may
diffuse happiness, God becometh subservient to all; and,
although the knowledge of this is in the hearts of the foolish, yet
will they not praise His name. O God, Thou art, as it were,
exceeding riches; Thy regulations are without compare; Thou
art the chief of every world, yet remainest invisible. Take such
food and raiment as it may please God to provide you with; you
require naught beside. He that partaketh of but one grain of
the love of God shall be released from the sinfulness of all his
doubts andactions. Itakefor my spiritual food the water andthe leaf
of Rim. Inthe world I care not; but God’s love is unfathomable.
What hope can those have elsewhere, even if they wandered
over the whole earth, who can abandon God? It will be impos-
sible for you to profit anything if you are not with God, even if
you were to wander from country to country. Have no desires,
but accept what circumstances may bring before you; because,
whatever God pleaseth to direct can never be wrong. All things
are exceeding sweet to those who love God; they would never
style them bitter, even if filled with poison; on the contrary,
they would accept them as if they were ambrosia. Adversity is
good, if on account of God; but it is useless to pain the body.
Without God the comforts of wealth are unprofitable. What-
ever is to be, will be; therefore long not for grief nor for joy;
because by seeking the one, you may find the other. Forget not
to praise God. Do unto me, O God, as Thou thinkest best. I
am obedient to Thee. My disciples, behold no other God; go
nowhere but to Him. Condemn none of those things that the
Creator has made. Those are His Holy servants; who are satis-
fied with them. We are not creators: the Creator is a distinct
Being. He can make whatever He desireth, but we can make
nothing. God is my clothing and my dwelling ; He is my ruler,
my body, and my soul. God ever fostereth His creatures, even
as a mother serves her offspring, and keepeth it from harm. O
God, Thou who art the Truth, grant me contentment, love, devo-
tion, and faith. Thy servant prayeth for true patience, and that
he may be devoted to Thee. He that formed the mind made it, as
it were, a temple for Himself to dwell in; for God liveth in the
mind, and none other but Gud. O my friend, recognise that,
Being, with whom thou art so intimately connected; think not
that God is distant, but believe that, like thy own shadow, He is
ever nearthee. Receive that which is perfect into your hearts, to
the exclusion of all besides; abandon all things for the love of
264

cop | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cop

God, for this Dadu declares is the true devotion. All have it
in their power to take away their own lives, but they cannot
release their souls from punishment; for God alone is able to
pardon the soul, though few deserve His mercy. If you call
upon God, you will be able to subdue your imperfections, and the
evil inclinations of your mind will depart from you; but
they will return to you again, when you cease to call upon
Him.” Another Indian philosopher wrote (Prof. A. J. Scott,
“Three Discourses,” &c., p. 97):—“God is the gift of charity,
God is the offering, God is the fire of the altar, by God the sacri-
fice is performed, and God is to be obtained by him who makes
God alone the object of His work.” In this, and the preceding
passages there is current a vein of Hermeticism not to be disre-
garded by those who truly reflect on the secret philosophy and
archeology of Masonry. An Indian philosopher says: “God is
One, the Eternal Creator of the whole of the Universe. He re-
sembles a sphere, without end and without beginning. God governs
the world by eternal and immutable laws. Mortal, do thou not
make rash researches into the Essence and Nature of the Eternal
God, nor into His laws by which He governs. It is a curiosity
as vain as it is criminal. Enough for thee is it to contemplate,
by day and night, the grandness of His work, His wisdom, His
power, and His goodness. Take thou profit therefrom.” Of
all the names given to the Deity, none have, perhaps, exerted
so much influence on European society as those which express
the divine goodness. The English word God, and the German
Gott, are the principal modern representatives of this class
of names. Among the ancients of the pre-classical, as well
as the classical ages, however, various epithets expressive
of this aspect of the Deity scem to have been closely con-
nected with the vital religions of the leading civilised com-
munities of those times. Having emerged from the social
condition in which the conception of the Deity is derived from
the contemplation of divine power in the sun,—criginating
names for God expressive of Light and Glory, such as Daaus,
Deus, Zeus, &c..—cultured humanity very early came to recog-
nise and worship the Supreme Power in its benignant aspect.
For the exercise of the divine benignancy, no better field could
be imagined than the unseen world to which souls are intro-
duced after death. Hence, the Good or Benignant Deity came
to be intimately associated with salvation from divine chastise-
ment. In the religion of ancient Egypt, which gradually per-
meated the Greek and Roman worlds, and, through them, modern
Europe,—their heir and successor,—Onnofre, the Divine Good-
ness, was the epithet by which God was addressed by alt who
205

cop } The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GOE

hoped for salvation. Among the Greeks, this name became
Chrestus (Xpioros, good, beneficent), and among the Romans, Deus
Bonus, or Dii Boni,—a name which still survives in the French
Bon Dieu. The faithful, who adored God in this aspect, were
Chrestians, and by a curious but not unusual popular substitu-
tion of 2 for e, as may be reasonably conjectured, after the recep-
tion, by the eastern Roman empire, of Jewish theological in-
fluence, Chrestus became Christus, and under the name of Chris-
tians, the followers of Jesus of Nazareth came tacitly to embody
in one religious system the worship of the Hebrew Anointed
(Christus), and that of the Gentile Saviour (Chrestus).

Gop anpD His TEMPLE, Knicur or.—A degree mentioned by Fustier.

GODFATHER.—In the French system the proposer of a profane for
initiation, is called his parrain or godfather.

GOETHE, JOHANN WOLFGANG von.—Poet, philosopher, and Free-
mason. Born 28th August, 1749, at Frankfort-on-the-Maine;
died at Weimar, 22d March, 1832. Initiated into Masonry on
St John’s Eve, 1780; semi-centennial celebrated by the Masons
of Weimar in 1830, at which the venerable Brother was much
pleased. The great and glorious mind of Goethe was far advanced
beyond the Masonry of his time—not in essentid, but in refer-
ence to forms, and the attentive student of his writings will find
many allusions, both conscious and unconscious, to the spirit of
the Fraternity. Like Shakspere, however, Goethe was universal,
and the genius he exhibited was independent of mere cere-
monials.

Gort1a.—The term for black magic, in contradistinction to Theurgia,
or white magic. The powers of darkness were invoked in this
system with horrible rites. For a terrible history in illustration
of Goetic practices, see Laval, Gilles de. As an illustration of
ordinary Goetic rites in the olden time, the following narrative
will suffice. The circumstances took place at Jena, at Christmas,
in1715. A student of medicine, named Johann Gotthard Weber,
born at Schweinsburgk, a league from Zwickau,—which, done
into the English, is a hamlet called Pigsborough near Pinchings,
—whose father had been a sculptor, subsequently residing at
Reichenbach (or Richpond), twenty-four years old, previously
studying at Leipzig since 1712, is our hero. It seems, like other
students, he made acquaintance with tailors during his terms at
the University of Jena, and one of these was a man named
George Heichler, Francicé Tartuffe—or, English, Hypocrite or
Jesuit,—who, about Michaelmas (the period when geese are
fattest) of the year 1715, made him a coat on the introduction
of a companion named Caspar Rechner or Reckoner. Probably
‘Weaver or Weber the sculptor’s son was better off than Reckoner,

266

GOE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GOE

or, perhaps, coming from Pigsborough, was not over wise, at any
rate,after this worthy introduction, Heichler, or Hypocrite, became
confidential enough to inform Weber that a shepherd in Dobritz-
schen, Jack (Hans) Frederick Gessner, knew of a great treasure,
for the discovery of which nothing was wanted but the necessary
magical appurtenances, and the celebrated Conjuration Book of
Dr. Faustus, known as the Héllen-zwang, or the Hell-compeller.
The student Weber, whom we may finally hereby recognise as
more foolish than rich, said the latter should at any rate not be
wanting. (The curious may consult the Hell-compeller of
Faustus, in the beautiful edition of Scheible, in five volumes.)
Hereupon Tartuffe promised him a rich guerdon, and undertook
to let the shepherd know of the project. Heichler then invited
Weber and the shepherd to meet him at his country villa (he
was bound to have a country villa, even in those days—strangely
situated, however, near the town-gallows of Jena), to confer
upon the subject of raising the treasure, the wind, and the devil
in general. The shepherd, however, perhaps descended from one
of those of Chaldea’s plain, with Chaldee wisdom, backed out on
this occasion and nothing came of it; unless the tailor, as is
possible, was too deep in his woolstapler’s debt, to approach him
on so dangerous a topic as money. The matter was further
negotiated through a certain anonymous lady (who had been in
gaol a little while before), and the information not accessible
through the woolstapler was obtained through her; for she let
out the secret, on one occasion when Weber was visiting
the lady; one Hans Zeuner, a farmer of Ammerbach, being by,
she asked if the student were the person who had engaged to
furnish the Hell-compeller. This was about a week before
Christmas, 1715. The answer was, Yes. The farmer Zeuner
hereupon appointed to meet Weber at four o’clock in the after-
noon at his house at Ammerbach on the 21st of December,
promising to invite Gessner. This was done. When Weber
arrived, Zeuner’s wife told him her husband had not yet returned,
but that Gessner had come, and, in the interval, had gone to the
alehouse. Hereupon Weber, after asking how Gessner, whom
he had never seen, was dressed,so that he might know him,
went to the alehouse also. It had been answered that he was
dressed in blue, but when he arrived there he found several
persons so apparelled, but by accident he overheard others saying,
on Gessner’s going out of the house, that that was the person
who frequented Zeuner’s house, and commonly spoke of knowing
where great treasures lay hidden. As soon as Weber had finished
his beer, he departed and returned to Zeuner’s house, where he
met the said Gessner. They entered into conversation, and after
207

GOE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | GOE

much talk of conjuration and enchantment, the said Gessner
announced himself as of the faculty (poor wight !) of the Theo-
sophie preumatice, concerning which art of magic he had once
possessed a pamphlet given by him to a monk who had seceded
to Lutheranism, which he had never got back, and he added,
that if he only could find anyone who could read books of this
art rightly, he could soon bring it about that a spirit should be
obedient to him and aid him in raising the treasure. Upon this
Weber requested to know, as the tailor Heichler (Tartuffe) wanted
to know formerly, where this great treasure lay hidden, to which
Gessner replied, as he before answered, that he was bound by oath
not to reveal it; but told him that this great treasure outvalued
several kingdoms, and consisted of gold and precious stones,
among which there was a carbuncle so bright and of such
splendour as to outrival the sun; besides this, there was a
covering of bear-skins surrounded by chains, and in the vault
where the treasure was preserved a small dog continually ran
about; and this he, Gessner, personally averred he had seen,
and one beside himself, whom he named not, with their own
eyes. He had also taken a rod covered with bird lime and
obtained for himself a few of these gems through the iron bars,
but the spirit who guarded the place had then told him that
for the present they ‘might depart, but they must not return or
their lives would be the penalty. Some of these gems were
square or cubical, and some globular. He further added that
ona table in the said vault lay certain manuscripts of which
they would have gladly possessed themselves but could not.
These he thought to refer to the importance and nature of the
treasure itself. He further related that the possessor of the
place where the treasure lay, was haunted day and night by the
apparition of a lovely virgin, who caressed him and told him
that the mystic root required to attain that treasure was already
in existence, but it was necessary to seek for it in the early
dawn. Its power might be essayed on a lock of small value
which would yield and break on being touched by it. This
great treasure was protected by an iron door, but this would
burst open on the approach of the person who carried with him
the mystic root, at a distance of forty paces, and the possessor
might carry away with him as much treasure as four horses
could draw in a waggon. The same Gessner proceeded to relate
that an apparition in the form of a white lady had frequently
been seen at the vineyard villa of the tailor Heichler, whence
it was likely that a treasure also lay hid, from the time of the
Thirty Years’ War. This apparition had been seen by several
persons, especially by a woman named Planer, Heichler himself,

GOE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GOE
and a farm labourer, on various occasions. The woman Planer
insisted that before she had only seen men in the vineyard, but
now she frequently saw a woman, which caused Heichler, our
above-named Tartuffe, great vexation, such a statement being a
great scandal to him. In testimony of the truth of his state-
ment, Gessner (as might be expected) displayed some ancient
coins, which he said he had drawn out with the bird-limed rod.
On the obverse of these coins were five shields, in each of which
was depicted an elephant, and on the reverse the Babylonian
Woman sitting on the seven-headed dragon named in the seventh
chapter of the Revelation of John the Divine, the number of
which chapter was inscribed on the coin, and before the dragon
were placed three male crowned figures. Upon this the student
Weber, sitting in Hans Zeuner’s chamber, drew out his collec-
tion, consisting of two magical manuscripts, the Héllen-zwany of
Faustus, and the Clavicula Salomonis, the former copied by his
own hand, and the latter obtained some six years before from
his father at Reichenbach. They were preserved in an old
parchment case with two locks. From these two books Weber
read passages in a low voice (so as not to disturb Zeuner’s wife
and children), to Gessner and Zeuner, especially portions relating
to the rules concerning the conjuration or invocation of spirits,
and the preparations for it. They then conversed of nothing but
the conjuration of spirits. Gessner was satisfied that Weber
possessed the book, but thought it advisable there should be some
experiment, precedent to the great procedure, tried, with which
Weber was content. Weber then demanded to know by what
spirit the great treasure was guarded, to which Gessner made
answer, that the virgin who appeared to the owner of the place
where the great treasure lay was the spirit Nathael, named in
Weber’s Hell-compeller, as appearing in that form. It was
therefore resolved to invoke Och, as the prince of these spirits
of the sun, under whose government Nathael stood. Weber
reminded them that this was a dangerous matter, and required
much forethought; but although he further read to them the
rules for preparation from his manuscript taken from the Occult
Philosophy of Cornelius Agrippa, he was overruled, and it was
determined to make a trial on Christmas night, the appointed
place being the little villa at the tailor’s vineyard. The three
individuals now remained together for the night at Zeuner’s house.
On the following Sunday Zeuner went to Heichler, to inform
him that the invocation would take place on Christmas night, at
the place named, and Gessner, Heichler, and the student Weber,
told the anonymous female of it, on the Monday ; she, how-
ever, refused to meddle in it further, and only Laie them

2

GOE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GoE

to put on warm clothes, and wraps round their heads, that the
frost might not injure them. On Tuesday, being Christmas eve,
Heichler and Weber went, in the morning about ten o'clock,
separately, in order that people might not observe them, by the
Lobdii through the New Gate, where, as arranged, Gessner met
them, and they proceeded to the little villa at the vineyard.
The old chronicler then relates particulars of their preparations,
unnecessary for a distinct understanding of the matter. They
ultimately assembled at Zeuner’s house, who proposed that, as he
had an empty chamber they might try the experiment there, to
which Gessner objected that the place was not solitary enough;
and Heichler then begged that he might be present, to which
the magician Weber would not assent, on the ground that with
Zeuner and Gessner, they were already three in number, and that
the magical trinity would be violated by a fourth, according to
the rules of magic. At last he allowed himself to be persuaded,
but the tailor did not show himself valiant, excusing him-
self on the plea of being very busy at the festival time, also
alleging that the matter might become known. He promised,

however, to supply fuel to warm them, and to bring a watch with
him that they might mark the time with accuracy. Weber him-
self was greatly entreated by his companions to remain with them,

in order to make a pleasure trip to Naumburg, but he refused,

saying that he was bound for the country with an intimate friend
to hear him preach, but he promised to return on the first holi-
day after Christmas, and accompany his companions, who in the
meantime made preparations for their departure. Weber, how-
ever, about four o’clock in the afternoon, went in company with
Gessner from Jena to meet Zeuner in Ammerbach, and on the
road they talked of nothing but of the invocations of spirits. At
Ammerbach he placed his two magical works on the table, upon
which Gessner remembered that he had at home another work
upon the art of invoking spirits, and if it had not been so late he
would fain have fetched it, but as he knew his invocation by
heart, he did not go. Weber also drew forth from his pocket,
wrapped in his handkerchief, an oval wooden casket, from which
he took several articles of a superstitious nature, as we shall
hereafter see. After several propositions as to the place in which
the great work was to be performed, it was finally determined to
proceed about nine at night to Heichler’s before-named villa at
the vineyard—each person being armed with three magical sigils,
supplied by Weber. They took with them several lanterns,
and found fuel and a lamp supplied there as promised by Heichler,
but he had not brought the watch. Before they entered the
house Weber wrote the word Tetragrammaton outside over the

270

GOE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GoE

door with a pencil, and before sitting down, they all together
repeated the Lord’s Prayer, and lighting a fire of charcoal in a
large flower pot, they put the light they had with them in a con-
venient place on the top of the lamp. All three being seated,
Weber took out his three manuscripts, and all his talismans,
magical sigils, and other apparatus, and placed certain purses of
pence before them, ten pieces being before Gessner, and ten
before Weber, in accordance with the rules of Theophrastus, as «
protection against evil spirits; not a word, however, was uttered
in conformity with that rule which forbids speech until the
magical circle is dissolved, or a spirit has appeared. After ten
o'clock, it having been previously agreed as to whether they
should proceed to the invocation before midnight or after—they
commenced the incantation by Gessner describing a magical
circle on the ceiling of the chamber with a sword, while Weber
merely put his sword point downwards on the flooring of the
room. They then commenced, Gessner being the invocator, the
labour of invocation, he pausing seven minutes between each
invocation, it being repeated in all thrice. On the invocation
and its nature it is unnecessary to pause here, it is sufficient to
say it may be found in the Héllen-zwang of Faustus. They
commanded the appearance of Och and his serving spirit Nathael.
Gessner delivered his invocation from memory, while Weber
read it once from his copy of Dr Faustus, but while repeating it
for the second time, he became giddy, lost his vision and was
obliged to lean his head on the table in a gentle slumber, while
Gessner and Zeuner both sat upright. The whole matter did not
last an hour. The charcoal-smoke was, however, too much for
them, and Weber related that he did not come to himself until
le was awakened by a thorough shaking from Heichler and other
friends. He could not tell whether any spirit had appeared or
what the two farming men had suffered in the meantime. These
two men had, however, paid the penalty of curiosity with their
lives. On the following day, George the Hypocrite, or Heichler,
being at afternoon service, became greatly exercised in his mind as
to the fate of his friends, and ran as hard as he could to the villa,
and witnessed the sorrowful sight; returning, he ran to the
anonymous lady and begged her to assemble Weber's friends.
Just upon this time one Reche, a fellow-student of Weber's,
returned, and on being told that a great calamity had happened
to Weber, replied, it was impossible, as Weber had gone into the
country to hear a friend of his preach, and it was not until
Heichler had hegged of him to accompany him, that they reached
the place of the invocation. Arrived there, Reche called him by
name several times, but received no answer, save in indeter-
271

COE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GoE

minate sounds, and at last Reche entered the house itself, at the
entreaty of Heichler. He found him lying with his whole body
on the left side, behind the table, his right foot touching the floor,
and the point of the sword nearly entering his bowels. Reche
at once took the sword away, returning it to the scabbard, which
lay doubled up in the window seat, and put it aside. Assisted
by the tailor, they then raised Weber up, but could get nothing
out of him, in any way, being almost dead and speechless. Reche,
however, at last induced him to nod his head affirmatively in
token of recognition, although with signs of the utmost affright.
Weber's two companions were, however, quite dead, Gessner on
his right hand, his head on the table, and Zeuner on the left,
under the table ; before Weber lay a manuscript which Reche
knew, having frequently seen it before, and suspected to be of a
magical nature, from the secrecy with which Weber treated it.
Reche gathered up all the paraphernalia that they might not fall
into strange hands, and handed them to his father confessor, Dr
Weissenbornen. The matter could now no longer be kept a
secret, and there was nothing for it but to inform the authorities,
and take measures for the preservation of the life of Weber. To
this Heichler agreed, and Weber was taken to the hotel of the
Yellow Angel, where Reche and three other fellow students
remained with him. To all their questions as to what had hap-
pened to him and the two dead countrymen he gave no answer.
The police of the town sent three watchmen to remain by the
bodies, named Christian Krempe, George Beyer, and Nicolas
Schumann. The first of these men assisted in removing
Weber to the inn, and brought a provision of brandy with him
tu the villa, being accompanied by two men named Starcke and
Strauss, making in all five persons. The latter individuals
returned to the town about one in the morning. Beyer, hearing
noises, went twice to the door, but could see nothing, except that it
had been twice opened by invisible means, whereupon they all
determined to remain inside with the bodies, come what might.
Krempe then lighted a fire of the charcoal in a flower-pot, where-
upon there arose a fearful smell and steam from the dead bodies,
but on opening a shutter it dispersed. They had taken three
lights with them, but as often as they lighted them they were
extinguished, so they were obliged to put them aside; but on
lighting those belonging to the peasants, of which there were
two, they burnt well and steadily. To pass the time they also
began to smoke some tobacco they had found in the pocket of
the deceased Gessner, and soon Krempe was overcome by a fit
of stupor, in which he was neither quite awake nor asleep. He
could then see that something moved about the place, and it
272

GOE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GoE

roused him, and they soon were all awake. The apparition was
that of a boy, about seven or eight years old, which first scratched
at the door, and then moved backwards and forwards before them,
blowing a blast of wind into the house; the door clapping-to as
if it had broken into a thousand pieces. Upon this they were
all much frightened, and Beyer asked Krempe whether he had
seen anything, and being answered Yes, they both fell to prayers.
The other watchman, Schumann, was violently pushed along the
seat until he fell on to the dead body under the table, where he
lay a-trembling, and in a state of stupor, from which his compan-
ions could not rouse him. Beyer and Krempe at this grew yet more
terrified, their hair standing on end with horror, and, finally, they
fell down insensible, and so remained until they were found the
next day by the people sent from the town. They could not stand,
and were transported in a waggon to the court-house, theycould,at
first, give no account of themselves, and ever afterwards remained
in bad health. The dead bodies were removed to the pest-house,
and afterwards buried under the common gallows outside the
town. An official inquiry was held, and the above particulars
attested on oath, and the student Weber prosecuted for unlawful
practices. His body and those of Gessner and Zeuner were
covered with patches and marks they had never had before; the
necks of the two dead men were broken, and their bodies
scratched fearfully. Of the watchmen, Beyer died from the
results of the night’s proceedings, and was allowed Christian
burial. Weber lived afterwards, but departed from Jena after
he was condemned to banishment for life. Heichler was con-
demned to ten years’ banishment. It is hardly necessary to give
any detailed account of the magical apparatus, as, however
potently it may have acted upon the foolish perpetrators of this
business, it is clear that the men were partially suffocated by
the fumes of the charcoal, and that Weber, who probably had
not joined in the brandy potations of the countrymen, or who
possessed a stronger constitution, escaped by reason of his
abstinence or strength. As to the watchmen who, also, had
partaken of brandy, it is plain that the solitariness of the place,
the circumstances under which they found themselves there, and
the contiguity of two dead bodies, heightened their imaginations,
and frightened the one man to death, while it made the two
others seriously ill. In such narratives there is always
something behind, especially when the period at which these
events are shown to have taken place is considered. It was at
a time when the belief in magic had by no means lost its hold
upon the common people, and before it came to be understood in
a higher philosophical sense, a among the more curious of the
273

GOL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GoL

learned, some few of whom preserved its traditions, Astrology
was yet an article of belief among many very superior minds,
and, hence, it is scarcely to be wondered at, that two country
boors, in pursuit of unlawful wealth,—an avaricious tailor, and an
enthusiastic student,—should be ready to give credence to the
possibility of raising spirits, according to the Key of Solomon.
Imbedded in this farrago of superstition is yet visible the
following beautiful and truly magical legend. According to the
statements made by the peasant who knew the locality in which
the treasure was concealed, a Virgin was occasionally seen in
a hazy misty way; this Virgin was virtue, philosophy, truth, as
in the vision of Dr Rudd (see Rudd). Virtue, being essential, is
incapable of violation and must be a virgin; the mystic root
again was temperance, the gift of virtue; as virtus means
valour, in this case, valour to resist; the lock of the vault sym-
bolises necessity, which resistless valour must overcome; the
treasure itself was wisdom, unattainable without the aid of virtue
and temperance ; the writings were experience teaching the laws
of wisdom; the cubical and globular stones drawn out were
mathematical expressions of number; the carbuncle was Truth
itself in a material form; the cavern was the world of Science,
into which none can enter except by method, symbolized by the
formule of Faustus; the forty paces make the Hebrew deter-
minate number for an indeterminate number.

Go.tprn Ass or APULEIUS.—This famous mystical romance has
engaged the attention of scholars since the earliest times subse-
quent to its appearance, and, like many works of a similar kind,
has been twisted and tortured into all sorts of meanings not
contemplated by the author. Even the episode of Cupid and
Psyche (probably introduced with no other motive than to convey
a pleasing allegory in a graceful dress) has received most strange
interpretations at the hands of the commentators. This habit
of glossing works prevailed throughout the middle ages, and has
generally led to the production of a mass of unsubstantial litera-
ture rather calculated to dismay than instruct the student of
ancient beliefs and forms of thought. As a matter of fact,
Apuleius was hardly the author of the story, but was himself a
transformer of what existed long before. Lucius of Patra was
the original founder of the fable, and Lucian of Samosata, with
his characteristic vein of satire, deformed the legend, and treated
it with a sort of clever vigour which reminds one rather of Swift
among the moderns. Apuleius himself, however, mastered
the subject, and has left one of the most ‘astonishing romances
behind him as a legacy for the world to enjoy. The “ Metamor-
phoses” remains as his monument; from its inherent merits it

274

GOL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GoL
became best known as the “Golden Ass,” and its pages have
furnished hints to Boccaccio, La Fontaine, and other fabulists. If
we take the book as a whole, there cannot but be perceived a
strain of the highest morality pervading it, but it is not to be
questioned that the phraseology is inflated and far too ambitious.
Apuleius also, to a great degree, sought to embody his autobio-
graphy within the work. The fable commences with the repre-
sentation of a youth, who narrates his adventures in the first
person, who having been well and carefully trained at home, has
an ardent love for all that is good and true, but when exposed
to the temptations of the world, his principles give way, in the
usual manner, before a love of pleasure and the world, and espe-
cially by an inordinate craving for the possession of secrets
esteemed unlawful. In another part of this work it has already
been said that magic was divided into a lower and a higher side,
and that in juxtaposition with sublime and eternal truths are to
be found the most pitiable superstitions and degraded ideas—the
eternal question of Truth and Falsehood being ever visible.
Lucius, on arriving in Thessaly, then the acknowledged head-
quarters of corrupt magic, is allured by the beauty of his host's
servant—symbolizing this false magic—and, after a course of
evil living, he is rescued by the advice of a wealthy matron,
named Byrrhena, who puts him on his guard. This Byrrhena
represents the highest expression of earthly wisdom, and her
palace is that of Goodness and Beauty. This matron promises
Lucius to make him her heir, and warns him against curiosity ;
but his fatal passion for secret things besets him again, and,
disobeying her injunctions, he finds himself changed into an ass.
His experiences in this form may be passed over; enough to say
that he is made the spectator and participator in the vilest
scenes, from which he can find no escape. Lucius here suffers
the most dreadful mental torture, and is informed that his only
method of restoration to his original form is by eating a rose.
The rose was esteemed the symbol of silence; but there are dif-
ferent kinds of roses, and Lucius is once more deluded and
nearly poisoned by a spurious rose. But the real rose to be at-
tained is that faith in the providence of God, only to be had
after trial and sorrow; that is, the providence of Isis, whose veil
no mortal hath ever raised. In a vision, Lucius is led to a know-
ledge of this all-pervading power, and proceeds, in his ass-form, to
lave himself seven times in the sea. When this is done, a divine
vision is vouchsafed him, and he is prepared for his restoration to
a human form. He proceeds throughout as in a dream, but finally
obtaining sight of the aporrheta, obtains the rose at the hand of
the officiator in a procession, and is triumphantly restored to

275

GOL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GOL

virtue and health. The whole romance abounds with allusions
of an interesting kind to the Freemason, and should be studied
by every true Brother of the Mystic Tie.

GoLDEN CANDLESTICK.—Moses first made the seven-branched golden
candlestick for the tabernacle service. It is called a candlestick,
but was unquestionably an oil lamp with seven receivers; the
purest olive-oil was used in it, and the branches were described
in the ineffable degrees as referring to the seven planets. It
forms also a part of the furniture of the Chapter series of the
Antient and Primitive Rite. It is a portion of the furniture of
a Royal Arch Chapter, but its symbolism has been lost, or at
any rate does not now receive illustration,

GOLDEN FLEEcE.—In the recommendation of the S. W. to the
E. A. P. as to his conduct on initiation, he is told that the Mason’s
apron is “ more ancient than the Golden Fleece, or Roman Eagle;
more honourable than the Star, Garter, or any other order in
existence.” This is one of those confused pieces of grand
eloquence we find often repeated in investitures of all kinds,
and not peculiar to any age or country; besides, it is usually
learnt by rote in ceremonial Masonry, and repeated by the S. W.
as the transmitter of an undoubtedly ancient privilege. There
is no nonsense so dear to the human mind as that which veils
itself in unintelligibility, even from ourselves, and when it rolls
sonorously from the throat and off the tongue, it is doubly dear.
It is not to be supposed that the ancient Operative Masons, who
certainly existed before the institution of the Order of the Golden
Fleece, would themselves know anything about it, and hence it
may have been put into the ritual by some diligent speculative
Freemason after the revival in 1717. It is only proper to add
here, that the Golden Fleece of the Argonauts was a symbol in
the previous systems of Hermeticism.

GOLDEN FLEECE, ORDER OF THE.—Instituted 10th January, 1429, at
Bruges, by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy and Brabant, and
Count of Flanders, on the day of his marriage with his third
wife, the Infanta Isabella of Portugal. The ancient motto of this
Order was Autre n’auray, “I will have no other.” The Sovereign
of this Order can admit any person, without chivalric proofs;
as the fundamental Code says :—“ That whoever is the object of
the choice of the Sovereign, possesses, in virtue of his so being,
every requisite which may entitle him to his admission therein.”
In its origin the number of knights was limited to twenty-
five; but there was an augmentation of this number under
the Emperor Charles V. A proof of noble birth and descent
from the twelfth century was required—at any rate in the
Spanish branch. The Collar of the Order is composed of double

276

GOL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GoL

steels, interwoven with flint stones, emitting sparks of fire—
wherefrom hangs a Golden Fleece. The fusils are joined two
and two together, as if they were double BB’s (the Cyphers of
Burgundy). The Flintstones are the ancient arms of the sove-
reigns of Burgundy, and their motto is added—Ante ferit quam
jlamma micet. Motto—Pretium non vile laborum. There are
four officers—Chancellor, Treasurer, Registrar, and a King-at-
Arms, whose title is Zoison d’Or. Badge—A Golden Fleece,
suspended from a Flint Stone proper, encircled with flames, 07,
worn from a flame-coloured ribbon. Habit—A long mantle, a
cap of crimson velvet; the mantle is bordée with flint-stones
and fire-steels, alternate, encircled with flames, worked in em-
broidery of gold. Underclothing—Plain white silk. At first
this Order was attached by inalienable rights to the Dukes of
Burgundy, as Counts of Flanders. This Golden Fleece has
nothing to do with that mystical Fleece for which the expedition
of the Argonauts was made.

GoLpren Key, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the Golden Key.)

GoLDEN Lance, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the Golden Lance.)

GoLpEN Lion oF HEssE-CASSEL, ORDER OF THE—Instituted by
Frederick the Second, Landgrave, who married Mary, a Princess
of Great Britain, and daughter of George IL,anda K.G. Patroness,
St Elisabeth. Decreed 6th July, 1770, instituted 14th August,
1770, to recompense virtue and merit. Grand Master, the reign-
ing sovereign of Hesse-Cassel. Badge, an oval ring, or, within
the contour, a Lion erect. Motto, Virtute et Fidelitate ; on the
obverse, Fredericus IL., D. G. Hassie Landgravius, inst. 1770.
Ribbon, deep crimson watered, very broad, worn scarf-wise over
the right. An eight-pointed star in silver is also worn on the
left side of the mantle. All princes of the House of Hesse are
by birth knights of the Order; but cannot be invested until the
age of twenty-five. Forty-one knights alone could be made,
including the Grand Master and Chancellor. Men of merit and.
ability, native and foreign, were eligible to this Order, and noi
necessarily of noble birth. Knights chosen, but unavoidably
absent, received a princely rescript in sign manual, by commission
through a previously elected knight. Each knight must send on
his installation two achievements of his paternal coat of arms,
properly blazoned. One must be on copper, with a field azure.
The other on parchment. The former is to be suspended in the
Aula of the Order. Every Knight may combine the insignia
with his own shield, or armorial bearings, and in all acts, papers,
parchments, and deeds, he is to be termed Der Wohlgeborner—
the Wellborn. Knights-Companions are under individual vows
of attachment to the sovereign, and obligations of mutual suc-

277

GOL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GoL

cour, and to protect, assist, and defend the poor, the helpless, the
widow, and the orphan. On the death of a knight, his insignia
must be returned, and his name is marked in the register of
matriculation.

GOLDEN Spur, ORDER OF THE. (See Papal Knights of the Golden
Spur.)

GOLDEN STOLE or VENIcE.—An ancient order of knighthood, con-
ferred by the Republic of Venice. The Cavalieri della Stola
D'Oro, or Knights of the Golden Stole, were unlimited in num-
ber, and their designation was derived from the decoration worn
over the left shonlder—richly embroidered with flowers of gold.
It is of the breadth of a hand, and falls behind and before, reach-
ing to the knee. The senators confer this dignity only upon
persons who descend from the oldest nobility of the State, or
upon those who have rendered themselves worthy of it by their
having filled the post of ambassador on some extraordinary
oceasion. The habit of the knights, which is also called the
ducal robe, consists of a long gown of red stuff, either of taffety
or damask, and the sleeves are so long that they touch the
ground. Their under garments are of crimson, and in winter
the robe is lined and turned up with the richest furs. Formerly
the knights were not only obliged to wear this dress during the
eight days following their promotion, but during that time they
were compelled to attend the person of the Doge in such a dress,
or to pay a fine of five hundred ducats. In 1631, however,
another regulation came into force, whereby they were directed
to appear in their habits of ceremony only on great occasions.
At other times the undress of the knights consisted of a long
surtout over their customary apparel. In summer it is of crimson
lutestring or taffety, in winter of cloth or velvet, fastened by a
fringed gndle of velvet, or golden buttons, The embroidered
stole of gold they wear every day. The cap is the same as that
of other distinguished personages—of black cloth with a black
silk fringe, lined with black taffety.

GoLeoTHa (Aramean, sna) ; Greek, Toayod%; Latin, Calvaria or
Calvary, a skull)—1. Mount Calvary is a small eminence, due
west of Mount Moriah, and, in the legend of the third degree,
this hillock, from its position in reference to the Temple, is
evidently the place where the weary Brother rested and made an
important discovery. Ancient traditions assert that Adam was
buried here, in order that, where he lay, who had caused the ruin
of mankind, there also might the Saviour suffer, die, and be
buried.—(Reland, Palest. p. 860). Another legend asserts that

Enoch here constructed his nine-arched vault, and concealed from
278

GoM | Lhe Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [coo

the eyes of men the true ineffable name of God; and a third story
relates that certain Masons making excavations on the spot during
the construction of the Temple, discovered this vault and the
name, and brought it to King Solomon. It is peculiarly sacred
as having been the spot where Christ was crucified, and near to
which Joseph of Arimathea subsequently laid the body. 2. Gol-
gotha is a significant word in the Knights Templar systeni.
3. Used in Swedish Masonry.

GomEL (Hebrew bn, retribuens).—A word used in the twenty-
sixth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite—sometimes
erroneously given as Gomez. It is derived from the Hebrew
word which signifies to reward. Tradition asserts that gomel
was the first word uttered by Adam on beholding Eve.

GooDALL.—The reputed author of the exposé of Masonry, known as
“Jachin and Boaz.” It is said that he was at one time W. Master
of the West India and American Lodge, now known as the Lodge
of Antiquity.

Goop Mason.—“ The good mason,” says Inwood, “is an example
to his neighbours, and his name and character are proverbial.
Those who are younger venerate him, his companions love him,
his superiors extol him. In his family he is high without
severity, and condescending without meanness; his commands
are gentle—indeed, his wishes are his commands; for all are
equally ready to answer his desires. To his wife, he is the tender
husband, not the usurping lord; to his children, he is the kind,
the providential father, not the domineering tyrant; to his ser-
vants, he is equally the friend as the superior. Thus ruling, he
is obeyed with cheerfulness ; and thus his home, whether a cottage
or a palace, is, while he is present, the habitation of peace; when
there, he leaves it with reluctance, and when absent, his return
is expected with a pleasing avidity.”

Goop SAMARITAN.—An American androgynous side degree con-
ferred only on Royal Arch Masons and their wives. The lecture
of the degree is taken from those passages of Scripture referring
to Lot’s wife. In conferring it, the presence of two Good Samari-
tans is necessary. The meetings are called assemblies, and, where
held, occur at intervals of 2 month.

Goop SHEPHERD.—Christ, in St John (x, 14, 15, 16), says :-—“I am
the Good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.
As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father; and I
lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have which
are not of this fold; them also must I bring, and they shall hear
my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.”
Christ is called the Good Shepherd in Masonic symbolism, as in

279

Goo | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

Christianity. Christ is represented as bearing a sheep upon his
shoulders—his two hands being crossed upon his breast, and
holding the legs of the sheep. Statues of Hermes, the Pagan
analogue of Christ, represent that god, who was guardian of flocks,
in the same position—hence the emblematic signification is not
peculiar to Christianity. The sign of the Good Shepherd has
been adopted in the Rose Croix system.

GoosE AND GRIDIRON.—A tavern in London House Yard, near the
north end of St Paul’s. It is probable that Sir Christopher
Wren used to dine at this house while engaged in the construc-
tion of the Cathedral. The Lodge of Antiquity met here in
1717, and the first quarterly communication of the Grand Lodge
was held here on the 24th June, 1717.

Gormocons, Society or —Established in London, 1724, in avowed
hostility to Freemasonry, and boasting of an origin from China.
Its rites were absurd, and no Mason could join it without
renouncing all connexion with the Fraternity. The Gormogons
made much noise during their brief existence, but perished igno-
miniously, while the Freemasons have, by the excellence of their
principles and morality, won a world-wide empire.

Gotuic Constitutions. (See York Constitutions.)

GotHic Mysteries. (See Scandinavian Mysteries.)

GourcGas, JOHN JAMES JOSEPH.—Born in France, 1777, received as
a member of the Scottish Rite, in 1806. He was a merchant at
New York, and was prominently connected with the rise and pro-
gress of the Ancient and Accepted Rite in the United States, in the
Northern Jurisdiction. On the establishment of this jurisdiction,
Bro. Gourgas was elected Secretary-General, an office he held until
1832, when he was elected Sovereign Grand Commander. He re-
signed this office, in 1851, in favour of Bro. Giles Fonda Yates, and
died at New York, 14th Feb., 1865, aged eighty-eight. He was
an enthusiastic Mason, and a liberal patron of Masonic literature.

Graprs.—A term sometimes used to express the degrees of Masonry.

GRAIN OF MUSTARD, ORDER OF THE—(German, Der Orden vom Senf
Korn).—An Order instituted in Germany, based on Mark iv., 30
and 52, The object was the propagation of morality.

GRAMMAR.—One of the seven liberal arts and sciences—specially
associated with logic, the art of right reasoning, and rhetoric, the
art of pleasing oratory; the others being Arithmetic, Geometry,
Music, and Astronomy.

Granp ArcuHiTectT. (See Architect.)

GRAND ARCHITECT OF THE UNIVERSE.—The technical name for the
Deity, in Masonry. In the second degree He is called the Grand
Geometrician of the Universe. He is Kneph, the Maker, in the
Hey pian Mysteries; the Demiurgos of the Platonic system ;

250

GRA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

Brahma, with his son Daksha, in India, equal to the spiritual
and material creators, or God, in His double form of divinity
and humanity.

GRAND CHAPTER.—In the United Kingdom, the officers are Zerub-
babel, Haggai, and Jeshua. Ina Supreme Grand Chapter they
receive additional titles of honour. The organisation in Ireland
is varied by the substitution of Grand King, while in America
the High Priest is made first in the triad, which must necessarily
remain unbroken. Supreme Grand Chapters have the govern-
ment of the Royal Arch Chapters throughout the country. The
title of the chief authority in England is First Grand Principal,
and is at present held by H.R.H. the M.W.G.M. the Prince of
Wales. In the provinces, there are Grand Superintendents.

GRAND COMMANDER.—In England this term has been, at least at
present, abandoned in the Templar system. The officer is now
called Grand, or Eminent Preceptor. This does hot apply to
foreign systems of Templary.

GRAND COMMANDER OF THE EASTERN STar.—A degree in Pyron’s
collection.

Granb Conciave. (See Grand Priory—Templar system.)

GRAND ConsEcRATOR.—The twenty-second degree of the Antient
and Primitive Rite. An official grade conferring the privilege
and ability to consecrate all Masonic Temples.

GRAND CONSERVATORS.— Officers appointed by the Grand Orient of
France, July 1, 1814, in place of Prince Cambacérés, to exercise
the oftice of Grand Master of France. The first three were
Macdonald, Duke of Tarentum ; the Count of Beurnonville; and
Timbrune, Count de Valence. They were appointed Ist August,
1814. The Grand Mastership of France is now abolished.

GRAND CONSERVATOR OF THE RITE, Sovurzicn. (See Knight, Grand
Inspector.)

GranD Consistory.—The principal governing body of the Ancient
and Accepted Scottish Rite in America, under the jurisdiction of
the Supreme Council of the 33d degree. All members must
necessarily be members of the 32d degree.

Granpd Councit.—1l. The three first officers of a Royal Arch
Chapter. 2. The superintending body in Cryptic Masonry,
formed from the first three officers of each council. 3. A term
for those degrees of the Antient and Primitive Rite which teach
Egyptian theosophy and the doctrine of the Ancient Mysteries.

GRAND DEFENDER.—The thirty-tirst degree of the Antient and
Primitive Rite of Masonry, and conferred ex officio upon the
second and third officers of a Chapter, Senate, and Council.

GranD DIRECTOR OF CEREMONIES.—An important officer in Grand

Lodge whose duty is to arrange all the details of the installation
281

GRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

festival, and other meetings of the Craft assembled on solemn
occasions. (See Director of Ceremonies.)

GranD East.—The situation of a Grand East is the place where
the documents relating to the transactions of a supreme body of
Craft Masonry are deposited, and whence its circulars, proclama-
tions, and advices issue. Thus the Grand East of England is
London ; that of Scotland, Edinburgh; and that of Ireland, Dub-
lin, although in the United Kingdom the term is not in use, In
France and America the latitude and longitude is always given.

GRAND Exrct, PERFECT, AND SUBLIME Mason.—The fourteenth
degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite. (See Perfection,
Degree of, and Secret Vault.)

GRAND ENCAMPMENT. (See Lncampment, Grand.)

Gnranp Evxocist.—The twenty-third degree of the Antient and
Primitive Rite. It is an official degree dealing with the funerals
of brethren of the Rite.

GRAND Hicu Priest.—The supreme officer of Royal Arch Masonry
in America—the Prince Zerubbabel baving been dethroned in
obedience to political exigencies. In fact, it is only since 1813
that the English system substituted the Prince for the High
Priest. The presiding officer before that time must have been a
High Priest.

GRAND INQUIRING CoMMANDER.—The sixty-sixth degree of the Rite
of Mizraim.

GRAND InsPecTOR INQuIsIroR COMMANDER.—The thirty-first de-
gree of the A. and A. Rite. It is of a judicial character. Its
place of meeting is called a sovereign tribunal; decorations
white; the presiding officer is called Most Perfect President.
Jewel—a Teutonic cross, argent, with a white watered ribbon.
In France the regulations prescribe a white apron with aurore
(yellow) flap, embroidered with the attributes of the degree.

GRAND InsTALLATOR. (See Jnstallator, Grand.)

GRAND INTENDANT. (See Knight Grand Inspector.)

FRAND JUDGE. (See Judge, Grand and Tribunal, Grand).

GRAND LopGE—In all countries the fountain of Craft Masonry,
having the real jurisdiction by right of antiquity and prescript.
It possesses an autocratic power, and forms the ultimate court of
appeal in all Masonic questions. The Grand Lodge of England
is the most venerable of these bodies, and implicit obedience is
enjoined to all Lodges under its wise and benevolent rule. In
fact, without a Grand Lodge it would be impossible to render the
proceedings of Masonry regular. It does not, however, concern
itself with the opinions of individuals, but regulates the Craft in
its original integrity. Its power is derived from the common con-
sent ot the four Lodges existing in London, in 1717, and ratified by

202

GRA | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [GRA

the Union of 1813. On the occasion of an installation, elected
Masters, previous to their occupying the chair of King Solomon,
are solemnly required to assent to the following declarations :—
“You agree to hold in veneration the original rulers and patrons
of the Order of Freemasonry, and their regular successors,
supreme and subordinate, according to their stations; and to sub-
mit to the awards and resolutions of your brethren in Grand
Lodge convened, in every case, consistent with the Constitutions
of the Order. You promise to pay homage to the Grand Master
for the time being, and to his officers, when duly installed, and
strictly to conform to every edict of the Grand Lodge.” The
officers of a Grand Lodge, in all countries, are:—The Grand
Master, the Deputy Grand Master, Senior and Junior Grand
Wardens, Grand Treasurer, and Grand Secretary. There are
also Grand Deacons, Grand Director of Ceremonies, Grand
Sword-Bearer, Grand Pursuivants, Grand Stewards, and—though
this last is hardly esteemed an officer—Grand Tyler. The Grand
Chaplains and Grand Organist are extra, and purely honorary.
In England, as the Prince of Wales is Grand Master, there is
also a Pro Grand Master. In the continental system, there is
also an officer called Grand Orator.

Grand LopcE Manuscripr.—Preserved in the archives of the
Grand Lodge of England. It is a roll of parchment, nine inches
long, and five broad, containing the Legend of the Craft, and the
Ancient Charges. The date, a.D. 1132, is given to this document,
but this is probably an error for 1632 or 1532. Published by
Bro. W. J. Hughan in his “Old Charges of British Freemasons.”

GranD Master—the president over the symbolical degrees in any
jurisdiction. He has the right of presiding over Grand Lodge
—the parliament of the Craft—and also that of presiding in any
Lodge he may choose to visit, with the Master of the Lodge to
his left, while his own Grand Wardens may be summoned to as-
sist him in the work. He may visit and inspect any Lodge, and
see that its work is properly done, and may appoint any one of
his Grand Officers to do the same. In him is vested the sole
power of granting dispensations for new Lodges. The Grand
Master in England appoints his Grand Officers, but in America,
and some other countries, the Grand Officers are elected by the
body of Grand Lodge. Should the Grand Master die during his
term of office, the Pro Grand Master, or Deputy Grand Master,
as the case may be, assumes his powers. Should there be no
deputy, then the Grand Wardens act according to seniority.

GraND MASTER ARcHITECT.—The twelfth degree in the Ancient
and Accepted Rite. It is a scientific degree, having a resemblance

to the Fellow Craft. Officers—Master and two verter The
283

GRA| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

—— =

Chapter has white and red hangings, the five orders of architec-
ture are displayed, with a case of mathematical instruments.
Apron—white, lined with blue ; Jewel—a heptagonal gold medal,
on which is depicted a star, in each angle, enclosed in a semi-
circle, in the centre an equilateral triangle with the letter 8; on
the reverse are the five Orders; Ribbon—stone or pale blue
colour. This degree is not practised in the A. and P. Rite.

GRAND Master Mason.—The title of the Grand Master in Scotland.

GRAND MASTER oF ALL SymBoLic Lopces (Vénérable Maitre de
toutes les Loges).—The twentieth degree of the Ancient and Ac-
cepted Rite. The president is called Venerable Grand Master,
and his officers are two Wardens in the West. Decorations—
blue and yellow. Apron—yellow, bordered and lined with blue
Sash—broad yellow and blue ribbon, worn from the left. Jewel
—a golden triangle with the initials of the Sacred Word. There
is reason to suppose that this degree owes its origin to the
Templar system of the Chevalier Ramsay. Brother Yarker
says:—‘“It is said this degree was the ceremonial of Master
ad vitam. Those in the French system held office for life, and
this was the ceremonial. The same remark may be made about
the Pontifical Orders as being derived from the presidency in
the Arch system.”

GRAND Master or Licut. The same as Grand Scottish Knight of
St Andrew. (Which see.)

GRAND MASTERS OF FREEMASONRY :-—
Grand Masters of England before the Revival of Masonry in 1717.

[This list has been collated with several authorities. It is, however, not
given as fact, but as tradition.]

AD.
287. Saint Alban, a Roman Knight when Carausius was
emperor of Britain.
557. Saint Augustine, Bishop of Canterbury.
597. Austin the Monk.
680. Bennet, Abbot of Wirral.
856-8, Saint Swithin.
872. King Alfred the Great.
900. Ethred, King of Mercia.
Prince Ethelward.
924. King Aithelstan.
926. Prince A.dwin or Edwin, Brother of Aithelstan.
957. Saint Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury.
1041. King Edward the Confessor; and Leofric, Earl of
Coventry.
1066. Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Arundel and of Shrews-

bury; and Gundulph, Bishop of Rochester.
284

GRA |

1100.
1135.
1154.

1176.
1212,
1216.
1234.
1272.

1307,
1327.
1350.
1357.
1375.

1377.
1399,
1413.
1443,
1471,
1485.

1493.
1502.
1515.
1539.
1540.
1549.

1551.

1561.

1567.

1579.

1588.

1603.
1607.
1618.
1625.
1630.
1633.
1635.
1636.

The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

King Henry I.
Gilbert de Clare, Marquis of Pembroke.
The Grand Master of the Templars, Bernard de Trem-

blay.
Peter de Colechurch.
William Almaine.
Peter de Rupibus, Bishop of Winchester.
Geoffrey Fitz Peter.
Walter Giffard, Archbishop of York.
Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester.
Ralph, Lord of Mount Hermer.
Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter.
King Edward ITI.
John de Spoulee, Master of the Ghiblim.
William de Wykeham, Bishop of Winchester.
Robert de Barnham.
Henry Yevele, surnamed the King’s Freemason.
Simon Langham, Abbot of Westiinster.
William de Wykeham (for a second time),
Thomas Fitz-Allen, Earl of Surrey.
Henry Chicheley, Archbishop of Canterbury.
William Wayntleet, Bishop of Winchester.
Richard Beauchamp, Bishop of Salisbury.
ae as VII, Grand Master of the Order of St
John
John Islip, Abbot of Westminster.
Sir Reginald Bray.
Cardinal Thomas Wolsey.
Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex.
John Touchett, Lord Audley.
Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset.
John Poynet, Bishop of Winchester.
Sir Thomas Sackville.
Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford.
Sir Thomas Gresham.
Charles Howard, Ear] of Effingham.
George Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon.
King James I.
Inigo Jones, the Architect.
William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke.
King Charles I.
Henry Danvers, Earl of Danby.
Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundel.
Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford.

Inigo Jones (a second time). :
205

GRA]
1660.

1666.
1674.
1679.
1685.
1695.
1698.

The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

King Charles IT.

Henry Jermyn, Earl of Saint Albans.
Thomas Savage, Earl Rivers.

George Villars, Duke of Buckingham.
Henry Bennet, Earl of Arlington.

Sir Christopher Wren.

Charles Lenox, Duke of Richmond.
Sir Christopher Wren (a second time).

Grand Masters of England after the Revival in 1717.

1717.
1718.
1719.
1720.
1721.
1722.
1723.
1724.
1725.
1726.
1727.
1728.
1729-30,
1781.
1732.
1733.
1734.
1735.
1736.
1737,
1738.
1739.
1740.
1741.
1742-3,
1744.
1745-6.
1747-51.
1752-3.
1754-6.
1757-61.
1762-3.
1764-6.
1767-71.
1772-6,
286

Anthony Sayer, Esquire.

George Payne, Esquire.

J. T. Desaguliers, LL.D., F.R.S.
George Payne, Esquire (a second time).
John, Duke of Montagu.

Philip, Duke of Wharton.

Francis Scott, Earl of Dalkeith.
Charles Lenox, Duke of Richmond.
James Hamilton, Lord Paisley.
William O’Brien, Earl of Inchiquin.
Henry Hare, Lord Coleraine.

James King, Lord Kingston.

Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk.

T. Coke, Lord Lovel, afterwards Earl of Leicester.
Anthony Brown, Viscount Montacute.
James Lyon, Earl of Strathmore.

John Lindsay, Earl of Crawfurd.
Thomas Thynne, Viscount Weymouth.
John Campbell, Earl of Loudoun.
Edward Bligh, Earl of Darnley.

H. Brydges, Marquis of Carnarvon.
Robert, Lord Raymond.

John Keith, Earl of Kintore.

James Douglas, Earl of Morton.

John, Lord Dudley and Ward.
Thomas Lyon, Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorn.
James, Lord Cranstoun.

William, Lord Byron.

John Proby, Lord Carysfort.

James Brydges, Marquis of Carnarvon.
Sholto Douglas, Lord Aberdour.
Washington Shirley, Earl Ferrers.
Cadwallader, Lord Blayney.

Henry Somerset, Duke of Beaufort.
Robert Edward, Lord Petre.

GRA| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

1777-81. George Montagu, Duke of Manchester.
1782-90. H. R. H. Henry Frederick, Duke of Cumberland.
1791-1812. H. R. H. George, Prince of Wales (George IV.).
1813-42. H. R. H. Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex.
1843-69. The Earl of Zetland, K.T.
1870-3. The Marquis of Ripon, K.G.
1874. H. R. H. Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, K.G., &c.

Grand Masters of the York Masons.

Note.—The earliest roll of Masons preserved of the ancient Lodge held at
York commences 1705, when Sir George Tempest was the “chief
officer” ; and down to the year 1724 the chairman was either styled
Master or President, in which capacity Lord Bingley, Sir William
Robinson, Bart., Sir Walter Hawkesworth, and others, served the
Lodge; but it was not until 1725 that the members constituted
themselves into the “Grand Lodge of all England, held at York,” at
which date the list of their Grand Masters begins.

1725. Charles Bathurst.

1729. Edward Thompson, jun.
1733. John Johnson, M.D.
1734. John Marsden.

1761-2. Francis Drake, F.R.S.
1763-4. John Sawry Morritt.
1765-6. John Palmer.
1767. Seth Agar.
1768-70. George Palmer.
1771-2. Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Bart.
1773. Charles Chaloner.
1774-5. Henry Stapleton.
1776-9. William Siddall.
1780. Francis Smyth.
1781. Robert Sinclair.

1792. Edward Wolley.
(Grand Lodge collapsed.)
From Brother W. J. Hughan’s “ Memorials of the Union.”

Grand Masters of the Ancient (or Atholl) Masons.

1753. Robert Turner.
1754-5. Edward Vaughan.
1756-9. The Earl of Blessington.
1760-5. Thomas, Earl of Kellie.
1766-70. The Hon. Thomas Matthew.
1771-4. John, 3d Duke of Atholl.

1775-81. John, 4th Duke of Atholl. :
287

GRA |

17
1791

The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

82-90. William Randall, Earl of Antrim.
-1813,. John, 4th Duke of Atholl.
1813. H. R. H. Edward, Duke of Kent.
From Brother W. J. Hughan’s “ Memorials of the Union,”

Grand Masters of Scotland, also Hereditary Patrons,
1314. Robert Bruce, Founder 1542.

of the Royal Order of 1567. James VI.

Heredom. 1625. Charles J.
1329. David II. 1660. Charles IT.
1371. Robert IT. 1685. James VII.
1390. Robert III. 1688. William IIL, Prince of
1424, James I. Orange.
1437. James II. 1714. George I.
1460. James III. 1727. George IT.
J488, James IV. 1760. George III.

1513, James V.
Grand Masters of the Grand Lodye of Scotland from 1736 —

1736.
17387.
1738.
1739.
17-40.
1741.
1742.
1743.
1744.
1748.
1746.
1747,

1748.
1749.
1750.
1751.
1752.
1753.
1754.

1753-6
1757-8

1759-60.

William St Clair of Roslin.

George, 3d and last Earl of Cromarty.

John, 3d Earl of Kintore.

James, 15th Earl of Morton, K.T.

Thomas, 7th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorn.

Alexander, 5th Earl of Leven and Melville.

William, 4th and last Earl of Kilmarnock.

James, 5th Earl of Wemyss.

James, 7th Earl of Moray.

Henry David, 6th Earl of Buchan.

William Nisbet, Esquire, of Dirleton.

Hon. Francis Charters, of Amisfield, afterwards 6th
Earl of Wemyss.

Hugh Seton, Esquire, of Touch.

Thomas, Lord Erskine.

Alexander, 10th Earl of Eglinton.

James, Lord Boyd.

George Drummond, Esquire, Lord Provost of Edinburgh.

George Hamilton Gordon, Esquire, Advocate.

The Honourable James, Master of Forbes, afterwards
16th Baron Forbes.

. Sholto Charles, Lord Aberdour, afterwards 16th Earl of

Morton.
. Alexander, 6th Earl of Galloway.
David, 6th Earl of Leven and Melville.

1761-2, Charles, 5th Earl of Elgin and 14th of Kincardine.

288

GRA]

1763-4,
1765-6.
1767-8.
1769-70.
1771-2.

1773.

1774-5,
1776-7.
1778-9.
1780-1.
1782-3.
1784-5.
1786-7.

1788-9.
1790-1.
1792-3.

1794-5.
1796-7,

1798-9.
1800-1.

1802-3.
1804-5.
1806-7.

1808-9.

1810-11.

1812-13.

1814-15.
1816-17.
1818-19,
1820-1.
1822-3.
1824-5.

1826.
1827-29.

1830-31.
1832.

The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

John, 7th Earl of Kellie.

Right Hon. James Stewart, Lord Provost of Edinburgh.

George, 8th Earl of Dalhousie.

Lieut.-General James Adolphus Oughton.

Patrick, 5th Earl of Dumfries,

John, 3d Duke of Atholl.

David Dalrymple, Esquire, afterwards Lord Westhall.

Sir William Forbes, of Pitsligo, Bart,

John, 4th Duke of Atholl.

Alexander, 6th Earl of Balcarres.

David, 6th Earl of Buchan.

George, Lord Haddo.

Bao Charteris, younger of Amisfield, afterwards Lord
Elcho.

Francis, 7th Lord Napier.

George, 17th Earl of Morton.

George, Marquis of Huntly, afterwards 4th Duke of
Gordon.

William, Earl of Ancrum, afterwards 6th Marquis of
Lothian.

Francis, Lord Doune, afterwards 9th Earl of Moray.

Sir James Stirling, Bart., Lord Provost of Edinburgh.

Charles William, Karl of Dalkeith, afterwards 4th Duke
of Buccleuch.

George, 5th Earl of Aboyne.

George, 9th Earl of Dalhousie.

Francis, Earl of Moira, K.G., G.C.B., afterwards Ist
Marquis of Hastings.

Hon. W. Ramsay Maule, of Panmure, afterwards Ist
Lord Panmure.

James, 2d Earl of Rosslyn.

Robert, Viscount Duncan, afterwards 2d Earl of Cam-
perdown.

James, 4th Earl of Fife.

Sir John Marjoribanks, of Lees, Bart., M.P.

George, 8th Marquis of Tweeddale.

Alexander, 10th Duke of Hamilton and Brandon.

George William, 7th Duke of Argyle.

John, Viscount Glenorchy, afterwards 2d Marquis of
Breadalbane.

Thomas Robert, 10th Earl of Kinnoul.

Francis, Lord Elcho, now 8th Earl of Wemyss and
March.

George William, 9th Baron Kinnaird and Rossie.

Henry David, 12th Earl of Buchan.
T 289

GRA]

The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

1833-4,

1835.
1836-7.
1838-9.

1840.
1841-2.
1843-63.

1864-6.
1867-9.
1870-3.

1874,

1804-29.
1830-6.
1871.

William Alexander, Marquis of Douglas and Clydes-
dale, afterwards 11th Duke of Hamilton and
Brandon.

Alexander Edward, Viscount Fincastle, afterwards 6th
Earl of Dunmore.

James Andrew, Lord Ramsay, afterwards 10th Earl and
1st Marquis of Dalhousie.

Sir James Forrest, of Comiston, Bart., Lord Provost of
Edinburgh.

George William, 11th Earl of Rothes.

Lord Frederick Fitz-Clarence, G.C.H.

George Augustus Frederick John, Lord Glenlyon, after-
wards 6th Duke of Atholl.

John Whyte-Melville, of Bennochy and Strathkinness,

Fox-Maule, 11th Earl of Dalhousie.

Francis Robert, 4th Earl of Rosslyn.

Sir M. R. Shaw-Stewart, Bart.

Patrons and Honorary Grand Masters in the
Grand Lodge of Scotland,

George, Prince of Wales, afterwards George IV.

William IV.
Albert Edward, Prince of Wales.

Grand Masters in France—elected by the Grand Lodge of France,

1735.
1737.
1738.
1743.
1771.

1805.

and the Grand Orient.

Lord Derwentwater.

Earl Harnwester.

The Duke D’Antin.

Louis de Bourbon, Prince of Clermont.

Louis-Philippe-Joseph, Duke de Chartres, afterwards
Duke of Orleans, afterwards Philippe Egalité.

. Alexander L. Roettiers de Montaleau, by the title of

Grand Vénérable.
Prince Joseph Bonaparte, Ex-King of Spain.

Deputies to the Grand Master.

Prince Cambacérés. Joachim Murat, King of the Two Sicilies.

Grand Masters elected by the Mother Lodge of the Philosophical

1776.
1785.
1807.

290

Scottish Rite.

The Marquis de la Rochefoucault-Bayers.
The Viscount de Gaud, grandee of Spain.
The Prince Cambacérés.

GRA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

Deputy Grand Master.
M. le Comte de Valence, peer of France.

Sovereign Grand Commanders elected by the Supreme Council of
the XXXII? in France.

1804. The Comte de Grasse-Tilly.
1807. The Prince Cambacérés.

Grand Masters of Holland,

1734. Vincent de la Chapelle.

~— The Count de Wassenaer.

1735. Jan Kornelius Rademacher.

1756. The Baron Van Aerssen-Beyeren-Van-Hoggerheide.
1758. Korstoff-Frederik-Antoni, Comte de Bentinck.
1759. The Baron Van Boetzelaer.

1798. Van-Teilingen.

1804. M. Byleveld.

1811. Ian Bousquet.

1812. M. Barnaart.

GRAND OFFERINGS.—These are traditionally said to have been made
on Mount Moriah, and were the offering of Isaac by Abraham,
the building of the altar by David to stay the pestilence, and the
dedication of the First Temple by Solomon.

Granp Orricers.—The Grand Wardens, Grand Registrar, Grand
Treasurer, and Grand Secretary ; the Grand Director of Cere-
monies, Grand Sword-Bearer, Grand Pursuivants, and others.
Grand Tyler is hardly an officer, not being mentioned in the
Constitutions.

GranD ORIENT.—The designation of a Grand Lodge among the
Latin races. (See Grand ast).

Grand PontiFF (Sublime Ecossais)—The nineteenth degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite—concerned with an examination of
the apocalyptic degrees of the New Jerusalem. Officers—a
Thrice Puissant in the East, and one Warden in the West. The
members are called True and Faithful Brothers, and are clothed
in white, with blue fillets, decorated with twelve golden stars.
Jewel—an oblong square of solid gold with the letter A on one
side, and © on the other.

GRAND PRINCIPALS.—The first three officers of any Royal Arch
Chapter in England—Zerubbabel, Haggai, and Jeshua.

GRAND Prior.—l. The chiefs or conventual bailiffs of the eight
langues of the Order of Malta. Other officers were also called
Grand Priors, and the number was twenty-six in all. 2. Third
officer in the Supreme Council, Ancient and Accepted Rite,

Southern Jurisdiction, United States of America. (See Prior.)
291

cra] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Gra

GRAND Priory.—The title applied to the head of the Templars in
Scotland and England, synonymous with Grand Encampment,
Conclave, &c.

GRAND REGIsTRAR—The Grand Lodge of England has a Grand
Registrar, usually a man of high position. His duties are to ad-
vise with the other Grand Lodge officials on questions of etiquette
and record.

GRAND ScorTisH KNIGHT oF St ANDREW.—The twenty-ninth de-
gree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite—also called Patriarch
of the Crusades, and Grand Master of Light. It is devoted to
toleration and freedom, inculcating equality under the moral law,
with a chivalric spirit. The assembly is called a Chapter, and
two apartments are required. The hangings of the first are crim-
son, with white columns, and the room represents the court of
Saladin, the great Sultan of Egypt and Syria; the second apart-
ment is decorated in the Oriental style. The president is termed
Venerable Grand Master. The costume of the Knights is a
crimson robe, with a large white cross of St Andrew on the
breast. The jewel consists of two interlaced triangles, formed by
ares of large circles, with the concave outward, of gold, enclosing
a pair of compasses, open to twenty-five degrees. At the bot-
tom, and to one of the points, is suspended a St. Andrew’s cross,
of gold, surmounted by a knight’s helmet. On the centre of the
cross is the letter , within an equilateral triangle, encompassed
by a winged serpent. Between the two lower arms may be sus-
pended a key.

GraNnD SECRETARY.—This office is esteemed a high honour, and, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, is usually bestowed upon a man
of superior abilities, unimpeachable integrity, and of gentle birth.
His duties are of extreme delicacy, as he has the very difficult
task of reconciling all sorts of practical questions, so as to satisfy
the inquirer, and still maintain the principles of Masonry intact.
Of late years, and since the decease of Grand Secretary W. H.
White, the duties of the office have become very onerous, and the
correspondence is voluminous in extent. His signature must be
affixed to every document issued from the office of the Grand
Secretary, and he is custodian of the Seal of the Grand Lodge.
The regulations of 1722 had provided for the creation of such an
office, but even up to the beginning of this century, that un-
divided attention, now imposed upon the Grand Secretary, was
unnecessary, and the work appertaining to the office could be
easily performed by a bi-weekly attendance of a few hours’ dura-
tion, At the present day, hundreds of letters are received and
forwarded in the course of a single day; and in almost every in-
stance the personal attention of the Grand Secretary is required

292

GRA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRA

to the correspondence. These remarks, of course, apply more
especially to London, Edinburgh, and Dublin, and, in a measure,
to France, Germany, America, Italy, and other countries; but
there is no country in which responsibility falls so heavily as it
does in England, the natural home of Masonry. The Jewel of
the Grand Secretary is acircle enclosing two pens crossed. His
badge of office was formerly a bag. (See Bag.)

GranD STEWARDS.—An office of distinction, much prized by the
Fraternity. These dignitaries have the superintendence of the
banquet, and other arrangements connected with the annual fes-
tival of Freemasonry. Eighteen Grand Stewards are, at the
present time, appointed from eighteen Lodges by the Grand
Master, on the nomination of the Lodge. <A P.G.S. is entitled
to wear purple clothing; his Jewel is a cornucopia, within a
circle; his badge of office a white rod.

Granp STEWARDS’ LopGcE.—In the English Constitutions, the past
and actual Grand Stewards constitute a Lodge without any
special number. It has, however, no working power, and is
represented in Grand Lodge by its Master, Wardens, and Past
Masters, There is no functional obligation to belong to the
Grand Stewards’ Lodge on the part of Stewards.

GRAND TILER, OR TYLER.—An official answering to the Tiler in a
subordinate Lodge. He is usually re-appointed from year to
year. He cannot be regarded as a grand officer, as his situation
precludes his joining in the discussions of the Grand Lodge.

GRAND TREASURER.—An elective office in Grand Lodge. His
duties are easily understood. Jewel—a circle enclosing two keys
crossed, or in saltire.

GranpD TRIBUNAL—The Judicial Council of the Antient and
Primitive Rite, held within the bosom of a Mystic Temple, and
formed of the Grand Defenders, thirty-first degree. It is pre-
sided over by a Grand Judge. The costume is a white sash, a
black collar with three white stripes, with the balance, book,
sword of justice, &c. Jewel—a double headed eagle with the
wings drooping, and the figure 31 upon the breast, also any
decoration which may have been conferred by the Grand
Chancery.

GRAND WARDENS.—The Senior and Junior Grand Wardens are,
in rank, next to the Provincial and District Grand Wardens, in
Grand Lodge. Their duties resemble those exercised by the
Wardens of subordinate Lodges. The Grand Master appoints
these officers in England, but in America they are elected.

GRANT, BARON, OF BLAERFINDY.—A member of the Lodge du
Contrat Social. Founder, in 1784, of the Order of Sublime Mas-
ters of the Luminous Ring.

293

GRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [GRE

GRASSE-TILLY, ALEXANDRE FRANCOIS AUGUSTE, COMTE DE.—Born
at Versailles, about 1766. Initiated in the Lodge Contrat Social,
and afterwards an afiiliated member of the French Lodge, la
Candeur, at Charleston, 8.C., U.S.A., in 1799; a founder of the
Lodge la Réunion Francaise, and at one time its Master. In
1802, he was a member of the Supreme Council of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite, established in 1801, at Charleston. He was
Grand Commander of this rite in France, from September 22,
1804, until 1806 ; and March 5, 1805, he founded another Sup-
reme Council at Milan, in Italy, and on July 4, 1811, another at
Madrid, in Spain. Being taken prisoner by the English, he did
not return to France until 1815, when he resumed his functions
as Grand Commander of the Supreme Council of America. He
resigned in 1818, and was succeeded by Comte Decazes. The
exact date of his death is not recorded.

GRavE.—In Masonry, the analogue of the pastos, couch, or coffin,
in the ancient mysteries. It is curious and suggestive that
jadathin is given in some copies of the Koran (Surat xxi.) in-
stead of hadabin, a hill.

GREATER Licuts. (See Lights, Symbolical.)

GREECE—Grand Lodge established 1867, but not finally indepen-
dent until 22d July, 1872. The chief seat of the fraternity is at
Athens, where the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accep-
ted Rite is also established. H.I.H. the Prince Rhodocanakis
has been elected Grand Master from 1872-1878.

GREEN.—The especial colour of the Perfect Master, Knight of the
East, Knight of the Red Cross, and Prince of Mercy. With the
Master Mason, it is a symbol of immortality, and among the
Druids, the emblem of hope.

GREETING.—A word signifying salutation. At the beginning of the
eighteenth century, it was usual, at the meeting of Masons, to say,
“ God’s good greeting be to this our happy meeting.” In Masonic
documents we sometimes find the letters 8.°. S.:. S..—the
initial of the Latin word sadutem, or health, thrice repeated.

GREGORIANS.—A society established early in the eighteenth cen-
tury, in ridicule of the Freemasons. They were still in existence
in 1797, but by that time they must have changed their charac-
ter, as Prince William Frederick of Gloucester was then their
chief ; and Dr Munkhouse, the chaplain who preached a sermon
in that year, spoke highly of the Order as a useful ally of Free-
masonry.

GREINEMANN, Lupwic.—A Dominican preacher at Aix la Chapelle,
who, in 1779, strove to prove that the Jews who crucified Christ
were Freemasons. He was abetted in this ridiculous design by
one Peter Schaff, a Capuchin, but at length the authorities inter-

294

GRI| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cus

vened, and extinguished the preachers, without showing any
special favour to the Masons.

Grip.—A word peculiar to Masonry ; in German, der Griff, and in
French, l’attowchement.

Groton.—A corruption of Crotona, in the Leland manuscript.

GRouND FLoor oF Kine Sotomon’s TempLte—A Mosaic pave-
ment of alternate white and black stones laid lozenge-wise. (See
Mosaic Pavement and Grand Offerings.)

GrounD Fioor oF THE Lopct.—tThe Lodge is said to rest on holy
ground, and symbolically represents Mount Moriah, the site of
the Temple of Solomon. It was once the threshing-floor of
Ornan, the Jebusite, and David bought it of him for fifty shekels
of silver. The Kabbalists assert that it was-here that Adam was
buried, and Abel slain. (See Holy Ground.)

Guarp. (See Due Guard.)

GUARD OF THE CONCLAVE. (See Knight of the Christian Mari.)

(iuaRDs.— Officers occasionally appointed in the Red Cross and
Templar systems.

GUERRIER DE Dumast.—Born at Nancy, 26th February, 1796. He
wrote a poem entitled La Magonnerie, in three cantos, with
elaborate notes, for which he received a gold medal.

Gucomos, Baron von.—A Masonic adventurer, who appeared in
Germany about 1775. He was a member of the Strict Observ-
ance, and claimed to have received powers from the Unknown
Superiors of the Holy See at Cyprus, to establish a new order of
Knights Templar. He convoked a congress, at Wiesbaden,
which was attended by some, despite the warnings of Dr Bode.
In 1786, he confessed that he was a Jesuit agent.

GuipBs.—A name assigned by some members of the high degrees
to one of the celebrated assassins. These names have taken the
most singular forms. One of these names is Romvel, ap-
parently a corruption of Cromwell; but Jubelum Guibbs has
puzzled many people. Dr Mackey suggests that it was derived
from the name of one Dr Adam Gib, a preacher of the Hano-
verian party, in 1745, who violently opposed Charles Edward
Stewart; when the young Pretender retired to France, he erected
his Primordial Chapter at Arras, and in the ritual he bestowed the
name of his old enemy on one of the ruffians. The notion is
amusing, but totally at variance with the character of that un-
fortunate prince, who never descended to such petty vengeance.

GUILLEMAINE DE ST. Victor, Lovis—A Masonic author, whose
principal work was the Récueil Précieux de la Maconnerie
Adonhiramite, 3 vols., Paris, 1'782.

Gustavus IV., or SWEDEN.—Initiated at Stockholm, 10th March,
1793. He issued an Ordonnance, 9th March, 1803, requiring all

295

Gut | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cy

the secret societies in his dominions to communicate their forms
and ceremonies to the government officials, but expressly exemp-
ted the Freemasons.

GUTTURAL Point oF Entrance. (See Points of Entrance.)

GyMnNosopPHisT, THE—Eighth degree of the Kabbalistical Rite.

Gymnosopuists, THE.—1. A section of ancient Indian philosophers,
who lived in the forests, and dispensed with the use of clothes.
Their tenets comprehended the immortality of the soul, and its
progressive migration into other bodies. Great astronomical and
scientific skill was attributed to them. They practised celibacy,
drank no wine, and lived on the fruits of the earth. According
to them, the chief happiness of man consisted in a contempt for
riches, and an abstinence from all sensual indulgences. 2. A
sect of Anchorites, who lived in Ethiopia, without any covering
by day or night.

GyPsiEs.—This curious race has been regarded with great interest
ever since its first appearance in Europe, and of late has again
attracted special attention, as presenting a great field for philo-
logical study. The Bohémiens, Zingart, Gitanos, or Zigeuner,—
for by these names are they known in various countries,—seem
first to have entered Europe early in the 16th century. Mun-
ster says that they first appeared in Germany in the year 1417,
but this is probably a clerical error for 1517. In a very few
years they had spread over almost all Europe, rousing the
alarm and suspicion of the governments of the several countries.
They were expelled from England, in 1530, by statute 22, Henry
VIIL., c. 10; and by 1st and 2d Philip and Mary, c. 4., and 5th
Elizabeth, c. 20. They were condemned to death, without bene-
fit of clergy, if they remained in the kingdom one month. This
was, however, repealed by 23 George III.,c. 54. From France
they were banished in the year 1560, and from Spain in the year
1591. In Scotland, they seem to have met with some favour, as
they were protected by writs of Privy Seal, in the years 1553
and 1554, and again in 1594, The name Gypsies was given
them from the supposition that they were of Egyptian origin,
arising, it is supposed, from their own statement; but later re-
search has shown that their language-—Romanis,—while devoid
of any resemblance to the Coptic, is an Indian dialect of great
antiquity, and may claim to be the oldest spoken language in
existence—being, probably, not a daughter, but a sister of Sans-
krit. The earliest specimen of the language we possess is con-
tained in the life of Dr Andrew Borde, physician to Henry VIII.
—the original Merry Andrew,—which has been lately published
by Mr Furnival for the Early English Text Society. We next
find a vocabulary in “ Bryce’s Travels in Hungary,” published

296

GYP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [cyp

early in this century ; and from that to the present time there
has been a constant supply of information on the subject. Per-
haps Mr George Borrow was the first to draw general attention to
the matter, by his fascinating romances, “Lavengro” and “Romany
Rye.” By-the-bye, the former word is given in Bryce, with the
meaning, a liar, Mr Borrow has lately published a Lavo-lil, or
dictionary, but he is so incautious (especially in his translations)
as to what words he uses,—occasiovally mixing up Spanish or
Hungarian words with his Romanis,—that it requires great care
in its use, and cannot be compared with the work of Dr Bath
Smart and H. Crofton, Esq., published by Messrs Asher, 1873.
Other English writers on the subject have been Crabbe, Roberts,
Mr Leyland (better known as “Hans Breitmann”), and Mr Sim-
son, who treats principally of the Scottish Gypsies. Among
foreign writers may be named—Grellman, Potts, and Professor
Miclositch, and, above all, Monsieur A. Paspati, whose erudite
work on the Turkish Gypsies must always be a standard book of
reference with students of the subject. All these authors show
that the language is essentially the same, wherever spoken; and
the testimony of the people themselves bears this out—one of the
men having given the writér a long account of a Gypsy family, from
Egypt, that he met at Gravesend, with whom he said he could
converse perfectly, only, “they talked very broad.’ He also
mentioned, as a curious fact, that the woman carried her child,
not, as in this country, at her back, but slung on the hip. The
Gypsies are generally considered to be simply the Pariahs, or
Suders, of India; but it is more probable that it will be found
they are as much a distinct class in India as in Europe, and that
their language, even there, is peculiar to themselves. Probably
the most singular thing about this people is the apparent absence
of anything like a religion. They always profess to belong to the
religion of the country in which they may chance to be, but
whether they have any cultus peculiar to themselves, still re-
mains unknown. Their word for God, viz., Diwoul,is no guide,
as it is clearly only connected with divvus, a day, but is curious
as being allied to the Sanskrit dyas; and so, probably, to Latin
dies, and Jupiter—i. ¢., dies pater. Their marriage ceremonies are
most strange, but will hardly admit of description here. A very
good account may be found in Mr Simson’s work, and the writer
knows of one person who has witnessed them. They have peculiar
customs at the death of any of their number, being careful to des-
troy everything belonging to the deceased, even to the cups and
other vessels used by them in their illness. They will also abstain
from anything, whether amusement, luxury, or whatever it may be,
in which the deceased took especial pleasure. The writer knows
297

GYP | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [cyp

one family who will never drink brandy, on the ground that it is
always the last thing that any of their people take before death.
The Gypsies have always made a trade of fortune-telling,—or
dukkering, as they themselves call it,—and there can be no doubt
that they put great faith in it, though few of them know any cer-
tain rules respecting it. The ordinary fortune-tellers make use
ofa jargon learned by rote, and the older, and more accredited, keep
their mode of divination so strictly secret that the writer has never
been able to discover the rules by which they profess to make
their calculations. All the race are most firm believers in ghosts,
and can relate many tales respecting them. One of the points
for which the pure-blooded Gypsies are most noted is, their strict
regard for the chastity of their women. It is said that formerly
any offender was punished with death, by burying alive. Mr Sim-
son says that “the Gypsies have certain signs by which theyrecog-
nise one another on meeting,” and though this has never been
actually verified by the writer, it is highly probable. At the pre-
sent day, the stringent police regulations have made the Gypsies
disappear, to some extent, from the roads, and settle near towns.
Their numbers are also kept down by the ravages made by con-
sumption among the younger members. According to De Pauw,
Freemasonry originated with the Gypsies. He says :—“Every
person who was not guilty of some crime could obtain admission
to the lesser mysteries. Those vagabonds called Egyptian priests,
in Greece and Italy, required considerable sums for initiation, and
their successors, the Gypsies, practice similar mummeries to ob-
tain money. And thus was Freemasonry introduced into Europe.”
Simson, in his “ History of the Gipsies,” 1866,.finds “a consider-
able resemblance between Gipsyism, in its harmless aspect, and
Freemasonry, with this difference, that the former is a general,
while the latter is a special society ; that is to say, the Gipsies
have the language, or some of the words and the signs peculiar
to the whole race, which each. individual or class will use for dif-
ferent purposes. The race does not necessarily, and does not in
fact, have intercourse with every other member of it; in that
respect they resemble any ordinary community of men.” And he
adds :—“ There are many Gipsies Freemasons; indeed, they are
the very people to push their way into a Mason’s Lodge, for they
have secrets of their own, and are naturally anxious to pry into
those of others, by which they may be benefited. I was told of
a Gipsy who died lately, the Master of a Mason’s Lodge. A
friend, a Mason, told me the other day of his having entered a
house in Yetholm, where were five Gipsies, all of whom respond-
ed to his Masonic signs.” This may be true, but it is not all the
truth. These despised Gypsies are in possession of many occult
298

H| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HAG

secrets, but they keep them jealously concealed. The system by
which they foretell events is one of great antiquity, and connect-
ed with Oriental methods of divination. It is possible to study
their science in a philosophical manner, and the means of divin-
ing are still in existence, although in a degraded form. They
certainly are acquainted with many Gnostic secrets, and it is
evident to any member of the Order of Ishmael that their chiefs,
at least, obtained a knowledge of many of the traditions con-
nected with that order. (See Litlts.)

H

H, the eighth letter of the English alphabet, but in its nature rather
an aspirate than a letter proper. As a Latin numeral, H denotes
200, and with a dash over it, thus, H, 200,000.

HH... A.. B..—Abbreviation of Hiram Abif.

HABAKKUK (Hebrew Pipi, a struggler, a favourite)—1. One of the
most distinguished of the Jewish prophets. 2. In the thirty-
second degree of the Ancient. and Accepted Rite, he answers to
Tuesday and Xerxes.

HABBAMAH, or JABAMIAH (Hebrew nnan, fanum excelswm).—Used
in the thirtieth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite of
France. Jabamiah is the corrupted form of this word, which, al-
though used in some Areopagi of the Scottish Rite, has no mean-
ing whatever. In process of time, many of the passwords have
been singularly distorted from their original forms.

Haat Fi SHarratT (Arabic, a grain, an ear of barley)—Used in
the Order of Ishmael.

HaBin (Hebrew }'333, intelligens)—1. A king of Canaan, who reigned
at Azor, whose general was Sisera (Judges iv. 2, 23). 2. The
name of the initiate in the fourth degree of the French Modern
Rite, sometimes given as Johaben, or Jabin }*2).

HaAvDEESES.—The traditions preserved by the Mohammedan doctors,
according to the Christian authorities, were said to be 5266 in
number. The Mohammedan doctors, unfortunately for the
Christian authorities, know nothing about them.

HRESIARCH.—The founder of an heretical sect.

HLZRESIMACHA:.— Writers who have written books against heresy.

HArepuA.—The second of the four gods worshipped by the Arab
tribe of Ad, before the time of Mohammed, to which Hid, or
Heber, was sent. These were Sakia, the God of rain, Hafedha,
the Preserver from Danger, Razeka, the Provider of Food, and
Salema, the God of Health.

Hagar (Hebrew 735, a stranger)—An important personage in the
Order of Ishmael. She was the substituted wife of Abraham,

299

HAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | HAT

with the consent of Sarah, and probably presented to the Syro-
Arabian prince by Pharaoh during his visit to Egypt (Gen. xii.
16), as she is mentioned as an Egyptian (Gen. xvi. 3). Sarah
was then Sarai, and Abraham, Abram. The touching history of
Hagar cannot be read without emotion. In the Order of Ishmael
her story with her justification is told atfulllength. She was ex-
pelled the tent of Abram at Sarai’s instigation, and is stated
at the time of her return to have been likely to produce seed to
Abram. She was specially blessed with a vision from the Lord
by his messengers, and told to call her son Ishmael, or God shall
perceiwve—in Hebrew Deyo? ; but the duty of obedience to her lord
was enjoined, while a blessing was given her in the promise of pro-
tection to her descendants through him. That prophecy has been
wonderfully fulfilled, through the three branches of Ishmael, and
through that family of man alone, it is said, will the Paraclete,
Comforter, or Periclyte, the Illustrious, arrive. (See Jshmael.) °

HAGARENES.—The descendants of Hagar, through Ishmael. They
were divided into twelve tribes:—1. Nebaioth (the Nabatheans
of Arabia Petrea); 2. Kedar (Kedarenes, or Bedouins); 3.
Abdeel; 4. Mibsam; 5. Mishma; 6. Dumah; 7. Massa; 8.
Hadad, or Hadar; 9. Thema; 10. Jetur; 11. Naphish (the
Itureans and Naphisheans were the tribe of Gad—1 Chron. v.,
19-20); and 12. Kedmah. Their local habitations seem to have
been east and south-east. Akin to them were the Keturahites
(descendants of Abraham and Keturah),Simram, Jokshan, Medan,
Median, Jishbak, and Shuach. From the tribe of Shuach was
descended Bildad, one of the friends of Job. We should also
not forgot to name the Edomites, or posterity of Esau, whose
capital was Petra.

Haeear (Hebrew ‘3).—1. Born in Babylon during the captivity, and
the companion of Zerubbabel and Jeshua, when they proceeded
to the rebuilding of the Temple, B.c. 516. 2. The second Prin-
cipal in an English Royal Arch Chapter ; in America, the third.

Hactagcuy.—Sacred or church government.

Hacue, THE. (See Netherlands.)

Hau.—The Hebrew definite article, and connected with the sub-
stitute word.

Hat, Hate, orn HELE!—1. Used in various ways—thus, as an inter-
rogation, “ Whence do you hail?” it means, “ Of what Lodge are
you a member?” from the Anglo-Saxon Hel, as “Hail, well met.”
2. From the Saxon Helan, to conceal. Gower uses it thus :—

“¢ There may no man’s privitie,
Be heled halve so well as myn.”
It is a word soon introduced to the notice of the initiate.
300

HAL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HAN

HAtL, Masonic.—The erection of buildings specially devoted to
Masonic purposes is much to be approved—the old system of
holding Lodges at taverns having led to many abuses. In Eng-
land, this principle is now being carried out with very happy
results, and similar advantages have accrued in America. It is
very desirable to emancipate all Masonic Lodges from the neces-
sity of continual feastings. The first Masonic Halls erected were
at Philadelphia in 1764, and at Marseilles about 1765; and in
1775, the Grand Lodge of England first laid the foundation of
a Masonic Hall in London, which was solemnly dedicated 23d
May, 1776, to Masonry, Virtue, and Universal Benevolence. A
similar hall was built at Newcastle in the same year, and Sun-
derland erected one in 1778. Masonic Halls now exist in all
parts of the United Kingdom, in the Colonies, on the Continent,
and in America. The two most magnificent buildings of the
kind in the world are at Philadelphia and New York—where
the convenience of the Fraternity for the working of all rites
has been consulted.

HALLELUIAH (Praise the Lord).—Expression of applause in the
Apprentice degree of Mizraim, in the degree of Sublime Ecossais,
Heavenly Jerusalem, and cthers.

HamBourc.—The Earl of Strathmore, in 1733, granted a dispensa-
tion for a Lodge in Hamburg, to eleven Masons, and by their
means Masonry was first introduced into Germany; but of the
further action of this Lodge we have no knowledge. Brother
Luettman obtained a warrant, in 1740, from the Grand Lodge of
England, together with a patent as Provincial Grand Master for
Hamburg and Lower Saxony, and established a Lodge, which, in
1741, assumed the name of Absalom. In 1801, Hamburg
declared its. Masonic independence.

HanD.—The hand is an important symbol in Masonry, as well as
in the various religions of the world, having been adopted from
the most ancient times out of the ceremonial of the mysteries.
According to Horapollo, the Egyptians regarded the hand as a
symbol of a builder; and, in the mysteries, the left hand was the
symbol of equity. The hand in the Roman Catholic Church
performs the operation of benediction, and the lines of the hand
were considered as typical of the events of life, and an art of
chiromancy was instituted to explain these. The most learned
chiromantist among the English was one Saunders, while, within
a few years, D’Arpentigny and Desbarolles have written two
valuable and interesting works in the French language, in which
this occult science is carried out to its ultimate expression.

Hanp-CLaprinc.—A common Masonic expression of applause and

approval, universal throughout the Fraternity.
30r

HAN | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [HAR

Hanp, Lert. (See Left Hand.)

Hanp, Ricut. (See Right Hand.)

Hanp To Back. (See Points of Fellowship.)
HanD To HAND. (See Points of Fellowship.)

Hanns, Unirep.—Clasped hands are a symbol of fidelity and trust.
A rare and curious Spanish work was published at Vittoria, in
1774, where three hands are shown united in the vignette on
the title.

HAanover.—The Lodge “ Frederick” was organized in Hanover in
1744, but being opposed by the priests, did not get into active
working until 1746. The first Provincial Grand Lodge was
established in 1755, and in 1828 it was declared an independent
Grand Lodge. This Grand Lodge was dissolved on the 17th
February, 1867, on the union of Hanover with Prussia, when
most of the Lodges went under the Grand Lodge Royal York at
Berlin, and a few acknowledged the Grand Lodge of the Three
Globes.

HAPTZIEL (yyy, voluntas Dei)—A word in the twenty-third
Degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

Happy ALLIANCE OF SAXE-HILDBURGHAUSEN, ORDER OF.—Instituted
1st October, 1749, by his Serene Highness Frederick Christian
Ernest, the Duke, in commemoration of his marriage with H.R.H.
Louisa, Princess Royal of Denmark, the daughter of Queen
Sophia Magdalena. (See Fidelity, Order of.) Badge—a small
white enamelled Maltese cross, ov. On the obverse, on the
upper and lower points, the initials F.C.E. ov; the extremities
two regal crowns; on the lateral points are the cyphers of the
Duchess, L.L., or., and the extremities are surmounted by a ducal
crown of red enamel, turned up with ermine. In the centre in
an escutcheon, ov, are the arms of Saxony, impaled with those of
Norway. Reverse—a morning star in the centre; under the
upper and lower points the motto, Fidelité et Constance ; the
lateral points bear the date of institution. In each angle there
is a glory, or. Ribbon—rose-coloured, watered, bordée argent.

Har.—The second King in the Scandinavian mysteries; also
called Odin.

Haram, GRanv.—The seventy-third degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

HaRBINGER.—An officer in the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre, and
also in the Knights of St John the Evangelist.

HARLEIAN MANnuscrirts.—No. 2054 in the Harleian collection,
British Museum, is a manuscript of four leaves, containing six
and a half pages of close writing, said to be in the autograph of
the Chester Herald, Randle Holmes, who died 1659, and con-
taining records of the Constitutions of Masonry. First published

302

HAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HAR

by Brother W. J. Hughan, in his “ Unpublished Records of the
Craft.’ There is another manuscript in the same collection,
No. 1942, containing the Oath of Secrecy as follows :—“I, A. B.
Doe, in the presence of Almighty God, and my fellows and
brethren here present, promise and declare that I will not at any
time hereafter, by any Act or Circumstance whatsoever, directly
or indirectly, publish, discover, reveall, or make knowne, any of
the Secrets, privileges, or Counsels of the Fraternity or fellow-
ship of Freemasonry, which, at this time, or any time hereafter,
shall be made known unto me; soe helpe mee God and the holy
contents of this book.”

Harmonists.—A sect of German Protestant emigrants who settled
in America about 1805. They were sometimes called Rappites,
from the name of their pastor, George Rapp. Their present
settlements are in Pennsylvania and Indiana. So far as they
exist, they are now few innumber. Their tenets were, toleration,
education, and community of goods.

Harmony.—In America, the S. W., who is supposed to preside over
the Lodge in the hours of labour, is also entrusted with the
preservation of harmony, so that none shall depart without profit
and pleasure.

Harmony, BrorHers or.—A name of the Order of the Black
Brothers, which see.

Harmony, Knicut or. (See Knight of Harmony.)

Harmony, ORDER or UNIvERSAL.—1. A society founded in 1783,
by Mesmer and his disciples, the object of which was to propagate
the doctrines of animal magnetism. (See Jatric Masonry.) 2.
An androgynous order, founded in 1788 by Grossinger, under the
patronage of Augusta, Countess of Staff. The Duchess of New-
castle was Grand Mistress. They bound themselves by a solemn
obligation to friendship and love. 3. A French Rite, established
in 1806, comprising twenty-six degrees, with an idea of cultivat-
ing a trade with the East Indies.

Harmostrs,—A title bestowed in Sparta upon the magistrates, to
whom was committed the duty of building and repairing the
forts, citadels, and other buildings.

HARNWESTER, EARL or.—Elected second Grand Master of France
in 1737. He was succeeded by the Duke D’Antin. It is pro-
bable that there is some confusion in the name, as it cannot be
found in the peerage.

Haropim.—Bad Hebrew for overseers or provosts. First used by
Anderson in his Constitutions, based upon 1 Kings v. 16, and
2 Chron. ii. 18.

Haropim, GRAND CHAPTER oF.—A Masonic educational body,

instituted by William Preston in 1787. It was intended therein

393

HAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopadza. [HAR

to give access to the lectures, as they then stood, much as they
are imparted in Lodges of Instruction at the present day. The
lectures were then divided into sections, and the sections into
clauses, These sections were annually assigned by the Chief
Harod to a certain number of skilful companions—denominated
Sectionists—who, in turn, distributed the clauses among a sub-
ordinate class, termed, in this system, clauseholders. Those who
distinguished themselves by application, and learnt all the lec-
tures, were called lecturers, and from among them the Chief
Director was chosen. <A system of clause tickets was brought
into vogue, which tickets were not transferable without the
consent of the Council. The government of this Chapter was
vested in a Grand Patron, two Vice-Patrons, a Chief Ruler, and
two Assistants, with a Council of twelve approved Companions,
chosen annually at the Chapter held nearest to the festival of St
John the Evangelist. However useful this system was at the time,
it is now superseded by Lodges and Chapters of Instruction.

HARopIM, PRINCE or.—Said to have been Tito, the eldest of the
Provosts and Judges, chief of the three hundred architects
termed Harodim.

HARPOCRATES.—The Hellenic god of silence and secrecy; also
Her-pe-yrut, sometimes called Horus the Child, among the Egyp-
tians. There is a double symbolism here—Horus being the
mystic son of Osiris and Isis, coming from the silent land in a
state of helplessness and innocence, he presses his finger to his
lip, and, when grown to manhood becomes the representation
of Osiris and enlightener of the world—which light is mystical,
and refers to the future life, and, therefore, should not be lightly
spoken of by mortals. He was the god of the renewed year—
the son of Osiris, in his capacity as Creator; and peach blos-
soms were consecrated to him in spring. His statues were erected
at the porches of temples and other places of mystery.

Harris, THADDEUS Mason, D.D.—Born at Charlestown, Mass.,
US.A., 7th July, 1767, graduated at Harvard, 1787. Ordained,
1793; died at Boston, 3d April, 1842. He was at various times
Deputy-Grand Master, Grand Chaplain, and Corresponding
Grand Secretary of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. He
published several Masonic works of value.

HaRvsPIces, ORDER OF.—An order established at Rome at the time
of the foundation of the city, on the basis of a pre-existent
Etruscan order, whose founder was Tages, a mythical personage
who, like Adam, was an autochthon, or formed from a clod of
earth. There were two sections in this order—those who judged
of future events and happy omens from the observation of the
flight of birds, and the habits of beasts; and those whose infer-

304

HAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HEA

ences were drawn from the examination of the entrails of newly
killed animals. Thus has superstition ever heralded the ad-
vent of true science, now represented by the naturalists and
physicists of our days in the one relation, and the physiologists
in the other. The two degrees were those of Haruspex, ab aris
aspiciendis, and Extispex, ab extis inspiciendis.

Hasipim, SovEREIGN Prince.—The seventy-fifth and seventy-sixth
degrees of the rite of Mizraim. The word in Hebrew is Chasi-
dim, ovvon, signifying saints.

Hat.—Among the Romans the hat was a sign of freedom. For-
merly, Masons wore hats in the Lodges as a symbol of freedom
and brotherly equality.

HATTEMISTS.—Founded by Pontian Van Hattem, in the seventeenth
century, he being a pastor in the province of Zeeland, Holland.
His interpretation of Calvinistic principles was, that mankind were
under no sort of obligation to obey the divine laws; and that the
whole of religion consisted not in action, but in patient suffering.
He denied that doctrine which imputes satisfaction by Christ,
and considered that God does not punish men fur their sins, but
by them.

HAUNCHES.—The haunches of an arch are situated between the
crownings and the springing, in architecture.

Haupt Hvuerte.—The German Steinmetzen in the Middle Ages re-
garded their Lodge of Strasburg as their Grand Lodge, calling it
the Haupt Hiitte.

Hautes Grapes.—French, High Degrees (which see).

Hayti—Freemasonry had been introduced into Hayti, but was
temporarily suppressed by the revolution under Toussaint
LOuverture ; but in 1809, the Grand Lodge of England granted a
warrant for a Lodge at Port au Prince, and another for Cayes.
In 1817, two other Lodges were established respectively at Jere-
mias and Jacmel. In 1824, the Lodges declared their indepen-
dence, and established the Grand Orient of Hayti.

Hazips.—A chapter in the Rite of Mizraim. The seventy-third
degree was called Supreme Council of the Hazids, Sovereign
Princes of Grand Haram, and the seventy-seventh Supreme
Council General of Grand Regulators.

HeaL.—lIf any one have received a Masonic degree irregularly, or
any act been done in an unconstitutional way, reparation is pos-
sible. The individual or body thus wittingly or unwittingly
offending is then technically said to be healed. The mode in
which this reparation is to be made necessarily depends upon the
circumstances of the case. Sometimes it involves an entire re-
initiation, but it is usually an act of mutual explanation and

reconciliation.
U 305

HEA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ HEI

Hzarinc.—One of the five senses important in Freemasonry.

Heart.—A candidate for Masonry must come prepared in his heart,
and by its own dictates, to receive the solemn lessons of the
science ; without this he will only become a mouth and lip Mason,
and his work will bring him no profit. The heart is not, pro-
perly speaking, a Masonic symbol, because it, according to the
previous words, belongs to the general sense of mankind, and
cannot be with justice peculiarly appropriated.

HespomaDary.—An officiatein a chapter or convent, who was bound
to do duty for a week in the cathedral; in Latin, Hebdomadius.

HeBpome.—In antiquity, a day sacred to Helios or Apollo, like
Sunday, being held on the seventh of every lunar month ; the
Athenians then having a solemn festival in praise of that god.

HEcartT, GABRIEL ANTOINE JOSEPH.—Born at Valenciennes, 1755,
died 1838. He is chiefly remembered for his collection of Ma-
sonic degrees, and attempted the introduction of five—ze, 1,
Knight of the Prussian Eagle; 2, Knight of the Comet; 3,
Scottish Purifier; 4, Victorious Knight ; 5, Scottish Knight, or
Grand Master Commander of the Temple. These degrees met
with a very slight amount of attention.

HEcates1a.—An annual festival observed by the Stratonicessians
in honour of Hecate, the daughter of Perses and Asteria, or
Night, appearing in the Orphic hymns as the first and eldest
divinity, the Almighty Queen of Heaven. The mullet and the
anchovy were offered to her. The Athenians also paid particular
attention to the festival, worshipping the same goddess under the
name of Artemis, who was deemed the patroness of families and
children. Public feasts were provided at every new moon at
the expense of the wealthy, and set out in the streets for the
enjoyment of the poor. In fact, at all the solemn festivals of
the Hellenic communities, this care for the poor was pre-eminently
a feature.

HeEcatompora.—aA festival in honour of Hebe and Juno, celebrated
by the Argians and Aginetans, at which a hundred bulls were
sacrificed, the flesh being distributed among the poor.

HECATOMPEDON.—A temple of a hundred feet in length.

HECATOMPHONIA.—A solemn festival in honour of Zeus among the
Messenians, where any of them had killed a hundred enemies.

HECATONSTYLON.—A temple having 2 hundred columns.

HEIGHT OF THE LopGE—From the earth to the highest heavens.

HeitMann, Danret.—Director of the Asylum for the Blind in
Paris, and himself a blind man, was, in contravention of the dis-
tinct landmark on the subject, admitted to the light of Masonry
in the Lodge Amis de la Sagesse (Friends of Wisdom), on the 2d
of January, 1805. Brother Daniel Heilmann had been blind

306

HEL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HEN

from the age of seven years. This is vouched for by Bazot
(Manuel, p. 136).

HELDMANN, Dr FrrepricHi— Born at Margetshochheim, 24th Nov.,
1770, initiated at Freiburg, 1809. He studied the works of
Fessler with enthusiasm, and founding himself upon the prin-
ciples of that great man, endeavoured to realise them. But,
alas! for Masonic reformers, he met with the same steady non
possumus, equally potent in Freemasonry as at the Vatican, and
was discouraged, and although he founded a Lodge according to
the views he had enunciated, named Zur Briidertreue, to Brotherly
Fidelity, at Aarau in Switzerland, in 1816, he was compelled to
retire into private life. He was the author of several learned
Masonic works, the chief of which was Die Drei diltesten geschi-
chtlichen Denkmale der deutschen Freimaurer-briderschaft (the
three oldest memorials of the German Masonic Fraternity),
Aarau, 1819.

Hewine.—The covering of the roof of a building, sometimes written
halling.

Hetmet.—In ancient times a headeovering of strength, adopted
among the modern Knights Templar by tradition. To deposit
helmets is a term in Templarism denoting the laying aside of
head coverings, and to recover them is to replace them.

HELvipians.—A_ sect founded in ancient times by Helvidius.
They denied the virginity of Mary or Miriam, the mother of
Christ, and asserted, in common with many other sects, that she
had other children by Joseph.

HEMEROBAPTISTS.—A Jewish sect who washed and bathed every
day. LEpiphanius says their opinions resembled those of the
Scribes and Pharisees, except that they denied the resurrection of
the dead, in common with the Sadducees.

HemMinG, SAMUEL, D.D.—The founder of the modern system of
lectures in the Grand Lodge of England. He was a celebrated
elucidator of the ceremonies and lectures of Freemasonry, and
received in his day a large amount of esteem and respect from
the brethren.

HENoticHuM.—An edict of the emperor Zeno, in the fifth century,
to reconcile the Eutychians and Christians.

HENRICIANS.—Founded by Henry, a monk, in the twelfth century.
They rejected the baptism of infants and the festivals of the
Roman Catholic Church, which they regarded, with justice, as
being derived from pagan times. Henry suffered martyrdom for
his opinions, under Pope Eugenius III.

Henry VI. or EncLanp.—The document commonly called the
“ Locke ” document is connected with that monarch, but it is
universally rejected as a fabrication.

307

HEP] The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [HER

Heruestia.—An Athenian festival in honour of Hephaistos, the
Greek Vulcan, in which races were run with lighted torches,
handed from one to another.

HERACLEONITES.—A Gnostic sect: They explained the Scriptures
after a method of their own, and esteemed St John their
patron.

Heratp.—1. Fourth officer in an Aryana of the Royal Oriental
Order of the Sat Bhai. 2. An officer in the Red Cross of Rome
and Constantine.

Herevom.—A word of doubtful signification in Masonry. It has
successively been associated with the Royal Order of Heredom
in Scotland, with the word Heroden as a Scottish mountain, and
from the Greek words iegis holy, and déuos house; thus the title of
Rose Croix of Heredom would convey the meaning of Rosy Cross
of the Holy House. But the whole subject is very obscure.
(See I-Colm-Kill.)

HeRMAINES.—A corruption of Hermes, found in some of the an-
cient Constitutions.

HERMANDAD (Brotherhood).—Founded in Castile and Leon, a..,1295,
It was based on the Masonic principle of secrecy, with initia-
tory ceremonies, signs and secret places of assembly, where causes
were tried and offenders sentenced and punished. It sought not
only to punish crime, but to prevent it—administering warnings
to high and low alike in case of necessity. Wholesale retribu-
tion awaited any one who neglected the commands of the
Brotherhood; no rank was exempt from the operation of its
tribunals, aud vengeance has been dealt out to criminals even in
the presence of royalty. This Spanish fraternity, in very stormy
times, exercised a very beneficial power ; its ideas were justice,
—absolute justice in the administration of the laws, and equality
in society, and before the Almighty.

HERMAPHRODITE. —1, A bissexual form of divinity mentioned in an-
cient times, and alluding to the combination of the Wisdom of
Hermes, with the Grace and Beauty of Aphrodité, the Hellenic
Venus. 2. Such monstrosities occasionally occur in human
nature, according to the law of monstrosities evolved by Barthe-
lemy St Hilaire ; but although sometimes alluded to in modern
Masonic documents, there is no historical importance to be at-
tached to the term.

HERMES.—This personage is generally referred to in the old manu-
scripts as one of the founders of Masonry. Should it ever be
proved, as some suspect, that modern Masonry is only a
rifaccimento of the ancient Egyptian mysteries, derived through
the alchymists, Hermes should occupy no inconsiderable posi-
tion. ; At any rate, Hermes is regarded as an individual, and the

30.

HER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HER

Grand Lodge MS. (dated 1632) specially says:—“The great
Hermarines that was Cubys sonne, the which Cubye was Semmes
sonne, that was Noes sonne. This same Hermarines was after-
wards called Hermes, the father of Wisdome; he found one of
the two pillars of stone, and found the science written thereon,
and he taught it to other men.” The divine Hermes was called
by the Romans, Mercurius, and by the Egyptians, Thoth; and
Diodorus Siculus says he was the secretary of Osiris. The second
Hermes was the one surnamed Trismegistus, or Thrice Great,
who combined in himself the attributes of legislator, priest, and
philosopher, his era being placed as that of Numa in the
year of the world 2670. To him was attributed the invention of
hieroglyphies, and he has been since considered as the patron of
all secret physical science.

HERMETIC BROTHERS OF Ecypr.—An occult fraternity which has
endured from very ancient times, having a hierarchy of officers,
secret signs, and passwords, and a peculiar method of instruction
in science, moral philosophy, and religion. The body is never
very numerous, and if we may believe those who at the present
time profess to belong to it, the philosopher’s stone, the elixir of
life, the art of invisibility, and the power of communication di-
rectly with the ultramundane life, are parts of the inheritance
they possess. The writer has met with only three persons who
maintained the actual existence of this body of religious philo-
sophers, and who hinted that they themselves were actually mem-
bers. There was no reason to doubt the good faith of these indi-
viduals—apparently unknown to each other, and men of moderate
competence, blameless lives, austere manners, and almost ascetic
in their habits. They all appeared to be men of forty to forty-five
years of age, and evidently of vast erudition. Their conversation
was simple and unaffected, and their knowledge of languages not
to be doubted. They cheerfully answered questions, but ap-
peared not to court enquiries. They never remained long in
any one country, but passed away without creating notice, or
wishing for undue respect to be paid to them. To their former
lives they never referred, and, when speaking of the past, seemed
to say whatever they had to say with an air of authority, and an
appearance of an intimate personal knowledge of all circum-
stances, They courted no publicity, and, in any communications
with them, uniformly treated the subjects under discussion as
very familiar things, although to be treated with a species of
reverence not always to be found among occult professors.

HERMETIC Cross.—A cross called Hermetic is used in France, and
exemplified in the Hermetic section of the Antient and Primitive
Rite. (See Jaina Cross.)

309

HER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HER

Hermetic INTERPRETER, GRAND.—-A degree in the collection of
Peuvret.

HERMETIC PHILOSOPHER—The twentieth degree and second section
in the Antient and Primitive Rite, claiming that its principles
have been superadded to Craft or Symbolical Masonry by the
middle age philosophers of Egyptian science.

HERMETIC PHILosoPpuy.—It is somewhat difficult within the limits of
the present work to enter as fully as might be desirable upon an
exposition of the Hermetic philosophy, and its range so overlaps
the domains both of theosophy and Rosicrucianism, that the task
is yet more delicate. Roughly speaking; this branch of human
speculation is best to be divided into its objective and subjective
aspects. Under the former division may be classed alchymy,
and the ruder natural philosophy of earlier times; under the
latter, speculations of a mental character, expressed by a corre-
sponding series of symbols, in most cases identical in form and
analogous in interpretation, but having no physical signification
whatever. That is to say, a certain series of formule may have
a concrete application and absolute value in technical alchymy,
and yet bear a vastly different sense where applied to a species
of psychological doctrine, in which physical science has no part
whatever. Let it also be remembered, that those who practised
the arts of alchymy, and similar pursuits, were familiar with the
duplex symbolism involved, and it will readily be seen how very
peculiar the distinetion between the two must necessarily be.
To the practical alchymist, whose object was the production of
wealth by the special rules of his art, the evolution of a semi-
mystical philosophy was a secondary consideration, and to be
pursued without any reference to an ultimate system of theo-
sophy ; while the sage, who had ascended to the higher plane of
metaphysical contemplation, would reject the mere material part
of these studies as unworthy of his further consideration. As
the occult sciences were pursued by the Rosicrucian fraternity,
and the theosophists possessed an independent course in relation
to these topics,—especially with reference to analogies and cor-
respondences,—it will be more convenient to consider the objec-
tive side of the occult sciences under the heads of Magic, Fosi-
crucianism, and Theurgia; and their subjective forms under
Theosophy (which articles see).

HERMETIC Rire—Established at Avignon by the Abbé Pernetty,
commonly known as the Zlluminati of Avignon (which see).

HERMOGENIANS.—A_ sect founded in the second century by Her-
mogenes. He taught that matter was the source of evil, and
that it had co-existence with God ; he also taught that the glori-

fied body of Christ resided in the material sun, and that evil
310

HER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HIB

spirits were formed of attenuated matter, to which they would
return.

HERODEM. (See Heredom.)

HeERopEM, Royau ORDER OF. (See Royal Order of Scotland.)

HERODEN.—Said, according to some manuscripts, to have been a
mountain in the north-west of Scotland. The term is now ob-
solete.

HEROpDIANS.—A sect among the ancient Jews, deriving their opin-
ions from Herod.

HEROINE or JERICHO.—An androgynous degree, now mainly con-
fined to America, and conferred on Royal Arch Masons, their
wives and daughters. The legend is taken from Rahab, the
woman of Jericho, and is rather an insult to any respectable lady
than an honour. It is another proof of the desire there exists in
the human mind to multiply degrees, and no country should
tolerate a degree of this kind, which virtually levels all its re-
cipients to the rank of the harlot who let down the cords.

Hertua.—the great earth goddess of the ancient Suevi. Her temple
was on an island, and she was served by a single priest. Other
temples or chapels to this goddess are still occasionally found in
Northern Germany.

Hxsep. (See Chesed.)

I{exacon.—The hexagon is formed of six triangles, *
whose apices converge to a point, making this figure, . *
It is worn as a ring by Sovereign Princes of the is

Royal Secret. Itis regarded asa symbol of universal * *
creation. a

HipputT-HAkKEBER.—A belief among the Mohammedans in relation
to the state.of the soul after death. When a corpse is laid in the
grave, they say it is received by an angel, who notifies to him the
approach of the examiners, two terrible, black, livid beings, named
Monker and Naki. These angels order the deceased to sit up-
right, and then interrogate him as to his faith in the unity of
God and the mission of Mohammed. If he answers rightly, his
body remains in peace, and is refreshed by the air of Paradise ;
but if not, he is beaten on the temples with iron maces, until he
roars aloud with anguish, which is heard by all created beings,
except only men and genii. The two angels then press the earth
on the body, which is “gnawed and stung by ninety-nine seven-
headed dragons, until the day of resurrection. The orthodox
Mohammedans therefore have their graves made hollow in order
that they may sit up with greater ease during the interrogation.
This belief was derived from the Jews, whose doctrine was as
follows :—The angel of death coming and sitting on the grave,
the soul immediately returns to the body, and raises it on its feet ;

311

HIC] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HIE

the angel then examines the body, and strikes it thrice with a
a chain half of iron and half of fire; at the first blow all the
limbs are loosened, at the second the bones are dispersed, but
gathered together again by angels, and the third stroke reduces
it to dust. This rack or torture they call Hibbit Hakkeber, or
the beating of the sepulchre, which all men must undergo, except-
ing those who die on the evening of the Sabbath, or those who
have dwelt or die in the land of Israel. Connected with this doc-
trine is that of Gilgul, already mentioned in a previous article.

Hiccopires.—The brethren of this most ancient and joyous Order
held their general court, 5th December, 1750, at the Sun Tavern,
Fish Street Hill. (See Derisive Societies.)

Hieracires.—An Egyptian sect founded by Hierax, a philosopher
of the third century. Its tenets were that Melchizedek was the
Holy Ghost, and that marriage was unholy.

HreroGiypPuics.—In times less analytically critical than our own,
the monuments of Egypt were regarded, from their antiquity,
with a kind of superstitious awe, and unheard of mysteries were
supposed to be contained within them. As has been before said,
modern science, patiently searching for truth, has effectually dis-
sipated this delusion. Where they are not heraldic, and hence
regally monumental, they sink into commonplace. It has been
truly remarked that the moderns are the only real ancients;
and whatever the oral traditions of those remote ages may have
been, they have survived only in fragments to our times; for the
more our archeological studies are verified, the less difference do
we find between the early ranges of civilised thought and those
of our own day. Man, in his moral nature and propensities, does
not change, and it is only a elass that would endeavour to fix
the very imperfect knowledge of antiquity as the standard of
aspiration.

HIEROGRAMMATISTS.—The title of such Egyptian priests entrusted
with the keeping of the sacred records ; they very probably also
superintended the incision of the monumental inscriptions. It
is also stated that they had the general guidance of neophytes,
and the regulation of sacred ceremonies. They resemble in all
these functions, scribes, secretaries, or recorders.

HIERONOMINITE.—A monk or nun of the order of St Hieronymus
or Jerome.

HIeRoPHANT (Greek jepopdvrys, one who explains sacred things)—
Chief director of the ceremonies and expounder of the doctrines
in the mysteries of Eleusis, peculiar to the descendants of
Eumolpus. Perfection of body and mind was necessary in the
holder of the office. In the inferior mysteries, he introduced
the neophyte into the Temple, and he was the final initiator into

312

HIE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HIG

the last and greater mysteries; and he figuratively represented
the Creator of the world, and explained to the novice the various
phenomena that appeared to him. He was the sole expounder
of the esoteric secrets and doctrines. It was forbidden even to
pronounce his name before an uninitiated person. He sat in
the East, and wore, as a symbol of authority, a golden globe
suspended from the-neck. He was also called Mystagogus.

HifrorpHyLax.—Guardian of the holy vessels and vestments in
several rites,

HicH Drcrers.—lIn the first instance, at the revival of Masonry, no
degrees existed except the three degrees of EA.P., F.C., and
M.M. ; but as man cannot rest satisfied with that which is
sufficiently genuine in itself (as we may see by the establishment
of particular orders of monks and friars in the Romish Church), so
the original principles of Masonry were invaded by numberless
fictions having a more or less remotely cogent similarity to the
original structure of the art. It was thought, in the first in-
stance, that the general body of Masons was unfit by social posi-
tion to associate with men of a higher rank, and to obtain the
support of the latter, in a gradual series, a number of degrees,
more or less resembling the chivalrié orders, were introduced,
with peculiar secrets and privileges. This work has already
given an account of many of these degrees, which, however valu-
able in themselves and illustrative of the value of Masonry, can-
not be regarded as of intrinsic authority; and before the work
is concluded many more will be found. Some of these degrees
were added from sources which kept alive the ancient belief in
Rosicrucianism, others foisted in by pretenders or enthusiasts,—
the whole forming such a body of tinsel superstition as was never
before seen. It is unfortunate that many of these high degrees
do not even possess the merit of historical authenticity ; of course,
given their bases as true, they are unobjectionable, but in very
rare instances will they bear the scrutiny of the historical critic.
Hence it was not only right, but laudable, that the Grand Lodge
of England would have nothing to do with them, but stigmatised
them as of extraneous growth, not essential for the comprehen-
sion of morality, nor necessary for the full development of the
human mind. However beautiful many of these degrees may
be, no Mason is bound to join them without his judgment being
enlisted in their favour.

HicH Grabes.—Sometimes used for High Degrees, which see.

HicH Piaces.—In all times mankind has regarded mountains, and
high places, with peculiar reverence, and religious feeling has
led to their consecration as places of worship. Solomon went
to Mount Gibeon to offer sacrifice for this reason. The Druids

313

HIG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HIN

also erected their altars on the summits of elevated places; and
the Freemasons anciently met on the highest of hills, and in the
lowest of valleys, with the earth as the Mosaic pavement, and
the starry heavens as the proper and only covering of the
Lodge.

Hicw Priest.——In America the first principal of a Royal Arch.
Chapter, representing Jeshua the son of Josedech, and the
High Priest of the Jews on their return from the Babylonian
captivity. His jewel is a mitre. He is third principal in the
English Royal Arch.

Hicu PriesrHoop, ORDER or.—An honorary degree in the United
States, bestowed upon the High Priest of a Royal Arch Chapter.
It cannot be conferred without the presence of three duly quali-
fied High Priests; and when given in ample form, nine High
Priests at least should attend. It is not essential, although
desirable, that all High Priests should receive it. The jewel
consists of a plate of gold in the form of a triple triangle or
breast-plate, being placed over the point of union. In front, the
face of each triangle i is inscribed with the Tetragrammaton mn,
and on the reverse the upper triangle is inscribed with the

mystical notation, J iB d J J FP 4 the two lower triangles

bearing the Echiew ledeis “ ana p It was adopted in 1856.
The High Priest is said to be installed and anointed. The first
authentic record of this Order is to be found in the proceedings
of the Grand Chapter of Ohio in 1828.

HIGH PRIEST OF THE JEWS.—This office was initiated by Moses,
after the completion of the directions for erecting the tabernacle,
and remained in the family of Aaron until the time of the
Asmonean dynasty, when it passed into the family of Judas
Maccabeeus. He was the chief judge of ecclesiastical and civil
affairs, superintended the Temple, directed the ceremonies of
worship, and preserved the building from profanation. The
sacerdotal garments of the High Priest have been imitated in the
modern Royal Arch degree: the mitre teaches the High Priest
the dignity of his office; the breast-plate his responsibility ; and
the robe symbolises the various graces and virtues according to
the colours of which it is composed.

Hicu TwEive.—Noon, or twelve o’clock in the day. This was the
hour at which the Craft was called from labour to refreshment.
Hinarta.—Roman feasts celebrated by the priests on the eighth of
the kalends of April and the 25th of March, in honour of Cybele,

mother of the gods.

Hinpustan, Mysteries or.—It is still a question of some difficulty
to decide whether the mysteries of Egypt or those of Hindustan

314

HIN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HIN

are older. It so happens, however, that, from the circumstance
of an alphabet having been adopted in the latter country, it is
more easy to investigate the philosophies of the East than those of
the land of Khemi. Speaking from an individual point of view, the
writer is disposed to regard them as nearly contemporaneous in
era, With a few centuries in favour of antiquity on the part of the
Egyptians. The latter are specially supported by a stricter chrono-
logical series, and a less mythical line of monarchs. In fact,
when the early history of Hindustan is surveyed, the investi-
gator is bewildered by a series of conflicting dynasties ranging
over similar countries, and suggesting, in a common-sense aspect,
the main idea of contemporaneity. The most exhaustive
work on this subject is that of Carl Lassen (Indische Alter-
thwmskunde). In his bulky tomes are comprehended the results
of many years of able research; but such was the pride of the
ancient Hindus, that in no case do we find them willing to
acknowledge, even in the most petty principality, anything but
a divine or semi-divine origin of their state. It is fortunate,
however, that a similar state of things does not prevail in regard
to their philosophy and theosophy. These appear to have been
preserved with singular care, and from them some light is to be
had. For the Vedas there is claimed an antiquity of forty
centuries, and even their name is somewhat singular, suggesting
a higher antiquity,—the word Veda signifying agglutinator or
collector, the special term being Vyasya. The ceremony of the
admission of a Brahman took place in @ spacious cavern, such as
that of Elephanta or Salsette. . The whole course comprehended
four degrees, the probationer commencing at the early age of
eight. In this degree—analogous to the modern French rite of
the adoption of a male child—the actual ceremony consisted only
of an investiture in a linen garment and the girding on of the
sacred Zennaar, or cord of three strands, nine times twisted.
Sacrifices, lustrations, and certain dedicatory words accompanied
this form, and the candidate was next committed to the care of
a Brahman, who became from thenceforward his spiritual teacher,
or gooroos, and who prepared him by fasts and other austerities
for the second degree. The second degree was an exaggeration
of the first ; and, as in the Fellow-Craft degree, the aspirant was
made to turn his attention to the sciences, and especially that of
astronomy, which in those days was identical with astrology.
Duly instructed in these main essentials, the disciple was led
into a gloomy cavern, in which the aporrheta were to be dis-
played to him. Here a striking similarity to the Masonic
system may be found. The three chief officers, or hierophants,
representing Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, are seated. in the east,
3t§

HIR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HIR

west, and south, attended by their respective subordinates,
After an invocation to the sun, an oath was demanded of the
aspirant to the effect of implicit obedience to superiors, purity of
body, and inviolable secrecy. Water was then sprinkled over
him, he was deprived of his sandals, or shoes, and was made to
circumambulate the cavern thrice, with the sun. Suitable
addresses were then made to him, after which he was conducted
through seven ranges of caverns in utter darkness, and the
lamentations of Mahadeva, or the Great Goddess, for the loss of
Siva, similar to the wailings of Isis for Osiris, were imitated,
After a number of impressive ceremonies, the initiate was sud-
denly admitted into an apartment of dazzling light, redolent
with perfume, and radiant with all the gorgeous beauty of the
Indian clime, alike in flowers, perfumes, and gems. This repre-
sented the Hindu Paradise, and the acme of all earthly bliss.
This was supposed to constitute the regeneration of the candi-
date, and he was now invested with the white robe and the
tiara ; a peculiar cross was marked on his forehead, and the tau
cross on his breast, upon which he was instructed in the peculiar
signs, tokens, and lectures of the Order. He was presented with
the sacred girdle, the magical black stone, the talismanic jewel for
his breast, and the serpent stone which guaranteed him from the
effects of poison. Finally, he was given the sacred word AUM, sig-
nificative of the creative, preservative, and destructive powers of
the Trimurti—Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva. With this the second
degree concluded. The third degree comprehended a total iso-
lation in the forests, when contemplation was enjoined as a duty,
and sacrifice, together with abstinence, became a daily rite. In
the fourth degree the Brahman was, by peculiar ceremonies, con-
joined to the divinity, and assured of future acceptance among
the blessed.

Hiram.—The gavel is sometimes called a Hiram, although the term
is more frequent in America than in England.

Hiram Abpir.—Although this personage has been rendered cele-
brated in Masonic tradition, there is absolutely next to nothing
known about him. At the time of the building of King Solo-
mon’s Temple, that monarch applied to Hiram of Tyre for a skil-
ful workman to superintend the construction of the edifice, and
the following passages give an account of Hiram (1 Kings, vii.
13, 14) :—“ And King Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out
of Tyre. He was a widow’s son of the tribe of Naphtali, and
his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he
was filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to
work all works in brass. And he came to King Solomon and
wrought all his work.” The other account differs to some extent

316

HIR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedza. [HIR

(2 Chron. ii, 13, 14). Hiram writes to Solomon—*“ And now I
have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of Huram
my father’s. The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and
his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in
silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue,
and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of
graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him,
with thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord
David thy father.” There is an apparent contradiction here,
but it has been reconciled by Bishop Patrick, who supposes that
his mother was of the tribe of Dan, but that her first husband
was of the tribe of Naphtali, by whom she had this son; when
she became a widow she married a man of Tyre; who is called
Hiram’s father from having adopted and educated him. Tyre
was one of the chief seats of the Dionysiac fraternity of builders,
the precursors of the operative masons; and it is not unreason-
able to suppose that Hiram Abif was a member of this fraternity,
and, on his arrival at Jerusalem, he instituted similar rules of
government among the Jewish workmen, about B.c. 1012. He
received the title of Principal Conductor of the Works; and if
he was not the same with Adoniram, he succeeded him in the
office next to the two kings, and formed the third person in the
Supreme Council of Grand Masters. In allusion to his labours
of taste and skill, the lectures say that while the wisdom of Solo-
mon contrived the fabric, and the strength of King Hiram’s wealth
and power supported the undertaking, it was adorned by the
beauty of Hiram Abif’s curious and cunning workmanship. Be-
sides the well known legend of the assassination of Hiram Abif,
several other stories of a ridiculous character are related of Hiram.
It has been asserted that he was never slain at all, but retired
to his native city of Tyre with rich presents from the Jewish
monarch, and then died at an advanced age in comfort and pro-
sperity.

I{rRaM, oR Huram (Hebrew, ov, or D1, noble born).—The
name of the King of Tyre who was contemporary with King
Solomon. In the Septuagint he is called Xepéu, or Cheiram.
(See Hiram, King of Tyre.)

Hiram, Kine or Tyre.—The son of Abibal and the contem-
porary of both David and Solomon; he was the firm ally of
both these kings, and evidently well-disposed towards the grow-
ing Jewish kingdom. He is always associated with Solomon and
Hiram Abif in the control of the building of the Temple.

HikaM, THE Burtper. (See Hiram Adi.)

HiRAMITES.—A name sometimes given to the Freemasons in con-
sequence of their being followers of Hiram. In the degree of

317

HIR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HoL

Patriarch Noachites, the tradition is that the Masons were de-
scended from Noah, through Peleg, the architect of the Tower of
Babel, hence the later Masons were called Hiramites.
HirscHau, WILHELM von.—Abbot and Count Palatine of Scheuren,
and founder at the end of the eleventh century of the German
Baubiitten, or Lodges. He was Master of the Lodge of St Em-
merau, at Ratisbon, and rebuilt the monastery of Hirschau be-
tween 1080 and 1091. The artizans were incorporated by him,
and general regulations for their guidance and government
formed, by which the later corporations also thought fit to abide.'
Hirraton (Arabic, Forgiveness)—A word used in the Order of
Ishmael.
H... K... T..-—-The abbreviation of Hiram, King of Tyre.
Hosen.—A name for one of the assassins,—probably an anagram
of Bohun, one of the opponents of the house of Stuart.
Hovin.—The Blind Fate in the Scandinavian mysteries.
Ho-HI.—The two Hebrew pronouns, 7 Ho, meaning he, and ‘nm Hi
meaning she, being read Kabbalistically from m7 the Tetragram-
maton, denote the bissexual character of the Deity : God is thus
the a and female principle ; and in one of the Orphic hymns
we read—

Lede dpony, tyévero, Leds d&pBporos Emrero woe Pn.
Zeus is a male, Zeus is an immortal virgin.

This bissexual character of the Supreme Deity is also affirmed by
Plutarch, who says (De Is. et Osir.): “God, who is a male and
female intelligence, being both life and light, brought forth an-
other intelligence, the Creator of the World.” This is also
affirmed in Genesis (i. 27): “So God created man in his own
image, in the image of God created he him: male and female
created He them.” This discovery of the anagrammatical read-
ing of Jahve unquestionably originated with Lanci, the librarian
to the Vatican; and George Robbins Gliddon, with whom the
editor was intimately acquainted for many years, pursued the
hints of the Italian, and elaborated the matter in a work on the
Israelitish names of God, which was never published, and has un-
happily been lost. In the days when the editor was in communica-
tion with the enthusiastic Gliddon,—to whose memory justice has
never been done,—he saw this lost work, which Gliddon asserted
would be an effectual bar to his being received into any workhouse
in England or America in case of need, the world being too preju-
diced to receive the deductions therein contained. The editor
tried hard, with the assistance of Mrs Gliddon, to trace the MS.,
but without avail.

HOHE TO THE LorD.—An inscription in the Samaritan char-

3!

HOL| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HOL

acter, worn on the forehead of the High Priest (Exod. xxxix., 30).
nimd wap Kodesh Laychovah, blazoned on a plate of gold.

Hoty Guost, ORDER OF THE. (See Knight of the Holy Ghost.)

Hoty Grounp.—A Masonic Lodge, according to the Prestonian
lectures, is said to be held on holy ground—having been originally
instituted on the place where the three Grand Offerings were
made. (See Grand Offerings, and Ground Floor of the Lodge.)

Hoty Lopcr—tThe ancient lectures inform us that there were
three Grand Lodges, opened at three especial periods of Masonic
history ; these are termed the Holy Lodge, the Sacred Lodge, and
the Royal Lodge. The whole tradition must be taken cum yrano
salis, The Holy Lodge was opened and presided over by Moses,
Aholiab, and Bezaleel, at the institution of the Tabernacle; the
Sacred Lodge was opened on Mount Moriah (see Moriah, Mount),
during the building of the First Temple—by Solomon, King of
Israel, Hiram, King of Tyre, and Hiram Abif; the Royal Lodge
was opened on the ruins of the Temple, with Zerubbabel, Haggai,
and Jeshua, as its presiding officers.

Hoty Name—In all times, and among all nations, the Holy Name
has been reverenced and adored, although this name has varied
according to the genius and language of the nation. The subject
is one upon which every one may instruct himself without special
reference to Freemasonry—but in that art “the great, mighty,
and terrible Name” is never spoken without reverence and
awe.

Hoty oF Hoties—The Sanctum Sanctorum. It was situated at
the western extremity of the Temple, and separated from it by
a heavy curtain, being enclosed on three sides by blank walls
without any aperture. Here was deposited the sacred Ark of the
Covenant, and it was only entered by the High Priest on certain
special occasions. A Master Mason’s Lodge is supposed to
represent this very solemn place; Masonic mysteries having a
common origin with those of other nations. We find similar
symbolism to prevail among the pagan nations. Every temple
was provided with an adytum, in which was placed a taphos or
tomb, with a statue of the god to whom it was consecrated. As
the doctrine of the resurrection was universally believed by the
ancient nations, the contiguity of the tomb and statue—as the
representative of the risen god—is easily understood. The Jewish
Kodesh Kodashim differed only from these other places by the
absence of this mystic tomb.

Hoty Puace.—Also called the Sanctuary. It was that part of the
Temple situated between the Porch and the Sanctwm Sanctorum.
In it were every day performed the usual offices of the Jewish
Church.

319

HOL| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Hop

Hoty SepuLcure, Knicut or THE. (See Knight of the Holy
Sepulchre.)

Hom.—The tree of life and man among the Persians.

HoMoIousIAN.—One who, at the time of the Arian controversy, in
the fourth century, maintained that the Son and Father were
similar, but not identical.

HoMoousIAN.—One who, during the Arian controversy, about 350,
asserted that the Father and the Son were identical in all
respects,

HonorariuM.—When a distinction is conferred in the higher
degrees, it is regarded as a mark of respect, and is designated
accordingly.

Honorary DEGREE—1. The Mark Master’s degree in the American
system, being a corollary to the Fellow Craft degree. 2. Past
Master in a symbolic Lodge. 3. High Priesthood, which see,
4, Side degrees, being communicated without fee or reward, are
considered to be honorary degrees.

Honorary Masons.—A society which rejected the oaths of Ma-
sonry, but bound themselves by ties of honour and fidelity.
They no longer exist.

Honorary MEMBERS.—On the occasion of the consecration of a new
Lodge, it is usual to create the consecrating officers, and some-
times others, honorary members of the Lodge. This distinction
confers no rights of voting, but allows of freedom of speech,
while no annual dues are required. The member thus created
is amenable to no Lodge rules; but the distinction is forfeited
by Masonic misbehaviour.

Honorary Tuirty-Tuirps.—Certain members of the Ancient and
Accepted Rite have, for merit, been given this degree; but it is
only a distinction carrying with it no privileges, and demanding
no duties at the hands of the Members so distinguished.

HonovurABLE—Formerly the designation of the Fellow Craft
degree.

Honours, GrAND.—Expressive of homage, joy and grief. They are
regulated by certain numbers, and given in a particular way not
susceptible of publication. They differ in different rites, and are
apportioned according to the Masonic rank of the recipient.

Hoopwink.—It is universal to hoodwink initiates, so that they
may obtain no knowledge of Masonic rites in an improper way.
It is manifestly derived from the practice of the ancients.

Horge.—The second round in the theological ladder, symbolizing a
belief in immortality. It is technically appropriated to Faith;
and the representation is a virgin leaning on an anchor.

Hore Manuscript.—A copy of the old Constitutions in the pos-
session of the Lodge of Hope at Bradford in England. It is 6 feet

320

HOR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HU

long, and 6 inches wide, but defaced at the lower edge, and its
date is presumed to be about 1680. It was first published by
Brother W. J. Hughan in his “Old Charges of the British Free-
masons.”

Horn or PLenty. (See Cornucopia.)

Horns OF THE ALTAR—TIn the Jewish Temple there were certain
horns of shittim wood at the corners of the altar—any one who
could seize these was sure of asylum and safety. They were not
peculiar to the Jewish temple, and asylum in a church was fre-
quently sought by great offenders, murderers, and manslayers, in
later times.

HoscuEea.—The word of acclamation used in the French Rite of
the Ancient and Accepted. The Crusaders used to ejaculate
“HEP, HEP, Huzza,” ie. Mierosolyme est perdita—Hoschea!

Hospirauity.—Largely exercised by Masons. In England it often
dwindles to a polite invitation to dinner; but in foreign countries
it means refuge, assistance, and material subsequent aid.

HospiraLLeR,—In the French Rite, an officer similar to that of
almoner.

HosPITaLLer, Knicut. (See Knight Hospitaller.)

HOSPITALLERS OF JERUSALEM.—A foundation obtained from the
Khalif Montaser Billah, in the eleventh century, by the corpora-
tion of merchants of Amalfi, then a rich city in the kingdom of
Naples, The object was the protectioa of poor Christians. They
obtained a site near the reputed place of the Holy Sepulchre,
with the right of exercising their worship according to the Roman
ceremonies ; and the building was completed about 1048. Two
hospitals were also erected—one in memory of St John the
Almoner, and the other to St Mary the Magdalene. This had a
great vogue in the middle ages, and subsequently gave rise to
the Knights Hospitallers, afterwards Knights of Rhodes, and
then Knights of Malta.

Host, Caprain OF THE. (See Captain of the Host.)

Hour Guass.— Used in the third degree by Webb—but not essen-
tial, nor authorized in any way.

Hours or IniT1aT1on.— Lodges, from very many reasons, are usually
held in the evening, and the hour of initiation may be regarded
as the darkest before the dawn. (See Night.)

H...R..D..M..—An abbreviation of Heredom or Herodem.

Hvu.—Chief deity among the Druids, usually termed Hu Gadarn,
or, Hu the Mighty. One of the Welch bards thus speaks of
him :—* The smallest of the small is Hu the mighty, in the
world’s judgment; yet he is the greatest, and the Lord over us,
and our God Almighty. His course is light and swift, his ear is

a particle of bright sunshine. He is great on land and sea, the
x 321

HUE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HUM

greatest whom I shall behold, greater than the worlds, Offer
not indignity to him, the Great and Beautiful.”

Huertrr.—Among the Stein-metzen, or stonemasons, of medixval
Germany, an equivalent for Lodge. In construction, it resembles
the huts of wood erected by modern contractors, wherein plans
are deposited, and consultations as to matters connected with the
work take place. (See Haupt Hiitte.)

HULOTHEISM.—The doctrine that matter is God, or that there is no
other God but matter.

Human Procress.—It is foreign to the purpose of this work to en-
ter upon the great subject of human progress, except in that
point in which Masons and builders are especially interested.
Material architecture may be safely left to operative masons,
while the onward march of the human mind, and its influence
on the amelioration of society in manners, religion, and humane
feeling, is interesting to speculative Masons in the highest
degree, From the time when suffering mankind sought refuge
from the elements in caverns or amidst spreading groves of trees,
to our own days of comfortable houses and stately domes for
political or religious purposes, is a great step. But, as humanity
has ever proceeded along a broad and important road with an
evident purpose, although its design is unfathomable to us, and
its processes infinitely slow, it is plain that a retrospective view
of society will not be unwelcome. Indeed, it is superfluous to
say that without some definite review of this kind this book
would not completely convey the design in view. When man
first emerged in that dread infancy of the world into a know-
ledge of himself, it is plain that his first endeavour was to ac-
count in some measure, not alone for his own existence, but for
the causes of the phenomena he witnessed around him in his
daily life. With all due reverence for what is termed revelation,
it must be conceded that countless ages had elapsed before any-
thing approaching to a clear system of theology could be elabo-
rated; that myriads must have been born, lived and died in
ignorance of its mystical, metaphysical, and religious importanee,
and it may be that myriads more may have to be born, live and
die, in alternate hope and fear, before a real and enduring faith
can be established throughout the world, having a just and re-
cognised position in relation to science and its marvellous power,
The earliest races of man—it being presumed for the sake of
argument that the arts of writing, sculpture, buildings, medicine,
and the ten thousand familiar accessories of modern civilised
society were unknown—must have had recourse to only two
modes of interpreting the wonders they beheld around them—the
daily unvarying succession of light and darkness, heat and cold,

322

Hun | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HUM

suminer and winter ; one of these modes was by at once attribut-
ing every thing, and truly, to the direct force of a Creative Power,
by common consent called God, and the other consisted in the
acceptation in some mysterious way of the Sun as that Creative
Power. Butas the phenomena of the Kosmos did not appear
consistently benevolent and favourable to man, it soon became
the habit of mankind to deify the minor powers of Nature, or at
least to attribute an existence to personal influences specifically
malignant or beneficent, or of a mixed quality to be pacified or
propitiated by personal efforts. These two great bodies soon
separated into camps of opinion, and they have failed to be re-
conciled up to the present hour. Those who accepted the Sun
as the visible type of a Creator gradually learnt to distinguish
between that luminary and the unseen Invisible Being yet more
difficult of apprehension, and thus a form of faith ensued, which
has never been essentially varied in its nature, differing only with
the tides of opinions with which subsequent philosophers have
irrigated the fields of man’s religious consciousness, Those, on the
other hand, who had deified the jower powers. of nature, becom-
ing gradually absorbed at a particular era of thought,—as
shown in the Table on next page,—abandoned their first im-
pressions, aud resigned their spiritual guidance to. priests and
spiritual teachers, while at the same time a process of an analogous
kind was taking place among the Sun worshippers. Here the
Sum of Necessity caused another split in the newly reorganized
sections of thought, and farther sub-divisions could not be
avoided. It is almost painful to contemplate the ultimate re-
sults of Science and Religion; but it has been attempted to in-
dicate in the table a probable net result. There is on the one
side Reception, on the other Rejection, on the one hand the Im-
mortalists, and on the other the Atheists, the Sheep and Goats of
the mystical Apocalypse. Unless a Divine Influence is mani-
fested, these classes must ever remain hopelessly and haplessly
divided ; but it can hardly be within the scope of the Almighty
Design to consign these misunderstood and misunderstanding
classes to hopeless eternal misery or to unmerited everlasting
happiness. It may be added, in conclusion, that this diagram is
to be read from the bottom upwards, in the same manner as a
genealogical table, and it will then be readily seen how the various
religions waves, which have passed over society, have affected
the progress of humanity throughout the countless generations
of the race.

323

HUM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HUM

SHORT CONSPECTUS IN TABULAR FORM OF HUMAN PROGRESS,

ATHEISTS, (Both these classes must come IMMORTALISTS.
into collision—the one consi- :
Positive | Pole. dering all things symbolic, the Negative Pole. | Recrrrioy.
Resec| Tron. other as the product of causes
and effects. In a Mopern Doamatists,

Movers Scientists, = certain sense they
UrTILiraRIANIsTs, must always be posi-
tive and negative to

8 @ y Absorp | tion in each other, making
ag]s com | merce up the world of opin-
sels and |enjoy- ion.)
sd 7
s me | nt.
NATURALISTS, PositIvists. —=INDIFFERENTISTS. Dessts. PaNTHeists, Soperya,
\ 4
| TURALISTS,
Pause of ‘y Pause of Satiation. Contemplation.
Scepti- 3. Indigna- St.
cism, 3 tion, % 3
& Sle
PaiLosopners, MEN or Science. Leais.aTors, REFORMERS, Movern Priests, ENTHUSIASTS,
3 >
E 3
S Mixed 4 priori and gq 5
z & posteriori. Line of Worship. me

Sum of |Necessity.

Mupicing-Men, Doctors. PRIESTS, SPIRITUAL TEACHERS.

oe A priori Science.

Worship.

a
Magic ARMLETS, CHARMS.2-=—==-=-=-=-—=——

~eousqog

Rocks, Trees, Winps, ANIMALS=

Yd
®
5 Ss, Line of Worshtp.
Natura, PHENOMENA——————. Goov. ——. Evi
$|
ai =
a
® FETISH-WORSHIP. s
Frstivats oF THE SEAsons. SacriFickEs To Spirits,
>
| &
oy
| SUN-WORSHIP == SPIRIT-FEAR. |
Souruern Savaces, NortTHERN SAVAGES.
Sours Por Nortx Pore,

324

HUM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HUN

HumsBucs.—The brethren of the Venerable Society of Humbugs
met at Brother Hallam’s, in Goodman’s Fields, from 1763.

Hunb, CARL GOTTHELF, BARoN Von.—Born in the Oberlausitz,
Germany, on the llth September, 1722, of noble descent aud
family estates, and of Protestant faith, In person he was of
middling stature, but well formed, a neat and agreeable man in
his dress and demeanour, and, although himself very abstemious,
distinguished for his hospitality. His servants lived and died
in his service, which speaks volumes in favour of his general
amiability of character. He was initiated into Masonry before
he was twenty, on the 20th March, 1742, in the Lodge of the
Three Thistles, at Frankfort-on-the-Main, receiving the two first
degrees on the same day, and subsequently being raised to the
degree of Master. He soon after went on his travels, visiting
England and Holland, as also Paris, where he seems to have ac-
cumulated much information likely to influence his future
Masonic career. Among other ideas he embraced as a cardinal
fact, was the derivation of the Masonic Order of Knights Temp-
lar from Scotland, through Pierre D’Aumont, who was said to
have been elected Grand Master on St John the Baptist’s day,
1313. These knights adopted the signs and outward guise of the
Freemasons, and in 1361, D’Aumont transferred his official seat
to Aberdeen. We are not going to enter upon any discussion
here as to the truth or falsehood of this statement. Baron Von
Hund was admitted, in 1743, into this Order of the Temple, at
Paris, according to Clavel, by the Pretender, Charles Edward
Stewart ; but, according to other authorities (such as Robison and
Gidicke), it did not happen until some time later, and in Bra-
bant. He was certainly appointed a Provincial Grand Master,
with powers to spread the Order in Germany. In 1749, at his
own expense, he built a Masonic Lodge, at Kiitlitz, near Lobau,
called “The Three Pillars ;’ and at the same time he erected a
Protestant church. He revisited Paris in 1754, and in Novem-
ber of that year the Chapter of Clermont was opened, and Hund
admitted to the degrees. Upon this system Hund founded his
own rite, which taught that Freemasonry originated in Knight
Templary, and that, in consequence, every Mason is a Templar,
although not entitled to the highest privileges of the Order until
a certain degree had been attained. Upon this basis, Hund after-
wards founded his Rite of the Strict Observance. Considerable
difficulty has arisen on this point, as the author of the rare book,
Anti-Saint-Nicatse, asserts that there was already, between 1730
and 1740, a Chapter of Templars in the Lausitz, and that there-
fore the dignities of Prior, Sub-Prior, Prefect, and Commander,
introduced by Hund, had long been known, while Ragon gives

325

HUN ] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [HUN

the name of the Superior of the Templar system as Baron von
Marschall. In the Strict Observance, the title of distinction was,
in place of Miles, Eques, and a characteristic name was added;
thus, Hund chose the name of Egues ab Ense, or, Knight of the
Sword—the cognizance thereof being a square and a sword
quartered saltire. Europe was divided into nine provinces, and he
took to himself the Grand Mastership of the seventh province,
comprehending Lower Saxony, Prussian Poland, Livonia, and
Courland ; and the Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick was placed at
the head of the Rite. In the year 1763, Hund was aroused from
a state of inactivity by the appearance of a man named Leucht,
a Jew, and secretary to the Prince of Anhalt-Bernbury, under the
name of Becker. (See Johnson.) It is difficult to ascertain the
exact position of this person, as he was reputed to have been en-
couraged by Hund, who admitted his claims to the office of
Grand Prior. Johnson or Becker was afterwards convicted of
theft and forgery, besides coining, and died in prison, in 1775.
Upon this, Hund convened the convention of Altenberg, and by
it was recognised as Grand Master of Templars, and the Strict
Observance soon evidenced its vitality by a marked increase in
the number of the Chapters, and the rank of the initiates. But
the predominating influence of the Strict Observance was as
speedily to be lost. Its members looked upon the members of
the old Johannite system with much the same feelings that the
members of the modern high degrees are disposed to regard their
brethren of the Craft, and this soon brought about a revul-
sion of feeling. A Mother Lodge, only recognising the three
symbolical degrees, was instituted at Frankfort, and as other
rivals arose to dispute the supremacy of the Strict Observance,
Hund’s system materially suffered. Thus, in 1767, Von Starck,
the rector at Wismar, tried to make an innovation by the insti-
tution of a new branch, to be called the clerical system of
Knights Templar, nominally spiritual in character, and insisting
that every candidate should be a Roman Catholic, having pre-
viously received the degrees of the Strict Observance. Von
Starck exercised sufficient influence over Baron von Hund to in-
duce him to abandon his faith as a Protestant, and be received
into the Roman Catholic Church, in order to obtain the sup-
posed privileges of the new rite. In 1774 and 1775, conventions
on this subject were again held at Kohlo and Brunswick, but
with little real effect. Hund was impeached at the latter on ac-
count of the derivation of his powers from the Superiores Incog-
nitz, or Unknown Superiors, and secession, together with ultimate
Masonic decease, was the natural consequence. Hund retired from
the Masonic arena, and ultimately died in his fifty-sixth year on
326

HUN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [1. A. A.

the 8th November, 1776, at Meiningen, in Prussia. Whatever
his errors, he never lost the affectionate regard of his brethren,
and a medal was struck by the members of the Lodge Minerva
in commemoration of him, on which a faithful likeness appeared,
with an urn and serpent on the obverse.

Huncary.—Masonry was introduced into this country about 1750.
In 1760, a Lodge, working in conformity with Hund’s system,
was established at Presburg; afterwards, the Lodges roceived
their warrants from England. In 1870, the Grand Lodge of
Hungary was established by the convention of the seven Lodges
then existing at Pesth.

Hour (Hebrew na, Liberty) —Used in the fourth degree of Perfect
Mistress in the French Rite of Adoption. :
Hutcuinson, WILLIAM.—Born in 1732, died 7th April, 1814. He
was the author of a book long esteemed by the Craft, entitled
“The Spirit of Masonry, in Moral and Elucidatory Lectures,”
published in 1775—a book always held in high esteem by the
Craft. He was a famous antiquary, and the author of many
other works, exhibiting throughout his long life an ardent and
cultured mind. Like many others, however, of his era, he was
beset with theories, and it is only the general frame-work of his

book which is now of any value.

Huzza.—The acclamation in the Scottish Rite, but referable to
Hoschea, the Deliverer.

Hyemantes.—Offenders in the primitive Church, who were not
allowed to enter, and were treated exactly as the cowans and
eavesdroppers in Freemasonry.

HyYPERDOULIA.—The worship of the Virgin Mary.

Hypoca#um.—1. The underground part of a building. 2. In astro-
logy, the celestial houses below the horizon.

HypostTyYLze.—That which is supported by pillars.

HyPsIsTARI—A sect of the fourth century. They revered fire and
lamps with the Pagans, observed the Sabbath, and also the dis-
tinction of clean and unclean things, according to the Jewish
system.

i,

I.—The ninth letter and third vowel of the English alphabet. I,
as a numeral, signifies one. Its Hebrew equivalent is », and
the Hebrew name of God corresponding to it is ™, Jah, Deus.

I. A. A. T.—On the authority of Reghellini (i. 29), we learn that
the German Rose Croix Masons wore a gold ring with these let-
ters, the initials of Ignis, Aer, Aqua, and Terra.

327

1 AM] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ILL

IAM THAT I AM. (See Eheyeh Asher Eheyeh.)

Tatric Masonry (Greek, farpxi, the art of healing).—It is said
by Ragon (Orthodoxie Magonnique, p. 450), that there was a de-
gree called the Oracle of Cos, instituted in the eighteenth cen-
tury, B.C.,from the fact that Cos was the birthplace of Hippocrates,
reputed the father of medicine. It is one of the degrees of
the Antient and Primitive Rite. (See Mesmer.) ITatric Masonry
is alsu practised by the members of the Brotherhood of Light.
(See Light, Brotherhood of.)

IcHABoD (Hebrew, i33"%, where ts the glory)—Used in the Order
of Ishmael.

[-Co_m-KiLu.—An island situated near the Hebrides, to the south;
once the seat of the Order of the Culdees, and containing the
ruins of the monastery of St Columba, founded a.p. 565. It was
here, according to tradition, that the rite of Heredom originated.

Tconocuasts (2.¢., Image-breakers).—1. In history, a title applied
to two of the Byzantine emperors—Leo the Isaurian, and his
son, Constantine Capronymus, who reigned from 726 to 795.

IpaHo.—The Grand Lodge of Idaho was established 10th Dec.,
1867, and Royal Arch Masonry was introduced in 1868 and
1870.

Ipot.—An image or representation of a heathen god, a Romish
saint, a Hindoo, African, Chinese, or Polynesian divinity. The
image of Plutus has survived, as an idol, to our own times, and
is possessed of rare powers, in the same way the other idols have
been made to yield a good profit, by the recommendation of a
principle—the apotheosis of some wretched impostor, or as the
means of conveying a symbol. Idol worship, if we may believe
the accounts of modern pilgrimages, is greatly on the increase.
(But see Talisman.)

IcneE Natura Renovatur InTEGRA—By fire nature is perfectly
renewed. (See J. No. Ru. I.)

I. H. 8—ZJn hoe signo, and Jesus Hominum Salvator, Also, IY,
one of the names of Dionysos or Bacchus.

Iyar.—Seventh month of the Hebrew civil year. Began on the
5th April, 1875, and will commence on the 25th April, 1876.
Intinois.—The first Grand Lodge was established in 1822, but was
afterwards done away with, and not reorganized until the 20th
Jan., 1840, A Grand Chapter, Grand Council, and Grand Com-
mandery speedily followed, and Masonry is now in a very satis-

factory state.

ILLUMINATED THEOSOPHISTS. (See Chastannier.)

ILLUMINATI OF AVIGNON. (See Académie des Vraies Magons
and Pernetty. Also, Swedenborg Rite.)

ILLUMINATI OF BAVARIA—The founder of this celebrated society
328

ILL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ILL

was Adam Weishaupt, professor of canon law at the University
of Ingolstadt, who set it on foot the lst of May, 1776, by the
title of Order of the Perfectibilists. Its object was the advance-
ment of morality, education, and virtue, by the mutual assistance
of good men. It can hardly be called a Masonic institution, but
its members were selected from the ranks of the fraternity. The
model on which Weishaupt formed this society was that of the
Jesuits, and having originally been a member of that body him-
self, his former brothers by no means approved of this new
society, and, by every means in their power, strove against him.
He was initiated in a Lodge at Munich, in 1777, and this initia-
tion led him to associate the ceremonies of Masonry still more
closely with his own order. In 1780, Baron von Knigge, known
as a poet and enthusiastic Mason, joined the Illuminati, and soon
became one of its principal directors. The Order of Illuminati
was thus constituted :—I. The Nursery, including the degrees of
—1, Novice ; 2, Minerval; 3, Iuminatus Minor. II.—Symbolic
Masonry. 4, E.A.P.; 5, F.C.; 6,M.M.; 7, Iuminatus Major,
or Novice Ecossais ; 8, Iuminatus Dirigens, or Knight Ecossais.
I1I—The Mysteries. A. The Lesser Mysteries; 9, Presbyter,
Priest, or Epopt ; 10, Prince, or Regent. B. The Greater Myste-
ries ; 11, Magus ; 12, Rex, or King. The degree of Novice could be
taken at the age of eighteen, and after a probation of not less than a
year, the novice was admitted to the second andthirddegrees. Very
few reached the higher degrees, and it does not seem that the
last two degrees were ever perfected. Inthe same manner that
the members of the Strict Observance, the modern Rosicrucians
and some other fraternities, assumed particular names ;—the Ilu-
minati were known by Order names. Weishaupt was Spartacus,
Knigge was Philo, Zwack was Cato, and so forth, and in a simi-
lar way the towns in which Lodges existed were designated by
classical names. Ingolstadt was spoken of as Eleusis; Austria,
being a non-Masonic country, was Egypt; Munich was Athens,
and Vienna was Rome. There was a special nomenclature in
reference to the Calendar, and, in fact, everything was arranged
in such a manner as to indicate perfect independence of pre-
viously existing institutions, with the sole exception of Free-
masonry. Of course, as it came into conflict with the inflexible
principles of the Romish Church, and proved successful enough
in stemming the tide of reaction, the Jesuits and priests opposed
it by every means in their power, and nothing was too vile for
those calumniators to assert of men whose principles were dif-
ferent. Itis hardly to be denied at this distance of time, when the
Order has become defunct, that there were grave charges, contain-
ing some slight truth in them ; but, as in all cases of this kind,
329

ILL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [IMM

the wholesale denunciation of the Order by its enemies only
served to increase the number of its supporters, and Lodges of
Illuminati were soon established in France, Belgium, Holland,
Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Hungary, and Italy. The priestly
party was too strong for the organisation of Weishaupt, and in
June, 1784, the Elector of Bavaria was induced to issue an edict
suppressing the Order. This was succeeded by fines and impri-
sonment for many of the members ; and, being afterwards further
repressed by other edicts, the Order finally became extinct at the
close of the last century. Had the Order been allowed free
scope, much good would have resulted, as the members were,
as a rule, men of the strictest morality and humanity, and the
ideas they sought to instil were those which have found uni-
versal acceptance in our own times. The special name has been
borne by other bodies, as the religious society of the Alumbra-
dos in Spain, founded in the sixteenth century ; the Order of
Guerinets, in France, in the seventeenth, and several others be-
fore and since.

ILLUMINATI OF STOCKHOLM.—Instituted for the purpose of spreading
the principles of Martinism. It is mentioned by Ragon, but
very little is known about it.

TLLUMINISM.—A name for Weishaupt’s system.

ILLUSTRIOUS ELECT OF FIFTEEN.—See Elect of Fifteen, Knight.:

ILLustrious Knicut.—Thirteenth degree of the 90 degrees of the
Rite of Mizraim.

JLLUsTRIOUS, THE, OR THE TEMPLARS.—Second degree of the ancient
Chapter of Clermont.

ImamM.—A minister of the Mohammedan faith, corresponding to
that of an ordinary holder of a living or incumbency in the Eng-
lish Church.

IMBAULTUS, BERNARDUS.—Elected Regent and Magisterial Vicar of
Africa, in the Order of the Temple, in 1472, according to the
chronology of that Order in France.

IMITATIVE SocieTIES.—Certain societies were instituted in imitation
of Masonry, having but little resemblance to it, merely bor-
rowing the idea of secret signs and passwords ;—among these we
may name the Oddfellows, the Foresters, the Knights of Pythias,
the Good Templars, the United Dukes of Christendom, and many
others. They cannot be brought under the category of derisive
societies, as they effected, and still continue to effect, a great
deal of good both in England and America. (See Derisive So-
cieties.)

IMMACULATE CONCEPTION, ORDER OF THE.—This royal Order was
established by Charles III. of Spain, in 1771, a prince who was
successively Duke of Parma and Placentia, Grand-Duke of Tus-

330

IMM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [1mm

cany, and King of Naples and the Two Sicilies, On the demise
of Ferdinand ¥I., in 1759, he succeeded to the Spanish throne,
at a time when Europe was convulsed by the Seven Years’ War.
His character was urbane and gentle, and in singular contrast to
that of many of his contemporaries, He instituted the Order
of the Immaculate Conception, in consequence of the birth of a
son, to mark his pious belief in the principles of the Roman
Catholic religion, which he professed. Badge: a Maltese cross
emaillée, blanc bordée, or. The obverse bears a figure of the Virgin
in white robes, with a mantle azure, alluding to the union
of the French and Spanish national colours, this king being the
fourth of the Bourbon-Anjou branch who had ascended the
throne of Spain and the Indies, On the reverse are the letters
Cre surrounded by the motto Virtute et Merito ; in the angles
four fleur-de-lis. There were four classes of knights :—The Grand
Crosses wear the jewel pendant from a broad sky-blue ribbon
bordée blanc, watered, worn scarfwise from right to left; the star
is of silver, with the image of the Virgin worn on the left breast.
The second class wear the scarf, but no star; and the third and
fourth classes are only distinguished by small crosses worn from
the button-hole. The third class are knights pensioners, and re-
ceive an annual income from the treasury of the Order. The
endowments of this Order are very great, and were increased by
the estates of the house of Ximenes, itself an order of knighthood
of great antiquity, founded in 722, and known as the “ Oak of
Navarre.” The Order of the Immaculate Conception ranks next
to that of the Golden Fleece, and none but persons of the highest
nobility can receive it.

IMMANUEL (Hebrew xray, God with us)—1. A word in the
eighteenth and nineteenth degrees of the Ancient and Accepted
Rite. 2. A word in Templarism. It is a designation of the
Soter or Saviour, applied by Matthew to the Messiah or Messen-
ger born of the Virgin. It is also a favourite designation of the
Divine Humanity with the religionists.

IMMATERIALISM.—The doctrine of the existence or state of imma-
terial creatures, or spiritual beings.

IMMEMORIAL.—Applied to certain Masonic bodies—very often inac-
curately enough—as having existed beyond the memory of man.
Legally speaking, the memory of man is considered to extend no
farther back than the reign of Richard Coeur de Lion.

IMMOLATION.—A sacrifice among the ancients. The victim, on
being slain, was sprinkled with wine, and some corn, frankincense,
and salt placed upon its head.

IMMORTALITY OF THE SoUL—Whoever attentively studies the Dar-

33t

IMM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [imp

winian theory of evolution, and the successive transformation of
beings from one form of existence to another, cannot fail to see
that soul must have an existence beyond the grave. It is taught
by the most ancient philosophers, and is a belief entirely inde-
pendent of Christianity; in fact, it is only Christianity which
arrogantly trifles with the feelings of millions, and asserts that,
according as it is near to or remote from Rome, frightful punish-
ment will follow. Both on the doctrine of the immortality of the
soul and the futurity of punishment, the fatal liking the Romish
Church and her shadow—the “unco guid”—have taken for
wholesale immolation of their fellow-creatures, by fabulous fiery
pits, has led to more actual unbelief than eould have been pro-
voked by a century of dull sermons: by: flaccid holders of plurali-
ties of any shape of faith. There is no royal road to science, and
none to religion; it must emerge in the life of a man, or it will
do him no good. Hence, killing the soul, immortal as it is, only
leads to greater unhappiness. If we, in our various faiths, trust
in the mercy of the Creator, His everlasting arms will ever hold
us up. But the mere outside and tinsel of religion is made its
substance; and hence the stress on all men who love humanity,
and the extra obligation to do right. Fiat justitid ruat coelum.

IMMOVABLE JEWELS. (See Jewels of a Lodge.)

IMPEACHMENT.—In 1842, a singular case occurred at New York, in
which the rights and privileges of the Master of a Lodge were
placed in jeopardy by the action of his Lodge. After the Lodge.

_ was opened, the Master had occasion to be absent for a short
time, leaving the Senior Warden in the chair. On his return,
he found that charges had been preferred against himself, and a
committee appointed to try him; and the Senior Warden refused
to return into his hands the warrant and gavel of the Lodge.
Complaint being made to the Grand Master by the Master, he
directed the Grand Secretary to inform the Senior Warden that
he must at once return the warrant to the hands of the Master, and
thatthe action of the Lodge on that case must be suspended,and the
Members hold themselves in readiness to maintain their charges
before the Grand Steward’s Lodge, which was all promptly
complied with by the parties. The ground of his decision was,
that the Master of a Lodge is only subject to impeachment and
trial before his peers, who are acquainted with his duties, but
which the Members of a Lodge cannot know, until they are
themselves seated in the Oriental Chair.

ImPETRATION (Latin impetro, I obtain).—The act of obtaining any-
thing by way of prayer.

ImpLEMENTS.—The symbolism of the Operative Masons being trans-
ferred to the Speculative Masons by a natural transition, their

332

Imp | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. {IND

tools became endowed with attributes congenial to their original
uses. The twenty-four inch guage and the gavel are given to
the E. A. P., as being the implements used in preparation. The
square, level, and plumb are made use of in the F. C. degree,
and the trowel is assigned to the M. M.

ImpLuviuM.—The outer part of a house, or the courtyard, exposed
to the weather.

Impostors.—In all organizations, it is necessary to be on the
guard against imposture, and in Freemasonry not less than in any
other. It is fortunately much more easy to do this now than it
used to be; but the production of a certificate, and a careful
examination, is always necessary, for, the Lodge door once passed,
Masonic privileges cannot be withheld. But although cases
sometimes arise of expelled or suspended Masons thus entering
various adyta, they are not so frequent as to be alarming.

Imposts.—“ The members of a secret society of Tyrian artists,” says
Husenheth, “who were hired by King Solomon to erect that sacred
structure, in order to distinguish them from the Jews, who
performed the more humble labours, were honoured with the
epithet of free annexed to the name of builder or Mason; and
being talented foreigners, were freed from the usual imposts paid
to the State by the subjects of Solomon.”

In Activiry.—A Lodge in regular work, duly represented at Grand
Lodge, is said to be in activity; whereas a Lodge which has
ceased its meetings, is dormant.

InauGuRATION.—After the augurs had been consulted in ancient
Rome, the person or thing respecting which the consultation had
been held was solemnly inaugurated. (See Jnstallation.)

IncENsSE— Used in the 3d degree in America, but not in England.

IncHoaTE Lopcrs.—Lodges under dispensation not fully war-
ranted. (See Lodges under Dispensation.)

INCOMMUNICABLE—The Tetragrammaton was said to be incom-
municable, because it could not be taken in relation with any-
thing except God.

IncorporaTion.—Grand Lodge, although recognized by the law of
the land, is not in England, at least, a corporate body, although
such rights have been given in some countries. It is, however,
fraught with dangerous difficulties to the necessary secrecy of
the proceedings, and has never been encouraged. The very
nature of the principles of Masonry are too intangible to come
into competition with corporate bodies.

INCREASE OF WaGES (French, Augmentation de gages).—To apply
for an increase of wages, in the technical language of French
Masonry, is to ask for advancement to a higher degree.

INDEFEASIBLE—A right which, under no circumstances, can be

333

IND | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [IND

denied, and which grave mora] delinquency can only jeopardy.
As the obligation into which a Mason enters on initiation is
purely voluntary, no act of his can affect his responsibilities
towards the Craft, although he may, for just cause shown, be de-
nuded of his privileges.

TNDELIBILITY.—Once a Mason, always a Mason. (See Indefeasible.)

INDENTED TARSEL.—The old name for the tessellated border.

INDENTED TESSEL. (See Tessellated Border.)

Inp1a.—The first Masonic Lodge in India was granted in 1728 by
Lord Kingston, the Grand Master, by deputation to Brother
George Pomfret, for Bengal, but the Masonic position of India
remained in abeyance until 1740, when the Lodge Star in the
East, No. 70, was established at Calcutta. It was soon after
introduced into Madras and Bombay, and the Grand Lodge of
Hindustan was finally established with independent powers in
1875. The progress of Masonry in that country has been very
surprising, and the natives have vied with the English and Scot-
tish residents in spreading it abroad. At some future time,
there can be little doubt that India will repay the mother
country for the care shown in sowing the seeds of the Craft,
the peculiar idiosyncracies of the inhabitants being of a kind
calculated to foster Masonic impressions, and the great attention
which the last half century, in the person of its scholars, has
paid to ancient Indian literature, will afford great and enduring
satisfaction to archeologists and students of symbolism.

TyDIANA.—Masonry introduced in 1807 from Kentucky. Grand
Lodge organized 12th January, 1818; Grand Chapter in 1845;
Grand Commandery in 1854; and the Council of Royal and
Select Masters, 11th December, 1855.

IxDIAN CALENDAR.—The Indian or Hindu year begins in April,
thus:—Ist Vaisikha, 13th April; Ist Jyaishtha, 14th May; 1st
Ashadha, 14th June; Ist Sravana, 16th July; 1st Bhadrapada,
16th August ; Ist Asvina, 16th September; 1st Kartlika, 17th
October; Ist Agrahayana, or Margasirsha, 16th November; 1st
Pansha, 15th December ; 1st Magha, 13th January ; 1st Phalguna,
12th February; Ist Caitra, 13th March. The days of the
week are: Aditya, Sunday; Soma, Monday; Mangala, Tuesday ;
Budha, Wednesday; Guru, Thursday; Sukra, Friday; and
Sani, Saturday. The current year of the Hindu era is
1933.

INDIFFERENTISTS.—An Androgynous Society established at Paris in
1738. The object of the Society was to protect the members
from the influence of love, and the jewel was an icicle.

Inpuction.—1. The Master is said to be inducted into the
Chair on his installation, 2. Induction is the term used when

334.

IND | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [IN H

any one is initiated into the Thrice Illustrious Order of the
Cross.

Inpuctor.—The senior and junior inductors are officers in a
Council of the Thrice Illustrious Order of the Cross, similar to
senior and junior deacons.

Inpustry.—The symbol of this virtue is the beehive, used in the
American 3d degree.

INEFFABLE DEGREES.—Latin, ineffabilis, not to be spoken or ex-
pressed. The degrees, from the 4th to the 14th, of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite are thus called, on account of their being
principally engaged in the investigation and contemplation of
the Ineffable Name.

INEFFABLE NaME. (See Zetragrammaton.)

INELIGIBLE. (See Qualifications.)

INFLAMED Urn.—An emblem in the alchymistical degree of Knight
of the Sun or Black Eagle. It teaches that the Hermetic Mason
should, by his knowledge and virtue, exercise an influence on
the world, as acceptable as the perfume of the burning urn.

INFORMATION, LAWFrUL.—Provided that a Brother has duly examined
another professing to belong to the Craft, he can give lawful in-
formation as to his status, but he must actually test him in all
matters, or the voucher will fall to the ground. It is therefore
very desirable that no trusty Brother should allow himself to
forget any of the secrets of the Craft, as, by a lapse, he may in-
troduce improper persons. It would be a great scandal upon
Masonry were this not carried out to the fullest extent, and no
worthy Brother can feel offended at undergoing the ordeal.

INFRALAPSARIANS.—The name of a Christian sect, whose principal
doctrine was predestinarianism, maintaining that God has crea-
ted a certain number of men only to be damned, without allow-
ing them the means of saving themselves if they would; and
they received this designation because they hold that God’s de-
crees were formed infra lapsum, after His knowledge of the fall,
and in consequence thereof. This sect has evidently found
favour among the modern supporters of infallibility, in the per-
son of the present Pope, for both in speech, and in other publi-
cations,—often of a solemn ceremonial character,—they assign
the majority of their fellow creatures to a doom more horrible
than the most subtile murderer or vivisectionist would condemn
the most wretched and undeserving animal.

InFULA.—A mitre worn by the priests of Greece and Rome, from
which on each side a species of ribbon was pendant. This covering
of the head is analogous to the former custom of the Master, and
even the members of the Lodge, wearing their heads covered.

In Hoc Signo Vinces.—l. Said to have been a motto of the

335

INT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [INN
Knights Templar, and still used in the American Rite of the
Order. 2. Adopted by the members of the Red Cross of Rome
and Constantine. The matter is, however, full of confusion.
The real banner of the Templars was the Beauseant of black and
white, with the motto, Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed nomini
tuo da gloriam,—“ Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
Thee give the glory.”

IniTIATE.—Latin, Jnitiatus. 1. Fifth and last degree of the Order
of the Temple. 2. Eleventh degree of the rite of Philalethes.
3. The designation of a candidate in any of the degrees of
Masonry.

INITIATED KNIGHT AND BROTHER OF AsIA, (See Asia, Knights
and Brothers of.)

INITIATE IN THE EaypTiaAN SECRETS.—Second degree in the rite of
African Architects.

INITIATE IN THE MysTERIES.—Twenty-first degree in the Metro-
politan Chapter of France.

INITIATE IN THE PRorouND MYSTERIES.—Sixty-second degree in
the Metropolitan Chapter of France.

INITIATE INTO THE ScIENCES, THE.—Second Degree of a Masonic
system founded on the doctrines and principles of Pythagoras.
IniT1aTI0on.—A term employed by the Romans to designate admis-
sion into the mysteries of their sacred and secret rites, derived
from initia, signifying the first principles of any science. It has

been adopted by the Masons.

In MeEmortamM.—Properly, Jn perpetuam ret memoriam, “as a
perpetual memorial of the event.” Used on cenotaphical pillars
and other solemn erections, and sometimes placed at the head of
the lists of deceased members issued by the Grand Lodges.

INNER GuarpD.—tThe officer who guards the interior of a Lodge, re-
ceives Masons upon proof, and announces the approach of any
stranger. This officer is always appointed in England, but in
America his duties are performed by the Junior Deacon.

INNOMINABLE, THE—A degree in the collection of Le Rouge.

INNovaTIoNS.—It is a cardinal principle of the Masonic fraternity
that no innovations can be permitted in the body of Masonry,
and more especially in the earliest and most venerable body of
Craft or Symbolical Masonry. Whatever modifications have been
suggested, or attempted, have ever collapsed ; but this cannot be
said to apply to the lectures, which have been very greatly im-
proved in style and perspicuity. It is for this reason that inven-
tors of new rites have already been obliged to adopt the three
symbolical degrees as the groundwork of their systems, and in-
deed, it would be practically illegal to administer the oaths of the
higher degrees in this country without the substructure of E. A. P.,

336

LN. R. | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [INS

F.C., and M.M. Hence, in other associations of a secret charac-
ter, it is desirable in all cases to guard those who administer the
oaths, by the egis of Masonry, which, allowed by the law of the
land in most countries throughout the world, constitutes an effec-
tual guarantee for the good faith of administrators and recipients.

IN. R. L—1. Jesus Nazarenus Rex Iudeorum—Jesus of Nazareth,
King of the Jews; Jgne natura regenerando integrat, Igne natura
renovatur integra, Igne nitrum roris invenitur; also, in the Heb-
rew, Wa MW, Jammim Nour Rouah Iabescheh. Maria
(water), Jgne (fire), ventus (air), terra (earth), or arida. Used in
several rites, especially in the eighteenth degree of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite. 2. In a Philosophical Lodge they represent
Fire, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. 3. Asacred word in the Rosi-
crucian Society.

Insect SHERMAH.—Many of the Jews believe the Temple to have
been a divine work. Some of them suppose that the stones were
not framed and polished by human art and industry, but by a
worm called samis, which God created for the purpose. And
they further feign that the stones came to the Temple of their
own accord, and were put together by angels. This legend
appears to have arisen from a misrepresentation of the word
samis, which signifies a very hard stone, that might be cut and
polished with great perfection. It was an emblem of the peace
and quiet of a Christian church. In Masonic lore, the above
worm is called “the Insect Shermah.”

Insienia. (See Jewels, Official.)

Inspector. (See Sovereign Grand Inspector General.)

InspecTOR, GRAND.—The eighteenth degree of the Antient and
Primitive Rite in some countries. It is the 33° of the A. and A.
Rite, and was acknowledged as such under the Grand Orient of
France.

INSTALLATION.—The act of placing an officer in possession of his
post. Previous to this ceremony, the Lodge, by its members,
solemnly, by ballot, elects its Master. He is then technically said
to be Worshipful Master Elect, but cannot do anything until a
board of Installed Past Masters has been impanelled to raise
him to a rank of authority. He is then formally installed by a
qualified Past Master, and is, ipso facto, a Past Master himself.
The word instal is compounded from two words in medieval
Latin, in and stallum, a seat. On a similar principle, the Grand
Master is installed, and he is then at liberty in Grand Lodge or
subordinate Lodges to appoint his officers, which, with the ex-
ception of the Treasurer and Tyler, is at his entire discretion.
There is a fitness in this, perhaps, not at once seen. As the Mas-
ter rules the Lodge for his year of office, he is presumed to know,

¥ 337

INS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [INT

by previous experience, who the best men are to represent him,
and although office has generally been taken by seniority and
length of membership, it is by no means a law that the seniors
should be so selected. In practice, however, it is found to work
best for the harmony of the Lodge for the Master to follow this
law of seniority.

INSTALLATOR, GRAND.—The twenty-first degree of the Antient and
Primitive Rite. An official grade conferring the privilege and the
ability to instal the officers ‘of Chapters, Senates, and Councils.

INSTALLED Masters, Boarp or.—A committee of Past Masters, to
whom the Master-elect is presented, that he may receive from his
predecessor the benefit of installation.

INSTALLING OFFICER—The performer of the ceremony of installa-
tion. He must be duly qualified to instruct and guide the bro-
ther whom he is about to instal. The strict Masonic rule re-
quires the presence of at least three Past Masters in the complete
jnstallation of a Master, and his investiture with the Past Mas-
ter’s degree. In the case of anew Lodge, the first Master can
only be installed by the G. M., or his deputy, provided he bea P. M.

Iystruction.—The Master of a Lodge on the initiation of a
candidate is bound to give him necessary instructions, and also
to deliver some part of the lecture appertaining to the degree,
and a similar obligation devolves upon him in the two higher
degrees of Craft Masonry. It is unfortunately an obligation
more frequently omitted than observed ; and certain words used
at the end of the address are thought to excuse the Master on
the occasion. In continental Lodges there is a special officer—
the Orator—who addresses the newly admitted brother in
appropriate terms, but that officer does not exist in the English
and American systems.

Insrruction, LopGE or. (See Lodge of Instruction.)

IntTecrity.—Symbolized by the plumb rule.

INTEMPERANCE.—A hateful vice to be visited by immediate punish-
ment. In a Masonic Lodge it is doubly hateful, as being in itself
a most inharmonious action. (See Temperance.)

INTENDANT, GRAND.—In England, the twentieth degree of the
Antient and Primitive Rite. (See Jnspector, Grand.)

INTENDANT OF THE BUILDING, OR Master IN IsraEL.—1. Eighth
degree in the Ancient and Accepted Rite. There are three
officers, a Thrice Puissant, representing Solomon, a Senior Warden,
Tito, and a Junior Warden, Adonhiram, son of Abda. The
colour is crimson; there are twenty-seven lights in a triple
triangle, and five lights on the altar. In the present American
Rite the three chief officers are Adonhiram, Joabert, and Stolkin
ae past officer being the representative of Solomon. It is

33

INT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [INT

supposed to be connected with the vacation of the place of chief
architect of the first Temple. 2. Seventh degree of the Second
class of the chapter of the Emperors of the East and West.
3. Ninth degree, first series, of the collection of the Metropolitan
Chapter of France.

INTERIOR, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the Interior.)

INTERIOR OF THE TEMPLE, KNIGHT COMMANDER OF THE. (See
Knight Commander of the Interior of the Temple.)

INTERPRETER, GENERAL [LLUSTRIOUS PHILOSOPHIC Mason, GRAND.—
A degree in the collection of M. Peuvret.

Intimate InrriatE (Latin, Jntimus Initiatus).—Fourth degree of the
Order of the Temple.

INTIMATE SECRETARY.—Sixth degree in the Ancient and Accepted
Rite. The colour is black strewed with tears—collar and lining
of the apron, red. The officers are three, representing Solomon,
Hiram the king, and a Captain of Guards. (See Cabul.)

INTOLERANCE.—A Masonic vice, and especially stigmatised by the
founders of Freemasonry in its present aspect. To be tolerant is
very different from being compliant, because compliance may
arise from interested motives, whereas tolerance need not be
either haughty or unamiable. Intolerance has been displayed in
this world in its most terrible aspects, and, like virtue, has
usually proved itsown and only reward. We have atthe present
time a powerful religious corporation existing with definite
objects and ulterior aims. The definite objects are, the idle tasks.
of subjugation and terrorism ; the ulterior aims, if we may judge
by the experience of history, are the absorption of the wealth of
the world, the subjection of the intellect of the world, and
the abasement of the women of the world, to a central power
—summed up in the word Jesuitism. Any one who is base
enough to join their standard, finds them equally faithless.
In the interests of their policy, they are astute enough to
select the acutest intellects; they enjoin excellent rules to
conserve the body, and they spare no efforts, pecuniary or
otherwise, to lead the mind to an abyss frightful to contem-
plate. They have existed in all ages of the world historically
known, and have fomented wars of the most terrible character,
upon the most trivial grounds. And yet, wonderful to relate,
they still pursue their way. The only redeeming feature in the
association is its extraordinary compactness, clearness of
thought, attention to details, and fidelity to superiors. But like
the Freemasons, the Jesuits had their predecessors, and they and
those men who thirsted for blood—for religion’s sake—have to
answer for the following frightful death-roll. Leaving depriva-
tion of property out of the question,—that cannot be assessed,

339

INT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [INT

though it might form part of the plunder,—I give the table,
imperfect as it is, to be an object of careful thought for those
who love Roman Catholicism better than just principles of
thought and action, and moderation in all things. It would
appear as follows, therefore, starting at a.D. 1 :—

Holy wars, massacred, and others put

to death, - - - - - 17,600,000
Holy Inquisition, - - - - 5,000,000
Religious massacres, - - - - 3,000,000

Various burnings, boilings, bakings,
roastings, toastings, fryings, gril-
lings, drownings, beheadings, stab-

bings, poisonings, and crucifixions, 500,000
26,100,000

Hindu religious murders and suicides, 18,500,000
Grand total, 44,600,000

With the Old Testament murders, 643,775
45,243,775

And this tremendous total, which does not include the wars of
modern contemporary history,—such as the Crimean War, the
Indian Mutiny, the Prusso-Austrian attack on Denmark, the
Franco-Italian War, the Prusso-Austrian War of 1866, or the
tremendous war of 1870,—has more or less arisen from religious
disputes. The history of the world teaches that every religious
body has in turn -been persecuted and has persecuted in return.
The pagans roasted the Christians, and the Christians, when strong
enough, returned the compliment; and should it happen that
some new faith should supplant that which now has sway over
the world, we may expect similar appalling scenes to take place
among mankind. Itis both humiliating and saddening to see all
this bloodshed taking place in the name of that merciful and
beneficent Being who created this glorious world as a monument
of supernal wisdom and love. From another source, I find that
the Spanish Inquisition alone, between 1781 and 1808,

Burnt alive, - - - - - - 34,628
Burnt in effigy, - - - - 18,649
Condemned to the galleys, &e., - - - 308,218

360,895,

while the victims of the Guillotine—including those who perished
during the Reign of Terror—from 1793 to 1871, only amounted,
340

INT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [IRE

by the official registers, to 3904, and among these were many
great criminals,

InTRODUCTOR AND InTRoDUCTRESS.—Officers in a Lodge of adop-
tion, with duties resembling those of a Master of Ceremonies.
Inrrustinc.—That part of the ceremony in which the initiate is
intrusted with the signs, passwords, and other modes of recogni-

tion.

Inversion oF Letrers.—In some French documents the letters of
some words were inverted in a very childish manuer. Thus,
SJOSVE OUNOIS was written for Rosae crucis, Nomolos was
substituted for Solomon, and Marih for Hiram. The Kabbalists
and Alchymists adopted the same plan.

INVESTITURE.—The initiate is said to be invested when he is pre-
sented with the apron of an E. A. P.

InvINCIBLE.—In the degree of Knights of the Christian Mark, the
word invincible was applied to the president, who was called the
Invincible Knight, and the Order, the Invincible Order.

INvISIBLES, THE.—A Society of occult Masonic character, of which
scarcely anything is known. It is still in full action. The
Members are bound to the most strict secrecy upon the objects
and ceremonies of the Order.

Inwoop, JETHRO, Rev.—Born in England about 1767, and initiated
as a Lewis in 1785. He was soon afterwards appointed Chap-
lain to the Provincial Grand Lodge of Kent, an office he held for
upwards of twenty years, and he enriched Masonic literature
with a series of sermons still worthy of attentive perusal.

Tonic Orper.—One of the three Hellenic orders of architecture, and
considered as the highest in Masonry, in which it is adopted as
the symbol of wisdom, and is placed in the East as the attribute of
the W. M.

Iowa.—Masonry was introduced into Iowa on the 20th November,
1840, at Burlington. After Lodges had been formed in other
parts of the State, a convention was held, and a Grand Lodge
instituted 2d January, 1844, Bro. Oliver Cook being the first
Grand Master. A Grand Chapter was organized 8th June, 1854,
a Grand Council in 1857, a Grand Commandery, 6th June, 1864.
The Ancient and Accepted Rite has also been introduced, with a
Grand Consistory and other subordinate bodies.

Irnam (Hebrew, Dy, aurewm excelsus)—A governor or Prince of
Idumea. 1 Chron. i. 54; Gen. xxxvi. 43.

IRELAND.—The time of the introduction of Masonry into Ireland is
very uncertain, but would seem to be between 1726 and 1730.
A Grand Lodge of Munster has been spoken of as existing in
1721, established at Cork, but a Grand Lodge of Ireland was
certainly formed at Dublin in 1730. In 1749, the Grand

34t

IRI] The Royal Masonte Cyclopedia. [1Ro

Master’s Lodge, still in existence, was instituted. This Lodge
has some curious privileges, Its Members are Members of Grand
Lodge without paymentofdues. It takes precedence of all other
Lodges, and candidates nominated by the Grand Master are to be
initiated without ballot. The Grand Lodge of Ireland in 1772
recognised the Schismatical Grand Lodge of Ancient Masons,
and entered into alliance with it, as did the Grand Lodge of
Scotland. In 1779, application was made to the Mother Kil-
winning Lodge of Scotland, by certain brethren in Dublin, for a
charter to enable Templar degrees to be conferred. The Kilwin-
ning Lodge granted the petition for the three craft degrees only,
but afterwards this Lodge became the fountain of the Grand
Encampment of Ireland. The Grand Lodge of Ireland holds
jurisdiction over all the Blue Lodges, while the Mark Degree is
worked under the Grand Royal Arch Chapter. Next comes the
Royal Arch, formerly divided into Excellent, Super Excellent,
and Royal Arch; the first two being nothing more than passing
the first two veils with separate obligations ; this, however, has
been altered. The next degrees are the fifteenth, sixteenth, and
seventeenth, under the jurisdiction of the Templar Grand
Conclave, and precede the creation of the candidate as a Knight
Templar; but modifications will be necessary in this under exist-
ing circumstances. Next to the Templar degrees, comes the
eighteenth or Rose-Croix, under the Government of the Grand
Chapter of Prince Masons, or Council of Rites. The twenty-
eighth degree, or Knight of the Sun, is next conferred, and then
the thirtieth, or Kadosch, in a body over which the Supreme
Council has no control. This last body confers the thirty-first,
thirty-second, and thirty-third degrees; there being no Grand Con-
sistory. The York Rite is the prevalent system worked under
the Grand Lodge.

Ins, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the Iris.)

IrtsH CHaPTEeRs.—According to Thory, these Chapters, warranted
by the Grand Chapter of Dublin, existed in Paris from 1730 to
1740, and soon spread throughout France. They comprehended
the degrees of Irish Master, Perfect Irish Master, and Sublime
Irish Master; but they were quite superseded by the Scottish
degrees, or rather the Scottish degrees were only variations of
them. Ramsay changed the title. These Chapters were also
called Colleges.

Inon Toots—No metallic tools were used, according to the
lectures, at the construction of the First Temple; every stone
being squared, carved, and numbered at the quarries; the
timbers, felled and prepared in the forests of Lebanon, being
brought on rafts by sea to Joppa, and thence transported to

342

ISA] The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [1st

Jerusalem ; every part being fitted in with perfect accuracy.
Although this is probably historically true, it likewise symbolizes
that the temple of the human mind, the body, and the temple of
the soul, in which God, as the Shekinah, should dwell, is prepared
in silence before birth and with the greatest harmony of propor-
tion. In like manner, the labours of Masonry should be conducted
with unanimity and peace, without the least animosity or disturb-
ance, and thus the framework of human society should be
reconstructive with regard to the Divine laws.

Isaac (Hebrew, pny’, laughter).—This personage was the son of
Abraham and Sarah, and born in their old age—the first being a
hundred years old, and his wife ninety. He was one of the grand
offerings on Mount Moriah, and it is stated in Genesis, xxii. 16-18:
“ Because thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son that in
blessing I wil] bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy
seed as the stars of the heaven, and in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed.” Isaac was the half brother of Ishmael,
and they conjointly buried their father Abraham in the cave of
Machpelah, near the well of Laharoi. Isaac was the father of
Esau, and behaved to him even more unjustifiably than Abraham
did to Ishmael, and hence raised up a standing rebuke to those
who regard the patriarchs as immutable standards ofconduct It
does not appear that Ishmael or Esau ever acted in any retaliatory
spirit towards their half brother and father; in fact, even the
wily Jacob received the forgiveness of his brother Esau, and
never appears to so much disadvantage as when he is having that
final interview, in which the reconciliation was more sincere on
the part of Esau than Jacob, Since that time, the offer has been
continually made, but there seems no truze possible between the
hunter and man of the forests, and the plain man dwelling in
tents.

Iscunct (Hebrew, ‘yw, salws mea)—One of the nine Masters
appointed by Solomon after the death of Hiram.

Ish Cuotzes (Hebrew, 2x7 u’x)—A word signifying men of
hewing, or hewers. Used by Anderson, but not found in the
Bible, although it is constructed in conformity with the rules of
the Hebrew language.

IsHMAEL (Hebrew, PNY, God hears; Sept. "Ioudna).—The eldest
son of Abraham, by his subordinate wife, Hagar. (See Hagar.)
There never seems to have been any estrangement between Ish-
mael and his younger half-brother Isaac, On the contrary,
they joined together in celebrating their father’s obsequies (Gen.
xxv. 9). God, by an angel, had promised Ishmael prosperity,
and a numerous posterity, and many adherents. He was the

343

ISH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [1s

father of twelve sons and two daughters, one of whom became
the wife of Esau; and he probably enjoined on the latter the
sacred duty of reconciliation—whence it is that the Order of
Ishmael is associated with the name of Reconciliation and Esau
to the present time. It was predicted by the angel—* And he
shall be a wild man: his hand shall be against every man, and
every man’s hand against him ; and he shall dwell in the presence
of all his brethren.” (Gen. xvi. 12.) The word “ presence,” in
the preceding passage, should be literally translated “face,” meta-
phorically for the “ east,” of his brethren, where, in fact we find
the Bedouin tribes located, who boast upon tradition to have
the blood of Ishmael in their veins. This would, however, not
seem to be actually true, as Ishmael was adopted into the desert
tribes, and became their ruler by the inherent force of his will.

ISHMAEL, ORDER OF, OR OF ESAU, AND RECONCILIATION.—This
very ancient Eastern order has a legendary history like that of
the Freemasons, and no doubt has claims upon the attention of
mankind. But, like the other history, it is lost in the night of
time; its traditionary story being that Ishmael, on arriving at
man’s estate, constantly strove, by pleasant offices and kindness,
to reconcile himself with his immediate relatives of the seed of
Abraham, like himself. He was undoubtedly the elder brother
of Isaac, and with him appears to have maintained peaceable and
brotherly relations; and in giving one of his daughters to Esau,
the brather of Jacob—like himself, supplanted in his birthright —
he strove to perpetuate this happy union of the two principal
branches of Abraham’s stock. We know, however, by daily ex-
perience, that these family jars cannot be so easily healed; and
however frankly and generously the hand may be tendered,
there is a breach over which there is no passing. The history of
Ishmael and his mother, and that of Jacob and Esau, form re-
spectively the subject of the first eighteen degrees of the Order
of Ishmael, as at present practised. There are four sections in
all:—I. Initiatory. 1, Stranger; 2, Guest; 3, Proselyte; 4,
Minor Fellow; 5, Major Fellow; 6, Trusted; 7, Companion; 8,
Master; 9, Guardian. IJ.—Historical. 1, Hagar; 2, Ishmael;
3, Isaac ; 4, The Burial; 5, Inheritance; 6, Marriage ; 7, Power;
8, The Meeting ; 9, The Desert. III—Explanatory. 1, Novelty;
2, The Attack; 3, Aid; 4, Chief; 5, Prince; 6, Teacher; 7, Il-
lustrious ; 8, Commander; 9, Patriarch. IV.—Philosophical. 1,
Hope; 2, Faith; 3, Charity; 4, Providence; 5, Fate; 6, Law-
giver; 7, Councillor; 8, Servant; 9, Submission. The govern-
nient of the Order is vested in three supreme and equal powers,
respectively known as Patriarch, Priest, and King. The consent
of all three must be obtained before the admission of any candi-

4

ISH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ISI

date. The postulate must be of mature age, of good breeding
and education, and must not be a Roman Catholic. Ifa Moham-
medan, he is obligated on the Koran; if a Brahman, on the Vedas ;
ifa Jew, on the Old Testament; Parsees, by Fire; Hindus, by the
Cow; if a member of the Orthodox Greek Church, or a Protestant
of any denomination, on the four Gospels; and a special form of
admission is prescribed in each case. It is not necessary, on the
continent, that he should be a Freemason, but if so, many secrets
are given to him not otherwise disclosed. Until very recent
years, there was a political section to the Order, but this has
been altogether suppressed, and the objects for which the Order
exists consist of mutual aid, instruction, and general enlighten-
ment. The Chiefs of the Order reside habitually in the East
and two of the three chiefs must always be east of Jerusalem.
Branches of this Order, under Arch-Chancellors, exist in
Russia, Turkey, Greece, Austria, Italy, Germany, Denmark,
Sweden, Norway, France, Spain, Portugal, Africa, and the United
Kingdom.

Is SaBAL (Hebrew, 2D wx, Aen of burden).—Anderson gives
this name to the seventy thousand labourers called Noshe sabal
in the original (1 Kings v.18). They were probably remains of
the earlier Canaanites. In Webb’s system, they constitute the
Apprentices at the building of the Temple.

Ish Sopi—Ish Soudy, in its corrupted form. From the words
wr, Ish “man,” and No, Sod “couch,” one seated on the same
seat—t.e., a person in whom great confidence is reposed, and
with whom the greatest familiarity is possible. King Solomon re-
posed special trust in his Select Masters, and hence the appel-
lation Ish Sodi is very appropriate to them.

Istac TABLE—A monument of ancient Egypt, formerly esteemed of
great antiquity, but since found to be very recent, in a compara-
tive sense of the word. It is a square copper tablet, covered
with silver mosaic, and skilfully inlaid. The principal figure in
the central group represents Isis. It is said to be preserved in
the Royal Museum at Turin.

Ists—The dread Goddess of Nature among the ancient Egyptians,
and the subject of the mysteries in all countries under various
names. She was the mother and nurse of all things. According to
Diodorus Siculus, Osiris, Isis, Typhon, Apollo, and Venus were
the children of Jupiter and Juno. Osiris, who is identical with
Dionysos (Bacchus) of the Greeks and also the Sun, married Isis,
the Moon, and the improvement and prosperity of mankind were
their peculiar care. When Isis had discovered and made known
the valuable properties of wheat and barley as food, an end was
put to cannibalism among the ancient nations, and Osiris taught

345

ISM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Isr

mankind how to prepare those grains. Isis was worshipped
throughout Egypt, Greece, and Rome, and it has been sought to
identify Iswara and Saraswati, in the Indian pantheon, with
these semi-mythical personages. In her terrestrial character,
Isis wears upon her head the throne, representing her name; in
her celestial, the disc and horn, or tall plumes, and nursing Horus,
The mysteries of Isis are peculiarly interesting to Masons,
as being the foundation of those of the Sidonian Builders or
Dionysian Architects, from whom so many symbolical rites have
emanated, and of which not a few are perpetuated in the various
degrees of Masonry. (See Virgin.)

IsMAELITES.—A sect of Mohammedans, who succeeded, by means of
a secret order, in substituting the descendants of the Prophet
through Fatima on the throne of Egypt. They upheld the rights of
Mohammed, the son of Ishmael ; and succeeded in delivering from
prison Obeidallah, who pretended to be descended from Ishmael.
Meetings were held in the Lodge at Cairo, under the Doial-Doat,
or supreme missionary and judge. There were nine degrees. In
the first degree, doubts were insinuated, and obscure hints were
held out, that the Koran was not to be taken in a literal sense,
but that great and important truths were hidden under the
mysterious words of the book. The disciple, however, was taught
nothing more unless he consented to be bound by terrible oaths to
obedience and blind faith. The second degree inculcated the
recognition of the imauims, or spiritual teachers, to whom it was
given to instruct every one in the true things to be believed, and
whose authority was infallible. The third degree was occupied
with the mysteries of the number seven, and its special applica-
tion to the number of imaums. The fourth degree taught the
initiate that Allah had sent into the world seven legislators,
each of whom had seven immediate subordinates, called mutes,
while the legislators were called speakers. The fifth degree
informed him that each of these coadjutors had twelve apostles,
The sixth degree was occupied with disquisitions on the precepts
of the Koran, and the subordination of religion to philosophy was
maintained; the initiate was also brought to study the systems
of Plato and Aristotle. The seventh degree comprehended an
investigation of mystical pantheism. The eighth degree contained
the principles of Mohammedan jurisprudence. The ninth degree,
being the last of all, summed up the teachings of the former, and
taught that nothing was to be believed, and that all things were
lawful, This sect endured for at least a century, and finally
expired from the inanition of its followers.

IsRAELITE, Most Wisk—Seventieth degree of the Order of
Mizraim.

346

ITA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ve 1

ITaLy.— Freemasonry was introduced into Italy in 1733, by Charles

Sackville, Duke of Dorset, who established a Lodge in Florence,
probably under an English warrant. The Grand Duke was him-
self initiated ; and, in 1735, Lodges were formed at Milan, Verona,
Padua, Vincenza, Venice, and Naples; but, in 1737, John Gaston,
the last Grand Duke of the house of Medicis, prohibited the
Craft; but as he died very soon after, the Lodges continued their
labours, while his successor, the Grand Duke of Lorraine,
declared himself the protector of the Fraternity, and Masonry
consequently flourished. But the bull of Pope Clement XIV., in
1738, and the edict of Cardinal Firrao, of January, 1739, closed
the Lodges, and many persons were arrested and perse-
cuted, although they obtained their liberty through the good
offices of the Grand Duke. After this, Masonry had a very
struggling existence for many years, and the members of the
Fraternity were obliged to meet with great secrecy. It is said,
however, by the author of Anti-Saint-Nicaise, that there was a
Grand Lodge at Naples in 1756. Writing in 1783, Smith
(Use and Abuse, p 211) says that the most of the Italian nobles
and dignified ecclesiastics belonged to the Fraternity. In 1805,
a Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Rite was
established at Milan by Count de Grasse-Tilly, and Prince
Eugene was Grand Commander of the Council and Grand
Master of the Grand Orient. As liberal ideas received a check
on the defeat of Napoleon I, in 1814, Masonry was again
suppressed, and languished for a great number of years—indeed,
had no formal existence until 1860; but at the present time,
Masonry is firmly established in Italy, with a Grand Orient
at Rome. A Lodge was founded at Turin in 1859, and a Grand
Lodge in 1861; and a Grand Orient was established by Garibaldi
with the Scottish Rite as its basis. A Supreme Council was also
formed at Naples, but internal troubles caused its action to be
weak and vacillating; but at present there is no apprehension
that the Grand Orient of Italy, seated at Rome, need fear any
danger, as it has received the sanction of the Government, and is
fully protected by law.

ITRATICS, ORDER OF.—No longer in existence. It was composed

om!

of a Society of adepts, who were engaged in a search for the
universal medicine, and is mentioned by Fustier.

“VeI-0..L:. (Invent verbum in ore leonis)—Letters on the

scarf of the Grand Treasurer, in the thirteenth degree of the

Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. The historical lectures say :

“Biblical history informs us that the Jews were slaves to the

Egyptians, until they were redeemed by Moses for the purpose of

occupying the promised land. We also learn from the annals
347

Ivo] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [1zR

deposited in the archives in Scotland,* and only to be examined
hy us, that in a certain battle the ark of alliance was lost in a
forest, and was subsequently found by the roaring of a lion,
which, on the approach of the Israelites, ceased its roarings, and
couched at their feet. This lion had previously devoured a great
number of the Egyptians who attempted to carry away the ark,
keeping securely in his mouth the key to the treasures which it
contained. But when the high priest came near him, he dropped
the key from his mouth and retired, couching and tame, without
offering the least violence to the chosen people.” There is a
similar allusion to a lion in the degree of the Venerable Grand
Master of all Symbolic Lodges, or Master ad vitam, where he is
represented as having been wounded by an arrow, and having
escaped from the stake to which he had been bound, lay at the
mouth of a cave with the broken rope about his neck, using
certain mathematical instruments. At the foot of the stake lies
a crown. The above was a symbol to signify the lion of the
tribe of Judah, or Christ in his Messianic character, pierced with
the spear, and bearing the key to unlock and explain the ten-
dency of the Jewish dispensation, and its reference to Chris-
tianity. The ancient Egyptians symbolized the same thing in
the Book of the Dead, by the spear piercing the crocodile ; and
the mysteries of Mithras contained the slaying of the Bull. It
all had an astronomical reference. We find the sign Taurus in
one case, and in the two others the signs Leo and Scorpio. But, if
Ttamsay is to be believed the whole legend referred to the
Stewart family and their misfortunes.

Ivory Kry.—1l. A symbol in the Philosophical Lodge or degree of
Knights Adept of the Eagle or Sun. It teaches caution in the
expression of the secrets of the heart, and the promulgation of
opinions. 2. The Ivory Key, withthe letter Z on the words in
black, is the jewel of the degree of Secret Master in the Ancient
and Accepted Rite.

Izaps.—1, Twenty-eight in number, a series of creatures by the
beneficent deity Oromazes or Auramazda, 2. The twenty-eight
days of a lunar month.

Izasup. (See Zabud.)

Izracuiau (Hebrew, monn, ortetur Dominus)—A word in the
seventh degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

* It should be remembered that there were several Calydonias — one was in
Armenia, where lions might abound in those remote times.

348

3] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Jac

a

J.

J.—The tenth letter of the English alphabet. It has no special
Masonic bearing.

JAABOROU-HAMMAIM (Hebrew, D’DN-1Sy, ague transibunt.)—Cor-
ruptly, ya vaurum hamen. 1. A word used in the fifteenth degree
of the Ancient and Accepted Rite. 2. Also in the sixth degree
of the French Modern Rite.

JABAL (Hebrew, by, a stream; Sept. ’Iw87).—The father of such
as dwell in tents, and have cattle (Gen. iv. 20). A word used
in the Order of Ishmael. He was the inventor of tents, and
tents mean Lodges in that Order.

JABAMIAH. (See Habbamiah.)

J ABESCHEH (Hebrew, W2, Earth. See I. NM. BR. 1)

JABULUM.—1. Used in the thirteenth degree of the Ancient and
Accepted Rite, but evidently a corruption of the Hebrew pbar
(Zabulon), heaven, or the abode of God. 2. The fourteenth degree
of the same Rite designates the Grand Treasurer as Jabulum,
and it is also a password. 3. Also used in the seventeenth
degree, as 2 sign and a password.

JACHIN (Hebrew, 2m, he that strengthens, or, will establish).—
One of the pillars of King Solomon’s Temple. The other pillar
was Boaz (ta, in strength), taken together, “in strength shall this
my house be established.” Stieglitz,in his work on “ Ancient
German Architecture,” gives an illustration of two celebrated
pillars, as they are now standing in the cathedral of Wiirtzburg,
one of the oldest cities of Germany, and formerly capital of
Franconia. He dates them from the time of the construction of
the old cathedral, in 1042, by the Fraternity of Steinmetzen, the
peculiar form and ornamentation of the capitals and bases being
characteristic of the architecture of that period. They were
originally situated, like the brazen columns of Solomon’s Temple,
on either side of the porch—Jachin on the right, and Boaz on
the left; but at the present time they are placed in an inverse
position, within the body of the cathedral, not far from the main
entrance, on either side of a Gothic doorway, leading to a small
vaulted chamber. He says that they were intended to bear a
symbolic reference to the Fraternity, which reference is revealed
to the initiated in their peculiar proportions, in the ingenious
construction and combination of the shafts and capitals, as well
as by the names sculptured on the abacus. Bernewitz, disagree-
ing with Stieglitz in his explanation of the symbolism of these

349

yac| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Jac

pillars, says that the artist intended by them to represent God
and man. Boaz is tripartite, and yet constitutes but one whole
(Trinity) ; the centre portion of the shaft re-enters within itself
(God without beginning or end). Jachin consists of only two ac-
tual parts—body and soul—which are united by a mysterious
entwined bond or tie. The interior of these pillars is invisible.
The inner man is likewise invisible—unfathomable. The lower
portion of the shaft rises from the earth, and again returns
thither (so shall the dust return to the earth as it was); while the
upper portion returns again within itself, and is bound with an
endless band (the smirit, being also without beginning or end, waits
hopefully for its union with the everlasting spirits above; it em-
braces eternity, and by it is embraced). Jachin and Boaz, these
two famous pillars, stood at the entrance of the pronaos. Jachin
is sometimes called the “pillar of establishment.” It is possible
that the cry, Ia, in the Dionysian mysteries, was connected
with Jachin.

JACHINAL—A French corruption of Shekinah.

JACOB (Hebrew, apy’; Sept., "Iaxw8).—The second son of Isaac, by
his wife Rebekah. In those days, supernaturalism was the rule,
and our modern way of thought the exception. It was custom-
ary for a pregnant woman to seek the advice of the only estab-
lished authorities, the priests, or rather the seers, or, as the High-
land Scottish call them, taibhsear, The seer, in the present in-
stance, told her that she had twins within her, and that the elder
should serve the younger. The younger one was Jacob, but no
one to the present time has ever heard of the Jews being served
by Esau and his descendants. It would seem that Jacob was of
a gentle disposition, and Esau disposed for kingly arts, such as
hunting and shooting ; and the latter, excelling in these arts, was
willing to barter his rights in a gentle spirit, probably laugh-
ingly not believing in them, for a trifle——a mess of pottage,
a dish of lentils, cr some small thing. Esau knew his
superiority in the wilderness, and would therefore laugh at the
idea of a birthright at all; and then Rebekah, who favoured her
younger son, deceived Isaac, and obtained the blessing of the
dying patriarch for Jacob, instead of Esau. Esau was defrauded
in every way, as his uncle Ishmael had been, but showed no re-
sentment, and was even reconciled to Jacob, after years of separa-
tion. The whole deception practised was unworthy of the per-
sons engaged, unless we regard the story as a fable, and draw our
conclusions in that way. The arch-deception was that of Re-
bekah, if the story be true—unless it be taken in a mystical
way, as it ought to be, having common anthropological ground with
all other histories. In fact, Jacob inherited his mother’s

35°

jac | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yal

spirit and education, and hence Orientals generally reject his
descendants with disdain and contumely, and prefer the frank-
ness and direct opposition of the descendants of Esau. Jacob
may be said in spirit and race to be the father of the Jews, and,
although there are honourable exceptions, the world has not been
the better for such an over-reaching race

Jacos’s LappER. (See Ladder.)

JACOBINS.—A. revolutionary society in France during the first
French Revolution, which took its name from the place where it
met—formerly a monastery of Jacobite monks. (See Barruel,
Augustin.)

JacoBITES.—A sect of Christians in Syria so named from one
Jacob, a monk, about a.p. 550. They held that Jesus Christ had
only one nature, and that confession was not of divine institution.
They had secret signs, passwords, and a formal initiation.

JacQuEs DE Motay. (See AMolay.)

JAFUHAR.—The equal of the sublime Thor; the second king in the
Scandinavian Mysteries,

JAH. (See Jehovah.)

JAHEB (Hebrew, 37, concedens).—Thirteenth degree of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite. One of the nine architects whose name
was engraved on the Secret Vault.

Jaina Cross.—This cross has already been depicted at page 9
of this work, and is there marked (A). It is used by several
orders, and occurs constantly as a mark of Masonic importance
in several of the abbeys of Great Britain, and also on the fort
and palace of Allahabad in India. It has a variety of significa-
tions, and was adopted by the sect of the Jains as a specific
symbol. It is also known as the Fylfot, among heralds, and it
is evidently a very ancient symbol indeed, Weaver quotes it in
his Funeral Monuments, and Dr Henry Schliemann found it on
the remains of the ancient city he takes to be Troy, where it
appears as a religious symbol. Raoul Rochette, Petra, and De
Rossi find it in the catacombs of Christian Rome, and these term
it the crua dissimulata. But it is not alone to periods of which
we have long had familiar historical cognizance that we are
enabled to refer this remarkable device. It is found alike in
the Old World and the New: on the monuments of Egypt, the
wedge-cut bas-reliefs of Assyria, the rock caverns of India, and
the Cyclopean walls of Perv as well as in the forest cities of
Pre-Columbian America; it is associated with the medieval
Rosicrucians, and perpetuated by the operative Guild-Masons on
the cathedrals and fortresses of Central Europe. The very fact
of its simplicity has singularly led to its conservation, and its
obscurity has prevented its degradation. Its dignity from the

35!

Jaq] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yal
times of Hermes has ever been preserved, and it has been
associated with naught but pregnant meanings of the most
elevated order. Although hallowed by antiquity, it is associated,
in the minds of those who bear it as a symbol, with nothing save
Youth, Hope, Praise, and Eternal Adoration of the Grand Archi-
tect of the Universe. The Jewel in the centre refers to the
universal monotheism taught among the early races of mankind.
Applied to T.G.A.0.T.U., it typifies His all-embracing power, its
arms extending in every direction to show that no one can
escape the illimitable power of the Almighty,—represented more
particularly by the stone in the centre——who, by means of His
angels, is acquainted with the minutest acts of His creatures
throughout the universe. There is no limit to the extension of
the arms, which, bent at right angles, show His universal love
and charity, and, in each corner, typify a place of refuge for the
weary soul of man. Applied to the Universe, the centre stone
represents the Sun, illuminating everything with his rays, and
restraining every member of the Solar system, however remote,
within the focus of his attraction. It is an emblem of activity,
as it typifies the continual revolution of the Earth upon its axis ;
and it also represents the four elements, which, in a mystical
sense, constitute the fabric of the Earth. Considered as Man, it
represents him in a humble sitting posture—one hand supporting
the body on the ground, the other raised towards heaven in
supplication and hope, deprecating punishment and entreating
mercy. In this sense, it likewise refers to the Smaragdine Tablet
of Hermes, and the upper arm should bear the word Solve and
the lower one Coagula. The head in the original hieroglyphic
is thrown back, and is surmounted by the magical conical cap,
signifying the earnestness with which man should rely upon the
Supreme Being on high, and the stedfastness with which man
should seek the true life and encounter the true light. The
figure is supposed to be naked, typifying the utter dependence
of man upon his Maker, and reminding us of the instability and
inefficiency of worldly wealth. As man is born naked and
helpless, so—devoid of wealth—he resigns himself to the grave.
The two hands, in their several positions, remind us that that
which is above is as that which is below, and that as life is spent
here so will the reward be in the immortal life. As applied to
Architecture, the four corners refer to the four sacred cities of
asylum prescribed by the legends of the Hermetic Order, and the
four letters of the Tetragrammaton, the four states of human life—
childhood, youth, manhood, and old age,—and in all ways it
possesses the scale of the number four, as mentioned by Cornelius
Agrippa in his Occult Philosophy. But it is not alone as an

352

yar] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yal

Indian or Hermetic symbol that the Fylfot Cross is important.
It was the hammer of Thor, celebrated in the mythology of the
Norse nations, and the tradition ran that when Thor threw this
golden cross, it struck, and, like the boomerang, returned again
to his hand. It is worthy of remark, here, that in the Assyrian
sculptures, we find Izdubar strangling the lion and holding in
his hand an object exactly resembling the boomerang of the
Australian natives. This hammer of Thor, then, might be thought
to represent, in a mathematical way, two boomerangs crossed
saltire wise. It ought to be noted that the Teutons and all the
Scandinavian races belong to the Aryan section of mankind, like
the Sanskrit-speaking Indians. Longfellow, in his King Olaf
BLYS —
: “*O’er his drinking horn the sign
He made of the cross divine,
As he drank and muttered his prayers ;
But the Berserks evermore

Made the sign of the hammer of Thor
Over theirs.”

In Masonry, however, we find this hammer of Thor exceedingly
important, and of very ancient usage among the Goths, and in
the Masonic fraternity it has survived in the form of the mallet.
“So early as the year 1462,” says Fort, in his admirable work,
recently published, “The Early History and Antiquities of Free-
masonry,” p. 274, “it was clearly recognised to be a Masonic
symbol, whose use regulated and defined territory surrounding a
Lodge. The ordinance of that date expressly declared that lewd
women should remain as far from the sacred enclosure as a
hammer could be hurled. This implement was a religious
symbol in the middle ages, and made use of to establish pro-
prietary rights over land and water. It was accomplished by
throwing the mallet at full swing, and all ground traversed was
acknowledged as irnmediately reduced to the person’s possession
casting the same. In the fifteenth century, therefore, this cus-
tom was practised, by the Masonic fraternity, and symbolized
proprietorship. In modern Freemasonry, it still survives as
an emblematic pledge of a Master’s ownership over his Lodge.
It is true the gavel is no longer hurled in order to limit the
outlying territory contiguous to the hallowed precincts, but the
use of thai implement perpetuates the medieval idea of posses-
sion, The hammer was, in very early ages, used as a signal by
which Gothic courts were convened. In districts where
Judges ordered tribunals to assemble, a mallet was carried around
aniong the inhabitants, who, upon seeing this emblem of judicial
authority, instantly collected at the designated place. The gavel
in the hand of the Master of a Masonic Lodge directly alludes to
Zz 353

Jar] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ Jar

this ancient usage, and when it sounds the decision of a question
submitted, that blow is merely the re-echo of a power current
many centuries ago, in the administration of justice. The
Judges of our modern courts of law wield the gavel with a no
less emblematic power than a Master of Masons. Grimm says
that the hammer-stroke which the auctioneer makes to conclude
a sale, is derived from the custom referred to.” But the mallet,
chiefly as a symbol of power, is of the remotest antiquity, which
I shall now proceed to trace. In northern mythology, Thor
was always represented with a mallet, called Midlner. Its
origin is as follows :—Loki, one of the Norse deities, made a
wager with a dwarf that he could not forge certain things, which
would compare with the mechanical skill of other dwarfs. Cer-
tain conditions were agreed upon, and the dwarf began to labour
industriously at his forge. A suitable time having elapsed, he
took from the fire, among other articles, a hammer, named
MidIner—the bruiser or crusher, from myla, milja, cognate with
the German mtih/en, to grind,and miihle, Eng. mill. The things
forged were produced before three principal gods of Asgard—
Odin, Thor, and Frey, who were selected as arbiters of their
relative value After careful test, it was unanimously decided
that the hammer was superior to all. This instrument possessed
the value of striking with unerring certainty any object at
which it was thrown, and however severe a blow was struck, no
injury ensued to the person wielding the hammer. The Scandi-
navian divinities at this time were waging a bitter warfare against
rebellious frost giants, and hailed the acquisition of Midlner, asa
powerful weapon of defence, with unaffected delight. To Thor
was given the mallet—a gift of especial applicability, as he was,
according to the prose Edda, the strongest of Norse gods; and,
when belted with the girdle of prowess—meginjardir—and with
hammer in hand, he was irresistible. Scaldic songs recite numer-
ous adventures in which Thor manifested Midlner’s divine
attributes. On one occasion, by a blow of this all-powerful
implement, he shattered into fragments a rocky mountain,
and, in a trial of strength, nearly loosed the Medgard serpent,
which, in northern er Teutonic mythology, was delineated as
encircling the earth and preserving it intact. Medgard was
finally slain by this terrible weapon. In the recovery of. his
mallet, which lay eight miles beneath Jotunheim’s congealed
rocks, Thor slew, with a singleblow of redoubted Midlner, the giant
Thrym and his followers. In the struggle with Hrungnr, the
mallet’s highest symbol of power is set forth. When these
gigantic rivals approached, Thor flashed in divine force, repre-
sented by the hammer. Hrungir hwled his club at the Asgard
354

jar] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia, [yal

god, but the irresistible power of Midlner fell with crushing
weight upon his antagonist and killed him. Thor’s mallet was
the irresistible thunderbolt, emblematically represented by this
implement: hence the derivation of thunder, from Thor, Thonar,.
Donnar. Whenever the god of thunder was not possessed of his
terrible weapon, he was not well matched with his opponents.
It was the marvellous property of Miolner, after having been
launched upon a voyage of destruction, that it invariably returned
to its owner. According to the traditions of Scandinavian myth-
ology, when this deity once lost that emblem of power, his
anxiety to regain it was extreme. Baldur's funeral pile was
consecrated by Thor with the hammer Midlner. The same
symbolical mallet was used in the solemn ceremonies of marriage,
and, to this day, the Finns, in their nuptial rites, strike fire wit]
flint and steel, in humble imitation of the terrible thunderbolt.
With the hammer, the banqueting cups of the ancient Norsemen
were rendered auspicious ; and, according to Geijer, food and
drink were blessed with Thor’s hammer sign, The learned
Therlacius asserts, that “the stone axes found in the graves of
Scandinavian warriors were merely simulacra armorum, and
that they were designed to typify the resistless power of Thor’s
hammer, which falls with killing force upon his demon adver-
saries ; or, in other words, they were emblems of the irresistible
might attributed to Midlner.” Thor’s mallet, laid upon the knce
of the veiled bride, inaugurated her into her new destiny , and,
as in the case of Baldur, the same symbol consecrated the fune-
brial timber on which the lifeless corpse was burned, and with
this sign the Norse god restored the dead goats to life. The
form cf Thor’s. hammer was a cross. crampondée. At the end of
the last century, the candidate for Masonic initiation was con-
secrated into the mysteries with the mazllet or gavel, by three
slight blows on the head of the compasses; and both hainmer
and chisel were symbolised in the Fellow-Craft degree at that
time. According to Grimm, Charles Martel carried the little
hammer in imitation of Miolner, or Thox’s hammer, probably as
asymbol of power. Martell is a diminutive form of the Latin
malleus. The decisive victory of Charles Martel at Tours
led to the modification of this emblem, being too Pagan for
general use, and the sword and mace—whence the name of
Mason, according to Lessing, in “ Ernst und Falk”—were substi-
tuted for it This same sign has many magical and philosophical
significations for which there is no space here

Jains —A race of Hindus, who dissent from the established faith
of Brahmanism, and deny the authority of the Vedas. They be-
lieve in the eternity of matter and the material world, and in

355

JAM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Jap

that of the minds of men and other animals, denying the per-
sonal existence of any Supreme Being.

J AMMIN.—Maria, or the water or sea. (See J. NV. BR. I)

Jamb.—In architecture, the supporter, side-piece, or door-post.

JAMBLICHUS.—The biographer of Pythagoras, and a Neoplatonician,
born at Chalcis in Calo, Syria, in the fourth century. He wasa
disciple of Porphyrius, and deeply versed in the Platonic and
Pythagorean systems, and also devoted much study to Egyptian
mystical theology, to which he attributed a divine origin. He
also seems to have devoted much attention to Chaldean myste-
ries, and the recent discoveries in Assyriology show that he was
undoubtedly right in so doing. One of his principles was that
man, by theursic rites and ceremonies, might enter into com-
munion with the Deity—a doctrine which has been maintained
by the Rosicrucians in later times. We often find the pupil
more eager than the teacher, and so it was with Jamblichus ; and
he carried the Pythagorean system to its ultimate expression.
He taught that the One, or Monad, was the principle of all unity,
as wellas diversity ; that the duad, or two, was the intellect; three
was the soul; four, the principle of universal harmony; eight,
the source of motion; nine, perfection ; and ten, the result of all
the emanations of the Ensoph. He was a diligent writer,and pub-
lished a life of Pythagoras, and a treatise on the mysteries, and
his entire system is replete with Masonic interest.

JANABORANE.—A corruption, used in the twentieth degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite.

JANITOR.—The name of a door-keeper in the high degrees.

JANSENISTS.—A sect of Roman Catholics in France, who espoused
the opinions of Jansen, Bishop of Ypres, forming a large body
in the seventeenth century. Many of their tenets resembled
those of Calvin, and in some other respects they held opinions
considered by the Roman Catholic Church entirely heretical.

JAPAN.—Masonry was introduced into Japan about 1868, when a
Lodge was founded at Yokohama, under a Charter from the Grand
Lodge of England, and a Masonic hall was formally inaugurated
in 1869. Masonry is now in a flourishing condition.

JAPHETH. (Hebrew mnb Sept. ’Iaged)—1. It is doubtful whether
he was the eldest or youngest son of Noah. He is regarded as
the progenitor of the European tribes of the West, and the
Asiatic tribes of the North. De Wette repudiates the opinion
of the Zargumim, both Jonath. and Hieros., who make Japheth
the progenitor of the African tribes. The Arabic traditions,
however, rank Japheth among the prophets, and assign to him
eleven sons: 1. The Tshin (Chinese); 2. Seklah (Slavs) ; 3. Man-
shuge (Mantchoos); 4. Gomari (Cimmerians or Celts); 5. Turk

356

jas] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JEH

(Turks); 6. Khalage (uncertain); 7. Khozar (Tatars); 8. Ros
(Russians); 9. Sussan (Persians); 10. Gaz (uncertain, perhaps
the Ghazi); and 11 Torage (uncertain). In these traditions
he is therefore called the ancestor of the Tarks and barbarians
( escsl) ra) J a3M al) 2. The word is used in the Order of

Ishmael. 3. Used in the twenty-first degree of the Ancient and
Accepted Rite.

JASHER, Book oF.—A lost primeval book of which some rifacei-
mentos have appeared from time to time. It is impossible to
decide this question without further research. An original is said
to be in the library at Samarkand.

JASPER (Hebrew, 15w*.)—A precious stone, of a dull green colour, in
the high priest’s breast-plate. It was appropriated to the tribe
of Zebulun

JeBusiT“e, (See Ornan.)

JEDADIAH.—A name of King Solomon, meaning “ beloved of God,”
said to have been bestowed upon him as a patronymic at the
time of the dedication of the Temple by Hiram, King of Tyre.

JEHOSHAPHAT (2.¢., The Judgment of God) —Avalley situated between
Mount Zion and Mount Olivet, to the east of Jerusalem. By the
Jews and the Mohammedans, it is believed that the last judg-
ment will take place in this valley But as Jerusalem, Jehosha-
phat, and similar names, do not really indicate geographical
localities, the mystical sense is the one to beconsidered. It isa
holy place—the judgment seat of conscience,—and might be ap-
plied to any valley. In the earliest rituals, we find the following
question and answer :—(Q.) “Where does the Lodge stand 2”
&.) “ Upon holy ground, or the highest hill, or lowest vale, or in
the Valley of Jehoshaphat, or in any other secret place.”

JEHOVAH (Hebrew 17, or, perhaps, more properly, Jahve, nin,
the Existing One)—It isa very important name in Masonry,
and is rightly called by Reghellini, “the basis of dogma and of
mystery.” It is quadriliteral, and hence has been called the
Tetragrammaton; the Jews, and the Masons after them, are
inhibited from pronouncing the name, substituting Adonai, or, the
Lord, for it. Its history is giving in Exod. vi. 23. It is derived
from the verb "7, to be. Abraham Ben David Halevi, when
discussing the names of God, says: “but the name 77 we are
not allowed to pronounce. In its original meaning, it is bestowed
upon no other being, and therefore we abstain from giving any
explanation of it.” It was even written in the Hebrew Bible,
in early times, in the Samaritan character instead of the
Masoretic, so that ignorant Jews might not know its import
Capellus says that this rule respecting the Holy Name was

357

JEH] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (JEH

derived from a text in Leviticus (xxiv. 16), which, in the faulty
English version, runs: “when he (ae. the Israelite or stranger,
Canaanite) blasphemeth the name of the Lord shall be put to
death.” Cahen translates into French what is more consonant
with the text, thus: “£¢ celud qui blasphéme le nom de I Eternel
mourra, toute la réunion Uaccablera de prerres ; [étranger comme
lindigéne, lorsque il blasphéme avec mépris le nom, qwil mourra.”
And Cahen adds, in a note, “2p, venokeb, who blasphemes or
stigmatizes. Here the penalty is pronounced It was not
necessary to maledict, it was enough to stigmatize the name of
Jehovah to be liable to the capital penality. Commentators
think that the whole matter consists in the pronunciation of
the Tetragrammaton, but that for any other name of the divinity,
such as Elohim, Sabaoth, Schaddai, there was no penalty of
death” (Cahen, vol iii. p. 117); and Capellus is distinctly of
this opinion when he translates: “whosoever shall pronounce
the name Jehovah shall suffer death,” which reminds us of the
New Testament analogue, that he who says Raca to his brother
shall be in danger of the council, but that he who should say
Thow fool, should be in danger of hell fire. The word nokeb
means to pronouce distinctly—to utter by name. Maimonides
says that the knowledge of this word was confined to their sages,
who only communicated the true pronunciation and the mysteries
connected therewith on the Sabbath day, to their worthiest
disciples; but its vocalization was utterly unknown to the
common people On the occasion of the annual visit of the
High Priest to the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Sanctuary, it was
pronounced with the utmost reverence, and the last priest who
performed the solemn act of awe, says Rabbi Bechai, was Simeon
the Just. After the destruction of the Temple under Vespasian,
the real pronunciatian was finally lost. Among the Greeks it
was called Iao, among the Romans Jova, while the Samaritans
always pronounced it Jahve. In the ineffable degrees of the
Scottish Rite we find a tradition to the effect that the vocaliza-
tion differed at different periods. By Methuselah, Lamech, and
Noah, it was pronounced Juha; Shem, Arphaxad, Selah, Heber,
and Peleg, called it Jeva; Reu, Serug, Nahor, Terah, Abraham
Isaac, and Judah, said Jova; by Hezrom and Ram, it was pro-
nounced Jero ; Aminadab and Nasshore called it Jevah ; Salmon,
Boaz, and Obed, called it Joke; while Jesse and David pro-
nounced it Jehovah. And it is further said that none of these
were the right pronunciation, which was only known to Enoch,
Jacob, and Moses, the three individuals said to have seen God
face to face;—Enoch, because he walked with God, Jacob, on
pecount of the wrestling, and Moses, in consequence of his con-
35

jex] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (JER

ference at the Burning Bush and on the Mount Another
designation for this name was the Shemhamphorash, being an
explanatory or declaratory name, expressing the true essence of
the Deity. It was a secret among the Essenes, by whom it
was always spoken in a whisper, like the sacred word of the
third degree, the Royal Arch Word, and many others. There is
not space in this book to enter upon the discussion at greater
length.

JEKSAN (Hebrew, Up).—The name of one of the sons of Abraham
and Keturah (Gen. xxv. 2). Used in the third degree of the
Scottish Rite.

JuKSON,—Sometimes called Jackson. The son of James or Charles
Edward Stuart. Arose at a time when politics were introduced
into Masonry by the Jesuits, and now the same body turns round
and says that Masonry was political.

JuNA, CONGRESS OF.—A Masonic Congress was convoked in Jena,
Saxe-Weimar, in 1763, by a person whose name was indifferently
Leucht, Johnson, and Becker. He was supposed to belong to
the Rite of Strict Observance, and he proclaimed that the Free-
masons were the legitimate heirs of the Knights Templar. In
the following year, this individual was brought to judgment by
Garon Hund, and his end was ignominious. (See Johnson.)

JEOPARDY, ORDER OF —A derisive society, meeting in Lambeth,
about 1818, at various public houses. The object of the society
may be understood when it is stated that a halter was drawn
tightly round the candidate’s neck, and his braces unbuttoned.

JEPHTHAH.—A judge of Israel, and the general of the Gileadites in
their war against the Ephraimites. (See Zphraimites.)

JEPHTHAH’S DAUGHTER,—The first ordaughter’s degree in the Ameri-
can order of the Eastern Star. It illustrates the obedience of a
child to the obligations of the parent, and has its male analogue
in the obedience of Isaac to Abraham, on the occasion of the
sacrifice proposed to be-made by him. It also shows how careful
any one should be in making rash vows. The colour is blue.
The legend of the degree is given in Judges xi. 30-40, (See
Eastern Star, Order of the.)

JERICHO, HEROINE OF. (See Heroine of Jericho.)

JERICHO, KNIGHT OF. (See Knight of Jericho.)

JERMYN, HENRY, EarL or St ALBan’s.—According to Preston
(“ Illustrations,” p. 161), elected Grand Master at a General As-
sembly, held 27th Dec., 1663, to which previous reference has
been made.

JERUSALEM. (Hebrew oun’, habitation of peace; Sept. 'IepovowAcw ;
Vulg. Hierosolyma Arab El Khuds).—The capital of the

359

JER] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (JER

Jewish kingdom, and usually supposed to be identical with that
Salem of which Melchizedek was the king or chief. In the Psalms
we find (Ps. Ixxvi. 2):—“In Salem is his Tabernacle, and his
dwelling-place in Sion.” Mount Moriah, to which Abraham
journeyed, there to offer up Isaac (Gen. xxii. 2), is that mountain
on which Solomon afterwards erected the first Temple (Josephus,
Anfig. i. 13, 2; 2 Chron. iii. 1). The name of Jerusalem is first
found in Joshua (x. 1), where Adoni-zedek (the Lord of Justice)
is named as being one of the kings allied together against Joshua,
and is called King of Jerusalem. This city was subsequently
selected by David as his capital, being within the limits of his
own tribe of Judah, and hence a place where his influence was
strongest, and its natural position also admirably adapted it for
the site of a royal residence. It was not, however, in a central
position as regards ali the tribes, when it is considered that the
law required the attendance of all the adult males of the
Israelites, thrice in the year, at the place of the Divine presence

Hence it is not singular that other places of worship were
instituted at Dan and Bethel (1 Kings xii. 28), leading to the
ultimate disruption of the kingdom of the Twelve Tribes, and the
establishment of the rival monarchy of Israel. It is Masonically
interesting, as that place where the famous Temple of King
Solomon was erected, and became yet more important in the
eyes of mankind after the martyrdom of the Great Prophet of
the Christian religion. Its Masonic importance increased on the
erection of the second Temple by Zerubbabel in the sixth century
before Christ. It was taken by Pompey in the year B.c. 63, and

not many years afterwards Herod the Great rebuilt the Temple
a third time with a splendour exceeding that of Solomon's first
noble structure. This Temple was razed to the ground by the
Romans, a.D. 70, and although an attempt was made by the

Emperor Julian to rebuild the sacred edifice, between A.D. 361 and
A.D. 363, it has ever since remained desolate. A horrible siege took

place under Vespasian and Titus, and the Jews were finally dis-
persed, A temple to Jupiter Capitolinus was erected on Mount
Moriah, and a new name, that of Alia Capitolina, was bestowed
upon the city. Alia remained its name until a.p. 536, as appears
by the acts of a synod held there. This name even passed to the
Mohammedans, by whom it was long retained ; and it did not re-
ceive its modern name of El-Khuds, until the True Believers had
wrested it from the Crusaders. We have no space to enter into
the further history of this famous place. Since the middle of
the thirteenth century it has been in the possession of the
Mohammedans. The present walls were erected by Suleiman
the ogra ae, in 1542, and the holy places were gradually

3

JER] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JER

covered by the mosques and other religious edifices of Islam.
In 1872, a Masonic Lodge was established at Jerusalem, and it
is in full activity, the members belonging to almost every variety
of religious belief.

JERUSALEM, HEAVENLY (The City of God).—Mentioned in the Rite
of H. R. D. M., where the Tirshata says:—* Brothers, may
we all, whether present or absent, so labour that we shall come
at last to Mount Zion, to the city of the living God—the heavenly
Jerusalem, where the sun shall set no more, nor the moon
deprive us of her light, and where the days of our affliction,
and the fatigues of our pilgrimage, shall find an end.” The nine-
teenth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite also refers to the
celestial or heavenly Jerusalem. (See the Revelation, or Apoca-
lypse, xxi. 2.)

JERUSALEM, KNIGHT OF. (See Knight of Jerusalem.)

JERUSALEM, NEw —1. The symbolic designation of the Christian
Church, and the presumed future home of the saints (Rev. xxi.
2-21; iii. 12). 2. Typified in the order of Ishmael as the Taber-
nacle of Reconciliation. 3. Alluded to in the nineteenth degree
of the Ancient and Accepted Rite. 4. In the Swedenborgian
rite, the New Jerusalem is a most important item. The theory
may be briefly expressed as follows :—The whole world is con-
stituted in the form of a man, whose limbs and powers are co-
extensive with the universe. As creation is infinite, it could not
be otherwise ; but as this awful and all-powerful Being, anxious
to undergo in his own person the experience of humanity, with
all the fluctuations of hight and shade, came from heaven in His
own person to try His people, and decide which of these should
arrive, by successive degrees, at the supernal bliss intended for
all, His motives, as He came in a humble shape, did not im-
press the higher class, steeped in luxury, and therefore He spoke
of His kingdom darkly, and made a division of mankind. Yet,
as a good life will assuredly find favour in the eyes of the Most
Merciful and Forgiving of Beings, so He hoped, asa hen gathereth
her chickens under her wings, to rescue not only His own time, but
all times, from mental sorrow and distress. It isin this way the
Divine Mission should be construed, and it is only in this
manner that the perfect mystical city can come from Heaven.
Swedenborg, who was a realist and not an idealist, gave us
pictures in his visions, very properly, of retributive justice, but
his lights pale before the visions of John the Theologer, who was
also inspired to teach us all the mystical meanings of the New
Jerusalem. It is not to be supposed that anyone living would not
desire to see a more just age, with happiness for all; and, like

Faust, we should tell the hand to fall from the dial at “ Such a
361

JER] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yes

coun devoutly to be wished.” (See under Swedenborg

ite.)

JERUSALEM, PRINCE OF. (See Prince of Jerusalem.)

JERUSALEM SOLS.—Royal Grand Modern Order of a convivial secret
society about 1785, in London.

JERUSALEM Worp.—In the rituals of 1724, the following is given:
—(@.) “Give me the Jerusalem Word.” (&) “Giblin.” It is
presumed that after the break up of the works, the artizans de-
parted in search of further employment, and that this question
was then the regular question among operative masons to distin-
guish obligated from mere labourers.

‘}esse.—A large candlestick of metal, with many sconces, hanging
from the ceiling of a church or choir, having a symbolical refer-
ence to the Branch of Jesse.

JESUATES.—A religious order of an ascetic character, instituted
1363.

Jesus, COMPANY OF, OR ORDER oF JESUITS.—This celebrated Order
was founded by a certain Inigo de Loyola, a youth of noble
birth, and a scion of the houses of Ognez and Loyole His life,
up to the time of the siege of Pampeluna had been, like that of
most men of his time, dissolute and frivolous; but no one has
ever dared to question his courage in the presence of the enemy,
or his punctilious ideas in reference to that code of honour of
which Spaniards are so jealous. He was wounded at this siege,
and after undergoing great tortures at the hands of chirurgeons,
found himself rejected by the lady of his affections, and lame for
life. His course of reading up to this time had been principally
confined to books of chivalry and knight-errantry, but the sub-
stitution of a volume of lives of saints and martyrs changed his
whole career. He at first devoted himself to deeds of piety and
charity, assuming poverty as a virtue, and supporting himself
by alms obtained by begying from door to door, while he
preached violently in favour of a life devoted to deeds of mercy
and human forbearance. Even the most intolerant Protestant
must confess that there was a kind of heroism in the man,
demanding respect, if not sympathy. In the pursuit of his new
vocation he incurred imprisonment, torture, and persecution of
every kind, and narrowly escaped condemnation for heresy on
several occasions. The firmness of his character, however, sup-
ported him throughout these trials, and after qualifying himself
for his new career by a diligent study of the ancient languages
and moral philosophy, as then taught, he repaired to Paris, as
the focus of the intellectual world. Jnigo (afterwards Ignatius,
in the Latin form), on arriving at Paris, went to the Charlemagne
Hospital, where nothing but bare lodging was allowed. Hence,

362

yes] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia [JES

this new reformer was obliged to live by alms, a method which
drew down remenstrances from the university, and in order not
to offend the authorities, he visited Flanders and England, where
he received sufficient alms to prevent his ultimately falling into
want, and on his retarn he recommenced his studies with vigour.
It now became a point of importance to him to carry out his
main idea—i.¢., that of a society which, in harmony with reli-
gion as then understood, should humanize and elevate the general
body of mankind. His first procedure was to acquaint himself
with the characters of his associates, and from among them to
select such persons apparently best fitted for his almost Quixotic
enterprise. Two young men he found were ready, with the
utmost devotion, to aid the purposes he had in view. These
were Peter Lefévre, the other Francis de Xavier; the former
was a student of philosophy in the College of Sainte Barbe, and
the other a precocious pupil of the College of Beauvais. The
former was a Savoyard, kind, gentle, and just to a fault, but
wonderfully disposed to make the best of his opportunities in
the learned world, living himself in the most retired way in that
city of corruption. He was, however, of a dull and heavy tem-
perament, and hardly the sort of person to be selected as an
apostle of a new movement. His heart was nevertheless in the
right place, and, what was more to the purpose, he was well
versed in points of theology. Ignatius (as we will henceforward
call him) found no difficulty in attaching this faithful disciple ;
and there can be little doubt that bis solid, noble, and generous
ideas went far to consolidate the nucleus of the new fraternity
Francis de Xavier was a man of a very different starnp. He
was born in 1506, in the Castle of Xaviei, at the foot of the
Pyrenees, not far from Pampeluna, and was about twenty-one
when he encountered Ignatius. In person he was remarkably
pleasant, his constitution was delicate, but he possessed those
remarkable blue eyes, with their inherent power of flashing light
under excitement, which anthropologists have ever associated
with great force of character, and, in circumstances admitting of
the exercise of such eyes, they have never belied the inductions
of science. Francis de Xavier had ever been spoilt; every
whim of his mind had been gratified, and consequently his
nature had never received any check; he was sturdy, impres-
sionable,and in every way fitted tobe an active agent in Ignatius’s
proposed society. In addition to this he was of royal extraction,
being descended from the kings of Navarre by the maternal side,
and gifted with natural eloquence. But these qualities and
advantages had rendered him very vain and difficult of manage-
ment. Hence, the winning of this disciple was a ucla task
393

yes | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JES

on the part of Ignatius; but the diplomacy of the future founder
of the Jesuits finally won Xavier over to the new cause, which,
artfully presented to a young and enthusiastic mind, had great
attractions. To be in rags, as it were, and yet the equal of
kings; to have no outward rank, but be able to control the
actions of sovereigns; to show no distinctive mark of learning,
but to be made acquainted with all learning—-such was the bait
insidiously offered and greedily swallowed. After compliments
had passed on the really eloquent capacities of Xavier from
Ignatius, after a liberal share of the proceeds of his pecuniary
pilgrimages, he was adroitly asked the very old question, “ What
good is it for a man to gain the whole universe, if he should lose
his own soul?” Xavier was not to be won lightly, but Ignatius
finaly won him to his cause in a manner worthy of the disciples
he has left behind. Ignatius one day visited Xavier, and proposed
a game of chance and skill to him, the wager upon it being that
whoever lost the game should in all things obey the commands
of the winner for cne month. Xavier accepted this singular
wager ; and Ignatius, winning the game, obliged his companion
to listen for the specified time to all he had to say. This was
sufficient to indoctrinate the loser with all the arguments of
Ignatius, and at the end of the time he became his most faithful
disciple, if indeed he did not afterwards become a formidable
adversary, or at least emulator. Two other disciples were gained
in no less singular a manner. One day, as he was proceeding
along the streets of Paris, he was accosted by two youths,
respectively of twenty and eighteen years of age. They
appeared struck by the handsome and imposing expression
of his face, and they asked him if he were not the student
of Barcelona and Salamanca, the saint of the Pyrenees, of
whom they had so often heard,—in fact, whether he was
not that Don Inigo de Loyola, so celebrated for charitable
work. Ignatius replied in the affirmative, and these youths, who
had only arrived in Paris on the previous day, attached them-
selves to him at once, never to quit him more. One of these
was James Laynez from the town of Almazan, in the diocese of
Siguenza; and the younger of the two was Alfonso Salmeron, from
the city of Toledo. They had both come from the university of
Alcala to find Ignatius at Paris, if they could. To these disciples,
Ignatius soon added two others, not less distinguished for learning
and intrepidity. These were Nicolas Alfonso, called Bobadilla,
from his birthplace in the small kingdom of Leon, at one time
a teacher of philosophy at Valladolid,—he is reported to have
been profoundly versed in the sciences and scholastic theology
of He time; and the other was Rodriguez Azevedo, a Portu-
304

JES] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JES
guese, of good family, and endowed with great physical strength
and abilities of no mean order. Up to this time, Ignatius had
never even hinted to his companions at the possible realization
of his hopes in an all-encompassing fraternity of moral virtue.
Their usual interviews were occupied with quiet conversation,
imaginary projects, and theological discussions. As Roman
Catholics, it was impossible for them to avoid mention of the
reforms initiated by Luther, who at that time had not openly
broken with the Papacy, but almost daily converts to his opinions
quitted Germany, and with zeal, ardour, and eloquence, strove in
their sermons against the turpitude of the clergy, striking, with-
out respect of persons, and without pity, the chief offenders.
Paris had received these preachers with avidity, for the evil was
so patent as to be undeniable; and Rome in vain attempted to
stifle the spirit of inquiry which threatened her ancient dogmas.
This new battle ground for liberty and independence was anxiously
watched by non-combatants, and the ultimate result was awaited
with breathless anxiety by all classes of thinking men. At this
juncture, Ignatius thought it was prudent to put into execution
the project he had so long entertained, and first to make trial of
the dispositions of his new found friends. He therefore, after
some anterior preparations, opened his mind to them, and bound
them by solemn oaths of poverty, chastity, and obedience. He
told them that the main object he had in view was the conver-
sion of souls, by preaching and mission work. He desired to
spread the light of rational truth, either revealed or written, and
even to revisit the tomb of Christ, and re-illumine that sacred
hearth in the interests of humanity. The idea was colossal, and
the mind of the man was equal to the Jahour. Palestine, India,
America, and all other parts of the earth, should receive the kiss
of peace and be at rest. This part of his design he put into
execution by a common communion in the crypt of Montmartre,
on the 15th of August, 1534. The vow of poverty established
among the leaders of the band an absolute equality of goods; and
by the vow of chastity they were reserved pure, healthy, apt for
instruction, and free from all mundane pre-occupations. Finally,
by the vow of obedience he reserved, for moments of difficulty
and critical times, an incessantly active force, which he might
direct at will against any obstacle within his range. This vow
of Montmartre did not long 1emain a secret, and Ignatius was
speedily denounced to the Inquisition at Paris, his book of
“Spiritual Exercises” being especially made the subject of com-
plaint. He appeared before Matthew Ori, the Inquisitor of
France, alone and unattended. “When I was alone,” he said to
him, “T treated these calumnies with contempt, but eed have
395

JES] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JES

companions, and they and I are called upon to fulfil the func-
tions of evangelists. It is my duty to pseserve their honour as my
own. May your reverence give judgment in the matter, and I pray
that that judgment may be final and just.” Matthew Ori openly
pronounced in favour of Ignatius, approved his book, and desired
copies to be made for himself and his clergy. After this Ignatius
announced to his disciples the necessity for a departure for the
Holy Land, there to preach to and otherwise combat the infidels.
A general assembly was therefore agreed upon for Venice in the
following year, while Ignatius himself departed for Spain in order
to arrange some attairs fcr Salmeron and Laynez. During this
visit to his native countzy he continued to lzad the same life he
did at Paris. He frequented the hospitals and nursed the sick;
he instructed the little children, and his career was marked by
independent devotion and high enthusiasm. If he had offended
any man he made reparation, and if he had wronged any man he
restored fourfold ; of this many instances are narrated. In this
manner a year passed away, and Ignatius set out for Venice,
never to revisit his own country. At this time the Company of
Jesus had received an auginentation in number ; three men of
«reat importance had joined the Order, of eminent learning and
wide experience. These were Claude Lejay, John Cadure, and
Pasquier Brouet. The whole company had set out on foot, staff
in hand, and passed through Lorraine, thus avoiding Provence,
then full of the troops of Charles V., and during their progress
they preached the faith according to their united views; and in
January, 1537, they entered Venice, full of hcpe and confidence
jn their cause and their leader. On their reunion, their first
thoughts were directed to the necessary preparations for their
. voyage to Jerusalem, but before their departure they deemed it
necessary to obtain the authorization of the Pope for the due
recognition of their newly-established Order ; for although they
had assumed a specific costume, they were not bound by any
acknowledged rule of a monastic character, and hence lacked
that authority with which the sanction of the Holy See could
invest them. The whole Brotherhood, with the exception of
Ignatius, went to Rome, and this abstinence on the part of
Ignatius has generally heen regarded as a politic act. At this
time Paul III. was Pove, a man of conciliatory and gentle views.
Dandolo says that in language he was slow, but of exquisite
eloquence, in Italian as in Latin and Greek, speakirg Latin with
the conciseness of Tacitus, and Greek with the richness of Homer.
Ortiz, a celebrated Spanish theologian, introduced the companions
of Ignatius to the Pope, having been formerly acquainted with
mney leader at Paris. At first Paul III. did not seem to under-
36

JES | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JES

stand the conception of Ignatius, and nominated a commission
to examine into the entire subject; this commission, however,
returned an unfavourable report, and even said that it was urgent
to refuse the requested authorization. Ignatius hastened from
Venice with all speed, and lost no opportunity of solicitation,
but his offers and promises were of no avail; the cardinals were
deaf to his prayers, and the Order was thus nearly dying an
ignominious death before having actually lived. Upon this,
Ignatius, after some consideration, added a fourth vow to those
previously taken—to obey the sovereign Pontiff, and go, without
any excuse or evasion, to any place which his Holiness might
direct, and in every way subordinate the Order to the decisions
and direction of the Holy See in all matters relating to the
advancement of the Christian religion and the divine worship.
The court of Rome was flattered by this vow, and the ambition
of Paul III. so much gratified that the Order was at once favour-
ably received. Even then the Company of Jesus had other
obstacles, as a monk of the Order of Augustine did not hesitate
to denounce them in Rome itself as men bound by an infamous
oath against society, and as worthy of the flames as their prede-
cessors, the Templars. The effect of his denunciations was that
the companions of Ignatius had a narrow escape of being con-
demned as heretics and sorcerers, and had not the Pope returned
to Rome at this juncture, the Society would have again been
defeated, but a decree in favour of their orthodoxy re-established
them in the eyes of the world, and the Saered College pro-
nounced a sentence of condemnation on the accusers. Being
now securely established, Ignatius began his work of evan-
gelization, despatching Francis de Xavier, of whom he was
probably secretly jealous, on a mission to India. But
before the members of the Society entered upon their labour it
became necessary to strengthen the enterprize by the formal
election of a supreme chief, whose title was to be that of General.
Francis de Xavier, before his departure, deposited a sealed
declaration in relation to this matter, and cn its being opened he
was found to say: “I protest, without having been solicited by
any one, and in the truth of my conscience before God, that the
chief of our Company ought to be our father and founder, Don
Ignatius de Loyola, who, after having united us with so much
labour, is entitled, rather than any other person, from his virtues
and the intimate knowledge he possesses of each of us, to govern
us and preserve us as servants of the Almighty.” Ignatius was
elected General by an almost unanimous vote of the Fathers of
the Company, and after a vain show of declining this honour,
Jgnatius accepted it, it was confirmed by the Pope, and ea cere-
397

JES | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JES

mony of investiture took place on Easter Day, 1541. On the
following Friday, Ignatius repeated his four vows at the Church
of St Paul at a solemn communion, and his companions imitated
his example. The Order now immediately dispersed; Xavier
embarked at Lisbon for Goa, Salmeron and Brouet departed for
Treland, at the very time that Henry VIII. of England had
declared himself the head of the Anglican Church. These three
Fathers had been invested by the Pope with the authority and
powers of Apostolic nuncios. Rodriguez went to Lusitania, Lefévre
to Spain, Laynez to Venice, while Bobadilla and Claude Lejiy
journeyed into Germany, with the title of Provincials. Ignatius
remained at Rome to watch over his companions and preserve
their unity and common interests. Thus was formed the nucleus
of that famous Society which has endured to our times, but
which, since the time of the founder, has been warped from its
original purposes and applied to the meanest and vilest of ends,
and however much we may feel disposed to value the genius and
enthusiasm of Ignatius, it is impossible to contemplate its sub-
sequent development without sorrow and regret Ignatius was
himself a man of austere morals and simple life, having the
interests of humanity unaffectedly at heart. Like John Wesley,
the motives of this eminent personage were excellent, and had
his standard been maintained in its integrity, and merely mollified
by the natural action of advancing civilization, great good instead
of harm would have been the result. It was not, however, so to
be, and at the present time the Company of Jesus are doing
incalculable mischief throughout the world. Ignatius died at
Rome on the last day of July, 1556, on his sixty-fifth birthday.
Tt does not come within the plan of this work to enter at length
into any discussion of the principles of Jesuitism; the ranks of
the Order have contained and still contain many men of learning
and piety, and while they have wrought much harm, it must be
conceded that they have also done good service to philology,
science, and general civilization, by their fearless travels and
many useful discoveries. The degrees of the Order are, I. Novices,
II. Lay Brothers, or temporal coadjutors. III. Scholastics.
IV. Spiritual Coadjutors. V. Professed of Three Vows. VI.
Professed of Five Vows. The novitiate is generally fixed at two
or three years, after which the trials begin—these are of five
kinds: 1. A strict seclusion of thirty days. 2. Service in the
hospitals. 3. A pilgrimage on foot. 4. The performance of the
most menial offices in the Jesuits’ houses. 5. Instruction in the
doctrines of Christianity, and when the members are already
priests, confession and preaching. During the time these trials
endure, the novice is followed and carefully kept in view; the

368

o

JET | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedza. (JET

superior is informed of every minute act of the novice’s life; his
gestures, looks, his least words are jealously reported, and hence,
on the termination of these trials, his superiors know precisely
what sort of a man he is, and to what purpose his abilities can
be applied in furtherance of the objects of the Society. The
General of the Society, at present Father Bexq, is always resi-
dent at Rome, and may be considered as the soul of this
tremendous organization, is named for life, and has absolute
power. He directs all provinces, religious houses, colleges, and
novitiates of the Order; and circumstantial reports are triennially
sent to him of everything concerning the inmates and lower
officers of the Society. Others are charged with the collection
of information in reference to the most minute matters in con-
nection with the habits and affairs of those whom the Socicty
have reason to suspect, or may desire to influence, and the in-
formation thus gained is transmitted to the General with such
notes as may appear necessary. The Society has been attacked
aud condemned in almost every country on the face of the earth,
but still maintains a vigorous existence, and exercises extraor-
dinary powers in secular and religious matters. The Order has
secret signs and passwords according to the degrees to which the
members belong, and as they wear no particular dress, it is very
difficult to recognize them, unless they reveal themselves as
members of the Order; for they may appear as Protestants or
Catholics, democrats or aristocrats, infidels or bigots, according
to the special mission with which they are entrusted. Their
spies are everywhere, of all apparent ranks of society, and they
may appear learned and wise, or simple and foolish, as their
instructions run. There are Jesuits of both sexes and all ages,
and it is a well known fact that members of the Order, of high
family and delicate nurture, are acting as menial servants in Pro-
testant families, and doing other things of a similar nature in aid
of the Society’s purposes. We cannot be too much on our guard,
for the whole Society, being founded on a law of unhesitating
obedience, can bring its force on any given point with unerring
and fatal aceuracy.

JETZIRAH, SEPHER, OR Book oF (Hebrew, myx anv, Book of the
Creation).-—This marvellous and famous document is traditionally,
but erroneously, said to have been originally written by the
patriarch Abraham, who was himself most probably a Chaldean
priest-king. It consists of six Perakim (Hebrew npr»), or chap-
ters, subdivided into thirty-three brief Afischnas (mw), or sec-
tions. The design of the book is to exhibit a system whereby the
universe may be methodically viewed,shewing fromthe systematic
development of creation, and fron the harmony a in its

2 399

JET] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia, (JET

parts, that it must have proceeded from One and Only Creator.
The order and correlative correspondence of these parts are
proved by the analogy subsisting between visible things, and the
signs of thought whereby men are able to denote, communicate,
and perpetuate wisdom throughout time. From the fact that
the unknown author also employed the letters of the Hebrew
alphabet in a double sense, this book also received the name of
Wax omMANT nvr, the Letters, or Alphabet of the Patriarch
Abraham.- There being twenty-two letters in the Hebrew alpha-
bet, and ten fundamental numbers, these are designated the
thirty-two ways of secret wisdom—the alphabet being used in a
numerical sense. (See Alphabet, Hebrew.) The treatise opens by
the declaration :—“ By thirty-two paths of secret wisdom, the
Eternal, the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, the living God, the
King of the Universe, the Merciful and Gracious, the High and
Exalted God, He who inhabiteth Eternity, Glorious and Holy is
His Name, hath created the world by means of numbers (75p),
phonetic language (mp), and writing (nyp).” The fundamental
number ten is divided into a tetrade and hexade, and from these is
shown the gradual evolution of the world from nothing. The
Divine Substance alone at first subsisted, with the creative idea
and the articulate creative Word as the Holy Spirit, identical with
the Divine Substance. Hence the Spirit of the living God
(ort ode mn) is at the head of all things, represented by the
number one, “One is the Spirit of the living God, blessed be His
Name, who liveth for ever! Voice, Spirit, and Word, this is the
Holy Spirit.” (Chap.i., Mischnaix.) From this Spirit emanated
the whole Kosmos. First, the number ¢wo or Air, (mI 71), the
creative element, and “in it He engraved the twenty-two letters.”
Water, or the number three, proceeded from the air (mn 0%),
“in it He engraved darkness and emptiness, slime and dung.”
Ether or Five, represented by four, again emanated from the
water (oD wk), and “in it He engraved the throne of His
Glory, the Ophanim, the Seraphim, the sacred animals, and the
ministering angels, and from these three He formed His habita-
tion; as it is written, ‘He maketh the wind His messengers,
flaming fire His servants”” (Ch. i. Mish. ix.,x.) “These inter-
mediate members between the Creator and the created words,’
says Ginsburg, “ sustain a passive and ercated relationship to God,
and an acting and creating relationship to the world ; so that God
is neither in immediate connection with the created and material
universe, nor is His creative fiat hindered by matter.” Next
comes the hexade, each unit of which represents space in the six
directions, or the four corners of the world, east, west, north, and
south, together with height and depth, which was an efflux fram
370

JET] The Royat Masonic Cyclopedia. | JET

the ether, and in the centre of which is the Holy Temple support-
ing the whole. The following, therefore, is the position of the
decade. 1. Spirit. 2. Air. 3. Water. 4. Ether or Fire. 5.
Height. 6. North. 7. West. 8. East. 9. South. 10. Depth.
These ten constitute the primordial numbers
whence the whole universe proceeded. The twenty-
two letters follow, divided into Three Mothers (3,1, ® @
w), the seven double consonants (3,3,1,3,D,7,N,) and @
thetwelvesimple consonants (71,1,1,11,2,%,9,3,0,2,% P,),
The Three Mothers represent Ether, Water and @®
Air, as yet partially ideal andethereal,andaboutto @ ©
develop themselves—the fire into the visible
heaven, the water into the earth, while element-
ary air became atmospheric air. These elements
again condensed themselves in another direction:
from ether came heat; from water, cold; and from
air the mild temperature shown by moisture or rain. In the
human organism ether became the head, the seat of human in-
telligence ; water gave rise to the body, or the abdominal region ;
whilst the air formed the reproductive system. The Three
Dominions proceeding from this primordial triad continued to
work: in the macrocosm, were developed the seven planets; in
time, the seven days; and in the microcosm, the seven sensuous
faculties, represented by the seven doubleconsonants, so called, be-
cause they have a double pronunciation, being sometimes aspirated
and sometimes not, 7.e., whether with the Dagesh point or no. God
thus created: Inthe World :—Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus,
Mercury, and Moon; Jn Man :—Wisdom, Riches, Dominion,
Life, Favour, Progeny, and Peace; Jn the Year :—Sabbath,
Thursday, Tuesday, Saturday, Friday, Wednesday, and Monday.
Owing to the Dagesh, the opposites were created in Man :—
Wisdom and Ignorance, Riches and Poverty, Fruitfulness and
Barrenness, Life and Death, Liberty and Bondage, Peace and
War, Beauty and Deformity. By the twelve simple consonants,
the Three Dominions then developed themselvesinto twelve parts:
the macrocosm into the twelve signs of the Zodiac, time into
twelve months, and the microcosm (man) into twelve active organs.
And thus, by means of the infinite permutations possible in this
way, issued the various definite objects of the Kosmos. The
Book Jetzirah was first translated into Latin in 1642, and pub-
lished at Amsterdam by John Stephen Rittengal, grandson of the
celebrated Don Isaac Abravanel, One of the greatest representa-
tives of modern occult philosophy says :—“ The Sepher Jetzirah,
the Zohar and the Apocalypse, are the masterpieces of occultism ;
they contain more significance than words, and its expression is
371

©

JEW | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [JEW

poetical, while in numbers it is exact. The Apocalypse sum-
marises, completes, and surpasses all the science of Abraham
and of Solomon, as we shall prove in explaining these Keys of
the high Kabbalah. The beginning of the Zohar astonishes by
the profundity of its views, and the grand simplicity of its images,
The author of the book is careful to explain, furthermore, that
the human form with which he clothes God is but an image of
his Word, and that God should not, or could not, be expressed in’
thought by any thought or any form. Pascal has said that God
is a circle, the centre of which is everywhere, and the circum-
ference is nowhere. But how can we conceive a circle without
a circurnference? The Zohar teaches us the inverse of this
paradoxical expression, and says of the circle of Pascal, that the
circumference is everywhere and the centre nowhere ; but it is
not to a circle but to a balance that it compares the univer-
sal equilibrium of things. Equilibrium being everywhere, it says,
the central point is also to be found everywhere, where the bal-
ance is suspended. And the Zohar is here more powerful and
profound than Pascal. The Zohar is a genesis of light; the
Sepher Jetzirah is a ladder of truth. In it are explained the
thirty-two absolute signs of all truths, numbers, and letters,
every letter reproduces a number, an idea, anda form. By the
science of the Sepher Jetzirah the human mind is fixed in truth
and reason, and may arrive at some calculation of the possible
progress of intelligence by the evolution of numbers. The Zohar
may be considered as representing absolute truth, and the Sepher
Jetzirah affords us the means of retaining, appropriating, and
making use of it.” (Eliph. Lévi. Histoire, pp. 51, 55.) This
requires some slight qualification ; it is quite clear, that the
Sepher Jetzirah, being founded on Kabbalistic lore, and relying on
the Masoretic points for some of its most important positions,
and itself referring to subsequent events, cannot be so ancient as
it claims. It is, however, an important fragment of Babylonian
science.

JEWEL, MEMBER’S.—In Germany a special jewel is given to each
member, called “ Afttglicder-Zeichen” (sign of membership). It
is worn from the button-hole, and has an appropriate device, with
the name of the Lodge upon it.

JEWEL OF AN ANCIENT GRAND-MastTer.—According to Masonic
tradition, the jewel of an ancient Grand-Master was the square
and compasses, with the letter Gin the centre, This is mani-
festly absurd, as the letter G could not have been known to the
ancient Hebrews at the building of the Temple. Yet itis asserted,
in the face of common sense, that Hiram wore such a jewel at the
time of his death.

372

JEW] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [jEw

JEWELS OF A Lopce.—All Lodges have six jewels, three of which
are moveable and three immovable. In America, the moveable
jewels are—the rough ashlar, the perfect ashlar, and the trestle, or
tracing board. The immovable jewels are the square, the level,
and the plumb-line, being fixed severally in the east, west, and
south. Butin England, the three latter jewels are termed move-
able, as they are transmitted from the three officers who wear
them to their successors.

JEWELS, OFFICIAL.—The following jewels in Craft Masonry are
sanctioned by the Grand Lodge of England, and it is expressly
provided in the Constitutions that “no honorary or other jewel
or emblem shall be worn in the Grand Lodge or any subordinate
Lodge, which shall not appertain to, or be consistent with, those
degrees which are recognised and acknowledged by, and are under
the control of, the Grand Lodge, as part of pure and ancient
Masonry.” The Grand Master and Pro Grand Master,—the
compasses extended to 45° with the segment of a circle at the
points, and a gold plate included, on which is to be represented
an eye irradiated within a triangle also irradiated. Past Grand
Masters and Past Pro Grand Masters—a similar jewel, without
the gold plate. Deputy Grand Master—the compasses and
square united, with a five-pointed star in the centre. Past Deputy
Grand Masters,—the compasses and square only. Senior Grand
Warden—the level. Junior Grand Wardens—the plumb.
Grand Chaplains,—a book, within a triangle. Grand Treasurer,
—a chased key. Grand Registrar,—a scroll, with seal appended.
President of the Board of Gencral Purposes,—arms, crest, and
supporters of Grand Lodge. Grand Secretary,—cross pens, with
a tie. Grand Deacons—dove and olive branch. Grand
Superintendent of Works,—a semicircular protractor. Grand
and Assistant Grand Director of Ceremonies,—cross rods. Grand
Sword-Bearer,—cross swords. Grand Organist—alyre. Grand
Pursuivants,—arms of the Grand Lodge, with rod and sword
crossed. The G.Cs.,G.B., P.B.G.P., SG.Ds., GS.W., D.C., A.D.C.,
GSB. G.0., and G.Ps., are to be within a wreath composed of a
sprig of acacia, and an ear of corn. Grand Steward,—a cornu-
copia between the legs of a pair of compasses, extended upon an
irradiated gold plate within a circle, on which is engraved
“ United Grand Lodge of Antient Free and Accepted Masons of
England.” Past Grand Stewerds,—collars of crimson four inches
broad, with silver edges; jewel—oval, similar to Grand Stew-
ards’, on crimson enamel and smaller. Provincial Grand Master,
—the compasses and square, with a five-pointed star in the
centre. Dep. Prov. Grand Master,—the square. Other officers
of the Provincial Grand Lodges wear jewels similer to those of the

373

JEW | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JEW

officers of Grand Lodge in corresponding rank, and the same
applies to Prov. Grand Stewards. The jewels of Prov. G. M. and
other officers are to be placed within a circle, with the name ot
the province engraven thereupon. Past grand officers, and past
provincial grand officers, may wear the jewel of their respective
offices on a blue enamelled oval medal. All these jewels to be
gold or gilt. Private Lodges: W. Mj—the square. Past
Masters—the square and the diagram of the xlvii. prop. Ist
Book of Euclid, engraven on a silver plate pendant within it.
S. W.—the level. J. W.,—the plumb. Treasurer—the key.
Secretary,—cross pens. Deacons—the dove. Inner Guard,—
cross swords. Tyler—The sword. These jewels to be in silver,
except those of the Lodge of Antiquity No. 2, and of the British
Lodge No. 8, which are to be golden or gilt. Collars: light blue,
ribbon four inches broad. In America, the Senior Deacon wears
the square and compasses,sun in the centre, andthe Junior Deacon
the square and compasses, moon in the centre, and the Steward
a cornucopia. In the Royal Arch, the First Grand Principal
has a jewel, a crown rayoné, between a pair of compasses, with
two equilateral triangles interlaced ; the Second Grand Principal
the same, with an eye rayond ; the Third Grand Principal, an
open book, and the same; Grand Superintendent (equivalent to
Prov. G. M.), an equilateral triangle on a plate, supporting a
circle, displaying two equilateral triangles, interlaced in the
midst of which is another equilateral triangle rayoné ; Prine. Z.,
a crown rayoné, on and within an equilateral triangle; P. H., an
eye of the same, within the same; P. J.,an open book of he
same, within the same; Past Prine. Z.,a circle bearing a triangle
of the same, and a crown of the same; Past H., a circle of the
same, with triangle and eye of the same; Past J., a circle of the
same, with triangle and book of the same; Scribes, cross pens on
a triangle of the same ; Principal Sojourners, a square rayond on
a triangle of the same; Assistant Sojourners, a square without
the rays, on a triangle of the same; Zrcasurer, a key on a
triangle; Registrar, a pen and scroll, with triple tau seal on a
triangle; Standard-Bearer, a standard, with triple tau within a
six-pointed star on a triangle; Sword-Bearer, crossed swords on
triangle; Stewards, a triangle; Master of Ceremonies, cross rods
and wreath on a triangle; Organist, a lyre on a triangle ; Janitor,
a sword.

JEWELS, PRECIOUS.—These are esoteric in their character, and are
referred to in the lectures of the second and third degrees. They
are three in each degree.

JEWEL, Royat ArcH.—This Jewel, by its interseetions, forms a
given number of angles, to be taken in five several combinations,

374

jew | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JEW

which being reduced to their amounts in right angles, will be
found equal to the five regular Platonic bodies, representing the
four elements, and the Universal Sphere. These combinations
will be found respectively to correspond in geometrical value
with the five regular solids contained under equal and equilateral
triangles, equal squares, and equal and equilateral pentagons,
viz., the Tetrahedron, Octahedron, Cube, Icosahedron, and Dode-
cahedron, which were used by the Platonists to express the four
elements and the sphere of the Universe.

Pig. Fig. 2 rig 3

XI AW &

It may be proper here to state that the Platonic theory was this,
that the Universe itself, as well as its subordinate parts, both
animate and inanimate, were created by the Deity from the four
elements—fire, air, water, and earth. It was conceived accord-
ing to this theory that all created matter must be both visible
and tangible. Now, considering fire as the source of light, it is
plain that nothing can be visible without it; and since nothing
can be tangible but what is solid, and that the earth is the most
properly solid of all the four elements, therefore, all created
matter was constituted of fire and earth. If you look at the
jewel, or on this figure, (Fig. 4) where it is represented, you will
perceive that it consists of two larger equal and equilateral
triangles, A B C and D E F, inscribed in one circle and equally
intersecting each other, and of a smaller triangle in the centre,
G HI, which divides or resolves the larger inverted triangle,
D E F, after the manner explained in the former figure. First,
then, the central triangle G HJ, resolved into its elements
according to the first figure, will be equal to eight right angles,
375

yew | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yEw

or—and these are equal in amount to those contained in the
Tetrahedron—a solid figure contained under four equal and
equilateral triangles. This body (each of the solid angles of
which is formed by the union of three plane acute angles), on
account of its lightness, as well as its acute and pyramidal
form, is used by the Platonists to express the element ire.
2dly The two larger triangles. A B C, D EF, considered without
regard to their intersections, aud resolved upon the foregoing
principle, will be = 2 ,1y, or 16 right angles, which are equal in
amount to those contained in the Octahedron, a solid figure
comprised of eight equal and equilateral triangles. This body
(each of the solid angles of which is formed by the union of four
plane acute angles), being next in lightness and acuteness to the
Tetrahedron, was used by the Platonists to express the element
air, 3dly. The triangles, ABC,DEF, and GHI (¢e., the
two larger and the small central triangle), considered without
regard to intersections, and resolved by the same rule, will be
found = 3 +4, or 24 right angles which are equal in amount to
those contained in the cube, a solid figure contained by six equal
squares. This body (each of the solid angles of which is formed
by the union of three plane right angles), being the most sub-
stantial in its form, as well as the firmest and most immovable
on its basis, of all the solids, was used by the Platonists to ex-
press the element earth. 4thly. Consider now the inverted
triangle D EF, as divided into 4 lesser ones by the central
triangle G H I, and add to these the other large triangle A B C.
These five triangles considered again without regard to te:
tions, and resolved i in the same manner as before, “will be = 5 4,
or 40 right angles, which are equal in amount to those contained
in the Icosahedron, a solid body bounded by 20 equal and equi-
lateral triangles. This body (each of the solid angles of which is
formed by the union of 5 plane acute angles), being the heaviest
of the solids contained by triangles, and the next in weight and
substance to the cube, was used by the Platonists to express the
element water. Thus, 1st, the central triangle G H I = }4,, is
equivalent to the Tetrahedron, which expresses the element ‘ire,
2d, the two large triangles, A B C,DEF, = 244), is equivalent
to the Octahedron, which expresses the element air. 3d, the 3
triangles ABC, DEF,G HI, = 3+4,, are equivalent to the
cube, which expresses earth, Ath, the 5 triangles A B C, E GI,
FHI,DGH,andGHI=5 +4, are equivalent to the Icosa-
hedron, which expresses water Again, it was supposed by the
Platonists that no two bodies could unite and cohere without
some intervening medium to consolidate them; that planes
nuda one such medium, and solids two. Therefore the Deity
37

jew] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JEW

constituted two intervening elements between fire and earth,
viz., air and water, in such a manner that there might be an
exact analogy between the four, we. as fire is to air, so is air to
water, and as air is to water, so is water to earth; thus forming
a regular and harmonious gradation from the lightest and most
penetrating of the elements to the heaviest and most obtuse.
Now all the elements, except the earth, are without form in them-
selves; yet, in order to assist the mind in arranging its ideas, it
is necessary to attach some form to them. Therefore, since the
elements are bodies, and all bodies are solid, and bounded by
superficies which consist of triangles either equilateral or other-
wise, the Platonic theory assigned to each of the four elements
the form of a solid, bounded by plane surfaces constituted of
triangles ; for although one of those solids is bounded by squares
and another by pentagons, yet it will be evident that equilateral
rectilineal figures may be reselved into as many triangles as the
figures have sides united by their vertices in a common centre.
(See Figs. 1 and 2.) Having thus stated the general outline of
the Platonic theory, we proceed to show by the assistance of the
Key +4 , that the Jewel forms byits various triangles and intersec-
tions an equivalent in geometrical value for the five regular solids
expressing the four elements and the sphere of the Universe. The
hermetic [T was a most ancient hieroglyphical representation of
the Deity, and consequently the triple T denotes His triunes-
scence, and in geometrical value is eight right angles, viz., two
on each of the exterior lines, and two at the point of union in
the centre. In this figure (fig. 3), which is similar to that in
which the six lights are arranged, there will be found a geomet-
rical value equivalent to the +L, , for since the interior angles
of every triangle are together equal to two right angles, the
whole triangle here displayed resolves itself into four equal
and equilateral triangles; that is three (a } c) on the extremities,
and a fourth (d) by their union at the centre. It follows, there-
fore, that the triangle thus resolved is equal to eight right angles,
and consequently to one ,1,. It now remains to find an equiva-
lent in the R. A. Jewel for the solid expressing the sphere of the
Universe, which is the Dodecahedron, a solid body bounded by
12 equal and equilateral pentagons. (See Fig. 5.) The 6 small
triangles round the circumference of the jewel (formed by the
intersections of the 2 larger triangles) together with the central
triangle G H I, if resolved in the same manner as the former, will
be found to be = 7 +4) , or x 8 = 56 right angles; to these add the
external angles of the before-mentioned 6 triangles, formed by
the intersections of the 2 larger triangles = 16 right angles.
For since the exterior angle of every triangle formed by produc-
377

yew | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yew

ing one of its sides is equal to 2 interior and opposite angles, and
every angle of one equilateral triongle is equal to one third of the
2 right angles, therefore each of these external angles will be
equal to two thirds of right angles; and as they are 12 in num-
ber, their amount in right angles will be 16, 3 of 2=4%= 14
x 12 = 16. Then 16 added to the before-mentioned 56 right
angles will make 72. But by a corollary of the 32d Prob. of the
1st Book of Euclid the interior angles of every rectilinearfigure are
equal to twice as many right angles — 4 as the figure has sides;
hence the interior angles of the 5-sided figure, called a pentagon
are 10 — 4 = 6 right angles; whence the solid figure called a
Dodecahedron being contained by 12 equal and equilateral penta-
gons, its amount, in right angles, will be 12 x 6 = 72, correspond-
ing with the number of right angles contained in the 7 triangles
betore-mentioned, and the 12 exterior angles of intersections.
Thus the Dodecahedron (each of the solid angles of which is form-
ed by the union of 3 plane obtuse angles), approaching nearer to
the form of a sphere than any of the other solids bounded by
plane superficies, was used by the Platonists to express the sphere
of the Universe, Thus it is proved, by the assistance of the Key
+l, that the R. A. Jewel is equivalent to the five geometrical
solids, which were used by the Platonists to express their 4
elements and the sphere of the Universe. In conclusion, let our
attention be directed to the fact that the R. A. Jewel thus pre-
sents us with an emblem of those great attributes of the Deity—
his eternity and triunessence. The former is represented by
the circle which surrounds the Jewel, the latter by the relation
which its component parts bear to the 44 ; while by the equiva-
lent we find in those parts for the 5 solids expressing the 4
elements and the sphere of the Universe, we are further reminded
of His Omnipotence and Creative power, who first formed the
elements out of nothing, and from them constitnted that mighty
frame within whosecomprehensive sphere are included myriads of
worlds, each containing millions of animated beings dependent on
His will and mercy. The Jewel which every Companion wears
on his breast should inspire him with profound veneration for
that Incomprehensible Being at whose command the world burst
forth from chaos into light, and all created matter had its birth;
whose Infinite Wisdom directs, and whose unspeakable Goodness
preserves and blesses every work that has proceeded from His
Hands. The Companion’s Jewel of the Royal Arch is a double
triangle, sometimes called the Seal of Solomon, within a circle
of gold; at the bottom isa scroll bearing the words Nil nisi
clavis deest—“ Nothing is wanting but the Key;” and on the
circle appears the legend, Si talia jungere possis sit tibi scire
378

JEW] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia [Joa

possis—“ If thou canst comprehend these things, thou knowest
enough.” On the triangle is inscribed Evpxayev—invenimus cultor
dei civis mundi—* We have found the worship of God, O citizen
of the world.” On the reverse of the circle are engraven the
words, Deo, regi, et fratribus ; honor, fidelitas, benevolentia—* For
God, king, and the brethren; honour, fidelity, and benevolence ;”
and on the reverse of the triangles, Wisdom, Strength, Beauty,
Peace, Concord, Truth. Within these is another triangle, with
the sun in the centre, irradiated ; a pair of compasses issue from
the sun, suspending a globe representing the earth, beneath
these is +44, the triple Tau, signifying, among other occult
things, Templum Hierosolyma, the Temple of Jerusalem. It
also means Clavis ad Thesaurum—*“ A key to a treasure”—and
Theca ubi ves pretiosa deponitur, “A place where a precious
thing is concealed,” or Res ipsa pretiosa—* The precious thing
itself.” It is usual to add on the scroll the date of the exalta-
tion of the wearer to the Companionship of the Holy Royal
Arch. (See Triple Tau.)

JEWS, DISQUALIFICATION OF.—Such wasthestrong prejudice existing
against Jews, that although Freemasonry is occupied with the
erection of a Jewish Temple, it was long before Jews were any-
where admitted to the privileges of the Craft. At the present
time the Jewish Lodges of England are worked with great ability,
and the Jewish Masons contribute with alacrity and generosity
to the charities. The Royal Arch-Chapters are full of noble-
hearted and patriotic Jews, and as a body they reflect great credit
upon the Craft, and labour in harmony and unanimity with their
Christian brethren and companions. Until of very late years,
there was an objection felt against the initiation of Jews in
Germany, but the good sense of the Grand Lodge of the Three
Globes has put an end to this condition of things, and Jews in
that empire are eligible for admission to the Order.

JEZEEDS.—A numerous Mohammedan sect in Turkey and Persia, of
an extremely ignorant kind. They have faith in the Bible and
Koran, but can read neither of them. They were called Jezeeds
from Jezeed, their chief, who slew the sons of Ali, the father-in-
law of Mahommed. Their hymns and psalms are addressed with-
out distinction to Christ, the Virgin, Moses, and Mohammed.

JIBELLUM—A corruption of Zabulon (see Zabulon), used in the
third degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite. Also used in
the thirteenth degree of the same Rite. (See Jabulwm.)

JOABERT.—Said, in the traditions of the high degrees, to have been
the chief adviser and favourite of King Solomon, but one who
incurred, on a special occasion, the displeasure of King Hiram of
Tyre. He was, however, pardoned, and raised to a rank of

379

Joa] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Jo
importance, that of Intimate Secretary; subsequently even
receiving higher promotion. There does not seem any reason to
suppose that any such person ever existed; the name is not
Hebrew, and the circumstances of the tradition are improbable in
themselves.

JOACHIM, ORDER OF ST.—Derived from a previous Order, called the
Order of Trueand Perfect Friendship of St Jonathan. It was
androgynous in its constitution, and composed of Knights and
Ladies, and in 1804 held its meetings at Bamberg in Germany.
One of the vows of the members required them to believe in the
Trinity and abstain from waltzing—to an English mind a some-
what odd conjunction of obligations, but to those who know how
deeply the love of that form of dance was at the time, and still is,
rooted in the German character, it will not appear so singular.
None but nobles, their wives, and children, were admitted into
this Order, which was not of a Masonic character.

Jos (Hebrew, as, the assailed).—1. An Arabian patriarchal prince
of the race of Esau, concerning whom many learned works have
been written. The Mohammedan writers say that he was of the
race of Esau,and was blessed with a numerous family,andabundant
wealth; but that Allah proved him by taking away every thing
from him, even his children, who were killed by the fall of a house ,
notwithstanding this, he continued to serve God, and to offer up
praises to Him as usual; he was then afflicted with a loathsome
disease, his body being full of worms, and this was so offensive
that, as he lay on the dunghill, none could bear to come near
him; his wife, however (whose name is differently given as
Rahmat, the daughter of Ephraim, the son of Joseph, and as
Makhir, the daughter of Manasses), attended him with great
patience, supporting him by what she earned by her labour; but
that Sheitan, or Satan, appearing to her one day, after having
reminded her of her past prosperity, promised her that, if she
would worship him, he would restore all they had lost; where-
upon she asked her husband’s consent; he was, however, enraged
at the proposal, and swore, if he should ever recover, to inflict
upon her a hundred stripes. Job having pronounced the prayer
recorded in the Koran (Surat xxi): “Verily evil hath afflicted
me, but Thou art the most merciful of those who show mercy,”
Allah sent Gabriel, who, taking him by the hand, raised him up,
and at the same time a fountain sprang up at his feet, of which
having drank, the worms fell off his ‘body, and, washing therein,
he recovered his former health and beauty; then Allah restored
to him every thing doubly, his wife also becoming young and
handsome again, bearing him twenty-six sons, Job, to satisfy
his oath, was directed by Allah to strike her one blow witha

380

JOR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [joc

palm branch having a hundred leaves. Some, to express the
great riches bestowed upon Job after his sufferings, say that he
had two threshing floors, one for wheat, and the other for barley,
and that Allah sent two clouds which raised gold on the one, and
silver on the other, till they ran over, according to Jallalo’ddin.
Traditions vary as to the continuance of Job’s calamities; it is
variously set down as eighteen, thirteen, three, and finally seven
years, seven months, and seven days. The prophet Dhulketi,
mentioned in the same Surat of the Koran, ig by some supposed
to have been the son of Job. 2. The book of Job is the most
sublimely philosophical book in the Old Testament, and has
formed the theme of some of the most valuable exegetical
treatises in many languages. Cahen publishes, in his French
translation and edition of the Old Testament, in his fifteenth
volume (1851), a magnificent Essay by Israel Cahen, Professor
of Philosophy, and it has been more recently translated by T. J
Conant, Professor of Hebrew in Rochester Theological Seminary,
London, 1859. This latter version is incomparably the best ever
made, and has the advantage of affording the reader an immediate
glance at the very faulty translation of King James’s time. No
grander poem on retributive justice has ever been written, and
whether taken as a kind of enthusiastic historical reverie, or as
a set mystical production, it continues unrivalled. The majesty
of the dramatis persone, the elegance of the tale, and the wonder-
ful philosophy of the Book of Job, have been a marvel throughout
the long ages succeeding its happy rescue from the neglect into
which so many valuable relics of ancient literature have fallen ;
but it should also be noted how close is the argument, and how
tersely the sentiments are expressed. From the Book of Joh
numerous writers have drawn the source of their best productions;
and Goethe, the great poet, evidently instinctively sought for the
clothing of his wonderful Faust in the weird forms which flit
before us during the discussions between Job and his friends.
3. The legend or allegory of Job, in the Order of Ishmael, is
regarded as positive history, and forms a portion of the instruction
given to the higher initiates of that Order. That patience which
the Jews have ever exhibited concerning the appearance of their
Messiah, judged by the Christians to have taken place, is equally
evinced by a gentle following of good precepts preparing the
way for the Paraclete, Comfoiter, or Periclyte the Illustrious,
according to Arabic traditions.

JOBEL (Hebrew, 23, jubilans)—A name of God, used in the
thirteenth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.
JOCHEBED (Hebrew, 1321, God-glorified ; Sept. "Iwyu8id) ~The
38t

JOE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopeata. [JOE

wife of Amram, and mother of Miriam, Moses and Aaron—alluded
to in the Order of Ishmael.

JOEHLA, BENJAMIN.—A Rosicrucian and occult philosopher of
Jewish birth, but Christian faith, the date of whose existence is
uncertain, but of whom a detailed account is given in the
Aurifontina Chymica, published by William Cooper at London,
in 1680, in a letter addressed to Frederick, Duke of Holstein and
Schleswig, as follows :—*My Friend,—You have desired of me
an account of the Life and Death, Inheritance and Heirs of my
master, B. J., of happy memory. I return you this answer in
Latine, as yours to me was, though I be not exactly skilled in it.
He was by nation a Jew, by religion a Christian, for he believed
in Christ the Saviour, and openly made profession of the same:
He was a man of great Honesty and gave great Alms in secret:
He lived chastely a Batchelor, and took me when I was about
Twenty Years of Age out of the House where Orphans are
maintained by the Publick, and caused me to be instructed in
the Latine, French, and Italian Tongues; to which I afterwards
by use added the Jewish or Hebrew. He made use of me, so far
as I was capable, in his Laboratory, for he had great Skill in
Physick, and cured most desperate Diseases. When I was
Twenty-five Years of Age he called me into his Parlour, and
made me swear to him that I would never marry without his
Consent and Knowledge, which I promised and have religiously
kept. When I was Thirty Years of Age, on a Morning he sends
for me into his Parlour, and said very lovingly to me: My Son,
—I perceive that the Balsam of my Life, by Reason of extreme
Old Age coming on (for he was Eighty-eight Years of Age), is
well nigh wasted, and that consequently my Death is at the
Door, wherefore I have writ my last Will and Testament, for
the use and benefit of my Brother’s Sons, and of you, and have
laid it upon the Table of my Closet, whither neither you nor any
Mortal ever entered; for you durst not so much as knock at the
door during the hours set apart for my Devotions. Having said
this, he went to the double-door of his Closet, and daubed over
the Joynings thereof with a certain transparent and chrystalline
Matter, which he wrought with his Fingers till it became soft
and yielding like Wax, and imprinted his Golden Seal upon it;
the said Matter was immediately hardened by the cold Air, so
that without defacing the Seal the Door could noway be opened.
Then he took the Keys of the Closet, and shut them up ina
small Cabinet, and sealed the same as before with the said
chrystalline Matter, and delivered the said Cabinet, after he had
sealed it, into my Hands, and charged me to deliver the same to
none but his Brother’s Sons—Mr Jesse Abrah, and Solomon

382

Jor] The Royat Masonic Cyclopedia. [JOE

Joelha, who at that Time lived in Switzerland, the Eldest of
them being a Batchelor. After this he returned with me into
the Parlour, and in my Presence dropped the Golden Seal he
had made use of into a Glass of Clear Water, in which the said
Seal was immediately dissolved, like Ice in Hot Water, a white
Powder settling to the Bottom, and the Liquor was tinged with
the pale red of a Provence Rose. Then he closed the said Glass
Vial with the above-mentioned transparent Matter, and charged
me to deliver the said Vial, together with the Keys, to Mr Jesse.
This being done, he repeated upon his bended knees some of
David’s Psalms in Hebrew, and betook himself to his Couch,
where he was used to sleep after Dinner, and commanded me to
bring him a Glass of Malaga, which now and then he sparingly
made Use of. As soon as he had drank off his Wine he bid me
come to him, and leaning his Head upon my Shoulders, he fell
into a quiet Sleep, and after half-an-hour’s Time fetched a very
deep Sigh, and so yielded his Soul to Gop, to my great Astonish-
ment. Upon this I, according to my promise, writ into Switzer-
land, to give Notice of Death to his Nephews; and to my great
Wonder, the very Day after my blessed Master died I received
a Letter from Mr Jesse, wherein he enquired whether my Master
were dead or alive, as if he had known Everything that had
passed; as indeed he did, by means of a certain Instrument, of
which hereafter I shall make mention. A little after his Nephews
came, to whom I gave an Account of what had passed: all which
Mr Jesse heard with a Smile, but the other Brother not without
Astonishment and Wonder. I gave him the Keys, together with
the Glass in which was the aforesaid Golden Solution; but they
refused then to meddle with Anything that Day, being tired
with their Journey; but, on the Morrow, after I had carefully
shut all the Doors of the House, and none but they and I being
present, Mr Jesse took the Glass Vial and broke it over a China
Dish, which might receive the inclosed Liquor, and took some of
the said Liquor, and put it upon the transparent Matter, with
which the Cabinet was sealed, and immediately the Matter,
which before was hard as Chrystal, was resolved into a thickish
Water ; so he opened the Cabinet, and took thence the Keys of
the Closet. Then we came to the Door of the Closet, where Mr
Jesse, having seen the Seal, he wetted it as formerly with the
forementioned Liquor, which immediately gave way; and so he
opened the said Double-door, but shut it again, and falling down
upon his Knees, prayed, as we also did; then we entered and
shut the Doors upon us. Here I saw great Miracles. In the
Midst of the Closet stood a Table, whose Frame was of Ebony

the Table itself was round, and of the same Wood, but covers

393

JOE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopadia. [JOE

with Plates of Beaten Gold; before the Table was placed a low
‘ootstool, for to kneel upon; in the Midst of the Table stood an
Instrument of a strange and wonderful Contrivance, the lower
Part of it, or Pedestal, was of Pure Gold, the Middle Part was
of most Transparent Chrystal, in which was inclosed an incom-
bustible and perpetually shining Fire; the upper Part of it was
likewise of pure Gold, made in the Form of a small Cup or Vial.
Just above this Instrument hung down a Chain of Gold, to
which was fastened an Artificial Chrystal, of an oval Form, filled
with the aforesaid perpetual Fire. On the right Side of the
Table we took notice of a Golden Box, and wpon the same a little
Spoon; this Box contained a Balsam of a Scarlet Colour. On
the left Side we saw a httle Desk of Massive Gold, upon which
was laid a Book containing twelve Leaves of pure beaten old,
being tractable and flexible as Paper; in the Midst of the
Leaves were several Characters engraved, as likewise in the
Corners of the said Leaves, but in the Space between the Center
and Corners of the Leaves, were filled with holy Prayers. Under
the Desk we found the last Will of my deceased Master; whilst
we were in the Closet, Mr Jesse kneeled down, leaning upon the
Desk, and with most humble Devotion, repeated some of the fore-
mentioned Prayers, and then with the little Spoon took up a Small
Quantity of the aforesaid Balsam, and put it into the Top of the In-
strument which was in the Midst of the Table, and instantly a most
grateful Fume ascending, which with its most pleasing Odour
did most sensibly refresh us; but that which to me seemed
miraculous was, that the said Fume ascending, caused the perpet-
ual Fire inclosed in the hanging Chrystal to flash and blaze
terribly, like some great Star or Lightning. After this Mr Jesse
read the Will, wherein he bequeathed to Mr Jesse, all his Instrn-
ments and Books of Wisdom, and the Rest of his Goods to be
equally divided between him and his Brother ; besides he left me
a Legacy of 6,000 Golden Ducatoons, as an Acknowledgment of
my Fidelity. And accordingly first Enquiry was made for the
Instruments and Books of Wisdom; of those that were on and
about the Table, I have spoke already : on the right Side of the
Closet stood a Chest of Ebony, whose Inside was all covered with
Plates of beaten Gold, and contained Twelve Characters engraven
upon then. From thenee we went to view a large Chest con-
taining Twelve Looking Glasses, not made of Glass, but of a
wonderful unknown Matter; the Center of the said Looking
Glasses were filled with wonderful Characters, the Brims of them
were inclosed in pure Gold, and between the said Brims and
Center they (sic) were polished Looking Glasses receiving all
opposite Images. After this we opened a very large Chest, or
3°4

JOE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JOE
Case, in which we found a most capacious Looking Glass, which
Mr Jesse told us was Solomon’s Looking Glass, and the Miracle of
the whole World * in which the Characterisms of the whole
Universe were united. We saw also in a Box of Ebony a Globe
made of a wonderful Matter: Mr Jesse told us, that in the said
Globe was shut up the Fire and Soul of the World, and that
therefore the said Globe of itself performed all its Motions, in an
exact Harmony and Agreement with those of the Universe.
Upon this Box aforementioned stood another, which contained an
Instrumentf resembling a Clock Dial, but instead of the Ficures
of the Twelve Hours, the Letters of the Alphabet were placed
round this, with a Hand of Index turning and pointing at them.
Mr Jesse told us that this Instrument would move of itself, upon
the motion of a corresponding and sympathetic Instrument which
he had at Home, and, that by means of this Instrument, my happy
Master had signified to him his approaching Death, and that
after this Signification, finding that his Instrument remained
without Motion, he concluded my Master was dead. Last of all
we came to the Books of Wisdom, which he opened not: near the
said Books was placed a Box of Gold, full of a most ponderous
Powder of a deep Scarlet Colour, which Mr Jesse smiling took
and put up. Near to the Closet where we were was another
Closet adjoyning, which we entered into, and there found four
large Chests full of small Ingots of most pure Gold, out of which
they gave me my Legacy of 6,000 Golden Ducatoons ina double
Proportion. But Mr Jesse refused to take for himself any of the
said Gold; for he said, that those Things which were afore be-
queathed to him, did fully content him, for he was skill’d in my
Master’s Art, and therefore ordered his Part of the Gold to be
bestowed on several poor Virgins of Kin to them, to make up
their Portions. I myself married one of these, and had with her
a good Portion of the said Gold; she embraced the Christian
Religion, and is yet alive. Mr Jesse packed up all his Things,
and carried them Home with him into Switzerland, though since
that he hath chose himself a quiet and well tempered Place in
the Last Indies, from whence he writ to me last Year, offering
me to adopt my eldest Son, whom IJ have accordingly sent to him.
During the Time we were in the Closet I saw strange Miracles
effected by the Motions of the said Instruments of Wisdom, which
IT neither can nor dare set down in Writing. Thus much, my inti-

*The word Miracle seems here to be used in the sense of Mirror—it was pro
bably a large Magic Mirror, such as were then, and are still, employed by occul
students.

t See this Instrument described tn a Book called Ars Notoria, printed in Latineo
English, p, 136.

2B 385

Joc | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Jou
mate Friend, I was willing you should know; more I cannot add.
Farewell.”

Jocuis.—A sect in the East, the members of which never marry,
have no private property, and live on alms, practising on them-
selves frightful tortures, of the most ridiculous and degrading
nature.

JoHaBENn (Hebrew ja", Jhaoben, jilius Dei).—1. Sixth, eighth,
ninth, eleventh, thirteenth, fourteenth, and thirty-second degrees
of the A. and A. Scottish Rite. 2. Also used in the fourth
and fifth degrees of the Modern Reformed French Rite.

JOHANNES Raup. (See Rapha.)

JOHANNITE CHRISTIANS.—A sect of Oriental Christians, who pre-
tended to be the sole depositaries of the true mysteries of the re-
Jigion of the Saviour. They asserted that they possessed the
real history of Jesus Christ, and, partly adopting the Jewish tra-
ditions and the narrations of the Talmud, they further said that
the facts narrated in the Gospels were only allegories, of which
St John gave the key when he remarks :—* And there are also
many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be
written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not
contain the books that should be written. Amen.” (St John xxi,
25.) According to the Johannite Christians this would be no-
thing but a ridiculous exaggeration, if there were not an allegory
and legend concerned, susceptible of infinite variation and inter-
pretation. The following is the actual historical legend of the
Johannites. A young virgin of Nazareth, named Miriam, who
had been betrothed to a youth of her tribe named Jochanan, was
one day surprised and outraged by a certain man, Pandira, or
Panther, who introduced himself into her chamber in the
garments, and under the name, of her betrothed Jochanan. The
latter being made acquainted with the misfortune quitted her
without compromising her, she being in fact innocent. The
result was that she gave birth to a son who received the very
ordinary Jewish name of Joshua, or Jesus in the Graco-Aramaic
dialect. This child was adopted by a Rabbi named Joseph, who
cairied him into Egypt where he was initiated into the occult
sciences, and the priests of Osiris, regarding him as the long
promised incarnation of Horus expected by the adepts, finally
consecrated him Sovereign-Pontiff of the universal religion.
Joshua and Joseph returned to Judwa, where the science and
virtue of the youth soon attracted the attention of the priests,
and excited their jealousy and hatred. At last, they publicly
reproached him with the illegitimacy of his birth. Joshua, who
loved and venerated lis mother, who had been preserved and
cared for by his adopted father Joseph, interrogated his master,

386

JOH } The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ JOH

and was informed by him of the crime of Pandira, and the imis-
fortune of Miriam. His first impulse was publicly to deny her,
saying to her in the midst of a marriage festival, “ Woman,
what have I to do with thee?” (St John ii 4.) But suddenly
remembering that a poor woman should not be punished for
having suffered that which it was impossible for her to prevent
or avoid, he exclaimed, ““ My mother has not sinned, she has not
lost her innocence ; she is immaculate, and yet she is a mother ;
be double honour therefore paid to her! As for myself, I have
no father in this world. I am the Son of God and of humanity !”
And thereupon he entered upon his mission. The Johannite
Christians assert that the apostle John had transmitted to them
these facts, and attributed to him the foundation of their mystical
Church. The Grand-Pontiffs of this sect took the title of Christ,
and laid claim to an unbroken chain of succession in their office
At the time of the foundation of the Order of the Temple
(A.D. 1118), the Grand-Pontiff was named Theocletes; he was
acquainted with Hugo de Payens, and initiated him into the
mysteries and privileges of his Church, promising him the
sovereign priesthood and supreme government, finally designua-
ting him as his successor. Of course, it is hardly necessary to
add that this legend should be received with the extreme
caution due to unauthenticated traditions, and it is given here
simply as a curious fragment of the history of past times.

JOHANNITE Masonry.—As the Craft Lodges were at one time
dedicated to the two St Johns, the Baptist and the Evangelist,
the tirst three degrees have been thus called.

JOHANNITES.—A_ sect originated by Bernard Raymond Fabré-
Palaprat at Paris, in 1814, and attached to the Order of the
Temple, of which he was Grand-Master. (See Leviticon, and
Lemple, Order of the.)

Joun’s Brotuens.—In the charter of Colne or Cologne, nuw reject-
ed as spurious, it is said :—“ Before the year 1440, the Masonic
Society was known by the name of John’s Brothers, but they then
began to be called Free and Accepted Masons, at which time in
some part of Flanders, by the assistance and riches of the brother-
hood, the first hospitals were erected for the relief of such as
were afflicted with St Anthony’s fire.”

JOHNSON ok JONNSTONE.—The assumed name of one Leucht, who
also passed under the name of Becker. This man was a per-
son of plausible manners, and very bad character, and adopted
Masonry as a mask under which he could most easily carry un.
his impostures. He first publicly appeared at Jena about 1763,
with an assumed commission from the chiefs of Scottish Templar
Masonry to introduce it into Germany. He succeeded in found:

387

Jou] The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [jon

ing a Chapter of Strict Observance, of which he assumed the
dignity of Grand Prior. He entered into controversy with the
Rector, Philipp Samuel Rosa (see under Hosa), and even attempt-
ed to beard the Grand Lodge of the Three Globes at Berlin. He
came into connection with Baron Von Hund (see Hund, Von),
but was speedily detected and denounced by him; and the fact
of his having formerly acted as Secretary to the Prince of
Anhalt-Bernburg, under the pseudonym of Becker, was made:
public. He had betrayed and robbed that prince, and had sub-
sequently wandered about with the papers of one Johnson, whose
name he had assumed. Leucht, upon this, fled, but was arrested
at Magdeburg, sent to the fortress of Wartzburg, and died there
very suddenly, in 1773.

JOHN THE Baptist. (See St John the Baptist.)

JOHN THE EVANGELIST. (See St John the Evangelist.)

JOINVILLE, CHAILLON DE—An important personage in the Free-
masonry of the last century. In 1761, he was an active member
of the Council of Emperors of the East and West, or Rite of
Perfection, first established in 1758. He signed the patent of
Stephen Morin, authorizing the extension of the Rite to America,
calling himself Substitute General of the Order, Venerable
Master of the first Lodge in France, called St Anthony’s, Chief
of the Eminent Degrees, Commander and Sublime Prince of the
Royal Secret, which subsequently led to the establishment of
the Ancient and Accepted Rite in the United States. In 1762,
he was substituted for Lacorne as Substitute General by the
Prince of Clermont, Grand Master of France, but this proceeding
appears to have created considerable confusion and opposition in
the Craft. (See France.) Chaillon de Joinville appears to have
given as much dissatisfaction as his predecessor Lacorne, from
his issuing many irregular warrants and charters, and in con-
sequence of this, the former seems to have retired into Masonic
obscurity, about 1772, after the death of the Prince of Clermont.

JOKSHAN. (Hebrew jp, fowler; Sept. ’Is¥dv)—The second son
of Abraham and Keturah, whose sons appear to have been the
ancestors of the Sabzans and Dedanites, who inhabited part of
Arabia Felix (Gen. xxv. 2, 3).

JOKTAN. (Hebrew inp, small; Sept. "lexrdv)—A son of Eber, a
son of Shem, and regarded as the progenitor of several tribes in
South Arabia. He is called Kahten by the Arabs, and looked
upen as one of their principal heroes.

JONAH (Hebrew 12"; Sept. Iwvé&s)—The signification of this word
is dove (Gen. viii. 8); or, he who oppresses (Jer. xlvi. 16). He
was the son of Amithai (Hebrew ‘npx), a word derived from

388

jon] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedta.

[Jon

nN, Emeth, truth. The latter is no doubt the prophet spoken
of in 2 Kings xiv. 25, and the Hebrew commentators regard him
as the same person miraculously restored by Elijah (1 Kings
xvii, 17-24). Hesychius says, that among the Hebrews the word
Idnas signifies a revealer of the Word, or the voice of the Most
High; it is also found as Oannes. Sharpe (Historic Notes, p.
174) says of the book of Jonah: “It is a moral tale, and is not
to be taken for a true story. It was written to teach the Jews
that they were not the only people cared for by God; and that
the heathen nations also, if they repented of their wickedness,
would be forgiven and spared.” The book of Jonah, like many
of the prophets in the Hebrew canon, is mystical and very
difficult of explanation. This Jonah or Oannes is claimed, by a
very clever enthusiast, as the author or transmittor of the
Apocalypse. (See Hagle and Revelations.)

JONATHAN. (Hebrew jnn', Godgiven or Theodorus; Sept. ’Iuvdday).
—Eldest son of Saul, and heir apparent to the throne of united
Israel. He is alluded to in the American Trading Degree, or
Secret Monitor, and is also erroneously introduced into the
degree of Zelator in the Rosicrucian Rite of the London College.

JonES, InIGo.—A famous English architect, born in London, 15th
July, 1573, died 21st June, 1652, about seventy-nine years of
age. He erected many magnificent structures throughout England
during his long life, not a few of which remain to our own day,
and no doubt many more are ascribed to him. He was ap-
pointed king’s architect, and those who are anxious to carry
back Masonry have made use of the fact in relation to him. He
is asserted to have been Grand Master, and afterwards Deputy
Grand Master, from his undoubted connection with the Operative
Masons all over England. That there existed occult societies in
this country at the time, no one will be disposed to doubt; but
there is not sufficient historical evidence to say that the members
of these occult societies were Masons, in the modern acceptation
of the term. Elias Ashrnole was admitted a Mason at Warring-
ton, but those who have read the works of the alchymists
will see that the Masonry to which he referred was of a very
different character. Inigo Jones not improbably belonged to the
guild of Operative Masons, and very likely was aware that they
had Craft secrets protected by oaths. This question must
ever remain undecided, unless an undoubted series of documents,
bearing close scrutiny, remains to be discovered. It would seem
as if the work of Anderson, on which most of these hypotheses
are built, had been too hastily thrown together, ever to possess
much historical credit.

JONES, STEPHEN.— Born in London, 1764. Originally pace under

369

jor] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Jos.

a sculptor, owins to some difficulty, he was removed to the
office of a printer, where, from an apprentice, he rapidly rose to
be corrector of the press, and subsequently, in succession, editor
of the Whitehall Evening Post, of the General Evening Post, and
at last of the Luropean Magazine. He published several works.
of importance unconnected with Masonry, which were well
thought of in his day. As a Mason, Brother Jones held a good
position; he was a Past Master of the Lodge of Antiquity, an
intimate friend and the executor of William Preston, after the
death of whom he filled the office of Prestonian lecturer. His
“Masonic Miscellanies in Proseand Verse” were published in 1797,
and passed through more than one edition, the last being that of
1811. He wrote the article “Masonry, or Freemasonry,” in the
Encyclopedia Londinensis, and edited “Preston’s Illustrations of
Masonry” in 1821. It would not seem that he escaped the com-
mon lot of literary men, for, after having received some assist-
ance from the Literary Fund, he died, in very poor circum-:
stances, in King Street, Holborn, of dropsy, the 20th December,
1828. He seems to have been much liked by his contemporaries,.
and his amiability of character and unblemished life constitute
his qualifications for remembrance.

Joput (Hebrew *5i*).— The equivalent for beauty.

JorppaA—The seaport. of Jerusalem to which the timbers for the
Temple were brought on floats. The place is now called Jaffa.
Joram (Hebrew oy, excelsws).—One of the three architects sent

by Solomon to cause the timber to be cut and prepared.

JORDAN.—A river in Judea, on the banks of which a terrible
slaughter, alluded to in the second degree, took place, when the
Ephraimites were killed in their flight from Jephtha. (See
Ephraimites.)

JORDAN, ForDS OF THE.—Probably due east of the modern Seikoot,
and opposite Mizpah. It is here that the slaughter of the Ephrai-
mites most probably took place. (See Jordan and Lphraimites.)

JORDAN, KARL STEPHAN.—Privy Councillor to the King of Prussia;
born in 1700, and died in 1745. He was one of the founders of
the Lodge of the Three Globes at Berlin, and was Secretary of
it at the time of his decease.

JOSAPHAT, THE SON OF AHILUD.—The Orator in the degree of
Provost and Judge in the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

JOSEPH. (Hebrew 40i1', Sept. ’Iw049).—The son of Jacob and Rachel,
and whose history is familiar to us through Scripture. He is
mentioned in one of the degrees of the Order of Ishmael, and it
is also the designation of an officer of position in it.

JOSEPH II, or AUSTRIAW—A monarch, whowas at one time extremely

39°

Jos | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [you

favourable to Masonry, and who, in an edict, written in his own
hand, in 1785, used the following expressions: “In return for
their compliance with this ordinance, the government accords
to the Freemasons, welcome protection, and liberty, leaving
entirely to their own direction the control of their members, and
their constitutions. The government will not attempt to pene-
trate into their mysteries. Following these directions, the Order
of Freemasons, in which body are comprised a great number of
worthy men, who are well known to me, may become useful to
the state.” This edict was, however, rescinded in 1789, at the
instigation of the priests, and Austria proper has remained in a
very low condition, as to Freemasonry, to the present time, while
in the kingdom of Hungary, where Liberal principles have, after a
sad and protracted struggle, found a safe asylum, although under
the same head, Freemasonry is in vigorous health, and a useful
adjunct to public and private order and morality.

JOSEPHUS, Fiavius——A Jewish author of the first century, who
wrote a “ History of the Jews,” and other works, whence various
modern high degrees have derived the basis for the legends on
which they are founded. This author, although voluminous, is
not remarkable for accuracy either in fact or in desire; but his
works should not be omitted by the diligent student.

JOSHUA (Hebrew sw, Salvator).—1. Used in the thirty-second de-
gree of the Ancient and Accepted Rite. 2 The leader of the
Israelites after the death of Moses. (See Soter )

JOSHUA OR JESHUA.—The high priest who, conjointly with Zerub-
babel, the Prince of Judah, superintended the reconstruction of
the Temple, after the captivity in Babylon. He was high priest
by lineal descent, being the son of Josadek, son of Seraiah, high-
priest when the Temple was destroyed by the Chaldeans. He
is represented by the High Priest in the Royal Arch degree.

JourNEY.— Work by the day instead of by the task or piece. It is
said, in the Dowland MS., that “noe maister nor felowe, put
no lord’s work to taske that was want to goe to jornaye.” It
has no reference to travelling, but is from the Norman-French
journee, day.

JOURNEYMAN.—An operative mason, who has served his apprentice-
ship, beginning to work for himself, is called a journeyman ; and
within a reasonable period (in Scotland, two years), he was
required to qualify himself by admission into an operative
Lodge, when he became a Fellow Craft. Journeyman Lodge
No. 8 was an offshoot of the ancient Lodge of Edinburgh, and its
separation from the parent gave rise to proceedings at law The
distinction between Master and Fellow Craft was marked by
superior authority. This regulation was often infringed and

39t

jov] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yup

sometimes set at defiance; hence the jealous exclusion of un-
authorized persons or cowans, in the modern speculative Lodges.

Jova.—aA corruption of the Sacred Word, sometimes erroneously
used in the ligh degrees.

Jua or JEA—A corrupted mode of putting the sacred Jah or 7,
God or Tetragrammaton. Used in the eighth degree of the
Ancient and Accepted Rite.

JUBALCAIN.—Often erroneously used for po-dan, Thubalcain—
worldly possessions, in the third degree of the Scottish Rite.

JUBELA—The name of an assassin, probably derived from the
Latin Jubeo—I command. Used in the last century, and in
America now.

JUBELO.—The name of an assassin, derived by alliteration from
Jubela. (See Jubela.)

JUBELUM.—Drobably a wretched distortion of Chibbelum, used in
the rituals of the last century. (See Jubela.)

JUDAH.—Palestine was sometimes geographically called the land
of Judah, and probably from the political ascendency of the
tribe of Judah. The standard of Judah was a lion. “Judah is
a lion’s whelp.” (Genesis xlix. 9.)

JUDAH AND BENJAMIN.—These were the only tribes of ancient Israel
who returned with Zerubbabel to build the second Temple. Hence,
in the high degrees, which are founded on circumstances which
occurred after that event, the allusions made to the tribes only
concern Judah and Benjamin. The ten tribes were dispersed, and
have never been satisfactorily identified, hence they are known
as the Lost Tribes, A writer in the “Quarterly Review” re-
marks :—“ The country which is the scene of the events described
{i.¢., those of the war in Afghdnistan] is one of great and parti-
cular interest. In geographical position, Afghanistan bears a
resemblance to Switzerland. Looking back to the history of the
two countries, we may, perhaps, find that, notwithstanding the
advantage enjoyed by Helvetia in having Ceesar for its first
chronicler, Afghanistan has more in it to excite and reward the
diligence of the antiquary. We confess that we should, but
recently, have feared to incur ridicule, by even alluding to the
opinion of those who find in the Afghan tribes, the descendants
of the lost tribes of Israel; but we must say, that we think
no man need feel sensitive on that head, since the appearance of
the last arguments, pro et contra, by the Right Hon. Sir George
Rose. We cannot go into his details at present; but, to glance
merely at a few leading points, the fact of their own universal
tradition, their calling themselves, collectively, Bin Israel, Chil-
dren of Israel (though they repudiate with indignation the name

392

jup | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [JUD

of Yahoudi, or Jew), the, to us, new fact, that one particular
warlike tribe style themselves Eusofzie, or the tribe of Joseph,
and several others, taken together with the strongly Jewish cast
of the modern Afghan physiognomy, seem to rebuke the levity
hitherto prevalent in essays alluding to this conjecture about
their origin.” Sir William Jones also says—“ The Pushtoo lan-
guaye has a manifest resemblance to the Chaldaic.” Among
Afghan or Pushtoo words, we have 18 Aur, light; oNw, Samin,
heavens (of which the Pushtoo Asman, heaven, is only a dialectic
variation), 173, 2ahar, river, in the Pushtoo, Ning-nehar, nine
rivers. Their own legend is, that Nebuchadnezzar, after the
overthrow of the Temple of Jerusalem, transplanted them to the
town of Ghore, near Bamecan, and that they are called Afghans,
from their chief Afghana, a son of the uncle of Azof (the vizier
of Solomon), who was the son of Berkia. They say they lived
as Jews, till Kalid (called by the title of Kalif) summoned them
in the first century of Islam, to assist in the wars against the
infidels. For their services on this occasion, Kyse, their leader,
received the title of Abdulresheed, or Servant of the Just, and
he was told to consider himself the butan, or mast of his tribe;
and the Afghans have since been called Putans or Bootans.
They were governed for many centuries by the line of Kyarri, or
Cyrus, until the eleventh century, when they were subdued by
Mahmud of Ghuzni; another race of kings from Ghore, sub-
verted the house of Ghuzni, and conquered India. There were
tribes of Afghans, called Solimdni, or of the tribe of Solomon;
Dawoodzie, or the tribe of David; Ishakzye, the tribe of Isaac;
Esau-K hail, tribe of Esau; Moosa-Khail, tribe of Moses. From
the history of the Jews of Cochin, we learn that Moosa-Khail
was the title of the Levites after the Babylonish Captivity ; there
they are described as the Levites, Sons of Moses, Twn Ya DNDN,
dwelling beyond the Euphrates. To these tribes, we may add
the Jshmael-Khail, sons of Ishmael, and the Sauleh-Khail, or
clan of Saul. The lex talionis, which formed a portion of the law
of Moses, was strictly practised among the Afghans; “the injured
party is considered,” says Mr Elphinstone, “to be entitled to
strict retaliation on the aggressor ; an eye for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth, and so on.” Again, Sir Alexander Burnes tells us, that
“the Afghans look like Jews; they say they are descended
from the Jews; and the younger brother marries the widow of
the elder, according to the law of Moses.” The government is
strictly patriarchal. The Zwsofzie, or sons of Joseph, are the
representatives of the half tribe of Ephraim—the half tribe of
Manasseh reappearing in another part of India. Eusof is one
section of this tribe, possessing Sivaut, Punjcora, and Boonere ;
393

jup] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yuL

while the other branch, that of Munder, acquired the plain north
of the Cabul river, and the valley of Chumla. The country is
covered with names obviously of Jewish origin. The tribe of
Zebulon reappeared in Zablestan, the inhabitants of which claim
a similar descent. In Ptolemy’s Ninth Table, there is mention
made of certain tribes, as the ’Apsorépuao—Aristophyloi, or Noble
Tribes, a designation peculiarly apposite to the tribes of Israel,
and Ptolemy further locates these tribes with the Kabolite—the
Tribes connected with the modern Kabul and Kabulistén—derived
froin the Arabic é3, Kabilat, a tribe, pl. v5, Kabazl, tribes.
The tribe of Manasseh may be found in the neighbourhood of the
Caspian, among the Khozar Tatars, where is the Tos Manassa,
ros-Movavacoa, the far-banished Manasseh. Near the town of
Ashor (the seat of the Aorsf of Ptolemy) is the river and city of
Esther and Estherabad. The tribe of Issachar, again, has been
identified in Ptolemy’s eighth table of Asia, where he names
the mountains of Oayoup or Iewyoup, Thagur or Isagur, and his
Tdayoupor Or Iouy ovpo:—the Ithaguri or Isaguri, or Issachar. There
was also a town of Isagurus on the banks of the Indus, now
Ashnagor, in the Afghan country, and in the territory of Joseph
or Eusof. The Black Jews of Malabar are mentioned in the
Cochin Manuscript as Mw wai, the tanned, or sunblack,
Manasseh, and the name reappears as the black Naussers of
Elphinstone. The tribe of Simeon appears to be the same as the
Samnitz, between the Caspian Sea and the Lake of Aral. Asher
is perhaps discoverable in the same region. There has of late
years been an attempt made to identify the lost tribes of Israel
with the English, but it is so utterly at variance with anthropo-
logical facts, that it hardly bears discussion, and the possible
identification of Israe] with the North American Indians is yet
more unworthy of notice At any rate, the identity of the
Afghans has more in its favour than any other hypothesis.

JUDGE, GRAND.—Presiding Officer in a Grand Tribunal of the
Antient and Primitive Rite. See also Tribunal, Grand.

JupDITH (Hebrew n).—Used in French Adoptive Masonry, in
the fifth degree of Sovereign Illustrious Ecossaise.

Juc Lonces.——An epithet bestowed in America, during the absurd
Anti-Masonic excitement, upon unauthorised derisive bodies of
men, among whom it would seem there were some Masons lost
to all shame, who, for the trifling consideration of a jug of whisky,
professed to confer Masonic degrees upon fools weak enough to
listen to them. Mackey says these men were chiefly to be found
in the mountain ranges of North and South Carolina and Georgia.

JULIAN, EMPEROR (A.D. 355).—This learned prince was educated at

394

jum | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yun

the University of Athens, and was one of the most intellectual
personages of his time. Disgusted with the feuds between the
successors of the Primitive Christians, he attempted to re-establish
the pagan faiths in their pristine integrity, without persecuting
the new religion. He also endeavoured to rebuild the Temple
of Jerusalem, but circumstances defeated him. In his various
letters he evinces a large heart and comprehensive understanding,
and his Misopogon is replete with genuine wit and playful satire.
The whole character of this remarkable man has never received
adequate justice, and, as the centuries recede, his truly liberal
spirit has been more and more maligned. In his early life he
‘was modest and philosophical, as a soldier he was distinguished
for administrative ability, and as a monarch his impartiality was
rivid. As aman his conduct was moral and truly religious, but
the “unco guid” whose business is self-glorification and deprecia-
tion of what they do not wish, or dare not, to understand, invested
him with the title of the Apostate. Lord Eldon should be
excepted, as he on one occasion, from the bench, spoke of him
as Julian the Apostle.

JuMPER.—A long iron chisel, used by operative masons as a. lever.

JUNIOR ADEPT, (Junior Adeptus)—One of the degrees of the
German Rose-Croix.

JUNIOR ENTERED APPRENTICE.—In the rituals of the early part of
the last century, the Junior Entered Apprentice was stationed
in the North, and his duty was to keep out all cowans and eaves-
droppers; a duty often impossible at the present time, the East
being sometimes so situated as to preclude its performance. There
was also a Senior Entered Apprentice, and to some extent they
appear—before the creation of Deacons—to have in some degree
performed these duties. (See Senior Entered Apprentice.)

JUNIOR GENERAL—An officer in the Red Cross of Rome and
Constantine.

JUNIOR OVERSEER.—The lowest interior officer of a Mark Lodge in
America. Where the Mark degree is bestowed in Royal Arch
Chapters, as in that country, the Master of the First Veil occupies
the position.

Junior WaRDEN.—1. Third officer in a symbolic Lodge. He is
the president during the hours of refreshment; in the absence of
the Worshipful Master and the Senior Warden, he performs, in
America, the duty of presiding officer. Should the Master and
Senior Warden both happen to die during their term of office,
the Junior Warden, instructed by some experienced Past
Master, would rule the Lodge in the absence of other bet-
ter qualified officer, and until the next election. Jewel:—a
plumbline, symbolizing the rectitude of the conduct of the

395

yup] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. fyuR

brethren, which should distinguish them during the hours of
refreshment, or when beyond the precincts of the Lodge. His
place is in the South, and his pillar is that of Beauty, or the
Corinthian column, also representing the left hand pillar which
stood at the porch of the Temple. (See Wardens.) 2. In America,
the sixth officer in a Commandery of Knights Templar is also
denominated Junior Warden. He is charged with important
duties in reference to the reception of candidates. Jewel: an
Eagle holding a flaming sword—wavy or cherubic.

JUPITER, KNIGHT OF. (See Knight of Jupiter.)

JURISDICTION.—Grand Lodge has jurisdiction over all Lodges work-
ing within its territorial limits, and in localities where no Grand
Lodge has been erected. The political boundaries of a ‘country
or state are the usual definition of these limits, and it would be
contrary to law to charter a Lodge in any country if previously
occupied by another jurisdiction. The three Grand Lodges of
the United Kingdom, however, occupy the area of the British
Colonies in common, although they have waived their rights over
Canada. The Grand Lodge of Scotland has recently established
a Grand Lodge of Hindustan. The Continent does not so rigidly
adhere to this rule, however, and several Grand Lodges coexist
in Germany, but without any inharmonious results, The juris-
diction of a private Lodge in England extends to a control of the
Masonic conduct of its members, but in America it has also a
geographical jurisdiction; in England, non-attendance at the
Lodge is not considered a Masonic offence, and is simply regarded
as placing the member in a non-effective position, and very often
is a bar to advancement in office. In America, personal allegiance
to the Lodge continues, no matter how far off the member may
remove, unless he “ dimits” and joins another Lodge, when his
obedience is transferred. The Supreme Council of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite has jurisdiction over its subordinate members
wheresoever they may be. In the United States, there are two
Supreme Councils, one for the Northern States, and the other for
the Southern States. The Northern jurisdiction comprehends
Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Pennsylvania,
Ohio, Illinois, and Indiana; all other States and Territories
appertain to the jurisdiction of the Southern Supreme Council.
The various Masonic and semi-Masonic bodies, such as the Red
Cross of Rome and Constantine, the Rosicrucian Society, the
Antient and Archeological Society of Druids, and similar
associations, claim jurisdiction over their subordinate Conclaves,
Colleges, and Assemblies, by virtue of their several Constitutions.
The Order of the Temple is independent, as also the Grand Lodge

396

jus | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAA

of Mark Masters, and the Rite of Cryptic Masonry. The Order
of Ishmael has its own Jaws and government, as also the Rite of
Mizraim. The Sovereign Sanctuary of the Antient and Primi-
tive Rite also claims allegiance from its members, wheresoever
they may be.

JustTiceE.—1. One of the four cardinal virtues of which the initiate
is reminded in the first degree. In iconology, Justice is repre-
sented as a matron with bandaged eyes, holding in one hand a
sword, and in the other a pair of scales in equipoise; in Masonry,
however, as every Brother knows, the true symbol is different
to this. 2. A word used in the thirty-first degree of the Scot-
tish Rite, and also in the fifth degree of the French Adoptive Rite.

JUSTIFICATION.—Fifth degree in the Rite of Fessler,—which see.

Just Lopce.—tThe following circumstances essentially constitute
a Just, Perfect, and Regular Lodge. It is Just, when furnished
with the Three Great Lights; Perfect, when it contains the con-
stitutional number of members; and Regular, when in possession
of a warrant from a legally constituted authority.

K.

K.—The eleventh letter of the English alphabet, derived from the
Greek K, xarra. It is usually denominated a guttural, but is
more properly a palatal. As a numeral, K stands for 250; and
with a stroke over it, K for 250,000. The word WIP (Kodesch),
Holiness, is appropriated as the name of God under this letter.

Kaasa, AL.—The name of the great temple at Mecca, as sacred
tothe Mohammedans as the Temple of Solomon was to the Jews.
It was appointed in the Koran as the great place of general
worship in the following passage :—“ But they who shall dis-
believe, and obstruct the way of God, and hinder men from
visiting the holy temple of Mecca, which we had appointed for
a place of worship unto all men—the inhabitant thereof, and the
stranger, have an equal right to visit it; and whosoever shall
seek impiously to profane it, we will cause him to taste a grievous
torment. Call to mind when we gave the site of the house of
the Kaaba for an abode unto Abraham, saying, Do not associate
anything with me; and cleanse my house for those who com-
pass it, and who stand up, and who bow down to worship. And
proclaim unto the people a solemn pilgrimage; let them come
unto thee on foot, and on every lean camel, arriving from every
distant road; that they may be witnesses of the advantages
which accrne to them from the visiting this holy place, and may
commemorate the name of God on the appointed days, in grati-

397

KAA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAA

tude for the brute cattle which he hath bestowed on them
Wherefore eat thereof, and feed the needy and the poor. After-
wards let them put an end to the neglect of their persons; and
let them pay their vows, and compass the ancient house. This
let them do. And who ever shall regard the sacred ordinances
of God, this will be better for him in the sight of his Lord.”
(Kordn, Surat xxii.) The Arabs had been accustomed to go in
pilgrimage to Mecca, in accordance with the command of Abra-
ham, who, the Arabs say, ascended the mountain Abu Robeis,
near Mecca, and thence proclaimed—*“ O men, perform the pil-
grimage to the house of your Lord.” The Arabs went thither to
celebrate the memory of Abraham and. Ismael. The Kordn
says (Surat ii.) —‘ And when we appointed the holy house of
Mecca to be a resort for mankind, and a place of security, and
said, Take the station of Abraham for a place of prayer; and we
covenanted with Abraham and Ismael, that they should purify
my temple from the idols which are around it, and from those
that are within it, and from their worshippers. And when
Abraham said, Lord, make this a territory of security, and
Lounteously bestow fruits on its inhabitants, such of them as
believe in God and the last day; God answered, I will extend
my gifts even to the unbelievers, but they shall enjoy little.
They shall be condemned to the flames, and deplorable shall be
their end. And when Abraham and Ismael raised the founda-
tions of the house, saying, Lord, accept it from us, for thou art
He who heareth and knoweth; Lord, make us also resigned unto
thee, and of our posterity a people resigned unto thee, and show
us our holy ceremonies, and be turned unto us, for thou art easy
to be reconciled, and merciful: Lord, send them likewise an
wpostle from among them, who may declare their signs unto
them, and teach them the book of the Koran and wisdom, and
may purify them; for thou art mighty and wise. Who will be
averse to the religion of Abraham, but he whose mind is infa-
tuated? Surely we have chosen him in this world, and in that
which is to come he shall be one of the righteous, When his
Lord said unto him, Resign thyself unto me; he answered, I have
resigned myself unto the Lord of all creatures. And Abraham
bequeathed this religion to his children, and Jacob did the same,
saying, My children, verily God hath chosen this religion for
you, therefore die not, unless ye also be resigned. Were ye
present when Jacob was at the point of death? when he said to
his sons, Whom will ye worship after me? They answered, We
will worship thy God, and the God of thy fathers, Abraham, and
Ismael, and Isaac, one God, and to Him will we be resigned. . . .
Say, x ay, we follow the religion of Abraham the orthodox, who
39

KAA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

was no idolater.” The Kaaba is of a cubical form, twenty-four
cubits from north to south, twenty-three cubits from east to west,
and twenty-seven cubits high—with one aperture to admit light
at the door in the east end. The north-east corner contains the
black stone, which is traditionally supposed to have come down
from Paradise, as white as milk; but it has become black in con-
sequence of the wickedness of mankind. Syed Ahmed, a modern
Mohammedan author, says it is a piece of rock from the vicinity
of Mecca, which has been blackened by fire. Its position reminds
us of the foundation stone of Solomon’s temple. The Kaaba is
contained within the Masjad al alhardm, the sacred or inviolable
temple. On the north side of the Kaaba is the white stone, the
reputed tomb of Ismael, and to the east is the place cr station
of Abraham. The Kaaba has a double roof, and is richly decor-
ated with gold and hangings. The legendary history of the
Kaaba is, that Adam, after his expulsion from Paradise, begged
of Allah to be allowed to erect a building like that which he
had seen in that blessed place; whereupon Allah let down a
representation of it in curtains of light, and placed it at Mecca,
immediately under its original ; but, according to others, it was
the edifice itself which was thus transferred from heaven to earth,
being taken up again at the time of the Deluge. The former
tradition, however, says, that Seth, after Adam’s death, built a
similar house of stones and clay, and this being destroyed by the
Flood, was rebuilt by Abraham and Ismael. It was certainly
rebuilt by the Koreish, a few years after the birth of Mohammed,
on the old foundation, repaired by Abdallah Ebn Zobeir, Khalif
of Mecca, and at last rebuilt in its present form by Yusof, sur-
named Al Hejaij Ebn Yasof, in the seventy-fourth year of the
Hijra. There is a prophecy by tradition, attributed to Mohammed,
that at the last days, when the final judgment will take place,
this holy place will be destroyed by the Ethiopians. When
Mecca was taken by Mohammed, he took the keys of the Kaaba
into his possession, but was directed by a revelation (Kordn,
Surat. iv.) to return them to Othman Ebn Telha Ebn Abdaldar,
who had then the honour to be their keeper. Othman was so
affected at the justice of this action, although he had at first
refused entrance to the Prophet, that he immediately embraced
Mohammedanism, whereupon, according to Al Beidéwi, the
custody of the sacred place was confirmed to him and his heirs
for ever.

KasBaLaH (Hebrew, mdap. from the root 92? to recctve).—Prac-
tically speaking, the doctrine of Kabbalah refers to the system
handed down by oral transmission, and is nearly allied to M7110,
tradition. Before it was accepted in the sense in which we now

399

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

generally adopt it, 7.2, as a species of traditional sagehioa of pre-
serving and handing down moral and occult truths, both in
metaphysics, and the natural operations of a peculiar and special
system of cosmogony— illustrating the nexus between God and
man—the term had been applied hypothetically to doctrines in
relation to the creeds of the world before the patriarchal func-
tions had commenced; to the interpretation of the mysterious
interview between Moses and the All High upon the mount;
and various other ideas having in their main essence the object
of the preservation and transmission of knowledge, veiled under
the symbolism, and protected by the mysterious inter-relations
of the system, alphabetical and numerical, of the Hebrew letters.
Although very remote from our own times, it is quite clear that
other nations possessed systems of a nature akin to the Kab-
balah ; but in no case has it been worked out with such signal
ability, and illustrated by such learning and profundity of
thouvht, as by the Jews and their Christian disciples. While
the Hindus of an early period sought to represent their mathe-
matical and mystical notions by huge figures of an emblematical
nature, which they are erroneously supposed to have worshipped,
the Hebrews, on the other hand, with a caution commanding our
respect, elaborated their system of numerical notation until it
was regarded by the ages preceding us as ineffable and sublime,
not to be approached ~ without awe, nor to be attained without
submission. Thus the system came to be known as the Holy
Kabbalah, and those who followed its patient inductions were
celebrated throughout all times as men of noble and exhaustive
thought, willing to undergo all things for the preservation of the
sacred lore transmitted to, by, and through them. This body
of learning formed the Mischnah. It would be useless to insert
any notice of the Kabbalah in this work, unless it were warranted
by the authority of men connected with occult inquiries. These
men were all distinguished in their various ways, and the recital
of their names would, to the student, recall august circumstances.
Before naming these, however, we must recur to the historical
facts connected with this high and holy science. The first
person who dared to commit any portion of this science to
writing was Simon Ben Jochai, who lived at the time of the
destruction of the Second Temple; and even he had great diffi-
culty in preserving his life, and the knowledge in his possession—
living retired in a cave for twelve years, having been condemned
to death by Titus. It is not to be supposed. that.the Romans,
who were generally tolerant of the religious ideas of other
nations, meant to destroy those beliefs, as enjoyed by indivi-
duals; but the very tumultuous and rebellious spirit evinced by
400

KAB] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

the inhabitants of the frontier provinces of Syria, from the
time of the Maccabees and others, drew specific attention to the
necessity of its total subjection to the Roman cagles; and hence
an intensified feeling gradually grew up, which extended itself
to the ranks of the Roman army, and ultimated in the siege and
destruction of Jerusalem—particularly when it had been reported
at Rome that a new king had arisen in the form of Jesus, The
intestine disorders appeared impossible of cure without severe
measures, and the manifest impotence of Pontius Pilate, in re-
straining the religious fury of the Sanhedrim, caused the matter
to be taken seriously in hand. If we may judge from the actions
of Pontius Pilate, and from the correspondence between Plinius
the Younger and Trajan, there was no intention of interfering
with religious sentiment, so long as it remained faithful to the
laws and ordinances of the empire; but to lose the Oriental
frontier, where powerful enemies were continually at work, was
a matter not to be contemplated without apprehension. Leaders
of all kinds kept starting up, and therefore there was paramount
and urgent necessity for prompt measures of repression. The
siege took place, Jerusalem surrendered, and the Jews and the
nascent sect of Christians were alike dispersed before the
victorious standards of Vespasian. Such was the political
situation; and in the common ruin were involved many branches
of occult learning, unfamiliar, and, therefore, distasteful, if not
abhorrent, to the political governors. Thought was persecuted
then for the same reason that it is now discouraged; men were
afraid of its subtle and sapping influence; and, like modern
Papal Rome, they preferred material, and almost meaningless
ideas, to the doctrines promulgated by nameless and powerless
fugitives. One of these fugitives was the Rabbi Simon Ben
Jochai, who remained in his cavern for twelve years, and, like
all recluses, became a visionary, asserting that he was visited by
the Prophet Elias. A small number of persons visited him, and
gathered from his mouth divine precepts, subsequently formed
by his son Rabbi Eliezer, and his secretary Rabbi Abba, into the
famous Sohar, or more correctly Zohar, 1M, we., splendour. This
work, the Sepher Jetzirah (which see), and the Commentary of the
Ten Sephiroth, make up the body and foundation of the Kab-
balah. Strange and marvellous tales are told of the death of
Simon Ben Jochai. For instance, it is related, that while con-
versing on his doctrines, in the presence of his disciples, he
suddenly expired, and scarcely had his spirit departed, than the
cavern was filled with dazzling light, so that no one could
see the Rabbi—a mode of departure which again reminds us of
the apotheosis of other renowned mystics, and which perhaps
2c 4ol

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

gave rise to the notion of the vulgar devil vanishing in a flame
of fire. Upon this a burning fire appeared beyond the mouth of
the cavern, acting as a guard against intruders. “It was not,”
says Ginsburg, “till the light inside, and the fire outside, had
disappeared, that the disciples of Israel perceived that the lamp
of Israel was extinguished.” His funeral was prepared, and then
a voice was heard from the heavens, saying—“ Come ye to the
matriage of Simon Ben Jochai; he is entering into peace, and shall
rest in his chamber.” The reader may here, we think, profitably
refer to the article on Gichtel, and his marriage with the divine
Sophia, And upon this the disappearance is completed by a flame
preceding the coffin, which was enveloped in fire. On the re-
mains being deposited in the tomb, another voice was heard from
heaven, saying—* This is he who caused the earth to quake,
and the kingdoms to shake!” The latter expression is curious,
because it is applicable as well to the Founder of Christianity,
and was probably an ejaculation made at the time when any
eminent Rabbi was interred. As we are only at present
interested with the historical, and not the philosophical, side of
the Kabbalah, it is perhaps better to consider next the exact
doctrine taught by Simon Ben Jochai, and therefore its historical
origin. For, from the state of an ancient doctrine, and the
absolute credible facts concerning its evolution, can we alone
ascertain the truthfulness of such a doctrine. We will hence
commence with Simon Ben Jochai’s own teaching, affirmed by him
to have been received by the Holy Tradition of Ages. According
to him, the system of Kabbalah was first taught by God Himself
to a certain number of angels—it may be presumed the immediate
messengers of His will—who, according to modern theosophic
schools of the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries, had
certain duties allotted to them in relation to the planets, or they
were identified as the souls or spirits of those planets themselves.
It is, however, clear, that the anthropomorphistic religion of Jesus
Christ and of Krishna (see Krishna) was much at variance
with this doctrine of angel-worship, although it resembled it in
some degree. No idea had then arisen of a possible inter-relation
between all bodies of the planetary system, otherwise than that
of astrology (see Astrology); and our time has shown that the
prophetic voice, or interior understanding of S. T. Coleridge, out-
valued many dogmas of science, and led the way to the creative
God of Masonry. The Kabbalists themselves saw this difficulty,
and shut out the En Soph and the En Soph Aur from any human
appreciation. These angels or spirits of the planets, if we may
trust Aureolus Bombastes Paracelsus, entered upon their eternal

task-—the reformation of mankind—upon the expulsion of the
402

KAB| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

mystical Adam ; and one angel conveyed to him a book, known
indifferently by the name of the Book of Raziel, Aziel, or Ariel.
Portraits of hideous personages, in the worst taste of the worst
stage of art, are in the writer’s possession, professedly derived
from magicians or seers, but probably the result of many
centuries of terrorism. With the decadence of Greece, and the
moral and political supremacy of Ancient Rome, there was a
gradual depreciation in art, almost unappreciable at first, but
distinctly visible to those who have studied art canons. Itisa
singular fact, that as the modern faith of the world progressed,
it was accompanied by this successive declension in the arts, and
the sublimest objects of mind became typified in visible forms,
The same process took place in Hindustan and China at a very
remote time. The idea, however, at present fixed in the general
modern mind, of an angel, is that of a man of youthful demeanour,
with wings at his back, in which position, were he not an abstrac-
tion, according to all physical laws, he could not fly. We shall
see the same idea, in its proper metaphysical reality, in another
part of this article. There is probably some truth in the state-
ment that Abraham was acquainted with the doctrine of Aur or
Light, as he is actually described as coming from Ur of the
Chaldees ; by which itis probably meant, that he came instructed
from one of the ancient Chaldean colleges in which this mystical
doctrine was taught, and in process of time the principles of the
science found a home in Egypt, where Moses received his educa-
tion, and in the course of his wanderings throughout the East
he probably attained a higher degree of initiation. It is impos-
sible for the modern archeologist to question the derivation of
the Mosaic cosmogony from the Mesopotamian countries, the
recent discoveries placing this fact beyond dispute. Those who
read the Pentateuch with the light of the Kabbalah will per-
ceive its system throughout the first four books, but little is to
be gathered from the Book of the Later Law. The seventy
elders were then initiated by Moses, and made the depositaries of
the secrets connected with the interpretation of the sacred books,
and in a Masonic manner they were transmitted to others; and
it is claimed that David and Solomon were amongst those chiefly
instructed in its mysteries. One of the names bestowed upon
the science was that of Secret Wisdom (TINIAN), on account
of its oral transmission. If the initials of these words are taken,
they form the word Grace, }’1, the classical name of this theo-
sophy. The principal doctrines of the Kabbalah are designed
for the solution of the problems concerning—1. The nature of
the Supreme Being; 2. The cosmogony; 3. The creation of
angels and man; 4. The destiny of man and angels; and 5. The
403

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

import of the revealed law. We will first consider the nature of
the Supreme Being, and the doctrine and classification of the
emanations or Sephiroth. God being of an infinite unity (see
God), He is in this system called Hn Soph (41D }'X) = 1) whiy =
cémeipos, Endless, Boundless, It is impossible to comprehend Him
by the intellect, or describe Him in words; in fact, in a certain
sense, He is non-existent (fx), as that which cannot be com-
prehended must be looked upon as such. In order that this
existence should be perceptible, the En Soph had to become
active and creative; but this it was impossible for him to be in
a direct manner, he possessing neither will, intention, desire,
thought, language, nor action, such properties being attributes of
limited and finite beings. Thus the En Soph was the creator of
the universe in an indirect manner. The medium by which this
existence was made known was by the ten Sephiroth (ny‘»p), or
intelligences, emanating from En Soph in the following way :—
At first En Soph, or the Aged of the Aged (NYT Np‘ny), or the
Holy Aged (RwIp Npyny), sent forth from his infinite light one
spiritual substance, the first Sephira, called the Crown, Kether (n>),
from its occupying the highest position. It has six other names—
1. The Aged (Xpny), as the oldest emanation; 2. The Primordial
Point, or the Smooth Point (ANWR TINPI or MMW) MN); 3.
The White Head (HAMM NW); 4. The Long Face (DIX TN);
5. The Inscrutable Height (Moy DN); and 6. Khejeh, or I am
(m7), Exod. iii. 4. This first Sephira contained the other nine,
and thus brought them forth ; (2.) Chochma or Wisdom (M2311), a
masculine active potency, represented among the divine names
by Jah (7), Is. xxvi. 4, and among the angelic hosts by Ophanim
(ODN, Wheels); and from this potency proceeded a feminine
passive potency denominated (3.) Intelligence (Binah, 133), re-
presented by the divine name Jehovah (717), and angelic name
Arelim (DRX), and from a union of these two Sephiroth, also
called Father, Abba (wax), and Mother, Amona (syn), the other
seven proceeded. Chochma and Binah being joined together by
the first potency, Kether, thus yielded the first triad of the
Sephiroth. This union of the second and third potencies pro-
duced (4.) Mercy or Love, Chesed (1011), also called Greatness
(sta) or Gedulah, a masculine potency represented by the
divine name Ei (x), and the angelic name Chashmalim (p‘»nwm),
comp. Ezek. i.4. From this emanated (5.) the feminine passive
potency Geburah, Judicial Power (11123) or Din, Justice (3),
represented by the divine name Hloha (75x), and the angeélic
name Seraphim (obi), Isa, vi. 6; and from these issued (6.) the
uniting potency Tiphereth, Beauty or Mildness (NNDN), re-
presented by the divine name Elohim (oy7)x), and the angelic
404

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

name Shinanim (dD NIW), Ps, xviii. 18. Thus by the union of
Justice and Mercy, we obtain Beauty or Clemency, and the
second triad of the Sephiroth is completed. From Beauty came
the masculine potency (7.) Netzah, or Firmness (72), correspond-
ing to the divine name Jehovah Tsabaoth (MX1I¥ MM), and the
angelic name Tarshishim (D'w'win), Dan. x. 6; from this pro-
ceeded the feminine passive potency (8.) Hod, or Splendour (1117),
answering to the divine name Elohim Tsabaoth (mxax pty),
and among the angels to Beni Elohim, or Sons of God (o‘7>x 22),
Gen. vi. 4. These two produced (9.) Jesod, Foundation, or the
Basis (310), represented by Zl Chaz (‘1 >), the Mighty Living
One, and among the angels by Jshim (OWR), Ps. civ. 4,
yielding the third triad of the Sephiroth. From this ninth
Sephira came the tenth, called Malchuth, or Kingdom (min),
and Shechinah (m2w), represented by the divine name Adonai
("3377"), and among the angelic hosts by Cherubim (D‘ANnD).
These, again, severally corresponded to the ten principal
members of the body—1. Head; 2. Brains; 3. Heart; 4. Right
Arm; 5. Left Arm; 6. Chest; 7. Right Leg; 8. Left Leg;
9. Reproductive Organs; and 10. Union of the whole Body.
Such were the ten Sephiroth, upon which the mystical
and magical speculation of the Hebrew Kabbalists and their
Christian successors were built. These Sephiroth have also
astrological relations:—Kether is Destiny and the Unknown
Will, and is under the planet Saturn (%). Chochma is Resist-
ing Wisdom, and under Jupiter (1). Binah is Motion, Liberty,
and in chiromancy is placed on the mount of Mercury (%)—
referring to activity, science, commerce, and inventive genius.
Hesed or Gedulah is Love or Greatness (Venus Urania), and
placed in chiromancy on the mount of Venus (?)—representing
in our world Charity. Geburah, Justice, is in antagonism with
Charity, and is placed on the mount of Mars. Tiphereth, Beauty,
is Apollo or the Sun (©). Netsah or Victory is placed at the
base of the third phalange of the thumb, and typifies the triumph
of progress over matter, which it subjugates and directs. Hod
is placed below force or Mars (3%), and above Luna () )—the
Moon or imagination, forming the science of good and evil.
Jesod is placed below the moon, but has a correspondence with
the sun; representing imagination in process of becoming
supreme intelligence and truth itself, when illuminated by the
sun, the source of nature. Malchuth is placed at the wrist,
between the arm, matter, and the hand, intelligence. We must
now return to the system as delivered through Simon Ben Jochai.
He asserted, as we have seen, that he was in communication with
Elias, who revealed to him that God, in His absolute nature, is
495

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

unknown and incomprehensible; and thus, to use the language
of the Kabbalah, “ Before He gave any shape to the world, before
He produced any form, He was alone, without a form and resem-
blance to anything else. Who, then, can comprehend Him how
He was before the creation, since He was formless? Hence it is
forbidden to represent Him by any form, similitude, or even by
His sacred name, by a single letter, or a single point.” To this
the words (Deut. iv. 15) refer—*“ Ye saw no manner of similitude
on the day that the Lord spake unto you.” “But after He
created the form of the Heavenly Man (mxby O78), He used it
as a, chariot (712277) wherein to descend, and wishes to be called
by this form, which is the sacred name Jehovah.” In the Jdra
Suta, Zohar iii. 288a, another description is given :—“The Aged
of the Aged, the Unknown of the Unknown, has a form, and yet
no form. He has a form whereby the universe is preserved, and
yet has no form, because He cannot be comprehended. When
He first assumed the form [of the first Sephira], He caused nine
splendid lights to emanate from it; which, shining through it,
diffused a bright light in all directions. Imagine an elevated light
sending forth its rays in all directions. Now, if we approach it
to examine the rays, we understand no more than that they
emanate from the said light. So is the Holy Aged an absolute
light, but in Himself concealed and incomprehensible. We can
only comprehend Him through those luminous emanations
(niv5np), which, again, are partly visible and partly concealed.
These constitute the sacred name of God.” In their totality and
unity, the ten Sephiroth represent the Archetypal Man, Adam
Kadmon (7127p DIN) = zpwrdyovos. In looking at the Sephiroth
constituting the first triad, it is evident they represent the intel-
lect ; and hence this triad is called the Intellectual World (ow
bounna). The second triad corresponds to the Moral or Sensuous
World (wanva pw); and the third represents power and stability,
and is therefore called the Material World (ynuyan py); and
these three aspects are called the Faces (j'D28 and PDwID =
axpsowror, Thus the Tree of Life (OT py), or the Tree (]'*X), is
formed as in the following diagrams. The first triad being
placed above, the second and third below, in such a manner that
the three masculine Sephiroth are on the right, the three
feminine, on the left, whilst the four uniting Sephiroth occupy
the centre. This is the Kabbalistic Tree of Life, on which things
depend having an analogy to the tree Ygedrasil of the Scandi-
navian mythology.

406

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

KETHER £4 SOPH

INAH y
GEBURAH CHESED
Ee
a NETZAN
vESOO
MALCHUTR

The three Sephiroth on the right representing Chesed are called
the Pillar of Mercy; the three on the left representing Geburah
form the Pillar of Judgment; while the four Sephiroth in the
centre representing Mildness (O1r1mm) are known as_ the
Middle Pillar. Each Sephira composing the trinity of triads is
in itself a trinity, having its own absolute character, receiving
from above and communicating to what is below. There is an
analogy in these three pillars to the three Pillars of Wisdom,
Strength, and Beauty in a Craft Lodge of Masonry, while the
En Soph forms the mysterious blazing star or mystic light of the
East. The Kabbalistic Cosmogony is another topic of vast
interest, upon which we have little space to dilate here, as a full
description would in itself occupy a volume, and therefore it is
better to refer the student to Franck and Ginsburg for an
extended exposition, and, for the scholar, H. Khunrath’s three
rare quartos, the Kabbala Denudata, would be the best guide.
It may be, however, mentioned that the theory of a prior creation
and destruction of worlds is amply illustrated in Kabbalistic
407

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

philosophy. The Zohar says, “There were old worlds, which
perished as soon as they came into existence: were formless, as
they were called sparks. Thus the smith, when hammering the
iron, lets the sparks fiy in all directions. These sparks are the
primordial worlds which could not continue, because the Sacred
Aged had not as yet assumed his form [of opposite sexes—the
king and queen], and the Master was not yet at his work.”—Jdra
Suta, Zohar, iii. 292b. The idea that worlds were created and
destroyed before the present creation was propounded in the
Midrash long before the existence of the Kabbalah. Rabbi
Abahu, in the Bereshith Rabba, Parsha ix., expressly says, “From
this we see that the Holy One, blessed be He, had successively
created and destroyed sundry worlds before He created the
present world; and when He created the present world, He said,
This pleases me; the previous ones did not please me”—alluding
in this place to Gen. i. 31. And if the question be asked, “ Why
were these primordial worlds destroyed? the Zohar answers,
“ Because the Man, represented by the ten Sephiroth, was not as
yet. The human form contains everything; and, as it did not
as yet exist, the worlds were destroyed.” Anditis added, “ Still
when it is said that they perished, it is only meant thereby that
they lacked the true form, till the human form came into being,
in which all things are comprised, and which also contains all
those forms. Hence, though the Scripture assigns death (nv)
to the kings of Edom, it only denotes a sinking down from their
dignity, 7.2, the worlds up to that time did not answer to the
Divine idea, since they had not as yet the perfect form of which
they were capable.”—Jdra Suta, Zohar, iii. 13856. Thus the
En Soph having assumed the Sephiric form, this present world
became permanent; and it is from this Archetypal Man that
Swedenborg derived the notion, so constantly elaborated in his
writings, of the Grand Man. That Swedenborg was a Hermetic
philosopher has been clearly proved by General Hitchcock in his
works on Alchymy, Swedenborg, and the Essenes—books which
are at present not known as they deserve to be. One of the
doctrines of the Zohar is strikingly like that of the Tablet of
Emerald (see Smaragdine Tablet), especially thus expressed :—
“The lower world is made after the pattern of the upper world;
everything which exists in the upper world is to be found as it
were in a copy upon earth; still the whole is one.”—Zohar,
ii. 20a. What is this other than the Swedenborgian doctrine
of correspondences upon which his whole system is based.?
The Kabbalists, it will be seen, did not admit of a creation ev
athilo, but an expansion of the Sephiroth emanating from the
En SOP: Thus in the Zohar (i. 20a) we read,—* The Indi-
40

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

visible Point (the Absolute), who has no limit, and who cannot
be comprehended because of his purity and brightness, expanded
from without, and formed a brightness which served as a cover-
ing to the Indivisible Point, yet it too could not be viewed in
consequence of its immeasurable light. It, too, expanded from
without, and this expansion was its garment. Thus everything
originated through a constant upheaving agitation, and thus
finally the world originated.” This bears out many of the pro-
positions enunciated in a previous article (see Lgg, Mundane).
Everything, too, must return to the source whence it emanated ;
and the Zohar says—‘ All things of which this world consists,
spirit as well as body, will return to their principal, and the
roots from which they proceeded” (ii. 2180). And again—“ He
is the beginning and end of all the degrees in the creation. All
these degrees are stamped with his seal, and he cannot be other-
wise described than by the unity. He is one, notwithstanding the
innumerable forms which are in him” (Zohar, i. 21a). These
Sephiroth, or the World of Emanations (mux dW), or the
Aitzilatic World, gave birth to three other worlds:—(1.) The World
of Creation, or the Briatic World (AX AT Dy), also called the
Throne (8077), the abode of pure spirits; also consisting of ten
Sephiroth, reflections of the former, in turn giving birth to
(2.) the World of Formation, or the Jetziratic World, (TV2T Ddry),
the habitation of the angels (or nox), which sent forth (3.) the
World of Act on, or the Assiatie World (rwyn dd’), also
called the World of Keliphoth (mip%pm vd), containing the
Spheres (o%y353) and Matter, the residence of the Prince of Dark-
ness and his legions. The doctrine of the Trinity is thus spoken
of in the Zohar, but, of course, not in the sense adopted by Chris-
tian theologists—* Whoso wishes to have an insight into the
Sacred Unity, let him consider a flame rising from a burning coal
ora burning lamp. He will see first a twofold light—a bright
white, and a black or blue light; the white light is above, and
ascends in a direct light; whilst the blue, or dark light, is below,
and seems as the chair of the former, yet both are so intimately
connected together that they constitute only one flame. The
seat, however, formed by the blue or dark light, is again con-
nected with the burning matter which is under it again. The
white light never changes its colour: it always remains white ;
but various shades are observed in the lower light, whilst the
lowest light, moreover, takes two directions; above it is connected
with the white light, and be/ow with the burning matter. Now
this is constantly consuming itself, and perpetually ascends to
the upper light, and thus everything merges into a single unity”
(Zohar, i. 51a). It thus follows that the creation, or universe, is
499

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | KAB

the garment of God, woven from his own substance, as it is
expressed by Goethe in Faust—

** Ein wechselnd Weben,
Ein glithend Leben,
So schaff’ ich am sausenden Webstuhl der Zeit
Und wirke der Gottheit lebendiges Kleid.”

‘* A seizing and giving
The fire of living,
*Tis thus at the roaring Loom of Time I ply
And weave for God the garment thou seest Him by.”

Mr Carlyle in this translation exactly appreciates the Kabbalistic
idea, for the Zohar says (i. 2a):—“ When the Concealed of all
the Concealed wanted to reveal himself, he first made a point
(ie. the first Sephira), shaped it into a sacred form (ze, the
whole of the Sephiroth), and covers it with a rich and splendid
garment, that is, the world.” We have now to consider the
doctrine of the Kabbalah in reference to the creation of men and
angels, the latter creation being precedent. In the universal
mirror or archetypal man nothing lives except the reflections of
the lower worlds; it exists of itself, and by reason of the En Soph
or Creator. The angel of the second or Briatic World is Metatron
(jwnM), being the first habitable world, constituting the world
of pure spirits. The name of this angel is Kabbalistically equiva-
lent to that of El Shaddai or the Mighty Omnipotent One (‘Tw’).
By position, Metatron is governor of the visible world: he pre-
serves the unity and guidance of all the planets and heavenly
bodies. Metatron signifies dyyzAog, messenger, and by some he
is called Great Teacher. Under him are the angels of the
Jetziratic World, in which the ten Sephiroth are divided into
ten orders, Each of these angels has a different function, pre-
siding over certain things partly within the scheme of astrology,
and in other particulars very distinct from that science; hence
tending back to the Table of Human Progress previously given in
this book. These angels inhabit or vivify this world as essential
intelligences, and their correlates and logical contraries inhabit
the third habitable world, called the Assiatic ; they are called the
shells (map) or demons, forming ten degrees in which darkness
increases downwards with the greater imperfection. They are
provided with suitable miserable habitations, and, according
to some views, the long prolonged fable concerning Tartarus
hell, and punishment, arose from this theory of the Kabbalah,
really meaning nothing more than natural light and shade,
These seven habitations are called Sheba Hachaloth (nda yaw),
410

KAB | The Royal Masonie Cyclopedia. [KAB

occupied by the demons (the incarnations of all human vices),
torturing the poor deluded beings who suffered themselves to be led
astrayin this world; and are divided into numerous compartments,
so as to afford a place of torture or expiation for every kind of
sin. The chief governor is a prince, called by the Kabbalah
Samaél (>xmp), being the angel of poison or death, He was the
seducing serpent Satan; the Talmud saying, that “the evil
spirit Satan and the angel of death are the same. It is pro-
pounded in the Boraitha that he descends and seduces, he then
ascendsand accuses,and then comes downagain and kills.”—(Baba
Bathra, 16a)—His wife is the woman of the Mystical Babylon
(ox Nw), and united they represented the beast (871).
(Compare the Zohar, ii. 255-259, with i. 35 6.) Wecan see from
this doctrine of the Kabbalah whence the idea of the fall of the
angels was derived. It has always been an indistinct and almost
apocryphal legend, but great light is thrown on the origin of evil
by a consideration of this peculiar mythology. It should be like-
wise remembered, that man did not exist in the world at the
epoch of these events, and chaos brooded over the inchoate
universe. Man was at length created by the ten Sephiroth (the
Heavenly Adam), and they engendered by common power the
earthly Adam. The Zohar says—“ Man is both the import and
the highest degree of creation; for which reason he was created
on the sixth day. As soon as man was created everything was
complete, including the upper and nether worlds, for everything
is comprised in man. He unites in himself all forms” (iii. 48a).
We here observe that worship of man commencing which has
passed through the stages of the deification of individuals and the
general anthropomorphistic worship, capped by the miserable
delusion of bleeding statues of saints and winking Madonnas.
This new being, man, was created with faculties far transcending
those of the angels, being of a progressive and not intransitive
nature. Nor were the protoplastic bodies formed of that matter
of which our mortal frames are constituted. That reflection of
the original En Soph still dwelt on earth in the first instance,
and the matter of the mythical Adam and Eve was luminously
ethereal. The Zohar says on this point—<« When Adam dwelled
in the garden of Eden, he was dressed in the celestial garment
which is a garment of heavenly light. But when he was expelled
from the garden of Eden, and became subject to the wants of
this world, what is written? The Lord God made coats of skins
unto Adam and to his wife, and clothed them (Gen. iii. 21), for
prior to this they had garments of light—light of that light
which was used in the garden of Eden” (ii. 2298). Thus the
garments of skins refer to the material bodies of both sexes.
4

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

Even in the present form, the righteous take precedence of the
angels, being able to do many works, while angels can do but
one, as it is said in the Talmud (Sanhedrim, 93a, and the Bereshith
Rabba, section i.), with which may be compared the New Testa-
ment assertion— Know ye not that we shall judge angels?
how much more things that pertain to this life?” (1 Cor. vi. 3.)
Man remains the microcosm. The Zohar distinctly says that
the real man is the soul, and his material frame no part of him,
although these parts typify the highest wisdom. The skin re-
presents the all surrounding firmament, the flesh the perishable
and changing matter of the world, the bones and veins the
heavenly chariot. “The mystery of the earthly man is after the
mystery of the Heavenly Man. And just as we seein the firma-
ment above, covering all things, different signs which are formed
of the stars and planets, and which contain secret things and
profound mysteries, studied by those who are wise and expert in
those signs; so these are in the skin which is the cover of the
body of the Son of man, and which is like ‘the sky that covers all
things, signs, and features, which are the stars and planets of the
skin, indicating secret things and profound mysteries, whereby
the wise are attracted, who understand to read the mysteries in
the human face” (ii. 76a). The very form of the body depicts
the Tetragrammaton—the head is the », the arms and shoulders
are like the 7, the breast is the 3, while the two legs and back
form the second 7 (Zohar, ii. 42a). The Mohammedan sect of
Karmathi in like manner asserted, that the name of Allah was
to be found in the human body—when standing it represents an
Alif, when kneeling a Zdm, and when prostrated on the ground
a Hé. All souls are pre-existent in the Worlds of Emanations;
a belief also found in the Book of Wisdom (viii. 20), in Josephus,
who says (De Bell. Jud. ii. 12), that the Essenes believed “ that
souls were immortal, and that they descended from the pure air,
Cunrreneobas worep eienraus rors oupeccor—to be chained to bodies,”
which doctrine is repeated by Philo. “ The air was full of them,
and that those which were nearest the earth, xuriaow éxdednoowéves
owas bynrois, descending to be tied to mortal bodies, wrarsdgouoie
ads, return back to bodies, being desirous to live in them”
(De Gignat., p. 222c ; De Somniis, p. 455p.). It is very evident
that very many ideas of modern theosophy have been derived
from these ancient sources. Each soul has ten potencies similar
to the Sephiroth, being subdivided into a trinity of triads; in its
primordial essence every soul is androgynous, and is separated
into male and female when united with a human body. Thereis
no choice in this descent of souls. In the Zohar, we read (ii. 96),
that prior to this process the soul addresses God, saying, “ Lord
412

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

of the universe! I am happy in this world, and do not wish to
go into another world, where I shall be a bondmaid, and be
exposed to all kinds of pollutions.” But this necessity of descent
is for the further good and enlightenment of the soul. The
Mischna says (Aboth, iv. 29),—* Against thy will thou becomest
an embryo, and against thy will thou art born.” The two
principles of male and female are in righteous man and woman
reunited at marriage, leading to an existence of harmony not to
be broken on a return to the primordial world. “When the
souls are to leave their heavenly abode, each soul separately ap-
pears before the Holy King, dressed in a sublime form, with the
features in which it is to appear in this world. It is from this
sublime form that the image proceeds” (Zohar, iii. 104ab). The
types of these faces are four in number—those of the man, the
lion, the ox, and the eagle. Although the souls have no choice
but to descend, they have complete independence as to the course
of their lives. “All souls,” says the Zohar, “ which are not guilt-
less in this world, have already alienated themselves in heaven
from the Holy One, blessed be He ; they have thrown themselves
into an abyss at their very existence, and have anticipated the
time when they are to descend on earth” (iii, 610). The soul
possesses two kinds of powers and two sorts of feelings. “It has
a faculty for that extraordinary prophetical knowledge,” says Dr
Ginsburg (p. 37), “ which was vouchsafed to Moses in an excep-
tional manner, called the Lwminous Mirror, (77) NMbpDDR =
Specularia), and the ordinary knowledge, termed the Non
Luminous Mirror (x77) xdINT>pDDN), respectively represented
in the earthly Paradise by the Tree of Life and the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil; and it possesses the higher feeling
of love and the lower feeling of fear.” The Zohar says—* Come
and see when the soul reaches that place which is called the
Treasury of Life ("m7 873), she enjoys a bright and luminous
mirror which receives its light from the highest heaven. The
soul could not bear this light but for the luminous mantle which
she puts on. For just as the soul, when sent to this earth, puts
on an earthly garment to preserve herself here, so she receives
above a shining garment, in order to be able to look without
injury into the mirror whose light proceeds from the Lord of
Light. Moses, too, could not approach to look into that
higher light which he saw, without putting on such an ethereal
garment; as it is written: And Moses went into the midst of the
cloud (Exod. xxiv. 18); which is to be translated, by means of the
cloud wherewith he wrapped himself as if dressed in a garment.
At that time Moses almost discarded the whole of his earthly
nature; as it is written: And Moses was on the mountain forty
413

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAB

days and forty nights ; and he thus approached that dark cloud
wherein God is enthroned. In this wise the departed spirits of
the righteous dress themselves in the upper regions in luminous
garments, to be able to endure that light which streams from the
Lord of Light” (Zohar, i. 656, 66a). These two principles of
Love and Fear play an important part in Kabbalistical lore—the
former corresponding to the fourth Sephira, Mercy ; and the latter
to the fifth, Rigour; and when these two principles are thoroughly
combined by the righteous in their worship and their acts, the
Sacred Tetragrammaton now rent in twain will be reunited, and
the souls of all heings will return to the bosom of the Father. In
this way knowledge and wisdom shall cover the earth; and not
only the Kabbalah receive its meed of justice, but the task of
Freemasonry be accomplished. To the Royal Arch Mason many
parts of this outline of the doctrines of the Kabbalah will be in-
telligible. The prayer of the Kabbalists was as follows :—“ For
the reunion of the Holy One, blessed be his name, and his
Shechinah, I do this in love and fear, in fear and love, for the
union of the name 71 with Minto a perfect harmony! I pro-
nounce this in the name of all Israel.” The mode of arranging
this union to the senses, the words Fear (TN) and Love (Tank),
is thus, so that they may be read either across or down :-—

mR 7
ma TR

The Sephiroth were incarnate in the patriarchs: iv. Love in
Abrahain; v. Rigour in Isaac; vi. Mildness in Jacob; vii. Firm-
ness in Moses; viii. Splendour .in Aaron; ix. Foundation in
Joseph; and x. Kingdom in David. We have before referred
to the three pillars identical with the pillars of a Mason’s lodge:
the Pillar of Mercy (1pm), represents Abraham (Micah vii. 20);
the Pillar of Justice (975), Isaac. (Gen. xxxi. 42); and the
Middle Pillar, Jacob (Micah vii. 20), being the connecting or
uniting principle. For this reason the patriarchs are called
the Chariot-throne of the Lord. The doctrine of the Kabbalah
on the transmigration of souls is no less coherent in itself. All
souls must revert to the Infinite; but as they arrive at various
states of purity, and hence cannot coalesce as they should do,
hence another term of life is permitted them, in order-that they
may be allowed the practice of virtues they were unable to
exercise in their previous earthly existences, and this extension
of probation is ensured to them for their more speedy return.
We have here the theory of Gilgul. (See Gilgul.) The Zohar
414

KAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (KAB

saying on this point—“ All souls are subject to transmigration
(xdiadaa pry), and men do not know the ways of the Holy One,
blessed be He; they do not know that they are brought before
the tribunal, both before they enter this world and after they
quit it; they are ignorant of the many transmigrations and
secret probations which they have to undergo, and of the number
of souls and spirits which enter into this world, and do not
return to the palace of the Heavenly King. Men do not know
how the souls revolve like a stone which is thrown from a sling ;
as it is written : ‘And the souls of thine enemies, them shall He sling
out, as out of the middle of a sling’ (1 Sam. xxv. 29). But the
time is at hand when these mysteries shall be disclosed” (Zohar,
ii. 99), This transmigration is, however, only allowed thrice;
and if two souls in their third residence in human bodies are
proved to be still too weak to resist all earthly trammels, they
are united and sent into one body, there to acquire the necessary
learning. In cases where one soul requires help, she is allowed
to select a companion of greater strength and better fortune.
The Pharisees also held this doctrine (Josephus, Antig. xviii.
I. 3; de Bell. Jud. ii. 8-14) of metempsychosis. All beings, with-
out exception, are included in this universal law of love, and
even Samaél, the venomous beast (Rw ‘2 N™T or dxDD), will be
restored to his angelic nature and name. This will take place
at the advent of the Messiah, whose coming is retarded by the
very few new souls now entering the world; for the soul of the
Messiah, pre-existent like all others, cannot be born until all
human souls have passed through the term of earthly probation,
and it will be the last born soul, after which the whole pleroma
of souls (N1dw27T NEW), cleansed and purified, will be restored at
the jubilee unto the bosom of the Infinite Source. The Zohar
says that they shall be in “the palace which is situate in the
secret and most elevated part of heaven, and which is called The
Palace of Love (WANK YIN). There the profound mysteries are;
there dwells the Heavenly King, blessed be He, with the holy
souls, and is united with them by a loving kiss. This kiss is
the union of the soul with the substance from which it emanated”
(Zohar, ii. 97a, 1. 168a). This will be the culmination of all
things, and resolution of all sorrows. The Kabbalah, however,
has also its practical side, in which it is applied to the interpre-
tation of matters of a less abstruse nature. This is divided into
three sections: Gematria, Notaricon, and Temura. Buxtorf
defines the first of these as a species of the Kabbalah, collecting
the same sense of different words from their equal numerical
values. (See Alphabet, Hebrew.) Thus from Gen. xviii. 2, And,
lo, three men (*¥5% 73M), it is deduced that these angels
415

KAD] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KAD

(messengers) were Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael, because
brpn dxvaa bxowa wbx, these are Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael,
amount to the same in numerical value, thus :-—

Wop: Se ws ara

5 + 300 + 30 + 300 +54+504+5+4+6=701.
and >& &® 39 * wn» 3 DO 8

+3041420410440464 3041

ye a a 2 |

+ 30414104 2004243

bw D9 3

+30 +1 +480 + 20046 == 701.

This Gematria, mak M3, is a metathesis of the Greek
word Pape, ypapmein, OF ypaymareiu. Notaricon (pprwn =
notaricum from notarius), a shorthand writer. The Kabbalah
constructed one word out of the initials or finals of many, or a
sentence out of the letters of a word, every letter being used as
the initial of another word. Thus Bereshith (M*wN 3, Gen. i. 1)
is converted into 771n beau Yapw ODN ANI MWD, in the.be-
ginning God saw that Israel would accept the law. Temura (TAN
or NYMN ny) or permutation, was another method, in which
the alphabet of twenty letters was bent in half, and the letters
used for each other by:a method for which we have no room
here. The two ways of doing this were called Albath and
Algath. Complete tables may be found in Ginsburg. It is im-
possible to enter at greater length into the subject. Kabbalisti-
cal studies found favour, however, in the eyes of the Christian
Hebraists, and the study has never died out among the students
of the higher or philosophical magic; we refer chiefly to the
works of Eliphas Levi Zahed, John Reuchlin, Picus de Miran-
dula, Jerome Cardan, and many more. (See Jetzirah, Sepher.)

KasBALISTIC COMPANION.—This degree is to be found in the
archives of the Mother Lodge of the Philosophical Rite of
France, C. 8. D.

KapirivAu, ORDER OF.—An Arabian secret society connected with
the Order of Ishmael. Captain Burton was initiated into it
under the following circumstances:—Having set out on his
memorable and perilous journey to El-Medinah and Meccah, he
at first assumed the style and title of Mirza, a Persian word,
answering to the English “ Mr,” but afterwards received admis-
sion into the Kadiriyah, under the name, first of Shaykh Abdullah
(or servant of God), the first degree, and then of Bismillah Shah
(King in the name of Allah), second degree, finally confirmed by
a patent as Murshid or Master, having powers to initiate.

416

KAD | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [kas

Kapmon, ADAM.—The Archetypal Man. (See Kabbalah.)

Kaposu or KoprscH.—An important degree in many Masonic
rites, from the Hebrew, wp, holy or consecrated. According to
Pluche, a person who had received this character bore a sceptre,
and sometimes a golden plate on the forehead, in testimony that
he was a public personage, sacred as the person of a herald, and
inviolable in that character. It has been adopted into many
systems of Masonry. The history of the degree is little more
than a century old, having been invented at Lyons in 1743; it
was incorporated into the Chapter of Emperors of the East and
‘West—the predecessor of the Ancient and Accepted Rite, in
which it is the thirtieth degree. The Grand Orient of France
has accepted the Philosophic Kadosh, founded upon well-vouched
papers. (See Kadosh, Philosophic.)

Kaposu, or Hoty Man.—(Kadosh ou l’Homme Saint.)\—Tenth
and final degree of the Rite of Martinism.

Kaposu, GRAND Exect Knicut.—Sixty-fifth degree of the Rite of
Mizraim.

Kaposu, Knicut.—(See Knight Kadosh.)

KapbosH OF THE JESUITS.—Thory says this degree was invented
by the Jesuits of the College of Clermont. It is, however,
supposed that this is hardly correct, and that De Bonneville’s
Chapter of Clermont was, undesignedly, confounded with the
Jesuit College of Clermont. (See Jeswits.)

Kaposu, PHILOSOPHIC.—A reformed degree of the original Kadosh,
for which it has been substituted by the French Grand Orient,
in which the original military character of the degree is aban-
doned, no swords are worn, and the only weapon is the Word.

KaposH, PRINCE.—A degree in the collection of Pyron. ©. 5S. D.

Kapbosu, PRINcE oF DEatu.—Twenty-seventh degree of the Rite
of Mizraim.

Kapr EL AMR (Arabic).— The matter is decreed—in allusion to the
chastisement of the infidels.

KALAND, BROTHERS OF.—A German lay fraternity, founded in the
thirteenth century, in honour of deceased relatives and friends.
They met on the first day of each month.

KamEa.—(Hebrew, yap, amulet.)—Specially applied by Hebrew
Kabbalists to magic squares on parchment or paper, tied about
the neck as a protection against evil. (See Magic Squares.)

KarMATIANS.—A Mohammedan sect founded at Irak in the ninth
century, A.H. 278, by one Karmata, who assumed the functions
and privileges of a prophet. This Karmata took away the black
stone of the Kaaba, and retained it for twenty-two years, when
it was voluntarily restored.

KasipEans.—(See Chasdim.)

2D 417

KAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KEY

Katuarsis PuriFication.—Appointed in the ancient mysteries to
take place in the spring time, and a song of health, or pwan, was
sung while the purificatory rites were proceeding.

Kavi, SUBLIME.—Seventy-seventh degree of the seventh class of
the Rite of Memphis. (1839.)

KEBHSENNUF.—One of the four Egyptian funeral Genii, guardians
of the entrails. He is represented with the head of a hawk.

KEEPER OF THE SEALS.—-1. An officer called Garde des Sceaux in
French Lodges. 2. The title of an officer in the Consistories of
the Scottish Rite.

KELLERMANN, MarsHaL.— Duke de Valmy, and Peer of France; a
member of the Supreme Council 33°, and Grand Officer of
Honour of the G. O. of France, elected in 1814.

KE Liz, THOMAS, Eart or.—(See Grand Masters of Ancient Masons.)

KELLY, CHRISTOPHER.—A. Masonic plagiarist, who appropriated the
whole of the typical portion of Samuel Lee’s work, entitled, “Orbis
Miraculum ; or the Temple of Solomon portrayed by Scripture
Light,” and published it as his own, under the title of “ Solomon’s
Temple Spiritualized; setting forth the Divine Mysteries of the
Temple, with an account of its Destruction.” Published with
“ An Address to all Free and Accepted Masons,” Dublin, 1803;
subsequently republished by him at Philadelphia in 1820.

Ketiy, Sir Epwarp.—See Rosicrucians, Eminent. This person
was the associate of Dr John Dee, and his speculator in the
magic crystal.

Keri-cetis.—A word used in Biblical literature to denote various
readings. Keri meaning that which is read, and cetib, that which
is written. From a desire to preserve the ancient text, the wrong
reading is allowed to remain in the body of the Hebrew Scrip-
tures (cetib), and the gloss or supposed correction appears in the
margin with § under it, and is ker.

KESSLER DE SPRENGEISEN.—A dignitary of a Templar Chapter in
Higher Lusatia in 1730, known in the Strict Observance as
Eques a Spino.

Key.—A symbol of silence among the ancients. Sophocles alludes
to it in the @dipus Coloneus (1051), where the chorus speaks of
“the golden key which had come upon the tongue of the minis-
tering hierophant in the mysteries of Eleusis, dv xa! xpucta
xAns tal yadoon PBéBane rpoowiawy edmorridav.’ The priestess of
Ceres, according to Callimachus, bore a key as her ensign of
office, and the key was, in the mysteries of Isis, symbolical of the
opening or disclosing of the heart and conscience before the
forty-two assessors of the dead. The key had once a very
different meaning in Masonry to its present application, being
now oe badge of the treasurer of a Craft Lodge. This key was

41

KEY] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KHO

the tongue, which kept the secrets “in a box of coral, which only
opens and shuts with ivory keys.” It is to be found in the
F. C. degree, the Royal Arch, the degree of Secret Master, the
fourth degree of the Scottish Rite. In Germany, it is adopted as
part of the clothing of every brother, and is made of ivory.

Kery-Bearer (Greek, xAcidotos.)—1. An official of high rank. 2.
Keys were presented among the Romans to a bride as a symbol
of her authority, and only resumed by the husband on the occa-
sion of a divorce. 3. The Hebrews likewise attached much
importance to the key (Isa. xxii. 22); and Christ gave the
powers of the keys to his apostles ; not only to Peter, but to the
rest.

Key or Masonry. (See Knight of the Sun.)

KerystonE—tThe centre stone of the arch in a building. It is
alluded to in the Mark degree, as well as the Royal Arch. The
use of the keystone as a central support has been discovered in
Egypt, Mexico, and among the Cyclopean works of Peru.

KuHAJARS—The worthy brethren of this Order met, in 1749, at
the Nag’s Head, Tothill Street, Westminster.

KHATEM-EL-NaBlIM—Mohammed, the seal of the prophets.

KueM.—the ithyphallic deity of Egypt, or the generating Ammon.
He is represented standing—his right arm raised in the attitude
of a sower, and his hand open; the flagellum is placed beside the
hand, the body is enveloped like that of a mummy, and the left
arm is concealed. This is analogous to the hands in the Her-
metic figures—one raised on high to indicate heaven, and the
other pointing to the earth, where the operations of nature and
germination take place. The figure of Buddha is the same.

Kuerra—aAn Egyptian god presiding over transformation, and
coming to life and light. He was represented with a beetle
in place of a head.

KuHER-HEB.—The official desiynation of the priest whose duty was
to read the sacred writings during funeral rites. He was also
the master of ceremonies and director of forms in the Egyptian
system of worship.

KHEWT-NEB-S.—The Egyptian goddess personifying the West, her
name signifying that she stood in the front of her lord the sun,
who advances from the east to the west.

Kuon.—The title of the deceased person in the Egyptian Ritual
of the Dead, and the hieroglyphical group expressed the idea of
illumination and justification after judgment. The judgment of
the soul is admirably depicted in chapter 125 of the Book of the
Dead. The deceased is introduced into the great hall, where
Osiris is enthroned, by the goddess Ma, or Truth. Horus and
Anubis proceed to weigh his acts, represented by his heart; in

419

KHO] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KIL

one scale the heart is placed, and in the other a statue of Ma,
and these should be in equilibrium. The result of the trial is
thus pronounced by Anubis :-—“ The heart is equal in the balance,
and the Osirified deceased (here mention his name) is justified.”
Upon which Thoth registers the sentence of the Court. “It is
accorded to him that his heart should be in its place,” z¢., in his
bosom. Thus the man to whom the heart is restored is capable
of entering upon a new existence. Kings, however, were not
subjected to the judgment of the dead; for, being divine even while
on earth, they were incapable of committing sin, and could not
be judged either here or hereafter. It is inaccurate, however, to
use the expression “ justified ;” the words ma kheru applied to
Osiris Onnofre being inappropriate, for Osiris being essentially
the Good Being and “God of Innocence, required no justification,

the real meaning of the phrase being\“truthfal,” or “true of speech.”
Hence, when a mortal was thus tried by the tribunal and
acquitted, he became like unto Osiris, “true of speech,” and
divine immortality was assigned to him.

Kuons.—The Theban Harpocrates, son of Ammon and Maut.
He, like Horus, tramples on the crocodile, the emblem of dark-
ness. The crocodile was Set or Sebek.

KuotBau.—The Confession of Faith and General Petition of the
Mohammedans.

KuunraTu, HEINRIcH.—A chemist and physician, born 1502, and at
the age of forty-two initiated into high theosophical science. His
principal work was the “ Amphitheatre of Eternal Wisdom,” pub-
lished in 1598, with the approbation of the Emperor Rudolf of
Prag. The colophon of this remarkable work consisted of the
words, Stgillum Nature et artis simplicitas—* the seal of nature
and art is simplicity.” He was an eminent Kabbalist, and
applied the ancient Jewish principles to the interpretation of
the Christian mysteries.

Kuvurum ABAL—A variation of the name of Hiram Abif.

K1.—A corrupt word used in the eighth degree of the Scottish Rite.

Kitt Carg Cius—The members of this club, styled also the
Sons of Sound Sense and Satisfaction, met at their Fortress, the
Castle Tavern, in Paternoster Row.

KILWINNING.—The priority of the York Rite and that of Kil-
winning has been a question of dispute for many years among
Masonic archeologists. There cannot be a shadow of doubt
that at some remote period anterior to the foundation of the
Abbey of Kilwinning, in 1140, by Hugh Morville, the Constable
of Scotland, dedicated to Saint Winning, the operative travelling
masons had existed, and also had their marks peculiar to them-
selves. Kilwinning, except for its Masonic importance, is a

420

KIL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia, [Is

place of no special note, situated in the Bailiwick of Cunning-
ham, three miles from the royal burgh of Irwing. It is very
difficult to decide the question: in fact, no documentary evidence
is extant; but the Lodge of Kilwinning has been conceded the
rank of an ancient Lodge in all conferences between the two
Grand Lodges of Scotland and England. It is more probable
that the foundation of the Knightly Order of Heredom, in com-
memoration of the battle of Bannockburn, by Robert the Bruce,
King, 24th June 1314, has given rise to this fancied priority.
Failing other evidence, we cannot but see that the submission of
the Lodge to the authority of the Grand Lodge of Scotland in
1807 is a proof that they abandoned such prerogatives as they
might previously have asserted; and such submission in itself is
proof that the York Rite was in all ways the predecessor in point
of time and organization to the Rite’of Kilwinning. The logic
of facts and inference may here be safely applied. Nor need
Scottish brethren fear the result, Freemasonry being too securely
set into the heart of that nation, in its principles, ever to be
rooted out. It might be asked, with Masonic feeling, whence
does it signify that benefits should be derived, provided they are
substantially in existence? It is open to all Masonic students
to maintain their own views in reference to Kilwinning and its
authority.

KILWINNING Manvuscript.—Published by Bro. W. J. Hughan, in
his “Unpublished Records of the Craft,” from a small quarto
book in possession of the Mother Kilwinning Lodge. It is
probably, from its character, a document inserted into the book
in question at a much later date. Bro. Hughan says the writing
is not later than 1670,and that the MS. is a part of theminute-book,

Kitwinnina Moruer Lopez. (See Kilwinning.)

Kine—In England the first, and in America the second, officer of
a Royal Arch Chapter, being the representative of Zerubbabel,
prince of Judah.

Kine or tHe Sancruary.—An honorary or side degree, conferred
in the presence of five Past Masters. He cannot himself per-
petuate the degree until nine years have elapsed, unless by
dispensation from those who bestowed it upon him.

Kinc oF THE WorLD.—A degree to be found in the archives of the
Philosophical Rite. It is supposed to be that of the Man-King
of Weishaupt, in the Order of the Illuminati.

Kine, SHepHrrpD, or Uz—Forty-eighth degree of the Rite of
Memphis. (1839.)

Kiss, FRaTERNAL—(German, Bruder Kuss; French, Baiser fra-
ternel.) Not practised in England, but sometimes a pledge of

mutual succour in Continental Lodges.
421

KIS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNE

Kiss or Peace.—(Latin, Osewlum pacts.) Formerly a portion of
the ceremony of Knight Templarism, but now disused.

Kir Cat Cius.—A society of gentlemen of wit and learning, who,
in the reigns of Queen Anne and George I., met at a house kept
by one Christopher Cat. The portraits of most of the members
of this society were painted by Sir Godfrey Kneller, of one size;
thence still called the Kit-Cat size.

Koss, GEORGE BURCKHARDT Franz, M.D.—Born in 1788, and
initiated into Masonry early in life; died February 10, 1854.
He was the reorganizer of the Eclectic Grand Lodge, and several
times its Grand Master, his head-quarters being at Frankfort-on-
the-Maine. Asa literary Mason we may place him in the first rank.
He held the theory that Masonry was derived from the operative
guilds of builders in the Middle Ages, a subject which has since
been worked out with distinguished success by Bro. J. G. Findel,
of Leipzig. One of his most valuable undertakings was that of
a complete Masonic bibliography, which remains a monument to
his memory. Ata time when it was difficult to work in Masonry
at all, he distinguished himself by assiduous labour in fields of re-
search by no means of an agreeable nature, but what he did gather
will never be forgotten. Kloss may be regarded as the comple-
ment of Fessler. The one was chiefly occupied with attempts
to purify the ceremonial part of Masonry, the other with its
historical verification. It is fortunate that we possess at the
same time such men as Bros, Findel, Woodford, Hughan, Lyon,
and Yarker, to aid in maintaining the literary standard of Free-
masonry. Similar attempts are being made in America, with
great success, by Bros. Mackey, Macoy, Myers, Moore and Morris.
Perhaps we should add to these names that of Bro. Dr Hermann
Beigel, of Vienna.

Knee TO Kwnere.—lIt is certain to all appreciative minds that
this expression alludes to the common support which Breth-
ren should give to each other. It is an essential sentiment
of Freemasonry, and forms one of the five points of fellow-
ship.

KNEELING.—We bend the knee to T.G.A.0O.T.U., in rever-
ence to His all-comprehending love, and as a sign of grati-
tude for its exercise towards us. It was not the custom in
ancient times to assume this attitude, nor was it until rulers
had assumed the prerogatives of Deity that kneeling was
introduced, and rendered peremptory upon worshippers. True
humility need assume no special form, but the act of kneeling has
been for many thousands of years associated with submission.
As God does not demand it of us, it is superfluous to pay such
deference to man, and it can only be interpreted as an impulse

422

KNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNI

of instinctive adoration. What says one of our noblest poets of
the present time, Algernon Charles Swinburne ?
sf lipe that the live blood faints on, the leavings of racks and rods!
O ghastly glories of saints, dead limbs of gibbeted gods!

Though all men abase them before you in spirit, and all knees bend,
I kneel not, neither adore you, but standing look to the end.”

The wisest of men were the Egyptians, and upon their sculptures,
so intimately associated with our Masonic mysteries, we find
them always standing in the act of adoration. They had no fear
of T.G.A.0.T.U., but a love for him; and in the New Testa-
ment a similar custom, in the instance of the Pharisee and the
Publican, is perceptible.

Kniaer, ADOLPH FRANZ FREDERICH LUDWIG, BARON Von.—Born
at Brendenbeck, near Hanover, October 16, 1752; initiated in a
Lodge of Strict Observance, January 20, 1772. He did not
seem at first to have been much impressed with the importance
of Freemasonry, but was finally induced to take much greater
interest in it through the representations of the Marquis de
Costanzo, in 1780, who had been induced to visit Northern
Germany by Adam Weishaupt. He ultimately cast in his lot
with the Illuminati, and became one of their leaders; but his
susceptibilities being offended at alterations being made in his
rituals, he subsequently withdrew, and retired from active
Masonry. He was known among the Illuminati by the Order
name of Philo, and published several Masonic tracts and pam-
phlets. He died at Bremen, May 6,1796. He was a celebrated
poet, and his general works continue to be read. His most
important literary effort was a book on social philosophy, entitled
“Ueber den Umgang mit Menschen”—* On Conversation with
Men;” and in this work he denounces secret societies with no
sparing hand.

Knicut.—Derived from the Anglo-Saxon, entht, eneoht ; Gothic,
enecht. In thefirst instance, bestowed upon a youth of gentle blood,
to distinguish him from a Anappe—tretainer of ignoble origin. A
enecht, or knecht, might be ennobled for valour on the field, when
hewould be allowed to do military service on horseback; he would
then become a reiter, or ritter. 2. One on whom knighthood is
conferred by the sovereign or authorized military power; or, in
Masonry, within the confines of the body having a charter of
validity, when the recipient becomes a Sir Knight. 3. In
Chivalry, knighthood had three degrees. I. Page—in the charge
of women until his seventh year, when he was transferred to a
governor, who prepared him for military service by robust and
athletic exercises, not forgetting the elements of education. He
was then fitted to assume the post of page, and his manners

423

KNI| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNI

were softened by a constant association with persons of gentle
and noble birth. II. Squire (French, dcuyer). On becoming a
squire, the youth became educated in the more practical arts
connected with war, hunting, and similar pursuits; but as in
those days nothing could be accomplished without great cere-
mony, his investiture as a squire took place in a church, where
a sword and girdle were given to him, and his due functions
explained and impressed upon him. In war, his office was to
personally attend upon the knight he followed; to receive his
instructions and perform his injunctions; to see to his armour
and horse; and attend as a witness in all the jousts and tourna-
ments. Hence it is that in modern times the title of Esquire
has been always considered honourable, although in practice the
designation of Master (corrupted into Mister or Mr) was no less
respectable. We have recently had a similar instance of the
misuse of words in the case of the title of “ Reverend,” now
assumed by Dissenters, and held to be right. in law—the word
not being in itself the necessary prefix to a clergyman’s title at
all, although as a distinctive appellation it has convenient usage,
the old-fashioned word Parson, or Person of the Parish, being.of
greater authority. The squire’s duty (as we may see in the case
of Sancho Panza and Don Quixote) was to ward off all blows,
and devote his bodily prowess to the defence of his knight—
acting purely on the defensive. This position of horse and foot
soldiers was known to the ancient Gallic nations, where the
superior fought on horseback, and the inferior on foot, in con-
junction. III. The squire, after due service, received the degree of
Knight, regarded by the laws of chivalry as the highest possible
dignity ; and then, with solemnities of sublime significance, he
entered upon functions entitling him to many privileges of great
honour. Fasting, prayer, lustration, watching, acts of charity
and devotion, were requisite on the admission of a knight, after
which he was dubbed or created. It will be plain to the Masonic
student that there was a solemn fitness in all these proceedings ;
and although our modern commercial system has softened, or
even rejected, many of the ceremonies, they remain as historically
and socially just as ever. The various distinctions granted by
the reigning princes of Europe are still objects coveted by men
of mark, although they may not be lightly conferred on the
crowd. Were this better understood, the aspirations of the
lower class to political power would be more easily satisfied, and
a greater condition of general security attained. The lower
classes, while jealously insisting on their own rights, do not per-
ceive that they are imperilling them by petulant claims to be
admitted to positions they would be unable to sustain with
424

KNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNI

dignity or retain with success. Knights were of two classes—
Knights Bachelor and Knights Banneret. The Knights Bachelor
was of the lower class, and it has been derived from the words
bas chevalier. The idea is perhaps better founded than that
which might be urged from the priestly character of the Knight
of bas eschellier—“ at the foot of the ladder” (see Ladder). The
degree was conferred without a property qualification, but with
submission—like the degree of Bachelor of Arts in the Univer-
sities, who submits his work, and is admitted to his degree in
sequence of it. Like the Master Mason of the Craft Rite, he had
undergone his proofs; or, like the Guild Mason or Artificer, had
exhibited a master-piece entitling him to certain immunities,
and a right to practise his art whensoever and wheresoever he
might find work to do. He bore a banner, forked cornet-wise,
doublée, of triangular shape, called a pennon. His squire carried
a triangular pennoncel non furcée. Sucha knight might serve
under any great lord at his own pleasure, and renounce his ser-
vice on droicts not being paid him. The Knight Banneret was a
knight possessed of fiefs, and was specially entitled to bear before
him a square standard in war, as a signal point for his command
—having brought into the field numerous men. Sometimes
Knights Bachelor were advanced on the field by the process of
cission, when the supreme authority for the time said, Advancez
toy banneret, and caused the cornets to be cut off. He then
became a Knight Banneret, and it was usually accompanied by
the gift of land, technically called seizin. Modern baronets are
in the same way made, because they are minor barons or lords
of fiefs, but it confers no title of nobility. It would lead us
beyond the scope of the present work to say more. A knight of
whichever degree is said to be dubbed, from Miles ddobatus = un
chevalier adoubé=adoptare, to adopt. “ Accolade” is a kiss,
“alapa” a blow of manumission.

Kyicuts, Masonic.—For the sake of saving space, it has been found
fitting in this necessarily long article to adopt abbreviations in
the various rites to which the Masonic Knights belong. It is
almost impossible to give these Knights a separate description.
Hence the student will be good enough to understand that the
following initial letters represent the following existing Masonic
organizations. Thus :—

A. and A. = Ancient and Accepted Rite.

E.E.W. = Emperors of the East and West. :

R, Mzm. Rite of Mizraim. O. R. = Oriental Rite.

R. M. Rite of Memphis. K. R. = Kabbalistic Rite.

A.and P, = Antient and Primitive Rite.
As a Council of Side Degrees is taking under its protection
all stray rites not otherwise expressly claimed by the former
425

KNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | KNI

five bodies, they will, for the sake of convenience, and for clear
Masonic thought, be placed unattached, but with the addition of
the letters C. 8S. D. to indicate the desire of this body to collect
and preserve in its archives many obsolete degrees at present
lying dormant. There has been a disposition of late years to
manufacture new degrees with more or less success; but any
true Mason who will bear with this article, will see that, how-
ever broad the field of unclaimed degrees, the present adapters
of the ideas of the past have not gone to the proper sources to
obtain them. There is also an obvious convenience in the con-
solidation of Masonic knighthoods.

Knicut, Biacx. (See Black Brothers, Order of the.)

Kwnicgut CoMMANDER.—5° Second Class Elect Cohens.

Knigut ComMMaNDER.—1. 9° of the Order of Elect Cohens. 2. An
honorary degree in the A. and A. Rite, conferred on members of
the 33°, and Sublime Princes of the Royal Secret, by a vote of the
Supreme Council.

Kyicut COMMANDER OF THE INTERIOR OF THE TEMPLE, (See
Sovereign Commander of the Temple.)

KNIGHT COMMANDER OF THE WHITE AND BLACK EAGLE.—80° Metro-
politan Chapter of France.

Knicut Crusaper—A chivalric degree, communicated to Thory
ees Lat. 1, 303) by a Member of the Grand Lodge of Kjoben-

aven.

Knicut Etect oF Firteen.—l. 16° A. and A.; also called Mlustrious
Knight of the Fifteen. 2.10° E. E,W. 3.11° R. Mzm. 4.10° R.M.

Knicat Evect or Nine.—9° R. M.

Kyicut E.ect or TWELVE, SUBLIME.—1. 11° A. and A.; also known
as Twelve Illustrious Knights. 2, 13° R. Mzm.°

Kyicut EvancELIst.—In the archives of the Lodge of St Louis
des Amis Réunis, at Calais.

KnicutT GRAND INSPECTOR GENERAL.—1. 33° R. M. 2. 20° A. and
P., England.

Knicut GRAND INSPECTOR GENERAL REGULATOR.—84° R, M.

Knicut GranD Kapbosy.—1. Sov. Gr. Inspec. 30° R. M. 2. 18° A.
and P., England.

Knicut GRAND Master ArcHiTEcT.—12° R. M.

Kyicut GRAND MASTER OF THE TEMPLE OF WispomM.—1, 20° R.
M. 2. 13° A. and P.

Knicut GRAND PONTIFF OF JERUSALEM.—19° R. M.

Kyicut Hospitanuer. (See Knight of Malta.)

Kwyicut INTENDANT OF THE BuILpInes.—8° R. M.

Knicut INTERPRETER OF H1IEROGLYPHICS.—47° R, M.

Knicut KaposH oF CRoMWELL.—<A spurious degree invented by
the enemies of Masonry ; of no authority whatever.

426

kNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNt

Kyicut Kaposu, or Granp Etect Knicut Kaposu.—1. 30° A. and
A. 2. 30° A. and P.

KnicuT Mawapon.—A degree preserved in the archives of the St
Louis Lodge des Amis Réunis, at Calais.

Kyicut NoacuIrTE, OR OF THE TOWER.—21° R. M.

Knicut or Asta. (See Asia, Knights and Brothers of.)

Kwyicut or ATHENS (See Athens, Knights of).—52° R. Mzm.

Knicut or Avrora (See Aurora, Knights of)—The same as
Knight of Palestine.

KniGut oF BENEFICENCE (See Knights of Benevolence).—67° R. Mzm.

Kyicut oF Curist. (See Christ, Order of.)

KNIGHT OF CoNSTANTINOPLE.—C.S.D.; but in another form has a
Grand Council at Devonport, England.

Kyicut or Etysium, oR ORDER OF DEATH.—Morally Iatric in its
character. Once conferred by Grand Conclave of Knights Tem-
plar of Scotland. C.S. D.

KNIGHT oF FRIENDLY Brotuers.—C.S. D.

KniGut oF Gop AND His TempLe.—C. 8. D.

Kuicut or Harmony.—C. 8. D.

KNIGHT OF Hops, ALSO, OF THE Mornine Star.—C. 8. D.

Kyicut or Iris.—4° Hermetic Rite of Montpellier.

Kwicut or JERUSALEM.—9° A. and P.

KNIGHT oF JUPITER.—Peuvret’s Collection, 78° R. Mzm.

KnicuT or Justice—The same as the Knights of St John of
Jerusalem.

jee Knepu.—Member of the Supreme Grand Council.

KnicuT or Lepanon.—22° R. M.

Kyicut oF LiGHT AND CLEARNESS.—7° and last of the Clerks of
Strict Observance, divided into five degrees. 1. Knight of the
Third Year. 2. Knight of the Fifth Year. 3. Knight of the
Seventh Year. 4. Levite. 5. Priest. (See Jesuits.)

Knicut or LIGHTNING AND THUNDER.—C. 8. D.

Kwicut or Matta. (See Malta.)

KyicuT oF Masonry, TERRIBLE—In the collection of Le Page.

Kyicut oF MELcHIzEDEK.—C. S. D.

KNIGHT OF PALESTINE—1. 63° R. Mzm. 2, 9° Martinist Rite.

Knicut or Parmos.—Refers to the banishment of St John.

KNIGHT OF PERFUMES.—8° O. R., according to Fustier.

Kyicut or Purity anD Licut.—Rite of Clerks of the Strict
Observance.

Kyicut or PytHiAs.—An American degree of a semi-Masonic kind.

KNIGHT oF RHODES—An appellation of the Knights Hospitallers,

KNIGHT oF RosE Croix—1.18° A. and A. Rite, 2.11° A. and P. Rite.

Kwicut or St ANDREW, FrEE—In the Collection of Pyron.

427

KNI| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNI

Kwnicut oF St ANDREW, GRAND ScoTrisH.—1.29°, R. M. 2. 4°, 2d
division Swedish system.

KyicuT or St ANDREW OF THE THISTLE.—75° Metropolitan Chapter
of France.

KniGuT oF St GeorcGe.—The State Order of the Byzantine Empire.

Kwyicut oF St JOHN OF JERUSALEM.—A mystical degree in three
sections, in the Collection of Lemanceau.

KNIGHT OF St JOHN OF JERUSALEM. (See Malta.)

KNIGHT oF ST JOHN, OR OF THE SuN.—28° R. M.

Kunicut oF St JOHN OF PALESTINE—48° Metropolitan Chapter of
France.

KNIGHT oF St JOHN THE Baprist.—Alludes to the death of that
personage. C.S. D.

Knicut or St LAURENCE.—The legend and secrets of this degree
refer to the death of St Laurence, who was broiled on a gridiron.
It is held to be operative, because it requires every brother to
cook a beefsteak, if presented to him for that purpose.

Kyicut oF St PAUL, OR MEDITERRANEAN Pass. (See Mediterranean
Pass.

Kuro oF UNncTION.—51° 6th Series Metropolitan Chapter of
France.

KNIGHT OF THE ALTAR.—12° O. R., according to Fustier. C.8S. D.

oe OF THE AMERICAN EAGLE.—A degree invented in America.

8. D.

KNIGHT OF THE ANCHOR.—21° 3d Series Metropolitan Chapter of
France.

KNIGHT OF THE APE AND Lion.—Described in Les Francs Macgons
Ecrasés.

KNIGHT OF THE ARCH.—In Fustier’s Collection. C.S.D.

KNIGHT OF THE ARGONAUTS.—1° Hermetic Rite of Montpellier.

KNIGHT OF THE BANQUETING TABLE OF THE SEVEN SaGES.—Philo-
sophic Scottish Rite.

KNIGHT OF THE BLACK CROSS, OR OF MuRDER.—Alludes to the death
of Abel. C.5. D.

KNIGHT OF THE BLACK EaGLE—1. 24° Metropolitan Chapter of
France ; also found in Le Rouge’s Collection. 2. 38° R. Mzm.
KNIGHT OF THE BLAacK MarkK.—Belonging to the Mark Masters of

Scotland, ete. C.S. D.

KNIGHT OF THE BRAZEN SERPENT.—1. 25° A.and A. 2. 25° R.M.
3. 15° A. and P.

KNIGHT OF THE BURNING Busu.—Theosophic degree Scottish Rite.

KNIGHT OF THE CABALA. (See Cabala, Knight of the.)

KNIGHT OF THE CHANUCA.—69° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE CHOICE.—1. 33° R. Mzm. 2. Grand, 34° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE CHRISTIAN MARK.—A degree in Templarism,

428

KNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNt

KNIGHT OF THE CoLuMNS.—7° O. R., according to Fustier.

KNIGHT OF THE ComET.—In Hécart’s Collection. C.S.D.

KNIGHT OF THE CorK.-—An order of semi-Masonic origin, for the
purpose of allowing dissidents in the Roman Catholic Church to
continue in Masonic confidence with their opponents.

KNIGHT oF THE Courts —3° O. R., according to Fustier.

KNIGHT OF THE Crown.—C. 8. D.

KNIGHT OF THE CROWNED EaGLEs.—22° Metropolitan Chapter of
France.

KniGut oF THE Door.—4° O. R., according to Fustier.

KNIGHT oF THE DovE.—An androgynous degree, now extinct, exist-
ing about 1784.

KNIGHT OF THE EaGLE—1. 1° Chapter of Clermont at Paris. 2. 3°
R.S. Observance.

KNIGHT OF THE EAGLE AND PELIcan.—18° A. and A.

KNIGHT OF THE EAGLE, or PERFECT MASTER IN ARCHITECTURE.—
1, 56° Metrop. Chapter of France. 2. 37° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE EAGLE REVERSED.—In the Archives of the Lodge
St Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais.

KNIGHT OF THE East, OR OF THE SworD.—1. A name applied to the
third order of the French high degrees. 2. 6° Royal York
Lodge, Berlin. 3. 15° E.E.W. 4. 52° 6th Series Metropolitan
Chapter of France.

KNIGHT OF THE East AND WesT.—1. 17° A.and A. 2.17° EE. W.
3. 10° A. and P., England.

KNIGHT OF THE EASTERN STaR.—57° Metropolitan Chapterof France.

KNIGHT OF THE East, VicTtoriIous.—In Hécart’s Collection.

KNIGHT OF THE East, WHITE.—40° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE ELECTION.—-33° R. Mzm.; also called additionally
Sublime, when it is the 34°.

KNIGHT OF THE GOLDEN EaGLE.—In the Collection of Pyron. C.S.D.

KNIGHT OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE.—6° Hermetic Rite of Montpellier.

KNIGHT OF THE GOLDEN KrEy.—In Fustier’s Collection. C.S.D.

KNIGHT OF THE GOLDEN LANCE—.A degree in the Primitive Rite.

KNIGHT OF THE GOLDEN Rinc.—28° Metropolitan Chapter of France.

KNIGHT OF THE GOLDEN STAR.—Peuvret’s Collection.

KNIGHT OF THE GRAND ArcH.—In the Archives of the Lodge St
Louis des Amis Réunis at Calais.

KnicuT oF THE Houy City, BENEFICENT.—16° R. M.

KnicuT oF THE Hoty Guost.

KNIGHT OF THE HoLy Grave.—This alludes to the rolling away of
the stone from the Sepulchre. C. 8S. D.

Kyicut oF THE HOLy SEPuLCHRE.—1. In Pyron’s Collection. C.S. D,
2. 50° 6th Series of the Metropolitan Chapter of France. 3. 6°
Royal York at Berlin.

429

KNI| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNI

KNIGHT OF THE INEXTINGUISHABLE LAMP.—A decree in the Col-
lection of Fustier. ©. 8. D.

KNIGHT OF THE INTERIOR.—5° O. R., according to Fustier.

KNIGHT OF THE KaBBALAH.—8° Metropolitan Chapter of France.

KNIGHT OF THE KHANUKA.—69° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE LILIES OF THE VALLEY.—Conferred by the G. O. of
France, in connection with Templarism.

KNIGHT OF THE LILY Cross.—Separate organization.

KNIGHT OF THE LION.—20° Metropolitan Chapter of France.

KNIGHT OF THE LumINouS Rinc.—5° Philosophical Rite.

KNIGHT OF THE Luminous TRIANGLE.—C. S. D.

KNIGHT OF THE LyRIAN StaR.—In Pyron’s Collection, consisting of
—1. Novice; 2. Professed Knight; 3. Grand Patriarch.

KNIGHT OF THE Moon.—A mock Masonic Society, extinct since 1810.

KNIGHT OF THE Mornina STar.—Same as Knight of Hope in Phi-
losophical Rite.

KNIGHT oF THE Mystic Cross.—18° Hermetic Rite.

KNIGHT OF THE NintH ArcH.—1. 13° A. and A. 2, 13° A. and P.

KNIGHT OF THE NOBLER Era.—Independent organization, existing
since 1797.

KNIGHT or THE NortH.—A degree in the archives of the Lodge St
Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais.

KNIGHT OF THE PAVEMENT.—3° O. R., according to Fustier.

KNIGHT OF THE PELICAN.—60° R. M.

KNIGHT OF THE PHENIX.—1. A degree in the system of the Phila-
lethes. 2. 36° R. M.

KNIGHT OF THE PILLARS. (See Knight of the Columns.)

KNIGHT OF THE PRUSSIAN EaGLe.—In Hécart’s Collection.

KNIGHT OF THE PuRIFICATORY.—16° O. R., according to Fustier.

KNIGHT OF THE PYRAMID.—7° Kabbalistic Rite.

KNIGHT OF THE RaInBow.—42° R. M.

KNIGHT OF THE RAINBOW OF THE SEVEN CoLours.—68° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE RED BRANCH.—Established in Ulster, Ireland, 3.c.
90; supposed to have been the basis on which King James
created his Irish Baronets. In 1760, there was a degree of that
name given in an Orange Lodge at Belfast. It is still in exist-
ence as a side degree. C. 8S. D.

KNIGHT OF THE RED Cross. (See Red Cross of Rome.)

KNIGHT OF THE RED EaGur.—l. 24° R. M.. 2.12° A. and P. 3.
39° R. Mzm. 4. In Pyron’s Collection.

KNIGHT OF THE REDOUBTABLE SaDA.—80° R. M.

KNIGHT OF THE RENOVATION. (See Knight of the Nobler Era.)

Kwnicut oF THE RosE—An androgynous degree.

KNIGHT OF THE Rosy AND TRIPLE Cross.—In the Archives of the
Lodge St Louis des Amis Réunis at Calais,

430

KNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KNI

KNIGHT oF THE Rounp TaBLeE—In the Archives of the Lodge St
Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais.

KNIGHT OF THE RounD TaBLE oF Kine ARTHUR.—A degree in the
Primitive Rite.

KNIGHT OF THE Roya, Axe.—1, Also Prince of Lebanon. 2. 22°
Scottish Rite.

Knicut oF THE SacRED ArcH.—1. 14° R.M. 2. 6° A. and P.

KNIGHT OF THE SACRED Movuntain.—In the Archives of the Lodge
St Louis des Amis Réunis at Calais.

KNIGHT OF THE SACRED WAND, OR OF THE Macnetic Rosz.—An
Itratic degree. OC. 8S. D.

KNicuT oF THE SANcTUARY.—11° O. R., according to Fustier.

KNIGHT OF THE SEVEN Stars.—41° R. M.

KNIGHT OF THE SouTH.—8° German Rosicrucian Rite, and a name
of a degree in the Swedish system.

Kwnicut oF THE SpHINx.—58° R. M.

KNIGHT OF THE Spur.—2° O. R., according to Fustier.

KNIGHT OF THE Star.—C. S. D.

KNIGHT OF THE STAR OF JERUSALEM.—In Fustier’s Lists,

KNIGHT OF THE STAR OF THE East.—1l. 57° 7th Series E. E. W.
2. Also in Pyron’s Collection.

KNIGHT OF THE SuN.—1. One of Pernetty’s degrees, 2, 28° A. and A.
3. 72° 8th Series Metropolitan Chapter of France. 4, 51° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE SworD.—1. 15° R. M. 2. 8° A. and P.

KNIGHT OF THE TABERNACLE—1, 23° R. M. 2. 14° A. and P.

KNIGHT OF THE TABERNACLE OF DIVINE TruTH—In Fustier’s
Lists.

KNIGHT OF THE TeMPLE—1. General designation in the Templar
system in England. 2. 8° Rite of the Philalethes. 3, 69° 8th
Series in the Metropolitan Chapter of France. 4. 6° R. S.
Observance. 5. 9° in the Oriental Rite, according to Fustier.
6. 36° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE TEMPLE OF St JoHN.—1. Formerly a degree in Temp-
lar Chapters in England. 2. Also a name for the Templar degree
in general.

KNIGHT OF THE THREE Kincs.—An American side degree. C.8.D.

KNIGHT OF THE THRONE.—2° Oriental Rite, according to Fustier.

KNIGHT OF THE TRUE LicHt.—Founded in Austria, 1780, by Baron
Hans Heinrich, and belonging to the Hermetic System of
Masonry with five degrees. 1. Knight Novice of the Third Year.
2. Knight Novice of the Fifth Year. 3. Knight Novice of the
Seventh Year. 4. Levite. 5. Priest. Similar to, but not iden-
tical with, Knight of Light and Clearness.

KNIGHT OF THE TRIPLE Cross.—66° 8th Series Metropolitan Chapter
of France.

431

KNI | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KN1

KNIGHT OF THE TRIPLE PERIOD.—3, 5, 7, and 9, in the Archives of
the Lodge St Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais.

KNIGHT OF THE TRIPLE SworD.—In Pyron’s Collection.

KNIGHT OF THE Two CROWNED EAGLES.

KNIGHT OF THE Two EacLes.—Instituted at Mohilin—Symbol, a
Nine-pointed Star.

KNIGHT OF THE WeEsT.—1. 64° 8th Series Metropolitan Chapter
of France. 2. 47° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT OF THE WHITE AND BLACK EAGLE.

KNIGHT OF THE WHITE EAGLE.

KNIGHT OF THE WHITE ORIENT.—40° R. Mzm.

KNIGHT, PErFect.—-C. 8. D.

KNIGHT PHILALETHES.—36° R. M.

KyicuT PRINCE OF THE East AND WeEst.—1. 17°R.M. 2. 10° A.
and P.

Kyicut PRINCE OF THE RoszE Croix oF HEREDOM or HERODEN.—
18° R. M.

KyiGut Prorector or InNocencE—A degree named by Fustier,
and also Viany. C.8. D.

Knicut, Prusstan.—35° R. Mzm.

Knicut Rose Croix.—1. 3° Order of Heredom (Kilwinning). 2.
17° R.M. 3. 18° A. and A.

KynicHT Rower.—Androgynous society at Rouen, 1758.

Kyicut Roya. Victorious.—Grand Orient of Bouillon.

Knicut SacriricaTory.—Degree C. 8. D.

KNIGHT, SCANDINAVIAN.—35° R, M.

KNIGHT, SoLAR.—In Peuvret’s Collection. ©. S. D.

KNIGHT SOVEREIGN PRINCE OF Rose Croix.—7° Royal York Lodge
of Berlin.

KNIGHT SOVEREIGN PRINCE OF THE ROYAL Mystery.—1. 82° R. M.
2. 19° A.and P. (England.)

KniGuTt, SUBLIME, COMMANDER OF THE Roya SECRET.—1. 25° 7th
Class E.E.W. 4 32° A. and P.

KNIGHT, SUBLIME, OF THE NortH.—Also called the Dawn of the
Brute Stone. In Peuvret’s Collection, 11° R. M.

KNIGHT, SUPREME COMMANDER OF THE STars.—1. 43° R.M. 2. 78°
Metropolitan Chapter of France,

Kyicut Tempiar.—tl. Of Light. 2. Of very Ilustrious Light,
R. Mzm.

KniGHT TEMPLAR Prizst.—A degree immediately following the
Templar.

KNIGHT THEOSOPHIST.—1. 72° R. M. 2. 34° Reformed R. M.

Kwicuts FEUILLANTS, ORDER OF, AND Labizs PHitféiprs.—A social
society established in Brittany in the last century.

KNIGHTS, INVULNERABLE, HERoIc ORDER oF. (See Knights of the
Diamond.)

432

KNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [KON

Knicuts TempLar.—This order of Knights, very illustrious for
many years, and not unillustrated by the deeds of otherwise
celebrated men, has been now merged into a corporative body.
(See Templarism.)

Kyicuts oF AMIABLE CommMuUNION.—A society of pleasure, estab-
lished at Verdun sur Meuse, in 1724.

Knicuts or Joy, ORDER OF THE—Placed under the protection of
Bacchus and Cupid. Its statutes were printed in 1696.

KnicuTs oF Liserty.—A secret association formed about 1820 in
the department of Deux-Sévres, France, against the Government
of the Restoration, and shortly afterwards merged in the French
Carbonari. (See Compagnonage.)

Kwicuts oF Purse TruTH.—A Jesuit secret society, established by
the students of the College of Tulle.

Kwicuts or REFORMED CucKOLDs.—A burlesque society formed in
France in the beginning of the nineteenth century, the statutes of
which have been published.

KNIGHTS OF THE CaJoTE.—A social society, the statutes of which
were published in 1683.

KNIGHTS OF THE DiAMoND.—A work containing the statutes of this
Order exists in quarto, entitled, “The Triumph of Constancy in
the Heroic Order of Illustrious Lords and Invulnerable Knights,
or of the Diamond.”

KNIGHTS OF THE GRAPPE—A dining society, existing at Arles, in
Provence, in 1697.

KNIGHTS OF THE OaR.—An androgynous society, founded at Rouen,
in 1758.

KNIGHTS OF THE REDEMPTION.—A chivalric society, the forms of
which were takén from the Knights of Malta. It was of a
Masonic character, and introduced into Marseilles about 1813,
by a noble Sicilian. It is now extinct.

KnownortHines.—An American secret political society, with seven
degrees, having for its object opposition to foreign influence in
the United States as distinguished from native born Americans,
and also directed against the Roman Catholics. It arose about
1853, and finally lapsed into obscurity in 1861.

Konx Ompax (Pali, but literated into Greek, Kéy& turaé).—Used in
various of the mysteries, and evidence that Mr Pococke’s theory
of the derivation of the Hellenes from India is true. Hesychius
says it is an acclamation used by those who have finished any-
thing. The Athenians used the word dlops. The Sanskrit
equivalent was Candsha, Om, Pacsha. (See Pitrees.) Lobeck
(Aglaophon, p. 775) says it is xéyz, du, ra¥, where, in the usual
way of barbarous medieval monks, they wrote 6 for éwofus, like
or similar to, = konz, like to ae. The Brahmans transferred

7 433

KOR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | KRA

their religion to Hellas, and also all the names of rivers and
mountains. (See Pococke’s “ India in Greece,” passim.)

Koran or Kariin.—Son of Yeshar or Izhar, uncle of Moses.
Famed for his beauty and his wealth. In Mohammedan tradi-
tions, we find it asserted that he built a large palace overlaid with
gold, and with doors of massive gold; that he was inflated with
the possession of so much wealth, and arrogantly refused to give
alms, as Moses had commanded; he also brought a villanous
charge against Moses, and God directed Moses, when he com-
plained of this usage, to command the earth what he pleased and
it should obey; whereupon he said, “ O earth, swallow them up!”
And immediately the earth swallowed up Korah and his con-
federates. And as Kariin sank gradually into the ground, he
cried out four times, ‘“‘O Moses, have mercy upon me!” but
Moses continued his imprecation, and Karin disappeared ; upon
which God said unto Moses, “ Thou hadst no mercy on Karin,
though he asked pardon of thee four times; but I would have
had compassion on him, if he had asked pardon of me but once.”
(Al Beiddwi.)

Koran.—The sacred book revealed to Mohammed, the true prophet
of God. It is of great importance even to Christians, containing,
as it does, the words of the last law. It proclaims the Unity of
the Deity; and, while giving all honour to Issa Ben Yussuf, it
throughout maintains the principle that Faith, Hope, and Charity
are indissolubly connected. Hence it is a book not to be igno-
rantly put aside, but commands the respect of persons of all
creeds. In Mohammedan Lodges it is emphatically the Great
Light.

Krause, KARL CHRISTIAN FRIEDERICH.—Born May 6, 1781, at
Eisenberg, in Germany; educated at Jena; a theologist, philoso-
pher, and mathematician. Admitted to the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy in 1801, he removed after his marriage to Dresden, in
1805, where he remained until 1813. Initiated in 1805 in the
Lodge Archimedes. He was the author of many lectures on
Masonry, and published in 1810 a work entitled “Die dret
dltersten. Kunsturkunden der Freimaurerbriiderschaft,’— “The
Three Eldest Art Documents of the Masonic Fraternity.” The
boldness of this publication drew down upon Krause heavy
animosity, and he felt the effects throughout his lifetime, being
by his enemies constantly prevented from obtaining professional
employment. He removed to Berlin, 1814, and travelled through
Germany, Italy, and France in 1821, finally settling at Gottingen,
where he lectured on philosophy until 1830, dying September
27, 1832. He is supposed to be the original of Mr Carlyle’s
Professor Teufelsdréckh, in the wonderful “ Sartor Resartus.”

434

KRI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Las

KrisHNA.—An incarnation of Vishni, in the Hindu system.
One of the Trimurti, or Hindu trinity. Vishnii consented to be
born of a woman, Deviki, wife of Vasudeva. Through the in-
stigation of Kanza, a demon, at his birth all male children were
ordered to be destroyed ; but by the orders of Vasudeva, Krishna
was placed, like other eminent mythological characters, with a
cowherd, whose wife had a son, a portion of Vishni, called Bala
Rama. Like Hercules, Krishna at an early age destroyed a
mighty serpent, while his foster-brother Bala Rama killed the
demon Dhentka. He was killed by a hunter, as some legends
inform us, but other authorities say that he was crucified. The
Purana says: “Having united himself with his own spiritual,
inexhaustible, inconceivable, unborn, undecaying, imperishable,
and universal spirit, which is one with Vasudeva, he abandoned
his mortal body, and the condition of the threefold qualities.”
Before his death, which he had predicted, he told his disciples
to wrap him up in a cow’s hide, and bury him for three days,
after which he revived in a monstrous form, with three heads
on one body, without limbs, now known indifferently as Jag-
gernaut or Cerberus.

Ku-KLux-Kian.—A society of a political character in America.

KuLtma.—Hindustani Confession of Faith.

Kum. — Arabic. Used in the Order of Ishmael, meaning “to
arise.”

Kun.—Arabic for Be, the creative fiat of God.

L.

L—tThe twelfth letter of the English alphabet—a liquid. As a
numeral, L denotes 50; with a dash L 50,000. L also stands
for Lucius, often found asa Roman name. J.LS. signifies a
sestertium, equal to two libre and a half. The Hebrew name of
God, equivalent to L, or is 71, Limmud, or Doctus.

Laanau.—Hebrew, nayd Arabic, (om sheeh, wormwood, a word
used in the order of Ishmael. In its Hebrew form, it has a rela-
tion to ws laan, he was accursed ; hence the Arabic sisi, aana,
malediction.

Laparum.—A standard or banner borne before the Roman Em-
perors ; being an extended lance, with a cross staff at right angles
dependent from it; a banner of purple, sometimes adorned with
jewels. The ancient emblem of sovereignty upon it was the
eagle ; but when Constantine became penitent, and replaced the

435

LAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LAC

ancient faith by Christianity, the monogram used by the Chris-
tians with the motto Ev rovro wxe, was substituted. This has
been made into In hoc signo vinces (which see), and adopted
by certain Masonic bodies. The monogram was a combination
of the X, Chi, and P, Rko—the initials of Christos. This is,
however, falsely derived, as the same monogram and variants
have been found in many other archeological centres of the
world. Gibbon, in the “ Decline and Fall,” long since disposed
of the legend of Constantine.

LaBpaDist.—A disciple of John Labbadie, enthusiast and orator.
Born among the Jesuits in 1639, he became a member of the
Reformed Church. He was greatly attacked on account of his
opinions, derived mostly from mystical sources. John Labbadie
was a member of the contemplative societies of the time.

Lazsour.—l. A Lodge is said to be at labour during its solemn
ceremonials, comprising initiations, passings, and raisings. 2,
The labours of a Masonic Lodge, however, are susceptible of a
better interpretation. To bring a candidate forward is to admit
him to a great privilege, should he be found worthy of initiation.
To entrust him with the degree of a Fellow Craft is to strengthen
his belief in the goodness of the institution ; and finally, with
proper solemnity, to confer upon him the solemn duties of a
completed Mason, is to leave him free for good or for evil, to be
a credit to himself and others, or a disgrace to himself and the
community, being supposed thus to have compassed all the
labour, science, and morality of the world.

Lasrum (Latin, labrum, a lip)—1. A tub standing at the entrance
of temples in antiquity, for purposes of lustration previous to the
performance of sacred duties. Diogenes, the cynic, never would
go beyond the tub; hence the association of his name with a tub.
He was evidently a man who protested against the follies of his
time, and especially against foolish practices, and therefore
declined a house or sacred edifices, and lived in his tub. But
he was always esteemed a true philosopher; or, if the stories
told of him were true, he could not have been tolerated. 2. In the
Roman Catholic system, a lipped vase is placed at the entrance
of cathedrals and chapels for the lustration of the faithful.

LaByRintu.—A place full of perplexing windings. Symbolically
used in ancient times to indicate the vicissitudes and anxieties
of life.

Lavorng.—A dancing master of no credit. (See France.)

Lacunar.—An architectural term, denoting the under surface of a
member of an order; likewise the larmier or corona of a cornice,
and the under side of the architrave between the capitals of
columns. A ceiling is called lacunar only when it consists of

436

LAD | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LAD

compartments sunk or hollowed without spaces or bands between
the panels; if bands exist it is called laguear.

LappER.—There are several ladders in Esoteric Masonry, and it
will be better to treat them in conjunction than exceed the
limits of our enterprise. 1. The Brahmanical Ladder is used in
the mysteries of Brahma, consisting of seven steps, and is likewise
the oldest theological ladder in the world. According to the
Brahmans, there were seven worlds, answering to the expression
throughout all time of a belief in the number seven, and per-
petuated even in Craft Masonry by the formal allusion to the
number seven in a Lodge. The Indian version was, that there
were seven specific stages,—the lowest was the Earth, including
its inhabitants; the second was the World of the Spiritualists, or
of the Re-incarnation ; the third, Heaven; the fourth answered to
the intermediate state, or what the Hebrews called the Firma-
ment in their Scriptures ; the fifth was the World of Regenera-
tion, where souls were again prepared for birth into this world;
the sixth was the Palace of the Great King, spoken of by the
early Rosicrucians, in which there were many mansions; and
the seventh and last was the Home of Brahma, himself Limitless
Truth, the En Soph of the Kabbalah; in this manner do reli-
gions and forms of theological thought repeat themselves.
Brahma, or Surya, was a symbol of the Sun, and Daksha was his
vicegerent on earth. 2. Jacob's Ladder, alluded to in the
twenty-eighth chapter of the Book of Genesis. Any reference
to the legend in any further way to a reader of this book, in its
true sense, is unnecessary. (See Jacob.) 3. Mithraic Ladder—
Identical with the before-named Brahmanical Ladder. 4. Kad-
balistical Ladder. (See Kabbalah.) 5. Kadosh Ladder, other-
wise called the Mysterious Ladder. Composed of two sides, with
seven steps to each. The first side to the right is called Oheb
Eloah, or the love of God (Hebrew, TiN 3k, Deus amans). The
second side is Oheb Kerobo, or love of the neighbour (Hebrew,
A21P INK, propinguum et amans). The first side is thus given in
steps—1. Hebrew, npty, Justice and Charity—Justitia,eleemosinia,
or Tsedakah ; 2. (Hebrew, 129 nv, the White Bull, Innocence,
Bos albus, Innocentia, or Schor Laban, referring to the spotless
Bull Apis of Egypt; 3. Mathok (Hebrew, pin, Suavity, or con-
cedence, Dulcis vel dulcedo); 4. Emounah—Faith, firmness, and
truth (Hebrew, 2308); 5. Amal Sagghi, the Great Work (He-
brew, 83 boy, Labor magnus); 6. Sabbal (Hebrew, Dab), Respon-
sibility, Onus ; 7. pan 13°3 S13, In medio vicissitudine prudentia,
or in the midst of changes prudence is the guide. On the left are

437

LAD | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LAN

placed Astronomy, Music, Geometry, Arithmetic, Logic, Rhetoric,
and Grammar, completing the circle of duties and attain-
ments. 6. Hosicrucian Ladder. (See Rosicructanism.) 7.
Scandinavian Ladder.—Connected with the sacred ash-tree,
Yggdrassil, of the Norse mysteries, but unimportant in Masonry.
8. Theological Ladder—The four cardinal and three theological
virtues.

Lapy (French, Dame).—Used for female members of the andro-
gynous degrees.

Laya.—A gown worn by the Roman Augurs, with which they
covered their heads in making observations on the flight of birds
and other omens,

Laxan Deror Pessanw (Hebrew, 755 177 nip), —Used in the
fifteenth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite,
being liberty of passage in that sense.

Lama.—The sovereign pontiff of the Asiatic Tatars. It is the ortho-
dox Buddhist opinion that he never dies, but his soul migrates
from one person to another, leaving the former Lama in old age,
and again residing in the body of an infant,

LamB.—1. The lamb has ever been esteemed the symbol of inno-
cence; and is so found depicted on Pre-Christian monuments.
The lambskin apron was adopted by the Freemasons of modern
times, probably from the white apron worn by the stone-cutters
of the Middle Ages. Although the lamb appears as a Templar
symbol, as the Lamb of God, or Paschal Lamb, it is really no
connecting link between the Templars and the Masons, but is
rather derived from the mystical ideas of John the Divine, in the
Apocalypse. 2. A symbol in the 17th degree of the Scottish
Rite, forming part of the jewel.

LamMa Sapactant (Hebrew, ‘ympay ma, Why hast thou forsaken
me? see Matt. xxvil. 46; Ps. xxii. 1)—A phrase used in the
Masonic French Rite of Adoption, and in the old degree of
Knight of Adoption.

Lampapary.—An officer of the Greek Church, whose business it
was to superintend the lamps, and whose privilege was to bear a
taper before the emperor or patriarch in procession.

LanpDMARKS.—Generally speaking, landimarks are pillars or stones,
denoting boundaries; and the term has been adopted by the
Freemasons to indicate certain leading principles from which
there can be no deviation. These are, in number, twenty-
five:—1. The modes of recognition. 2, The division into
three degrees of a symbolical character, and known as Craft
Masonry; to which the Grand Lodge of England, at the Union
in pele, added the Holy Royal Arch. 3. The legend of the

43

LAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LAN

third degree. 4. The government of the Fraternity in each
country by a Grand Master, with certain duties and prerogatives.
5. The prerogative of the Grand Master to preside, wherever he
may be, is a landmark. As also, 6. his right to grant dispensa-
tions for conferring degrees at irregular times, 7%. His right to
grant dispensations for opening and holding Lodges. (See Lodges
under Dispensation.) 8. His right to make Masons at sight. (See
Sight, Making Masons at.) 9, The necessity for Masons to con-
gregate in Lodges. 10. The government of Lodges by a Master
and two Wardens. 11. The necessity of duly tiling every
Lodge. 12. The right of every Mason to be represented in all
general assemblies of the Craft, which is done by the officers of
his particular Lodge. 13. The right of every Mason to appeal
from the decision of the Brethren of his Lodge to Grand Lodge.
14, The right of every Mason to visit any Lodge, and sit therein
—this landmark is most important in cases where Masons travel
from country to country. 15. The right of the officers of a
Lodge to direct an examination of an unknown Brother—rather
perhaps to be called a duty. But this examination is un-
necessary when any member present can vouch for the Brother
so applying for admission. 16. The right of non-interference
between Lodges inter se. For instance, a candidate initiated in
one Lodge, ought. to receive his other two degrees in the same
Lodge, unless the Master courteously applies under extreme and
urgent circumstances for the conferring of the other degrees in
another Lodge, and the Master of the Lodge so entreated may, if
he choose, decline to confer such degrees, without appeal. 17.
Every Mason is amenable to the jurisdiction, its laws, and ordi-
nances, of the Grand Lodge of the country in which he resides,
although he may not be an actual member of any Lodge. 18.
Candidates shall not be mutilated persons, they shall he free
born, and of mature age. 19. Candidates shall profess a sincere
belief in the Grand Architect of the Universe. 20. Candidates
shall profess a sincere belief in the immortality of the soul.
21. The Book of the Law constitutes an indispensable part of
the Lodge furniture. This, however, need not be the Bible; but,
according to the religious faith of the Lodge, it may be the
Koran, the Zend Avesta, or the Vedas and Shasters. 22. The
equality of all Masons is a landmark. 23. The secrecy of the
Fraternity. 24. The basis of a speculative philosophic science
upon an operative art is a landmark—the construction of the
Temple of Solomon constitutes this basis, and underlies the
whole Masonic fabric in its symbolical application to the human
intellect and soul. 25. The last landmark of Craft Masonry—
that all these principles are susceptible of no mutation; that
439

LAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LAT

they can not, and shall never be, changed ; nothing can be added,
and nothing taken away from them.

Lancuacez, UNIVERSAL.—This consists in certain signs and tokens
conveyed from one to another in silence, and is irrespective of
country, race, or creed, and indeed can really constitute the
only universal method of communication between the diverse
members of the human family. Perhaps the language of symbols
may be included under this heading, for it is impossible to avoid
seeing the similar acceptations they obtain in widely spread
regions of the most varied kind.

LANTURELUS, ORDER OF THE.—Instituted in 1771 by the Marquis
de Croismarc, but now extinct.

Lanx.—A broad sacrificial dish used in antiquity. It was called
Satura when filled with fruits to be presented to the deities,

Laricipa.—From lapis, stone, and cedo, to cut. Used by Livy and
Varro ; in the signification of stone-cutter. Ducange (Glossarium)
defines it as “Aideficiorum structor,” or Mason; citing documents
of 1304 and 1392. Ugutio (“ Vocabularium,’ 1592, s.v. Lapi-
cedius) uses it in the same sense. (See Latomus.)

Laquear. (See Lacunar.)

Lararium.—The apartment in which the Jares or household gods
were preserved, together with the statutes of the family. The
lares were of three kinds, lares familiaris, presiding over the
house and family ; dares parva, of small size, like little statues of
patron saints; and ares prestites, who maintained order.

LARMENIUS, JOHANNES Marcus.—Said, with doubtful authority, to
have been the successor of James de Molay.

LARMIER. (See Lacunar.)

Larupan, ABBE.—Reputed author of “Les Francs-Magons écrasés,”
Amsterdam, 1747.—A vituperative work of no authority, but
which the enemies of Masonry continually quote. The Abbé
Larudan sought to attribute the authorship to the Abbé Perau,
author of “ L’Ordre des Francs-Macons trahi,’ Amsterdam, 1745.
Larudan first invented the lie that Oliver Cromwell was the
founder of Freemasonry.

Lascaris.—An alchymist who passed as an Archimandrite of the
Orient, who had been charged to collect alms for a Greek con-
vent, about the middle of the eighteenth century. His mystical
name was Althotas, and he was the preceptor of Cagliostro. He
is said to have sometimes appeared as a very old man, and some-
times as a youth. Some have thought that Althotas was iden-
tical with the Count de St Germain, but this is not the case.
Lascaris represented the school of naturalists attached to the
Hermetic doctrine.

LaTeran.—Originally the name of an individual, and afterwards

440

LAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LAV

applied to the ancient palace at Rome, and the buildings and
church of St John of Lateran. Councils of the Lateran were
held in the basilica, and there were canons regular of the church
seated there.

Latin Lopce.—The Grand Lodge of Scotland granted a warrant in
1784 for the establishment of the Roman Eagle Lodge at Edin-
burgh, in which the work was conducted in Latin, and the
founder and first Master was the linguist Dr John Brown. On
his removal to London it became extinct.

Latomia.—A corruption of lautomia, a stone quarry, sometimes
found in Latin Masonic documents.

Latomus.—Used by Thory in his “Acta Latomorum” as an equiva-
lent for Freemason, but by no means with accuracy.

LatriA.—In the Roman Catholic Church, that worship paid to God,
or highest worship, not rendered to saints.

Laursa.—A collection of little cells, at short distances from each
other, in which hermits and religious persons dwelt, in early
Christian times, afterwards replaced by monasteries.

Laure. Crown (Corona triumphalis)—Uséd in the higher degrees
of the Scottish Rite, and allotted as a sign that the recipient has
triumphed over his passions.

Laurens, J. L—A Masonic author. He published in 1805, the
“ Essai historique et antique sur la Franche-Maconnerie,” and other
works have been attributed to him.

Lavurig. (See Lawrie, Alexander.)

Lavru.—A cotton band twisted together, worn as the emblem of
regal and sacerdotal authority by the Incas of Peru.

LAVAL, GILLES DE.—Under a former heading (see Goetia) we have
spoken of the fatal effects of excited imagination on the unedu-
cated mind, inducing phantoms, delirium, and even death. We
have now to deal with a case of a perverted mind, interesting in
a psychological sense, but otherwise horrible to the humane
student of speculative Masonry. The person whose acts we are
about to describe was the actual original of the children’s story
of Blue Beard; in fact, his beard was so black, that it glinted
blue when exposed to the sun’s rays. He was lord or seigneur
of Raiz, in Brittany, and his portrait still hangs, as a Marshal of
France, in its accustomed place, in the Museum of Versailles. He
was a man of violent temper, and thus devoted himself to black
magic. He was luxurious both in his devotions and his table ;
he was accompanied by chaplains covered with gold ornaments,
and the cross and banner (according to the habits of those days)
were ever carried before him. Pages and choristers surrounded
him in rich habiliments. It was, however, after a time, a matter
of remark, that one of these boys was every day withdrawn and

441

LAV The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Lav

seen no more, but was replaced by another, and there was a
severe interdiction against inquiry on the part of any one. The
children, under the feudal system supported by the priests of
Rome to the present day, were taken under enormous promises
of a brilliant future from poor families. This devotion was a
mask for infamous practices. The marshal, being ruined by his
expenses, had determined to create for himself riches he was too
idle to draw from his Jands. He had already exhausted his
resources in futile alchymical experiments, and so resolved to
appeal to the demoniacal powers, if such there be, for gold, the
besetting sin of humanity. He found a tool in a Florentine,
named Prelati, an apostate priest, and in Sillé, his steward, who
was, perhaps, equally eager for gold as his master. The marshal
had married a young lady of noble birth, and retained her almost
a prisoner in his mansion of Machecoul, where there was a tower,
which, already in ruins, might fall to pieces at any day. The
marshal gave orders that no one was to enter this tower. But
Madame de Raiz, who was often left alone at night, could not but
perceive glaring torchlights in it. Being afraid of her husband,
she did not dare to ask him, his strange and preoccupied manners
having terrified her. On Easter Day, 1440, after having taken a
solemn communion in his chapel, the marshal took leave of his
wife, telling her that he was about to set out for the Holy Land.
His poor wife did not utter a word in her terror, and being in a
delicate state, the marshal permitted her sister to come to her
as company during his absence. Madame de Raiz eagerly
accepted this, and sent for her sister, and Gilles de Laval took
horse and departed. When her sister arrived, she confided her
fears and anxieties to her. What may be going on in the man-
sion? Why is the Seigneur de Raiz so sombre? What becomes
of those children which daily disappear? Wherefore these noc-
turnal lights in the walled tower? This was a problem sufficient
to excite the curiosity of two women, educated as women then
were. We can easily imagine that to think was to do.- They
explored every nook and cranny; and finally, in the chapel
behind the altar, they found what they sought—a brazen spring,
concealed within the architectural ornaments, yielded to their
touch, a stone turned, and the steps of a staircase leading
upwards were visible. It was the forbidden tower. On the
first floor they found a chapel, with a reversed cross, and tapers
of black wax, and on the altar a figure of the demon. On the
second they found furnaces, alembics, charcoal, and all alchymis-
tical apparatus. The third chamber was dark, suffocating, and
foetid. Madame de Raiz overturned a vase, and felt her robe
and her feet inundated by a thick and unknown liquid. When
442

Lav] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Lav

she regained the common light, she found herself covered with
blood. Her sister Anne wished to fly, but the Chastelaine of the
castle was more courageous. She went down and took the lamp
of the infernal chapel, and returned to the upper chamber, where
she beheld a horrible sight. Copper basins were ranged along
the walls, with tickets indicating their dates, and in the centre
of the chamber lay the body of a child recently murdered. The
two women were nearly dead with affright, and Madame de Raiz
tried all she could to efface the stains from her apparel, but in
vain; and they were about to depart, when fearful sounds were
heard in the courtyard calling to Madame de Raiz, and telling
her the marshal had returned. Sister Anne rushed up to the
battlements, and when madame came down trembling through
the chapel, she found herself face to face with her infuriated
husband, followed by the Florentine Prelati and Sillé. The
monster seized his wife by the arm, and took her into the chapel,
when Prelati remarked to his master, “You perceive the victim
has come willingly.” “Very well,” said the marshal, “let the
black mass be performed.” M. de Raiz himself opened a chest
within the altar, and took therefrom a long sharp knife, and sat
down by his wife, with the intent of sacrificing her. The deluded
marshal had pursued the assistants, and from Nantes had brought
back the culprits. During this time her sister Anne, being for-
gotten upon the battlements, did not descend, being also in
terror, but having her veil with her, detached it, and made sig-
nals of distress, to which two cavaliers replied, riding furiously
up to the castle or mansion. These were two brothers of the
Chastelaine who came to see her, and make her merry during
her husband’s absence. They created some excitement, as
strangers, in the outer precincts, and frightened Gilles de Laval.
So he interrupted the absurd and horrible ceremony; and he
said, “Madame, if you will do what I tell you, I shall give you
mercy, and nothing further will happen. On these conditions—
that you return to your chamber, change your apparel, and rejoin
me in the reception-hall, where I shall receive your brothers. If
you say a word before them, or even anything that may cause
suspicion, I shall, after their departure, bring you back into this
place, and we shall resume the black mass now commenced; and
when the consecration takes place, it is necessary that you die.”
He then rose, and taking his wife by the hand, led her to her
chamber, and himself descended to the reception-hall, where,
with consummate dissimulation, he welcomed his brothers-in-law.
Presently appeared Madame de Raiz, pale as a ghost. Gilles de
Laval dominated her with a fixed look, and never took his eyes
off her. “ You are ill, my sister,” said one of the brothers. “ No;
443

LAV | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | LAW

merely unwell;” and then she whispered, “he is about to kill
me; save my life!” At this crisis sister Anne, who had man-
aged to get away from the battlements, rushed into the chamber,
erying, “ Take us away ; save us, my brothers! for this man is a
murderer!” pointing to Gilles de Laval. It was seen by the
men-at-arms that their master was in the wrong; so, although a
slight encounter took place, they speedily laid down their arms,
and justice was done. Don John V. invested Machecoul, and
Gilles de Laval surrendered without any trouble. He was
adjudged homicidal; and the ecclesiastical laws were even more
severe. Finally, he was burnt alive in the field of St Magdalene,
close to Nantes, but before his death bequeathed a moral to
mankind. He had been a daring man, and was convicted of
execrable crimes. Even to the last he showed a bold front, and
stood upon points of etiquette with his judges. Greed of gold,
in his case, as in that of so many others, had been his ruin. Itis
beyond our immediate purpose to say more. The moral is obvious
to those who will calmly read this article and the article Goetia,

Laver, Brazen.—Commanded to be made by Moses for the taber-

' nacle service (Exod. xxxviii. 8). Similar vessels were in use in
the ancient mysteries, and still necessary in the symbolism of
some of the high degrees.

Law, Morat, (See Moral Law.)

Law, ORAL. (See Oral Law.)

Law, PaRLiaMentTaRy. (See Parliamentary Law.)

Law, SacreD. (See Sacred Law and Thertoz.)

Lawruu Inrormation. (See Information, Lawful.)

LawriE, ALEXANDER.—Originally a stocking weaver, and afterwards
a bookseller and stationer in Parliament Square, Edinburgh, and
publisher of a work on the History of Freemasonry in 1804; but
there is a doubt as to whether he was really the author. He
was afterwards Grand Secretary of the Grand Lodge of Scotland.
According to an autograph note by Dr David Irving, his book
was really written by Sir David Brewster. Lawrie’s son, William
Alexander Laurie, for some unexplained reason, changed the
spelling of his name, using w instead of w, and published a re-
markable work, based on the former book, in 1859. This latter
was Grand Secretary in Scotland for many years, and died in
1870, highly respected.

Laws oF Masonry.—These consist of three classes—1. Landmarks ;
2. General Laws or Regulations; 3. Local Laws or Regulations.
The first of these classes has already been discussed. The second
consists of the regulations enacted by the various Grand Lodges
at a time when the jurisdiction of the severak bodies was
co-existent; and from the fact of their demise, they have become

444

LAX | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Laz

practically unrepealable. Their general substance is to be found
in the old constitutions recognised in 1717, and adopted previous
to 1721. Local laws are such laws as are made by special Grand
Lodges for the regulation of affairs within their several jurisdic-
tions, and are only binding in so far that they do not conflict
with the Landmarks and the General Laws.

Lax OBSERVANCE (Observantia Lata).—On the establishment of the
rite of Strict Observance by Hund, the adherents of the latter
designated by this term all Lodges preferring to remain faithful
to the English Rite,

Lay Brotuers.—1. Founded in the eleventh century, and appa-
rently connected with the corporations of builders and stone
masons. The order had two classes, and was skilled in architec-
ture, 2. A degree or class in the Strict Observance.

Layer.—A_ workman inferior to an Operative Freemason—one who
builds in brick; the word is thus found “layer” (Hart and Kil-
winning MSS.), “leyer” (Sloane MS.), “rough layer” (Alnwick
MSS.), “leye” (Contract for Fotheringay Church). In modern
times we say bricklayer, but the word is to be found in the
Booke for a Justice of Peace (fol. 17), 1559, in this passage :—
“None artificer nor labourer hereafter named, take no more nor
greater wages than hereafter is limited . . . that is to say,
a free mason, master carpenter, rough mason, bricke layer.”

Lazarists.—A body of Roman Catholic missionaries, founded by
St Vincent de Paul in 1632, and so termed from their occupying
the priory of St Lazarus at Paris.

Lazarus, ORDER OF.—1. The memory of a monk of this name in the
ninth century is celebrated by the Romish Church on February
21st, because neither the threats nor violence of the Emperor
Theophilus could prevent him painting images of the saints. He
was afterwards esteemed the patron of the sick, especially lepers ;
and an order was instituted in Palestine, termed the United
Order of St Lazarus and of our beloved Lady of Mount Carmel.
But the Order of St Lazarus has a prior historical claim to that
of Mount Carmel. It was originally founded at Jerusalem, and
was a military order fighting against the Saracens, by whom it
was almost destroyed. It was in the highest state of prosperity
during the reign of Baldwin IIL, king of Jerusalem. In 1150,
the knights pronounced the three vows of obedience, poverty,
and chastity, in the presence of William the Patriarch—adopting
the rules of St Benedict. In 1590, Innocent VIII. tried, with-
out success, to incorporate them, and all their estates in France,
with the Knights of Malta. In 1572, Gregory XII. united the
Italian Knights of the Order with that of St Maurice, then
founded by Philibert Emmanuel, Duke of Savoy. In 1607-8,

445

LEA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LEc

Henry IV. united them by Bull from Paul V. with Notre-Dame
de Mount Carmel, the first Grand Master being Philibert de
Nerestan, his chamberlain, and the dignity was confirmed to his
descendants. Badge, an eight-pointed star emazli¢e; colours,
amaranth and vert, with figures of the Virgin Mary and St
Lazarus on the obverse and reverse. The points terminate with
pearls and gold beads, and in the four chief angles are flewrs-de-
lis. Ribbon: broad, watered, amaranth colour, worn scarf-wise
over the left. In 1779, the brother of Louis XVI., Louis Stanis-
laus Xavier, Count de Provence, was Grand Master of the United
Confraternities, and, with the king’s approbation, he thought
proper to separate them. St Lazarus then became the first
order, and was divided into two classes—1, Grand Commanders,
wearing a small star of silver spangles, bordée with spangles or;
in the centre a small square-ended cross or, on which appears
the motto, Armis e¢ Atavis. Ribbon: pale green, watered. II.
Commanders, wearing a somewhat smaller cross, suspended from
the neck. The Order of Notre-Dame de Mont Carmel was
annexed to the Ecole Militaire, with an amaranth ribbon and
cross similar to the original form, 2. The Order of Lazarus is also
Masonic, and the members wear an emerald cross on the breast.

LraGur, GERMAN, or Deutsches Bund.—lInstituted against Napoleon
ip 1810.

Lrsanon (Hebrew, 1233, Sept. A/Bavos, White Incense).—Used in the
twenty-second degree of the Scottish Rite, otherwise known as
Knight of the Royal Axe or Prince of Lebanon or Libanus. The
range of mountains in Syria are of white limestone, and tradition
says that thence the timber for King Solomon’s Temple was
obtained. (See Druses.)

Le BauLtp DE Nans, CLAUDE ETIENNE—Born at Besancon. 1736.
By profession an actor, but devoting his leisure time to the
cultivation of the literary aspects of Masonry. He was seven
years, from 1771 to 1778, W.M. of the Lodge St Charles de
YUnion at Mannheim, and afterwards orator of the Lodge Royal
York of Friendship at Berlin. He composed many odes and
essays of a Masonic character, and died at Berlin in 1789.

LEcHANGEUR.—An officer of a lodge in Milan. In 1805, he was a
candidate for membership in the newly-established Ancient and
Accepted Rite, but after having received some of the degrees,
the Supreme Council declined to allow him to proceed further ;
whereupon he, it is said, revenged himself by creating the Rite
of Mizraim of ninety degrees, and declared himself Superior
Grand Conservator. Chapters were established by him at
Naples; and, in 1810, he granted a patent to Michel Bedarride,
who eames the rite to France. He died 1812,

44

LEC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LEL

Lecturer, Granp.—An officer peculiar to American Masonry, who
watches over the ritual of the craft in that country, and travels
from place to place to correct inaccuracies and give instruction.

LecturEs.—Craft Masonry has appropriate lectures to each degree,
divided into sections for the greater convenience of instruction.
It would be out of place, and even superfluous, to enter upon
details here. They have been frequently revised, and contain
the principles, ceremonies, and symbolical interpretations neces-
sary for the proper appreciation of Freemasonry.

Lerranc, ABBE—A Roman Catholic writer on Masonry, and a
bitter enemy of the Fraternity. He was massacred at Paris,
together with many other priests, on the 2d September, 1792,
although it is said by Thory (Act. Lat. i. 192), that M. Ledhui, a
Freemason, attempted to save his life, but perished with him.
Of his two treatises, “Ze Voile levé pour les curieux” (1791), and
“ Conjuration Contre la Religion Catholique,” Robison made great
use. Some idea may be formed of his veracity from the fact that
he asserts Faustus Socinus, the founder of Unitarianism, to have
been the inventor of Freemasonry.

Lerr Hanp.—Among the ancients a symbol of equity and justice.
Apuleius (Met. 1. xi.) says, that one of the ministers of Isis in
the procession “ bore the symbol of equity, a left hand, fashioned
with the palm extended, which seems to be more adapted to
administering equity than the right, from its natural inertness,
and its being endowed with no craft and no subtilty.”

Lerr Sipe.—tThe first degree is represented by the left side; as the
E. A. P. degree is the weakest part of Masonry.

LecaTe (Latin, Legatus)—Du Cange says (Glossar.) that a legate
was one who was “in provincias 4 Principe ad exercendas judi-
cias mittebatur,’—sent by a prince into the provinces to exercise
judicial functions. In the American Scottish Rite, it designates
persons sent into unoccupied territories to propagate the rite.
It has only come into use since 1866. A legate should possess
the 32° at least.

LeciriMisM, CONSERVATORS OF—A political society in France
under the Restoration of Louis XVIIL., having for its object the
abolition of coustitutionalism.

LEHRLING.—German for an entered apprentice,

LELAND, JoHN.—Born early in the sixteenth century at London,
died 18th April, 1552. He was Chaplain to Henry VIII, and
“King’s Antiquary.” His collections are deposited in the Bodleian
Library at Oxford,

Letanp Manuscrirt,—This MS. is that constantly referred to as
the Henry VI. document, the title of which is, “Certayne
questyons with answeres to the same, concernynge the mystery

447

LEM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LER

of maconrye; wryttene by the hands of Kynge Henry the Sixthe
of the name, and faythfullye copied by me, Johan Leylande,
Antiquarius, by the commaunde of his Highnesse, Henry VIII.”
It has been rejected by the best authorities, although it has been
repeatedly reprinted, and the original, after having been diligently
sought for, is nowhere to be found in the Bodleian. It was first
printed at Frankfort, together with a forged letter from John
Locke in 1748, and republished in England in the Gentleman's
Magazine, 1753 (p. 417). It is now universally given up,
although it excited a hot controversy among Masonic critics,
Halliwell, Lessing, Keller, and more recently Findel, have opposed
it; while Krause, Fessler, Lenning, Reghellini, Preston, Hutchin-
son, Calcott, and Oliver pronounced for it; Mackey also gives
it up.

Lemancrau.—A consul of France, who possessed an admirable
collection of degrees, of which many are named in this work.

LENGTH OF THE LopcE. (See Form of the Lodge.)

Lennixc, C.—The pseudonym of a learned German Mason, residing
at Paris in 1817, who first projected the “Encyclopddie der Free-
maurerei,” a most valuable book. It was edited for Brockhaus of
Leipzig, by Mossdorf; and, indeed, many articles were really
written by the editor. Several volumes were published in 1822,
1825, and 1828. A second edition has since appeared, edited by
Schletter and Zille.

Lenomr, ALEXANDRE—Born at Paris, 1761. He was, at first, a
successful painter, and, in 1790, was appointed by the National
Assembly Conservator of the Museum. He classified the objects
of art contained therein, and proved himself an able antiquary.
He was the author of a book entitled, “Za Franche Maconnerie
rendue & sa veritable Origine,” Paris, 1814; being the substance of
eight lectures delivered before the Metropolitan Chapter of
France. He had previously published a book, now practically
valueless, on the connection between the Mysteries and Egyptian
Hieroglyphics. Died at Paris, 12th June, 1839.

Lrontica.—Sacrificial festivals among the ancients in honour of
the sun. The priests were called Leontes, because they repre-
sented the sun under the form of a lion radiant, surmounted by
a tiara, and gripping in his forepaws the horns of a bull.

LrpaGe.—Like Lemanceau, a collector of degrees. He lived at
Bayonne.

LeroucE, ANDRE JOSEPH ETIENNE—Born at Commercy, 25th
April, 1766. He was also a collector of degrees. Died 1834.
He was one of the editors of the French Masonic paper Hermes,
and was a man of considerable learning, and great liberality in
eons his brethren in the promulgation of Masonic principles.

44

LES | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Les

Lerouge was possessed of a large Masonic library, a catalogue of
which is printed.

Lesser Licuts.—The lights in a lodge placed East, West, and
South. From the situation of Solomon’s Temple geographically,
the rays of the sun could not penetrate to the North, and there-
fore it is symbolically a place of darkness.

LESSING, GOTTHOLD EPHRAIM.— Born at Camenz,in the Niederlausitz,
22d January, 1726, and died at Wolfenbiittel, 15th February,
1781, being then librarian to the Duke of Brunswick. He was
initiated at Hamburg, and his fearless and critical spirit still
finds many adherents at the present day. His two most promi-
nent works on Masonry are Ernst und Falk, and the wonderful
dramatic epos, Nathan der Weise. In the former fragmentary
work he discussed, in a remarkable way, the theories of his time
in relation to Masonry, and in the latter he showed what
were his hopes of its possible future; and he evinced a spirit
of harmony, using fables derived from much older sources.
There exist two great classical Masonic writers in German
literature: the one is Lessing, the other Goethe. They rarely
allude openly to the Masonic idea, but their works are full of
references. Perhaps the greatest summary of Lessing’s character
is that of Gervinus (Gesch. d. d. L. iv. 290), who, after describing
the miserable and superficial age in which he lived, says of
him—in contradistinction to Klopstock and Wieland—that while
the two latter had run wild upon classical models and on
scriptural subjects, Lessing alone had laid himself at the maternal
breast and wrote German, taking his illustrations from actual life.
But, in another sense, Lessing illustrated Masonic principles by his
wonderful work on art canons, entitled “ Zaocoon,” in which not
only the critical faculty is so finely developed, but that suggestive,
genial, reconstructive principle, of the possession of which critics
are so cruelly denuded by the critics’ critics. This question of
criticism is, after all, Masonic. As Masons pull down, so they
ought to rebuild; and, in a speculative sense, that which vanishes
from social life, in the way of manners and ideas, requires refor-
mation; hence it is that we may even bracket the remarkable
Anti-Goetze letters with the other Masonic endeavours of our
Bro. Lessing. It would be really a difficult task to indicate the
very many Masonic authors of Germany who have striven in
their time to give life and light to the principles of the
Fraternity. Goethe was one of these, and his lifetime was
consecrated to the propagation of ideas in consonance with
Masonry ; and he died full of honour and reward. So also did
Lessing.

2F 449

LET | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LEW

Lettuce.—A plant esteemed sacred in the mysteries of Adonis,
(See Tammvuz.)

Leucur. (See Johnson or Johnstone.)

LrucopetRIANs.—The followers of Leucopetrius, in the Greek
Church, during the twelfth century, who rejected all outward
ceremonies of religion, and spent their time in prayer and sup-
plication.

Levet.—A symbol of equality in Masonry. In the English system
a moveable jewel, in the American immovable. It is the pro-
per official emblem of the Senior Warden, and one of the working
tools of a F. C. Freemason.

Levi, ELipHaz, otherwise EipHaz Levi ZaHED.—The Abbé
Alphonse Louis Constant, an eminent author of works on _philo-
sophical magic. He was a member of the Brotherhood of Light,
or Fratres Lucis, and at one time an abbé of the Roman Catholic
Church, which thrust him out, although in genius and learning
he was by far the superior of those who stripped his gown. The
editor of this book knew him personally, and a man more unaf-
fected in his manners, or less inflated by his superior attain-
ments, could not be found. At the same time, he entertained
no feeling of animosity against his persecutors; he was affable
in conversation, genial in manner, and eager to afford informa-
tion to those whom he found he could admit to his confidence.
When he died, some two years ago, the Holy Kabbalah lost one
of its most learned expositors. His life was retired, and he left
many valuable works behind him in manuscript. He published
at Paris four hooks,—“ Dogme et Rituel dela Haute Magie,” 1856,
second edition, 1860; “ Histoire de la Magie,” 1860; “La
Clef de Grand Mysteres,’ 1861; and “ Legendes et Symboles,” 1862.
He also published “ Za Science des Esprits” and “ Le Soreier de
Meudon.” At his death, he had prepared for publication “ Le
Livre de Mystere,” and “ L’ Anneau de Salomon.”

LevitE, Knicut. (See Knight of Light and Clearness, and Knight
of the True Light.)

LeEviTEs.—Sometimes used in the high degrees,

Leviticon.—The Ritual Book of the New Templars of Paris,
founded on a forged gospel of St John, made in the fifteenth
century. Fabré de Palaprat made considerable use of it about
1814. The internal evidence is enough to show that it has no
exegetical value. The author is said to have been one Nicephorus,
a Greek monk of Athens.

Lrewis.—l. The son of a Mason. In France it is lowveteau, or
young wolf, probably on account of the bad state of education
among French Masons, who derived everything in Masonry from
Egyptian hieroglyphics, and sought to give a factitious glory to

450

LIB The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LIB

the institution. There is no nation so exact in mathematics,
and so wild in theory, as the French. In England and France
to be a lewis, or louveteau, confers certain privileges-—in England,
that of being initiated at eighteen (if otherwise suitable, a dis-
pensation being obtained), and in any case before any other can-
didate of the same evening, however noble; and in France, of
receiving Masonic baptism, and the Lodge incurs certain respon-
sibilities of nurture and education. 2. A cramp-iron to be
inserted into a cavity in any large stone, so that a pulley and
hook may be inserted to lift the stone. Mackey thinks the
word to be derived from Norman French, as lévis ; in technical
French building it is called lowve ; but if we think of pont lévis,
or drawbridge, where a wind-pulley is or was applied, we can
perceive the application. 3. The enemies of Masonry may find
some consolation in the same idea as applied to the bands, which
they themselves called into existence, of the lowve tétes, who
revenged, by fire and sword, the abominations committed upon
their fathers and mothers. 4. The placid Masons of 1723, who
knew none of these things, adopted the idea of Jewis into their
system, little supposing what mischief they had imported.

Lizanus. (See Lebanon.)

Lipation.—An ancient rite of homage to God, in whatever form
adored; usual among the Hellenes and Romans, but not so much
in use among Khamitic races. It was customary to pour wine,
or water mixed with wine, upon the heads of victims for the
altar, and in social banquets to do the same by pouring a certain
portion of the first goblet of the feast by each guest on the
ground. It has been stated that the Sacrament of the Cup,
denied to the laity by the Roman Catholic system, originated
from this practice. In some of the high degrees this custom is
perpetuated. In the Order of Ishmael, and other orders, milk,
salt, and bread are proffered, and thus the rites of hospitality
preserved.

LiBavius, ANDREAS.—Born at Halle, Saxony, died at Coburg, rector
of the Gymnasium, 1616. A physician, and an opponent of Para-
celsus and the Rosicrucians, against whom he published books.

Lisertas.—A word in the Red Cross degree, and also important in
that of Knights of the East, or of the Sword.

LiBeRTINE—A man, according to the charges of 1723, is not, if a
candidate for Masonry, to be “an irreligious libertine ;” that is
to* say, he must not, whatever other ideas he may entertain,
decline to believe in a God. He is distinguished from an
Atheist, because the latter, from unreasoning pride, proclaims
his infidelity ; but many men have been thus stigmatised by the
Roman Catholic clergy, and even burnt, without due examination.

45!

LIB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Lic

Liperty oF PAssAGE—-Sometimes interpreted liberté de penser.
(See Libertas.)

LiserTY, ORDER OF.—A secret androgynous society, founded at
Paris in 1740, long since extinct.

LisraRy.—Every properly constituted Lodge should have a library,
not alone of Masonic works, but of general literature, so as to
inform the minds of the members as to the generous sentiments of
those who have illustrated the progress of the human mind. It
is well enough to perform the ceremonies of Masonry, but these
ceremonies have only a galvanized and spasmodic life without
the essential spirit which instructs by reflection. How can
Masonry be truly universal without the adornment and content-
ment of learning? How can any fraternity of men be humane
without the advantages of culture? Charity is a noble and
essential principle, but unthinking charity becomes a vain glory.

LIEUTENANT GRAND CoMMANDER.—The title of the second and third
officers in the Scottish Rite (Grand Consistory), and of the
second officer in a Supreme Court.

Lirr MemBer—In America the life membership of a Lodge is
possible, but not so in an English Lodge. It has many disad-
vantages ; it makes Masonry to assume the functions of a benefit
society, and if introduced here would lead to grave difficulties.
An unworthy person could not be excluded, because his money
would represent him, and it would be admitting plutocrats into
the institution—an idea abhorrent to those who, out of small
earnings, maintain their proper status in Masonry from a real
love of the science. It would leave no choice to the real
Masons, for any one might thus, by a sudden accession of for-
tune, avail himself of sucha law. Dr Mackey argues differently,
but it is fraught with such grave difficulties, that the English
system wisely rejects the notion.

Licut.—A very great deal of obscure nonsense has been written on
this subject. The light of the Freemason is moral, and not
encumbered by the trammels of any particular faith. Craft
Masonry brings him to the knowledge of himself, and allowing
him as a Master Mason to weigh the comparative safety of good-
ness and common sense against that of moral and mental obli-
quity, leaves him free to pursue either course. This has been
the endeavour of moralists in all ages, and in the Masonic
Fraternity the attempt to enforce the maxim has been on the
grandest scale. Hence it is that religion forms no part of the
scheme of Masonry: it could not do so as a purely voluntary
institution ; and were it to be untrue to this essential principle,
it would no longer deserve the support of enlightened and gene-
rous minds, The symbolism in relation to light is beautiful in

452

Lic | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (LIN

itself, but, being the common property of all men, needs not tp
be put under a Masonic bushel. All forms of faith include the
preference of light to darkness, and it is unnecessary to appeal
to ancient times, to the religions of America or the Chinese, in
support of the proposition. Without light, none of the designs
of T.G.A.0.T. U. could be completed; with light, come hope
and happiness to all men.

Licut, BROTHERS or.—A mystic order, Frates Iucis, established in
Florence in 1498. Among the members of this Order were
Pasqualis, Cagliostro, Swedenborg, St Martin, Eliphaz Levi, and
many other eminent mystics. Its members were much perse-
cuted by the Inquisition. It is a small but compact body, the
members being spread all over the world.

Licut, Great.—In Viany’s Collection.

Licut, True, or PErFect Mason.—In the Chapter of the Grand
Lodge Royal York of Berlin.

Licuts, Fixep.—In the rituals of the last century, every Lodge-
room was supposed to be furnished with three dormer windows,
situated east, west, and south.

Licuts, SYMBOLICAL—The lights situated near the chairs of the
Master and Senior and Junior Wardens are thus denominated.
Licure (Hebrew, nw ).—The first stone in the third row of the
high priest’s breastplate, and referred to the tribe of Dan. It is

supposed to have been the rubellite.

Lity.—An emblem of purity and peace, as was the lotus in Egypt
and India. (See Lotus.)

Lity OF THE VALLEY.—A side degree in the Templar system of
France.

Lity Work.—Properly lotus work, a part of the ornamentation of
King Solomon’s Temple.

LINDNER, FRIEDRICH WILHELM.—A professor of philosophy at
Leipzig, and author of an attack on Masonry, published in 1819,
entitled “ Mac-Benac; Er lebet im Sohne; oder das Positive der
Freimaureret.”

Livge.—One of the working tools of a Past Master, and presented
to the Master of a Lodge on his installation. (See Plumbline.)
Linear TriaDs.—According to Oliver, this is a figure appearing on
some old Royal Arch floorcloth, and had a reference to the three
sojourners, representing the three stones on which prayers and

thanksgivings were offered on the discovery of the lost. Word.

Lincam.—The symbol of the creating and producing power, together
with the yonz, in India. In the Hellenic system; they were called
the phallus and the cteis. (See Phallus.)

Linx.—A degree connected with Mark Masonry (see Gen. xi. 1-9),
known as Ark, Mark, Link, or Wrestle. The latter was founded

453

LIN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Lop

upon Gen. xxxil. 24-30, when Jacob wrestles with an angel.
Jacob named the place Peniel *"35, because he had seen (as
he thought) God face to face.
LiynEcaR, RIcHarD.—Author of the celebrated Masonic ode be-
ginning—
“* Let there be light—th’ Almighty spoke ;

Refulgent beams from chaos broke,
T’ illume the rising earth.”

He was Coroner of Wakefield, and for many years Master of the
Lodge of Unanimity, No. 238, not now in existence.

Lion, KNIGHT OF THE—Twentieth degree of the Third Series of the
Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Lion, ORDER OF THE—An ancient Egyptian Order, during the eigh-
teenth dynasty, mentioned in hieroglyphic documents. There
was also the Order of the Fly.

Lion, ORDER OF THE SLEEPING.—A political association, founded
at Paris in 1816, by Holleville and Cugnet de Montarleau, in
favour of the restoration of Napoleon; it was suppressed by the
police in the same year.

Lion’s Paw.—The grip of the lion was formerly a term for a mode
of recognition among Masons, referring to the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah.

LITERATURE OF Masonry. (See Masonic Literature.)

Livery. (See Clothed.)

Livre D’OR. (See Book of Gold.)

Lopontan Soctery.—This Society met in the last century at Lob
Hall, at the King and Queen, in Norton Folgate, by order of Lob
the Great. (See Derisive Societies.)

Locat Laws. (See Laws of Masonry.)

Locxe’s Letter. (See Leland Manuscript.)

Lopce.—French, loge ; German, loge; Spanish, logia ; Portuguese,
loja ; Italian, loggia ; Sanskrit, loga—1. The assembly room of
a Masonic body is thus termed. (See Lodge Room.) 2. An
assembly of Masons, duly warranted, for labour or business.
An assembly of Royal Arch Masons is called a Chapter, and of
Cryptic Masons a Council. In the Ancient Order of Ishmael
(which see), such meetings are termed Tents, and in the Royal
Order of Sikha and the Sat Bhai, they are named Ashayanas.
The medieval builders used to erect wooden sheds or huts for
deliberative purposes, and there discuss all matters of architec-
tural importance, and they recognised Strasburg as the Haupt
Hiitte (which see). Du Cange (Glossar.) defines logia or logium
as “a house or habitation,” quoting Lambertus Ardensis as say-
ing that “logia is a place next to the house where persons were

454

Lop} The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Lop

accustomed to hold pleasant conversation.” And thence Lam-
bertus infers that it came from the Greek Aoyés, logos, a discourse.
The Cardinals of the Romish Church, when met in conclave, held
their formal proceedings in loyie or lodges. 3. The Lodge itself
is a piece of furniture containing the archives and important
documents connected with the ceremonials of Masonry, and is
only used on grand occasions. (See Charter, Clandestine, Constitu-
tion of a Lodge, Dormant Lodge, Emergency, Extinct Lodge, Holy
Lodge, Just Lodge.)

Loner, Hoty.—The Lodge over which Moses, Aholiab, and Beza-
leel presided at Mount Horeb, referred to in the Royal Arch
degree.

tones Master, EncLisH.—A degree mentioned in the collection
of Lemanceau.

Lopce Master, Frencu.—Twenty-sixth degree of the collection of
the Metropolitan Chapter of France.

LopGE, OccasIonaL. (See Occasional Lodge.)

Lopez oF Insrruction.—In England these Lodges are attached by
permission to regular Lodges, and afford great instruction to work-
ing members. The most important of these Lodges is the Emu-
lation Lodge of Improvement for Master Masons, meeting at Free-
mason’s Hall, London, every Friday throughout the year. It
would be illegal to initiate at any of these Lodges; but they
have a great effect in maintaining order and proper ceremony.
They have a regular record of their proceedings, and effect a
great deal of good in Masonry.

Lopcz or Sr JoHN.—Masonic tradition asserts that the first
Masonic Lodge, after the establishment of Christianity, was held
at Jerusalem under the Grand Mastership-of St John the Evan-
gelist; and that he and St John the Baptist were both Grand
Masters. It accounts for Lodges being called St John’s Lodges.

Lopceg, Perrect. (See Just Lodge.)

Lopce Room. (See Form of the Lodge.)

LopGe, Royau.—The Grand, or Royal Lodge over which Zerub-
babel, Prince of the people, together with Haggai the prophet,
and Jeshua, the son of Josedech, the High Priest, presided at
the building of the Second Temple, referred to in the Royal
Arch degree.

Lopes, Sacrep.—The Lodge over which King Solomon, Hiram
King of Tyre, and Hiram Abif, presided at the building of the
First Temple, built on Mount Moriah, according to tradition.

Lopcez, SYMBOL OF THE—See Adbreviations, p. 9, under (a), (6), and
(7). Sometimes the delta was placed above the cross, It is
obsolete.

‘LODGES UNDER DISPENSATION. (See Dispensation.)

455

LOG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Loy

Locic.—The art of reasoning, and one of the seven liberal arts and
sciences. The Old Constitutions define logic to be the art “ that
teacheth to discern truth from falsehood.”

Loke.—The Scandinavian Typhon.

Lomparpy. (See Travelling Freemasons.)

Lorp.—A Saxon word implying raised or exalted birth, from Anglo-
Saxon Alaford (hlarop), corrupted into laford or loverd, and con-
tracted into lord. (J. H. Tooke, Diversions of Purley, p. 418.)

Lost Worp. (See Royal Arch, and Shemhamphorash.)

Lotus (Greek, Awrés; Arabic, @ébdlié)—The marsh lotus, or bird’s
foot trefoil. Lotus Dioscoridis, found in Candia or Crete, is still
eaten by the poorer inhabitants. There are some twenty-four
species of this plant. It is a species of nympheea or water-lily,
and was not indigenous to Egypt, but introduced from India,
It enters largely into the symbolism of the Brahmanical sys-
tem; and was the analogue among the Hindu poets of the rose
in the poetry of the Persians. It was the emblem of the world,
and the type of the mountain Meru, the Oriental Olympus. The
Egyptians regarded it as a symbol of Osiris, Isis, and Horus.
(See also Lily.)

Lovuistana.— Masonry introduced in 1793—the first Lodge being
Perfect Union Lodge, under the Grand Lodge of South Carolina.
Another Lodge was chartered by the Mother Lodge of Marseilles,
and three others by the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. These
five Lodges met and constituted a Grand Lodge, 11th July, 1812,
the first Grand Master being Francis Dubourg. There were
many Masonic troubles in Louisiana, but in 1850 they were
surmounted, and one Grand Lodge since 1850 has ruled in peace.
The Grand Chapter was founded the 5th March, 1813, and the
Grand Royal Arch Chapter, acknowledging the jurisdiction of
the General Grand Chapter of the U.S. A., in 1828; the Grand
Council of Royal and Select Masters was established 16th
February, 1856 ; and the Grand Commandery of Knights Temp-

- lar, 4th February, 1864. The Ancient and Accepted Scottish
Rite has a Grand Consistory, and subordinate bodies under the
Supreme Council for the Southern Jurisdiction.

LovuveTeav. (See Lewis.)

LowEn.—Possibly a mistake in the Lansdowne MS. for Cowan; or
possibly from the old Saxon Léwen, lion—to signify a wild beast.
In any sense, it meant a “ Rough Mason.” (See Layer.)

Low TweLveE—In Masonic terminology, midnight, the sun being
withdrawn to its utmost extent at that time. It is supposed to
be an unpropitious hour.

Loyatty.—Masonry is a loyal institution, and the words used by
our M. W. G. M, “ Loyalty and Charity,” should be engraven on

456

Luc] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. {LuL

every Masonic heart. In all countries obedience to the laws is
enjoined as a sacred duty.

LucHET, JEAN PIERRE Louis, Marquis pE—Born at Saintes in
1740, died .1791. He was the author of an attack upon
MMuminism, entitled “ Lssat sui la Secte des Illuminés,” published
in 1789. The third and fourth editions, with alterations and
additions attributed to Mirabeau, were printed with the outer
title of “ Histoire secret de la Cour de Berlin,’ a work of extreme
rarity, and burnt by the common executioner. Copies, however,
have survived this destruction.

Luctanists, or Lucanists.—(1.) A sect of the second century,
deriving its name from one Lucianus, or Lucanus, who believed
in the materiality of the soul, and denied its immortality.
(2.) A sect somewhat later, who taught that God had always
been God the Father, and had had the name even before He had
a Son.

LuciFrerians.—A religious sect in the fourth century, who taught
that the soul was of a carnal nature, and transmitted to a child
from its father. In other respects, they were devout Trini-
tarians,

Luxs, St—This Evangelist is claimed as the patron of [atric
Masonry.

Lutis.—A certain tribe of nomads, renowned in the days of the
poet Hafiz of Persia, who danced and sang with great skill. It
is thought that they were ,identical with the Luris, introduced
into that country from India by Yezdegird, and very probably
the ancestors of the modern Oriental Gypsies, who were widely
known in the East as the Nuri. The word Luli is still used in
Persian as a synonym for “wanton,” “bold,” and “ vagabond.”
(See Gypsies.)

Lutty, RayMonp.—Philosopher and adept, son of the seneschal of
Majorca, and surnamed le docteur illuminé. He was born about
1234, and from his earliest. years evinced decided scientific ten-
dencies, of course tinged with the peculiar spirit of the times.
Much has been written about him, and his romantic history is
not devoid of an instructive moral, and here it is:—One Sun-
day, in the year 1250, at Palma, in the island of Majorca, a
beautiful and wise lady named Ambrosia di Castello, a native of
Genoa, went to church, A richly-dressed and gallant cavalier
was passing down the street, and beheld the lady. He was
struck as by lightning, and the lady passed on into the church.
The cavalier spurred on his horse, and followed her in, causing
much disturbance among the assembled faithful, for he was
known to be the Seiior Raymond Lully, seneschal of the isles
and mayor of the palace, having a wife and three children; one

457

LUL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LUL

named Raymond like himself, another William, and a third a
daughter called Magdalene. Madame Castello was also married,
and bore a stainless reputation; but the reputation of Raymond.
Lully was that of a great seducer. This sudden entrance on
horseback into the church made considerable noise in the town.
Ambrosia was much confused by the circumstance, and. con-
sulted her husband, who sagely advised her to cure the man of
his madness by a counter-stroke. Lully by this time had already
written to the lady in extravagant terms. She replied thus :—
“To answer a love which you allege to be superhuman, it is
necessary that you should have an immortal existence. This
love, heroically and entirely sacrificed to our duty throughout all
the lives dear to us (I hope they may be long), might create an
eternity for us at the moment when God and the world will
permit of our amours. It is said that there exists an elixir of
life ; seek to discover it, and when you are certain that you have
found it, come and see me. Until that time, live for your wife
and children, as I live for my husband, whom I love, and if you
meet me in the street, by no means take any notice of me.”
This was a gracious mode of remitting the daring suitor to the
Greek Kalends; but he did not understand it in that sense;
and from that hour the brilliant cavalier was merged into the
grave and sombre alchymist. Don Juan had metamorphosed.
himself into Faust. Years passed away, and Lully’s wife died,
Ambrosia di Castello also becoming a widow; but the alchymist
had become absorbed in the great work. Finally, on one parti-
cular day, the widow being alone, Raymond Lully was announced
to her, and there entered an old, bald-pated man, holding in his
hand a phial full of a red elixir which flashed like fire. He
advanced with trembling feebleness, and sought to gain her eyes.
She was before him, and did not know him—her ideal being still
the young and brilliant horseman of the church of Palma, At
last she said, “It is 1; what do you require?” Qn hearing her
speak he shuddered, and beheld her as he had seen her years
before. He fell at her feet, and still holding out the phial, he
said, “Take this—drink, for this is life. I have spent thirty
years of my own life on it; but I have tried it, and I am sure
this is the elixir of immortality!” “How have you tried it?”
asked Ambrosia, with a sad smile. “For two months,” replied
Raymond, “after having partaken of it, I abstained from all
nourishment. Hunger seized upon me—pains ensued; but I
feel a potency of life within me stronger than any I yet pos-
sessed.” “TI am willing to believe you,” replied Ambrosia; “ but
this elixir which preserves life cannot restore youth, my poor
fiend -—hebold yourself!” and presented him with a mirror.
45

LUL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LUL

Lully started back in horror; for thirty years he had never
thought of looking at himself. “And now, Raymond,” continued
Ambrosia, displaying her white hair, and showing him her
bosom eaten away by a cancer, “is it this you would render
immortal?” And observing the terrible looks of the alchymist,
she calmly continued: “Listen to me. For thirty years I have
loved you, and do not wish to condemn you to perpetual im-
prisonment in the body of a decrepid man. Do not condemn
me in return. Let me enjoy the happiness of that death which
is true life. Let me be transformed to live once more in eternal
youth. I desire none of that elixir which prolongs the night of
the tomb, and aspire to immortality!” Raymond Lully dashed
the phial to the earth, and it was broken to pieces. “I deliver
you,” said he, “and remain in prison for you. Live in the
immortality of heaven. I am condemned for ever to the living
death of earth!” And bursting into a flood of tears, with his
face hidden in his hands, he filed. Some months afterwards, a
monk of the Order of St Francis ministered to Ambrosia di
Castello in her last moments, and that monk was Raymond
Lully. Legend goes on to relate, that for several centuries the
unhappy man lingered on in his living tomb ; and that on the day
appointed for his natural death he suffered all the tortures
attendant upon the death-transformation ; but the fatal elixir.
preserved him, and relief was impossible. He recovered, and
devoted himself to pious and good works. God granted him
every blessing, save that of death. One day the tree of know-
ledge appeared to him in a vision, and he divined the meaning
of the Holy Kabbalah, and became the Juminated Doctor. His
glory and fame spread over the whole earth; but that renown,
for which so many sigh in vain, brought no relief to him. He
knew how to make gold, and could buy the whole world, and all
its monuments, without being able to purchase the luxury of the
tomb. He sought death in every form, but in vain; and when
a young Arab tried to assassinate him for the sake of the religion of
Isl4m, his wounds. healed, and he was himself once more. He
went to Tunis, and preached Christianity in the hope of finding
a grave; but the Bey of Tunis, admiring his wisdom and heroism,
strictly protected him, and forbade the slightest harm to be
offered him. After preaching vehemently against Islim in dif-
ferent parts of Africa, he returned to Tunis, unhurt. At last the
mob grew furious with him, and almost buried him under a
mountain of stones, where he lay bleeding and wounded, but
immortal in mortality! The next night two Genoese merchants
—Stephen Colonna and Louis de Pastorga—sailing on the coast,
beheld a brilliant light upon the shore. They landed, and
459

LUM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [LUN

beneath the stones, discovered Raymond Lully alive and breath-
ing. They conveyed him on board their vessel, and took him to
Majorca. Here God had pity on him, and finally, by a miracle,
mercifully permitted him to receive the boon of death. Such is
the romance of Raymond Lully. The real history of this man
is very different. He was the son of the seneschal of the legend,
and an able chymist. He discovered the art of preparing car-
bonate of potash with tartrates and wood. ashes, the mode of
rectifying spirits of wine, the preparation of essential oils, the
refining of silver, and the production of ductile mercury. The
rose nobles he made for Edward III. were not actually gold, but
the science of the times could not detect the sophistication of
the alloy, although some philosophers have maintained that
Raymond Lully really separated the gold hidden in silver ores, and
purified it with antimony—a process actually indicated by many
hermetic symbols. In 1276, Lully founded a college of Francis-
cans at Palma, for the study of Oriental languages, especially
Arabic, to enable the students to refute the Mohammedan Moors,
John XXI. confirmed this institution by a brief. Between 1293
and 1311, Lully founded several colleges for the study of lan-
guages. Cardinal Ximenes held Lully in high esteem. He died
at about eighty years of age, in 1314, according to Genebrard.

Luminaries.—Luminaires. The first five officers in a French Lodge
are thus termed, viz. the Master, two Wardens, Orator, and
Secretary, because by them light is dispensed to the Lodge.

Lunatics, ORDER OF.—An association existing in France at one
time, and probably not yet extinct. As a corporation, it was
formed about the beginning of the eighteenth century. All
persons eminent for eccentricity were jocularly elected members
of this society in their absence, some special act being selected
as the test qualification.

ve architecture, a spherical or cylindrical aperture in a
ceiling.

Junus.—Khons-Lunus is an Egyptian deity sometimes represented
as a hawk-headed divinity surmounted by the crescent and the
disc, and sometimes as a child with a tress on the shoulder with
the same accompaniments ; also with the head of an ibis similarly
crowned or bearing a feather, when he is called Thoth-Lunus. In
some papyri, he is depicted as sitting in a boat with a human
bearded face, and adored by the four cynocephali. It is not
clear why lunar attributes should be assigned to Khons, Thoth,
and sometimes to Osiris, but the worship of Lunus was very ex-
tensive through ancient Egypt; the figures are very numerous,
and in the bas-reliefs the god bears either the flagellum, the
sceptre, or the triple tat. The native Egyptian name was Aah.

460

LuP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [M

Champollion mentions in his Pantheon a Lunus difrons. Hermes
Trismegistus says—‘ The moon, instrument of birth, transforms
the inferior matter.” In consequence of the phases of the moon,
it is continually associated with the ideas of birth and renova-
tion, and it is thus that Lucina is confounded with Diana or
Selené. Aah presides over rejuvenation and resurrection. (See
Khons.)

LuPERCALIA.—Festivals of the ancient Romans in honour of Pau,
at which the priest known as Luperci presided. Pope Gelasius
abolished them in 496.

Lustration.—A religious rite practised in antiquity before any act
of devotion; it was a symbol of purification and innocence. In
Medieval Latin, lustrare means to initiate.

Lux.—Latin for light. The Rosicrucians esteemed light to be the
philosopher’s stone, and the cross was an emblem of light, because
it contained within its figure the three parts forming LVX, or
light.

LUXE TENEBRIS.—Light out of darkness, Masonic truth proceeding
from initiation.

Lux Fiat er Lux Fit.—tLet there be light, and there was light.
Sometimes used in Masonic documents.

Luxor, BRoTHERHOOD OF.—A fraternity in America having a Rosi-
crucian basis, and numbering many members.

L. V. C.—Labor viris convenit. Labour is suitable formen. Letters
inscribed on the rings of the Knights of Baron Von Hund’s
system. The device of the Scottish Lodge of the Nine Sisters at
Brunswick.

Lyons, THE System or.—The name applied to the reformed ritual
and regulations adopted by the Lodge Chevaliers bienfaisants
de la Sainte Cité, at Lyons, at the Convention of Lyons, Novem-
ber and December, 1778, under the presidency of Brother
Villermoz.

Lyre, CHILD OF THE.—Fifty-fourth degree ofthe Rite of Memphis.

M
M.—tThe thirteenth letter of the English and Hebrew, and the
twenty-fourth of the Arabic, alphabets, (7) Mem signifying water,
and having the numerical equivalent of 40. Asa Roman numeral,
M stands for a thousand, being the definite numeral in Hebrew
and Latin for an indeterminate number, as before said in this book.
With a dash over it thus, M, it signifies a million. The Hebrew
sacred name of God applied to this letter is 15, Meborach,

Benedictus.
461

MAA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAG

Maacau.—Hebrew ny, the father of Achish, king of Gath
(1 Kings ii. 39), to whom the servants of Shimei fled, causing the
ruin of their master. The Scottish Rite talks (in the eleventh
degree) of a certain Maacah, king of Cheth, which is an obvious
error. It has been thought that the legend of the assassins of
Hiram arose from this passage.

Mac.—Hebrew ? (Isa. iii. 24). Rottenness, whence our word
muck; also Hebrew 23, nacha, direct, straight (Jud. xviii. 6), and
sometimes ¢o strike. The whole word is Mac-bénah; 23-pn, adifi-
cantis putrido, filius putrificationis ; compare the Syriac 82299,
percussio, interfectio cedificantis. An important word in the third
degree. Dr Mackey attributes the introduction of this word to
the adherents of the House of Stuart, who used Masonry for
political purposes; hence “the widow’s son” was applied by
them to James the Second, son of Henrietta Maria, widow of
Charles I, taking the word macbenac from the Gaelic, in which
Hs is son and benach is blessed, from verb active, bennaich, to

ess.

Macarians.—l. A sect of the fourth century, following Macarius,
an Egyptian monk. 2. Also the followers of an Irishman of the
same name in the ninth century, who maintained that one special
intelligence performed the spiritual and rational functions of
mankind.

Macaronis.—In the last century, foppish men affecting extreme
views on dress were thus termed.

Macsenac.—(Sve Mac.) Used inthe Lodge Chevaliers bienfaisants
de la Cité Swinte, where the novice is thus termed.

Maccasrees.—A family of Jewish warriors who bore on their
standards the letters ‘22%, M. C. B. I., being the initials of the
sentence, Mt Camocha Baalim Jehovah—“ Who is like unto Thee
among the gods, O Jehovah.” Used in the Scottish Rite.

Macrrio.—Given by Du Cange as Medieval Latin for Mason, from
maceria, a wall = materia, building materials. Obsolete. The
same may be said of macio, magonetus, maczo, and massonus,

Macon.—French for mason—said to be derived from maison, a
house.

Maconne.—Used in France to designate a female Mason. 2. M.
Egyptiénne. The third degree in Cagliostro’s Rite of Adoption.

MacrocosM.—The outer world or universe, as distinguished from

man.
MapE.—Initiated. (See Jfake.)
MapMan.—Madmen are necessarily unqualified to become Masons.
MaGazinE. (See Masonic Literature.)
Mech The title of the ancient hereditary priests of the Persians
462

MAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAG

and Medians, said to be derived from mog or mag, or priest, in
Pehlvi. They were originally one of the six tribes into which
the Medes were divided (Herod. i. 101; Plin. Hist. Nat. v. 29).
Under the Medo-Persian Government, they acquired great in-
fluence, and formed a sacred caste or college (Xenoph. Cyrop
viii. 1-23; Ammian. Marcell. xxiii. 6). Porphyry (Abst. iv. 16)
says, “The learned men who are engaged among the Persians in
the service of the Deity are called Magi;” and Suidas says,
“« Among the Persians the lovers of wisdom (g:Aéoogos) and the
servants of God are called Magi.” Under the reform of Zoroaster,
they were divided into three classes or degrees—1. Herbeds, novi-
tiates or apprentices; 2. Mobeds, or Masters; 3. Destur Mobeds,
or Perfect Masters (Zendav. ii. 171, 261). These latter only
were allowed to officiate in the temples. The headship of this
caste would seem to have been elective, and we find Nergal
Sharetser mentioned as the 19°22 or Master of the Magi, chief
of the Sacred Fire, an office to which Daniel was subsequently
elevated (Dan. ii. 48). The Chaldees had similar colleges as
well as the Egyptians, and there is an analogy between them
and the chief of the various ancient mysteries. They practised
various arts of divination, and had great political influence.
Their mode of life was austere; their food, flour and vegetables ;
they wore white garments, and slept on the ground. The initia-
tory ceremonies were of the most severe character. (See Alli
Allahis.)

Macic.—That science which, apparently of a subjective character,
is actually objective and governs the world. It is the practical
art of communicating with supernal, supramundane, and infernal
or lower beings. As a matter of fact, it may be divided into
three divisions, Theurgia, Goetia, and Natural Magic, or the cog-
nizance of physical objects in their essential forms and properties.
Theurgia has long since been appropriated as the peculiar sphere
of the theosophists and metaphysicians; Goetia has been
abandoned to the lowest of quacks; and natural magic has risen
with healing in its wings to the proud position of an exact and
progressive study, ameliorating the condition of mankind wher-
ever its beneficent influence is found. The codification of any
system is sure to lead to comparison, and from comparison we
attain truth. It is for this reason that in Christian philosophical
magic we find a constant identification of the founder of that
faith with its doctrines—in which, we may presumie, he had been
reared, All our great world-teachers were to a certain extent
magicians; and they were occupied with the inter-relations of
number and form—especially Plato in his Parmenides and
Timzus, and Pythagoras in his school at Crotona. There is

463

MAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAG

little doubt that the realistic desires of modern times have con-
tributed to bring magic into disrepute and ridicule, and it is im-
possible to blame the spirit of the time in doing so, when we
regard the hideous and foolish manner in which magical matters
have been portrayed. Faith is an essential element in magic,
and existed long before other ideas which presume its pre-exist-
ence. It is said that it takes a wise man to make a fool; and a
man’s ideas must be exalted almost to madness,—that is to say,
his brain-susceptibility must be increased far beyond the low,
miserable status of modern civilisation,—before he can become a
true magician. A pursuit of this science also implies a certain
amount of isolation and an abnegation of self. That the modern
Freemasons ever had anything to do with magic is doubtful, in
the sense especially of invoking spirits. It is true that some of
the continental Hermetic Rites employed magical formule to
express philosophical truths, and in the Rite of St Martin and
in the Rite of Cagliostro visions were sought, but not exactly of
a magical character. Dr John Dee, Eckharthausen the German,
and Nicolas Flamel, have nothing in common with them, and
these three are good specimens of each class. (See Goetia;
Laval, Gilles de; Theurgia; and Theosophists.)

Maaicians, Society oF THE—Founded in the seventeenth century
by Baptista Porta, and subsequently identified with the Rosicru-
clans, who at one time held great sway in Lombardy and other
parts of Upper Italy. The Society of Magicians wore flat caps,
with Templar ear flaps, and a black close gown.

Maaic Squares.—A magic square has been defined to be a series
of numbers, arranged in an
equal number of cells, con-
stituting a square figure, the
enumeration of all of whose

columns, vertically, horizon-
tally,and diagonally, will give
the same sum. These magic

squares, which almost run to
infinity, have attracted theat-
tention of the thoughtful and
learned in all ages. It would

be impossible to give these
magic squares, together with NS
their explanation, in this
book. It is sufficient to give
the Oriental Square, named
afterthe planet Saturn, Zahal,

the sum of the digits being equal to 45 (1+2+3+445+6+7+
464

Fig. 1.

MAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAL

8 +9), being the exact corresponding value of the letters in the
word Zahal, in Arabic. The table (fig. 2) is

the Talmudical method, making fifteen each Rie:

way, being the numerical value of m, JAH—

a form of the Tetragrammaton. Cornelius 4 | 9 | 2

Agrippa Von Nettesheim has given all these ees 7

squares. |
MaaistTer.—Latin for Master. 1. The Magister ateey

Camentarium was one who presided over the
building of edifices in the Middle Ages, equal ~__———sS~S
to Master. 2. Magister Hospitalis (see Master of the Hospital).
3. Magister Lapidum, otherwise Master Mason. 4. Magister
Militie Christi (see Master of the Chivalry of Christ). 5. Magister
Perrerius, Master of Stones. 6. Magister Templi (see Master of
the Temple).

Macistri Comactni.—The city of Como was the principal rendez-
vous of the Travelling Masons, and those who had passed its ex-
aminations were called Masters of Como, and held in high esteem.

Macna EsT VERITAS ET PRA&VALEBIT—Truth is great and will
prevail. Motto of the Red Cross degree.

Macnanimous.—A term applied in modern times to Knights
Templar.

Macnetic Masonry. (See Jatric Masonry.)

Macus.—l1. Eighth (or, according to some, fourteenth) degree of
the system of Illuminism, and the first of the Greater Mysteries.
2. Ninth and last degree of the German Rosicrucians, 3. 7° R.
Strict Observance. 4. 65° R. M. degree of the Strict Observance.
Thory mentions a Sovereign Magus of the fifth degree of the
Clerical-Kabbalistic system.

Mau (Hebrew, n9)—An enclitic particle of exclamation, and
sometimes of interrogation ; as a pronoun, who, which, what; as
a particle, how, by what means? in what manner? wherefore?
why? When combined with the Hebrew definite article, it
signified what ! the—and alludes to the Master’s word.

Mauaragas, Sect or. (See Vallabhdcharyas.)

MAHER-SHALAL-HasH-Baz, 12°02 ; Sept., Tod o&évg srpovomsty
worjcur oxtAw—*He hasteth to the spoil.” Alluding to the
night attack of the Assyrians. Used to indicate readiness of
action on the part of the Masonic Knights Templar, as well as
in the Red Cross degree.

Mater, MicHarL.—Born in Holstein, 1568; died at Magdeburg,
1620. He was a Rosicrucian, and attempted to introduce it
into England. He was an authority on the subject, and wrote
several hooks in defence of it, viz, “ Lusus Bete Ok

2G 465

MAT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAL

“ Atlanta Fugiens,” 1618 ; “ De Fraternitate Roscee Crucis,” 1618;
“ Septimana Philosophica,” 1620. In one of these works he says
—‘ Like’ the Pythagoreans and Egyptians, the Rosicrucians
exact vows of silence and secrecy. Ignorant men have treated
the whole as a fiction; but this has arisen from the five years’
probation to which they subject even well-qualified novices
before they are admitted to the higher mysteries, and within this
period they are to learn how to govern their own tongues.”

Matne.—The Grand Lodge of Maine was not organized definitively
until the 1st June, 1820, with Bro. William King as first G. M.
To this, in 1821, succeeded the Grand Royal Arch Chapter; the
Grand Council of Royal Arch Masons was organized in 1851;
and the Grand Commandery in 1852.

MattTRE Macon.—The French designation of the Master Mason.

MAITRESSE AGISSANTE.—Active mistress of an androgynous lodge,
under Cagliostro’s system. Maitresse Macon was a title given in
the French Rite of Adoption.

Masor.—Sixth degree of the German Rose Croix.

Maysor Intuminatus.—Eighth degree of the Jlluminati of Bavaria.

MakE.—“ To make Masons” is a very ancient term ; it is found in
the Lansdowne MS., 1560. ‘These be all the charges . . . read
at the making of a Mason.”

Matacu.—The term has been improperly thought to be “angel ;”
it may be used for “ king ;” it really means any proper person in
just authority. It is properly “ Melek.”

Maacui.—Pavilion 8. in the thirty-second degree of the Scottish
Rite, appertaining to the Princes of the Royal Secret, the Knights
of the East and West, and the Princes of Jerusalem. Derived
from the Emperors of the East and West.

Matacui, or Matacu (Hebrew, ‘28?).—1. A messenger ;- also
aking; one having power to confer benefits not to be hereafter:
disputed. 2. Melech was also Moloch, or Saturn, the Seb of
Egypt, or crocodile who devoured his children, until the Cretans
elevated Jupiter Dyaus, or Zeus, in his place. The Sabbath, or
Dies Saturnis, was dedicated to the stone devourer. (See the
thirty-second degree of the A. and A, Rite.)

Matiet.—1. A working tool of a Mark Master. 2. An emblem of
the third degree, often confounded with the common gavel.

Matra.—Formerly Melita, 1. A little island in the Mediterranean
Sea. At one time a great seat of Masonry, having a singular
history ; now a station of the British fleet, and the place to which
Earl Russell beckoned the effete Pope of Rome. 2. To this
island territorially is affixed the degree of Knight of Malta,
and the Knight of St Paul orthe Mediterranean Pass. To receive
it pertectly it is necessary to land at Valetta, and make eréve in

4

MAL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAN

a very humble posture, which being satisfactorily done, it
becomes a right to the postulant. This posture of créve, which
cannot be described here, is restricted to Christian nationalities ;
no Mussulman or Brahman can receive it. It is, however, fre-
quently conferred “by communication.” (See Maltese Cross.)

MALTESE Cross.—An eight-pointed cross, worn by the Knights of
Malta, and heraldically described as “a cross pattée, the extre-
mity of each patiée notched ata deep angle.” These points are
supposed to refer to the eight beatitudes.

Man.—1. The microcosm, or the little world. 2. A man was in-
scribed on the Royal Arch banners, denoting Reuben. 3. Der
Mann is the second degree of the German Union.

ManpateE—1. A commission of supreme authority. Du Cange
has it thus:—“ Mandatum breve aut edictum regium”—royal
brief or edict. “ Mandamentum litere quibus mayistratus ali-
quid mandat”—letters in which a magistrate commands any-
thing. Hence the decrees and orders of a Grand Master have
a mandatory character. 2. The Sdasdnas, or commissions of the
Royal Order of Sikha and the Sat B’hai, are called mandates,
and require implicit obedience. 3. The Jesuits issue mandatory
instructions; but, having lost their real head (see Jesuits), they
have shielded themselves very unsuccessfully under another
crumbling authority.

Mancourit, MicHEL ANGE BERNARD DE.—Founder, in 1776, of the
Rite of Sublime Elus de la Vérité (Sublime Elects of Truth), and
also a promoter of the Charitable Society of Ladies of Mont
Thabor. He must have been a many-sided man, for he exerted
himself to found, in addition to his former benefactions, the
French Masonic Literary Society des Libres Penseurs. He was
the author of Le Cours de Philosophie Maconnique. Died, Feb-
ruary 17, 1829.

ManicH@ans.—A sect of the third century, who believed in two.
eternal principles of good and evil, the latter power having
formed the bodies of mankind, and the former the souls. (See
Kabbalah.) They further held, that the great object of the God
of light was to deliver the souls of men from the captive state of
the body; and thus he created Christ and the Holy Ghost, in
adumbrative forms, to teach men how to accomplish this deliver-
ance, and emancipate themselves from the evil influences of
matter. Mani, the founder of this sect, announced himself as
the promised Comforter. (See Sofer.)

MANICHEKS, THE BROTHERHOOD oF.—An Italian society of the
eighteenth century. The doctrines of Manes were taught in
this society, which conferred several degrees.

Manna, Por or. — An innovation, regarding the Royal Arch

467

MAN | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [MAR

degree. Possibly it may be symbolised to mean aid or help; it
has no significance in real Masonry.

MANNINGHAM, THoMas.—Dr Manningham was a London physician,
and was appointed Deputy-Grand Master by Lord Carysfort in
1755. He was the author of the prayer since used at the
initiation of candidates, and which contains no word which is
likely to rouse the animosity of any person, however peculiar in
his religious views. It is perhaps one of the many reasons why
the clergy of ultra views dislike and distrust Masonry, that most
of the simple, pathetic, and pious offerings to T.G. A.O.T. U.
have been written by laymen. Dr Manningham died Feb-
ruary 3, 1794.

Mantie.—1. A covering used by Knights. A mantle of honour was
worn by Knights on state occasions, and derived from antiquity,
being similar to the toga virilis of the Romans. It denoted
nobility and valour. In this manner it has descended to magis-
trates and aldermen. The chivalric and religious orders wore it
with certain specific insignia. 2. The undress of a general hold-
ing high military rank. 3. The robe of a Magus in the Rosi-
crucians.

Manu.—An Egyptian designation for the West. In the region of
Manu was a basin which received the sun on its setting in that
quarter. (Book of the Dead, xv. 44, cx. 11.)

Manuat (Latin, manus, a hand).—The hand given truly is a pledge
of fidelity and honour,and hence the gripis of importance as a sign.

Manuscripts—It is stated that many MSS. were destroyed by
scrupulous brethren early in the eighteenth century, and shortly
after the revival. It is most probable that this is only partially
true, as many of these manuscripts, by the diligence of Masonic
archeologists, and especially of Brother William James Hughan,
have been recovered and published.

MARCELLIANS.-—A sect founded in the second century by Marcellus
of Ancyra. He taught that the Son and the Holy Ghost were
emanations from the Divine nature, and that after performing
their offices, they would coalesce with the Father.

MaRrcHESHVAN.—tThe second month of the Jewish civil year, begin-
ning with the new moon in November, and ending in December.

MARCcIONITES—An ancient sect, founded by Marcion, who denied
the actual facts of Christ’s birth, incarnation, and passion, con-
sidering them only apparent ; as also, according to his doctrine,
was the resurrection of the body.

Marcites.—From a certain Marcus, who admitted women to the
priesthood, and permitted them to administer the sacraments.
They called themselves the Perfecti, and professed the utmost
Heber liberty.

46:

MAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAR

Marconis, JACQUES Errenne. (See Negre, de.)

Marcosians.—A sect of Christians in the second century, founded
by a man of the name of Marcus, who taught that God was a
quaternity, viz., the Ineffable (see Hn Soph), Silence, the Father,
and Truth.

Marianne.—A nickname for the Red Republican party.

Mark.— At one time, among the operative builders, companions, or
fellow crafts, when in want of an advance of money, deposited
their token or mark with the paymaster or overseer. This was
held to be, in conformity with the practice of ancient times, a
religious fiduciary trust, to be redeemed by work or actual service
ag soon as possible; and “to lose a mark” was ignominious in
itself. The very modern legend of the Mark degree refers to the
invention of the keystone of the arch, which we, however, find
to be much older than the reputed time of King Solomon’s
Temple. The mark of an operative Mason was an arbitrary
sign, used in lieu of a signet, and it was understood that it
could not be varied. The modern Mark Jewel is a keystone
proper, bearing on the obverse the letters H. T. W. 8.8. T. K.S. in
a circle; and on the reverse the Hebrew letters, woxwxayn.
The mark of the wearer was engraved in the centre, and also
registered in a book of Marks; and ne varietur is the strict rule.
The presentation of this mark, to a properly qualified individual,
required the best recognition possible at his hands—not only
protection for the one who presented it, but, in case of need, sub-
stantialaid. The mere production of the absolute mark is enough,
for, unlike the mummies on which the Egyptians borrowed
money, it remains in the owner’s possession, and must not be
disgraced, while a suitable equivalent or return, in more auspi-
cious times, redeems the favour. It cannot be pledged in this
manner twice, for it is a rule, not to be broken, that no Mark
Master “shall pledge his mark a second time until he has
redeemed his previous pledge,’ and thereby great abuses of
hospitality are rendered impossible. In Pagan times, a similar
custom prevailed, and when communication was difficult and
rare, did good service. (See Apocalypse ii. 17.)

Mark Man.—Properly an appendage of the Fellow Craft's degree,
and it ought to be restored to its actual place in the ceremony ;
in which case the Grand Lodge of Mark Master Masons might
suitably return to the bosom of the parent society. Although
many great authorities on Masonry are in favour of this restora-
tion, it has been postponed indefinitely, in deference to the
Solemn Act of Union of December, 1813. The degree of Mark
Man in England is incorporated with that of Mark Master.

Mark Masrer.—In the American Rite, the fourth degree: in

469.

MAR | Lhe Royal Masonic. Cyclopedia. [MAR

England, established as an independent body. There have been
some grave complications in connection with Mark Masonry,
only to be historically indicated. In practice, the Mark Master's
degree in America leads from the Craft Lodge to the Royal
Arch, the officers being a Right Worshipful Master, Senior and
Junior Wardens, Secretary, Treasurer, Senior and Junior Dea-
cons, Master, and Senior and Junior Overseers. The working
tools are the mallet and indenting chisel. Colour: purple.
The only valuable addition to the officers in English Mark Lodges
is the Registrar of Marks; but as the whole scheme of Mark
Masonry is quite adventitious and modern, it is impossible to
give any great attention to it. It is an historical fact, however,
that for two hundred years the Operative Lodges of Scotland
registered the mark of every apprentice Mason whom they
accepted, but there is no record of such a custom in England.

MARK OF THE CRAFT, Recutar. (See Mark and Cubical Stone.)

Mark, ORDER OF St.—A Venetian order of knighthood. The Lion
and Book formed the heraldic token.

MAnzkKs OF THE CraFT.—To speak of Craft marks, their antiquity and
importance, would involve a treatise of itself; indeed, we might be
tempted into a field of a most enticing archxological character.
Every ancient country where architecture has flourished bears
evidence of marks showing symbolical ingenuity and a common
canon of proportion according to the style of architecture; and
such marks are found in the new world as wellasinthe old. The
enormous walls of Peru, formed of blocks weighing many tons,
are as nicely adjusted as a cemented wall, and at the points of
juncture have marks cut upon them. A curious work was pub-
lished twenty years ago, by Mr Richard Pote, on Nineveh, in
which these marks are discussed, and the theory of a wandering
guild of builders advocated with great force.

Maronites.—Founded by John Maron, patriarch of Antioch, in
the sixth century. The sect now inhabits a district of country
in the Libanus. They regard the supremacy of the Pope as
nominal, and their clergy do not practice celibacy. They are
close neighbours to the Druses.

Marrow IN THE BonE.—<An absurd distortion of a Hebrew word,
now universally rejected.

MarseIttes, Moruer Lopce or—Established by a travelling
Mason, and named by him St Jean @’Ecosse, in 1748. It after-
wards took the other names of Mother Lodge of Marseilles and
Scottish Mother Lodge of France. In 1765, a magnificent hall
was erected and adorned with fine scriptural paintings and
mottoes. This Lodge granted warrants on its own authority for
France and the French colonies.

470

MAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mas

MarsHaL.—1. An officer in some Masonic bodies having charge
of processions; his emblem of office is a baton or short rod.
2. The title is also very ancient in military matters, and was a
distinction of the highest kind.

MaRTEL, CHARLES.—Died 741, and reigned as Mayor of the Palace
over France, and the victor on the battlefield of Tours in 732,
where he defeated the Saxons, Frisians, and Arabs from Spain,
permanently rolling back the tide of Mohammedan invasion.
The French tradition, that Charles Martel was a brother who gave
laws to the Masons can be authenticated for six hundred years.
Marteler, old French, means ¢o strike. Spenser says—

‘* Her dreadful weapon she to him address’d,
Which, on his helmet, martelled so hard.”

Martua.—Fourth degree of the Order of the Eastern Star (which
see). The symbolical colour is green. The legend of the degree
is to be found in John xi.

Martin, Louis CLAUDE DE St. (See Saint Martin.)

MartinisM—tThe Rectified Rite of St Martin was established at
Lyons by the Marquis de St Martin, a disciple of Martinez
Paschalis, and had a philosophical character. The Rite was
divided into two classes, called temples; the first class con-
tained—1l. EA. P. 2. F.C. 3.M.M. 4. Past Master.
5. Elect. 6. Grand Architect. 7. Mason of the Secret. The
second class comprehended—8. Prince of Jerusalem. 9. Knight
of Palestine. 10. Kadosh. The Martinists were mystics, and
believed in the possibility of communicating with spirits of the
ultramundane spheres. (See Saint Martin, and also Gichtel.)

Martyr.—Greek, Méprup (Aol. for wéprus), a witness, One who
seals by his blood his faith in that which he professes. Jacques
de Molay has been called a martyr by the Templars.

Martyrs, Four CrowneD. (See Four Crowned Martyrs.)

MaryLanp.—Masonry was introduced into Maryland in 1750, in
a lodge warranted by the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts at
Annapolis. An attempt was made to found a Grand Lodge in
1783, but this was not finally accomplished until 17th April,
1787, when a convention was held at Baltimore, and Bro. John
Coates appointed the first Grand Master.

sar nsied CROWNED (Macon Couronnd)—A degree in Fustier’s Col-
ection.

Mason, DERIVATION OF THE WORD.—The speculations of various
writers on this point are too numerous to bear repetition here.
Probably from the Medieval Latin magonner, to build, or ma-
¢onetus, a builder; or perhaps from the old German meézen, to cut.

Mason HERMETIQUE (Macon Hermetique)—A degree preserved by
the Mother Lodge of the Eclectic Philosophic Rite. C. 8S. D.

471

MAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [mas

Mason, ILLUSTRIOUS AND SUBLIME GRAND MasTER.—A degree in
Peuvret’s Collection. C. 8S. D.

Mason oF THE SecreT.—1. The sixth degree of Tschoudy’s Rite.
2. The seventh degree of the Rite of St Martin.

Mason, OPERATIVE. (See Operative Masons.)

Mason, Perrect.—Twenty-seventh degree of the Collection of the
Metropolitan Chapter of France. C. 5S. D.

MASON PHILOSOPHER.—A degree in Peuvret’s Collection. C.S. D.

Mason, PracticaL.—l. An operative Mason is by the French
called macon de pratique. 2. In England, a Freemason is some-
times styled a Practical Mason when he distinguishes himself by
learning or benevolence.

Mason, ScorrisH MASTER ; also, PERFECT Execr—A degree in the
Collection of the Mother Lodge of the Philosophic Scottish Rite.

Mason, SuBLIME.—A degree in the Collection of Peuvret. C.S.D.

Mason, SUBLIME OPERATIVE.—A degree in the Collection of Peuvret.
C. 8. D.

Mason, TrueE.—One of Pernetty’s degrees, and belonging to the
Hermetic system of the Rite of Avignon. (See Académie des
Vraies Magons.) C.S8. D.

Masonry.—Lessing, in the Ernst und Falk, speaks of masoney as an
English word, but no such word exists in the language, It
would, however, seem to have been used in the Strasburg
constitutions, and Nicolai thinks it came from the Latin
massonya, meaning both a club and a key. Krause, like Lessing,
connects it with mas or mase, food, or a banquet.

Masonic Cotours.—All degrees of Masonry have peculiar em-
blematical colours, and seven, together with their correlates, are
thus assigned:—1l. Blue, belonging specially to the Ancient
Craft degree, denoting universal friendship, brotherhood, and
benevolence, all men being brothers under the canopy of heaven,
in virtue of their common humanity. White, emblematic of
innocence, is associated with blue in Craft Masonry. The ’Tien
Te of the Chinese alluded to the vastness of the expanse, and
the necessity of moral care; and, amongst civilized nations, none
is more respectable in morals, just in heart, and regular in habit,
than that nation. The Chinese have had for thousands of years
a code of morals that every Missionary, Jesuit or Baptist, breaks,
when he forces an alien faith down their throats. 2, Purple—
a mixture of blue and scarlet—first made at Bozrah, an insigni-
ficant town of Coelo-Syria—* Comest thou with dyed garments
from Bozrah.” It is appropriated to the Holy Royal Arch, but
the historical reason for the colour is vague, probably taken as an
ornament from the vestimentaria of the Imperators of Rome.
3. Scarlet, in itself, was a colour worn by knights engaged in the

472

MAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mas

Crusades, and is the national colour of England. It was presumed
to be royal,and the frightful wars which have devastated humanity
form a terrible commentary on “those who walk in purple and
scarlet.” 4, White—as a religious colour to be found among all
nations—in some the colour of joy, in others of mourning. As a
rule it refers to purity, and truth, and integrity—in woman, hu-
mility and chastity. 5. Black—in occidental countries, an em-
blem of grief ; mixed with white it signifies a pure life, and mourn-
ing or humiliation. 6. Green is the colour of hope, and a belief
in immortality. Nationally, it is appropriated to the Daoine She of
Scotland, who are supposed to direct, mediately and immediately,
the destinies of the human race. The evergreen belongs to Scot-
land, and at once reminds us of the perfect plan of the Creator,
and His immutable decrees. 7. Yellow—used by the Ancient
and Accepted Rite. It implies inconstancy, jealousy, and deceit.

Masonic HaLu. (See Hall, Masonic.)

Masonic LiTeRATURE.—It is very difficult indeed to comprehend
this very important subject within the limits of a short article.
In general, Masonic literature may be divided into several
classes—1, The purely historical; 2. the ceremonial literature ;
3. the dogmatic and logical literature; and 4. the combative
literature, including pamphlets on every conceivable point.
Perhaps it is not too much to say that the time has scarcely
arrived for a complete Masonic bibliography. Several attempts
have been made, from different sources of information, such as
the collections of Krause, of Kloss, of Spencer, and of Carson,
but in no way do they add to the ordinary resources of a Cyclo-
pedist. These lists, however, are exceedingly accurate, and
deserve analysis. Under the various headings it will be found
‘that most of the salient works have received attention; but to
do adequate justice to the subject, a separate volume would be
required. For history, we should recommend Kloss, Fort,
Krause, Yarker, Rebold, Findel, Hughan, Lyon, and Woodford,
and, to a certain extent, Thory and Ragon. For ceremonial litera-
ture, thére can be little doubt that Fessler, Vulliaume, and

. Delaunay, would be of the best use, together with Oliver, Preston,
and Hutchinson. Logical and dogmatic works are best repre-
sented by Lessing, Clavel, Krause, and again in part Oliver; but as
to the combative literature, it would be impossible to make any
selection. Masonry, like every other institution, has not
received kind handling; for anything professing to be grounded
on tradition lies open to remarks of the most galling nature; and
although the whole world might be Masons—and all the better
for it—the mere fact of the necessary secresy (a mere protective
ordinance) observed by the Members, causes violent opposition

473

MAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mas

on the part of those who will not, or cannot, understand its
aims.

Masons, Company oF —A minor company of the Livery of London,
still boasting a very respectable antiquity—arms having been
granted in 1477, and, in 1677, Charles II. grantedacharter. The
arms are azure a chevron between three castles argent, a pair of
compasses extended of the first—crest a castle of the second.
Motto: “The Lord is all our trust.” Although it has been said
that there was no actual connection between the Freemasons
and the Masons’ Company, it is still a point to be kept in view.

Masons, EMPEROR OF ALL THE.—In the Collection of Fustier. C.S.D.

Mason’s WIFE AND DauGHTER.—Conferred in the United States
in outlying districts. It is a modification of the Adoptive
Rite, and has, since its introduction, been incorporated by
Brother Dr Robert Morris, Past G. M. of G. L. of Kentucky,
with the Order of the Eastern Star (which see). A work was
published by Brother William Leigh, Past Grand Master of
Alabama, on the subject, in 1851, called The Ladies’ Masonry; or,
Hieroglyphic Monitor. This contains the elements of a ritual, but
the title of Holy Virgin is very ill chosen. Any Master Mason
can confer it; and the legend is derived from John xi. and xii.

Masora.—A Hebrew work on the Bible, intended to secure it from
any alterations or innovations. Those who composed it were
known as Masorites; they taught from tradition, and invented
the Hebrew points. They were also called Melchites.

MAssacHUSETTS.—Masonry was introduced in 1733, by warrant
of Henry Price, Prov. G. M., dated April 30th of that year.
The actual Grand Lodge was commenced 27th Dec., 1769—
Joseph Warren being the first Grand Master. There was a rival
jurisdiction for some years, but finally Brother Joseph Cutler
was elected Grand Master in 1792. Grand Chapter originated
12th June, 11798, and Grand Council of Royal and Select Mas-
ters, 1826. Grand Commandery established 6th May, 1865,
now merged.

MASSALIANS.—A sect which originated about 361, holding that men
had two souls—a celestial and a diabolical one—the latter of
which could only be expelled by prayer.

Massonus.—A word said to have been used to indicate Freemasons
in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

Master Mason.—The third and crowning degree of the English
Rite. No matter what degrees may have been introduced, this
continues to be the most honourable distinction within the
power of the craft all over the world to bestow. The revival
of many of these other degrees, however, proves one great, his-
torical fact, viz., the deep-rooted hatred of the Roman Catholic

474

MAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAS

Church to an institution it could not coerce or corrupt, and
which, in real security, continues its course of calm benevolence.

MASTER OF CEREMONIES. (See Director of Ceremonies.)

MASTER OF THE VEILS.—In Ireland and in America three officers
are appointed to guard the Veils of a Royal Arch Chapter—
armed with a sword and invested with a banner. The jewel
is a sword within a triangle.

MASTER OF THE WoRK.—The chief builder or architect of a build-
ing was thus termed in the middle ages, eg., Jost Dotzinger at
the Cathedral of Strasburg. All public works were immediately
under theeye of the Magister operis. The official title was Operarius.

Master, WorsHIPFuL. (See Worshipful Master.)

MasteErs,.—It is desirable to pursue the same course with the various
Master degrees that was done with the Knights. They will be
classified in a similar manner, and the reader can easily refer.

Master. Absolute Sovereign Grand.—90° R. Mzm.

Master ad Vitam.—Held these offices for life. Now done
away with, except as an honorary distinction.

Master, Ancient—4° R. Martinism.
Master Architect, Grand. (See Grand Master Architect.)
Master Architect, Perfect—A degree in the collection of the
Mother Lodge of the Philosophic Scottish Rite. C.S. D.
Master Architect, Prussian.—Degree in the Mother Lodge of
the Philosophie Scottish Rite. C.S. D.

Master, Blue—A master in the English Craft Rite.

Master Builder—Used as an epithet for T.G.A.O.T.U. (See
Algabil.)

Master Cohen.—Mother Lodge PhilosophicScottish Rite. C.S.D.

Master Crowned.—In the Archives of Lodge St Louis des
Amis Réunis, at Calais. ©.8.D.

Master Discreet—4° A. and P.

Master Egyptian.—Mother Lodge Philo. Scottish Rite. C.S.D.

Master, Elect. (See lect Master.)

Master, English_—8° R. Mzm.

Master, English Perfect.—Collection of La Rouge. C.5S. D.

Master, Four Times Venerable——Introduced into Berlin by the
Marquis de Bernez. C.S.D.

Master, Hermetic.—Collection of Lemanceau. C. 8S. D.

Master, Illustrious.—Collection of Lemanceau. C.8. D.

Master, Illustrious Symbolic.—Collection of Fustier. C.S.D.

Master in Israel. (See Intendant of the Building.)

Master in Perfect Architecture—Fustier’s Collection. C.S. D.

Master, Irish—7° R. Mzm. Introduced by Ramsay.

Master, Kabbalistic—Mother Lodge of the Philosophical

Scottish Rite. C. 8S. D.
475

MAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mas
Master, Minor Elect—Mother Lodge Philosophical Scot. Rite.
C.8.D

Master, Most High and Puissant—62° R. Mzm.

Master, Most Wise.—Presiding Officer in a Rose Croix Chap-
ter, but in England Most Wise Sovereign.

Master, Mystic—Lemanceau’s and Pyron’s Collections. C.S.D.

Master of all Symbolic Lodges. (See Grand Master of all

Symbolic Lodges.)
Master of Cavalry.
Master of Despatches. For these four, see Red Cross of
Master of Finances. Babylon.

Master of Infantry.

Master of Hamburg, Perfect.—In Fustier’s Collection. C.S. D.

Master of Light, Sovereign.—69° Rite Memphis.

Master of Lodges.—61° R. Mzm.

Master of Masters, Grand.—59° Metrop, Chapter of France.

Master of Paracelsus.—Collection of Pyron. C.S8. D.

Master of Secrets, Perfect.—Collection of Peuvret. C.S. D.

Master of St Andrew, of Chardon, and of Scotland—1, 5°
Swedish Rite. 2. 63° and 75° Metropolitan Chapter of
France. 3. 29° A.and A. Rite. 4 A degree in Tschoudy’s
system. 5. 21° R.Mzm. (See also Elect, Grand.)

Master of Wisdom, Supreme.—82° Rite of Memphis.

Master of the Chivalry of Christ—St Bernard addresses Hugo
de Payens, G. M. of the Temple, as Hugont Militi Christi
et Magistro Christi.

Master of the Great Work.—1.88° Rite Memphis. 2.30° A. and P.

M: aa of the Hermetic Secrets, Grand.—Collection of Peuvret.

. 8. D.

Master of the Hospital. Official title of the Chief of the Order
of Knights of Malta. On the tomb of Zacosta, who died
1467, we find Magnus Magister, but twenty-three years after-
wards D’ Aubusson signs Magister Hospitalis Hierosolymitant.

Master of the Key to Masonry.—21° E. E. W.

Master of the Legitimate Lodges.—Eclectic Philosophic Rite.
C.8;.D,

Master of the Number Fifteen. (See Elect of Fifteen Knights.)
Found in the Collection of Peuvret. C.S. D.

Master of the Palace-—Officer in the Red Cross Degree.

Master of the Sages—4° Knights and Brothers of Asia.

Master of the Seven Kabbalistic Secrets, INustrious—In Peu-
vret’s Collection. C. S. D.

Master of the Temple—1. Custos or guardian of the Temple
Church. 2. A title in the Rosicrucian Society. 3. Ori-
ginally the title of the Chief of the Order of the Temple.

476

MAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | MAT

Master, Past. (See Past Master.)

Master, Perfect.—d° Rite of Memphis. (See Perfect Master.)

Master, Perfect. Architect—27° R. Mzm.

Master, Perfect Irish. (See Perfect Irish Master.)

Master, Perfect, of the Sloka—59° Rite Memphis.

Master Philosopher by the Number Three.—Peuvret’s Collec-
tion. ©. 5. D.

Master Philosopher by the Number Nine.—Peuvret’s Collec-
tion. C.S. D.

Master Philosopher Hermetic.—Peuvret’s Collection. C. 8. D.

Master, Private—19° Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Master Provost and Judge.— 8° Metropolitan Chapter of France.

Master, Puissant, Irish. (See Puissant Jrish Master.)

Master, Pythagorean.—3° Rite of Pythagoras.

Master, Royal. (See Royal Master.)

Master, Royal of Philippi. (See Knight of Patmos.)

Master, Secret. (See Secret Master.)

Master, Select. “(See Select Master.)

Master Sovereign of the Mysteries.—43° Rite of Memphis.

Master, Sublime.—5° A. and P. Rite.

Master, Supreme Elect.—Philosophic Scottish Rite. ©. S. D.

Master, Theosophist.—3° Rite of Swedenborg.

Master Through Curiosity.—1. 6° R. Mzm. ; 2. 6° Metropolitan
Chapter of France. (See Intimate Secretary.)

Master, True—A degree in the Chapter of Clermont.

MATERIALS OF THE TEMPLE.—The whole of the legend about the
silence observed in the preparation of the materials of the temple
of King Solomon must be taken in a symbolical sense. The
neighbourhood of El Khods, or the Holy City, however, abounds
in quarries. (See Jerusalem.)

Maters.—A, word occurring in one of the British Museum MSS.
thus—* Hit is seyd in ye art of Masonry yt no man scholde
make end so well of worke begoune bi another to ye profite of his
lorde as he began hit for to end hit bi his maters or to whom he
scheweth his maters.” A corruption of matrix or mould. (See
Mould Stone.)

Martuurins.—An order of religion founded by Innocent IIT. for
the redemption of Christians from Turkish Slavery.

Marratia—aA Roman festival celebrated by the nations in honour
of the goddess Mater Matula, on the third of the ides of June.

MATRICULATION BookK.—Medieval Latin, matricula ; a catalogue.
A list in which the Provinces, Lodges, and Members of the 8S. O.
were entered. To matriculate was to inscribe one’s name.

Matronauia.—A festival observed in Ancient Rome in honour of
Mars, on the Kalends of March, by matrons. Bachelors were
entirely excluded from the ceremony.

477

VLO'SSZ9ZL6ELL8Z6099/Z101'01L/6s01lopyy:sdaqy *swa1/8109/640'abpuquies‘mmmy:sdiy ye ajgeyiene ‘asn Jo sua} as0> abpiuquie>

au} 0} Palqns ‘Sg:GE:91 Ie ZLOZ JEW 90 UO ‘UOpUNT Jo AjIsuaAlUN ‘Auey| UaaNd *3109/H10'aHpiiquiedmwwy:sdiiy wo. papeojumMoq

MATrTTeER.

Elori wesvre wupos ives txyeyaara.
o-o--—-.- 2 OON>4~2 I>
1. Subject, . . . . . 7 . ° . a . 7 .

Matter.
d Proper, . 7 ® Go 8 . - ee oie 7 4 « ri a . . .
3 Sensible, : . * ae % . oe a Me . . . . is .
5 Centrifugal Force.
g of Impuise, Expansion.
o Simple, Sublimation.
"a 2, Cause, . . . Motion, Vaporisation. From these ‘two forces,
g Volatisation. cern only oe, : arise
3 : ion, rbicular —
2 cone etal Foree. Motion, and Motion
ies Baa Aare in general
Se of Repulsion, Precipitation. .
$ Condensation.
4 Fixation.
y
& OfAgeregation, « . «© «© © © © © © © © © © © «© «4
Hl 3. Means,. . 2... Intestine, . . «. « - say Fermentation,
2 whence
a] 4, Effect, .... =.=. . Generation, . 6. 2. 6 2 © © © © 2 ee . . 8
Fs Beginning or Formation.

Animation, . . . (A, A Generators) Q, E)
Crystallisation,. . (A). (©). ED 0) 7c

Separation of the two
terms of the Binary.

5. Result, . . . . . LIFE.

Union of the two terms of the

Binary in the Individual. Agglomeration, . . Increase (yy, Y) Volatile fixed (4 )

Light VW... ww. CDarkness “TR/TT

Nature of Oxygen,or . - 0» + ss Mydrogen, or From these two principles are formed
the Le 7 8 © © © «6 6 Vv the Magnetic, Electric, Galvanic, Ner-
terms of the whence = yous or Vital, or Psychical fluids—all
Binary. ACS t-te «we oo & v of which are the same,
Acid, «5 ff 8D atkal.
Latent, or spiritual, . j 7 . Sensible, Material.
Their Suvtile, s ‘ . e * « ° Heavy,
s43 e, E si 5 F 7 . ixed.
qualities. Hut,Dy, .  . eke Cold, Moist.
Pure, . s > . * ° . Impure.
Application, . . GOOD, . re - . ‘ EVIL.

Communicated.
Insensible or Rest.

. Composite,

From the con-
flict of these

Of Disgregation. {
motive results,

. Putrefaction.

End or Mutation of Form. ( A
Ignition ( A, A) destructives a)

Vitrification (A) (t=).

Decrease, Dissolution Vv, A, the fixed
volatitized ( ¥ ).

These diverse Binaries, which may all be re-
duced to a single one, give birth to all com-
posite bodies, 4.¢., all things existing in the
Universe, for nothing is simple except the
Generative Principle.

MAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MAT

Martter,.—The table with which this article is prefaced is of great
importance to the students of Alchymical and Hermetical Science.
It has an empirical sway, so to speak, and demands a little further
explanation. In a former article (see Human Progress) a table
was given, of which this is a supplementary part, as will be ex-
plained. A third table (see Spirit) will appear in its proper
place. It was desirable to disintegrate human actions from
matter, and in discussing the metaphysical aspects of spirit, to
equally separate the consideration of this vexata questio, as far as
possible and convenient. Let us now apply ourselves to the
consideration of the table before us, which is worthy of the most
careful study. It is quite clear that everything substantial or
material must have had an origin—it is taught by Indian and
Greek philosophers, and was imported into Egypt; and although
the latter country had very clear ideas, the foolish superstitions
of the worst part of the middle ages entirely precluded proper
and systematic survey. Of course this led to another school of
teachers, who, educated ina belief of the traditions of the land of
Khemi, would throw a weird similitude over what fragments they
could extricate. It is not very difficult to accumulate a few retorts
and other chemical apparatus to try those experiments rejected
by contemporary learned men. Most of the latter were, or had
been, priests or deacons, and the result was a close borough
in every instance, retarding real education and science. Of
course, Nature has never altered in her course; the kind mother
of the world remains ever active, aud neutral to the mere wretched
strife of men. But although it may be said that God is past
finding out, mother Nature is not in the same category; to the
earnest desire and careful investigation of the true student, she
will yield herself. How can Nature manifest herself independent
of form? at once boldly saying that the jiat of creation was be-
yond recall]. Certain forms of matter, at some very incalculable
period, came into existence by that jiat, and since that time,
according to the natural laws of growth and vegetation, climate,
&c., have been the mediate cause of subsequent developments of
the Divine Will. The study of these developments properly be-
longs to the realm of science, and the test of truth is invariably
applied. Of course the students brought up to think of the
& priori school, think little of that school which travels back
& posteriori by patient experiment and inductive reasoning. But
the table which is printed opposite is applicable to both principles.
Of course, when so much learning was adumbrated or shaded
from the commonality, the profession of a medical man, or even
the reputation of a learned man, led to grave suspicions, and all
things had to be veiled in symbols. Learning not being regarded

479

MAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MED

as power, it was in that black night disdained by the territorial
authorities and discouraged. Giordano Bruno was burnt, John
Huss was burnt, and even Philip Melanchthon (Schwarzerd) was
assailed, because he heroically ranged himself on the side of
the better cause. What is the use of speaking to the people if
they cannot understand? say one side. Why not tell the truth,
and let them come to it? say the other side. Now the Alchy-
mists, proscribed as they were, took the better part of the con-
troversy, and they have founded and confirmed modern science;
and that modern science will be found outlined in the table of
matter. It may be said that matter is mutable in form; but
agreed that it is so, matter is no less a fact formed as before said
by the Divine Will, and even matter has a point where it touches
spirit; another development of Divine Goodness of which we
shall speak hereafter. Matter is subject to change, transforma-
tion, and apparent dissolution, but in the great and glorious
ideas of the Creator it suffers no mutability at all. (See Spirit.)

Mature AGE.—This is twenty-one in England, except in the case
of a lewis, otherwise recommended and qualified, when it is
eighteen. France and Switzerland adopted the same rule.
Twenty is the rule at Frankfort-on-the-Maine, and in Prussia
and Germany it is twenty-five.

Mau. (See Setting Maul.)

Maut.—Wite of the god Ammon. Horapollo says (i. 11) Marépa 3
ypdpovres, 7 oupaviay, yiaree Corypepoter—* When they desired to write
mother or heaven, they depicted a vulture.” Maut is usually
crowned with the pschent or double diadem, emblem of the
sovereignty of the two regions. Sometimes a vulture, the
symbol of maternity, shows its head on the forehead of the god-
dess, its wings forming the head-dress. She is clothed in a long
close-fitting robe, and holds in her hand the sacred anch or sign
of life. The principal titles of Maut are those of lady of heaven,
and regent of all the gods.

Mepats, Masonic.—There is no sanction for striking Masonic
medals before 1813, for the rules of 1723 were so vague, even if
they had possessed authority, that they could not have conferred
any dignity on the wearer or possessor. However, the first
Masonic medal was struck in 1733, in consequence of a Lodge,
warranted from nowhere, being established by Lord Charles
Sackville, son of Lionel Granville Sackville, great-grandson of
Thomas Sackville, said to have been G. M. in 1561. This medal
is in the possession of the Lodge Minerva of the Three Palms,
at Leipzig. The obverse gives the bust of Lord Sackville, and
the reverse Harpocrates, the god of silence. Motto: “Ab ori-
pine. Commemorative jewels are now given by sanction of

480

MED | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MEL

Grand Lodge (see Jewels, Oficial). In some rites stars or medals
of merit are given in testimony of good service done to humanity,
or for special proficiency in literature and Freemasonry. (See
Star, Bronze, of Merit.) Macoy, in his “Cyclopedia,” gives
illustrations of many medals struck on the Continent or in
America.

MEDITERRANEAN Pass (oR Knicut oF St Pavt).—It is an appanage
of the Knights Templar. In consequence of a severe battle
between the Knights of Malta and the Saracens in 1367, a con-
vention ensued, when it was agreed for ever (and has been scrupu-
lously observed by the authorities of Islam), that the victorious
knights should have free passage, without let or hindrance, in
all Mohammedan ports of the Mediterranean. It is another
proof of the fact that the word of an Arab is sure and may be
trusted, if used with a like generous spirit on the part of his
opponent. (See Ishmael, Order of.)

MeEpusa, ORDER OF —Existing at Marseilles and Toulon at the end
of the seventeenth century. Its statutes were printed under the
title of “ Agreeable Diversions of the Table, or Regulations of
the Brethren of Medusa.”

Mecacosm.—A_ great world, not identical with Macrocosm, the
universe, but something between it and Microcosm, the little
world. (See Man.)

MEGALESIAN GAMES.—Celebrated in the circus at Rome in ancient
times, and appertaining to the worship of Cybele, or the Earth.
Mecarian Scnoot.—tThe philosophical academy founded by the

disciples of Socrates, after his murder, at Megara.

Mrnen.—The Egyptian mythological serpent supposed to exist in
the inferior hemisphere; the windings of its body representing
the tortuous course of the sun in the nocturnal regions.

Menour.—Greek, Meévep (Plutarch, Js. e¢ Osir, c. lvi.) Space, and the
name given to the feminine principle of the deity by the
Egyptians.

Muistrr.--The German for Master Mason. Meister im or vom Stuhle
is equivalent to Worshipful Master.

MEKHITARISTS.—Peter Mekhitar founded a congregation of Ar-
menian monks, who lived on the island of San Lazaro, Venice,
and published books on theology, literature, and general science.

MELANCHTHON, PuiLip.—In the forgery known as the Charter of
Koln this name appears. Schwarzerd, like Capnion or Reuch-
lin, was an astrologer and Kabbalist, but in no way a Free-
mason.

MELCHISEDICIANS.—A name given to certain early sects, who looked
upon Melchizedek as a divine personage.

MELCHIZEDEK (Hebrew, PIY"29D),—The Just King, or King of

2H 481

MEL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MEN

Righteousness. Sept., MeAyscedex. Appears only once in Scripture.
Ben Ouziel glosses the passage (Gen. xiv. 18-20), thus—* This is
Shem,son of Noah,king of Jerusalem? —nowr"7 x25 13 32 DWRIT
See also the official title of the King of Jerusalem, PIy724y,
Lord of Justice (Josh. x. 3). He is regarded as the Canaanitish
King of Salem, which was Jebuz. He was also a priest. Be-
cause the translators of King James’s version said he brought
bread and wine, he has been thought to be the antetype of the
Soter, or Saviour of the New Testament. Carpzov regards him
(“ Apparat. Antig. Sacri Cod.,” c. iv. p. 52) as one of the posterity
of Noah, and, like most eastern men of authority, exercising the
double function of patriarch, priest, and king. (See Abraham.)

MELCHIZEDEK, DEGREE oF.—Sixth- degree of the Brothers of
Asia.

Me ezsino, Rite or.—A rite founded in Russia about 1765 bya
Greek military officer and Mason. It had analogies with the
Order of Ishmael, but was very much distorted. There were
seven degrees—l. E. A. P.; 2.7.C.; 3. M.M.; 4. Mystic
Arch; 5. Scottish (Calydonian) Master and Knight; 6. Philo-
sopher (Patriarch); 7. Priest of the Temple. It contained the
exoteric teachings of the Order of Ishmael (which see).

Meuita, (See Malta.)

MELITIANS.—Followers of Melitius, a bishop, deposed 306, on a
suspicion of having sacrificed to idols.

MEMBER OF A LopcE. (See Affiliation.)

Mempuis, RirE or.—lIn the first instance, see Lechangeur, also
Bédarride, The Brothers. Jt will be more concise to discuss the
Rite of Memphis and the Rite of Mizraim together. (See there-
fore Mizraim, Rite of.)

MENAHHEM (Hebrew, 072).—A word used in the thirteenth
degree, Ancient and Accepted Rite.

MeENATZCHIM.—1. Three thousand six hundred wardens, on the
authority of 2 Chron. ii. 17, 18, were appointed as overseers
by Solomon. 2. The principal degree of the French Rite of
Véille Bru (which see). Sometimes called a Council.

MENpDESIUS.—A division or name of Lower Egypt in ancient times,
and its metropolis was Pa-bi-neb-tat, the dwelling of the Spirit,
lord of Tat. In Assyrian inscriptions, it reads Bindidi, and was
gradually corrupted into the Mendes of the Greeks. Pierret says
that this contraction may seem considerable, but it is not
unlikely when compared with Eevdéris, the name of a man cor
rupted from Nesa-bi-neb-tat (he who is devoted to Bi-neb-tat),
which was the name of the god of Mendes, represented with the
head of a ram, giving rise to the statement in ancient authors

482

MEN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MES

that the Egyptians called the goat Mendes. From the inscrip-
tions, we learn that the goat of Mendes was the living spirit of
Ra, the sun.

MENNoNITES.—Followers of Simon Mennon, an Anabaptist reformer
of the sixteenth century. They condemned infant baptism, and
rejected civil authority in their church. Oaths and wars were
unlawful. They anticipated, like the Fifth Monarchy Men, the
reign of Christ for a thousand years on the earth. They were
Chiliasts or Millenarians.

Men or Kent.—A society held at the Fountain Tavern, Bartholo-
mew Lane, 1743.

MeERcAToRIUM—A sow was sacrificed by the Roman merchants on
the 15th May, in honour of Mercury, the god of thieves and
commerce.

Mercy, Prince oF. (See Prince of Mercy.)

Mercy Seat. (See Lodge.)

Mer-Sker—Hathor, Neith, Maut, or Nout is the Egyptian per-
sonification of the space in which the sun moved, Hathor lite-
rally signifying the habitation of Horus, and also personifying the
nocturnal or funereal region—under the form of a cow—in the
West ; while Mersker (she who loves silence) was a special form
of Hathor. In the song of the harpists, the funereal region was
called Pta-mer-sker—the silence-loving land.

MEsHIA AND MESHIANE—The first man and woman in the
Persian system.

Mesmer, Frieprich ANTon.— A learned German physician, born in
Schwaben, 1734, and who applied a long antecedent art to cura-
tive purposes, since his time known as Mesmerism. He was
thought to be a quack, like the notorious Graham of Pall Mall,
but his experiments were supplemented by the more careful
researches of Elliotson, and the system is now accepted by many
as established. (See Harmony, Order of.) Mesmer died in
1815. He was a member of the Fratres Lucis.

MesmerIc Masonry. (See Jatric Masonry, and Light, Brother-
hood of.)

MeEsopotyTE.—Fourth degree of the German Union of the Twenty-
two.

MEsourRANEO (Greek, Mesougévew)—According to Hutchinson, J am
in the centre of heaven. Very far-fetched; the Greek word
Heooupdynua signifies the meridian, zenith, or mid-heaven, uéea
feoovon, noon, and zpos weootv, mid-summer; but it is somewhat
absurd to find the origin of the word Masonry in this. It is
like Bro. Beswick’s derivation of Freemason from Phremason=
Pi, the Re, Light, Mason, blind man feeling = Freemason=a
poor candidate in a state of darkness= Blind man feeling der the

4°3

MET] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MEX

light, which, if true, would make the candidate a Freemason
before his initiation.

Mera. Toots.—According to the Scriptures (1 Kings vi. 7), “the
house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready
before it was brought thither; so that there was neither hammer
nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in
the building.” This has been symbolically adopted in Masonry,
to signify that peaceful quiet in which the soul should prepare
in this world to raise a fitting temple for the spirit of God to
visit occasionally in our trial state, and to inhabit in a future
world.

Merats.—No man can devote himself to anything with a just
spirit, ifhe anticipates anything of a mercenary nature to come of
it. Hence candidates are divested of coins and valuables previ-
ous to their introduction.

Metempsycui.—aA sect of religionists who believed in the trans-
migration of souls.

METROPOLITAN CHAPTER OF FRANCE—This body existed towards
the close of the last century, being formed of the fragments of
the Council of Emperors of the East and West, and Pirlet’s
Council of Knights of the East. In 1786, it united with the
Schismatic Grand Orient, under the above name.

Mexican Mysterts.—The Mexicans (Aztecs) had religious orders
and secret ceremonies like other nations. Dedicating themselves
to the worship of some special deity, such as Quetzalcoatl (the
Mexican Saviour), they secluded themselves in monasteries, and
practised secret rites. This order was called Tlamacazcajotl, and
the members Tlamacazque. Another order was called Telpocht-
liztli, or the youths, being composed of youths dedicated to
Tezcatlipoca. There was an order for men over sixty, taking
vows of chastity, devoted to the Goddess Centcotl. They were
men of extreme learning, and anything uttered by them was
deemed oracular. The number was limited, and they passed
their time in making historical paintings for the instruction of
the people. The North American Indians had similar societies.
Among the Algonkins there were three degrees :—1. Waubeno;
2. Meda; and 3. Jossakeed. Humboldt speaks of the Order of
the Botuto, or Holy Trumpet, among the Orinoco Indians. The
Collahuayas of Peru also practised secret ceremonies.

Mexico.—It is not exactly known when Masonry was first intro-
duced here; but in 1825 three Lodges, warranted from New
York, were formed in the city of Mexico, and a Grand Lodge
formed, with Jose Ignacio Esteva as first Grand Master. A
Grand Chapter and Supreme Council also exist, and although the
pers prétre is of course hostile, Masonry is in a fair condition.

484

MEZ | The Royal Masonic Cyclopaedta. [MIN

MEzzZANINE—In architecture, a storey of small height introduced
between higher ones.

MicHaEL (Hebrew, 9X22, Who as God? or Who is like unto
God ?)—The protecting angel of Israel (Dan. x. 13), and leader
of the celestial hosts, as Lucifer is of the infernal hosts. He
presided over Saturn and the Sabbath. Used in the twenty-
eighth degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.

Micuican.—Masonry introduced September 7, 1794; Grand Lodge
organized 1826, Bro. Lewis Cass, Grand Master; but as there
was some informality, there was another election in June, 1841.
Grand Chapter instituted 1848; Grand Council, 1858; Grand
Commandery, 1857.

MicrocosM.—The little world; applied to man in philosophical
language.

Mrippie CHAMBER (Hebrew, siv).—The English version (1 Kings
v. 8) talks of chambers being built ‘against the wall of the
Temple; but the far more accurate version of Cohen (vol. viii.
p. 25) speaks of galleries, which would be more in consonance
with the necessities of Oriental architecture, with chambers
leading from them. Of these chambers or galleries, there were
three storeys, and in the middle storey, reached by a winding
outside staircase, the wages were paid. One of the old York
lectures says:—“The middle chambers of each row over the
porch were totally dark, except the upper storey, and appro-
priated as repositories for the sacred furniture of the travelling
tabernacle of Moses, which was there laid up, hidden from pro-
fane eyes, as the ark was in the holy of holies. When the
Temple was finished, and a short time prior to its dedication,
King Solomon permitted such of the 80,000 Fellow Crafts as had
become proselytes to the Jewish faith to ascend to the upper or
fourth row of chambers in the porch, where the most sacred
furniture of the tabernacle had been deposited; in the centre of
which was the famous middle chamber, which being symbolical
of the Divine presence, contained the celebrated letter which was
a symbol of the Divine name.” In Masonry, this is entirely sym-
bolical. (See Pillars and Winding Stairs.)

Mites—1. Latin, a soldier; Medieval Latin, a military knight.
2. Seventh degree of the Order of African Architects.

Muurary Lopes are attached under peculiar arrangements to the
armies, and are moveable from station to station. They are of
respectable historical seniority.

Miuitta.—Medieval Latin for the chivalry of knighthood.

MinervaL.—Third degree of the Illuminati of Weishaupt. :

495

MIN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MIT

Minister.—A degree in the Royal Oriental Order of Sikha and
the Sat Bvhai.

MINNESOTA.—Masonry introduced in 1849, and a Grand Lodge
organized 12th February, 1853, Bro. A. E. Ames, Grand Master.
Grand Chapter established 17th December, 1859. Grand Com-
mandery instituted 1866.

Mrnor.—Fifth degree of the German Rose Croix.

Mivor ILLUMINATE (Illwminatus Minor).—Fourth degree of the
Iuminati of Weishaupt.

Minutes.—The official record of the transactions of a Lodge,
entered by the secretary in a minute book kept for that purpose.
The minutes of a regular Lodge should not he read at a Lodge
of emergency, but together with the minutes of the latter at the
next ensuing regular meeting for confirmation.

MISCHCHAN, MISCHAPHERETH, MIScHTAI (Hebrew, myn powin, tent
of testimony. Sept., oxavi rod yaprupiov. Chaldee and Syrian,
nonr pein, test of festival.)—Used in the twenty-fourth degree
of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. 7pwp is used in
the thirtieth degree.

Misconpuct.—In the event of misconduct, such as disturbing the
harmony of the Lodge, and*the like, the Master of a Lodge is
bound by the constitutions of Grand Lodge to admonish the
brother thrice, and can then enforce his removal from the Lodge-
room. The rule applies equally to visitors, and is universal.

MISERABLE ScaLD Masons. (See Scald Miserables.)

Misuna. (See Zalmud.)

Mississipri.—Masonry introduced in 1801, and afterwards in 1812
and 1815. The Grand Lodge was organized 25th August, 1818,
Bro. Henry Tooley, Grand Master. Grand Chapter established
18th May, 1846. Grand Council of Royal and Select Masters,
19th January, 1856. Grand Commandery, 22d January, 1857.
Scottish Masonry was introduced in 1815, under a Grand
Council of Princes of Jerusalem.

MissourIl—Masonry introduced in 1807. Grand Lodge estab-
lished 23d April, 1821, Thomas F. Riddick, Grand Master.
Grand Chapter, 18th May,1846. Grand Commandery, 22d May,
1860.

MIstTLETOE.—The Druidical sacred plant, similar to the Masonic
Acacia, and the shamrock, trefoil, of Ireland, and shamrack of
Arabia. (See Alli Allahis.)

Miruras.—A Persian divinity, of an epicene or hermaphrodite
character. In Oriental languages, the Sun, Zeus, Dies Pater,
Jupiter, and Jahve, are frequently found to be bisexual. (See
Ho-Hi.) His worship is supposed to have been introduced by
Zeradusht or Zoroaster. (See Zoroastrianism.) Herodotus identi-

486

MIT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MIT

fies Mithras with the Babylonian Astarte, and the Arabian
Alitta (both representations of Venus, in her threefold character) ;
according to Porphyrius, he was the Demiurgos, and lord of
generation; and, in fact, we always find him associated with a
bull (sign, not constellation, Taurus). The Hebrews regarded him
as the same deity as Pheebus, or the sun; he was also Hephaistos,
or Vulcan, having every association with fire and light. He
wore, in his male character, a Phrygian mantle and cap, and
pressed with his knee upon a bull, one of the horns of which he
holds in his left hand, while with his right he is plunging a
dagger into its neck, while the dog—(see Cynocephalus)—licks
up the blood flowing from the wound. A crab or scorpion
(Cancer or Scorpio) is close by. (See Zodiac.) As to the con-
nection of Mithras with the year, the student is referred to
Abraxas, Gnostics, and Fire Worship, and as to his identity with
the solar god, to Gypsies and God. It is said by some that the
statue we have described, of which many fine specimens are
extant, may be thus interpreted. The throat pierced’ by the
dagger alludes to the penetration of the solar rays into the earth,
by which nature is nourished; the dog, a very anciently
domesticated animal, as evinced by pre-historical associations of
the bones of the dog at an almost fabulous period with those of
man—(see the admirable work “ Dates and Data,’ Triibner & Co.,
1876, now in course of publication)—and known as the friend of
man, licking up the blood. It has been asserted that the dog
licking up the bull’s blood is a symbol of the resurrection: it is
far more likely that it was typical of the fact of the indestructi-
bility of matter. The mysteries of Mithras were, as Suidas says,
most probably twelve in their number of degrees, corresponding
with the Zodiacal signs. They were held in caves. (See Secret
Vault.) Nonnus (Dionysiaca) says that the proofs were eighty
in number, and demanded great fortitude and courage, especially
as they were more rigorous as they proceeded. Purity was an
essential ingredient, and elementary tests of water, fire, and
fasting were introduced. A mark was placed on the forehead—
(see Hindu Mysteries)—and a crown was presented on the point
of a sword, which the candidate should decline, with the words:
“ Mithras is my only crown.” The candidate was next prepared
by purification, anointment, and a wreath of laurel, together with
a suit of armour, and he was introduced into the first cavern of
total darkness, with a representation of a violent storm of
lightning. An apartment in the cavern received him, and he
was assailed by the initiated, disguised as wild beasts. Having
surmounted these obstacles, he passed to a second cavern, equally
dark, where frightful peals of thunder were contiqually near:
4°7

MIT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MIT

In other caverns, he had to swim a raging torrent, to endure the
torments of hunger; cold, according to Niccetas, with a previous
severe flagellation, was another test. On arriving at the seventh
cavern, called the Sacellum, light was restored to the initiate, and
in the presence of the Archimagus, the solemn oath of secrecy
was administered. It is plain that the contrivers of these rites
were far more penetrated with the solemn problems of life and
death, than a certain class among the Masons of the present day,
who regard these institutions more as a pastime. These mysteries,
introduced from Persia, reached Rome in the time of Pompey,
but were suppressed in 378, by a decree of the senate. The
dress of an initiate consisted of the kara, or conical cap, the
candyo, or loose tunic, our modern hussar jacket, bearing repre-
sentations of constellations; the zone, similar to the Zenaar, or
Indian cord; a pastoral crook, or crozier, alluding to the influ-
ences of the sun on agricultural matters; and finally, the golden
serpent, which was placed in his bosom, as an emblem of regenera-
tion, as the serpent annually casts its skin. The immortality
of the soul was taught in these mysteries, and the candidate was
submitted to a typical death. It is said by Lampridius, that
Commodus, imperator of Rome, actually caused a person to be
slain, to give effect to the ceremony, and the story is very likely
tobe true. MrC. W. King, in his book “ The Gnostics and their
Remains,” says—“There is a talisman which, from its frequent
repetition, would seem to be a badge of some particular degree
amongst the initiated. A man blindfolded, with hands tied
behind his back, is bound to a pillar, on which stands a gryphon
holding a wheel; the latter a most ancient emblem of the sun.
Probably it was in this manner that the candidate was tested by
the appearance of imminent death, when the bandage was sud-
denly removed from his eyes.” The griffin or sphinx was, how-
ever, nothing of the kind. In the ancient system derived from
the Egyptians, and perpetuated in the game of cards, this griffin
or sphinx was the Archeus or representative of justice armed
with a sword, and silent, but not blind, as justice is represented
in modern mythology. Breitkopf and Eliphaz Levi, in their
respective works, have illustrated this portion of symbolism.
There is a trinity in matter as in all other things, and that trinity
is balanced by Mithras—the Demiurg—the bisexual god with
which we commenced this article. The climbing or ascending
power is the Azoth of the alchymists, or its active principle;
while its descending node, to use an astronomical phrase, is found
in Hyle or inert matter, or pure passivity. It is not strange to
see, under these circumstances, how it happened that the Mith-
mate aes should have arisen and developed itself in a country
4

MIT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mrz

where the belief of men has perceived the necessity of an eternal
balance and an eternal life. Thus it is that Michael is Light;
Lucifer—the lost Pleiad—darkness; and yet both are but forms
of the great. Tetragrammaton. The lost Pleiad is beautifully
illustrated in one of the degrees of the Order of Ishmael.

Mirre.—Hebrew nopsyn, metznephet, a turban. 1. A mitre was worn
by the high priest of the Jews, being something rolled round
the head, and a significant sign in the Royal Arch degree alludes
to its removal. Hebrew and Arabic roots are so interrelated
that it is not singular to find the phrase, TINXD or TNYON, the
hand findeth or has found, connected with the action alluded to,
signifying possession, power, or readiness to act. It was a cap
of maintenance. 2. The episcopal mitre is worn by the prelate
in a Priory of Knights Templar. There is, however, no con-
nection between the symbolism of the Jews and the Tem-
plars.

Mizraim, otherwise Mezr or Mizr—At one time the name of
Egypt.

Mizkabe, Reve or, with which we shall diseuss the Rite of Memphis.
—lLechangeur is said to have founded this Rite, but there is evi-
dence to prove that this is an error, and that he only used
previous material. In point of fact, the Rite of Mizraim arose
out of Egyptian Masonry, which Cagliostro derived from an
older source. The Ancient and Accepted Rite claims priority,
but it is difficult to decide the historical merits of the question.
It has been stated that sixty-six degrees of the Rite of
Mizraim were taken from the Ancient and Accepted Rite;
but as the latter had at first from the Emperors of the East
and West only twenty-five, with eight degrees added (so it
is affirmed) by Frederick II, surnamed the Great, it is difficult
to understand how sixty-six can have been got out of thirty-
three. Lechangeur, Joly, and the Bédarrides, soon spread the
Rite all over Italy, and in 1814 it reached France. An Absolute
Sovereign Grand Master, with irresponsible authority, governs
this Rite; but this system of government did not agree with the
Fraternity, and eleven brethren (among whom were Ragon, Ga-
borria, Décollet, Méallet, with others) united under the presi-
dency of Joly to create and establish the Rite of Mizraim in its
four series and ninety degrees, in virtue of the powers obtained
from Naples, in 1813, placing themselves under the egis of the
Grand Orient, which accepted the Rite. Brother Langlacé, the
orator, speaking of it on the 24th June, 1817, the authorities of
the Grand Orient promptly rejected it on the following 27th of
December. Thereupon they declared their independence. The
solemn festivals of the Rite of Mizraim are at the perigus of the

409

MIz | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Miz

equinoxes, and are termed the Awakening and Repose of
Nature. Mark Bédarride published two thick volumes at Paris
on the subject, in 1835. The following were the degrees :—I.
Series, Symbolical—lst Class—1. E. A.P.; 2. F.C.; 3. Master.
2d Class—4, Secret Master; 5. Perfect Master; 6. Intimate
Secretary, or Master through Curiosity; 7. Provost and Judge,
or Irish Master; 8, English Master. 3d Class—9. Elect of Nine;
10. Elect of the Unknown; 11. Elect of Fifteen; 12. Perfect
Elect; 13. Iustrious Elect. 4th Class—14. Scottish Trinitarian ;
15. Scottish F.C.; 16. Scottish Master; 17. Scottish Panisiére ;
18. Master Ecossais; 19. Ecossais of the three J J J; 20. Ecos-
sais of the Sacred Vault of James VI.; 21. Ecossais of St An-
drew. 5th Class—22. Little Architect; 23. Grand Architect; 24.
Architecture; 25. Apprentice Perfect Architect; 26. F. C. Perfect
Architect ; 27. Master Perfect Architect; 28. Perfect Architect;
29. Sublime Ecossais; 30. Sublime Ecossais of Heroden. 6th
Class—31. Grand Royal Arch; 32. Grand Axe; 33. Sublime
Knight of Election and Chief of the Symbolic Series. IT. Series,
Philosophic. 7th Class—34, Knight of the Sublime Election;
35. Prussian Knight; 36. Knight of the Temple; 37. Knight of
the Eagle; 38. Knight of the Black Eagle; 39. Knight of the
Red Eagle; 40. White Knight of the East; 41. Knight of the
East. 8th Class—42. Commander of the East; 43. Grand Com-
mander of the East; 44. Architecture of the Sovereign Comman-
ders of the Temple; 45. Prince of Jerusalem. 9¢h Class—46.
Sovereign Prince Rose Croix of Kilwinning and Heroden; 47.
Knight of the West; 48. Sublime Philosopher ; 49. Chaos I. Dis-
creet; 50. Chaos II. Wise ; 51. Knight of the Sun. 10th Class—
52, Supreme Commander of the Stars; 53, Sublime Philosopher ;
54. First Degree of the Key of Masonry, Minor; 55. Second
Degree, Washer; 56. Third Degree, Bellows Blower; 57. Fourth
Degree, Caster; 58. True Mason Adept; 59. Sovereign Elect;
60. Sovereign of Sovereigns; 61. Grand Master of Symbolic
Lodges ; 62. Most High and Most Powerful Grand Priest Sacri-
ficer; 63. Knight of Palestine; 64. Grand Knight of the White
and Black Eagle; 65. Grand Elect Knight Kadosh; 66. Grand
Inquiring Commander, Chief of the Second Series. III. Series,
Mystical. 11th Class—67. Benevolent Knight; 68. Knight of
the Rainbow ; 69. Knight Khanuka, called Hynaroth; 70. Most
Wise Israelitish Priest. 12th Class—71. Sovereign Princes Tal-
mudim; 72. Sovereign Prince Zadkim; 73. Grand Haram. 13¢h
Class—74. Sovereign Princes Haram; 75. Sovereign Princes
Hasidim ; 76. (Wanting); 77. Grand Inspector Intendant Regu-
lator, General of the Order, Chief of the Third Series. IV. Series,
Kabbalistic. 15th and 16th Classes—78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84
499

MIZ | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Miz

85, 86 degrees, the names of which are only known to the pos-
sessors. 17th Class—87. Sovereign Grand Princes, constituted
Grand Masters, representatives of the First Series; 88. The same
for the Second Series; 89. The same for the Third Series; 90.
Absolute Sovereign Grand Master, Supreme Power of the Order
and Chief of the Fourth Series. This Order claimed absolute
sovereignty over all others, and the system adopted closely
reserabled that of the ancient Egyptian mysteries. An important
variation is made in this Rite as to Hiram Abif—instead of being
murdered, he is reported to have returned to his family, and
spent the rest of his life in ease and comfort. But as a murder
is necessary, it is transferred to the times of Lamech, whose son
Jubal is represented to have been slain by three traitors, Hagava,
Hakina, and Haremda. This is, however, absurd, as Lamech, 71?,
in Genesis (iv. 23), rather accuses himself of a murder to his two
wives—Adah and Zillah. To those, however, who know that to
bless and to curse in Hebrew were the same words, it will not
appear so strange. Onkelos says, I have not killed a man
(rip 7229); or, Have I killed aman? AndCahen translates—
“ Listen to my voice, wives of Lemech, give ear to my words; I
have killed a man, because he wounded me—a young man,
because he gave me a wound. Cain shall be avenged seventy
times—Lemech seventy times seven.” This is the ordinary
hyperbolic strain of Hebrew poetry. Let us, however, return to
the second portion of our subject, and it must be predicated that
the opinions hereafter enounced are merely those of a recorder,
and quite to be taken in the sense of impartiality. If im-
partiality were not to be observed, numberless incongruous rites
might be intruded, and the whole system of Freemasonry
thrown into disorder. In 1839, Brothers J. E. Marconis and
E. N. Mouttet, dating from the Valley of Paris, set forth the
elaborate system known as the Oriental Order, or Rite of Mem-
phis, with statutes, regulations, and every other appliance neces-
sary for the due development of an Order; but they subsequently
took it to Marseilles and Brussels. Brother Marconis had been elec-
ted Grand Hierophant, 7th July, 1838, the Councils being formed
in the following September. 1. Sanctuary of Memphis, composed
of the Grand Hierophant, and six Patriarch Conservators, nomi-
nated for seven years, 93°, of which Dr Morison of Greenfield, a
member of the Rite of Mizraim, was one. 2. Mystic Temple Grand
Master, and six dignitaries, five years, 92°. 3. Sovereign Grand
Council, President, and six officers, five years, 91°. In November,
1839, the Brothers Bédarride, heads of the Rite of Mizraim,
attempted to have the Memphite Lodges closed, but they failed
on this occasion, although they were declared dormant, 15th June,
49t

MNA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mor

1841, finally ceasing to work in 1842, A council of seven mem-
bers, entitled Mystic Temple, 95°, was however appointed as a
watch council, consisting of Brothers J. Et. Marconis, Henry
Delapline, Dr J. E. Audibert, Henry de Payen, de Laroussie,
Honoré Gazay, and Baron de Poederlé. On the 5th March, 1848,
the Rite of Memphis resumed labour at the Grand Orient of
Paris, and three councils were again installed. 1. Mystic
Temple, 95°; Grand Hierophant, and six Patriarchs. 2. Sane-
tuary ; G. M. and six Patriarchs, 95°. 3. Sovereign Grand Coun-
cil, President, and six Princes, 94°. A Chapterial and Areopagite
Lodge, called Disciples of Memphis, was the Senior Lodge ; it was
founded by St Honis of Cairo, a relative of the Marconis, in 1815.
In 1849, the General Statutes were republished in the Sanctuaire,
and Five Councils watched over the administration. In Novem-
ber, 1862, the Rite of Memphis was admitted as a subordinate
Masonic system to the Grand Orient of France; and Brother
Marconis surrendered his powers to that body. It would take
many pages to properly discuss the Rite of Memphis; complete
lists of the 95 degrees however exist, and are given under their
various headings in this work. (See Antient and Primitive Rite,
also Oriental Rites of Memphis and Mizraim.)

Mnason (Greek, Mvdcwv)—“ An old disciple,” mentioned Acts
xxi. 16. Paul, who was an initiate, plus Hebrew que les Hebreuc,
lodged there. Those who are acquainted with the Essene doc-
trines, may find food for thought in this.

Moason (Hebrew, 1axi0, Gen. xix. 36, 37).—Used in the following
degrees—3°, 14°, 18°, and 29°, A. and A. Rite.

Mock Masons. (See Scald Miserables).

Mopern Masons.—The seceders from the legal Grand Lodge of
England, in 1738, denominated their opponents Modern Masons,
taking themselves the title of Ancient Masons. This difficulty
was surmounted in December, 1813, by the amicable process of
amalgamation.

MopvERN Rite (French, Rite Moderne). (See French Rite.)

Mopi.iion.—In architecture, an ornamental portion of a Corin-
thian column, like a small horizontal bracket.

Moputa.—A model. In architecture, a model regulates by propor-
tion the parts of any building. It has been variously adapted
for practical purposes.

Mourims.— Initiates and pilgrims.

Morrs, Francis, Earn or—G. M. M. of Scotland, 1806-7, after-
wards Marquess of Hastings. Laurie (“ History of Freemasonry,”
p. 513) says -—“ In 1809, the Earl of Moira, Past Grand Master,
consecrated the first Freemasons’ hall in Scotland. The dedica-
tion of this Temple to Masonry by so distinguished and

492

MOL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mon

enlightened a craftsman, may be said to have closed the brilliant
Masonic career of his lordship in Scotland; and it was with
unfeigned regret that the Scottish Craft beheld the departure
from among them of this highly esteemed brother, who, besides
his other distinctions, had enjoyed the rare felicity of being
Acting Grand Master of the Grand Lodges both of England and
Scotland during the same period. Shortly afterwards, he was
appointed, under the title of Marquess of Hastings, Governor-
General and Commander-in-Chief in India, a sphere well suited
to his talents both as a statesman and a soldier, and where, from
his mild and benignant sway, he became the idol of all classes
in that vast portion of the British Empire.” He was Acting
G. M. of England from 1790 to 1813.

Motart, Witi1aM.—Preston mentions this person as a prior of
Canterbury, and author of a MS. Latin Register, in which refer-
ence is made to a lodge having been held there in 1429, during
the minority of Henry VI, under Henry Chicheley, the arch-
bishop, Thomas Stapylton, master, with John Morris, fifteen
fellow-crafts, and three entered apprentices.

Mo ay, Jacques DE—Born at Beganson, in Burgundy, about 1240,
of ancient noble lineage. Received into the Order of Knights
Templar, 1265, by Imbert de Peraudo, preceptor of France in
the Chapel of the Temple at Beaune. He was eminent for good-
ness and simplicity of heart, intrepid in battle, prompt in council,
and distinguished for his learning and forethought for other
people. He was unanimously elected Grand Master in 1298,
during his absence from Palestine, on the death of Theobald
Gaudenius. Pope Clement V., of infamous memory, summoned
him to France in 1305, and Philip le Bel, King of France,
received him with distinguished but perfidious honours. Charges
were made against the Order, but the explanations of Molay
obtained an apparent peace in April, 1307, at Poitiers. In the
September of 1307, he, with many other Knights of the Order,
was placed under arrest, and consigned to a dungeon, where, by the
Holy Powers, he was subjected to every indignity and hardship,
in the hope that he would be unfaithful to his vow of knight-
hood. Nothing could be extracted from him, as, in fact, there
was nothing to tell; and he was burnt on the 12th September,
1314, in front of the Cathedral of Nétre Dame de Paris. He
summoned his murderers before the tribunal with his dying
breath—Clement in forty days, and Philip within a year; and
it is an historical fact that they obeyed the summons.
The revenues of the Templars were divided by the thieves and
assassins, but they lived not to enjoy the usufruct.

Manan. (See Numbers and One.)

493

MON | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MON

Monve Primitir.—A remarkable work, written by Bro. Court de
Gebelin, containing a mass of esoteric learning. It may be said
to form a link between the old critical system of learning and the
new. (See also Voltaire.)

Monitor.—1. Manuals containing no esoteric secrets have been
frequently issued for the use of the Craft. 2. A monitor is an
officer also in the Ancient Order of Ishmael, who has in his
special charge the delivery of notices.

Monitor, Secret.—A side degree only conferred on worthy Master
Masons. In 1778, there existed an Order of David and Jona-
than in Holland. It has been very inaccurately adopted in the
London Rosicrucian College without authority, and has no re-
lation to the mysteries of Rosicrucianism. It is sometimes called
the Trading Degree. As a matter of fact, any Master Mason
possessing the Ritual is at liberty to give it to an approved
Master Mason at slight cost. C.S. D.

MonoGraM.—These are general and particular—general to orders,
and particular to individuals. (See Mark Masonry.)

MonopuHysitE.—One who maintains the unity of the nature of
Christ, the human and divine being completely blended.

MonoruE.ires.—A Christian sect which conceived the influence of
the Divine Will to be superior to the material nature, although
the two natures of Christ distinctly co-existed.

MonTana.—Masonry introduced, 27th April, 1863. On 24th
January, 1866, the Grand Lodge of Montana was organized, and
Royal Arch Masonry and Templarism have since been introduced.

Monrtanists.—Followers of the Phrygian Montanus, who pretended
to inspiration by Christ. They were numerous in the second
century, and very austere in their customs. They fasted and
condemned second marriages, and expected a millennium.

Montraugon, Priok or.— One of the traitors who denounced
Jacques de Molay and his associates of the Temple.

Montus, FrencH Masonic.—The French Masonic year begins in
March, and the months are numerically designated—z.e., the 15th
day of Ist month, or 15th of March.

Montus, HeBprEw.—These months are used in the Scottish Rite,
beginning with the full moon, the civil year commencing at the
new moon (immediately succeeding the autumnal equinox) in

September.

wn Tisri Sept. and Oct. ax Tjar April and May.
pwrt Khesvan Oct. and Nov. yo Sivan May and June.
‘y0D Kisleu Dec. and Jan. fon Tammuz June and July.
naw Tebeth Dec. and Jan. cor Ab July and August.
naw Schebet Jan. and Feb. box Alul August and Sept.
IN Adar Feb. and March. Intercalary month after Adar.

70°) ‘Nisan Marchand April.|} “81 Veadar Second Adar.
494

MON | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedta. [MOR

MONTPELLIER, HERMETIC RiTE OF.—Established by Pernetty at
Avignon in 1770, and in 1778 transferred to Montpellier. (See
Académie des Vraies Magons and Pernetty.)

MonvuMENT.—Improperly supposed to be of ancient Masonic origin.
Cross was the inventor of the Weeping Virgin, Broken Column,
Acacia and Urn, &c.,as may be seen in his Chart. The Master’s
Monument in the French Rite was less fanciful and more mor-
tuary, being in the form of an obelisk, with a golden triangle,
centred with the Tetragrammaton.

Moon.—1. In ancient times, before Shemesh worship was estab-
lished, the moon came in for a fair share of adoration. She was
Isis, Diana (Artemis), sometimes Héré (Juno), sometimes Hecate.
She was supposed to influence lunatics; and, as Masons pursue
their labours in the light of the sun, they should shun being
“ Diana’s foresters,’ or “minions of the moon.” 2. The great
split between the Luni-Solar races in the plains of Upper Hin-
dustan brought a moral avalanche upon modern society, now
only being gradually cleared up. (Lassen’s “ Indische Alterthwms-
Kunde.)

Mopses.—1. From the German, mops, a young mastiff; a dog known
for fidelity and strength. Originated in consequence of the bull
of Clement XII. against Masonry in 1738. Bending to the
storm, the mopses kept alive the principle of private association,
of which the Roman Catholic authorities strove to deprive society
in general, although enjoying it by virtue of their immunity
from moral law for centuries, in the persons of their own law-
makers. 2. An androgynous society, about 1776, having similar
objects; but the revival of Masonry in the home of liberty (Eng-
land), soon rendered its existence unnecessary.

Morat Law.—The Freemasons in all places are bound by their
tenure to obey the moral law. (See Decalogue, Masonic).

Morana.—The Bohemian goddess of winter and death, the Maryana
of Scandinavia. A festival in her honour was held in the month
of March, when she was solemnly drowned.

MoRAVIAN BRETHREN. (See Grain of Mustard Seed, Order of.)

Morean, WILLIAM.—Born in Virginia, Culpepper County, 1775.
In 1826, he, or some one for him, published a book professing to
reveal the secrets of Masonry. It was stated by anti-Masons,
that, for this, he was murdered by drowning, but the story was
confuted for want of proof. There was a statement, probably
equally true, that he fled to Turkey, and ended his days at
Smyrna, at a good old age. Very little, indeed, is known about
him, although he caused much disturbance in his native country
at the time.

Moriau, Mount (Hebrew, 15; Sept., ’Awwpia)—There is an

495

MOR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MOR

old tradition connected with Mount Moriah, the site of King
Solomon’s Temple, well deserving of mention here. This, says
the legend, was formerly a ploughed field, possessed in common
by two brothers, One was married and had several children;
the other was a bachelor. They lived together in perfect con-
cord, cultivating the patrimony they jointly inherited from their
father. Harvest time arrived. The brothers wisped their
sheaves, and apportioned them in two equal heaps, which they
left in the field. During the night the unmarried brother said
to himself, “ My brother has a wife and children to support; is
it, then, just that my portion of the harvest should equal his?”
On that he arose and took down several sheaves, which he added
to his brother’s portion. This he did with as much secrecy and
caution as if he had been committing some bad action. The
other brother awoke the same night, and said to his wife, “My
brother lives alone, and without company; he has no one to
assist him in his labour, or to recompense him for his fatigues,
whilst God has given mea wife and children. It is not right
that we should take from the field so many sheaves as he, since
we have already more domestic felicity than he enjoys. Let us,
therefore, without his knowing it, add to his store a certain num-
ber of our sheaves.” This was dene, but in the morning the two
brothers were surprised to find the two heaps quite equal. In
the night they each carried sheaves from the one heap to the
other; but as each bore a like number of sheaves to the other's
store, they still remained equal, and so it went on for several
nights. Astonished at this, they determined to watch and see
how this miracle was effected; but at last they met face to face,
each bearing the sheaves destined for the other, and all was
cleared. They then threw themselves into each other’s arms. both
thanking God for the possession of so good a brother. Hence
Mount Moriah has been consecrated to brotherly love, and was
a fitting site whereon to build a place of worship to the Lord.

Monin, STEPHEN.—Of the Jewish faith, and first Inspector-General
of America. It is claimed that this personage was warranted by
Frederick II. the Great; but it is most probably erroneous, as no
traces can be found in historical documents of any such patent.
There is a marvellous inconsistency here. Oliver (“ Landmarks,”
ii. 51, n. 48) says:—“ When Bro, Morin arrived in St Domingo,
A.D. 1742 (mark the date), he appointed a Deputy Inspector-
General for North America”—Bro. Hayes. But it is not likely
that any one would claim that antiquity for the Ancient Scottish
Rite. The Emperors of the East and West, from whom the
Ancient and Accepted Rite have their degrees, did not exist at
the time. This, furthermore, envelopes the whole question in

496

MOR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [MOR

difficulty. It would rather appear, agreeing with Dr Mackey,
that from some Grand Lodge at Paris he received power to
establish a Symbolic Lodge, and he might from the Grand Con-
sistory have had powers to confer the degrees of the Emperors of
the East and West.

Moritz, Cari Puitiep,—Born 1757, died 1793. He wrote several
works, among which was the “Diary of a Freemason,” Berlin, 1793.

Mormon Masonry.—tThe Latter-Day Saints, with great shrewd-
ness, have tried to harmonize their institutions with pre-
existent forms of social life, and they have, therefore, a system of
Masonry. This is called the Endowment, and is of an androgy-
nous character. If not sealed to their husbands to all eternity,
this process precedes the other ceremony on the part of the
women. The persons to be admitted are then introduced into a
long room in the Endowment House, divided by white screens
into compartments, ranged in two lines. Men go to the right,
and women to the left, barefoot, with the exception of the priests.
Men are undressed, and laid in tin baths, and treated with warm
water; each member of the body is then blessed according to its
function—as brain to be strong, ears to be quick to hear the
words of God’s servants, eyes to be sharp; nose, mouth, and so
on, down to the feet, “to be swift to run in the ways of righte-
ousness.” This completes the lustration. A new name is next
given by an apostle, and, in the next chamber, the initiate is
anointed with oil and invested with a linen tunic; and a small
square linen apron, ornamented with fig leaves, a linen cap,
stockings, and shoes of cotton, complete the costume, The cere-
mony continues by a consultation between the High Priest, as
Elohim, who, with Jehovah, Jesus, and Michael (Adam), repre-
sented by other priests, speak of creating and peopling the earth,
and this ends the first section. Jehovah, Jesus, and Michael
then touch and breathe upon the candidate, and he is constituted
the original Adam. A woman who has been similarly prepared
is then brought in, and Adam, who is supposed to be asleep,
wakes up and finds Eve, his wife; they are conducted to another
chamber, representing Eden, where the temptation scene is
enacted; and it ends with the expulsion of the Devil, but Elohim
promises a restoration by means of the priesthood. Oaths are
now administered, grips and pass-words communicated, and the
initiates are admitted to the third degree of Endowment, or first
degree of the Order of Aaron. The second degree consists of the
revelation of the Book of Mormon to man as a means of redemp-
tion, and oaths, grips, and pass-words of this degree are given.
From this degree the candidates are passed to the priesthood,
third degree, or Order of Melchizedek. The fourth degree is the

21 497

MOR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mos

second degree of the same order, and finally the candidate passes
the veil, and the aporrheta are shown him. (For real Craft
Masonry, see Utah.)

Mornine Star, KNIGHT oF THE.—In the Lists of Fustier. C.S. D.

Morpuy.—In a French MS. of the A. and A. Rite, in the Library
of the United Grand Lodge of England, Morphy is named as
one of the nine inspectors appointed to seek for the body of
Hiram. This would be unintelligible, unless we were to under-
stand that Stewart Masonry (which see) had a political object.
Mackey thinks it was James Murray, Lord Stormont’s second
son, who was given the title of Earl of Dunbar after his escape
in 1715. This Earl of Dunbar died at Avignon, in 1770.

MorTA.ity, SYMBOL oF.—The skull, as the most enduring portion
of the skeleton, and the supposed seat of the soul, has always
been adopted as an emblem of death and the grave; and Masonry,
being occupied with graver subjects than death, assents to
its use on certain occasions. This is a principle of very ancient
origin; and, “from grave to gay, and lively to severe,” has a
duplicate meaning. Among the most remarkable facts con-
nected with the funereal rites of all nations, is the association of
banquets, more or less expressed, whether in an Irish wake, a
Scotch coronach, or an Egyptian banquet, at which the head of
the family was always placed.

Mortar, UNTEMPERED.—It alludes, in the American Lectures, to
restraint or passion.

Mosaic PaveMENT.—Black and white squares, or lozenges, alter-
nate. Symbolically, the adventures of human life; technically, a
species of adornment for floors in palatial residences ; also the
trials of the candidate, actually teaching him that a chequered
career, sustained by honourable principles, will not fail to ensure
success and esteem, when the last steps are past.

Mosss (Hebrew, mend ; Sept., Mwtons, Mwo%¢).—1. The son of Amram
and Jochebed, and the younger brother of Aaron. According
to Raschi, his mother was one hundred and thirty years old when
she gave birth to Moses, As Cahen says—“ It is impossible to
establish any system of chronology on this basis.” And he
adds, “To co-ordinate this passage with those in the sixth
chapter (of Exodus), it is necessary, as the Biour says, to admit
the axiom, TNA IMM Oipwd PR, ‘in the law there is no time,
antecedent or ulterior’” 2. He is supposed to be of importance
in the Royal Arch degree, and in the twenty-second and twenty-
fifth of the A. and A. Rite. It is said he died on Mount Nebo, on
the last day of the month of Adar, A.M. 2553, B.C. 1451. 3.
There is an esoteric account of Mosche, or Moses, not susceptible
of poblication:

49

Mos | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mus

Mossporr, FRIEDRICH.—Born at Eckhartsbergen, 2d March, 1757,
died 1830. A supporter of Fessler and a friend of Krause, and
a contributor to Lenning.

Most ExceLLent.—1. The title of the Principal in a Royal Arch
Chapter. 2. Also that of the presiding officer in a Lodge of
M. E. Masons, which is the sixth degree in the American York
Rite, invented by Webb.

Most Puissant.—A title of the chief officer in the American Rite
of Royal and Select Masters.

Most WorsHIPFuL.—Title of a Grand Lodge and its Master.

Mot bE SemEstreE.—A bi-annual word given by the Grand Orient
of France to regulate charity.

Morto.—A select sentence, conveying the pith of any purpose, as
Ordo ab Chao ; Luxe tenebris ; Deus mewmque Jus. These are not
only applied to orders, but clans or families; as, for instance, one
of the mottoes of the author, In utriuimque paratus.

Movuip.—A common expression in the old Constitutions in for-
bidding a Freemason to give a mould to a rough Mason, by
which the secrets of the Craft would be betrayed. The Harleian
MS. says :—* Alsoe that no Mason shall make any mould, square,
or rule to any Rough Mason ; alsoe that no Mason, within the
Lodge or without, shall sett or lay any mould stones without
mowlds of his own making.” It is the pattern by which the
Mason works, made of a thin board or metal plate representing
the exact section of the mouldings to be worked from it. (See
Maters.) Mould stones were the large peaked stones for those
parts of the building on which carvings were to be made.

Mount Catvary. (See Golgotha.)

Mounr Moran. (See Moriah.)

Mount Sinar. (See Stnaz.)

MUENTER, FRIEDRICH.—Born 1761, died 1830. Professor of Theo-
logy at Kjovenhaven, and afterwards Bishop of Seeland ; author
of a work on the Templar Order.

Munxuouss, Rev. RicHarp, D.D.—A copious writer on Free-
masonry about 1805, and a member of the Phoenix Lodge of
Sunderland, and afterwards of the Lodge of Unanimity of
Wakefield ; he was Rector of St John the Baptist’s Church, and
died early in this century.

Murr, CuRIsToPH GOTTLIEB voN.—Bom at Nuremberg, 1733; died
April 8, 1811. In addition to some archeological works, he
published an “ Essay on the True Origin of the Orders of Rosicru-
cianism and Freemasonry, with an Appendix on the History of
the Order of Templars,” in 1803.

Muscus Domus.—In Browne’s Ritual, and others, it is said that
H. A. B’s grave was found covered with moss and turf, and the

499

MUS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Mys

Hebrew discoverers shouted out in Latin, a language then un-
known, Muscus Domus, Deo Gratias, This anachronism confutes
itself.

Music.—One of the seven liberal arts.

MusTArD SEED, ORDER OF. (See Grain of Mustard, Order of the.)

Muta.—The Roman goddess of Silence.

Murtrs.—A degree in the Order of the Sat B’hai.

MyrrtLe.—tThe sacred plant in the Eleusinian mysteries, and in
those of Adonis, equivalent to the acacia of Freemasonry.

Mystacocue.—A president at the ancient mysteries, and one who
leads an initiate.

MYSTERIES OF THE Druips (Gaelic, Drwidh, a wise man, magician ;
Zend, Dru, a sorcerer; Welsh, Drud, a remitter of sin, physician,
restorer of health; Irish, Druiz, wise man; Arabic, Dari, wise
man, and remitter of sins, confessor to soul and body).—There
were three degrees—1. Bards or chanters; 2. Prophets or spaiers ;
and 3. Druidhs, or sanctified authorities, from whose judgment
there was no appeal. In Albion, now England, there were pro-
vinces under an Arch-Druidh, invested with supreme authority ;
under him was a trinity of ministers, and twenty-five subor-
dinates, deans or deacons. The assembly of the Druidhs met
annually for the judgment of causes and enactment of rules, and
four other meetings took place as near as possible to the equi-
noctial and solstitial periods of the year. They had secret
symbols and pass-words, and adored Hu, the Mighty Hu (see
Hu). Initiates were made under the canopy of heaven, the
place of meeting was to be unpolluted with a metal tool, and
those belonging to the order were invested with a chain. (See
Scandinavian Mysteries.) The colours were white, blue, and
green—light, truth, and hope. A pastos was required, and the
progress of the initiate was gradual; after severe trials he was
admitted to the privileges of Druidism. The following principles
were instilled into the candidate at progressive stages :—1. That
all worthy things descend from the Heaven of Heavens. 2.
The soul, after death, goeth into divers other bodies; the sub-
limer minds ascend to higher orbs than our earth, there to enjoy
unbounded felicity. 3. Whatever is left with the dying, or
which is cast upon their funereal pyres, are surely theirs in the
other world. 4. Those who destroy themselves will go thither
with their friends, and there abide with them. 5. None shall
receive instruction without the limits of our sacred grove: there
the oak and the mistletoe favour devotion. 6. The education of
children demands the greatest care; twenty years of assiduous
teachings will scarce suffice. 7. The secrets of our sciences and
arts must not be committed to writing; they must repose in the

500

MYS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [mys

memory alone. 8. Every soul is immortal, however long and
variously it may transmigrate. 9. The mistletoe must never be
cut but with a golden bill, and, if possible, only in the sixth
moon: it is to be gathered with a holy reverence, and, when
deposited in the white sagum, must be then conveyed upon two
white bulls to the place where needed. 10. The powder of the
mistletoe is salutary for women, making them fruitful. 11. The
sacrifices are holy; none but the obedient shall attend them.
12. Man or woman may be sacrificed on extraordinary occasions.
13. Prisoners of war are to be slain at times, and upon the crom-
lechs; or they may be burnt alive within the wickers, in honour
of the immortal gods. 14. Future events may be foretold from
the direction in which the body falls when seized by death, or
as the same shall move when fallen, or as the blood may flow
therefrom. 15. Strangers must have no commerce with our
people, save from necessity, or for some good unto ourselves.
16, Children are to be brought up separate from their parents
until their fourteenth year; the foundation must be laid by
their ghostly fathers. 17. When the world is destroyed, it must
be by fire or by water. 18. Money lent, and not repaid, will be
restored in the next world. 19. Every one who cometh
sluggishly to the Assembly of our States, and he who is the last
of all in attendance, shall surely die! 20. The earth we inhabit
is not a plain, but a globe; and so are the sun, and moon, and
stars likewise. 21, All light cometh from the sun; that which
by the moon is shed is but borrowed by him from her. 22. Our
people were mighty in knowledge once. Upon the heights of
Caer-Idris, also at Cerrig Brudyn and at Myfyrion, they were
used to meditate upon the heavenly bodies, and there did they
contemplate all nature; the mysteries were there taught unto
our youth ; and, in the plains below, our wise men saw that the
wisdom so gained was practised. 23. Temples are never to be
raised with closed walls, and they are likewise to be open to the
skies ; they are to be upon the plains, or upon some lofty height,
that the heavenly spheres may be the better seen; and if upon
the plains, then in the open air, and yet with trees encompassing.
24, No images of the gods have we, but emblems only ; hence
does the truncated oak symbolize both the firmness and the
majesty of the God of gods. 25. Our Faids, also called Vacerri,
are the ordinary priests ; the Zubages are our augurs ; the Bardi,
also called Vates, are our poets and chroniclers; the Vergobretus
doth judge the law; and the Saronid@ instruct our youths, and
also administer justice, under the guidance of the Arch-Druid
and of the Vergobretus. Such is the creed of the Druids.
soi

mys | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [N

Mysterious City, GRAND ARCHITECTS OF THE—64° Rite of
Memphis.

Mystes (Greek, Méw).—The cardinals of the Romish Church,
who derive all their practices from the Hellenic or Aryan reli-
gion, have their eyes and mouth shut, on their consecration, as
wtoas, to keep the mouth and eyes closed. (See Vehmgericht.)

Mystic Crown, KNIGHTS AND COMPANIONS OF THE.—This society,
like many others, had a Masonic origin. It was formed by the
adherents of Mesmer, and in itself comprehended many healthful
secrets. It was first established, Rue de Sept Vois, Paris, in
August, 1787, but was afterwards centred in the Rue Jacob,
Faubourg St Germain. It was necessary, to obtain admission
into this society, that the postulate should be a Master Mason.
The objects were beneficent and non-political, and no interfer-
ence with religious views was admitted. In 1838 this society
still lived in the Rue de Bac, Paris. Its ritual alone survives,

Mystic Mason, ORDER OF THE. —We know very little of this order,
but, as Bro. Macoy mentions it in his work, it may be briefy
noticed. It recognises the three degrees of the York Rite;
is Swedenborgian rather than Sadducean, asserting the ae
ence of supra-mundane beings. The rite comprised three
degrees subsequent to the Craft degrees. 1. Mystic E. A. P.;
2. Mystic F. C.; 3. Mystic M.M. Mahir, in this system, was
supposed to preside over the east, southward; Havuzay, spirit of
the west, northward; and Mahul Marainto, spirit of the east.
One question was, What is Masonry? Answer, The knowledge
of the covenants of God with man. The whole question of this
Order is very obscure.

Mystic TempLE.—This is formed of the Princes of Memphis, 32°
A. and P. Rite, and is the governing body of a province, and the
agent of the Sovereign Sanctuary, 33°. Clothing: a purple
collar and white sash, with attributes of the grade. Conferred
ex officio on the first officer of a Council.

N.

N.—Fourteenth letter of the English and Hebrew alphabets, 3 sig-
nifying, in the latter language, a fish. (See Nun, Oannes, and
Soter.) The Hebrew numeral power 3 is 50; but it was also
assigned—under the Peripatetic School—the value of 900, and
with a stroke over it N 9000. The Hebrew divine appellation
belonging to this letter is N72, or Formidabilis.

g02

NAA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NEB

NaaMAH (Hebrew, i193, pleasant)—The daughter of Lamech and
Zillah, sister of Tubal-Cain. According to tradition, the inventor
of the spinning of wool and weaving of cloth.

NaBaim or NaBIIM.—Theological colleges among the ancient Semi-
tic nations, in which the rudiments of secret and prophetic
wisdom were taught.

Nznia.—l. In Roman times, a funeral dirge performed on flutes.
2. Name of the Roman goddess presiding over funerals, having
a temple outside the city gates.

NAHARDA, BROTHERI00D oF.—The Hebrew Rabbins relate that the
captive tribes of Israel, during their exile after the destruction
of the First Temple, founded a brotherhood at Naharda, on the
Euphrates; and it was thence that Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and
Esdras carried away the secret knowledge preserved within this
mysterious institution to Jerusalem.

Nakep.—Candidates for Masonry come neither naked nor clothed,
to signify that personal appearances or advantages are not recog-
nised by the rules of Masonry, which only regard the inner
qualifications and virtues of those who seek admission.

Namaz.—The common prayer of the Turks or Sunis.

NAME, INEFFABLE. (See Shemhamphorath.)

NAME OF GOD. (See God, Names of, and God.)

Namur.—The Primitive Scottish Rite was first established in this
Belgian city, and hence is sometimes called the Rite of Namur.
NaputTaLi—tThe territory of the tribe of Naphtali adjoined the
kingdom of Pheenicia, and intermarriages were not uncommon
on the borders. This might account for the widow of Naphtali

marrying a man of Tyre,

Naries.—The date of the introduction of Masonry into Naples is
unknown, but was prohibited in 1751, and the meetings of a
subsequently established Grand Lodge were suspended in 1775.
(See Italy.)

Napotronic Masonry. (See Moachide, Order of French.)

NARBONNE, RITE oF. (See Philadelphians.)

NATIONAL GRAND LODGE oF GERMANY. (See Germany.)

Nature, SoclETy oF THE FRIENDS OF AWAKING—Founded 19th
May, 1804, by the Brethren Roettiers de Montaleau, Fustier,
Angebault, de Beaurepaire, Houssemont, Mercadier, and others,
to celebrate the return of spring by an annual banquet.

Nexo (Hebrew, 123; Sept., Na@sé, Lord, high, aspiring).—The symbol
of the planet Mercury, nearest to the sun, Hermes and Anubis
(Isa. xlvi. 1.)

NEBRASKA.—Masonry introduced from Illinois, October, 1855.
Grand Lodge instituted September, 1857, Brother R. C. Jordan,

593

NEB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NEM

G. M.; Grand Chapter, organized March, 1867; Grand Comman-
dery, 28th December, 1871.

NEBUCHADNEZZAR.— Conqueror of Jerusalem, 630 B.C., and leader of
the Israelites into captivity.

NEBUZARADAN.—1. Hebrew, 1x22, Webu is the Lord, or Persian,
Nebu is wise. General under Nebuchadnezzar, and commander
against Jerusalem. 2. Name of an officer in the Knights of the
East and West, Prince of Jerusalem, and in the degree of Sove-
reign Prince of Masonry.

NEGRE, Dz.—An epithet borne by Gabriel Mathieu Marconis, a
native of Montauban, France, born about the year 1768. He
was a relative, a nephew, it is said, of Samuel Honis, of Montau-
ban, whe was a native of Cairo, and to have acquired the term
from his dark complexion and Egyptian blood. His son, Jacques
Etienne Marcunis, was born at Montauban, January 3, 1795, and
died at Paris on the 21st day of November, 1868. (See Mizraim,
Order of.)

Necro LopcEes.—Although since the civil war in America—
between the rival sections, on the subject of slavery—the right
of coloured persons to be admitted to Masonic privileges has been
tolerated, it remains far from being settled as a legal fact, nor is
it by any means certain that the “African Lodge, No. 429,”
Boston, warranted to Prince Hall and others, has actually any
legal existence. A warrant was certainly issued, 20th September,
1784, by the Grand Lodge of England, but it would seem to have
fallen into abeyance after the death of Prince Hall. The coloured
people of the American continent, however, thought otherwise,
and now continued, since 1827, to fly a Masonic flag of an illegal
character, terming themselves the Prince Hall Grand Lodge;
and are accordingly repudiated by all other Masons. The war-
rants issued by this self-assumed Grand Lodge are consequently
illegal, as being contrary to the rule of the Grand Lodge of
Massachusetts.

NEHALLENIA.—The name of an ancient Dutch and Flemish deity,
presiding over commerce and manufactures.

Neitu.—The Egyptian synonym of the Greek Athené or Minerva.

Nexam. (See Vengeance.)

NEKAMAH. (See Vengeance.)

NEMBROTH.—A corruption of Nimrod, and used in magical and
Hermetic Masonry.

NeEMESIS.—Fate, the daughter of Nox, goddess of Vengeance, and
sometimes represented with a helm and wheel ; her power did
not cease with death, but sought out the soul which had to expiate
her dread commands. She was worshipped by the Hellenes at
Rhamuus, where she had a statue of Parian marble sculptured

504

NEO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NET

by Phidias. The Hellenes held a festival in her honour, called
Nemesia, in memory of the dead, and she was supposed to defend
the relics of the deceased from insult.

NeEocoros.—The guardian of a temple among the Greeks.

NeEopAMODE.— A newly admitted freeman or citizen among the
Greeks.

NEOMENIA.—A festival observed among the Greeks, at the beginning
of every lunar month, in honour of all the deities.

NEoNOMIAN.—One advocating new laws.

NeoruyTe—1l. A convert. 2. A newly admitted priest. 3. A
beginner.

NEOPLATONISM. (See Proclus.)

NEPHALIA (Greek, vngdéass, sober, without wine).—1. Festivals cele-
brated in antiquity to the lesser deities, in which no wine was
offered. The wines of Hellas and Rome were evidently alco-
holic in their character, and it was a matter of reproach to drink
unmixed wines. The offerings to the Eumenides were composed
of milk, water, and honey.

NE PLUS ULTRA (Latin, Nothing further)—Motto adopted in the
higher degrees to show there is nothing further to be obtained
beyond a certain point. There would appear reason to regard
this motto as very flexible, inasmuch as there are several systems
claiming the right of Ne plus ultra.

NERGAL, 22).—The Hebrew name for the planet Mars, and every-
where associated with ill-luck and misfortune. In astrology,
it is the lesser, but more active, malefic. The Khalif Hakim,
on the last night of his life, saw Mars rising, and murmured,
“ Dost thou ascend, accursed shedder of blood? Then is my hour
come?” Whereupon his assassins sprang upon him (Abu Taleb ;
Bar Hebreus, p. 220). He was associated with the Saturnian
pee or man-devourer (from the Sanskrit, Nrigal), the greater
malefic.

NESTORIANS.—Followers of Nestorius, patriarch of Constantinople
in the fifth century. He condemned the phrase, Mother of God,
applied to Miriam, regarding her as only mother in a human
sense.

NETHENIM.—The servant of a Jewish Levite or priest, and taken
from among the Gibeonites or Canaanites.

NETHERLANDS.—Masonry was introduced in 1731, under an occa-
sional dispensation from Lord Lovel, M. W. G. M. of England, by
Dr Desaguliers (see Desaguliers); but the first regular Lodge was
opened September 30, 1754, by Brother Vincent de la Chapelle,
as G. M. of the United Provinces (see Grand Masters of Holland).
The Grand Lodge of the Netherlands tolerates the high degrees—
without actual recognition—the Orient being at the Hague.

595

NET | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NEW

NETTESHEIM VON, Henry CoRNELIUS AGRIPPA—Born about 1530,
in Nettesheim; an occult philosopher of great eminence, but of
unfortunate fate. Had he lived in the light of modern science,
his acute intelligence and love of learning would have placed
him on the same level as Sir Humphrey Davy, for he had one of
those enlightened intellects not easily content with the outside of
things, while his expansive heart led him to a contemplation of
universals as well as particulars. He was a member of many
occult fraternities, and thereby made enemies, and he died poor
and neglected by his high and wealthy friends. An admirable
biography of him has been written by Professor John Morley,
who could see the man through the shell of ceremonial and the
hollowness of the times.

Network. (See Pillars of the Porch).

NeEvapa.—Grand Lodge of Nevada was instituted at Virginia, 1865,
separating from the Grand Lodge of California, to which State it
was formerly a. tributary.

NE VarietuR, That it may not be changed.—To guard against
imposture, certificates are marginally furnished with a place for
the Brother’s name, and, if he present himself at a strange Lodge,
a check is thus kept on him, as, on his signing the visitor's book,
his signature can be compared with his actual original certificate.
This obviates fraud. A Mason should guard his certificate, if
necessary, with his life, for, by losing it, he would commit an
imprudent act, which sooner or later he would regret. This signa-
ture should be made in the presence of the Master of his Lodge,
whose duty it is to procure it for him; there is then proper
evidence that the signature has been verified.

New Brunswick.—The early history of Masonry in this portion of
the Dominion is obscure. A Grand Lodge was established in
September, 1867—Bro. B. Lester Peters, Grand Master. Other
bodies of a capitular character have been introduced.

New HampsuHire.—Masonry introduced June, 1734, but the Grand
Lodge, with Bro. John Sullivan as Grand Master, was not estab-
lished until 1789. Grand Chapter was instituted in 1819, and a
Grand Commandery in 1860.

NEw JERsrY.—A Grand Lodge was organized December 18, 1786,
Bro. David Brearley, Grand Master. Grand Chapter instituted,
December 30, 1856 ; Grand Commandery, 14th February, 1860.

New TEmMPLARS.—An order instituted in France in the early part
of the present century, claiming to be legally derived from the
Knights Templar, but this is probably a mere assertion. The
degrees are—1. Initiati; 2. Intimi Initiati; 3. Adepti; 4.
Orientales Adepti; 5. Magne aquile nigre sancti Johannes
Apostoli Adepti.

506

NIc | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. |NOA

NicHE.—A square or cylindrical recess in the walls of an apart-
ment for the reception of a statue.

Nick (Swedish and Danish, Nikken).—In Scandinavian mythology,
the spirit of the waters, supposed to be inimical to mankind ;
hence “ old nick,” the devil—the spirit of the waters under the
waters, and associated with fire and destruction. Hela or Hell
means cold, not heat.

Nicoual, KristopH FRIEDRICH.—Born at Berlin, 18th March, 1733,
and died there, 8th January,1811. He was a bookseller, and an
active one, and a man who controlled the literary coteries of the
city. He was also the friend of Lessing, and the editor of Moses
Mendelssohn, the philosopher. He had a theory of his own, and
sought to derive everything from the Rosicrucians ; this will, how-
ever, be discussed hereafter. (See Andrea and Rosicrucianism.)

NIcoLaITANs.—1. A sect of heretics mentioned in the Apocalypse,
ji. 5 and 15. They preached a community of women, and held
the eating of the sacrifices to idols as lawful, according to
Ireneus. 2. An early sect of Gnostics, denounced by Peter
(2 Ep. ii. 15) as followers of the way of Balaam, the noun Nixéraos
being a translation of py?2. They were known in Arabic as
Shuaibites.

NICOTIATES, ORDER OF.—A complicated Masonic Order, named by
Clavel, in which the doctrines of Pythagoras were taught.

NIMETULAHITES. — So called from their founder Nimetulahi, a
Turkish darweesh, celebrated for the austerity of his life.

Nive, THE (The Muse.)—In the ritual of the Royal Order of Hero-
dom of Kilwinning, the following is to be found:—“@Q. How
many knights are necessary to constitute a Chapter of the Royal
Order of Herodom? A. Nine. @. Why? A. For three
reasons, @. Will you tell me the first? 4. Because there are
three divisions in numbers which teach us so to number our
days as to apply ourselves to wisdom. Q. Will you give me the
second? A, Because there are nine muses in harmony, which
refine and polish human nature. @Q. Will you name them to
me? A. Calliope, Clio, Euterpe, Melpomene, Terpsichore, Erato,
Polyhymnia, Urania, and Thalia. @. Will you give me the third
reason? .A. Because there are nine orders of angels in the celes-
tial hierarchy. @. Will you name them? A. Cherubim and
Seraphim, Thrones, Dominations (Dominions), Principalities,
Powers, Virtues, Archangels, and Angels.” ;

Noacuib#2.—Descendants of Noah. Applied in Masonic legend to
the Craft in general, as being derived from Noah, traditionally
claimed as the founder and father of Masonic theology, according
to some theories, because the Masons preserved the traditions of
the one God amidst the corruptions of surrounding faiths. In

5°7

Noa | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NOA

the second edition of Anderson’s “ Constitutions” we read—*“ A
Mason is obliged by his tenure to observe the moral law as a
true Noachida.”

NoAcHID&, ORDER oF FRENcH.—The battle of Waterloo had para-
lysed France, in one sense, when this Order, which had many
adherents, was founded at Paris in 1816. It was composed of
partisans of Napoleon; and General Bertrand, who was with
Napoleon at St Helena, was nominated Grand Master. In his
absence, the Order was governed by a Supreme Commander and
two Lieutenants. It consisted of three degrees—1. Knight; 2.
Commander; 3, Grand Elect—the last degree having three
sections: i. Secret Judge; ii. Perfect Initiate; iii. Knight of the
Crown of Oak. As a political society, no secresy need be
observed in reference to the Catechism of the Rite, which was as
follows :—First Degree—Acclamation: Glory to the Architect!
(Napoleon). @. Under what master have you worked? A.
Under the architect Phalege. @. Who was Phaleg? A. A
cunning workman, raised by his ability to the direction of the
work at the building of the Tower of Babel. He laboured for
fourteen years (from 1790 to 1804) as an apprentice, fellow-craft,
and master mason, and ten years as an architect. @. What is
that tower? .4. A vast edifice, intended to preserve mankind
from the possibility of another deluge. @. Where was it
situated? A. In a plain, between two mountains and two
lakes. @. How many stories had it? A. Eight. @. Their
names? .4, Adam, Eve, Noah, Lamech, Naamah, Phaleg, Oubal,
Orient (forming the initials of Napoleon). @. How old are you?
A. I have only lived ten years (from 1804 to 1814). @. What
time is it? .4. The hour when the workmen of the tower dis-
perse. Second Degree—the aspirant brings in an urn, covered
with a veil. @. Whatis your name? A. Fidelis. @ Whence
do youcome? A. From an island. @. What have you seen?
A, Acolumn. @Q. What do you bring with you? A, An um.
Q. What does it contain? .4. The ashes of Phaleg. This Order
has long since been extinct.

Noacuirz, on Prussian Kyicut.—Sometimes called the Very
Ancient Order of Noachites. In the A. and A. System, it forms
the 2ist degree. It is distinct from ordinary Masonry by its
traditions carrying it back to the building of the Tower of Babel,
and is founded upon the immutable principle of justice, the
motto being Fiat Justitia Ruat Colum. A meeting is called a
Grand Chapter, and must be held in some retired place on the
night of the full moon in each month. The only light allowed
is that of the moon, the rays of which are admitted to the
asuembly by a window. The Lieutenant Commander sits facing

5

NOA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NOA

the moonlight, with the other officers at their stations—viz., the
Wardens, Knight of Eloquence, Knight Chancellor, Knight
Treasurer, Master of Ceremonies, Warder, and Standard-Bearer.
Apron, yellow. The sash, worn from left to right, is of broad
black ribbon; and the jewel, a full moon or a golden equilateral,
may be traversed by an arrow, point downward ; on the jewel is
an arm upraised, holding a naked sword. Early French rituals
inform us that this degree was translated, in 1757, from the
German by M. De Beraye, Inspector-General of Prussian Lodges
in France. It was probably introduced about that time, and the
substitution of Noah for Solomon, and Peleg or Phaleg for H.
A. B., and the Tower of Babel for King Solomon’s Temple, marks
it as a more recent invention. The legend of the degree narrates
the journey of Peleg, the architect of Babel, to the north, and ends
with this statement:—“In trenching the rubbish of the salt
mines of Prussia was found, in A.D. 553, at a depth of fifteen
cubits, the appearance of a triangular building, in which was a
column of white marble, on which was written, in Hebrew, the
whole history of the Noachites. At the side of this column was
a tomb of freestone, on which was a piece of agate, inscribed
with the following epitaph :—Here rest the ashes of Peleg, one
Grand Architect of the Tower of Babel. The Almighty had
pity upon him, because he became humble.” 2. Thirty-fifth
degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

N oe SOVEREIGN.—A degree in the collection of Fustier.

Noacuires. (See Moachide).

Noau.— Hebrew, 1), rest or comfort, from the root nm. Although
Raschi adopts the same sense, the etymology is very faulty.
He is first mentioned as the son of Lamech or Lemech (Gen.
v. 29); and if modern archeological studies are finally proved
true, the employment of this name would justify Cahen’s remark
as to the inexactitude of the etymology, and bear out modern
views as to the mythological character of the antediluvian
patriarchs. The Jews or Israelites invented nothing, but re-
ceived from their Grand Master Moses that which he had learned
in his travels, from the experience gained in more ancient col-
leges, where strange and mysterious doctrines were taught. The
whole story of the ark, geologically, is surrounded with difficulty,
for it is a physical impossibility for a round sphere to be
enclosed in water from above without entirely destroying all
forms of animal life. If water incessantly poured down for the
space of time named, it must have, to be general, done so on every
side of the globe, in which case respiration would cease, and
animal life, whether within the ark or without, would expire.

599

NOA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NOA

And that even a partial deluge can be admitted is not possible;
for, if so, the tradition would not be general: hence, a mystical
sense such as the Burmese give in their cosmogonical traditions,
is far more in consonance with common sense. Let us, however,
apply it to a moral and religious avalanche, and we may begin
to see how the myth arose. Although it may not be the whole
truth, still it is possible that some form of religious belief was
threatened, from which it was anticipated that one Soter or
Saviour would save the human race. Those clean and unclean,
doubters and half-doubters, sheep and goats, who chose to avail
themselves of Noah’s ark, were preserved from danger to per-
petuate the mission of mankind; while the scoffers and atheists
were visited by a punishment of excommunication, making them
true sons of Cain, and not descendants of Seth. Now Seth is
reported, with his descendants in a right line, to have been in-
structed in great wisdom, and endowed with insight into the
principles of morality. Besides this, the useful arts were evi-
dently invented previous to this supposed deluge; and even
according to the statements in Genesis, the earth was in a con-
dition of high culture and luxury ina literal sense. Nor do the
recently-discovered monuments deny this, but rather confirm it;
while the chronology of Egypt, so exact and perfect, utterly
cancels the idea of a deluge in a physical sense, leaving out all
geological considerations. If it might not be considered too
premature, perhaps—having regard to the subsequent descent of
the survivors to the plains and the building of a tower to pre-
clude the possibility of such another catastrophe—it might have
been the time when the Luni Solar races separated on the high-
lands of the Hindu Kush to begin their task of colonization in
the plains, and they would naturally rush from places where they
had been too closely aggregated together. It is very easy to
understand that populations with small resources and increasing
wants would pour down from uncultivated or incultivable lands,
and seek refuge elsewhere; and that, therefore, the most recent
historical necessity in the minds of wild races, possessing little
if any learning, would first preserve, and then confuse, the
mystical myth with the actual fact. Although it is plain from
the Assyrian tablets that there was a mythological account of
this deluge—the disturbance of religious sympathies—among
men, there is no trace of its having occurred anywhere near the
time of the discovered tablets. Others have so fully discussed
the dimensions of the ark that it is unnecessary to enter upon
it here ; but if the suggestion of a swamped church should find
favour, these dimensions would signify nothing, except in the
possible mystical interrelations of the proportions, where, of
510

Noa | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | NOE

course, they might be regarded of interest. Noah was reputed
the planter of the vine, and the first maker of wine, by which he
suffered, and received disgrace at the hands of one of his sons.
This again is mysterious, and contains a reference to the Diony-
siac mysteries and rites. In all cases of great heroes of anti-
quity, we either find a disgrace, a defeat, or some catastrophe
from which the individual emerges to become the companion of
the gods. Systole and diastole are ever visible in this anthro-
pomorphistic world, and in different proportions overtake all
men. The fault in the matter, if there be any, lies first in the
compilers of the Hebrew Canons, and next in the woeful want
of insight on the part of translators, both Roman Catholic and
Protestants, With respect to the latter translators—the forty-
seven of King James I. of England and VI. of Scotland—be it
remembered that only three understood Hebrew ; and of these
two died before the psalms were translated; while the great
lights, such as Bochart, Lightfoot, Steadman, and others, were
steadily ignored. It is not a matter of surprise, therefore, that
little or nothing can be really gathered as to the merits of these
ancient statements. But those who really believe the Scriptures
to contain the essence of life, need not be discouraged; the truth
of these ancient documents, as it were miraculously and for-
tunately preserved, is only confirmed by modern systematic
inquiry ; and the Reverend A. H. Sayce, M. Page Lenouf, Dr
Samuel Birch, Mr George Smith, and other gentlemen whose
leisure is devoted to the investigation of these most intricate
problems, deserve our utmost gratitude for what they are effect-
ing. Ancient life is no longer a sealed book ; but with mingled
feelings of sorrow and joy we can grieve and laugh with those
gone before, through the medium of exegetical science, carefully
applied with modern philological acumen. There is no society
in London doing so much effectual good as the Society of Biblical
Archzology in its own sphere.

Noau, ORDER OF.—A Bacchic society mentioned by Delaunay.

Noa, PRECEPTS oF. —Certain commandments transmitted to our
times in documents of the ancient stonemasons, of no historical
value, are thus called. They are—l. Renounce all idols; 2.
Worship the only true God; 3. Commit no murder; 4. Be not
defiled with incest; 5. Do not steal; 6. Be just; 7. Eat no
flesh with blood in it. These have been preserved in the Tal-
mud. Maimonides says that the first six precepts were
enunciated by Adam, and the seventh by Noah. They are not
mentioned by Onkelos, Josephus, or Philo; still, they have been
adopted by the Rabbins.

Noetians.—Founded by an Ephesian, Noetus, the teacher of

Sil

NOF | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ NOP

Sabellius. They maintained that God the Father had suffered
on the cross, Christ being divine; but they also asserted that
there was only one person in the Godhead.

Norroprt.— Variously spelt by Villani and Burnes Noffo Dei ;
Reghellini, Meffoder; and Addison, Nosso de Florentin. (See
Squin de Flewian.)

Noc.—In architecture, a provincial term for a wood brick.

NomInaLists.—Disciples of the Stoical Philosophy; the Realists
following the Peripatetic School of Aristotle. They affirmed the
principles now adopted by modern philologists, namely, that
words and names only were universals. The Peripatetic School
maintained the proper existence of universals.

Nomocanon.—A work summarizing canon law.

NomopuyLaces.—In Athens, guardians of the law, or landmarks.

NomotTueT£.—Inspectors of laws at Athens, with a view to health-
ful reform, so as not to overburthen the statute-book.

Now-AfriLiaTIonN.—The condition of being unconnected by mem-
bership with a lodge, which involves certain temporary disquali-
fications.

Non-Ceremoniat Society.—Established in Paris as a social society,
in 1715.

NoNESYNCHES.—The Dowland MS. of the “Old Constitutions”
says—‘“St Albann loved well Masons, and cherished them much.
And he made their paie right good, for he gave them ijs. a week,
and iijd. to their nonesynches.” This meant cheer, food, noonshun
or luncheon.

Non Nosis.—On the Grand Standard of a Priory or Commandery
of Knights Templar appear, by prescription, the words, “Non
nobis, Domine! non nobis, sed nomine tuo da Gloriam !” beneath
the Passion Cross, being the commencement of the hundred and
fifteenth Psalm, which is sung in Christian churches on thanks-
giving occasions. It has been previously mentioned.

Non-REsIDENT.—Members of lodges frequently reside at consider-
able distances from the lodges to which they pay their dues, and
hence are non-resident; they are also termed country members.
Of course they are debarred by distance from many privileges of
their lodges, and do not pay the same fees. Rules respecting
this class of members differ according to the bye-laws of the
lodge.

NoortHHouck, JOHN.—Son of Herman Noorthhouck, a bookseller,
born in London, 1745. Edited an edition of the “ Constitutions,”
published 1784. He also wrote a History of London, 1775, and
edited a Historical and Classical Dictionary, in two volumes,
1776. He died in 1816.

Nopuecu. (See Hmerald.)

512

NOR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | Nov

NormaL.—From the Latin norma. A square for measuring right
angles; used by masons and carpenters to prove that angles are
true.

Norns.—In Scandinavian mythology, the three fates — Urd,
Warand, and Skuld,—Past, Present, and Future.

Nort CaRoLina.—tThere is considerable doubt as to when Masonry
was introduced here; but the most authentic date is that of 2d
October, 1767, when a warrant was granted for the establishment
of the Royal White Hart Lodge at Halifax, with a Provincial
Grand Lodge, about 1769—Joseph Montford, first Prov. G. M.
On December 9, 1787, the Grand Lodge of the State of North
Carolina was constituted, the first G. M. being the Hon. Samuel
Johnston. The first attempt to introduce Royal Arch Masonry
was not successful, as the Chapter languished, and became
extinct in 1827; but on 28th June, 1847, the Grand Chapter
was reorganized. The Grand Council was established in June,
1860.

Nortu-East CornrER.—Every Mason cannot fail to remember his
introduction to the North-East Corner of the Lodge, and the
admirable admonition he received there. It is unnecessary there-
fore to expatiate upon the subject, but in the interests of
Masonry and true morality it is to be hoped the lesson will
never be forgotten. The north-east corner is the usual place in
which the foundation stone of any building of importance should
be laid ; and we find in the Institutes of Manu—the sacred book
of the Brahmans—it is said : “ If any one has an incurable disease,
let him advance in a straight path towards the invincible north-
east point, feeding on water and air till his mortal frame totally
decays, and his soul becomes united with the Supreme.”

Notuma.—A. word in the High Degrees of the Templar System—
being an anagram of Aumont, said to have been first Grand
ecleed of the Knight Templars in Scotland after the death of

olay.

Nova Scotia——Masonry was introduced into Nova Scotia, at
Halifax, from England, in 1749, and until June, 1866, remained a
Masonic dependency of the Grand Lodge of England, when an
Independent Grand Lodge was established; but as some lodges
holding under the Grand Lodge of Scotland would not recognise
this Grand Lodge, it became necessary to effect a union, which
was satisfactorily accomplished on 24th June, 1869, Brother
Alexander Keith being elected the first Grand Master of the
Grand Lodge of Nova Scotia.

Novatians.—Followers of Novatianus in the third century, who
was in himself the ante-type of the Puritans, insisting upon rigid
conformance to the letter of pe a

2 513

Nov] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Num

NovVENDIALE—A Roman occasional festival, from which arose the
Roman Catholic system of neuvaines. It was celebrated, in
cases of great necessity, for nine days, to avert calamities. The
Novennalia were celebrated in honour of the dead every ninth
year.

Novice.—1. In Weishaupt’s system the second. degree of the
Illuminati of Bavaria; 2. The fifth degree of the Rite of
Strict Observance; 3. The fifth degree of the Swedish system;
4, In the Order of Knights of the Holy City, certain members
were distinguished by this name.

Novice Ecossaiss oF Mont THasor.—The first degree of the
women’s order of Ladies of Mont Thabor, in a moral sense.

NovicE, MyTHOLoGIcAL.—The first degree of the historical series
of Ladies of Mont Thabor.

Novice, Scortisu. (See Novice Ecossaise of Mont Thabor.)

Nuk-PE-Nuxk.—I am that I am. The Egyptian equivalent for
Jehovah or Jahve. (See Burning Bush.)

NumBeErs.—The symbolism of numbers, and their mathematical
interrelations, have occupied the minds of all nations and races;
in fact, numbers, and the ideas of form connected with them,
constitute the basis of all ceremonial religions. The various
views entertained by the realists and nominalists on this subject,
have only tended to make confusion worse confounded; and,
just as there has been no progress made in the principles of
morality—which, being based on conscience, are immutable—
so no adequate philosophical exposition of numerical values can
he expected. One system adopts unity, another, trinity, a third,
quinquenity ; again, we have sexagons, heptagons, novems, duo-
decimals, and so on, until the mind is lost in the survey of
the materials alone of a science of numbers. Numbers also
are related to proportion, and as one scale or the other is adopted
in a system, so the proportion varies; and with the divarication
we obtain dissimilar forms of architecture alike intended to
honour the Unseen. It is very natural to see how these
several apparent incongruities have arisen. As God reveals
Himself solely through His works, and as man, as a finite and
progressive being, is in a state of pupilage, it would only be
possible to obtain a knowledge of number by tentative experi-
ment, or, if the phrase be preferred, the inductive method.
It is singular to observe, that while the nations of the earth
throughout all history have multiplied their divinities, or, in
other words, have assigned special properties to an unindi-
vidualised form, and given it a name significative of those
properties, there is a universal tendency to return to unity;
and yet a shudder passes through the moral organization of

514

NUM] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NUM

the majority at the words Pantheism or Deism. It has been
shown in discussing the Kabbalah (see Kabbalah), that such a
fear is fairly encountered, and that the system thus propounded
was amply sufficient to calm the distracted discussions raging for
centuries. To minds interested and constantly pondering upon
the connection between the unseen mathematical quality and
the concrete visible fact of form, created and tangible, the excla-
mation of the philosopher, who rushed from his bath with the
shout, Eipéixa, is quite comprehensible ; and probably the uncer-
tainty of life and property, the arbitrary and evanescent sway of
rulers, and the utter irregularity of life among the nations of
antiquity, tended to increase the ranks of ragged philosophers,
from whom nothing could be taken but their lives. But in this
persecution and uncertainty, this right of the strong over the
weak, lay the elements of modern science, the sister of true reli-
gion, and not its antagonist, as so many suppose. Then, again,
among the multitude arose a profound awe, mingled with dis-
trust, of those innovating philosophers who tried to upset the
doctrines of the priests upon which their future welfare depended ;
and, despite of themselves, they were forced to listen, and as
ideas grew clearer to each generation, there came a permeation
of knowledge, bringing things to a crisis, and placing the times
on a new plane of thought. Then arose a struggle, for those
accustomed to old forms of faith could not endure change, as
disturbing social proprieties and things established. One series
of numbers in relation to the Infinite could only be substituted
for another with extreme caution, and the Great Protector of
All was forgotten in the strife of party. Add to this, the fear of
death, consciously or unconsciously entertained by all men, and
what a terrible picture might be made of the state of society, not
only at remote times, but even now! Nor was it until philosophers
dissociated matter from spirit, and attained a truly scientific
platform, that men ceased to distract themselves. Thus, any
system of philosophy, provided it did not absolutely contradict,
in an open and violent manner, the general traditions of the race ;
wound its vanity ; or arouse the ten thousand susceptibilities of
men: received acceptation as a species of compromise. All men
desired to make their own ideas prevalent and satisfactory, and
thus the battle would recommence. Where the personal vanity
of mankind is engaged, there is no hope of peace. It being, how-
ever, certain that’ mathematical formule admit of rigid proof,
philosopher and priest, realist and nominalist, Roman Catholic
and Protestant, Jew and Mohammedan, have at any rate left the
consideration of these, together with their application, as a
neutral ground. Modern scientists are, and have been for some
515

NuM] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [NUN

years, pushing the consideration of these important matters
further, and again we hear the foolish cry raised that science
and religion are irreconcilable, that they are deadly foes, and
either one or the other must go to the ground. That this is a
fallacy is sufficiently evident by the fact, that science is at peace
and one with itself, passionless, and benefits mankind in propor-
tion to its assiduous cultivation; while, on the other hand, all
forms of religion are emotional, and depend upon the enthusiasm
of the moment—as a man or woman may change their views, may
misinterpret a phrase, or in some other way have what appears to
themselves a reasonable cause for an entire denial of a previous
strenuous assertion. But it is impossible to deny the multipli-
cation table, or to assert that the three angles of any triangle do
not comprise two rectangles. Although beings are infinite in
number, however (as Leibnitz says), it does not follow that their
systems should at once receive all the perfection of which they
are capable. “For, if so,” he adds, “the hypothesis of the rect-
angle would be demonstrated, for the hypothesis of equal perfec-
tion is that of the rectangle.” The most easily accessible book
on numbers is that of the late Brother Dr George Oliver, entitled
“The Pythagorean Triangle,’ published by John Hogg & Co., but to
write a book exhaustive of the subject would require the limits of
the present volume. Suffice it to say, that in a certain progressive
series various numbers signify especial things, and not always of
the same category of thought; a number may refer to several
distinct groups of ideas, each discrete from the other, and hence
it is that the difficulty of disentangling the nodus has arisen in
symbolical studies. Two parallel lines may be indefinitely pro-
duced without meeting, and they would ever remain thus; but
where nations of widely different intellectual calibres have hap-
pened to adopt some special number—say, three, as a representa-
tive of particular notions—it is impossible for the most acute
reconciler of symbolical systems to give any intelligible idea of
what is meant by the mythological facts before him. Hence it
is that endless bewildering systems have arisen, arousing unne-
cessary emotions in the minds of intellectual men.

NUMERATION BY LETTERS. (See Alphabet, Hebrew.)

Nun.—(Hebrew, po, a fish; and also an inkhorn, in Syriac and
Arabic).—That Joshua, the deliverer of Israel, should have been
the son of Nun, or a fish, need surprise no one acquainted with
the Kabbalah. Joshua was an ante-type of Issa Ben Yussuf, the
founder of Christianity, and to Miriam, the mother of the Christ,
the Vesica Piscis was sacred. The Septuagint contains nothing
explanatory of Nun, using NAYH for NAYN. We have here
a Prook of permutation of letters, for in some MSS. we find

SI

NuR| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (OAN

Nafi and Ne®4, from the Hebrew x39; whence our word Naue
or Navy, the navel of the fish, the ship of the Argonauts.
These derivations are not, and cannot be, very serious—still, when
we remember how mistakes are made, it may not be out of place to
try and correct them. Nabi is a prophet—from among the sacer-
dotal class Moses selected his immediate councillors, and it is very
likely that the Septuagint is right, and the Masoretic version of
the Jewish Scriptures wrong :—hence the historical Joshua might
have been the son of one of the Council of Seventy, and hence a
Nabi or prophet, and from intrepidity entrusted with command.
But as to the fish symbol, it was subsequently confused, and
consequently must be left fora time. (See Oannes.)

Nursery.—tThe first of the three classes of Weishaupt’s Rite of the
Illuminati, which comprised three degrees,

NyctazonTEes.—1, An ancient sect who praised God during the day,
but regarded the night asa time of rest. 2, A remnant of a sect
who looked upon the sun with confidence, hope, and trust, and
whose belief, from his daily reappearance, was that all would be
well. (See £n Soph and Kabbalah.)

NycreLea.—A festival in honour of Cybele and Bacchus (Dionysos),
celebrated at night.

O.

0.—Fifteenth letter of the English alphabet, and fourth vowel. As
a numeral it was sometimes used by the ancients to signify 11,
and with a dash over it, thus, O, 11,000.

Oak APPLE, SOCIETY OF THE.—Instituted about the Restoration of
Charles IL, in 1658. The violent disturbances in England dur-
ing the reign of James II., and his deposition, virtually put an
end to the Society, but it continued to linger on among the
Stuart party for many years.

Oak, ORDER OF THE—An order instituted about 1625, having for
its objects antiquarian pursuits, and the preservation of ancient
monuments, and thus allied to the Masonic principle.

Oannes.—According to Berosus, there appeared in the Erythrean
Sea—the modern Persian Gulf—bordering on Babylonia, an
animal endowed with reason, whose name was Oannes or John,
perhaps the Anu of the Assyrian inscriptions. By various
writers, this creature was differently represented; but the usual
appearance in which it was visible was in that of a fish, having
beneath its fish’s head a human head, and feet beneath like
those of a man—strongly reminding archeologists of the disguises
of the Mexican priests, who covered themselves with skins of

517

OAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [oan

wild beasts, and wore masks representing hideous forms. Alex-
ander Polyhistor, from whom we derive a knowledge of this
mysterious personage, on the prior authority of Berosus, says,
that he used in the daytime to converse with men, but never ate
in common with them; that he communicated a knowledge of
letters, sciences, and arts. He taught the art of building, the
principles of architecture and geometry; he was also the first
instructor in botany and agriculture. In fact, he was the uni-
versal teacher of all human learning; and, at sunset, this being
again plunged into the sea, and remained concealed from the
eyes of men, until light again dawned on the world. Apollo-
dorus identifies Oannes with the Greek Ofvas, and the Ionas or
Jonah of the Babylonians or Chaldees. He was also called
Odacon, a corruption of ¢ Aayov, the God Dagon or the Sun-Fish.
It has been supposed, also, that Oannes was the same as the
Welsh Guoydion—the son of Don or God. Annedotus (given
by Anna) was a name assigned to an early mystical benefactor—
in allusion to his descent from the celestial Nun or Fish—(see
Nun.) Ana or Diana signified heaven, from the radical Nox,
I pray. Jonah the prophet, swallowed by the fish, likewise
appeared at Nineveh; and traces continue at the present time
in ancient Accadian mythology concerning this monster. At
Kouyun Jik there was a colossal statue of the fish-god Oannes,
Without expressing any opinion, the following may be quoted
here from the Book of Enoch (vol. ii. p. 154):—“The Masons
hold their grand festival on the day of St John, not knowing
that therein they merely signify the fish-god Oannes, the first
Hermes, and the first Founder of the Mysteries; the first mes-
senger to whom the Apocalypse was given, and whom they
ignorantly confound with the fabulous author of the common
Apocalypse. The sun is then (midsummer day) in its greatest
altitude ; in this the Naros is commemorated.” It is very pro-
pable that, in those remote times, traditions were current as to
the existence of monsters, like those flying dragons (identical
with the geological pterodactyli), crocodile-like sauria (the
ichthyosaurus of geology), and other strange forms which, in the
infancy of mankind, our race might have beheld; and of which
traces may be seen in the great work of Lartet and Christy.
“There was a time,” says Berosus, “in which there was nothing
but darkness and an abyss of waters, wherein resided most
hideous beings, which were produced of a twofold principle.
Men appeared with two wings, some with four wings and two
faces; they had one body, but two heads—the one of a man, the
other of a woman. They were likewise in their several organs
both male and female. Other human figures were to be seen
518

OAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. {oat

with the legs and horns of goats. Some had horses’ feet ; others
had the limbs of a horse behind, but before were fashioned like
men, resembling hippocentaurs. Bulls likewise bred there with
the heads of men; and dogs with fourfold bodies, and the tails
of fishes. Also horses, with the heads of dogs; men, too, and
other animals, with the heads and bodies of horses, and the tails
of fishes. In short, there were creatures with the limbs of every
species of animals, Add to these, fishes, reptiles, serpents, with
other wonderful animals which assumed each other’s shape and
countenance. Of all these were preserved delineations in the
teinple of Belus at Babylon.” It is plain that a complicated
religion of symbolism prevailed in those ancient times. “The
person,” continues the historian, “who was supposed to have
presided over them, was a woman, named Omoroca, which in the
Chaldee language is ThaJath; which in Greek is interpreted
Thalassa, the sea; but, according to the most true computation,
it is equivalent to Selene, the moon.” ‘The Rev. E. R. Hodges
considers Omoroca to be a Greek corruption of the Aramaic
word xp"oy, “Amgia, te, the deep, the ocean—while Thalath or
Thalassa is ra dds, 1, re for tha=the Egyptian feminine article
the, and the Greek As, salt, or the sea. It might have some
relation to a combination of Om or Aum, the Indian sacred word,
and Erech, the Holy City, whence these ancient objects of reli-
gious adoration were originally derived. The vague yet grandiose
creations of ancient Indian mythology seem to point to a
primeval symbol worship, of which but feeble outlines have sur-
vived to our times.

OatH (Hebrew, nya and ndx).—A solemn affirmation, in the name

of God, that what you testify is true, or that you will not depart
in any way from the obligations you assume at the time of attes-
tation. Cicero properly defines this as a religious affirmation
(De Officiis, iti. 29)—* Quod autem affirmate, quasi Deo teste,
promiseris, id tenendum est. Jam enim non ad iram deorum,
que nulla est, sed ad justitiam et ad fidem pertinet.” According
to the canon law, the three elements of an oath are represented
by judiciwm, veritas, and justitia—1. Judicium, judgment or trial
on the part of society; 2. Veritas, truth on the part of the person
taking the oath ; 3. Justitia, justice on the part of God. There-
fore an oath is a religious undertaking, either to say (juramen-
tum assertorium) or to do (juramentum promissorium) something
entered into in a voluntary manner, with established forms
accompanying it. The Masonic oath is more than any other of a
voluntary character—no person can be forced to take it; and
should any one refuse, such refusal would involve no penalty,
save that of non-admission into the Fraternity. It has been
519

O. B. The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [oBE

regarded by the Roman Catholic Church, since 1738, when the
Bull of Pope Clement XII. was issued, with unfavourable eyes
by that communion ; and in 1757, the Associate Synod of Sece-
ders of Scotland censured it in strong terms, amounting to
practical excommunication from the body of their sect. The
objections to the Masonic oath are fivefold, and have been thus
summarized by Dr Mackey :—1. It is an oath. 2. It is adminis-
tered before the secrets are communicated. 3. It is accompanied
by certain superstitious ceremonies. 4. It is attended by a
penalty. 5. It is, in a Masonic point of view, paramount to the
laws of the land. But to this it may be replied, that the oath or
promise cannot in itself be sinful, unless there is something
immoral in the obligation it imposes; but this cannot be, as it
involves only the safe custody of certain peculiar secrets un-
connected with religion or politics. Nor is the second objection
better founded. If any one is about to be entrusted with a
solemn privilege, it is usual to exact a promise beforehand, that
it shall not be made common property, except under specially
limited conditions. As to the superstitious ceremonies accom-
panying the oath, it is to be observed that all nations of all times
have, according to their own customs, ordained formalities of
some kind to impress the solemnity of the circumstance on the
mind of the postulate. The Masonic oath has simply its own
form like any other. Then, as to the penalty involved in the oath
of a Mason—this really is answered under the last head—it has
a meaning, but a meaning not incompatible with due obedience
to the state, or to the dictates of conscience. Lastly, the asser-
tion that the Masonic oath is paramount to the state law is an
absurdity, confuted best by the spotless lives and common loyalty
observed by Masons to the laws of their native land. Of course,

all things are subject to exceptions, but disobedience involves
social and masonic extinction, and those who break the rule are,
by its very infraction, put out of the pale of Masonic protection.
The modern form of taking an oath is by placing the hands on
the Gospels, Bible, or some other sacred book, binding on the
conscience of the person so taking the oath.

O. B.—The abbreviation of the word “obligation,” which is the
Masonic designation for the voluntary oath taken on admission
into the Fraternity.

OBED (Hebrew, 72\p, Serving)—1. One of the nine masters selected
by Solomon after the death of H. A.B, to superintend the
work. 2. The grandfather of King David, and father of Jesse.

OBEDIENCE.—The Old Constitutions direct that “every Mason
shall prefer his elder, and put him to worship.” Upon the doc-
trine of obedience, united with the restraining power of appeal

520

OBE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | OBE

against arbitrary despotism, the whole Masonic form of govern-
ment is founded.

OBEDIENCE OF A GRAND Bopy.—Obetlience, in the sense of being
under the jurisdiction, is technically borrowed from the French
system. Thus “the Grand Lodge has addressed a letter to all
the Lodges of its obedience” (4 toutes les Loges de son obedience) ;
ae. all Lodges under its jurisdiction. The Grand Lodge having
granted a charter, homage is due to the body conferring it.

OBELISK.—Sun-worship was plainly connected with the erection of
obelisks, which are monoliths of a quadrangular form, slightly
tapering towards the top, and terminating in a flattened pyra-
midal figure. The material was usually Syenitic marble, and
they were placed in front of the temples of Egypt—the four
faces being engraved with hieroglyphics. Until Egyptology
became a practical science, great mystery was attributed to the
inscriptions; but they have been found to be only of political
importance—usually sounding the praises of the monarch who
set them up. The most ancient of these obelisks is that of
Heliopolis, erected by Osortasen I. (of the twelfth dynasty) ; but
there is no doubt that obelisks were introduced into the archi-
tectural system of Egypt at a much earlier period, as we find an
official of the fifth dynasty termed Prophet of the Pyramid ;
and it has been shown by M. E. de Rougé that there was a close
interrelation between the pyramid cultus and that of the
obelisk—both referring, as before said, to the worship of the
sun. The obelisk was, in fact,a species of gnomon. The tallest
obelisk is that of Hatasu, at Karnak, being thirty-three metres
in height; the one at Paris, from Luxor, measuring only twenty-
two metres. The obelisk of St John Lateran, at Rome, is thirty-
two metres high, bearing the royal signets of Thothmes III. and
Thothmes IV. The Flaminian obelisk, translated by Hermapion,
belongs to the era of Seti I.; while the Barberini obelisk is the
most modern of all, bearing the names of the Emperor Adrian,
the Empress Sabina, and of Antinous. It is desirable, however,
to refer to the obelisk of Karnak, the grandest of all. According
to the inscription upon it, it only took seven months in its con-
struction, from the time it left the quarry, and it would seem to
have been cased in copper, and must have formed a magnificent
object under the rays of an Egyptian sun. The hieroglyphic
name of the obelisk was tek-hen; but atter the twenty-second
dynasty, the appellation of men was given to it—a word signify-
ing radically “stability,” and hence of Masonic interest. Although
the obelisk referred to the cultus of the sun, it had alsoa phallic
Meaning; and scarabei exist representing the worship of the
obelisk in this connection, being the symbol of Ammon the

§21

OBI | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [oce

Generator, otherwise the sun or source of life and all vegetation.
In continental Masonry, the monument of the Master’s degree
is very frequently represented as an obelisk, with the letters
M.B. inscribed; and in Christian iconography, after all only
borrowed from the older religions, the obelisk is the symbol of
the resurrection. The fashion of surmounting cathedrals with
double towers is plainly derived from the obelisks of Egypt and
the pillars of King Solomon's temple. Jachin and Boaz had a
like origin.

Osi, (Hebrew D2iK, Sept. ’a@ias)—An officer of the Order of
Ishmael who had to see to transit; technically, “a keeper of
camels,”

OBLATE.—In ecclesiastical antiquities—1. A person who, on enter-
ing some monastic orders, had made a donation of all his posses-
sions to the community. 2. One who, like-‘Samuel, is dedicated to
the service of God from his infancy by his parents. 3. A lay-
man, residing as an inmate in some regular religious community,
after divestment of personal and real estate. In very early
times the King of France possessed the privilege of conferring
upon worthy persons, usually old soldiers, the rank of oblatus,
and the monasteries to which they were assigned were bound to
maintain them as pensioners.

OBLIGATED. (See Oath and O. B.)

OBLIGATION. (See Oath.) The solemn promise made by a candi-
date previous to his initiation, derived from the Latin obligatio,
literally signifying a tying or binding.

OBLONG SquaRE (so called).—The Ark of Noah, the Camp of the
Israelites, the Ark of the Covenant, the Tabernacle, and the
Temple of Solomon, were all oblong squares, sometimes spoken
of as the double cube, with doubtful accuracy. The heathen
deities, such as Mercury and Apollo, were often represented by
cubes. (See Kaaba.)

Oprack, HiBERNUS.—Grand Master of the Order of the Temple in
1392, according to the chronology of the Strict Observance of
Germany.

OBRINE, ORDER OF. —Also known as the order of Jesus Christ.
This was a military institution, founded in the thirteenth
century, by Conrad, Duke of Mazovia, in Poland, for the purpose
of combating the troops of Russia.

OBSERVANCE, STRICT, CLERKS OF THE. (See Strict Observance.)

OssERVANTS.—A body of Franciscan friars located at Greenwich
by King Edward IV. They were men of learning, and to them
we owe the foundation of our great National Astronomical
Observatory at Flamsteed House.

OccasionaL Lopce.—In a certain sense similar to a Lodge of
522

occ] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [opp
Emergency, only held by a Grand Master for specific purposes.
Not in use in England, but often necessary in America. In an
Occasional Lodge, Masons are made “at sight,” but the officers
must be the same; it is not often that it happens. The most
memorable instance was the making of Voltaire, who was made
“at sight” in the “Loge des Neufs Sceurs,” at Paris, (But see
Voltaire, and Sight, Making Masons at.)

OCCASIONALISTS, SocleTY oF—A society which held the direct
action of God in the slightest movement of the body, denying
the existence of human will, but affirming that when the
will requires motion, it is an immediate action of the di-
vinity.

OccuLT Masonry.—Although Ragon proposed a system of Occult
Masonry, it had been anticipated, but it remains with very few
to carry out its system.

OccutT SclencEs.—Sciences which are hidden from the vulgar; or,
in other words, would not be appreciated by the less educated
classes. As humanity has progressed, so these unexplored
regions have become more easy of access. The modern scientists
have equally veiled what they have wrung from the bowels of
Nature, by terms unintelligible to the ordinary mind,—hence the
necessity for a Greco-Latin system of expression—the commonest
things being expressed in words derived, by necessity, from their
names in these ancient languages. To juggle thus with words
when the facts are so simple, is the art of the scientists of the
present time, in striking contrast to those of the seventeenth
century, who called spades spades, and not “agricultural imple-
ments.” The occult sciences contained at one time the quint-
essence of human learning; they are now superseded by chemists,
jugglers, showmen, and wordpainters. In an ordinary sense, the
occult sciences refer to astrology, magic, alchymy, and anything
cognate to Hermetic Science.

Occuriep TERRITORY. (See Jurisdiction of a Grand Lodge.)

Octacon.—l. A figure of eight sides and angles all equal. Used
in Ecclesiology. 2. Also used by the Knights of Malta—refer-
ring to the eight beatitudes.

OctoGontIans.—This ancient and honourable Order met November
16, 1750, at the Ship and Anchor, Temple Bar, London. (See
Derisive Societies.)

Ocuuists, ILLUMINATED SociETY oFr.—A semi-philosophical society
existing in Germany about the middle of the last century.

ODDFELLOWS, INDEPENDENT ORDER OF.—This institution has attained
a position of some importance—in the sense that it affords an
opportunity for working men, as also in the Ancient Order of
Foresters, in a sort of beneficial way, to accumulate funds

523

ODE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [OHE

amongst themselves by slight periodical payments ; therefore to
a certain extent they act upon the Masonic principle of self-help
when well, and mutual assistance to be accorded on evidence,
medical or otherwise, when ill. But they have no such claim as
Masonry, having no history upon which they can rely. Their
ceremonies are peculiar; and however seriously some minds
might be attracted, no Mason could possibly deal with them,
and the various other benefit societies, without a smile. The
motto of the order is “ Friendship, Love, and Truth,” and the
teachings of the order are moral.

Opra (Hebrew, DIN, Sept. ocpdsov).—The sardius or cornelian in the
High Priest’s breastplate, of a red colour. It was supposed to
possess great medical qualities,

Opi1N.—Chief of the Scandinavian deities, and father of Thor and
Baldur. Regarded in Roman antiquity as identical with Hermes
or Mercury.

“cus—In ancient architecture, the apartment contiguous to a
dining-room.

(Enopr%.—In Athens, censors were appointed to regulate the
number of cups each person should drink at a feast, and they
were bound to report those who exceeded a proper and fitting
quantity.

OFFERINGS, THREE GRAND. (See Mosaic Pavement and Grand
Offerings.)

OrricE, TENURE OF.—From the term of appointment, or election,
until another person is selected or appointed to fulfil the duties
by a regularly constituted meeting.

OrricEers.—The Officers of a Grand Lodge or Grand Chapter are
similar to those of ordinary Lodges, only possessing greater
dignity and power, as being the fountain of their subordinate
Lodges. This is too sufficiently understood to require lengthened
commentary.

OFFICERS’ JEWELS. (See Jewels, Oficial.)

OcrE.—A moulding formed with one part concave, and the other
convex.

Ocmius—The Druidical name for Heracles or Hercules, who was
represented, according to Lucian, with a number of fine chains
proceeding from the mouth to the ears of other people. Hence
identical with Hermes, and overcoming by his powers of elo-
quence and persuasion. The ancient Irish called their alphabet
the Ogham, which has an obvious relation to the present matter.
Ogham was pronounced like the Hindu root Ovum, or Aum.

OaycGrra, PonTIFF or.—68° R. Memphis.

Ones ELoAH (Hebrew, mizx ank), The love of God, being the right
side of the mysterious ladder used in the high degrees ; each side

$24

out | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [out

having seven steps; the other side is termed Oheb Kerobo(Hebrew,
jahp ank, Love of your neighbour), situated on the left. It is
evident from the use of the Masoretic points, that High Masonry,
at any rate, had nothing to do with the original legend of King
Solomon’s Temple.

Ou10.—Masonry introduced early in the nineteenth century. Grand
Lodge organized at Chillicothe, 7th of January, 1808—Brother
Rufus Putnam, Grand Master. Grand Chapter established 1816 ;
Grand Council, 1829; and Grand Commandery, 1843.

O1.—Anciently a symbol of prosperity and happiness, and derived
from very remote periods of ecclesiastical and regal times. It is
not improbable that the half savage races who founded modern
civilization regarded oil as a blessing, and so bestowed it only on
solemn occasions, and used it as a mark of respect and consecra-
tion in the election of their kings.

OLp REGULATIONS.—Known as the “General Regulations of
1722-23,” and recognised as of authority. Many changes from
time to time have been made in the regulations, and, in an
archaic sense, very few for the better.

Oive.—Symbol of peace and victory, and analogous to the acacia
of Masonry. It was specially attributed to Minerva, the goddess
of statesmanship.

OLIvE BRANCH IN THE EAST, FRATERNITY OF THE.—An Order pro-
posed in 1845 at Bombay, by Dr James Burnes, author of a
“History of the Knights Templars.” This Order proposed to
address the natives, who from their religion were excluded from
the chivalric degrees. The degrees were three—1l. Novice; 2.
Companion; 3. Officer. Qualification for the first degree, Initia-
tion; for the second, the degree of Master Mason; and for the
third degree, it was considered advisable that the recipient should
have at least received the Royal Arch degree. The denoting
emblem of the Order was a dove, with an olive branch; but it
found no favour at the time, and fell through. The possessors
of a much more ancient order, extant among the Indians for an
almost incalculable period, were not likely to view with favour-
able notice that which had been gleaned by hints and misdirec-
tion from the outer Brahmans, or those who by the laws of Manu
had placed themselves at a disadvantage with their royal caste.
The literary merits of Dr Burnes being conceded, nothing more
remains to be said.

OLIVER, GEORGE, D.D.—Born at Pepplewick, Nov. 5, 1782, and
educated at Nottingham. In 1803, he was elected second master
of the Grammar School at Caiston, Lincoln, and was in 1809
appointed head-master of King Edward’s Grammar School at
Great Grimsby. He was ordained deacon in the year 1813, in

525

our] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. |our

the Church of England, and took priest’s orders in the following
year. In the ranks of the Church he obtained rapid promotion,
being placed on the living of Clee—being at the.same time on
the boards of Trinity College, Cambridge, as a ten-year man. In
the same year, he was made a surrogate and steward of the
clerical fund. In 1831, he was presented to the living of
Scopwick. In 1836, he graduated as a doctor of divinity, being
at the time rector of Wolverhampton. He was a fine specimen
of the pluralist system. He married early in life, in 1805, Miss
Mary Ann Beverley, by whom he left five children; and he died
March 3, 1867, at Eastgate, Lincoln. Dr Oliver was initiated
in the year 1801 by his father, the Rev. Samuel Oliver, rector of
Lambley, in the St Peter’s Lodge at Peterborough, by dispensa-
tion as a Lewis, and became an ardent Mason. In 1812, he laid
the first stone of a Masonic Hall at Great Grimsby. He was
exalted in the Rodney Chapter at Kingston-upon-Hull, and
subsequently took the chivalric degrees in Chapters and Consis-
tories at the saine place. In 1813, he was a Prov. G. Steward;
in 1816, he was Prov. Grand Chaplain; and in 1832, he was
Provincial Deputy Grand Master for Lincolnshire. He was also
honoured by the title of Past Deputy Grand Master of Massa-
chusetts. Unfortunately, Dr Oliver was connected with the
notorious Goss, alias Crucefix, and was obliged to share his dis-
grace ; and his otherwise blameless Masonic career was marred
by his removal from the Deputyship. Subsequently, in 1844,
however, a testimonial was presented to him in the form of a
service of plate (marking the esteem in which he was held),—this
had been very generally subscribed for throughout the Craft, and
was genuinely due to Bro. Oliver. Although Bro, Oliver was
replete with traditions of the old school of Masonry, it is im-
possible to deny him high honour as a literary Mason. With
diligence and fidelity he collected from almost forgotten sources
everything which could throw light upon Masonry—the mysteries
and the antiquities of architecture, and the new school of Masonic
investigation, is indebted to Bro. Dr Oliver more than some of its
votaries appear anxious to admit. The following books emanated
from his pen :—History and Antiquities of the Collegiate Church
of Beverley; the same of the Collegiate Church of Wolver-
hampton; History of the Conventual Church of Grimsby;
History of the Guild of the Holy Trinity, Sleaford ; Letters on the
Druidical Remains near Lincoln; Guide to the Druidical Temple
at Nottingham; Vindication of Christianity against Deism and
Infidelity ; Jacob’s Ladder; Scopwickiana; an Essay on Educa-
tion; Monumental Antiquities of Grimsby; an Account of the
Religious Houses formerly situated on the east side of the River
526

oLt| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [oir

Witham; and Remains of Ancient Britons between Lincoln and
Sleaford. His contributions to Masonic literature deserve special
description, the first work of a more than negative character
being the Antiquities of Freemasonry, comprising illustrations
of the five Grand Periods of Masonry, from the Creation of the
World to the Dedication of King Solomon’s Temple, 1823. The
Star in the East, 1825; Signs and Symbols, 1841, consisting of
twelve lectures; History of Initiation, 1829 (which, in fact,
summarizes all the most important points of Van Dael, De
Mysteriis). Next followed the Theocratic Philosophy of Free-
masonry, and a History of Freemasonry from 1829 to 1841; but
probably his most important and enduring book was the His-
torical Landmarks and other Evidences of Freemasonry Explained,
in two volumes, and embracing the widest field of research.
Other works succeeded ; but although the venerable author might
himself smile in deprecation at the assertion, he never beat the
Landmarks; the works published, only recently and posthumously,
do not possess the geniality of style and finished tone we find in
the works of his more vigorous period of thought. Bro. Oliver
performed one great office, he founded for England a vast
Masonic archeological arena, and those who love Masonic
inquiry, with perhaps sometimes a dash of Quixotism, can now
ride out and have a friendly tournament, and be none the worse
for it. There is plenty of room for investigation, and many laurel
crowns yet to be distributed to those whose care is to record and
hymn the singular truths veiled behind the intricacy of occultism.
Dr Oliver, as a Christian clergyman, adopted a theory which he
strenuously maintained, in which a sectarian aspect was given to
a series of universal principles, and for that reason his works do
not command that respect in extra-Masonic circles that from
their inherent worth they deserve. It is very doubtful whether
Masonic students are over-familiar with the erudite productions
of Bro. Oliver, and yet we owe him a great debt for the diligence
and enthusiasm with which he supported Masonic archeology.
The following are the titles of his Masonic works not mentioned
above :—The Revelations of a Square; The Book of the Lodge;
Symbol of Glory; An Apology for the Freemasons; Brief
History of the Witham Lodge; An Account of the Centenary
of the Witham Lodge, and a Narrative of the Circumstances
attending the Author's Removal from the Deputy Grand Master-
ship of the Province; Ornaments, Furniture, and Jewels; The
Freemason’s Treasury; A Dictionary of Symbolical Masonry ;
Institutes of Masonic Jurisprudence ; A Mirror for the Johannite
Masons; Origin and Insignia of the R. A. Degree; An Oration
on some of the Peculiar Excellences of Freemasonry, and Fare-
527

OME] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ONE

well Address to the Prov. G. L.; The Pythagorean Triangle;
Discrepancies of Freemasonry. He also published many Masonic
Sermons, was a frequent contributor to the “ Freemason’s
Quarterly Review,” and “Freemason’s Magazine,” and edited
several of the old standard Masonic works, among which may be
mentioned “ The Golden Remains of the Early Masonic Writers,”
in five volumes,

OMEGA AND ALPHA.—The and the A of the Greek alphabet, like
rand & in the Hebrew, to signify the first and the last. It is
used in the 19th and 28th degrees of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite.

Omniric Worp.—The Tetragrammaton is thus called, and the
exclamation of the Royal Arch of triple pronunciation is also
sometimes honoured by the designation. But the omnific word
is susceptible of more interpretations than those assigned to it
in Masonry and the Kabbalah.

On (Hebrew jix, Sept. ’Aiv.)—1. A chief of the tribe of Reuben, who
led in the revolt of Korah against Moses and Aaron. He appears
amongst the conspirators (Num. xvi. 17), but does not seem to
have received any punishment. The Rabbins say that bis wife
dissuaded him. 2. A designation of the city of the sun, or
Heliopolis, at a few miles from the modern Cairo (Gen. xli. 45);
also called (Jer. xliii. 13) Beth Shemesh—the Egyptian name
was Pa-Ra, or dwelling of the sun, and the sun was there wor-
shipped as Toum and Ra. On or An was the sacred name of
the place, and the name or district was in Lower Egypt. There
was also a city of An or On in Upper Egypt, Hermonthis or
An-Mont, now Erment in the nome of Thebes. Mont or Mentou
was the warrior-god of Egypt, and a solar deity. 3. A portion
of a peculiarly important word in Royal Arch Masonry, but
adopted in that degree without sufficient archeological warrant.

OnpHoma.—1. This word is of very ancient origin, and really means
Holy Spirit, but for centuries has been used as a pious invoca-
tion to the great Creator and Preserver, literally signifying,
“ Hear and regard us!” 2, The word is also used in the Order
of Ishmael.

Oxze.—1. The first number especially devoted to the expression of
that Great Being by whom this infinite universe was brought
into existence and coherency—(see God, Kabbalah, and Num-
bers). The modern Trinitarians regard him,as did the ancient
Hindus, as of a triform or triune nature; but all forms of the
religions of mankind hold tothe doctrine of His unity; while, as
manifest in nature, His power is displayed in infinite forms of
variety, possessing one principle in common, that of regular
moHon and faculties of life——hence unity becomes the expression

$2

ONE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [OPE

of all other numbers, although too vast for a finite mind to grasp.
It is evident that unity is primordial, and must precede in evolu-
tion all other forms of activity, sentient or latent. But the
mode in which the Great Entity exhibits its illimitable power is
multiform, and hence the confusion constantly found in theo-
logical discussions. 2. The same number represents the Monad
in the philosophical systems of Leibnitz and Spinoza, being
regarded somewhat in the sense of the mathematical point, but
possessing a species of life and motion of its own, not, however,
accessible to human knowledge. 3. In the Pythagorean system
the same number was made the basis of all things. Although
vast periods of time separate the philosophers who adopted
number as a necessary constituent of form, there is no incon-
gruity in their several speculative systems. (See Bro. Dr Oliver
on “The Pythagorean Triangle,” previously spoken of.)

OnecH (Hebrew, P2¥)—The bird Phcenix, named after Enoch or
Phenoch. Enoch, as we have previously said, means initiation.
The Pheenix is always associated with a tree—the mystical
Ababil or Ababel mentioned in the Koran. In Egyptian mytho-
logical sculptures, a bird is also placed in the mystical tree—
probably a palm-tree—the Hebrew name being Wn, TMR (John
xii, 18, ra Baia rév poivxowv). Palm branches are used at the
awakening of Nature, and hence we have allusions to the branch
of gold in the sixth book of the Atneid. The Pheenix is also the
Holy Spirit which brooded as a dove over the face of the waters,
and the dove of Noah and Jesus Christ, which bore a sprig in its
mouth. The dove (a remarkably reproductive bird) was sacred
to Venus in her three aspects,

Onyx (Hebrew, niw).—The stone representing the tribe of Joseph.
(See Breastplate.)

OotiaB. (See Aholiad.)

OPENING OF THE Lopcr.—A Masonic Lodge is opened with certain
expressly designed formalities, by which brethren present are
recalled to a sense of the peculiar nature of the institution. The
great moral principles of the Fraternity are thus successfully
kept before the members of all lodges, and necessarily no work
can be performed until the Lodge has been duly tyled and
opened, nor can any business be introduced. The necessity of a
practical knowledge of the expressions employed need scarcely
be referred to, and a due and punctual attendance at the time
of opening generally marks the character of a “ bright” Mason,
and is always calculated to ensure esteem and advancement in the
science. Brethren should be present in a decorous manner, and
clothed in their aprons, together with the craft insignia to which
they may be entitled. It is an error to be decked out ina Craft

2L 529

OPE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ORA

Lodge with jewels or insignia of Mark Lodges, Rose Croix, or
the higher degrees, although this error is constantly committed.
There is a species of pride of a character much to be deprecated
in displaying, in a place of equality, indications of superiority,
however well merited. H.R. H.the Grand Master was, no doubt,
actuated by this laudable motive on the memorable occasion of
his inauguration.

OPERATIVE ART. (See Operative Masons.)

OPERATIVE Masons.—The Operative or Free Stone Masons built
the various grand edifices which, even in their beautiful decay,
adorn Europe, parts of Asia, and even America. They possessed
certain rites of their own, to which frequent reference has been
made, and thus they became suspected of unlawful practices.
Tn our own day, operative masonry is a special branch of industry,
lawfully pursued by skilled artisans, who do not, however,
exhibit that constructive ability for which their predecessors
were so renowned. These operative masons, generally, to their
credit be it said, men of intelligence and industry, are not neces-
sarily members of the Speculative Fraternity, which teaches
morality by signs and symbols in our own day, although they
are not debarred from a participation in its privileges, An
operative mason is a builder in stone of a material sort ; a specu-
lative mason, in the proper and higher sense, labours at the
Temple of Morality and Humanity, symbolised by the great
structure of King Solomon.

Orutrrs—A Gnostic fraternity in Egypt, sometimes known as
the Brotherhood of the Serpent. It flourished in the second
century, and held the principles of the Valentinians, who main-
tained that there were two principles of sons, and of the theo-
gony therewith connected. A living serpent was displayed in
their ceremonies, and was reverenced as a symbol of Wisdom or
Sophia, being looked upon as a type of good and not of evil

Option.—In America, under certain circumstances, an optional
right is assigned to distinguished Masons to omit, but not to
vary, portions of the ceremony. It is a dangerous privilege, to
be entrusted only to tried men, and in Europe would be regarded
with distrust, if even permitted. This right of option is, however,
guided by certain definite rules of practice. Let us hope such
powers will never be recognised in England.

OxaL InstrucTION.—In many rites besides that of Freemasonry,
with its system of higher degrees, oral instruction is regarded as
essential. We find it invariable in the Ancient Mysteries, among
the Druids and the Hindus, and afterwards among the Jewish
disciples of the Kabbalah, and their Christian imitators, The
magicians and occult students of the middle ages had their

530

oRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ORA

apprentices formally bound to them (see Jochla, Benjamin), sub-
sequently rewarding them with great sums. Even the early
Christian Church insisted upon the necessity of oral instruction,
and refused, with probably very good reason, to commit many of
their principles to writing, preferring tradition as a safer method
of conveying thoughts, which every successive century might
tinge with a novel hue, and which might then safely be asserted
to have been the original intent of the founders—evidence of
any except a traditional character being impossible of production.
In a similar way, the Freemasons have preferred to transmit
certain legends orally, together with certain observances, many
of them well, although imperfectly, known; but the course of
oral instruction has at any rate the advantage of educating the
memory, and therefore strengthening the understanding.

OraL Law.—This is a corollary of the previous article. When the
Written Law was given to Moses, it is natural to suppose that
the human understanding was to exercise its faculties in carry-
ing its provisions out with the intentions and in the spirit in
which that Written Law was delivered; and hence in the feeble
and unstable nature of man in general, the strongest minds
would interpret, and by their mental authority enforce, such
views as appeared most agreeable or useful to themselves. It is
thus that priests and potentates have ever made themselves the
leading members of communities—a position which it is desirable
to indicate has never been assumed by greater men in science,
literature, art, or philosophy. As a rule, the philosophers have
been persecuted, the great sculptors or painters mediatized, the
poets laughed at, the prose writers defamed, and the scientific
man degraded. For, having the keeping of the oral law, the
priests naturally could anathematize at will from the depths of
their moral consciousness. The same method has been some-
times employed by men of authority in Freemasonry, but
fortunately without permanent effect. Recurring to the written
law as understood among the Israelites, it is divided by the
Jewish lawgivers into 613 precepts; but the oral law was trans-
mitted, it is asserted, by Moses to Joshua, and thence in the
course of ages, with many variations, it was formed into the
Mischna, now only a remarkable book consulted by the learned,
and of no effective use in general society.

ORANGEMEN.—A political order of a Masonic character, founded
previous to 1794, and derived from the nickname bestowed by the
Roman Catholics of Ireland on the Protestants of Ireland and
adherents of the House of Orange. At first this order had only one
degree, but in 1794 John Templeton added the purple degree, and
afterwards a degree resembling that of Mark-man, and another

531

oRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [orD

similar to Heroine of Jericho, These assemblies are called
Lodges, and the objects of the society are to defend the interests
of Irish Protestants and propagate Protestant ideas among the
Irish, A solemn oath is taken by the candidate on his initiation
to renounce all allegiance to the Pope, all sympathy with Roman
Catholicism, and to observe unswerving fidelity to the Protestant
dynasty of Great Britain. The province of Ulster is the head-
quarters of Orangeism, but there are Orange Lodges sprinkled
over various parts of the north of England and western Scotland.
It is doubtful whether this association is strictly legal, but so
many prominent men have belonged, and still belong to it, that
it is at any rate tolerated. Unhappy riots between the two
religious parties often take place in Belfast and other centres,
but the magistracy impartially inflict fine or imprisonment on
those of either side brought before them, either for inciting to
disturbance or for actual rioting.

OratTor.—An officer in the French system, and in the A. and A.
Scottish Rite, whose duty is to harangue the candidate on his
admission, and in general to lecture on the esoteric mysteries
of Freemasonry. Not in use in England (except perhaps in
oe Lodge of Antiquity), Ireland, Scotland, or the United

ates,

OrpeR.—Freemasonry is often spoken of as an Order, but the term
is scarcely technically correct; the usual definition, however, just
renders it colourably applicable, being as follows :—* A regular
government, a society of dignified persons distinguished by
marks of honour, and a religious fraternity.” It is plain, how-
ever, that as Freemasons solemnly disclaim any special religious
sentiments, that their constitution does not fulfil the whole of
these conditions.

OrvER NaME.—A name assumed or bestowed on admission into
several of the Masonic Societies, or Societies more or less con-
nected with Masonry. Among these bodies we may mention
the Rite of Strict Observance, the Royal Order of H.R. D. M. of
Scotland, the Illuminati and the Royal Oriental Order of Sikha
(Apex), and the Sat B’hai. The Rosicrucian initiates adopted a
moito as distinctive of their personality. In the Ancient Order
of Ishmael a number is given. The following names were
assumed by the members of the Iuminati:—Weishaupt was
Spartacus; Knigge, Philo; Bode, Amelius; Nicolai, Lucian;
Westerode, Pythagoras; Constanza, Diomedes; Zwack, Cato;
Savioli, Brutus; Busche, Bayard ; and Ecker, Saladin. In the
Strict Observance, the Members called themselves Knights,
selecting some particular object as the symbol of their knight-
hood, thus :—Hund was Egues ab ense, Knight of the Sword;

532

oRD | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [orD

Jacobi, Eques a, stelld, Knight of the Star; Bruhl, Zques & gladio
ancigiti, Knight of the Double-edged Sword; Bode, Lques a lilio
convallium, Knight of the Lily of the Valleys; Beyerle, Zques &
JSascid, Knight of the Girdle; Prince Charles Edward, Eques &
sole aureo, Knight of the Golden Sun; Zinnendorf, Zques & lapide
nigro, Knight of the Black Stone.

ORDER OF BusINESs.—This is usually prescribed in the bye-laws,
but in cases where it is likely to be uncertain, it may be as well
to indicate the following general principles :—1. First open the
Lodge; 2. Then read the minutes; 3. Ballot for initiates, if any ;
4, Direct them to be prepared; 5. Initiations; 6. Passings, if
any, in the Second Degree; 7. Raisings, if any; 8. Closing down
of the Lodge, when business can be resumed in the first degree,
and general motions brought on; 9. Closing of the Lodge alto-
gether, with the usual notice from the Junior Warden. The rest
should depend upon efficiency and memory.

ORDER oF Curist. (See Christ, Order of.)

ORDER OF JESUS CHRIST. (See Obdrine, Order of.)

OrpeEr OF Merit.—Prussia has an Order of Merit for distinguished
scientific and literary service. England has none.

ORDER OF THE TEMPLE. (See Templarism.)

OrvDER, RULES oF.—In places where order is preserved, definitive
rules are laid down for the conduct of affairs, thus—1. Two pro-
positions cannot be submitted at once to any meeting; if two
propositions arise, the second is necessarily an amendment, and
is put first, and, if not carried, is lost; and the original motion
stands, subject to further amendments. 2. The brother speaking
must address the Worshipful Master ; and the latter, in the case
of two brethren rising at the time, may assign a priority to one
of them. 3. No brother is to be interrupted while speaking,
unless for purposes of calling him to order. 4. No brother can
speak oftener than the rules of his lodge admit; but this may
be dispensed with (for internal matters) by the Master. 5. There
shall not be any unseemly disturbance, nor shall any one pass
between the Master and the speaker. 6. Personalities, abusive
remarks, or other improper language, shall not be used by any
brother in debate. 7. The W.M., or other presiding officer, if
rising, should be heard in preference to any one in the lodge.
8. Strict adherence to the question is imperative in all
cases.

OnrDERs OF ARCHITECTURE.—In number, five, being proportionate in
themselves, and having definite relative proportions to be found
in the others to whom they are made equal. They are Doric,
Jonic, Corinthian, Tuscan, and Composite. There is a separate
Egyptian order.

533

ORD | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [orr

OrvErs, RoyaL ENGLIsH.—As very easily accessible books give
good histories of the Royal English Orders, it will only be
necessary to name the chief of them. 1. The Most Noble Order
of the Garter of England, founded by Edward III., 1350; 2. The
Most Ancient Order of the Thistle of Scotland, instituted by
James V., 1540, and revived by Queen Anne, 1703; 3. Most
Honourable Order of the Bath, instituted by Henry IV. in 1399,
and revived by George I. in 1725.

ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. (See Knight.)

Orpinacio.—The word occurs in the Halliwell MS. (Cent. XIV.):
“ Alia ordinacio artes geometrie,’ in the sense of a law. In
the Roman law, the word ordinatio, whence our modern word
ordinance, meant an imperial rescript. It was also applied in a
Siatutory way, and referred to the decision of a judge in the
middle ages.

OrDINATION.—When a neophyte was received into the order of
Elect Cohens, the Master touched him with the thumb, index,
and middle finger on the forehead, heart, and side of the head,
and then communicated the passwords.

OrDo aB CHao.— Order out of chaos. First found in the patent
of Count de Grasse-Tilly, February 1, 1802, at Charlestown; the
real motto of the A. and A. Scottish Rite being Lux e tenebris.
It was, therefore, most probably an error. Ordo ab hoc was
afterwards used in French documents by the same authority.
There is evidently an error somewhere.

OREGON.—Masonry introduced from California in 1849. Grand
Lodge instituted in Oregon City, 16th August, 1851; Brother
Berryman Jennings, Grand Master. Grand Chapter organized
at Salem, 18th September, 1860. Templarism established at
Oregon City, by the opening of the Oregon Commandery, No. 1,
on 24th July, 1860.

OrGaNist, GRAND.—An officer of Grand Lodge in Great Britain and
Ireland, by whom musical services on special occasions are organ-
ized. Jewel: an antique lyre,

ORGANIZATION OF GRAND LopcEs. (See Grand Lodge.)

Ortri (Medizv. French, oriol.)—In architecture, a bay window
of an angular kind, usually pentagonal or triagonal, divided by
mullions and transoms into bays and compartments.

ORIENT, GRAND. (See Last and East Grand.)

OrieNnT, GRAND COMMANDER OF THE.—The 43° of the Rite of Miz-
raim.

Orient, INTERIOR—Sometimes used in Germany to designate a
Grand Chapter or principal body in the high degrees.

ORIENT, ORDER OF THE—Founded at Paris, 1806, on a system simi-
lar to that of the Temple.

534

ort | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ort

ORIENTAL CHAIR.—The seat of the W. M. in the Lodge, as repre-
senting King Solomon, In Grand Lodge it is called the
throne.

ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY. (See Zoroastrianism.)

ORIENTAL Rites OF MEMPHIS AND MizRaIm.—The Sovereign Sanc-
tuary of A. and P. Masonry, 33° and last degree for Great Britain,
have recently issued their permission for subordinate bodies to
communicate the secrets and degrees of the original Rites of
Memphis and Mizraim, as the former existed prior to 1862; and
as the latter have been recently conferred by the Royal Grand
Council of Antient Rites time immemorial. Thus members of
the various A. and P. degrees may accept and communicate as
follows:—11° A. and P. with 18° Mem. and 46° Mzm. ;—20° A.
and P. with 33° Mem. and 66° Mzm.;—30° A. and P. with 90°
Mem. and 87° Mzm.; 31° A. and P. with 92° Mem. and 88°
Mzm.; 32° A. and P. with 94° Mem. and 89° Mzm. ;—33° A. and
P. with 95° Mem. and 90° Mzm. We have already given the
names of the degrees of the Rite of Mizraim, and we will now

ive those of Memphis, premising that the lists of Marconis
1839), Ragon (1861), American Certificate (1856-72), and the
later lists of Brother Marconis (1864), vary. We here give the
latest form—1°-33° identical with those of the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite (First Series, 1st Class, Lodge, 1°-13° ;
Second Class, College, 14°-30° ; Second Series, 3d Class, Chapter,
31°-33°) ; 34° Knight of Scandinavia; 35° Sublime Commander
of the Temple. 4th Class, Areopagus: 36° Sublime Negotiate
or Companion of the Luminous Triangle; 37° Knight of Shota,
Adept of Truth ; 38° Sublime Elect of Truth or Philalethes ; 39°
Grand Elect of the AZons; 40° Sage Savaiste, Perfect Sage; 41°
Knight of the Arch of Seven Colours or of the Rainbow ; 42°
Sublime Hermetic Philosopher ; 43° Doctor of the Planispheres ;
44° Sublime Sage of the Zodiac ; 45° Sublime Sage of Isis; 46°
Sublime Pastor of the Huts ; 47° Knight of the Seven Stars; 48°
Sublime Guardian of the Sacred Mount; 49° Sublime Sage of
the Pyramids. 5th Class, Senate: 50° Sublime Philosopher of
Samothrace ; 51° Sublime Titan of the Caucasus; 52° Sage of
the Labyrinth; 53° Sage of the Phenix; 54° Sublime Scald ;
55° Sublime Orphic Doctor, or Sage of Orpheus; 56° Sublime
Sage of Cadmus; 57° Sublime Magus; 58° Sage Brahman ; 59°
Sublime Sage of Ogygia; 60° Sublime Guardian of the Three
Fires ; 61° Sublime Unknown Philosopher ; 62° Sublime Sage of
Eleusis. Third Series, 6th Class, Consistory: 63° Adept of
Sirius; 64° Adept of Babylon; 65° Companion Banuke; 66°
Companion Zeradust; 67° Companion of the Luminous Ring ;
68° Companion of the Sacred Vedas; 69° Companion of the

535

ORI | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ORI

Sacred Name; 70° Companion of the Golden Fleece; 71° Com-
panion of the Lyre; 72° Companion of the Lybic Chain ; 73°
Companion of the Sanctuary ; 74° Patriarch of Truth; 75° Sub-
lime Master of the Secrets of the Order. th Class, Council:
76° Sage of Elea; 77° Sage of Mithras; 78° Sage of Delphi, or
the Sacred Curtain ; 79° Sage Theosopher; 80° Sublime Sage of
Symbols, Interpreter of Hieroglyphics; 81° Sublime Sage of
Wisdom ; 82° Sublime Sage of the Mysteries ; 83° Sublime Sage
of the Sphinx; 84° Priest of On, or Heliopolis; 85° Priest of
Memphis; 86° Pontiff of Serapis; 87° Pontiff of Isis; 88° Pontiff
of Kneph; 89° Pontiff of the Mystic City; 90° Perfect Pontiff,
Sublime Master of the Great Work; 91° Grand Inspector of the
Order (Grand Council); 92° Grand Defender of the Order
(Grand Tribunal) ; 93° Grand Regulator General of the Order
(Lithurgic College); 94° Sublime Prince of Memphis, or of
Masonry (Mystic Temple) ; 95° Sublime Prince of the Magi, or
Pontiff of Memphis (Sovereign Sanctuary) ; 96° Sovereign Pontiff
of the Magi of the Sanctuary of Memphis (G. M. 8.8); 97°
Grand Hierophant—this last being the ruler of the whole Order,
for whom a vacant seat should be reserved at all meetings of the
various Sovereign Sanctuaries. It will be seen that the rite is
a collection, and that the foregoing degrees are derived from the
Ancient Chapter of Clermont (1728), the Rite of the Illuminati
of Avignon (1760), the Order of African Architects (1767),
Philosophie Scotch Rite (1776), the Rite of Philalethes (1773),
Primitive Rite of Philadelphes of Narbonne (1779), (its ground-
work) ; Rite of Negotiates (1780) ; Ancient and Accepted Rite
(1802), Oriental Rite of Mizraim (1805); additions by Brother
Samuel Honis of Cairo (1815) and the later revisal of Brother
J. Et. Marconis. On the other hand, the degrees of Mizraim
are chiefly inventions of the founders of the rite, where they do
not belong to the A. and A. Rite of 33 degrees; and this is
the great distinction between the two rites. (See Lechangeur.)

OrRIENTATION.—1. The Egyptians used the same word for signify-
ing the right hand and the west, and the left hand and the easé,
which shows that they must have directed their regards to the
south; and the hieroglyphic typifying the north means at the
same time behind. On votive pyramids, the principal person,
the adorer, generally faces the south. On his left are the for-
mule of invocation to the rising sun, and to his right his prayer
to the setting sun. A remarkable stele of this description has
been lately recovered from the bed of the Thames, by Mr Lam-
bert Clark of Hammersmith, bearing a prayer in the centre, in
front, and on the sides invocations of Amun and Anubis. This
stele is from Thebes, and is, all things considered, in a good

536

ort | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ort

state of preservation. 2. A Masonic Lodge is properly oriented
when situated due east and west; but, of course, this is often an
impossibility, from the nature of the places where Lodges are
usually held. It was derived originally, according to the old
lectures, from the fact that all chapels and churches are, or
ought to be, so; and as the Freemasons claimed to be descended
from the old ecclesiastical builders, the practice, as far as possi-
ble, would be continued. Symbolically, the W. M. is always in
the east, as representing the sun and the east, from whence
western knowledge was derived.

ORIFLAMME.—The ancient royal standard of France, and at first the
church banner of the abbey of St Denis, which was presented
by the Lord Protector of the convent whenever it was necessary
to take up arms on behalf of its rights. It was of red silk, seccée
into five points, each bearing a tassel of green silk. Several of
the bodies which have originated from Masonry have banners of
this kind, and sometimes bear the word Oriflamme upon them.

ORIGIN OF FREEMASONRY.—Several theories have been promulgated
on this subject, and we have partly discussed the subject—(see
Antiquity of Freemasonry.) It may be convenient, however, to
summarize the theories for reference. 1. Masonry derived from
the Patriarchs, 2. From the Mysteries of the Pagans. 3. From
the Construction of King Solomon’s Temple. 4. From the Cru-
sades. 5. From the Knights Templar. 6. From the Roman
Collegia of Artificers, 7. From the Operative Masons of the
Middle Ages. 8. From the Rosicrucians of the sixteenth cen-
tury. 9. From Oliver Cromwell. 10. From Prince Charles
Stuart, for political purposes, 11. From Sir Christopher Wren,
at the building of St Paul’s. 12. From Dr Desaguliers and his
friends in 1717. It is hardly necessary to express any opinion
on the point; the Fraternity has the advantage of being able to
choose for itself, and as Masonry is now worked, any decision on
the point is as impossible, as the value of that decision would
be futile.

ORIGINAL Points, TwWELveE.—The Obsolete Lectures of the last
century say :—“ There are in Freemasonry twelve original points,
which form the basis of the system, and comprehend the whole
ceremony of initiation. Without the existence of these points,
no man ever was, or can be, legally and essentially received into
the Order. Every person who is made a Mason must go through
all these twelve forms and ceremonies, not only in the first
degree, but in every subsequent one.” To each of these points
is assigned one of the twelve tribes of Israel in the following
manner :—1, Opening, Reuben; 2. Preparing, Simeon ; 3. Report-
ing, Levi; 4. Entering, Judah; 5. Prayer, Zebulon; 6. Cirewm-

537

ORL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [orP

vallation, Issachar; 7. Advancing, Dan; 8. Obligation, Gad;
9. Intrusting, Asher; 10. Investing, Naphtali; 11. Situation,
Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh) ; 12. Closing, Benjamin. These
twelve points also alluded to the twelve signs of the Zodiac.

Orteaxs, DuKE or.—Louis Philippe Joseph, also known as Egalité,
fifth G. M. of France, when Duke of Chartres. In a singular
letter of the 13th May, 1793, he abandoned all connection with
the Grand Orient. The Grand Mastership was then declared
vacant, and he himself expiated his great treachery to all persons
concerned with him on the 6th November following.

OrMuUDZ OR AURAMADZA. (See Zoroastrianism.)

Ormus oR ORMESIUS.—According to Baron de Westerode, the foun-
der of the Rosicrucians was one Ormesius, who had been con-
verted by St Mark, at Alexandria, in A.D. 46. He purified the
Egyptian rites, and reconciled them with Christianity, carrying
his disciples with him, and founded the Society of Ormus, or of
the Light—each member wearing a red cross. To this college
the Essenes and Therapeute joined themselves, and conserved
the Hermetic secrets.

ORNAMENTS OF A LopDGE—The Mosaic Pavement, Indented Tessel,
and Blazing Star. (See Blazing Star, Mosaic Pavement, and
Tessellated Border.)

ORNAN OR ARNAN (Hebrew, )18.)—Mentioned 1 Chron. xxi. 18-25.
From this person, an inhabitant of Jebus, afterwards Jerusalem,
David purchased a threshing floor on Mount Moriah, where the
Temple was afterwards built. (See Threshing Floor.)

Orpuic, Docror—ss° R. M. in 1864. Subject: Perfection of
man, search for truth, love of justice. Rule: practice of all
virtue.

OrpHIc MysTERIES.—I. The principles of the Orphic Theology, known
to have been taught in Europe, 1400 B.c., were these:—1. Before the
creation, God was united with whatever exists in such a manner
that in Him were contained all things that are, or have been, or
shall ever be; all forms from all eternity being thus concealed
within His Essence, and thus being compatible with the con-
tinual development of new forms, whether macroscopic or micro-
scopic. 2. At a self-determined period, God separated these
from Himself; and thus gods, goddesses, the sun, stars, moon,
and planets, and every other form of existence existing, were
progressively produced, and by the Creative Energy will con-
tinue to be produced. 3. It follows, that by this progressive
productivity, or law of emanation, all things participate in the
Essence of God, being parts and members, instinct unconsciously
with the Divine Nature. 4. This confers a kind of transmitted
crane nature upon every creature, But, 5. The Essence of God

53

ORT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ost

thus proceeding from Him, and present in all things, must
necessarily be the sole principle of animation. 6. Thus, all
things being not only from God, but also in God, the Divine
Infinity must be admitted. 7. This Divine Nature may be
venerated in its parts by those who, from the infirmity of human
nature, cannot comprehend any idea of the Supreme God who is
concealed, invisible, and unknowable from the majority of men.
8. It is improper and unlawful to make any image or representa-
tion of God; it is necessarily false. His Essence being diffused
throughout the universe, and the universe being only visible in
part to finite beings, consequently no complete or adequate
representation is possible. 9. All things having proceeded from
God by His own will, He has the power of reswaing them, and
the return of the divided part of the Essence is the highest
beatitude to be anticipated by the pure and good. 10. Many
transmigrations and purifications are necessary before this con-
summation can take place; hence patience and humility under
trial in this world is an essential part of human conduct.
11. In the Orphic Mysteries was commemorated the murder of
Bacchus or Dionysos—(see Dionysian Mysteries). But they
differed from other mysteries in this respect, that the celebrants
were laymen and not priests. In the daytime the initiates were
crowned with fennel and poplar, bearing serpents in their hands,
crying out enos, sabos, and hyes attes, attes hyes, bathing at
night in the lustral water; and the mystes being rubbed over
with clay and bran, he was clothed in the skin of a fawn, and
rising from the bath, he exclaimed, “I have departed from evil,
and have found the good!”

OrtHOsTAT&—In ancient architecture, the name of pilasters,
buttresses, and other supporters of any buildings.

Orvius, L. C—A member of the Hermetic body, who published a
preface to Montani’s “ Principles of Hermetic Science,” in 1622;
but he seems, according to Thory, to have fallen into bad hands,
for he died in misery, after being despoiled of his own and his
wife's property.

OSIANDRIANS.—Followers of the learned divine Osiander, a Lutheran,
who differed from Calvin and others as to the efficient cause of
justification.

Osiris—1. The husband of Isis (see Jsis). The legend of this
mysterious personage was that he reigned on the earth; and so
great were the benefits he bestowed on mankind, and especially
Egypt, that he was honoured with the special designation of
Onnofre, or the Good Being ; and having been murdered by Set,
or Typhon, the latter became the type of all evil. His body was
cut to pieces by Typhon and cast into the Nile, but was found at

539

osT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [OvR

Byblos, on the shore, by Isis and Nephthys, being embalmed by
Anubis. 2. Osiris was also regarded as the divinity, “the lord
supreme above all neb-er-djer,” whose material manifestation is
the sun, and whose moral manifestation was Good. The sun
setting, dies and rises again in Horus, the son of Osiris; Good
falls under the stroke of Evil, but is born again as Horus, the
son and avenger of Osiris. Horus is the type of all regeneration,
as Osiris is of death, and under his name the sun appears in the
oriental horizon, whence Har-em-Khu or Harmachis. In his
character of the lost sun, Osiris is king of the infernal regions,
where he sits in judgment on the dead. (See Lgyptian
Mysteries.)

OstaRA. (See Lostre.)

OrTERPET.—A name given to the ruffian at the west gate of the
Temple, in the legend of Hiram Abiff. Probably an anagram of
some person obnoxious to the Stuart party.

OtrEeB.—The literary name of the Rosicrucian, Michael Maier,
under which he wrote his book, “ De vitd, morte, et reswrrectione.”
(See Mater.)

OTTOMAN PorTE, IMPERIAL CRESCENT OF THE.—Instituted by Sultan
Selim III., in 1799, in commemoration of the services rendered
by Lord Nelson to the Turkish empire, consisting of two classes
of knighthood. Badge: a medallion of an oval form, bearing on
a field azure, argent a crescent with a star argent in the centre,
surrounded with diamonds. Ribbon: broad red. The Knights
of the first-class wear it scarf-wise with the badge appendant,
and on the left side of their upper apparel is embroidered a star
argent in the form of a brilliant sun, having in its centre the
star and crescent on a field azure. The Knights of the second
class wear a similar decoration without the star, nor is the
ribbon as broad.

OurRIEL. (See Uriel.)

OvAL TEMPLES.— Usual in Druidical structures, as representing the
mundane egg, which, like the oblong temple, was a symbol of
the world. (See Zgg, Mundane.)

OVERSEER.—1. A title of three officers in a Mark Lodge: Master,
Senior, and Junior. 2. The title of an officer in a tent of the
Order of Ishmael.

Ox.—Symbol on the banner of the tribe of Ephraim, on a scarlet
field.

OyRES DE ORNELLAS, Pracao.—A Portuguese gentleman arrested
at Madeira as a Freemason, and sent to Lisbon, in 1776, and
thrown into a dungeon, where he remained fourteen months.
At the same time was arrested a French gentleman, named
Francois d’Alincourt, who shared his captivity.

540

ozE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PAL

OzEE.—Sometimes Osee. A variation of Huzza or Hoschea. (See
Hoschea.)

OztaH (Hebrew ny, Latin, fortitudo domini)—A Prince of Judah,
and the name of the Senior Warden in the fifth degree of the
French Rite of Adoption, Sublime Lady Scottish Elect.

P.

P.—Sixteenth letter of the English and Greek alphabets, and seven-
teenth of the Hebrew; in the two latter, it corresponds to the
number 80, and also 100, and with a dash over it, thus, P,
for 400,000. The sacred name of God associated with this letter
is 12, Phodeh or Redeemer. Its symbolical value is a mouth.

PacuacaAMAc.—The Peruvian name for the Creator of the Universe ;
to be worshipped in all sincerity, and upon whose blameless
altars first fruits of the vegetable creation were alone to be laid.

Paciricator.—An officer of the Order of Ishmael, who, on an
important occasion, restores amity and happiness, where disorder
and revenge had previously reigned.

Paan.—A song of rejoicing among the ancients in honour of the
sun god, Apollo or Helios.

Pa:poBaPtist.—One who holds that children should be baptised in
infancy, in which they agree with the Hindus.

Pacan.—Originally an inhabitant of the country, unaccustomed to
the wiles of sacerdotal influence, seeking the woods and deserts
for his religious services—subsequently, he was stigmatized as a
heathen, for which the word is now considered an equivalent.

PaGanis, Hueco pg. (See Payens.)

PaLaDos.—In ancient Greek architecture, the principal entrance
to the scene of a theatre, leading to the stage and the orchestra.
PaLastra.—A place to wrestle in, or for other athletic purposes.
The Hellenic youth used to assemble in them. Morally applied,

the term palestra is associated with healthy argument.

PALESTINE.—The land of the Palistan—those whose fate was to be
banished from the Sacred Five Rivers of India, and whose tradi-
tions are preserved in the first five and the two last books of the
Hebrew Bible. Speaking in a philological manner, it must be
admitted that Hebrew, the language spoken in Palistan, was
derived from the Sanskrit.

PALESTINE, KNIGHT or. (See Knight of Palestine.)

PALESTINE, KnicuT oF St JoHN oF. (See Knight of St John of
Palestine.)

541

PAL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PAN

PALESTINE, ORDER OF.—Mentioned by Baron de Tschoudy, and it
has been said that it secretly existed, and was the fountain
whence the Chevalier Ramsay obtained his information for the
regulation of his system.

PALILIAW—The anniversary festival held in honour of Pales, the
goddess of cattle, on the 21st April of each year, in commemora-
tion of the foundation of the city of Rome by Romulus, when
they first enclosed their possession in herds and bullion within
walls. A pale is a stake driven into the ground: hence the
connection.

PALIM-ENTOR-SEPHIM.—A word used in the Order of Ishmael.

PaLLa.—Archeologically, a canopy borne over a sovereign at his
coronation; also an altar cloth.

PALLADIUM, ORDER OF THE.—The date of this Order is uncertain,
but according to Ragon it appeared at Paris in 1737, and was
derived from Douai. The idea that its ritual and statutes were
written by Féndlon is erroneous—as these seem to have been
written in 1637, another proof of the absurdity of relying on
dates—as its antiquity could not be greater than the time of its
introduction at Paris; and the fact that Fénélon was not born
until 1651 settles the question. It made extravagant preten-
sions to antiquity. There were two degrees—1. Adelph. 2. Com-
panion of Ulysses. Females were admitted to the degree of
Sisters of Penelope. The seal of the Order was a heart crowned
with flowers upon an altar, ornamented with a garland having
laurels to the right, and palms to the left. The motto was—Je
sais aimer, I know how to love, And the spiritual and moral
purpose of the Order was the mutual enlightenment of the
members; but, of course, without being initiated, it is impossible
to say in what manner this was effected. It was dissolved by
the police in a very short time. It may be remarked, that the
attempt to use the name of Féndélon, the Archbishop of
Cambrai, is a gross libel on the reputation of a great and
virtuous man.

PaLMER (Latin, Palmifer).—A palmer returning from the Crusades,
bearing a branch of the holy palm in verification of his really
having been there.

Pan, Tot Gop.—The special god venerated by shepherds, hunts-
men, and country people, and sometimes called the great god
Pan. Homer says that he was the son of Hermes or Mercury
by Dryope, but Lucian and others say his mother was Penelope,
atterwards the wife of Ulysses. His name signifies All or Every-
thing, and his form was monstrous, as was that of Baphometus—
(see Baphometus). His complexion was ruddy—two horns issued
from his forehead, his nose was flat, and some assign him the

542

PAN | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [PAN

head of an ass; his legs, thighs, tail, and feet, were those of a
goat. Dionysos bestowed upon him the name of Pan, and his
residence was in Arcadia. He was the inventor of the Pandan
pipes; and although his form was so grotesque, he was not re-
garded as absolutely a malevolent being. The Abbé Constant,
in his “Doctrine and Ritual of High Magic,” has given a plate
in which all his attributes are united. His wisdom was vast,
and comprehended a knowledge of all sciences. In Egypt, he
was identified with the Mendesian goat, and worshipped with
great devotion, and esteemed to be the Creator of the Universe,
in one sense. His horns represented the rays of the sun, and
the brightness of his face symbolized the brightness of the firma-
ment. On his breast he wore the blazing star, and his hairy legs
and feet were emblematical of the woods and plants in the
inferior part of the earth. He had an oracle on Mount Lyceeus
in Arcadia, and Evander brought his worship into Italy, where
the festival of the Lupercalia was celebrated in his honour; at
Athens, he had a temple near the Acropolis. This peculiar form
has been in modern times assigned to the devil. There can be
little doubt that the ideas relating to Pan were successive accu-
mulations of various ages, so varied has been the part he plays
in Ancient Mythology. It is said that the final history of Pan
was as follows, according to Plutarch:—A company of sailors,
navigating the A®gean Sea, near the Echinades, in the reign of
Tiberius, suddenly heard a great voice calling upon Thamus, the
Egyptian pilot; thrice the voice repeated the summons, and on
the third time, the pilot was enjoined, on his arrival at port, to
announce that the Great Pan was dead, which was done.
Tiberius inquired into the matter, and commanded the attend-
ance of Thamus; and after his story had been related, it was
corroborated by Demetrius, who had been sent by the emperor
to the coast of Brittany, where the Druidical inhabitants averred
that, during a tremendous storm, frightful outcries were heard,
and that one of the chief demons had been vanquished and put
to death. Legendary histories connect this with the birth of
Christ. If there were any truth in it, there would no longer
exist any reason for a belief in the existence of Auld Clootie.
Jt may be worth while to note that, throughout the history of the
human race, personal hideousness has ever been associated with
superhuman power, and frequently with knowledge; while beauty
has usually received exactly the opposite interpretation, being
attributed in mythology to weak and puerile personages with
little strength of mind.

PANTACLE. (See Pentalpha.)

PANTHEISM.—Very great exception has been taken by the various

543

PAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PAN

expressed creeds at the doctrine of Pantheism ; but it can scarcely
be regarded in so reprehensible a light by unimpassioned minds,
The idea of the universe being one being is not recent, and un-
derlies most of the religious forms in which the emotional part of
the human mind delights. It is universally admitted by Theists
that one Great Being created this marvellous universe, the in-
finite proportions and interrelations of which the finite intellect
is from its special constitution unable to grasp. At the same
time, it is degrading to that Being to promulgate a theory that
His infinitude has ceased to labour at any time in the constitu-
tion of things as they actually exist. Mutation of form is a ne-
cessary condition of matter; life, death, and resurrection are only
phenomena of the activity of that Sublime Creator in whom we
live and move and have our being. The discoveries of Leuwen-
hoeck have displayed by means of the microscope the infinitely
little; the telescope has by its gradually increased power revealed
the doctrine of the infinitely great ; but so chained has the human
intellect been to certain traditions which, on examination, prove
only relatively true, that the power of T.G.A.0.T. U. has been
presumptuously limited. The researches of modern archeology
prove, that within the known history of man, while there has been
a progressive development caused by increase of power, there has
been little change in morals. What was integrally true thou-
sands of years ago, remains integrally true at the present time.
It is but the temporary aspect which is veritable, and it is impos-
sible to predicate the end. It was generally believed in the dark
ages, when education was but slightly disseminated, that a period
would arrive when the whole of this vast universe would be de-
stroyed; but the presumptuous ideas of men very unphilosophi-
cally set bounds to the existence of matter, and as a result found
their theories and beliefs triumphantly defeated by the event. No
catastrophe occurred in a universal sense, and so the doctrine was
shown by practical facts to be erroneous. That human beings, like
the smallest nat, are subject to the universal law of death, cannot
be disputed; and as the Great Ruler of all is the arbiter of these
conditions, men and animals alike should accept in humility and
awe the unalterable decrees of the Almighty. If persons really
would study the unquestionably truthful and divine doctrines
contained in the philosophy of the Book of Job, they would not
cry out so readily against God. The notion of any activity being
suspended is in itself a rebellion against Providence; while a
cheerful submission to the general rule is a guarantee of future
happiness. It is in this way that the doctrine of the resurrec-
tion, so constantly inculcated in Freemasonry, becomes consoling.
And even supposing for a moment that there is no hereafter
544

PAN] The Royal Masonic Cyclopadia. [PAP

existence, what can it signify? A true life will lead to a proper
appreciation of those privileges accorded to mankind, and no
dogma can alter the laws of our being. As Masons, therefore, it
forms an essential part of our duty to be unweary in well-doing ;
and thus, by the eradication of superstition and ignorance, to
reconcile the nature of may with God. It is a cardinal fact, that
good will produce good, and this power of producing good is
within the capacity of all.

PaNACHE.—The French term in architecture for the triangular
part of an arch, contributing to the support of turrets or elevated
structures.

PantTueEist.—A believer in the identity of God and Nature,

PANTHEISTIC BROTHERHOOD.—Described by John Toland, in his
celebrated essay “ Pantheisticon”—having strong features of re-
semblance to Freemasonry. In Germany, a rite was based upon
this, called the Socratic Lodge; it had, however, only a brief ex-
istence.

PapaL KNIGHTS OF THE GOLDEN Spur.—By some historians sup-
posed to have been instituted by Pope Pius IV. in 1559, but
rather under his own name than that subsequently assigned to it.
In a Bull of Pius V., 1569, they are denominated Chevaliers Pies
or Piorum. Peter de Belloi says these Knights were created in
the same manner as those of the GoldenSpur. According to Favin,
these Knights have been called of the Golden Spur, on account of
their having the permission to wear it. The diploma of reception
recites that they are Sacri Palatii Lateranenses Comites, milites, et
equites aurati; but the eight-pointed gold cross enamelled rouge,
with a spur or pendant, is not the original ensign conferred by
Pius IV.; his decoration consisted of an image on the obverse of
the St Ambrosius, the reverse being appropriated to the arms of
the reigning Pontiff. The Piorum Order, by the statements of
Guistuiani, is clearly connected with St Ambrose, the following
words being used in the Bull :—“ Insigniaque dictorum militum
piorum esse volumnus imaginem B. Ambrosii Ep. ab una parte
alicujus pendentis aurei, et ab altera parte insignia nostra, vel pro
tempore existentis Pontificis,” &c. Of this order, at any rate,
there were some five hundred with an annual honorarium of
about £200 sterling. They possessed great privileges. Their
title was Comites Sacri Palatii, by virtue of which they could
create doctors and notaries, and legitimatise natural children ; and
they also enjoyed many benefices even when married. They were
immediately under the jurisdiction of the Pope himself, and
exempt from other blame. At present this order is purely hon-
orary. As we shall not have occasion to refer to Papal Orders
again, it may be as well to enbien in brief that the Popes

2 545

PAP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PAR

have claimed the following Orders as their prerogative :—1. St
George (Rome); 2. St George (Ravenna); 3. St Peter and St
Paul; 4. Jesus and Mary; 5. Jesus Christ; 6. St Mary the Glo-
rious; 7. The Order of Pius; 8. Of the Holy Ghost at Rome; 9.
Of the Golden Spur in Rome; 10. Of Loretto; 11. And of the
Virgin Mary. Of these Orders there is no doubt that the Order
of the Golden Spur was the most distinguished; it was conferred
only on persons of ambassadorial rank, artists, and men of letters,
It might seem strange to mention a Papal Order in this work
with such emphasis; but when we regard the lamentable want
in this country of some distinction for literature, it would be
unfaithful to historical verity to omit to record that an alien
faith had already established something of the kind, maintained
it with success, and distributed it with discrimination.

ParpwortH Manuscript.—A MS. purchased from a London book-
seller in 1860, by Mr Wyatt Papworth. The paper bears the
watermark G. R., so cannot be older than 1714, but is probably
of rather later date. Bro. Hughan has published it, and it is
simply a copy of the Old Constitutions in more modernized
language.

Paracesus, PHILipp BoMBAST AUREOLE.—Born in the canton of
Zurich, in 1493. A man of an active mind and incisive spirit,
butreputed in that superstitious age to be in league with demons,
from the fertility of his chymical resources, and the singular
cures he effected by the doctrine of sigils. No doubt the oppo-
sition he encountered at the hands of the uneducated persons of
his time, while it caused him trouble, nerved him to declare
himself the reformer of medicine. It is certain that he first
medicinally prepared mercury and opium, and some say antimony.
He asserted, like many others about the same time, that he was
in possession of the philosopher’s stone, and most egregious
stories have been told of him. His decisive character caused
him to be magnified by his followers into a demi-god, and his dis-
solute habits rendered him, on the other hand, the laughing-stock
of all who came near him. Malicious contemporaries have
asserted that he never was sober, but this statement is not com-
patible with the fact that he exhibited a restless literary and
philosophic energy not exceeded by the works of Faraday, Crosse,
and Sir Humphrey Davy. Tinged as he was with the prevalent
idea of the realisation of the philosopher’s stone—the secret of
which he claimed to possess—he was by the multitude regarded
as a charlatan ; his wild aspirations and singular doctrines con-
firmed the idea of his madness, although his voluminous works
display a profound knowledge of the mysteries of nature. He was
a mystic in the highest sense, for he often gave vent to utterances

546

PAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PAR

of the wildest prophetic character. He did much good and more
harm, for the introduction of mercury as a salivating agency has
been no gain to mankind. He laid claim to a power over mil-
lions of demons, which, if not taken in a mystical sense, must be
disallowed as nonsense; he asserted that he carried in the
pommel of his sword a familiar demon who taught him whatever
he required to know, and directed him to the secret resources
of the chymical art, as many people now claim to see images in
precious stones, crystals, mirrors, and water vessels. Accord-
ing to his own account, he was acquainted with the secret of
making gold, and declared that, by the use of his correspon-
dential medicines, he could prolong life to an indefinite period.
His enemies regarded him as a madman; he never appears
to have had a real friend, and under these circumstances it
is not strange that a man of such singular peculiarities should
have, after breaking through all conventionalities, died at an
early age, that of forty-eight, at Salzburg. When in his
quieter moods, he was an affectionate friend, and an intelli-
gent and instructive companion. The most recent contribution
to the literaturé respecting Paracelsus has been made by Dr
Friedrich Mook, who has critically examined all his known works
in an able work.

PARACELSUS (SUBLIME).—A degree in the collection of Peuvret.

PARACLETE (Greek, Mapaxayros, 1 John ii. 1)—Christ promises to
send after him “ another paraclete” (John xiv. 16). It has been
greatly argued what this could mean. Theologians differ very
much, as the passage is enigmatical. The Mohammedans under-
stand it to refer to their prophet, and read Periclyte or Illustrious.

PARALLEL Lines.—The symbolism of parallel lines, with that of
the point within a circle, would seem to have been introduced by
Dunckerley, in the last quarter of the eighteenth century. (See
Dedication.)

PARALLELEPIPEDON. (See Oblong Square, so called.)

Paris, CONGRESS OF. (See Convention.)

PARLIAMENTARY LAw.—A sound knowledge of the routine of public
meetings is required at the hands of every W. M., as the business
proceedings of a Lodge are conducted in conformity therewith.
(See Order, Rules of.)

PaROLE—The Order of Oddfellows and the Order of Foresters, in
addition to their permanent password, have a quarterly word
which they term password. This arrangement shows at once
whether the member is in good standing or not. Except in the
French system, this is not adopted in Masonry; but the Grand
Orient communicates a parole for the half year at the semi-annual
festival—mot de semestre—and an annual word in November.

547

PAR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Pas

ParroT Masons.—Men accomplished in the ritual, but thinking
little of the meaning of what they glibly run off. It is very
difficult to give dignity to the ritual without being impressed
with the real significance of what is to be pronounced. There
are many wonderful exceptions.

ParsEES.—An eminently benevolent class of men who observe the
principles of Zoroaster. To their honour be it said, that they
have never been anything but true and loyal subjects and unof-
fending citizens, while the gratifications they have accorded to
other creeds have been princely and unostentatious. Like the
Armenians, their rule has been to return good for evil, and make
their individual path through life as quiet as may well be
imagined. (See Zoroastrianism, and Olive Branch, Order of the.)

ParTICULAR LopcEs.—A term used in 1721 to designate members
of special lodges, showing the inefficient machinery of Sir Chris-
topher Wren’s Grand Lodge.

PARTICULARIST.—A term originated at the Council of Dort, sig-
nifying a person holding the doctrine of God’s particular decrees
of salvation and reprobation.

ParTs.—The arts, parts, or points of Masonry are not to be revealed.
It might, according to Oliver, refer to degrees, but this is
doubtful.

Parvis.—1. The French term for the preparation room or ante-
chamber. 2. In architecture, a porch or portico, or an upper
chamber immediately situated above the entrance to a church.

Pas Perpus.—A term for the visitor’s room in France.

PascHAL FEeast.—A lamb was directed to be slain at this time
amongst the Jews, and the Christians, who derive their traditions
from that body of religionists, have perpetuated the practice.

Pascua, Lams. (See Lamb.)

PASCHALIS, MARTINEZ—A. German, born about 1700, according to
some authorities, but, according to Ragon,he was a Portuguese Jew.
At any rate he was a learned man, and one who had travelled far
and wide in the East—throughout Turkey, Arabia, and Palestine.
He was a proficient in the Kabbalah. He founded the Rite of
Elected Cohens or Priests in 1754, and brought it to Paris
in 1768, and some Martinistic Lodges were formed by 1775—
(see Elected Cohens or Pricsts.) He was the teacher of St Mar-
tin, who afterwards reformed the rite. Paschalis finally died in
St Domingo in 1779. His published works were :—1. Proteus.
2. Axioms. 3. The Wheel. 4 The World.

Passace.—The fourth degree of Fessler’s Rite, of which Patria or
Country forms the fifth.

PasseD.—A brother has been said to have been passed when he has
cai the second degree.

5

PAS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [pas

PASSING OF CONYNG, i.¢., surpassing in skill—An expression used
in the British Museum MS. (line 676) :—* The forsyde Maister
Euglet ordeynet thei were passing of conyng schold be passing
honoured.”

PassING THE River—A mystical Hebrew alphabet used by the
Kabbalists, having no resemblance to the ordinary alphabet.
It was no doubt necessary to conceal the speculations of the
Jewish thinkers; and, in addition to this, a certain system of
thought requires to express itself in peculiar forms. Cornelius
Agrippa gives this alphabet in his “ Occult Philosophy,” book iii.
ch. xxx., together with the celestial alphabet and some others.

PassworD.—l, A countersign. 2. A word intermediate between
one degree and the next. (See Sign.)

Past.—A title given to an officer who has held the chair for the
prescribed time and retired. Hence we say Past Master, Past
Zerubbabel (or in America, Past High Priest); the French say
Mattre passé, and also denominate the immediate Past Master
the Ancien Vénérable.

Past Master.—This rank is always conferred upon a Master
previous to his induction into the chair, by a duly qualified
Board of Installed Masters—(see Installation, Installed Masters,
Board of, and Installing Officer.) The ceremony appears to have
existed at least as long ago as 1722, when Philip, Duke of Wharton,
was G, M. (p. 286). Certain expressions were then used, stated to
be “proper and usual on that occasion, but not proper to be
written.” It is also conferred in Royal Arch Chapters in
America, to obviate certain inconveniences; but a P. M. made
in a Chapter has not the status of the P. M. of a Craft Lodge.
Past Masters in England, Scotland, Ireland, and other countries,
are members of Grand Lodge within the jurisdiction. The
P. M.’s jewel in England is the 47th proposition of Euclid en-
graved on a plate of silver or gold; but in America it is a pair of
compasses extended to 60° on the fourth part of a circle, with a
sun in the centre. (See Jewels.)

Pastos.—l. We have two forms of the word—Maorés and Masrds.
The latter is a corruption of Magasrds, anything standing beside,
such as a post or pillar, ai ragacrédes, are pillars placed in a line,
whence we get the idea of portico.* The Latin is vestibulum.
Pastas signifies also a secluded or sacred chamber, sanctified as
a pastos to funeral purposes, but as a pastas to bridals. The
Romish Church regards marriage as a sacrament, and it is curious
to find the word «racréos in its adjectival form has the exact mean-

* Kedpurd raordiay vxip repéevec — Orestes, 1366. The word Neorevxros
means one newly initiated, resurrected, or laid in the grave, alluding to the
double meaning of Pastos or Pastas,

549

PAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PAT

ing of sprinkling. The Pastophori were those who bore the
sacred couch or coffin of Osiris, Adonis, Atys, and others ; hence
the association of life and death, generation and destruction,
mortal and immortal. The pastos or reclining couch thus
answered for a double purpose ; it reminded man of the necessity
for mutual friendship, and of the immutable law which condemns
matter to pass for purification into other forms under the uni-
versal law of reproduction and transmigration. It was customary
among the Oriental nations, the Pheenicians for instance, to
excavate a stone and lay the body of a distinguished or a beloved
man or woman therein. A magnificent specimen exists in the
British Museum of one of these tombs, and our rites of burial
in coffins have come down from very remote times, 2. The
Pastos is often associated by students with the ark. 3, In
Masonry, the emblems of mortality are displayed on certain
occasions, and not in any way in ridicule of those solemn mys-
teries connected with religion. There is a ghastly contrast
between Pastos and Pastas—the wedding couch and the grave.
This was thoroughly understood by the ancients, but the material
moderns never think of it.

PATEXNTs.—1. Diplomas of certain degrees are sometimes thus
called in the Scottish Rite. It is a corruption of the term letters-
patent. Litera patentes or aperte, open or distinctly visible
letters, was a medieval term in immediate contrast with litere
clause, closed letters. The latter resembles sealed orders personal
to the individual and his trust, the former might be safely
displayed to all persons. Open letters were sealed in green with
the sigillum of the sovereign; sealed orders had a white seal.
Letters-patent were thus directed—Universis tum preesentibus
quam futuris—to all present or to come; while sealed orders
were directed—Universis presentibus literis inspecturis ; 1.¢., to
all present who shall inspect these letters. Masonic diplomas,
therefore, are in limine letters-patent. In England they are
called certificates; they do not mark proficiency, but preserve
dates, and act as a protection to worthy brethren in misfortune.
2. The warrant or authority given to a Provincial Grand Master
by the M. W. G. M. is thus termed.

PATIENCE.—1. One of the reasons assigned by the original founders
of the system of Freemasonry for the non-admission of women
is their want of patience. It might be true in those days of very
bad education, but there is not the slightest reason at the present
day for saying that education is not liberally sown forth ; in fact,
the pupils at Eton, and the captures of the school board, show
how boys conduct themselves; and as to girls, such a foolish
suavity of demeanour has for centuries been extended towards

55°

PAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PAT

them, that it is no wonder that they have no patience. 2.
Patient labour is necessary to achieve or obtain (according to the
two Hermetic processes) a proper idea of the philosopher’s stone—
(see Stone, Cubical.) The true philosopher’s stone is morality,
and the veiled teachers of a purer system of practice were forced
to content themselves with symbols and emblems, In the
science of Masonry, properly understood, self-vanquishment is
the trophy leading to happiness.

Patmos, Knicut or. (See Knight of Patmos.)

PATRIARCH.—1. It is unnecessary to mention in such a work as this
what a patriarch may be. We find the adoption of the phrase
to be wider than could be supposed. The Oddfellows claim the
title, and so do the Foresters; and it is found in the 20° of the
Emperors of the East and West—a manifest proof that arche-
ology was reviving, or it would not have been known. 2. A
mystical degree in the Collection of Viany. O.S.D. 3. There still
exists at Paris an officer of the rank of Grand Patriarch—he is
necessarily a member of the Order of Ishmael, and a Fellow of the
Hermetic College of Samarkhand, in which he must have gradu-
ated, and passed an examination after an interval of seven years.
Till very recently, this office was filled by the marvellous Persian
who attended the National Library.

PaTRIARCH.—Second Officer in a Tent of the Order of Reconciliation,
otherwise the Order of Ishmael or of Esau. His office resembles
a combination of that of Past Master in a Lodge and of Orator.
Points of ceremony are referred to him, and he closes the pro-
ceedings of the Tent with admonition. His place is to the right
of the Chief of the Tent, towards the South—the Chief sitting in
the West.

PATRIARCH, CONFIDENTIAL, OF SoLoMON.—In the collection of
Peuvret. C.5.D.

PATRIARCH, GRAND CONSERVATOR.—The 33° (being the last) of the
A. and P. Rite of Masonry, and conferred ex-officio upon the
Grand Master of Light, or the first officer of a Mystic Temple.
The whole government of the Order being thus elective step by
step, and terminating in the Sovereign Sanctuary. The clothing
is a sash and collar, which is purple for honorary members, and of
golden colour for officers—the jewel is the double-headed eagle,
wings drooping, with the figures “33” on breast, and any decora~-
tion which may have been conferred by the Grand Chancery.
This is also Sovereign Patriarch.

PATRIARCH OF Isis.—44° R. Mzm.

PATRIARCH OF THE GRAND Luminary.—In the lists of Lepage. C.S.D.

PATRIARCH OF THE SACRED VEDAS.—Also called Doctor. 1. 78° R.
Mzm. 2. 26° A. and P.

551

PAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Pau

PATRIARCH, OR DocToR OF THE PLANISPHERES.—1. 37° R.M. 2,
24° A. and P.

PatRIARCH, GRAND DEFENDER.—Member of the Sovereign Tribunal,
and Defender of the Rite. 1. 92°R.M. 2. 31° A. and P.

PATRIARCH OF THE Mystic City.—1. A. and P. 2. 64° R. Mzm.

PATRIARCH OF THE G. W. P. P.—1. 38° R. Mzm. 2. 30° A. and P.

PATRIARCH OF THE CRUSADES.—A term for the degree of Grand
Scottish Knight of St Andrew. 29° A. and A. Scottish Rite.

PATRIARCH OF TRuTH.—1. 24° A. and P. 2. 83° R. Mem.

Patriots OF 1816, Society or.—In opposition to the Restoration in
France, founded the 16th of February, 1816. Its chiefs were
Pleignier, Tolleron, and Carbonneau, who were condemned to
death on the 6th July, 1816, and executed a few days afterwards,

PATRIPASSIANS.—A_ sect holding that the Father—they perceiving
no distinction between the Persons of the Trinity—Himself suf-
tered on the Cross.

Patron (Latin, patronus).—1. A protector of the Patrician Order at
Rome, whose influence was exerted in favour of his clients—
plebeians. 2. Patron, Grand. The York constitutions ordain
that “all legitimate societies shall labour under a patron.” It is
said that Charles I. was patron of Masons from 1625 to 1644.
The reigning sovereign of Great Britain and Ireland, being a
male, is ex-officio patron of the Fraternity of Freemasons. This
office originated in 1812, when the Prince of Wales, afterwards
Go IV., became Regent; it was afterwards held by William

Patrons OF Masonry.—Traditionally said to have been the two
St Johns—the Baptist and Evangelist. The sun passing on his
course throughout the year touches the solstices at this time,
whence the legend. (See Dedication.)

Pav I, EMPEROR OF THE Russias.—This potentate was induced by
the Jesuits to prohibit secret societies in general, and Freemasons
in particular, from 1797 to 1803, when a repeal took place under
his successor. He was an admirer of the Order of Malta—was
in 1797 its Protector, and in 1798 its Grand Master. Dr Mackey
observes, that “this is another evidence, if one was needed, that
there was no sympathy between the Order of Malta and the
Freemasons.” It is, however, a fact that the Knights of Malta,
who were expelled in 1738 for being Freemasons, have influenced
the higher degrees.

Pau, Knicut or —(See Knight of St Paul.)

PauL, Society or St.—A fraternity founded on the principles of the
Vehmeericht, in the time of the Emperor Charles V., in Sicily,
and known as La Confraternita di San Paolo. Sentence being
passed, a special member was told off to execute the death doom

552

PAU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PED

of the person sentenced—ending, as such things do, in most
cases, in the detection and prompt death of the murderer—for
such, in the eye of the law, would such a person be. Such
societies, it is to be deplored, still exist in free Italy.

PauLicians.—A sect of the ninth and tenth centuries, who held
the doctrine of two principles, good and evil, and denied the
inspiration of the Old Testament. They also condemned the
worship of the Virgin and the adoration of the Cross. It has
been thought they were connected with the Albigenses of the
meridianal districts of France.

PAVEMENT, Mosaic. (See Mosaic Pavement.)

PaviLion.—In architecture, a projecting apartment on the side of
a building, situated at a greater elevation than others,

Pax Vosis.—A word used in the 19° A. and A. Scottish Rite.

Payvens, HucH pr.—Founder, through Theocletes, of the Order of
the Temple, and first Grand Master (1118) at Jerusalem. He died
in 1129, and was succeeded by Robert de Craon, the Burgundian.
(See Johannite Christians and Templarism.)

P. D. E. P.—Pro Deo et Patria—for God and my country. Initials
on the ring of profession of a Knight Templar.

PEAR TREE, ORDER OF ST JULIAN OF THE.-—Established in the king-
dom of Leon in 1170, and sanctioned by Popes Alexander III.,
Lucius II, and Innocent III. The Protectorship of this Order
was assumed by Ferdinand II, king of Leon—Gomez Fernan-
dez being the first Grand Master. Arms: on a shield or, a cross
vert flewry, centred by a shield or a pear-tree, blazonde proper.
In 1212, Alphonso IX., king of Leon, took the city of Alcantara,
on the Tagus, in the province of Estremadura, from the Moors,
and in 1214 it passed from the possession of the Knightly Order
of Calatrava to the Knights of St Julian of the Pear Tree, who
assumed the title of Knights of Alcantara. In the first instance,
vows of chastity had been imposed, but afterwards, in 1540, they
were absolved from the vow. They now bear a cross vert fleury.
The Grand Mastership was reassumed by the Spanish Crown
during the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella.

Pecton (Latin, Pectinatum tectum)—A comb-roof in architecture,
causing the water to flow off in two directions.

PecToRaL (Latin, Pectus, breast)—1. In the earlier lectures, the
pectoral sign was called one of the principal signs, with the hier-
oglyphic x, and associated with fortitude. The word is now ap-
plied to one of the perfect points of entrance. 2. The breastplate
of the High Priest was also called the pectoral. (See Breastplate.)

PEDAL—The pedal sign symbolises justice, and was formerly in-
dicated by the sign <; it is now one of the principal points of
entrance.

553

PED | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PEN

PEDARIAN (Latin, pes, a foot)—A name given to senators who
signified their approval of special measures by walking over to
the side of the senatorial assembly where the advocates of such
measures stood. It was at one time a significant method of sup-
porting a member of a Lodge in debate. (See Parliamentary
Law.

eae In architecture, the substruction of a wall or column,
consisting of the base, die, and cornice. The proportion is from
one-quarter to a third of the height of the column and entabla-
ture. 2. The columns before the officers of a Lodge are called
pedestals,

PEDIMENT.—In architecture, the low triangular mass representing
a roof gable in front of a building.

PepumM.—A shepherd’s crook, and applied to a bishop’s crozier.
(See Baculus,)

Peer. (See Alla Allahis.)

PEETASH.—The demon of calumny in the system of Zoroaster.

Peacius.—A British monk of the fifth century. He denied the
doctrine of original sin, and he asserted that man, by the aid of
free will, exercised by himself, was able to work out his own sal-
vation.

PELeG (Hebrew bp, Division)—The son of Eber (Gen. x. 25).
Used in the 21° A. and A. Rite. Also the name of Tent x No. 5
block, the Tent of the Elect of Nine and Grand Master Archi-
tect.

PeLican.—A prominent symbol in the Eighteenth or Rose Croix
degree.

PELLEGRINI, Marquis oF. (See Cagliostro.)

PELOTTE, ORDER OF THE.—Mentioned by Delaunay.

PENAL S1GN.—The third part of the F.C. sign in Craft Masonry.

PeEncIL.—A_ working tool in Masonry.

PENELOPE, COMPANIONS OF. (See Palladium, Order of the.)

PENITENTIAL SicN.—The third sign in Royal Arch Masonry.

PENNSYLVANIA.—It is vouched for by Bro. Hughan that Masonry
was introduced by the G. L. of England in 1730, but the usual
accounts aver that it was introduced from Massachusetts in 1734
at Philadelphia, Benjamin Franklin being the first W. M. of the
Lodge. Grand Lodge was organized on the 26th September, 1786.
Grand Chapter in 1795. Grand Council of Royal and Select
Degrees established 16th October, 1847. Grand Encampment,
16th February, 1814. Grand Commandery, 14th April, 1854, and
February, 1857. These two latter bodies united into what is now
the Grand Commandery of Pennsylvania. The ritual of Penn-
sylvania differs materially from the other American systems, and
is a modification of the English York Rite.

554

PEN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PER

Pentacon.—A figure of five sides and five angles, the third figure
from the exterior in the camp of Sublime Princes of the Royal
Secret, 32° A. and A. Rite. The pentagon was also used by Cag-
liostro in his Egyptian Masonry.

PENTAGRAM (Greek zévre, five, and ypdéyua, letter).
(See Pentalpha).

PENTALPHA.—The triple triangle of Pythagoras, thus called because
it shows the form of Alpha—the letter a—in five different posi-
tions. The number five formed by the union of the first odd and
the first even is of peculiar value. It was regarded as a talisman,
as a preservative from danger, and, inscribed on the threshold of
a door, it kept out evil spirits. It is found almost everywhere in
Egypt and Greece, and in the middle ages was greatly esteemed.
The early Christians considered that it referred to the five
wounds of Christ. In Masonry, it forms the outline of the five-
pointed star.

PENTHOUSE—1. A shed hanging forward slopingly from the wall
of a main building. 2. In the Order of Ishmael, the candidate is
sent to seek a penthouse; but, as it cannot be found in the desert,
he receives shelter in the tent.

PERAU, GABRIEL LovIs CALABRE—Born at Semur, in Auxois, in
1700; died at Paris, 31st March, 1767. He was an author, an
abbé, and a member of the Sorbonne. He published “ L’Ordre
des Francs-Magons Trahi,” detailing with impartiality what he
knew, but in no spirit of hostility. The Abbé Larudan wrote a
continuation (“ Les Francs-Magons Ecrasés”), marked by the bit-
terest feelings of enmity to the Fraternity, and sought to attri-
bute the authorship to the Abbé Perau.

Perrect AsuHLaR, (See Ashlar.) .

PerFrecT INITIATES OF Ecypt, RirE or.—A system consisting of
seven degrees, with head-quarters at Lyons.

PerFEcT IniT1aTES, RITE or—The original name of Cagliostro’s
system of Masonry.

PERFECT IRISH MASTER.—A degree invented by Ramsay, and given
in the Irish Colleges,

PERFECT MasTer.—5° A. and A. Rite.

PERFECT Prussian.—Invented at Geneva in 1770, and belonging
to the Noachites.

Perrect Union, LopGE or.—A modification of Masonic rites which
appeared in France towards the close of the eighteenth century,
at Rennes. The system differs very slightly from the Rite of
Perfection. (See Elect of Truth.)

PERFECTION.—Ninth and last degree in Fessler’s Rite.

PERFECTION, GRAND LoDGE or.—The 4th to the 14th degrees of the
A, and A. Rite are conferred in a Grand Lodge of Perfection. In

555

Used in magic.

PER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PER

England and America, the 14th degree is called Grand Elect Per-
fect and Sublime Mason; but in France it is Grand Ecossais
Mason of the Sacred Vault of James VI. It is one of the de-
grees introduced by the Stuart Masons. It is the last of the In-
effable degrees. The place of meeting is called the Secret Vault ;
the officers are a Thrice Puissant Grand Master, two Grand War-
dens, Grand Treasurer, and Grand Secretary. The legend of the
degree refers to the capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar.

PERFECTION, RITE OF.—Said to have been established by De Bon-
neville at Paris in 1754, in the College of Jesuits of Clermont;
hence called Chapter of Clermont. The College of Clermont was
the asylum of the adherents of the Stuart party, and hence the
rite possesses Stuart peculiarities. Some of the degrees are the
same as those of the Emperors of the East and West (which
see), and of the A. and A. Scottish Rite.

PERFECTIONISTS.—The name first given by Weishaupt to the Order
of Illuminati.

PERFUMES, KNIGHT OF.—8° Oriental Rite, according to Fustier.

PercuLa.—A gallery or baleony to a house, where persons could
see and be seen. The word is used by Plautus.

PERICLYTE.—A term applied to Mohammed by his followers, and
signifying Illustrious. (See Paraclete.)

PeERIcoPpe.—An extract from some important work, such as the
Bible, to be read in churches.

PericNan.—A name invented by the adherents of the Stuarts, and
applied to one of the Elu degrees. The Rite of Mizraim retains
the name as Elect of the Unknown. (See these articles.)

PERISTOMIANS.—Teetotallers.

PeristyLitm.—In architecture, a court or square surrounded with
acolonnade. Perhaps the most attractive peristylium in England,
from the quaint figures associated with it, is that of Magdalene
College, Oxford. It is worth a Freemason’s while to go there.

PERNETTY, ANTOINE JOSEPH.—Born at Roanne, France, in 1716.
He was originally a Benedictine, but, becoming dissatisfied, he
applied in 1765, together with twenty-eight others, for a dispen-
sation from his vows. He repaired to Berlin, and Frederick IT.
made him his librarian, but he soon after returned to Paris. He
embraced Swedenborgian ideas; but although he appears to
have done so in good faith, he was badly received by the Swe-
denborgians of his time. He published a French translation of
Swedenborg’s “Heaven and Hell,” and established a system of
Hermetic Masonry. (See Académie des Illuminés d’ Avignon.)
He is also the reputed author of the degree of Knight of the
Sun, 28° A. and A. He published many works on Hermeticism ;
they are only valuable now as showing the ideas of the time.

556

PER | The Royal Masonie Cyclopedia. [PER

Philological archeology has put the hazy learning of the last cen-
tury to flight. Pernetty died at Valence, in Dauphiné, in 1800.
PERPENDICULAR.—In a geometrical sense, that which is upright
and erect; and applied morally to a mason, it denotes him to be
a just and upright man in all his transactions.
PERSECUTIONS.—It is impossible, with the space at our command,
to enlarge upon the persecutions which the Fraternity, collect-
ively and individually, have had to endure at the hands of poli-
tical and religious persons. In ancient times, the priests and
the builders were not at variance, and even in modern times the
persecutions have been prompted by political motives, for it
might to the uninitiated well appear strange to have a body of
men existing in the midst of society of whom it is uncertain
whether they are friends or foes; and this applies equally well
to the institutions fostered by Papal influence. It is perhaps
enough briefly to give a few dates and particulars since 1717.

1735. Holland, 16th October. Riots at Amsterdam. Lodge
broken into; furniture destroyed. Prohibition of
Freemasonry by the States-General. One Lodge
defends itself, and offers to initiate one of the author-
ities. Town-clerk initiated, and on his report the
magistrates follow his example.

1737. France. The police attempt to stop the meetings of
Lodges, but without success.

1738. Italy. Pope Clement XII. issues a Bull, 28th April,
against Freemasonry, still in force, followed by an
edict of Cardinal Ferrao in the following year.

1745. France. June. Dispersion of a Lodge meeting at the
Hotel de Soissons; jewels and furniture seized;
landlord fined 3000 livres—Germany. Persecution
by the Empress Maria Theresa frustrated by the
Emperor Joseph I., himself a Mason.

1745. Switzerland. The Council of Berne prohibits Masonry.

1748, Turkey. The Divan at Constantinople demolishes a
Lodge and arrests its members.

1751. Italy. Edict of Benedict XIV., confirming the Bull of
Clement.

1757. Scotland. The Synod of Stirling excommunicated many
of its members.

Add to this the various individual persecutions, and
an idea may be formed of the wonderful vitality
possessed by the Fraternity. It is unnecessary to
pursue the matter, for we have given other instances
of the steadfastness of the Brethren under the severest
trials.

557

PER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PER

PERSEVERANCE—A_ virtue inculcated in the third degree.

PERSEVERANCE, ORDER OF.—An order of Knights and Ladies founded
at the Court of Louis XV. in 1771, by the Polish Countess
Potoski, Count Brostosky, and the Marquis de Seignelay. It was
alleged that it had existed from time immemorial in Poland,—a
statement sanctioned by the King of Poland. Madame de
Genlis was among the dupes of the inventors of this rite. It
very soon lapsed into obscurity.

Persia. Freemasonry in Persia, in its Western acceptation, is not
in a very flourishing condition. It is certain that many Persians
are Masons, and it is stated that there is a Lodge at Teheran;
but the knowledge we possess of the social condition of the
country is so very incoherent, that nothing definite can be stated
on the matter, despite the many rumours inserted in Masonic
periodicals. This, however, seems worthy of credit, that Askeri
Khan, Ambassador of Persia to France, on November 24, 1808,
was initiated into the Order in the Mother Lodge of the Philo-
sophic Scottish Rite, on which occasion he presented the Lodge
with a pure Damascus blade in token of homage, at the same
time accompanying the present with the remark, that it had served
him in twenty-seven battles, Whether a Lodge was ever estab-
lished at Ispahan, as the Ambassador proposed, is very uncertain.
There is an officer of the Order of Ishmael in Persia.

PERSIAN PHILOSOPHICAL RITE.—Introduced into Paris in 1819, its
author claiming to have brought it from Erzeroum, in Persia,
where it had been established in 1818. The degrees were seven
in number. I. Symbolical—1. Listening Apprentice; 2. F. C.,
Adept, Esquire of Benevolence; 3. Master, Knight of the Sun.
II. Capitular—4. Architect of all Rites, and Knight of the Phi-
losophy of the Heart; 5. Knight of Eclecticism and Truth. [IT.
Areopagite—6. Master Good Shepherd; 7. Venerable Grand
Elect. Considering the important disclosures made by Dr Beigel
of Vienna, with reference to the Loge Bon Pasteur, in his recent
book, it.is hardly possible to resist the conclusion that some con-
nection existed between the two; and, as some of these degrees
were introduced by Roman Catholics, it was probably one of the
many compromises of the Restoration of Louis XVIII. The Rite
has long been extinct.

PrersonaL Merit.—The only qualification for preferment among
Masons.

Pertunpa.—A Roman goddess who presided over marriage, and
whose statue was a complimentary gift from an ancient Roman
husband to his bride.

Peru.—l1. Masonry introduced in 1807 by the French, but suppressed
in vs In 1825, when the independence of Peru had been ac-

55

PER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PET

complished, several Scottish Rite Lodges were established at Lima
and Colombia. Supreme Council established 1830. Grand Orient
of Peru, 1831, Royal Arch Masonry introduced at Callao in
1852, under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Chapter of Scotland.
2. There was a society founded in 1824 in Lima—the ancient
Rimac—called the Valenciennes Society of Incas. They had an
annual procession in carnival costume, and the alms they received
were given to the Mayor for the benefit of the poor.

PERVIGILIUM—A_ nocturnal watch-night, in use in antiquity, and
perpetuated in many forms of worship to the present time.

PETALISM.—A mode of dismission from an honourable station by
the name being written on a leaf. There is a passing allusion
to petalism in one of the ceremonies.

PETERSTHAL Society OF Frienps.—A social institution established
at Strasburg in 1817.

Peritions.—These are of three kinds—1. For a dispensation to hold
a new Lodge until the sanction of the Grand Master can be ob-
tained. The way of doing this resembles the following. 2. For
permission for a new Lodge to be formed. This is done by seven
or more Master Masons signing a requisition, according to a form
given in the Book of Constitutions, and it is usually accompanied
by recommendations from well-known members of other Lodges.
This being forwarded to the Grand Secretary, is duly submitted
to the Grand Master, who, on inquiry having been made, is
pleased to sanction the issue of a warrant, and appoints an officer
to consecrate; a time and place being arranged, with regular
fixed days for meeting, the new Lodge is formally incorporated
with the rest of the Craft. 3. For initiation. This is a personal
right, inherent in every man of mature mind, full age, and re-
spectable antecedents. The practice is to apply to a friend known
as a Mason, who proposes the candidate, and has him seconded.
He is subjected to a ballot, and, if favourably received, is invited
to attend for the purpose of receiving the benefit of initiation.
If the ballot should be unfavourable, he cannot again present
himself within three calendar months.

PETROBRUCHIANS.—This sect was founded in the twelfth century,
by-Peter de Bruys, about 1126, in the Netherlands. They re-
vived the traditions of the Primitive Christians, in which Christ
was regarded not only as the Body but the Church itself, and
asserted that His injunctions as to being prayerful in the closet,
and not in any special structure, was the best. They denied the
vicarious efficacy of the cross, and strongly opposed the worship of
an object upon which, according to their sincere belief, the Soter
or the Christ Jesus, or Jesus Christ, had been sacrificed; and to
them, as to many others, the cross was abhorrent.

559

PEU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PHA

PEUVRET, JEAN EusTacHE.—Ani official of the Parliament of Paris,
and at one time Venerable of the Lodge of St Pierre, in Mar-
tinico; subsequently a Grand Officer of the French Grand Orient.
He was an enthusiastic collector of degrees and documents, espe-
cially of matters in connection with Hermetic Masonry. His six
quarto volumes, containing eighty-one degrees, are extremely
curious; but it is very doubtful whether many of them are not
open to suspicion. | He died at Paris in 1800.

PHAALCHOL (Hebrew, °2°-¥5, operatum est omne).—1. A word used
in the 30° A. and A. R., to which the reply is Pharashcol—(see
Pharashcol). 2. The same words are used in the 32° A. and
A. R., and the 19° of the English A. and P. R.

PHAINOTELETIAN SocIETY.—Founded by Louis Theodore Juge, at
Paris, 1840, having for its object the common investigation, by
persons of all rites and degrees, of the principles and ceremonies
of non-political associations of all ages and countries.

PHALLUS.—The emblem of the male generative power anciently
adored in India as the Lingham and Iona, without any of the low
associations produced by the confluence of classes in the ages of
modern civilisation. That it was extensively sculptured in ancient
times cannot be questioned, and it was the principal object of
public and private processions, According to Jewish legends, the
accomplishment of the construction of the material Temple was
accompanied with a devotion on the part of King Solomon to
the phallic rites. There was a noble cultus attached to this
symbol, viz., that men should live a healthy life of a character
not exactly cznobite, but as bishops or overseers of their own
conduct, husbands of one wife, and not desirous of others. Curi-
ous as it may seem, this recommendation, usually supposed to
have been made by St Paul, is one common to the Hindus,
Evyptians, and Chinese; and in the latter nation, a man of two
wives is a depraved being, according to Sir John Davis.

PHARASHCOL (Hebrew, DS-UNB, All ts explained).—Used in the 30°
A. and A., and the 32° A. and A.S. R. The common word is
Pharaxal, which is faulty both in Hebrew and common sense.

PuarisEes (from the Aramaic Perushim, separated)—A strict
sect among the Jews, laying great stress upon the accuracy of
their rites and ceremonies, vestments and phylacteries. They pre-
tended to a superior knowledge derived from mysterious sources ;
possibly they were aware of the doctrines of the Kabbalah. The
Pharisees were allied to the Essenes. Although not identical, they
held Lodges of theirown,the members of which were called kabirim.
All persons beyond their association were Gentiles, people of the
land. Jesus was obnoxious to these persons, as to the sect of

Sadducees, who believed in no resurrection at all. By some it
560

PHT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PHI

has been supposed that the victim never died at all, as in the
case of Hiram, but was a paid agent of his party; at any rate,
the Gnostics would not allow of his physical death,

Pui-Beta-Kappa.—An Order composed of American students, first
organized in William and Mary’s College, Virginia, under the
auspices of Thomas Jefferson. It has its signs, grips, and pass-
words, with a silver membership jewel peculiar to each member.
On the obverse, under six stars, are the number of colleges
adopting the Order; and above, a hand, and the letters o.B.K.
Marked on the other side, or reverse, is the date of founda-
tion, “S. P., December 5th, 1776.” The letters S. P. stand for
Societas Philosophie; while the three Greek initials signify
“ Philosophia bion Kubernetes”—Philosophy the Guide of Life.
It has been stated by persons whose venom was far beyond their
knowledge, that this society sought to overthrow the constitution
of society ; but the idea is unfounded.

Putco, (Hebrew, 55°, mouth of all, ie., all-commanding).—Used
in the Order of Ishmael; commander of guard.

PHILADELPHES, LoDGE OF THE.—A Lodge at Narbonne, in France,
where the Primitive Rite was first established. (See Primitive
Rite.)

PHILADELPHIA.—In the days when Masonic books were interdicted,
it was very often the name for Paris.

PHILADELPHIANS.—A sect of the seventeenth century, followers of
one Jane Leadly. They professed a disdain for forms and cere-
monies, and committed their souls to the guidance of an internal
monitor.

PHILADELPHIANS, RITE OF THE. (See Primitive Rite.)

PHILALETHES, RITE OF THE.—From the Greek for Lovers of Truth.
A rite founded at Paris in 1773, in the Loge des Amis Réunis,
based on the principles of Martinism. Its assemblies were called
convents, and the members made special study of the occult
sciences. There were twelve chambers or classes of instruction,
viz:—l. RAP. 2.F.C. 3. MM. 4 Elect. 5. Scottish
Knight or Master. 6. Knight of the East: 7. Knight of Rose
Croix. 8. Knight of the Temple. 9, Unknown Philosopher.
10. Sublime Philosopher. 11. Initiate. 12. Philalethes, or
Searcher after Truth. The principal members of this order were
Savalette de Langes, Court de Gebelin, Dutroussel D’Hericourt,
Prince Friedrich Ludwig of Hesse-Darmstadt, Baron Gleichen,
the Abbé Rozier, the Vicomte de Tavannes, M. de Sainte-Jamos,
and others. The order did not spread very rapidly, for after nine
years there were only some twenty lodges in France and else-
where. In 1784-5 (see Convention), there was a meeting at Paris

2N 561

PHI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PHI

with a view to effect a radical reform in Masonry, but it was un-
successful; and on the death of Savalette de Langes in 1788,
the Loge des Amis Réunis was dissolved. Bro. Beswick states
that Cagliostro was connected with this Society under the name
of Count Grabianka, as well as Mosma and St Germain. (See
Savalette de Langes.)

Puiuip IV. or Francze.—The persecutor of the Knights Templar,
surnamed Le Bel, or the Fair. He ascended the throne in 1285,
and died, universally detested, in 1314.

PHILIPPIAN ORDER.—A degree invented by Finch the impostor.

PuitippPists.—A Lutheran sect, followers of Philip Melanchthon, and
opposed to the Ubiquists and the Flacians.

PHILOCOREITES, ORDER OF.—Established 26th December, 1808, in
Spain, by officers of the French army, in the camp before Orense,
in Galicia. The members were called Knights and Ladies,
Philocoreites, or Lovers of Pleasure. The Lodge was styled a
Circle, and each Knight had an order name.

Puiio-Jupaus. — A Jewish philosopher of Alexandria, who
flourished B.c. 30. His works abound with grand ideas and
beautiful symbolism. In esoteric learning, he was surpassed by
none of his time.

PHILOSOPHER, CHRISTIAN. (See Bosonian.)

PHILOSOPHER, CYCLOMAGNIC.—In the archives of the Lodge of St
Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais. C.S. D.

PHILOSOPHER, GRAND AND SUBLIME HerMzTIC.—In Peuvret’s Col-
lection, 40° R. M. C.S.D.

PHILOSOPHER, GRAND Misrress.—Last grade of instruction in the
Scottish Chapter of Ladies of Mount Thabor.

PHILOSOPHER, GRAND NEapoLiTan.—In the manuscript of Peuvret.

PHILOSOPHER, GRAND PRacTIcAL.—1. In the manuscript of Peuvret;
together with 2. Little P. P. 3. Sublime P. P. 4 P. to the
number 9.

PHILOSOPHER OF HERMES.—In the archives of the Lodge of St
Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais. C.S. D.

PHILOSOPHER, KABBALISTIC.—1. Degree in the arehives of the Lodge
of St Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais. 2. In Peuvret’s Collec-
tion. 38. With the addition of the words, “to the number five,”
in Peuvret’s Collection.

PHILOSOPHER, LITTLE NEAPOLITAN.—In the manuscript of Peuvret.

PHILOSOPHER, MASTER.—In the manuscript of Peuvret.

PHILOSOPHER, PERFECT Mason.—In the manuscript of Peuvret.

PHILOSOPHER OF SAMOTHRACE.—51° R. M.

PHILOSOPHER’S STONE—Not exactly 2 myth, but to be accepted
symbolically. At the same time, it should be remembered,
when science was persecuted by the Papists, who scented in its

562

PHI | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PHI

calm progress their downfall, it became necessary to veil its
inductions in language likely to attract little attention ; and if it
produced contempt on the part of the persecutors, the object of
the adepts, namely, impunity from interference, was attained.
General Hitchcock, in three able works, “Alchymy and the
Alchymists,’ 1857; “Swedenborg a Hermetic Philosopher,”
1858; and “Christ the Spirit,” 1861, has illustrated this subject
in a manner at once noble and convincing. His general theory
points to an identity between the alchymical and Masonic
system. (See Rosicrucianism.)

PHILOSOPHER, SUBLIME.—1. 53° R. Mzm. 2. Tenth class, rite of the
Philalethes.

PHILOSOPHER, SUBLIME UNKNOWN.—79° ninth series of the Metro-
politan Chapter of France.

PHILOSOPHER, UNKNoWN.—Ninth class of the Rite of the Phila-
lethes, in allusion to St Martin, whose pseudonym this was.

PHILOSOPHER, URANIMITICAL.—Degree in the archives of the Lodge
of St Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais. C.S.D.

eee THE LitTLe.—A degree in the collection of Pyron.

.S. D.

PHILOSOPHERS, UNKNOWN, ORDER OF THE—Sometimes also called
the Order of Unknown Philosopher-Judges. A Masonic society
having two degrees, and belonging to the Templar-Jesuitical
system. Its objects, however, were not Masonic. The jewel of
the order was a dagger, with the words Tais and Revenge.

PuiLosopuic ScoTrisH Rite—Established in Paris, 1776, being
founded on Pernetty’s Rite of the Hermetic Sublime Masters of
the Luminous Ring, in which alchymical ideas were promulgated.
Boileau, a physician, Pernetty’s pupil, reformed the system, and
gave it the name it still bears. The Master’s degree is indis-
pensable ; then we arrive at 1, 2, 3. Knight of the Black Eagle
or Rose Croix, in three points. 4. Knight of the Pheenix. 5.
Knight of the Sun. 6. Knight of Iris. 7. True Mason. 8.
Knight of the Argonauts. 9. Knight of the Golden Fleece.
10. Grand Inspector, Perfect Initiate. 11. Grand Inspector
Grand Scottish Mason, 12. Sublime Master of the Luminous
Ring—(see Académie des Sublimes Mattres de Vauneau lumineun
and Académie des Vraies Magons.) This rite was suspended in
1792, and only resuscitated at the termination of the Revolution;
the Lodge of Social Contract, and that of St Alexander of Scot-
land, then, in 1805, assumed the title of Mother Lodge of the
Philosophical Scottish Rite in France.

PHILOSOPHICAL DEGREES.—The degrees above the eighteenth and
up to the thirty-second A. and A. Scottish Rite are thus denom-
inated; but Dr Mackey thinks they should rather be pemnes

503

HI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PIL

apocalyptic degrees, being connected with the symbolism of the
Spiritual Temple of the New Jerusalem.

PHILOSOPHUS.—4° of the German Rose Croix system.

PHILOSOPHY, SUBLIME—48° R. Mzm.

Puenix. (See Onech.)

PuoTINians.—Followers of Photinus, bishop of Sirmium in the
fourth century, who denied the divinity of Christ.

PuysicaL Cus oF Moscow.—An androgynous order of Nobles thus
named existed from 1828 to 1850, when a government order
stopped them.

PuysicaL QUALIFICATIONS.—A candidate must be of the male sex,
mature and discreet age, without blemish, and having perfect
use of all his limbs, and no bondman or slave. (See Qualifica-
tions of Candidates.)

Prarists,—A religious order founded at Rome in the seventeenth
century, having for its sphere of action the education of youth,
and still in full force in some parts of Continental Europe.

Prazza.—The Italian term for a portico or covered walk supported
by columns.

PickaxE.—One of the working tools in Royal Arch Masonry.

Piece oF ARCHITECTURE—The French term for any literary pro-
duction on Masonry.

Pier—lIn architecture, this term denotes the solid between the
openings of a building, or that from which an arch springs.

Pietists.—A German sect of the seventeenth century, affecting
great austerity of morals.

PitasTer.—A square column imbedded in a wall, showing only a
portion of the thickness sometimes insulated; sometimes the
latter is termed a pillage.

. Pieri. (See Zemplarism.)

Piterims, Society oF.—The existence of this Secret Society was
revealed in 1825, at Lyons, on the arrest of one of the members,
a Prussian shoemaker, on whose person was found the printed
catechism for the use of the Fraternity. It assumed a religious
garb, but the work was of a Masonic character.

Pitter.—A title sometimes bestowed on the bailiffs or conventional
heads of the Order of Malta, there being eight langues in all,
It signifies a pillar or support of a building.

Pittars.—Pillars were continually used among ancient nations for
the purposes of commemorating events of public and private im-
portance, and it is quite unnecessary here to mention instances
of this universal practice. It may be sufficient to mention
the pillars of Seth—on which secrets are mythologically said to
have been engraved. There can be no doubt that first the rude
pillar unhewn, and afterwards the sculptured column, like the

564

PIL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PIT

modern church spire, was a method of calling Heaven to witness
concerning some fact, or confirming a solemn contract. Enoch
is said to have constructed pillars; and pillars of cloud and fire
are related to have preceded the Israelites in their march. There
has been a great mass of nonsense talked about such mystical
pillars. Sanchoniathon has been invoked; every crack-brain
author, who would give credence to what is susceptible of no
rational proof, has been brought into the field.

PILLARS OF THE Porcu.—Jachin and Boaz, the entrance pillars of
King Solomon’s Temple—(see Jachin and Boaz.) These pillars
were said to be hollow, and encased with brass of four fingers’
breadth—their height being 18 cubits or 27 feet, circumference
12 cubits or 18 feet; with a chapiter of lily-work of 5 cubits or
74 feet, with adornments of pomegranates. Jachin stood at the
south side of the entrance of the Temple, and Boaz at the north
side. Under these pillars the Fellow Craft is supposed not only
to seek but acquire his knowledge.

Pin, Society oF THE Biack.—Established at Paris in 1817, by
Captain Contremoulin, having for its object the defeat of the
Bourbons.

PinacotHeca (Greek, rivak, a picture; djxa from ridnus, to assign to
a place).—In architecture, a place for the reception of pictures.
PinaRil.—An order of priests who sacrificed morning and evening

to Heracles or Hercules,

Pinceau. (See Pencil.)

PineconE.—In America the wands of deacons are often ornamented
with pinecones, in imitation of the Thyrsus of Dionysos. There
is no warrant either for or against this.

PINNACLE.—A turret, or spire, in architecture.

PirLet.—A tailor in Paris, who, in 1762, got up a body, which he
called Council of the Knights of the East, in opposition to the
Emperors of the East and West.

Pisé.—A method of building, in which walls are formed of clayey
mortar mixed with straw, indurated into a hard mass when dry.

PitpaH (Hebrew, 705, Sept. rowd{sov)—One of the stones in the
High Priest’s breastplate, of a. golden yellow. The Sanskrit for
yellow is pita.

Pituo.—The Goddess of Persuasion among the Romans, daughter
of Mercury and Venus.

Pirris, THE SecT OF THE—An important and ancient Order, exist-
ing in Hindustan, having peculiar rites of their own, and no very
well established history; 7.2, what they have is purely traditional.
They have, however, defined rites. That same human feeling,
which unconsciously fills every breast, and causes every one to
respect the memory of ancestors, is the main principle of this

, 565

PIU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Pru

denomination, hardly however to be called a religion. The Pitris
themselves are the ancestors of those who regard it right to do
them honour, and to celebrate anniversaries in connection with
them ; while, at the same time, none of the Pitris are supposed in
any sense to be dead. On the other hand, they are presumed to
be useful intercessors, careful guardians, and representatives in
the High Court of Heaven of all who follow them. They are
susceptible of invocation, and able to transmit true petitions to
the Throne of Grace. As a fact in the psychological history of
religion, the doctrine connected with this sect is very important,
especially when we regard the place whence it emanated, and
the antiquity of the religious beliefs of India. To give an account
of the ceremonies of this sect would involve an amount of space
not at our disposal. There were three degrees, from almost
childhood to old age. During the period of the first degree, the
postulate was given to understand that he was merely a learner
or apprentice; and the section in which he was then placed was
that of Upanayana, z., introduction to knowledge. In this
degree he was enjoined to repeat sage saws of a much older
period, to practice personal abstinence and follow cleanliness,
and perform other rites of a more or less significant character.
At the end of ten years, according to caste, the grihasta and
purohita became sannyassis and vanapsrasthas, regarded as the
second degree, or rather as the degree of Mark Man, and addi-
tional duties were enjoined on the recipient. He now became a
master of the elements, and had many privileges denied to the
multitude. This second stage lasted for another ten years.
After another twenty years, passed in the study of the occult
sciences, he received the third degree, and became a sannyasi-
nirwani. In this third degree were taught the most esoteric
doctrines of the Order, and it is only by inference that we can
arrive even at any proximate idea of the sphere in which they
laboured. There can be no doubt that the third degree compre-
hended the doctrines of the ancient gymnosophists, and that the
members conceived themselves to be in actual communication
with the Deity. They also commanded elementary spirits, djin,
the intermediate class; had in their possession magical secrets ;
and could at will summon any and every soul from its secret
place in the Heart of God. The Brahmans refuse to explain the
meanings of the passwords Lom L’Rhum Sh’hrum, and Sho’rhim
Ramaya-Namaha. There was a grand council of seventy govern-
ing this Order, every member being of more than seventy years.
(See Shinto.)

Pius VII.—This Pope issued an edict, 13th August, 1814, against
the _ Peemiins and Carbonari, renewing the Bull of Clement XII.

5

PIU | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PNE

Pius IX.—It is perhaps better to agree with Solon, and esteem no
man happy until he is dead; consequently, the absurd allocution
of a Mason Pope in 1865 may be treated with compassionate
contempt. Were it not well known under what fatal influence
it was issued, the world might be likely to take less notice of
the matter.

Piaces. (See Stations.)

PLANCHE TRACEE.—The French name for the minutes of a Lodge.
As some work is supposed to be transacted in a Masonic Lodge,
such may be regarded as the record of results,

Pians AND Desiens.—In morals, those plans and designs by which
the mason aids in the construction of the spiritual temple of the
mind.

PLAT-BAND.—1. In architecture, 2 square moulding, with very slight
projection. 2. The lintel of a door.

PLats.—A piece of timber placed horizontally on a wall to support
girders and joists.

Piaronic AcaDEMy. (See Academy, Platonic.)

PLENTY.—Symbolized in Masonry by an ear of corn. (See Shibboleth.)

PuintH (Greek, rAiros, a brick)—The lower square put under a
pedestal or wall.

PLoT Manuscript.—Alluded to by Dr Plot in the “History of
Staffordshire.” Oliver thought it was the Leland MS., but this
is uncertain.

Prot, Rosert, M.D.—Born 1651, and died 1696. Professor of
Chemistry at Oxford, and Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, by
appointment of Elias Ashmole, author of the “ Natural History
of Staffordshire ” (1686), in which book he attacks the Masons ;
but even this attack affords valuable information on the subject.

PLotixus.—A distinguished Platonic philosopher of the third cen-
tury at Alexandria. He taught that the soul emanated from
the Deity, and at death was reunited to that Great Being. His
followers were called Platinists.

PiuG.—In architecture, a piece of wood driven into a wall, and cut
off flush with it, to receive nails or holdfasts.

PLums.—Used by operative masons to erect perpendicular lines,
and one of the working tools of a fellowcraft in speculative
masonry, as an emblem of unerring rectitude.

PLUMBLINE—A working tool of a Past Master.

PLUMBRULE—A working tool of a fellowcraft Mason.

PNEUMATICI.—Followers of Athenzus of Attalia, in the first’ cen-
tury, who taught that the pneuma or spirit was the vital principle,

PNEUMATOMACHIANS.—A term applied in a reproachful sense to the
heretical sects of the fourth and fifth centuries, who denied the
divinity of the Holy Ghost.

567

Por] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | POL

PoINT WITHIN A CiRCLE—A symbol of great importance. Its
exoteric explanation is, that the point represents an individual
brother, the circle being the boundary line of his duty to God
and man; the two perpendicular parallel lines representing the
Holy Saints, John the Evangelist and Baptist. But the esoteric
meaning is far different, and would require a volume in itself to
explain.

Pornts.—1. The Halliwell MS. of the Old Constitutions contains
fifteen regulations known as points. We are told,

“ Fifteen artyculus they there sougton,
And fifteen poyntys there they wrogton.”
2. The Perfect Points of Entrance were formerly called Principal
Points—the guttural, pectoral, manual, and pedal. (See these
articles respectively.) 3. The Points of Fellowship were five, and
are in use in the third degree ; they are so well known that they
require no elucidation here. 4. In architecture, the collected areas
on the plan of the piers and walls upon which an edifice rests.

Points, TWELVE GRAND. (See Original Points and Twelve Grand
Points,

Perec aegis introduced from England in 1736, but the
Lodges were closed in 1739 by King Augustus II., who carried
out the Bull of Clement XII. In 1742, Masonry was again
revived, but relapsed into obscurity in 1749, and it was not until
1766 that any special action was taken. In 1769, Count Mos-
rynski was elected Grand Master of a Grand Lodge—recognised
as Provincial by the Grand Lodge of England. Masonry again
fell into desuetude on the first partition of Poland, but was again
revived by Count Bruhl in 1773, when the Rite of Strict Observ-
ance was introduced, paying allegiance to the United Lodges of
Germany. There was another Lodge working under the author-
ity of the French Grand Orient, but great dissensions took place,
ending in the erection of a Provincial Grand Lodge on the 27th
December, 1781, under Ignatius, Pococki, with the English rite as
a basis. When Poland ceased in 1794 to be a kingdom, Masonry
was suppressed in the Russian and Austrian provinces, continu-
ing to exist only in Prussian Poland. At the time of the estab-
lishment of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw by Napoleon, a Grand
Orient of Poland was instituted, and this body continued its
labours until 1823, with more than forty lodges under it. A
ukase of Alexander I, however, put a stop to all secret societies,
and Masonry to the present time has remained in obscurity.

Po.anp, Society or Younc.—An association formed in Germany
on the model of the Young Italy Society, and consisting of Polish
students, having for its object the subversion of Russian suprem-
acy.

568

POL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PON

POLEPLATE.—A board of wood laid on the top of walls in a build-
ing to support the particular kind of roof called a mansard.

Poiz1a—aA festival celebrated at Thebes in Beeotia, where the
sun god Apollo was represented with grey hair—the declining
sun Osiris of the west.

Pouitics.—It is a vain task to attempt to convince the opponents
of Freemasonry that it is not a political institution, which in
England and America is most certainly the case. At the same
time, it is deeply to be deplored that certain unauthorized conti-
nental bodies have given colourable cause for the charge, thereby
endangering the fair fabric of charity and mutual good-will. As
a matter of fact, in times of revolution or political excitement,
the Masons of all countries close their Lodges, and do not resume
their peaceful labours until the dire dilemma has been solved by
other means. It would be a mockery to continue to preach
peace where there is no peace; and Freemasons, as a rule,
strongly condemn such foolish conduct as that of the French
Masons in planting their banners on the walls of Paris during
the contest between the Commune of Paris and the Versaillese
troops.

Beran a word in the high degrees, meaning wholly separated,
and said by Mackey to be a corruption of palkol.

PoLYsTYLE.—An edifice containing many pillars.

POMEGRANATE.—From the multiplicity of its seeds, it has been
adopted as a type of abundance: it was also a symbol of the ark,
and played a part in many of the religious mysteries of antiquity.
The pomegranate is associated with the pillars of King Solomon’s
Temple.

PomMME VERTE (GREEN APPLE), ORDER OF THE—An androgynous
order instituted in Germany in 1780, and afterwards intro-
duced into France.

PoMMEL—1. Architecturally, any ornament of a globular form.
2. A round knob—a term applied to the globes or balls on the
top of the pillars Jachin and Boaz (2 Chron. iv. 13).

Pomeérium.—A portion of ground in Roman cities solemnly con-
secrated at the first raising of the walls, both inside and outside,
on which it was unlawful to erect buildings.

PontTIFES FRERES.—(See Brothers of the Bridge.)

PONTIFEX.—A title borne by the members of one of the great col-
leges in ancient Rome, instituted by Numa Pompilius for the
purpose of preserving and cultivating the highest order of know-
ledge, especially that of a religious character. To this college
was confided the regulation of all the religious rites and cere-
monies, public and private, of the State. At first they were a
self-elected body, but at a subsequent period the i had a

599

PON | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Pos

voice in the election ; finally, it was vested in the emperors, who
regulated the number at will. The chief of the college was Pon-
tifex Maximus, and the present Popes arrogate to themselves
similar functions and privileges; by the bridge frora earth to
heaven thus built it was considered all must pass.

PontirF OF CaDMUS.—62° R. M.

PonTIFF, GRAND. (See Grand Pontiff.)

PontIFF OF Isis, GRAND.—1. 44° R. M. 2. 27° A. and P.

PontirF MASTER ad vitam.—19° 5th Class of the E. E. W.

PonrirF oF MirHra.—74° R. M.

PoNTIFF OF TRUTH, GRAND.—83° R..M.

Poor FELLow SoLpiers OF JESUS CHRIST (Pauperes commilitones
Jesu Christi)—tThe original title of the Knights Templar.

PooroosH.—The vital spirit or essence of Brahm, in the Indian
system.

Poppy.—The symbol of regeneration in the ancient mysteries. The
properties of the plant, similar to those of the lettuce, induced what
the Germans call Schein-tod, apparent death or sleep of a lethargic
kind, while the seeds typified a new existence. Thus poppies
planted in a cemetery signify the certainty of a resurrection, and
make this humble plant an analogue of the Masonic acacia.

PorcH OF THE TEMPLE. (See Temple of Solomon.)

Porta, GIAN. Battista——The founder of the Academy of Secrets
at Rome, the meetings of which were forbidden by the Pope.
He was an illustrious chymist, and died 1515.

Portico. (See Piazza.)

Portico, KNIGHT OF THE—4° Oriental Rite, in Fustier’s lists.

PoRTIFORIUM.—An ensign or banner provided in cathedrals to be
carried at the head of religious processions.

PorrucaL—aA Lodge was instituted at Lisbon in 1736 by Brother
George Gordon, by a deputation from England. In 17438, Coustos
(see Coustos, John) tried to do the same, but was arrested. In
1776, other arrests were made by the Inquisition, In 1805, a
Grand Lodge was established—Egaz-Moritz, Grand Master.
John VI., in 1818, issued a decree of death against all Masons,
foreigners as well as natives; and on his restoration to the throne
in 1823, he issued another edict, but in 1834 the Lodges were
revived. Freemasonry remained in great confusion for many
years owing to disputes as to jurisdiction. In 1871, the Supreme
Council united with the Grand Orient, and matters are now con-
ducted by the united bodies.

PosQuliERES, CHARLES JEAN DE.—Founder in 1705 of a Society of
Drinkers in Lower Languedoc. He was Grand Master or Re-
joicing Brother. They encouraged music and poetry, and pub-
lished a volume every year.

57°

Pos | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | PRE

Post, KNIGHT OF THE—A slang term for a person suborned to do
a bad action.

PostEL.—A marginal note in the Bible, or one placed after the
text in any other book.

PostscenluM—A space behind the stage where the machinery of
a theatre was stored; similar to the green room or robing room
of the actors. Also called Parascenium.

PosTuLanT.—The title of a candidate in some degrees, especially
that of Knight Kadosh.

Por or INCENSE. (See Incense.)

Pot oF Manna.—Said to have been laid up in the ark by Aaron,
and alluded to in the Royal Arch degree.

Potirit, ORDER or.—An order of Roman priests clad in the skins of
beasts ; instituted by Evander in honour of Hercules, after he
had slain the giant Cacus.

Potoska, CouNTESS oF.—One of the founders of the Order of Per-
severance at Paris, in 1771.

PoursvivanT. (See Pursuivant and Grand Officers.)

Practicus.—3° of the German Rosicrucians.

PRAXGANS.—Followers of Praxeas, an Asiatic heretic of the second
century. They denied a plurality in the Deity, and asserted that
the Father himself had suffered on the cross.

PRAYER.—Lodges in all countries are opened with prayer of a char-
re in which the professor of any religious creed could take a
share.

PREADAMITE.—A degree in the archives of the Mother Lodge of the
Philosophic Scottish Rite.

PrecavuTion.—A Masonic virtue constantly insisted upon.

PRECEDENCY OF LopcEs.—This is determined by the date of the
warrant, the oldest Lodge being either said to be of time imme-
morial, or to be No. 1. Hence, a Lodge by process of time may
change its number, but it retains its name.

PRECEPTOR.—The officer presiding over a province or kingdom
among the Knights Templar. In former times, the most illustri-
ous preceptors were those of Jerusalem, Tripoli, and Antioch.
The houses of the Knights Templar were called Preceptories.

PRECIOUS JEWELS. (See Jewels, Precious.)

PREFERMENT.— Among Masons this is solely by merit.

PRELATE OF LEBANON.—A mystical degree in the Collection of Pyron.

PRELATES,—Fourth officer in a Council of Red Cross Knights and
Commandery, or Preceptory, of Knights Templar, termed “ Excel-
lent.” He officiates at the altar, and is practically the chaplain.
His place is at the right of the generalissimo in the East. Jewel:
a triple triangle with a passion cross in the centre of each.

PREMONSTRANTS, ORDER OF.—An Order of White Canons instituted

571

PRE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PRE

at Premontre, in the Isle of France Proper, by Worbert, in
1120.

Prentice PitLar.—This column is in the south-east part of the
chapel of Roslin Castle, being a plain fluted shaft enwreathed
with a floral garland. The legend attached to it is, that when
the plans of the chapel were sent from Rome, the master builder
either did not understand the particulars of the design, or had
lost them, in consequence of which he had to go to Rome to
obtain fresh instructions. While he was away, an apprentice,
recollecting the intended outline, carved from memory the column
in question, or invented something better ; and when the master
returned, being incensed at finding his pains wasted, he killed
him with a blow of a heavy setting maul.

PREPARATION.—The preparation of a candidate for Masonry is a
serious and symbolical operation, and cannot be altered, varied,
or abridged, no matter what the rank of the candidate may be.

PREPARING BROTHER (French Frére Terrible, German Fiirchter-
licher Bruder)—A brother deputed to prepare a candidate, who
must himself be a man of experience in Masonry. In England,
the Tyler generally prepares the candidate, and hands him over
to the Deacons.

PresBYTER.—1. In the Primitive Christian Church—an elder. 2.
A priest. 3. A pastor in charge of a congregation.

PRESBYTERY.—In architecture, parts of the choir or chancel of a
church fitted with seats for its dignitaries.

Prestimony (Spanish, prestimonio).—In Roman Catholicism, a fund
not subject to the Pope or the Church, but appropriated for un-
beneficed priests—the patron being collector, and the proceeds
devoted to services of piety.

PreEsTON, WILLIAM.—Born at Edinburgh, the 7th August, 1742,
New Style ; 28th July, Old Style. The son of a writer to the
Signet, by whose care he received a liberal education. After-
wards he became the secretary of the celebrated scholar Thomas
Ruddiman, although he had been bound apprentice to the trade
of printing. The knowledge he thus acquired stood him in good
literary stead, and his bibliographical list of Ruddiman’s library
was highly esteemed. After his patron’s death, he returned to
the printing office; but, with the consent of his master, went to
London in 1760, and, aided by the letters of introduction he had
obtained, devoted himself to literature, for many years editing
the London Chronicle. In all ways, Preston exhibited capabilities
of a high class, but here our business is principally with him in
his Masonic capacity. He was installed at a Lodge of Ancient
Masons, held at the White Hart, in the Strand, in 1762, but
subsequently cast in his fortunes with the struggling Lodge of

572

PRE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PRE

Modern Masons. The Lodge was afterwards removed from the
White Hart to the Horn Tavern in Fleet Street; and next to
Scot’s Hall, Blackfriars ; finally settling down at the Half-Moon
Tavern, Cheapside. This Lodge was, after a time, merged in the
Lodge which met under the regular English Constitution, at the
Talbot Inn, in the Strand; and a warrant having been granted,
it recommenced its labours as the “ Caledonian Lodge.” Preston’s
attention, always of a critical character, was soon drawn to the
lectures, and he effected great reforms and improvements in them
—sparing no expense and effort towards a more classical and
positive interpretation. On May 21, 1772, he delivered an ora-
tion on the subject at the Crown and Anchor Tavern, in the
Strand, which the student can find printed in his works. He
gradually completed a series of lectures, and delivered them in
1774, at the Mitre, in Fleet Street. He was invited to attend
the Lodge of Antiquity soon after, and in due course became its
Master, having previously been Master of several other Lodges.
But his activity led to envious enmity in due course, as it has
done in many other cases; and Preston was expelled Grand
Lodge in 1779, with others of the Lodge of Antiquity; nor
was he reinstated in his Masonic rights until 1790, amid the
general congratulations of the Craft at the grand festival. The
matter which led to his expulsion was a question touching the
inherent right of the Lodge of Antiquity, which was not under
Grand Lodge, to have processions on certain occasions, Preston
upheld and tried this right on the 17th December, 1777, by pro-
ceeding, with other brethren, in full costume, from the Lodge
Room to St Dunstan’s Church, where they heard a sermon and
returned. The legality of this act was defended by Preston, and
the Lodge of Antiquity then united itself with the Grand Lodge
of York; while Preston retired from active participation in the
affairs of Masonry. In 1787, Preston was restored and welcomed
at the banquet as above stated, in 1790. No sooner was he re-
stored than he organized the Order of Harodim, in which lectures
of an instructive character were delivered—(see Harodim, Grand
Chapter of:) He finally devised the sum of £300, invested in
Consols, for an Annual Prestonian Lecture—the interest to be
paid to the lecturer. His principal literary contribution to
Masonry was his “ Illustrations of Masonry,” first published in
1772. It has since passed through many editions. He also left
£500 to the Royal Freemasons’ Charity, and £500 to the General
Charity Fund of Grand Lodge. He died, after a long illness, in
Dean Street, Fetter Lane, on the 1st April, 1818, at the age of
seventy-six, and was buried in St Paul’s.
PRETENDER. (See Stuart Masonry.)
$73

PRE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | PRI

PREVIOUS QUESTION.—It is out of order in Masonry to resort to
this method of quashing a debate.

Price, Henry.—First Prov. G. M. of New England, by deputation
from Viscount Montague, April 30, 1733. On the 30th July,
he organized the Provincial Grand Lodge, and thus became the
founder of Masonry in New England. He was born in England
about 1697, and died in Massachusetts in 1780.

PRICHARD, SAMUEL.—This brother, styled by Oliver “ unprincipled
and needy,” published in 1730 a work entitled “Masonry Dis-
sected,” in which the secrets of Masonry were asserted to be
given. It would be very difficult for any one to obtain admis-
sion to a Lodge by its use at the present day, and it is quite un-
necessary when the legitimate mode is so much more easy. The
book, however, obtained a wide circulation, and has no doubt led,
in the minds of interested or thoughtless people, to much miscon-
ception as to the scope of Masonic science, and the objects of its
students.

Priest.— It would be an insult to the readers of this book to attempt
to define a priest ; but it may be said that there are priests in every
religion, and, what is also very curious, priests beyond the pale of
the authorised or recognised churches—men of insight, and it may
almost be said of inspiration—men such as was Samuel Taylor
Coleridge. These men correspond to that class of teachers known
in the East as prophets in ancient times, and dervishes in modern
times. The best priest, however, is he who sets the best example;
and every Freemason being bound to do that, is, in so far as
he acts up to the Masonic principle, a priest in himself. In
Masonry, however, there are certain degrees partaking of the
characteristic features of a regular ordination.

Priest, GRAND HicH. (See Grand High Priest.)

Puizst, Hicu. (See High Priest.)

Priest, HIGH, OF MELCHIZEDEK.—Presiding officer of the degree of
Knight Templar Priest.

Priest ROYAL, OR OF MELCHIZEDEC.—5° Kabbalistic Rite.

Priest, RoyaL.—5° of the Initiated Brothers of Asia.

PRIEST OF THE TEMPLE OF HoLty WispoM.—Practised at Bath and
elsewhere; also a degree under the authority of the late Grand
hon of Knights Templar of Scotland. (See Knight Templar
Priest.

Prikst, THEOSOPHIST.—6° degree of the Kabbalistic Rite.

PRIESTHOOD, ORDER OF HicH. (See High Priesthood, Order of.)

PRIESTLY ORDER.—According to Bro. Yarker, this order was for-
merly practised in Ireland, and formed the system of the York
Grand Lodge, consisting of seven degrees—1, 2, 3. The Symbolic
degrees. 4, Past Master. 5. Royal Arch. 6. Knight Templar.

$74

PRI | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | PRI

7. Knight Templar Priest The last degree was conducted in a
Tabernacle, and was governed by seven “ Pillars.” Bro, Hughan
casts a doubt upon the York origin of the Priestly Order, which
is now nearly obsolete. It is, however, still given in Scotland,
England, and Canada, but has been suppressed in Ireland,

PRIMITIVE AND ORIGINAL RITE oF Masonry. (See Swedenborgian
Masonry.)

Primitive Masonry.—It was a favourite and constantly imposed
argument of Bro. Dr Oliver, that there had been a system of
Primitive Masonry, something like that which is ignorantly
brought forward in the Ark Mariners. It has, however, no
archeological foundation whatever, and the modern investiga-
tions now carried on are disproving such faded historical know-
ledge.

PRIMITIVE Masons, ANTIENT AND. “(See Antient and Primitive
Rite.

Sous RiteE.—Founded at Narbonne, in France, April 19, 1780,
by the Superiors of the Order of Free and Accepted Masons, and
attached to the Lodge of Philadelphes, under the title of First
Lodge of St John, united to the Primitive Rite, for the country
of France. We have already seen it under other aspects.
The degrees were divided into three classes. I—1. E. A. P.
2. F.C. 3.M.M. IL—4. Perfect Master, Elect and Architect.
5. Sublime Ecossais. 6. Knight of the Sword, Knight of the
East, and Prince of Jerusalem. III—7. First Chapter of Rose
Croix, with ritual instructions. 8. Second Chapter, with histori-
cal information. 9. Third Chapter of Rose Croix, comprising
physical and philosophical instructions. 10. Fourth and last
Chapter of Rose Croix, or Rose Croix Brethren of the Grand
Rosary, in which the occult sciences formed the main object of
research. United to the Grand Orient in 1786, and afterwards
reconstituted in the Netherlands in 1819.

Primitive ScortisH Rite.—Claims to have been established at
Namur, in Belgium, in 1770, by a body calling themselves the
Metropolitan Grand Lodge of Edinburgh; the truth being that
it was an invention of one Marchot of Nivelles, who in 1818
(see the previous article) reconstituted the Primitive Rite. It
comprehended the thirty-three degrees, of which we know eight
were added about 1801, and the other twenty-five were taken
from the Emperors of the East and West.

Prince ADEPT. (See Adept 3.)

Prince Depositary, GRaND.—In the Collection of Pyron. C.5S.D.

Prince Mason, Prince oF MEmpPHIS.—The 32° of the A. and P.
Rite of Masonry, conferred ex oficio upon the first officers of a
Chapter, Senate, or Council. The costume is a white sash; jewel :

575

PRI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PRI

a double-headed eagle, wings drooping, with the figures 32 on the
breast ; and any decoration which may have been conferred by
the Grand Chancery.

PRINCE OF BRAHMANS.—66° R. M.

PrINcE OF JERUSALEM.—1, 16° A. and A. 2.16° E. E. W.
3. 53° Metropolitan Chapter of France. 4. 50°R.Mzm. There
is also a degree in Le Page’s Collection, entitled Valorous
Prince of Jerusalem.

PRINCE oF LeBaNon.—Also called Libanus. (See Knight of the
Royal Axe.)

PriIncE OF MEMPHIS, MEMBER OF THE Mystic TEMPLE—1. 94° R.
M.; 2. 32° A. and P.

PrINcE oF Mercy.—26° A. and A.S. R.; also called Scottish Trini-
tarian.

PRINCE or RosE Croix. (See Rose Croix, Prince of.)

Prince oF TrutH.—1. 76° R.M. 2. 24° A. and P.

PRINCE OF THE CapTivity.—The Jews are stated, by the Talmudists,
to have kept a list of the rightful heirs to the throne of Israel;
and, at the time of the restoration, Zerubbabel, as the lineal de-
scendant of Solomon, was the Prince of the Captivity.

PRINCE OF THE East, GRAND.—In the Collection of Le Page. C.S.D.

PRINCE OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE.—52° R. M.

PRINCE OF THE LevitEs.—A degree in the Collection of the Lodge
of St Louis des Aims Réunis, at Calais.

ee THE RoyaL SEcreT.—(See Sublime Prince of the Royal

ecret,

PRINCE OF THE SAcRED Mount.—49° R. M.

PRINCE OF THE SEVEN PLANETS, ILLUSTRIOUS GRAND.—In Peuvret’s
Collection. C.S.D.

PRINCE OF THE TABERNACLE.—24° A, and A.

PRINCE OF THE ZopIAc.— 39° R. M.

PRINCE SOVEREIGN, GENERAL RULER OF THE ORDER.—87° R. M.

PRINCE SOVEREIGN OF Masonry.—85° R. M.

PRINCE, SUBLIME, OF THE SACRED CuRTAIN.—46° R. M.

PRINCESS OF THE Crown.—Tenth and last degree of Adoptive
Masonry in the French rite; composed in Saxony about 1770,
and representing the reception of the Queen of Sheba by Solomon.
Tt was, according to Ragon, an honorary degree.

PrincipaL.—l1. In architecture, a principal brace is one immediately
beneath the chief rafters, assisting to support the roof. 2. Principal
rafters—these are larger than the others, being main timbers.

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS.—The W. M., 8. W., and J. W., in Craft Masonry,
are thus called; and as a triplicity runs through the whole of
Masonry, with scarcely any exception, these three are usually to
be found.

576

PRI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [pri

PrRINcIPAL SoJOURNER.—An officer in a Chapter of Royal Arch
Masons, representing the leader of a party of Jews who sojourned
in Babylon for a time, after the departure of Zerubbabel with the
majority of the people, to reconstruct the Temple. His duties
are similar to those of a Senior Deacon, and he introduces the
candidates according to system.

PRINCIPALS.—The three presiding officers in Royal Arch Masonry—
Zerubbabel, Haggai, and Joshua, or Jeshua—King, Prophet, and
Priest. No one is eligible to serve in the first Principal’s chair
unless he has previously served a year in the two others, although
absolute equality exists between these three officers. He must
also be a Past Master of a Craft Lodge, and have served the
offices of Scribe, Sojourner, or Assistant Sojourner. There is an
installing degree, as in Craft Lodges. In America, the first
Principal is the High Priest, and there are important differences
between the English Royal Arch and the American Order of
High Priesthood. Jewels—of Z, a crown; of H, an all-seeing
eye; and of J,a book; surrounded in each case by a nimbus, and
placed within an equilateral triangle.

Prior, GRAND. (See Grand Prior.)

Priors—1. The former designation of the superiors of the
tongues, nations, and provinces into which the Temple Order
was divided; they are now called Preceptors, or Grand Pre-
ceptors. 2. The Order of Malta was divided into twenty-six
Grand Priories, with a superior to each. The next grade com-
prehended Commanderies. 3. The second officer in a Council
of Kadosh, in the southern jurisdiction of the United States’
Supreme Council. 4. Third officer in the 8. C. of the A. and
A. R., in the southern jurisdiction. 5, An officer in the Order
of K. H.S., an appendant order of the Red Cross, also having a
Subprior.

Priory.—Jurisdiction of a Grand Prior in the Order of Malta, or
St John of Jerusalem.

PRISCILLIANISTS.—Followers of Priscillian, bishop of Avila, who
was a magician, held Gnostic ideas, and considered it lawful to
take false oaths on behalf of one’s own cause and interest.

Prison.—In 1782, a Lodge was held in the King’s Bench Prison,
in London, whereupon it was very properly declared illegal. It
is clear that such a proceeding was quite at variance with the
emphatically voluntary principles of the Fraternity.

PrIvATE ComMITTEE. (See Committee.)

PRIVILEGED QUESTIONS.—Precedential questions above others in
Masonry. These are—1. Those which have relation to rights and
privileges. 2. Motions for reconsideration. 3. Special orders of
the day.

20 577

PRO] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PRO

Pro GRAND Master.—When a Prince of the Blood Royal accepts
office as Grand Master, he has a right to nominate as a repre-
sentative anobleman of high rank. This practice was introduced
in 1782, on the election of the Duke of Cambridge. The present
Pro Grand Master is the universally beloved and respected Earl
of Carnarvon, whose qualities as aman and Mason have endeared
him to the Craft.

PROAULION (Greek, apo, and adAn, a hall).—In architecture, the same
as a vestibule.

PROBATION.—The time between the reception of one degree and
another. In English Masonry, this is a clear twenty-eight days,
but as the recipient is prompted throughout, the ceremonial
Masonry of England thus sticks to the letter, while the spirit is
wanting. In continental countries, the period of probation is ex-
tended toa year, and a careful study of the degree previously
received is at any rate regarded as necessary, particularly in
Germany. In the Rite of Perfection, the time of probation ex-
tended over six years and nine months; it is, however, doubtful
whether it ever was enforced.

PROBLEM, ForTY-SEVENTH. (See Forty-Seventh Proposition.)

Processions.— Warranted by usage, but not common. They have
been revived in recent times on the occasion of the meeting of
Provincial Grand Lodges, and when special foundation stones
have been laid ; they are permissible only by dispensation.

ProcHARISTERIAA—A solemn sacrifice made to Athené or Minerva,
by the magistrates of Athens, at the approach of spring.

Prociamation.—A W.M. is proclaimed in ancient form on his
installation by the installing officer, as well in private Lodges as
in Grand Lodge.

PROCLAMATION OF Cyrus.—The opening of the second part of the
American Royal Arch Degree.

PROCLINIATA.—A sect, in the fourth century, who denied the incar-
nation of Jesus Christ, the doctrine of the resurrection of the
body, and any general judgment.

Procius.—The great commentator of Plato, who was surnamed
Diadochus. His works are chiefly mystical, and consist of
hymns to the Sun, to the Muses, and to Venus. He died a.D.
485 at Athens, aged seventy-five. The best translation of Pro-
clus is that of Thomas Taylor of Norwich, a modern mystic, who
adopted the pagan faith as being the only veritable faith, and
actually sacrificed doves to Venus, a goat to Bacchus, and, if his
credit had been sufficiently good at the butcher’s, he designed to
have immolated a bull to Jupiter; but the interposition of his land-
lady prevented the consummation of this design not “devoutly
to be wished.”

578

PRO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PRO

Propicgat CONVERTED, THE.—68°, 8th Series of the Metropolitan
Chapter of France.

Propomus.—In architecture, the portico anterior to the cell of a
temple.

ProraNne.—In Continental Masonry, one not a Mason—one ignor-
ant of its sacred rites. In the hymn of Orpheus we find éeyZowas
og @kuss tors Odpag & Ear Ocode BeByrcrs—“ To those to whom it is
lawful I speak, but let the doors be closed against the profane.”
There is a reprehensible practice adopted at some Lodges of
drinking.a toast to the laymen of the Lodge, in the sense of not
being office-bearers ; it is impossible fora brother to be a layman,
because he has received initiation, and thenceforward ranks as a
brother.

ProGREss, ORDER OF ETERNAL.—A secret beneficial society, founded
at Philadelphia, America, about 1867, of an androgynous char-
acter. It, like many other modern orders emanating from that
country, enjoins temperance and mutual visitation in sickness,
and also furnishes the ordinary advantages of a benefit society.
The meeting-places are called Sanctuaries. The officers are
called Masters of Light, Hope, and Innocence, and there are also
Mistresses of corresponding rank, with Master and Mistress of
Ceremonies, Secretary, Assistant Secretary, Treasurer, and
Orator of Innocence, Hope, and Light; Musical Superintendent,
and Guardians of Inner and Outer Veil. The emblem is the
rising sun, rising from clouds, within a circle of immortelles in
gold, bearing the letters O. E. P.; disk silver, and sun gold, and
above it, on an arch, the word Progression.

PROGRESSIVE Masonry.—In one sense a misnomer, in another
justly to be applied. But it is certainly doubtful whether it is
to be called a progress in Masonry merely to invent a number
of new degrees for the benefit of the various persons who trade
in decorations. It was this system of decoration which brought
real Freemasonry into contempt amongst the better classes at
the end of the last century ; and there seems a danger of its per-
forming the same function at the present time. But, in con-
sidering Progressive Masonry, it may be interesting to compare
the Masonry of now with the Masonry of then. If the time
chosen be about exactly a century ago, we find pretensions of
all kinds then advanced, as they are advanced now, to give a
garish light of the Will-o’-the-wisp sort, and then die out. Al-
ready within this book it has continually been recorded, “ Order
so-and-so, founded so-and-so, now extinct.” Now there is always
a reason for the extinction of an order, chiefly the want of truth-
fulness on the part of those who bring it forward for public
favour. Next is the idea that orders can be resuscitated—a

579

PRO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PRO

notion as vain as the other; for, if the true spirit of the inten-
tion of the founder, as in the case of the Order of Jesuits, be
wanting, all the rest is grimace and farce. This is said in order
to clearly set before the Fraternity the necessity of enlarging the
boundaries of Masonry without removing the landmarks. If
Masonry is to degenerate into a mere ceremonial mutual charity
club, the sooner such a hypocritical monster is done away with
the better; but it depends upon the good sense of the Brethren
whether this is to happen. It is certain that the solemn obligation
of the Fraternity is, in many instances, now regarded as a mere
light promise, and broken whenever civil interests conflict with
Masonic probity. Some men go into Masonry because it is
fashionable; because itis their interest ; because 1t amuses them ;
because they meet people in a Lodge who ignore them in the
street. How few of these ever even see that there is a Masonry of
the heart superior to the mere ritual ? Progressive Masonry in this
sense is merely retrogressive. It is also curious that these carpet
Masons never signalise themselves otherwise than at the dinner
table. They are able to propose toasts; but they aid in the de-
velopment of no science; they promote no education; they
evince no interest in the measures necessary for the promotion
of health and well-being in the community at large. It is said
they cultivate the heart; if so, the climate must be arid and the
soil strong. Of course, in the elevation of such a temple now
depicted there can be little to invite; hence Masonry, instead of
being progressive, remains stationary as a rule. But its true
disciples remain actively employed, promoting every good work
within their power. As to the literary side of Masonry, there
has been much book-making, but little culture.

PROMETHEIA.—A festival held at Athens in honour of Prometheus,
in which a torch race was run, from the belief that Prometheus
stole fire from heaven, and hence was called the torch-bearer.
The legend of Prometheus formed a part of the ancient mysteries.

PrRomIseE.—The promise of a candidate is sacred, being voluntary
and spontaneous. It is well known as a fact, to even the oppo-
nents of Masonry, that there is nothing in the Masonic oath
likely to render a man a worse father, husband, son, citizen, or
friend, It exists in truth, and requires no confutation.

Promotion. (See Preferment.)

Proors.—It is desirable that a Mason should be prepared on proof
with evidence personal and documentary. Being a Mason only
in name is a reflection on the institution. Study and practice
can alone bring about this desirable result, viz., that a Brother,
as is fitting, should be received with welcome, and parted from
ae regret. Not only is proficiency properly demanded, which

500

PRO] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PRO

any rogue might master, but sound moral conduct is likewise re-
quired at the hands of any one desiring to enter a Lodge.

PROPADEUTICS.—The preliminary information necessary for thestudy
of a science. It would be well if a society were established for
the instruction of candidates,

PROPAGANDA, SOCIETY OF THE.—Established by Pope Gregory XV.
in 1622, for diffusing a knowledge of Roman Catholic Chris-
tianity. It has a committee of cardinals and special agents, and
meets at frequent intervals. The main services of this society
have been to literature, in which department it deserves the
thanks of every enlightened man.

Property oF a LopGr—It is vested in the Master for the time
being, in the same manner that the warrant is vested. Malversa-
tion is impossible, as the other officials of the Lodge are neces-
sarily acquainted with all documents and memorials. The best
property of a Lodge is its good character. In the event of a
Lodge breaking up from want of members, or any other cause, the
charter or warrant reverts to the Grand Lodge by which it was
issued.

PROPHET.—Haggai, in the American Royal Arch System, is called
the scribe, but in the English system is the prophet and second
principal in a Chapter.

PRopYLZUM.—Any court or vestibule before a building is thus
termed in architecture, particularly before the main entrance.
Also called Propylon.

ProscriPTion (German, Verbannung).—The equivalent for expulsion
or deprivation of all Masonic rights and privileges.

PROSELYTE OF JERUSALEM.—68° of the Metropolitan Chapter, of
France. ©. 5S. D.

PxostTYLe.—In architecture, a portico in which the columns stand
in advance of the building to which they appertain.

Protector oF INNocence.—A degree to be found in the Collection
of Fustier, and also in that of Viany. C.S. D.

PROTHYkUM.—A portal or porch.

Protocot.—In Germany, the rough draught of any instrument or
document, such as the Minutes of a Lodge.

PRoTOMARTYR.—The first witness whose blood is shed in support
of any cause.

Protopore.—the office of imperial confessor or chief pope, belong-
ing to the holy directing synod—the ultimate Court of the Greek
Church in Russia.

PrototyPe.—The Tabernacle and the Temple may be regarded as
prototypes of the modern Lodge.

PROVINCIAL GRAND Lopcr.—A Provincial Grand Lodge is composed
of the various Lodges in each county or Masonic cece of

581

PRO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Psa

England, having a Provincial Grand Master as its president, who
is appointed by patent of the Grand Master. This appointment
is usually held for life, although it may be resigned, or the Prov.
G. M. may be removed, when the Provincial Grand Lodge ipso
Jacto ceases to exist, unless the Grand Registrar keeps it alive
by taking it under his charge, as was the case with Oxfordshire,
until the appointment of H. R. H. Prince Leopold. In Scotland,
the commission of a Prov. G. M. emanates from the Grand
Lodge. The officers are similar to those in Grand Lodge.

PROVINCIAL MASTER OF THE Rep Cross.—6° of the Strict Ob-
servance.

Provost and JuDGE.—Seventh degree of the A. and A. Rite. The
legend of the degree is, that, after the death of Hiram, King
Solomon appointed seven Provosts and Judges to decide com-
plaints and disputes among the workmen, according to the prin-
ciples of impartiality and justice. The lodge-room represents
the middle chamber of the Temple—hangings red, with a sky-
blue canopy in the east. The lights are five in number, one in
each corner and one in the centre. The presiding officer repre-
sents Tito, Prince Harodim, the first Grand Warden, and is called
Venerable Chief Provost and Judge. Apron white, edged with
red ; in the middle is a pocket with red and white rosette. A
key is embroidered in gold on the flap. Sash crimson, worn from
right to left. Jewel appendant to the sash a golden key; on the
key is the letter A in a triangle on the ward. This degree was
the Irish Master of Ramsay.

Proxy INSTALLATION.—By the constitutions of 1721, it is provided
that if the newly-elected Grand Master be absent on the occa-
sion of the Festival, he may be proclaimed in proper form, while
the homage due to him is paid ad interim to the former Grand
Master. Proxy installations are very rare.

Proxy Master.—In the Scottish Grand Lodge, it is admissible for a
Lodge to elect as a representative any Master holding its diploma,
even if he be not a member of the Lodge. He has also the power
of nominating two Proxy Wardens, and they sit as representa-
tives, It is accompanied with great inconvenience, and is a
practice to be reprehended.

PrRuDENCE.—One of the four cardinal virtues, and recommended to
the attention of the Entered Apprentice on his initiation. The
exact words vary in different countries, but all inculcate the
same morality.

Prussia. (See Germany.)

PrussIAN KNIGHT. (See Noachite, or Prussian Knight.)

PsaTeRIANS.—A sect of Arians, who maintained at the Council of
Antioch, a.D. 360, that the Son was dissimilar to the Father in

582

PSE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PuL

will; that He was made out of nothing; and that, in God, crea-
tion and generation were synonymous terms.

PSEUDOPERIPTERAL—In architecture, this term was applied to
temples in which the columns were embedded in the walls, and
where there was no portico, except to the front facade.

PSEUDOTHYRON.—A false door.

PreRoMA.—Sometimes called ambulatio, the space between the wall
of the cell of a temple and the cotumns of the peristyle.

PTOLEMAITES.—A sect of Gnostics, who asserted that the Mosaic
law partly came from God, partly from Moses, and partly from
tradition.

Pusiic CEREMONIES.—The usual ceremonies (or work) are con-
ducted in strict privacy, and can only be performed in the
presence of the members of the Fraternity. The public cere-
monies are funerals, the laying of corner stones, and matters of
an architectural nature.

PusuicaTions, Masonic. (See Masonic Literature.)

PucciaANITE—A follower of Puccius, whose doctrine was that
through the merits of the atonement of Christ all men might be
saved by natural religion alone, and without any faith or know-
ledge of His existence.

PuGcGinc.—A coarse mortar laid upon the boarding between the
joists, to prevent sound being conveyed from one apartment to
another.

ec a title of the presiding officer in several of the high

egrees.

PurssanT IntsH Mastrer.—8° in Ramsay’s Irish Colleges.

PuLiarius.—The Roman augur, who drew inferences as to future
events from the sacred chickens.

Putten, WiLL1AM HypE—One of the most accomplished Masons
of the present day, and one who, in many ways, has done good
service to the Craft at large. In particular, his impressive mode
of rendering the various ceremonies is excellence itself; and it is
no ordinary pleasure to listen to his dignified language, and to
observe the care, facility, and exactness with which every detail
is performed. No fear of a “hitch” when Brother Pullen is at
work.

Poreir (Latin, pulpitum, a stage or scaffold)—A place in which
priests stand when they deliver their ideas on religion. Derived
from the area in which the actors played their part in the Roman
theatre—it was lower than the scena, and higher than the
orchestra,

PULSANTI OPERIETUR (Latin, Jo him who knocks it shall be opened).
—Sometimes found over the doors of Masonic Lodges.

PuLVERATICUM—In Roman times, a fee thus called was paid to

583

PUN] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [PYR

surveyors in consideration of the trouble, sweat, and dust incurred
by them in the execution of their office.

PuNIsHMENTS, Masonic.—-These consist of—1. Censure; 2. Repri-
mand; 3. Exclusion; 4. Suspension, definite or indefinite ; and
5, Expulsion.

PurcuasE.—The British Museum MS. published by Cooke (line
630) says that the son of Athelstan “purchased a free patent of
the Kyng that they (the Masons) shulde make a sembly.” Pur-
chase meant in this case “procure,” as may be said in lifting
aheavy weight that a good purchase has been obtained. The
thief’s booty was called his purchase, not because he paid
anything for it. Purchase in a commercial sense does not imply
payment; and the word is a singular instance of the antiquity of
the meaning of a dissyllable,

PurtFicaTIon. (See Lustration.)

PuriricaTory, KNicHT OF THE—6° of the Oriental Rite, according
to Fustier,

Purity, BROTHERS or —An association of philosophers of Arab
origin, founded at Bosra in the tenth century. Their principles
seem to have been analogous to those of the Essenes. They
studied and wrote much, and their writings were afterwards
studied by the learned Spanish Jews. Having peculiar forms of
initiation, they came to be regarded as a kind of Freemasons, a
term specially applied to them by Steinschneider.

PurpLe.—tThe appropriate colours of the Mark, Past, and Most Ex-
cellent Masters, being compounded of blue, significant of Craft
Masonry, and red, the colour of the Royal Arch. In the Grand
Lodge of England, Grand Officers and Provincial Grand Officers
wear purple collars and aprons; hence the term of Purple Breth-
ren sometimes applied to them. Certain Lodges, for the reason
of a similar distinction, are called Purple Lodges.

Purrau, THE—A society of Sussu Negroes, similar to the Vehm-
gericht of Westphalia.

Pursvivant. (See Grand Officers.)

PutLoc.—A cross piece of timber, extending from the standards of
a scaffold to the wall of the building, resting at one end on
the ledges, and supporting the planks on which the workmen
stand. Putlog holes are small holes left in the walls for the in-
sertion of the ends of the putlogs.

PycnostYLE—A range of pillars, in ancient architecture, standing
very close together, a diameter and a half only being allowed as
an interval.

PyLorus. — A gatekeeper, from the Greek, riAy, a gate, and
ovpos, a watcher,

salar SAGE OF THE—350° R. M.

5°4

PYR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [pyT

Pyrron, JEAN Baptiste PIERRE JULIEN.—A French Mason of great
distinction, who died in September, 1821. He published a curi-
ous work in 1814, on the “ History of the Ancient and Accepted
Rite.” He was also one of the founders of the Grand Orient, and he
accepted from the Count de Grasse-Tilly the thirty-third degree of
the Ancient and Accepted Rite, which appears to have then been
attracting notice; the eight degrees, supplementary to the Em-
perors of the East and West, having been by that time intro-
duced. He was struck out of the list of the Grand Orient on
account of his adherence to the A. and A. Rite, in 1805, but
remained Secretary of the Supreme Council till his death. He
made a very valuable collection of degrees, frequently cited in
this book.

PyrRHONIsM.—The doctrine of scepticism first taught by Pyrrho.

PytTHacoras.—A celebrated Greek philosopher, born about 586 B.c.,
at Samos. He is known to have travelled all over the ancient
world, and from the various philosophies he encountered, and
the mysteries into which he was initiated, he formed a school of
his own. It is evident that he must have visited Hindustan,
Egypt, Chaldea,and Asia Minor. It is, in fact, doubtful whether
we now have his real name, for the word Pythagoras, if Indian-
ized, proves to be Buddha’s gooroos, or Buddha's spiritual teacher,
and hence might have been an official epithet instead of a per-
sonal name. We find a similar case in Plato, whose real name was
Aristocles, the former name being given to him on account of the
broadness of his brow. Pythagoras settled himself at Crotona, in
Magna Grecia, where he founded a college or university, to which
students and disciples resorted in great numbers from all parts
of the civilized world. One of his principal doctrines was that
of the metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls; a doctrine
which has at all times found adherents, and at least has the
merit of explaining many appearances in society in a summary
way, without resorting to the subtle and generally unintelligible
systems of the metaphysicians—(see Gilgul). In very recent
times, this doctrine has been revived and expounded by men of
fair abilities and education, especially by M. Rivail of Paris, who
renamed himself Allan Kardec, and wrote several books on the
doctrine of Spiritism, in which this continual restoration of souls
is regarded as a cardinal fact. Perhaps the belief has arisen
from the natural incapacity of the human mind to grasp the
infinite. In the time of Pythagoras, the world, material and
moral, was regarded as a completed whole—not as a progressingly
created universe, in which the activity of the Creator was being
continually exhibited; and, if we may judge by the superior
instruments of science at our command, it is difficult - stop

5°5

PYT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [pyT

anywhere. The higher powers of the microscope reveal to us
universes as complete in their particulars as those exhibited by
the higher powers of the telescope. New forms of life are con-
tinually starting into being, and the necessity for some faith, or
form of religion, becomes obvious to the thoughtful mind, which
would be driven to insanity if permitted to grasp the whole
problem. No doubt that Pythagoras, who was persecuted like
other reformers and philosophers—Anaxagoras and Sucrates, for
instance—felt the awful problem of the universe, and made him-
self enemies in the interest of truth. Appalled by the amazing
intricacy of reconciling good and evil, he called himself only a
seeker after truth. His school was invaded, and himself com-
pelled to fly from Crotona. From the peculiar customs of -the
time, the Locrians would not receive him, and he died at last at
Metapontum, B.c. 506, of starvation, having taken refuge in the
temple of the Muses. He is said to have been a great geome-
trician, but this is open to some doubt; nowhere do we find at
the time he flourished that Hellenic art had attained rules of
proportion; and, as to music, this also is a question necessarily
sealed to usin modern days. The only specimens of Greek music
extant are given in Walsh’s Aristophanes, and they certainly
exhibit no features of harmony, as understood at the present day.
The system of Pythagoras, as unfolded in his method of tuition,
was not dissimilar to the silential schools of every age, and was
accompanied by a surrender of all property, and the most im-
plicit obedience. Thesimplest clothing was worn by the disciples
of this doctrine, and the strictest abstinence was enjoined, together
with a silence which was observed for the space of three years.
Pythagoras was also an infallible teacher, like the present occu-
pant of the Vatican, and no dog dared bark when his mouth was
opened. The college was divided into two'classes—the Exoterics
and the Esoterics ; and the latter alone formed the real members
of his order. The brethren resided in large houses or buildings,
with their wives and children. Their labours were daily appor-
tioned, and a settlement was made every night. The curriculum
comprehended a study of Homer and Hesiod, gymnastic and
athletic sports, and exercises worthy of manly skill. Their food
consisted mainly of bread, honey, and water; while, in exact con-
tradiction to the Barmecide in the Arabian tale, the tables were
covered with delicacies, of which no Pythagorean dare partake.
A backsliding novice was allowed to return to the world, but
the steadfast brethren then contemptuously erected a cenotaph to
his memory, and regarded him as morally and physically dead.
The degrees in this system were three—1. Mathematici, engaged
in ue study of the exact sciences. 2. Theoretici, engaged in the
5

PYT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Qua

study of theosophy, and probably magic. 3. Electi, consisting of
only a few favoured disciples, regarded by the master as worthy
of especial enlightenment. The school of Crotona, after being in
existence for thirty years, was dispersed by the conspiracy of
Kylo, an inhabitant of Crotona, who had been refused admission.
Some forty of the disciples of Pythagoras were burned to death
in the attack made on the house of Milo, where they were assem-
bled, and the master himself compelled to fly. The Masonic
interest in Pythagoras is founded upon the passage in the Leland
MS., where the following questions and answers occur :—Q.
“How comede ytt (Freemasonry) yn Engelonde?” A. “ Peter
Gower, a Grecian, journeyeded for kunnynge yn Egypte and in
Syria, and yn everyche londe whereat the Venetians hadde
plauntedde Maconrye, and wynnynge entraunce yn al Lodges of
Maconnes, he lerned muche, and retournedde and worked in
Grecia Magna wachsynge and becommynge a myghtye wysacre
and gratelyche renowned ; and here he framed a grate Lodge at
Groton, and maked many Maconnes, some whereoffe dyd jour-
neye yn Fraunce, and maked manye Maconnes, wherefromme, yn
process of tyme, the art passed yn Engelonde.” The symbols of
Pythagoras were numerous, and comprehended the general gist
of his doctrines. For a fuller exposition, we would refer to Dr
Oliver’s “Pythagorean Triangle,” 1875. The chief of these
figures were the Equilateral Triangle, the Square, the Tetractys,
the Cube, the Point within a Circle, the Triple Triangle, and the
Forty-seventh proposition of Euclid, of which Pythagoras was
the reputed inventor.

PYTHAGOREANS, SocieTy oF.—Established in Germany, and having
several degrees.

Q.

Q.—The seventeenth letter of the English alphabet. At what time
this letter had a special sign attached to it is uncertain. We
find it in the Latin alphabet, and it has an Indian analogue; the
nearest Greek letter is the disused Molic Qoppa.

QuapRa (Latin, a syware)—A square border round a basso relievo ;
the fillets of the Ionic base on the sides of the scotia; also the
plinth or lower member of the podium.

QUADREL— Artificial stone made of chalky earth in squares, taking
a long time to dry.

Quaprivium—A scholastic phrase adopted by the schoolmen of
the middle ages to signify the paths of learning, or the seven
liberal arts and sciences—viz., grammar, rhetoric, logic, arith-

587

Qua] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [QUE

metic, geometry, music, and astronomy; the three first were
called the trivium, and the latter the guadrivium.

Quakers. (See Affirmation.)

QUALIFICATIONS OF CANDIDATES.—These are, that the candidate
should, uninfluenced by friends, come of his own accord, and offer
himself without expectation of reward, but with a favourable
idea of the institution, and a resolution to conform to its usages.
The candidate is presupposed to be a man of virtuous carriage, be-
lieving in a God—the Almighty Creator of the Universe; of
mature age, but not a dotard; in possession of all his faculties;
no fool or idiot; able to read and write, and understand the
nature of an oath; and especially a free man, no slave, or son
of a slave. The Americans insist likewise upon no kind of im-
perfection of body.

QUARRELS.—Contention in Lodge is strictly against Masonic law,
nor are private matters to intervenein any way. However often
this has been asserted, it has been found impossible in practice
to avoid occasional disputes; and these, the W. M., by his autho-
rity, should try to terminate. Asa rule, however, it may be
safely said, that any difference of opinion between Brother Masons,
both inside and outside of the Lodge, is much more easily adjusted
than is the case in general society, there being ever present in
the Masonic mind a disposition to regard matters calmly and in
a dispassionate manner,

QuarRies.—The quarries whence the stones were taken for the
Temple were obviously at no great distance from the building itself.

QUARTERLY COMMUNICATION.—A meeting of this description for the
consideration of matters of importance to the Craft is held regu-
larly, at which the Grand Master, or some eminent Mason on his
behalf, presides. In ancient times, there seem to have been
triennial, and afterwards annual, meetings. It is not a custom
of general adoption, however.

QUARTERS.——In architecture, small vertical timbers lathed over to
separate apartments.

QUATERNION, (See Four.)

Quesec.—The Grand Lodge of Quebec dates from 1869, having
been formed by a secession of many of the Lodges of the Domin-
ion from the Grand Lodge of Canada, based upon a principle
adopted in American Masonic law, that the jurisdiction of any
Grand Lodge is conterminous with the geographical area of the
political state. This was violently opposed by the Grand Lodge
of Canada, as might be expected, but the American Grand Lodges
have nearly all recognised the validity of the transaction.

Questions or Henry VI.—This document, known as the Leland
Meninenpl has been contested. (See Leland Manuscript.)

5

QuE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (gut

QUESTIONS TO CANDIDATES.—It is desirable to print under this
head the following important questions invariably put to can-
didates, for they in themselves fully show the entirely volun-
tary nature of the Institution. Unless the candidate can unre-
servedly reply to these questions, he is not permitted by the
spirit and principles of the Institution to proceed any farther
in his candidature. @. 1. “Do you seriously declare, on your
honour, that, unbiassed by the improper solicitation of friends
against your own inclination, and uninfluenced by mercenary or
other unworthy motives, you freely and voluntarily offer yourself
as a candidate for the mysteries and privileges of Freemasonry?
A.1. Ido. @. 2. Do you likewise pledge yourself that you are
prompted to solicit those privileges from a favourable opinion
preconceived of the Institution, a general desire for knowledge,
and a sincere wish to render yourself more extensively ser-
viceable to your fellow-creatures? 4. 2. I do. @ 3. Do you
seriously declare, on your honour, that you will act and abide by
the ancient usages and established customs of the Order? 4. 3.
Ido.” The Americans sometimes add this question, but it is
not legal: @. 4. “Do you solemnly declare, upon your honour,
that you have never petitioned any other Lodge for initiation,
and been rejected? 4.4. I do.” The fourth question is the
only one requiring consideration in this place ; for, if a candidate
has been for some reason previously rejected, he has the power,
after a certain time—in some countries, in three months, and
in others, in six—of petitioning for admission again. It would
be hard, indeed, in such a universal institution as Masonry, that
a worthy man should be excluded from Masonry, when, perhaps,
secret influence has been brought to bear on the ballot, or when,
perhaps, some mistake has taken place as to circumstances,
identity, or knowledge. It would be well, however, if the moral
and general character of a candidate were strictly investigated in
all cases by a Committee of the Lodge to which he seeks admis-
sion. Many cases have occurred in which men of, to say the
least, indifferent character have received initiation, and, so long
as they maintained their payments, have heen treated with the
same consideration that should be extended to the most careful
student of the science. Hence,a strict guard should ever be
maintained as to admissions. It would be wrong to say that
many persons enter Masonry with a view to personal profit, and
it is to be regretted that no adequate assessment of motives
beyond this declaration of honour can be arrived at, although it
is creditable to the Fraternity that it is willing to trust the out-
side world sufficiently to ask no more.

QUIETISTs—A religious sect founded by one Molino, a Spanish

589

Qui] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RAB

ecclesiastic, whose principle was to maintain that religion con-
sisted in the internal state of rest or contemplation, similar to
the Indian nirwdna, with submission to the will of the Almighty.

QUINDECEMVIR.—A_ Roman priest in charge of the Sybilline books.

QUINTILLIANTS.—A sect following Quintillius, who administered the
Eucharist in the form of bread and cheese, and admitted women
as well as men to the highest offices of the priesthood.

Quixote, Don.—Several German pamphlets, of a more or less amus-
ing character, appeared in the last century, bearing such titles as
“ Don Quixote a Freemason ;’ “The Latest News of Don Quixote
in Freemasonry,” and similar squibs. It is usually supposed that
these fascicult were published by the Roman Catholics. They
are quite harmless, and, in part, ludicrous.

Quoin (Old French, coin, a corner).—In architecture, any external
angle, especially indicating the angular courses of stone raised
from the naked end of the wall at any corner of a building, and
therefore called rustic quoins.

QuoruM.—The old law used to be, three rule a Lodge, jive form a
Lodge, and seven are necessary to be present at any initiation,
not including the candidate. In Royal Arch Masonry, nine are
necessary to be present at a Chapter, and in a Preceptory or
Commandery of Knights Templar, eleven are requisite; but it is
not contrary to Masonic law to appoint special committees of
any uneven number, not less than three, for the settlement of
special business,

R.

2.—The eighteenth letter of the English alphabet, sometimes called
the canine letter, in consequence of its resembling a snarl. The
Hebrew equivalent for R as a name of God is nim, Rahum,
meaning clemency.

RaBsBanain (Hebrew, #2739, Master of the building).—A word used
in the twelfth degree of the A. and A. Rite; it is sometimes
faultily given as Rabacim.

RaBsi oR RaBBont (Hebrew, 452).—A teacher or master in ethi-
cal science ; also used to designate members of the prophetical
order. Gamaliel was esteemed one of these; but the title was
not until post-Christian times actually assumed. Christ was thus
addressed (John xx. 16). The title arose in the school of Hillel,
and was bestowed upon seven of the members for pre-eminent
learning. It is in use in the degree of Most Excellent Master,
but without a shadow of authority.

RaBELAIS, FRANGOIS.—A monk and physician, who wrote a mar-

59°

RAC] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Rac

vellous book. He was born, about 1483, at Chinon, a little town
in the district of the Loire. His father, Thomas Rabelais, was
an apothecary there. He served a boy apprenticeship, first at
Sevillé, afterwards at Angers and La Baumette, but does not seem
to have gained much advantage. He seems from early youth to
have been somewhat of an ungovernable nature. He entered
the order of Franciscans in the Lower Poictou—bveing especially
attached to the Convent of Fontenay-le-Comte ; when his mind
began to develope, he became a fine scholar in Greek and Latin,
and attempted to persuade others to join him in scholastic learn-
ing. He hada quick wit—a dangerous implement in those days—
and becoming disgusted, as many of his time were, with the
ignorance of the Cordeliers, he, at the instance of friends, left
them altogether. It is related, on the authority of a monk,
that he was imprisoned between four walls on bread and water
in his convent, and redeemed from it by the chief judge, Andrew
Tiraqueau, of the bailiwick of Fontenay-le-Comte. Ononeoccasion
Rabelais himself, for fun, personated St Francis, and was taken
for the saint, but it proved his downfall in that order. He sub-
sequently became a Benedictine, but he could not remain in
orders, so at the University of Montpellier he became a phy-
sician. He died Curé of Meudon, near Paris. His wonderful and
mystical book, “Gargantua and Pantagruel,” has been the admira-
tion of centuries ; the fertility of invention contained in it having
won him a niche in the temple of fame. He was an uncom-
promising opponent of abuses in his works, and an order was
afterwards founded, called the Order of the Sacred Bottle, to
maintain the doctrines his work taught. It is another proof of
the necessity of some peaceable order that sucha book should be
written. He was the contemporary of Erasmus and Thomas
Murner, the author of “ Zulenspiegel.” Many of his notions
were purely Masonic; but whether he knew anything of Masonry
it is difficult to say. Many passages, however, prove that he
was acquainted with the Hermetic branch of the subject. The
description of the Abbey of Theleme, where every one was to
do just as he pleased, together with its government, may take its
place besides More’s “ Utopia,” Plato’s “ Republic,” and Bacon’s
“ Atlantis.” “Rabelais” is a forbidden book to many on account of
its containing much that a thin-skinned modern century does
not like to see expressed in writing, but has no scruple, as daily
experience shows, to put in practice.

Raca.—The Syriac term for worthless, specially denounced in the
New Testament. It also signifies beggarly or despicable, from
the Chaldee, Xp™.

Racovians.—The Unitarians of Racow, in Poland, where Jacobus

59!

RAG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RAK

& Sienna erected a public college for the education of youth, in
the year 1600.

Racon, J. M—A distinguished French Masonic author, and one
who laboured hard to distinguish between the actual history of
various Masonic societies and that vague traditional history
which to so great an extent refutes itself. He was born at
Bruges, in Belgium, about 1789, and was initiated in the Lodge
Réunion des Amis du Nord, at Bruges, in 1803, and afterwards
assisted in the foundation of the Lodge and Chapter of Vraies
Amis, in the same city. On his removal to Paris, he founded, in
1805, the Lodge of Les Trinosophes, and in that Lodge he de-
livered a remarkable series of lectures, in 1818, on ancient and
modern initiation, afterwards repeated in 1841, and finally pub-
lished. Ragon was, in 1818 and 1819, editor-in-chief of “Hermes
ou Archives Maconniques,” and in August, 1853, he published a
remarkable book entitled “ Orthodoxie Maconnique,” and, in 1861,
he followed up this publication by “Twileur Général de la Franc-
Maconnerie, ow Manuel de? Inité.” He had projected several other
important works, and partly completed them, when he died at
Paris, in 1866. His MS. remains are in the hands of the Grand
Orient. Ragon supported the idea that Elias Ashmole was the
main founder of Freemasonry in its present form.

Racorzxy, Cart Aucust.—A German who, in 1792, published a
work, “ Ueber Maurerische Frethett fiir eingewethte und unein-
geweihte.”—“Masonic Liberty for the Initiated and Unitiated;”
and in 1793, “ Der Fret Denker in der Maureret, oder freimiithige
Briefe ther wichtige Gegenstinde in der Fret-Maureret.”—“The
Freethinker in Masonry; or, Candid Letters on important sub-
jects in Masonry.” He died the 5th January, 1823.

RAGUEL (Hebrew, 8°), Friend of God).—A name given by Esau
to his son in testimony of his gratitude for his mercies. Used
in the Order of Ishmael.

RAINBOW, THE MOST ANCIENT ORDER OF THE—A Society held in
Moorfields, in 1760. ;

Rarns, It.—An old slang Masonic phrase to signify that there were
uninitiated present. When a woman was seen, it was also cus-
tomary among French Masons to say, J/ netge—it snows.

Ratsep—An expression used in reference to the ceremony of
Master Mason, to which degree a fellowcraft is technically said
to be raised. It has a double meaning, referring to the cere-
mony, and also to the mystical import of that ceremony.

Raisinc Piate.—In architecture, the longitudinal timber on which
the roof stands.

RaIsING SHEET.—Used in the third degree of Craft. Masonry.

Raxsui.—The Arabic name for Simorgh. (See Stmorgh.)

592

RAM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RAM

RamA.—The Indian Bacchus or Dionysos.

Ramist.—The followers of Pierre Ramé, a professor of philosophy
and rhetoric at Paris, who perished in the murders of St
Bartholomew. He was opposed to the prevailing Aristotelian
notions of the day, and probably rendered more services to
science than many scientists of the present day.

Ramsay, ANDREW MicHAEL.—Usually known as the Chevalier
Ramsay. Born at Ayr, in Scotland, 9th June, 1668, his father
being a baker of considerable wealth in that town. He received
an admirable education at the schools of his native burgh, and
was afterwards sent to the University of Edinburgh, of which he
proved an ornament. On entering life, he became tutor to the
two sons of the-Earl of Wemyss. He was born a Protestant, but,
after a time, became unsettled in his religious opinions, and
repairing to Leyden, in Holland, became a disciple of a famous
mystical preacher, Pierre Poiret, and grounded himself in the
principles of theosophy, as understood in those days. In 1710,
he visited the amiable and learned Fénélon, archbishop of
Cambray, and by the influence of this prelate he was induced to
become a Roman Catholic, and was entrusted with the tuition of
the Duc de Chateau-Thierry and the Prince de Turenne. By the
powerful aid of these nobles, he was made a-Knight of the Order
of St Lazarus, whence his title of Chevalier. The elder preten-
der James Stuart (titularly James. III. of England and VIIL of
Scotland), made him preceptor of his sons, Prince Charles
Edward and Prince Henry, after Cardinal York (titularly Henry
IX. of England), and for this purpose he repaired to Rome, in
1724. In 1728, he returned to England, and became an inmate
of the family of the Duke of Argyle. In 1727, he published
“The Travels of Cyrus,” and probably began his work, “The
Principles of Natural and Revealed Religion,” which was not
published until after his death. His reputation was at this time
sufficiently great to induce the University of Oxford to confer on
him the degree of Doctor of Laws. He finally returned to France,
and, after many years spent in literary pursuits at Pontoise, he
died at St Germain-de-Laye, the 6th May, 1743, aged fifty-six. His
Masonic career was a very remarkable one; nor are the results
of his opinions without their Masonic value at the present time,
especially in relation to the high degrees. He was by nature an
aristocrat, and therefore declined to entertain the ordinary views
then current as to the origin of the Fraternity, and insisted upon
deriving Masonry from the Crusaders; and this origin he sus-
tained in various orations with special ability, but as it would
seem at the present time with no permanent results, particularly
as he accompanied his advocacy of this theory with no historical

2P 593

RAM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RAW

evidence. Huis connection with the House of Stuart rendered
him an enthusiast in their cause, and his various Masonic labours
have left very many traces on the High Grade Masonic System.
He is also generally credited with the invention, or at least the
further promulgation, of the degree of Holy Royal Arch. This is
in part correct, for that special degree, known as the Royal Arch
of Enoch, was incorporated into the system of the Emperors of
the East and West, organized in 1754, and reappears in the
Ancient and Accepted Rite, and Ancient and Primitive Rite.
The name of the completing degree was at one time “Grand
Scottish Knight of the Sacred Vault of James VI.” Ramsay
was evidently a man of deep learning, and one who was unwearied
in spreading his theories wherever practicable, although it would
seem that he often lacked judgment. In personal conduct his
life was blameless, and his heart truly charitable towards others.

RAMSAY'S RirE—Attempted to be introduced by the Chevalier
Ramsay in England, either in the years 1728 or 1730, and founded
on the Templar theory. There were six degrees—1, 2, 3. The
Symbolical Degrees. 4. Scottish Master. 5. Novice. 6. Knight
of the Temple. It was repudiated by the Grand Lodge of Eng-
land, but was received by the French, and formed the substratum
upon which the High Degrees were constructed through the
Council of Emperors of the East and West.

Ranatites.—A sect among the Jews who worshipped frogs, in con-
sequence of their belief that God sent them to punish Pharaoh.

Ranvuka, KNIGHT oF THE—69° Rite of Mzm.

Rarua—A mystical leader in the seventeenth century, not to be
confounded with Rapp, the communist leader, who founded a
colony in the south-western states of the Union in the early
part of the nineteenth century.

RAPHALL—An officer in a Rose Croix Chapter.

Raskouniks.—The Puritans of the Orthodox Greek Church in Russia.

Ratispon.—Masonically famous, as being the Bavarian city in
which two Masonic conventions were held—the first in 1459,
couvoked by Jost Dotzinger, chief architect of Strasburg ca-
thedral; and the second in 1464, to ratify certain laws previously
enacted, and to settle differences under the Operative Grand
Lodge of Strasburg between the Masons of Strasburg, Cologne,
Vienna, and Berne.

Rawuinson Manuscript.—In 1855, Brother the Rev. John Samuel
Sidebotham, M.A., of New College, Oxford, published some curious
extracts from a collection made by Dr Richard Rawlinson, and de-
posited in the Bodleian Library. We find mentioned here various
Lodges held at the Sash and Cocoa Tree, Moorfields (37) ; St Paul’s
Head, Ludgate Street (40); Rose Tavern, Cheapside ; and Oxford

594

REB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | REC

Arms, Moorgate Street (94). The materials extend from 1724
to 1740. A copy of the old Constitutions, supposed by Brother
W. J. Hughan to be as old as 1700, occurs amongst them; but the
original, whence Brother Dr Rawlinson obtained them, has never
been found. Rawlinson was born, about 1690, in London, and
died 6th April, 1755, He was a nonjuring bishop of the Church
of England, consecrated 25th March, 1728, It is much to be
regretted that a careful examination of these papers has not been
made, and a proper account of the contents given to the world.

REBEKAH, DEGREE OF.—A female degree, established in America,
in 1851, by the Independent Order of Oddfellows, for the use
of the wives of members of that order.

RECEIVED AND ACKNOWLEDGED.—A term used in America on initia-
tion into the Sixth or Most Excellent Master’s degree. Reception
is also applied in the case of an initiation. The person thus
admitted is called the recipient, or in French, le recipiendaire.

RecHaBirEs.—An Order instituted by Jonadab, son of Rechab. The
principles of the society caused them to abstain from building
houses, planting vines, and recommended them to dwell in
tents. (Jeremiah xxxv. 6.)

Recoenition, Moprs or.—The tests by which brethren recognise
each other. Inthe main points—ze., in Symbolical Masonry—
all nations agree; but particular ceremonies and sub-ceremonies
have, especially in America and France, contrary to the frank
spirit of the Institution, been adopted; and although it may
appear uncharitable to say so, it has not been done without just
cause.

RECOMMENDATION.—It is usual for a candidate for initiation in an
English, Scottish, or Irish Lodge, to be proposed by one brother
having personal knowledge of him, and to be seconded by another
who may, or may not, know him, although it is highly desirable
that he should be acquainted with him—(see Ballot). In cases
of a petition for a dispensation for a new lodge, preparatory to
an application for a warrant, it is usual to obtain the recom-
mendation of one or more lodges to the prayer of the petition.
(See Dispensation.)

RECONCILIATION, LODGE or.—This lodge was constituted in London
on the 27th of December, 1813, when the two contending Lodges
of the Ancients and Moderns united into one Grand Lodge under
the Duke of Sussex—the Duke of Kent representing the
Ancients. Each of the two Grand Masters appointed nine
Master Masons to meet in some convenient place; and these
eighteen having severally opened a just and perfect lodge ina
separate apartment, it was agreed that they should mutually give
and receive the obligations of both Fraternities; and being thus

595

REC] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [REC

in possession of both forms of the ceremony, they should be em-
powered and directed to hold a lodge, under a warrant or dispensa-
tion, as a Lodge of Reconciliation. This lodge proceeded to visit
the existing lodges, and instructed them in the various forms, so
as to secure 2 uniformity of working; and when this had been
done, the functions of this temporary lodge were fulfilled, and
its existence expired.

RECONCILIATION, ORDER OF. (See Jshmael, Order of.)

RECONSIDERATION, Motion ror.—This can only be made in Grand
Lodge, Chapter, or Council, on the same day, or the day after the
adoption of the motion proposed to be reconsidered. In a private
lodge, it must be made at the same meeting. It cannot be
moved by any person who has voted in the minority, nor can
such motion be made when the matter has passed beyond the
control of the lodge. Such a motion is not debatable if the
question proposed to be considered is also not debatable. It
may be postponed, but a definite time must be appointed for
the affair; and if not then acted upon, it falls through and
canuot be renewed. To lay it on the table is equivalent to
rejection. On the adoption of a motion for reconsideration,
the original motion at once is revived, as if it were a new
motion never before considered. A reconsideration of the ballot
is an impossibility on the part of any member, but the W. M. or
presiding Officer may, for reasons satisfactory to himself, order
such a proceeding.

RecorDER.—In some bodies of Masonic importance, there is an
officer called by this title, whose duties correspoud to those of
a secretary. In Grand Lodges or other Councils, &c., his title
is Grand Recorder.

REcorpDs, OLD.—A name given to the various Manuscripts dis-
covered from time to time, and professing to give the early
history of the Craft; but their importance might be thought
much over-estimated. The following list may be useful to the
student :—1. Halliwell MS. 2. Book of the Fraternity of Stone
Masons. 3. Paris Regulations. 4. Strasburg Constitutions.
5. British Museum MS., published by Cooke. 6. Lansdowne MS.
7. Schaw MS, 8. St Clair Charters, 9. Eglinton MS. 10. York
MSS. (six in number.) 11. Grand Lodge MS. 12. Sloane MSS.
(two in number.) 13, Aitcheson Haven MS. 14. Kilwinning MS.
15. Harleian MS. 16. Hope MS. 17. Alnwick MS. 18.
Papworth MS, 19. Roberts MS. 20. Edward III. MS. 21.
St Alban’s Regulations. 22. Anderson MS. 23. Stone MSS.
24, Constitutions of Strasburg. 25. Constitutions of Torgau.
26. Dowland MS. 27. Wilson MS. 28. Spencer MS. 29.
Cole MS. 30. Plot MS. 31. Rawlinson MS. 32. Woodford

596

REC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RED

MS. 33. Krause MS. 34. Antiquity MS. 35. Leland MS.,
sometimes called the Locke MS. 36. Charter of Cologne. It
is not improbable that many other MSS. exist, and in process of
time will be found; but it is impossible to be too much on one’s
guard in their consideration, as the art of forgery has become
greatly developed in modern times, and many things have been
passed off as original in recent times, utterly undeserving of
notice.

RectiricaTion.— Used in Germany. (See Heal.)

REcTIFIED RiTE—A modification of the Templar rite, adopted in
1782 by the Lodges of Strict Observance, and afterwards by
some of the Ecossais Directories, the last of which was still at
work in 1844, at Zurich; but this may now be considered as
extinct, as that directory has been united with the National
Grand Lodge of Berne, and formed itself into a new power,
styled Grand Lodge of Alpina, sitting alternately at Berne and
Zurich, and working the modern English rite. (See Switzerland.)

RectTiFIgED Rose Croix, Rite or. (See Schroeder, Friedrich Joseph
Wilhelm.)

Recusant.—In Masonic law, one who sets at defiance and disobeys
an edict of Grand Lodge; punishable by arrest of Charter in the
case of a Corporate Lodge, and by the suspension or expulsion
of any individual offender.

Rep.—The colour appropriated, together with its shades of scarlet
and crimson, to Royal Arch Masonry. It is the colour of ardour
and zeal, and symbolically represents fire, as referring to the re-
generation and purification of souls, as also the reconstruction of
the temple. The Hebrews used red as one of the colours of the
veils of the tabernacle, and in many other ways.

Rep BrotHer.—l1. Sixth and last degree of the Swedenborgian
System. 2. 6° of the Primitive and Original Rite of Symbolic
Phremasonry.

Rep Cross, BRETHREN OF THE—A name for the members of the
Enlightened Chapter in the Swedish Rite.

Rep Cross Kwnicut.—In the middle ages, at the time of the
Crusades, a red cross on the shoulder of a knight was a mark of
his being devoted to the recovery of the Holy Sepulchre by force
of arms.

Rep Cross Lecenp.—The embassy of Zerubbabel, to the court of
Darius, constitutes the basis of the Red Cross degree.

Rep Cross SworD oF Basyton.—A degree worked in the Royal
Arch Chapters of Scotland and in parts of England, similar to
the degree of Knight of the Red Cross in the United States,

Rep Cross or Basyton. (See Babylonish Pass.)

RED Cross OF RoME AND CONSTANTINE—A degree at present

597

RED | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [REG

worked under its own constitution, together with the appendant
Orders of St John the Evangelist and the Knight of the Holy
Sepulchre, in Great Britain, Ireland, the United States, and the
Colonies. According to Bro. R. Wentworth Little, it has been
traced back to the year 1780, when it was given by Bro. Charles
Shirreff. It was reorganized by Bro. Waller Rodwell Wright in
1804, by whom the existing ritual, which is very elaborate, was
formed. The legend of the Order refers to the miraculous ap-
pearance of a Cross to that disreputable murderer Constantine,
and was formed soon after the battle of Saxa Rubra, October 28,
312 A.D. The presiding Officer is a Sovereign, and the second
Officer is the Viceroy Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia. It now
enjoys considerable favour in the Masonic world.

Rep EAGLE OF BAIREUTH. (See Sincerity, Order of.)

Rep Masonry (see Royal Arch,)—This term is sometimes applied
to Royal Arch Masonry where the colour red is prevalent, to
distinguish it from Blue or Symbolical Masonry.

REDEMPTIONISTS, ORDER OF.—Founded at Naples by Liguori in 1732.
They were bound by monastic vows, and devoted themselves to
the education of youth and the spread of Roman Catholicism.
Among them were to be found many earnest, noble, and pious
men, of great learning. They styled themselves members of the
Order of the Holy Redeemer.

REFLECTION, CHAMBER OF. (See Chamber of Reflection.)

Re¥FoRMED Ritz.—A reformation of the Rite of Strict Observance,
established in 1754, extruding the Templar element. This
reformation took place in 1782, at a convention held at Wil-
helmsbad, under the presidency of Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick,
and was first known as the Order of Beneficent Knights of the
Holy City. The Marquis of St Martin’s rite was incorporated
with this (see Martinism.) Bro. Glayre of Lausanne, minister
of King Stanislaus, carried the system into Poland, in 1784, and
it was adopted by the Grand Orient there. It may be considered
to be extinct. The degrees were—1, 2, 3. Symbolical Degrees.
4. Scottish Master. 5. Knight of the Holy City, in three points—
a. Novice; b. Professed Brother; c. Knight.

REFRESHMENT.— A lodge in a state of temporary inactivity or abey-
ance, but with all its powers intact, not closed down, and which,
at the Master’s call, may be summoned to continue its work.
The Junior Warden is at such a time the principal officer of a
lodge, and as such in control, and his column is therefore erected,
while that of the Senior Warden is laid down. It is a brief
ceremony. (See Called or Calling off, and Called or Calling on.)

ReGauia.—The principal jewels of a lodge are thus called, the cloth-
ing poeming no part of the regalia, as has sometimes been assumed.

59

REG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [REG

REGENERATED FREEMASONS, ORDER OF.—TIustituted in Canada about
1787, having a Masonic character.

REGENERATION. —In the Eleusinian mysteries, the last day when
initiation was complete was called the day of regeneration.

REGENERATION, ORDER OF UNIVERSAL.—A Swiss “society founded
between 1815 and 1820. Its aims were republican, and a Euro-
pean revolution was contemplated.

ReGEenT.—Fourth degree of the lesser mysteries of the Illuminati.

REGENT, OR ILLUMINATED PRINCE.—2° of the lesser mysteries of the
Tluminati of Bavaria.

REGHELLINI, Marco p1—A learned Mason, born in the island of
Scio about 1780, of Venetian parents, He was a mathematician
and chemist. He also applied himself to theosophy, and in
1834 published a book entitled “ Hxamen du Mosaisme et du
Christianisme,’ containing very bold opinions. He was likewise
an accomplished Masonic archeologist, and wrote a book on
the Spirit of Masonry, and a second work, “ La Magonnerie con-
siderée comme le resultat des Religions Egyptiénne, Juive et Chré-
tiens,” in which he referred, as many do, the origin of the science
to the Egyptian priests. Between 1822 and 1829, he edited
the “ Annales Chronologiques, Litteraires et Historiques de la
Magonnerie des Pays Bas.” There is much mystery about his
life; he was accused of being present in Vienna in 1848, but
this was not the case. He appears to have died in August, 1855,
in the House of Mendicity at Brussels.

REGIMENTAL LopcE. (See Military Lodge.)

Recister.—The List of Masons in good standing. It is sometimes,
in America, published with the Proceedings of the Grand Lodge
of the particular jurisdiction.

REGISTRAR, GRAND.—1. In England, a Grand Officer who has, in
conjunetion with the Grand ‘Secretary, charge of the seal; and
who, on very important occasions, sees to its being affixed to
special documents. 2. An officer in a Grand Consistory of the
Scottish Rite, answering to Grand Secretary.

REGISTRATION.—It is imperative that every Mason be registered in
the books of the Grand Lodge of England; and the W. M. of every
Lodge under that constitution is bound to see this done, as in
default of such registration the Brother not registered has no
claim at any subsequent time upon the charities, nor has he any
claim whatever unless he shall have been a contributing member
for at least two years, except as follows :—shipwreck, capture at
sea, loss by fire, or the fracture or dislocation of a limb; these
cases being fully attested and proved. Should a Lodge neglect,
from design or accident, to register such a member, on produc-
ing evidence that he has paid his dues, he is entitled to all the

599

REG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [REL

privileges of the Craft. The offending Lodge shall be reported
to the Board of General Purposes. An unregistered member,
like an unaffiliated member, has no rights, but his rights revive
on his affiliation.

RecGLet.—lIn architecture, a flat narrow moulding, separating the
parts and members of compartments or panels.

Recuta.—In architecture, a band below the tenia in the Doric
architrave.

Reuum.—Called by Ezra the Chancellor, probably a lieutenant-
governor in Judea, who, together with Shimshai the Scribe,
wrote to Artaxerxes in order to stop the building of the Second
Temple. His name occurs in some of the high degrees.

REINHOLD, Kart LEONHARD.—Born at Vienna, in Austria, in 1758,
and died in 1823. He was the associate and son-in-law of Wie-
land, and professor of philosophy at Kiel. He published several
metaphysical works in connection with the theories of Kant.
In 1788, he also published, under the name of Decius, at Leipzig,
a Masonic work on the Hebrew mysteries, in which he argued
that the principles of Masonry had been derived through Moses
from the Egyptian priests. He also delivered several addresses
of merit about 1809, and up to 1820, when a Lodge was reopened
at Kiel. He died in 1823.

Reins.—The reins of a vault, in architecture, are the sides or walls
sustaining the arch.

REINSTATION.—To reinstate is to restore a suspended Mason to his
former rights and privileges ; whether it can be really extended
to an expelled Mason is technically difficult to say: in any case,
it can only be effected by the suspending body, and upon proper
representations, with evidence. It may be remarked that many
Brethren, singular for their devotion to the legitimate objects of
the Craft, have been, like the scape-goat, thus thrust out, and
then, by a species of enchantment, they have been restored. It
would be needless to cite any special instance, for in one sense
it might seem only a natural corollary to some other Masonic
propositions.

REJECTION. (See Ballot.)

ReJoicinc.—Applicable to the first and third degrees; to the first,
because a brother is brought out from the valley of darkness into
light; to the third, because a brother is thereby impressively
reminded of life eternal, and the sacred happiness of freedom.
It is common to all secret societies, of whatever system.

RELAXED OBSERVANCE, CLERKS OF THE (see Lax Observance.\—
The originators of this degree were Baron von Cavin and Dr
Johann August von Starck (born at Schwerin, 29th October, 1741,
munis in 1763, and died 1816), who, in Vienna, in 1767,

ie

REL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [REP

asserted a peculiar possession of particular secrets. They arro-
gated to themselves the knowledge of the mysterious cavern where
the secret treasures of the Templars were concealed. There were
ten degrees. 1, 2,3. Symbolical Masonry. 4. African Brother.
5. Knight of St Andrew. 6. Knight of the Eagle or Master
Elect. 7. Scottish Master. 8. Sovereign Magus. 9. Provincial
Master of the Red Cross. 10. Magus, or Knight of Splendour
and Light. It was, however, repudiated by the Grand Mother
Lodge Royal York of Friendship, at Berlin. We also find the
High Observance which concerned itself with magical and alchy-
mical ideas, and the Kabbalah, and the Exact Observance which
follows in the simple routine of its founders, the Jesuits.

Reuier.—A principle specially connected with the pillar of beauty,
while Truth is associated with the column of Wisdom, and that
of Brotherly Love with the column of strength. These three
principles constitute the great framework on which Masonry prides
itself to be based. There is usually a special board for relief in
every land, which extends aid to the worthy indigent Mason, and
some Lodges have a special benevolent fund of their own.

RELIGION OF FREEMASONRY.—Masonry is not an irreligious institu-
tion, but it assumes no special dogmatic form; it demands at the
hands of its candidates a sincere and honest belief in a Creative
Being, ever attentive to the honourable aspirations of those who
seek Him in spirit and in truth; and it rejects with scorn those
who would degrade the Contriver into a part of the contrivance,
and thus would set bounds to the limitless and loving Author of
all Being.

REMEMBRANCER.—One of the titles of the Orator in a Tent of the
Order of Ishmael.

REMONSTRANTS.—These were those who remonstrated against the
decisions of the Synod of Dort, in 1618.

Remora.—A name given to the serpent in heraldry, which is typi-
cal of prudence.

RemovaL or Lopces.—In England, any Lodge can remove from one
place of meeting to another, provided the new place is not un-
suitable to the dignity of the Craft, and it has been inspected by
a proper officer for the purpose appointed, notice having been
given to the Grand Secretary.

RENDERING.—In architecture, the process of putting the first layer
of plaster on brick work is thus called.

REPEAL.—A resolution adopted at a regular meeting of a Lodge can-
not be rescinded or repealed, except at another regular meeting.
RepLuM.—In architecture, the panels of the impages of a framed

door.

REPRESENTATIVES.—These are of several kinds. 1. Within any

601

REP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RES

jurisdiction, the Grand Officers take precedence of any other;
2. Next, there may be illustrious visitors ; and 3. There may be
specially appointed visitors, who, on behalf of Masonry in general,
give a straightforward account of the working of the Lodge and
its general conduct, not in any spying way, but in order to
advise with the best informed in Masonry for the amelioration
of education and similar purposes.

REPRESENTATIVES OF GRAND LopGEs.— Wherever there is Masonic
unanimity, it will be found that some eminent Mason is entrusted
with the charge of representing his country; and although his
privileges are limited by the fact that Masonry is not political,
it very often happens that his own status in society has the
influence of ambassadorial rank, and thus. the special grievance
of any represented and afflicted Brother is redressed.

REPRIMAND.—A mode of Masonic castigation. It cannot be inflicted
without written charges, and these by a majority of the Lodge.
It does not affect Masonic standing, and is a mere brief exposi-
tion of authority,

ReputaTion.—In the language of Masonry, a person of good repu-
tation is said to be under the tongue of good report; the words
“ Sea standing” indicate a brother in the habit of attending his

odge.
" Rerepos.—In architecture, a screen or division-wall placed behind
an altar or rood loft.

Rescript.—A reply given by any potentate to any question laid
before him for solution, and intended to be regarded afterwards
as of legal authority.

REsIDENCE.—In England, a Mason may belong to any Lodge willing
to elect him, and there is no restriction as to number or locality.
In America, however, owing to geographical and other reasons,
a candidate is usually initiated in a Lodge near his own resi-
dence, and the initiation of non-residents, where it is not expressly
forbidden, is discouraged.

RESIGNATION.—It has been said that this is a peculiarly Christian
virtue, but we find it more generally prevalent in the Oriental
religions of an anterior date, or in Theistic religions, founded
after the time assigned to Christ Jesus. The Brahmans incul-
cated it, as well as the disciples of Zerduscht and Buddha; but
its culmination was in the religion of Mohammed, who in the
Koran (Surat, IIT.) says ——“ Verily the true religion in the sight
of God is Islam,’—signifying literally the resigning or devoting
one’s self entirely to God and His service. The Christiolators
deny the inspiration of the Koran; but no reasonable person can
question the beauty of the precepts laid down therein, or the
tolerant spirit shown towards any who will believe that God in

02

RES | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [REV

His essence is One; and not any number of principles, with low
and debasing ideas, tending to slavery and utter prostration of
mind.

RESIGNATION, PERSoNAL—1. Of membership—(see Demut). 2. Of
office. As an officer of a Lodge, on his appointment to an office,
engages to perform its duties for a certain specified time, it is
difficult to see how he can resign, unless from circumstances of
illness, or some sudden calamity.

ResibaAy.—The fee paid for admission into the Order of Ishmael,
and which varies according to the means of the initiate, is called
the Resilah, from a term for an ancient patriarchal coin.

RESPECTABLE.—The equivalent for Worshipful in French—usually
abbreviated thus :—R.°. L..., or R.°. £1}...

Responses.—The responses in Masonry consist of those replies
made in common to the speeches of the Master. In all Masonic
prayers the proper response, never to be omitted, is “So mote
it be!”

RessauLt.—In architecture, the recess or projection of a member
from or before another, so as to be out of the range or line with it.

RESURRECTIONISTS, ORDER OF.—A friendly order, meeting at the
North Pole in Oxford Street, with the purpose of reviving anti-
quated ideas,and, where valuable, reintroducing them to the world.

RETURNS OF LopcEs.—The annual list bound to be furnished to the
Grand Lodge, stating all particulars of the business of the Private
Lodge making the return.

REUBEN.—The eldest son of Jacob. In the Royal Arch, his banner
is purple, and bears the device of a man.

Réunion DE LovIsE, ORDER oF.—Instituted in Prussia by Baron
von Noslitz, in memory of the gentle and noble Queen of
Prussia. The order was diplomatic, although secret, and the
badge was a silver chain.

REVEALS.—Twovertical sides of an aperture in architecture, between
the point of the walls and the window or door-frame. Some-
times written revels.

REVELATION.—This grand and wonderful book, which closes the
New Testament, is a work offering considerable difficulty to the
student. It has been usually attributed to St John the Evan-
gelist, but the close and critical studies of modern writers have
shown that this is at least doubtful, and this from very stroug
internal evidence. An eloquent writer of the present day, the
author of a series of volumes connected with the onward progress
of the human race, asserts the Apocalypse to be far older than
Christianity, and to have come down from the most remote an-
tiquity, being the Revelation of the whole drama of human his-
tory. With infinite learning and patience, the author 2 “The

3

REV] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RHI

Book of God,” who preserves strict anonymity, has endeavoured
to show that the work was originally revealed to a primeval
John, otherwise Oannes, and identical with the first messenger
of God to man. This theory is sufficiently remarkable to be
mentioned here. The messengers, twelve in number, are sup-
posed by the author to appear at intervals of 600 years. Thus—
1, Adam, A.M. 3000; 2. Enoch, A.M. 3600 ; 3. Fohi, A.M. 4200;
4, Brigoo, A.M. 4800; 5. Zaratusht, A.M. 5400; 6. Thoth,
A.M. 6000; 7. Amosis or Moses, A.M. 6600; 8. Laotseu, A.M.
7200; 9. Jesus, A.M. 7800; 10. Mohammed, A.M., 8400; 11.
Chengiz-Khan, A.M. 9000; and 12. The twelfth messenger yet
to be revealed, AM. 9600. With the aid of this theory, the
whole history of the world, down to our own days, is shown to be
foretold in the Apocalypse; and although it is difficult to agree
with the accomplished writer’s conclusions, supported by him
with an array of learning, and a sincere belief in what is stated,
no one with any taste for these studies should be without this
wonderful series of books. The same author has published, in two
volumes, a revised edition of the “Book of Enoch,” with a Com-
mentary, and he promises to continue, and, if possible, complete
his design, Throughout the many thousand pages of closely
printed matter, this writer-evinces a sincere reverence for true
religion, and seeks only to expose the errors which priests and
interested persons have promulgated from time immemorial.

REVERENTIAL S1GN.—The second sign in the English Royal Arch
system.

Revestiany—The place where sacred garments are kept. Hence
vestry.

RevokE.—Dispensations may be revoked at any time by the
authority issuing them, or by a higher authority. Charters are
arrested, forfeited, or declared null and void, while dispensations
are simply revoked.

RuaBpoPHoRi.—Bearers of wands in antiquity at ancient games,
similar to Grand Stewards at modern Masonic festivals.

RuHETORIAN.—One of the followers of Rhetorius in Egypt, who
preached that all the heretics were right, and hence no one could
be in the wrong. The most infallible teacher ever commissioned
to instruct mankind.

RHINOSCERI, ORDER OF.—An Order meeting in the City fortnightly,
under the presidency of the Principal Pachyderm. If any were
thin-skinned, they were at once rejected.

RuHINSBURGERS.—A sect which sprang up in Holland, at Rhinsburg,
in the eighteenth century. They held all the doctrines of the
Church, but rejected all discipline. Their assemblies were called
Colleges of Piety, and priests were excluded.

604

RHO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | RIG

RuovE Istanp.—Masonry introduced at Newport in 1750, the
Charter being granted by the St John’s Grand Lodge of Boston,
on 27th December, 1749. A second Lodge was established at
Providence, 18th January, 1757. These two Lodges, on the 6th
of April, 1791, organized a Grand Lodge—Brother Christopher
Champlin first G.M. The establishment of a Grand Lodge in
this way was very irregular, but it has not been attended with
apy evil results, the character of the members standing high in
the annals of Masonry. Grand Chapter was instituted in March,
1798, and Grand Council in October, 1860. The Grand Com-
mandery is a section of the Grand Commandery of Massachu-
setts and Rhode Island, formed, in 1805, with the famous Brother
Thomas Smith Webb, as first presiding officer.

Ruopes.—In thé Mediterranean. In 1308, Fulke de Vilaret,
Grand Master of the Knights Hospitallers, landed with consider-
able forces, expelled the Saracens, who then held it, and trans-
ferred the seat of the Order from Cyprus. In 1522, the Saracens
regained it, and the Knights Hospitallers subsequently established
themselves at Malta. This circumstance has led to the occa-
sional title of Knights of Rhodes. (See Malta.)

RIBALDRY, ORDER OF.—A society of a social character founded at
Paris, in 1812.

RisBinc.—lIn architecture, 2 number of ribs for an arched ceiling.

Rippon. (See Collar.)

RIDEL, CORNELIUS JOHANN RuDOLPH—Born at Hamburg, 25th
May, 1759; died at Weimar, 16th January, 1821. He was a
learned bibliographist, and W. M. for many years of the Lodge
Amalia, at Weimar. He was the author, in 1817, of a valuable
bibliographical and chronological work, in four volumes, contain-
ing an examination of everything of importance from 1717 to
1817.

Ripce.—In architecture, the upper horizontal timber in a roof on
which the rafters pitch.

Ricut AncLe.—The incidence of two lines at an angle of 90°, or
the fourth part of a circle—symbolically representative of
uprightness of conduct. It is equivalent to the square.

Ricut Eminent.—A prefix to the title of Deputy G. M. of the
G. Encampment of Knights Templar in the United States; and
to that of the Grand Commander of a State Grand Commandery.

Ricut ExcELLenT.—The prefix to the title of all superior officers
of a Grand Chapter of the Royal Arch, below the dignity of
M. E. Z., in Great Britain and Ireland, and Grand High Priest
in the United States.

Ricut Hanp.—The emblem of fidelity when presented to a brother.
In the ancient Roman Collegia Fabrorum, the goddess Fides

b)

RIG] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RIT

was worshipped—symbolically represented by two right hands
joined, or by two female figures holding each other by the right
hands. The Persians of antiquity considered the pledge of the
right hand as inviolable, and any infringement of a promise thus
solemnly given as infamous. In the same way, the right side
was in antiquity esteemed the seat of honour. (See Hand, Left
Hand, and Left Side.)

RichHT WorsHiPruL—the title of all officers of a Grand Lodge
below the dignity of Grand Master.

Ricorist.—One of the party of the Jansenists.

Rine, Luminous. (See Académie des Sublimes Mattre de l Anneau
Inumineauz.)

Rines.—Not in use in Symbolical Masonry, but conferred in some
of the high degrees and chivalric orders. There are also rings
used in some Hermetic rites. The Templar ring, called the ring
of profession, is of gold, bearing on it the letters P.D.E.P., the
initials of Pro Deo et Patria—worn on the index finger of the
right hand. The Inspectors General, 33° A. and A. Rite, wear a
ring on the third finger of the left hand, with the motto, Deus
Mewmque Jus, inside. In the 14° of the same rite, a plain gold
ring is worn, with the motto, Virtus junxit, mors non separabit.
This has been adopted in the United States. Members of the
Northern Jurisdiction wear it on the fourth finger of the left
hand ; those of the Southern Jurisdiction wear it on the same
finger of the left hand. Rings have been universally used as
types of power in ancient and modern times. The ring of King
Solomon was a magical ring of great virtue, and many traditions
exist concerning it. According to the Mohammedan authorities,
the ring was derived from Jared, the son of Enoch.

Rising Sun.—Represented by the W. M.; because as the sun, by
his rising, opens and enlivens the day, so the Master opens and
governs his Lodge with equal regularity and precision.

Rite (Latin, ritus, an approved usage or custom; Greek, rp:Bew, a
trodden path)—It would be impossible to name all the rites of
Masonic origin ; suffice it to say, that as a principle they are all
founded on the York Rite, and subsequent to the revival of
Masonry in 1717. No matter what pretensions may be ad-
vanced by the various high degrees, it is simply unhistorical
to depart from this fact, one which none but the enthusiast
would venture to question. The following are among the prin-
cipal rites now in use, founded in common upon the York Rite,
the parent of all, not however arranged in strict alphabetical
order :—I. African Architects. 2. American Rite. 3. Antient
and Primitive Rite. 4. Beneficent Knights of the Holy City.
5. piaave Star. 6. Brothersof Asia. 7. Brother Henoch’s Rite.

RIT| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ro

8. Chapter of Clermont. 9. Chastanier’s Rite. 10. Elected
Cohens. 11. Emperors of the East and West. 12. Elect of
Truth. 13. French, or Modern Rite. 14. Globes, Three, of Berlin.
15. Fessler’s Rite. 16. Egyptian Masonry of Cagliostro. 17.
Martinism. 18. Narbonne. 19. Scottish Rite (Ancient and
Accepted). 20. Scottish Rite (Philosophic Scottish Rite Primi-
tive). 21. Eclectic Rite (Reformed). 22. Schreeder’s Rite. 23.
Vielle Bru. 24. Pernetty’s Rite. 25. Philalethes. 26. Phila-
delphians. 27. Memphis and Mizraim. 28. Lax Observance
and Strict Observance. 29. Perfection. 30. Temple. 31.
Swedish Rite. 32. Swedenborg Rite. 33. Zinnendorf Rite.
This list might be extended, but it would serve no useful pur-
pose. Connected with Masonry, and yet outside of it, are
numerous asteroidal bodies moving in a similar manner round
the Sun of York, but in a different plane. Of course, strictly
professed scientific societies are not supposed to be alluded
to here.

Rirter.—The German for knight.

RituaL—tThe ceremonies of Masonry are termed its ritual, and
hence the word has been applied to the ceremonies of other
Orders. It clothes exoterically the doctrines of Freemasonry as
a universally actuating spirit; and forms the nexus desirable
between men of various nations, languages, and customs. Its
form is symbolical, but sufficiently at one with the common
traditions of all mankind to command respect and confidence.
Any brother who keeps before him the thought that Masonry is
continually at work, ceremonially and unceremonially, through-
out the inhabited globe, must be impressed with the necessity
of industry, the sanctity of labour, and the peace which follows
the performance of good works, even if by chance they should
occasionally err in the selection of the objects of charity.

Rizkacom.—A word signifying “your food,” employed in the An-
cient Order of Ishmael.

RoseELot.—An advocate, and member of the Philosophic Scottish
Rite, in which he was Grand Orator when Askeri Khan, the Per-
sian ambassador, was exalted to the degree of a Master Mason
on the 8th December, 1808. A medal was struck in Robelot’s
honour. He held that Masonry was derived from Zoroastrianism.

Rosert L, THE BRUCE. (See Royal Order of Scotland.)

Rozerts MS.—A forgery, like many of the documents connected
with the early origin of Freemasonry. An Operative MS. (re-
sembling Harleian MS. No. 1942), so called by Bro. Hughan,
was published by J. Roberts, London, a.p. 1722.

Rosison, Joun.—The author of a silly and self-contradictory book
about Freemasonry, in which he has the effrontery to say an he

7

ROB | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [ROD

sought admission into the Order on purpose to betray it. It is
always best to deal with a bold and uncompromising opponent;
but the nauseating nonsense with which Robison decks his book
is only to be compared to the more virulent and subtle sarcasm
of Barruel.

Rogius, THE ABBE CLAUDE.—Author of a book on Institutions in
1779. Like other works of that time, there could not be the real
ring of archeological merit in it.

RocKWELL, WILLIAM SPENCER.—Born at Albany, New York, 1804;
died in Maryland, 1865. He was a lawyer and archeologist ; and,
at the instance of the Egyptologist, George Robbins Gliddon, he
turned his attention to the history of Egypt. In this study he
does not appear to have adhered to the true philological school ;
hence his ideas were not received with attention. He left many
MSS. behind him of an interesting character. He was at one
time G. M. of Georgia, and a high officer in the Southern Juris-
diction of the Southern States in the A. and A. Rite.

Rop.—In the hands of kings the rod is a sceptre and attribute of
justice; in the hands of subordinates it expresses order. It has
a relation to the magical wand, and also to the crook or crozier
of the bishops. The short rod grasped in the hand by Field
Marshals indicates separated authority, and is derived from the
a of antiquity. Rods or batons: were apportioned to
offices.

Rop, Dzacon’s.—A blue rod surmounted by a pine cone, or rather
a pomegranate, being tipped with gold.

Rop-Kwicuts.—Feudal servitors who held their land by the tenure
of serving their lords on horseback.

Rop, MarsHar’s. (See Baton.)

Rop, Srewarp’s.—A white rod, or staff, first used in 1724. It im-
plies, in modern times, the obligation of attending the procession
with a definite position.

Rop, TREASURER’S, (See Staff, Treasurer's.)

RopEnts, SOCIETY OF THE—In the middle ages, while the attempts
were being made to abolish serfdom, there existed a society
under this name, or of the Mice. From this association origi-
nated in various countries the avenging societies who secretly
strove to do justice alike upon rich and poor, such as the Vehm-
gericht and other fraternities, against which were instituted the
Santa Hermandad—Holy Brotherhood of Spain, and the Inquisi-
tion. Protestants having attained an amount of adequate free-
dom, soon abandoned the practice of conspiracy; but the Roman
Catholics have superfceted themselves with plots within plots,
and so prevented that which all classes of thinkers assert to be

mee object—the natural benefits of life properly dispensed, and

ROE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

a charitable feeling towards the convictions of others. It was
the Society of Rodents, founded in 1422 at Immengau,in the West-
phalian country, with a certain Rudolph at their head, which
brought on a reformation of the Vehmgericht, substituting prin-
ciples of forbearance for violent means, (Storbaneus, de Lue.
Sec. p. 168 a.) There was an oath, dimly referred to by Goethe
in “ Gotz von Berlichingen;” and the sacred tradition of a secret
vault formed an important and essential part of the ceremony
of admission.

RogsLuER, CARL.—The translator of Reghellini’s work on Masonry,
who published it under the pseudonym of R. S. Acerrolles.

Roti.—A roll is directed to be placed in the coffin of a deceased
Brother by the Master in the Prestonian Funeral Service. In
England, a sprig of acacia is thrown into the grave.

Roman COLLEGES OF ARTIFICERS.—A theory has been advanced by
Krause that the Freemasons derived their origin from these Col-
leges; but of late years it has been abandoned as untenable.
Hence it would be a work of supererogation to occupy space here
in its consideration.

RoMAN ORDER OF ARCHITECTURE.—The same as the Composite.

RoMvEL.—A name given in some of the high degrees to one of the
assassins, It is no doubt an introduction by the Stuart party,
who attempted to identify Hiram with Charles I. Hence Rom-
vel would stand for Cromwell.

Roop Lorr.—The gallery between the nave and choir of a church,
in front of which stood the rood or cross. This position is
now generally occupied by the organ in ecclesiastical build-
ings.

Rosa, PHiniep SAMUEL—Born at Ysenberg. He was at one time a
Lutheran clergyman, and, in 1757, was rector of the Cathedral of
St James at Berlin. He was initiated in the Lodge of the Three
Globes, and was a coadjutor of Baron von Printzen in the estab-
lishment of a Chapter of High Degrees on the System of Clermont.
Being afterwards appointed deputy of this Chapter, he was sent
into Holland, Denmark, Sweden, and various parts of Germany,
to propagate the Rite—hence called the Rosaic Rite. He mixed
up many Hermetic and Alchymistical notions with his system,
and may be regarded as a. Masonic charlatan. His last public
act was a protest, in 1765, against the Congress of Jena. Nothing
seems to be known of his ultimate fate.

Rosr.—Dedicated in antiquity to Venus, as the symbol of secrecy ;
hence the common expression, “ under the rose.” It was also a
symbol of immortality. The rose was afterwards applied to sig-
nify Christ; and a rose resting on a cross typified the Soter on
the Cross, or the secret of a Re

2

ROS | Lhe Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

RosE AND GOLD.—A degree of the Primitive Rite.

R0SE AND TRIPLE Cross.—A degree contained in the archives of the
Lodge of St Louis des Amis Réunis, at Calais.

RosrE Croix, BRETHREN OF THE.—It is stated by Thory that the
archives of the Mother Lodge of the Philosophic Scottish Rite
contain the manuscript records of a society bearing this name,
and existing at the Hague in 1622, being a branch of the original
Rosicrucian Society.

Rose Croix, JACOBITE.—The degree conferred in the Jacobite Chap-
ter of Arras, under the charter of James Stuart, who called him-
self James IIT.

Rose Croix Kyicut. (See Rose Croix, Prince of.)

Rosk Croix, Macnetic.—38° Rite of Mizraim.

ROSE CROIX, PHiLosornic.—A German Hermetic degree in the Col-
lection of Pyron, and in the archives of the Philosophic Scottish
Rite. The Philosophic Rose Croix had a greater affinity with
the Rosicrucian system than any other, and may be regarded as
the link between Masonry and Rosicrucianism, so far as there is
any real connection.

Rose Croix, Princr or.—French, and literally Rose Cross. This
degree has been regarded as a distinction by all Masons rising
from the ranks, but it can hardly be esteemed so highly when
its origin is considered. It was eagerly coveted as a resting-place
between symbolical Masonry and the Ne Plus Ultra, which, in
fact, it at one time formed. At present a very large number
of Rose Croix chapters exist, and the number of members is
constantly on the increase. 1. 18° A. and A. R. 2. 7° French
or Modern Rite. 3. 18° E. E. W. 4. 3° Royal Order of Scotland.
5. 12° Elect of Truth. 6.11° A. and P. 7. 7° of the Philalethes.
8. 8° of the Mother Lodge of the Philosophic Scottish Rite. 9.
18° of the Mother Scottish Lodge at Marseilles. 10. 18° Rite of
Heredom, or of Perfection. 11. 90° R.Mzm. It was also given at
one time in some Priories of the Knights Templar, and was the
sixth degree of the Encampment of Baldwyn at Bristol. It is con-
ferred on a chapter deriving its authority from a Supreme Council.
The principal Officers are a Most Wise Sovereign and two War-
dens. Their days of meeting are obligatory —Maundy Thursday,
Easter Sunday, and Shrove Tuesday. Jewel: a compass of gold
extended on an arc to the sixteenth part of a circle, or twenty-
two and a half degrees. The head of the compass is surrounded
by a triple crown consisting of three series of points arranged by
three, five, and seven. Between the legs of the compass is a
cross resting on the arc, in the centre of which is a full-blown
rose, together with the figure of a pelican wounding its breast to
feed its young, displayed in a nest around it; on the reverse,

1G

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

there is an eagle with displayed wings. On the are of the circle
certain mystical words are engraved intelligible to the possessor
of the degree. The degree is known by various names, such as
Sovereign Princes of Rose Croix, Princes of Rose Croix of Here-
dom, and Knights of the Eagle and Pelican. There is no con-
nection between the Rose Croix and the Alchymistical Rosicru-
cians. In 1747, Prince Charles Edward Stuart established the
Chapter of Arras in France with the title of “ Chapitre Primor-
dial de Rose Croix.” As the Pretender in the charter describes
himself as “ King of England, France, Scotland, and Ireland, and
by virtue of this Grand Master of the Chapter of H., known
under the title of the Eagle and Pelican, and since our sorrows
and misfortunes, under that of Rose Croix,” it seems fair to infer
that the name of Rose Croix originated about 1747. This, however,
must be regarded only as a surmise, for the degree may have been
founded on some older rite of which nothing has been preserved,

Rosxz Croix, RectirieD. (See Schroeder, Fredrich Joseph Wilhelm.)

Rose Croix, SOVEREIGN PRINCE oF.—A title now abandoned. (See
Rose Croix, Prince of.)

Rose Croix or Germany,—A Hermetic degree. (See Rosicrucianism.)

Rose Croix oF GOLD, BRETHREN OF THE—An Alchymical and Her-
metic society, founded in 1777. The history of this fraternity is
mixed up with so much fable, that it is impossible to attach any
value to the statements which are made by those who professed
to know its history. (See Rosicrucianism.)

Roser Croix or HEREDOM. (See Heredom, and Rose Croix, Prince of.)

RosE Croix OF THE DAMEs.—6° of the Capitular Series in the French
Adoptive Rite, and 9° intheirSystem. It is of a strictly Roman
Catholic character, and is derived from the Jesuitical Masonry
of the Chapter of Arras.

Rose Croix OF THE GRAND Rosary.—Fourth and last degree of the
Rose Croix Chapter in the Primitive Rite.

Roser or JERICHO.—Reported in Sir Thomas Brown’s “Essay on
Popular Errors” to bloom on the eve of Christmas. It is most
likely derived from the same authority which indecently identi-
fied the Rose of Sharon with the Soter.

Rosz, ORDER OF THE—Established at Berlin, 1778, by one Franz
Rudolph Van Grossing, or otherwise Franz Matthaus Grossinger.
It was of an androgynous character, and consisted of two degrees.
1. Female Friends. 2. Confidants. It had only a brief existence,
and its secrets were published by Frederick Wadzeck in 1787.

ROSENFELDERS.—Followers of Hans or John Rosenfeld, who about
1793 declared himself to be the Messiah. He was evidently
insane, and declared his mission to be the government of the

world with the assistance of twenty-four elders.
611

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

ROSENKREUZ, CHRISTIAN.—The supposed creator of the Rosicrucian
philosophy, but in reality a fictitious character invented by John
Valentine Andrei.

ROSICRUCIANISM.—In times long gone by, there existed—up to the
.age of the martyrdom of science—-men of various races, religions,
and climes, who, consolidated by a humane feeling for the pre-
servation of those means by which human life is maintained, and
next those by which human prosperity in the true sense of know-
ledge is assured, formed a bond understood never to be broken, un-
less any brother of this strange fraternity should be really worthy
of expulsion, disgrace, and death. This mysterious body was
bound by solemn obligations of mutual succour, of impenetrable
secrecy, and of humility, while the recipient of its secrets was
enjoined to labour for the preservation of human life by the
exercise of the healing art. At various periods of history, this
body has emerged into a sort of temporary light; but its true
name has never transpired, and is only known to the innermost
adepts and rulers of the society. By other names, having a sort
of general relation, members of this body have occasionally
announced themselves, and among these perhaps that of Rosi-
crucian is the best known. Men of the most opposite worldly
creeds, of diverse habits, and even of apparently remote ideas,
have ever joined together, consciously or unconsciously, to glorify
the good, and despise, although with pity, the evil that might be
reconciled to the good. But in the centuries of unrest which
accompanied the evolution of any kind of civilisation, either
ancient or modern, how was this laudable principle to be main-
tained? This was done by a body of the learned, existing in all
ages under peculiar restrictions, and at one time known under
the name of the Rosicrucian Fraternity. Although this body
existed, its corporate character was by no means marked. Un-
like the institutions with which antiquity and the middle ages
abounded, and of which the Masonic and other bodies are the
modern equivalents, the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross seldom had
gatherings together. The brethren were isolated from each other,
although aware of their mutual existence, and corresponding
by secret and mysterious writings, and books, after the introduc-
tion of printing. They courted solitude and obscurity, and sought,
in the contemplation of the divine qualities of the Creator, that
beatitude which the rude outside world despised or feared. In
this manner, however, they also became the discoverers and con-
servators of important physical secrets, which by slow degrees
they gradually communicated to the world, with which, in an-
other sense, they had so little todo. It is not, at the same time,
to be supposed that these occult philosophers either despised the

12

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | Ros

pleasures or discouraged the pursuits of their active contempo-
raries; but, as we ever find some innermost sanctuary in each
noble and sacred fane, so they retired to constitute a body apart,
and more peculiarly devoted to those mystical studies for which
the great mass of mankind were unfitted by taste or character.
Mildness and beneficence marked such courteous intercourse as
their studious habits permitted them to have with their fellow-
men; and, in times of danger, in centuries of great physical
suffering, they emerged from their retreats, with the benevolent
object of vanquishing and alleviating the calamities of mankind.
In a rude period of turmoil, of battle, and of political change,
they placidly pursued their way, the custodians of human learn-
ing, and thus acquired the respect, and even the reverence, of
their less cultivated contemporaries. They were regarded as sanc-
tified personages of whom men spoke with bated breath, and with
a species of awe such as individuals regarded as being in com-
munion with intelligences of an ultramontane nature could alone
inspire. The very fact of their limited number led to their further
elevation in the public esteem, and there grew up around them
somewhat of “the divinity that doth hedge a king.” Nor did
these pursuits uniformly withdraw them from the more active
duties of their respective times. Some of them, such as the
Abbot John of Trittenheim, ruled over communities of monks,
and preserved, by copying, the ancient historical and poetical
works of Hellas and Italy; others applied themselves to the
arts of legislation, and were councillors at various courts ; others,
again, like Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, sought their
fortunes as town orators and jurists, while some followed
the arts like Albertus Magnus, and a large proportion
devoted themselves, as in the cases of John Baptista Porta,
Theophrastus Aureolus Bombastus Paracelsus, and Johann Faust,
to the study and practice of medicine. Thus the mystical fra-
ternities did not neglect the practical and useful, while they pur-
sued the more recondite studies of mental and theosophic lore.
It may, however, be truly said, that these philosophers were di-
vided into two great schools—the one occult, silent, and jealous
of intrusion; and the other militant and even blatant in their
pretensions. All sections of men bear this twofold char-
acter; and while we may very properly regret the waste of
energy which consumed itself in the fruitless search after the
philosopher’s stone, and the art of producing gold and precious
stones, we ought not to lose sight of the undoubted fact that
these enthusiasts, in a marked degree, contributed to an increase
in our knowledge of psychology and mental science in other
ways. Even of the alchymists there were two erie tose who
13

ROS] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

laboured at the physical forge and crucible, and those who, by a
theosophic process, sought to elevate the mind into a knowledge
of its constitution ; thus perfecting a much higher series of inves-
tigations, and arriving at a mystical gold beyond all price. In
a certain sense, these philosophers contributed very greatly to
the common stock of human wisdom. They insensibly prepared
the way for larger and grander views of the divine purpose in
humanity—to them we owe the first promulgation of more exact
ideas on the mutual inter-relations of duty and right; and our
modern political economists are far more indebted to their
speculations than they are willing to confess. It is easy at the
present day to see that which is held up before every one in the
broad light of a tolerant century, but it was’not so in the days
of the Rosicrucian and other fraternities. There was a dread
among the great masses of society in bygone days of the unseen
—a dread, as recent events and phenomena show very clearly,
not yet overcome in its entirety. Hence students of nature
and mind were forced into an obscurity not altogether un-
welcome or irksome, but in this obscurity they paved the
way for a vast revolution in mental science. The Kab-
balistic reveries of a Johann Reuchlin led to the fiery action
of a Luther, and the patient labours of Trittenheim produced
the modern system of diplomatic cipher writing. Even the
apparently aimless wanderings of the monks and friars were
associated with practical life, and the numerous missals and
books of prayer carried from camp to camp conveyed, to the
initiated, secret messages and intelligence dangerous to be com-
municated in other ways. The sphere of human intelligence
was thus enlarged, and the freedom of mankind from the con-
trol of a pitiless priesthood, or perhaps rather a system of
tyranny under which that priesthood equally suffered, was
ensured. It is a fact not even disputed by Roman Catholic
writers of the most Papal ideas, that the evils of society,
ecclesiastical and lay, were materially increased by the grow-
ing worldliness of each successive Pontiff. Hence we may
see why the origin of Rosicrucianism was veiled by symbols,—
and even its founder Andrei was not the only philoso-
phical romancer—Plato, Apuleius, Heliodorus, Lucian, and
others had preceded him in this path; nor may we omit the
Gargantua and Pantagruel of Rabelais—probably the profoundest
Masonic problem yet to be unriddled. It is very worthy of
remark, that one particular century, and that in which the
Rosicrucians first showed themselves, is distinguished in history
as the era in which most of these efforts at throwing off the

trammels of the past occurred. Hence the opposition of the
614

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

losing party, and their virulence against anything mysterious
or unknown. They freely organized pseudo-Rosicrucian and
Masonic Societies in return, as the pages of this book have
already sufficiently shown; and these societies were instructed to
irregularly entrap the weaker brethren of the True and Invisible
Order, and then triumphantly betray anything they might be so
inconsiderate as to communicate to the superiors of these tran-
sitory and unmeaning associations. Every wile was adopted by
the authorities fighting in self-defence against the progress of
truth, to engage, by persuasion, interest, or terror, such as might
be cajoled into receiving the Pope as Master—when gained, as
many converts to that faith know, but dare not own, they are
treated with neglect, and left to fight the battle of life as best
they may, not even being admitted to the knowledge of such
miserable aporrheta as the Romish faith considers itself entitled
to withhold. The modern Society of Rosicrucians, however, is
constituted upon a widely different basis to that of the parent
society. While the adepts of former times were contented with
the knowledge of their mutual obligations, and observed them
as a matter of course and custom, the eighteenth century Rosi-
crucians forced the world to think for a time that they were not
only the precursors of Masonry, but in essentid that body itself.
This has led to numerous misconceptions. With Freemasonry
the occult fraternity has only this much to do, «2, that some of
the Rosicrucians were also Freemasons; and this idea was
strengthened by the fact that a portion of the curriculum of a
Rosicrucian consisted in theosophy—these bodies had, however,
no other substantial connective ties. In fact, Freemasons have
never actually laid claim to the possession of alchymical secrets.
Starting from a definite lerend—that of the building of Solomon’s
temple—they have merely moralised on life, death, and the
resurrection, correspondentially with the increase, decrease, and
the palingenesia of nature; and rightly so. For as the science of
mathematics contains within itself the protoplasmatic forms of
things, and the science of morals comprehends the application of
these forms to intellectual purification, so the Rosicrucian doctrine
specifically pointed out the uses and interrelations between the
qualities of the substances in nature, although their enlarged ideas
admitted of a moral survey. The Freemasons, while they have
deserved the esteem of mankind for charity and works of love,
have never accomplished, and by their inherent sphere of opera-
tion never can accomplish, what these isolated students effected.
Modern times have eagerly accepted in the full light of science
the precious inheritance of knowledge bequeathed by the Rosi-
crucians, and that body has disappeared from the visible know-
615

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

ledge of mankind, and re-entered that invisible fraternity of
which mention was made in the opening of this article. Pre-
supposing in the minds of occult students some knowledge of
these principles, it will readily be seen that a system existed
amongst what may be emphatically, although only symbolically,
termed “our ancient brethren.” It is not desirable in a work of
this kind to make disclosures of an indiscreet nature. The
Brethren of the Rosy Cross will never, and should not, at peril
and under alarm, give up their secrets. Their silent influence
terminated the Crusades with an honourable peace; at their
behest the Old Man of the Mountain stopped his assassinations,
and in all cases we find Rosicrucians exercise a silent and salient
influence. The “dewy” question cannot be discussed in public.
This ancient body has nothing to do with any kind of Masonic rite.
It has apparently disappeared from the field of human activity,
but its labours are being carried on with alacrity, and with a sure
delight in an ultimate success. The degrees of the modern Rosi-
crucian system are nine—1. Zelator, or [lluminatus, or Junior;
2. Theoricus or Theoreticus; 3. Practicus; 4. Philosophus; 9.
Adeptus, Junior or Minor; 6. Adeptus, Senior or Major; 7.
Adeptus Exemptus ; 8. Magistri Templi; and 9. Magus. The last
degree is triple—thus, Supreme Major, and Senior and Junior
Substitute. The officers are a Master General, Deputy Master
General, Treasurer General, Secretary General; and seven
Ancient Assistant Officers are Precentor, Conductor of Novices,
Organist, Torch-bearer, Herald, Guardian of the Temple, and
Medallist. The Rosicrucian Society of England, which has been
reformed upon the basis of the original body, meets in various
parts of England, and possesses a Metropolitan College, together
with several Provincial Colleges—the rite is also known in
Scotland and Canada. To belong to it the degree of Master
Mason must be attained; but no oath of obligation is adminis-
tered, it being contrary to the genius of a philosophical society,
having for its object the discussion of occult science, to exact
vows of fidelity already ensured by the solemn acts of the three
degrees of Craft Masonry. It has been thought desirable to
insert in this place two tables illustrative of Rosicrucian philo-
sophy—the first of these has never before been published, and
has been specially constructed by the editor for this work. The
statements therein contained are derived from many sources of
an authentic character, but have never been collected together
before. The second table has been previously published, but is
not readily accessible to the general student.

616

dui 0) palqns ‘py:sp:9L Ie LLOZ JEW 90 UO ‘UOpUNT Jo AISuaAlUN ‘Auey| UaaNd *2109/H.10'aH5piiquiedmwwy:sdjiy wo. papeojuMog

6L0°SSZ9Z L6EL L8Z609D/ZL01'01L/6101op//:sdqqy *sww4a1/8109/610'abpuquues‘mmwy:sdjqy ye ajqelene ‘asn Jo sua} 2105 abpuquie>

MeEmMBER- BroTHERHOOD CoUNTRIES AND ASSEMBLY
DEGREE. | “carp, | NUMBERS. Sten. Coxours, SyYMBoL. Nawe. PracusorCenrre,| CONSULATES. PLACES. CIRCLES.
1,9. Magi. q Urim, Thum- | Bright and Fiery. / An equitateral| Luxianus Renaldus} Egypt, Persia, | Hassan (Ispahan),| Smyrna every 10 1
mim, and triangle. de Perfectis, Venice, Madrid, Venice, and years.
Sbhemham- London, Amster- | other places.
phorash. dam, Cologne.
2,8. | Magistri. U7 Cross of Gold} Blue withdiamonds.| A compass. |Pedemontanusde | All over the Naples. Camra in Poland, 2
enamelled, Rebus. world, and Paris in
France, every
9 years,
3, ‘7. | Adepti U77 Cross of Gold | With the four chief | Hitakel. Tanus de aure All over the Vienna (Austria), | Basle, Augsburg, 3
: exempti, enamelled. colours. campis. world. and Niirnberg,
every 8 years,
4, 6. Majores. 788 Cross of Gold| Red on yellow, #.e., | Phrat. Spheere fontus & Differentiated all | Prague (Bohemia).| Aachen, Hamburg, 4
enamelled, on gold, Sales, over the world. Lisbon, & Malta,
every 7 years.
5, 5. Minores, 799 = Cross of Silver} Yellow on white, Pison. Hodus Camlionis. | Uncertain, but | Frankfort-on-the-| Kénigsberg, Stet- 5
enamelled, 4.¢., on silver, must go where Oder. tin, Berlin, and
they are told. Dantzig, every
G years.
6, 4. Philo- 822 {Cross of Silver] White with black, | Gihon. Pharus illuminans. | Apostles seldom | Dresden (Saxony).| Leipzig, Cracow, 6
sophi, enamelled. 4.¢,, Silver with a to be found. Breslau, War-
black edging. saw, and Her-
manstadt every
5 years.
7, 3. Practici. 833 [Cross of Silver, Black on white, 7.¢.,] Wetharetz. | Monoceros de astris.] Almost every- Zurich (Switzer- | Moveable—fixed 7
enamelled, on silver, where, and land). every 4 years.
nilitant.
8, 2. Theo- | 844 Anorb of | White and gold. Maim. Porajus de Rejectus,.| Engaged in study.] Bergen-op-Zoom | Moveable—fixed 8
retici. Chrystal, (Holland). every 8 years.
9, 1. Juniores, 909 A Ring with | Of gold. Aesch, Pereclinus de The lowest degree | Inspruck (Aus- | Moveable—fixed 9
characters, Faustis, of the order, tria). every 2 years,
5856
Forming | Without | Era ofthe |Bythese marks| Thus it may beseen| Names by These names are | There is areason | The Consuls must | Conventions are 45
the Kab- |distinction) Fraternity, | with the aid how far each which the periodically given verbally | not be addressed | for the purpose
balistical |of religion.jand the time} of the word, | Brother has arrived Superior changed, according for this. except by Masters} of preventing Circles
highest oftheir |honour should in his work. knows his to the rules of the of Lodges. evils coming in. in all.
number, leadership. | be rendered Inferior. Kabbalah,

for honour,

RABBINICAL SIGNIFICATIONS OF THE SEPHIROTH,
ACCORDING TO BASNAGE’S TABLE.

The
Kingdom

10 Members of PLANETS, MEMBERS
— Tar Nawesor | "ian, on10 | 08 Memoeasor | | organ | | Tux Tew Conntanp.
SEPHIROTH. Gop. ORDERS or ae ei me ate vee
The Crown | Tam thatTam | HacitHakkodssh | The Opes | the Brain | Sot but mer’ 20 otter
Wisdom | the atencet | ox Gnerabim, | “'aobie™ | TeeZunes | "riven mange
Understanding | zenorak | oritieones Firmament | ape ‘nameoftheLerd inva,
aagnineence | iyo Creator} | “ar Dominions | Seem | Thestomech| "Stpatnaage
Might | The Mighty God. | oevitaen | Jupiter | The Ever | cane
aaa | yee Go: | Melachim, Mars | The Gall | Thou shalt not kil.
Victory God of Hosts. es Cea ities The Sun | The Reins [eee eee not commit
Glory | The Lord God of Lee Venus | The Reins | Thou shalt not steal,
“Fourltion | Tee Omnipotent [ER | Mercury |The Vitale | Thog siAIFnot bear fs

| The Lord Adonai | Ischim, or Souls | The Moon. | The Womb. | Thou shalt not covet.

ROSICRUCIAN SIGNIFICATIONS OF THE SEPHIROTH,
ACCORDING TO THE TABLE OF ROSENBERG.

KABBALISTIC
NAMES OF GOD.

Ehje
I am.
Jehovah I

x

4

oO Uy

Being of Beings.
Elohim Jehova

Being of Beings.
Et

God,

mig

NAMES OF GOD

ACCORDING TO THE:

NUMBER OF THE
HEBREW LETTERS,

I

I
El Jah
One God, self-
existing.
Jeschou Schaddat
Jesus
Omnipotent.

Jehoua

Being of Beings.

THE SEPHIROTH,

Gibbor Elohin

Strong God.
Eloah

God.
Sabacth Jehovah

Lord of Hosts,
Tsebacth Elohim

God of Hosts.
Schaddat

fa] aks

a uly x(a w

KY

Omnipotent.
Adonai

Lord,
Makom

em

Nou

Place,
Agla

Triune God.

u

JFeheschouha elohim|
Elyon Saviour
God very exalted.

El gibber

Dieu fort.
Araritha

Immutable.
Vedahath Jehova

Knowledge of God,
Tsebaoth Jehova

Lord of Hosts.
Tsebaoth Elohim

God of hosts,

Kingdom.

THE BLESSED.

en,

Initium Sapientie Timor Dominis,

OF THE SPHEXES,

Kethre Haccodesch hajoth Mittatron
Seraphims
Crown, Holy Animals, | ofthe World. |
Hochma Ophanim Ratsied
Wisdom. WheeledCherubins| Courier of God._|
Bina Lrelim Tsaphkiel
Contemplation of
Intelligence. _ |Puissant Thrones. God.
Hesea Haschmatin, Tsadkiel
5 Brilliant ‘
Liberality, Dominations. Justice of God.
Gebourah Seraphim Sammael
Punishment of
Strength. Flaming Powers. God.
Tiphereth Aalachim Michael
Similar to
Beauty, Royal Virtues God.
Netsah Elohim Hanniel
7 Principatities
Victory. of God. Mercy of God.
Hod Elohim bene Raphael
. Archangels
Praise, Children of God. | Health of God.
Jesod Kerubim Gabriel
Establishment. | Angelic Children. Man-God.
Maichuth Ischim Mittatron
Blessed souls,

Messiah.

THE ORDERS OF |THE INTELLIGENCES) MS.

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

RosIcRUCIANS, EMINENT—

Adelgreiff, Johann Albrech_—A mystic and Rosicrucian, burnt
at Koenigsberg as a magician, 11th October, 1636. He was a
profoundly learned linguist; but his mind was affected, and he
advanced most extravagant pretensions. He arrogated to him-
self the omnipotence of God on earth, and asserted that his mis-
sion was to chastise the sovereigns of the earth with rods of iron.
His decrees were signed “Johann Albrecht Adelgreiff, Kihi
Schmalkhitinandis, arch-sovereign pontiff, king of the kingdom
of heaven, judge of the living and the dead, God and Father, in
the glory of whom Christ will appear at the last day, Lord of
lords and King of kings.”

Adept Merchant of Liibec—In the year 1620, Gustavus
Adolphus, king of Sweden, desiring to see a proof of the secret
of transmutation, this anonymous adept undertook to perform the
operation before him. The projection succeeded perfectly, and
the gold was coined in medals bearing the king’s effigy ; on the
reverse appeared Mercury and Venus. This adept merchant did
not appear opulent. He never entered into any commercial
business, except a transaction by which he did not profit; but
after his death there were found in his house 1,700,000 crowns.

Alain of Lisle— Celebrated for the extent of his learning ; after
a brilliant period passed in the University of Paris, he retired as a
lay brother to a cloister, and devoted his whole time to the cul-
tivation of the most sublime philosophy. His acknowledged
merit and deep researches into the Hermetic science made him
become one of the learned and illustrious doctors among the
adepts of the thirteenth century. He lived to be more than 100
years of age, and died in 1298. His philosophical writings were
separately printed and carefully preserved, some of which may
be found in the “ Theatrum Chymicum.”

Alary, Francis—A visionary and mystic, author of a book
called the “ Prophecy of Count Bombastes, Knight of the Rose
Croix, and Nephew of Paracelsus,” published in the year 1609, at
the birth of Louis the Great.

Albert de Groot, commonly called Albertus Magnus.—A Domi-
nican friar, born in Suabia at Lauigen, on the Danube, 1205,
and tutor of St Thomas Aquinas, afterwards Bishop of Ratisbon.
He died in the odour of sanctity at Cologne, aged eighty-seven.
His works were published in twenty-one folio volumes, in 1651.
He was credited with the possession of the secret of the philoso-
pher's stone. His learning surpassed that of most men of his time.

Ales, Alexander—Born at Edinburgh in 1500, and a friend
of Melanchthon. He was a profound believer in the efficacy of

amulets.
619

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

Alessandro Alessandri, otherwise Alexander ab Alexandro.—
A Neapolitan jurisconsult, died in 1523. He was the author of
a dissertation on remarkable things, and one of the precursors
of modern science.

Alfarabi—An adept who lived about the middle of the tenth
century, devoting himself to the study of all the scientific subjects
of the time, being considered one of the greatest philosophers
of his age. His adventure with the Sultan of Syria will serve
to throw some light upon his character and singular knowledge.
Alfarabi entered the court where the Sultan was seated, sur-
rounded by his ministers and learned men, and, without ceremony,
seated himself not far distant from the monarch, who, astonished
at the intruder’s boldness, directed his officers to eject him. But
Alfarabi said to him, “O King, he who acts hastily is sure to
repent.” The prince, surprised at the quaintness of his language,
as well as at his general appearance, entered into conversation
with him, and encouraged him to dispute with the doctors of his
court, who were soon silenced by the eloquence and knowledge
of the stranger. Music having been introduced, the adept sur-
passed all the other musicians by his performance on the lute.
He moved the court alternately to laughter and to tears; and
finally put them all into a profound sleep by a change in the
measure. The Sultan wished to retain this adept at his court.
Alfarabi, however, had determined to return to his own province,
but was destined never to reach it, for he was attacked by rob-
bers, and, in spite of a gallant resistance, slain. Thus perished,
in the year 954, one of the most illustrious and learned of the
followers of Mohammed. A number of his works, treating of the
Hermetic sciences, are said to exist in the Library of Leyden.

Almulus, Solomon.—A mystic who published an explanation
of dreams in Hebrew, at Amsterdam, in 1642,

Alphonso X.—King of Castile and Leon, surnamed the Wise.
He was the author of the “ Alphonsine Tables.” He pretended
to the knowledge of futurity by means of astrology.

Anselmo of Parma,—A mystic and astrologer, deceased in 1440.

Argeus, Boyer d’, Marquis—Born at Aix in Provence, 1704,
and author of the celebrated “ Lettres Cabalistiques.”

Arnold of Villanova—Born at Montpellier, died in a ship-
wreck in 1314. He was a great chemist, and discovered sul-
phuric, nitric, and muriatic acid. He first compounded alcohol,
and made several other discoveries. He was accused of magic,
like many other eminent men of his era.

Artephius——A most learned philosopher and wise adept, who
attained to the true and complete wisdom of the Hermetic science
by studying the books of the faithful Hermes, and by the use

620

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

of the wonderful quintessence of the philosopher’s stone. He is
supposed to have lived for the space of a thousand years or there-
abouts. In the latter days of his life, he determined, for the
benefit of mankind, to declare all things necessary for the perfect-
ing of this stone of the philosophers, with the single exception
of one certain thing, which he declared was not lawful for him
to impart to any one, because such knowledge could only be
revealed by God himself. We find, in the Secret Book of Arte-
phius, written in the twelfth century, that he discloses, though
clothed or disguised with a few colours, the naked truth; and so
fully has he written, that every good and wise man may happily
gather those desirable apples of the Hesperides from their own
philosopher's tree.

Avicenna.—An Arabian doctor, who died about the middle of
the eleventh century, and who was called, for his extensive
learning, the famous. He wrote many alchymical treatises ; he
was also allowed to be able to govern spirits; and it is an Oriental
belief, even to the present day, that he is not dead, but exists
somewhere, and will disclose himself at his own time.

Bacon, Roger.—A famous Franciscan friar of the eleventh
century, and a believer in the philosopher’s stone and in astrology.
He is said to have invented gunpowder; but this is doubtful,
as are also his pretensions to be considered the originator of
telescopes and spectacles. He made a famous brazen head,
which, artfully fitted with acoustic apparatus, gave forth oracles.

Barnaud, Nicolas—A Protestant doctor, of the seventeenth
century, who sought the philosopher’s stone, and enriched alchy-
mical literature with several treatises.

Bartholin, Thomas.—Born at Kjobenhaven, in Denmark, 1619.
He was a mystic and alchymist, and wrote a book on the
powder of sympathy.

Bassantin, James.—A Scottish astrologer who, in 1562, pre-
dicted the fate of Mary Queen of Scots to Sir Robert Melville.

Beausoleil, Jean du Chatelet, Baron de—A German mystic,
astrologer, and alchymist, and one who made great researches
into the doctrine of the divining wand. He was married to Mar-
tine Berthereau, who shared his pursuits ; but he was imprisoned
in the Bastile in 1641 by Cardinal Richelieu, his wife being sent
to Vincennes. From that time nothing is heard of either of
them.

Becher, Jean Joachim.—Born at Speil, 1670. A man of vast
erudition ; he travelled all over Europe, seeking and imparting a
knowledge of the Hermetic art. His works are numerous and
greatly esteemed.

Belin, Albert.—A Benedictine monk, born at Besancon in

621

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

1610. He was the author of a treatise on talismans, and also
made researches into the history and nature of the sympathetic
owder.

f Berigard of Pisa.—This celebrated adept and Italian philoso-
pher, far from being a credulous man, was inclined to scepticism.
In his “ Circulus Pisanus,’ published at Florence in the year
1641, he records the fact that in his early life he was a disbeliever
in the possibility of converting quicksilver into gold, but an
acquaintance thought fit to remove that doubt by giving him
about a drachm of a powder of the colour of the wild poppy,
which, on being mixed with ten drachms of quicksilver, and
heated in a crucible, was on projection transmuted into nearly
the same weight of pure gold. A prodigy so extraordinary sur-
prised and astonished him, but the result removed every doubt
from his mind, and for ever afterwards he made alchymy his
peculiar study.

Bernardo Trevisano.—An alchymist of the fifteenth century,
born at Padua in 1406. He wrote extensively on the philoso-
pher’s stone,

Bonati, Guido.—Florentine astrologer and alchymist of the
thirteenth century. After a long life passed in the pursuit of
the occult sciences, he became a Franciscan, and died in 1300.

Bonlleuc, James.—An astrologer at Bologna, but a native of
the diocese of Dol in Brittany.

Bono, Peter.—An adept in the Hermetic science, born in Lom-
hardy, and while residing at Pola, a seaport town of Istria, in the
year 1330, he wrote a complete treatise on the much-desired
art of the transmutation of metals. Lacinius, a Calabrian monk,
in 1702, published a faithful abridgment of Bono’s writings.

Borri, Joseph Francis—Born at Milan in 1627. He was an
alchymist who, after the death of Innocent X., was arrested on
the 3d January, 1661, and was condemned to death for heresy.
He managed, however, to escape to the North, and was not
rearrested for many years, when he was seized in a small Turkish
village, reclaimed by the Papa] nuncio, and conducted to Rome,
where he died in prison the 10th August, 1695. Borri is sup-
posed to be the character from which the imaginary Count of
Gabalis was taken by Villars.

Braccesco, Giovanni.—An alchymist of Brescia, of the sixteenth
century.

Bragadini, Marco Antonio.—A Venetian alchymist, decapi-
tated in Bavaria, in 1595, because he pretended to make gold.

Bruhesen, Pierre Van.—Died at Bruges in 1571. He was an
astrologer of some note in his day.

Busardier.—A resident of Prague, and a most learned and skilful

622

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

philosopher. When he perceived that his death was inevitably ap-
proaching, he wrote to his friend Richthausen, at Vienna, requiring
him to come with all possible expedition. He set out imme-
diately, and travelled with all speed, but, alas! on his arrival at
Prague, he found the adept was no more. He had left behind
him a great treasure in a little red powder, the merit of which
was fully known to Richthausen, and, in the year 1637, he pre-
sented himself to the Emperor Ferdinand JIL, who was also an
alchymist, and with one grain of Busardier’s red powder, on pro-
jection, they converted three pounds of mercury into fine gold.
The force of this tincture was 1 upon 19,470. Among the
many other transmutations made by this powder, was one by the
Elector of Mayence, in 1658. His Highness, with a little button,
like a small onion, covered with gum tragacanth to retain the
powder, with four ounces of quicksilver added, in a crucet heated
by a charcoal fire, made a projection, and the Master of the Mint
declared to his Highness he had never seen such fine gold, that
it was more than 24 carats. The Emperor Ferdinand caused a
medal to be struck, viz., Apollo, with the caduceus of Mercury ;
the motto, “Divina metamorphosis exhibit, Prague, Jan. 15,
anno 1648, in presentia: Sac: Ces: Majest: Ferdinandi Tertii.”
On the reverse, “ Raris hec hominibus est ars: ita rara in lIncem
prodit laudetur Deus in eternum qui partem sue infinite poten-
tie nobis suis abjectissimus creaturis communicat.”

Butler, an Alchymist about 1624.—This adept in occult mys-
tery, while serving as a slave to an Arabian philosopher, obtained
a perfect knowledge of the importance of the Hermetic treasure,
and having bargained with an Irish merchant for his ransom,
made his escape, taking with him a large portion of his master’s
red powder. Some years afterwards, while imprisoned in the
Castle of Vilvord, in Flanders, Butler performed some wonderful
cures, A fellow prisoner,a monk of Brittany, having a desperate
erysipelas in his arm, was restored to health in one hour by
drinking almond milk in which Butler only dipped a stone.
He likewise cured an old woman of a megrim by anointing her
head with oil of olives in which this stone had been dipped.
An abbess was also cured by a few applications of the same stone
to her tongue, her arm having been swelled and her fingers stiff
for eighteen years, The celebrated and illustrious Van Helmont,
and several noblemen who visited Butler while in prison, wit-
nessed these cures.

Ceesar.—An astrologer and professor of magic in the time of
Henry IV. of France. He was reputed to have been strangled
by the devil in 1611.

Calid.—Caliph or Sultan of Egypt, about 1110, i of

23

ROS] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | ROS

Morien, a learned and benevolent prince, deeply versed in the
mystic sciences.

Campanella, Thomas.—Born in Calabria in 1568, and very

early initiated into the secrets of alchymy by a learned Rabbi.
It is said he was quite instructed in all occult sciences within
fifteen days by means of the notary art. He combated the
Aristotelian philosophy, and was obliged to fly from Naples.
The Inquisition condemned him on a charge of magic ; but this
was not the real cause, which, in fact, was a political offence
against the pride of Spain. In 1626, he was invited by the Pope
to emerge from his sanctuary, and he finally died at Paris, in the
convent of the Jacobins, on the 2ist May, 1639. He wrote
several magical and alchymical works.

Cardan, Jerome—An astrologer, mystic, and alchymist, born
at Pavia in 1501, and died at Rome in 1576. His life is easily
accessible in the learned and agreeable volumes of Professor
Morley, and need not be further enlarged upon.

Castaigne, Gabriel de.—The almoner of Louis’ XIII, and an
alchymist ; ‘author of several rare and important alchymical
treatises about 1611 to 1615.

Cayet, Pierre Victor Palma.—A learned alchymist of the six-
teenth century, and author of several works on magical subjects.

Cazotte, Jacques.—Born at Dijon, 1720. Received into the
school of Martinez Pasqualis, at Lyons. He was the author of
“Le Diable Amoureux.’ On August 10, 1791, he, together with
his daughter Elizabeth, were arrested. He was condemned to
death, but was saved by the filial courage displayed by his
daughter. On the 11th of September, he was again arrested,
and. was condemned, the president of the tribunal being a
member of the school at Lyons. He was executed at seven
o'clock on the 25th of September, on the Place de Carrousel.

Cecco d’Ascoli (Francois Stabili, surnamed).—A professor of
astrolovy in the thirteenth century. It is said he was burnt
alive in 1327. He was the author of a work entitled “Com-
mentartt in spheram Joannis de Sacrabosco.” Basle, 1485.

Charnock, Thomas.—An accomplished scholar in the liberal
sciences, who at the age of 28 years practised surgery in the neigh-
bourhood of Salisbury. There he found the acquaintance of Sir
James § , & priest who lived in the cloisters near Salisbury,
who informed Charnock that he did not discover the secrets of
alchymy from any living adept, but by meditation on the
works of the ancients. Charnock became desirous to possess this
Hermetic knowledge, and one day accidentally discovered, at an
inn, an old blind man led by a boy. This man was an adept in
occas chymistry, and Charnock requested to be instructed in

24

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

natural philosophy. Being a stranger, the old man objected, say-
ing he would render his knowledge to God who gave it, if he
did not meet one Charnock, whose fame had reached him.
Charnock then made himself known, and the adept discoursed
with him for an hour on the sacred science. He promised Char-
nock to make him the heir of his knowledge, if he would make
a vow never to reveal, “only at dying,” the secret to any persou
whatsoever, except to one who was truly devoted to the search
of Nature. On the following Sunday, after receiving the sacra-
ment together, they retired into the middle of a large field, and
dismissed the boy. The blind man in a few words uttered
“the mystery of mineral prudence;” told him his name was
William Bird, and related his private history, acquainting Char-
nock that he had been a prior of Bath, and defrayed the expense
of repairing the Abbey Church from the gold which he made by
the red and white elixirs. After the old man’s death, Charnock
experimented in the science of transmutation. The work being
costly, obliged him to sell some valuable rings and jewels to
maintain it. In eight months he had made good progress, and
in a short time expected to be rewarded for his labours; but at
this critical period, being impressed to serve as a soldier in a
war with France, and furious with disappointment, he smashed
his furnace, glasses, and apparatus with a hatchet, and threw
them out of the house. In the year 1557, he wrote his “ Breviary
of Philosophy,” and in 1572, “The Enigma of Alchemy,” with a
memorandum dated 1574. He declared he only obtained the
attainment of the gold-making powder when his hairs were
white with age.

Chavigny, Jean Aimé de.—A disciple of Nostradamus, astrolo-
ger and alchymist, died in 1604.

Chevalier Imperial, The—Nationality unknown. He first ap-
peared as an alchymist in the year 1610. It is believed by some
that he was the author of the“ Arcanum Hermeticce Philosophie,”
attributed to the President Espagnet.

Chifflet, Jean—Canon of Tournay, born at Besancon about
1611. He was an authority on the Abraxas question, and the
author of a work in which the Gnostic Jews were duly con-
sidered.

Coeur, Jacques, 1408—Grand Treasurer of France. A man
who acquired enormous wealth, which was attributed by some to
the practice of alchymy, by others to his great knowledge
of finance. “His house was named ‘La Loge.’ Pierre Borel,
author of ‘ Antiquités Gauloises; thinks it probable that he be-
longed to the fraternity of Freemasons, and his being repre-

sented on the friezes of his house with a trowel in his hand,
2R 625

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

gives an indication that such was the fact.” He was banished,
and retired to Cyprus, where he died about 1460, one of the
richest and most conspicuous personages of the island.

Coley, Henry—An astrologer of England, who died in 1690.

Collanges, Gabriel de.— Astrologer, born at Auvergne in 1524,
His principal researches were directed towards the unravelling
of the Kabbalah.

Collemann, Jean.—-An astrologer born at Orleans, and in great
favour with King Charles VII. and Louis XI.

Cremer, John.— Abbot of Westminster ; after working for thirty
years to obtain the secret of the Hermetic writers, and still find-
ing himself in a labyrinth of errors, for the more he read the
more he wandered, he determined to travel. He went to Italy,
where he had the good fortune to find that pious philosopher
Raymond Lully, with whom he formed a sincere friendship.
Cremer was insinuating and affectionate, and induced Lully to
return with him to England, which he did, and lodged in the
Abbey of Westminster, where he worked and perfected the stone
which Cremer had so long sought without success. The abbot
knew how to join the duties of religion with the practice of the
Hermetic science ; his monastery daily offered up prayers to the
Most High for the success of Lully’s cause. Cremer having ob-
tained a profound knowledge of the secrets of alchymy, became
a most celebrated and learned disciple of occult philosophy.
He lived to a good old age, and died in the reign of King Edward

Denis Angorans.—A physician of Paris, astrologer, and alchy-
mist, in the fourteenth century.

Denis of Vincennes.—A doctor of the faculty of Montpellier,
and an astrologer. He sought diligently for the philosopher's
stone.

Dionysio dal Borgo.—An Italian astrologer of the thirteenth
century, and professor of theology at the University of Paris.

Espagnet, Jean d’— A Hermetic philosopher of some eminence,
and author of several treatises.

Fabre, Pierre Jean.—A physician of Montpellier, who made
considerable progress in chemistry at the commencement of the
seventeenth century. His most remarkable book was the “ Al-
chemista Christianus,” published at Toulouse in 1632. He like-
wise published a work entitled “Hercules Piochymica,” at Toulouse,
1634, in which he maintained that the labours of Hercules were
only emblems concealing portions of the Hermetic art.

Faddel-ben-Sahal.—The Vizier of the Khalif Almamon, cele-
brated as a great astrologer.

Falk, Cain Chenul, commonly known as Doctor Falcon—An

626

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

inhabitant of London, commemorated by the German annalist
Archenoiz, who speaks of him thus in his work on Eng-
land, published in 1788—“ There exists in London an extra-
ordinary man, who for thirty years has been celebrated in
Kabbalistical records. He is named Cain Chenul Falk. <A
certain Count de Rautzow, lately dead, in the service of France,
with the rank of Field Marshal, certifies that he has seen this
Falk in Brunswick, and that evocations of spirits took place in
the presence of credible witnesses,” He was at this time some
seventy years of age, and he accomplished his miracles without
any apparent intermediation, and was himself healthy and ruddy.
Falk, Johann Friedrich, son of the preceding.—He was born at
Hamburg, and was of Jewish parentage. He had great skill in
the Holy Kabbalah, and his writings, hitherio unprinted, are
preserved with great respect by all those who knew him. He is
reported to have died about 1824, and he was the head of a
Kabbalistic College in London. His occupation was that of a
jeweller and appraiser of diamonds and other precious stones,
but his chief delight was in doing good, and his reward was in the
affectionate regard bestowed upon him by a large circle of friends,
whose minds he enlarged by his instruction, while his ample
funds were always at their disposal. Whether he was any rela-
tion to the Falk named in a former article (see Falk, de Rabbi)
it is elton to say, but there seems a similarity of ideas
among these men which might warrant such an assumption.
Faust, Johann.—Born at Gundling, in Wurtemberg, about the
end of the fifteenth century. His father was a peasant farmer,
but having rich relatives at Wittemberg, he attended that univer-
sity, and made the acquaintance of Luther, Melanchthon, and
others, He afterwards repaired to Cracow, in Poland, where a
course of magic was publicly taught, but he soon returned
proclaiming himself an adept in all occult science. He also pro-
cured the assistance of the great crystalomancian, Christopher
Kayllinger, and sought the spirit world by that peculiar path.
Many lies have been published about Faust, for perhaps the
very obvious reason that little was ever actually known about
him. To receive from contemporaries the reputation of a wizard,
and a companion of a demon, scarcely whitewashes your name at
the expiration of three centuries, Historically, however, Faust
was a very learned physician and profound student, who exposed
himself, without any sensation of fear, to a horrible epidemic,
and, by his example and his courage, saved at least many hundred
lives. He was not strangled by the devil, nor did he do more
than nine-tenths of the learned men of his time in occult science.
It may appear strange for a nineteenth century writer zo stiep
27

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

a vindication of a fifteenth century personage, but where there is
a reason to do so it must be done.

Ferrier, Auger.—A physician and astrologer, author of a book
on horoscopes, dedicated to Queen Catherine de Medicis.

Fioravanti, Leonardo.— A physician and alchymist of the six-
teenth century. He was a very voluminous writer on scientific
secrets.

Flamel, Nicolas—A distinguished Kabbalist, thaumaturgist,
and philosopher of the fourteenth century. His attainments
embraced the whole circle of the sciences, practical and specula-
tive, of his time. He was public notary to the Cemetery of the
Innocents at Paris, and from being extremely poor suddenly
became immensely rich, owing, it was thought, to his having
discovered the philosopher’s stone. His wife Pernelle assisted
him in his alchymical studies. He was very charitable with his
wealth. He was buried in the church St Jacques de la Bou-
cherie, at Paris, although a report was widely believed that, being
in possession of the elixir of life, he merely disappeared, and
never died at all.

Gaffarelli, James.—An oriental scholar, born at Mannes, in Pro-
vence, in 1601, died 1681. He was librarian to Cardinal Riche-
lieu. His chief works were—“Secret Mysteries of the Divine
Kabbalah—Paris, 1625;” “Unheard-of Curiosities respecting
the Talismanic Sculptures of the Persians, the Horoscope of the
Patriarchs, and the Reading of the Stars—Paris, 1629 ;” “ Index
to the Nineteen Kabbalistical MSS. used by John Pico de
Mirandula—Paris, 1651.”

Gauric, Luke—A Neapolitan astrologer, born in 1476, died
1558. He was famous for the accuracy of his predictions.

Gauthier, John.—A charlatan who obtained an immense sum
from Charles IX., on the pretence that he would produce the
philosopher's stone. He fled with this money, but was pursued,
and ultimately hanged.

Gobineau de Montluisant—An alchymist of the sixteenth
century, who professed to discover the whole of the Hermetic
art on the sculptures adorning the fagade and front of the
Cathedral of Notre Dame, at Paris.

Gohorry, James.—An alchymical author much neglected.

Gratarole, William.—A physician and alchymist. Died 1568.

Gualdi, The Signor—About the middle of the seventeenth
century, there appeared at Venice a man as eniymatical as Lord
Lytton’s Zanoni, and the description given of him might well
pass for the latter. His habits were so singularly simple, and
his tastes so cultivated, that he aroused the curiosity of all
ese in that city. He was affable and communicative in con-

y

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia, [Ros

versation, and no period of history appeared unknown to him; he
made the most remarkable corrections in conversation upon in-
considerable facts in ancient history. He never corresponded
with any one, and paid for everything in money—making “no
use of bankers, bills of exchange, or letters of credit.” —-(Jennings’
“ Rosicrucians: their Rites and Mysteries,” p. 25). The daughter
of a Venetian noble fell in love with him, and on a visit paid by
her father and herself to his apartments, they saw a magnificent
portrait painted by Titian, evidently of Gualdi himself. When
spoken to in reference to it, he parried the inquiry by the asser-
tion that it was not strange he should be like a picture by Titian.
It was plain, however, that Gualdi was alarmed, for he quitted
Venice the next day, and was never heard of again. An account
of this personage may be found in “ Les Mémoires Historiques” for
1687, tom. i. p. 365.

Hynerfanger, Isaac_—A Jewish Kabbalist of the thirteenth cen-
tury, regarded by his contemporaries as a very powerful magician.

Isle en Jourdain, Mainfroy de 1’.—A learned astrologer and
alchymist, who discovered the abominable intrigues of Philip and
Walter D’Aunoy with Marguerite of Navarre and Queen Blanche.

Jechiel—A Jewish Rabbi and Kabbalist. He lived at Paris
in the days of Saint Louis, and possessed a marvellous lamp,
which filled his chamber with the light of day. He used no oil,
and it never went out. This was, no doubt, some preparation of
phosphorus, similar to that discovered, in 1750, by the Prince de
San Severo, at Naples, in the course of some of his experiments.

John of Meung—aAn alchymist who composed the famous
“Romance of the Rose,” although he was then only nineteen
years of age.

John of Milan.—An astrologer of the fifteenth century, who
predicted to Velasquez, the governor of Hispaniola, the fortunate
issue of the celebrated expedition of Cortez to Mexico.

John of Sicily.—A theologian and astrologer, who predicted the
coronation of the Emperor Sigismund.

Kelly, Edward.—Born 1555, a native of Lancashire, and seer
to Dr John Dee. He was a notary, or, according to some, an
apothecary. He is said to have discovered a book of St Dunstan
and the powder, whilst digging among the ruins of Glastonbury
Abbey. In 1583, Edward Kelly left England, together with Dr
Dee and others, on a journey to Cracow. In 1595, Kelly was
knighted by the Emperor Rudolph, was imprisoned shortly
afterwards, and killed whilst attempting to escape.

Lensberg, Matthew.—A canonical priest of Liége, in Belgium,
about 1636, who published an astrological almanac, and was
highly esteemed for his knowledge of the occult Eerene:

29

ROS| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

Lagneau, or Laigneau (David)—An adept who died in the
seventeenth century. He translated the “Twelve Keys of Phi-
losophy” of Basil Valentine; and his work on “ Mystical Har-
mony,” published at Paris in 1636, shows that he was deeply
engaged in alchymy.

Le Normant, Martin.—An astrologer esteemed by King John
of France, to whom he predicted the victory he was to gain over
the Flemings,

Lenglet-Dufresnoy, Nicolas.—Born at Beauvais in 1674, and
died in 1755. His principal work was a “ History of Hermetic
Philosophy, 1742.”

Leopold; Prince—The natural son of the Emperor Rudolph
II., who was himself a student of the occult sciences. He was
eredited with raising the devil.

Levi of Moravia.—A Kabbalist of the sixteenth century, of
great renown.

Lomelli, Battista—An Italian mystic who appeared in Paris
in the reign of Louis XIII, and performed many marvels about
1630.

Menasseh-ben-Israel—A learned Portuguese Kabbalist, born
about 1604. His commentaries on the Talmud were very volu-
minous. He, together with a converted Jew, Antonio Monte-
sini, of Villaflor, first promulgated the theory that the lost tribes
of Israel were to be found in America, and he published a book,
“ Snes Israelis,” at Amsterdam, in 1650, in proof of the idea. In
the third portion of his Hebrew book, “ Breath of Life,” Amster-
dam, 5412 (1652), he treats of magical and alchymistical
matters.

Ménestrier, Claude Francis—Author, in 1694, of a work
entitled “The Philosophy of Enigmatical Images.”

Messa-Hala.—An Arabian astrologer and mystic of the eighth
century.

Moult, Thomas Joseph A Neapolitan astrologer and alchy-
mist.

Miiller, John (surnamed Regiomontanus).—Born in Franconia
in 1436, died at Rome in 1476. He wasa learned Kabbalist, an
astronomer, and astrologer, and was also celebrated for his
mechanical skill. He made an eagle which flew before the
Emperor on his entrance into Ratisbon, and an iron fly, which
saluted each member of the company by buzzing in the ear, and
then returned to the mechanician’s hand. Regiomontanus was
the constructor of a series of astronomical tables. These are so
excessively rare, that the author of the present book, in the year
1856, published two copies, both in his possession, and calculated
for the latitude of London 51° 32'; the Domal Polar Altitudes

630

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

being for the 11th and 3d Houses=32° 11’; while those of the
12th and 2d House=47° 28. Certain formule were added, but
as they would alone be intelligible to the astrologer, their repub-
lication is unnecessary in this place.

Naudé, Gabriel—One of the most distinguished scholars of
his time. Born at Paris, in 1600, he became librarian to Cardinal
Mazarin, and afterwards of Queen Christina, dying at Abbeville,
in 1653. He wrote several works on Rosicrucian history, but
he was opposed to the theories they enunciated.

Nostradamus, Michael.—Physician and astrologer, born at
St Remi, in Provence, in 1503, and died at Salon, in 1566.
He published seven centuries of predictions at Lyons in 1555,
and, strange to say, many of these have come true. He was a
favourite with Catherine de Medicis and Charles IX. Jodelle
the poet wrote these punning lines on him :—

“ Nostra damus cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrum est ;
Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi nostra damus.”

Obereit, Jacob Hermann.—Alchymist and mystic, born in
1725 at Arbon in Switzerland, died in 1798. His father
was an alchymist before him. After a time, this mystic’s
laboratory was closed by authority. Obereit appears to have
belonged to Gichtel’s school, although living long after him, for
he declared himself married to a seraphic influence, named
Theantis, whom he had wedded in a castle surrounded by
clouds—(see Gichtel). She died, it is said, in thirty-six days.
Mystics may perceive that this being was the moon, and that he
was talking only to avoid persecution. He was the author of
several books connected with magic.

Penote.—An alchymist of the seventeenth century, who was
reduced to the poorhouse, and used with some bitterness to say,
that he desired no worse fate for his deadliest enemies than an
inclination for following out the principles of alchymy.

Picus, John, Earl of Mirandola.—Born 1463, died 1494 ; author
of a very curious treatise “On Gold,” and of many curious Kabba-
listic works, He is said not to have been an adept.

Postel, Guillaume.—A Norman Jesuit, born in 1510, of obscure
parents, who left, him an orphan at a very early age. His pre-
cocious talents soon raised him friends, and he became a servitor
in the college of St Barbe. His vast learning brought him under
the notice of Francis I., by whom he was sent to the Levant in
search of valuable MSS. and antiquities. He is said by some to
have been received into an Eastern fraternity. On his return to
France, he was received with great honour, but was subsequently
banished. He for some time led a wandering life, and fell
under the censure of the Inquisition, by whom he mas TOTO:

3

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Ros

into a dungeon. He was ultimately released. He wrote
“ Clavis Absconditorum,’—a key to the things hidden since the
commencement of the world.

Ragusa, George of —A theologian, physician, and professor in
the University of Padua. He published a work at Paris, in 1623,
on the occult sciences—comprehending astrology, chiromancy,
geomancy, magic, and the Kabbalah.

Riviere, Roch le Bailiff, Sieur de la—A physician and astro-
loger, born at Falaise in the fifteenth century. He was body
physician to Henry IV., and received many favours at the hands
of his king. He died the 5th November, 1605. He wrote a
Treatise on the Comet of 1577.

Spirinx, John.—A Belgian astrologer of the fifteenth century.
He predicted to Charles the Bold his approaching death if he
marched against the Swiss. This prediction was actually rejected
with contumelious words on the duke’s part; but the prophecy
proved not the less true, although the dukedied honourably fighting.

Stoffler—_A German mathematician and astrologer, who flour-
ished towards the end of the fifteenth century. He announced
the end of the world by water for the close of February, 1524—
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, being in congress in Pisces. This
prediction caused a great deal of alarm throughout Europe, but
the affair did not come off—not a drop of rain fell.

Valentine, Basil.— Alchymist and philosopher, concerning
whose existence many stories of the most contradictory nature
have been told, he being made to have lived in the twelfth, the
thirteenth, and the fourteenth centuries. He has been stated to
have been a Benedictine monk of Erfurt. The discovery of
antimony is said to be due to him, and there cannot be a doubt
that he rendered valuable services to science. His works were
very voluminous, but were not published till many years after
his death, the date of which is uncertain.

Villiers, Florent de—An astrologer who flourished in the times
of Louis XI., and a great traveller. He was eternally on the
wing through France from place to place—stopping at Mont-
pellier, where he studied medicine. Then he went to Rome,
Venice, Alexandria, Cairo, and finally entered the household of
Duke John of Bourbon, whence he was taken into the service of
the king, Louis XI, himself no mean student in the natural
sciences, and accompanied him into Savoy to study the botany of
that region. He remained in Switzerland for a long time, and
finally settled at Lyons, built himself a library and workshop,
married, and publicly held a school of astrology, which it is said
King Charles VII. attended. He was accused, like most learned
men of his time, of having a familiar demon.

632

ROS | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Rou

This list of eminent persons connected with the occult sciences
can hardly be regarded as complete, but it has been given in
order that the readers of this book may at anyrate be brought
to meditate for a time on the singular effect produced by a desire
for knowledge, and also that its multiform influence will, despite
education, evince itself according to the anthropological idiosyn-
crasy of the individual devoting himself to occult pursuits, even
if they be innocent in their tendency and elevating in themselves.
More important members of the occult body will be found already
described, or in their proper places in the general body of the
work.

Rosy Cross. (See Royal Order of Scotland.)

Rosy Cross.—To the Magi nothing is unknown, and they claim
superiority and rank over all others, as Moses, Aaron, Hermes,
Hiram, and others, did. To the Magistri are assigned the three
principal sciences in a perfect degree. The Adepti Exempti are
acquainted with the philosophic stone, commonly called the
philosopher’s stone; also with the Kabbalah and natural magic.
The Majores possess the Lapidem mineralem, or magnet. The
Minores are instructed in the nature of the philosophical sun,
and thereby perform marvellous cures. The Philosophi are ac-
quainted with botany, natural history, and other branches of
science. The Practici are inured to hardship, and find from other
sources the essential forces in the form of coin, which govern any
body of men. They are invested with a knowledge of chaos, not
perhaps a very desirable acquisition. The Theoretici are engaged,
like many others, in that frightful hunt symbolized in Der Freis-
chiitz, where the wild huntsman comes along—the realization of
gold without labour. Of the Juniores, it is only necessary to be
said that they are learners, more or less diligent according to ca-
pacity. If students of Rosicrucianism would be content to adopt
symbolical interpretations, they would progress in what is really
pleasing in the science. (See Rosicructanism.)

RoTA.—1. An ecclesiastical court at Rome formed of twelve bishops,
one a German, another a Frenchman, two Spaniards, and eight
Italians, 2. A club in England about 1650, which advocated the
principle of government by rotation, somewhat after the fashion
pursued at one time in ancient Athens.

Rotunpa.—A building, round both within and without.

Roucu Asuiar. (See Ashlar.)

Rovucucast.—A species of plastering used in building on external
walls, formed of a mixture of lime, shells, pebbles, and other
rude material.

Rovunp TasBe, Kine Artuur’s.—It is traditionally asserted that
King Arthur of Britain, whose existence is very doubtful, but

633

ROU] The Royal Masonic Cytlopedia. [Roy

the date of whose death, according to the twelfth century
Chronicle of the Brute of England, was A.D. 542, established an
order of knighthood under this name. These knights were twelve
or twenty-four in number, and were bound to appear at his
court on certain solemn days, and were seated at a round table,
which gave its name to the Order. The members of the Order
were bound, after having given proofs of their valour, to defend
widows, maidens, and children; to relieve the distressed, main-
tain the Christian religion, contribute to the support of the
church, protect pilgrims, advance honour, and suppress vice.
They were also enjoined to administer to the wants of wounded
soldiers and to bury the slain; to ransom captives, deliver pri-
soners, and record all prominent events in connection with the
history of the Order.

RounD Tas.e, KNIGHTS OF THE—A convivial society meeting at
the Round Table in St Martin’s Court, St Martin’s Lane, London.

RounD Towers or IRELAND.—These buildings, of which sixty-two
remain, vary in height from 80 to 120 feet, and are found in
many parts of Ireland. Their shape is cylindrical, having a
single door about 8 or 10 feet from the ground, and a small
aperture near the top. Many theories have been advanced as to
their origin and object, but up to the present time scarcely any-
thing definite is known concerning them. It is very probable,
however, that one of the uses to which they were-applied was to
sustain beacon fires in times of war—an almost chronic condition
in ancient Ireland. It is somewhat curious to find similar
structures in Oriental countries—no doubt they had some con-
nection with an early form of religious faith, but the idea, at
one time entertained, that they were connected with Masonic
initiation, may be at once dismissed as unworthy of notice.

Rowers. (See Knight Rower.)

Row.anps.—A fraternity, by the title of the ancient and honour-
able family of the Rowlands, held their annual meeting at the
Prince and Princess of Orange, Whitechapel Fields, cired 1750.
(See Derisive Societies.

Roya AND SELECT Masters. (See Vault.)

RoyaL ARCH, ANCIENT. (See Enoch.)

Royat Arco Apron.—A lambskin, lined and bound with scarlet,
on the flap of which is a triple tau within a triangle, again sur-
rounded by a circle.

Roya, ArcH BADGE—This consists of the triple tau, or three tau
crosses joined at the feet thus, ,1,. It is sometimes termed the
“emblem of all emblems,” and in the English Royal Arch lecture
it is thus defined :—“ The triple tau forms two right angles on
each of the exterior lines, and another at the centre by their

634

ROY | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Roy

union; for the three angles of each triangle are equal to two
right angles. This, being triplified, illustrates the jewel worn by
the companions of the Royal Arch, which, by its intersection,
forms a given number of angles that may be taken in five several
combinations.” (See Jewel, Royal Arch.)

Royau ARcH BANNERS. (See Arms of Freemasonry.)

Roya, Axrcy Caprain.—The sixth officer of a Royal Arch Chapter,
according to the American rite. He represents the Captain of
the King’s Guards, and is seated in front of the Council, at the
entrance of the fourth veil, which he guards. He is clothed in
a white robe and cap, is armed with a sword, and bears a white
banner, on which is a representation of a lion, the emblem of
the tribe of Judah. Jewel: a triangular plate of gold displaying
a sword. He is equivalent to a Junior Deacon in a Craft Lodge.

RoyaL ARCH CLOTHING.—This consists, in the American rite, of an
apron, as previously described; a scarf of scarlet velvet or silk,
on which is represented the words, “ Holiness to the Lord,” on a
blue ground. If an officer, he has a scarlet collar, from which
depends the jewel of his office. Every companion should also
wear, at his button hole, attached by a scarlet ribbon, the general
jewel of the Order.

Royat Arc Cotours.—The special colour of the Royal Arch
degree is red or scarlet, symbolical of fervency or zeal. The
colours employed in the decorations of a Chapter are blue,
purple, scarlet, and white, in each case having a symbolical
signification. (See Veils of the Tabernacle.)

Royat ArcH DEGREE.—At the present day, there is no degree so
popular in England and America, as the Companionship of the
Holy Royal Arch of Jerusalem; and its system has been so
elaborately refined in all its parts, that it deserves the high
favour it has attained. Yet, like Craft Masonry, its history is
obscure, and its origin uncertain. It would appear, however,
according to the best authorities, that not only has it arisen as a
distinct branch of Craft Masonry at a period much less remote
than that of the craft revival of 1717, but that it was introduced
by the schismatic body known as the Ancient Grand Lodge,
some two years after their secession in 1738. There can, how-
ever, be little doubt that it was formed upon imperfect traditions
previously extant, and really pertaining to the Master Mason’s
degree, as the principal quest of the Companions is the discovery
of that lost word, for which another was temporarily substituted
in the Craft Third Degree; nor is it at all unlikely that the
Mark degree owes such authority as it possesses to a similar
condition of things ; and this is further confirmed by the fact that
manuscripts of importance were unquestionably destroyed by

35

ROY | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ROY

scrupulous brethren soon after 1717. On the union in 1813, the
Royal Arch was fully and formally recognised by the United
Grand Lodge of England, and has since remained an important
constituent of Craft Masonry, completing the-series of symbolical
teachings comprised in Freemasonry. The estimation in which
it was held from the period of its introduction is shown by the
terins in which Dermott and Oliver speak of it. By the former
it is called “the root, heart, and marrow of Masonry ;” and the
latter says that “it is indescribably more august, sublime, and
important than any which precede it, and is, in fact, the summit
and perfection of ancient Masonry.” This may be true, in point
of symbolism ; but it is evidently a fact that the addition of the
Royal Arch, as a separate degree, was an after thought; and its
admission at the union an act of compromise to conciliate then
existing members of the schismatic Ancient Grand Lodge. In
some form or other, however, we find ideas connected with many
of the degrees in vogue on the Continent at an early day;
and although it would be erroneous to say that the degrees of
the Ninth Arch, Burning Bush, of the East or of the Sword, and
similar degrees, contributed to the modern ritual of the Royal
Arch, still in these degrees much is to be found of analogy—
(see Ramsay's Rite.) It is certain that, as recently as 1758,
the Constitutional Grand Lodge held no royal degree, for the
Secretary in that year declared that the society was “neither
Arch, Royal Arch, nor Ancient.’ Oliver thinks it certain that
the Royal Arch was accepted by the Moderns about 1776, about
the time of the dedication of the Freemason’s Hall, this form of
the Royal Arch being the invention of Dunckerley. America
derived its Royal Arch warrants from the Athol or Ancient
Grand Lodge, and it would seem that the Symbolic Lodge War-
rant included the Royal Arch. The first distinct Grand Chapter,
however, according to proofs in the possession of Brother Hughan,
was formed in 1766, virtually under the wings of the “ Moderns,”
although it had considerable difficulty in establishing its autho-
rity. There must, however, have been some original cause for
the establishment of the Royal Arch, the lost word having
been found by Brother Oliver, on an ancient tracing board, of
the date of 1725; but in this case it was still not a separate
degree. One great effect of the peculiar symbolism of the Royal
Arch has been the cordial support by an influential and liberal-
minded number of our fellow-countrymen, those who still pre-
serve the ancient faith of Judaism without allowing it to militate
against their obligations of nationality, and all must agree that
the abolition or modification of the Royal Arch would result in
much Masonic disorder and dissatisfaction. The principal officers
636

ROY] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Roy

of a Royal Arch Chapter in England are Zerubbabel, Haggai,
and Joshua: there should also be three Sojourners and two Scribes,
Ezra and Nehemiah, together with a Treasurer and Janitor; and
in the English system of Freemasonry, the Royal Arch degree is
the fourth, attainable after twelve months’ majority as a Master
Mason. In Scotland, it is necessary to have taken the Mark,
Past, and Excellent Masters’ degrees. The legend in the Irish
rite is different, alluding to the discovery of the Book of the
Law in the Temple by Hilkiah (B.c. 624) ; the preliminary degrees
are Past, Excellent, and Super-Excellent. The American Chap-
ters differ in some respects, especially in the arrangement of the
three principals—Priest coming first, King second, and Prophet
third, with a Scribe, Captain of the Host, Principal Sojourner,
Royal Arch Captain, and three Masters of Veils. Although the
building of the Second Temple forms no unimportant feature in
this degree, it is evident that the discovery of the Lost Word is
the main purpose. As to the other details, they have already
been explained under former titles. (See Apron, Jewel, Royal
Arch, and other articles.)

Royau Arcu, Granbp.—Thirty-first degree of the Rite of Mizraim.

RoyaL ARCH JEWEL, (See Jewel, Royal Arch.)

ROYAL ARCH, Ramsay’s. (See Royal Arch.)

ROYAL ARCH OF Enocu. (See Enoch.)

Roya, ARcH OF SoLomon.—Identical with the Knights of the
Ninth Arch and that of Enoch. (See Enoch.)

RoyvaL ARCH OF ZERUBBABEL.—So called to distinguish it from the
toyal Arch of the High Degrees. (See Royal .4rch.)

ROYAL ARK MARINER.—A side degree, usually called Ark Mariner,
conferred on Royal Arch Masons in England and Scotland, under
the authority of the Grand Mark Lodge of England and Grand
Chapter of Scotland. (See Noachide.)

RoyaL Art.—Masonry is thus called, because its objects are so
beneficent that princes of the blood royal at all times have fol-
lowed its great restorer Solomon, in patronising and protecting
arehitecture in all its forms, whether castellated, ecclesiastical,
or secular. It is also distinguished asa Royal Art, because to
attain distinction in its operative and speculative branches re-
quires a keen sense of beauty, a just hand ready to adorn and
perfect any edifice, and strength to move great weights by appa-
rently small appliances.

Roya, AxE.—This degree, which is now the 22° A. and A. Rite,
was instituted to commemorate the services rendered to Masonry
by the “mighty cedars of Lebanon.” In the traditional history
of the degree, we are told that the Sidonians were employed to
cut cedars on Mount Lebanon for the timbers of Noah’s ee

37

ROY | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RUD

obvious anachronism, as Sidon was not in existence in Noah’s
time. The descendants of the Sidonians also cut cedars for the
construction of the ark of the covenant, which could not be, for
similar historical reasons. Still later, their posterity hewed
down the trees for King Solomon’s Temple, and Zerubbabel
again called in their services on the occasion of the rebuilding of
the second temple. All these statements show that some occult
symbolism underlies the legend. Apron: white, lined and
bordered with purple, bearing the device of a round table on
which lie architectural designs; the flap is ornamented with a
three-headed serpent. Jewel: a golden axe, with particular
initials. The Lodge is termed a College.

toyaL Lopce.—The English Royal Arch Lectures say that the
Royal (or Grand) Lodge was held at Jerusalem, on the return of
the Babylonian captives, in the first year of the reign of Cyrus,
the Principals of which were the noble Zerubbabel, Haggai the
prophet, and Joshua the high priest.

RoyaL Master.—Eighth degree of the American Rite, and first of
those conferred in a Council of Royal and Select Masters, It is
evidently a theatrical extension of the Master’s degree, borrowed,
like the remainder of the cryptic degrees, from the A. and A.
Rite. (See Vault.)

Roya, ORDER OF ScoTLAND.—An order of Freemasonry peculiar
to Scotland, conferred upon members of the Royal Arch, having
two degrees—1.Heredom. 2. Rosy Cross,thus literated, H.R.D.M.
and R.S. ¥.C.S. According to the legends of the former degree,
the Culdees purified the third degree of Craft Masonry from any
Pagan taint ; while the second is an order of Civil Knighthood,
said to have been founded by Robert the Bruce after the battle
of Bannockburn. The King of Scotland is Hereditary Grand
Master of this Order, and a vacant chair is reserved for him at all
meetings.

Roya PriestHoon.—Fifth degree of the Initiated Brothers of Asia,
sometimes also called True Rose Croix.

Royat Secret. (See Sublime Prince of the Royal Seeret.)

Royat StaG Socizety.—Was held every Monday evening at seven
o’clock at the Three Tuns, near the Hospital Gate, Newgate
Street, from 1745 to 1770. (See Derisive Societies.)

Roya.ist SociETY.—An association in Spain under Ferdinand VII,
having reactionary tendencies.

R. 8. ¥. C. S—An abbreviation of Rosy Cross, in the Royal Order
of Scotland.

Rupp, Dr.—A west country Rosicrucian and Quietist of whom very
little is known, except that he has left behind him six quarto
olannies of Rosicrucian lore, now in the British Museum, Har-

63

RUF | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [RUS

leian MSS., Nos. 6481 to 6486. In the Rosicrucian, Vol. II,
p. 65, will be found a specimen of the style of this author.

RUFFIANS.—The appellation of the assassins of Hiram Abiff, in
English Masonry ; numerous and widely different names have
been given to them, and these are given under their respective
heads.

Ru.te—An instrument by which proportion is ascertained, mea-
surements made, and straight lines drawn. It is, in Symbolical
Masonry, the peculiar attribute of the Actual Master and Past
Master, and is introduced to his notice to impress upon him the
absolute imperativeness of rigid rectitude and unswerving devo-
tion to the paths of virtue, while his general conduct should be
measured by gradations of firmness and justice. Thus a Past
Master of an earthly Lodge may by this rule attain an honoured
place in the Grand Lodge in Heaven. It is an error to confound
this instrument with the twenty-four inch gauge.

RULE OF THE TEMPLARS. (See Templarism.)

Russta.—Freemasonry introduced into Russia by the Grand Lodge
of England in1731,Captain John Philips being the first Provincial
Grand Master. A Lodge was said to have been established in 1732
at St Petersburg ; but the earliest notice of regular lodges we pos-
sess points to the Lodge of Silence in the capital, and the North
Star Lodge at Riga, about 1750. In 1763, the Empress Catherine
II. declared herself patroness of the order. The Rite of Melesino,
named after its inventor, was introduced about 1765—(see Melesino,
Rite of.) A National Grand Lodge was formed by twelve Lodges
in 1783, on the basis of the Swedish system, and for a few years
Masonry flourished with great activity ; but, in 1794, Catherine
withdrew her protection, being afraid of the political condition
of France. The Lodges were then closed down by the brethren,
and the Fraternity became dormant in that country. Paul I. in
1797, at the instance of the Jesuits, placed formal interdict upon
the Freemasons of the empire; but it is difficult to understand
how the Head of the Orthodox Greek Church could be controlled
by Roman Catholic authorities, It is well known that Russia
has ever suffered from innumerable sects starting up unexpect-
edly, and perhaps it is rather to this cause than to the repre-
sentations of the Jesuits that we may attribute the suppression
of an institution so directly useful to the state in principle and
mode of action. In 1803, Boeber, a counsellor of state, obtained
a revocation from Alexander I., and the Czar was himself ini-
tiated, but the political exigencies occurring in Poland brought
a decree, 12th August, 1822, closing all Lodges, and forbidding the
erection of any further temples. It is, perhaps, the prevalence
of the High Degrees which actuated the Czar in this course.

639

s| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sac

Ancient Craft Masonry has never done any harm in any country,
but the interference with the prerogative of the Sovereign by the
conference of pseudo-chivalric degrees in the higher orders of
Masonry has very often acted to the disadvantage of Masonry in
general.

8.

S, the nineteenth letter of the English alphabet. As a numeral it
denoted sixty. The sacred letter of the Hebrews was Samech, D;
and the holy name of God is Somech, Did, Fulciens or Firmas.

Saaus.—A Hindu sect, somewhat resembling the Quakers, who
have embraced Christianity. They abound about Furruckabad
and Murzapore.

SaBaoTH.—A name of God constantly occurring in the prophetical
books of the Old Testament.

SABBATIANS.—Followers of Sabbatius, a Jew, converted to Chris-
tianity in the fourth century. He attempted to maintain the
Old Covenant as well as the New, and insisted that they were
both compulsory.

SABELLIANS.—Disciples of an Egyptian philosopher of the third
century, who taught that there was only one person in the God-
head, and that the Word and Spirit were only emanations or
functions of the Deity.

SapranisM.—the religion of the ancient Chaldees. They believed
in the Unity of God, but adored the stars as well, or rather the
angels and intelligences, supposed to reside in them, and to
govern the universe under God himself. They believed that the
souls of the wicked would be punished for nine thousand years,
but would be finally restored and forgiven. They prayed thrice
a-day, and offered sacrifices, but did not partake of them.

Sapians. (See Johannite Christians.)

SaccoPHori.—A sect of Christians, so called because they always
went clothed in sackcloth, and affected great austerity of life.
SACELLUM.—In Roman architecture, a small enclosed space without
a roof; and in ecclesiastical architecture, a small monumental

chapel within a church.

SACKCLOTH.—A symbol of grief in the Rose Croix ritual.

SacRARIuM.—A little room in a Roman house, dedicated to some
particular deity; also the adytum of a temple.

SacRED AsyLUM.—Applied to chapters, councils, and senates in the
high degrees.

SacrED Law, VOLUME OF THE—The Bible is thus named in

Masonry.
640

SAC] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sat

Sacca, Fratres pE—A penitential order of Begging Friars (de
penitentid Jesu), to whom some ground was given in the Old
Jewry, London, in the time of Henry III., taken from the Jews
who had there built the first synagogue in England. With the
sarcasm of history, it has passed to the possession of the City
Police Force, and is now occupied by the members of that body.

SacreD Lopce.—The Sacred Lodge was that over which King
Solomon, Hiram, king of Tyre, and Hiram Abiff presided, and was
held in the bowels of the sacred Mount Moriah, under the part
whereon was erected the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple.

SACRED Fire, Doctor oF THE.—70° of the Rite of Memphis.

SacrIFIcANT.— A degree in the archives of the Lodge of Saint Louis
des Amis Réunis, at Calais; also called Sacrificer, and named in
Pyron’s list.

SACRIFICE, ALTAR OF. (See Altar.)

SapDER—A summary of the Zendavesta of the Parsees.

SADDUCEES.—One of the sects of the Jews existing at the time of
Christ, who followed Zadok, himself a disciple of Antigonus
Saccho. They denied the doctrine of the immortality of the soul,
and that of the resurrection.

Sacr or HELIoPpoLis.—73° of the Rite of Memphis.

SaGE or Stva.—63° of the Rite of Memphis.

Sace or TrurH.—A degree in the Antient and Primitive Rite.

Sace, SUBLIME, OF THE LABYRINTH.—61° of the Rite of Memphis.

Sacirra.— term for the keystone of an arch.

Saint ADHABELL, (See Amphibolus.)

Saint ALBAN.—The proto-martyr of England, born at Verulam or
Saint Albans, in Hertfordshire, in the third century. He is the
reputed legendary introducer of Freemasonry into England, but
without much evidence. He suffered death in the persecution
of the Emperor Diocletian. (See Grand Masters of Freemasonry.)

SaInT ALBANS, Ear. or.—Said to have been elected G.M. in 1663.

Saint ANDREW’s Day.—The 30th November, on which the Grand
Lodge of Scotland holds its Annual Festival. Saint Andrew is
the Patron Saint of Scotland.

Saint Aucustine.—According to tradition, G. M. in A.D. 557.

SAINT BERNARD, OF CLAIRVAUX.—A man of extreme piety and
learning in the twelfth century. In 1128, he was present at the
Council of Troyes, where his influence procured the confirmation
of the Order of Knights Templar, and he is the reputed author
of their Rule or Statute.

Saint CONSTANTINE, ORDER OF.—lInstituted 313; also known as the
Order of the Golden Angel, and sometimes as that of Saint George.
The Abbé Giustiniani, who asserted himself to be a Knight and
Grand Cross of the Order at Venice, in 1692, declared ie 2 be the

2S 4t

Sat] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SAI

most ancient order of knighthood in the world. But it does not seem
in reality to be older than the twelfth century. It is true, letters
of Pope Leo to the Emperor Marcian, in 456, have been produced,
confirming the order under the rule of Saint Basil, and other
letters from the Emperor Leo I. in 489; but they are mere for-
geries, deposited in the archives in 1533, together with other
documents of a like nature. These papers were made out by
order of the Emperor Isaac Angelus Comnenus, in 1190, who has
been called the reformer of the order, but who was in reality its
founder. The sign of the order is a red cross, in the form of
four fleurs-de-lis, joined at the extremities and bordered with gold,
with the four letters I. H. S. V.—ln Hoe Signo Vinces. In the
centre is the monogram for Christ, expressed by X and P joined,
with A and © on either side. The Grand Mastership was vested
in the House of Comnenus for ever, but, in 1699, Andrew Angelus
Flavius Comnenus, titular Prince of Macedonia, and Duke of
Dravasto, resigned this dignity to Francis Farnese, reigning Duke
of Parma, to him and his heirs for ever. This transfer was
solemnly approved by Innocent XII., and confirmed by a brief
dated 29th October, 1699. In 1735, the house of Farnese became
extinct, and Don Carlos, the infant of Philip V. of Spain, became
Duke of Parma and Placentia, and was entitled, through his
mother, Elizabeth Farnese, to the Grand Mastership of the order.
He afterwards became Grand Duke of Tuscany and King of
Naples. It was finally declared a royal order, and ranks next to
the Order of Saint Januarius, which was created in 1738. The
Prince Rhodocanakis, Grand Master Mason of Greece, disputes
the validity of the above revival and transfer, and claims the
order for his own family, as heir-general.

SAINT DoMINGO.—Masonry introduced, according to Rebold, in 1748.
Morin was there in 1761, and adopted this island as the seat of
his Grand Priesthood, when deputed to spread the Rite of the
Emperors of the East and West, from which the A. and A. Rite of
the present day is derived. A Grand Lodge exists in the Haytian
portion of the island, but has not received universal recognition.
The Grand Lodge of Saint Domingo was organized 11th December,
1858. Masonry is not in a very flourishing condition, owing to
the frequent political changes occurring there.

SaInT GEORGE'S Day.—The 23d of April. Saint George is the
Patron Saint of England and Russia, and the English Grand
Lodge Constitution provides that there shall be a Masonic
festival on the Wednesday next following Saint George’s day,
which shall be dedicated to brotherly love and refreshment. No
private Lodge within the London district shall have a Masonic
feast on the day of the grand festival.

642

sat] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SAI

SAINT GERMAIN, THE Count or.—This enigmatical personage, like
the Man in the Iron Mask, has puzzled many people. Even the
astute monarch, Frederick II. of Prussia, called him “aman no
one has ever been able to make out.” His origin is doubtful;
one account says he was born at Letmeritz, in Bohemia; by the
Marquis de Crequy he was pronounced to be an Alsatian Jew, of
the name of Simon Wolff, born at Strasburg, about the beginning
of the eighteenth century ; others affirm that he was a Spanish
Jesuit, named Aymar ; while others again state that the true name
of this remarkable personage was the Marquis de Betmar, and
that he was born in Portugal. But the most reasonable theory
makes him the natural son of an Italian Princess, born at San
Germano, in Savoy, about 1710; his father being one Rotondo,
a tax-collector of the district. That this would seem to be true,
is borne out by the fact, that he spoke all the languages he knew
with a strong Italian accent. He was first heard of in Europe
as the Count de Saint Germain, in 1750, when the Marquis de
Bellisle made his acquaintance in Germany, and induced him to
come to Paris, where he was soon introduced to the Marquise de
Pompadour. This fixed his destiny, and rendered him a favourite
at Court. He was singularly handsome, a great proficient in
music, especially upon the violin. Indeed, he wrote a musical
work, “ La Musique Ratsonné,’ which was published in England
for private circulation. He was also an able magician and diviner,
and practised many higher branches of the magical art. In 1760,
he was sent by Louis XV. to negotiate a peace with England ;
but M. de Choiseul, then Prime Minister of France, wrote secretly
to Pitt to have him arrested as a Russian spy. For this there
would seem to have been some reason, as he was the inseparable
friend of Prince Lobkowitz. The fashion of the times warranting
it, he was an inveterate gambler, and won fabulous sums, which
he spent with equal munificence. And Masonry being then in
the ascendant, he laid claim to the highest rank, and asserted
himself to be over five hundred years of é age. He spoke English,
French, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, German, Russian, Polish,
Swedish, Danish, and many Oriental languages, with equal
facility ; and he laid claim to powers over the spiritual world,
into which he used to pass in 2 trance condition, long before
Mesmer had methodized that peculiar form of psychology. His
own pretensions were amazing. He said he had been born in
Chaldea, and professed to possess the secrets of the Egyptian
sages. He claimed to have been personally intimate with the
Saviour and his Twelve Apostles, and to have reproved Peter
for his bad temper. As to modern history, he conversed with ease
and anecdotical power—mentioning obscure points without refer-

643

SAT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sat

ence to himself, and correcting errors which had crept into the
records. His power of prediction was verified in the case of
King Louis XV., respecting whom he made a remarkably accurate
prophecy His gift of memory was also amazing. After reading
through a newspaper of the day, he could from memory repeat
every word it contained ; and he also exercised the rare faculty
of duality of brain, writing a love-letter with one hand, and a
verse with the other. Sealed letters he could read at a glance ;
and the most recondite and difficult problems were solved by him.
His “ Aqua Benedetta” was the true Elixir of Life, and he was
never seen to eat or drink by any one. He declared himself in
possession of the art of transmutation of metals, which he had
learnt in Hindustan ; and, by the assistance of the Brahmans, he
had acquired the art of the artificial crystallization of pure
carbon ; in other words, the production of the diamond. In 1780,
when on a visit to the French ambassador to the Hague, he
broke to pieces with a hammer a superb diamond of his own
manufacture, the counterpart of which, also manufactured by
himself, he had just before sold to a jeweller for 5500 louis d’or.
His political importance was evidently great, as he was concerned
in the conspiracies of 1762 at Saint Petersburg, and ten years
afterwards Count Orloff received him with joy at Vienna, accost-
ing him as “caro padre,” and presenting him with 20,000 sequins
He became intimate with, and fascinated Frederick the Great
at whose Court he remained a long time. In 1774, he went to
live at Schwalbach, in Germany, under the name of Count
Tzarogy, but afterwards travelled much in Italy and Denmark.
He declared that he was tired of immortality in 1783,.and
resigned it at Eckernfiorde, in Schleswig. He founded the
Society of Saint Jackin, afterwards known as the Saint
Joachim. His mantle fell on Cagliostro. He had numerous
aliases—in Venice he was known as the Count de Bellamura;
at Pisa, as the Chevalier de Schéning; at Milan, as the Che-
valier Welldone; and at Genoa, as Count Soltikow. There
can be no doubt of his attainments. It was sometimes said
that he was the famous Althotas, but it was not the case.
(See Lascaris.)

SAINT JACKIN OR JOACHIM, SOCIETY or. (See Saint Germain, The
Count of.)

Saint JouHn, Favourite or.—l. 7° Swedish Rite. 2. 7° Prussian
System. 3. 6° Knights of the East and West.

SAINT JOHN, FAVOURITE BROTHER OF.—8° Swedish Rite.

SainT JOHN, Lopcz oF (See Lodge of Saint John.)

Saint JOHN OF JERUSALEM, KNIGHT OF. (See Knight of Saint John
of Jerusalem.)

644

sat | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Sat

Saint JoHN’s Masonry AND Saint JoHN’s OrpER.—The three
symbolical degrees are sometimes thus named.

SAINT JOHN THE ALMONER—Son of the King of Cyprus, born in
the sixth century, and Patriarch of Alexandria. Bazot says that
this is the historical saint (festival day, 11th November, Greek
Church, and 23d of January, Roman Church) of Freemasonry.
(See Johannite Christians.)

Saint JOHN THE Baptist.—Esteemed one of the patron saints of
Masonry, and, in fact, the chief one. The Grand Lodge of Eng-
land was revived on Saint John’s day, 24th June, 1717, and the
annual festival was held on that day until 1727, when it was
held on Saint John the Evangelist’s day, 27th December. The
festival of the Baptist was also kept up by the Grand Lodge of
Scotland until 1737, when the annual election was changed to
Saint Andrew’s day.

Saint JOHN THE Baptist, DiscipLes oF—An Asiatic Society of
great antiquity, the date of its foundation being unknown. It
is said to have originated with the immediate followers of Saint
John, who fled from Judea immediately after the decapitation of
their master. The doctrines of this society are purely mystical ;
the highest virtues are inculcated and rigidly practised, and there
were three degrees in their order of priesthood. There seems to
be some similitude between them and the Primitive Christians,
especially in the institution of agape or love feasts.

SAINT JOHN THE Baptist, KNIGHT or.—Was formed in Ireland,
but is now extinct.

SainT JOHN THE EVANGELIST.—The other patron saint of Masonry,
but adopted as such at a comparatively recent period, long after
the sixteenth century. (See Dedication.)

Saint LEGER. (See Aldworth, Hon. Mrs.)

Saint Martin, Louis CLAUDE DE—Born at Amboise, in France,
18th January, 1743. A mystical writer of great influence. He
originally entered the army, but after six years of service retired
from an occupation so distasteful, and devoted himself to what
was then termed the belles-lettres. He passed much of his time
in travelling through Switzerland, Germany, England, and Italy,
and for some years fixed himself in total retirement at Lyons.
Afterwards he removed to Paris, and, unappalled by the terrors
of the French Revolution, continued his theosophical studies
throughout that eventful period. He was an ardent disciple of
Jacob Boehme, concerning whom the following lines may be
quoted here in an apposite manner :—

‘* Whate’er the Eastern Magi sought,
Or Orpheus sung, or Hermes taught,

645

SAT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Sat

Whate’er Confucius would inspire,

Or Zoroaster’s inystic fire ;

The symbols that Pythagoras drew,

The wisdom god-like Plato knew ;

What Socrates debating proved,

Or Epictetus lived and loved ;

The sacred fire of saint and sage,
Through ev'ry clime, in every age,

In Behmen’s wondrous page we view,
Discovered and revealed anew.

* Aurora’ dawned the coming day,
Succeeding books meridian light display.
Ten thousand depths his works explore,
Ten thousand truths unknown before.
Through all his works profound we trace
The abyss of nature, God, and grace.
The seals are broke, the mystery’s past,
And all is now revealed at last.

The trumpet sounds, the spirit’s given,
And Behmen’s is the voice from heaven.”

Animated by such ideas as these, Saint Martin continued to
labour at the mystical side of Freemasonry, which had been
the work of Martinez Paschalis, and he subsequently thought to
improve on the system of his master, adding also views taken
from Swedenborgian philosophy. Saint Martin having pub-
lished a book in 1775, “On Error and Truth; or, Men recalled
to the Universal Principle of Science,” this work became exceed-
ingly popular, and passed through five editions between 1775
and 1784. The Rectified Rite of Saint Martin originally con-
sisted of ten degrees, but was afterwards reduced to seven. Per-
sonally, Saint Martin was amiable, erudite, and charitable. Very

. few enemies were made by him during his lengthened career.
His system was introduced into Pussia, and the Martinist Lodges
of Masonry were ever held in high esteem. He adopted certain
ideas evidently at variance with the archeological history of
Masonry; but as a symbolical completion of the design, every-
thing enunciated by him deserves the careful study of the intelli-
sent theosophist. (See Gichtel.)

Saint Meruopius.—A father of the Church in the first century.
Among his works, although unrecognised in patristic literature,
is a prophetic apocalypse, which has been printed in the “ Liber
Mirabilis,” and there ignorantly attributed to one Bermechobus, a
corruption of the abbreviation Bea-Methodius, for Beatus Metho-
dius. It contains prophecies relating to the history of the world,
some of which have yet to be fulfilled.

Saint Nicalse.—A work was published in Frankfort, in 1755, called
“Saint Nicaise; or, a Collection of remarkable Masonic Letters
for Masons and Non-Masons.” It was actually written by Dr
Starck, although it purported to be a translation from the

646

SA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SAL

French. It defended Starck’s system of Spiritual Templarism.
It was answered by Von Sprengeisen in a work entitled “ Anti-
Saint Nicaise;” and this work, with the “ Archimedes” and the
“ Scala Algebraica Gcoiomica,” are now very rare,

SAINT PATRICK, FRIENDLY BROTHERS OF.—A Protestant society, the
meetings of which are termed “ knots,” existing in Ulster and
London.

Saint Paut’s CATHEDRAL.—It was the favourite theory of Lessing
that Freemasonry took its rise from the construction of this edi-
fice; but, however specious this argument, so many circum-
stances have since become known that it is undesirable to rely
upon the theory as truth. The evidence is insufficient on either
side, as in so many other circumstances of Masonic history.
It was said that the Freemasons of Sir Christopher Wren’s time
met in a vault of Saint Faith’s, beneath the cathedral, as the
York Masons were said to have met in the crypt of York
Minster; but there is no proof of this, and no likelihood of any
proof ever being discovered.

SAINT SEPULCHRE, HosPITALLERS oF. (See Knight of the Holy
Sepulchre).

Sart THomas Aquinas. (See Thomists.)

Saint Victor, Louis GUILLEMAIN DE.—Author of several French
books on Adonhiramite Masonry, 1781-1787. His opinion

oe that Masonry could be traced to the Egyptian priest-
oods.

SAINTE Croix, EMANUEL JOSEPH GIULHEM DE CLERMONT-LODEVE DE.
—A French antiquary, born in 1746, and died in 1809. He
published two valuable volumes, entitled “ Historical and Criti-
cal Researches into the Mysteries of Paganism,” in 1784.

SAINTONGE—A society held at the Excise Coffee-House, Old
Broad Street, in the last century.

Saints, New Society or THE—Founded by Israel, the thauma-
turgist, in Podolia, about 1740.

SaxinaT.—The Shekinah—Divine presence; also tranquillity of
mind. (See Shekinah).

SALA-EDDIN.—Sultan of the Egyptians and Syrians in the time
of Richard Cceur-de-Lion, It is said that Saladin, as he is
commonly called, received knighthood at the hands of his
adversary, and in return communicated to him the secrets of
the Order of Ishmael.

SALAM ALEICA, AL (Pax tibt and Som aleica, Al, Mischief be to
thee)—Two Arabic modes of salutation and exclamation. Used
in the Order of Ishmael.

SALAMANDERS.—The members of this society used to meet about
1770, at the Bull and Anchor, near Hammersmith.

647

SAL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SAN

SALATHIEL (Hebrew, SwNORNw, Deo postulatus)—A word used in the
eighteenth degree.

SALFI, FRANCESCO.— Born at Cozenza, in Calabria, Ist January, 1759;
died at Passy, near Paris, September, 1832. He was the author
of many works on political economy and history, and in 1811
received a prize from the Livorno Lodge for an “ Essay on the
Utility of Freemasonry as a Philanthropic and Moral Institution.”

SaLu.—Priests of Mars, who danced through the streets of Rome,
on certain solemn occasions, in an appropriate costume.

Satix (An Urn).—(J.) Used in Napoleonic Masonry. (2.) It is
also a word used in the Rite of the Council of Emperors of
the East and West, and thence transferred to the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite, 32°

SALLE DES Pas PerDuS (Hall of Lost Footsteps); German, Vorhof
or Forecourt.—The ante-room of a Lodge; it is not ceremonial,
and merely a general term.

SALOMONIS SANCTIFICATUS ILLUMINATUS, MAGNUS JEHOVA—The
title of the president of the third class of an Huminated Chapter

’ in the Swedish Rite.

SaLt.—Used in addition to corn, wine, and oil, in the Swiss Rite,
as an element of consecration, and regarded as a symbol of
wisdom and strength.

SALUTATION, VisiToR’s.—Formerly greatly in use, but now obsolete,
at least in the English system. A strange brother would, in
the last century, say in reply to the W. M. as to whence he came,
that he came from the Brethren and Fellows of such and such a
Right Worshipful and Holy Lodge of Saint John, “in whose
name I come, and greet you thrice heartily well.” It formed an
integral part of the system, and was wholly independent of the
production of the certificate. In the same way, it was and is
customary to prefix the letters $..8..S.. to any written balustre
—the initial of Salutem or Health. The Masonic Salute in
use in the old Operative Lodges has reference*to this.

SAMANEANS.—A sect of Indian philosophers believing in one God,
but holding that He takes no interest in the affairs of the world,
leaving them to inferior beings.

Samaritan, Goop.—An American adoptive degree.

SANCTUARY, GUARDIAN OF THE—75° of the Rite of Memphis.

SanctuM SanctoruM.—The Holy of Holies,

Sanp.—In the Egyptian mysteries, sand was esteemed of an evil or
Typhonic character, being inimical to Osiris, the benevolent god
of agriculture.

SANHEDRIM.—The highest judicial tribunal among the Jews,
composed of seventy-two members, besides its president, the
High Trice and was instituted by Moses on the occasion

4

SAP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SAT

of a rebellion in the wilderness. They met in an apartment in
the form of a rotunda, half of which was built within the
temple, and half beyond its precincts. The Nasi or Prince presided,
with his deputy, named Ab beth dini, on his right hand, and
the sub-deputy, Chacon, on his left; the others sat around
in a semicircle. It has been thought that some of the
arrangements of a Royal Arch Chapter were derived from this ;
but this is an error, as there was no Sanhedrim in the time
of Zerubbabel, this court having been established after the
Macedonian conquest.

SapicoLe, THE—A deoree named in the lists of Fustier and Viany.
SAPPHIRE (Hebrew, 5D)—The second stone in the second row
of the High Priest’s breastplate—appropriated to Naphtali.
SappHo, Society or.—An order of semi-Masonic character, origi-
nated about 1774, and confined to women. It was in some way
connected with the Girondist party, and became extinct with

their fall.

Sarpius (Hebrew, 07).—The first stone in the first row of the
High Priest’s breastplate, and appropriated to the tribe of Reuben.

Sarsena.—A work by Gerlach, which appeared at Bamberg, in
1817, professing to reveal much of the interior doctrine of Free-
masonry, but it has in reality nothing of authority.

SasH.—Sashes are worn in France, but not in England, except in
the Royal Arch and the high degrees. (See Zennaar.)

Sastra.—A Hindu book of sacred law. Of these there were six,
and the Hindus taught that they contained all learning ; they
were the Veda, the Upaveda, Vedanga, Purana, D’herma, and
Dersana.

SATANIANS.-—A sect, in early Christian times, which taught that as
Satan was powerful it was wise to respect and adore him, so that
he might be propitiated.

Sat B’ual, ROYAL ORIENTAL ORDER OF THE.—An order incorporated
with that of Sikha. It originated in India, and is so named aftera
bird held sacred by the Hindus, and known to naturalists as the
Malacocercus grisius, whose flight, invariably in sevens, has ob-
tained for the rite the appellation of the seven (Sa) brethren
(Bhat). The last meeting in India was held at Allahabad (Pryaya
or Prag), in the year 1845. It is divided into seven degrees (but,
with Sikha, composed of the Sponsors, nine), the first being the
highest, 7.¢. 1. Arch Censor. 2. Arch Courier. 3, Arch Minister.
4. Arch Herald. 5. Arch Scribe. 6. Arch Auditor. 7. Arch
Mute. The three last degrees are, under certain limitations, open
to both sexes, and none but Master Masons are admitted into the
first four degrees. The officers consist of an Arch Registrar,
Arch Secretary, Arch Treasurer, Arch Emissary, Arch Arbiter

649

SAT] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sat

(who must be an Arch Censor), and Arch Illuminator. For
the first year of membership the signs and passwords are
tentative, but after that period the probationers receive them
perfected. The city of Allahabad, anciently called Pryaya
or Prag, and, by the Mohammedans, Iliabaz, contains many relics
of the early Hindus; and, as occupying that point where the Juinna
and Ganges unite, it has always been regarded with the greatest
veneration. A third river, representing the Sactt of Brahma,
as the other two do those of Vishnu and Siva, is believed to
unite its waters by a subterranean outlet from a well in the fort
with the other rivers, thus symbolizing the Triad. The fort,
which occupies the delta [reversed] as it were, bears evidence of
having been frequently rebuilt. Here is to be seen a subter-
ranean temple, and one of the celebrated columns of Asoka.
Numerous ancient sculptured stones are found utilised in the
more recent structures, and on these are irregularly carved
many of the well-known symbols of Masonry, dating from an
extremely remote period. These have been transmitted through
the present order, and attest the fact, if fact it be, that the
great architect of Solomon’s temple derived much of his mystic
lore from the land which, according to Thornton and others, was
the cradle of the earliest civilization. The present order,
derived from such a source, is especially interesting. Its prac-
tical uses are also obvious, and as an institution for develop-
ing Masonic archeology, it will probably find many supporters
in the lands to which it has immigrated. The principles of the
order are Masonic, and include the preservation, in its original
Archaic purity, of Craft Masonry; the support of duly constituted
authority wherever found; sympathy with all branches of the
Aryan race, and the cultivation of a fraternal sentiment, more
especially towards the Hindus; and it inculcates the study
of Hindu literature and archeology. As regards Stkha, the
Sponsors preside over the united order, but in other respects
they delegate much of their authority to the Arch Censors.
Promotion is by selection of the Sponsors on the nomination
of the Arch Censors. Finally, the jewel of the order [exclusive
of the jewels peculiar to the Sponsors] is of gold, enamelled red
and gray, with a Sanskrit legend or motto, and jewelled in
the centre. The order is now firmly established in England
and Scotland, and has branches in America, Austria, and other
countries. The ceremonies are of an august nature, and the
ritual is elaborate, and yet appeals forcibly to the good sense
of the members. It is impossible to say more in this place
respecting it; but its Masonic value is highly appreciated by
eminent brethren all over the world ; and there can be no doubt
650

SAT | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SCA

that its ashayanas or meetings will effect substantial good in
maintaining Masonry in a healthy and active condition.

SaTRAP.—The title of a Persian governor of a province, according
to the Greeks. Satraps are alluded to in the Red Cross degree,
and in that of Prince of Jerusalem.

SAVALETTE DE LANGES.—Founder of the Rite of Philalethes of
Paris, in 1773, and president of the Masonic Congress at Paris,
of 1785 and 1787. He died about the beginning of the First
French Revolution, and left behind him manuscripts and
documents of great value, which passed to the Philosophic
Scottish Rite, formed of. the Lodges of Saint Alexander of
Scotland and of the Contrat Social.

Saxony.—The first Lodge in Saxony was formed at Dresden in
1738; and in 1741 and 1742 two others were founded at Leipzig
and Altenburg. The Grand Lodge was established in 1812.

Sayer, ANTHONY.—Elected Grand Master at the revival of 1717,
and succeeded by George Payne. He was appointed S. G. W.
by G. Master Desaguliers, in 1719; and we last hear of him
as being present at Grand Lodge, in 1730, when he appeared
as the oldest Past Grand Master. He seems to have been a man
of amiable and cultivated mind, and his portraits after Highmore,
in mezzotint, are not uncommon.

ScaBELLUM.—A species of pedestal for supporting busts and statues.

ScaLp MIsERABLES.—In 1741, on the 9th of March, a number
of individuals, in derision of Freemasonry, paraded the Strand
on foot and on horseback, with ludicrous designs, under the
leadership of Paul Whitehead and Carey. First, we read in
a contemporary account, came a number of persons on jack-
asses, with cows’ horns in their hands; then a kettle-drummer
on a jackass, with two butter tubs as drums; next, two carts
drawn by the same animals, containing the stewards, with
ludicrous insignia of the mock order; following this was a
mourning coach, containing the mock G. M. and Wardens, the
horses of which were all of different sizes; and finally, came a
tremendous body of the mob. They came as far as Temple Bar,
and saluted their brethren of the real order, who repaid them, it
is said, by a good-humoured reception, calculated to discomfit
their plan. Afterwards, in the same year, another procession of
a similar character, consisting of bootblacks, chimney sweepers,
&c., with absurd symbols carried before them, attempted to
disturb the annual procession of the 27th April, but were
apprehended by the constables, and laid by the heels in gaol.

SCALD, SUBLIME.—57° of the Rite of Memphis.

ScaLes, Pair or.—A symbol in the degree of Princes of Jerusalem.

SCALLOP SHELL.—This, with the staff and sandals, forms part of
651

SCA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [scx

the costume of a Masonic Knight Templar. By naturalists, it
is called the pecten Jacobus, from being used as a sign that the
pilgrim was on his way to the shrine of Saint James of Com-
postella, in Spain. Pilgrims from Rome wore the keys, those
of Saint James the shell, and those from the Holy Land palm
branches, whence the word palmer,

SCANDINAVIAN Mysrertes.—This form of worship was introduced
into the north of Europe, probably before the Christian era, by
Sigge, a Scythian chieftain and priest, who was afterwards known
as Odin. It involved, like the Masonic myth, an initiation and
a murder. However, it is only really the usual strife between
good and evil.

ScANTLING.—1. In architecture, the measures of the breadth and
thickness of a piece of wood. 2. A term for a piece of timber
under five inches square.

ScaPuLar.—A portion of the dress of certain Roman Catholic
orders, consisting of two narrow strips of cloth, worn over the
gown and extending to the feet. It is worn in honour of the
Virgin Mary.

ScarFIne.—In architecture, the joining of two pieces of timber by
bolting or nailing them transversely together.

SCARLET. (See Red. )

ScHaw Manuscript.—a code of laws for the government of the
Operative Masons of Scotland, drawn up by William Schaw,
Master of the Work to James VI., in the Scottish dialect, dated
28th December, 1598. It has been several times published—first
in the Laws and Constitutions of the Grand Lodge of Scotland,
1848, by Lawrie, and next by W. J. Hughan. William Schaw
was born in 1550, in Clackmannanshire ; “he was a distinguished
architect, and after holding many high offices, he died 18th April,
1602, and was buried in the Abbey ‘Church of Dunfermline.

ScuHEeME Arcu.—An arch forming the segment of a circle.

SCHERBIAH. (See Zerbal.)

SCHINDLER, Magnus Pau.tus.—Born at Baireuth; a Masonic im-
postor, who asserted his connection with Rosicrucianism, His
father was a physician at Niirnberg; he pretended to belong to
the Directory of the Order at Cologne, but was obliged to fly
from Munich to Ratisbon, and thence to Vienna. He also gave
out that he possessed the philosopher’s stone. He died at Inn-
spruck. He was exposed by Gerhard van Swieten.

ScHISMATIC.—Brethren who revolt from the lawful authority of
the Grand Lodge of their country, and set up a Grand Lodge of
their own, are called schismatic; but this only applies to a
revolt in Craft Masonry—the high degrees have not any legal
status in any country except by toleration, and they can only

652

scH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SCH

command the allegiance of their own affiliates. The first schism
in Masonry, after the revival in 1717, took place in 1722, when
the Duke of Wharton caused himself to be irregularly elected
Grand Master; his authority, however, in the words of Anderson,
was disowned “ by all those who would not countenance irregu-
larities.” This dispute was terminated by the Grand Master
Montague, who resigned his own just claim to the chair in
favour of the duke, and aided in his proper election and instal-
lation. The second schism was more serious, and began in 1738,
when a number of brethren withdrew from Grand Lodge, and
formed a body known as the Grand Lodge of the Ancients ; this
was again healed by the solemn act of Union in 1813. In
France, irregular lodges were common as early as 1756, but the
most serious schism was that of the dancing master Lacorne, who,
in 1761, formed a rival Grand Lodge; they returned to their
allegiance in the following year, only however to break off again
in 1765. French Masonry has been in a continual state of
schisms through its whole history, even to the present time. In
1772, a number of Masons revolted, and formed a body called
the National Assembly. It would be beyond our limits to write
a complete account of the disputes in question. In Germany,
Masonic law is so construed as to admit of several co-existing
and co-extensive jurisdictions; and Lodges unwilling to remain
under the authority of one Grand Lodge can withdraw, and give
their allegiance to another, without being schismatic. America
has seen several schisms. In Massachusetts, the Saint Andrew's
irand Lodge was thus formed in 1752; in South Carolina, a
Grand Lodge of York Masons was formed in 1787; in Louisiana,
a similar Grand Lodge started up in 1848 ; and in New York, a
Grand Lodge seceded, called the Saint John’s,in 1823; while,
in 1849, a body was formed known as the Philip’s Grand Lodge.
There is also an illegal Grand Lodge of Negroes, known as
the Prince Hall Grand Lodge. None of these bodies have any
right to recognition, Brother Mackey very properly says :—‘“ A
Masonic schism is always illegal: it violates the law of exclusive
jurisdiction; and a schismatic hody cannot be recognised as
possessing any of the rights or prerogatives which belong alone
to the supreme dogmatic Masonic power of the State.”
SCHNEIDER, JOHANN AuGusT.—A learned Mason of Altenburg,
where he was born, 22d May,1755; and died 13th August, 1816.
He was the author of many valuable Masonic works, and the
compiler of the “ Constitutions-Buch” of the Lodge Archimedes
zu den drei Reissbretten (Archimedes of the Three Tracing Boards),
his mother lodge, and also the author of a scarce and valuable
History of Freemasonry.” ;
53

SCH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [scH

ScHOOLs.—Among the Masonic charities none are more important
than the various schools for boys and girls instituted from time
to time. England, Ireland, and Scotland, Sweden, Holland, the
United States, and other countries, have from time to time
established such institutions; and of late years these foundations,
depending entirely upon the voluntary contributions of the
benevolent, have received additional spontaneous aid of a princely
nature. The education is necessarily quite unsectarian.

SCHOOLS OF THE PropuEets.—Although Dr Oliver (Landmarks, ii.
p. 374) assumes the existence of the schools of the Nabiim,
as instituted by Samuel, there does not seem any historical
authority for their being of a Masonic character These schools
were evidently of a theological character, in no way resembling
modern Masonic Lodges.

ScHREDER, FRIEDERICH JOSEPH "WILHELM.—Born at Bielefeld,
Prussia, 19th March, 1733 ; died 27th October, 1778. He was
an ardent pursuer of the occult sciences, and in 1766 established,
at Marburg, a Chapter of True and Ancient Rose Croix Masons,
and later on he founded at Sarreburg a school or rite based upon
magic, theosophy, and alchymy, consisting of seven degrees,
known as the Rectified Rose Croix. This rite is acknowledged
as legitimate by the Grand Lodge of Hamburg, and several
Lodges still work it.

SCHR@DER, FRIEDERICH LUDWIG.—Born at Schwerin, 3d November,
1744; died near Hamburg, 3d September, 1816. He was an
actor and dramatic author of great note and unblemished fame,
and his Masonic character stood exceedingly high, By the
influence of his intimate friend Bode (see Bode), he was initiated
into Freemasonry in 1774, in the Lodge Emanuel zur Maien-
blume (May blossom), and he soon after established a Lodge of
his own working in the rite of Zinnendorf, which did not last
very long. He went to Vienna to pursue his profession, and
remained there until 1785, when he returned to Hamburg, and
was elected master of the Emanuel Lodge, continuing in that
office until 1799. In 1794, he was elected Deputy Grand
Master of the English Provincial Grand Lodge of Lower Saxony,
and in 1814, Grand Master. He was an indefatigable reformer
and purifier in Masonry, and rigidly excluded anything of a
fantastic character from the Lodges over which he presided—the
three ancient craft degrees being the only degrees permitted.
The philosophical history of Masonry was investigated in a body
called the Engbund, or Select Historical Union, consisting only
of Master Masons, who were engaged in the study of the various
systems of Masonry.

SCHR@PFER, JOHANN GEORG.—A coffee-house keeper at Leipzig,

654

scr] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sco

who, in 1768, established a spurious Scottish Lodge, in which
magic and alchymy were taught. He pretended to have received
authority from some unknown superiors to destroy the Rite of
the Strict Observance ; he arrogated to himself a power over the
spiritual world, and the principal occupation in his Lodge was
the pretended evocation of spirits. His object was to make
money, and for a long time he succeeded in this design. He
afterwards left Leipzig and travelled about, and on his return
published abroad the rumour that he was in reality the natural
son of one of the French princes, assuming the title of Baron
von Steinbach. He committed suicide by shooting himselt
through the head, in the presence of a party of friends, in the
Rosenthal, near Leipzig, October 8, 1774.

Scizntiric Masons.—A body of Masons was formed, in 1803, by
Fessler, Mossdorf, Fischer, and others, under the name of the
Scientific Masonic Association, the objects of which were to draw
up the most complete and accurate accounts, from authentic
sources, of everything connected with the history and systema-
tology of the Fraternity. The members of this union had no
particular rites, dress, or ceremonial of any kind, but were
necessarily Master Masons. To become a member, it was neces
sary that the ballot should be unanimous, and this was irrespec-
tive of country or jurisdiction. Such a society, if existing at the
present time, would effect a vast deal of good, but there has
always been great difficulty in the establishment of an institu-
tion of the kind. Masons do not seem favourable, as a rule, to a
study of their antiquities; and though isolated workers form
an honourable exception, it seems almost impossible to give
coherency to any society having this object in view.

ScorpPion.—A reptile sacred to the goddess Selk, dreaded by the
Egyptians, and solemnly cursed once a year in all temples.

Scortist.—A follower of Duns Scotus, who maintained the doctrine
of Realism, in the thirteenth century.

ScoTLAND.—A legend asserts that Freemasonry was first introduced
into Scotland by the masons who built the Abbey of Kilwinning ;
and the name of Kilwinning is therefore held in similar esteem
to that of York in English Masonry. In the time of James II.
of Scotland, the distinction of Grand Patron of Scotland was
granted to William St Clair, or Sinclair, Earl of Orkney and
Caithness, and Baron of Roslyn, his heirs and successors, by
charter. In 1736, however, the St Clair, their Grand Master,
surrendered this hereditary position into the hands of the recently
formed Grand Lodge, and he was immediately elected Grand
Master. (See Grand Masters of Scotland.)

ScorLanD, RoyaL ORDER or. (See Royal Order of eciane,)

55

sco] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sco

Scott, CHARLES—An American Masonic author of some note, born
at- Knoxville, Tennessee, 12th November, 1811; died at Jackson,
Mississippi, 5th June, 1861; initiated in Silas Brown Lodge at
Jackson, in 1842; Grand Master of Grand Lodge of Mississippi,
in 1849 and 1850; in 1851, Grand High Priest of Grand Chapter.
He joined the A. and A. Scottish Rite in 1857, and in 1859 was
elevated to the 33°, and to active membership in the Southern
Supreme Council. He wrote, amongst others, two valuable
Masonic books—“ The Analogy of Ancient Craft Masonry to
Natural and Revealed Religion,” 1850; and ‘The Keystone of
the Masonic Arch,” 1856.

Scorrisu.—The word Scottish is used, as also Scotch, in anything
referring to Scotland, and is probably not only the most elegant
form, but also the most correct. Some think Scottish is most
applicable to the nobility and gentry of the Highlands, and that
Scotch is more particularly applicable to residents in Scotland,
on this side of the imaginary Highland line. In modern times,
however, to make such a distinction is invidious.

ScorrisH DecREES. (See Ecossais.)

ScortisH Masonry.—The French writers called Scottish Masonry
the Scottish Rite, or Ancient and Accepted Rite. In the Latin
constitutions, it is designated Antiguus Scoticus Ritus Acceptus,
or the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite; and this name has
now been generally adopted. In point of date, it is not very old,
and dates from about the year 1802. In 1758, a body existed at
Paris, called the Council of Emperors of the East and West, and
they organized a Rite called the Rite of Perfection, consisting of
twenty-five degrees, the highest of which was Sublime Prince
of the Royal Secret. In 1761, it is said this council granted a
deputation or patent to a Jewish brother, Stephen Morin (see
Morin), authorizing him to spread the Rite of Perfection in
America. The whole question is difficult; and, in fact, it is not
easy to see how Morin could propagate a rite at that time not
in existence. Eight more degrees were added at some unknown
period, and hence the modern establishment of the A. and A.
Rite. The degrees are as follows:—I. Symbolic Lodge—1.
E.A.P.; 2. F.C.; 3. M.M. II. Lodge of Perfection—4. Secret
Master; 5. Perfect Master; 6. Intimate Secretary; 7. Provost
and Judge, or Irish Master; 8. Superintendent of the Buildings,
or Master in Israel; 9. Master Elect of Nine; 10. Illustrious
Master Elect of Fifteen; 11. Sublime Knight, or Chevalier Elect ;
12. Grand Master Architect ; 13. Royal Arch ; 14. Grand Scot-
tish Chevalier of the Holy Vault, or of James the Sixth.
III. Council of the Princes of Jerusalem—15. Chevalier of
the East, or of the Sword; 16. Prince of Jerusalem, or Chief of

656

sco] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SEA

Regular Lodges. IV. Sovereign Chapter of Prince Rose Croix—
17. Chevalier of the East and West; 18. Sovereign Prince Rose
Croix. V. Council of Kadosh—19. Grand Pontiff or Sublime
Scotch Mason; 20. Venerable Grand Master ad vitam; 21.
Noachite, or Prussian Chevalier ; 22. Prince of Lebanus, or Royal
Hatchet; 23. Chief of the Tabernacle ; 24. Prince of the Taber-
nacle ; 25. Chevalier of the Brazen Serpent; 26. Scotch Trini-
tarian, or Prince of Mercy; 27. Grand Commander of the Temple ;
28. Chevalier of the Sun, or Prince Adept; 29. Grand Scotch
Chevalier of Saint Andrew of Scotland; 30, Chevalier Kadosh.
VI. Consistory of Sublime Princes of the Royal Secret ; 31. Grand
Inspector Inquisitor Commander; 32. Sublime and Valiant Prince
of the Royal Secret. VII. Supreme Council—33. Sovereign
Grand Inspector General.

ScoTrisH Master. (See Zcossais.)

Scorrisy Temptars, (See Templars of Scotland.)

ScorrisH TRINITARIANS. (See Prince of Mercy.)

ScreeD.—A wooden rule for running mouldings.

Screw, Monks or THE—A burlesque society established in Ireland
towards the close of the eighteenth century. It has been alluded
to by Charles Lever, in more than one of his entertaining works
of fiction, and had a real existence for many years, although not
now extant.

ScrrsE.—In the American system of Royal Arch Masonry, Haggai,
the third Principal, is the Scribe of the Chapter; but in the
English system there are two Scribes, Ezra and Nehemiah, whose
duties are those of Secretaries. There were amongst the Jews
civil and ecclesiastical scribes.

ScROBICULIL.—Altars dedicated to the infernal deities, consisting of
holes into which the libations were poured and the sacrifices
deposited.

ScroL..—t1. A convolved or spiral ornament. 2. The volutes of
the Ionic and Corinthian capitals.

ScYTHE.—Since the time of Webh, the scythe has been adopted in
the American system of Freemasonry, as an emblem of the power
of time in destroying the institutions of mankind. In England,
it is not regarded as of any typical meaning.

SEAL—A document under seal is always regarded as of great
importance, as conferring a stamp of validity upon the document
so sealed. In French diplomas, the seal is enclosed in a little
tin box, and suspended by a ribbon to the parchment. Eccle-
siastical seals, like the rings of abbots and bishops, were oval,
in allusion to the Vesica Piscis. The English Grand Lodge seal
is superimposed. No document is valid in Masonry without a
seal, and in some cases several seals are necessary

7 657

SEA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SEC

SEAL OF SOLOMON.—This is indifferently called the Seal of Solomon
and the Shield of David, and is a hexagonal figure formed of two
interlaced triangles, the outline of a six-pointed star. This seal
was esteemed to be a talisman of great efficacy.

SEALS, Book OF THE SEVEN.—The Apocalypse (v. 1.) says—“ And
I saw in the right hand of Him that sat on the throne a book
written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.”
It is a symbol in the degrees of Knights of the East and West,
and Holy Royal Arch Knight Templar Priest.

SEALS, KEEPER OF THE—<An officer, in some degrees, in charge of
the seal or seals of the Lodge. It is not recognised in York or
American Masonry. In Germany, he is called Siegelbewahrer ;
and in France, Garde des Sceaux.

SECOND TEMPLE. (See Temple of Zerubbabel.)

SEcos or Sexos. (See Adytum.)

SECRECY AND SILENCE.—In Masonry, as in the Great Temple of the
Grand Architect, everything is secret and mysterious. <As Bro,
Macoy says:—“The bosom of Nature is a vast laboratory,
where the mysterious work of transmutation of substances is
perpetually going forward. There is not a point in the universe,
the edges of which do not touch the realms of night and silence.
God himself is environed with shadows, and clouds, and dark-
ness, all round about His throne. Yet His beneficence is felt, and
His loving Spirit makes itself visible through all the world; and
so Freemasonry works in secrecy, but its benignant fruits are
visible in all lands. Besides, this principle of secrecy furnishes
a mysterious bond of unity and strength which can be found
nowhere else.” Silence and secrecy are called the cardinal
virtues of a Select Master.

SecReT Master.—4° A. and A. R., and the first of the Ineffable
degrees. There are only two presiding officers, the Puissant
Master representing Solomon, and Venerable Inspector repre-
senting Adonhiram, son of Abda, who had the inspection of the
workmen on Mount Lebanon. Decoration of Puissant Master—
mourning robes lined with ermine, blue sash from right shoulder,
from which hangs a golden triangle. Altar, triangular with
wreath of laurel and oak leaves. Decoration of Venerable In-
spector, a triangular white collar bordered with black, from
which is suspended an ivory key, with the letter Z engraved on
it. Apron: white, edged with black, and black strings. Flap
blue, with an eye embroidered on it in gold.

Secret Moniror. (See Monitor, Secret.)

SECRET OF THE SECRETS, THE.—A degree in the collection of Fustier.
C. 8. D.

SECRET SocieTIES—Much has been written for and against the

658

SEC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sEc

system under which secret societies are formed, and it is pro-
bable that the question will for ever continue unsettled. That
many societies of this character have existed, of a highly objec-
tionable description, cannot be denied; but their existence, on
the other hand, has been justifiel by many of the facts of history,
and political conditions at various periods of civilization. Where
an inefficient police, and an unsettled state of society, existed, it
is by no means extraordinary that confederations of this descrip-
tion should obtain; but in modern times, and in states where
security of life and property prevails, they become superfluous.
We have not at the present day to dread the unauthorized
intrusion of lawless classes, but we still have to encounter the
subtle and sapping influences of the priesthood of Rome, with their
train of crafty reasoning and soul-killing arguments. To oppose
these and other evils, secret: societies still continue, as a necessity;
and while scientific and social objects can be safely pursued in
the broad light of day, it is still necessary to combat the infiu-
ences of darkness and night by less open means. But, in one
sense, Masonry is no longer a secret society at all; any man of
good character is admissible to its lodges, and is entitled to
participate in its secrets, its charities, and its mysteries; and no
true Mason need be ashamed to confess that he is a brother of
the mystic tie. The cultivation of the human heart and its
finer sensibilities, is the object of the Royal Art, and in the
accomplishment of this task all may equally participate. The
means of mutual recognition are inherently secret in their form,
and to the outside world they signify little or nothing; not so to
the Mason, who, by the possession of certain signs and tokens,
proclaims himself to be a man to whom special privileges, accom-
panied by special duties, have been granted. The majority of
the Masonic fraternity are high-minded and noble men. There
is a minority which shametully abuses the rights attained through
initiation, but this is by no means general. Freemasonry, as
Bro. Dr Mackey observes, “is a secret society only as respects
its signs, a few of its legends and traditions, and its method of
inculeating its mystical philosophy ; but which, as to everything
else, its design, its object, its moral and religious tenets, and
the great doctrine which it teaches, is as open a society as if
it met on the highways beneath the sun of day, and not within
the well-guarded portals of a Lodge.”

SecRET VAULT. (See Vault, Secret.)

SEckET Writinc.—At the present day many systems of cypher
writing are in use for diplomatic and commercial purposes, but
it is not an art of recent invention. Books written by Tritten-
heim, by the Duke of Brunswick, in the sexonieentt century,

59

SEC | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SEE

and by J B. Porta, are still extant, in which several systems are
developed. The Ordinary Royal Arch Masonic alphabet has
become a mere boy’s amusement at the present time, and the
merest tyro can correspond in it, with a certainty of being found
out. Many occult alphabets, however, exist, but their reproduc-
tion here would add to the expense of this volume, with little
benefit to the reader.

SECRETARY.—The recording and corresponding ofticer in a Lodge.
His duty is to keep an accurate account of the business transac-
tions of the Lodge, to receive all money due to the Lodge, and to
pay it over to the Treasurer His jewel of office is a pen.

SECRETARY GENERAL OF THE HOLy Empire.—Title of the Secretary
of the Ancient and Accepted Rite.

SECRETARY, GRAND. (See Grand Secretary.)

Secrets.—The Secrets of Masonry are of two kinds: those im-
parted in the three degrees to admit the brother to a means of
recognising other Masons, and those attainable only by himself
through a severe course of study of the symbolism and spirit of
Freemasonry in general. It is a proficiency in the latter part of
the art that more especially indicates an active and intelligent
Mason.

SEcTION.—In architecture, the projection or geometrical repre-
sentation of a building supposed to be cut through, so as to show
the interior.

SecuLaR LopcEes.—A term sometimes inaccurately applied to sub-
ordinate Lodges. All Lodges are secular, and to make any
distinction is grossly at variance with facts.

Sepition Act.—An Act passed in Great Britain, 12th July, 1798,
for the suppression of Secret Societies, from which the Masonic
Lodges were however exempted by the following clause -—“ And
whereas certain societies have been long accustomed to be holden
in this kingdom, under the denomination of Lodges of Free-
masons, the meetings whereof have been in a great measure
directed to charitable purposes; be it therefore enacted, that
nothing in this Act shall extend to the meetings of any such
Society or Lodge, which shall, before the passing of this Act,
have been usually holden under the said denomination, and in
conformity to the rules prevailing among the said Societies of
Freemasons.” As a technical point—not, however, likely to be
raisel—it may be as well to note, that the Act only recognises
Lodges in absolute existence at the time, without extending the
privilege to other Lodges afterwards created.

SEEING.— One of the five senses treated of in the Fellow Craft degree.

SEEKERS.—1. A sect which arose in 1645. They affirmed that the

true Church ministry, scripture, and ordinances were lost, and
660

SEF | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SEL
taught the Scriptures were obscure and doubtful; while a revival
of the age of miracles was necessary for the purpose of confirm-
ing faith. 2. 1° of the Order of Initiated Knights and Brothers
of Asia.

SEFIDD-SCHAMAGAN.—A Mohammedan secret society; also called
the Candidati, or those clothed in white. The head-quarters
were in the Caucasus, and their head was known as the Veiled
Prophet. Hakem-ben-Haschem wore a golden mask, and his
doctrine was that the Divine Being put on a human form from
the day He commanded the angels to adore man; and also that
the line of prophecy was transmitted direct from the first divine
natural form of God until it arrived at Hakem. He also taught
that the wicked after death would be transformed into beasts,
while the good would be absorbed into the Divine Being.
Hakem finally cast himself into a pit full of corrosive matter, in
order to leave behind an idea that he had ascended bodily into
heaven, and that no particle of his body should be found.

Sermncatt.—The Chevalier Jacob Casanova de Seingalt, in his
“Memoirs,” has a curious passage about Freemasonry. “No man
knows all the secrets of Masonry, but every man keeps in view
the prospect of discovering them. Every young man who is
about travelling, and desirous to know the world, and who has
no wish to be deprived of going into good society, must, in the
times we live in, become a Mason, and at least understand it super-
ficially, and know what connection exists between it and the
world. Those, however, who are made Masons for the purpose
of learning the secrets, may deceive themselves; for they may
be for fifty years Masters of Chairs, and yet not learn the secrets
of the brotherhood. This secret is, in its own nature, invulner-
able, for the Mason to whom it has become known can only
have guessed it, and certainly not received it from any one; he
has discovered it, because he has been in the Lodge—marked,
learned, and inwardly digested. When he arrives at the dis-
covery, he unquestionably keeps it to himself, not communicating
it even to his most intimate Brother, because, should this person
not have capability to discover it of himself, he would likewise
be wanting in the capability to use it if he received it verbally.
For this reason it will for ever remain a secret.”

SevJIn (Arabic)—The general register of the wicked; also the
residence of Eblis and his hosts.

SeLect Master.—9° American Rite, and the last of the two belong-
ing to the Royal and Select Masters or Cryptic Rite. Officers :
1. Thrice INustrious G. M. 2. Jllustrious Hiram of Tyre.
3. Principal Conductor of the Works. 4. Treasurer. 5. Recorder.
6. Captain of the Guards. 7. Conductor of the Council.

661

SEL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SER

8. Steward. The number of members of a Council are supposed
to be.twenty-seven; but nine form a quorum for the transaction
of business and labour. The candidate is said to be “chosen.”
The Royal Master’s degree immediately precedes this.

SELL.—The wood or stone at the foot of a door.

SeMELIUS.—Grand -Master of Dispatches in the Modern French
Rite 6°.

SEMESTRE. (See Mot de Semestre.)

SEMI-PELAGIANS.—A sect differing from the Pelagians in main-
taining the necessity of divine grace, but at the same time con-
ceiving that this grace may be obtained by an effort of the
human will. (See Pelagius.)

SENATORIAL CHAMBER.—The apartment in which the 33° A. and
A. BR. meets.

SENESCHAL.—1. An officer in the 32° A. and A.R. 2, An officer in
the adjunct degree of the Holy Sepulchre.

SENIOR Deacon. (See Deacon.)

SENIOR ENTERED APPRENTICE. (See Junior Entered Apprentice.)

SENIOR GENERAL.—An officer in several of the high degrees.

SENIOR WaRDEN.—Second officer in a Craft Lodge, presiding over
the Brethren during the hours of labour. (See Junior Werden.)

SENSES. (See Five Senses.)

SENTINEL.—An officer in a Royal Arch Chapter, in the Red Cross,
and in a Commandery or Preceptory of Knights Templar.

SEPARATISTS.—A religious sect which arose in Dublin about 1803.
The object of the sect was to return to the primitive purity of
the Christian church.

SEPHIROTH. (See Kabbalah.)

SEPHORA (Hebrew, 7215x).— Wife of Moses, and daughter of Raguel
or Jethro, priest of Midian (Exod. ii. 21; iv.25; xviti. 2). Used
in the fourth degree of the French Rite of Adoption.

SEPTENARY. (See Seven.)

SEPTERION.—A festival held every nine years at Delphi, in honour
of Helios, Apollo, or the Sun, commemorating his triumph over
darkness or Python, which is only Typhon transliterated.

SEPULCHRE, KNIGHT OF THE HoLy.—A degree appendant to that of
Red Cross of Rome and Constantine. Royal Arch Masons ore
alone eligible.

SERAPHIM (Hebrew, D’=1¥, Sept. 2<papiu).—The plural of the word,
WY, saraph, “ burning or fiery,” and applied to celestial beings,
described by Isaiah vi. 2-6. They were supposed to be in attend-
ance at the Throne of the Almighty to perform His commands.
(See also Cherubim.)

SERAPHIM, ORDER OF, OR ORDER OF JESUS.—An ancient Swedish

rite, instituted 1334, and revived in 1748. The number of
662

SER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SET

knights, besides the king and members of the royal family, is
limited to twenty-four.

SERAPIS, MYSTERIES OF. (See Egyptian Mysteries.)

SERPENT.—The whole history of serpent or ophite symbolism would
require a book as large as the present volume to render it fair
justice ; hence very little space can be given toit here. In Craft
Masonry, the symbol of the serpent does not occur, except on
the die of the centenary 'jewel; and in the Templar and Philo-
sophical degrees, the serpent is an emblem of Christ. In ancient
Egypt, the god Nehebka, who represented the resurrection of
nature, was represented with a serpent’s head.

SERPENT AND Cross.—A symbol] used in the Templar degrees and
in the Knight of the Brazen Serpent. The cross is a Tau Cross T,
with the serpent twined round it, and its origin is to be found in
the Bible (Numbers xxi. 9).

SERPENT, KNIGHT OF THE Brazen. (See Knight of the Brazen Serpent.)

SERVIANS, SECT or.—A sect of the Orthodox Greek Church. They
rebaptize their proselytes, renounce the Pope and the adoration
of crucifixes and images, except certain palladia of their own,
and believe in Purgatory.

SERVING BRETHREN.—Brethren initiated as Serving Brethren are
not Members of the Lodge; they serve, but fill the subordinate
and paid offices of Tylers and waiters. They can, however,
legitimately belong to other Lodges. In Military Lodges, private
soldiers are sometimes thus initiated. In France, they are called
Fréres Servants, and in Germany Dienenden Briider.

SERVITES.—A religious order established in Tuscany, 1233, under
the rules of Saint Augustine, in honour of the Virgin Mary. They
wore a black robe in memory of her widowhood.

SeET-FaIr.—A term applied in building to the coat of plaster used
after roughing in and floating, or pricked up and floated.

SeTH.—The School of Masons who derive Masonry from the earliest
times of the world, associate Seth with the preservation of the
secrets of.Masonry. (See Hnoch.)

SETHIANS.—A sect of Christians of the second century, in Egypt, who
held that Jesus Christ was identical with Seth, the son of Adam.

SetTHOs.—A book published by the Abbé Terrasson at Paris, in 1731.
It was a kind of mystical romance, in which the system of
ancient initiation was elaborately worked up. It was afterwards
republished by Matthew Claudius, at Breslau, in 1774.

Settinc MauL.—An instrument of the F. C. degree.

Settine Sun.—The Senior Warden in the West represents the
luminary sinking to rest.

663

THE SCALE OF THE NUMBER SEVEN.

inal mw The nam

RAUININ Asser Eheie withsev

Ararita

He Zapkiel Zadkiel Camael Raphael Haniel

Seven An;
Michael Gabriel stand in
sence of |

Saturn Jupiter Mars The Sun Venus

stial Mercury The Moon | Seven Pla:

The Lapwing| The Eagle |The Vulture} The Swan |The Dove |TheStork | The Owl Seven Bir
ene piece |The Dolphin | The Pike The Seacalf |The Mallus | The Mullet | The Seacat | Seven Fis

d |The Mole :The Hart The Wolf | The Lion The Goat The Ape The Cat Seven Ani

Lead Tin | lron Gold Copper Quicksilver] Silver Seven Met
The Onyx |The Sapphire| The DiamondjTheCarbuncle] The Emerald] The Agate | Crystal Seven Sto

ser |The right foot}

fan |The right ear

|

The head Therighthand|The heart [The members| The left hand| The left foot | Seven mer
The left ear |,, right nostril] The right eye |Theleftnostril| The mouth | The left eye | Seven orif

a i | | | |_|”

ae 7 4
‘nal The Gates of | The shadow | The pit of | The clay of wpe The depth of internals
— Death of Death destraction Death Perdition the Earth by Rabbi

Castile,
Garden o

Astaroth The §
1 Nabam Acham Nambroth Sabaoth Astarte or Lucifer poeeht

Thartach of the

SEV] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SEV

SEVEN.——This number is composed of the first two perfect numbers,
equal and unequal, 3 and 4—for the number 2, consisting of
repeated unity, which is no number, is not perfect—it compre-
hends the primary numerical in triangle or trine, and square or
quartile conjunction, considered by the favourers of planetary
influence as of the most benign aspect. In six days creation
was completed, and the 7th was consecrated to rest. On the
7th day of the 7th month, a holy observance was ordained to
the children of Israel, who feasted 7 days, and remained 7
days in tents; the 7th year was directed to be a Sabbath of rest
for all things; and at the end of 7 times 7 years commenced the
grand jubilee. Every 7th year the land lay fallow; every
7th year there was a general release from all debts, and all
bondmen were set free. From this law may have originated
the custom of our binding young men to 7 years’ apprenticeship,
and punishing incorrigible offenders by transportation for 7,
twice 7, and three times 7, years. Every 7 years the law was
to be read to the people. Jacob served 7 years for the posses-
sion of Rachel, and also other 7. Noah had 7 days’ warning of
the flood, and was commanded to take the fowls of the air in by
7, and the clean beasts by 7. The ark touched ground in the
7th month; and after 7 days the dove was sent out, and again in
7 days another. The 7 years of plenty, and the 7 years of famine,
were foretold in Pharaoh’s dream by 7 fat and 7 lean beasts,
and the 7 full and 7 blighted ears of corn. Nebuchadnezzar was
7 years a beast; and the fiery furnace was 7 times hotter to
receive Shadrach, &c. A man defiled, was, by the Mosaic law,
unclean 7 days; the young of both animals was to remain with
the dam 7 days, and at the end of the 7th was to be taken
away. By the old law, man was commanded to forgive his
offending brother 7 times; but the meekness of the revealed law
extended his humility to seventy times 7; if Cain shall be
avenged 7 times, truly Lamech seventy times 7. In the destruc-
tion of Jericho, 7 priests bore 7 trumpets 7 days; on the 7th,
they surrounded the wall 7 times; after the 7th, the walls fell.
Balaam prepared 7 years for a sacrifice; and 7 of Saul’s sons
were hanged to stay a famine. Laban pursued Jacob 7 days’
journey. Job’s friends sat 7 days and 7 nights, and offered
7 bullocks and 7 rams as an atonement for their wickedness.
In the 7th year of his reign, King Ahazuerus feasted 7 days,
and on the 7th deputed his 7 chamberlains to find a queen, who
was allowed 7 maidens to attend her. Miriam was cleansed of her
leprosy by being shut up 7 days. Solomon was 7 years in build-
ing the temple, at the dedication of which he feasted 7 days. In
the temple were 7 lamps; 7 days were appointed for an atonement

665

SEV] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SEV

upon the altar, and the priest's son was ordained to wear his
father’s garments 7 days. Abraham gave 7 ewe-lambs to Abime-
lech, as a,memorial for a well. Joseph mourned 7 days for
Jacob. Namaan was cleansed of his leprosy by bathing 7 times
in Jordan. The Rabbins say that God employed the power of this
number to perfect the greatness of Samuel, his name answering
the value of the letters in the Hebrew word which signifies 7;
whence Hannah his mother, in her thanksgiving,says, “The barren
hath brought forth 7.” In Scripture are enumerated 7 resurrec-
tions—the widow’s son, by Elias; the Shunamiite’s son, by Elisha;
the soldier who touched the bones of the prophet; the daughter
of the ruler of the synagogue; the widow’s son of Nain; Lazarus;
aud our Lord. The apostles chose 7 deacons. Enoch, who was
translated, was the 7th from Adam; and Jesus Christ was the
77th in a direct line. Our Lord spoke 7 times on the cross, on
which He was 7 hours; He appeared 7 times, and after 7 times 7
days sent the Holy Ghost. In the Lord’s prayer are 7 petitions,
contained in 7 times 7 words, omitting those of mere grammatical
connexion; within this number are concealed all the mysteries of
Apocalypse revealed to the 7 churches of Asia. There appeared
7 golden candlesticks, and 7 stars in the hands of Him that was
in the midst ; 7 lambs before the 7 spirits of God; the book with
7 seals; the lamb with 7 horns and 7 eyes; 7 angels with 7
trumpets; 7 kings; 7 thunders; 7000 men slain. The dragon
with 7 heads and 7 crowns, and the beast with 7 heads; 7
angels bearing 7 plagues, and 7 vials of wrath. The vision of
Daniel was of 70 weeks; and the elders of Israel were 70
There were also 7 heavens, 7 planets, 7 spheres, 7 stars, 7
wise men, 7 champions of Christendom, 7 notes in music, 7
primary colours, 7 deadly sins, and 7 sacraments in the Catholic
church. The 7th son was endowed with pre-eminent wisdom ,
and the 7th son of a 7th son is still thought to possess the power
of healing diseases spontaneously. Perfection is likened to gold
7 times purified in the fire; and we yet say, you frightened
me out of my 7 senses. The opposite sides of a dice make 7
whence the players at hazard make 7 the main. Hippocrates
says the septenary number, by its occult virtues, tends to the
accomplishment of all things, to be the dispenser of life, and
fountain of all its changes; and, like Shakspere, he divided
the life of man into 7 ages; for as the moon changes her phases
every 7 days, this number infiuences all sublunary beings. The
teeth spring out on the 7th month, and are shed and renewed in
the 7th year, when infancy is changed into childhood; at twice
7 years puberty begins; at three times 7 the faculties are
developed and manhood commences, and we are become legally
666

SEV} The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [SHA

competent to all civil acts; at four times 7 man is in full posses-
sion of all his strength; at five times 7 he is fit for the business
of the world; at six times 7 he becomes grave and wise, or
never; at seven times 7 he is in his apogee, and from that time
decays; at eight times 7 he is in his first climacteric; at nine
times 7, or 63, he is in his last or grand climacteric or year of
danger; and ten times 7, or threescore and ten, has, by the
royal prophet, been pronounced the natural period of human
life. The Pythagoreans called the number 7 a perfect number,
because it was composed of 3 and 4, the triangle and the
square, the two perfect figures. It was also a virgin number,
and without a mother, like Minerva; the motherless virgin,
because it cannot by multiplication produce any numbers
within ten, nor can any two numbers multiplied together
produce 7. The number 7 is remarkable in many other ways,
there were 7 ancient planets, 7 Pleiades, and 7 Hyades; 7 altars
were lighted before the God Mithras; the Arabians had 7 holy
temples; the Hindus regarded the world as being enclosed
within 7 peninsulas; the Goths had 7 deities—Sun, Moon, Tuisco,
Woden, Thor, Friga, and Seatur ; whence the modern days of the
week are derived. There were 7 spacious caverns in the Persian
mysteries; in the Gothic mysteries, the road of the 7 stages was
encumbered with 7 obstructions, and sacrifices were considered
most efficacious when conducted in the number 7. This number
to the Hebrew, as well as to the Pythagorean, was the perfect
number. In Masonry it requires 7 members to make a Lodge
perfect; and in every way we find the number 7 widely
associated with Masonic legend and symbolism.

SEVEN GOLDEN CANDLESTICKS.—An American side degree.

SEVEN Srars.—The tracing board of the seventeenth degree Knight
of the East and West, shows us a representation of a man
clothed in a white robe, with a girdle about his waist, his right
hand extended and surrounded with seven stars. This degree is
apocalyptic, and is referred to in the Apocalypse (i. 16), “ And
he had in his hand seven stars.” It is a symbol of the mystical
seven churches. (See Oannes and Revelations.)

SEVENTY YEARS OF CapTivity.—These years must be computed
from the defeat of the Egyptians at Carchemish, when
Nebuchadnezzar reduced the nations of Syria and Palestine as
wel] as Jerusalen On the accession of Cyrus, seventy years
later, the Babylonian monarchy came to an end.

SHADDAI (Hebrew, ‘3v, Omnipotent)—One of the names of God
alluded to in Exodus vi. 13, and known to the Israelites before

the Tetragrammaton was communicated.
667

SHA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SHE

Suart.—In architecture, that part of the column between the base
and the capital, sometimes called the trunk.

Suaxtus.—A Hindu sect, worshippers of Bhuguvatee or Dirga, of
the Brahmanical caste, having particular rites.

SHALAL SHALOM ABI (Hebrew, *28 Dive 2¥, Diripuit pacem patri).—
A word used in the fifteenth degree of the Scottish Rite.

SHALASH Esrim (Hebrew, Dp viv) Word in the sixteenth de-
gree of the Scottish Rite.

SHAMIR.—A worm by which it was reported that Solomon worked
his wonders. It was, however, also a hard precious stone, and
probably a diamond. (See Talisman.)

SHANK.—The space between two channels of the Doric triglyph,
sometimes called the legs of the triglyph.

SHARP INSTRUMENT.—This is variously applied. The candidate
enters always on the point of a sharp instrument, properly
compasses in the first degree, and afterwardsa dagger. No doubt
the Tyler's drawn sword originated from a fear of intrusion in
times when Masonry was much more persecuted, in an age when
men habitually wore swords as a part of their costume. It might,
however, be used as an argument for the short existence of
Masonry. It could never have been an attribute of the operative
masons, who were not entitled to wear swords at all. This was
a peculiar attribute of the printing guild; and they could hold
chapels independently of their employers, electing their own
master or father.

SHASTRAS.—The sacred book of the Hindus, being a commentary
on the Vedas containing the Hindu doctrines and ceremonies.
SHEBA, QUEEN OF.—Traditionally named Balkis. By some, she is
said to have been the daughter of al Hodhad Ebn Sharhabil, by
others, of Sharabil Ebn Malec, but then all agree in making her a
descendant of Yarab Ebn Kahtan. She is the twenty second
sovereign of Yaman, in Pococke’s list. She is mentioned in
Kings and Chronicles as visiting Solomon, and a still longer
account of her is given in the Koran (Surat xxvii), Sheba or
Saba was generally supposed to be a small territory in Arabia

Felix. (See Admiration, Sign of.)

SHEKINAH (Hebrew, 72'2¥).—A term applied by the Jews in the
Targums to the divine glory which dwelt in the tabernacle and
the first temple, manifested by a visible cloud resting over the
mercy-seat, in the Sanctum Sanctorum. It is this divine glory
which is symbolized by the numerous emblems significative of
light in the various systems of Masonry. (See Sekinat.)

SuHEm (Hebrew, ov, fama)—1. The Name. Applied by the Jews
to the name Jehovah or Jahve, which was unpronounceable.

668

SHE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SHI

2. Used in the twenty-first degree of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite.

SHem, Ham, Japuet.—The three sons of Noah who aided him in
the building of the ark. In the American Royal Arch, these
names are significant; as also, in the Ark Mariner’s degree.

SHEMED (Hebrew, 30, destruction).—A word in the 73° R. Mzm.

SHEMESH.—In the Oriental system, the sun is feminine, and the
moon masculine. Bel Shemesh would mean “lord of the‘sun.”
It is curious that Cagliostro’s original name, Balsamo, should so
closely resemble Belshemesh. Another name for the sun was
‘D') "1, DAYAN-NISI, Judge or Ruler of Men.

SHEMHAMPHORASCH (Hebrew, whapzow).—1. The separated Name.
Applied to the Tetragrammaton, because all the other names of
God are derived from His works, while this is derived from His
substance, indicating His self-existent essence. 2. Used 5° French
Rite.

SHEPHERD, THE Goop.—Bro. Dr Beigel has recently published an
important memoir on a ritual discovered by him in the Imperial
and Royal Library at Vienna, having great analogies to the
Ancient and Accepted Rite, but continuing Masonry into the
higher regions of Alchymy and the Kabbalah.

SHERBIAH. (See Zerbal.)

SHERIFF.—Preston informs us in his “ Illustrations,” that “a suffi-
cient number of Masons met together within a certain district, with
the consent of the sheriff or chief magistrate of the place—were
empowered at this time (previous to 1717) to make Masons,
and practice the rites of Masonry, without a warrant of constitu-
tion.” The Cooke MS. confirms this statement.

SHEsHA.—In the Hindu system, the name of the great seven-headed
serpent, upon which, floating in the cosmical ocean, the throne of
Brahma rested.

SHETHARBOZNAL (See Tatnaz.)

SHEWBREAD.—The twelve loaves placed ona table in the sanctuary
are also represented in a Lodge of Perfection. They were sym-
bolical of the bread of life.

SHIBBOLETH (Hebrew, npay, spica)—A word used in the second
degree, meaning at once an ear of corn or a fall of water. It is
a matter of tradition that the Ephraimites were unable to pro-
nounce the sk, but called it Sibboleth, whereby they were
detected and slain at the fords of Jordan. (See Waterfall).

Suica—A lock of hair worn by the priests in the Brahmanical
religion, in commemoration of the snatching to heaven.

SHIELD or Davip.—This is the same as the seal of Solomon already
mentioned, but was certainly applicable to the Wanike King

9

SHI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sur

David. In his time, the word Agla was usually displayed upon
it, which were the initials of the words ‘4x nbybasy nny, Atah
Gbor Lolam Adonai, “ Thou art strong in the Eternal God.”

SHutTEes.—A sect of Mohammedans who reject the first three
caliphs, prefer Ali to Mohammed, and throw aside the sunnah or
traditions concerning the prophet.

SHINTO, WorsuHIP oF.—This worship, to a great extent resembling
that of the Pitris of India, is associated with esoteric forms of
cultus. It was at a very ancient period indeed, certainly by
1000 B.C., the national worship of the Japanese. It consisted in a
reverence for ancestors, and was very simple in its general
character. About the sixth century of the Christian era,
Buddhistic doctrines began to invade the supremacy of this
faith, but without shaking the general belief in it. The literal
meaning of Shinto is, the path of the gods, derived from some
form of ancient Chinese, and appears, like most primeval faiths,
to have been associated with sun worship. Those who had pre-
ceded others by their death were supposed to have entered on
felicity, still however retaining powers of communication with
this earth, of a preservative nature, and requiring only faith to
lend their aid in protecting their posterity. We owe to the zeal
of MM. Satow and Kempermann, two eminent Sinologues, such
knowledge of this very ancient religion as occidentals are likely
to obtain. The Emperor Temmu, in 681 A.D., caused a com-
pilation of books to be made concerning it, known as the
Kodjiki, the most ancient document accessible. This teaches,
that before the beginning of things there existed nothing but
infinite space, in which floated, in a state of pure spirit, invisible
deities of a visionary kind, represented by fantastic names,
having some analogy with those preserved in other antique forms
of belief, ¢.g., “Master of Heaven, Son of Heaven, Son of the
Earth, Sons of the Gods.” These divinities came into existence
in some mysterious way, at a period of time not conceivable to
mortals, In the midst of space an indefinable thing at last arose,
hanging like a cloud, whence emerged a horn or cornucopia (see
Amalthea) forming the firmament. The next cosmical appear-
ance was that of the moon; and finally, mankind was formed in
the persons of Izanagi and Izanami, the last representatives of
the purely divine race, preceded by seven generations of gods.
This celestial pair did not observe the law of continence, hitherto
the rule of their faith; and on one oecasion, when they stood on
the aerial bridge (Milky Way), they thought they would
sound the depths of the sea. Izanagi extended his lance, and
from the drops which fell from it was formed an island Awadsi,
to which this celestial pair descended. The goddess Izanami

670

SHI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SHI

gave birth to a son, who was abandoned by his parents, and
saved himself in a boat, becoming the companion of fishermen.
Upon this the eight chief Japanese islands emerged from the sea,
and the empire was established; the other islands being formed
of the foam of the sea, after which the numerous deities of
Shintoism, named Kami, care into existence. The most recent
of the gods to which Izanami gave birth was the fiery god; and
such was the pain she suffered, that, like Euridyce or Persephone,
she fled to the regions of darkness, whither her husband
followed her—(see Orphic Mysteries) Degraded by this,
a purification became necessary, and then many other deities
were born. From the left eye issued Amateras, a lovely
female, to whom was assigned the rule of heaven; while
to Suzan, another divinity, was allotted the empire of the
seas. Suzan, which in another language is equivalent to
Sarah—princess—was so violent in her temper, that her sister
Amateras, or Venus Urania, took refuge in the primeval dark-
ness, and thus became Cybele, or the earth goddess. She pene-
trated into a deep cave, and was lost to sight. Every attempt
was made to allure her back to light, and hence it is that the
priests of Cybele executed dances in front of the Cretan temple,
and the solemn measures executed by all the priests of early
religions had the same mystic references. Persons accustomed
to researches into what may be perhaps called the comparative
anatomy of mythology, will not be astonished at finding in the
Shinto traditions traces of the earlier belief. Dates, of course,
are of very slight importance, being in themselves unsubstantial,
and incapable of any settlement; but according to the Shintoist
belief, the world, that is, the Japanese world, remained 2,500,000
years under the rule of Cybele or Amateras. Hence we may
conclude, that in ancient times there was the same want of
authenticity felt, which is now prevalent. We next approach the
singular mythological synonym of a war of the gods between
themselves, and the ultimate settlement of the Japanese em-
pire under Sin-mu Tenno, the first Mikado, B.C. 660, the
year 1 of the Japanese chronology. Amateras was the female
divinity of the sun, and her flight had an evident relation
to the change of seasons. We find a similar legend in the
cosmological traditions of the Burmese and Indo-Chinese. The
ordinary Shinto belief was based upon a respect for ancestors
(an idea almost universally implanted into human nature),
and the future belief in an immortality of the soul. It is beyond
the purpose of the present work to enter into details, but it may
be apposite to say that there was an esoteric and exoteric side
to the doctrine, and three degrees existed through which can-
71

SHO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sp

didates passed to the solemn knowledge of the physical rest of
Nature, in itself a kind of death. It is here where we may again
catch dim glimpses of glorious natural truths, since distorted for
very different purposes, by writers and thinkers of different
schools, for diverse reasons. It would occupy many pages
to explain the doctrines of Shinto. (But see Pitris.)

SHocK oF ENLIGHTENMENT.—The signal that the brother has passed
from one state of probation to another, and is accordingly
enlightened.

Suock or ENTRANCE—On the admission of an apprentice, when
the light is given him, it is usual to accompany this part of the
ceremony by a clash of hands, the authority for which is very
ancient. This shock symbolizes the severance of all old ties on
the part of the candidate, and his adoption into a new and better
state of things.

SHocracom (Arabic)—Your gratitude. Used in the Order of
Ishmael.

SHoE. (See Discalceation.)

Suor-Lasan (Hebrew, }2? v/).—White bull, or innocence. (See
Ladder.)

SHOULKAIN (Hebrew, pow, Fimbria possessionis).—The real word,
which has been distorted into Stolkin and Sterkin. Used in the
ninth degree of the A. and A. Scottish Rite.

SHOVEL. a4 tool in the Royal Arch degree. It teaches the candi-
date to remove the rubbish of passions and prejudices, and to
pursue the investigation of truth.

Suu (Egyptian, Light.)\—In ancient Egypt, one of the names of
Osiris as the rising sun, as such termed son of Ra. By his
influence the vault of heaven was supported, and he is repre-
sented with arms uplifted, in an attitude well known to Masons.

Sime Decrees.—The side degrees in Masonry are exceedingly
numerous, and the investigations of Masonic archeologists are
continually bringing fresh degrees to light. At the present time,
Craft, Masonry is so admirably governed by its several bodies in
various countries, that there is no difficulty in the proposition
and initiation of a worthy member of society; but in regard to
the side degrees, it is somewhat different. Up to the present
time, these degrees have been conferred by the individuals pre-
viously acquainted with them, at their own will, and without
reference to any supreme controlling or guiding power; conse-
quently, it is not improbable that many persons, quite unfitted to
understand their symbolical meaning, may have received them.
To obviate this in the future, and also in the interests of Masonic
archi o/98y: it has been proposed to found a Society or Council

72

SID] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sic

of Side Degrees, in which these stray ceremonials may be care-
fully formulated into a system—not necessarily correlative as in
a rite, but rather for the purpose of preserving whatever may
be of good from the vicissitudes of time, or the carelessness which
often accompanies matters of this kind. It is to be hoped that
such a movement, by preserving many curious rituals, and other-
wise raising an interest in real Masonic history, may effect actual
good ; and, as it cannot in any way interfere with Craft Masonry,
and does not set itself in any antagonism to present institutions,
it is thought to have in itself a sufficient reason for its exist-
ence. In this work, the letters C.S. D. have been affixed to side
degrees of which there is any knowledge.

Sipontus (Hebrew, "sy, a hunter)—A name used in the twenty-
second degree of the A. and A. Scottish Rite.

Srpororr, APOLLON.—Among the papers of a mystic recently de-
ceased in Russia was discovered the following curious diploma:
—* Reincarnation and evocation of spirits: No. 11. Continuity
of life from age to age and world to world. Diploma: The
Legions of Spirits, recognising your ardent and unlimited zeal for
the science which reveals the mysteries of the supernatural power
of spitits, consecrate you a medium, in order that you may serve
as a link of union between the material world and the imma-
terial world, and may transmit to the profane manifestations
from the spirit world. In token whereof the present diploma is
conferred upon you. Paris, Jan. 1, 1876.—RENARD, Great Pon-
tiff; Gizo, Secretary.—Conferred upon Apollon Sidoroff.”

Sice—Silence. Used in the fifth degree of French Adoptive
Masonry.

SicHT, Maxine Masons at.—A prerogative of a Grand Master,
and the eighth landmark of the order. Its exercise is rare; but
the Grand Master, of his own authority, can initiate, pass, and
raise in a lodge of emergency appointed to be held. The lodge is,
however, purely transitory, and expires when closed down. This
authority has, however, been disputed, although it unquestionably
exists. In fact, the history of Masonry, in many ways, shows
that such a power has been exercised, not only by a Grand
Master, but by a deputed emissary. In 1731, Lord Lovel being
Grand Master, an occasional lodge was formed at Houghton
Hall, the seat of Sir Robert Walpole, in Norfolk, when the Duke
of Lorraine, afterwards Emperor of Germany, and the Duke of
Newcastle, were made Masons. In 1766, Lord Blaney held an
occasional lodge, and initiated, passed, and raised the Duke of
Gloucester. In the following year, 1767, John Salter, Deputy
Grand Master, held an occasional lodge, and conferred the three

degrees upon the Duke of Cumberland. In 1787, the Face of
2uU 73

SIG] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sic

Wales was made a Mason at an occasional lodge at the Star and
Garter Tavern, Pall Mall, when the Duke of Cumberland, Grand
Master, presided in person. The method is similar to that of
any ordinary lodge, with the exception of the authority. Six
other Master Masons must be present, and therefore no harm
can be done. In addition to this, the following conditions must
be with satisfaction fulfilled :-—

1. Moral_—A candidate for the mysteries must be a man of
irreproachable conduct, a believer in the existence of God,
obedient to the precepts of moral law; neither an atheist nor an
irreligious libertine; but of still tongue, good report, and well
recommended.

2. Physical—He must be a man arrived at a mature age;
upright in body, with all the senses of a man; not maimed, dis-
membered, or deformed, but with hale and entire limbs, as a man
ought to be.

3. Intellectual.—He must be a man of even and well-balanced
mind; not so young that his mind shall not have been formed,
nor so old that it shall fall into dotage; neither a fool, an idiot,
nor a madman; a lover of the liberal arts and sciences, and dis-
posed to make continual progress in the pursuit of wisdom
and virtue.

4. Political—He must be free-born, and in the unstrained
enjoyment of civil and personal liberty; a dutiful subject or
citizen in fulfilling the requirements of the civil laws of the
country where he resides ; and obedient to the authorities which
are set over him and yield him protection,

5. Domestic—He must be a lover of quiet ; frugal, industrious,
and temperate in his habits; carefully providing for his own
necessities and those of his family and dependants. He must
always be ready to contribute to the wants of the poor and dis-
tressed around him to the extent of his ability. Hence he must
be a good father, a good husband, a good brother, a good son,
and a good neighbour. It is desirable to add, however, that the
second and fourth qualifications have been greatly modified.

Sicn.—It is needless to comment on the question of signs. These
formed a necessary constituent part of the esoteric side of
Masonry—the esoteric side being reserved for men of rare cul-
ture, high inventive faculties, and unimpeachable honour. That,
however, this secret method of intercommunicating significantly
by signs is very ancient, we learn from classical sources. Even
the dramas of Plautus are full of this peculiar sign play, and
there can be little doubt that their influence was great at the
time they were produced. The Pcenulus, in particular, is rife in
references to esoteric mysteries, perhaps only partially understood

674

SIG | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SIN

by the author of that comedy. In another of his comedies, he
says (Miles Gloriosus, iv. 2): “ Cede signum, si harum Baccharum
es.”——“ Give me the sign if you are one of these Bacchantes.”

SicN oF Distress.—Indifferently called the Master’s Clap, the
Grand Hailing Sign, and the Sign of the Children of the Widow.
Every Master Mason is in possession of this sign, which should
not receive explanation in this place.

SIGNATURE.—Every Mason is furnished by his Grand Lodge with
a certificate, and he is necessarily obliged to affix his signature,
which should be done in the presence of the Master; and he is
not allowed afterwards to vary his signature, to which the words
Ne varietur refer.

SteneTt Rinc.—Formerly an attribute of kings conveying supreme
power. It is now limited to the Princes of the Royal Secret—
when the ring is sexagonal, and contains a device appropriate to
the person, and indicative of rank.

SIGNET OF ZERUBBABEL.—A Hebrew yod within a triangle.

Sieniricant WorD.—Any word significantly put in aid of the
object in view. It alludes to the Tetragrammaton, the only self-
existent significant word in the world.

Suet, AL—The recording angel in Islam.

SILence. (See Secrecy and Silence.)

SILENTIARY.—A person sworn not to divulge secrets of state is
sometimes thus termed.

SILICERNIUM (Latin, stlex, a stone, and cena, a supper).—Among
the Romans, a feast prepared for the dead, consisting of beans,
lettuces, bread, eggs, &c., laid upon the tomb, similar to the
Nykken offering at Christmas, in Norway.

SitverR Corp.—Taken from Ecclesiastes xii. 6, 7—“Or ever the
silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the
pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the
cistern, Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and
the spirit shall return unto God who gave it.” The silver cord
is presumed to be the spinal marrow; the golden bowl is the
brain, or, according to some, the whole body of man, containing
the spirit; the pitcher, the great vein carrying the blood to the
right ventricle of the heart, denoted by the fountain; while the
wheel is the great artery, receiving the blood from the left
ventricle, used in the third degree. Aben Ezra says that this
is a proof that the spirit and the Ruach or Gust, ghost, is not
an effect. of chance—for chance returns not.

Simorcu.—A monstrous griffin, guardian of the Persian Mysteries.

Sinat, Mount.—Referred to in the 23° and 24° of the A. and A.
Scottish Rite.

Sincerity, ORDER OF.—Instituted by the Margrave Christian-Emest

675

SIR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [six

of Baireuth in 1705, and now known as the Order of the Red
Eagle of Prussia. Badge: an eight-pointed white enamelled
cross or, in centre the Red Eagle of Brandenburg bearing a shield
with the arms of Hohenzollern, and around it the motto, Toujours
le méme. On the reverse, is the name of the sovereign or on a
shield gules, surmounted by an electoral cap, worn at the neck
pendant from a ribbon. At present the badge is an eight-pointed
white enamelled Maltese cross ov, and the rest of the insignia
slightly vary.

Sir.—Every possessor of Masonic knighthood is, within the limits
of Masonry, entitled to this prefix. It is a contraction of the old
French title of Seigneur or Lord. English Masons use the word
Srater, or brother, in the Craft degrees.

SIRLOIN, SOCIETY OF THE.—A society known as the Societé d’ Aloyau
existed in France in 1789, the last Grand Master being the Duke
of Casse Brissac. It professed to continue the secrets and prac-
tices of the Templars, and came to an end with the massacre of the
Grand Master at Versailles, in 1792. (See Temple, Order of the.)

Srroc.—A word used in the American Order of High Priesthood,
meaning a shoe latchet, and referring to the declaration of
Abraham to Melchizedek, that he would not take from a thread
even to a shoe latchet.

Sistyna.—General Grand Master of Cavalry. Sixth degree, French
Modern Rite.

SisTER Lopces.—Lodges under the same obedience or jurisdiction.

Sister Masons.—Androgynous lodges of adoption necessarily con-
tain many female members thus termed. This however is very
uncommon, even unheard of in England.

SISTERS OF THE GILD.—The idea that females were admitted into.
the medieval gild of builders—which some few writers have
sustained—may be dismissed as untenable, although v omen
were certainly admitted into other companies of the Midd e
Ages.

SITUATION oF THE LopcE.—This should always be, if possible, due
east and west, although in practice it is often not so, in conse-
quence of the various situation of the lodge rooms. But the
seat of the W. M. is always metaphorically considered to be in
the east. (See East.)

Six, CoLLEGE or.—A mysterious college in ancient Egypt, to which
none but priests of the highest rank were admitted. Their
meetings were secret, and they had special ceremonies. A per-
sonage of the fifth dynasty named Asesra bore the official title of
Master of the Mysterious Words of the Six. The functions of
these priests extended to the cultus of deceased sovereigns. A
statue of the thirteenth dynasty still exists of a person named

670

$1x] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SMA

Ei-meri, whose title was that of Chief of the Great Dwelling of
the Six. They had a monthly festival on the sixth day.

Six Licuts. (See Lights, Symbolical, and Lesser Lights.)

S1x Periops.—The six periods of the creation formerly constituted
a part of the old Prestonian lecture. It is retained in the Webb
system, but in a very concise manner.

SKELETON.—A skeleton was always placed by the Egyptians at
their feasts, to remind them, even at a time of gaiety and mirth,
of the mortality of human nature. In some of the high degrees
this emblem is also introduced.

SKIRRET.—One of the working tools of a Master Mason. It is an
instrument usually made of wood, shaped like the letter T, acting
on a centre-pin, from which a line is drawn, chalked, and struck
to mark out the ground for the intended edifice. In a specula-
tive sense, it points out that straight and undeviating line of
conduct laid down in the Volume of the Sacred Law.

Sxutu.—A skull is used as an emblem in the Master Mason’s
degree, and in some of the high degrees, especially in Masonic
Templarism. It is associated with the cross-bones in the
Chamber of Reflection of the French and Scottish systems.

Stave. (See Free Born, and Free Man or Free Agent.)

Stoang Manuscripts.—Three in number, and containing copies of
the Old Constitutions. They are respectively numbered 3848,
Sloane Collection (published for the first time by Bro. Hughan in
his “Old Charges of the British Freemasons”), dated 16th Octo-
ber, 1646; the second is numbered 3323 in the same collection,
dated 1659 (first published in 1871 by Bro. Hughan, in his
“Masonic Sketches and Reprints;” the third manuscript is
numbered 3329, and is thought by Bro. Hughan to be dated
between 1640 and 1700 ; but there is much difference of opinion
on the point. It contained the Ritual of the Society of Free
Operative Masons.

SMARAGDINE TaBLET OF Hermes.—The foundation of Hermetic
knowledge, according to the occult system of viewing the pheno-
mena of life and history. It is impossible to ascribe to it any
definite author, but it certainly contains principles upon which
there can be no general doubt, although it is expressed in
mystical language. The translation here given is that of Dr
Everard, from the Latin of Ficinus, in the great work of the
learned Jesuit, Athanasius Kircher—the Gdipus Afgyptiacus.
“1. Itis true. Without error. Most certainly true. 2. That
which is above is as that which is below, and that which is below
is as that which is above, for performing the miracles of the
One Thing. 3. As all things are from One, by the meditation
of One, so all things arose from this one thing by adaptation.

677

SMA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SMa
4. The father of it is the Sun, the mother of it is the Moon. 5.
The wind carried it in its belly. 6. The nurse thereof is the
Earth. 7. This is the father of all perfection, or consummation
of the whole world. 8. The power of it is integral, if it is turned
into earth. 9. Thou shalt separate the earth from the fire, the
subtle from the gross, gently, with much sagacity. 10. It ascends
from earth to Heaven, and again descends to earth, and revives
the strength of the superiors and of the inferiors. 11. Thus thou
hast the glory of the whole world,—therefore, let all obscurity flee
before thee. 12. This is the strong fortitude of all fortitudes, over-
coming every subtle, and penetrating every solid, thing. 13. So
the world was created. 14. Hence were all wonderful adaptations,
of which this is the manner. 15. Therefore am I called thrice
Great Hermes, having the three parts of the philosophy of the
whole world. 16, That which I have written is consummated con-
cerning the Operation of the Sun.” Eliphas Levi, in his “ History
of Magic,” thus comments on this wonderful document :—“ It is
in Egypt,” says he (p. 77), “that Magic completes itself as a
universal science, and formulates itself as a perfect doctrine.
Nothing surpasses, and nothing equals, as a compendium of all
the doctrines of the ancient world, the few sentences engraved
on a precious stone by Hermes, and known as the Table of
Emerald: the unity of Being, and the unity of the harmonies,
either ascending or descending, the progressive and proportional
ladder of the Word, the immutable law of equilibrium and pro-
portional progress of universal analogies, the relation of the Idea
to the Word, giving the measure of the relation between the
Creator and the created; the necessary mathematics of the in-
finite, proved by the measurements of a single corner-stone, is
entirely expressed by the single proposition of the great Egyptian
hierophant: ‘That which is above is as that which is below,
and that which is below is as that which is above, for performing
the miracles of the One Thing.” Then follows the revelation
and learned description of the creative agent, of the pantomor-
phic fire, of the great motive of occult power, or, in a word, of
the astral light: ‘The father of it is the Sun, the mother of it is
the Moon, the wind carried it in its belly.’ Therefore, this light
emanated from the sun, it received its form and regular motion
by the influence of the moon, and the atmosphere is its receptacle
and its prison. ‘The nurse thereof is the Earth;’ that is to say,
that it is balanced and put in motion by the central heat of the
Earth. ‘It is the universal principle or Telesma of the world.’
Hermes next teaches how this light—which is also a power—
[as manifested in modern science within the last two years] can
be converte into a lever and a universal dissolvent, and likewise
7

SMI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [soc

a formative and coagulating agent; how it is to be drawn from
bodies in which it is latent, in a condition of fire, of motion, of
splendour, of luminous gas, of boiling water, and finally, from
igneous earth, in order to imitate by means of these various
substances all the creations of Nature. The Table of Emerald,”
he concludes, “is the whole of magic in a single page.”

SmirH, GEorcr—A Mason of some distinction during the latter
portion of the eighteenth century. He was born in England,
but at an early age entered the military service of Prussia, and
was initiated in Germany. On his return to England, he was
appointed Inspector of the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich,
and was the author of a Military Dictionary, and other profes-
sional works, He was four years W M. of the Royal Military
Lodge at Woolwich, and during his mastership he incurred
censure for opening a Lodge and initiating candidates within the
precincts of the King’s Bench Prison. In 1778, he was appointed,
by the Duke of Manchester, Provincial Grand Master of Kent,
and for a short time was Junior Grand Warden, in 1780. He
published a book, entitled “The Use and Abuse of Masonry,” in
1783, the contents of which are now little known. The date of
his death is uncertain.

SMITTEN BuILDER.—In the old lectures we find: “The veil of the
temple is rent, the builder is smitten, and we are raised from
the tomb of transgression.” Although this has been applied to
the Saviour, it is equally applicable to the personage of the third
degree, without any disrespect to Christianity.

Snow, Joun.—A distinguished American brother, born at Provi-
dence, Rhode Island, 25th February, 1780; initiated in the Mount
Vernon Lodge at Providence, in 1809; and died at Worthington,
Ohio, 16th May, 1852. He was instrumental in introducing the
system of Webb into the Western States.

SocireTtas Jocosa; or, Society oF Joy.—A musical association
founded at Paris, in 1816.

Societies, SECRET, CHINA.—There are several secret societies in
China, the principal of which are—1l. The Thian-ti-wé, or Union
of Heaven and Earth—the leading doctrine of which is the
equality of mankind, and the duty of the rich to share super-
fluities with the poor; 2. the Pe-lian-kiao, or Society of the
Lotus; 3 the Thian-le, or Society of Celestial Reason; 4. the
Triad Society (which see); and 5. the Society of the White
Waterlily, a political society.

Societies, SEcRET, Russia.—-Among these may be named—1. The
Skopzis, founded, about 1740, by Seliwanow, on the ruins of an
anterior sect, the Chlysty, which was originated by a peasant
named Philippow, in the seventeenth century. The Skopzis

79

soc] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Sor

practise self-mutilation and other horrors. They are very rich,
and abound throughout Russia and in Bulgaria. 2, The Mon-
tanists, who declare that they have a “ living Christ,” “a living
Mother of God,” “a living Holy Spirit,” and twelve “living
Apostles.” They have peculiar ceremonies.

Socinus.—The founder of a sect in the sixteenth century, who
maintained that Christ was merely an inspired man, and that
His divinity and atonement were alike inefficacious ; and that the
doctrine of original sin could not be held as valid.

Soctus.—The sixth degree of the Rite of Strict Observance.

SocLE (Italian, soccolo, a shoe).—In architecture, a square member
of less height than its horizontal dimensions, serving to raise
pedestals or to support vases. The socle has neither base nor
ornament.

SoDALITI£s,—Social bodies, having secret rites, existing at Rome for
mutual protection, founded by Cato the Censor; they were sup-
pressed B.C. 80, but afterwards restored by a law of Clodius.

Sora.—In architecture, an alcove, about two feet above the floor.

Sorrit.—A ceiling, the lower surface of a vault or arch.

SorisM.—A mystical sect, having its head-quarters in Persia, very
strong in numbers and intelligence. The name is derived from
Zogia, wisdom, and they called themselves philosaufs. They
claimed to possess the secret doctrines of Mohammedanism.
There are four stages of initiation :—1. Preliminary—the can-
didate being enjoined to observe the ordinary rites and ceremonies
of his religion, the interior meaning of which is unknown to the
multitude. 2. Spiritual—in which a philosophical meaning is
given to religion. 3. Wisdom—when the initiate is supposed
to have attained supernatural knowledge, and to be equal to the
angels. 4. Truth—implying complete union with the Deity. In
each stage there are secrets and mysteries which it is considered
a crime to reveal. There are many points where the Order of
Ishmael and the principles of Sofism are almost identical ;
indeed, many members of the one belong to the other, as well as
to the Masonic system. King, in his admirable book on the
Guosties, says :—“ Inasmuch as these Sofis were composed ex-
clusively of the learned amongst the Persians and the Syrians,
and learning at that time meant little more than a proficiency
in medicine and astrology, the two points that brought the
Eastern Sages into amicable contact with their barbarous in-
vaders from the West, it is easy to see how the latter may have
imbibed the secret doctrines simultaneously with the science of
those who were their instructors in all matters pertaining to
science and art. The Sofi doctrine involved the grand idea of
one universal creed, which could be secretly held under any

SOF ] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [son

profession of an outward faith ; and, in fact, took virtually the
same view of religious systems as that in which the ancient
philosophers had regarded such matters.”

Sorras.—Students in the universities of Islim, somewhat resem-
bling the undergraduates of English universities.

Sosourner. (See Principal Sojourner.)

Soxar.—Applied in Egypt to a mummy preserved from corruption,
and alluding to Osiris in his tomb. The Egyptian root has not
been found, but it may be compared with the Hebrew 130,
(clausus, occlusus est), he who is enclosed in the tomb.

Soupiers oF Curist.—Milites Christi was the title by which Saint
Bernard addressed his exhortations to the Knights Templar.
The title now in use is, Regula pauperum commilitonum Templi
Salomonis—Rule of the poor fellow-soldiers of the Temple of
Solomon.

Sotpins—A Greek sect of the fifth century, from Soldin, their
founder. They made many alterations—the priests offering gold,
deacons incense, and the sub-deacons myrrh, in imitation of
the three Sages of the East who made like offerings to the
Infant Jesus.

SoLomon, House or—The main feature of Lord Verulam’s Mew
Atlantis. By some it is thought to have been the instigatory
motive of modern Freemasonry.

Sotomon, Kine or IsrarL.—tThe history of this monarch is well
known to every one from the accounts contained in the Scrip-
tures; and his reputation for wisdom, wealth, and piety was un-
bounded. He has been given an adventitious glory by the com-
mon consent of the Eastern World, and Suliem4n is as much
the hero of Mohammedan tradition as of Semitic. If we read
the various books attributed to him—such as the Proverbs and
the Preacher—we perceive a shrewd, rugged man, given much to
enigmatical sayings, mixed with inspirations from a mind of no
ordinary calibre—a man of keen insight into the follies of human
nature. He has been called the First Grand Master of Masonry,
but this should rather be taken in a symbolical light than as an
absolute fact. Solomon ascended the throne, according to the
ordinary chronology, B.C. 1015, and commenced the construction
of the Temple, B.C. 1012, and it took rather over seven years
building. Hiram Abiff was the skilled operative mason, sent by
his master, Hiram King of Tyre, to preside over the works; his
master, Hiram the King, undertook to find the materials, and
Solomon to find the means of payment. The date of the actual
laying of the foundation stone we cannot now tell, but it was
commenced in the month Zif, and ended in the month Bul, about
November of our year. After forty years, the eieorey deter:

681

SOL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | son

nate for the indeterminate number, Solomon ceased to reign.
Masonry does not seem to have flourished under his successors;
for we certainly do not find Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, or Reho-
boam, the son of Solomon, practising anything remotely like it,
and we hear little more of Jewish Masonry until the days of
Zerubbabel. (See Zerubbabel.)

SoLomon, TEMPLE oF. (See Temple of Solomon.)

Soma (Arabic, Wisdom) AND AHARRA (Arabic, an Ant)—Words
used in the first degree of the Order of Ishmael.

SomEcuH (Hebrew, jn, Fulciens-Firmans).—A name of God.

Son or HirkAM.—Traditionally, it is said that a son of Hiram, named
Aynon, was appointed Master Mason of all the timber work,
being especially distinguished for his geometrical knowledge,
and a master of engraving and carving.

Son or A Mason.—A Lufton or Louveteau. (See Lewis.)

Soncs or Masonry.—Of these there are many, but hardly any
come up to the requirements of an intellectual mind. Probably
the most genuine song is the Entered Apprentice Song of
Matthew Birkhead, as old as 1728. Modern Masonic Songs
either allude to some circumstances connected with them,
or involve particular theories, and hence are best left alone.
The editor of this work has collected a great number of songs
from all nations, of a Masonic character, but they do not, asa
rule, seem, technically speaking, poetry. It is a curious fact
that Masonry, although benevolent in its objects, has never pro-
duced a real Masonic poet. There are some isolated productions
which merit praise and acceptance at all hands, and some of
which might be introduced as general songs, but for the most
part they are stale, flat, and unprofitable. One of the best is
“ The Farewell to the Brethren of the St James’s Lodge, Tarbol-
ton,” written by Robert Burns.

SONNENFELS, JOSEF voN.—Born at Nikolsberg, in Moravia, in 1733;
died at Vienna, 25th April, 1817. Eminent as a Freemason, but
still more eminent as a humanitarian. He obtained from Maria
Theresa the abolition of torture throughout the Austrian dominions
from 1776. ;

Sons or LicHt.—Masons by their tenure are necessarily Sons of
Light, and are so accepted even by their opponents, who are
Sons of Darkness.

Sons oF THE PropHETs.—Disciples of the Prophets under the old
dispensation.

Sons oF THE Wipow.—A title given to Freemasons on account of
Hiram Abiff. It is perhaps curious to note that the mother
of Jesus is traditionally reported to have comported herself
as & anow after the miraculous conception.

682

soP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sou

SopuIs!AN RitE.—Founded in 1801, in the Lodge Fréres Artistes
at Paris, by Cuvelier de Trie. It claimed to interpret Egyptian
mysteries.

SopHonias (Secretum domini).—The equivalent of Wednesday, and
Alexander in the 32° A. and A. Rite.

SoRBONNE.—A college remarkable for its persecution of Free-
masonry, or any other way of aiding in the enlightenment of
mankind. The Sorbonne rendered some services to learning,
but was of such an ultra-conservative nature that it became
entirely effete, and all its efforts evinced its entire want of
reason and vitality

Sorrow Lopces.—Not frequently held, and generally on great
occasions, such as that of the death of Voltaire. (See Voltaire.)

Sorer.—An appellation assigned to deities, and great kings and
heroes, indicating “Saviour.” It has been applied redundantly
to Jesus Christ, whose name, Jesus or Joshua, itself bears the
same interpretation, The name Jesus, in fact, is rather a title
of honour than a name—the true name of the Soter of Chris-
tianity being Emmanuel, or God with us (Matt. i 23). The
name Joshua was a2 common name bestowed among the Jews to
mark their faith that in one of the numerous Joshuas might
appear the promised Messiah, who was to fulfil the promises
made to them. Great divinities among all nations, who are
represented as expiatory or self-sacrificing, have been designated
by the same title, or one of an analogous kind.

Souru.—the position of the Junior Warden.

SouTn CaRoLina.—Masonry was introduced into South Carolina
at Charlestown, 28th October, 1736, under a warrant from Lord
Weymouth, G. M. of England. Bro. John Hamilton was ap-
pointed the first Prov. G. M., but matters do not appear to have
flourished, as a second Prov. G. L. was established in 1754. In
1777, this body became independent, with Barnard Elliott as
G. M. The Ancient Masons invaded the jurisdiction of South
Carolina in 1783, and five of the Athol Lodges united to form a
Grand Lodge of Ancient York Masons. After considerable
hostility, a union between the two Grand Bodies was effected in
1808, but, almost immediately, disruption took place, and a per-
manent reconciliation was not effected until 1817, when these
bodies united under the name of: G. L. of Ancient Freemasons.
The Grand R. A. Chapter was instituted 29th May, 1812;
Grand Council of Royal and Select Masons, February, 1860, by
eight Councils warranted by the A. and A. Rite. The Grand
Encampment of Knights Templar was formed in 1826, by three
Encampments, but appears to have become extinct about 1830.
There is now only one Commandery under warrant Om the

3

sov | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sov

Grand Encampment of the U.S., dated 17th May, 1843. Supreme
Council of the A. and A. Rite was opened 31st May, 1801, ac-
cording to some authorities, and claims to be the Mother Council
of the World.

SoveEREIGN.—1. An epithet used in certain degrees, but practically
obsolete. Formerly it expressed certain supreme powers over
inferior degrees; it is, however, technically retained. 2. The
principal officer of a Rose Croix Chapter is termed a Most Wise
Sovereign. 3. The head of the Masonic Order of the Red Cross
is the Illustrious Sovereign. 4. Sometimes associated with Prince,

SOVEREIGN EMPIRE OF GALILKE.—A semi-burlesque society existing
in the early part of the fourteenth century, in the time of Philip
the Fair; the members of which were clerks of the Courts of
Account, the Parliament of Paris, and the Chatelet. The law
writers attached to the Royal Chancery annually elected a chief,
who was invested with the pompous title of emperor, and his
seat was fixed in the Rue de Galilée. Every year, on the eve of
the Epiphany, the grand dignitaries of the empire, led by their
chief, visited their patrons, and with much magnificence offered
them Epiphany cakes. Largesse was distributed in return, and
good cheer provided; after which, the august emperor and his
associates returned home, probably not in a very sober condition.
This society was governed by a tribunal, which was a court for
the trial of all offences committed by its members.

SOVEREIGN GRAND COMMANDER OF THE TEMPLE, OR GRAND Com-
MANDER OF THE TEMPLE—1. 27° of the A. and A. R. 2. 44°
Rite of Mizraim.

SOVEREIGN GRAND INSPECTOR-GENERAL—1. 33° of the A. and A.
Rite, invented about 1801, the system having then been ex-
tended from the twenty-five degrees of the Emperors of the East
and West, the ne plus ultra of which was the Sublime Prince of
the Royal Secret. As late as 24th May, 1801, Bro. John Mitchell
signs himself “ Kadosh, Prince of the Royal Secret, and Deputy
Inspector General.” On the 31st May, 1801, the Supreme
Council was created at Charlestown, in America, with eight
degrees added by Bro. Stephen Morin. 2. 88° Rite of
Mizraim.

SoverEIGN Master.—l. Presiding officer in a Council of Knights
of the Red Cross, representing Darius, King of Persia. 2. 60°
Rite of Mizraim.

SOVEREIGN PATRIARCH, GRAND CONSERVATOR OF THE ORDER.—
91° Rite of Memphis.

SOVEREIGN Prince Mason.—A title in the Emperors of the East
and West.

nove PRINCE OF Rosk Croix. (See Rose Croix.)

4

sov | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SPA

SoverEIcn SancruaRy.—The governing body of the Antient and
Primitive Rite of Masonry, and formed of the Patriarchs Grand
Conservators, 33d and last degree. It is presided over by a
Most Illustrious Sovereign Grand Master General, and eleven
Grand Officers, who govern the three legions of the Knights of
Masonry.

SOVEREIGN OF SOVEREIGNS.—60° of the Egyptian or Mizraim Rite.

Spain.—A dispensation was granted by Lord Coleraine, G. M. in
1728, for a Lodge at Madrid ; another in 1731, by Lord Lovel to
Bro. Captain James Cummerford, as the Prov. G. M. of Andalusia,
and a third in 1732, by Lord Montague, for a Lodge at Valen-
ciennes. Masonry seems to have been, therefore, introduced in
1727 or 1728, from England. Géadicke says there was a second
Lodge at Madrid in 1751. In 1741, Philip V. issued a Royal
Ordinance against the Masons, who were in consequence ar-
rested, and treated with great indignity by the Inquisition,
and sent to the galleys. In 1751, Masonry was treated by
Ferdinand VI, at the instance of Joseph Torrubia, as high trea-
son; and in the same year Benedict XIV. renewed the bull of
Clement XII. Death was decreed against the Freemasons in
1793, and yet Masonry flourished in secret throughout Spain.
When Joseph Napoleon ascended the throne in 1807, the re-
strictions against Masonry were removed, and in October, 1809,
a National Grand Lodge of Spain was established, and actually
held in the edifice previously used by the Inquisition, then
abolished. The Masonry of Spain, however, is more assimilated
to the Scottish Rite, as, in 1810, the Marquis de Clermont-
Tonnere, and, in 1811, the Count de Grasse-Tilly, established the
Supreme Council, and the National Grand Lodge was reorgan-
ized, under the title of Grand Orient of Spain and the Indies.
But, in 1813, the fall of French supremacy put an end to these
liberal ideas. The year 1814 witnessed the restoration of the
Inquisition by Ferdinand VII., and Masonry became a tabula
rasa until 1820. In 1821, a Supreme Council was again estab-
lished, but the history of Masonry has ever since been fluctu-
ating between noble success and undeserved persecution. At
the present time Spain possesses Lodges, but the members are
obliged to work in secret; and the many revolutions of that
splendid but unhappy country do not seem, in the face of the
intolerant priesthood, ever likely to accomplish results at which
the lover of humanity can rejoice.

SPANDREL.—In architecture, the irregular triangular space contained
between the outer curve of an arch, a horizontal line from its
apex, and a perpendicular from its springing.

SPANGENBERG.—A Marburg professor, known in the peer of

b)

SPA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SPH
Initiates of Asia, of which he was one of the founders, as Marcus
Ben-Bina. His office was that of Ockev-Harim, or Grand
Architect, and he devoted himself to the Kabbalah and the
explanation of dreams.

SPARTACUS.—The name assumed by Weishaupt, as Head of the
Order of the Illuminati of Bavaria.

SpeciaL ComMMunicaTions.—The G.M. of any Grand Lodge is
entitled to call a special meeting for the purpose of promulgating
some new regulation for the government of his jurisdiction, at
which, however, nothing can be introduced except the actual
matter in hand.

SPECULATIVE Masonry.—This differs from ordinary stone or opera-
tive masonry in the apportionment of the symbols. Everything
hitherto materialised is converted into morality, and the period
at which this was done is very doubtful. It would seem, how-
ever, only fair to grant, on such evidence as we possess, a transi-
tion period antecedent to the revival of 1717, but not of
the fabulous antiquity claimed by enthusiasts. It does not seem
likely, from the modern history of Freemasonry, that its main
modern features could have preceded 1717 by any very great
length of time, or we should not find it being spread as an
evident novelty throughout Europe within the space of a quarter
of acentury. Allowing, however, that the operative masons had,
as is unquestionably the case, some form of ritual, it seems quite
natural to see it changed into what is now called Speculative
Masonry, but without the refinements introduced in more recent
times. On the one hand, therefore, we can perceive historical
progression, together with the strong sense underlying the system
as a matter of morality; and on the other, an attempt to link the
modern system with a remote antiquity which later researches
have shown to be inaccurate in an archeological sense. The
results of later researches, illuminated by modern exegesis, render
it impossible to accept, save in a general and very limited degree,
the assertions of Dr Anderson and the founders of Speculative
Masonry, as now understood. (See Antiquity of Freemasonry,
and many other articles.)

Spes Mea 1n Deo Est (Latin, My hope is in God.)—Motto of the
32° of the A. and A. Scottish Rite.

SpieRz or Masonry.—It has hitherto been considered that Ma-
sonry properly fulfils its office by immediate acts of charity to
its own people; but a vaster idea of the Masonic principle might
be entertained, and one that would yield good fruits both in an
educational and hygienic sense. This vast corporation, with
almost unlimited resources, might, to its own great advantage—
and to the advantage of society at large—aid in the transport of

SPH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [spr

persons to climates where they might recover from endemic
diseases, their minds be opened, and their hearts refined. The
immediate effect upon this country would be, that many obscure
individuals would have an opportunity of learning how fair other
regions of Europe are, and how easy it would be to form a good
understanding even with persons of an alien creed. To a consi-
derable extent it would realize the great thought of Goethe in
the second part of Faust, and the propositions of Fourier. Let it
only be thought, how pleasant would be the aspect of armies of
industrial and educated warriors, conquering not men, but
Nature, everywhere dispersed over Europe, with a centre-point
to which the result of their inquiries might be communicated.
It may be said that this is a day-dream, and so not to be realized;
but in the future, so sure as this is written, it will become a
fact. Leaving politics to the sharks of ambition, and money-
grubbing to the Plutocratic class, no better method of diverting
epidemics, counteracting endemics, and raising our poorer fellow-
creatures to some sense of moral responsibility can be devised.
As it does not interfere with Justinian, Papinian, Vattel, Grotius,
and other great lawyers, it cannot be received with objection;
and if the object of the Christian religion be to find the greatest
happiness for the greatest number, with careful respect for the
preservation of the minority, it is difficult to conceive of any
method more easy than that of a free intercommunication of
nations.

Spuinx.—An emblem of comparatively recent introduction as an
ornament in Masonry, chiefly adopted by that school which de-
rives Masonry from Egypt and the Eleusinian mysteries. It is
of no real importance in modern Freemasonry.

SpuRicist&.—An order of Egyptian priests, whose duty was to
affix the sacred seal on the bulls marked with the sacred
stigmata of Apis.

Spiuta Nera, SocieTy OF THE. (See Pin, Society of the Black.)

SPIRE, CONVENTION OF. (See Convention.)

Sprrit—Those who have read the articles Human Progress and
Matter in this work, will remember that a table illustrative of
Spirit was promised to be given, which is now done, although it
is hardly as complete or satisfactory to its constructor as it
might be. It is clear that Spirit, like every other phenomenon, is
the direct creation of the Almighty. It is impossible to define
it in a satisfactory manner; for to call it, as some do, an infi-
nitely subtle and attenuated form of matter, would not be suffi-
cient, as it would only be saying that in essentid it is the same
thing, which it cannot be from its mode of existence Spirit
differs from matter in being viewless and without form ie effects

7

sPr] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [spr

travel with incalculable rapidity, if we consider thought to be
one of its representatives; but as it is possible to conceive of
the non-existence of Spirit, it must have had a beginning. In
the Vedas, we find it written concerning Creation—“ Originally
this universe was naught but Soul: nothing else existed active
(or passive). HE had this thought— J will create worlds. It is
thus that He created these worlds—the water, the light, the
mortals, and the waters. This water is the region above the sky,
which the sky supports; the atmosphere contains the light; the
earth is mortal; and the regions beneath are the waters”
(Aitaréya Aranya). This passage contains some ideas of a very
suggestive character. It is clear that Spirit cannot be identified
with God himself, for the pre-existence of a Creator is a necessity;
but it may be asked, whether Spirit may not be identical with,
or similar to, the thought of God which animated the primeval
chaos? Spirit shares with the Deity the attribute of omnipre-
sence, and acts as a direct emanation of His will. In an essay
published some years ago in The Biological Review, the following
passage occurs, worthy of quotation in the present instance :—
“Spirit, who art thou, and where? The universe answers us—
matter of the earth says, ‘here;’ every object in creation speaks
of its presence, the minutest part of nature is its habitation, its
father is God, and its birthplace Heaven; and this universal
existence that pervades all space, that keeps the earth on its
axis, keeps one atom of material to another atom, keeps the sea
and the land apart, that makes the green leaves of the oak spring
from the brown seed of the acorn, that makes kind produce kind,
from the infinite to the great through every generation; that
never errs, never fails in its system of progress through the most
minute object ; that makes the same little flower raise its head
gently to the genial warmth of the summer sun, and be of an
unVarying hue;—this same Power speaks in the thunder’s roar
and the lightning’s flash—is electricity and odic force—is heard
in every sound, harmony, and discord that thrills through space
—is seen in every colour, and smelt in every perfume, and is the
same as the great incomprehensible body that constitutes the
inner life of man, intelligent being of another sphere, the angels
higher, and still further on the Seraphim and Cherubim above
them, and chief of all is the nature and body of Him who is the
Creator of it. . . . Where Spirit is, there also is God; and where
Spirit speaks in any production of Nature, so also does He; and
when that says, from the rich stores of the earth provided for
man’s benefit and comfort, ‘I am here,’ He also speaks, ‘ Thou
must recognise me.’” Spirit, therefore, may be regarded as the
invisible incorporeal vestment of God, and no better definition
688

spr]

The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia.

[SPI

can be given.

Man may be thus given, and

the explanation of this
table is briefly this— At
rst, as explained before
(see Kabbalah), the En
Soph reigned alone, hav-
ing within his Being the
Principles of the three
firstSephiroth,intelligible
to Christians as the Tri-
nity in Unity. Originally,
this Trinity existed only
in Chaos, but at the Crea-
tive Thought the Trinity
developed itself into these
three Sephiroth. Thence
arose the creation of an-
gels, spirits of the high-
est degree, who prepared
x place for mortality,
rendered immortal in the
Sphere of Blessed Souls ;
and also a series of pro-
gressive states symbolized
by Jacob's Ladder, and
also by the seven planets,
in which is Tiphereth, the
spiritual sun enlighten-

EN SOPH,

Ante

T
Trinity rm

Father /\ Kether.
esis.
Birth of Spirit.
Binah

Genesis,

in Chaos,

epee
Holy Spirit. SSCS it.
Sphere of Angels.
Geburah. Chesed.
Sphere of Blessed Souls.
— Jacob’s Ladder. 7
— 5 5-- :
Planetary |" 4 Seven Spheresof 4 —| Heavens.
— 3 Progress. 3—
— 2 2—
—1 Tiphereth. 1-
Place of Atmospheric Record.
Hod, Netzah.
Earth Sphere.
Jesod.
Human Intelligence,
Matcuth.
Animal Kingdom.
Vegetable Kingdom.
Mineral Kingdom.
Vv Aa

The progression of Spirit Life from the Creator to

ing the spiritual world,
not the material world,
as we perceive it at Jesod.
Below these spheres ix
placed an etherial region
in which the moral and
intelligent acts of earth’s
inhabitants are recorded
by the action of spirit.
Next succeeds the earth
sphere as we behold it
around us, in which Hu-
man Intelligence, vivi-
fied by spirit, is ever
actively at work; while,
in other ways, spirit is
manifested in the three
Kingdonis of Nature. The
two triangles at the bot
tom of the column are
the signs of fire and
water—the two spiritual
active electrical agents in
the universe. (See Hu-
man Progress, Matter, aint
Jetzirah, Sepher.)

Spirit, KNIGHTS or THE—A semi-political society, established in
the Rhenish province of Prussia, about 1808; also known as the
Judiciary Council of the Knights of the Golden Circle.

SrirituaL LopGe.—A term used by Hutchinson with reference to the
Valley of Jehoshaphat, a place in which the judgment of the
Jord is to be declared. Itis the imaginary or symbolic Lodge, as
described in the lectures,

2X

689

sPr] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia [STA

SPIRITUAL TEMPLE.—The interior of a man’s heart is either a temple
or a hell, according to which principles he is supposed to enter
the presence of the awful Judge of the Universe. It is on this
principle that Swedenborgian Masonry, somewhat Calvinistic in
its character, was formed, and the eternal question of fate and
predestination proclaimed as a matter of fact. That a spiritual
temple should be built up in the heart of men as a sure fortifi-
cation against the subtle infiuence of evil is certain; but the
gentler and sweeter idea is conveyed by that all-forgiveness,
mercy, and peace eminently prevalent in the hearts of true
Masons, and exerted continually by the Giver of all Good.

Sponsors.—The highest officers in the Royal Oriental Order of
Sikha and the Sat B’hai. (See Sat Bhai.)

SPOULFE, JOHN DE—A reputed Master Mason in the time of
Edward ITI, anno 1350, called Master of the Ghiblim.

SPRENGEISEN, CHRISTIAN FRIEDRICH KESSLER VON.—An adherent of
Baron Hund, and the author of “Anti Saint Nicaise.”’ Born at
Saalsfeld, 1731; died, 11th January, 1809 (See Saint Nicaise.)

Spur.—A brace propping two columns, supporting a bridge or
other arch.

Square.—An important emblem in Freemasonry. It is one of the
three great lights presented to the initiate, is also one of the
working tools of a Fellow Craft, and is the official jewel of the
Master of a Lodge. Evidently derived from the operative system,
it has passed into universal acceptance, and ¢o act on the square
is to act honourably. Combined with the compass, it may be
said to represent the union of the Old and New Testaments.

Squin DE FLExian.—A member of the Order of Templars, who,
together with Noffodei, a Florentine, conspired for the ruin and
murder of James de Molay and the Knights Templar. He was
born in Beziers, in Provence, and was appointed Head of the
Priory of Montfaucon. Authorities of no mean value have
ascribed to this person crimes of the most detestable character,
even malicious murder. He preferred against the general body
of Templars infamous accusations, which he could only support
by his own creatures He was ultimately assassinated, and

Marigni was hanged by order of Louis X., two years after the
murder of Molay. (See Zemplarism )

Starr, TREASURER’S.—This should be a white staff. When Masonry
was being made aristocratic, aided by the general ideas of a very
haughty age—that of Queen Anne and George I—the humble
founders of the 1717 Masonry were forced to abdicate their well-
won honours in favour of more monied and aristocratic men.
The men who built the real Temple of Masonry were sent into
the background, snubbed, and defeated. The decoration of the

690

STA] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sTa

Grand Treasurer is a key. The Grand Lodge of England decreed,
on 24th June, 1741, that the Grand Treasurer should appear
with a white staff.

Stancuion.—The upright mullions or bars of a windowor open screen.

STANDARD.—A staff with a flag or colours under which men are
united or bound for some general purpose. The practice of
carrying standards is of very remote antiquity. The first Roman
Standard was a bundle of straw tied to the top of a spear, but
soon the figures of animals replaced the perishable material, and
at last the Eagle became the general Roman ensign. In Masonry,
the word Banner is more usual. (See Banners and Arms of
Freemasonry.)

STANDARD BeareR.—An officer in a Commandery or Preceptory of
Knights Templar, and also in some other high degrees.

StTanisLaus, Saint, Knicut or.—A Polish order of Knighthood,
founded by King Stanislaus, in 1765; and renewed by the Emperor
Alexander I., in 1815.

Star.—In the French and Scottish System, the lighted candles or
torches are called Stars, especially in the reception of distin-
guished visitors, when a certain number, in proportion to rank,
as 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, are lighted in their honour.

Star, Buazine. (See Blazing Star.)

STARBUZANAIL—Used in the 6° of the Modern French Rite. It
should be Shethar-bozenai, yn37NY, the name of one of the
officers of the king of Persia (1 Esdras v. 3).

Starck, JoHANN AuGust von.—Born at Schwerin, 29th October,
1741, and studied at Gottingen. Initiated in a French Military
Lodge in 1761. In 1763, he went to St Petersburg, in the capacity
of a professor in one of the public schools, and it would seem
that he was then initiated into the Rite of Melesino, and also
became connected with the Rite of Strict Observance, in which
he afterwards took a prominent part. In 1765, he visited Eng-
land, and went to Paris in the following year. In 1767, he was
director of the schools at Wismar, and Junior Warden of the
Lodge of the Three Lions. He was appointed Professor of
Theology at Kénigsberg in 1770, and also Court Chaplain ; but
in the following year he resigned these offices, and retired to
Mettau, and devoted himself to literary and philosophical studies.
In 1781, he was appointed Principal Preacher by the Court at
Darmstadt, which post he continued to fill until his decease, on
the 3d March, 1816. He was the founder of that schismatic
body called the Clerks of the Relaxed Observance, consisting of
seven degrees—1. BE. A. P. 2.7. C. 3.M.M_= 4. Young
Scottish Master 5. Old Scottish Master, or Knight of Saint
Andrew. 6. Provincial Chapter of Red Cross. 7. meet or

I

sTa| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [STA

Knight of Brightness and Light; with several classes of the last
degree—Novice, Levite, Priest, and Knight-Priest. In this
system, he connected Masonry with Templarism, and having
embraced Roman Catholicism, he insisted that candidates for
this rite should be of that faith, and have previously passed
through the degrees of the Strict Observance. An attempt was
made in 1768 to fuse these two orders, but it was unsuccess-
ful, and the Relaxed Observance formed themselves into an
independent body in 1775; the whole rite, however, soon fell
into disuse, and it is doubtful whether, as Ragon says, it lasted
until 1800. Starck, in reality, was a very insincere Mason, and
the author of “Saint Nicaise,” published 1785; and in 1787 he
published a work on Secret Catholicism, directed mainly against
Nicolai. In this work he says—“ It is true that in my youthful
days I was a Freemason. It is also true that when the so-called
Strict Observance was introduced into Masonry I belonged to it,
and was, like others, an Eques, Socius, Armiger, Commendator,
Prefect, and Sub-Prior; and having taken some formal cloister-
like profession, I have been a Clericus. But I have withdrawn
from all that, and all that is called Freemasonry, for more than
nine years.” But it must be admitted that, however strangely
he withdrew from the Fraternity, he at first rendered it valuable
services by several publications, such as the “ Apology for the
Order of Freemasonry,” Berlin, 1778; “Qn the Design of the
Order of Freemasonry,” Berlin, 1781; “On the Ancient and
Modern Mysteries,” 1782. (See Saint Nicaise.)

Star, Eastern. (See Eastern Star, Order of the.)

Star, Five-Poixtep. (See Five-Pointed Star.)

Stak IN THE East.—The name for the Blazing Star, used by those
Masons who inaccurately identify Masonry with the special
doctrines of Christianity. (See Blazing Star.)

STAR OF JERUSALEM.—A degree in the collection of Fustier. C.S.D.

STAR oF Merit, BronzE.—One of the six decorations of the An-
tient and Primitive Rite of Masonry, and conferred by a Grand
Chancery for works of literary excellence, bravery, presence
of mind, saving of life, and other acts of humanity. Unlike
other decorations of that rite, which are graduated amongst its
members from the fourth to the thirty-third degree, it is not
necessarily Masonic.

STAR OF THE SYRIAN Knicuts.—A system contained in the Collection
of Pyron, having three degrees—1. Novice. 2. Professed Knight.
3. Grand Patriarch.

Stare Super Vias ANTIQUAS.—To stand on the old paths. Ap-
plied as a Masonic motto, in reference to the duty of adhering
to the ancient landmarks,

4

STA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [STE

StaTIons.—The positions occupied by the W. M. and the Wardens
are in America called Stations, while those of the subordinate
officers are merely called Places.

Sr CLair—William of Roslin or Rosslyn, Earl of Orkney and
Caithness, was in 1441 appointed by King James II. of Scotland
the Patron and Protector of Masons in Scotland, and the office
was hereditary. He died about 1480, and his descendants held
their principal annual meeting at Kilwinning, In 1736, William
St Clair, Esquire, finding himself with no children of his own,
and anxious that the office of G. M. should not become vacant at
his death, surrendered his hereditary rights to a Grand Lodge,
subsequently presiding over the Craft as G. M., 30th Nov., 1736.
He held this office for only one year, and was succeeded in 1737
by the Earl of Cromarty. He died January, 1778, at about
seventy-eight.

ST CuaiR CHARTERS—Two remarkable documents, published by
Lawrie, and also by Bro. W. J. Hughan. The first paper is a
letter of jurisdiction granted by the Freemen Masons of Scotland to
William Saint Clair of Roslin (probable date 1600-1). The second
is a grant by the Freemen Masons and Hammermen of Scotland
to Sir William St Clair of Roslin (probable date 1st May, 1628).

STEINBACH, ERWIN oF, (See Erwin von Steinbach.)

STEINERT, JOHANN.—A Prussian mystic of the eighteenth century,
who professed to hold intercommunication with ultramundane
intelligences. He often shut himself up in a mansion especially
built for magical evocations at Berlin, with the king, Frederick
William III.

ST£ELA.—A small column without base or capital, usually inscribed
with a votive inscription.

STELLA, SEDET, Sot1.—Science, sageness, sanctity. Used in the
decoration of the 28° A. and A. Rite.

Step—Certain steps are used in the three degrees, and have par-
ticular numerical values.

STEPS ON THE Masrter’s CarPET.—The three steps on the Master’s
Carpet, in the third degree of the American Rite, alludes to the
three periods of life—youth, manhood, and old age. They also
refer to life, death, and immortality—generation, preservation,
and destruction.

STERCORANIST.—One who in the ninth century affirmed that the
Eucharist suffered the same transformation as other food. Used
as a term of reproach.

STEWARDS.—Some Lodges appoint Stewards as assistants in the
performance of the duties of the Junior Warden, or for specific
purposes. They are supposed to bear white rods, and the jewel
is a cornucopia, as a symbol of plenty. £5

3

STE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sto

STEWARDS, GRAND. (See Grand Stewards.)

STewARD’sS LopcE. (See Grand Steward’s Lodge.)

STEwARTRY.—In Scotland, somewhat equivalent to county in
England.

SrisiuM.—Antimony. A password used in the 28° A. and A. Rite.

STILE.—The vertical piece in panelling or framing.

SToLKIN.— Used in the 7°, 9°, 11°, 13°, 14°, and 20° A. and A. Rite;
one of the three assassins sometimes called Sterkin, in the
legend of the higher degrees. (See Showlkain.)

Stone. (See Ashlar.)

Srone, Corner. (See Corner Stone.)

Stone, CusicaL.—At the building of the Temple in Jerusalem, an
unexpected and afflicting event occurred, which threw the
Masons engaged in the work into the greatest consternation and
confusion. The G.M., H. A.B. had sent to certain F. Cs,
thirteen stones, and directed that with these they should com-
plete a small square near the capestone, being the only portion
of the fabric which remained unfinished. Every stone of the
Temple was formed into a square containing five equilateral
triangles, each equilateral triangle being equal to a cube, and
each side and base of the Triangles being equal to a Plumb-Line.
The space, therefore, which remained to be completed was the
last Triangle of the last stone, and equal to the eighth part of
the Plumb-Line, or } of the Circle, and 7; of the Triangle, which
number is in Hebrew 26, or the great Name of the Almighty.
The thirteen stones consisted of all the fragments which
remained from the building, and comprised two Cubes in two
divisions. In the jirst was contained one Cube in an entire piece,
and in the second a Cube in 12 parts; viz. 44 parts in one piece;
2 parts in 4 pieces; 1 part in 1 piece; and 3 part in 6 pieces:
total, 12 pieces. The F. Cs., perceiving that they could finish
the Square with the fragments in the second Cube, REJECTED the
Jirst, observing that the exterior of the stone was marked with
certain lines: viz., an Isosceles Triangle bisected—thrce lines :-—
the edge of the Cube being the base :—two squares diagonally
bisected, and each having a perpendicular line to the centre—six
lines :—two straight lines at right angles -—and a square diagon-
ally bisected—two lines: total, ¢hirteen lines or five surfaces of the
Cuse. Seeing these lines, the Masons thought the stone was
split, and therefore useless. It was then thrown aside, and one
of their number in contempt struck the Cube a violent blow with
a wooden mallet (no tron tool having been allowed in the
building of the Temple); the Cube instantly divided into 12
parts, the second of which bore the same relation to the jirst
that the third did to the second, and the fourth to the third:

694

sTo | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sto

being the arithmetical progression of 1, 2,3,4. The parts were }
of the Cube in one piece ; } of the Cube divided into } and 7;
4 of the Cube divided into two Hexahedrons, and two Tri-
angles equal to one Hexahedron; and } of the Cube divided into
4 Pentahedrons. Upon the 4 pieces they discovered a number
of Hieroglyphics, which, to those Masons who could read them,
proved that these characters were in the handwriting of the G. M.
himself, coupled with an inscription to the following effect :—
Tue GREAT PROBLEM. Required to construct the Temple, Roof,
Pinnacles, and Porch, with a Step and Door, from } of a Cube,
to consist of 12 parts, each part bearing a proportional relation
to the Cube, the Building, and to each other. Required from }
of a Cube, and ys of a Cube, to construct the Porch of Pillars,
the Lintel, and posterior Pillars of the Temple. Required from
} of the Cube in ? to construct the rests for the wall, the pillar
bases, and the steps. Required from } of a Cube in # to con-
struct the foundation of the Building, the entire fabric to contain
36 parts, or the Square of the Hexahedron. Required to
construct, from 2 Cubes of the same dimensions, the outer and
inner Court, and the Porch of Judgment. The first Court to be
double the area of the Foundation, and to consist of an Octagon
formed into a Square, containing 12 parts. The outer Court to
be double the area of the inner Court, and to consist of 12 parts,
each a Square; and the Porch of Judgment to be equal to ry of
the outer Court, and to consist of 4 parts, each a Triangle, the
whole comprising 64 parts, or the Sguare of the Cube. These
pieces to be constructed separately in the quarries, and to be
packed in 3 Cubes of equal dimensions, the first containing 36
pieces, the second 8, and the third 20, that is, a Square, a Cube,
and ¢ of a Square. The Throne is a separate piece, to be taken
from the interior of the Temple Cube, and to consist of 4 of } of
a Cube, making in all 65 pieces, which number in the Hebrew
means the Great Secret. The F.Cs. carried the broken Cube to
_§.K.I.,who,in conjunction with H. K.'.,directed that they should
be placed, along with the Jewels of the Craft, on a Cubic stone,
encrusted with gold, in the centre of a deep cavern, within the
foundations of the Temple, and further ordered, that the Door
of this Mysterious Court should be built up with large stones,
in order that no one in future should be able to gain admission
into this mysterious apartment. At the rebuilding of the
Temple, however, three F.Cs., lately returned from Babylon, in
the course of their labours inadvertently stumbled upon this
mysterious recess. They discovered the fractured Cube, and
carried the pieces to Z.,J., and H., who recognised in the four pieces
the XX_XX, and accordingly advanced the F. Cs. toa as order in
5

sTo | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sto

Masonry, for having accomplished this discovery. But the problem
they were unable to solve, or re-construct the broken Cube ; and,
in consequence, they declared that a profound mystery involved
the whole transaction, which would doubtless be one day
revealed to the werld. Since that period, the Cube remained
fractured, and continued in that state until the month of October,
1835, when it was re-constructed, and the Temple built by
Robert Tytler, M@.D., at Midnapoor, from an attentive investiga-
tion of the properties of the Magnetic Angle dividing a Cube of
the universe.

pu

st

Ly

i al il
ie mr A

Se

= ie = yt :

The above is a diagram of the TEMPLE OF JERUSALEM, as_ built
from an investigation of the Magnetic Angle, by Robert Tytler,
M.D.,Surgeon, 34th Regt. N.I., Bengal. This work was completed
in October, 1835, and corresponds precisely with the construction
of the sacred edifice, as described by Holy Scripture in 1 Kings,
vi. and vii. The centre of the power is the cosine 30°. The
force is the cord of 60°. The angle is 45°, and the field of
operation is from 45° to 90°. The apex of the beam above the
angle of the roof is the completion of the angle or Magnetic
Point, a. is the Beam. 8. Porch of Pillars. ¢. Inner Porch.
d, Pillar Bases. ¢. 7. Cape and Body of the Temple. g. Posterior
Pillars, h. Ribs or Rests. « Inner Court. 7. Outer Court.
k. Porch of Judgment. 2. Place of the Throne. JEHOVAH, in
Hebrew, is 10, 5, 6, 5—26. This is the magnetic measurement,
and corresponds to a hair’s breadth with Scripture: and 2x6=8,
or the Cube and Plumb-Line. The Israelitish measurement
was hence a Cube, divided into 8 Cubes, and the length of each
divided into 40 Cubits, or the four letters of the Name, multiplied
by 10, the jirst letter. J—10, E—8, S—200, o—70, U—400,
S—200=888, The number, therefore, of the Name JEsouS
(the Name of our Saviour in Greek) is 888, or 3 Cubes. We

696

STO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sto

have further ascertained that this is the Anatomy of the Brain.
When the Brain is spread out it is the Temple. When the
Temple is wrapped within the Sphere, or formed into a Ball, it
is the Brain.

Stone Manuscript.—One of those destroyed in 1720 by scrupulous
brethren ; mentioned by Preston as having been in the possession
of Nicholas Stone, a pupil of Inigo Jones. Very little is known
of its contents. (See Saint Alban.)

STONE oF FounDaTIon.—One of the most abstruse symbols in Free-
masonry. Not only the traditions of the Freemasons allude to
it, but also the Jewish Rabbis, the Talmudic writers, and the
doctors of the faith of Islam. It must not be confounded with
the other stones named in various degrees, and it must further-
more be taken strictly as an allegorical stone. It may be
identified with the mysterious philosopher’s stone of the alchy-
mists. According to the legend, it is supposed to have been a
stone placed within the foundations of Solomon’s Temple, and
afterwards, on the rebuilding of the Temple by Zerubbabel, it was
transported to the Holy of Holies. Its form was a perfect cube,
having inscribed upon its upper face, within the delta or triangle,
the sacred Tetragrammaton, or ineffable name of the Deity.
The Book of Enoch speaks of the “stone which supports the
corners of the earth,” and it was called eben shatijah, because it
was reputed to have been laid by the Almighty at the very
creation itself, The magnificent poem of Job thus alludes to the
stone (xxxviii. 4) :—

“Where wast thou when I founded the earth?
Declare if thou hast understanding.
Who fixed its measures that thou shouldst know ?
Or who stretched the line upon it?
Whereon were its foundations sunken ?
Or who laid its corner-stone ?

When the morning stars sang together,
And all the sons of God shouted for joy!”

The version is by Professor T. J. Conant, Hebrew Professor
at Rochester, U.S., a most graceful and learned translator
and annotator. It is an accepted fact, that many of the
Jewish traditions in the Talmud formed the basis of our modern
Masonic legends; and except that the Masons regarded them in
an allegorical light there is very little distinction in their import.
The Toldoth Jeshu says— At that time (the era of Jesus) there
was in the House of the Sanctuary (the Temple) a stone of foun-
dation, which is the very stone that our father Jacob anointed
with oil, as it is described in the 28th chapter of the book of
Genesis. On that stone the letters of the Tetragrammaton were
inscribed, and whosoever of the Israelites should learn that name
697

sTo] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (str.

would be able to master the world. To prevent, therefore, any
one from learning these letters, two iron dogs were placed upon
two columns in front of the Sanctuary. If any person, having
acquired the knowledge of these letters, desired to depart from
the Sanctuary, the barking of the dogs, by magical power, in-
spired so much fear that he suddenly forgot what he had acquired.”
Another passage runs thus—“ At that time there was in the
Temple the ineffable name of God inscribed upon the Stone of
Foundation. For when King David was digging the foundation
for the Temple, he found in the depths of the excavation a cer-
tain stone on which the name of God was inscribed. This stone
he removed, and deposited in the Holy of Holies.” The legend
is, that Adam possessed this stone while in the Garden of Eden ;
and that he used it as an altar, and carried it with him on his
emergence into the world, and Seth received it from him. Noah
preserved it in the ark, and left it on Mount Ararat, where Abra-
ham found it. His grandson Jacob took it with him in his tlight
to his uncle Laban in Mesopotamia, and used it as a pillow
when he had his celebrated vision near Luz. The history of the
stone here becomes very indistinct ; but one legend asserts that
Jeremiah, escaping with a Jewish princess, took it to Spain, and
thence it was brought to Ireland, and that one of the Dalriad
kings conveyed it to Scotland, and that finally it was transported
by Edward I. from Scone to Westminster Abbey, where it is still
the Coronation Stone. But legends vary. It is also spoken of
in connection with Enoch (see Enoch). The Stone of Founda-
tion plays a part in the Royal Arch degree, in 13° A. and A.
Rite. Itis a symbol of Divine truth, perpetuated throughout
the ages. Bro. J. Leyland Feilden has written concerning this
stone in his recently published book, “ New Links in the Chain.”

STong, WILLIAM LEETE.—An American journalist, born in the State
of New York in 1792, and died in 1844. He was an anti-
Mason, aud published a work entitled “ Letters on Masonry and
Anti-Masonry, addressed to the Hon. John Quincy Adams.”
New York, 1832. The value of the book is very slight.

STRASBURG, CATHEDRAL OF.—Founded in 504, and almost com-
pletely destroyed in 1007 by lightning. The present edifice was
commenced in 1015, and completed in 1439. (See Erwin von
Steinbach.)

STRASBURG, CONGRESS OF.—Two congresses or conventions have
been held at Strasburg—1. Convoked by Erwin von Steinbach
in 1275, and attended by numerous Masons from Germany,
England, and Italy. The operative masons, it is said, at this
time assumed the name of Freemasons, and established regula-
tions for the government and guidance of the Craft. 2. The

698

STR] The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [SUA

Haupt Hiitte or Grand Lodge held a similar meeting in 1564,
resuming the business commenced in the same year at Basle,
and many laws were reformed on this occasion.

StrenctH.—Symbolised in Masonry by the Doric column, and ap-
propriated to the Senior Warden.

Stri#z—tThe fillets between the flutes of columns.

StricT OBSERVANCE, RITE oF.—This rite was purely a Jesuit rite,
and was the third attack made upon pure Freemasonry; the bait
held out was the hope of arriving at a restoration of the hidden
treasures of the Knights Templar. It was established by Baron
von Hund (see Hund, Von) about 1754, consisting of at first six
degrees—1, 2, 3. The symbolical degrees. 4. Scottish Master.
5. Novice. 6. Templar Knight; but afterwards a seventh degree
was added, that of Eques Professus, or Professed Knight. The
head of the order was supposed to be unknown ; and in one sense
this was true, inasmuch as the General of the Jesuits directed
the entire proceeding. Europe was divided into nine provinces,
the seventh of which was assigned to Hund, including all North
Germany between the Elbe and the Oder. The rite was founded
upon an organized system of deception, which was discovered,
and proved its extinction. (See Starck.)

STRIGOLNIKS.—Russian schismatics, who combined the practice of
the Jewish law with that of the New Testament.

STRIKING oFF.—A forfeiture of the existence of a lodge is called
“ striking off the roll,” or “erasure.” The charter then becomes
invalid.

Stuart Masonry.—By some historians and essayists it has been
considered that the Rebellion of 1745 had to do with Masonry ;
and the relentless enemies of the Craft have done all in their
power to persuade mankind of this idea. It is even doubtful
that the earlier Stuarts ever knew much about Masonry. It is
certain, however, that the residence of the elder and younger
Pretender in France tended to much confusion, and produced the
tinsel decorations of the unsubstantial rites practised at Arras and
elsewhere. The objects they entertained were purely political.
The patent for the Arras Chapter was issued 15th April, 1747,
being a Chapter of Rose Croix—a widely different affair from
the Alchymistical and Philosophical Association of Andrea or
Rosenkreutz.

STup-work.—In architecture, the same as brick nogging.

Suastica, Mosr ANCIENT ORDER OF, OR BROTHERHOOD OF THE
Mystic Cross.—Said to have been founded B.C. 1027, by Fohi,
and introduced into China, B.C. 975. The order consists of three
degrees :—1. Apprentice Brothers. 2. Tao Sze, or Doctors of
Reason. 3. Grand Master. The Apprentice wears the Jaina

699

suB] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedza. [sup

Cross (see Jaina Cross) worked on a blue silk ribbon. The Tao
Sze wear a cross of silver,and the Grand Master one in gold.
Meetings are called Tents, The vows are in five sections :—
“1. To worship God daily, to obey the law, to walk in purity
and truth, to honour and assist to the utmost of my power the
Brethren of the Mystic Cross, and to obey all the rules of the
Order. 2. To pursue wisdom, to eschew avarice, to be charitable,
to assist the poor and necessitous, never to take furtively the
property of another, directly or indirectly. 3. To be pure and
chaste, abstinent and studious, so that I may learn truth and
attain to knowledge, wisdom, and understanding. 4. To be
sincere, and never to deceive another; to be free from the sins of
the mouth—lying, affectation in language, duplicity, and calumny;
never to flatter, and never to drink to excess any intoxicating
liquor. 5. I promise as a man, and a lover of truth, and by the
grace of God, to keep faithfully all these my sacred vows as far
as in me lies.” The year 1877 corresponds to the year 2904 of the
era of Fohi. This Order was very little encouraged in England.

SUBLIME.—This word is usually applied to the third degree, but
like many other terms, the words “Sublime degree of a Master
Mason” signify nothing, and are without authority. Hutchin-
son, Smith, and Preston do not use it. The first of these speaks
of “the most sacred and solemn order,’ and of the “ exalted”
but not “sublime” degree. Since the introduction of the Royal
Arch degree, the word Sublime has been used, and the word
Exalted appropriated to the Arch. In the Constitutions, Dublin,
1769, the Master’s degree is called “most respectable,” and the
term “high and honourable” has also been employed. The
word sublime first occurs in DrT. M. Harris’s “ Discourses,”
Boston, U.S., 1801. It was also used by Cole in 1817; and
Jeremy L, Cross introduced it in his Hieroglyphic Chart. As it
has been adopted in the modern English lectures, it is too firmly
established to be removed.

SUBLIME DEGREES.—The twenty-six degrees, from the fourth to the
twenty-ninth inclusive, of the A. and A. Rite, usually termed
Ineffable, are sometimes thus called.

SUBLIME GRAND Lopce.—At one time used to designate a Lodge
of Perfection.

SUBLIME KNIGHT ELEcT.—11° A. and A. R.

SuBLIME Masons.—Members of 14° A. and A. R. are sometimes so
called, but the full term is Scotch Knight of Perfection, being
the last degree in the Lodge of Perfection.

SUBLIME PHILOSOPHER.—48° R. Mzm.

SUBLIME PRINCE OF MEMPHIS.—94° of the Rite of Memphis.

SUBLIME PRINCE OF THE Roya SEcreT.—32° A. and A. R. In-

700

SUB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SUN

stituted at first by the founders of the Council of Emperors of
the East and West, about 1758. Bodies of this degree are called
Consistories. The motto of the degree is, Spes mea in Deo est—
My hope is in God.

SUBLIME SOLOMON.—A degree in Peuvret’s Collection.

SuBLIMES, THE—One of the degrees of the Ancient Chapter of
Clermont.

SuporDINATE LopcE. (See Lodge.)

SuB-PLINTH.—A second and lower plinth placed beneath the
principal one in columns and pedestals.

SuB-PRINCIPAL—An auxiliary rafter or principal brace.

SupsTiTuTE ARK. (See A7k.)

SuBsTiTuUTE GRAND MastTER.—Third officer in the Grand Lodge of
Scotland. The office was created in 1738, and is annual.

Succotu.—aA city of Palestine about 40 miles N. E. of Jerusalem—
now Seikoot. Here Hiram Abiff cast the sacred vessels for the
Temple. (See Clay Ground.)

SuFFERER.—2° of the Order of Initiated Knights and Brothers of
Asia.

Summons.—The letter of forewarning sent by command of the
W. M. to each member of a Lodge is called a summons, and
should specify the business likely to be undertaken at the meet-
ing. There is no special prescribed form, each Lodge using its
own general expressions.

Sun.—In all times, the sun has necessarily played an important
part as a symbol, and especially in Freemasonry. The W. M.
represents the rising sun, the J. W. the sun at the meridian, and
the S. W. the setting sun. In the Druidical rites, the Arch-Druid
represented the sun, and was aided by two other officers, one
representing the moon in the West, and the other the sun at the
South in its meridian. It is quite unnecessary to enter into any
lengthened discussion on this symbol.

Sun, KNIGHT OF THE. (See Knight of the Sun.)

Sun oF Mercy, SoctETY oF THE—A society to which Swedenborg
is said to have belonged after his illumination as a prophet and
seer. He appears to have received overtures from this body through
Pernetty, whose keen and trained insight perceived the advantages
to be gained from attaching to his Hermetic system a man of such
influence, undoubted erudition, and truthfulness. It would seem,
like many societies of that time, to have issued from the neigh-
bourhood of Avignon and Montpellier. Whether it was a society
possessing ceremonies and degrees is doubtful, but it is probable
that some forms must have existed. If it be remembered that
the period during which Pernetty worked was one during which

the religio-political machinations of the Jesuits were very power-
yor

sun ] The Royal Masonie Cyclopedia. [sup

ful, it is easy to understand why an ex-Jesuit like Pernetty
would strive to identify his own cause with that of a man so
distinguished, and at the same time so innocently unassailable
and impracticable, as Swedenborg. It is not very likely that a
man trained in Jesuit ways would be likely even to abandon
the hope of power; and what might be the case with such a
man as Pernetty would be just as true of Fessler, in whom the
love of power seems to have been equal in degree, if not entirely
equal in literary power and endurance. It is possible that this
society may have been identical with that of the Illuminés
ad’ Avignon.

Sunnan—The designation of that portion of Mohammedan law
embodied in the traditions, and not accepted by the Shiites.
Those who regard these traditions are termed Sunnites ; and the
house of Osman follows this principle.

SUPER-EXCELLENT MastEr.—An honorary or side degree, sometimes
conferred in the Councils of Royal and Select Masters.

SUPERINTENDENT OF THE WorRKS, GRAND.—An officer in the Grand
Lodge of England, appointed every year by the G. M.

SUPERINTENDENTS, THE NINE.—After the death of Hiram Abiff,
we are informed King Solomon selected nine of his principal
workmen to form a kind of committee to carry on and com-
plete the great work in hand. These were Moabon (Hebrew
paxio, Latin @ patre); Jachin (Hebrew p>, Latin Firmws) ;
Boaz (Hebrew 13, Latin In fortitudine), (see Boaz); Ngam-
gam or Anigam (Hebrew py, Latin <Afflictio Populi;
Azariah (Hebrew ny, Latin Auxiliwm Det); Joram (Hebrew
oo", Latin Hwcelsus); Ishoni (Hebrew ‘yw, Latin Salus mea);
Achal (Hebrew 52x, Latin Comedit); and Obed (Hebrew 739,
Latin Serviens).

Suprrior.—6° of the German Union of the Twenty-two.

Svperiors, Unknown. (See Unknown Superiors.)

SUPPORTS OF THE LoDGE. (See Pillars.)

SUPREME AUTHORITY.—The Grand, or Presiding, Body of every Rite,
is its supreme authority, from which there is no appeal; and in
cases of expulsion from Craft Masonry, the operation of such a
sentence operates throughout all the higher degrees: this pro-
vision is a wise one, safely exercised. Expulsion may be met
by appeal, and reinstatement on submission may follow. The
authorities of Masonry all over the world are very careful to
exercise their supremacy with due justice and clemency. A
Mason, however, expelled by Grand Lodge, stands thereby ex-
pelled from the Royal Arch, from Cryptic, and from Templar
Masonry.

702

suP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [SWE

SUPREME COMMANDER OF THE STARS.—A degree invented at Geneva,
1779; in the collection of Viany.

SuPREME ConsiIsTorY.—1. The title of some of the highest bodies in
the Rite of Mizraim—especially the 90°, but the Bedarrides
changed the title to Supreme Council. 2. 72° R. Mzm.

Supreme Councit.—tThe chief authority in the A. and A. Rite.
There are nine members—1. Most Puissant Sovereign Grand
Commander. 2. Most Dlustrious Lieutenant Grand Commander.
3. Grand Treasurer General, 4. Grand Chancellor. 5. Grand
Secretary General. 6. Grand Chaplain. 7. Grand Captain of
Guards. 8 and 9. Sovereign Grand Inspectors General.

Suspension. (See Hxpulsion.)

Sussex, DukE or.—The sixth son of H. M. King George IIL., born
27th January, 1773; initiated in the Royal York Lodge of Friend-
ship at Berlin, in 1798. Honorary rank of Past G. M. conferred
on him in 1805 by the Grand Lodge of England; on the 13th
May, 1812, he was appointed Deputy Grand Master; and on
the 13th April, 1813, he was elected G. M. in succession
to his brother the Prince Regent, afterwards George IV.;
and, in December of the same year, he became G. M. of the
United Grand Lodge of England. The Duke was also M. E.
Zerubbabel of the Grand Chapter, and Grand Superintendent of
the Grand Conclave of Knights Templar. He retained office as
G. M. until his death, which took place 21st April, 1843, in his
seventy-first year. His was a long and brilliant career, un-
chequered by any maladministration, although, in the opinion of
some, he exercised much undue severity in the cases of Bros.
Crucifix and Oliver.

SwEDEN.—Masonry was introduced into Sweden in 1735 by Count
Sparre, who had been initiated in Paris. His lodge, however,
very soon became extinct, and in 1738, King Frederick I. issued
a decree putting down Masonry altogether ; but after seven years
the interdict was removed, and Masonry became popular. In
1753, the Swedish Masons laid the foundation stone of the
Orphan Asylum at Stockholm; in 1767, Bro. Boham of the
Grand Lodge endowed this school with about 130,000 francs;
while the Queen of Sweden, on 27th July, 1778, together with
the Mayor of Stockholm, added a liberal annual donation. The
Masons of Gotheborg, in 1778, built an inoculation hospital
for the poor. In 1762, King Adolphus Frederick took Masonry
under his protection; in 1765, Lord Blaney, the G. M. of
England, granted a dispensation to Charles Fullmann, Secre-
tary of the English Embassy, to establish Lodges; and, at
the same time, an unsuccessful attempt was made by Schubart
to introduce the Rite of Strict Observance. In 1770, the

703

SWE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Swe

Illuminated Grand Chapter was established, of which the
Duke of Sudermania was appointed Vicarius Salomonis; and
in 1780, the Grand Lodge of Sweden was revived, the same
prince being elected G.M. On the 22d of March, 1793, Gus-
tavus IV. was initiated at Stockholm; and in 1799, a fraternal
alliance was formed between England and Sweden, which has
ever since subsisted. In 1809, the Duke of Sudermania became
king, and on the 27th May, 1811, he instituted the Order of
Charles XIII. (see Charles XIII, Order of). The Swedish
Rite is partially that of Zinnendorf, and is practised to the pre-
sent day. (See Swedish Rite.)

SWEDENBORG, EMANUEL.—-Born at Stockholm, Sweden, 29th January,
1688, the third child and second son of Dr Jesper Swedberg,
bishop of Skara, in West Gothland, and of Sarah Behm, daughter
of Albrecht Behm, assessor of the Royal Mines. His father was
a man of consequence, influence, and learning. To a great extent,
Emanuel Swedenborg has influenced not only the world of
science, but that of theosophy; but it does not appear well
established that he had ever anything to do with Masonry in his
own person. He professed to belong to an Angelic Society in
his later years, and declined honours to which his unparalleled
talents justly entitled him—(see Sun of Mercy, Society of the).
As a mathematician, astronomer, physiologist, and natural
philosopher, he was far in advance of his times. There
is no doubt also that he was a man of valuable official
knowledge. In his forty-fifth year, for good or evil, he became
a theosophist, and claimed to pass almost at will into the
angelic world, upon which he wrote voluminously, and without
apparent effort. All that he says upon the grave subjects con-
nected with religion is marked by continuity and keen appre-
ciation of the unseen world. It can hardly be admitted, however,
that he was of the Fraternity, although Brother Beswick, in a
singular and interesting book published in 1870, says he was
made a Mason at Lund in 1706. The evidence is at present in-
sufficient to mark him as a member. His life was blameless and
benevolent; hence he might easily become a good quarry for the
system-mongers then so actively at work. Of these was the Abbé
Pernetty, who manufactured a Theosophico-Masonic System out
of the numerous works of the sage assessor. He died in London,
in Great Bath Street, Clerkenwell, in the full possession of his
senses, on the 29th of March, 1772.

SWEDENBORG, RITE oF.—This rite consists of six degrees—
LEAP 2.FC. 3.M.M. 4 Enlightened Freemason,
or Green Brother. 5. Sublime Freemason, or Blue Brother. 6.
Perfect Freemason, or Red Brother. It is difficult to describe

704

SWE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Swi

its ceremonies, but it is interesting and perfect in its symbolism.
It is practised in Canada as a distinct rite, and also under a
charter from the Dominion, by an independent Supreme Grand
Council in the United Kingdom, by whose authority the three
last degrees only are conferred.

SweDIsH Rite—Formed about 1777, and principally by the exer-
tions of Gustavus III. It is a mixture of the old York Rite,
with some of the French high degrees, and fragments of Tem-
plarism and Rosicrucianism. The Swedish Rite is exclusively
confined to Sweden, and consists of the following degrees :—
I. Symbolic—1, 2, 3. The Craft degrees, as in English Masonry.
4, 5. Apprentice and Fellow Craft Master of St Andrew.
6. Master of the Scotch Lodge of St Andrew. 7. Knight of the
East and Jerusalem, an apocalyptic degree, in which the celestial
Jerusalem and its twelve gates are represented. 8. Knight of
the West, or Knight Templar, also called True Templar, Master
of the Key. 9. Commander of the Temple, or Favourite Brother
of Saint John. 10. Preceptor of the Temple, or Favourite
Brother of Saint Andrew. II. Illuminated Chapter—11. Mas-
ter of the Temple, and Knight Commander of the Red Cross,
12. Dignitary of the Chapter. 13. Vicar of Solomon. This last de-
gree is held by the King as Perpetual Grand Master of the order.

SwEET BriaR.—A female degree in America.

SWITZERLAND.—Masonry was established at Geneva in 1737, by
Bro. George Hamilton, under a dispensation from the Grand
Lodge of England, and other Lodges speedily followed; but the
authorities almost immediately began to persecute the fraternity.
The Genevan Lodges were closed in 1738, and, in 1743, the
magistrates at Berne interdicted Masonry ; but not being obeyed,
they issued, 3d March, 1745, a still more severe ordinance,
inflicting a fine and deprivation of office upon any Government
official continuing his connection with the Fraternity. The
Masons replied to this in a pamphlet (1746) defending themselves,
but the Pays de Vaud Lodges continued suspended for nineteen
years. In 1764, the Primitive Lodge at Lausanne was revived, and
gradually the Craft reappeared in ordinary activity ; but in 1770,
the magistrates again put a stop to the practice of Freemasonry.
The Masons in Geneva appear, however, to have been able to
continue work, and by 1771, Lodges had been erected at Vevay
and Zurich, at first working on the French ritual, but afterwards
adopting that of Germany. In 1775, the Pays de Vaud Lodges
were allowed to be reopened, and they abandoned the English
Rite in favour of that of the Strict Observance. The French high
degrees were introduced at Basle in the same year. In 1777,a
Convocation was held at Beale, with delegates from the other

2 795

sw1| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | Swi

Swiss Lodges, when it was determined to divide Swiss Masonry
into two sections,—one to be governed by the German Helvetic
Directory, the head-quarters at Zurich; and the other by the
Scottish Helvetic Roman Directory, the seat of authority being
at Lausanne. Schism was, however, at work, and the establish-
ment of a clandestine Lodge at Lausanne, by a Mason named
Sidrac, gave a great deal of trouble, and it was several years
before this Lodge was finally dispersed. The Constitutions of
the Helvetic Roman Directory were published in 1782, and the
rite was purely philosophic. The Council of Berne again inter-
dicted Masonry in November, 1782, and the Helvetic Roman
Directory, to give an example ‘of its obedience to law, dissolved
the Lodges, and discontinued to meet, only maintaining a com-
mittee for foreign correspondence. In 1785, the Swiss Lodges
held a conference at Zurich, to consider the propositions of the
Congress of Paris, convened by the Philalethes; but the idea
of holding a similar congress at Lausanne met with no favour.
Many Lodges of Switzerland, ten of those in Geneva, placed
themselves under the French Grand Orient; while the other seven,
faithful to the English rite, formed themselves into a Grand
Orient of Geneva, and in 1789 formed an alliance with the Grand
Lodge of England. About this time the Pays de Vaud Lodges
were reopened. In 1792, the Helvetic Roman Directory sus-
pended labour, and from 1793 to 1803 F reemasonry was virtu-
ally dead in Switzerland, although a few Lodges in Geneva, and
a German one at Ni euenburg, maintained a shadow of vitality. In
1803, a Lodge, Zur Hoffnung or Hope, was established under the
French Constitution at Berne. When the Republic of Geneva
was ceded to France, its Grand Lodge ceased to exist, and went
under the Grand Orient at Paris. The Lodges of the Pays de
Vaud, however, united as an independent body, under the title
of Grand National Helvetic Orient, electing Bro. Peter Maurice
Glaire, at the age of 87, G. M. for life. He introduced the modi-
fied Scottish Rite of seven degrees. Swiss Masonry continued
in a very unsettled state for many years. In 1820, there were
nineteen Lodges working under four different authorities —the
Scottish Directory ; the Grand Helvetic Roman Orient; the
English Provincial Grand Lodge; and the Grand Orient of
France, with two Lodges of the Rite of Mizraim. In 1836, the
Lodge Modestia cum Libertate of Zurich celebrated its twenty-
fifth anniversary, and invited all the Swiss Lodges to the festival,
and propositions were then favourably made towards a national
union. Other meetings were held in 1838, at Berne; in 1840, at
Basle; and in 1842, at Locle. In this year, Bro. Gysi-Schinz, of
Garichs wes authorized to prepare a draft of a Constitution for a
7

swo | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [sym

United Grand Lodge, and this he so successfully accomplished,
that on the 22d June, 1844, the new Grand Lodge was inaugu-
rated, to the general satisfaction, under the title of the Grand
Lodge Alpina—Bro. J. J. Hottinger, first Grand Master. Since
that time, the progress of Masonry in Switzerland has been unin-
terrupted, and at the present time there are some thirty Lodges,
with over two thousand members.

SworpD anpD TROWEL. (See Trowel and Sword.)

SworD-BeaRER.—An officer in several of the Chivalric Orders.

SworD-BEARER, GRAND.—An annual office in the G. L. of England,
in the appointment of the G. M.

SworD, TYLER’s.—Should be a wavy sword, and not straight, as it
is usually found, being derived from the Cherubic sword.

SymBot.— We have already (see Hmblem) defined the nature of a
symbol as being the pictorial expression of a thought or emotion
To symbols at all times have been attributed great value, and in
religious and esoteric matter they play a great part. But an em-
blem is of later date than a symbol; the former being associated
with a refined literature, while the latter may rudely convey a
simply pictorial idea. A parable is a spoken symbol, and in
Freemasonry most of the teaching is conveyed by symbolism.
Bro. Dr Woodman, P. G. S. B., thus writes :—‘“ That man from
the earliest period of his existence worshipped the one true God
we have every evidence that can be given. This pure worship
continued for some considerable space of time, being handed
down from father to son, until it became corrupted by the intro-
duction of numerous objects of adoration, some of which were
regarded as adverse or destroying agencies, others as beneficent
or creative and preservative powers. The first symbols in use were
doubtless rude attempts to portray the image of the thing they
were intended to represent. There is no doubt but that in the
dark ages of Christianity the symbols and images of saints and
angels, and holy pictures, became objects of actual worship, not
to mention the relics of many holy men and women enclosed in
their jewelled shrines. Intended at first to recall the good
deeds .nd holy works of the original, the symbol or image was
itself worshipped, and no doubt with so many objects of adora-
tion around him claiming his devotion, the worshipper of that
dark period in the Church’s history had but little time or reverence
left for the worship of the true and the living God. In the Chinese
language, which is no doubt of greater antiquity than we com-
monly suppose, every word has its symbol or sign, which was
intended to convey its meaning in a pictorial form, corrupted
and abbreviated by use and necessity. Thus in this language
there are several thousands of so-called letters, or, more properly

797

SYM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedta. [sym

speaking, ‘logoyrams, as each represents an entire word. The
ancient Egyptians, in their several writings or Aieroglyphics, fol-
lowed a somewhat similar practice, though they retained the
form and outline of the thing thus pictorially written. In later
times, characters representing, either singly or in combination,
the sownds of the various words of the spoken language, were
adopted; and this is the most complete form of writing with
which we are at present acquainted. There is a form of writing
still more perfect, though only used by the professional reporter,
in which the lines or curves representing the leading consonant
sound or sounds in a word, and frequently even in a common
phrase,are used as a short though unerring method of recording the
idea. We have now traced Symbolism through its various phases as
it bears on writing as a mode of conveying and perpetuating facts
and ideas ; let us trace it in its relation to religion in the various
ages with whose history we are more or less conversant. The
pure worship of the Most High, the Great Creator and Preserver
of all things, was by degrees corrupted. The visible was adored
instead of the invisible. ‘They worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator.’ God appeared clothed in
darkness, ‘and lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him
(Abram), and He said unto Abram, &c. He also appeared
enveloped in fire in the midst of the burning bush ; also, He is
described as ‘ descending in fire’ upon Mount Sinai, which was
enveloped in a thick cloud, with thunders and lightnings, at the
time when the Decalogue was promulgated, as recorded in the
Book of Exodus, ‘so that all the people trembled.’ ‘ And Moses
brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and
they stood at the nether part of the mount. And Mount Sinai
was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it
in fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a fur-
nace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.’ Thus Lightning,
and Thunder, and Fire, became objects of worship; as they
were the surroundings of the Deity, they became associated
with His presence, and thus endowed in the minds of the ignor-
ant with Divine attributes ; terror probably gave an impetus to
the belief, and fire has always been associated with Divine power
and glory. Symbolical lights, which mean the Divinity of Fire,
abound in ceremonies observed throughout the world. The
marriage feast, the altar with its many lights, and the festival of
the Holy Nativity, the Baal fires on the mountain tops, the
votive sanctuary lights in the secluded hermitage, in the
‘Chapelle Ardente, in the Romish funeral observances, with its
abundance of silent touching lights around the splendid cata-
a os twinkling singly, pale and ineffectual, at the deathbed
7

syM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [syM

in the cottage of the peasant; the innumerable torches at the
stately funeral, or at any pompous celebration, mean the same.
In short, light all over the world, when applied to religious rites
and to ceremonial, whether in ancient or modern times, bespeaks
the same origin, and struggles to express the same meaning,
which is Parseeism, or the worship of the deified Firg, disguised
in many theological or theosophic forms. It will, we trust, never
be supposed that we mean in this real fire, but only the inexpres-
sible something of which real fire, or rather its flower or glory,
is the gross and visible though inadequate image. J am indebted
for a portion of the last few lines, and the ideas conveyed in them,
to the well-known author of The Rosicrucians, who also, quoting
from another, says, ‘So true itis that God loves to retire into His
clouded Throne, and thickening the darkness that encompasses
His awful Majesty, He inhabits an inaccessible light, and lets
none into His truths but the poor in spirit” The Rosicrucians
contended that these so ‘poor in spirit’ meant themselves, and
implied their abasement before God. Man was to have lived
as the angels, of an impregnable, impassible vitality, taking his
respiration, not by short snatches as it were, but as out of the
great cup of the centuries. He was to be the spectator of Nature,
not Nature his spectator. The real objects of the adept were, in
truth, to remain no longer a slave to those things supposed to be
necessities, but by the assistance of Heaven to remove back to
Heaven’s original intention; to rise superior to the consequences
of the original Curse, and to tread under foot, in vindicating the
purpose of God, that mortal (however seductive), sexual, dis-
tinctive degradation, entailing dissolution, heired from Adam, or
from the first Transgression. That poverty and celibacy (under
certain limitations) must be the obligations of the true Brothers
of the ‘ R. C.’ will at once be seen from the above reasons, how-
ever wild and mistaken—barely even comprehensible. The
original curse was entailed upon mankind by eating of
* The fruit
Of that forbidden ‘‘ tree,” whose mortal taste
Brought death into the world and all our woe.’
The Logos or Word, the Divine Wisdom, Christ symbolised by
the Cross, provided the only remedy, and therefore the Cross is the
most precious emblem; it is the true Talisman to lift fallen
man from his lost position, and raise his soul to that highest of
all conceivable beatitudes—a reunion with the Father of All. The
flame that points upwards is symbolical of Him: the tall spires
of our churches, the obelisks of Egypt, the stone which Jacob
set up after his glorious vision of the ladder leading to heaven, all
remind us of Him who dwells there ; and the sum of all the stars,
799

SYM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TAB

though worshipped by man in his ignorance, are but the reflec-
tion of the glory of the Great Architect of the universe.”

SYMBOL OF GLORY.—The Blazing Star was called the Glory in the
Centre, hieroglyphically representing the Ineffable Name. (See
Blazing Star.)

SympoLic Decrees. (See Symbolic Masonry.)

SymBoLic LecturE.—tThe lecture explaining the Royal Arch sym-
bols is technically called the Symbolic Lecture.

Sympo.ic Lopez. (See Symbolie Masonry.)

SymsBoLic Masonry.—The three Craft degrees, peculiar to no
special religion, form the essence of Symbolic Masonry, and the
Craft Lodge hence becomes the Symbolic Lodge. But in a more
general sense, any part of Masonry inculcated by a system of
symbols may justly be included in this definition.

SynpIcaTion oF LopGes.—A term used in France about 1773 by
the Schismatic Grand Orient, and peculiar to that country.

SYNERGIsTS.—A sect of the Lutheran Church in the sixteenth cen-
tury. They considered that divine grace required a corresponding
action of the human will to become effectual.

Synop oF ScorLanD.—The Associate Synod of Seceders of Scot-
land, in 1757, adopted a resolution concerning the Masonic Obli-
gation, in which it is declared that all persons who shall refuse
to make such revelations as the Kirk-sessions may require, and
promise to abstain from all future connection with the order,
“shall be reputed under scandal, and incapable of admission to
sealing ordinances.” Of course such an act might have some
influence over weak minds, but it has no significance in reality
anywhere.

Syria.—A country of Asia Minor, on the eastern shore of the
Mediterranean. It is in this country that the legendary history
of Masonry is supposed to have arisen. Here the Temple of
Solomon was built, and here also the events connected with the
foundation of the entire system took place.

T.

T.—The twentieth letter of the English alphabet, and the last of
the Hebrew. To those who love to follow philological varia-
tions, T is often commutable with D. As a numeral among the
Romans it stood for 160, and thus T signifies 160,000.

TaBaor—A name in some rituals assigned, together with Toffet
and Edom, to the three principal Elects in the eleventh degree,
A. and A. R.

TABELLION.—An officer of recording or secretarial functions under

the Roman empire.
710

TAB | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TAB

TABERNACLE.—The diminutive of the word ¢aberna, used to signify a
soldier’s tent. The Jews sometimes called it nusthean, or dwelling-
place, but generally ofel,a tent. At first, the tabernacle was
probably a mere tent, somewhat larger than others, for the trans-
action of business by the leaders of the Exodus, and it was
afterwards replaced by the first tabernacle constructed by
Aholiab and Bezaleel, under the direction of Moses. It was
situated in the centre of the camp, with the entrance to the east,
in an enclosure of 150 feet long by 50 feet wide, surrounded
by canvas screens 7} feet high. The structure itself was 45 feet
long by 15 wide, the greatest length being from east to west;
the sides being 15 feet high, with a sloping or span roof. The
only entrance was at the east, which was covered with curtains,
and internally it was divided into two apartments by a magnifi-
cent curtain. The apartment at the western end was 15 feet
every way, and hence a perfect cube. This formed the Holy of
Holies, and was never entered by any one except the High Priest,
and only then on extraordinary occasions. It contained the
Ark of the Covenant. The outer room was the Sanctuary, 30
feet by 15. It contained the table of shewbread to the north,
the golden candlestick to the south, and the altar of incense be-
tween them. This ancient Tabernacle accompanied the Israel-
ites in their wanderings, and constituted their Temple until
David obtained possession of Jerusalem, when it was left at
Gibeon. On the removal of the Ark to Jerusalem, David con-
structed a new Tabernacle for its reception, and worship was

‘ here conducted until the completion of Solomon’s Temple. Ac-
cording to Masonic tradition, Zerubbabel erected a fourth Taber-
nacle on his arrival to rebuild the Temple.

TABERNACLE, CHIEF OF THE. (See Chief of the Tabernacle.)

TABERNACLE, PRINCE OF THE. (See Prince of the Tabernacle.)

Taste Lonce (French, Loge de Table)—In use in the French Sys-
tem, with rules as strictly isolating as those of the Lodge itself,
held in the first degree. The table is in the form of a horse-
shoe. The Master sits at the head, the S. W. at the N.W., and
the J. W. at the S.W., the Deacons sitting in between. A sym-
bolism has been assigned to this arrangement, but it is probably
based only upon fancy. The Table Lodge is opened with an
invocation to the Grand Architect, and seven toasts are given.
1, The Sovereign or Chief Magistrate. 2. The Grand Master and
the Grand Orient. 3. The W.M. of the Lodge, by the 8. W.
4. The two Wardens. 5. The Visiting Brethren. 6. The other
officers of the Lodge and the Initiates. 7. All Masons, where-
soever spread over the face of the globe. The vocabulary of the
Table Lodge is worth inserting even as a matter of curiosity :—

711

TAB | Lhe Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TAL

Articles, French. Terms.
Lodge (Loge), Atelier, Workshop.
Tablecloth (Za nappe), Voile, Standard.

Napkin (la serviette), Drapeau, Flag.

Dish (Ze plat), Plateau, Great Plates.

Plate (l’asstette), Tuile, Tile.

Spoon (/a cuiller), Truelle, Trowel.

Knife (de coutear), Glatve, Sword.

Fork (la fourchette), Pioche, Pickaxe.

Bottle (Za buuteiile), Barrique, Cask.

Glass (la verre), Canon, Cannon.

Lights (/es fmieres), Etoiles, Stars.

Snuffers (les mouchettes), Pinces, Pincers.

Chairs (les chaises), Etales, Stalls. ‘

Provisions (les provi- Matériauz, Materials.
sions),

Bread (le pain). Pierre brute, Rough ashlar.

Wine (le vin rouge ou Poudre forte, rouge ou Strong powder, red or
blanc), blanche, white.

Water (L’car), Poudre faible, Weak powder.

Beer or cider (le cidre Poudre jaune, Yellow powder.
ou la biére),

Brandy orliqueurs (lean Poudre fulminante, Fulminating powder.
de vie ou des liqueurs),

Coffee (le café). Poudre noire, Black powder.

Salt (Ze sel), Sable blanc, White sand.

Pepper (Ze potvre), Sable jaune, ow ciment, Yellow sand, or cement.

To eat is to masticate, to drink is to fire, and to carve the dish
before you is to hew. At one time this system was in vogue in
England, and fines of a pecuniary or humorous nature were im-
posed upon persons who omitted to use the proper terms when
the Table Lodge, or banquet, had once commenced.

TABLE OF THE BANQUET OF SAGES.—One of the high degrees of the
Primitive Rite of Narbonne. Also called Banquet of Wisdom.
TABLETS, ENGRAVED.—The term for the minutes or records in the
A. and A. Rite, in which the names of illustrious visitors are

registered.

TABLETS OF H1rAM ABIrF.—There is an unaccredited Masonic
legendary reference to the trestle-board of Hiram, of a purely
fanciful nature. (See Hiram Abif-)

TABLINIUM.—In ancient architecture, an apartment situated in the
narrow part of the atrium, fronting the entrance.

TABORITES.—A designation of a sect of the Hussites.

TABULATUM.—In ancient architecture, a term designating the floors,
ceilings, and other wood-work of a house, sometimes applied to
balconies.

TACITURNITY.—This was at one time reckoned among the three
principal points pertaining to a Mason. It is now obsolete.

Tauor (Hebrew, inv, Mundus).—A name given to the Deity.

TaLisMAN.—Some object, generally a precious stone, a metallic coin
or plate, or a piece of virgin parchment, inscribed with particu-

7i2

TAL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TAL

lar characters under certain aspects of the planets, and other
mystical and magical formule. These must be prepared in a
particular way, and different talismans or telesms are used for
different purposes by those who still believe in them. It is pro-
bably, however, in the faith of the wearer that the principal
virtue of the talisman—whatever it may be—resides. Many
collections of these have been made by occult students, and by
means of such objects Paracelsus effected many cures. A kind
of belief in them has survived to our own times, of which the
celebrated Lee penny is the best-known instance.

TALJAHAD (Hebrew, sap, angel of water).—The word, corrupted
into Talliud, is found in the 29° A. and A. R.

TaLmuD (Hebrew, “abn, doctrine, from 12, to learn).—An exten-
sive work, containing the civil and canonical laws of the Jews,
and a supplement to those given in the Old Testament. The
law contained in the Pentateuch was esteemed to be the written
law, whereas that recorded in the Talmud was oral, or tradition-
ally handed down; but the Jews affirm that there is no priority
in either of these, both of them having been received by Moses
on Mount Sinai. The first permanent record of these oral laws
was made by Rabbi Judah Hakkadosh (z¢., the Holy), between
A.D. 190 and 220, and was termed the text, or Mishna. These
were succeeded, about A.D. 427 to 500, by the Babylonian
Gemara, commenced by Rabbi Asche, being notes on the Mishna ;
and by the Jerusalem Gemara, written chiefly by Rabbi Jochanan,
the date of which is given variously at A.D. 230, 270, and 370.
The last date is that most generally accepted, on the opinion of
Maimonides, but it is clear that Jochanan could not have been
the principal author. According to Vossius, this Gemara was
begun about 655 and ended in 727. The term Mishna (mv)
signifies repetition, being, as it were, a repetition of the written
law; while the word Gemara (793) means completion or
supplement. The Babylonian Talmud contained six parts :—
1. py 170, Seder zeraim, the order of seeds, and contains agri-
cultural directions ; 2. ty 71D, Seder moad, order of festivals,
occupied with directions as to the proper times of the festivals,
rites, and ceremonies; 3. p‘w3 11D, Seder nashim, the order of
women, discussing the rights of women, marriage, divorce, &c. ;
4, pyr ap, Seder nezikim, the order of damages, regulating
the laws concerning compensations, treaties, punishments, for-
feits, &.; 5. owitp wp, Seder kodashim, the order of holy
things, treating of sacrifices, oblations, &c.; 6. nnmMo Wp, Seder
taharoth, the order of purifications, relating to the purification of
household utensils, and other things. These six sections are

713

TAM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TAM

divided into sections and chapters. Four treatises were after-
wards added to the Talmud, as follows :—1. paw noapn, Mas-
seceth sopherim, containing directions for the writers of the
manuscript rolls; 2. snan bax, Ebel rabbethe, or mmuw npn,
Masseceth shemacoth, of mourning for the dead; 3. mp, Callah,
of the mode of choosing a wife; 4. px Jrinspn, Masseceth deerk
aretz, about modes of life; to which is appended a nybw pry,
Perek shalom, or chapter of peace, as a conclusion to the whole.
Those who desire to become more familiar with the Talmud
had better read Emanuel Deutsch’s able treatise on the sub-
ject.

TAMARISK. (See Z7ica.)

TAMMUZ, yon.—Tenth month of the Hebrew civil year, equivalent
to the months June and July.

Tammuz (Hebrew, non; Sept., @apumotk)—A deity of Syria, for
whom the Hebrew idolatresses held an annual lamentation
(Ezek. viii. 14), and identical with the Phcenician god Adon or
Adonis. The legend in connection with Tammuz was similar
to that of Osiris and Hiram. The feast held in his honour was
solstitial, and commenced with the new moon of July, in the
month called Tammuz. This annual celebration was chiefly held
at Byblos, in Phcenicia—the scriptural name of which place was
Gebal, whence came the Giblites or Giblemites, referred to in
the Bible (1 Kings v. 18) as “ stone-squarers.” It was also on the
shore near Byblos that the sacred pastos containing the mutilated
body of Osiris was found by Isis in her wanderings. Adonis or
Tammuz is also that beautiful youth, the son of Myrrha and
Cinyras, king of Cyprus, beloved by Venus or Aphrodite. He
was killed on Mount Lebanon by a wild boar while hunting, and
is the male equivalent of Proserpine or Persephone, and, like
that female divinity, subsequently spent half the year above the
horizon and half below; for, when he was dead, Persephone be-
came enamoured of him, and thus, by the decree of Zeus, was
shared between the celestial Aphrodite and the infernal Perse-
phone. The earliest Christian version of the myth of Tammuz
is from the Syriac of St Melito: “The sons of Phoenicia wor-
shipped Balthi, queen of Cyprus; for she loved Tamuzo, son of
Cuthar, king of the Phcenicians, and forsook her kingdom, and
came and dwelt in Gebal, a fortress of the Phoenicians, and at
that time she made all the villages subject to Cuthar, the king.
For before Tamuzo she had loved Ares (Mars), and Hephaistos
(Vulcan), her husband, caught her and was jealous of her. And
Ares came and slew Tamuzo on Lebanon, while he made a hunt-
ing among the wild boars. And from that time Balthi remained
in Gebal, and died in the city of Apatha, where Tamuzo was

714

TAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TAU

buried.” In the mysteries of Tammuz or Adonis, a week was
spent in lamentation and funeral processions, succeeded by a
rigid fast, after which the populace regarded Adonis as raised
from the dead, and wild orgies of joy succeeded the lugubrious
ceremonies preceding the fast.

Tanca-Tanco.—An idol of the Peruvians, the symbol of the
Triune—literally signifying, “ One in three and three in one.”
TANKARD, ORDER OF THE.—A social society existing in the south of

France, about the end of the seventeenth century.

TANNEHILL, WILKINS.—Born in Tennessee, 1787; died 2d June,
1858. He was one of the founders of the Grand Lodge of
Tennessee in 1813, and a contributor to Masonic literature in
the form of periodical essays in the Portfolio (1847-50).

Tapis (German, Teppich).—The carpet or floorcloth of the Lodge,
on which formerly the tracing board and its emblems were de-
lineated in charcoal or chalk.

TaRANIS.—The evil principle among the Celts.

TARICHEUTES.—The embalmers or salters of the dead among the
ancient Egyptians.

TaROFARIL—A word used in 50° R. Mzm.

TARSEL. (See TZesselated Border.)

TaRSEL BoaRD.—An archaism for trestle-board.

TARSHATHA. (See Tirshatha.)

TassELs.—At the corners of the tracing-boards in the English and
French systems four tassels are placed, one at each angle, at-
tached to a cord forming the true tesselated border. They are
referred to the four cardinal virtues and the four principal points
—ihe guttural, pectoral, manual, and pedal. (See Tesselated
Border.)

TASTING AND SMELLING.—Two of the five senses. Of course the
real senses required by Masons for mutual recognition are only
hearing, seeing, and feeling; but tasting and smelling are highly
in vogue among Masons at their banquets.

TATNAI AND SHETHAR-BozNAl.—The former was a Persian satrap in
the time of Darius and Zerubbabel, and the latter an officer
under his command. They united with the Apharsachites in
attempting to obstruct the building of the Second Temple (Ezra
v.); but the decree of Cyrus having been found, they were en-
joined to assist in the reconstruction of the sacred edifice. They
occur in an old Mark degree of the Second Temple, practised
still in the north of England.

Tav.—Anciently the Tau was a mystical sign, not at all like the
square letter Hebrew n, but more cruciform, and almost iden-
tical with the any of the Egyptians, otherwise known as the
Crux ansata. It was a mark in use among many ancient nations,

715

TAU | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [TcH

and not peculiar to the Jews; and it is found among the Hin-
dus, and these last placed it on the foreheads of their disciples,
It wasa symbol of salvation and consecration, and as such has
been adopted as a Masonic symbol in the Royal Arch degree,
and in some other degrees of high Masonry.

Tau Cross.—A cross of three limbs. (See Tau.)

TAVELLZ.—Bricks seven inches long, and three and a half broad,
used by the Roman architects.

TCHANDALAS.—Among the many races that have issued from Hin-
dustan, that mixed body of pariahs, which was rejected according
to Hindu law, at a period of almost fabulous remoteness, claims
attentive consideration, and up to the present time very little has
appeared in English on the subject. The class of Tchandalas are
only once mentioned in the Institutes of Manu, and then with
great contempt, as being the lowest of the low. In view, how-
ever, of the difficulties which have presented themselves in
reference to the Gypsies and the wandering races, they become
important in a historical and social aspect, and form an interest-
ing study for the thoughtful Freemason, inasmuch as they appear
to have been the inventors of the brick for building purposes, as
is attested by the most ancient Hindu historians—Vina-Snati
and Véda-Vyasa. In the first instance, this class was composed
of individuals who had lost caste, and who therefore were rejected
from their original localities, and forced to seek refuge in the
forests—where, as their numbers increased, they resumed their
former caste-positions among themselves—having their own
brahmans (priests), xchatrias (warriors), vaysias (merchants), and
sudras (agriculturists). This, however, was highly offensive to
the classes from whom they had been expelled, and it was there-
fore determined to wage a war of extermination upon them. An
edict of the brahmatma Yati-Richi forbade their inhabiting vil-
lages, and hence they were forced into a nomadic life, wandering
about with their flocks, but not very far from their centres of
meeting, the brickkilns, and their numbers increased with extra-
ordinary rapidity. After a time, they ventured to build small
structures of clay and dry wood, to serve as their pagodas and
schools—thus forming a new nation within the nation. The
brahman Vamana, the conqueror of Prithu, a man of active
intelligence, advised the artaxchatria Aristanata, whose throne
had been firmly established by his victories, to readmit the
Tchandalas, according to caste, and restore them their rights; and
had this advice been followed, the sanguinary servile wars which
desolated ancient Hindustan would have been avoided. Accord-
ing to Brahmanical chronology, some eight thousand years before
our ere the artaxchatria, or great king Pratichta, issued an

71

TCH | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TCH

edict avainst them, by which they were forbidden to practise the
religion of Brahma, or permitted the perusal of the Vedas. Fune-
ral ceremonies were interdicted, and the honouring of ancestors.
prohibited, and they were, under the penalty of death, to abstain
from writing from left to right, or to use the right hand in writ-
ing. The right hand should be pure, and only used in offering
sacrifices to the Deity ; and as the Tchandalas performed offices
from which even Sudras would shrink, they were accursed. This
edict did not, however, dismay the Tchandalas—they continued to
build dwellings of foliage, which could be easily destroyed,and they
made pottery and bricks, selling these outside the cities they
might not enter. A karana or edict of the brahmatma Yati-
Richi allowed the caste Hindus to purchase these articles;
because the earth was so pure that it could not be defiled, even
by such vile creatures as the Tchandalas. Not having the right
to hold land, in the course of ages the Tchandalas amassed in
their hands the majority of the pecuniary wealth of Hindustan.
Despite of their being forbidden the use of rice, water, and fire,
they contrived not only to procure these necessaries, but many
luxuries required by their wives; they gradually invaded the
purlieus of the towns, constructing their dwellings after a dif-
ferent model, in order not to excite the anger of the pure caste
Hindus. In two thousand years they had grown in numbers so as.
to form one-third of the population. This aroused the fears of the
artaxchatria Agastya, and the rigorous persecution which ensued
threw them back into their former wretched condition in a few
months. The hill tribes of the Himalaya having, for the second
time, invaded the plains of Hindustan, and destroyed Asgartha,
the city of the Sun, Agastya, after narrowly escaping destruction
himself, managed to defeat them, and used the occasion for the
spoliation of the Tchandalas, who were accused of aiding the
mountaineers. By a karana, he:confiscated the entire possessions
of the Tchandalas, and, by a similar edict, he ordered that they
should be only allowed to make bricks and pottery for the
benefit of the vaysias, to whom they were furthermore assigned
as slaves; and they were condemned to build walls around the
cities for their bare subsistence. They were also sentenced to
live upon the grossest food, and the old edicts against them were
put into full force. Water they were only permitted to draw
from ditches, or the watering-places of wild beasts ; they were not
allowed to wash their clothes; and they were only allowed to drink
the putrid water from these impure sources. The Sudra women
were not permitted to assist the Tchandala women at childbirth,
nor were the latter to aid each other. It is easy to perceive the
natural result. Disease of the most horrible kind spread itself
717

TEA ], The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TEM

among them, and a further decree of Agastya condemned them to
circumcision and mutilation. When this prince died, the Tchan-
dalas had been reduced to less than half their original number.
Under his successors, however, the rigour of this persecution was
slightly relaxed, and about B.C. 4000, they had become a noma-
dic race once more, with flocks and herds, living in the most
primitive manner. They did not, however, dare to assemble in
villages, but made the forests their homes. They might still
exercise their trade of potters, but they were not allowed to
possess any vessels themselves, unless they were broken; the
cast-off garments of dead people clothed them, and they con-
tinued a race apart; and to them was assigned the duty of
executing criminals. It is not difficult to guess in what such
persecutions would end; and between B.C. 3000 and 4000, they
emigrated, according to Hindu authorities, towards the west in
crowds, entering the countries of Sind and Aria (Iran), in the
direction of the Euphrates and Tigris, towards Babylon and
Chaldea, the chief of these expeditions being under Artaxa-Phasi-
cal. It was thus, therefore, that the primitive wanderers emerged
from the Holy Land of Palistan, the country of the Chief of the
Tribes. All this may be read in the Avadana-Sastra, and how-
ever exaggerated, is nevertheless authentic history. From them
have originated the Greeks, Pheenicians, Philistines, Hykshos,
and other nations of antiquity; while many still remain in their
original rudeness in the deserts of Kariun, Khorassan, Kuhistan,
Kernan, Zerrah, Djalk, Lora, and Saravan. Had we space, we
might enlarge upon the customs of these tribes; but the thought-
ful reader will appreciate what is here offered as being an earnest
of important investigations yet to be made in the early his-
tory of mankind,

TeamM—An inelegant expression, sometimes used to express the
three candidates for the privileges of Royal Arch Masonry in
America,

TEARS (heraldically, guttes).—In continental Lodges, and in most of
the high degrees, tears are strewn on the hangings of the Lodge,
which are black.

TEBETH, N3.—Fourth month of the Hebrew civil year, correspond-
ing to December and January. Tenth lunar month used in 16°
A. and A. Rite.

TELAMONES.—Male figures used, like caryatides, for the support of
entablatures in architecture.

TEMONES.—In ancient architecture, the situation in the temples
where statues were placed.

TEMPEL ORDEN, OR TEMPELHERRENORDEN. (See Zemplarism.)

TEMPERANCE.—A Masonic virtue of the highest order, the practice

718

TEM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TEM

of which is inculcated in the first degree. It demands, not

abstinence, but moderation in the satisfaction of physical wants.

TEMPLAR. (See Templarism.)

TEMPLAR ORIGIN OF FREEMASONRY.— The theory that Masonry
originated with the Knights Templar was first brought forward by
Ramsay, and adopted by the College of Clermont and by Baron
Hund. It has, however, long since been abandoned as untenable.
Traces of the influence of this theory, however, continue to be
visible in the high degrees. (See Templarism.)

TEMPLAR Priest, KNIGHT.—A rite of one degree, with a beautiful
ritual. Officers—Seventh Pillar, or H. P., and six other pillars.
‘TEMPLARISM.—Although at the present time there is great activity
on the part of the Masonic Knights Templar, it is a very doubtful
question whether that Order deserves the support it has recently
obtained, and chiefly for the following reasons. The first order of
Knights Templar was a religious order, founded for a purpose of
definite design. It received the sanction of the ecclesiastical
authority of the times, and there can be little doubt, despite the
exaggerations of history, that the professions of the original
knights were fairly and honourably carried out. It is not just
to the Middle Ages to impute to all those who lived in them the
barbarity which might be exercised in individual cases; be-
cause, with such practical knowledge of the arts and sciences as
then was conquered by man, it is clear that honourable motives
might easily be prevalent in society; and our general contempt
for that transition period is rather based on our imperfect know-
ledge of the manners and customs of the time, than to be attri-
buted to any specially inherent principle of cruelty and want of
refinement. On the contrary, by those authorities best worthy
of credence, who wrote contemporaneously with the progress of
events, we find among the upper classes a singular refinement of
feeling, and a delicacy which might well be emulated at the
present day. The honour of knights, and a scrupulous regard
for the feelings of the ladies of their houses, pervades the
authentic history of the so-called dark ages ; while liberality of
sentiment and nobility of thought prove elements not wanting
in those remote times. Even the Crusades, epidemically mad as
they were, may be put in as evidence of a grander and greater
purpose than the money-grubbing instinct of ourown times. To
go to war for an idea was no unfamiliar occurrence in those days;
and the fact that estates were then carefully administered speaks
volumes, both for the integrity of the lower class of administrators
and for the confidence of the landowners. The Order of Knights
Templar was founded in 1118 by Hugh de Payens and eight other
French knights established in Palestine, and was received with

719

TEM] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TEM

such favour, that in 1128 the Council of Troyes acknowledged its
importance, and Saint Bernard wrote a rule, for the guidance of
the knights, of avery strict character. They were bound by vows
of poverty, and lived on the coarsest food; at matins, they were
obliged to attend and recite thirteen paters, seven at intervals,
and nine at vespers. They fasted four times a week. Whena
member of the Order died, every survivor had to repeat one
hundred paters every day for the space of a week. Even the
pleasures of the chase were denied to the knights. When not
engaged in combating the enemies of Christ, they remained
secluded in the house assigned to them, furbishing their armour
and mending their clothes. They were forbidden to play at
chess, draughts, or dice; and as their numbers increased, they
formed a hardy and determined band of warriors, devoted to the
cause of their institution. Those entering the Order abandoned
their property of every kind to the Order; and hence, although
they were individually poor, as a body they rapidly became
enormously rich, and their power increased in proportion. Philip
Augustus declared himself their protector, and Pope Innocent
III. himself desired to be affiliated to them. In all parts of
Europe and in Asia their houses abounded, and their riches
were enormous. The principal officer was the Grand Master,
who ranked as a prince at the Courts of Europe; and
under him were Preceptors or Grand Priors, Visitors, Com-
manders, &c. When a new candidate presented himself
for admission, the Chapter assembled, and all the gates of
the Temple were scrupulously closed, while every officer occu-
pied his proper place in the assembly—which usually met
by torchlight, at the dead of night, in the church. The can-
didate attended outside, and the presiding officer three several
tines deputed two brethren to ask the future knight whether he
was firmly determined to enter the Order. On his reply in the
affirmative, he was admitted, and he then thrice, humbly kneel-
ing on his knees, solicited bread and water, and his admission to
the Order. He was then addressed in the following terms by
the Preceptor or other President :—* You are about to subscribe
to heavy engagements. You will be exposed to many difficulties
and dangers: you will have to watch when you would desire to
sleep, to suffer the pangs of hunger wheh you would desire to
eat and drink, and depart into one country when you would
desire to be in another.” He was then asked whether he was
a knight in good health; whether married or betrothed;
whether he belonged to any other Order; and finally, whether
he had any debts to pay? When the candidate had replied to

these questions, he pronounced the three vows of poverty, chas-
720

TEM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TEM

tity, and obedience. “I swear,” said the novice, “ to consecrate
my thoughts, my energy, and my life, to the defence of the unity
of God and the mysteries of the faith, &c. I promise to be sub-
missive and obedient to the Grand Master of the Order. When-
soever necessity shall arise, I agree to pass over the seas to the
battlefield. I will give my aid in fighting infidel kings and
princes ; and, in the presence of three opponents, I will not turn
and fly, but will encounter them, if they be infidels.” He then
received the mantle of the Order, and the knights present gave
him the kiss of fraternity. The number three was peculiarly
sacred among the Templars. They observed three great fasts;
they communicated thrice a year; alms were given in all the
houses of the Order thrice in every week; each knight was
bound to have three horses; mass was chanted thrice a week;
meat was eaten on three days in each week only; on fast-days
three different dishes were presented; the cross was solemnly
adored at three periods of the year; delinquents were flogged
three times in open Chapter. In the brief limits of this article,
we can do no more than allude to the judicial murder of James
de Molay, which was obviously brought about by the avarice of
Philip the Fair, and his associate and tool, Pope Clement; and
the history of that sad event is so easily accessible as to require
no further mention. After the suppression of the Templars, the
Order was revived in a more secret form, and subsists to the
present day. To obtain Masonic Knighthood in the Order it is
necessary that the candidate should be a Royal Arch Mason.
For a few years some alterations prevailed in the nomenclature of
the assemblies and officers, as follows :—Encampment became
Preceptory; Eminent Commander, Eminent Preceptor; First Cap-
tain, Constable; Second Captain, Marshal; Expert, Sub-Marshal;
a Grand Conclave became a Great Priory ruled by a Prior; the
New Chief Assembly became a Convent General. The designa-
tions of Registrar, Captain of Lines, Equerry Without, and Trea-
surer, were retained. But this nomenclature has been recently
abandoned in favour of the old names. The Grand Master at
the present time is H. R. H. the Prince of Wales.

TEMPLARS OF SCOTLAND.—tThe organisation of Scottish Templarism
differs from that adopted in other countries. It is termed the
Religious and Military Order, and consists of two classes —1.
Novice and Esquire. 2. Knight Templar. The Knights are sub-
divided into four classes—(1.) Knights created by proxies ; (2.)
Knights elected on petition to the Grand Master and Council,
supported by the recommendation of the proxies to which the
memorialists belong; (3.) Knights Commanders; (4.) Knights Grand
Crosses nominated by the Grand Master. The supreme autho-

22 72

TEM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TEM

rity is the Chapter General, consisting of the Grand Officers,
Knights Grand Crosses, and Knights Commanders; the Chap-
ter is annual, the Grand Master president, and the meeting is
held on the 11th of March, being the anniversary of the mar-
tvrdom of James de Molay, when the Grand Officers are elected.
The Order is in the interim governed by the Grand Master’s
Council, formed of the Grand Officers, the Grand Priors of
Foreign Langues, and the Knights Grand Crosses. The Grand
Officers hold office for a year, except the Past Grand Masters,
who are appointed ad vitam; the Grand Master, who is elected
triennially ; and the Grand Aides-de-Camp, who are appointed
by the Grand Master, and removable at pleasure. The Grand
officers are—l. Grand Master; 2. Past Grand Masters; 3. Grand
Seneschal ; 4. Preceptor and Grand Prior of Scotland; 5. Grand
Constable and Mareschal; 6. Grand Admiral; 7. Grand Almoner
or Hospitaller; 8. Grand Chancellor; 9. Grand Treasurer; 10,
Grand Revistrar; 11. Grand Prelate or Primate; 12. Grand Pro-
vost or Governor General; 13. Grand Standard-bearer or Beau-
cennifer; 14. Grand Bearer of the Vexillum Belli; 15. Grand
Chamberlain; 16. Grand Steward; 17 and 18. Grand Aides-de-
Camp. Grand Priors are elected for life. Priories consist of the
following officers :—-1. Prior; 2. Sub-Prior; 3. Mareschal or Master
of Ceremonies ; 4 Hospitaller or Almoner; 5. Chancellor; 6. Trea-
surer; 7. Secretary; 8. Chaplain and Instructor; 9. Beaucennifer
or Bearer of the Beauseant; 10. Bearer of the Red Cross Banner
or Vexillum Belli; 11. Chamberlain; 12 and 13. Aides-de-Camp.

TEMPLARIUS.—The Latin designation of a Knight Templar. (See
Templarism.)

TEMPLE. (See Temple of Solomon.)

TEMPLE, GRAND COMMANDER OF THE—The 58° of the Collection of
the Metropolitan Chapter of France.

TEMPLE OF EZEKIEL.—In Ezekiel xl. 5-49; xli. 1-26; xlii. 1-20;
xliii, 1-27; xliv. 1-5, we find an elaborate vision of a temple
presented to the prophet, which, although agreeing in its main
symbolism with the principles of that of King Solomon, is con-
structed on a much grander scale, and was no doubt presented to
his internal sight for the purpose of foreshowing the glories of the
Grand Lodge above. It has also analogies with the description
of the New Jerusalem in the Apocalypse. In some of the higher
degrees, this Temple appears as a symbol, but has nothing to do
with Craft Masonry.

TEMPLE OF Herop.—Commenced B.C. 7, and completed A.D. 4,
and destroyed by the Romans A.D. 70. It was a magnificent
structure, and memorable to the Christian as being that Temple
in which the Saviour taught.

722

TEM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TEM

TEMPLE OF SOLOMON.—For this many preparations had been made
by King David, but it was reserved for his son and successor to
carry out the design. Its foundations were laid in 1012 B.C.,
and with the aid of Hiram, King of Tyre, it was completed in
about seven years, and dedicated 1004 B.C. It stood upon
Mount Moriah, one of the ridges of Mount Zion, and had been
purchased from Ornan, the Jebusite, for religious purposes, by
David. About thirty-three years after its completion, Shishak,
king of Egypt, invaded Judah, and captured Rehoboam, carrying
away from Jerusalem the choicest treasures of the Temple.
From this time forward warfare was carried on by Assyria,
Babylon, and Egypt for centuries ; and B.C. 588, during the reign
of Zedekiah, Nebuchadnezzar finally destroyed the Temple,
carried the remaining vessels of the Temple to Babylon, and
enslaved the inhabitants of Judah.

TEMPLE OF ZERUBBABEL.—In the year 536 B.C., Cyrus gave the
Jews permission to return to Jerusalem, and rebuild the temple
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. It is stated that 42,360 of the
captives returned, under the guidance of Joshua, the high priest ;
Zerubbabel, their prince ; and Haggai, the scribe, and immediately
commenced the work of reconstruction. The Samaritans, how-
ever, strenuously opposed this work, because, on account of
ancient religious differences, their co-operation had been refused.
In consequence of their representations, Artaxerxes, or Cambyses,
issued a decree, forbidding the work to proceed; but on the
accession of Darius, Zerubbabel obtained another decree, allowing
it to be resumed, and finally the temple was completed in the
sixth year of the reign of Darius, B.C. 515, just twenty years from
the time it had been commenced. The ceremonies of dedication
were exactly assimilated to those observed on the consecration
of the first temple. The plans upon which it was constructed
were the same as those of King Solomon’s temple; but the mag-
nitude of the building was increased, although the richness of
decoration by no means equalled the structure previously erected.
In the second temple—which would seem to symbolise the
broken and contrite spirit of man—several things were wanting:
the Ark was lost, the Urim and Thummin could not be found,
the divine fire from heaven no longer irradiated the sanctuary,
and the spirit of enthusiastic prophecy and the power of per-
forming miracles had departed. A Masonic legend, probably a
pious fraud of the last century, says, that while the workmen
were engaged in the necessary excavations for the foundation,
and frequent arrivals took place from Babylon, three worn and
footsore travellers presented themselves, and asked to be per-
mitted to join in the great work. Furnished with implements,

723

TEM] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TEM

they retired and made a great discovery, upon which the Royal
Arch degree has been founded. It is said that these three men
were Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, better known as Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, who had been miraculously preserved
from the fiery furnace to which the fury of Nebuchadnezzar had
consigned them. Upon this frail basis has been erected a system
or form of Masonry which finds many disciples at the present
day. There is a symbolism underlying it which it would not
become the present writer to explain, although intelligent exe-
getists can easily see what inference should be drawn.

TEMPLE, ORDER OF THE.—Distinct from the Knights Templar,
although claiming a common origin, was the Order of the Temple,
organized in 1705, under a fraudulent charter purporting to be
signed by John Mark Larmenius, 13th February, 1324, who was.
succeeded by twenty-two Grand Masters, Francis Thomas Theo-
baldus Alexandrinus, in 1324, being the first, and Bernard Ray-
mund Fabré, in 1804, the last. The Duke of Orleans, in 1705,
endeavoured to obtain its recognition by the Order of Christ of
Portugal, but without success ; and it therefore secretly subsisted
under the title of the Societé d’ Aloyau—(see Sirloin, Society of the).
After the death of the Duke of Casse Brissac, the charter of Lar-
menius was discovered in an old piece of furniture, and shown by
a certain Brother Ledru, who had been the Duke’s physician, in
1804, to his two friends de Saintot and Fabré Palaprat. These
three, with Claudius Matheus Radix de Chevillon, reconstituted
the order, and the earliest members set to work to obtain confir-
matory relics in proof of the genuineness of the Charter and
Statutes, but sufficient evidence exists to prove that the whole
was a forgery. However, the order was launched with great
magnificence, and still continues to claim the attention of the
world. There were three houses:—I. Initiation—1. Initiate
(E. A.P.); 2. Initiate of the Interior (F.C.); 3. Adept (MM);
4, Adept of the East (Elect of Fifteen of the Scottish Rite);
5. Grand Adept of the Black Eagle of St John (Elect of Nine,
Scottish Rite). II. Postulance—6. Postulant of the Order (Rose
Croix Degree). III. Council_—7. Esquire, merely a preparation
for the eighth degree; 8. Knight or Levite of the Interior Guard
(Philosophical Kadosh). The Order was at first Roman Catholic,
but afterwards, in 1814, the Grand Master obtained a copy of a
spurious Gospel of St John (see Leviticon), and on it founded a
schismatic religious sect he termed Johannism, and its liturgy is
still followed by the members of the so-called Order at Paris to
the present day.

TEMPLE, SOVEREIGN COMMANDER OF THE. (See Sovereign Commander
of the Temple.)

724

TEM | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TER

TEMPLE, SOVEREIGN OF THE SOVEREIGNS, GRAND COMMANDER OF THE.
—A degree in the Collections of Lemanceau and Le Page, and sup-
posed to have some relation to the order of Christ of Portugal.

TEMPLE, SPIRITUAL. (See Spiritual Temple.)

TEMPLE, SYMBOLISM OF THE—The symbolism of the first temple is
entirely restricted to the Craft degrees, and that of the second to
the Royal Arch, although the second temple is frequently alluded
to in the higher degrees. The first temple is the symbol to the
Master Mason of this life; the second temple, to the Royal Arch
Companion, is the symbol of the future life.

TEMPLE, WORKMEN AT THE. (See Workinen at the Temple.)

TEMPLIER.—The expression for a Knight Templar in French.

TEMPLUM HIEROSOLYMZ&.—Latin for Temple of Jerusalem.

Tew.—A sacred number among the Pythagoreans. (See Tetractys.)

Tencu.— Used in one of the high degrees of the Scottish Rite.

TENNESSEE.— Became independent of North Carolina in 1813. This
step was taken in October of that year by a convention of
Lodges at Knoxville, and independence was obtained by the
Grand Lodge being formed, with eight Lodges as a basis, on
27th December, 1813, Brother Thomas Clairborne, first G. M.
The Royal Arch degree was promptly introduced, and the
Grand Chapter of Tennessee was instituted in 1826. The Grand
Council of Royal and Select Masters was formed 13th October,
1847. The Grand Commandery was organized 12th October,
1859. The A. and A. Rite has also been introduced.

Tensio-Dai-Sin.—The name of the unknown god worshipped by the
Japanese. This deity is the sun with his twelve apostles, and
he fights with monsters and the elements. The priests and
initiates wore flame-coloured garments. They have four festi-
vals in the year—the third of the third month, the fifth of the
fifth, the seventh of the seventh, and the ninth of the ninth
month. The initiates are called Jammabos. They abstain from
meat, and undergo many purifications.

Trnt.—The designation of an assembly of the Order of Ishmael
in which the preliminary and historical ceremonies are per-
formed. This term does nut, however, apply to certain other
conventions or meetings. (See Ishmael, Order of.)

TENURE OF OFFIcE.— All offices in the English and American Rites
are held by annual election, but the W. M. holds his office until
his successor is installed, as the chair of K. 8. must never be
vacant. At one time, in France and Germany, Masters were
irremovable, and the abuses to which this led had to be abated
by a change in the tenure. In the high degrees, many offices
are ad vitam, or for life.

Tercy.—One of the elected Nine, said in the high degrees to have

728

TER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TES

been sent in search of the body of Hiram Abiff. It is supposed
to be a name invented by Ramsay in connection with Stuart
Masonry.

TERMINISTS.—A Calvinistical sect which held that God has fixed, for
certain persons, such as Saul, Pharaoh, and Judas, a time before
their deaths, after which He no longer wills their salvation.

TERMINUS.—The god of landmarks among the Romans, represented
by a cubical stone.

TERRASSON, THE ABBE JEAN.— Born at Lyons, France, in 1670, died
1750. His principal work was a learned book connected with
the ancient mysteries, published under the title of Sethos, in
1731. This book, which.contained an exhaustive series of
essays, so much interested the then reading world, that it was
widely read and frequently translated. It is only a romance,
however, although the learning evinced in it is sufficient to arrest
the attention of even many modern scholars.

TERRIBLE BroTHER (French, Frére Terrible)—An officer in the
French Rite, who acted as the introducer of the candidate, in
somewhat the same manner as is done by the Senior Deacon in
the modern English Rite.

TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.—The bounds of a political state or pro-
vince are regarded as conferring certain geographical limits
to a G. L, within which its authority is paramount. In Ger-
many, several Grand Lodges, however, exercise indiscriminate
authority, the fealty of subordinate Lodges being only due to
such Grand Lodges by which they may have been warranted.
Whether any subordinate German Lodge has power to break
this bond between mother and daughter Lodge has never yet
been tested.

TERTIARIES.—Associates of the Franciscans who acknowledge the
third rule of St Francis, and appear to be connected with the
Fraticelli and Beghardi of the thirteenth century.

TERTULLIANISTS.—A_ branch of the African Montanists, so named
after their leader, the patristic writer Tertullian.

TESsEL, INDENTED, (See Zesselated Border.)

TESSELATED (Latin, tessella.)—A little square stone, chequered and
formed into squares of mosaic. In Masonry, it is applied to the
mosaic pavement of the Temple, the black and white squares of
which symbolize the alternate good and evil of human life.

TESSELATED Borper (Latin, tessella, a small square stone).—De-
fined by Browne, in his “ Master Key,” to be “ the skirt-work
round the Lodge.” By the French it is called, “la houpe dentelée;”
and by the Germans “die Schnurr von starken Faden,” or cord of
strong thread. It consists of a cord intertwined with knots, to
each ety of which is appended a tassel; hence it is sometimes

72

TES | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TES

called the tasselated border—the tassels representing the four car-
dinal virtues. In some old tracing boards, it is represented by black
and white triangles, thus mistaken for ¢essella, or little stones.

TESSERA HOSPITALIS (Latin.)—The guests’ token, implying literally
that what you have done for me, when required I will do for you
and yours, It is an ancient anda friendly practice, and amounted
to a religious ceremony among those who scrupulously observed
these obligations. It was in one sense truly Masonic, for the
sons of the contracting parties were bound on presentation of the
tessaron, as it were, to honour their father’s acceptance at any
distance of time or space. It is gratifying to be able to record that
the idea which prompted the institution of the tessaron has never
died out in any part of the world, but, like a talisman, it is only
efficacious to those who bear it with them in spirit and in truth.
The possession of this tessaron, and the mode of its presentation
to a stranger, constitutes one of the real secrets of Masonry ; but
even with a very mediocre condition of the ancient art, the good
feeling produced by the tessaron can still be seen wherever
brethren meet on occasions of doubt and difficulty. There is the
less reason for bashfulness in presenting it, when the disposition
of the presenter is honourable, as it is purely a secular matter,
and yet one of which no true Mason, except under circumstances
of dire necessity, would think of availing himself.

TEsTIMoNy.—In Masonry, it is held that the testimony of a brother
Mason in matters outside the Lodge must be taken as if he were
no brother at all, should the accused be a criminal; nor can a
brother, without disgrace to himself, although innocent, avail
himself of the fact of the magistrate or judge being a Mason; in
other words, Masonic law cannot override the law of the land;
else where would be the principle of noninterference so consist-
ently and properly taught by Masonic authorities? In reality, the
delinquent who appeals on Masonic grounds to the person whose
duty it is to decide his dispute, or to pronounce his doom, violates
not only his solemn oath of obligation, but every duty to his
craft and country: for he shows himself a mean coward, unwilling,
in the one case, that of his innocence, to bear a limited time of un-
merited obloquy; and in the other, that of his guilt, that his oath
solemnly pronounced before the Lodge is utterly valueless and
actually dishonourably taken. In the same way, a witness may be
a Mason, and averse to giving evidence; but if he shrink from tell-
ing the exact truth, he, in the eye of the Craft, is almost as ignoble
as the accused ; and should the judge, for Masonic reasons, incline
to less than a just interpretation of what is submitted to him, he
is by the very fact unfit to retain his seat on the bench; and cer-
tainly he could not, with a clear conscience, enter a Lodge. But

727

TES | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TEs

human law is one thing, and Masonic law another. In human
law, many interests are involved which never invade the sanctity
of the Lodge; and among the principles of Masonry, it is held
that a brother cannot be attacked in his absence, or, if he be,
that the brother or brethren can be punished for it; that if a
brother is willing to explain, he has a right to a fair field; and
that he can meet his accusers, and, as in general law, he is to be
held innocent until evidence of his guilt is forthcoming. But
imagine the moral condition of an accusing brother without evi-
dence! What position can he ever hope to occupy in the Grand
Lodge above? Wherefore it was well said by Lao-Tzse and Jesus,
that forgiveness was the betterlaw. If even the accusing brother
convicts the one against whom he brings his deliberate accusation,
what is the benefit to him? Hence the cardinal and efficient idea
in Masonic law, is to do nothing without the clearest evidence
throughout; therefore Masonic trials—things rather rare than de-
sirable—have a court of appeal, and in that court of appeal the
sentence is reversible, on evidence being shown in surrebutter.

Tests.—The last century, which was as ripe in folly as the present,
and perhaps as the previous centuries, invented a number of tests
to prove brother Masons. They were made much fun of at the
time: for instance, that a brother Mason seeing another brother
Mason on a church steeple, could cause him at once to descend and
fraternise ; or that. a Mason taking up a flint and smelling it, could
transfer it to the other brother with a cheering feeling that his
confidence would not be misplaced. Some of those customs of
the Masons of the eighteenth century depended upon politeness,
such as, “Where does the Master hang his hat?” Certainly
not on the pink of politeness, for he keeps his hat on his head.
This has been abolished, and is one of the proofs that Masonry
is a symbolical and progressive institution. But the fact is,
that the true test of a Mason is in that which he does; that
any amount of profession is not worth a pennyworth of per-
formance; and that all the tests in the world cannot prevent the
false and fraudulent Mason creeping in. Unless a man has
Masonry at his heart, no amount of factitious rank can exalt
him; but if he is acquainted with the true desire of all Masons,
nothing can prevent him from attaining his ends. To such a man
tests are valueless, because in every action of his life he will
perform duties of benevolence, and thus vindicate the humane
character of Masonry.

Test Worp.—As it is known that the rules of Masonry are in-
variable, the idea of a test word, something beyond our former
Jandmarks, is abhorrent. It is, however, curious, that in the Odd-
fellows’ Institution this has been found to work well, and has

728

TET | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ TEU

rooted out many members of which that fraternity might be well
quit. During the Morgan Masonic riots (1829), a test. word was
given, but it was rejected by the Grand Lodges as an invasion of
the landmarks.

Terractys (Greek, rergaxrds,z.¢., four)— A Pythagorean symbol, com-
posed of ten Jods or dots, arranged triangularly in four rows. It
was emblematical of the Tetragrammaton. The one point at the
top was symbolical of the active principle or Creator; the two
next to it, of the passive principle, or matter; the three next, of the
world proceeding from their union ; and the four, of the principal
liberal arts and sciences. For further particulars, the reader is
referred to Oliver’s “ Pythagorean Triangle.”

TETRADITES.—A name given to some heretical sects, such as the
Manichees, who believed the Godhead to consist of four instead
of three persons. This was, however, not exclusively a religious
appellation, but, among the Gnostic philosophers, the value and
dignity of numbers being exceedingly important, those who paid
the greatest reverence to the quaternary, or number four, were
also thus designated.

TETRADORON.—Bricks used by ancient Greek builders in private
dwellings, four palms long.

TETRAGRAMMATON.—The name of God in four letters, mm. Of
consequence in many of the higher degrees. A whole essay
might be written on the properties of the Tetragrammaton.

TETRAGRAMMATON, KNIGHT OF THE; OR, GUARDIAN OF THE INCOM-
MUNICABLE NaME.—79° Rite of Memphis.

TETRASTYLE.—A building having four columns in front.

TEvToNIc KNniGHTs.—Founded during the Crusades by a German
gentleman residing at Jerusalem, where he built an hospital,
together with an oratory to the Virgin Mary. During the third
Crusade, this Order was greatly enlarged, and the members of it
assumed the title of Teutonic Knights, or Brethren of the
Hospital of our Lady of the Germans of Jerusalem, with Henry
Walpott as first Grand Master. Dress—a white mantle, with a
black cross embroidered in gold. These knights subsequently
acquired by degrees the following arms :—a cross double potent,
or on a black cross, with a black double-headed eagle on an
escutcheon in centre, augmented by a blue chief with flewrs-de-
lis-semée, In 1340, they built the city of Marienburg, where they
established their seat, and thence were engaged in many contests
with the Kings of Poland. They were excommunicated by Pope
John XXII, but finally received Prussia Proper as a fief from
the Kingdom of Poland. In 1511, Albrecht, Margrave of
Brandenburg, was elected Grand Master; but on his becoming a
Protestant he laid down this office, became Duke of East Prussia,

729

TEX ] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [THE

and thus laid the foundation for the modern Kingdom of Prussia.
The Order, however, continued to exist at Mergentheim, in
Swabia; and in 1805, Francis II. of Austria was Grand Master.
The Order was finally abolished by Napoleon, in 1809, although
it has still a titular existence in Austria. It had no connection
with Freemasonry.

TExAs.—Freemasonry introduced at Brazoria, 27th December, 1835,
under dispensation by the G. M., J. H. Holland, after whom it
was called the Holland Lodge. The war with Mexico stopped
its action in 1836. The Lodge was regularly reopened under a
warrant from the Grand Lodge of Louisiana, at Houston, and
Lodges were also warranted in other parts of the State. In
1837, the Lodges of Texas met and organized, on 20th December,
the G. L. of the Republic of Texas, Bro. Anson Jones, first G. M.
With reference to Royal Arch Masonry, the Republic of the
Lone Star was much troubled, political considerations of a Masonic
nature preventing its lawful acceptance. A charter was granted
in 1838 for a Chapter at San Felipe de Austin, but those persons
to whom it was granted took upon themselves the responsibility
of opening at Galveston, 2d June, 1840. This proceeding was
irregular, and its irregularity was not mended by the union of the
Galveston Chapter with two other irregular Chapters, who met
and formed a Grand Chapter of Texas, subsequently prohibited.
The Galveston Chapter submitted to the authority of the General
Grand Chapter, and upon this submission an actual Grand Chap-
ter of Texas was formed in 1850. The Grand Commandery of
Texas was instituted 19th January, 1855.

T..G..A..0..T..U..—The Grand Architect of the Universe. The
technical name used without any irreverence by the general
body of Freemasons. In Germany, the same term D.G. B.A.W.
—Der Grosse Baumeister aller Welten, is used, and in France it
is termed L. G. M. D. Lp U—Le Grand Mattre de 0 Univers.

THAMIM (Hebrew, D’on, Perfectus)—A name given to the Deity.

THAMMUZ. (See Tammuz.)

THANKS.—In the French Rite, and in Irish lodges, the candidate
voluntarily returns thanks for the honour conferred upon him
at initiation. The practice is different in the English and
American Rites.

THARGELIA.—Festivals in honour of Apollo and Diana.

THEATINES, ORDER oF.—A Roman Catholic order founded 1524, by
Giovanni Caraffa, afterwards Pope Paul IV. They rejected fixed
revenues, and lived upon whatever was given them by Provi-
dence. They succoured the sick and wounded during the siege
of Rome by Charles V.

THEISM.—Every Freemason is bound to believe in a God, of an All-

730

THE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [THE

Merciful, Omnipresent, and Omnipotent Nature. Masonry does
not, however, interfere with individual creeds; but it is the
general rule that morality of the highest kind is a necessary
qualification. On this so much has been said before that it is
unnecessary to repeat the paramount obligation.

THEODVOSIAN.—A follower of Theodosius, a learned tanner of the

- second century, whose opinions were similar to those after-
wards promulgated by Socinus.

THEOLOGICAL VIRTUES.—I. Cardinal virtues—1. Temperance. 2.
Prudence. 3. Fortitude. 4. Justice. II. Pauline virtues—I.
Faith. 2. Hope. 3, Charity.

THEOPASCHITES.—A heretical sect inthefifth century, which followed
Peter the Fuller. They held the doctrine that all three Persons
of the Godhead were crucified.

THEOPHILANTHROPISTS.—The name of a deistical society formed
at Paris during the first French Revolution. They were
granted the use of ten churches by the Directory, but were
finally suppressed in 1802.

TuEOoRICUS.—The second degree of the German Rose Croix.

THEOSOPHICAL SocieTy oF NEw YorK.—Formed in 1875 by Colonel
Olcott and others, for the scientific investigation of so-called
occult phenomena, such as magic, white and black ; astrology,
alchymy, Hermeticism, and the like. Similar to modern scientific
societies, it is open to both sexes.

THEOSOPHY.—There are always existent in this world a number of
independent thinkers, whose tenets, unless they markedly vary
from received opinions, receive toleration, and even tacit ap-
proval, from the various representatives of what may be termed the
official religions ; and by the moderate survey of particular ideas,
they have at all times rendered good service to society. For the
most part their works have had a limited area of circulation,
and the general tendency of their speculations has been of
a commentative nature. Starting from ordinary principles
denied by none, they built up a system agreeable to the interior
consciousness of all; nor, unless they attempted to put their in-
structions into a practical shape, have they ever encountered resist-
ance. Entirely speculative, and founding no schools, they have
still exercised a silent influence upon philosophy; and, no doubt,
when the time arrives, many ideas thus silently propounded may
yet give new directions to human thought. One of the ways in
which these doctrines have obtained not only authority, but
power, has been amongst certain enthusiasts in the higher de-
grees of Masonry. This power has, however, to a great degree,
died with the founders, and modern Freemasonry contains few
traces of theosophic influence. However accurate and beautiful

731

THE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [THE

the ideas of Swedenborg, Pernetty, Paschalis, Saint Martin,
Marconis, Ragon, and Chastanier may have been, they have but
little direct influence on society.

THERAPEUTA,—An ascetic sect of Jews in the first century; resid-
ing near Alexandria. They resembled the Essenes in their
principles, and borrowed from Orphic, Pythagorean, and Kab-
balistic philosophy. Traces of their influence survive in several
of the higher degrees. (See Essenes.)

THERIOG.—The Jews divided the Mosaical law into 613 pre-
cepts, and gave them the general name of Theriog, because the
Hebrew letters of »7n numerically express 613.

THEURGIA.—We have already seen, in the article Goetia, to what a
very low ebb the human mind can be .brought by a non-
interpretative spirit of the sublime Symbols with which man, as
a moral and intellectual being, is environed. In the considera-
tion of theurgia we have to proceed, as it were, to the opposite
pole. There have existed, and there still exist, men who seri-
ously and firmly believe that a communication is possible with
the ultra-mundane intelligences and angels of God, but not that
it is possible to obtain direct audience of the Throne of Grace
itself, that great privilege being reserved for a boundless exist-
ence on the other side of the wall of matter—(see Kabbalah).
But as God, or T.G.A.0.T.U., has been pleased to give us
“broken lights” of His majesty and glory, so the theurgists
hold, He has allowed, either by His own direct appointment, or
by faith and diligence, many of the human race to confer for a
longer or shorter period with the celestial beings around His
throne. Those thus appointed enter into immediate relations with
the angels without difficulty, without degrading and disgusting
rites, such as are demanded by the infernal powers, and solely by
true faith engendered by love, and in all cases unleavened with
the sordid ideas attached to wealth and power. In proof of this,
it may usually be seen that those whom the world deride
as mystics, frequently have appeared without apparent worldly
learning, as in the case of Behmen; or, if endowed with worldly
knowledge, as in the case of Swedenborg, they have generally led
a life, not outwardly solitary, but apparently removed from the
necessity of much personal society. Such men, so endowed, are
of the very highest class of theurgists; for, merely asking by
faith, they freely receive. But there is a second rank, partly
engaged in worldly matters, whose requirements and tastes are
different, and to whom perhaps also special guidance is more
necessary. Members of this class prepare themselves by severe
study, and even by personal asceticism, for this communion with
those who are ever about us, and yet unseen. Their knowledge

732

THI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [THI

is necessary to guard them in the path they are about to tread;
their purity can only attain for them the goal they desire; and
to arrive at this goal they must be actuated by no unworthy
motives. Romancists and novelists have frequently depicted
this life of self-abneyation ; but those who would wish, in sim-
plicity and truth, to partake of a share in the divine glories of
theurgia, must, to a great degree, follow, as it were, in the foot-
steps of a Zanoni, and not be led aside by the vacillatory daring
of a Glyndon. Those who would pursue the subject are recom-
mended to the volumes of Eliphaz Levi. (See Levi, Eliphaz.)

THIBAULT.—Baillet (Vie des Saints, ler Juillet, Ime siecle, vers Can
1017, Paris, 1704) informs us that St Thibault or Theobaldus
was descended from the first Counts of Brie and Champagne.
Surrounded with luxury and riches, his fondness for solitude
displayed itself, notwithstanding, at an early age. Thibault
refused to marry, or to command the companies which one of
his uncles had levied, in 1037, against the Emperor Conrad
the Salic. If St Theobald was descended from the first
Counts of Brie and Champagne, he could scarcely be the
nephew of Eudes II., fifth Count of Champagne, who claimed the
crown of Burgundy, in opposition to Conrad the Salic, and was
killed in battle, 1037, as Eudes himself only succeeded to the
title of Count of Champagne and Brie, on the death of Count
Stephen without heirs. He might, however, be the nephew of
Eudes, if we suppose him the natural son of Theobald, or
Thibault, Count of Blois, who was never married, the brother
and predecessor of Eudes, in the county of Blois. This line
of Blois, Count of Champagne, descended from Thibault le
Tricheur, whose daughter Luitgard married Herbert of Ver-
mandois, of the House of Charlemagne, and first Count of
Champagne. This Thibault was the son of Gerlo, the near rela-
tion of Rollo, first Duke of Normandy, and the intermarriage of
his posterity with that of Rollo connects them almost equally
with the royal race of England (see Art de Verifier les
Dates). Thibault quitted his father’s house with a noble-
man (Gautier), a friend of his, about 1053. They left their
followers and equipage at Rheims, and proceeded on foot into
Germany, and in the forest of Piting, in Suabia, they began to
live as poor hermits. Convinced that they could live only by
labour, they occasionally went to the neighbouring villages and
hamlets, where they worked as journeymen, carrying stones and
mortar under the direction of the masons, or laboured in the
fields under the reapers; assisted in loading and unloading car-
riages; cleaned stables with the farmers’ servants; and, above all,
prepared charcoal for the forges, &c., &c. Notwithstanding their

733

THI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [THO

humility, the respect which their virtue gained them in the vil-
lages procured for them honour which they were resolved to
avoid by pilgrimage. They returned to France, after having
walked barefoot to St Jacques de Compostella, in Gallicia. Thi-
bault met his father at Treves, in 1054; but that he might not be
affected, and so turned from his devotion, he renewed his pious
travel with the blessed Gautier. After having adored the tombs
of the Apostles at Rome, they went to Venice to embark for the
Holy Land ; but the war between the Christians and the Saracens
prevented them from reaching it. In 1056, they set about
travelling through various parts of Italy, and after wandering up
and down they came to a woody place called Salanigo, near
Vicenza, where they established themselves in an old chapel,
dedicated to the martyrs, Saint Thermagoras and Saint Fortun-
atus. Gautier died in 1059. Thibault continued in the same
place, and lived in the greatest austerity. The Bishop of Vienna,
called Sindeker, raised him to sacred orders, and made him
a priest. He has been adopted by the Carbonari as their
patron. He obtained from God, even in his lifetime, the gift of
miracles; but he was tormented by temptations which ceased
only two years before his death, at the end of a painful and
offensive disease. The fame of his sanctity reached his parents,
who went to see him, and his mother established herself in a
little cell not far from his own. He expired the last day of
June, 1066. Three days before his death there was a consider-
able earthquake. Thibault’s dwelling received five shocks, which
were followed by a violent agony, in which he suffered ex-
tremely. There are various opinions as to the place where his
remains were deposited. The most authentic account is, that
they were carried back from Vicenza to France some years after
his death. His relics were distributed in France, Switzerland,
and Upper Germany, as far as Vienna in Austria, and in Venice
itself, where a parish was founded in his name in 1171, which
was called by corruption Saint Baldo. It is said that Thibault
was canonised by Pope Alexander III. His principal festival is
celebrated in some places on the 30th June—the day of his
death; in others, on the 1st July, &c. He is sometimes con-
founded with Saint Thibault de Vengadice, Saint Thibault
d’Alba, and Saint Thibault de Marley de Vaux des Cornay.

‘THIRTEEN, THE—A society exercising an occult influence in Paris
during the first empire, and on which Balzac founded a romance.
It is not improbable that Lord Lytton made use of the hint in
the secret society he names in his powerful fiction, “The
Parisians.”

THOKATH (Hebrew, npin, strength) —Used in the 12° A.and A. R.

734

THO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [THR

THomists.—The followers of St Thomas Aquinas, the angelic
doctor of the thirteenth century. They still survived in the
seventeenth century.

THOMITES OR THOMAANS.—The European name of the ancient
Christian Church of Malabar, reputed to have been founded by
St Thomas.

Tuory, CLAUDE ANTOINE—Born at Paris, 26th May, 1759; by pro-
fession a lawyer, and afterwards Registrar of the Criminal Court
of the Chatelét. He was a botanist, and hence his tastes were
directed to subdivision ; his published works are chiefly in the
botanical department, on the genus Rosa. Thory was a member
of the Lodge “Saint Alexandre d’ Ecosse,” and of the “ Contrat
Social,” whence was formed the Mother Lodge of the Philosophic
Scottish Rite, in the foundation of which Thory played the prin-
cipal part. As the permanent officer, he made a remarkable
collection of valuable books, manuscripts, seals, jewels, and
statuary, connected with Freemasonry. On the decease of the
Mother Lodge, after 1826, his collection passed to the Lodge
Mont Thabor. In 1813, he published the “ Annales Originis
Magni Galliarum Orientis; ou Histoire de la Fondation du
Grand Orient de France ;” and in 1815, his “ Acta Latomorum,
ou Chronologie de Histoire de la Franche-Maconnerie Francaise
et Etrangere.” He died in October, 1827, and must ever be
regarded with respect by all truly Masonic bibliographers.

THoux pe SaLVERTE—Founder of the Academy of Ancients at
Warsaw, in 1763. A colonel in the Polish service, and a deputy
to the Convention of Paris, in 1785. He was also a member of
the Strict Observance, by the designation Lques d carcere.

THREAD OF LirE.—The following forms a part of an obsolete cate-
chism of the last century :—“ Q. Have you the key of the Lodge ?
A. Yes, I have. @. What is its virtue? A. To open and shut,
and shut and open. @. Where do you keep it? A. In an ivory
box, between my tongue and my teeth, or within my: heart,
where all my secrets are kept. @. Have you the chain to the
key? A. Yes, have. @. How long is it? 4. As long as from
my tongue to my heart.” Later lectures have referred to this
catechism, but it is now abandoned. The signification of a con-
nection between the tongue and the heart is sufficiently obvious.

THREE.—A number which has commanded reverence from unima-
gined antiquity. The Chinese assigned to this number myste-
rious properties, and founded upon it their famous Triad Society.
If we examine ancient mythology, we still find a triplicity attri-
buted to the deities of antiquity among the nations of Rome and
Greece, as well as in Egypt and India. Virgil expressly says,
that “numero Deus impari gaudet.” The Druids and the dis-

735

THR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TIE

ciples of Mithra also delighted in and honoured the number
three. But it is no less honoured in Freemasonry, which pos-
sesses its three symbolical degrees, in which birth, manhood,
and death, life, maturity, and transmigration, are depicted in
a forcible manner. Every efficient practical and speculative
Mason is acquainted with the importance of this number. (See
also Triangle.)

THREE Fires, GUARDIANS OF THE—67° Rite Memphis.

THREE GLOBES, RITE OF THE GRAND LODGE OF THE—This Lodge,
now a Grand Lodge of Prussia, was formed 13th Sept., 1740, at
Berlin. It at first worked in the Three Craft degrees, but it has
now a rite of its own, founded on various systems, and consisting
of seven degrees, beside the three symbolic degrees.

THREE GRAND OFFERINGS. (See Ground Floor of the Lodge.)

THREE Kinas, DEGREE OF THE.—An American side degree.

THREE Pomnts.—Three points arranged thus .*. are usually placed
after letters in Masonic documents, and especially on the con-
tinent and in the high degrees. There is nothing especially
symbolic about the practice, unless it may be held to be signifi-
cative of the equilateral triangle.

THREE SENSES. (See Tasting and Smelling.)

THREEFOLD Corp.—A triple cord in many rites was formed of
three colours—red, white, and blue; and, in some instances, of red,
white, and black, conveying appropriate teachings to the reci-
pient. (See Zennaar.)

THRESHING FLoor,—Circular places of hard ground were used by
the Hebrews, as by the modern Hungarians, for threshing or
treading out their corn. David purchased one of these from
Ornan the Jebusite, as it was situated on the sacred Mount
Moriah, for six hundred shekels of gold, and it was destined for
the site of the first Temple—(see Moriah, Mount). It has been
fancifully used to signify the area of a Masons’ Lodge.

THRONE.—The seat of the Grand Master of the English Rite; in
America, it is called the Oriental Chair of Solomon. In a Lodge,
it is styled the Seat of King Solomon.

THUBAL-CAIN (Hebrew, fp-b21A, worldly possessions).—A word used
in the Master Mason’s degree. Also in the first E. A. P. degree
of the Modern French Rite.

TuuGs, OR PHANSEGURS.—A Hindu association of a murderous
character. Their divinity was Kali, and human sacrifices were
offered to the goddess. They were divided into Stranglers and
Khumsiehs or Aspirants.

THumMiM. (See Urim and Thummim.)

Tre, Mystic.—The first oath of obligation is called the tie. A
sacred ged inviolable bond uniting men of the most discordant

73

TIE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (ToL.

opinions into a band of brothers, giving but one language to
men of all nations, and one altar to men of all religions.

Trerck, Dr tA.—The friend of Anderson, and the translator of the
“Constitutions” into French, in 1742; in itself one of the most
valuable works ever published.

TiLe.—A Lodge is said to be tiled, when persons unauthorized are

recluded from entering its precincts.

TILE-CREASING.—In architecture, two rows of plain tiles placed
horizontally under the coping of a wall, projecting about an inch
and a half on each side to throw off rain water—eaves, in fact.
(See Lavesdropper.)

TILER, OR TYLER.—An officer expressly appointed to stand at the
door of the Lodge, and with a drawn sword to keep off intruders
or eavesdroppers. The Tiler of the present time is a most
valuable officer, and it is necessary that he should be a Master
Mason, and able, on occasion, to examine persons presenting
themselves, and use prompt action of ejectment. It is not ne-
cessary, in populous towns, that he should be a’ member of the
Lodge he tiles, and he has no vote in the election of members.
The word is written indifferently, Tiler or Tyler; but Tiler is
right. He was also, as the first officer a visitor encountered,
entitled to administer to him an oath of attestation as to the
actual position of the applicant for admission.

TiLuK.—The sacred forehead mark of the Brahmans, corresponding
to the sacred Tau or signet of the Jews and Christians.

TIMBRE—A stamp. Used in the French Lodges in addition to the
Lodge seal.

TmsHATHA.—The title of the Persian governors of Ccelo-Syria and
the modern Palestine. It has been adopted in the Royal Order
of Scotland and in the French Rite; but the severity of archzo-
logical investigation rejects it from any special merit as a
Masonic term.

TIsRI, “\wn.—First month of the Hebrew civil year, corresponding
to September and October.

TITAN OF THE CaUCASUS.—53° Rite of Memphis.

Trro, Prince Haropim.—The official title of the president in the
7° A. and A. R. of Provost and Judge.

ToBACcOLOGIcAL SocleTy.—A semi-masonic society of the last cen-
tury, with four degrees. The symbolism of the tobacco plant
formed the basis of mora] instruction. The catechisms of this
curious society are still extant.

ToLERANcE Lopcr.—It is a singular thing that, of all people, the
Jews should have been shut out from Masonry by some Con-
tinental Lodges, but so it is. The very people who built the
Temple were excluded. Opinion soon grew strong on the matter,

34 737

TOP | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [Tow

and Bros. Von Hirschfeld and Catter organized Lodges for the
initiation of Jews. But symbolic Lodges, with the Royal Arch
degree attached, could not really prohibit Jews from such benefits
as Masonry bestows; or where would be the validity of the
Royal Arch degree, grounded upon Jewish traditions, and sup-
ported by the authority of the Old Testament ?

Topaz (Hebrew, m1m5).—The second stone in. the first row of the.
high priest's breastplate, referred to Simeon. It is of bright
greenish-yellow, and the softest of all precious stones.

TORCHBEARER.—1. An officer in the Appendant Order of the Holy
Sepulchre. 2. An officer in the Rosicrucian Society.

TORGAU, CONSTITUTIONS OF.—These consist of one hundred and
twelve articles drawn up by the stonemasons for their go-
vernment, in 1462. They were published in 1829, by C. L.
Stieglitz. They, and the Strasburg Constitutions of 1459, are
the only two authentic series of Operative Constitutions in
existence.

TorrvuBIA, JOSEPH.—Franciscan monk and censor of the Spanish
Inquisition in Spain, about 1751. Under an assumed name, and
with the guilty complicity of his ecclesiastical superiors, together
with absolution from his oaths of secrecy, he obtained admission
into the then existing Spanish Masonry, and ruthlessly denounced
the brethren to the extent of many hundreds throughout that
country, and obtained from King Ferdinand VI. an order pro-
hibiting Masonry.

Tournon, M.—A French Freemason who deserves special mention,
from his having been one of the Spanish traitors. He was
arrested in 1757, and imprisoned ; but, on a solemn renunciation
of all Masonic Fraternity, he was liberated and banished to
France.

Tow, CaBLE. (See Cable Tow.)

Tower, DEGREE oF THE—A designation of the 2° of the Royal
Order of Scotland.

ToweER OF BABEL. (See Babel.)

Town, SALEM.—Born at Belchertown, Mass., U.S., 5th March, 1779;
died at Greencastle, Indiana, 24th February, 1864. He was a
clergyman and Doctor of Laws, and Grand Chaplain of the
Grand Lodge and Grand Chapter of New York, also Grand
Prelate of the Commandery. He published a little book on
Masonry, entitled, “A System of Speculative Masonry.”

TOWNSHEND, SIMEON.—To this person has been attributed the
authorship of a book entitled, “Observations and Inquiries
relating to the Brotherhood of the Free Masons,” said to have
been published in 1712, at London; but it does not appear to
have oo been actually seen by the best authorities.

73

TRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TRA

TraBs (Latin, trades, a beam).—A wall plate or horizontal piece of
timber lying on a wall for the reception of the ends of the timbers
of a floor or roof.

Tracinc Boarp.—A framework upon which are inscribed or painted
the emblems of each of the three degrees separately. It was
originally called a floorcloth, because it was inscribed on the floor
of the Lodge in chalk or charcoal, and wiped out when the Lodge
was over. Now it is customary to substitute an engraved or
painted diagram. In symbolical Masonry, there are now three of
these—one for each Degree ; although formerly there was a sub-
sidiary Tracing Board for the Fellow Craft’s Degree. (See Dr
Oliver’s “ Book of the Lodge.”)

TRADITION.— Although Masonry in its present form has a history,
its origines are entirely traditional; and it is not easy to see how,
unless some powerful body had preserved the traditions of
Masonry, it could have lasted so long in an unwritten form; for
it is a matter worthy of remark, that the confessedly more modern
degrees have history to back them up, while original Masonry
is devoid of any such support, not that by its inherent merits it
should need any. For an institution founded upon the invariable
_ principles of morality, rightly known and administered, can never
travel into the region of improbability or passion. Hence, not
only in a historical sense is tradition important to the Freemasons,
as establishing landmarks in common with the rest of mankind,
but as a modus satisfaciendi for those who deny or disregard the
Fraternity. For it is certainly just in all bodies, where there is
any question, to be clear with the opposing party; it avoids many
fruitless struggles, and aids in what is professed by all parties and
modes of thought, the establishment of harmony in the universe.
With the historical and symbolical traditions of Masonry, it is
not possible to deal in this way, because, like many of the tradi-
tions of the Roman Church, they are not susceptible of proof,
viz., they depend so much upon dogmatic teaching, that they
must be either received or rejected. With reference to the sym-
bolical traditions of Masonry, it is desirable to be cautious, for
these cannot be publicly explained. The legal status of Masonry
is unquestionable; and in blood, money, and suffering, it has
long since paid enough. After all is said, there must, in all
eg of men, remain some part to be accepted upon good

aith.

TRAMPING Masons.—A term applied to unworthy brethren, who go
from place to place, exciting charity wherever they can. This
class is unfortunately numerous enough, and often prevents
really distressed brethren from obtaining that temporary relief
to which the principles of the Order entitle them.

739

TRA | The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [TRA

TRANSTRA.—In Roman architecture, the horizontal timbers in the
roofs of buildings.

TRAPPISTS, ORDER OF RELIGIOUS.—Founded by Count la Perche in
1140, and still in existence.

TRAVEL—A Mason is always said to be travelling from west to
east in search of light.

TRAVELLING FREEMASONS.—Before operative masonry had received
its speculative development as at present understood, guilds or
sodalities of stonemasons were in the custom of traversing the
whole of Europe for the purpose of erecting buildings of an
ecclesiastical or castellated description, and even they, in point of
time, had been preceded by similar bodies, whose skill was superior
to that of the uninstructed artificers of the respective eras in which
they lived. It is not too much to say, that the night of time has
closed with complete obscurity over the earliest fraternities of
this kind. There can be little doubt that what took place in
Hellas, Italy, Asia Minor, and, during the Middle Ages, in Europe,
had long before been familiar to India, Egypt, Mexico, Central
America, and Peru; and it is not a little startling to find the
walls of great structures in the New World, not only constructed
upon similar principles to the Pelasgic structures of early Greece,
but executed in precisely the same manner. We are astonished at
the size and weight of the blocks used in the Pyramids of Egypt,
but still more amazed at the strength and magnitude of the works
executed, in Pre-Incarial times, in ancient Peru. Enormous blocks
fitted accurately together, without mortar or cement, are here to
be found, weighing many tons, and vertically superimposed upon
each other, indicating thus machinery and appliances unknown
at the present day. And when we consider the uniformity of
design, and the enormous superficial area covered by such remains,
—as, for instance, the temple and city of Pachachamac, in Peru,—
extending over many hundred miles, we cannot resist the conclu-
sion, that these magnificent relics of the ancient world must have
been constructed by men drawn together by a common bond, and
probably instructed from the same common school of design. So,
in comparatively recent times, we find everywhere the marks of
high culture, whether in India or in Europe. The modern
guilds of travelling Freemasons, however, would seem to have
issued rather from Italy than any other country, for nowhere do
we lose sight of the prevailing ideas of Italian architecture, until
the rise of the Gothic school fashioned the taste of Europe anew.
These guilds of wandering builders were allowed many privileges:
—they were declared independent of the laws of the country
where they might be residing, and subject only to their internal
regulations; they were permitted to fix their own prices; they

740

TRA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TRE

were exempted from all taxation; and they had a monopoly of
work wherever they presented themselves. It is perhaps curious
to add, that the papal briefs which protected them, alleged that
such immunities were given them, “after the example of Hiram,
King of Tyre, when he sent artizans to King Solomon, for the
purpose of building the Temple of Jerusalem.” . Their internal
government was very simple. On undertaking any enterprise,
they first built a number of huts near the site of the intended
structure, and over every ten men was placed a warden, whose
business was to pay them their wages, and see that no undue
waste of materials or loss of implements took place. These
wardens, in turn, were responsible to a surveyor or master, called
in their documents “ magister,” and to whom reference was made
as a supreme arbiter of the work to be executed. They had secret
words and signs, and general means of recognition, for the pur-
pose of protecting themselves from interlopers. In the first
instance, they were purely ecclesiastical in their character,
acknowledging the Pope as their supreme master, patron, and
protector, and the early Popes evidently looked upon them with
favourable eyes. Many of their “magistri” were bishops and
abbots, and for centuries their principal occupation was the
construction of churches, convents, and ecclesiastical buildings.
Their chief contribution to architectural science and art was the
introduction and elaboration of the beautiful Gothic school, in
which they have never been surpassed.

TRAVELLING WARRANTS.—It is sometimes the designation of the
Warrants of Military Lodges which are transferred from one
a a to another, in obedience to the exigencies of

uty.

TRAVENOL, Louis.—A French Mason of some ability and zeal, who
assumed the nom de plume of Leonard Gabanon, and published
several small works, the chief of which was “Catechisime des
Francs-Magons, precédé d'un Abregé de Histoire d’ Adoniram,”
dc. Dedié au Beau Sexe. Paris, 1743.

TREASURE, INCOMPARABLE.—A phrase much in use among alchy-
mists and Hermetic philosophers. The definition of Pernetty
(Dictionnaire Mytho-Hermétique) is as follows :—“ The incompar-
able treasure is the powder of projection, the source of all that
is good, since it procures unbounded riches, and a long life
without infirmities to enjoy them.” This is to be taken ina
symbolical sense. It was in use in the Council of the Em-
perors of the East and West, especially in the degree of Sub-
lime Princes of the Royal Secret.

TREASURER.—An officer of considerable importance in every Lodge.
He has usually nothing to do with the collection of the Lodge

741

TRE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TRI

funds, but receives the money from the Secretary, and acts as a
trustee for the Lodge in general. His jewel is a key.

TREASURER, GRAND. (See Grand Treasurer.)

TREASURER, GRAND AND SUBLIME, DEPOSITOR OF THE GREAT SOLO-
MON, FAITHFUL GUARDIAN OF JEHOVAH.—A degree in the Col-
lection of Peuvret. C.S. D.

TREASURER, HERMETIC.—A degree in Peuvret’s Collection. C.S. D.

TREASURER, ILLUSTRIOUS.—A degree in Peuvret’s Collection. C.S. D.

TREASURER OF THE Masonic Mysteries,—A degree in Peuvret’s
Collection. C.8S. D.

TREASURER OF THE NUMBER SEVEN.—A degree in Peuvret’s Collec-
tion. C.S. D. ‘

TREASURER OF PARACELSUS.—A degree in Peuvret’s Collection.
C. 8. D.

TREASURER OF SOLOMON.—A degree in Peuvret’s Collection. C.S. D.

TREASURER SUBLIME, DEPOSITOR OF THE KEY OF THE GRAND WORK.
—A degree in Peuvret’s Collection. C. 8. D.

Trepic.—The highest king in the Scandinavian Mysteries.

TREE (PALM), MASONIC ORDER OF KNIGHTS OF THE—An American
Rite of one degree. The officers are—1. Chief. 2, 3, and 4
First, Second, and Third Sheikhs. 5. Knight Errant. 6. Janitor.

TRIAD SocieTY OF CuIna—The San-ho hwuy is rather a political
than a Masonic society, although its professed design is benevo-
lence. The government is vested in three chiefs, called Ko or
Elder Brothers, respectively named Yihko, First Brother; Urhko,
Second Brother; and Sanko, Third Brother. They have initiatory
ceremonies, and the candidate enters into an obligation under an
arch of swords. They have also signs and passwords.

TriaDs.—The following mythological triads, or mysterious co-ex-
istences, of three deities, will be found useful in unravelling
ancient symbolisms :—1. Egypt—Osiris, Isis, and Horus. 2.
Orphic Mysteries—Phanes, Uranus, and Kronos. 3. Zoroastrian-
ism—Ormuzd, Mithras, and Ahriman. 4. Hindu—Brahma,
Vishnu, and Siva. 5. Cabiric Mysteries—Axieros, Axiokersos,
and Axiokersa. 6. Phcenicia—Ashtaroth, Milcom, and Chemosh.
7. Tyre—Belus, Venus, and Tammuz. 8. Greece—Zeus, Po-
seidon, and Hades. 9. Rome—Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto.
10. Eleusis—Jacchus, Persephone, and Demeter. 11. Platonic
Mysteries—Tagathon, Nous, and Psyche. 12. Celtic—Hu,
Ceridwen, and Creirwy. 13. Teutonic—Fenris, Midgard, and
Hela. 14, Gothic—Woden, Frigga,and Thor. 15. Scandinavia
—Odin, Vile, and Ve. 16. Mexico—vVitzliputzli, Tlaloc, and
Tezeatlipoca.

TRIALS, Masonic.—The following is the method of procedure in the
very rare instances of Masonic trials :—1. Accusation in writing

742

TRI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TRI

signed by the accuser, delivered to the Secretary, and read at the
next regular Lodge meeting—the accused being furnished with
an attested copy of the charge, together with a specification of
the time and place appointed for the trial. Ifthe accused resides
at a distance, the charge should be transmitted to him through
the post, and a reasonable time allowed for reply. 2. The trial
must be commenced at a regular communication, and proceeded
with as quickly as possible, in order that delay may not pre-
vent right being done. 3. The Lodge should be opened in the
highest degree to which the accused has attained, and the accused
may employ counsel of the rank of a Master Mason ; but, if of
the same Lodge, the counsel cannot vote in the matter. 4. The
decision should be delivered in a Lodge open in the third degree,
from which the accuser and accused should retire. 5. No visitors
are allowed to be present at a Masonic trial. 6. The testimony
of Master Masons is taken on their honour. 7. The testimony
of non-masons, or of any lower degree, is taken by a committee,
and reported to the Lodge. 8. When the accuser and accused
have retired, the W. M. may put the question of “guilty” or “not
guilty” to the Lodge; and not Jess than two-thirds of the votes
should condemn, a majority not being regarded as sufficient to
deprive a Mason of his good character. 9. Should the verdict
be “guilty,” the W. M. shall proceed to a consideration of the
punishment; to inflict expulsion or suspension,a vote of two-thirds
is required; but for a reprimand, a majority is regarded as suffi-
cient. The voting is taken viva voce, or by show of hands.
Grand Lodge trials are conducted on a similar principle; but on
avcount of the large number of members of a Grand Lodge, it is
usual to entrust the investigation to a committee, while Grand
Lodge pronounces the sentence.

TRIANGLE.—An important symbol in Masonry. 1. The equilateral
triangle was adopted by all ancient nations as a symbol of Deity,
and was regarded as the most perfect of figures. It constantly
recurred in Craft Masonry as well as in the Royal Arch. 2. The
right-angled triangle was also regarded as an important figure.
Among the Egyptians the base represented Osiris, or the male
principle ; the perpendicular, Isis, or the female principle; and
the hypothenuse, Horus, their son, the product.

TRIANGLE, DouBLE. (See Seal of Solomon and Shield of David.)

TRIANGLE OF PyrHacoras. (See Pentalpha.)

TRIBE OF JUDAH, LION OF THE.—A symbolical reference to Christ,
the Soter or Saviour, borrowed from the Apocalypse (v. 5), “ Be-
hold, the Lion which is of the tribe of Judah, the root of David,
hath prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals
thereof.”

743

TRI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TRI

TRIBUNAL.—1. A Court in the A. and A. Rite to try offences com-
mitted by members of degrees higher than the 18°, being a Court
of the 31°, consisting of not more or less‘than nine members—
an appeal lying from such court to the Grand Consistory or
Supreme Council. 2. 17° Rite of Mizraim.

TRICLINIUM.—The ancient Roman dining-room, furnished on three
sides with couches, the fourth side being left for the necessary
attendance of servants.

TRIGLYPH.—The vertical tables in the Doric frieze, chambered on
the vertical edges, doubly channelled in the middle.

TRILITERAL NAME.—The sacred name of God (AUM), among the
Hindus.

TRILITHON.—Three stones placed together, as in Stonehenge, like
two door-posts and a lintel.

TRINIDAD.—Masonry was introduced into this island from Pennsyl-
vania in 1797. There were, however, Masons in the island be-
fore this time, and a warrant had been granted by the Grand
Orient of France, in 1790, but suspended by the French Revolu-
tion, and never acted upon. In 1804, a Capitular Warrant was
granted by Pennsylvania for a Royal Arch Chapter, which met
till 1813, when a new warrant was issued by the Grand Chapter
of Scotland. Templar Masonry was introduced under a Deuchar
Warrant from the Grand Conclave of Scotland. The Council of
Royal and Select Masters originated in 1819. At present, Trini-
dad works under the Grand Lodge of Scotland, together with
some Lodges under the English United Grand Lodge.

TRINITARIANS, ORDER OF.—Founded in 1198, in the time of Innocent
IIL, for the ransoming of Christians from the Moors. It was
androgynous.

TRINITY, RELIGIOUS FRATERNITY OF THE HoLy.—lInstituted at Rome
by St Philip Neri, in 1548.

TRINOSOPHS.—This Lodge was established at Paris by Bro. J. M.
Ragon, 15th October, 1815, and duly recognised by the Grand
Orient, 11th January, 1817. The derivation of the name is Hel-
lenic, signifying Students of Three Sciences, in allusion to the
three symbolical degrees. In this Lodge, Ragon delivered his
celebrated lectures. It had connected with it a Chapter and
Council of High Degrees ; but the Lodge of Trinosophs strictly
confined itself to the Blue degrees.

TRIPLE ALLIANCE.-—A phrase used in the High Degrees, referring
to the covenant of God with His people, that of King Solomon
with Hiram of Tyre, and the general covenant binding the fra-
ternity of Masons together.

TRIPLE Tau. (See Jaw.)

TRIUMPHANT AND SOVEREIGN ORDER OF THE Basocne.—Chartered

744

TRI] The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [TRU

by Philip the Fair, in 1302, and governed by a king. By the
charter, the members belonging to the inferior branches of the
legal profession were constituted a court of ultimate appeal, both
in criminal and civil matters, in all things concerning the
Fraternity. The officers comprised a chancellor, vice-chancellor,
a certain number of masters of requests, bailiffs, sheriffs, and
tipstaves ; and they met every Wednesday and Saturday to hear
and determine cases, The general password was “Safety.” This
order extended rapidly in the provinces, but always under the
supreme authority of the King Basoche at Paris; and so powerful
was this association, that the office of Procureur in the Parlia-
ment could only be obtained by a previous membership of ten
years in the Basoche. They even coined money tokens of their
own, and a general assembly was annually held.

Trivium. (See Quadrivium.)

TROWEL.—In speculative Masonry, the special working tool of the
Master’s degree, and it is symbolically said to spread the cement
binding the whole of the building into a common mass, blended
together by affection and kindness, and thus uniting the whole
Masonic body into a companionship of brotherly love. It is also
the jewel of the degree of Select Master, connected with the tra-
ditional history of that degree.

TROWEL, SOCIETY OF THE— An artistic society, established at Flor-
ence about 1512, which had an annual dinner. It owed its title
to the circumstance, that on one occasion these artists were dining
together, and finding a heap of mortar and a trowel in the garden,
they merrily bespattered each other with the mortar, and used
the trowel to scrape it off. It had no symbolical meaning at all,
as has been erroneously supposed.

TROWEL AND Sworp.—Josephus (Antzg., book xi. chap. vi. § 8)
says, that Nehemiah gave orders to the builders of the broken down
walls of Jerusalem, to work with swords at their sides and in
armour, to prevent any surprise on the part of the Samaritans.
Although the events which took place under Nehemiah were
long subsequent to the times of Zerubbabel, yet in the High
Degrees this Order has been antedated to the time of the com-
pletion of the second Temple. We find it alluded to in the
fifteenth degree of the Scottish Rite, or Knight of the East.

TRUE BRiToNs.—The Honourable Corporation held their annual
feast at the Three Kings in the Minories, Oct. 29, 1743, being
Lord Mayor’s Day (old style).

True KinDRED.—A female American side degree.

True Masons. (See Académie des Vraies Magons.)

TRUMPET, ORDER OF THE SacrED.—A secret religious society
celebrating the mysteries of Botuto, existing among the Indians

745

TRU] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ TSI

on the banks of the Rio Negro and the Orinoco in South
America.

TrurH.—The symbolical quest of the Freemason is Truth, which
is typified by the lost Word; and Masonry is thus progressive,
as the continual advance of knowledge causes absolute Truth ever
to appearin the future. This Truth cannot be attained in the
present life, and hence the absolute necessity for a belief in
immortality.

TrYONISTS.—A designation of the Pythagoreans, who abstained
from animal food, and killed no animals.

TSAPHEIL (Hebrew, -x'b¥, Mirans Deus, the angel of the moon).—
In the Kabbalistical system, Michael governs Saturn; Gabriel,
Jupiter; Uriel, Mars; Zarriel, the Sun; Hamaliel, Venus; and
Raphael, Mercury.

TscHoupy, Louis THEODORE, BARON.—Born at Metz, in 1720, of a
Swiss family, originally from the canton Glaris, but established
in France since the beginning of the sixteenth century. He was
a Counsellor of State and a Member of the Parliament of Metz.
In 1752, he went to Italy, adopting the name of the Chevalier de
Lussy, and there gave great offence by the publication of a book
at the Hague, called “ Etrenne aw Pape, ou les Francs Magons
Venges,” being a critical commentary on the Bull of Benedict
XIV. excommunicating the Freemasons. But by way of salve,
he also published in the same year, 1752, “Le Vatican Vengé,”
which salve appears to have been of a most irritating nature,
and caused him to fly. He next went to Russia, where it would
seem he became one of the comedians of the Empress Elizabeth ;
but he was speedily rescued from this condition by receiving the
appointment of private secretary to Count Ivan Schouvalow, also
being made secretary of the Academy of Moscow, and governor
of the pages at the Court. Here, however, evil fortune still pur-
sued him, and he was compelled to return to France, where, on
his arrival, he was committed to the Bastile. His mother inter-
ceded with the Empress Elizabeth and the Grand Duke Peter,
and he was speedily restored to liberty ; upon which he retired to
Metz, and spent the rest of his life in Masonic reforms and the
invention of new systems. In 1766, he published “ L’Etoile Flam-
boyante,” and became connected with the Council of the Knights
of the East. He composed the degree of Ecossais de Saint
André, afterwards adopted as the twenty-ninth degree of the
Scottish Rite. He died at Paris, 28th May, 1769.

TsEDAKAH (Hebrew, i:p7¥, justice).—The first step of the mystical
ladder.

Tsipon1 (Hebrew, ‘'¥, venator)—A word used in the 22°
A. and A. R.

746

TSO | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TUR

Tsoim (Hebrew, o'ys).—A term sometimes applied to visitors.

TUAPHOLL.—A term used by the Druids to indicate an unhallowed
circumambulation of the sacred cairn or altar, being opposed to
the course of the sun, from west to east by the north, in direct
opposition to the official circumambulation.

TUB BAANI AMAL ABAL (Hebrew, 928 doy ‘2 0, It is truly right to
reward labour).—Used in the 13° A. and A. R. This is often
erroneously given as “Tub banai amalabec.”

Tupat-Cain.—The first worker in metals. (See Thubal Cain.)

TucEND BunD.—The Tugend Bund, or Order of Virtue, was insti-
tuted in Germany. It was androgynous, and had a semi-
political character, and a branch was formed at Charlottenburg
in 1813.

TumprsiimThe name of an Egyptian heretical sect, signifying
“do not cook ;” also called Pertotkai, “Let violence kill.” They
existed under the twenty-sixth dynasty. It is only known of
them that they ate raw meat, and were officially excom-
municated by the Theban priests.

TuRBAN.—In Royal Arch Chapters, a purple turban is assigned to
the Scribe representing Haggai.

TURCOPOLIER—An officer in the Knights Hospitallers of Saint John
or Knights of Malta, derived from the Turcopoles, a body of
Light Horse named in the history of the Christian wars in
Palestine. This office was held by the Conventual Bailiff, or
head of the langue of England, and had the command of the
cavalry of the Order.

TuRIN FUNEREAL Papyrus.—This important book has been published
in facsimile by Dr Lepsius, and translated by Dr Birch. It is
known as the Book of the Dead, and contains the entire ancient
Egyptian philosophy respecting death and resurrection. It was
customary to bury a portion at least of this document with every
mummy. At present, the scholars of Europe are engaged in pre-
paring an elaborate edition of this work, with all the various
readings, there being very many manuscript copies scattered all
over Europe, and they still keep turning up in the course of the
excavations in Egypt.

TuRKEY.—This country is very badly represented in Freemasonry.
There is only a Provincial Grand Lodge, and the influence is
mainly exerted by foreign traders, who act under warrants from
England. A few intelligent Turks of position have joined the
Order from curiosity, but there has never been any progress
made. The population is speechless, and even the higher
Sunnis have neither vivacity nor energy. There is a native
religious order in Turkey, founded in 1328 by the Hadji Begtasch,
having secret signs and passwords, and there is also the Society

747

TUR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [TWE

of the Melewi. The former were the clerical branch of the oath-
bound fraternity, called Janizaries.

Tur.urins.—A heretical sect of the fourteenth century, called the
Fraternity of the Poor. They maintained that when man had
arrived at a certain point of perfection he was irresponsible, and
had obtained exemption from the divine law.

‘Tuscan ORDER.—The simplest of the five orders of architecture,
and referred to in the Craft lectures.

Tuscany.—In 1737, John Gaston, the last of the Medici, published
an edict against Freemasonry, whereupon the Brethren changed
their name to the Society of the Cucchiara, or of the Trowel—a
name formerly in existence; but Gaston’s death removed the
force of the edict, and Francis Stephen of Lorraine, the successor
of Gaston, became protector of the Masons.

TWELVE—A number of considerable mystical importance, com-
posed of 7 + 5,and 3 x 4. Cornelius Agrippa (“Occult Philo-
sophy,” book ii. c. 13) says—* Now the number twelve is divine,
and that whereby the celestials are measured.” There are
twelve signs of the zodiac, twelve orders of blessed spirits, twelve
angels governing the signs, twelve tribes of Israel, twelve prophets,
twelve apostles, twelve months, twelve stones in the breastplate,
twelve principal members of the body, twelve oxen supporting
the molten sea in the twelve; the New Jerusalem has twelve
gates, and the number of the sealed were twelve times twelve
thousand. In Pagan mythology, there were twelve superior and
twelve inferior gods. The queen of heaven was crowned with
twelve stars, and twelve baskets of fragments were gathered up
in the Gospel story. The number twelve was also applied to
consecrated animals, birds, and trees; thus there were the owl,
she-goat, and olive, sacred to Pallas; the dove, he-goat, and
myrtle to Aphrodite ; the cock, bull, and laurel to Helios; the
ibis, dog, and hazel to Hermes; the eagle, hart, and aesculus to
Zeus; the sparrow, sow, and apple-tree to Demeter; the goose,
ass, and box-tree to Hephaistos; the magpie, wolf, and dog-
tree to Ares; the daw, hind, and palm to Artemis; the heron,
lion, and pine to Vesta; the peacock, sheep, and ramthorn to
Hera ; and the swan, horse, and elm to Poseidon.

TWELVE ILLUsTRIoUs Knicuts. (See Knights, Twelve Illustrious.)

TWELVE-LETTERED NamME—A name of the Deity, formed Kabba-
listically from a sentence, or by a triple combination and permu-
tation of the four letters of the Tetragrammaton, according to
Rabbi Bechai.

TWELVE ORIGINAL Points OF Masonry. (See Original Points,
Twelve.)

TWELVE TRIBES, KNIGHTS OF THE—In Pyron’s Collection.

748

TWE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [uck

TweENnTY-One.— A mystical number, being the product of 3 x 7;
the most sacred of the odd numbers, and also as being the sum
of the numerical value of the Divine name, mnx,—thus:

77 TR

5+10+5+1=21.
In Masonry, it has no special value ; but in alchymy, it denotes
the twenty-one days’ distillation necessary for the conversion of
baser metals into silver.

TWENTY-FOUR INCH GAUGE—A rule two feet long, divided by
marks into twenty-four equal parts. One of the working tools.
of an Entered Apprentice, when the divisions are presumed to
signify hours, eight of which should be devoted to the service of
God and to good works, eight to labour at usual business, and
eight to refreshment and sleep.

TWENTY-SEVEN.—Found in some of the higher degrees, but of little
importance. It is obtained by the multiplication of the square
of three by three, thus—3 x 3 «3=27.

TwENTy-S1x.—Regarded by the Kabbalists as the most sacred of
mystical numbers, being equal to the numerical value of the
letters of the Tetragrarnmaton—thus :

mm 3
5+64+5+10=26,

TWo0-LETTERED NAME.—The designation of the Talmudists for the
name of God, m, Jah.

Tytz.—Tyle and Tyler are variations in the spelling of Tile and
Tiler, but are, however, incorrect. (See Tiler.)

Typr.—The picture or model of something of which it is considered
the symbol. Also used in a metaphorical sense.

TypHon.—Brother and slayer of Osiris; and as the latter was the
type or symbol of the sun, so Typhon was the symbol of winter
and darkness.

TyrE—An ancient Pheenician city, governéd in the time of Solo-
mon by Hiram, who aided in the building of the Temple.

TyRIAN FREEMASONS.—It was at one time thought that the Tyrian
Freemasons were members of the Society of Dionysiac Artificers ;
but the theory, although it at one time met with great favour, is
not now in much repute.

U.

U.—tThe twenty-first letter of the English alphabet.
UcKENWALLISTS.—A._ sect of rigid Anabaptists, foHowers of one
Ucke Wallis, a native of Friesland.
U..D.—An abbreviation for Under Dispensation, and placed after
749

UDE] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [UNI

the names of Lodges or Chapters which have not as yet received
their warrants of constitution.

UDbEN, ConRAD FRIEDRICH.—M.D. and Professor in Ordinary at the
University of Dorpat, also Secretary of the Medical College of
St Petersburg. From 1783 to 1785 he edited the “ Archiv fir
Freimaureret und Rosenkreuzer,” published at Berlin; and also at
Altona, the “ Ephemeriden der gesammten Freimaureret auf das
Logenjahr,’ 1715-6.

UNAFFILIATED Mason.—A mason who has resigned his previous
Lodge, and remains unattached to any Masonic Lodge. Although
it is not a Masonic offence to take this position, still it is a course
much tobe deprecated. Of course, all Masonic privileges, except
a very restricted right of visiting, are suspended during such
non-affiliation, and for the time being the brother is practically
dormant, if not dead. He is still bound, however, by all those
Masonic duties and obligations derived from membership in
general, and still possesses those rights which are universal in
the Fraternity. He has a right to assistance in a general way
when in imminent peril, but he has no right to pecuniary aid
from any Lodge; his right of visitation is restricted to two
visits ; he is excluded from Masonic processions, and he has no
right to Masonic burial; but he continues amenable to Masonic
law for any offence committed by him. It is also stated by
some Masonic jurists that non-affiliation is a violation of Masonic
law; and that should the non-affiliated brother refuse to affiliate,
he may be tried and punished for such offence, the punishment
even extending to expulsion. This, however, is uncertain.

Unanimous Consent.—Some Lodges still insist that the election
of a profane to membership in a Lodge must be unanimous, but
as a rule a certain number of black balls are required to exclude.
(See Ballot.)

Unction, Knicut or —51°, sixth series, R. Mzm.

Unpber-Fittinc.—The lower part of a building.

UNFAVOURABLE Report.—In countries where the laudable custom
of appointing a committee of investigation prevails, an unfavour-
able report respecting any candidate is held to be prima facie
evidence of unfitness for initiation ; and such candidate is regarded
as excluded without the formality of a ballot, the latter process
being therefore considered unnecessary. (See Ballot.)

UNHELE—To uncover, or reveal (see Hele). Spenser in the
Fatry Queen says—“Then suddenly both would themselves
unhele.”

UNIFORMITY OF WorK.—This is an object very desirable to be
accomplished, but in the very nature of things it is very difficult to
attain. Difference of language and social peculiarities have much

75°

UNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [unr

to do with the variations to be found in the ritual of different
countries. In England, Ireland, and Scotland the variations are
so inconsiderable as practically to interfere but slightly with
intercommunication ; but in America, France, Germany, Sweden,
Holland, and some other countries, this is not so. Whether it
would be of great utility to substitute a written or printed
ritual remains to the present time a matter of debate, but cer-
tainly if the strengthening of the memory be one of the benefits
of Masonry, then it would be better to continue without such a
written or recorded ritual. In the face, however, of the printed
rituals in existence, it would be idle to take up either view, for
the question, as a matter of fact, has solved itself. It must not
be forgotten, however, that such rituals are actually illegal, and
their publication a clear violation of a chief Masonic landmark.
Much of Masonic philosophy, from its very nature, however, can-
not be put down on paper, and thus the secrets of the institution
do not suffer much from the publication of the ceremonial work-
ings.

UNt0y, Actor. (See United Grand Lodge of England.)

Union, GranD Masters’..—After many attempts to form in Ger-
many a union or association of the Grand Masters of Germany,
this was happily accomplished by the efforts of Brother Warnetz,
Grand Master of Saxony, on the 31st May, 1868, when a diet
of Grand Masters, seven in number, assembled at Berlin. This
body has, however, no official status—meeting annually, with no
legislative functions, but forming a conference at which points of
ritual, history, symbolism, and philosophy are discussed.

Union MasteEr’s DEGREE.—An honorary degree said to have been
invented by the Lodge of Reconciliation in England, in 1813, at
the period of the union of the Ancients and Moderns. It was
adopted by the Grand Lodge of New York, in 1819, which
authorised its Lodges to confer it. Its object was to provide a
means of detecting clandestine and irregular Masons, and only
consisted of investing the recipient with certain special modes of
recognition.

Union or GERMAN Masons (Verein deutscher Maurer).—The exist-
ence of this admirable institution is mainly to be attributed to
Brother J. G. Findel, of Leipzig, who has done so much for the
history of the Craft, and whose labours are uniformly directed to
the introduction of intelligent and intellectual Masonry as a
principal feature of the institution. It was first organized at
Potsdam, the 19th May, 1861. Its objects are the encourage-
ment of Masonic science in its entirety, especially in reference
to the history, jurisprudence, symbolism, and doctrine of Masonry,
and the associations connected therewith, or of a similar cha-

751

UNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [UNI

racter, thus ensuriny a firmer bond between all members of the
Fraternity. The means by which the Union hopes to attain
these objects are—l. By the collection of Masonic documents
and manuscripts, books, medals, seals, &c.; 2. by the publication
of unprinted Masonic manuscripts and rare books, and the trans-
lation of Masonic works in foreign languages; 3. by the support
of Masonic literary and scientific works; 4. by a system of inter-
national correspondence, on Masonic subjects, with distinguished
members of the Masonic Fraternity ; 5. and by an annual congress
to be held in some Masonic centre. The Union consists of
ordinary and corresponding members, foreigners being eligible to
either class as well as Germans, any active Mason being eligible
for membership, but of course apprentices and fellow-crafts are
necessarily excluded when degrees to which they do not belong
are topics of discussion. Corresponding members are nominated
by the Council, The subscription of an ordinary member is one
dollar—three shillings—per annum. The Council (consisting of
three members), is chosen by ballot triennially, and the position
is of a purely honorary character. Brother Findel has further
illustrated the objects of this Union in his recent remarkably
clear and concise work, “Geist und Form der Freimaurerei.”
Leipzig, 1874.

UNION OF SCIENTIFIC FREEMASONS (Bund scientifischer Freimaurer).
—Formed the 28th November, 1802, by Fessler, Fischer, Moss-
dorf, and others. Its objects were similar to those of the more
recent Union stated in the previous article, and the latter to a
great extent may be considered its successor. Possibly the
reason of its non-success is attributable in great measure to the
peculiarities exhibited by its founder Fessler (see Fessler), and
the exceptional position he had assumed. That the motives
were excellent is beyond question. This body has long been
extinct.

ae a THE TWENTY-TWO. (See German Union of the Twenty-

wo,

Unitep Friars, FRATERNITY OF.—This Society was originally
established at Norwich, in the year 1785, with a view, as the
original prospectus says, “To the cultivation of a liberal and
rational system of goodfellowship.” And this document further
proceeds—“ Whatever evils may have arisen from monastic
institutions, or however incompatible with refined policy the
sequestered habits of former times may be considered, it is
allowed, on all authorities, that within the gloomy mansions of
the ancient religious fraternities, the fine arts were nurtured,
philosophy and science flourished; all the profundity of erudition
was deposited; and, to add lustre to the scene, the eleemosynary

752

unr] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [UNI

virtues took their stand before their gates, and dispensed the
blessings of charity far and widethroughout the world! . . . .
Disclaiming everything which appertains to the religious func-
tions of the monks and friars, this Society professes only to imi-
tate what has been justly deerned praiseworthy in that descrip-
tion of men; to emulate their scientific acquisitions, their love of
learning, their benevolence and philanthropy ; and, adopting de-
cent mirth in lieu of their austere rules, to exhibit the picture of
a convent free from the dark and offensive shadows of bigotry,
enthusiasm, and superstition . . . . To give external consistency
to this plan, and to strengthen the idea of fraternal combination,
the United Friars have thought proper to assume the habili-
ments of all the known monastic orders; but in every instance
where they have adopted the formalities of the Romish Church,.
especial care has been taken to divest them of all reference to
religion or sacred objects, and, in lieu thereof, to annex to them
meanings significant of those moral and social duties which apply
essentially to the interest and happiness of mankind.” The Society
appears to have flourished for many years, the place of meeting
being known as the College of St Luke. The officers of the
College consisted of an Abbot (who, on his annual election, took
the name of Paul I., PaulII., and so on), a Prior, Procurator,
Confessor, Bursar, Hospitaller, and Librarian. The earlier lists of
members are wanting in the series of papers from which this
brief account is compiled ; but in 1819 we find the names of R.
Taylor (St Dominic), Thomas Eaton (Grandmonte), T. Martineau
(Augustin), J. F. Priest (Mercy), A. Browne (Holy Trinity), R.
Morgan (St Francis), C. Brown (Teutonic Knight), and J. R.
Staff (Canon of St Maurice in Sicily), as officers ; while among
the members are R. Kitson (St John of Jerusalem), S. W.
Stevenson (Knight of St James of Compostela), Hudson Gurney
(Premonstratensian Canon), W. Stevenson (Canon of the Holy
Sepulchre), J. Bennett (Benedictine), E. de Hague (Crutched
Friar), Morgan (Franciscan), Hindes (Carmelite), G.
Waite, Verger (Friar de Sacco). Several gentlemen of learning and
standing in the metropolis placed themselves in communication
with the Norwich Fraternity, and from 1818 to 1824 appear to
have met together at the College of St Mark, in Great St Helen’s.
The Society met twice a-month, and papers of an historical char-
acter were read by the members, who afterwards supped to-
gether in a substantial but very moderate way. One of the
rules was, that each member, as conveniently as he could after
his admission, should give an account of the history of that
order whose garb he assumed on his profession. In deference
to the parent society, the London College did not elect an Abbot,
3B 753

UNI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [UNI

but were presided over by a Prior. The Norwich Society ap-
pears to have effected a great deal of good, for the Almoner’s
Books record that between the years 1796 and 1820 no less a
sum than £5100 was expended on soup and bread for the poor,
distributed under the superintendence of the Friars. On the
initiation of a novice, there was a regular ceremony, of a simple
but impressive description, and a charge was delivered to him
by the Abbot or Prior. They formed a library, and the objects
of the Society were peaceably pursued for several years. It
would seem that the London College languished, and finally died
a natural death about 1825.

UniTeED GRAND LopGE oF ENGLAND.—This title was assumed by
the present Grand Lodge in 1813, being formed from the junc-
tion of the two Lodges of Ancients and Moderns, then existing
under H.R.H. the Duke of Kent and H.R.H. the Duke of
Sussex.

Unitep Hosts. (See Concord, Order of.)

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.—Under the different States, the origin
of Freemasonry has already been given, and little need be added,
Of course, many secret societies existed in the North American
Union besides Masonry, but being rather of a political nature
than of social importance, they do not enter into the design of
this book.

Unitep SuPREME Councit.—An illegal body, formed February 18,
1832, in the city of New York, adopting the workings of the
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, and formed by a union
between a self-denominated Supreme Council of the United
States, and the Supreme Council of South America, assuming
the title of the United Supreme Council for the Western Hemi-
sphere. It was never recognised, and is most probably extinct.

Unity or Gop. (See God and One.)

UNIVERSAL AURORA, SOCIETY OF THE.—A society founded in 1783,
at Paris, for the support and practice of mesmerism, in the
establishment of which Count Cagliostro took an active part.
Although its principles do not appear at any variance with
morality and common sense, it speedily fell into disuse, and
very little at the present time is ascertainable about it.

UNIVERSAL Harmony, ORDER oF. (See Jatric Masonry, and Light,
Brotherhood of.)

UNIVERSAL LANGUAGE. (See Language, Universal.) :

UNIVERSALISTS, ORDER oF.—A Masonic Society, first formed in
Paris about 1841, having only one degree. Its originator was
Retif de la Bretonne.

Universi TERRARUM, &c.—The heading of documents of the A. and
A. Scottish Rite always runs :—Universt Terrarum Orbis Archi-

754

UNK] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. (URI

tectonis ad Gloriam Ingentis, viz., To the Glory of the Grand
Architect of the Universe. First used by the Council formed at
Charleston in 1802, but of doubtful authority.

UNKNOWN PHILOSOPHER.—1. Saint Martin wrote a book entitled
“Le Philosophe Inconnu,’ and was invested by his disciples with
thetitle. 2. A degree in Saint Martin’s Rite was also thus named.
3. A degree, named by Tschoudy, of an alchymistical nature.

UNKNowNn Superiorsi—1. When Hund established the Rite of
Strict Observance, he asserted that his society was managed by
certain eminent Masons of high authority and attainments, whose
names were withheld. These he termed the Superiores Incogniti.
An attempt to identify them with the Jesuits is unworthy of
notice. 2. In the Royal Oriental Order of Sikha (Apex), and
the Sit B’hai, the lower brethren do not know any but their
immediate superiors; but they are aware, from the general consti-
tution of the Society,-that they must be Freemasons, and of
respectable rank ; they formerly met in India, masked.

UNTEMPERED Mortar.—A term peculiar to the American lectures.
The operative apprentice was instructed to wear his apron in a
particular way, to prevent his dress being sullied ; and hence the
speculative mason receives similar instructions, that he should
not allow his soul to be defiled by the untempered mortar of
unruly passions.

UNUITERABLE NaME. (See Z'etragrammaton.)

Upricut Posture.—the position in which the apprentice is placed
after initiation, and which attitude morally he is exhorted to
maintain throughout his life.

Ur (Hebrew, "yx).— According to Josephus, the name of the father
of Hiram; but as the word signifies light or fire, we must adopt
a different theory.

Unig. (Hebrew, ONTRR, or fire of God).—1. This was an archangel
mentioned in the second book of Esdras ; but in other apocryphal
writings, Uriel is often named, especially in the magical sixth
and seventh books of Moses. By Michael Glycas, the Byzantine
historian, his sphere is said to be the sun; and in the days before
heaven was closed to man by his disobedience, he is frequently
represented as descending to Adam, and afterwards to Seth and
Enoch. In some of the high degrees, his name becomes a signi-
ficant word. 2. Uriel is also a word in the Order of Ishmael.

Urim anD THUMMIM.—These have given much trouble to the inter-
preter of ancient symbolism, and have been variously translated
—as “manifestation and truth,” “doctrine and truth,” “lights
and perfections,” “perfect brilliancy,” and “light and truth.” They
were regarded as talismans of great importance, but the mode in
which they were used is quite unknown at the present day.

755

URI] The Royal Masonite Cyclopedia. [VAG

With the exception, perhaps, of the degree of Scottish Master,
they nowhere appear in Masonry.

Uriot, JosepH—Author of a book entitled “ Le veritable Portrait
@un Francmagon,” published at Frankfort, 1742. One of the
earliestsand rarest works on Freemasonry ; an extension of it was
published at Stuttgart, in 1769.

Urn.—The urn, as a Masonic symbol, is quite modern, and was
introduced by Cross in his chart.

UruGuay.—Masonry was introduced by the Grand Orient of France
into this Republic about 1827. After this time, many other
Grand Lodges claimed territorial jurisdiction, but the prevailing
regular authority recognised has been that of the Grand Orient
of Brazil, from which the present Grand Lodge and Orient of
Uruguay, sitting in the Valley of Monte Video, has its title.
The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite has also a position in
Uruguay.

Urau.—For many years, owing to the peculiar principles of the
majority of the inhabitants of this country, it was impossible
to introduce Masonry in the universal sense; but, in 1867, the
Grand Lodge of Montana, on October the 7th, chartered a Lodge,
called the Wasatch Lodge, No. 8. The Mount Moriah Lodge,
No. 70, was chartered October 21st, 1868, by the Grand Lodge
of Kansas, and the Argenta Lodge, No. 21, by the Grand Lodge
of Colorado, September 26th, 1871, all being within Salt Lake
City. In January, 1868, these three Lodges met by representa-
tives, and formed the Grand Lodge of Utah; Brother G. F.
Strickland being first Grand Master. (See Mormon Masonry.)

Vv,

V.—The twenty second letter in the English language. As a
numeral it stands for 5, and thus V for 5000. The divine
name connected with it is wn, Vezio, Cum Splendore.

Vacancy.—Officers in Masonic Lodges are elected and installed to
hold their respective offices for a specific time, and until their
successors are installed. Resignation would be a violation of
the contract between the officer and the Lodge. Hence an
office is only vacated by death.

Vacuist.—One who holds the doctrine of a vacuum in nature,
as opposed to a plenist.

Vacuna.—The name of the Roman God presiding over leisure, to
whom sacrifice was offered at harvest. Hence our word “ vaca-
tion.”

Vacao a Bacaos.—One of the eunuchs of Holofernes (see

75

VAL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [VED

Judith xii, 11). Used in 4° of the French Rite of Adoption.
It is customary to reply to this challenge by saying, “The
valley of Bethunia is known to me.”

VALENTINIANS, ORDER OF.—A sect of the second century, having
opinions similar to those of the Gnostics.

VaLEsIANs.—An ancient sect of heretics, named by Epiphanius,
existing about A.D. 240: they are said to have done by themselves
what the patristic writer Origen did.

VALHALLA.—The Scandinavian hall of the Gods, or Olympus.

‘VVALLABHACHARYAS.—The followers of Vadtrabha or Vallabha, born
1497, at Champaranya, who preached a new religion to the Hin-
dus. Now known as the sect of the Maharajahs.

Vattry.—1. In architecture, the internal angle formed by the two
sides of an inclined roof, supported by the valley rafter or valley
piece, upon which is placed a board for the reception of the
leaden gutter, called the valley board. 2. A term early adopted
to indicate the situation of a Lodge. The French, Italians,
Portuguese, and Spaniards, use the word as synonymous with
Orient, eg. Valley of Paris=Orient of Paris. It has been
sometimes incorrectly employed to designate the south and
north sides of the Lodge; thus a Warden would speak of
the brethren of his valley, not the brethren of his column,
which would be a manifest error.

VASSAL, PIERRE GERARD.—Born at Manosques, in France, 14th
October, 1769; and died at Paris, 4th May, 1840. He was origin-
ally intended for the Church, but entered the army at the out-
break of the Revolution, soon retiring from it, and becoming a
physician ; to him is ascribed the introduction of digitalis pur-
purea, for the cure of disease of the heart. He was initiated in
1811, and after presiding over several Lodges, was, in 1819,
elected Secretary General of the Grand Orient, and, in 1827,
President of the Council of Rites. He wrote two Masonic
works of importance—one on the Scottish Rite, and the other on
Initiation.

VauLT.—In architecture, an arched roof having the bricks or
stones of which it is constructed so placed as to sustain and
keep each other in their places.

Vautt, SECRET.—Occurs in the legends of the high degrees.

Vauur or SreeL.—The French term, Vowte d’acier, for the arch of
steel.

VaYEcHouLow. (Hebrew, 7)2 , penfecti sunt)—A word used in
75° Rite of Mizraim.

VEDANTIA.—A Hindu sect whose theory of philosophy is founded
on the Vedas. According to this sect, matter has no existence
independent of mental perception.

757

VED] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [VER

Vepas.—The Sacred Scriptures of the Hindus, comprehending their
cosmology, philosophy, and religious doctrines.

VEEMOUNA (Hebrew, x2398}, jirmitas)—A word in 73° Rite of
Mizraim.

VEHMGERICHT. (See Westphalia, Secret Tribunal of.)

Veits, GRAND MASTER OF THE.—Three officers in a Royal Arch
Chapter in the American Rite, who guard the veils, armed with
swords. The title Grand Master is inappropriate, and a much
more fitting term would be Guardian. In the English Royal
Arch, the ceremony of passing the veils has been abandoned.

VEILS, SYMBOLISM OF THE.—The passage through the veils in the
Royal Arch is preserved in America, and typifies the difficulties
and dangers to be encountered in the search for truth.

VENDICOSI OR AVENGERS.—A secret society established about 1186,
in the Sicilies, in the time of William II., the Norman. Their
Grand Master, Arinulfo di Ponte Corvo, was hanged by order of
the King, and many of his partisans branded with hot irons.

VENERABLE.—The French term for Worshipful Master.

VENERABLE GRAND MASTER OF ALL SYMBOLIC LopGEs. (See Grand
Master of all Symbolic Lodges.)

VENERABLE, PERFECT.—A degree in Viany’s Collection. ©. 8. D.

VENEZUELA.—Masonry was introduced from Spain in the beginning
of the nineteenth century. In 1825, Cerneau, the head of the
irregular Supreme Council at New York, established a Grand
Lodge and Supreme Council at Caraccas. Masonry was in a
very low condition until 1838, when a National Grand Lodge of
Venezuela was instituted; but a regular Grand Lodge did not
exist until 12th January, 1865. There is also a Supreme Council.

VENGEANCE—Vengeance is symbolically invoked in certain of the
high degrees upon the murderers of James de Molay.

‘VERANDAH.—A kind of open portico formed by extending a sloping
roof beyond the principal building ; also a kind of gallery.

VERGER.—An officer in a Council of Knights of the Holy Sepulchre.

VERMONT.—Masonry was introduced in 1781 from Massachusetts,
at Cornish; a Grand Lodge was organized, 19th October, 1794, at
Rutland ; but owing to the great influence possessed by the Anti-
masons in Vermont, Masonry did not flourish, but led a fluctuat-
ing and secret existence until January, 1846. Grand Chapter
was instituted 20th December, 1864; and reopened 18th July,
1849. Grand Council of Royal and Select Masters, founded 19th
August, 1854. Grand Encampment (now Grand Commandery)
first formed in 1825, but was not finally in regular action until
14th January, 1852.

VeRNHES, J. F.—Author of an essay on the “History of Free-
a published at Paris, 1813; and of “ Le Parfait Macon,”

75

VER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | VIN

Montpellier, 1820. He was an active member of the Rite of
Mizraim, and published a defence of it in 1822.

VERNONIANS.—The gentlemen belonging to this honourable society
held their meetings, during the last century, at the Rose
Tavern, in Cheapside.

VerTot D’AUBGUF, RENE AUBERT DE, THE ABBE.—Born at the
Chateau de Bennelot, in Normandy, in 1665, and died in 1735.
He was historiographer to the Knights of Malta, and published a
learned work on them, in four volumes, at Paris, in 1726.

VesicA Piscis.—The fish (see Fish) was an emblem of the
Saviour. The most complete account of the Vesica Piscis is to
be found in Oliver's “ Pythagorean Triangle.”

VESSEL, ORDER OF THE—An androgynous order established in
North America. (See Felicity, Order of.)

VESTIBULE.—A. porch ; an ante-chamber.

VEXILLUM BELLI.—A_ war-flag, consisting of a piece of cloth fixed
on a frame or cross-tree, used in the Order of Knights Templar.
Viany, AUGUSTE DE—An Italian Masonic writer, and one of the
founders of the Philosophie Scottish Rite. He was a diligent

collector of degrees.

Vicrroy EvsEBIUS.—The second officer in a Conclave of the Red
Cross of Rome and Constantine.

VIELLE-Bru, Rite oF.—This Rite was established at Toulouse by
Sir Samuel Lockhart, an adherent of Prince Charles Edward, in
1743, under the name of Viélle-Bru, or Faithful Scottish
Masons, There were nine degrees, in three chapters:—I. Chapter
Symbolic—l. E. A. P.; 2. F.C.; 3. M.M.; 4. Secret Master.
II. Chapter Elect—5, 6, 7, 8. Four élu degrees similar to
Templar Masonry. III. Chapter—Scientific Masonry. At the
head of the Rite was a Council of Menatzchim. It is long since
extinct, having been twice refused recognition by the Grand
Orient of France—once in 1804, and again in 1812, on the
grounds that it represented nothing of importance, and because
its charter could not be proved authentic. ;

VILLARS, MONTFAUGON DE, THE ABBE.—Born in Languedoc, in 1653;
and cruelly assassinated on the high road between Parisand Lyons,
in 1675, by one of his relatives. He is celebrated as the author of
“The Count of Gabalis ; or, Conversations on the Secret Sciences,”
published at Paris in 1670. Although professedly a satire on the
ideas then currentabout the Rosicrucians, it contains much worthy
of consideration, being a work in which flashes of wit continually
abound. It has been translated into most European languages.

VINCERE AUT Mort (French, Vainere ou mourir)—To conquer
or to die. Motto of the degree of Perfect Elect Mason.

Vinton, Davip.—A distinguished American lecturer on Masonry,

759

vio | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [vis

in the early part of the nineteenth century, but a man of in-
different character, and ultimately, it is said, expelled by the
Grand Lodge of North Carolina. He died at Shakertown,
Kentucky, in July, 1838. He was the author of a book published
at Dedham, Massachusetts, in 1816, entitled, “The Masonic
Minstrel,” and many of his songs are still recollected.

VioLET.—A colour only used in some of the high degrees of the
Scottish Rite in Sorrow Lodges. Red is the symbol of life, and
blue that of immortality ; and hence sometimes, when blended
into violet, it is regarded to signify a trust in the resurrection.
Politically, violets are used by the adherents of the dynasty of
Napoleon, to indicate their faith in the ultimate triumph of the
principles of Napoleonism.

ViRGIN.—Many ancient mythologies contain legends in which
sacred virgins appear, and such were presumed to possess special
privileges, when they dedicated themselves to temple service.

VIRGIN Mary, KNIGHTS OF THE ANNUNCIATIUN OF THE.—The
Knights wore a collar of gold and silver plates, with a figure of the
Virgin. There is also a female degree of this name.

Vircinia.—It is uncertain when Masonry was first introduced
into this State, but there would appear to have been a Lodge
called St John’s, at Norfolk, 8th August, 1763, deriving its charter
from Scotland; and another from the same at Blandford, 9th
March, 1756; and on the 22d December, 1753, the Royal
Exchange Lodge was chartered by the Modern Grand Lodge
of England. There was another at York Town in 1755. There
were two others in the same State, under the same authority, in
1773. Mother Lodge Kilwinning, Scotland, also granted war-
rants. Washington was initiated in a Virginian Lodge, at Fre-
dericksburg, 4th November, 1752. A convention of Masons
was held at Williamsburgh, 13th October, 1778, when John
Blair was elected first Grand Master; and on the 4th October,
1784, James Mercer succeeded him at Richmond. Royal Arch
Masonry was introduced by Joseph Myers, under his authority
as Deputy Inspector of the Scottish Rite; and Grand Chapter
was instituted at Norfolk, lst May, 1808. The Cryptic degrees
are conferred in the Royal Arch Chapters. The history of the
Grand Encampment (Commandery) is bound up with that of
the war of secession, but in 1865 it returned to its allegiance
to the General Grand Encampment of the United States.

Visitinc BreTHREN.—Brethren from other Lodges are usually re-
ceived with hospitality, and treated with distinction, according to
the rank they have attained in the general body of the Fraternity.

Visitor.—An officer in the Order of Ishmael, whose duty it is to
test the capability of the initiate.

760

viv] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | voy

Vivat.—The French acclamatory expression, used in honour of
illustrious visitors, and on other occasions.

VoceL, Pau, JOACHIM SiGisMUND.—Born in Germany, 1753.
Co-rector of the Sebastian School at Altdorf, and professor of
theology at Erlangen. He published a work in three volumes
at Nuremberg, in 1785, on the Knights Templar, the Ancient
Mysteries, and Freemasonry. He may be considered the
originator of that theory, which derived the modern Freemasons
from the ancient Guilds of Operative Masons. He published
another work at Berlin, in 1791, entitled, “ Discourses on the
Design, Character, and Origin of Freemasonry.”

Voict, FRIEDRICH.—Doctor of medicine, and professor at Dresden.
He was a member of the Strict Observance, in which his order
name was Eques & Falcone, or Knight of the Falcon.

VoisHnuvus.— Worshippers of Vishnu, wearing white garments, and
rejecting animal food. Those who abstain from all human
passions form a higher rank, and are termed Voiragees.

VOLTAIRE.—This great writer was initiated in the Lodge of the
Nine Sisters, at Paris, the 7th February, 1778, in the presence of
Franklin, Court de Gebelin, and others ; his death took place the
30th May, 1778, and a Sorrow Lodge was held on the 28th
November of the same year.

VoLutEe.—In architecture, the spiral scroll appended on each side
to the capital of the Ionic Order. The Corinthian and Composite
are also thus decorated, but the scrolls are smaller, and diagonally
placed. In the Ionic Order there are four volutes, in Composite
eight, and eight angular volutes in the Corinthian, with eight
smaller ones called helices.

VomiTort1a.—The openings, gates, or doors, in the ancient system of
architecture, to theatres and amphitheatres, by which the public
obtained ingress and egress.

Votinc.— Viva voce voting is now the usual way in which questions
are decided, but formerly the presiding officer usually said—
“So many as are in favour will signify the same by the usual
sign of the Order;” and when the votes were counted, the
negative question was put in the same way, and the number of
votes reported.

Votinc, Ricut o¥.—In English Lodges, business is usually con-
ducted in the first degree; hence all entered apprentices, not
twelve months in arrear of their subscriptions, have the right of
voting in their Lodges. Regulations in reference to voting differ
according to the bye-laws:

Voucuinc.—If any Brother pledges himself that a visitor, of his
personal knowledge, is a good and true Mason, the usual exaimi-

nation is dispensed with in most lodges.
761

vuL] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [WAH

YVoyacers.—In the French Rite, the voyages of an entered apprentice
are three, and symbolical of the life of man; those of a fellow-
craft are five, and are emblematic of labour in the search of
knowledge; and the seven voyages of the Mason denote the
pursuit of crime, the wandering life of the assassin, and his vain
attempts to escape remorse and punishment.

VULTURES OF BONAPARTE.—A secret society named in the act of
accusation against the four sergeants of Rochelle, in 1822.

W.

W.—The twenty-third letter of the English alphabet.

W..—An abbreviation for Worshipful, West, Warden, and Wisdom.

WAECHTER, EBERHARD BARON Von.—Chamberlain to the King of
Denmark, and Danish Ambassador at Ratisbon ; born 1747. An
active member at one time of the Rite of Strict Observance,
under the order name of Eques & ceraso, and Chancellor of the
German Priories of the Seventh Province. At the time of the
schism in the Strict Observance, when unknown superiors were
said to exist, Von Wachter was sent to Italy by the old Scottish
Lodye, of which Duke Ferdinand was Master, to obtain informa-
tion from Prince Charles Edward and others on the points at
issue, but returned with reports of a character highly unfavourable
to the Strict Observance. He was assailed on all sides, accused
of the practice of magical arts, of having become a Jesuit, and of
making a traffic in Masonic degrees. It must certainly be ad-
mitted that he left a poor man and returned rich. It would seem
that his aim was to reorganize the Templar system on the ruins
of the Strict Observance, and very likely shape it anew altogether ;
but in this he did not succeed. He died on the 25th May, 1825,
and probably was one of the very last of the members of the Strict
Observance.

WacEs or A MAsTER Mason, SYMBOLIC.—In the lecture of the third
degree, the recipient is represented as seeking that sublime
degree, “ that he might perfect himself in Masonry, so as to travel
into foreign countries, and work and receive wages as a Master
Mason.” These wages are the receipt of Divine Truth, not to be
attained in the present life, but in that far better land beyond the

ave.

Wie 8 fanatical sect in Arabia, founded about 1740 by
Abdul Wahab, who conquered a great part of Arabia from the
Turks, and died in 1787. Mecca and Medina were taken by this
sect, who were strict reformers, did not smoke, and carried the
law of the Koran out in the most literal sense. In 1816,

762

waL | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [WAR

however, Seyid Ahmad, one of this sect, who had been a warrior
under Amir Khan, nawab of Tonk, came to Delhi, and speedily
became a prophet and leader; and since then they have main-
tained a military position to the north-east of Peshawur.

WALDENSES.—Followers of Peter Waldo, a Lyonese merchant about
1180, holding Calvinistic tenets, and having a Presbyterian form
of government.

Wa.es.—In the second edition of “ Anderson’s Constitutions,” it is
stated that Grand Master Inchiquin granted a dispensation,
10th May, 1727, to Hugh Warburton, Esquire, to be Provincial
Grand Master of North Wales; and another on the 24th June,
1727, to Sir Edward Mansel, to be Provincial Grand Master of
South Wales, so that the introduction of Masonry into Wales
may be considered to have taken place in that year.

WALLACHIA, GRAND ScotcH DEGREE oFr.—In Fustier’s lists.

Wampum, Society or.—A society existing among the traders with
the Indians from early times until the incorporation of the East
India Company, which at one time traded partially with North
America. The ceremonies of the Wampum Society were handed
over to the Hudson’s Bay Company many years ago.

Wanb, KNIGHT OF THE SACRED, OR OF THE Macnetic Rost.—
A mesmeric degree. (See Jatric Masonry.)

WANDERERS, ORDER OF. (See Jshmael, Order of.)

Wanps.—The sceptres of the three Principals in a Royal Arch
Chapter are thus termed by Oliver in his Dictionary.

War, Masonry 1n.—It is usual to suspend the action of Masonic
Lodges during the times of war in places likely to be affected by
the calamities which military operations necessarily bring about ;
but the general obligations of the Craft still continue valid, even
towards the enemyin the field; and it is very certain that in many
great struggles, where the passions and interests of mankind have
been inflamed, the soothing influence of Masonry has frequently
alleviated many of the horrors of strife, and saved many lives. It
is the common cant of practical men to say, that war is a necessary
evil; but if men acted up to the inspiration of their consciences,
such frightful events would cease; and it should ever be one of
the main individual objects of a true Mason so to act as to avoid
strife with his brethren; and not to forget, in the patriotism he
owes to his own country, the fact, that he is a citizen of a larger
country, boundless in extent, and conterminous only with the
wide realms of T. G. A. O. T. U.

Warpens.—1. The two immediate subordinate officers of the Master
in every Craft Lodge. In French they are termed Surveillants,
in German Au/fseher, in Spanish Vigilante, and in Italian Sor-
veghiante. It does not seem very evident when two Wardens

763

WAR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [WAR

were first introduced into theLodges. In Scotland, the Operative
Lodges’ were governed by a Deacon, as Worshipful Master; and
a Warden, who was also Treasurer. The head of the Craft seems,
however,to have been termed Warden General; but in astatute of
the Aberdeen Lodge, 27th December, 1670, contained in its Mark
Book, and published by Brother W. J. Hughan, we find it stated,
“ And lykwayse we all protest, by the oath we have made at our
entrie, to own the Warden of our Lodge as the next man in
power to the Maister, and in the Maister’s absence he is full
Maister.” It is evident that the Wardens existed as officers long
anterior to the revival of 1717. The senior Warden of a Craft
Lodge presides over the Craft, immediately under the Master,
during the hours of labour; and the junior Warden presides during
the hours of refreshment; and their several rule is marked by
the elevation of their pillars during the time of their special rule.
2. In the American System, the Expert in a Commandery of
Knights Templar is also called Senior Warden, and has for his
duty the introduction of candidates. Jewel: a triple triangle.

WARDENS, GRAND. (See Grand Wardens.)

Warver.—In America, an officer whose symbolof office is a trumpet,
with crossed swords, in a Commandery of Knights Templar.

WARLIKE INSTRUMENT.—The use of the compasses in the first
degree, instead of a sword or dagger, is much to be deprecated; in
fact, entirely wrong, as the compasses refer to the third degree in
particular, and should never quit the altar while the Lodge is at
work.

WakRANT OF CoNSTITUTION—The document by which certain
persons therein named are authorised by a properly constituted
authority to hold, organize, and constitute a Lodge, Chapter,
College, or other Masonic body. The warrant is an institution
dating from the time of the revivalin 1717. Before that time, it
was only necessary that a sufficient number of duly initiated and
qualified members should be present; and even now it is very
doubtful whether seven or more Master Masons may not at any
time assemble for mutual instruction in the Royal Art, although
they could not legally make, pass, or raise initiates or brethren.
In England, the Grand Master himself issues the warrant, or
directs it to be done; in America, the warrant emanates from
the Grand Lodge. The warrant must always be at hand in the
Lodge during labour or business, and is vested in the Master for
the time being. If lost, destroyed, or mislaid, it must be re-
covered, or another obtained ; for a Lodge without a warrant is no
Lodge at all, and cannot perform any Masonic act. If revoked
or recalled, the jewels, furniture, and funds revert to the autho-
rity whence the authority emanated.

764

was | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [WED

Wasuine Hanns. (See Lustration.)

WASHINGTON, CONGRESS oF.—There was an unsuccessful congress
at Washington, D.C., U. S. A., for the purpose of forming a
General Grand Lodge of the United States, in 1822.

WASHINGTON, GEORGE, GENERAL.—Initiated at Fredericksburg, the
4th November, 1752; passed to a Fellow Craft, the 3d March,
1758; and raised to a Master Mason on the 4th August, 1753.
He was Master of a Lodge at Alexandria, La, in 1788, being
elected to that office on the 29th May. He was ever an upholder
of the principles of the Fraternity, although he does not seem to
have assumed a peculiarly active position in the Craft. Wash-
ington’s claims upon the respect of mankind rest upon other
duties, most admirably and patriotically performed, with a sin-
gular noble-heartedness which won the involuntary respect of
all his opponents.

WASHINGTON TERRITORY.—Masonry was introduced here from
Oregon. On the 6th to the 9th December, 1858, the Lodges in
existence formed an independent Grand Lodge. The Ancient
and Accepted Rite was organized in 1872.

WatcuworpDs.—The 32° A. and A.S. R. has watchwords, but no
other degree in Masonry.

WaTERFALL.—A flood or fall of water is alluded to in the Fellow
Craft’s degree, as a symbol of plenty, in conjunction with an ear
: a It has sometimes been incorrectly given as water

ord.

WayvFarInc May.—Alluded to in the third degree, to denote the
person seen near Joppa, by those sent out to search for the
assassins. The English lectures have omitted it, but it still sur-
vives in the lectures of the American Rite.

Weary SOJOURNERS. (See Sojourners.)

Wess, THOMAS SMITH.—Born of English parents in Boston, Massa-
chusetts, 18th October, 1771; died at Cleveland, Ohio, 6th July,
1819. He was initiated about 1792, in Rising Sun Lodge, Keene,
New Hampshire. He seems to have been early struck with the
incompleteness of the Masonic ritual, and, in 1797, published, at
Albany, his “ Freemason’s Monitor; or, Illustrations of Masonry.”
In 1813, he was elected Grand Master of the Masons of Rhode
Island. He was an enthusiastic Mason, and held the office of
General Grand High Priest from 1816 to the time of his death.
He may be regarded as the reconstituter of the American Rite
of Masonry.

WEDEKIND, GEORG CHRISTIAN GOTTLIEB, BARON Von.—Born at
Gottingen, 8th January, 1761; died 1831. He was a physician
and professor of medicine at Metz. He was a member of the
Eclectic Union, and laboured assiduously to produce a barmonion:

795

WEE | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | WES

feeling between that body and the Masonic authorities of Frank-
fort.

WEEPING ViRGIN.—A woman standing with dishevelled hair near
atomb. <A symbol introduced by Jeremy Cross.

WEIsHAUPT, ADAM.—Born at Ingoldstadt, 6th February, 1748,
initiated at Munich in 1777, died at Gotha in 1811. In youth,
he received his education from the Jesuits, against whom he
seems afterwards to have entertained sentiments of the utmost
animosity, returned by that body with interest. In 1772, he
became a professor of law, and in 1775, professor of natural and
canonlawin the University of Ingoldstadt. This post had hitherto
only been held by an ecclesiastic, and excited the anger of the
clergy. In defiance of them he formed a party of his own, and
out of it grew the famous Order of Illuminati, which at one time
exercised an enormous influence (see Jlluminati of Bavaria).
Weishaupt was a much belied man; and the best proof that the
infamous reports circulated against him were not true, is to be
found in the steady friendship he received from the amiable and
virtuous Duke Ernest of Gotha, and from the statements respect-
ing him made by impartial contemporaries. What he wished
Illuminism to be, may be judged by the following summary of
the qualifications of a candidate :—* Whoever does not close his
ear to the lamentations of the miserable, nor his heart to gentle
pity ; whoever is the friend and brother of the unfortunate ;
whoever has a heart capable of love and friendship ; whoever is
steadfast in adversity, unwearied in the carrying out of whatever
has been once engaged in, undaunted in the overcoming of difii-
culties; whoever does not mock and despise the weak; whose
soul is susceptible of conceiving great designs, desirous of rising
superior to base motives, and of distinguishing itself by deeds
of benevolence; whoever shuns idleness; whoever considers no
knowledge as unessential which he may have the opportunity of
acquiring, regarding the knowledge of mankind as his chief study ;
whoever, when truth and virtue are in question, despising the
approbation of the multitude, is sufficiently courageous to follow
the dictates of his own heart—such a one is a proper candidate.”

WESLEY, SAMUEL.—Born 24th February, 1766, at Bristol; died 11th
October, 1837 ; initiated 17th December, 1788; and the first
Grand Organist of England. He was renowned for his musical
skill, and was called by Mendelssohn “the father of English
organ-playing.” He continued Grand Organist from 1812 to
1818, and composed many songs, glees, &c., for the use of the
Craft. He was the son of the Rev. Charles Wesley, and nephew
of the celebrated John Wesley.

766

WES | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [WHI

West.—The place of the Senior Warden, and the region of sun-
set.

West VirnGINIA.—Formerly under the jurisdiction of the Grand
Lodge of Virginia, but on the formation of Western Virginia into
a separate State in 1863, the Lodges threw off their fealty, and
on the 12th April, 1865, formed a new Grand Lodge at Fairmount.
Grand Chapter was organized 16th November, 1871.

WESTPHALIA, SECRET TRIBUNAL OF.—Westphalia was the original
seat of the famous Vehmgericht of the Middle Ages, which flou-
tished in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, having tacitly
come down from pagan Saxon times. They were established for
the purpose of punishing crimes among those whom the ordinary
law could not touch. The titular head of this body was the
Emperor, if initiated; but, if not, a lieutenant was appointed.
Next to the supreme officer came the Free Counts, with the
power of appointing a substitute. The Schéppen (assessors or
councillors) were next in rank, divided into two degrees—1. the
Ignorant; and 2, the Knowing. All members were sworn.
Their power for a long time was immense, but they gradually
sank into obscurity when no longer wanted as an element in
society.

WHISTLE, ORDER OF THE.—Mentioned by Delaunay.

Wuirt.—The Masonic symbol for purity.

Wuitse Batu.—tThe affirmative ball in the ballot. (See Ballot.)

Wuirts Cross KNIGHTs.—A term sometimes applied to the Knights
Hospitallers of St John.

Wuite Cross, KNIGHT OF THE—In Scotland, this degree is a
version of the Mediterranean Pass; in England, it represents a
journey to Calvary.

Witz MANTLE, ORDER OF THE.—A designation of the Teutonic
Knights.

WuitEe Masonry.—A title given by some French writers to Female
or Adoptive Masonry.

Waire Stons.—Alluded to in the Mark degree, in reference to the
Apocalypse (ii: 17); also referred to in the Knights Templar and
other degrees.

Waite Sword, OrpER oF St Mary or THE.—This was a Military
Order which was suggested by Philip IL of Spain, but never
actually instituted. Its object was to have been the defence of
the Catholic religion and of the kingdom of Spain, the
chastisement of Jews and Moors, and in other respects it was to
take the place of the Inquisition. According to the projected
Statutes, the Order was to be divided into provinces, with Priors
as presiding officers. The only authority to which they were to
be subject was that of the Inquisitor General, ane Grand

797

WHI] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [WIN

Master. They vowed poverty and concession of property, and
marriage was to be no obstacle to profession ; but impoverished
knights were eligible for the Order. This proposed Order was
strongly supported by the provinces of Castile, Leon, the
Asturias, Arragon, Navarre, Galicia, Alava, Guipuscoa, Biscay,
Valentia, and Catalonia. After a consultation with his council,
Philip, however, decided not to institute the new Order.

Wuirr, Witttam Henry.—Born in 1778; died 5th April, 1866;
initiated 15th April, 1799; and elected Master of his Lodge, 15th
December, 1800, continuing in that office until 1809. In 1805,
he was appointed a Grand Steward, and in 1810 Joint Grand
Secretary—his father, William White, being the Principal Grand
Secretary. In 1813, he was further appointed Joint Grand
Secretary, with Brother Edward Harper; and in 1838, sole
Grand Secretary, an office which he held until 1857.

Wipow, Sons oF THE—A powerful society founded by Manes, a
Persian slave, who had been adopted by a widow who purchased
his freedom, instituted by him in the third century, and con-
tinued to the present day. It consisted of two degrees—
1. Auditor. 2. Elect. It was at peace under the mother of the
Emperor Anastasius (A.D. 491-518), but was persecuted by
Justin. In the course of time, its agents secretly instigated the
Crusades ; but, being betrayed, had to veil their mysteries under
many names. In Bulgaria and Lombardy, it was known as the
Society of the Paterini, in France as the Cathari and Albigenses,
and from it originated the Hussites, Wyckliffites, and Lollards.
The Dutch sect of the Family of Love also sprang from it about
1580,

Winow’s Son.—A term applied to Masons in the French system.

WIFE AND DauGHTER, Mason’s. (See Mason's Wife and Daughter.)

Witt—In some of the Continental Rites, and in certain high
degrees, it is customary to require the candidate to make his
will; but this custom cannot be regarded as compulsory, and no
sensible man would consent to do so.

Witson Manuscript.—Referred to in the marginal notes to the
“ Manifesto of the Lodge of Antiquity,” published in 1778, as
written in the reign of Henry VIIL, and said to be in the pos-
session of Mr Wilson, of Broomhead, near Sheffield. It has been
published in the Masonic Magazine.

Winpine Stairs—tThe following reference to winding stairs is the
only one made in the Bible (1 Kings vi. 8):—‘ The door for the
middle chamber was in the right side of the house; and they
went up with winding stairs into the middle chamber, and out
of the middle into the third.” The adoption of a winding stair
in the scone degree is founded upon this fragmentary allusion.

76

WIN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ WOE

The symbolism of the winding stairs may be thus summarized:
The Temple represents the world purified by the Divine Presence
or Shekinah ; to enter the porch of the Temple is therefore to be
initiated a Mason, and the Entered Apprentice represents a child.
The winding stairs do not begin until the initiate has passed
between the pillars of strength and establishment; and there, as
a Fellow Craft, he commences the ascent by three, five, and seven,
although the Prestonian lectures of the last century give the
whole number as thirty-six—divided into one, three, five, seven,
nine, and eleven. As a Master Mason, he receives in the middle
chamber the wages—a knowledge of the Truth.

Winpine Staircase, KNIGHT oF THE.—A degree in the Collection
of Fustier. C.S. D.

Winbow.-——Used, without a shadow of authority, in the Mark
degree.

Wine Used as an element of Masonic consecration, with an obvious
purpose.

WIncs OF THE CHERUBIM, EXTENDED.—In the degree of Royal
Master (American Rite), the candidate is said to be received
beneath the extended wings of the cherubim. It means that he
who comes to ask and to seek Truth should begin by placing
himself under the protection of the Divine Power.

Wisconsin.—Masonry was introduced in 1843, and the Grand
Lodge was organized at Madison, 18th December, 1843; Grand
Chapter was founded 13th February, 1850; Grand Council of
Royal and Select Masters in 1857; and the Grand Commandery,
20th October, 1859.

Wispom, LopcE or. (See [smaelites.)

WITHDRAWAL OF PeTITION.—By American Masonic law, a petition
for initiation cannot be withdrawn ; it must go before the Lodge.
In England, however, 2. candidate is frequently withdrawn, or is
quietly warned not to present himself.

WITTENAGEMOTE (Anglo-Saxon witan, to know; and gemot, a meet-
ing or council)—The meeting of kenning or canning ones held
by the Anglo-Saxons, and the precursor of the modern English
Parliament, or place of mutual explanation.

WOELLNER, JOHANN CHRISTOPH Von.—Born at Dobritz, 19th May,
1732. He studied theology, and was appointed a preacher near
Berlin, and afterwards a canon at Halberstadt. In 1786, King
Frederick William III. appointed him Privy Councillor of
Finance; and in 1788, he became a Minister of State, and was
placed at the head of ecclesiastical affairs. He was an active
member of the Strict Observance, and a Rosicrucian. At the
death of the king, he was dismissed, and retired to his estates
near Grossriez, and died 11th September, 1800. :

3c 769

woo | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [WRE

‘Woopcurters, ORDER OF. (See Fendeurs, Ordre de.)

Wooae, CarL CHRISTIAN.— Born at Dresden in 1713, died at Leipzig,
24th April, 1771. He would appear to have been initiated in
London about 1740, and seems to have known something of
Ramsay’s Rite.

Worip. (See Form of the Lodge).

WorLDLY Possessions. (See Thubal Cain.)

Work, MASTER OF THE.—An architect or superintendent of the
building of an edifice. In the monasteries, there was a simi-
lar officer, called the Overarius, and sometimes Magister Operis.

Workine Toors.—These are described under their respective heads.

WorKMEN AT THE TEMPLE—There is no authentic Scriptural
account of the number of the workmen at the temple of Solo-
mon, except the statements given in the Book of Kings (1 Kings
v. 13, 14), and in Chronicles (2 Chron. ii, 17-19). Josephus also
speaks of the workmen, but the subject is unimportant.

WoRKMEN, JUDGE OF THEA degree preserved by the Mother
Lodge of the Philosophic Rite, and also in the nomenclature of
Fustier. C.S. D.

WorsHIPFUL—A designation of a Lodge and its Master. The
Germans sometimes say Hochwiirdig. The French term their
Master Vénérable, and the Lodge Respectable.

WorSHIPFUL, Most.—The title of a Grand Master and a Grand
Lodge.

WorsHiPrut, Ricut.—tThe elective officers of a Grand Lodge below
the Grand Master are thus styled.

WorsuIPFUL, VERY.—A title applied to Grand Officers under the
rank of the M. W. the G. M.; also used by the Rosicrucians.

WorxsuHop.—tThe French call a Lodge literally an atelier, or work-
shop.

Woon: Mason’s.—According to Nicolai, a definition of a Mason’s
wound is to be found in a dictionary published at the beginning
of the eighteenth century, thus :—*“ Mason’s wound; an ima-
ginary wound above the elbow to represent a fracture of the arm
occasioned by a fall from an elevated place.”

WREN, SIR CHRISTOPHER.—Born at East Knoyle, in Wiltshire,
20th October, 1632; and found dead in his chair, after dinner,
25th February, 1723, in the ninety-first year of his age. He
was the son of Dr Christopher Wren, the rector of East
Knoyle. He was entered at Wadham College, Oxford, in his
fourteenth year, being even then remarkable for his mathemati-
cal attainments. In 1645, he became a member of a scientific
club, connected with Gresham College, from which the Royal
Society afterwards arose. In 1653, he was elected a Fellow of
All Souls’ College; and in 1657, on his appointment as Pro-

77°

WRE | The. Royal Masonite Cyclopedia, [x

fessor of Astronomy at Gresham College, he removed perman-
ently to London. In 1660, he was appointed one of a commis-
sion to superintend the restoration of St Paul’s Cathedral ; and in
1665, went to Paris to study the various styles of the public edi-
fices there. The destruction by fire of a large part of London
gave great scope for the exercise of Wren’s genius for architec-
ture, and it is a matter of regret to the present day that the plan
for the rebuilding of London, designed by him, was not carried
out. In 1667, he succeeded Sir John Denham as Surveyor-
General and Chief Architect, and in this capacity he erected a
large number of churches, the Royal Exchange, Greenwich Ob-
servatory, &c. His chief work, however, was the rebuilding of
St Paul’s, commenced in 1675, and finished in 1710. His first
plan was rejected, through the ignorance of the authorities ; but
Wren superintended the structure subsequently decided on. He
was knighted in 1672, and in 1674 he married a daughter of
Sir John Coghill, and after her death he married a daughter of
Viscount Fitzwilliam. He was President of the Royal Society
in 1680, and continued his architectural labours; but after the
death of Queen Anne, he was removed from his post of Surveyor-
General,.and spent the remainder of his life in retirement. There
can be little doubt that Wren took a deep interest in speculative
as well as operative Masonry (see Book of Constitutions), and
that he was an eminent Member of the Craft cannot be doubted ;
but the dates respecting Wren’s initiation are vague and unsa-
tisfactory, none of the authorities agreeing. It would seem cer-
tain, however, that for many years he was a member of the old
Lodge of St Paul’s, meeting at the Goose and Gridiron, in St
Paul’s Churchyard.

WresTLE—A degree sometimes called the Mark and Link, or
Wrestle. The ceremonies are founded on Genesis xxxii. 24-30.

WYKEHAM, WILLIAM oF.—Born at Wykeham, Hampshire, in 1324;
died in 1404. He was Bishop of Winchester, and remarkable
both as an ecclesiastic and statesman. In 1359, he was ap-
pointed Surveyor of the Works at Windsor (which castle he
rebuilt) by Edward III. Anderson says he was Master of the
Work under that king, and Grand Master under Richard II.

p.

X—The twenty-fourth letter of the English alphabet. As a
numeral, X stands for the perfect number 10; horizontally, x, for
1000; and, with a dash, X, for 10,000.

77

XAl| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | XIN

XAINTRAILLES, MADAME DE.—In the latter part of the last century,
according to Clavel, a lady was initiated into Craft Masonry in
the following manner :—Al]] Lodges of adoption were required to
be connected with, and immediately under the guardianship of, a
regular Masonic Lodge, by the laws of the Grand Orient of
France. The Lodge of “ Fréres Artistes,” under Bro. Cuvelier
de Trie as T. V. or W. M., was about to give a Féte of Adoption,
viz., to open a Lodge for Female Freemasonry ; but before the
female members were introduced, a regular Lodge of Free-
masonry was opened in the first degree, and among the persons
in the preparation-room was a young officer in the uniform of
the cavalry. He was requested to hand his diploma to the
proper officer ; and he handed in a folded paper, which, on being
inspected by the Orator, proved to be the commission of an
aide-de-camp, granted by the Directory to the wife of General
de Xaintrailles, who had served in the army. Of course, this
was at once made known, and the surprise was general. But
Frenchmen, like Hungarians, if we may trust recent events, are
not beyond enthusiastic emotions, and it was resolved, in a fit of
unpardonable zeal, to confer, not the degree of Adoption, but the
first degree of Masonry, upon the courageous woman to whom
had been committed trusts of discretion as well as bravery.
Madame de Xaintrailles, on being made acquainted with the
resolution of the Lodge, acquiesced, saying—* I have been a man
for my country, and I will again be a man for my brethren.” She
was forthwith initiated, and afterwards frequently assisted in the
working of the Lodge in the first degree. That the action of the
Lodge was reprehensible cannot be doubted. (See Aldworth,
Hon. Mrs, and Beaton, Mrs.)

XAviER MIeER & CAMPELLO, FRANCISCO.—Bishop of Almeria, and
Inquisitor General of Spain, in the reign of Ferdinand VII. In
1815, he published the Bull of Pius VII. against the Freemasons ;
and in an ordinance of his own spoke of the Lodges as “ societies
which lead to sedition, to independence, and to all errors and
crimes.” He followed up this announcement by very arbitrary
proceedings, and imprisoned many men of the best families on
suspicion of Freemasonry.

XEROPHAGISTS.—The Freemasons of Italy, to conceal their exist-
ence, assumed in 1746 the name of Xerophagists. They
further abstained from wine, and lived upon bread and dried
fruits.

XERXES.—A significant word in the degree of Sublime Prince of the
Royal Secret, 32° A. and A. R.

XINCHEU.—A corrupt form of some password in the high degrees.

XinxE. (See Xincheu.)

772

y] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. | vce

x.

Y.--The twenty-fifth letter of the English alphabet. As a numeral,
Y stands for 150, and with a dash over it, Y,for 150,000. The
letter Y was adopted by Pythagoras as a symbol, and held by
him to signify the different paths of virtue and vice—the right
branch conducting to the former, and the left to the latter. It
was hence termed “ Litera Pythagore,”’—the letter of Pythagoras.

YA VAURUM-HAMEN. (See Jaaborou-hammaim.)

Yatta.—A word said to have been used by the Knights Templar
in the adoration of Baphometus, and derived from the Sara-
cens,

Yares, Gites FonpA—Born at Schenectady, New York State, in
1796; died December 13, 1859. He was educated for the law,
but being of independent means did not follow that profession.
He was initiated in 1817 at Schenectady, and in 1821 he was
Senior Warden of the Morton Lodge, and Master of the St
George’s Lodge, his mother-lodge, in 1844. He was also a
Royal Arch Mason and a Knight Templar. It was to the
spread of Scottish Masonry that he, however, most devoted him-
self, and, in 1825, was appointed a Sovereign Grand Inspector
General. In 1851, he was elected Sovereign Grand Commander
of the Supreme Council for the Northern Jurisdiction, but
shortly afterwards laid down this office. His closing years were
marked by reverses of fortune, against which he seems to have
borne up with patience and fortitude. He was a voluminous
writer on Masonic subjects, and published some other works of
an archeological character.

YeLpis— An old Hermetic degree, said by Thory to have been
given in some secret societies in Germany.

YeLtow Caps, Society or.—Founded under Ling-Ti, in China, in
the eleventh century. The members were chiefly of the literary
class, and their efforts were directed against the eunuchs, whose
overthrow they attempted.

YELLOW JACKET.—In the early part of the eighteenth century, the
following dialogue seems to have formed part of the catechism :
—“@. Have you seen your Master to-day? A. Yes. @. How
was he clothed? A. In a yellow jacket and a blue pair of
breeches.” The yellow jacket being the brass of the compasses,
and the blue the steel points.

YEVELE, Henry.—One of the Magistri Operi, or Masters of the
Work, in the reign of Edward III.

YoacrasiL.—The sacred ash-tree of the Scandinavian mysteries.

773

Y-HA | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [yz1

Y-HA-HO.—-Said to have been a sacred word in the Egyptian
mysteries, signifying the Eternal God.

Yop (Hebrew, *).—The initial letter of TT, Jahve or Jehovah. In
symbolic Masonry, the Yod has been replaced by the letter G; but
in the high degrees it is frequently depicted within a triangle.

Yont.—The female symbol in the Orient, corresponding to the
lingam or male principle. Among the Greeks, they were known
as Phallus and Cteis.

York Constitutions.—Also known as Krause’s MS., purporting
to be the Constitutions adopted by the General Assembly of
Masons, held at York in 926. The original manuscript is un-
known, but Krause published a German translation of a Latin
version, and an English version was published by Bro. W. J.
Hughan. Opinions have differed as to the authenticity of this
document, and diligent search has been made respecting it;
no vestiges or notices of it have ever been found, and therefore
it is placed among the doubtful class of manuscripts.

York LecEeND.—That tradition which referred the establishment
of a Grand Lodge at York, in 926, to Edwin, in the days of
Athelstane. It has of late years been very much criticised ; and
even so long since as 1726, Francis Drake, the antiquary, in a
speech before the Grand Lodge of York, threw doubts upon it.
According to Drake, the Edwin mentioned in the legend was
not the brother of Athelstane, but Edwin, king of Northumbria
(born 587, ascended the throne 617, and died 633), who laid the
foundation stone of York Cathedral, about 626.

York MSS.—There were originally six manuscripts thus named
from their being deposited in the archives of the extinct York
Grand Lodge of all England. No. 3 is now missing, although it
is named in the inventory made at York in 1779. The dates of
these manuscripts are as follows:—No. 1, about 1600; No. 2,
1704; No. 3, 1630; No. 4,1693; No. 5, about 1670; No. 6,
about 1680. Two other York manuscripts of the Operative Ma-
sons have been published by the Surtees Society, in the “ Fabric
Rolls of York Minster,” edited by the Reverend James Raine.

York Ritz.—This rite does not now exist anywhere, as Masonry
has undergone many changes; but it may be considered that the
system to which this name may be fitly applied, in a historical
sense, is that Masonry which prevailed in England at the time
of the revival in 1717. It consisted of the three degrees of
LE A.P.; 2. F.C; and 3.M. M.; but the Master’s degree then
contained more than it does now, and the True Word was found
in it. Very probably the Mark degrees of Man and Master also
found some representation in this system, at least in Scotland.

Yzirre.— A corruption of a password, Izrachish, 7° A. and A. R.

774

Z| The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ZaL

Z.

Z—The twenty-sixth letter of the English alphabet. As a
numeral, it stands for 2000, and with a dash over it, Z, for
2,000,000.

ZaBuD.—-A person mentioned in Scripture (1 Kings iv. 5) as being
the friend of the king. He was the son of Nathan, a priest. In
the legend of the Select Master’s degree, Zabud, or, as it has,
in the French system, been corrupted, Izabud, appears.

ZABULON (Hebrew, po31).—Special habitation, heaven, abode of God.
Used in the Mark degree, and in the 13° and 20° A. and A. R.
It is also the Greek form of Zebulon, the tenth son of Jacob.

Zaccual (Hebrew, °3!, Purus, Mundus)—A name applied to the
Deity.

ZACHARIAH (Hebrew, nt, Memoria Domini)—Occurs in connec-
tion with the 32° A. and A. R.

ZADOK.—A. personage occurring in some of the Ineffable Degrees
of the A.and A. R. He is said in Scripture to have been one
of the two chief priests in the time of David, his associate being
Abiathar. It was Zadok who anointed Solomon king. Ac-
cording to Josephus (A ntig. x. 8, § 6), he was the first high-priest
of the First Temple; but as his name nowhere occurs in the
account of the dedication of that structure, it has been thought
that he must have died before the temple was finished.

ZaLeucus.—A ruler (B.C. 1000) among the Locrians, who left
behind him the following summary of his religious belief:—
1. Every man ought to be convinced of the existence of God.
He who shall observe the order, harmony, and music of the
universe cannot believe that chance has formed this splendid
structure. 2. He should be master also of his own mind; he
should purify his soul, by disengaging it from all evil inclina-
tions; holding it essential that the supremely pure cannot be
adored by the corrupt; and that the Divine has no likeness to
those miserable human beings who allow themselves to be
dazzled by magnificent ceremonies, or by sumptuous offerings.
Virtue only, and the constant desire to do good, are pleasing in
the eyes of Him. 3. He therefore who sincerely labours to
be just and true in his principles, and conforms his daily life
to those ends, will make’ himself beloved in the eyes of God.
4. Let every mortal man avoid what may lead him into disgrace
before the Ruler of Heaven, more anxiously than the minor
evil of poverty ; for honour is bestowed by all the wise on him
who prefers justice to mere wealth. 5. The many whom

775

ZAN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ZEN

their violent passions drag into evil—men, women, children,
citizens, common people—should be taught to have the Divine
Ones before them, and to reflect often on the severe judg-
ment which they shall be bound to execute on the sinful.
6. They should see perpetually before them the form of death,
that fatal hour which awaits us all; an hour wherein the
recollection of our past crimes will be attended with dread
remorse; and when the doers of evil will repent that all their
actions had not been subjected to the severe but salutary laws
of entire equity. 7. Let each one therefore so rule his life, as if
every moment of that life were to be the last ; but if some evil
power should at any time ensnare to the commission of crime
a frail mortal, let him fly a suppliant at the feet of the altar;
let him pray to Heaven to give him its assistance, and shield
him from the power of all sin; let him entreat that he may be
supported and led on in life by the Spirit of Beauty, whose
counsels shall conduct him into virtuous thoughts and deeds,
the while bringing vividly before his eyes the mildness, but
the inflexible justice, of the Most High God.

ZANABOSANE.—A. corruption of Nabuzaradan (Hebrew, NR,
princeps exercitus), used in the 20° A.and A. R.

ZAPHIEL. (See Z'saphiel.)

ZARATHUSTRA. (See Zoroastrianism.)

ZARTHAN.—Zarthan (2 Chron. iv. 17) seems to be the same place
as Zeredatha (1 Kings vii. 46). The latter word is always used
in Masonry.

ZEAL.— Apprentices have been taught in the lectures, ever since
the revival of 1717, to serve their masters with freedom, fervency,
and zeal. (See Larthen Pan, Fervency, and Freedom.)

ZEALAND, ORDER OF PROTECTION oF.—Established in the eighth
century by Absalom, Bishop of Roschild, in the island of Zea-
land, Denmark, and sometimes called Societas Piratica Ros-
childensis, for the protection of the inhabitants against the
pagan pirates infesting the coasts of Sweden. It was still in
existence in the sixteenth century.

ZEDEKIAH.—T wentieth and last king of Judah, who was placed as
a tributary monarch on the throne by Nebuchadnezzar, but who
soon violated his oath of allegiance, and was again chastised by
that king, who carried him away captive, putting out his eyes.
He soon afterwards died at Babylon. He is introduced in the
Super-Excellent Master’s degree.

ZELATOR.—The lowest degree in the Rosicrucian system, and the
word alludes to the spirit of emulation which should animate
the neophyte.

ZENDAVESTA. (See Zoroastrianism.)

776

ZEN | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ZER

ZENITH.—The point in the heavens vertical to the spectator, and
from which a perpendicular line passing through him would
reach the centre of the earth. The oldest documents of the
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite are all dated “under the
celestial canopy of the Zenith, which answers to »’ adding the
latitude of the place, but the longitude is omitted, as every place
whence such a document is sent is regarded as the point of
sunrise, or True, or Grand, East or Orient.

ZENNAAR.—1. The sacred cord used in an initiation in Hindustan,
and as indispensable as the Masonic apron in Hindu rites.
Every boy receives this between the years of eight and fifteen,
and the investiture is accompanied by many solemn ceremonies of
prayer and sacrifices. He also receives a new name, signifying
“twice born.” This sacred cord must be made by a Brahman,
and consists of three strings, each ninety-six hands (forty-eight
yards) long, twisted together; it is then folded into three, and
twisted again; and these being again folded into three, are
fastened at the ends with knots. It is worn over the left
shoulder, next the skin, extending half-way down the right thigh,
by the Brahmans, Xchatrias, and Vaisya castes. 2. In the order
of the Sat B’hai, the brethren wear a red, blue, and white silken
cord round the neck, twisted into three strands,

ZEPHOFRAS.—A word in 53° Rite of Mizraim.

ZERAHIAH OR ZERAIAS (Hebrew, mim, Oriens Dominus).—The
name of one Of the three officers appointed by King Solomon
to superintend the hewing of the timbers in the forests of
Lebanon.

ZERBAL (Hebrew, sereb-iah, nw, prevalens cum domino).—Cap-
tain of the Guards in the degree of Perfect Master and Intimate
Secretary. (See 2 Esdras ix. 5.)

ZERUBBABEL.—This prince is called, in the Book of Ezra, Shesh-
bazzar, the prince of Judah, and was the grandson of King
Jehoiachim or Jeconiah, deposed by Nebuchadnezzar, and carried
captive to Babylon, and hence in him was legally vested the
royal authority of Judah. Masonic tradition affirms that Cyrus
returned him his grandfather’s sword when he came back to
Jerusalem at the head of the released captives. After encount-
ering the Assyrians at the River Euphrates, and vanquishing
them, Zerubbabel, despite great difficulties and dangers, finally
arrived at Jerusalem, at seven o’clock in the morning of the
22d June, B.C. 535. By Masonic tradition, we are told, that,
during the captivity, the Jews had continued the practice of the
ceremonies of the Fraternity, and had several Lodges, especially
one at Naharda, on the Euphrates. Therefore, no sooner had
they arrived at their destination, than they erected a temporary

777

ZER | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ZER

tabernacle, and called a council, in which Zerubbabel presided
as king, Joshua as high priest, and Haggai as scribe or princi-
pal officer of state. And it was by them determined to begin
the rebuilding of the temple on the foundations of the struc-
ture of Solomon. The site being determined on, the first step was
to remove the rubbish of the old temple; and while this was
being done, an important discovery was made by three sojour-
ners who had arrived at Jerusalem some time after the settle-
ment of Zerubbabel. This discovery was no other than that
of the stone of foundation, and the three sojourners have been
traditionally said to have been no other than Esdras, Zachariah,
and Nehemiah, known in the Chaldee language as Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego. This discovery was appreciated, and
rewarded by Zerubbabel, Joshua or Jeshua, and Haggai; and, as
other discoveries ensued, led to the permanent establishment of
the Royal Arch degree. The stone of foundation, thus happily
found, was then solemnly laid as the foundation stone of the
Second Temple, and the aid of the Tyrians and Sidonians called
for the supply of timber The Samaritans, however, whose
aid in the construction of the Temple had been refused, then
began to oppose the works commenced by the Jews, and made
such representations at the court of Cyrus as caused the
work to be impeded, if not suspended, for several years, and
the builders were obliged to labour with swords by their sides
and trowels in their hands—hence the appéarance of these
emblems on the Royal Arch Tracing-board. In the seventh
year after the restoration of the Jews, Cyrus, who had evinced
himself a friend to their design, was succeeded by Cambyses,
called Ahasuerus in the Scriptures. From this prince the
Samaritans obtained a peremptory order suspending the works,
and they remained at a standstill until the second year of
Darius, successor.of Cambyses. But Darius appeared to have
been a friend to the Jews, and especially of Zerubbabel ; and
when the latter appealed to him in person, after a perilous
journey, during which he was seized and put in chains by the
Persian soldiers, he was magnificently entertained. Darius, it is
said, on this occasion promised to restore the Jews to all their
rights, if Zerubbabel would reveal to him the secrets of Free-
masonry ; but on the Prince of Judah manfully declaring he
would rather suffer death than reveal them, Darius, struck by
the inflexibility and magnanimity of his character, released him,
and spontaneously granted the required privileges. On this
occasion, as recorded in the Apocrypha, King Darius proposed the
question as to whether the power of wine, women, or the king,
was the strongest. Answers affirmative of the strength of each
778

z1c | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [zn

were given; but on Zerubbabel being asked his opinion, he
declared that the power of wine and the king might be great, that
of women was yet stronger; but that the power of women was
nothing as compared with that of truth, for above all things
this bore the victory. The Second Temple was completed twenty
years after it had been commenced, in the sixth year of Darius,
the third of Adar, B.C. 513, Although we hear nothing further
of Zerubbabel, it is probable that he lived to a great age, as no
successor in the government of Jerusalem is named until the
appointment of Ezra by Artaxerxes, fifty-seven years after the
completion of the Second Temple.

Zicu, OR ZicGARA—The Accadian (archaic-Assyrian) name for
primeval matter.

ZINNENDORF, JOHANN WILHELM ELLENBERGER VoN.—Born at Halle,
10th August, 1731; died 6th June, 1782. He was early initiated
into Masonry, and followed the medical profession, being General
Staff Surgeon and Chief of the Medical Corps of the Prussian
Army. He joined the Lodge of the Three Globes at Berlin, and
afterwards the Rite of the Strict Observance, in which body he
bore the order name of Egues & lapide nigro. He was elected
Master of the Scottish Lodge, and in this capacity had absolute
control of the funds; but as he refused for some reason to account
for them, the Rite of the Strict Observance held an investigation,
whereupon Zinnendorf withdrew from that body, which imme-
diately excommunicated him. Upon this, he retaliated by
denouncing the Strict Observance as an imposture, and stigma-
tised its doctrine of the Templar origin of Masonry as false.
He sent his friend Hans Carl Baumann to Sweden to obtain
manuscript rituals of the Swedish system, which had been pro-
mised him by the Grand Master of the Scottish Chapter at
Stockholm, Carl Friedrich von Eckhoff. These manuscripts, it
would seem, were very imperfect, as it appeared by a subsequent
declaration made by the Duke of Sudermania. From these
documents Zinnendorf constructed a new rite in opposition to
the Strict Observance, and his energy, together with his personal
influence, soon attracted to him many friends and followers. In
1766, he’ founded the Lodge Minerva, at Potsdam, and in the
next year opened a second Lodge at Berlin, called the Three
Golden Keys. By the 24th June, 1770, his system had obtained
such power, that twelve Lodges of his rite were strong enough to
unite into a Grand Lodge of Germany, with the Prince of Hesse
Darmstadt as Grand Master; the Grand Lodge of England
entered into alliance with this body in 1773, withdrawing from it,
however, in 1780. In 1774, Zinnendorf secured the patronage of
the King of Prussia; and such was the impetus given to the rite

779

z10 | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ZOR

by these proceedings, that in 1778 it had thirty-four flourishing
Lodges under it, with Provincial Lodges in Austria, Silesia, Pomer-
ania, Lower Saxony, and Russia. In 1774, Zinnendorf was
elected Grand Master, an office he held for the rest of his life.
His principal opponents were the members of the Royal York
Lodge at Berlin, who obtained a declaration from the Duke of
Sudermania, in 1777, to the effect that the warrant granted by
Eckleff to Zinnendorf, on which he had founded his Grand
Lodge, was spurious and unauthorised. In 1779, Zinnendorf
retired from the government service, and went to Stockholm to
obtain all the documents connected with the Swedish system,
but failed to accomplish this design. He was undismayed at
this failure, and returned to Germany, and continued to preside
over his Grand Lodge until his death in 1782. There were at
first seven, and afterwards nine, degrees of the Rite of Zinnendorf,
as follows:—I. Blue Masonry—1. E.A.P.; 2. F.C.; 3. M.M.
IL. Red Masonry—4. Scottish Apprentice; 5. Scottish Fellow
Craft; 6. Scottish Master. III. Capitular Masons—7. Confidant
of St John; 8. Enlightened Brother, or Knight of the South;
9. Vicarius Salomonis, or Most Wise Master of the Order.

Z1onN.—Mount Zion was the south-western of the three hills con-
stituting the table-land on which Jerusalem was built, and on it
was built the royal palace; hence it has been called the City of
David. Zion was also used as a name synonymous with
Jerusalem.

Ziza (Hebrew, XM or Nt, resplendent)—Used in the 4° A. and
ALR.

Z1zon.—In one of the ineffable degrees of the Scottish Rite, this is
given as the name of the balustrade before the Sanctum Sanc-
torum. It is a corruption of Ziza,signifying a small beam or rafters.

Zopiac, Masonic.—A series of twelve degrees named after the
signs of the Zodiac, in the series of the Metropolitan Chapter of
France, and also in the Manuscript Collection of Peuvret.

ZOHAR, THE Boox. (See Kabbalah.)

ZOHARITI, 7.¢., THE ILLUMINATED.—A society founded, at the begin-
ning of the eighteenth century, by Jacob Franck.

Zonnark.—A belt or girdle which the Christians and Jews are re-
quired to wear in the Orient, to mark their distinction from the
Mohammedans.

ZOROASTER, Mirror oF.—1. A degree in the Collection of Fustier.
2. The title of a curious magical work, containing a mode of
divination which, by mathematical formule, renders future events
clear.

ZOROASTRIANISM.—This famous religion, which has survived to
ourown days in the sect of the Parsees, was founded by Zoroaster,

780

ZOR | The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ZOR

or more correctly Zarathustra. The age of this celebrated phil-
osopher, legislator, and religious reformer, is variously reported.
By Xanthus of Lydia, the earliest Greek writer who mentions
him, he is said to have lived about six hundred years before the
Trojan war, which would be about 1800 B.C. Aristotle and
Eudoxus place him 6000 years before Plato, while Berosus makes
him a king of Babylon between 2200 and 2000 B.C.; but
Hermippus places him at 500 years before the Trojan war. By
the Parsees, he is stated to have lived at the same time as
Hystaspes, the father of Darius, therefore about 550 B.C.; but
according to Haug, this period is too low, and he refers him to at
least B.C. 1000, and even would prefer to make him a contem-
porary of Moses. The death of Plato took place, however, in
348 B.C.; and, with the 6000 years of Aristotle and Eudoxus,
the date of Zarathustra’s reign would be about 6300 or
6350 B.C. Bunsen (God in History, vol. i., book iii, ch.
vi, p. 276) speaks of Zarathustra Spitama as living under
the reign of Vistaspa, towards the year 3000 B.C, end
certainly not later than 2500 B.C., and calls him “one of
the mightiest intellects, and one of the greatest men of all
time.” And further adds—* Accounted by his contemporaries
a blasphemer, atheist, and firebrand worthy of death; regarded
even by his own adherents, after some centuries, as the founder
of magic, by others as a sorcerer and deceiver, he was, neverthe-
less, recognised already by Hippocratesas a great spiritual hero,and
esteemed the earliest sage of a primeval epoch.” In the Zenda-
vesta, his name is always given as Zarathustra, with which is
associated Spitama, the name of his family. He denounced, as
Mohammed did at a far later period, the Nature worship of the
tribes of Bactria, among whom he was born, and ended in
establishing his spiritual religion, in,which, says Bunsen, “the
antagonisms of light and darkness, of sunshine and storm, be-
came transformed into antagonisms of good and evil, of powers
exerting a beneficent or corrupting influence on the mind.”
The principles of Zoroastrianism were purely monotheistic. The
Supreme Deity was called Ahuramazda, and his attributes
strongly resembled those of the Hebrew Jehovah. He is called
“the Creator of the earthly and spiritual life, the Lord of the
whole Universe, at whose hands are all the creatures.” In him
are wisdom, intellect, the light itself, and the source of light.
He is the rewarder of the virtuous, and the judge of the wicked.
The opposition of Ahriman, the evil principle, is an importation
of a later age, although Zerdusht imagined a double nature in
the Supreme Being in which all that was good was positive, real,
and existent; and all that was evil was negative, maoeAnay, or
781

ZOR] The Royal Masonic Cyclopedia. [ZOR

non-existent. His doctrine comprehended the belief in a future
life and the immortality of the soul; and in the Zendavesta the
idea of a resurrection is taught in no dubious manner; while his
theology also comprehended the idea of a heaven and hell. In
one of the Yashts or portions of the Zendavesta, Ahuramazda
tells Zarathustra that the utterance of one of his sacred names,
of which twenty are enumerated, is the best protection from
evil. Among these names one is ahmi, “I am;” and another,
ahmi yat ahmi, “JT am that I am”—similar to the Hebrew ex-
pression for the same idea. The doctrines of Zoroaster spread
from Bactria to Media; and thence, under the title of Magism, or
doctrines of the Magavas or Mighty Ones, became incorporated
with the .ethics and philosophy of Chaldea, and traces of its
influence may be found in Rabbinical and Kabbalistic lore; while
in Persia it developed itself into what is now known as the
religion of the Parsees. The entire teachings of Zarathustra are
to be found in the Zendavesta, where Avesta means the text,
and Zend the commentary. A great portion of this work has
been lost, and all that we at present possess consists of the Ven-
didad, comprising twenty chapters; the Vendidad Sadé, fragments
of the Yasna and the Vespered; together with another fragmen-
tary collection termed the Yasht Sadé. This work is to the
Parsee what the Bible is to the Christian; but being in the
Zend language, now extinct, it is a sealed book, except- to
scholars. The Parsees, however, honour it with great reverence,
and say in their catechism or compendium—“ We consider
these books as heavenly hooks, because God sent the tidings of
these books to us through the holy prophet Zurthost.” Zurthost
is the name given to their prophet by the modern Parsees, and
their community they termed the Zurthosti Community.

FINIS,

COMMERCIAL PRINTING COMPANY, EDINBURGH.
